9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

4

 
 

1
v
9
0
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

holomorphic vector bundles and non-perturbative vacua in

m-theory

upr-827t

ron donagi,1 andre lukas2, burt a. ovrut3  and daniel waldram4

1department of mathematics, university of pennsylvania

philadelphia, pa 191046395, usa

2department of physics, theoretical physics, university of oxford

1 keble road, oxford ox1 3np, united kingdom
3department of physics, university of pennsylvania

philadelphia, pa 191046396, usa

4department of physics, joseph henry laboratories,

princeton university, princeton, nj 08544, usa

abstract

we review the spectral cover formalism for constructing both u (n) and su (n) holomorphic

vector bundles on elliptically bered calabiyau three-folds which admit a section. we discuss

the allowed bases of these three-folds and show that physical constraints eliminate enriques

surfaces from consideration. relevant properties of the remaining del pezzo and hirzebruch

surfaces are presented. restricting the structure group to su (n), we derive, in detail, a set

of rules for the construction of three-family particle physics theories with phenomenologically

relevant gauge groups. we show that anomaly cancellation generically requires the existence of

non-perturbative vacua containing ve-branes. we illustrate these ideas by constructing four

explicit three-family non-perturbative vacua.

supported in part by a senior alexander von humboldt award.

1

introduction

the ground breaking work of horava and witten [1, 2] showed that n = 1 supersymmetric, chiral
theories can arise in four-dimensions upon compactication of m -theory on an s1/z2 orbifold times
a calabiyau three-fold. early work on this subject indicated that one could get reasonable phe-

nomenological values for newtons constant and the gauge unication parameter and scale [3, 4].

interestingly, acceptable values were contingent upon the radius of the orbifold being an order of

magnitude, or more, larger than the calabiyau radius. thus, with decreasing energy, the uni-

verse appears rst eleven-, then ve- and, nally, four-dimensional. the eective four-dimensional

reduction of horava-witten theory was rst constructed, directly from eleven-dimensions, in [5, 6].

various aspects of this four-dimensional theory have been discussed by many authors [7][27].

more recently, the eective ve-dimensional heterotic m -theory was constructed [28, 29]. it

was shown to be a specic form of gauged n = 1 supergravity coupled to hyper and vector

supermultiplets and bounded by two four-dimensional orbifold xed planes. these boundary planes

contain n = 1 supersymmetric gauge theories coupled to chiral matter supermultiplets. in [28, 29],

the so-called standard embedding of the spin connection into an su (3) subgroup of e8 on one of
the orbifold planes was assumed. it was shown in [28, 29], that this ve-dimensional theory does

not admit at space as its static vacuum solution. rather, it supports bps three-brane domain

walls, much as the gauged type iia supergravity theory discussed by romans [30] supports bps

eight-branes [31]. the minimal number of such domain walls is two, with one wall located at each

orbifold xed plane. when expanded to leading non-trivial order, this pair of bps three-branes

exactly reproduces the eleven-dimensional deformations of the metric line element discussed by

witten [3]. we refer to this as the minimal, or perturbative, vacuum. this ve-dimensional theory is

not simply a formal development, since the universe actually passes through this ve-dimensional

phase for an energy range of an order of magnitude or so below the unication scale. various

physical aspects of this theory have been discussed in [32, 33]. it was shown in [28, 29] that, when

dimensionally reduced onto the worldvolume of the pair of three-branes, the ve-dimensional theory

exactly reproduces the eective four-dimensional theory derived by other methods in [5, 6], as it

must.

as emphasized in [34], the restriction to the standard embedding of the spin connection into the

gauge connection when reducing heterotic m -theory to ve- and four-dimensions is very unnatural.

this is so because, unlike the case of the weakly coupled heterotic superstring, there is no choice

of embedding, standard or otherwise, that is to say no choice of gauge eld background, that

allows one to set the entire supergravity three-form to zero. hence, in heterotic m -theory, one

should consider arbitrary gauge eld backgrounds which preserve n = 1 supersymmetry. this was

also discussed in [35].

in addition, as was rst noted in [3], one can include m 5-branes in the

background and still preserve supersymmetry, provided the branes are wrapped on holomorphic

1

curves within the calabiyau threefold. these general vacua, which in ve dimensions involving

extra bps three-branes, the remnants of the ve-branes, in addition to the two located at the

orbifold planes, were also analyzed in [34]. it was shown that the worldvolume theories of the extra

three-branes are n = 1 supersymmetric gauge theories, whose gauge groups depend on the genus

and the position in their moduli space of the holomorphic curves. we refer to ve-dimensional

vacua with extra bps three-branes as non-perturbative vacua. the main conclusion of [34] was

that, because of the condition of anomaly cancellation, including background ve-branes greatly

relaxes the constraint on allowed non-standard embeddings, and allows much more freedom in

constructing vacua. it should be noted that there is a long history to constructing backgrounds

with non-standard embeddings ((0, 2) models), such as, for example, [40] and the three-family

model of [41], or more recently of [42]. the new development is the inclusion of ve-branes in the

vacuum.

the results of [34] indicated the importance of heterotic m -theories with non-standard embed-

dings and non-perturbative vacua, analyzing the general structure of such backgrounds. a specic

example of these vauca was given recently in [36], where explicit constructions were carried out

within the context of holomorphic vector bundles on the orbifold planes of heterotic m -theory

compactied on elliptically bered calabiyau three-folds which admit a section. the results of

[36] rely upon recent mathematical work by friedman, morgan and witten [37], donagi [38] and

bershadsky, johansen, pantev and sadov [39] who show how to explicitly construct such vector

bundles, and on results of [43, 44] who computed the family generation index in this context.

most recently work has also appeared discussing the stablity of this index under deformations of

the bundle [45]. extending these results, we were able to formulate rules for constructing three-

family particle physics theories with phenomenologically interesting gauge groups. as expected,

the appearance of gauge groups other than the e6 group of the standard embedding, as well as the
three-family condition, necessitate the existence of m 5-branes and, hence, non-perturbative vacua.

in [36], we showed how to compute the topological class of these ve-branes and, given this class,

analyzed an example of the moduli space of the associated holomorphic curves. our results were

summarized as a set of rules for constructing vacua. in addition, we gave one concrete example of

a three-family model with gauge group su (5), along with its ve-brane class and moduli space.

in this paper, we greatly enlarge the discussion of the results in [36], deriving in detail the rules

presented there. in order to make this work more accessible to physicists, as well as to lay the

foundation for the necessary derivations and proofs, we present brief discussions of (1) elliptically

bered calabiyau three-folds, (2) spectral cover constructions of both u (n) and su (n) bundles,

(3) chern classes and (4) complex surfaces, specically del pezzo, hirzebruch and enriques surfaces.

using this background, we explicitly derive the rules for the construction of three-family models

based on semi-stable holomorphic vector bundles with structure group su (n). specically, we

2

construct the form of the ve-brane class [w ], as well as the constraints imposed on this class due

to the three-family condition, the restriction that the vector bundle have structure group su (n)

and the requirement that [w ] be an eective class. from these considerations, we derive a set

of rules that are presented in section 7. as discussed in this paper, elliptically bered calabi

yau three-folds that admit a section can only have del pezzo, hirzebruch, enriques and blown-up

hirzebruch surfaces as a base. we show in section 8, however, that enriques surfaces can never

lead to eective ve-brane curves in vacua with three generations. therefore, the base b of the

elliptic bration is restricted to be a del pezzo, hirzebruch or a blow-up of a hirzebruch surface.

in appendix b, we present the generators of all eective classes in h2(b, z), as well as the rst
and second chern classes c1(b) and c2(b), for these allowed bases. combining the rules in section
7 with the generators and chern classes given in appendix b, we present a general algorithm for

the construction of non-perturbative vacua corresponding to three-family particle physics theories

with phenomenologically relevant gauge groups. we illustrate this algorithm by constructing four

such non-perturbative vacua, three with del pezzo surfaces as a base and one with a hirzebruch

surface. we do not, in this paper, discuss the moduli spaces of the ve-brane holomorphic curves.

an explicit example of such a moduli space was given in [36]. a discussion of the general method for

constructing ve-brane curve moduli spaces will be presented, in detail, elsewhere [46]. we also leave

for later discussions of some natural phenomenological questions, in particular the breaking of the

gauge group down to the standard model, since the main focus of this paper is to present the tools for

constructing non-perturbative vacua. the results given here are all within the context of heterotic

m -theory. however, our formalism will apply, with very minor modications, to compactications

of the weakly coupled heterotic superstring on elliptically bered calabiyau three-folds with n s5-

branes. finally, we would like to point out that the ve-brane classes [w ] that appear naturally in

three-family models have a component in the base surface. that is, they are not wrapped purely on

the ber and, therefore, are not dual to three-branes in f -theory. the interesting question of what

vacua they are dual to in f -theory and superstrings will be discussed elsewhere. in the context of

toric varieties this has been addressed in an interesting paper by rajesh [47].

2 holomorphic gauge bundles, five-branes and non-perturbative

vacua

in this section, we will discuss the generic properties of heterotic m -theory vacua appropriate for

a reduction of the theory to n = 1 supersymmetric theories in both ve and four dimensions. the

m -theory vacuum is given in eleven dimensions by specifying the metric gij and the three-form
cijk with eld strength gijkl = 24[i cjkl] of the supergravity multiplet. following horava and
witten [1, 2] and witten [3], the space-time structure, to lowest order in the expansion parameter

3

2/3, will be taken to be

m11 = m4  s1/z2  x

(2.1)

where m4 is four-dimensional minkowski space, s1/z2 is a one-dimensional orbifold and x is a
smooth calabiyau three-fold. the vacuum space-time structure becomes more complicated at
the next order in 2/3, but this metric deformation, which has been the subject of a number

of papers [3, 4, 5], can be viewed as arising as the static vacuum of the ve-dimensional eective

theory [28, 29] and, hence, need not concern us here.

the z2 orbifold projection necessitates the introduction, on each of the two ten-dimensional
orbifold xed planes, of an n = 1, e8 yang-mills supermultiplet which is required for anomaly
in general, one can consider vacua with non-zero gauge elds excited within the
cancellation.

calabiyau space, on each plane. however, the supersymmetry transformations imply the elds

must be a solution of the hermitian yangmills equations for an e8-valued connection in order to
be compatible with four preserved supercharges in four dimensions. donaldson [48] and uhlenbeck

and yau [49] have shown that picking a solution of the hermitian yangmills equations is equivalent

to the topological problem of choosing a semi-stable, holomorphic bundle with the structure group

being the complexication e8c of e8. it is this second formulation we will use in this paper and
we will often refer to xing the background gauge elds as simply choosing a gauge bundle. in the

following, we will denote both the real and complexied groups by e8, letting context dictate which
group is being referred to. (in general, we will denote any group g and its complexication gc

simply as g). these semi-stable, holomorphic gauge bundles are, a priori, allowed to be arbitrary in

all other respects. in particular, there is no requirement that the spin-connection of the calabiyau

three-fold be embedded into an su (3) subgroup of the gauge connection of one of the e8 bundles,
the so-called standard embedding. this generalization to arbitrary semi-stable holomorphic gauge

bundles is what is referred to as non-standard embedding. the terms standard and non-standard

embedding are historical and somewhat irrelevant in the context of m -theory, where no choice of

embedding can ever set the entire three-form cijk to zero. for this reason, we will avoid those
terms and simply refer to arbitrary semi-stable holomorphic e8 gauge bundles. fixing the gauge
bundle will in general completely break the e8 gauge symmetry in the low-energy theory. however,
it is clear, that in order to preserve a non-trivial low-energy gauge group, we can restrict the

transition functions to be elements of any subgroup g of e8, such as g = u (n), su (n) or sp(n).
we will refer to the restricted bundle as a semi-stable, holomorphic g bundle, or simply as a g

bundle. it is clear that the g1 bundle on one orbifold plane and the g2 bundle on the other plane
need not, generically, have the same subgroups g1 and g2 of e8. we will denote the semi-stable
holomorphic gauge bundle on the i-th orbifold plane by vi and the associated structure group by
gi.

in addition, as discussed in [3] and [34, 36], we will allow for the presence of ve-branes located

4

at points throughout the orbifold interval. the ve-branes will preserve n = 1 supersymme-

try provided they are wrapped on holomorphic two-cycles within x and otherwise span the at

minkowski space m4 [3, 50, 51]. the inclusion of ve-branes is essential for a complete discussion of
m -theory vacua. the reason for this is that, given a calabiyau three-fold background, the pres-

ence of ve-branes allows one to construct large numbers of gauge bundles that would otherwise

be disallowed [34, 36].

the requirements of gauge and gravitational anomaly cancellation on the two orbifold xed

planes, as well as anomaly cancellation on each ve-brane worldvolume, places a further very

strong constraint on, and relationship between, the space-time manifold, the gauge bundles and

the ve-brane structure of the vacuum. specically, anomaly cancellation necessitates the addition

of magnetic sources to the four-form eld strength bianchi identity. the modied bianchi identity

is given by

(dg)11 i j k l = 22(cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3h2j (0)(x11)+
2j (n +1)(x11  ) +

n

xn=1

j (n)((x11  xn) + (x11 + xn))# i j k l

(2.2)

the sources j (0) and j (n +1) on the orbifold planes are

and

j (0) = 

1

162 (cid:18)trf (1)  f (1) 

1
2

j (n +1) = 

1

162 (cid:18)trf (2)  f (2) 

trr  r(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)x11=0
trr  r(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)x11=0

1
2

(2.3)

(2.4)

respectively. the two-form f (i) is the eld strength of a connection on the gauge bundle vi of
the i-th orbifold plane and r is the curvature two-form on the calabi-yau three-fold. by tr
for the gauge elds we mean 1
30 -th of the trace in the 248 representation of e8, while for the
curvature it is the trace in the fundamental representation of the tangent space so(10). we have
also introduced n additional sources j (n), where n = 1, . . . , n . these arise from n ve-branes
located at x11 = x1, . . . , xn where 0  x1    xn  . note that each ve-brane at x = xn
has to be paired with a mirror ve-brane at x = xn with the same source since the bianchi
identity must be even under the z2 orbifold symmetry. these sources are four-form delta functions
localized on the vebrane world-volume. as forms there are poincare dual to the six-dimensional

cycles of the vebrane world volumes. (this duality is summarized in appendix a). in particular

their normalization is such that there are in integer cohomology classes.

non-zero source terms on the right hand side of the bianchi identity (2.2) preclude the simulta-

neous vanishing of all components of the three-form cijk. the result of this is that, to next order

5

in the horavawitten expansion parameter 2/3, the space-time of the supersymmetry preserving

vacua gets deformed away from that given in expression (2.1). as discussed above, this deforma-

tion of the vacuum need not concern us here. in this paper, we will focus on yet another aspect of

the bianchi identity (2.2), a topological condition that constrains the cohomology of the vacuum.

this constraint is found as follows. consider integrating the bianchi identity (2.2) over any ve-
cycle which spans the orbifold interval together with an arbitrary four-cycle c4 in the calabi-yau
three-fold. since dg is exact, this integral must vanish. physically, this is the statement that there

can be no net charge in a compact space, since there is nowhere for the ux to escape. performing

the integral over the orbifold interval, we derive, using (2.2), that

n +1

xn=0zc4

j (n) = 0

(2.5)

hence, the total magnetic charge over c4 vanishes. since this is true for an arbitrary four-cycle c4
in the calabi-yau three-fold, it follows that the sum of the sources must be cohomologically trivial.

that is

"n +1
xn=0

j (n)# = 0

(2.6)

(throughout this papar we will use the notation [] to refer to the cohomology class of , in this

case a closed four-form.) the physical meaning of this expression becomes more transparent if we

rewrite it using equations (2.3) and (2.4). using these expressions, equation (2.6) becomes



1

162 htrf (1)  f (1)i 

1

162 htrf (2)  f (2)i +

1
162 [trr  r] +

n

xn=1hj (n)i = 0

(2.7)

it is useful to recall that the second chern class of an arbitrary g bundle v , thought of as an e8
sub-bundle, is dened to be

c2(v ) = 

1
162 [trf  f ]

(2.8)

similarly, the second chern class of the tangent bundle of the calabi-yau manifold x is given by

c2(t x) = 

1
162 [trr  r]

(2.9)

where as above the trace is taken in the vector representation of so(6)  su (3). it follows that
expression (2.7) can be written as

where

c2(v1) + c2(v2) + [w ] = c2(t x)

[w ] =

n

[j (n)]

xn=1

6

(2.10)

(2.11)

is the four-form cohomology class associated with the ve-branes. this is a fundamental constraint

imposed on the vacuum structure. we will explore this cohomology condition in great detail in this

paper. since the chern classes are integer, this is a condition between integer classes (or rather the
image of h 4(x, z) in h 4
arbitrary four-cycle c4 yields the integral expression

dr(x, r) as derived). this means that integrating this constraint over an

n1(c4) + n2(c4) + n5(c4) = nr(c4)

(2.12)

which states that the sum of the number of gauge instantons on the two orbifold planes, plus

the sum of the ve-brane magnetic charges, must equal the instanton number for the calabi-yau

tangent bundle, a number which is xed once the calabi-yau three-fold is chosen. note that the

normalizatio is such that one unit of ve-brane charge is equal to one unit of instanton charge.

to summarize, we are considering vacuum states of m -theory with the following structure.

 space-time is taken to have the form

m11 = m4  s1/z2  x

(2.13)

where x is a calabi-yau three-fold.

 there is a semi-stable holomorphic gauge bundle vi with ber group gi  e8 over the calabi-
yau three-fold on the i-th orbifold xed plane for i = 1, 2. the structure groups g1 and g2
of the two bundles can be any subgroups of e8 and need not be the same.

 we allow for the presence of ve-branes in the vacuum, which are wrapped on holomorphic

two-cycles within x and are parallel to the orbifold xed planes.

 the calabi-yau three-fold, the gauge bundles and the ve-branes are subject to the cohomo-

logical constraint on x

c2(v1) + c2(v2) + [w ] = c2(t x)

(2.14)

where c2(vi) and c2(t x) are the second chern classes of the gauge bundle vi and the tangent
bundle t x respectively and [w ] is the class associated with the ve-branes .

vacua of this type will be referred to as non-perturbative heterotic m-theory vacua.

the discussion given in this section is completely generic, in that it applies to any calabi-yau

three-fold and any gauge bundles that can be constructed over it. however, realistic particle physics

theories require the explicit construction of these gauge bundles. until now, such constructions

have been carried out for the restricted cases of standard or non-standard embeddings without

ve-branes. these restrictions make it very dicult to obtain realistic particle physics theories,

that is, theories with three families, appropriate gauge groups and so on. it is the purpose of this

7

paper to resolve these diculties by explicitly constructing theories with non-perturbative heterotic

m -theory vacua, utilizing the freedom introduced by including ve-branes.

specically, we will present a formalism for the construction of semi-stable holomorphic gauge

bundles with ber groups g1 and g2 over the two orbifold xed planes. in this paper, for specicity,
we will restrict the structure groups to be

gi = u (ni) or su (ni)

(2.15)

for i = 1, 2. other structure groups, such as sp(n) or exceptional groups, will be discussed else-

where. our explicit bundle constructions will be achieved over the restricted, but rich, set of ellip-

tically bered calabi-yau three-folds which admit a section. such three-folds have been extensively

discussed within the context of duality between string theory and m - and f -theory. independent

of this use, however, elliptically bered calabiyau three-folds with a section are known to be the

simplest class of calabiyau spaces on which one can explicitly construct bundles, compute chern

classes, moduli spaces and so on [37, 38, 39]. this makes them a compelling choice for the con-

struction of concrete particle physics theories. having constructed the bundles, one can explicitly

calculate the gauge bundle chern classes c2(vi) for i = 1, 2, as well as the tangent bundle chern
class c2(t x). having done so, one can then nd the class [w ] of the ve-branes using the coho-
mology condition (2.10). that is, in this paper we will present a formalism in which the structure

of non-perturbative m -theory vacua can be calculated.

as will be discussed in detail below, having constructed a non-perturbative vacuum, we can

compute the number of low energy families and the yang-mills gauge group associated with that

vacuum. we will show that, because of the exibility introduced by the presence of ve-branes,

we will easily construct non-perturbative vacua with three-families. similarly, one easily nds

phenomenologically interesting gauge groups, such as e6, su (5) and so(10), as the e8 subgroups
commutant with the g-bundle structure groups, such as su (3), su (4) and su (5) respectively, on

the observable orbifold xed plane.

in addition, using the cohomology constraint 2.10, one can

explicitly determine the cohomology class [w ] of the ve-branes for a specic vacuum. hence, one

can compute the holomorphic curve associated with the ve-branes exactly and determine all of its

geometrical attributes. these include the number of its irreducible components, which tells us the

number of independent ve-branes, and its genus, which will tell us the minimal gauge group on

the ve-brane worldvolume when dimensionally reduced on the holomorphic curve. furthermore,

we are, in general, able to compute the entire moduli space of the holomorphic curve. this can

tell us about gauge group enhancement on the ve-brane worldvolume, for example. in [36], we

discussed the generic properties of examples of holomorphic curves associated with ve-branes. we

will present a more detailed discussion in [46].

finally, we want to point out that there are more moduli associated with these non-perturbative

vacua. these are (1) the moduli associated with the gauge instantons on the two orbifold planes

8

and (2) the translation moduli of the ve-branes in the orbifold dimension. taken along with

the ve-brane holomorphic curve moduli, these form an enormously complicated, but physically

rich, space of non-perturbative vacua. the structure of the full moduli space of non-perturbative

heterotic m -theory vacua will be discussed elsewhere.

3 elliptically fibered calabiyau three-folds

as discussed previously, we will consider non-perturbative vacua where the calabiyau three-fold

is an elliptic bration which admits a section. in this section, we give an introduction to these

spaces, summarizing the properties we will need in order to compute explicitly properties of the

vacua.

an elliptically bered calabiyau three-fold x consists of a base b, which is a complex two-

surface, and an analytic map

 : x  b

with the property that for a generic point b  b, the ber

eb = 1(b)

(3.1)

(3.2)

is an elliptic curve. that is, eb is a riemann surface of genus one. in addition, we will require that
there exist a global section, denoted , dened to be an analytic map

 : b  x

(3.3)

that assigns to every point b  b the zero element (b) = p  eb discussed below. the requirement
that the elliptic bration have a section is crucial for duality to f -theory and to make contact with

the chern class formulas in [37]. however, this assumption does not seem fundamentally essential

and we will explore bundles without sections in future work [52]. the calabiyau three-fold must

be a complex kahler manifold. this implies that the base is itself a complex manifold, while we have

already assumed that the ber is a riemann surface and so has a complex structure. furthermore,

the bration must be holomorphic, that is, it must have holomorphic transition functions. finally,

the condition that the calabiyau three-fold has vanishing rst chern class puts a further constraint

on the types of bration allowed.

let us start by briey summarizing the properties of an elliptic curve e.

it is a genus one
riemann surface and so can be embedded in the two-dimensional complex projective space p2. a

simple way to do this is by using the homogeneous weierstrass equation

zy2 = 4x3  g2xz2  g3z3

9

(3.4)

where x, y and z are complex homogeneous coordinates on p2.

it follows that we identify

(x, y, z) with (x, y, z) for any non-zero complex number . the parameters g2 and g3 en-
code the dierent complex structures one can put on the torus. provided z 6= 0, we can rescale to
ane coordinates where z = 1. we then see, viewed as a map from x to y, that there are two branch
cuts in the x-plane, linking x =  and the three roots of the cubic equation 4x3  g2x  g3 = 0.
when any two of these points coincide, the elliptic curve becomes singular. this corresponds to

one of the cycles in the torus shrinking to zero. such singular behaviour is characterized by the

discriminant

 = g3

2  27g2

3

(3.5)

vanishing. finally, we note that the complex structure provides a natural notion of addition of

points on the elliptic curve. the torus can also be considered as the complex plane modulo a

discrete group of translations. addition of points in the complex plane then induces a natural

notion of addition of points on the torus. translated to the weierstrass equation, the identity

element corresponds to the point where x/z and y/z become innite. thus, in ane coordinates,
the element p  e is the point x = y = . this can be scaled elsewhere in non-ane coordinates,
such as to x = z = 0, y = 1.

the elliptic bration is dened by giving the elliptic curve e over each point in the base b.

if we assume the bration has a global section, and in this paper we do, then on each coordinate

patch this requires giving the parameters g2 and g3 in the weierstrass equation as functions on the
base. globally, g2 and g3 will be sections of appropriate line bundles on b. in fact, specifying the
type of an elliptic bration over b is equivalent to specifying a line bundle on b. given the elliptic
bration  : x  b, we dene l as the line bundle on b whose ber at b  b is the cotangent line
tp(eb) to the elliptic curve at the origin. that is, l is the conormal bundle to the section (b)
in x. conversely, given l, we take x and y to scale as sections of l2 and l3 respectively, which
means that g2 and g3 should be sections of l4 and l6. by li we mean the tensor product of the
line bundle l with itself i times. in conclusion, we see that the elliptic bration is characterized
by a line bundle l over the base b together with a choice of sections g2 and g3 of l4 and l6.

note that the set of points in the base over which the bration becomes singular is given by

the vanishing of the discriminant  = g3
3. it follows from the above discussion that  is a
section of the line bundle l12. the zeros of  then naturally dene a divisor, which in this case is
a complex curve, in the base. since  is a section of l12, the cohomology class of the discriminant
curve is 12 times the cohomology class of the divisors dened by sections of l.

2  27g2

finally, we come to the important condition that on a calabiyau three-fold x the rst chern

class of the tangent bundle tx must vanish. the canonical bundle kx is the line bundle constructed

10

as the determinant of the holomorphic cotangent bundle of x. the condition that

c1(tx ) = 0

(3.6)

implies that kx = o, where o is the trivial bundle. this, in turn, puts a constraint on l. to see
this, note that the adjunction formula tells us that, since b is a divisor of x, the canonical bundle

kb of b is given by

kb = kx|b  nb/x

(3.7)

where nb/x is the normal bundle of b in x and by kx|b we mean the restriction of the canonical
bundle kx to the base b. from the above discussion, we know that

inserting this into (3.7) tells us that

n 1
b/x = l,

kx|b = o

l = k 1

b

(3.8)

(3.9)

this condition means that k 4

b and k 6

b must have sections g2 and g3 respectively. furthermore,
the calabiyau property imposes restrictions on how the curves where these sections vanish are
allowed to intersect. it is possible to classify the surfaces on which k 4
b have such sections.
these are found to be [53] the del pezzo, hirzebruch and enriques surfaces, as well as blow-ups of

b and k 6

hirzebruch surfaces. in this paper we will discuss the rst three possibilities in detail.

as noted previously, in order to discuss the anomaly cancellation condition, we will need the

second chern class of the holomorphic tangent bundle of x. friedman, morgan and witten [37]

show that it can be written in terms of the chern classes of the holomorphic tangent bundle of b

as

c2(t x) = c2(b) + 11c1(b)2 + 12c1(b)

(3.10)

where the wedge product is understood, c1(b) and c2(b) are the rst and second chern classes of
b respectively and  is the two-form poincare dual to the global section. we have used the fact

that

in writing (3.10).

c1(l) = c1(k 1

b ) = c1(b)

(3.11)

4 spectral cover constructions

in this section, we follow the construction of semi-stable holomorphic bundles on elliptically bered

calabiyau manifolds presented in [37, 38, 39]. the idea is to understand the bundle structure

11

on a given elliptic ber and then to patch these bundles together over the base. the authors

in [37, 38, 39] discuss a number of techniques for constructing bundles with dierent gauge groups.

here we will restrict ourselves to u (n) and su (n) sub-bundles of e8. these are sucient to give
suitable phenomenological gauge groups. this restriction allows us to consider only the simplest of

the dierent constructions, namely that via spectral covers. in this section, we will summarize the

spectral cover construction, concentrating on the properties necessary for an explicit discussion of
non-perturbative vacua. we note that for structure groups g 6= u (n) or su (n), the construction
of bundles is more complicated than the construction of rank n vector bundles presented here.

as we have already mentioned, the condition of supersymmetry requires that the e8 gauge
bundles admit a eld strength satisfying the hermitian yangmills equations. donaldson, uhlen-

beck and yau [48, 49] have shown that this is equivalent to the topological requirement that the

associated bundle be semi-stable, with transition functions in the complexication of the gauge

group. since we are considering u (n) and su (n) sub-bundles, this means u (n)c = gl(n, c) and

su (n)c = sl(n, c) respectively. the spectral cover construction is given in terms of this latter

formulation of the supersymmetry condition. note that the distinction between semi-stable and

stable bundles corresponds to whether the hermitian yang-mills eld strength is reducible or not.

this refers to whether, globally, it can be diagonalized into parts coming from dierent subgroups

of the full gauge group. more precisely, it refers to whether or not the holonomy commutes with

more that just the center of the group. usually, a generic solution of the hermitian yangmills

equations corresponds to a stable bundle. however, on some spaces, for instance on an elliptic

curve, the generic case is semi-stable.

u(n) and su(n) bundles over an elliptic curve

we begin by considering semi-stable bundles on a single elliptic curve e. a theorem of looijenga [54]

states that the moduli space of such bundles for any simply-connected group of rank r is an

r-dimensional complex weighted projective space. for the simply-connected group su (n), this
moduli space is the projective space pn1. u (n) is not simply-connected. u (n) bundles have a

discrete integer invariant, their degree or rst chern class, which we denote by d. let k be the

greatest common divisor of d and n. it can be shown that the moduli space of a u (n) bundle of
degree d over a single elliptic curve e is the k-th symmetric product of e, denoted by e[k]. in this

paper, we will restrict our discussion to u (n) bundles of degree zero. for these bundles, the moduli
space is e[n].

a holomorphic u (n)c = gl(n, c) bundle v over an elliptic curve e is a rank n complex vector

bundle. as discussed earlier, we will denote u (n)c simply as u (n), letting context dictate which

group is being referred to. to dene the bundle, we need to specify the holonomy; that is, how

the bundle twists as one moves around in the elliptic curve. the holonomy is a map from the

12

fundamental group 1 of the elliptic curve into the gauge group. since the fundamental group of
the torus is abelian, the holonomy must map into the maximal torus of the gauge group. this

means we can diagonalize all the transition functions, so that v becomes the direct sum of line

bundles (one-dimensional complex vector bundles)

v = n1    nn

(4.1)

furthermore, the weyl group permutes the diagonal elements, so that v only determines the ni
only up to permutations. to reduce from a u (n) bundle to an su (n) bundle, one imposes the

additional condition that the determinant of the transition functions be taken to be unity. this

implies that the product, formed by simply taking the product of the transition functions for each

bundle, satises

n1    nn = o

(4.2)

where o is the trivial bundle on e.

the semi-stable condition implies that the line bundles ni are of the same degree, which can be
taken to be zero. we can understand this from the hermitian yangmills equations. on a riemann

surface, these equations imply that the eld strength is actually zero. thus, the rst chern class
of each of the bundles ni must vanish, or equivalently ni must be of degree zero. on an elliptic
curve, this condition means that there is a unique point qi on e such that there is a meromorphic
section of ni which is allowed to have a pole at qi and is zero at the origin p. we can write this as
(4.3)

ni = o(qi)  o(p)1

let us briey clarify this notation. one can associate a line bundle to any divisor in a complex

manifold x. a divisor is a subspace dened locally by the vanishing of a single holomorphic function

or any linear combination of such subspaces d = pi aivi with integer coecients ai, and so are
spaces of one complex dimension lower than x. then the associated line bundle has a section
corresponding to a meromorphic function on x with poles of order  ai on the subspaces vi. (if ai
is negative then the function has a  ai-th order zero on vi.) by o(d) we mean the line bundle
associated with the divisor d. in particular, on a riemann surface, the divisors are collections of
points and for example o(qi) means the line bundle with a section corresponding to a meromorphic
function which is allowed to have a rst order pole at the particular point qi.

if one further restricts the structure group to be su (n), then condition (4.2) translates into the

requirement that

n

xi=1

(qi  p) = 0

(4.4)

where one uses the natural addition of points on e discussed above.

13

thus, on a given elliptic curve, giving a semi-stable u (n) bundle is equivalent to giving an

unordered (because of the weyl symmetry) n-tuple of points on the curve. an su (n) bundle has

the further restriction that pi(qi  p) = 0. for an su (n) bundle, these points can be represented

very explicitly as roots of an equation in the weierstrass coordinates describing the elliptic curve.

in ane coordinates, where z = 1, we write

s = a0 + a2x + a3y + a4x2 + a5x2y +  + anxn/2

(4.5)

(if n is odd the last term is anx(n3)/2y.) solving the equation s = 0, together with the weierstrass
equation (hence the appearance of only linear terms in y in s), gives n roots corresponding to

the n points qi, where one can show that pi(qi  p) = 0 as required. one notes that the roots

are determined by the coecients ai only up to an overall scale factor. thus the moduli space of
roots qi is the projective space pn1 as anticipated, with the coecients ai acting as homogeneous
coordinates.

in summary, semi-stable u (n) bundles on an elliptic curve are described by an unordered n-tuple

of points qi on the elliptic curve. su (n) bundles have the additional condition thatpi(qip) = 0.

in the su (n) case, these points can be realized as roots of the equation s = 0 and give a moduli
space of bundles which is simply pn1, as mentioned above.

the spectral cover and the line bundle n
given that a bundle on an elliptic curve is described by the n-tuple qi, it seems reasonable that
a bundle on an elliptic bration determines how the n points vary as one moves around the base

b. the set of all the n points over the base is called the spectral cover c and is an n-fold cover of
b with c : c  b. the spectral cover alone does not contain enough information to allow us to
construct the bundle v . to do this, one must specify an additional line bundle, denoted by n , on
the spectral cover c. one obtains n , given the vector bundle v , as follows. consider the elliptic
ber eb at any point b  b. it follows from the previous section that

v, eb| = n1b    nnb

(4.6)

where nib for i = 1, .., n are line bundles on eb.
in particular, we get a decomposition of the
ber v(b) of v at p = (b). let v |b be the restriction of v to the base b embedded in x via
the section . we have just shown that the n-dimensional bers of v |b come equipped with a
decomposition into a sum of lines. as point b moves around the base b, these n lines move in one
to one correspondence with the n points qi above b. this data species a unique line bundle 1
n on c such that the direct image cn is v |b with its given decomposition. the direct image
1when c is singular, n may be more generally a rank-1 torsion free sheaf on c. for non-singular c this is the

same as a line bundle.

14

cn is a vector bundle on b whose ber at a generic point b, where the inverse image 1
consists of the n distinct points qi, is the direct sum of the n lines n|qi.

c (b)

construction of bundles

we are now in a a position to construct the rank n vector bundle starting with the spectral data
[37, 38, 39]. the spectral data consists of the spectral cover c  x together with the line bundle
n on c. the spectral cover is a divisor (hypersurface) c  x which is of degree n over the base
b; that is, the restriction c : c  b of the elliptic bration is an n-sheeted branched cover.
equivalently, the cohomology class of c in h 2(x, z) must be of the form

[c] = n + 

(4.7)

where  is a class in h 2(b, z) and  is the section. this is equivalent to saying that the line bundle
ox (c) on x determined by c, whose sections are meromorphic functions on x with simple poles
along c, is given by

ox (c) = ox (n)  m

(4.8)

where m is some line bundle on x whose restriction to each ber eb is of degree zero. written in
this formulation

 = c1(m)

(4.9)

the line bundle n is, at this point, completely arbitrary.

given this data, one can construct a rank n vector bundle v on x. it is easy to describe the
restriction v |b of v to the base b. it is simply the direct image v |b = cn . it is also easy to
describe the restriction of v to a general elliptic ber eb. let c  eb = 1
c (b) = q1 + . . . + qn
and   eb = p. then each qi determines a line bundle ni of degree zero on eb whose sections are
the meromorphic functions on eb with rst order poles at qi which vanish at p. the restriction
v |eb is then the sum of the ni. now the main point is that there is a unique vector bundle v on
x with these specied restrictions to the base and the bers.

to describe the entire vector bundle v , we use the poincare bundle p. this is a line bundle
on the ber product x b x . here x  is the dual bration to x. in general, this is another
elliptic bration which is locally, but not globally, isomorphic to x. however, when x has a section
(which we assume), then x and x  are globally isomorphic, so we can identify them if we wish.
(actually, the spectral cover c lives most naturally as a hypersurface in the dual x , not in x.

when we described it above as living in x, we were implicitly using the identication of x and
x .) the ber product x b x  is a space of complex dimension four. it is bered over b, the
ber over b  b being the ordinary product eb  e 
b of the two bers. now, the poincare bundle

15

p is determined by the following two properties: (1) its restriction p|ebx to a ber eb  x, for
x  e 
b, is the line bundle on eb determined by x while (2) its restriction to  b x  is the trivial
bundle. explicitly, p can be given by the bundle whose sections are meromorphic functions on
x b x  with rst order poles on d and which vanish on  b x  and on x b . that is

p = oxb x (d   b x   x b )  kb

(4.10)

where d is the diagonal divisor representing the graph of the isomorphism x  x .

using this poincare bundle, we can nally describe the entire vector bundle v in terms of the

spectral data. it is given by

v = 1(2

n  p)

(4.11)

here 1 and 2 are the two projections of the ber product x b c onto the two factors x and
c. the two properties of the poincare bundle guarantee that the restrictions of this v to the base
and the bers indeed agree with the intuitive versions of vb and v |eb given above.

in general, this procedure produces u (n) bundles. in order to get su (n) bundles, two additional
conditions must hold. first, the condition that the line bundle m in equation (4.8) has degree
zero on each ber eb must be strengthened to require that the restriction of m to eb is the trivial
bundle. hence, m is the pullback to x of a line bundle on b which, for simplicity, we also denote
by m. this guarantees that the restrictions to the bers v |eb are su (n) bundles. the second
condition is that v |b must be an su (n) bundle as well. that is, the line bundle n on c is such that
the rst chern class c1 of the resulting bundle v vanishes. this condition, and its ramications,
will be discussed in the next section.

u (n) vector bundles on the orbifold planes of heterotic m -theory are always sub-bundles of

an e8 vector bundle. as such, issues arise concerning their stability or semi-stability which are
important and require considerable analysis. furthermore, the associated chern classes require an

extended analysis to compute. for these reasons, in this paper, we will limit our discussion to

su (n) bundles, which are easier to study, and postpone the important discussion of u (n) bundles

for a future publication [52].

chern classes and restrictions on the bundle

as discussed above, the global condition that the bundle be su (n) is that

c1(v ) = (1/2)trf = 0

(4.12)

this condition is clearly true since, for structure group su (n), the trace must vanish. a formula

for c1(v ) can be extracted from the discussion in friedman, morgan and witten [37]. one nds

16

that

c1(v ) = c(cid:18)c1(n ) +

1
2

c1(c) 

1
2

c1(b)(cid:19)

(4.13)

where c1(b) means the rst chern class of the tangent bundle of b considered as a complex vector
bundle, and similarly for c, while c is the projection from the spectral cover onto b; that is,
c : c  b. the operators 
c and c are the pull-back and push-forward of cohomology classes
between b and c. the condition that c1(v ) is zero then implies that

c1(n ) = 

1
2

c1(c) +

1
2


cc1(b) + 

where  is some cohomology class satisfying the equation

c = 0

the general solution for  constructed from cohomology classes is

 =  (n  

c + n

cc1(b))

(4.14)

(4.15)

(4.16)

where  is a rational number and  is the global section of the elliptic bration. appropriate values

for  will emerge shortly. from (4.7) we recall that c1(c) is given by

c1(c) = n  
c
combining the equations (4.14), (4.16) and (4.17) yields

c1(n ) = n(cid:18) 1

2

+ (cid:19)  +(cid:18)1

2  (cid:19) 

c +(cid:18)1

2

(4.17)

(4.18)

+ n(cid:19) 

cc1(b)

essentially, this means that the bundle n is completely determined in terms of the elliptic bra-
tion and m.
it is important to note, however, that there is not always a solution for n . the
reason for this is that c1(n ) must be integer, a condition that puts a substantial constraint on the
allowed bundles. to see this, note that the section is a horizontal divisor, having unit intersection
number with the elliptic ber. on the other hand, the quantities 

c are vertical,
corresponding to curves in the base lifted to the ber and so have zero intersection number with

cc1(b) and 

the ber. therefore, we cannot choose  to cancel  and, hence, the coecient of  must, by itself,
be an integer . this implies that a consistent bundle n will exist if either

or

n is odd,  = m +

1
2

n is even,  = m,

 = c1(b) mod 2

17

(4.19)

(4.20)

where m is an integer. here, the  = c1(b) mod 2 condition means that  and c1(b) dier by
an even element of h 2(b, z). note that when n is even, we cannot choose  arbitrarily. these
conditions are only sucient for the existence of a consistent line bundle n . they are also sucient
for all the examples we consider in this paper, and are the only classes of solutions which is easy
to describe in general. however, other solutions do exist. we could, for example take n = 4,  = 1
4
and  = 2c1(b) (mod 4), or n = 5,  = 1

10 and  = 0 (mod 5).

finally, we can give the explicit chern classes for the su (n) vector bundle v . friedman,

morgan and witten calculate c1(v ) and c2(v ), while curio and andreas [43, 44] have found c3(v ).
the results are

c1(v ) = 0

1
24

c2(v ) =  
c3(v ) = 2 (  nc1(b))

c1(b)2(cid:0)n3  n(cid:1) +

1

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19) n (  nc1(b))

(4.21)

(4.22)

(4.23)

where the wedge product is understood.

5 summary of elliptic fibrations and bundles

the previous two sections are somewhat abstract. for the sake of clarity, we will here summarize

those results which are directly relevant to constructing physically acceptable non-perturbative

vacua. first consider the calabiyau space.

 an elliptically bered calabiyau three-fold is composed of a two-fold base b and elliptic
in this paper, we consider only those elliptic

curves eb bered over each point b  b.
brations that admit a global section .

 the elliptic bration is characterized by a single line bundle l over b. the vanishing of the

rst chern class of the canonical bundle kx of the calabiyau three-fold x implies that

l = k 1
where kb is the canonical bundle of the base b.

b

(5.1)

 from the previous condition, it follows that the base b is restricted to del pezzo, hirzebruch

and enriques surfaces, as well as blow-ups of hirzebruch surfaces.

 the second chern class of the holomorphic tangent bundle of x is given by

c2(t x) = c2(b) + 11c1(b)2 + 12c1(b)

(5.2)

where c1(b) and c2(b) are the rst and second chern classes of b.

18

next we summarize the spectral cover construction of semi-stable holomophic gauge bundles.

 a general semi-stable su (n) gauge bundle v is determined by two line bundles, m and n .

the relevant quantities associated with m and n are their rst chern classes

 = c1(m)

(5.3)

and c1(n ) respectively. the class c1(n ), in addition to depending on n, , c1(b) and , also
contains a rational number .

 the condition that c1(n ) be an integer leads to the sucient but not necessary constraints

on  and  given by

n is odd,

 = m +

n is even,  = m,

1
2
 = c1(b) mod 2

where m is an integer.

 the relevant chern classes of an su (n) gauge bundle v are given by

c1(v ) = 0

1
24

c2(v ) =  
c3(v ) = 2 (  nc1(b))

c1(b)2(cid:0)n3  n(cid:1) +

1

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19) n (  nc1(b))

(5.4)

(5.5)

(5.6)

(5.7)

how can one use the this data to construct realistic particle physics theories? one proceeds as

follows.

 choose a base b from one of the allowed bases; namely, a del pezzo, hirzebruch or enriques
surface, or a blow-up of a hirzebruch surface. the associated chern classes c1(b) and c2(b)
can be computed for any of these surfaces.

this allows one to construct the second chern class of the calabi-yau tangent bundle and a part

of the gauge bundle chern classes.

 specify  and  subject to the constraints (5.4).

given appropriate  and , one can completely determine the relevant gauge bundle chern classes.

in addition we must satisfy the cohomology condition (2.10). this relates the chern classes to the

curves on which the ve-branes wrap and it is what we will turn to next.

19

6 eective curves and five-branes

let us now consider the ve-branes. having discussed the calabiyau three-fold x and the gauge

bundle, the third ingredient for dening a non-perturbative vacuum, is to give a set of ve-branes

wrapped on holomorphic curves within x. we recall that the cohomology condition (2.10) xes

the cohomology class associated with the ve-branes so that

[w ] = c2(t x)  c2(v1)  c2(v2)

(6.1)

in order to make physical sense, this class must be poincare dual to the homology class of a set

of curves in the calabiyau space. as discussed in appendix a, this means that [w ] must be

eective. in general, this will restrict the bundles vi one can choose. to understand the form of
this restriction we need to nd the set of eective curves on x.

consider a complex manifold x which is an elliptic bration over a base b. let us suppose

we have found an eective class in h2(b, z). then, it naturally also lies in an eective homology
class in h2(x, z) of the elliptic bration. note that the bration structure guarantees that if two
curves are in dierent classes in the base, then they are in dierent classes in the full manifold x.

this implies, among other things, that if one nds the eective generating class of the mori cone

of b, these classes remain distinct classes of x. in addition, there is at least one other eective

class that is not associated with the base. this is the class f of the ber itself. there may also be

other eective classes, for example, those related to points where the ber degenerates. however,

we will ignore these since they will not appear in the homology classes of the ve-branes, our main

interest in this paper.

the algebraic classes that do appear naturally are quadratic polynomials in classes of the line

bundles. the line bundle classes are represented by two-forms or equivalently, under poincare

duality, by divisors, which are surfaces in x. classes such as c2(vi), given in (5.6), are quadratic
in these line bundle classes. in terms of homology they are represented by curves corresponding

to the intersection of two divisors. the only line bundle classes on a general elliptically bered
calabiyau three-fold x are the base b and the divisors 1(c), where c is a curve in b. any
quadratic polynomial in these classes can be written as

w = wb + af f

(6.2)

where wb is an algebraic homology class in the base manifold b embedded in x and af is some
integer. under what conditions is w an eective class? it is clear that w is eective if wb is an
eective class in the base and af  0. one can also prove that the converse is true in almost all
cases. one sees this as follows. first, unless a curve is purely in the ber, in which case wb = 0,
the fact that x is elliptically bered means that all curves w project to curves in the base. the

class [w ] similarly projects to the class wb. the projection of an eective class must be eective,

20

thus if [w ] is eective in x then so is wb in b. the only question then is whether there are
eective curves in x with negative af . to address this we use the fact that any eective curve
must have non-negative intersection with any eective divisor in x unless the curve is contained

within the divisor. the intersections of [w ] with the eective divisor classes mentioned above are

given by

1(c)  w = c  wb

b  w = kb  wb + af

(6.3)

where the intersections on the right-hand side are for classes in the base. the second expression
is derived by adjunction, recalling, from (3.9), that the normal bundle to b is nb/x = l = kb.
from the rst intersection one simply deduces again that if [w ] is eective then so is wb. suppose
that af is non-zero. then w cannot be contained within b and so from the second expression we
have af  kb wb. from appendix b we recall that for del pezzo and enriques surfaces, kb is
nef, so that its intersection with any eective class wb is non-negative. thus we do have af ) for
[w ] to be eective. the exception is a hirzebruch surface for r  3. we then have kb e = 2 > 0
but kb  s = 2  r < 0.

in conclusion, we see that, rst [w ] is eective if and only if wb is an eective class in b and
af  0 for any del pezzo or enriques surface. second, this is also true for a hirzebruch surface
fr, with the exception of when wb happens to contain the negative section s and r  3. in this
paper, for simplicity, we will consider only those cases for which the statement is true. thus, under

this restriction, we have that

w is eective  wb is eective in b and af  0

(6.4)

this reduces the question of nding the eective curves in x to knowing the generating set of

eective curves in the base b. for the set of base surfaces b we are considering, nding such

generators is always possible.

for simplicity, in this paper we will allow for arbitrary semi-stable gauge bundles v1, which we
henceforth call v , on the rst orbifold plane, but always take the gauge bundle v2 to be trivial.
physically, this corresponds to allowing observable sector gauge groups to be subgroups, such as

su (5), so(10) or e6, of e8 but leaving the hidden sector e8 gauge group unbroken. we do this
only for simplicity. our formalism also allows an analysis of the general case where the hidden

sector e8 gauge group is broken by a non-trivial bundle v2. with this restriction, equation (6.1)
simplies to

inserting the expressions (5.2) and (4.22) for the second chern classes, we nd that

[w ] = c2(t x)  c2(v )

[w ] = wb + af f

21

(6.5)

(6.6)

where

is the part of the class associated with the base b and

wb = (12c1(b)  )

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

n3  n
24 (cid:19) c1(b)2 

1
2

n(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19)  (  nc1(b))

(6.7)

(6.8)

is the part associated with the elliptic ber.

as we have already stated, to make physical sense, [w ] must be an eective class. this physical

requirement then implies, using the theorem (6.4), that necessarily

wb is eective in b,

af  0

(6.9)

this puts a further constraint on the allowed bundles in non-perturbative vacua. note, however,

that this condition is much weaker that the corresponding constraint without ve-branes. in that

case wb and af must vanish. it is this additional freedom which greatly facilitates the construction
of suitable particle physics vacua.

7 number of families and model building rules

the rst obvious physical criterion for constructing realistic particle physics models is that we

should be able to nd theories with a small number of families, preferably three. we will see that

this is, in fact, easy to do via the bundle constructions on elliptically bered calabiyau three-folds

that we are discussing. we start by deriving the three family criterion as discussed, for instance,

in green, schwarz and witten [55]. the form of this condition for elliptically bered calabiyau

manifolds was rst given by curio [43].

the number of families is related to the number of zero-modes of the dirac operator in the

presence of the gauge bundle on the calabiyau three-fold, since we want to count the number of

massless fermions of dierent chiralities. the original gauginos are in the adjoint representation of

e8. in this paper, we are considering only gauge bundles v with su (n) ber groups. to count
the number of families, we need to count the number of elds in the matter representations of the

low energy gauge group, that is, the subgroup of e8 commutant with su (n), and their complex
conjugates respectively. explicitly, in this paper, we will be interested in the following breaking

patterns

e8  su (3)  e6 : 248 = (8, 1)  (1, 78)  (3, 27)  (3, 27)

e8  su (4)  so(10) : 248 = (15, 1)  (1, 45)  (4, 16)  (4, 16)  (6, 10)
e8  su (5)  su (5) : 248 = (24, 1)  (1, 24)  (10, 5)  ( 10, 5)  (5, 10)  (5, 10)

(7.1)

22

note, however, that the methods presented here will apply to any breaking pattern with an su (n)

subgroup. we see that all the matter representations appear in the fundamental representation of

the structure group su (n). by denition, the index of the dirac operator measures the dierence

in the number of positive and negative chirality spinors, in this case, on the calabiyau three-fold.

since six-dimensional chirality is correlated with four-dimensional chirality, the index gives the

number of families. from the fact that all the relevant elds are in the fundamental representation

of su (n), we have that the number of generations is

ngen = index (v,6d) =zx

td (x)ch (v ) =

1

2zx

c3(v )

(7.2)

where td (x) is the todd class of x. for the case of su (n) bundles on elliptically bered calabi

yau three-folds, one can show, using equation (4.23) above, that the number of families becomes

ngen = (  nc1(b))

(7.3)

where we have integrated over the ber. hence, to obtain three families the bundle must be

constrained so that

3 =  (  nc1(b))

(7.4)

it is useful to express this condition in terms of the class wb given in equation (6.7) and integrated
over the ber. we nd that

3 = (cid:0)w 2

b  (24  n)wbc1(b) + 12(12  n)c1(b)2(cid:1)

furthermore, inserting the three family constraint into (6.8) gives

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

1
24

(n3  n)(cid:19) c1(b)2 

3n

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19)

(7.5)

(7.6)

we are now in a position to summarize all the rules and constraints that are required to produce

particle physics theories with three families. we have that the homology class associated with the

ve-branes is specically of the form

where

[w ] = wb + af f

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

wb = (12c1(b)  )
(n3  n)(cid:19) c1(b)2 

1
24

(7.7)

(7.8)

(7.9)

3n

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19)

and c1(b) and c2(b) are the rst and second chern classes of b.

the constraints for constructing particle physics vauca are then

23

 eective condition: the requirement that [w ] is the class of a set of physical ve-branes

constrains [w ] to be an eective. therefore, we must guarantee that

wb is eective in b,

af  0 integer

(7.10)

 three-family condition: the requirement that the theory have three families imposes the

further constraint that

to these conditions, we can add the remaining relevant constraint from section 4. it is

3 = (cid:0)w 2

b  (24  n)wbc1(b) + 12(12  n)c1(b)2(cid:1)

(7.11)

 bundle condition: the condition that c1(n ) be an integer leads to the constraints on wb

and  given by

n is odd,  = m +

1
2

n is even,  = m, wb = c1(b) mod 2

(7.12)

where m is an integer. recall that this condition is sucient, but not necessary.

note that in this last condition, the class , which appeared in constraint (5.4), has been replaced

by wb. that this replacement is valid can be seen as follows. for n odd, there is no constraint
on  and, hence, using (7.8), no constraint on wb. when n is even, it is sucient for  to satisfy
 = c1(b) mod 2. since 12c1(b) is an even element of h 2(b, z), it follows that wb = c1(b) mod 2.
it is important to note that all quantities and constraints have now been reduced to properties

of the base two-fold b. specically, if we know c1(b), c2(b), as well as a set of generators of
eective classes in b in which to expand wb, we will be able to exactly specify all appropriate non-
perturbative vacua. for the del pezzo, hirzebruch, enriques and blown-up hirzebruch surfaces, all

of these quantities are known.

finally, from the expressions in (7.1) we nd the following rule.

 if we denote by g the structure group of the gauge bundle and by h its commutant subgroup,

then

g = su (3) = h = e6

g = su (4) = h = so(10)

(7.13)

g = su (5) = h = su (5)
h corresponds to the low energy gauge group of the theory.

armed with the above rules, we now turn to the explicit construction of phenomenologically relevant

non-perturbative vacua.

24

8 three family models

in this section, we will construct four explicit solutions satisfying the above rules.

in general,

we will look for solutions where the class representing the curve on which the vebranes wrap

is comparatively simple. as discussed above, the allowed base surfaces b of elliptically bered

calabiyau three-folds which admit a section are restricted to be the del pezzo, hirzebruch and

enriques surfaces, as well as blow-ups of hirzebruch surfaces. relevant properties of del pezzo,

hirzebruch and enriques surfaces, including their generators of eective curves, are given in the

appendix b. however, we now show that calabiyau three-folds of this type with an enriques base

never admit an eective ve-brane curve if one requires that there be three families. recall that

the cohomology class of the spectral cover must be of the form

[c] = n + 

(8.1)

and this necessarily is an eective class in x. we may assume that c does not contain (b).
otherwise, replace c in the following discussion with its subcover c  obtained by discarding the

appropriate multiples of (b). this implies that the class of the intersection of  with [c]

[c] = n2 + 

(8.2)

must be eective in the base b. let us restrict b to be an enriques surface. using the adjunction

formula, we nd that

where kb is the torsion class. since nkb vanishes for even n, it follows that when n is even

2 = kb

[c] = 

clearly,  is eective, since [c] is. for n odd, nkb = kb and, hence

[c] = kb + 

(8.3)

(8.4)

(8.5)

using the discussion in appendix b, one can still conclude that  is either an eective class or it

equals kb. from the fact that

c1(b) = kb

(8.6)

it follows, using equation (7.8), that the ve-brane class restricted to the enriques base is given by

wb = 12kb  

25

(8.7)

since 12kb vanishes, this becomes

wb = 

(8.8)

from which we can conclude that wb is never eective for non-vanishing class . since, as
explained above, wb must be eective for the ve-branes to be physical, such theories must be
discarded. the only possible loop-hole is when  vanishes or equals kb. however, in this case, it
follows from (7.3) that

ngen = 0

(8.9)

which is also physically unacceptable. we conclude that, on general grounds, calabiyau three-

folds with an enriques base never admit eective ve-brane curves if one requires that there be
three families 2. for this reason, we henceforth restrict our discussion to the remaining possibilities.

in this section, for specicity, the base b will always be chosen to be either a del pezzo surface or

a hirzebruch surface.

we rst give two su (5) examples, each on del pezzo surfaces; one where the base component,

wb, is simple and one where the ber component has a small coecient.

example 1: b = dp8, h = su(5)

we begin by choosing

h = su (5)

(8.10)

as the gauge group for our model. then it follows from (7.13) that we must choose the structure

group of the gauge bundle to be

g = su (5)

and, hence, n = 5.

at this point, it is necessary to explicitly choose the base surface, which we take to be

b = dp8

(8.11)

(8.12)

it follows from appendix b that for the del pezzo surface dp8, a basis for h2(dp8, z) composed
entirely of eective classes is given by l and ei for i = 1, .., 8 where

ei  ej = ij
2we thank e. witten for pointing out to us the likelihood of this conclusion.

l  ei = 0

l  l = 1

(8.13)

26

there are other eective classes in dp8 not obtainable as a linear combination of l and ei with
non-negative integer coecients, but we will not need them in this example. to these we add the

ber class f . furthermore

and

c1(b) = 3l 

ei

8

xr=1

c2(b) = 11

(8.14)

(8.15)

we now must specify the component of the ve-brane class in the base and the coecient 

subject to the three constraints (7.10), (7.11) and (7.12). since n is odd, the bundle constraint (7.12)
tells us that  = m + 1

2 for integer m. here we will choose m = 1 and wb such that

wb = 2e1 + e2 + e3

 =

3
2

(8.16)

since e1, e2 and e3 are eective, it follows that wb is also eective, as it must be. using the
above intersection rules, one can easily show that

w 2

b = 6,

wbc1(b) = 4,

c1(b)2 = 1

using these results, as well as n = 5 and  = 3

2 , one nds that

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

n3  n
24 (cid:19) c1(b)2 

3n

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19) = 17

(8.17)

(8.18)

since this is a positive integer, we have satised the eectiveness condition (7.10) and the full

ve-brane class [w ] is eective in the calabiyau three-fold x. finally, we nd that

(w 2

b  (24  n)wbc1(b) + 12(12  n)c1(b)2) = 3

(8.19)

and, therefore, the three family condition (7.11) is satised.

this completes our construction of this explicit non-perturbative vacuum. it represents a model

of particle physics with three families and gauge group h = su (5), along with explicit ve-branes

wrapped on a holomorphic curve with homology class

[w ] = 2e1 + e2 + e3 + 17f

(8.20)

the properties of the moduli space of the ve-branes were discussed in [36] and will be explored in

more detail in a future publication [46].

27

example 2: b = dp9, h = su(5)

as a second example, we again choose gauge group

and, hence, the structure group

h = su (5)

g = su (5)

then n = 5 and we can again choose m = 1 and, therefore

 =

3
2

in this example, we will take as a base surface

b = dp9

(8.21)

(8.22)

(8.23)

(8.24)

it follows from appendix b that a basis for h2(dp9, z) composed entirely of eective classes is
given by l and ei for i = 1, .., 9. in addition, there are other eective classes in dp9 not obtainable
as linear combinations of l and ei with non-negative integer coecients. one such eective class is

furthermore

c1(b) = 3l 

ei

9

xr=1

c2(b) = 12

(8.25)

(8.26)

we now must specify the component of the ve-brane class in the base. in this example, we choose

wb = 6e1 + e2 + e3 + 12 3l 

ei!

9

xi=1

(8.27)

since e1, e2, e3 and 3l p9

using the above intersection rules, one can easily show that

i=1 ei are eective, it follows that wb is also eective, as it must be.

w 2

b = 154,

wbc1(b) = 8,

c1(b)2 = 0

using these results, as well as n = 5 and  = 3

2 one can check that

(8.28)

(8.29)

(cid:0)w 2

b  (24  n)wbc1(b) + 12(12  n)c1(b)2(cid:1) = 3

and, therefore, the three family condition is satised. finally, let us compute the coecient af of
f . using the above information, we nd that

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

n3  n
24 (cid:19) c1(b)2 

3n

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19) = 2

(8.30)

28

since this is a positive integer, it follows from the above discussion that the full ve-brane curve

[w ] is eective in the calabiyau three-fold, as it must be. this completes our construction of this

explicit non-perturbative vacuum. it represents a model of particle physics with three families and

gauge group h = su (5), along with explicit ve-branes wrapped on a holomorphic curve specied

by

[w ] = 6e1 + e2 + e3 + 12(3l 

9

xi=1

ei) + 2f

(8.31)

still within the context of del pezzo base manifolds, we now give a third example, this time with

gauge group h = so(10).

example 3: b = dp8, h = so(10)

in this third example, we choose the gauge group to be

and, hence, the structure group

h = so(10)

g = su (4)

(8.32)

(8.33)

then n = 4. since n is even, then from constraint (7.12) we must have  = m where m is an
integer and wb = c1(b) mod 2. here we will choose m = 1 so that

 = 1

(8.34)

we will return to the choice of wb momentarily. in this example, we will take as a base surface

b = dp8

(8.35)

some of the eective generators and the rst and second chern classes of dp8 were given in the
previous example. we now must specify the component of the ve-brane class in the base. in this

example, we choose

wb = 2e1 + 2e2 + (3l 

ei)

8

xi=1

(8.36)

since e1, e2 and 3l p8

furthermore, since

i=1 ei are eective, it follows that wb is also eective, as it must be.

c1(b) = 3l 

ei

8

xr=1

29

(8.37)

it follows that

wb = c1(b) mod 2

(8.38)

since 2e1 + 2e2 is an even element of h 2(dp9, z). using the above intersection rules, one can easily
show that

w 2

b = 1,

wbc1(b) = 5,

c1(b)2 = 1

using these results, as well as n = 4 and  = 1, one can check that

(cid:0)w 2

b  (24  n)wbc1(b) + 12(12  n)c1(b)2(cid:1) = 3

(8.39)

(8.40)

3n

1

4(cid:19) = 29

and, therefore, the three family condition is satised. finally, let us compute the coecient af of
f . using the above information, we nd that
n3  n
24 (cid:19) c1(b)2 

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

2(cid:18)2 

(8.41)

since this is a positive integer, it follows from the above discussion that the full ve-brane curve

[w ] is eective, as it must be. this completes our construction of this explicit non-perturbative

vacuum. it represents a model of particle physics with three families and gauge group h = so(10),

along with explicit ve-branes wrapped on a holomorphic curve specied by

[w ] = 2e1 + 2e2 + (3l 

8

xi=1

ei) + 29f

(8.42)

example 4: b = fr, h = su(5)

we now return to choosing

h = su (5)

(8.43)

as the gauge group for our model. then it follows from (7.13) that we must choose the structure

group of the gauge bundle to be

and, hence, n = 5. since n is odd, constraint (7.12) tells us that  = m + 1

2 for integer m. here we

will take m = 0 and, therefore

g = su (5)

(8.44)

in this example, we will choose the base surface to be a general hirzebruch surface

 =

1
2

b = fr

30

(8.45)

(8.46)

where r is any non-negative integer. it follows from appendix b that for the hirzebruch surface
fr, a basis for h2(fr, z) composed entirely of eective classes is given by s and e where

e  e = 0,

s  s = r,

s  e = 1

(8.47)

furthermore, these completely generate the set of all eective classes. to these classes we add the

ber class f . in addition

and

c1(b) = 2s + (r + 2)e

c2(b) = 4

(8.48)

(8.49)

we now must specify the component of the ve-brane class in the base. in this example, we choose

wb = 26s + (13r + 23)e

(8.50)

since s and e are eective, it follows that wb is also eective, as it must be. using the above
intersection rules, one can easily show that

w 2

b = 1196,

wbc1(b) = 98,

c1(b)2 = 8

(8.51)

note that the integer r has cancelled out of these expressions. using these results, as well as n = 5
and  = 1

2 , one can check that

(w 2

b  (24  n)wbc1(b) + 12(12  n)c1(b)2) = 3

(8.52)

and, therefore, the three family condition is satised. finally, let us compute the coecient af of
f . using the above information, we nd that

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

n3  n
24 (cid:19) c1(b)2 

3n

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19) = 132

(8.53)

since this is a positive integer, it follows from the above discussion that the full ve-brane curve

[w ] is eective, as it must be. this completes our construction of this explicit non-perturbative

vacuum. it represents a model of particle physics with three families and gauge group h = su (5),

along with explicit ve-branes wrapped on a holomorphic curve specied by

[w ] = 26s + (13r + 23)e + 132f

(8.54)

to repeat, we will explore the properties of the moduli spaces of ve-branes in detail in [46].

31

appendices

a general concepts

poincare duality and intersection numbers

the relationship between the cohomology class [w ] of the ve-branes and the holomorphic curves

in x over which they are wrapped arises from the generic relationship between the cohomology and

homology groups of a manifold. while this connection is a familiar one, since it is used extensively

in this paper, we will give a brief description of it here.

let hk(x, r) be the k-th real homology group over an oriented manifold x. the elements
of hk(x, r) are closed cycles of dimension k on x. now, every element ck of hk(x, r) can be
considered as a linear functional on forms in the de rham cohomology group h k
dr(x, r) in the
following way. let  be any element of h k

dr(x, r). then

 zck



(a.1)

denes a linear map from h k
dr(x, r)  r for any ck in hk(x, r). this map is well dened since
two cycles ck give the same integral if they are equal in homology (since  is closed). in fact, all
such linear maps can be realized this way and so the homology group hk(x, r) is dual as a vector
space to h k
dr(x, r). this is simply the statement that homology and cohomology are dual to each

other.

there is another notion of duality, poincare duality, that must be discussed to complete the

story. let n be the real dimension of the manifold x. one is then familiar with the notion of
poincare duality for forms, that the de rham cohomology groups h k
dr (x, r) are
dual as vector spaces, as follows. let  be any element of h k

dr(x, r) and h nk

dr(x, r). then

 zx

  

(a.2)

denes a linear map from h k
realized this way, and h k
element of h nk

dr(x, r)  r for any  in h nk

dr (x, r). again all such maps can be
dr (x, r) are dual vector spaces. now, denote by ck the

dr(x, r) and h nk

dr (x, r) with the property that

zck

 =zx

  ck

for all   h k

dr(x, r). then the mapping

ck  ck

32

(a.3)

(a.4)

denes an isomorphism between the homology group hk(x, r) and the cohomology group h nk
since both are dual to h k

dr(x, r). this is the nal result we want, that is

dr (x, r)

hk(x, r) = h nk

dr (x, r)

(a.5)

for example, let x be a calabi-yau three-fold and c2 any homology two-cycle contained in
h2(x, r). then, by the above discussion, this two-dimensional cycle in x can be identied with
a unique cohomology class c2 contained in h 4
dr(x, r), and vice versa. this expresses the exact
relationship between the ve-brane four-form [w ] and its associated holomorphic curve. we will
refer to isomorphism (a.5) as the poincare isomorphism and, loosely speaking, to the pair ck and
ck as poincare dual classes. this isomorphism of forms and homology classes is used extensively

throughout this paper and we often use the same notation for both objects in a poincare dual pair.

let x be any oriented manifold of dimension n, a an element of hk(x, r) and b an element
of hnk(x, r). one can dene the intersection number of a and b by taking representative cycles
which intersect transversally, the intersection number is then the sum of intersections weighted

with a plus or minus sign depending on the orientation of the intersection. in terms of the poincare

dual forms it is given by

a  b =zb

a =zx

a  b

(a.6)

where a  h nk
since we often denote a and b by a and b respectively, we can write

dr (x, r) is the poincare dual of a and b  h k

dr(x, r) is the poincare dual of b.

a  b =zx

a  b

(a.7)

note that a  b = (1)k(nk)b  a. a non-vanishing intersection number a  b can be positive
or negative, depending upon the orientations of the tangent space basis vectors at the points of

intersection.

it is frequently essential in this paper to discuss the integer cohomology groups hk(x, z). there
is a map from hk(x, z)  hk(x, r) whose kernel consists of torsion classes. if there is no torsion,
if there is
the map is an embedding and all of the above statements are correct for hk(x, z).
torsion, the above formulas still have obvious analogues over z.

eective curves and homology

let x be any n-dimensional complex manifold. a curve in x is a closed subset which locally near
each of its points can be dened by the vanishing of n 1 (and no fewer) holomorphic functions. a
curve is irreducible if it is not the union of two proper subsets, each of which is itself a curve. from

now on we will take our manifold x to be compact, that is, a complex submanifold of a complex

33

projective space. then any curve in x is the union of a nite number of irreducible curves. to
every curve corresponds its homology class in h2(x, z). we say that a class c is irreducible if it
is the class of an irreducible curve (though it may have other representatives which are reducible).
we say that a class c is algebraic if it is a linear combination of irreducible classes with integer
coecients. that is, class c is algebraic if

c =xi

aici

(a.8)

where ci are irreducible classes and the coecients ai are any integers. note that when x is a
compact manifold the sum is nite. the set of all algebraic classes, denote it by h2(x, z)alg, forms
a subgroup of h2(x, z).

a class is called eective if it is algebraic with all the coecients ai being non-negative. one can
show that there is always a basis of h2(x, z)alg composed entirely of eective classes. clearly, any
linear combination of such a basis with non-negative integer coecients is also an eective class.

note, however, that there can be other eective classes not of this form. in general, the collection

of all eective classes forms a cone in h2(x, z)alg known as the mori cone. the mori cone can be
shown to be linearly generated by a set of eective classes. this set includes the eective basis of

h2(x, z)alg but is, in general, larger. the mori cone can be nitely generated, as for del pezzo
surfaces, or innitely generated, as for dp9 and enriques surfaces. we refer the reader to appendix
b for examples.

by denition, any eective class corresponds to a, in general reducible, curve in x. non-eective

classes can not be interpreted as curves in x, since they involve negative integers. herein lies the

importance of eective classes. for example, in physical applications, such as the ve-branes in

this paper, it is clearly essential that the classes correspond to curves, as the ve-branes must wrap

around them. we, therefore, must require ve-brane classes to be eective.

b complex surfaces

properties of del pezzo surfaces

a del pezzo surface is a complex manifold of complex dimension two the canonical bundle of which

is negative. this means that the dual anticanonical bundle has positive intersection with every

curve in the surface. the del pezzo surfaces which will concern us in this paper are the surfaces
dpr constructed from complex projective space p2 by blowing up r points p1, . . . , pr in general
position where r = 0, 1, . . . , 8.

one also encounters the rational elliptic surface, which we denote dp9, although it is not a del
pezzo surface in the strict sense. it can be obtained as the blow-up of p2 at nine points which form

the complete intersection of two cubic curves, and which are otherwise in general position. for a

34

dp9 surface, the anticanonical bundle is no longer positive but, rather, it is nef, which means
that its intersection with every curve on the dp9 surface is non-negative. in fact, a dp9 surface
is elliptically bered over p1 and the elliptic bers (the proper transforms of the pencil of cubics

through the nine blown up points) are in the anticanonical class. this description fails when the

nine points are in completely general position, which is why we require them to be the complete

intersection of two (and, hence, of a pencil of) cubics.

of particular interest is the homology group of curves h2(dpr, z) on the del pezzo surface.
since a new cycle is created each time a point is blown up, we see that the dimension of h2(dpr, z)
is dim h2(dpr, z) = r + 1. from p2 we thus inherit the single class of hyperplane divisors l. a
representative of this class is any linear embedding of p1 into p2. the blow-up of the i-th point

pi corresponds to an exceptional divisor ei. hence, for dpr, there are r exceptional divisors ei,
i = 1, . . . , r. the curves l and ei where i = 1, . . . , r form a basis of homology classes of h2(dpr, z).
note that since dpr is a rational surface, h 2,0(dpr) = 0 and, since on a surface, the lefschetz
theorem relates elements of h 1,1 to algebraic classes, we have h2(dpr, z) = h2(dpr, z)alg. a
particularly important element of h2(dpr, z) is the anticanonical class f = kdpr , given by

r

f = kdpr = 3l 

xi=1

ei.

(b.1)

let us consider the intersection numbers, dened in appendix a, of the basis of curves l and
ei, i = 1, . . . , r of h2(dpr, z). now, any two lines in p2 generically intersect once. hence one
expects, and it can be shown, that

it is a known property of the exceptional divisors that each has self intersection number 1.
furthermore, it is clear that exceptional divisors associated with distinct points do not intersect.

l  l =zdpr

l  l = 1

(b.2)

therefore, we have

ei  ej =zdpr

ei  ej = ij

(b.3)

since a general line in p2 does not pass through any of the blown up points, it follows that the
proper transform of a general line in p2 does not intersect the ei. thus, we have

ei  l =zdpr

ei  l = 0

(b.4)

it is important to explicitly know the set of eective divisors on dpr. by denition, l and ei for
i = 1, . . . , r are eective, as is the anticanonical class f. now consider a line l in p2 which passes
through the i-th blown up point pi. such a line is still eective. the class of such a curve is given
by

l  ei
35

(b.5)

and, hence, this is an eective divisor for any i = 1, . . . , r. in general, a line can pass through at
most two points, say pi and pj where i 6= j. the properties of blow-ups then imply that the class
of such a curve is

l  ei  ej

which, by construction, is an eective divisor for any i 6= j = 1, . . . , r.
in general, a class c  h2(dpr, z) is called exceptional if it satises

c  c = 1,

c  f = 1

(b.6)

(b.7)

where f is the anticanonical class. the classes of the exceptional curves ei certainly are of this
type, but there are others; for example, the class l ei ej just described satises these properties
in fact, any exceptional class on a general del pezzo surface is the class of a unique,
as well.

irreducible, non-singular curve which can be blown down without creating any singularities in the
resulting surface. this curve is in fact a p1 and has self-intersection 1. such curves are called
exceptional or simply 1 curves. even though this is not apparent from our description, all these
1 curves look exactly alike and, in fact, can be interchanged by the weyl group which acts as a
symmetry group of the family of del pezzo surfaces. so, for example, our del pezzo surface admits
another description, in which the line l  ei  ej appears as the blow-up of some point, while one
or more of the exceptional divisors ei appears as a line or higher degree curve.

for r  4, all exceptional curves are of the types already discussed. but consider, for r  5, a
conic in p2; that is, a curve dened by a quadratic equation. the conic is denoted by 2l. a conic

can pass through at most ve blown up points, say pi, pj, pk, pl and pm. if they are all dierent,
then the curves

2l  ei  ej  ek  el  em

(b.8)

are exceptional divisors. these are easily seen to be eective as well. similarly, consider a cubic in
p2; that is, a curve dened by a cubic equation. the cubic is denoted by 3l. when r = 7, 8 or 9, a

cubic can be chosen to pass through one of the blown up points, say pi, twice (that is, it will be a
singular cubic curve, with singular point at pi), while also passing (once) through six more of the
blown up points, say pj, pk, pl, pm, pn and po. therefore, we see that, for r = 7, 8 or 9, we also
get exceptional divisors of the form

3l  2ei  ej  ek  el  em  en  eo

(b.9)

where all the points are dierent. again, these are easily seen to be eective classes. yet more

examples of exceptional curves are obtained, for r = 8 or 9, by considering appropriate plane curves
of degrees 4, 5 or 6. the complete list of exceptional curves for r  8 can be found, for example,
in table 3, page 35 of [56]. all these classes are eective.

36

we can now complete the description of the set of eective classes on a del pezzo surface.

these classes are precisely the linear combinations, with non-negative integer coecients, of the
anticanonical class f and of the exceptional classes, including the ei, the curves in (b.6), (b.8)
and (b.9), and their more complicated cousins for large r. for r  8 this gives us an explicit, nite
set which generates the mori cone.

the above statement, that is, that the eective classes are precisely the linear combinations,
with non-negative integer coecients, of the anticanonical class f and of the exceptional classes,
remains true for the rational elliptic surface dp9. the new and, perhaps, surprising feature is that
on a dp9 surface there are innitely many exceptional classes. this is easiest to see using the elliptic
bration structure. each of the nine exceptional divisors ei has intersection number 1 with the
elliptic ber f, so it gives a section of the bration. conversely, it is easy to see that any section
is an exceptional curve. but since each ber, an elliptic curve, is a group, it follows that the set

of sections is itself a group under the operation of pointwise addition of sections. we are free to

designate one of our nine sections, say e9, as the zero section. the other eight sections then
generate an innite group of sections, which generically will be z8. the mori cone in this case is

not generated by any nite set of eective curves.

finally, we list the formulas for the chern classes on dpr. we nd that

and

c1(dpr) = kdpr = 3l 

ei

r

xi=1

c2(dpr) = 3 + r

(b.10)

(b.11)

are the rst and second chern classes of dpr respectively. the second chern class is simply a
number, since there is only one class in h0(dpr, z).

properties of hirzebruch surfaces

a hirzebruch surface f is a two-dimensional complex manifold constructed as a bration with base
p1 and ber p1. one way to construct these surfaces is to start with a rank two vector bundle v
over p1 and to take f to be the projectivization of v . for example, we can take v to be

v = o  o(r)

(b.12)

where r is a non-negative integer. the resulting hirzebruch surface is denoted by fr. it is, in fact,
easy to see that all hirzebruch surfaces arise in this way. we denote the ber of fr over p1 by e.
the sections are not all equivalent. let s and s0 denote the two sections of fr corresponding to
the sub-bundles o and o(r) respectively.the intersection numbers are found to be

e  e = 0,

s  s = r,

s0  s0 = r

(b.13)

37

and

e  s = e  s0 = 1,

s  s0 = 0

(b.14)

these results are determined as follows. each section s and s0 meets each ber e at a unique
point, while the self-intersection of a ber is 0 since it can also be interpreted as the intersection of
two distinct, hence disjoint, bers. the section s corresponds to the lower degree sub-bundle o,
so it can not be moved away from itself. this is reected in the negative self-intersection number.
on the other hand, s0 corresponds to the larger bundle o(r). it moves in an r-dimensional linear
system and any two representatives meet in r points. but a generic representative of this system

does not meet the section at innity s, thus providing the last intersection number.

we should note, however, that some special curves in the linear system will, in fact, meet s.

these are forced to become reducible; that is, they contain s plus exactly r bers, leading to the

equality

s0 = s + re

(b.15)

which is valid in h2(fr, z). a basis for h2(fr, z) is provided by e together with either s or s0.
the pair e, s has the advantage that it is also the set of generators for the mori cone. that is,
a class ae + bs is eective on fr for integers a and b if and only if a  0 and b  0, as is easily
seen from the intersection numbers above.

in this paper, we will choose e and s as the basis of h2(fr, z). note again that since fr is
a rational surface, h 2,0(fr) = 0 and, hence, h2(fr, z) = h2(fr, z)alg. if we denote s simply by
s, then the intersection numbers become

e  e = 0,

s  s = r,

s  e = 1

the rst and second chern classes are given by

and

c1(fr) = 2s + (r + 2)e

c2(fr) = 4

(b.16)

(b.17)

(b.18)

respectively. finally, to repeat, it is clear that s and e are eective. any other irreducible eective
curve must have a non-negative intersection number with s and e. from this condition, one
nds that all eective curves in fr are simply linear combinations of s and e with non-negative
coecients.

38

properties of enriques surfaces

following [57], we dene an enriques surface as a complex algebraic surface b with h 1(b, c) = 0,

whose canonical bundle is torsion. that is

kb 6= ob,

kb  kb = ob

(b.19)

it follows immediately from the denition that c1(b)2 = 0 and h2,0 = 0. the riemann-roch
theorem then implies that the euler characteristic is c2(b) = 12, so h1,1 = h2 = 10. in fact, the
non-trivial cohomology is given by

h 2(b, z) = z10 + z2

(b.20)

that is, the canonical bundle is the only torsion class. the intersection form on h 2(b, z) vanishes
on the torsion, while on the z10 part it is even, unimodular and of signature (1,9). the torsion

canonical bundle implies that the fundamental group of an enriques surface is non-trivial and, in

fact, is z2. the universal cover is thus a double cover. it is a surface with euler characteristic
2 12 = 24 and it has a trivial canonical bundle. it follows that the universal cover is a k3 surface.
in other words, every enriques surface is obtained as the quotient of a k3 surface by an involution.

this involution must act freely, since the k3 is an unramied cover of the enriques surface. since

we require that the canonical bundle of the enriques surface is not the trivial bundle, it cannot

have any global sections. thus, the involution on the k3 must send the holomorphic two-form to
1 times itself.

although we will not use this in this paper, we mention the fact that the covering k3 is rather
special. among other properties, it must be elliptically bered over p1 and this bration must

also be preserved by the involution. therefore, the enriques surface itself inherits a bration by

curves of genus 1. however, we do not consider this to be an elliptic bration, since it does not

have a section. in fact, two of the bers occur with multiplicity two, which prevents the existence

of a section even locally near these bers. in addition to these two double bers, there are on a

generic enriques surface exactly 12 singular bers, just as there are in the elliptic bration of a dp9
surface. these two surfaces are actually related, the enriques surface being obtained from a dp9
surface by performing logarithmic transforms along the two bers which thereby become doubled.

conversely, the dp9 surface can be recovered as the jacobian bration of the enriques surface.

since h 2,0(b) = 0, all cohomology two-classes on the enriques surface are algebraic. we need

to decide which of these classes are eective. on a general enriques surface it turns out that the

eective classes fall into two components, each essentially the upper half of a ten-dimensional light
cone. first we note that, by the adjunction formula, if c is an irreducible curve of arithmetic genus
g on the enriques surface, then the self-intersection number is

c2 = 2g  2  2

39

(b.21)

with equality holding if and only if c is a smooth rational curve. some special enriques surfaces
may certainly contain such smooth, rational curves, but not the general enriques surface, as can

be seen by a deformation argument. therefore, we are left to discuss irreducible curves of non-
negative self-intersection. let us ignore torsion for the moment and, hence, consider h 2(b, r).
the cone in h 2(b, r) of all classes of non-negative self-intersection looks like the time-like cone

of 10d lorentzian geometry; that is, it consists of two components, the past and the future

(recall that the signature is (1,9)). any ample class h takes positive values on one side of the cone

and negative values on the other. therefore, all the eective classes are in one half of the cone.

conversely, we claim that all integral classes in this half cone are eective. this follows from the
fact that for any class c with c2  0, exactly one of the two classes c or c is eective, as can be
seen from the riemann-roch formula. since, in our case, c lies in the wrong half cone it cannot
be eective and, therefore, c must be eective.

so far we ignored the torsion by considering h 2(b, r). returning to h 2(b, z) = z10 + z2, we
see that along with each class c comes another class, kb + c, with the same image in h 2(b, r).
fortunately, with a single exception, these are both eective (or not) together, so the eectivity of
a class c  h 2(b, z) depends only on its image in h 2(b, r). the single exception is, of course,
the pair 0 and kb itself. (we are still assuming that our enriques surface is general, so we only
consider classes satisfying c2  0.) the reasoning is similar to the above; that is, the riemann-
roch theorem tells us that either c or kb  c must be eective and, likewise, that either kb + c
or c must be eective. but c and c cannot both be eective (unless c = 0), nor can kb  c,
kb + c (unless c = kb), so if c is eective, so must be kb + c and vice versa.
for more information on enriques surfaces we refer the reader to [57] or [58].

acknowledgements

we would like to thank ed witten for helpful discussions. r.d. and b.a.o. would like to thank a.

grassi and t. pantev for useful conversations. r.d. is supported in part by an nsf grant dms-

9802456 as well as a university of pennsylvania research foundation grant. a.l. is supported

by the european community under contract no. fmrxct 960090. b.a.o. is supported in part

by the doe under contract no. de-ac02-76-er-03071 and by a university of pennsylvania

research foundation grant. d.w. is supported in part by the doe under contract no. de-fg02-

91er40671.

references

[1] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506.

[2] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 94.

40

[3] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 135.

[4] t. banks and m. dine, nucl. phys. b479 (1996) 173.

[5] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, on the four-dimensional eective action of strongly

coupled heterotic string theory, upr-771t, hep-th/9710208, to be published in nucl. phys.

b.

[6] h.-p. nilles, m. olechowski and m. yamaguchi, phys. lett. b415 (1997) 24.

[7] i. antoniadis and m. quiros, phys. lett. b392 (1997) 61.

[8] e. caceres, v. s. kaplunovsky and i. m. mandelberg, nucl. phys. b493 (1997) 73.

[9] h.-p. nilles and s. stieberger, nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 3.

[10] t. li, j. l. lopez and d. v. nanopoulos, mod. phys. lett. a12 (1997) 2647.

[11] j. o. conrad, brane tensions and coupling constants from within m-theory, tum-hep-

289-97, hep-th/9708031.

[12] e. dudas and c. grojean, nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 553.

[13] e. dudas and j. mourad, phys. lett. b400 (1997) 71.

[14] k. choi, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 6588.

[15] i. antoniadis and m. quiros, phys. lett. b416 (1998) 327.

[16] z. lalak and s. thomas, gaugino condensation, moduli potential and supersymmetry break-

ing in m-theory models, qmw-ph-97-23, hep-th/9707223.

[17] e. dudas, supersymmetry breaking in m-theory and quantization rules, cern-th/97-236,

hep-th/9709043.

[18] j. ellis, a. e. faraggi and d. v. nanopoulos, m-theory model-building and proton stability,

cern-th-97-237, hep-th/9709049.

[19] d. v. nanopoulos, m phenomenology, ctp-tamu-42-97, hep-th/9711080.

[20] k. choi, h. b. kim and c. munoz, four-dimensional eective supergravity and soft terms

in m-theory, kaist-th 97/20, ftuam 97/16, hep-th/9711158.

[21] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, gaugino condensation in m-theory on s1/z2, upr-

785t, hep-th/9711197.

41

[22] e. a. mirabelli and m. e. peskin, transmission of supersymmetry breaking from a four-

dimensional boundary, slac-pub-7681, hep-th/9712214.

[23] h.-p. nilles, m. olechowski and m. yamaguchi, supersymmetry breakdown at a hidden wall,

bonn-th-97-10, hep-th/9801030.

[24] t. li, compactication and supersymmetry breaking in m theory, hep-th/9801123.

[25] p. majumdar and s. sengupta, gaugino mass in the heterotic string with scherkschwarz

compactication, sinp-98-05, hep-th/9802111.

[26] n. wyllard, the heterotic prepotential from eleven dimensions, goteborg-itp-98-01,

hep-th/9802148.

[27] d. bailin, g. v. kraniotis and a. love, sparticle spectrum and dark matter in m theory,

susx-th-98-003, hep-ph/9803274.

[28] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k. s. stelle and d. waldram, the universe as a domain wall, upr-

797t, hep-th/9803235.

[29] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k. s. stelle and d. waldram, heterotic m-theory in five dimensions,

upr-804t, hep-th/9806051.

[30] l. j. romans, phys. lett. b169 374 (1986).

[31] e. bergshoe, m. de roo, m. b. green, g. papadopoulos, and p k. townsend, nucl. phys.

b470 113 (1996).

[32] j. ellis, z. lalak, s. pokorski and w. pokorski, five-dimensional aspects of m-theory and

supersymmetry breaking, cern-th-98-118, hep-ph/9805377.

[33] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, cosmological solutions of horava-witten theory,

upr-805t, hep-th/9806022.

[34] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, non-standard embedding and five-branes in het-

erotic m-theory, hep-th/9808101.

[35] z. lalak, s. pokorski and s. thomas, beyond the standard embedding in m-theory on s1/z2,

cern-th/98-230, hep-ph/9807503.

[36] r. donagi, a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, non-perturbative vacua and particle

physics in m-theory, hep-th/9811168.

[37] r. friedman, j. morgan and e. witten, commun. math. phys. 187, 679 (1997).

42

[38] r. donagi, asian. j. math. 1, 214 (1997).

[39] m. bershadsky, a. johansen, t. pantev and v. sadov, nuc. phys. b505 165 (1997).

[40] j. distler and b. greene, nucl. phys. b304 1 (1988).

[41] s. kachru, phys. lett. b349 76 (1995).

[42] w. pokorski and g. g. ross, flat directions, string compactication and three generation

models, hep-ph/9809537.

[43] g. curio, phys. lett. b435 39 (1998).

[44] b. andreas, on vector bundles and chiral matter in n = 1 heterotic compactications,

hep-th/9802202.

[45] d.-e. diaconescu and g. ionesei, spectral covers, charged matter and bundle cohomology,

hep-th/9811129.

[46] r. donagi, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, in preparation.

[47] g. rajesh, toric geometry and f-theory/heterotic duality in four dimensions, hep-

th/9811240.

[48] s. donaldson, proc. london math. soc. 3 1 (1985).

[49] k. uhlenbeck and s.-t. yau, comm. pure app. math.39 257 (1986), 42 703 (1986).

[50] k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b456 130 (1995).

[51] m. bershadsky, v. sadov and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b463 420 (1996).

[52] r. donagi, b. ovrut and d. waldram, in preparation.

[53] d. r. morrison and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b476 437 (1996).

[54] e. looijenga, invent. math. 38 17 (1977), 61 1 (1980).

[55] m. green, j. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory:2, cambridge university press, 1987.

[56] seminaire sur les singularites des surfaces, proceedings 1976-1977, springer lnm 777,

m.demazure et. al. eds..

[57] w. barth, c. peters and a. van de ven, compact complex surfaces, ergebnisse der mathe-

matik, 3 folge, bd. 4, springer-verlag, 1984.

[58] f. cossec and i.v. dolgachev, enriques surfaces i, birkhauser, 1989.

43

