9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
9

 

 
 

2
v
9
5
1
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

clns-99/1602, kias-p99006

hep-th/9901159

membranes from five-branes and

fundamental strings from dp branes

piljin yi 1

newman laboratory of nuclear studies cornell university

ithaca, new york 14853-5001, usa

and

school of physics, korea institute for advanced study

207-43 cheongryangri-dong, dongdaemun-gu, seoul 130-012, korea

abstract

we argue that m2 brane is realized as a topological soliton on a coincident pair of

m5 and anti-m5 branes, as the two ve-branes annihilate each other. topology and

quantum numbers of this world-volume soliton are discussed in some detail, and its

formation is explained qualitatively. it follows from a compactication that a d4-anti-

d4 pair annihilate and produce type ii fundamental strings. the phenomenon is best

described as the connement of a world-volume u (1) gauge eld on d4-anti-d4, where

the conned electric ux string is identied as the fundamental string. this generalizes

to other dp-anti-dp systems, and solves a puzzle recently pointed out by witten.

1electronic mail:

piljin@mail.lns.cornell.edu

1

introduction

the basic idea behind a. sens realization of supersymmetric d branes from nonsupersymmetric d-

brane-anti-d-brane system [1, 2, 3], is simple. the instability of the initial conguration manifests

itself in a tachyonic mode of open string, which is charged under some world-volume gauge eld.

the tachyon rolls down to a true vacuum, but may create a topological defect in the process. in the

simplest case of a d-anti-d pair, the broken gauge group is u (1), and possible topological solitons

are vortices. a. sen identied this soliton as supersymmetric d-brane of two lower dimensions.

recently, this eect was further studied in a more abstract perspective of k theory [4, 5, 6, 7].

physics here is so simple that one naturally wonders whether a similar phenomenon should exist

in other branes, say, ns5 branes and m5 branes. type iib ns5 branes are related to d5 branes

by a u-duality, so whatever happens with d5 should happen with iib ns5 as well. indeed, world-

volume theory of type iib ns5 branes is an ordinary gauge theory, and d3 branes again appear

as vortex solitons. on the other hand, type iia ns5 branes and m5 branes share the same low

energy dynamics, modulo the matter of periodicity of one of the scalar elds. we start this paper

by trying to understand what happens when a m5 brane coincides with an anti-m5 brane.

m5 branes or type iia ns5 branes admit (2, 0) supersymmetry, so their world-volume degrees of

freedom must be in a tensor multiplet, whose bosonic eld content include a chiral 2-form b+

m n .

anti-m5 admits anti-chiral 2-form eld b. on the m5-anti-m5 world-volume, the combined and

unrestricted 2-form eld b allows a soliton of co-dimension three that carries a quantized magnetic

ux h = db. this object will be shown to carry membrane charge, and, in the spirit of sens

construction, identied as m2.

this construction has an interesting corollary in the context of d branes. note that, compactied

on a circle, it reduces to a system of a d4-anti-d4 pair that annihilates and produces wrapped

membranes, or equivalently fundamental strings of type iia theory. via t-duality transformations,

it also tells us that dp-anti-dp pairs annihilate and produce fundamental strings. the physics of

the condensation is, it turns out, best described as the connement of the unbroken u (1) gauge

1

eld on dp-anti-dp.2 the fundamental string is realized as the conned electric ux string of this

u (1) that remains unbroken after the open string tachyon condenses.

this observation solves a puzzle which was recently posed by witten [4], who observed that the

tachyon condensation of sen breaks only one of two u (1) gauge elds on dp-anti-dp world-volume,

whereas both must disappear once the pair annihilate each other. we have just learned that,

while the second u (1) indeed remains unbroken, it is actually conned and its only remnant is the

fundamental string itself.

the paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we start with a d4-anti-d4 system and explain how

it naturally predicts a co-dimension-three soliton on m5-anti-m5. the topological coupling that

induces the appropriate m2 charge on such solitons is identied and explained. we also discuss

topology of the world-volume elds. section 3 discusses some features of low energy dynamics

that are independent of details of the condensation mechanism, and explains how the topology of

the soliton is supported by the topology of the would-be goldstone vector eld. section 4 starts

by compactifying m5-anti-m5 on a circle to deduce that a fundamental string is also realized on

d4-anti-d4, where the condensing tachyonic objects originate from open d2 branes. these objects

are magnetically charged with respect to the overall u (1) gauge eld, as we will explain in detail.

the resulting dual higgs machanism generalizes to other dp-anti-dp systems. we conclude with a

summary.

2 membranes from m5-anti-m5

let us start with a system of coincident d4-anti-d4 brane pair, later to be considered as m5-anti-

m5 that are wrapped along the compact circle s 1. the instability of the conguration [8] manifest

itself in the lowest lying open string mode t , which becomes tachyonic. from the chan-paton

factors of open strings that connect the two d branes, we know that the tachyon is charged with

2this result may sound quite counter-intuitive, because we are used to seeing one of the two u (1)s decouple
from rest of dynamics. but we need to recall that the decoupling of the center of mass u (1) follows from the
combined eect of world-volume supersymmetry and translational invariance of string theory. on a dp-anti-dp pair,
supersymmetry is absent. see section 4 for detail.

2

respect to a u (1) gauge eld, a12 = a1  a2, usually associated with the relative motion of the two

branes. a1 is the gauge eld on d4 while a2 is on anti-d4. later it will turn out that the overall

u (1) gauge eld as  a1 + a2 also plays a crucial role, but for the moment we will concentrate

on a12.

the tachyon rolls down to a true vacuum and condenses, ht i 6= 0, but in the process its phase

may acquire a winding number. otherwise, the nal state would correspond to the trivial vacuum

of the string theory [2]. because of its coupling to a12, the winding number is accompanied by a

localized magnetic ux of a12 = a1  a2 near t = 0, and a magnetic vortex soliton is created. on

the other hand, the world-volume lagrangian contains a chern-simons term [9] of type,

zd4

c3  da1 + zantid4

c3  da2 = zr4+1

c3  d(a1  a2),

(1)

where c3 is the ramond-ramond 3-form tensor eld. note that, unlike the case of a d4 brane

pair where the sum of gauge elds couples to c3, the dierence of the two gauge eld couples to

c3. this is due to the opposite orientations carried by d4 and anti-d4.

quantized magnetic ux generated by the winding number of t is localized near t = 0. thus,

integrating over the plane transverse to the ux line, the above coupling reduces to

z{t =0}r4+1 =r2+1

c3.

(2)

this is precisely how c3 would have coupled to an ordinary d2 brane [10], from which one concludes

that the resulting (2 + 1)-dimensional object must be a d2 brane [3]. since d2 brane is the lightest

object that carries the electric c3 charge, and since the soliton does not seem to possess any other

spacetime charge, it is a reasonable extrapolation.

interestingly enough, at least part of spacetime supersymmetry is restored in the nal state, be it

the trivial vacuum or d2 branes. although there is no sense in which the soliton was bps with

respect to the world-volume theory of d4-anti-d4, the soliton is actually bps with respect to the

spacetime supersymmetry. despite the lack of supersymmetry of the eective eld theory that

produces the soliton, one can still reply on the soliton mass formula to be stable against continuous

change of parameters.

3

when we regard the d4-anti-d4 pair as a m5-anti-m5 pair wrapped on a compact circle s 1, the

instability should persist. the only dierence is that the tachyonic degrees of freedom must arise

from open membranes that are stretched between the ve-branes. the boundary of a membrane

ending on ve-branes is string-like, so the object that condenses is a tachyonic world-volume string.

the open string tachyon on the d4-anti-d4 may be regarded as the tachyonic string wrapped on

s 1. given that d2 branes are nothing but transverse m2 branes, and given that the nal state is

preserved by restored spacetime supersymmetry, we conclude that a m5-anti-m5 pair annihilate

and produce m2 branes as world-volume solitons. let us see this phenomenon in m theory setting

in more detail.

the m5 brane admits a single chiral 2-form b+ whose 3-form eld strength h + is restricted to

be self-dual. the anti-m5 brane, on the other hand, is identical to the m5 brane, except for the

reverse orientation. the orientation is in turn related to the chirality of the massless fermions

and 2-form tensor. anti-m5 thus admits anti-chiral b, whose eld strength h  is anti-self-dual.

on an m5-anti-m5 system, the two elds combine to become a whole 2-form eld, to be denoted

by bm n . when we wrap the m5-anti-m5 pair on a circle to make a d4-anti-d4 pair, this bm n

reduces to a pair of vector elds. one is obtained from b5, which we may identify with (a12).

the remaining tensor b is dual to a vector in (4 + 1) dimensions, which can be identied with the

overall u (1) vector as. (it may seem ambiguous which of the two u (1) vectors a12 and as should

be identied with, say, b5. but actually, it is simply a matter of convention, since, by switching

to the dual eld strength h = h +  h  in place of h = h + + h , one eectively exchanges the

longitudinal and the transverse parts.)

because the 2-form b is now unrestricted, its dynamics can be described by a lagrangian.

in

particular, the chern-simon coupling (1) on the d4-anti-d4 pair must come from a similar coupling

on the m5-anti-m5 pair wrapped on s 1, and the obvious conclusion we draw is that there is a term

in the world-volume lagrangian of the form [11],

zr5+1=m5antim5

c3  h.

(3)

as we will see in section 4, this coupling is also related to part of born-infeld actions of the d4 brane

4

and of the anti-d4 brane, upon the compactication. integrating over a localized and quantized

magnetic ux h on a transverse r3, we nd

zr2+1

c3.

(4)

again this is how c3 would have coupled to m2 brane, and so the localized and quantized magnetic

h ux behave as m2 brane.

so far, we are yet to say how such a soliton of h ux is realized dynamically. since the con-

densing charged objects are string-like, one would think that the low energy eective eld theory

is impossible to write down. but the essential ingredients of the soliton construction is not that

mysterious. recall that, when a gauge symmetry is broken spontaneously, there always exists an

would-be goldstone mode. in the above case of spontaneously broken u (1) gauge theory, it is given

by the phase  of t , which is eaten up by the gauge eld and give the latter an eective mass. the

eective mass term appears as

|t |2(  a)2,

(5)

and is gauge invariant on its own because a gauge transformation of a is accompanied by a canceling

shift of . when the 1-form gauge eld is replaced by 2-form gauge eld bm n , one also should

nd a similarly gauge-invariant mass term that involves a new would-be goldstone mode. a gauge

transformation of 2-form b is induced by 1-form, so the goldstone boson itself should be 1-form.

call it gm . thus, the gauge-invariant mass term must look like [12],

f 2(m gn  n gm  bm n )2,

(6)

where f is some scalar eld that is tachyonic and condenses to restore spacetime supersymmetry.

however complicated is the underlying theory of m5 branes, this particular feature of condensation

should be robust. finally, the would-be goldstone boson itself can carry a nontrivial topology,

namely the topology of the complex line bundle associated with the connection g. signicance of

this will become obvious in next section.

5

3 condensation of tachyonic string: a toy model

let us rst recall how one obtains vortex solitons in u (1) gauge theory. the condensation of charged

particle can be treated using a simple eective eld theory of a complex scalar eld t = |t |ei. let

us point out the obvious and say that the phase  is periodic in 2. when it couples to a gauge

eld, the eective lagrangian is

l = 

1
4

f 2
 + (|t |)2 + |t |2(  ea)2  u (|t |).

(7)

in the decoupled theory, where e  0, one sees plane wave of charged eld, t , which is promoted

to charged particles upon quantization.

in addition there exist some classical solitons.

in the

symmetric phase, one nds q-balls [13] for some u (f ), a nontopological soliton of net global u (1)

charge. in the broken phase, ht i 6= 0, the soliton that one obtains is a global vortex, for which

the periodic variable  has a net winding number along some asymptotic circle. since a continuous

symmetry is broken, a goldstone boson must be present and is identied with .

when the gauge coupling e is turned on, this global vortex becomes a soliton of nite energy

that also carries a quantized magnetic ux: the gauge particle becomes massive by eating up the

would-be goldstone boson . because of this mass term, the asymptotic behavior of a is now tied

to that of , leading to a localized magnetic ux whenever  has a winding number. magnetic

ux is quantized as

zr2

f = i a =

1

e i  =

2n

e

.

(8)

the asymptotic form of a is clearly a pure gauge, so the magnetic ux f is localized near |t | = 0.

when we identify a as the relative u (1) gauge eld a12, this vortex soliton in the broken phase is

exactly what sen identied as the d0 brane obtained from a d2-anti-d2 pair.

one can ask if there is an analogous eective description when charged string condenses? first

of all, 1-form gauge eld a is promoted to 2-form gauge eld bm n , so naturally the would-be

goldstone boson  is also promoted to a 1-form, gm . denote their eld strengths by hm n p and

km n , respectively. one can imagine that the relevant string eld is dened over a loop space and

6

that the 1-form g comes from a factor of it,

eih g.

(9)

the phase factor exp(ih g) must be single-valued in the loop space, and this quantizes possible

net k ux along any closed surface ;

i

k = 2n,

(10)

where n is an integer. one possible generalization of the eective lagrangian above is then,

l =

1
12

(hm n p )2 +

1
2

(m f )2  m(f )2(km n  ebm n )2  u (f ),

(11)

where f is a macroscopic version of some modulus eld associated with the factor eih g. u and m

are functions of f that must be determined microscopically. we wish to argue that this lagrangian

contains many qualitative features one would expect from string condensation.

suppose e = 0 for the moment. the physics of the symmetric phase is that of a strongly interacting

qed with gauge eld gm , coupled to a real scalar f . again, the symmetric phase (hf i 6= 0)

may contain nontopological soliton which now consists of a ux tube of km n , given an appropriate

form of u (f ). the existence argument is almost identical to the q-ball case [14].3 in other words,

the theory contains a solitonic string in the symmetric phase, which couples to b as a fundamental

string would when we turn e back on. this is one justication for using the above as a toy model

for the string condensation.

let us keep e 6= 0. when the potential u becomes tachyonic, the theory settles down in the broken

phase, hf i 6= 0. since the would-be goldstone boson is now a vector, a possible topological defect

3suppose that the electric eld is spread evenly on transverse volume v and that the scalar eld is constant f = v
in this region. the total ux is approximately  = f 2e01v . the total energy per unit length of the string will be
then

e =

+ v u (f ).

2
2v2v

when v 2 = 2/(2f 2u (f )), the minimum of this energy density would be obtained with value

e = r 2u (f )

f 2

.

once there is the minimum of 2u (f )/f 2 away from the symmetric phase, there exists a stable q-bundle.

7

(12)

(13)

is that of a dirac monopole. the defect imposes a boundary condition at innity of type,

is 2

k = 2n.

(14)

for n 6= 0, the 1-form eld gm requires more than one coordinate patches, and, if we associate g

with a line bundle on s 2, the integer n would be the rst chern class of that line bundle.

in this asymmetric phase, the gauge-invariant mass term for b tells us that the asymptotic behavior

of b is tied to that of k. the ux of h is then quantized as

zr3

h = is 2

b =

1

e is 2

k =

2n

e

.

(15)

the asymptotic form of b  k is pure gauge, since dk = 0, so the h = db ux is again localized

near f = 0, just as in the vortex soliton, except that now the resulting solitonic object is of

co-dimension three. given the topological coupling (3), this soliton is interpreted as m2 brane.

one may worry whether a nite mass soliton is possible in such a theory, let alone whether the

soliton has the right mass to be a m2 brane. while one does not know the detailed form of the

soliton, it is relatively easy to see how possible divergences in energy density are avoided. at large

distances, it is the behavior of h 2 that could be troublesome. however, the asymptotics, b  k,

tells us that h decays as 1/r3, so the energy density contribution h 2 scales as 1/r6. in (5 + 1)

dimensions, the integrated energy is convergent. near the soliton cores, where the match between

b and k need not hold any more, it is vanishing f and thus m(f ) that should come to the rescue.

by having m(f )  0 suciently fast, we do nd a nite core energy. for instance, m(f )  f 2 near

f = 0 will do. (although, since this eective lagrangian governs long distance dynamics at best,

it is not meaningful to ask exactly what m(f ) is for small f . a better prescription might be to

introduce a short distance cut-o.)

4 fundamental strings from dp-anti-dp; connement of as

discussions in previous sections apply to other cases. as we observed above, ns5 brane of type iia

theory has essentially the same low energy behavior as m5 brane, so the same analysis will show

8

that d2 branes are produced when an ns5 brane annihilates an anti-ns5 brane. another way to

see this is to compactify m theory such that neither the m5s nor the resulting m2 is wrapped on

s 1.

one can consider an alternate compactication of m5-anti-m5 to a string theory conguration, in

such a way that the resulting m2 brane is wrapped on s 1 and becomes a fundamental string. this

m2 would be lying on m5-anti-m5 world-volume, so the m5s also have to be wrapped on s 1 and

become d4s. it follows that fundamental strings are produced when a d4 brane annihilates an

anti-d4 brane. one naturally wonders how such co-dimension-three objects are possible when d4

brane theory is an ordinary gauge theory.

expanding born-infeld action of the d4 brane and the anti-d4 brane, one nds terms,

zd4

hb, da1i + zantid4

hb, da2i = zr4+1

hb, d(a1 + a2)i,

(16)

where b is ns-ns 2-form eld pulled back to the common world-volume. the two gauge elds are

summed in this case, because the inner product h, i is insensitive to the orientation of the world-

volume. clearly it is the electric ux of the overall u (1) gauge eld as  a1 + a2 that would

generate the fundamental string charge of b.

on the other hand, from the above discussions of m5-anti-m5, we know that open d2 ending on

a d4-anti-d4 pair provides string-like tachyonic objects. this object is magnetically charged with

respect to the world-volume gauge elds a1 and a2. more specically, it couples minimally to

b  b

1  b

2 when we dualize the gauge vectors ais to gauge 2-form b

is. this actually implies

that it carries a magnetic charge of as, rather than that of a12. as we saw in section 3, the hodge

dual operator on anti-d4 has an extra sign with respect to the one on d4, owing to the reverse

orientation. this introduces a sign when we dualize the gauge eld, so we nd that

d(b

1  b

2) =  d(a1 + a2),

(17)

where the hodge dual operator  is dened with respect to d4. thus, the tachyonic string is indeed

magnetically charged with respect to as = a1 + a2.

9

once this tachyonic string condenses, the u (1) gauge eld as is conned by the dual higgs mech-

anism. the only remnant of as is the conned electric ux string. the world-volume coupling

(16) induces b charge on as ux, so the conned ux string is the fundamental string of type iia

theory.

let us see how the gauge-invariant mass term for b arises from m theory picture. it must be

present if dual higgs mechanism is to work for the overall u (1). we already noted that, upon the

compactication on a circle, the m5-anti-m5 world-volume eld b reduces to a pair of vector elds

on d4-anti-d4. having identied the longitudinal part b5 as the relative u (1) vector (a12), we

know that the overall u (1) as must be dual to the transverse part b. that is, b is nothing but

the part of b parallel to the d4-anti-d4 world-volume. the would-be goldstone boson gm also

reduces to a single angle  = g5 and a vector a = g. the b mass term (6) on m5-anti-m5 is

then split into two pieces. the rst,

((a12)  )2,

is the mass term for (a12), while the second

(b

  a + a)2,

is the mass term for the dual photon b.

(18)

(19)

this identication also provides an alternate check on the all-important topological coupling (3)

on m5-anti-m5. a dimensional reduction of the coupling (3), when 3-form c3 is aligned along s 1

and becomes ns-ns 2-form b, gives us

zr4+1

b  db = zr4+1

b  d(b

1  b

2) = zr4+1

hb, d(a1 + a2)i,

(20)

which is, as we saw in eq. (16), part of well-established born-infeld actions of the d4 brane and of

the anti-d4 brane.

although there is no analogous m theory picture for other dp-anti-dp pairs, it is rather clear

that a generalization of this mechanism to arbitrary dp-anti-dp must also exist. open d(p  2)

branes ending on the pair must provide a (p  2)-dimensional tachyonic objects, which couples to

10

the overall u (1) gauge eld as magnetically. the subsequent condensation connes the unbroken

u (1), and the fundamental string is realized as its electric ux string. one example where this is

most clearly seen is the case of d3-anti-d3, where sl(2, z) u-duality maps fundamental strings to

d-strings and vice sersa, while keeping d3s invariant.

5 summary

we have observed how the higgs mechanism of world-volume 2-form eld b produces co-dimension

three solitonic byproducts on m5-anti-m5, type iia ns5-anti-ns5, and d4-anti-d4 systems. they

are interpreted as m2 branes, d2 branes, and fundamental strings, respectively. in particular, the

fundamental string that emerges from a d4-anti-d4 pair, is nothing but the conned electric ux

string of the overall u (1) which remains unbroken upon condensation of the open string tachyon.

generally, there exist a pair of tachyonic objects when a dp brane is coincident with an anti-dp

brane. one is perturbative in origin and couples to the relative u (1) electrically, while the other is

nonperturbative and couples to the overall u (1) magnetically. the combined electric and magnetic

higgs phenomena introduce mass gaps to both u (1) gauge sectors. the only remnants are d(p  2)

branes and fundamental strings, which are realized as solitons on the common (p+1)-dimensional

world-volume. in particular, this neatly addresses the question raised by witten [4] of how the

unbroken u (1) becomes invisible on the annihilated dp-anti-dp world-volume.

acknowledgment

the author beneted from conversations with several visitors to korea institute for advanced

study (kias). kentaro horis probing questions lead to many of the insights of this paper, while

mans henningsons expertise on m5 brane was very helpful. most of all, the author is grateful

to kimyeong lee who explained how a higgs mechanism of 2-form tensor should be treated, and

who is largely responsible for content of section 3. the author also thanks miao li for critical

comments. this work is supported in part by national science foundation of the united states.

11

references

[1] a. sen, j. high energy phys. 9808 (1998) 010, hep-th/9805019.

[2] a. sen, j. high energy phys. 9808 (1998) 012, hep-th/9805170.

[3] a. sen, j. high energy phys. 9809 (1998) 023, hep-th/9808141.

[4] e. witten, hep-th/9810188.

[5] p. horava, hepth/9812135.

[6] h. garcia-compean, hep-th/9812226.

[7] s. gukov, hep-th/9901042.

[8] m. green, phys. lett. b329 (1994) 435, hep-th/9403040; t. banks and l. susskind, hep-

th/9511194; m. green and m. gutperle, nucl.phys. b476 (1996) 484, hep-th/9604091; g.

lifschytz, phys. lett. b388 (1996) 720, hep-th/9604156; v. periwal, hep-th/9612215.

[9] m. li, nucl.phys. b460 (1996) 351, hep-th/9510161; m. green, j.a. harvey, g. moore,

class.quant.grav. 14 (1997) 47, hep-th/9605033.

[10] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724, hep-th/9510017.

[11] e. witten, j.geom.phys. 22 (1997) 103-133, hep-th/9610234.

[12] s. rey, phys. rev. d40 (1989) 3396.

[13] s. coleman, nucl. phys. b262 (1985) 263; erratum-ibid.b269 (1986) 744.

[14] k. lee, private communication.

12

