9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

1
1

 
 

1
v
9
3
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

center vortices, nexuses, and the

georgi-glashow model

john m. cornwall*

department of physics and astronomy
university of california, los angeles

los angeles ca 90095

abstract

in a gauge theory with no higgs elds the mechanism for connement is
by center vortices, but in theories with adjoint higgs elds and generic sym-
metry breaking, such as the georgi-glashow model, polyakov showed that
in d=3 connement arises via a condensate of t hooft-polyakov monopoles.
we study the connection in d=3 between pure-gauge theory and the theory
with adjoint higgs by varying the higgs vev v. as one lowers v from the
polyakov semiclassical regime v  g (g is the gauge coupling) toward zero,
where the unbroken theory lies, one encounters eects associated with the
unbroken theory at a nite value v  g, where dynamical mass generation
of a gauge-symmetric gauge-boson mass m  g2 takes place, in addition to
the higgs-generated non-symmetric mass m  vg. this dynamical mass
generation is forced by the infrared instability (in both 3 and 4 dimensions)
of the pure-gauge theory. we construct solitonic congurations of the theory
with both m, m 6= 0 which are generically closed loops consisting of nexuses
(a class of soliton recently studied for the pure-gauge theory), each paired
with an antinexus, sitting like beads on a string of center vortices with vortex
elds always pointing into (out of) a nexus (antinexus); the vortex magnetic
elds extend a transverse distance 1/m. an isolated nexus with vortices is
continuously deformable from the t hooft-polyakov (m = 0) monopole to
the pure-gauge nexus-vortex complex (m = 0). in the pure-gauge m = 0
limit the homotopy 2(su(2)/u(1)) = z2 (or its analog for su(n)) of the
t hooft-polyakov monopoles is no longer applicable, and is replaced by the
center-vortex homotopy 1(su(n)/zn ) = zn of the center vortices.

*e-mail address: cornwall@physics.ucla.edu
ucla/98/tep/37

december, 1998

1

i. introduction

in this paper we demonstrate a smooth transition from the georgi-glashow
model in the semiclassical limit, where connement was argued long ago to
be due to a condensate of essentially abelian t hooft-polyakov monopoles,
to the center-vortex picture of connement as proposed for the pure-gauge
theory with no higgs symmetry breaking. the issues raised are also relevant
for an understanding of claims for understanding connement by abelian
projection.

in the seventies several mechanisms for gauge-theory connement were
put forth. the rst continuum mechanism to be carefully worked out was
polyakovs treatment[1] of the d=3 georgi-glashow model. he showed that
t hooft-polyakov (tp) monopoles, associated with the breaking of su(2) to
u(1) by an adjoint higgs eld, condensed and conned as would be expected
in the much-discussed dual superconductor picture[2]. (to avoid confusion,
we note that essentially abelian thick vortices are invoked not only in the dual
superconductivity picture, but also in the center-vortex picture put forward
here. these are far from being the same; in the center-vortex picture the vor-
tices are of magnetic character, but are electric in the dual-superconductor
picture. for more modern references to the dual superconductivity hypoth-
esis, see, e.g., ref. [3].)

soon thereafter the center vortex picture[4, 5, 6, 7, 8] of connement was
put forth, based on the idea that a pure-gauge (i.e., no higgs elds to break
the gauge symmetry) theory possessed a kind of quantum soliton which was
a fat object of co-dimension two (in particular, a closed string in d=3) car-
rying magnetic ux quantized in the center of the gauge group. much of
this work was lattice-oriented, but ref.[4], working in the continuum, ar-
gued that a dynamical gauge-boson mass was generated because of infrared-
instability eects, and showed that the eective lagrangian describing this
mass (a gauged non-linear sigma model) had nielsen-olesen-like vortices.
the mass associated with the center vortices is not associated with gauge
symmetry breaking; instead, it arises[9] as a necessary element of solving the
infrared-unstable schwinger-dyson equations of the gauge theory. all n 2 1
gauge bosons of su(n) acquire the same mass m. these vortices could link
with wilson loops and for fundamental wilson loops whose size scales were
large compared to 1/m (hereafter, large wilson loops) led to topological
connement in which the vortices gave rise to a wilson-loop phase factor of

2

the form of an element of the center raised to a power which was a linking
number: exp(2ijk/n). here the integer j species the quantized vortex
ux and k is the gauss linking number of the vortex and the wilson loop.
averaging over these phase uctuations then led to an area law[4].

it has been shown by lattice-theoretic arguments[10, 11] that in pure-
gauge su(2) only center vortices can conne, by constructing lattice actions
in which by adjusting parameters it is possible to retain or exclude thick
center vortices and other phenomena. those actions with no thick center
vortices are proved not to conne, for any nite lattice spacing however small.
(thin vortices conne, but in the small-lattice-spacing limit their action is
so large that they are suppressed.)

more recently, the center-vortex picture has been revived and various
groups[12, 13] have made lattice calculations comparing the area law as com-
puted conventionally with the area law computed in various ways. all the
ways are related to, but not identical to, the continuum phase approximation
which the author has used[4]. this approximation consists, for a given gauge
conguration, of replacing the true wilson loop value by a phase factor chosen
to be the element of the center nearest to the true phase factor (i.e., for su(2)
one replaces the wilson loop by its sign). in the continuum it is clear that
the phase approximation leaves out perimeter-law terms and short-distance
contributions. these lattice calculations show that the phase approxima-
tion exactly reproduces the full area law, but their interpretation depends
markedly on exactly what version of a phase approximation one uses on the
lattice. kovacs and tomboulis[12] have studied the center-vortex picture of
connement both for su(2) and for su(3), in both cases nding excellent
agreement between the fundamental area law in their phase approximation
and the conventional full wilson-loop calculation. these authors distinguish
the behavior of thick vortices (those which, in the continuum, are the ones
we discuss here, with a thickness of the inverse physical mass scale) and thin
vortices (one lattice spacing thick) by a cooling procedure which destroys the
lattice-scale thin vortices, which cannot survive to the continuum limit. not
only do they nd that the fundamental-loop area law is exactly reproduced
by their phase approximation, they nd, as expected, dierences at short
distances.

on the other hand, greensite and collaborators[13] use dierent phase
approximations, in some cases not xing a gauge and in some case xing
a gauge. their essential su(2) phase approximation is to replace the full

3

fundamental wilson loop value for a given conguration by its sign. for
the fundamental-loop area law they nd perfect agreement, in either case,
between the full lattice calculations and their approximations. however,
when they do not x a gauge (so-called maximal center projection), the
agreement extends to short distances as well.
it has been claimed[14, 15,
16] on the basis of an su(2) character expansion that such agreement is
an inevitable consequence, given certain very plausible behavior of higher-j
wilson loops. they then claim that xing the gauge to the so-called maximal
center gauge is, in fact, a meaningful test of the center-vortex picture. the
argument is that the gauge xing is a global construct which can single
out thick vortices, while the phase approximations without gauge xing are
infected by lattice-scale vortices.

it would take another paper as long as this one now is to discuss these
issues thoroughly. we will make only two comments. the rst is that while
it might be true that the expectation value hzi of the sign z of the funda-
mental wilson loop wf may essentially be hwf i itself, this in itself does not
answer the interesting physical questions connected with the center-vortex
picture. one such question is why hzi yields an area law at all (aside from
lattice empirics).
in
fact, an area law for hzi [4, 17, 18] comes about because center vortices
have co-dimension two, that is, they are characterized by a two-dimensional
density , with the area-law coecient (string tension) proportional to .1
another question, hard to address with conventional creutz-ratio calcula-
tions of string tensions, is the actual magnitude of the higher-j wilson loops
invoked in their character expansion. work is underway in the continuum
center-vortex picture to study such loops, but we will not discuss it here.

it could have, for instance, yielded a perimeter law.

second, it should be noted that the groups who argue for the trivial
equality of the phase approximation and of the full fundamental wilson loop
vev when no gauge xing is used have been motivated in part by devel-
opments in so-called maximal abelian projection, or map. map is an idea
introduced long ago by t hooft[21]. he proposed a special way of looking
at a gauge theory, by choosing a gauge in which the gauge potentials were
abelian as nearly as possible. points where the eigenvalues of the gauge
potential had degeneracies had to be associated with monopoles, as t hooft

1evidence for scaling behavior of an areal density for vortices on the lattice is presented

in refs. [19, 20].

4

showed. the t hooft gauge xing was equivalent to breaking the gauge sym-
metry (su(n)  u(1)n 1) with an adjoint higgs eld of generic expectation
value, and is relevant to our discuss of the georgi-glashow model. recent
lattice calculations[22] are claimed to show that connement via monopoles
can indeed be seen on the lattice by projecting gauge congurations onto
the cartan subalgebra. this projection can be done without gauge xing,
and the same groups[14, 15, 16] who have been concerned with center-vortex
gauge xing have argued that abelian projection without gauge xing also
does not lead to any signicant test of whether t hoofts map monopoles
are involved in connement. they have argued that the map-projected the-
ory is derived from the non-abelian theory, and not the other way around.
the present paper gives evidence for this point of view not for map, but for
the transition from polyakov-like connement to center-vortex connement
in the georgi-glashow model. the above-cited authors also claim that pro-
jecting onto an abelian ensemble is not important; other projections could be
used, and argue that abelian projection is essentially trivial, that projection
itself has nothing to do with the abelian dominance claimed to be revealed
by projection, and that things are very dierent with gauge-xing; only with
gauge-xing can one identify the true physical objects (such as center vor-
tices) responsible for connement. however, one certainly cannot base ones
ultimate understanding of connement on gauge-dependent properties. the
arguments we give here are independent of a choice of gauge.

once again, we forego further detailed comment on these issues, except to
note that map is often done with a subsidiary calculation which minimizes an
action which is essentially the adjoint-higgs gauge-boson mass term. clearly
map leads to a description of a pure-gauge theory as if it were a georgi-
glashow model. there is one dierence, however: the gauge theory quite
independently of any map considerations generates a dynamical mass m. a
map projection may imitate the further generation of a higgs-mechanism
mass m, dierent from m, as well. so map pictures, in general, call for
consideration of the georgi-glashow model and its monopoles. one must
ask whether it is really some form of essentially abelian monopole or some
form of center vortex which truly underlies connement in either a pure-
gauge theory or in the georgi-glashow model. this paper argues that it is
the center vortex and its near relations which are essential; in this, we agree
with refs. [14, 16].

in particular, we claim that what replaces the tp monopole for nite

5

figure 1:
schematic picture of a nexus-vortex combination in su(2). a
nexus and an anti-nexus are shown as black circles. they are joined by
oppositely-directed vortex segments.

m is the combination of nexuses[4, 23, 24] with segments of center vortices,
formed into closed loops. these closed loops lead to connement just as pure
center-vortex loops do. fig. 1 shows a schematic model of a nexus-antinexus
pair, connecting regions of center vortex with oppositely-directed elds.2 in
actuality the elds extend a distance of order 1/m transverse to the main
eld direction, indicated by the lines in the gure.

this closed loop can be interpreted as a monopole-antimonopole pair
with eld lines squeezed into tubes, or alternatively it can be interpreted as
a center vortex with a nexus-antinexus pair (black circles) on it[23]. nexuses
are congurations inherent to a pure-gauge theory, and we will show that they
also exist in the georgi-glashow model, with its two dierent mass scales
m, m.
in this paper we show that a nexus is the essential interpolating
element between the georgi-glashow model in the semiclassical limit and
the pure-gauge theory, where the higgs vev v vanishes. generically, a
nexus is a place where up to n center vortices can meet, provided that their
ux adds to zero (mod n), for gauge group su(n). the concept of the
nexus (not by that name, however) was introduced long ago[4, 24], but the
rst quantitative developments came only recently[23]. quite independently,

2we will be more specic below what we mean by oppositely-directed elds in a non-
abelian gauge theory. in any case, it is clear what we mean when we speak of conventional
photonic elds in the georgi-glashow model.

6

ambjrn and greensite[14] have argued in favor of such congurations in the
georgi-glashow vacuum, and have given a cogent discussion of the dierences
between center vortices, the georgi-glashow model, and compact qed in
d=3.

this picture contains, but is certainly not implied by, the picture of con-
nement developed by polyakov[1] for the georgi-glashow model in d=3.
this model, for gauge group su(2), identies two gauge bosons as charged,
and the third as the uncharged photon, massless at the classical level. the
charged bosons pick up a mass m = vg from the higgs eect (v is the
higgs vev). working in the semiclassical limit where v  g, he showed
that there was a condensate of tp monopoles which conned as would a
dual superconductor. he further showed that because of quantum eects the
condensate density, the string tension, and an induced photon mass m were
all exponentially-small in the tp monpole action, which scales like v/g  1.
naturally, one might expect that in the limit where the charged mass m
and the photon mass m were the same, that is, the pure-gauge limit where
the higgs eld vev is zero and there is no symmetry breaking, that center
vortices are the mechanism of connement. our claim is that in compar-
ing the d=3 georgi-glashow model and connement in a pure-gauge theory,
the master mechanism of connement follows from center vortices, and that
tp monopoles as they appear in the polyakov[1] condensate are to be un-
derstood as particular cases of the general nexus-vortex congurations we
expose here. once the tp monopoles condense their photonic elds have a
mass m which is, in the semiclassical limit, small compared to the charged
mass m. nevertheless, for a (fundamental) wilson loop whose size scales are
large compared to 1/m there is an area law of precisely the type prescribed
by the center-vortex picture, following from a linkage of the nexus-vortex
combination of fig. 1 to the wilson loop, as described above. the ux of a
single center-vortex line is half the tp monopole ux, as would be inferred
from fig. 1 by interpreting the nexus as a tp monopole.

it therefore should be possible to trace the evolution of the georgi-
glashow model into the pure-gauge theory by varying the two masses of
the theory. there is one mass m for the photon, or third component, of the
gauge potential, and another mass m due to symmetry breaking by a higgs
vev. it is useful to think of m as not just a photonic mass, but as a sym-
metric mass present for all three gauge potentials; there is no real dierence
in the semiclassical regime where m  m. there one has the polyakov pic-

7

ture, as described above. when m  m one has (essentially) the pure-gauge
theory with its center vortices sustained by dynamical mass generation. the
two masses can be adjusted by varying the higgs vev v from much larger
than g toward zero, where there is no symmetry breaking and the pure-gauge
theory emerges, except for an unimportant coupling to the massless scalars.
but something perhaps unexpected arises: before reaching v = 0 the georgi-
glashow model takes on the character of the pure-gauge theory, at a critical
value v = vc  g. at this point infrared instability of the pure-gauge theory,
in d=3,4, forces the photon mass to become of order g2, the same order as
the charged mass m = vg becomes at the critical value. so the georgi-
glashow model is in the same class as the pure-gauge theory even before the
symmetry breaking is restored. in section ii we discuss this consequence of
infrared instability, and give a one-loop estimate of the critical value vc. at
this point there is essentially only one mass scale (even though m 6= m), and
this scale g2 gives the (inverse) distance scale for the transverse extension of
the magnetic elds of fig. 1, and there is no qualitative dierence between
center-vortex connement and connement in the georgi-glashow model.

naively it might appear that the congurations of fig. 1 could easily
be understood in some abelian version of the theory, just as center vortices
themselves and the tp monopole have a certain abelian character. but this
is wrong; any conguration of gauge elds which has a non-zero magnetic
ux over a sphere at innity is necessarily non-abelian, as evidenced by the
homotopy 2(su(2)/u(1)) = z2. in section iii we discuss the non-trivial
constructions which lead to a qualitative description of a quantum soliton
depending on the two scales m, m and capable of describing a tp monopole
at m = 0 and a pure-gauge nexus-vortex combination at m = 0. we do not
give a quantitative treatment of the soliton, which will be deferred to later
work.

ii. infrared instability in the georgi-glashow

model

the georgi-glashow model is a yang-mills theory coupled to an adjoint
higgs eld. it can be dened for any su(n), and with generic vevs it breaks
this symmetry down to u(1)n 1. we will only consider it explicitly for the
originally-proposed model where the gauge group su(2) is broken to u(1),
and we will only work out the d=3 case (as polyakov[1] did). two of the gauge

8

bosons (carrying u(1) charge, identied with electromagnetic (em) charge)
acquire a mass, while the third, the photon, remains massless. this model
has tp monopoles with long-range em magnetic elds; asymptotically, the
monopole elds are precisely those of the wu-yang singular monopoles of
the corresponding pure-gauge theory.

the action for this model is:

s = z d3x{

1
4g2 (ga

ij)2 +

1
2

(dia)2 +


8

[(a)2  v2)]2}

(1)

we will often use the conventional antihermitean matrices

ai =

 a
2i

aa

i ,  =

 a
2i

a, di = i + ai.

(2)

the vev of, say, 3 is v; the mass m of the charged gauge bosons is m = gv
and the mass mh of the higgs particle is mh = ()1/2v. mostly we are
interested in the    limit, where the massive higgs particle decouples
(but not the goldstone elds).

the semiclassical limit of the theory is v  g, or m  g2. the action of

the tp monopole is then large:

st p =

4m

g2 =

4v

g

 1,

(3)

where  is a numerical constant of order unity. in the semiclassical theory
polyakov shows that there is a condensate of tp monopoles with a density
proportional to exp(st p ) which is exponentially-small in v/g. the string
tension is proportional to this density and therefore is exponentially-small,
and the condensate causes the tp monopoles to acquire a mass m which is
exponentially-small too. for all practical purposes this small mass m can be
ignored.

how can one go from the georgi-glashow model to the pure-gauge the-
ory, with no higgs elds? at the classical level, to decouple the scalar elds
requires changing the sign of v2 in the action (1), thereby removing the
goldstone elds which give the charged gauge bosons their mass. if v2 turns
negative the symmetry is restored, and all the particles of the scalar sec-
tor acquire the same mass. ultimately the scalar sector can be eectively
decoupled by making that mass large enough.

9

we will study the transition between the semiclassical higgs regime and
the pure-gauge regime by reducing v toward zero from a value much larger
than g. clearly, at v = 0 the symmetry breaking is turned o, and one has a
gauge theory coupled to three massless scalar elds (this is not, as we will see,
an important coupling). at rst it may appear that even when v  g the the-
ory looks much like the abelian-monopole phase, with long-range em elds
for an isolated tp monopole and massive charged gauge bosons. however,
this is not so. because of the underlying infrared instability of the pure-
gauge theory[17, 30, 18] when the charged mass m is small enough, tachyons
appear in the s-matrix as calculated in one-loop3 perturbation theory. the
cure for these tachyons[9, 26] is a dynamically-generated mass, having noth-
ing to do with higgs eects, which must be large enough to overcome the
tachyonic instability. another example of the same phenomenon occurs in
yang-mills-chern-simons (ymcs) theory, where the cs term produces a
mass of classical value kg2/4 at level k. however, if k is less than a critical
value of order[30] 2n in su(n), the tachyon persists, at least at one-loop
level, and dynamical mass generation must take place. this dynamical mass
is of order ng2.

the main technique for uncovering these results is the pinch technique
(pt)[9, 31, 32, 33].
in the pt a gauge-invariant gauge-boson propagator
is extracted from the s-matrix by incorporating pieces of vertex, box, and
other graphs which have the kinematic structure of propagator parts into
the usual propagator dened by feynman graphs. since the s-matrix is
gauge-invariant, so is the resulting propagator. this propagator-like kine-
matic structure arises from pinching out certain lines in these non-propagator
graphs by elementary applications of ward identities.

although we will be more precise momentarily, it is useful to indicate
crudely what is going on. roughly, the structure of the d=3 euclidean pt
propagator (denoted with a hat), when some of the gauge bosons pick up a
mass m = vg from the higgs eld, is (omitting inessential longitudinal terms

3is a one-loop result even qualitatively right? there is some evidence that it is,
from eberleins paper[29] where he calculates two-loop results which are quite close to
previously-calculated one-loop gap-equation results for the d=3 gauge boson mass. how-
ever, most of these one-loop gap equation results are infected with tachyons[18], coming
from calculated mass values which are too small to cure the infrared instability.

10

which come from the free propagator and have no physical eect)

d1
ij = (ij 

pipj
p2 )[p2(1 

bg2
vg

) + v2g2 +   ]

(4)

where b is a gauge-invariant positive number; the quantity bg2/vg is short-
hand for a more complicated function as given below, but what is important
for us is that it contributes negatively and that it grows as the mass vg di-
minishes. evidently, if v  bg there is a tachyonic (positive p2) propagator
pole. this, then, must be removed by other eects, as indicated by the dots
in (4). dynamical mass generation will add a mass term of order g4 to the
self-energy, and in combination with the v2g2 this term must self-consistently
be large enough to remove the tachyon.

let us consider this eect for the photon in the george-glashow model.
even with the pt it is necessary to x a gauge, although all gauge dependence
cancels in the physically-relevant results. we choose an r gauge and add
the gauge-xing term sgf to the action (1):

sgf = z d3x

1
2

[(  a2 + gv1)2 + (  a1  gv2)2 + (  a3)2].

(5)

the free charged gauge-boson propagator is

ij =

ij

p2 + m 2 + (  1)

pipj

(p2 + m 2)(p2 + m 2)

.

(6)

as before, m = vg and the goldstone bosons and charged ghosts have
squared masses (gv)2. the nal result for the pt one-loop inverse propa-
gator is (again omitting free-propagator longitudinal terms):

d1(p2) = {p2 + (

g2
4

)[(7p +

6m 2

p

) arctan(

)  3m]}.

d1
ij  (ij 

d1(p2);

(7)

pipj
p2
p
2m

note that, as advertised, all  dependence is gone. the mark of infrared
instability is the 7p term in (7), with its negative sign.
in the massless
limit the inverse pt propagator is

d1(p2) = p2 

7g2p

8

11

(8)

which diers slightly from the pure-gauge pt propagator, in which -7/8 is
replaced for su(2) by[9] -15/16. the dierence of +1/16 comes from the
scalar elds. the scalar contribution is infrared-stable, but it is very far in
size from turning o the infrared instability of the pure-gauge theory.

note that the inverse pt photon propagator has a pole at p2 = 0, as it
should in perturbation theory. but it has, for suciently small v, a tachyon
as well; this tachyon also means that the zero-mass pole has negative residue.
both phenomena are, of course, unphysical. a quick calculation shows that
this tachyon exists when

15g
16

v  vc; vc =

.

(9)

one can do a similar computation for the charged-boson pt propagator,
which we do not report here; since the charged gauge bosons couple to the
massive higgs elds, the resulting condition for tachyons therefore depends
on the higgs mass. in any event, when v  g, or equivalently when m is
small enough (of order g2) tachyons appear. these tachyons are removed in a
variant of what happens in the pure-gauge theory[9, 26], in ymcs theory[30],
or in gauge theories with higgs symmetry breaking[34]: a dynamical mass
of order g2 is generated, so that the charged-boson mass is a combination
of eects of o(vg) and o(g2) and large enough to remove the tachyons.
similarly, the photon gets a mass of o(g2). these eects are revealed by
solving dressed schwinger-dyson equations for the pt propagator, with the
necessary full vertices approximated by a functional of the pt propagator[9,
26, 34, 27] which satises the pt ward identities.

we will not attempt a solution of such equations here. instead, we will
model the results of such solutions by adding to the action (1) another mass
term which is completely gauge-symmetric. this term is just the gauged
non-linear sigma model. it has been used extensively[9, 26, 27, 29, 30, 34]
to discuss aspects of mass generation in a pure-gauge theory, or in a higgs
model with the higgs mass taken to innity.

iii. from the georgi-glashow model to center

vortices

as indicated in the last section, when v is small enough (but not zero)
there is an additional source of gauge-boson mass, coming not from higgs
eects but from the underlying infrared instability of the su(2) theory. we

12

will construct an eective action, a modication of the georgi-glashow ac-
tion (1), which represents the new source of mass. we then search for solitons
of this eective action, just as in previous works[4, 23] we sought such soli-
tons as the center vortices themselves and the nexuses to which they can be
connected.

the rst step is to construct the new eective action. it is simply the
georgi-glashow action (1) with an added mass term, a gauged non-linear
sigma model term. the new mass term contributes a term m2 to the squared
mass of all three gauge bosons, while the old higgs mass terms contributes,
as before, a mass m 2 to only the charged bosons. in the limit m = 0 we
must nd the original tp monopole, while in the limit m = 0 we must nd a
nexus solution. this nexus is attached to center vortices on each side, center
vortices which give a non-trivial contribution to a fundamental wilson loop
when linked to it. as explained in ref[23] and sketched in fig. 1, the entire
conguration consists of a nexus and an antinexus lying on a closed loop of
center vortices, with the nexus and anti-nexus serving as sites for reversal of
the magnetic elds of the vortices. however, when we give explicit formulas
below for solitons they will consist of a nexus at the origin, straight-line
vortices, and the antinexus pushed to innity.

a. the two-mass eective action

using the matrix notation of equation (2), we add to the action (1) a

symmetric mass term:

s = z d3x{

1
2g2 t r(gij)2t r[di, ]2+


8

[2t r()2+v2)]2

m2
g2 t r( ai)2} (10)

where

ai = u 1diu

(11)

and u is a 22 unitary matrix representative of the group su(2). the
gauge-transformation laws for ai, u are:

ai  v aiv 1 + v iv 1; u  v u.

(12)

this transformation law shows that not only is the mass term involving m2
in (10) gauge-invariant, but in fact the gauge potential ai is locally gauge-
invariant.

13

the new degrees of freedom in u constitute the long-range pure-gauge de-
grees of freedom which are responsible for connement by linking[4]. they are
massless, and correspond to massless scalar poles which arise self-consistently
in the schwinger-dyson equations[9, 26, 27]. in the eective action (10) de-
scribing such solution they satisfy equations of motion which, as we show
below, amount to covariant conservation for the mass sources appearing in
the gauge-potential equations of motion.

we want to nd solitons of eectively nite (three-dimensional) action.
one problem to be faced is the simultaneous vanishing of the two mass terms
at innite distance. evidently, the mass term proportional to m2 vanishes
when ai vanishes at innity, or

xi   : ai  uiu 1.

(13)

the long-range behavior of (14) must be compatible with the vanishing
of the higgs mass term at innity. it is convenient, in discussing the higgs
mass term, to introduce the modied potential ai, simply related to ai:

ai = ai + (iu)u 1 = u aiu 1.

(14)

one can replace ai by ai in the m2 mass term of equation (10).
it will
not interfere with our main purpose to simplify the higgs terms as much
as possible, so we will in eect take the higgs mass mh to innity, drop
the term multiplying  in the action (10), and replace  by its asymptotic
value as given in (15,16) below. given that niteness of the m2 mass term
at spatial innity requires the requires the behavior shown in equation (13),
it is standard to show that niteness of the higgs mass term requires:

xi   :   u0u 1

where 0 is constant. for example, one might choose 0 as:

0 = v

3
2i

.

(15)

(16)

then the kinetic term for the higgs elds, or from the point of view of the
gauge bosons, the higgs mass term in (10) becomes:

 t r[ ai, ]2 = t r[ ai, 0]2.

(17)

14

note here the dierence that the new mass term proportional to m2
makes, compared to the usual tp monopole: when m = 0, there is no
requirement that the long-range (o(1/r)) part of ai approach a pure gauge
at spatial innity; all that is required is that the commutator in the higgs
action in (10) vanish. indeed, the tp monopole in the spherical gauge, where
  iri, is the wu-yang monopole, which is certainly not pure gauge. be-
low we illustrate an ansatz which behaves appropriately both at m = 0 and
at m 6= 0.

b. from monopole to nexus-vortex

the action for which we seek solitonic solutions is:
m2
g2 t r( ai)2}

1
2g2 t r(gij)2  t r[ ai, ]2 
the equations of motion for the gauge potential are:

s = z d3x{

[di, gij] = ji  m2 ai + g2[, [ ai, ]].

in view of the identity

it follows that

[dj, [di, gij]]  0

[di, ji] = 0;

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

these are, as one easily shows, the equations of motion found by varying
the gauge matrix u. so the u equations are not independent of the gauge-
potential equations.

equation (19) generically has soliton solutions, as one sees by using trial
wave functions in the action (18) for ai, u which depend on a single spa-
tial scale a. the rst term on the right-hand side of (18) scales like 1/a
while the other two scale like a times the square of some xed mass; this
action always has a minimum as a is varied. the only questions which need
investigation are whether a given trial wave function appropriately satises
boundary conditions, and leads to no singularities in the action.4 . in this
4there is a short-distance singularity in ai which gives rise to logarithmically-divergent
mass contributions to the m2 part of the action (18). but since it is an essential feature
of gauge-boson mass generation, whether dynamical or of higgs nature, that the mass
vanish at short distance, this singularity could be removed by a detailed consideration
of the schwinger-dyson equations and of the eective action which they generate. we
will not do that here, nor will we be concerned further with this removable short-distance
singularity.

15

rst investigation of the solitons we seek there is no reason to attempt strin-
gent quantitative accuracy of the soliton action, so we will be content with
nding only crude trial wave functions. moreover, we will spend most of
our eort on insuring that the behavior of the wave function at spatial inn-
ity is correct, since this is what determines the topology of the soliton and
its connement properties. more detailed numerical investigations will be
postponed to further work.

our strategy is to consider solutions of the equations of motion which are
determined by one or the other of the two mass terms in (18). first we nd
a solution of nexus-vortex character depending only on the symmetric mass
m. it is simplest to display this solution in a singular gauge, where it has
dirac strings. then we show that when m = 0 this nexus-vortex becomes the
tp monopole at distances large compared to 1/m, or equivalently the wu-
yang solution, in an abelian gauge also possessing dirac strings. the next
step is to remove the string singularities by a singular gauge transformation.
finally, we recover a trial wave function which can be used to describe both
the tp monopole and the appropriate nexus-vortex combination for generic
mass values.

begin by recalling[4] the standard center vortex at m or  = 0:

ai = 2(

3
2i

)ijkj z

dzk[m(x  z)  0(x  z)]

(22)

where  denotes a closed contour. in (22), m,0 is a free scalar propagator
of mass m, 0. the zero-mass term is a long-range pure-gauge part; it is in
essence the contribution of the u degrees of freedom and is responsible for
connement. this term is the gradient of the scalar function

 =

3
4i

ijk zs

djkk

1

|x  z|

(23)

where the integral is over a surface s whose boundary is the contour .
there is a 2 jump in the value of the integral in (21) for any loop which
links with the contour  once; this is responsible for the dirac string in the
eld strength coming from this term.

there is also a dirac string in the m part of (22), coming from values
of x near the contour, where m can be set to zero. the dirac strings from
the two parts of (22) then exactly cancel, so there is no dirac string in the
eld strength coming from ai as a whole. below we will need to nd another

16

vortex which is composed of two terms, each an integral running over an open
contour. this complicates things, because as is well-known, if one tries to
nd a vortex for which the integral in (18) is over an open string, one nds
long-range monopoles as well as dirac strings coming from the zero-mass
propagator. but a conguration with open strings turns out to be necessary
in order to nd a conguration which smoothly turns into the tp monopole
at m = 0. it will turn out that we need a non-abelian center vortex to do
that. the reason has to do with the ux carried by the tp monopole.

the exhibited soliton (22) is purely abelian. in fact, it is just a nielsen-
olesen vortex at innite higgs mass. its abelian nature means that it nec-
essarily has zero ux as dened by the usual integral r dsibi over a closed
surface, even if the contour  pierces the surface of integration. the point is,
of course, that by stokes theorem the ux over a closed surface must vanish,
if ~b = ~  ~a.

it follows that to make contact with the tp monopole and its non-zero
ux we must nd a truly non-abelian generalization of the center vortex in
(22). note that it is not essential that the center-vortex wave function itself
be abelian; all that matters is that the holonomy group generated by the
usual loop formula

exp(i dzia(0)

i (z)),

(24)

where a(0)
tion, be in the center of the group (and thus abelian).

is the long-range pure-gauge part of the center vortex congura-

i

to construct the necessary non-abelian generalization of (22), we will
abandon the long-range pure-gauge part of (22), and start with just the
massive terms in abelian form, looking for a center vortex running along
the positive z axis from the origin to innity, and another running along
the negative z axis with oppositely-directed eld strength. the long-range
pure-gauge part will be determined later. we choose the massive part of the
nexus-vortex gauge potential as:

an v

i

(x) = 2(

3
2i

)ij3j{z 

0

dz3 + z 

0

dz3}m(x  z).

(25)

the integrals are easily done; in cylindrical-coordinate notation one nds:

an v

i = i(

3
2i

)b; b  (z)[mk1(m)  j(, z; m)].

(26)

17

figure 2: a sketch of the eld lines associated with the nexus-vortex combi-
nation of equation (25). the heavy straight lines are dirac-string elds.

here k1 is a hankel function of imaginary argument. the function j has
the useful integral representation

j(, z; m) = z 

0

dk

k2

k2 + m2 e|z|(k2+m2)1/2

j1(k).

(27)

in spite of supercial appearances, an v
tiable function of z.

i

of (26,27) is a continuous dieren-

this (partial) vortex has dirac strings pointing in opposite directions
along the z axis, because of the behavior mk1(m)  1/ at short distances.
fig. 2 sketches the general behavior of the eld lines, with the singular dirac-
string elds shown as heavy lines. this solution has zero ux, as it must
because of its abelian nature.

we rst consider what happens at m = 0. the reason for choosing the
particular form (25,26,27) is that in the massless limit it becomes the wu-
yang monopole in a singular gauge, or equivalently the long-range part of
the tp monopole:

) cos 

(28)

an v

i

(m = 0) = i(

3
2i

(where  is the polar angle). this form of the wu-yang potential has two
strings, just as in fig. 2, each carrying half the wu-yang (or tp) magnetic
ux. the ux of each of the strings in fig. 2 is the ux of a center vortex.
it appears that the m = 0 limit of the nexus-vortex combination can
describe the long-range elds of a tp monopole, but at the price of intro-
ducing singular strings. these must be gotten rid of. we do this by nding
the gauge transformations which connect the wu-yang or tp monopole in
spherical gauge, where it has no string singularities, to the singular abelian

18

wu-yang potential (28). the same gauge transformations occur in the de-
formation of the general spherical soliton to a nexus-vortex conguration[23].
begin with the spherical ansatz for the tp monopole:

at p

i =

iakark

2ir

(1(r)  1).

(29)

the function 1 vanishes exponentially at r = , leaving the wu-yang
monopole to describe the long-range eld. as is well-known, this potential
can be transformed to a form with an abelian string via the gauge transfor-
mation

w = exp(i  /2).

(30)

(31)

applied to the tp potential (29) it yields:

i aw 1 + w iw 1 =

i  w at p
at p
[i2  i1]1 + i(

3
2i

)(cos   1).

=

1
2ir

this has a string along the negative z axis, which carries the full tp monopole
ux. we can split it into two strings, each of half the ux as in fig. 2, by
the further gauge transformation exp(i3/2). this yields:

at p

i 

1
2ir

[i(cos 2 + sin 1) + i(sin 2  cos 1)]1 +

(32)

+i

3
2i

cos .

the point of this exercise is that the last term on the right-hand side of
(32) is the m = 0 limit of the nexus-vortex combination (26,27) with which
we started, so we can promote that last term to nite values of m easily.
consider the trial wave function

ai =

1
2ir

[i(cos 2 + sin 1) + i(sin 2  cos 1)]1 +

(33)

+i

3
2i

b,

diering from (32) only in the appearance of b from (26,27) instead of just
its massless limit. it describes the tp monopole at m = 0, as just discussed,
and describes the nexus-vortex (26,27) at m = 0 if we require that  vanish
at m = 0.

19

we now wish to remove the string singularities in both the nexus-vortex
and the tp monopole by applying one more singular gauge transformation
v . this gauge transformation will supply the long-range pure-gauge part
analogous to the 0 term in the original center vortex (22), which cancels
the string singularity of the m part. this singular gauge transformation is
not unique, but we choose:

an v

i  v an v

i v 1 + v iv 1; v = ei r/2.

(34)

that this gauge transformation removes the strings follows simply from
the observation that the string eld strengths, coming from ~  ~ =
2z(x)(y), are multiplied by matrix coecients to be evaluated at x, y = 0.
we have

v iv 1 =

iakark

2ir

(cos   1)  (

i  ri  r

2ir

) sin   i(

  r
2i

),

(35)

where the string singularity comes from the curl of the last term on the right.
the coecient   r multiplying this singularity can be replaced by 3 cos .
furthermore, along the z axis it is clear that v 3v 1 = 3. these remarks
show the cancellation of the strings in the center vortex described by (26,27).
similarly there are no strings in the tp gauge potential, when the singular
potential (32,33) is transformed by v also. the total gauge transformation
going from the spherical tp potential of (29) to the nal string-free potential
is v exp(i3/2)w , but in view of the identity

ei3/2w = w v 1

the overall gauge transformation from (32) or (33) is

x  v w v 1.

(36)

(37)

we can now suggest a non-singular trial wave function which incorporates
features of both the tp monopole and the nexus-vortex combination. it is
the potential (33) gauge-transformed by v of (34). there are no string
singularities left, but there could possibly be a singularity at the origin. any
such singularity can easily be removed by a further deformation, along the
lines of ref. [23]; we will not discuss such ne points here. when the higgs-
generated mass m vanishes one can take 1 to zero and recover the nexus

20

figure 3: a sketch of the eld lines associated with the nexus-vortex com-
bination of equation (33), gauge-transformed by the singular gauge transfor-
mation v . the dirac strings are gone.

plus vortex. the general conguration of gauge elds is shown in fig. 3,
which is fig. 2 with the dirac strings missing. note that the holonomy of
v taken around a closed loop enclosing the z axis is, as needed, -1, the non-
trivial element of the center z2. because of this, the fundamental wilson
loop encircling the z axis at innite distance has the value -1, just as for the
standard center-vortex picture of connement.

the next question to ask is how the higgs elds  behaves after all these
gauge transformations. recall that in the spherical tp gauge (see (29)) the
higgs eld has the kinematic structure

 = v(r)(

  r
2i

).

(38)

the overall gauge transformation from the original spherical gauge (29) is by
x of (37), and the gauge-transformed higgs kinematics follows from

x  rx 1 = v 3v 1

(39)

as is easily calculated. we already know from (15) that  must approach
a gauge transformation of a constant 0, with the gauge transformation
precisely that which ai approaches at innity. this shows that in the m 6= 0
case the potential at innity is:

ai  v iv 1

(40)

and therefore the matrix u in the action is to be set equal to v , in order that
both the dynamical mass term and the higgs mass term vanish at innity.

to summarize these arguments:

21

1. there is a nexus-vortex trial wave function given by the gauge trans-
form by v = exp(i  r/2) (see (34)) of the potential (33).
it is
necessarily non-abelian, in order to carry ux, and has non-trivial z2
holonomy.

2. this gauge-transformed potential is free of dirac string singularities.

3. when the dynamical mass m vanishes the result is the usual tp monopole.

4. when the higgs-generated mass m vanishes the result is a nexus-vortex

combination appropriate to the pure-gauge theory.

5. when m 6= 0, the general conguration of elds is as shown in fig.
3, with the bundle of elds on either side having the ux of a center
vortex. the transverse extent of the elds is 1/m.

iv. conclusions

this paper has shown that the abelian tp-monopole condensate asso-
ciated with connement in the d=3 georgi-glashow model is a special case
of a nexus-vortex condensate, very similar to the center-vortex condensate
associated with the pure-gauge theory. nexus-vortex combinations were rst
introduced for the pure-gauge theory, with equal dynamical masses for all
gauge bosons; the new combinations considered here are appropriate to a
broken gauge symmetry as in the georgi-glashow model, and have dierent
masses m, m for the neutral and charged gauge bosons, respectively. the
limit m = 0 yields the tp monopole. it must be remembered[1] that a con-
densate of such monopoles does not have strictly massless magnetic elds,
although the mass m induced by condensation (the meissner eect) is ex-
ponentially small in the semiclassical regime of polyakovs calculations. as
one moves away from the semiclassical regime of polyakov to the quantum
regime, this mass m grows larger, and eventually as the higgs symmetry
breaking is turned o (by tuning the higgs vev v toward zero) one encoun-
ters a critical value vc  g at which infrared instability of the gauge theory
requires generation of a dynamical mass for all three gauge bosons. this mass
m is of order g2, and it is in addition to whatever mass m (now also of order
g2) is induced by symmetry breaking. for all non-zero values of m, including
the semiclassical regime of the georgi-glashow model, the generic vacuum

22

congurations responsible for connement are of nexus-vortex type, consist-
ing of closed loops with a nexus and anti-nexus separating vortex pieces of
oppositely-directed magnetic elds; these vacuum loops have magnetic uxes
leading to a factor -1 for fundamental wilson loops linked once to them. the
sum of the uxes of the elds on either side of a nexus is the tp monopole
ux, so the nexus introduced here is in fact the correct generalization to
a vacuum condensate of the tp monopole. for fundamental wilson loops
large compared to 1/m the mechanism for connement is just that of the
center-vortex picture, based on topological linking of a vacuum loop with
the wilson loop as expressed in the homotopy 1(su(2)/z2) = z2.

based on earlier work[23] on gauge-symmetric nexuses, the action of a
nexus in the georgi-glashow model is expected to be of order 2m/g2, mul-
tiplied by a coecient of order unity. in the quantum regime discussed in this
paper, it is not likely that the congurational entropy of nexuses (as beads
on a center-vortex string) will be big enough to overcome this action penalty,
although detailed calculations need to be done to be sure. the nexus action
is not necessarily large compared to entropic factors since m is of order g2/
(again up to a coecient of order unity). if the action penalty is too large
then the nexus and the anti-nexus on a given vacuum loop will annihilate,
leaving a pure center vortex and a vacuum condensate essentially equivalent
to that of the pure-gauge theory.

there are a number of interesting calculations which remain to be done,
and work on some of them is in progress. for example, when m is consid-
erably less than m, as in the polyakov picture, there is a real distinction in
the connement or screening mechanisms for wilson loops whose size is large
compared to 1/m but small compared to 1/m. it is of particular interest to
consider the screening mechanism for adjoint (or more generally integral-j)
wilson loops, where there is a real distinction between pure-gauge theory
and either the georgi-glashow model or compact qed, as discussed in de-
tail by ambjrn and greensite[14]. in the adjoint wilson loop there is only
screening, not connement[35, 36], with screening produced in the georgi-
glashow model by charged bosons of mass m. as pointed out in ref. [14],
this screening means that the georgi-glashow model is not really represented
by a simple gas of tp monopoles. work is in progress to understand how
the congurations displayed here impact on screening for arbitrary su(2)
representations.

23

acknowledgements

this work was supported in part by national science foundation grant
phy-9531023. i wish to thank the aspen center for physics for hospitality
during the summer of 1998, when part of this work was done,and to thank
e. t. tomboulis for useful discussions.

24

references

[1] a. m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b 120, 429 (1977).

[2] y. nambu, phys. rev. d 10, 4662 (1974); g. t hooft, in high-energy
physics, proc. eps international conf., ed. a. zichichi, editrici com-
positori (1976); s. mandelstam, phys. rev. 23, 245 (1976); a. m.
polyakov, phys. lett. b59, 82 (1975).

[3] g. s. bali, humboldt university preprint hub-rp-98/57 (hep-

ph/9809351), august 1998 (unpublished).

[4] j. m. cornwall, nucl. phys. b 157, 392 (1979).

[5] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 153, 392 (1979).

[6] g. mack and v. b. petkova, ann. phys. (ny) 123, 442 (1979); ibid.

125, 117 (1980); z. phys. c 12, 177 (1982).

[7] h. b. nielsen and p. olesen, nucl. phys. b 160, 380 (1979); j. ambjrn

and p. olesen, nucl. phys. b 170, 60 (1980); ibid. 225.

[8] l. g. yae, phys. rev. d 21, 1574 (1980).

[9] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 26, 1453 (1982).

[10] e. t. tomboulis, phys. lett. b 303, 103 (1993); nucl. phys. b (proc.

suppl.) 34, 192 (1994).

[11] t. g. kovacs and e. t. tomboulis, ucla preprint ucla/98/tep/14

(hep-lat/9806030), june 1998 (unpublished).

[12] t. g. kovacs and e. t. tomboulis, presentation at lattice 98 (hep-
lat/9808046); phys. rev. d 57, 4054 (1998); nucl. phys. b (proc.
suppl.) 63, 534 (1998); 53, 509 (1997).

[13] l. del debbio, m. faber, j. greensite, and s. olenk, nucl. phys. proc.
suppl. 63, 552 (1998); phys. rev. d 55, 2298 (1997); presentations at
the nato workshop new developments in quantum field theory,
zakopane, poland, june 1997 (hep-lat/9708023) and at the 31st inter-
national symposium on the theory of elementary particles, buckow,
germany, september 2-6. 1997 )hep-lat/9802003).

25

[14] j. ambjrn and j. greensite, niels bohr institute preprint (hep-

lat/9804022), april 1998 (unpublished).

[15] m. c. ogilvie, washington university preprint (hep-lat/9806018), june

1998 (unpublished).

[16] m. faber, j. greensite, and s. olenk, preprint (hep-lat/981008), octo-

ber 1998 (unpublished).

[17] j. m. cornwall and b. yan, phys. rev. d 53, 4638 (1996).

[18] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 57, 3694 (1998).

[19] m. faber, j. greensite, and s. olenk, talk at lattice 98 (hep-

lat/9809053), to be published in the conference proceedings.

[20] m. engelhardt, k. langfeld, h. reinhardt, and o. tennert, phys. lett.
b 431, 141 (1998); k. langfeld, h. reinhardt, and o. tennert, phys.
lett. b 419, 317 (1998).

[21] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 190 [fs3], 455 (1981).

[22] t.suzuki and y. yotsunagi, phys. rev. d 42, 4257 (1990).

[23] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 58, 105028 (1998).

[24] j. m. cornwall and g. tiktopoulos, phys. lett. b 181, 353 (1986).

[25] a. linde, phys. lett. 96b, 289 (1980).

[26] j. m. cornwall, w.-s. hou, and j. king, phys. lett. 153b, 173 (1985).

[27] g. alexanian and v. p. nair, phys. lett. b 352, 435 (1995).

[28] w. buchmuller and o. philipsen, nucl. phys. b 443, 47 (1995); phys.

lett. b 397, 112 (1997).

[29] f. eberlein, desy preprint 998-048 (hep-ph/9804460), april 1998 (un-

published).

[30] j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 54, 1814 (1996).

26

[31] j. m. cornwall and j. papavassiliou, phys. rev. d 40, 3474 (1989).

[32] j. papvassiliou, phys. rev. d 41, 3179 (1990); phys. rev. d 47, 4728

(1992).

[33] n. j. watson, phys. lett. b 349, 155 (1995); preprint hep-ph/9812202,

december 1998 (unpublished).

[34] j. m. cornwall and w.-s. hou, phys. rev. d 34, 585 (1986).

[35] j. m. cornwall,

in progress in physics, v. 8, workshop on non-
perturbative quantum chromodynamics, proceedings of the conference,
stillwater, oklahoma, 1983, edited by k. a. milton and m. a. samuel
(birkha user, boston, 1983); j. m. cornwall, phys. rev. d 57, 7589
(1998).

[36] m. faber, j. greensite, and s. olenk, phys. rev. d 57, 2603 (1998).

27

