dftuz 98/34

parity and ct realization in qcd

vicente azcoiti and angelo galante

departamento de fsica teorica, facultad de ciencias, universidad de zaragoza,

50009 zaragoza (spain).

abstract

we show that an essential assumption in the vafa and wittens theorem on
p and ct realization in vector-like theories, the existence of a free energy
density in euclidean space in the presence of any external hermitian symme-
try breaking source, does not apply if the symmetry is spontaneously broken.
the assumption that the free energy density is well dened requires the pre-
vious assumption that the symmetry is realized in the vacuum. even if vafa
and wittens conjecture is plausible, actually a theorem is still lacking.

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

9
1

 
 

2
v
8
6
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

a few years ago vafa and witten gave an argument against spontaneous

breaking of parity in vector-like parity-conserving theories as qcd [1]. the

main point in their proof was the crucial observation that any arbitrary

hermitian local order parameter x constructed from bose elds should be

proportional to an odd power of the four indices antisymmetric tensor 

and therefore would pick-up a factor of i under wick rotation. the addition

of an external symmetry breaking eld x to the lagrangian in minkowski

space becomes then a pure phase factor in the path-integral denition of

the partition function in euclidean space. but a pure phase factor in the

integrand of a partition function with positive denite integration measure

can only increase the vacuum energy density and their conclusion was that,

in such a situation, the mean value of the order parameter should vanish in

the limit of vanishing symmetry breaking eld.

a weak point in this simple and nice argument is the assumption that the

vacuum energy density (equivalently, the free energy density) is well dened

when the symmetry breaking external eld  is not zero.

we want to show here how vafa and wittens argument breaks down if

parity is spontaneously broken. in other words, the assumption that the vac-

uum energy density is well dened at non-vanishing  requires the previous

assumption that parity is not spontaneously broken.

before going on with the presentation of our argument, let us say that it

is rather surprising that the impossibility to break spontaneously a symmetry

depends so crucially on the fact that an hermitian order parameter picks-up

a factor of i under wick rotation. it is well known in statistical mechanics

2

that the inclusion of an external symmetry breaking eld in the hamilto-

nian of a statistical system is a useful tool to analyze spontaneous symmetry

breaking.

if the symmetry breaking term is nite, i.e.

if its contribution

to the hamiltonian is proportional to the number of degrees of freedom, a

very small perturbation is enough to select one between the degenerate vacua

when the symmetry is spontaneously broken. but it is also known that the

addition of a symmetry breaking term to the hamiltonian is not necessary

to analyze spontaneous symmetry breaking. the analysis of the probability

distribution function (p.d.f.) of the order parameter in the symmetric model

has been extensively used to investigate spontaneous symmetry breaking in

spin systems [2] or to analyze in complex systems, as spin-glasses, the struc-

ture of equilibrium states not connected by symmetry transformations [3].

the p.d.f. formalism has also been extended to quantum eld theories with

fermionic degrees of freedom [4] and applied to the analysis of the chiral

structure of the vacuum in vector-like gauge theories. in other words, the

symmetric action contains enough information on the vacuum structure.

in our approach, in order to work with well dened mathematical objects,

we will use the lattice regularization scheme and assume that the lattice

regularized action preserves, as for kogut-susskind fermions, the positivity

of the determinant of the dirac operator. the other essential assumption we

use is that the hermitian p-non-conserving order parameter is a local operator

constructed from bose elds and therefore, as any intensive operator, it does

not uctuate in a pure vacuum state. this property is equivalent to the

statement that all connected correlation functions verify cluster property in

3

a pure vacuum state.

the euclidean path integral formula for the partition function is

z = z daa

d dexp(cid:18)z d4x (l(x) + ix(x))(cid:19)

(1)

where following vafa and witten we have exhibited the factor of i that arises

from wick rotation, i.e. x in (1) is real.

using the p.d.f. of the order parameter x, we can write the partition

function as

z() = z(0)z d xp ( x, v )eiv x

(2)

where v in (2) is the number of lattice sites, p ( x, v ) is the p.d.f. of x at a

given lattice volume

p ( x, v ) = r daa

d der d4xl(x) (cid:16) x(aa
d d er d4xl(x)

r daa

)  x(cid:17)

(3)

and

x(aa

) =

1

v z d4xx(x)

notice that, since the integration measure in (3) is positive or at least

semi-positive denite, p ( x, v ) is a true well normalized p.d.f.

let us assume that parity is spontaneously broken. in the simplest case in

which there is no an extra vacuum degeneracy due to spontaneous breakdown

of some other symmetry, we will have two vacuum states as corresponds to a

4

discrete z2 symmetry. since x is an intensive operator, the p.d.f. of x will

be, in the thermodynamical limit, the sum of two  distributions:

p ( x, v ) =

lim
v 

1
2

( x  a) +

( x + a)

1
2

(4)

at any nite volume, p ( x, v ) will be some symmetric function (p ( x, v ) =

p ( x, v )) developing a two peak structure at x = a and approaching (4)

in the innite volume limit.

due to the symmetry of p ( x, v ) we can write the partition function as

z() = 2z(0)rez 

0

p ( x, v )eiv xd x

and if we pick up a factor of eiv a

z() = 2z(0)re(cid:18)eiv a z 

0

p ( x, v )eiv ( xa)d x(cid:19)

which after simple algebra reads as follows:

(5)

(6)

z()/(2z(0)) =

cos(v a)z 
 sin(v a)z 

0

0

p ( x, v ) cos(cid:16)v ( x  a)(cid:17) d x
p ( x, v ) sin(cid:16)v ( x  a)(cid:17) d x (7)

the relevant zeroes of the partition function in  can be obtained as the

solutions of the following equation:

0 p ( x, v ) sin(cid:16)v ( x  a)(cid:17) d x
cot(v a) = r 
0 p ( x, v ) cos(cid:16)v ( x  a)(cid:17) d x
r 

(8)

5

let us assume for a while that the denominator in (8) is constant at large

v . since the absolute value of the numerator is bounded by 1, the partition

function will have an innite number of zeroes approaching the origin ( = 0)

with velocity v . in such a situation the free energy density does not converge

in the innite volume limit.

but this is essentially what happens in the actual case.

in fact if we

consider the integral in (8)

f (v, v ) = z 

0

p ( x, v ) cos(cid:16)v ( x  a)(cid:17) d x

(9)

as a function of v and v it is easy to check that the derivative of f (v, v )

respect to v vanishes in the large volume limit due to the fact that p ( x, v )

develops a ( x  a) in the innite volume limit. at xed large volumes v ,

f (v, v ) as function of v is an almost constant non-vanishing function (it

takes the value of 1/2 at v = 0). the previous result on the zeroes of the

partition function in  remains therefore unchanged; it generalizes [5] the

lee-yang theorem on the zeroes of the grand canonical partition function of

the ising model in the complex fugacity plane [6] to any statistical model

with a discrete z2 symmetry.

to illustrate this result with an example, let us take for p ( x, v ) a double

gaussian distribution

p ( x, v ) =

1/2

1

2 (cid:18)v
 (cid:19)

(cid:16)ev ( x a)2

+ ev ( x+a)2(cid:17)

(10)

which gives for the partition function

6

z() = z(0) cos(v a)e

1

4 2v

(11)

and for the mean value of the order parameter

< ix >=

1
2

 + tan(av )a

(12)

the zeroes structure of the partition function is evident in (11) and con-

sequently the mean value of the order parameter (12) is not dened in the

thermodynamical limit. notice also that if a = 0 (symmetric vacuum), the

free energy density is well dened at any  and then vafa and wittens

argument applies.

in conclusion we have shown that an essential assumption in the vafa and

wittens theorem on p and ct realization in vector-like theories, namely the

existence of a free energy density in euclidean space in the presence of any

external hermitian symmetry breaking source, does not apply if the symmetry

is spontaneously broken. the assumption that the free energy density is well

dened requires the previous assumption that the symmetry is realized in

the vacuum.

to clarify this point let us discuss a simple model which, as vector-like

theories, has a positive denite integration measure and, after the introduc-

tion of an imaginary order parameter, a complex action: the ising model

in presence of an imaginary external magnetic eld. this model veries all

the conditions of vafa-witten theorem. if we assume that the free energy

density exists, we will conclude that the z2 symmetry is not spontaneously

7

broken. this is obviously wrong in the low temperature phase. the solu-

tion to this paradox lies in the fact that the free energy density in the low

temperature phase and for an imaginary magnetic eld is not dened (it is

singular on the imaginary axis of the complex magnetic eld plane). it is

true that this model is not a vector-like gauge model but in any case veries

all vafa-witten conditions, except the existence of the free energy density.

this example demonstrates that such an assumption is not trivial and, what

is more relevant, to assume the existence of the free energy density is at least

at the same level than assume the symmetry be realized in the vacuum.

a possible way to prove vafa and wittens claim on parity realization

in vector-like theories could be to show the existence of a transfer matrix

connecting the euclidean formulation with the hamiltonian approach in the

presence of any hermitian symmetry breaking eld. a weaker sucient con-

dition would be the positivity of z() around  = 0, even if, from a math-

ematical point of view, it is not a necessary one for the symmetry to be

realized.

the proof of these conditions for any symmetry breaking operator seems

very hard, even for the weaker condition. however in the case of the more

standard operator f f , associated to the -vacuum term, the reection posi-

tivity of z has been shown for the two dimensional pure gauge model using

the lattice regularization scheme [7]. up to our knowledge a generalization of

this result to four dimensional theories and (or) dynamical fermions does not

exists. only arguments suggesting that a consistent hamiltonian approach

could be constructed in the four dimensional pure gauge yang-mills model

8

can be found in the literature [8]. summarizing, even if vafa and wittens

conjecture seems to be plausible, a theorem on the impossibility to break

spontaneously parity in vector-like theories is still lacking.

9

acknowledgements

we thank m. asorey for useful discussions and e. witten for a critical

reading of the manuscript. this work has been partially supported by cicyt

(proyecto aen97-1680). a.g. was supported by a istituto nazionale di

fisica nucleare fellowship at the university of zaragoza.

10

references

[1] c. vafa, e. witten, phys. rev. lett. 53 (1984) 535.

[2] k. binder, z. phys. b43, 119 (1981).

[3] m. mezard, g. parisi and m.a. virasoro in spin glass theory and

beyond, world scientic lecture notes in physics vol. 9 (1987).

[4] v. azcoiti, v. laliena, x.q. luo, phys. lett. b354 (1995) 111.

[5] v. azcoiti, a. galante, in preparation.

[6] c.n. yang and t.d. lee, phys. rev. 87, (1952) 410.

[7] e. seiler, gauge theories as a problem of constructive quantum field

theory and statistical mechanics, lecture notes in physics 159 (springer-

verlag, berlin 1982).

[8] m. asorey, p.k. mitter, on geometry, topology and -sectors in the reg-

ularized quantum yang-mills theory, cern th-2423 preprint (1982).

11

