su-itp

holography in the flat space limit

leonard susskind

department of physics, stanford university

stanford, ca 94305-4060

abstract

matrix theory and the ads/cft correspondence provide nonper-
turbative holographic formulations of string theory. in both cases the
nite n theories can be thought of as infrared regulated versions of
at space string theory in which removing the cuto is equivalent to
letting n go to innity.

in this paper we consider the nature of this limit. in both cases the
holographic mapping becomes completely nonlocal. in matrix theory
this corresponds to the growth of d0-brane bound states with n. for
the ads/cft correspondence there is a similar delocalization of the
holographic image of a system as n increases. in this case the limiting
theory seems to require a number of degrees of freedom comparable
to large n matrix quantum mechanics.

december 1998

9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

9
1

 
 

1
v
9
7
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1 introduction

according to the holographic principle, a physical system of dimensionality
d which includes gravity, should be described by a quantum system which
lives in fewer dimensions. we have seen a good deal of evidence for the holo-
graphic principle from both matrix theory and the ads/cft correspondence
but very little real understanding of how it works, in other words, how a gen-
eral conguration of a d dimensional system is coded by lower dimensional
degrees of freedom. my main purpose in this paper is to provoke discussion
about the mechanism of holography [1], [2]. most of the things that i will
discuss i do not understand very well. in trying to formulate them precisely i
have mainly encountered frustration. nevertheless i think they are important
and deserve to be discussed.

one of the characteristic features of a real hologram is that it codes
information in a highly nonlocal way. for example by casually looking at a
hologram of several distinct objects it is impossible to tell how many objects
it describes or their size and shape. these details are completely delocalized
on the hologram. the point of this paper is to argue that quantum gravity
is holographic in exactly this sense.

two concrete realizations of holographic theories now exit, namely matrix
theory [3] and the ads/cft correspondence [4],[5],[6],[7]. in both theories
the hologram is a large n super yang mills (sym) theory. furthermore in
both cases n serves as a kind of infrared regulator. in the limit n   keep-
ing the yang mills coupling xed both theories describe physics in innite
at space. furthermore, as we shall see, as n grows, the mapping between
the hologram and the system it describes becomes more and more nonlocal,
in this respect the mapping is like a real hologram. in this paper i will raise
some unanswered questions about the nature of the holographic mapping,
especially in the limit of innite at spacetime. as we shall see, the large n
limit involved in going to at space is quite dierent than the usual t hooft
limit in which the coupling shrinks to zero as n increases. the at space
limits in matrix and ads/cft theories both involve letting n go to innity
with xed gauge coupling. thus the t hooft coupling parameter g2
ymn tends
to innity and the xed point becomes innitely strongly coupled.

imagine a system composed of point sources of light (particles). assume
that the light from the dierent sources is coherent as long as they are within
a coherence length lc. all of this takes place in the 3-dimensional half
space z > 0. at z = 0 in the x, y plane there is a photographic lm which
records the light from the particles. as long as the particles are separated
by distance greater than lc they form two separate blobs of light on the
lm. if we made a movie from such photos we could follow the individual
particles motion from these blobs. however as soon as they approached
within lc the individual identities would disappear. however the details

2

would not be lost. at this point the details such as the number and position
of point sources would become encoded holographically, that is nonlocally
distributed over the coherence length lc. as the coherence length increases
the information becomes completely delocalized over the entire hologram.
for an ordinary hologram the information is in the interference patterns
created by the coherent light sources. for matrix theory and the ads/cft
correspondence the coding is more obscure but in both cases it involves the
in both
n  n matrix degrees of freedom of super yang mills theories.
these theories we will see the same kind of delocalization with a coherence
length that increases like n 1/3 in matrix theory and n 1/4in the ads/cft
correspondence.

2 holography and matrix theory

let us begin with matrix theory. for the present purposes we are interested
in uncompactied matrix theory described by 0 + 1 dimensional sym theory.
for a review of matrix theory and notations we refer the reader to [8].

matrix theory can be thought of as the discrete light cone quantization
(dlcq)[9] of m-theory in which the spacetime is compactied on an almost
light like circle x . the discrete conjugate momentum is related to the gauge
group rank n by pr = n. thus we see that if we x the momentum p,
removing the ir cuto (letting r  ) is tantamount to letting n  .
what has not been suciently realized is that n also plays the role of an
infrared cuto in the transverse dimensions. to see why, let us rst consider
the 10 dimensional metric and dilaton describing a collection of n coincident
d0-branes in the near horizon limit [10].

ds2 = f 1/2dt2 + f 1/2dxidxi

exp(2) = f 3/2
nl9
11
r2r7

f =

(2.1)

where l11 is the 11 dimensional planck scale.

now consider the limits of validity of (2.1). at small r the ten dimensional
supergravity description breaks down because the eective string coupling
gets large. in 11 dimensional terms, the local value of the radius of the 11th
direction becomes bigger than l11. this happens at r  n 1/7l11
while we have to give up the duality between 10d supergravity and d0-
brane physics at this point we can replace it with a duality between d0-branes
and 11d supergravity. this is the basis for matrix theory. thus there is no
limit on the matrix theory/supergravity duality at r  n 1/7l11
vature r of the 10d metric satises

at the large distance end another limitation is reached. the scalar cur-

3

r 

r3/2r
n 1/2l9/2
11

it is monotonically increasing with r and exceeds the string scale at
r  n 1/3l11. at this point the supergravity description completely breaks
down. the region r > n 1/3l11 is the region where the d0-brane quantum me-
chanics can be treated perturbatively. from the supergravity point of view
r = n 1/3l11 represents an infrared cuto beyond which classical supergravity
is no longer applicable. this means that when two colliding objects in ma-
trix theory approach each other from innity, semiclassical gravity will not
generally describe their interactions correctly until r < n 1/3l11. although it
is true that matrix theory with 16 supersymmetries sometimes agrees with
dlcq tree graph supergravity to asymptotic distances this probably has
more to do with the tight constraints of maximal supersymmetry than with
any general reason for agreement. a more typical example is matrix theory
on a blown up orbifold where for nite n the supergravity and one loop ma-
trix theory disagree [11]. if this case is typical, we would expect agreement
only when n > ( r
l11

these considerations suggest although the compactication radius r is
allowed to be vanishingly small, the d0-branes create a bubble of space whose
transverse size grows as n 1/3 so that the limit n   is eectively decom-
it is therefore interesting to ask if we can see the scale n 1/3l11
pactied.
occurring in matrix theory. in the original matrix theory conjecture [3] it
was speculated that the threshold bound state describing a supergraviton
would grow with n. one estimate was based on the well known v4/r7 veloc-
ity dependent eective interaction between d0-brane clusters and suggested
that the bound state radius grows like n 1/9l11. a second estimate based on
a perturbative large n argument gave the even more rapid growth n 1/3l11.
recently polchinski has given a rigorous proof [12] that the growth is at least
as fast as n 1/3l11. polchinskis argument is based on the virial theorem. the
argument i will give here is a less rigorous paraphrase of polchinskis but
gives some intuition about the nature of the bound state.

)3.

let us use the gauge freedom of matrix theory to work in a basis in which
one of the 9 x-coordinates, say x1, is diagonal. the eigenvalues can be
thought of as the locations of the constituent d0-branes along the x1 axis.
let us suppose that they are smoothly spread over a region of size l. now
consider the quantity ht r(x1)2i. this obviously satises

ht r(x1)2i  nl2

(2.2)

consider the quantity ht ry 2i where y is any of the other 8 x s. the
o diagonal elements of the matrixy are described by harmonic oscillators

4

in the background of x with frequency of order

 

lr
l3
11

(2.3)

and uctuation (y )2  l3

11

l . since there are of  n 2 such elements we nd
(2.4)

ht ry 2i 

n 2l3
11
l

but now we can use rotational symmetry to equate ht r(x1)2i and ht ry 2i
giving
(2.5)

l  n 1/3l11

the typical conjugate momentum of a matrix element is also easily esti-

mated and is given by

pij = n 1/6/l11

(2.6)

thus we see that the bound state grows large with n, extending to the
boundaries of the region of validity of 10d supergravity. as seen from eq(2.3)
the matrices x have very high frequency oscillations reminiscent of the high
frequency zero point oscillations of free strings which also lead to a growth of
the wave function but in this case only a logarithmic growth [13],[14]. finally,
the kinetic energy of the d0-branes is estimated as follows. the total kinetic
energy is r
. using (2.6) and the fact that there are n 2 matrix elements
we nd the total kinetic energy to be of order rn 7/3
. this is to be compared
with the typical energy scale in dlcq m-theory r
2 . evidently, on the
n ls
scale of the energies of physical processes the kinetic energies are huge. the
kinetic energy per d0-brane is

2 t rp 2

l2

11

e/n =

rn 4/3

l2
11

(2.7)

this enormous energy is cancelled by the quartic and fermionic terms in the
hamiltonian but this estimate gives an idea of the energy scales involved.

in light of the above, let us consider a collision between two gravitons.
most of the literature on scattering in matrix theory makes the implicit
assumption that the wave function eects are not important. what this
means is that the scattering objects are described by little clusters of d0-
branes which are much smaller than the distance separating them. as we
shall see this is completely incorrect.

for simplicity take the gravitons to have equal light cone momenta and
therefore equal values of n. in the transverse center of mass frame they have
equal and opposite transverse momenta p and p. the light cone energy
is

elc =

= r



p 2
n



p 2
p

5

(2.8)

and the mandelstam invariant center of mass energy is

s = 2p 2



(2.9)

suppose p is xed and of order 1/l11. if matrix theory is consistent then
the scattering amplitude must tend to a nite limit in 11d planck units as
n increases. but as we have seen the size of the bound state wave functions
grow as n 1/3. each particle is huge blob of eigenvalues and the blobs begin
to overlap long before the particles come close in the usual sense. during
the period of overlap the constituents of each blob lose their identity. this
is obvious because of the very large energy scales involved in the d0-brane
dynamics eq(2.7). the puny available energy in eq (2.8) is not enough to
signicantly modify the correlations in the ground state. therefore the state
of the system should more closely resemble the ground state of the 2n  2n
matrix theory than two overlapping but distinguishable subsystems.
thus the history of the scattering process has two very dierent but
equivalent descriptions. in the usual space time supergravity description two
small particles come in from innity and remain essentially noninteracting
until they come within a distance of order l11. they interact for a short time
and then separate into nal particles which cease to interact as soon as they
are separated by l11. in light cone units the interaction lasts for a time l11n
pr .
the holographic matrix description also begins with asymptotically dis-
tant noninteracting objects.
in this description the constituents begin to
merge and interact when their separation is of order n 1/3l11. as they ap-
proach, the many body wave function begins to more and more resemble the
ground state. the system remains in this entangled state for a light cone
time of order l11n 4/3
pr and then separate into noninteracting nal clusters. the
situation is particularly perplexing if the energy is not very large and the im-
pact parameter is much larger than l11. in this case the gravity description
the particles miss each other and just continue without signicant deection.
exactly how this miracle happens from the sym description is still a mystery.
we will see exactly the same puzzles in the ads/cft correspondence.

3 holography and the ads/cft duality

string theory in ads5s5 is dual to sym theory on the boundary of the space
[4], [5]. as pointed out by witten, this is another example of a holographic
connection [6]. for our purposes ads is best thought of as a nite cavity
with reecting walls. the metric is given by

ds2 = r2ds2

(3.1)

6

where r is the radius of curvature of the ads and ds2 is the metric of a
unit ads. the unit ads metric is

ds2 =

(1 + r2)2

(1  r2)2 dt2 

4

(1  r2)2 (dr2 + r2d)

(3.2)

with d being the unit 3-sphere.

the full geometry is ads5  s5. the s5 factor is a 5-sphere of radius
r. although the boundary, r = 1 is an innite proper distance from any
point in the interior of the ball r < 1 the time for a light signal to reect o
the boundary is nite. a light signal originating at r = 0 (with vanishing s5
momentum) will return after a coordinate time . thus as far as light signals
are concerned the space behaves like a nite radiation cavity with reecting
walls. the eect of the inhomogeneous metric is to slow the light velocity at
the center to half its value at the boundary. in other words the bulk sphere
has a varying dielectric constant. a very simple example of the equivalence of
bulk physics with the boundary theory is given by the restriction of causality.
consider a signal originating at a point on the boundary. at a later time it
will reappear at the antipodal point on the boundary. in the sym description
it travels with the speed of light on the boundary taking a time  to get to
the antipode. in the dual bulk theory the signal travels through the center
of the ball, r = 0, along a light like geodesic. a simple calculation shows
that it again arrives after coordinate time .

massive particle trajectories (timelike geodesics) are all periodic in time
with period 2. these trajectories never reach the boundary. the cavity
walls repel massive particles with a force which diverges near r = 1. the
force is proportional to the mass of the particle as is always the case in gravity.
from the point of view of the ads5 the particles carrying momentum along
the 5-sphere are massive. a massive particle which starts at r = 0 with
velocity v will move outward on a radial trajectory for a time /2 at which
point it reaches a maximum radial coordinate satisfying

v2 =

4r2
(1 + r2

max
max)2

(3.3)

in describing the sym theory we will use the dimensionless metric ds2.
this means that all sym quantities will be treated as dimensionless. the
corresponding quantities in the bulk theory carry their usual dimensions. to
go from one to the other the conversion factor is r. for example an sym
energy of order 1 corresponds to an energy of order 1/r in the bulk theory.
a coordinate time interval t is an interval rt in bulk units.

the dimensionless parameters of the bulk theory are the 10 dimensional
string coupling constant gs and the ratio of the radius of curvature to the
string length scale r/ls. the parameters of the dual sym theory are the

7

sym coupling gym and the rank of the gauge group n. the connection
between these parameters was given by maldacena,

gs = g2
ym

r/ls = (ngs)1/4

(3.4)

the fact that by increasing n the radius of curvature in eq(3.11) can be
made to increase while keeping the string coupling xed leads to a conjecture
for a new nonperturbative denition of iib string theory in terms of sym
theory. the ads  s5 geometry can be thought of as an infrared regulator
for type iib string theory. as r   the space becomes locally at 10
dimensional minkowski space. to formulate this precisely let us begin with
euclidean sym theory in the euclidean version of the metric (3.2).

ds2 = (1 + r2)2

(1  r2)2 d 2 

4

(1  r2)2 (dr2 + r2d)

(3.5)

i will refer to these coordinates and their minkowski counterparts as cavity
coordinates where  is euclidean time. it is very convenient to transform
to 1/2-plane coordinates with metric

ds2 = r2 (dxidxi + dy2)

y2

(3.6)

the 4 noncompact coordinates xi are parallel to the boundary and can also be
used as coordinates for the sym theory. the coordinate y runs perpendicular
to the boundary and varies from zero to innity.

the transformation from 1/2-plane to cavity coordinates is given as fol-
lows. first transform (xi, y) to 5 dimensional polar coordinates , , , , ,.

y =  cos 
x1 =  sin  cos 
x2 =  sin  sin  cos 
x3 =  sin  sin  sin  cos 
x4 =  sin  sin  sin  sin 

(3.7)

now set  = e and cos  = 1r2
of the unit sphere .

1+r2 . the three angles , ,  are the coordinates

we will be interested in correlation functions of various elds in the su-
perconformally invariant sym theory. thus consider a set of points xa on
the boundary of the 1/2-plane coordinates. for each pair of points a, b dene
xab  |xa  xb|2. in terms of euclidean cavity coordinates xab is given by

xab = e(a+b)(cosh ab  cosab)

(3.8)

where ab  a  b and ab is the angular separation between the points in
. it is also convenient to dene zab = (cosh ab  cosab).

8

euclidean correlation functions of the sym theory are typically homo-
geneous functions of the xab of degree determined by the dimensions of the
operators. to express the corresponding correlators in cavity coordinates
just replace each xab by zab. the various of e cancel the jacobian factors in
the transformation of elds with nonvanishing dimensions. thus the corre-
lators are homogeneous functions of the zab. as an example, the correlation
function of two scalar elds  of dimension 4 is of the form z 4
ab

it is now a simple matter to pass to minkowski signature by replacing 

by it. thus the correlator becomes

h(xa)(xb)i = (cos tab  cosab)4

(3.9)

the singularity when cos tab = cosab is the usual light cone singularity.

strictly speaking there is no true s matrix in ads space. as i have
emphasized, ads is for all practical purposes a nite cavity with reecting
walls. asymptotic states can not be dened in such a geometry. the strategy
that we follow is to introduce sources on the walls of the cavity which act as
particle sources and detectors. this will allow us to dene a nite time version
of the s matrix. when the size of the box is allowed to increase, keeping xed
the energies, impact parameters and other physical quantities the nite time
s matrix should tend to a true asymptotic scattering amplitude.

before discussing the boundary sources further we need to determine what
quantities should be kept xed as r   in order to recover at space string
theory. first of all we must keep the microscopic parameters of string theory
xed. this means letting r/ls   with gs xed. in terms of yang mills
quantities

gym = f ixed
n  

(3.10)

in addition the energy scale of physical processes should be xed in string
units. in terms of the dimensionless energy of the sym theory e

e  (g2

ymn)1/4

(3.11)

thus we see that the at space limit involves the high energy limit of large
n sym theory. we will also require restrictions on the angular momenta of
particles.

we will dene a spacetime region called the lab. the lab is centered at
r = t = 0. its linear dimensions l in both space and time are xed in string
units but are much larger than ls at the end we may take l/ls as big as we
like. as n   the entire region of the lab becomes accurately described
by at spacetime. the sources will be constructed in such a way as to insure
that the entire collision process takes place within the lab.

9

a particle can carry momentum components in both the ads5 directions
and in the s5 directions. we will call these p and k respectively. for the
moment we will ignore k. consider a massless particle that is inside the
lab with momentum p. its angular momentum l is necessarily less than lp.
since the cavity is spherically symmetric, the angular momentum of a freely
moving incoming particle is conserved. therefore if the particle is to arrive in
the lab it must be emitted from the boundary with l < lp. this restriction
guarantees that the beam is focused to pass through the lab.

as an example we will consider scattering amplitudes for dilatons carrying
vanishing momentum in the s5 directions. the dilatons will be emitted
in such a way that they propagate freely toward the region r = 0 where
they meet and interact within the lab. since the wavelength of the particles
is vanishingly small by comparison with the radius of the ads space, the
propagation of the wave packets toward the lab can be treated by geometrical
optics. the time it takes for a wave packet to travel from the boundary to
the lab is /2, just half the time for a light signal to cross the ads space.
therefore the initial sources must act at t = ( 
r ). similarly the nal
detector-sources must act at t = +( 

2  l

the appropriate sym operators for emitting all massless 10 dimensional
particles are known. in particular the operator that creates a dilaton at the
boundary is the dimension 4 operator t rff   f f . let us consider the
emission operator for a zero angular momentum dilaton of bulk energy p.
the obvious choice is

2  l
r).

ain(p)  z dtdeiprtf f

(3.12)

however in order to build wave packets which arrive at the lab at t = 0  l
r
we need modify the denition of a. this can be done by replacing the
factor eiprt by a wave packet of nite extent. let finh(t  
li be a smooth
2 ) r
l(cid:21) eiprtf f

function (such as a gaussian) which is peaked at t = /2. the denition of
a is

ain(p)  z dtdfin(cid:20)(t 

(3.13)

r


2

)

a similar expression denes the operators representing the nal particles.

aout(p)  z dtdfout(cid:20)(t +


2

)

r

l(cid:21) eiprtf f

(3.14)

to create particles of arbitrary angular momentum the integral over  should
contain the relevant o(4) spherical harmonic.

the recipe for computing bulk s matrix elements from sym quantities is

straightforward.

s = h0|yout

zoutaoutyin

zinain|0i

(3.15)

10

the factors z are inverse boundary-bulk propagators which are needed to
amputate the external ads propagators.

the above prescription for recovering at space amplitudes can be gen-
eralized to include nonvanishing momenta along the 5-sphere. the opera-
tors which create particles with nonvanishing o(6) angular momentum n are
schematically of the form t rf f xxxx... where f represents components
of the yang mills field strength and xxxx.. is a polynomial of order n in
the scalar elds which transform as vectors under o(6). these are operators
of mass dimension 4 + n. we must also integrate these operators with func-
tions of time and  in order to project out denite energy and o(4) angular
momentum. again the frequencies should be of order g2
ymn 1/4 in order to
keep the physical momentum of the bulk particles of order unity in string
units.

thus we see that passing to the at space limit generally involves op-
erators in the sym theory which are high frequency components of high
dimension operators.

to actually compute scattering amplitudes from conformal eld theory
data, a useful strategy might be to use the operator product expansion for
the operators ain,out. consider for example a two particle scattering process
in which the incoming (outgoing) particles are emitted (absorbed) at time
tin,out = /2. the angular positions of the incoming particles are 1,2 and
the outgoing particles 3,4. the 4 points (1, 2, 3, 4) are far from each other in
spacetime and it is not obvious why the operator product expansion is useful.
however, consider the case where there is a small momentum transfer (p1 
p3) << p. then the locations of 1 and 3 will be almost light-like with respect
to each other. in the rules for continuation from euclidean to minkowski
signature in ads space the almost light like separation between 1 and 3
maps to an almost vanishing euclidean separation so that the ope should
provide an expansion for small angle scattering. obviously, the operators
of low dimensionality in the operator product of a(1)a(3) correspond to
massless exchange. in addition we also expect contributions corresponding
to massive string exchange with masses of order l1
s . from the point of view
of the operator product expansion this means operators of dimensionality
 gsn 1/4. we will leave it to a future publication, hopefully by someone else,
to work out the detailed rules for computing on shell scattering amplitudes
from cft data in the at limit.

4 the infrared ultraviolet connection

the connection between the boundary sym theory and the ideas of holog-
raphy rely on an important connection between the ultraviolet behavior of
the sym theory and the infrared behaviour of the bulk supergravity [7]. we

11

will begin by reviewing the argument for counting the number of degrees of
freedom of the system. by now it is well known that an ultraviolet cuto at
wavelength  in the sym is equivalent to a cuto in the radial coordinate r
at r = 1  . the cuto sym describes the bulk supergravity in the interior
of the ball r < 1  . now the number of cuto cells of coordinate size  on
the boundary of this ball is of order 1/3. assuming that each independent
sym eld has one degree of freedom per cells, the total number of degrees
of freedom is

if we use

ndof 

n 2
3

r = ls(ngs)1/4

area =

r8
3
g = g2
s l8
s

(4.1)

(4.2)

where area is the area of the cuto 3-sphere times s5 and g is the 10d
gravitational coupling constant we nd the typical holographic behaviour

ndof  area/g

(4.3)

let us push this reasoning to the extreme and take the cuto  such
that the proper volume of the 4 dimensional ball r <  is r4 (dimensionless
volume  1). the area of the cuto boundary sphere is then  r3 and
the number of degrees of freedom is just n 2.
in other words it takes n 2
degrees of freedom to describe all the states of the bulk theory which are
supported within a sphere of proper size r. this means that the physics,
within a neighborhood small enough so that curvature can be ignored, is
coded by the n 2 matrix degrees of freedom and that the inhomogeneous
spatial modes of the sym are unexcited. this suggests the possibility that
the states supported within such a neighborhood might be described by an
n  n matrix quantum mechanics.
as an illustration of the ir-uv connection consider a graviton carrying
momentum k along the s5 and momentum p >> k in the radial direction
along r.
it is created by applying the
operator

its total energy is e = p2 + k2.

ain(p, k) = z dtdfin(cid:20)(t 


2

)

r

l(cid:21) eiertt rf f xxxxx...

(4.4)

where there are n = kr factors inside the trace. this means that the total
energy is divided among n sym quanta and the energy  of each sym
quantum is

 = s (p2 + k2)

k2

p
k



12

(4.5)

this corresponds to a cuto in the sym theory   1/  k
p . the implica-
tion is that in the bulk theory the particle created by a appears not at the
boundary but at 1  r  k
p . this makes good sense for the following reason.
from the point of view of ads5 a particle with s5 momentum k is a massive
particle with mass k. the classical trajectory of such a massive particle with
(bulk) energy e has a turning point (vanishing velocity) given by (3.3). in
terms momentum components the turning point is at 1  r  k
p . hence the
particle starts out at the outermost point on its trajectory.

the fact that massive particles originate in the interior of the ads space
does not require a modication of the rules for constructing the a operators.
although they start closer to the interaction point at r = 0, the time that it
takes to arrive at r = 0 is independent of the mass.

k

from the above discussion it seems that the cuto theory with a given
value of  can describe the sector of the theory containing particles with
k
p  . suppose for example, all the particles in a given reaction have
p  1.in this case only the lowest modes of the sym theory are excited corre-
sponding to congurations which are spatially homogeneous (in the boundary
theory). in other words physical processes involving such particles always ap-
pear completely smeared and nonlocal in the holographic sym description.
the situation is very similar to the matrix case.

at this point it is interesting to consider just what problems we in princi-
ple would know how to set up and solve if we could completely master sym
theory and nd all its correlators, and energy levels. first of all we could
apply the recipe described in section(3) to compute any scattering ampli-
tude involving 10 dimensional massless particles. since we do not expect any
other stable particles in the theory, this exhausts all iib at space scattering
amplitudes.

in addition we could compute the thermodynamics of the theory and
discover the existence of a phase transition at (dimensionless) temperature 
1. this corresponds to the formation of a large black hole at bulk temperature
 r1. this object has no signicance in the at space limit since it has a
size of order the radius of curvature.
however most of ordinary at space physics would remain out of reach
even though it implicitly must be described by the sym theory. as an exam-
ple consider the problem of describing an ordinary 10 dimensional schwarzschild
black hole of nite mass and entropy as n  . for simplicity the black
hole could be located near the center of the ads at some point on the 5-
sphere. if the proper distance of the black hole from the center is kept xed
as r   then its coordinates will tend to the origin at r = 0. the image
will become completely symmetric on the 3-sphere. what features of the
sym state contain the information of the exact position or even the fact
that it is a black hole or any other object of the same mass and angular
momentum is not known. in fact it is not even clear how to distinguish this

13

conguration from a pair of distant black holes or other objects of the same
total mass if their separation is much smaller than the radius of curvature
r. in principle the ads/cft correspondence requires the sym theory to
contain these objects. recognizing them from their sym description requires
deciphering the holographic code.

5 instantons in ads

it has been suggested that a simple place to begin trying to crack the holo-
graphic code is the theory of instantons. in the bulk supergravity theory the
instantons are d-instantons whose holographic images are expected to be
ordinary yang mills instantons . in order to discuss instantons we must con-
sider the euclidean version of ads. as is well known this is a 5 dimensional
ball bounded by a 4-sphere of radius r. the euclidean sym theory lives on
this boundary sphere. as before, when discussing the sym the 4-sphere will
be thought of as having unit radius.

for small , a d-instanton in the bulk located at r = (1  ) is rep-
resented in the sym as an localized instanton of size  =  [15]. this is
another example of the uv-ir connection. d-instantons near the center of
the ball correspond to y.m. instantons which ll the entire boundary sphere
homogeneously. in fact the gauge eld for such instantons is completely ho-
mogeneous up to a gauge transformation. note that if we have one or more
d-instantons at a xed separation from one another and from r = 0 then
as n increases their coordinates get closer and closer to r = 0. thus in the
limit all the instantons lying within a nite proper volume are found within
an innitesimal coordinate distance from the origin. thus in the sym theory
they are described by the largest homogeneous gauge instantons. again, the
features of the sym description which distinguish the dierent d-instanton
congurations are obscure.

an sym instanton will appear approximately homogeneous if the corre-
sponding d-instanton is within a ball of volume r5. an interesting paradox
occurs if we ask how many d-instantons can we put in such a region. the
naive answer if that the number should roughly be the 10 dimensional volume
of the product of the balls5. in other words the maximum instanton num-
ber in this volume is naively ( r
)10 = (ngs)5/2. however if we try to build
ls
homogeneous instanton congurations on the sym sphere we nd that we
can have a maximum instanton number of order n. a single large su(2) in-
stanton is a homogeneous conguration. if we try to put two instantons into
the same su(2) subgroup we nd that it can not be done without making
the eld inhomogeneous. since their are n/2 commuting su(2) subgroups
we can only accommodate this number of homogeneous instantons. either
the d-instantons within volume r5 can not be identied with homogeneous

14

gauge eld congurations or there must be some reason why it is not possible
to cram as many d-instantons into a region as the naive argument suggests.
exactly this conclusion can be reached by an argument similar to that
used for d0-branes in section 2. if we are interested in a small region of ads
over which the curvature can be ignored we can use a at space description.
d-instantons are formally d-branes of dimensionality 1 and are described
by a matrix integral [16] dened by the dimensional reduction of maximally
supersymmetric sym. if the instanton number is k the matrices are k by k.
the action for the d-instantons is

s = 

1
gsl4
s

t r[x i, x j]2

(5.1)

an argument exactly paralleling the one in eqs(2.2), (2.3) and (2.4) will give
the size of the region occupied by k d-instantons. as in that case, rst
diagonalize x 1 and assume that the eigenvalues are smeared over a region of
size l. as before

now consider one of the o diagonal elements of y where y is any other

ht r(x 1)2i  kl2

(5.2)

x j. the average of y 2 in the x 1 background is

hy 2i = gsl4

s/l2

and

using rotational symmetry to equate (5.23) and (5.25) gives

ht ry 2i = k2gsl4

s/l2

l = (kgs)1/4ls

(5.3)

(5.4)

(5.5)

to nd the maximum number of d-instantons that we can put into a at
region of size r we set l = r = (ngs)1/4. thus we nd that the maxi-
mum number of d-instantons is of order n in agreement with the maximum
number of homogeneous gauge eld instantons. it is also clear that the posi-
tions of the d-instantons, within the region approximated by at space, in
the limit n   must be coded somehow in the n  n matrix degrees of
freedom of the sym and not in the large gauge eld inhomogeneities.
finally, classical gravitational considerations give the same result. the

gravitational eld of k d-instantons in at space is given by

ds2 = f 1/2dxidxi

(5.6)

where

f = 1 + kgsl8

(5.7)
thus the gravitational eld extends out to distance r = (kgs)1/4ls. if this
distance is not to exceed r then k  n.
15

sr8

6 decoding the hologram

exactly how information is holographically stored in either matrix theory or
the ads/cft correspondence is a mystery. i will try to give some thoughts
about it. lets begin with matrix theory.

the n 1/3 increase in the size of the low energy wave functions of d0-brane
wave functions is caused by the ground state oscillations of an increasing
number ( n 2) of high frequency modes. the situation is parallel to that in
free string theory where as the number of modes is increased the ground state
expands [13]. in the free string case the expansion is only logarithmic but
for any nite coupling it will eventually grow like a power [2]. the increase
in the sizes of images eventually blurs the details of a system. for example if
the system consists of two distinct objects separated by transverse distance
 then when n 1/3 > 
l11 the holographic images become entangled. given
a state of the matrix theory at very large n it would be very dicult to
decipher its meaning.

the trick in decoding the hologram is to get rid of the high frequency
oscillations. this can be done by averaging over time but the right thing has
to be averaged. for example we could dene a density of d0-branes along
the x 1 axis in terms of the distribution of its eigenvalues. this however is a
very slowly varying quantity which does not have high frequency oscillations.
the right thing to average is the heisenberg operators representing the matrix
elements xa,b. for example, we may average x over a time t. if we work
in the eigenbasis of the hamiltonian, the averaging is equivalent to throwing
away all (quantum) matrix elements he1|xab|e2i with |e1 e2| > 1/t. the
resulting quantum operators will have a modied distribution of eigenvalues.
since modes of frequency > 1/t are now absent the distribution should have
a smaller spread. therefore the holographic image of several objects should
become clear. it is evident that all of this is a manifestation of the stringy
space, time uncertainty relation [17].

in order to be a little more quantitative i will make an assumption that
is motivated by a particular view of the large n limit. according to this
view, the large n limit is a xed point of a kind of renormalization group
associated with integrating out rows and columns of the n  n matrix de-
grees of freedom to produce a theory with smaller matrices. what i will
assume is that time averaging over t, or equivalently, integrating out high
frequency modes is equivalent to replacing the original n  n matrix system
by another with smaller n  n matrices. the maximum relevant frequency
for the original system is given by eq(2.3) with l = n 1/3l11. we will call this
the characteristic frequency n .

n =

n 1/3r
l112

16

(6.8)

if we identify the characteristic frequency of the nn model to be n = (t)1
then

n
n

l6
11

(rt)3n

=

=

3
n
3
n

(6.9)

furthermore since the size of the eigenvalue distributions of x scale like n 1/3
we should nd the spread diminished by the factor n
. according to this
n
estimate, by averaging over t = l2
11/r resolution of order the planck length
should be restored for a pair of gravitons.

for the ads/cft correspondence decoding the hologram seems to be
very dierent.
in the at space limit the sym dimensionless energy of a
given system increases like (gsn)1/4. on the other hand the information is
coded in the longest wavelength modes on the unit sphere. these modes
have frequency  1 in dimensionless units which corresponds to very long
bulk time scales of order r. in other words, information seems to be coded
in extremely slow degrees of freedom. at the moment i have no idea how
this works.

7 acknowledgements

much of what is written in this paper was stimulated during discussion
with juan maldacena and andy strominger while i was visiting harvard
in september of this year. this of course does not mean that they are re-
sponsible for the confusion and fuzzyness of my ideas. i also beneted from
many conversations with steve shenker over the last couple of years about
these issues.

references

[1] g. t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, gr-qc/9310026

[2] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, hep-th/9409089

[3] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. shenker, l. susskind, m theory as a

matrixmodel: a conjecture, hep-th/9610043

[4] juan m. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field the-

ories and supergravity, hep-th/9711200

[5] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov, a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators

from non-critical string theory, hep-th/9802109

[6] edward witten, anti de sitter space and holography, hep-th/9802

17

[7] l. susskind, edward witten, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter

space hep-th/9805114

[8] daniela bigatti, leonard susskind, review of matrix theory, hep-

th/9712072

[9] leonard susskind, another conjecture about m(atrix) theory hep-

th/9704080

[10] g. horowitz and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b360 (1990)197.

[11] michael r. douglas, hirosi ooguri, stephen h. shenker, issues in

m(atrix) theory compactication, hep-th/9702203

[12] j. polchinski, unpublished

[13] m. karliner, i. klebanov and l. susskind, size and shape of strings,

int.j.mod.phys. a3 (1988) 1981

[14] leonard susskind, particle growth and bps saturated states, hep-

th/9511116

[15] massimo bianchi, michael b. green, stefano kovacs, giancarlo rossi
instantons in supersymmetric yang-mills and d-instantons in iib su-
perstring theory hep-th/9807033 [abs, src, ps, other]

[16] m.b. green , congurations of two d-instantons, phys.lett. b398

(1997) 69

[17] miao li, tamiaki yoneya, d-particle dynamics and the space-time
uncertainty relation hep-th/9611072, journal-ref: phys.rev.lett. 78
(1997) 1219-1222

18

