9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

0
1

 
 

1
v
1
3
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

looking beyond the thermal horizon: hidden

symmetries in chiral models

b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock

fb physik der fu berlin

arnimallee 14, 14193 berlin, germany

schroer@physik.fu-berlin.de

november, 1998

abstract

in thermal states of chiral theories, as recently investigated by
h.-j. borchers and j. yngvason, there exists a rich group of hidden
symmetries. here we show that this leads to a radical converse of of
the hawking-unruh observation in the following sense. the algebraic
commutant of the algebra associated with a (heat bath) thermal chiral
system can be used to reprocess the thermal system into a ground state
system on a larger algebra with a larger localization space-time. this
happens in such a way that the original system appears as a kind
of generalized unruh restriction of the ground state sytem and the
thermal commutant as being transmutated into newly created virgin
space-time region behind a horizon.

1 introduction

in a previous paper we dened and illustrated the concept of a hidden sym-
metry [s-w1]. we remind the reader that we use the terminology hidden
for such symmetries of local quantum physics (lqp) which cannot be seen
and understood by (lagrangian-, functional integral-) quantization. they
simply do not exist on a classical level nor in a euclidean functional inte-
gral representation and hence cannot be transposed into the noncommuta-

1

tive realm by e.g. an adaption (quantization1) of noethers theorem. one
rather needs the power of the modular theory, which is totally characteris-
tic of the noncommutative aspects of lqp (local quantum physics) and
which in addition to the classical space-time dieomorphisms (poincare- or
conformal- automorphisms) of minkowski space-time also reveals a host of
non-noetherian hidden symmetries of modular origin. the latter escape
the quantization approach to lqp (see previous footnote)..

there are two mechanisms which reveal such hidden structures: the mod-
ular theories of multiply localized double cone algebras together with suitably
chosen states, and the symmetries constructed from modular inclusions and
modular intersections. the rst mechanism leads to a fuzzy action of the
modular group for which the double cone situation for the free massive theory
is the simplest illustration. it is believed that such modular actions become
at most asymptotically pointlike near the horizon (boundary) of the local-
ization region [s-w1]. we will use the word hidden in this paper exclusively
for the second inclusion/intersection mechanism which leads to (partially)
geometric transformations of localization regions i.e. of the net which cannot
be implemented as point transformations (for details see below and [s-w1]).
modular inclusions/intersections of von neumann algebras are signicantly
dierent from the well-studied v. jones inclusions (subfactors). whereas
by denition the latter have conditional expectations onto the smaller alge-
bra (shallow inclusions), the former, as a result of their modular structure,
cannot have conditional expectations (deep inclusions). in passing we men-
tion that there is a third type of deep inclusion which also has no conditional
expectation and is not modular; it is the so-called split inclusion which is
related to the control of the phase space degrees of freedom in lqp [ha].

it is well-known that the v. jones inclusions lead to vast generalzations of
compact group symmetry. on the other hand modular inclusions/intersections
have only been around for some years and very little is known about their
consequences except that noncompact groups as the two parametric trans-
lation/dilation group as well as sl(2,r) emerge already from the simplest
examples. these groups act in a natural way on the two original algebras
and their intersection and generate a space-time indexed net. the consider-

1if a quantization approach could lead to nonperturbative mathematically controllable
real time local quantum physics, then these symmetries would show up in modular prop-
erties of the local algebras generated by the elds. but as everybody knows, we are are
far away from such a situation and it appears presently much more plausible that this will
be achieved by modular methods [s-w2] instead of quantization.

2

ations in this paper lead to an increase in knowledge about modular inclu-
sions/intersections.

in our previous work we commented among other things on a very reveal-
ing chiral illustration of such a situation which was found by borchers and
yngvason [bo/yng]. in this note we use their example as a starting point for
a furthergoing analysis of hidden symmetries in low-dimensional theories.

as was shown by those authors, it might happen that the modular group
acts only geometrically on a certain subregion. we show that in their case this
group acts geometrically in a much larger region! moreover there is a much
richer hidden symmetry behind. in fact it turns out that in addition to the
hidden symmetry generated by the two-parametric tranlation/dilation group
[bo/yng] (with the dilation part being hidden), there is a hidden sl(2,r)
moebius symmetry with a dierently localized net which is partially local
relative to the old thermal net. in fact the thermal shadow world associated
with a heat bath becomes converted into a piece of real space-time which is
to be localized behind the horizon! this is an inversion from the hawking-
unruh situation in a two-fold sense: not only is the thermalization through
localizing (unruh) horizons undone and the thermal region returned as a
piece of minkowski space to the vacuum world (in analogy to the unruh
eect [s/s-v]), but even the shadow world (the non-geometric thermal
commutant) of a standard heat-bath thermal situation becomes converted into
virgin spac-etime behind the horizon, thus giving additional weight to some
speculative remarks of jaekel [ja]. although we can presently illustrate this
idea only in the chiral light ray setting, we consider the potential possibility
of a space time interpretation of heat bath temperature (and the ensuing
unknown conversion of a still missing notion of quantum entropy) suciently
intriguing in order to justify publication.

using our recent ideas on the modular origin of the chiral dieomorphism
group which we illustrated with some computations on the weyl-algebra
[s-w1], it could be interesting to extend also these ideas to the thermal
setting. leaving this for future investigations, we make some remarks on the
existence of hidden symmetries in d=1+1 massive theories and we conclude
with some comments on higher dimensional theories. in all cases the modular
method is used to extend the hidden action of translation/dilation [s-w1] to
a hidden sl(2,r) action.

3

2 beyond the borchers-yngvason results

consider a chiral quantum eld theory given by a local net of observables.
the bisognano-wichmann property holds for the net, as it was in general
shown by [b/g/l, fr/ga]. for simplicity we also assume strong additivity
or equivalently, haag duality on the line, see [g/l/w]. this can always be
achieved by passing to the dual net. with borchers and yngvason we take
a thermal state on the net w.r.t. the lightlike translations. let n denote
the observable algebra to the half-line [0, [, then borchers and yngvason
showed that the modular group of n w.r.t. the thermal state transforms
local algebras on the half-line geometrically (see below). the global thermal
algebra is known to be of hypernite von neumann type iii1 and hence
inequivalent to a ground state representation. this is the prerequisite for
an unruh-like interpretation in terms of a locally restricted ground state
representation.

we will show that this group also acts geometrically on the whole line
and that even more, there is a hidden conformal group su(2,r)/z2 acting
geometrically on intervals, but not pointwise in the sense of spatial automor-
phisms..

for describing our observation let us rst recall the setting of borchers
and yngvason. denote by a the quasilocal algebra of the chiral model, by
+ the gns-vector to the thermal state w.r.t. the unitary group u(a) of

lightlike translations and by gn the c*-algebra of observables localized in

[0, [. let j0 be the cpt-symmetry of our model. then we easily have by
strong additivity [wie2]

j0gn j0  gn = a.

(1)

let us pass to the weak closure of these algebras w.r.t. the thermal state
denoted by m and n . under these circumstances u is the modular group
by the very denitions [wie1] we have (n 
associated with (m, +).

m, +) is a -hsm inclusion. now j0gn j0  n   m, and it is easy to see
that therefore (n  m, +) is a standard -hsm inclusion. but we even have
m = n (n  m) , see [g/l/w]. now in general , we have due to borchers
result [bo1][wie1]

which easily implies that

[j0, u(a)] = 0,

a 7< +, j0aj0+ >, a  a

4

(2)

(3)

is again a thermal state of the chiral theory w.r.t.
the lightlike transla-
tions. the absence of phase transitions in chiral theories implies that we can
anti-unitarily implement the cpt-operator. then we immediately get with

j0fn j0 = n   a

j0n j0 = n   m .

(4)

this implies that the relative commutant of the observable algebra to a half-
line is the algebra to the opposite half-line.

in case of a -hsm standard inclusion we can always construct out of these
data a chiral vacuum net [wie2][g/l/w]. therefore, within the above ther-
mal situation we encounter a hidden vacuum theory. for this let us sketch
the general construction in the context of this particular case. one starts by
associating the algebra m to the upper half-circle. then exploiting the fact
that the modular groups of m, n , and m  n  generate a positive energy
representation of the mobius group, we implement the covariance of the al-
gebra system by dening the various local algebras by mapping m according
to the modular representation of the spacetime symmetry. in this way we
generate a mobius-covariant net.

let us now compare both theories from a more conceptual point of view.
first, they have the weak closure m of the quasilocal algebra a in common.
further the modular theory u(a) to that algebra w.r.t. + acts geometrically
in both systems, namely as lightlike translations in the thermal case, and as
half-line dilations in the vacuum case.

secondly they have the observable algebras n and n  m in common,
which in the thermal case are interpreted as the algebras to the two half-lines
beginning at origin, whereas in the vacuum case they are associated to [1, [,
and [0, 1].

now we notice that the physical symmetry in the thermal case is given by
the lightlike translations, whereas in the vacuum theory we have a natural
conformal symmetry sl(2, r)/z2 behind, where the lightlike translations of
the former theory are equal to the dilations in the latter.

let us exploit the common structures in order to compare the localizations
in both theories. for this we denote the local algebras by ath(a, b) if we refer
to the thermal theory, a0(a, b) in the vacuum case. so we can rephrase the
above remark by

ath(0, ) = n = a0(a, b),

ath(, 0) = n   m = a0(0, 1)

(5)

and u(2t) = it
m where we set the inverse temperature to be 2. (the
necessary modications for the general case is left to the interested reader.).

5

then we have

ath(a, ) = ad u(a/2)(ath(0, )) = ad u(a/2)(n )

(6)

= a0(e2a, )

and similarly

ath(, a) = a0(0, e2a).

now, by the very denition we have

a0(e2a, e2b) = a0(0, e2b)  a0(e2a, )

and similarly

ath(a, b) = ath(, b)  ath(a, )

(7)

(8)

(9)

holds due to the strong additivity of the thermal net. therefore we conclude

ath(a, b) = ath(, b)  ath(a, )
= a0(0, e2b)  a0(e2a, )
= a0(e2a, e2b).

(10)

but now we know by the very denition that the conformal group sl(2r)/z2
acts geometrically on the vacuum theory. and due to the above relation
we immediately get the action of that group on the thermal theory. there-
fore, restricting on vacuum localization intervals in the half-line [0, [ and
to group actions mapping this interval into another one contained in the
half-line we can transfer this action onto a geometrical action in the thermal
theory. moreover we see that there is a natural spacetime structure also on
the shadow world i.e. on the thermal commutant to the quasilocal algebra
on which this hidden symmetry naturally acts. in conclusion, we have en-
countered a rich hidden symmetry lying behind the tip of an iceberg of which
the tip was rst seen by borchers and yngvason.

in fact using our previous result on the modular origin of the dieomor-
phism for the special case of the weyl-algebra [s-w1], it seems plausible that
there is even a much larger innite dimensional symmetry of modular origin
hidden in this thermal situation.

before we make some qualitative remarks about hidden sl(2,r) symme-
tries in the higher dimensional case, let us separately look at d=1+1 massive
theories.
it is clear that in this case we should use the two modular in-
clusions which are obtained by sliding the (right hand) wedge inside itself

6

(m  ma) by applying an upper/lower lightlike translation a and form-
ing the relative commutant (the size of a is irrelevant)

m(i)  m

a  m

(11)

where the notation indicates that the localization of m(i) is thought of as
the piece of the upper/lower light ray between the origin and the endpoint of
the a lightlike translation. by viewing this relative commutant as a limiting
case of a spacelike shift of w into itself (and using haag duality) on obtains
the interval i as a limit of a double cone. the net obtained by applying the
modular transformation it
m to the m(i) via its ad action is a chiral net
with total algebra

it

w (m(i))  m,

(12)

fm  [

t

where we used the hsm standard inclusion (m(i)  fm, ) for the con-

struction. since this net is chiral, it cannot create the full space from the
vacuum. rather the cyclically generated space is a genuine subspace with

projector p. since the modular group of ( fm, ) is obtained from restrict-
ing it
m to ph, the projection is associated with a conditional expectation
of the algebra

e(m) = pmp = fm

(13)

although the two-dimensional conformal theory lives in the tensor-product
space of the two chiral theories on the upper/lower light ray, the two chi-
ral components constructed in the present way do not commute with each
other unless one also performs the massless limit m 0. indeed since the
upper/lower light ray have a relative time-like separation, one does not
expect huygens principle to become eective outside of m = 0. in fact a
simple staightforward calculation on algebras generated by massive currents
or energy-momentum tensor reveals that the relative commutator is propor-
tional to a power of the mass but independent of the space-time coordinates.
the mechanism can be illustrated in the simplest way by looking at the
relative commutator of the 1-2 components of the fermion eld on the up-
per/lower light ray

n(x), (y)o = (cid:16)i  m(cid:17) i(x  y)

(14)

i.e. {1(u)

2(v)}  m

where the last relation holds in th limit x,yupper/lower light ray. so it ap-
pears that one has to distinguish beween the tensorproduct algebra m(i+)

7

m(i) associated with the full d=1+1 conformal theory (the zero mass
limit) and the combined m(i+)  m(i) subalgebra of b(h). in fact, since
one expects the vacuum to be cyclic in h with respect to m(i+)  m(i),
we conclude from the shared modular group structure with m that m =
m(i+)  m(i). so modulo a ne point concerning the dierence to a ten-
sor product, the two conformal symmetries sl(2, r)/z2 of the upper/lower
light ray reductions are in fact inherited as hidden symmetries by the massive
theory. the light ray reduction of the massive theory, although being a chi-
ral conformal theory in its own right, can be transmutated into the original
massive theory by adjoining the opposite light cone translation u(a) i.e. by
extending m(i+) to alg {m(i+), u(a)} [s-w2]. one would expect that the
relation between the thermal version and the groundstate representation of
the massive theory goes through the light ray reduction. in addition to the
proper conformal transformation which are already hidden in the massive
theory there should be a thermal hiding for all transformations except the
translations.

3 qualitative remarks about higher dimen-

sions

in a previous paper we have shown how for d  1 + 2 one may use the
situation of modular intersections to come to hidden symmetries [s-w1].
in higher dimensions one expects that in general a conversion of thermal
nets into spatially extended ground state nets, if possible at all, will involve
sl(2, r)/z2 symmetries of modular origin with positiv energy translation
operators i.e.symmetries which have hidden pieces already in their ground
state realization. they should originate from borchers situation [bo1] and
extensions via light front relative commutants similar to the massive two-
dimensional massive case of the previous section. the only exceptions are
higher dimensional conformal theories. by identifying the parameter of a
time-like line and subtended double cones with the indexing of a chiral net,
one obtains a manifest sl(2, r)/z2 symmetry of possible modular origin.
by combining the modular intersecting situation with the use of the previ-
ously used gliding light ray translations one may even in massive theories
extend these hidden symmetries to an action of sl(2, r)/z2 on spacetime
regions i.e. on the net indexing. it is characteristic of these modular gener-

8

ated symmetries which involve light rays, that the analogue of the conformal
rotation is hidden. from the point of view of the associated light front
theories which live in a smaller hilbert subspace (for a recent illustration see
[s-w2]) but have more symmetry [s/s-v]. this is of course the prerequisite
for the generalization of the fascinating heat-bathspacetime equivalence
which we observed in the borchers-yngvason example. we leave the higher
dimensional constructions for future work and comment on the problem of
broken symmetries. it is well-known that the change of temperature is often
accompanied by a transition of phase related to a change in global symmetry.
the possibility of a modular transmutation of a thermal into a ground state
theory (with spatial extension behind a horizon) creates all kinds of curious
consistency problems.

unfortunately the better understood chiral conformal theories do not al-
low for spontaneous symmetry breaking. the only exceptional case is the
thermal collapse of supersymmetry [b-o]. since the collapse mechanism
originates from the impossibility of annihilating a faithful state (any thermal
state is faithful) on a c-algebra by an antiderivation, it is independent of
space-time dimensions and holds in particular in chiral theories. although
it does not serve as a an illustration of spontaneous symmetry breaking,
its thermal aspects are interesting in their own right. assuming that our
transmutation mechanism also works for general chiral models including su-
persymmetric ones, and confronting it with the collapse mechanism one nds
a somewhat curious situation whose only resolution seems to be that the (un-
ruh) thermal restriction wrecks the action of the antiderivative on only one
side of the horizon and in this way explains the violent collapse. whether
this results allow for a deeper understanding of supersymmetry or only adds
to the growing suspicion that this symmetry is of an accidental nature [schr],
remains to be seen.

4 concluding remarks

although the fully geometric symmetries which are well-known from the
quantization approach to relativistic qft, are, with the exception of chiral
conformal qft, restricted to nite dimensional automorphisms as poincare
symmetry and (only for zero mass) conformal symmetry, the modular struc-
ture of lqp opens the gates for a vast variety of innite dimensional groups.
one may either vary the states and consider the modular groups generated by

9

wedge- and double cone-algebras and/or modular inclusions/intersections of
wedges with respect to naturally chosen states. we expect obtain an (innite
dimensional) hidden analogue of the chiral dieomorphism group. this is
based on the fact that the chiral dieomorphism group can be buildt up from
innitely many moebius layers [s-w1] by lifting the vacuum moebius group
with a covering transformation and by realyzing that each such nth layer lifted
moebius group2 is the modular group of a pair (a(i1)  ...  a(in), n). the
von neumann algebra n this case is n-fold localized and the lifted vacua
n are suitably chosen states such that the endpoints of the ik, k = 1...n are
xed points of the nth layer moebius transformation and n is its unique in-
variant state [s-w1]. the higher dimensional analogues of this construction
beyond the poincare resp.conformal group are expected to be fuzzy (non-
local) independent of the chosen state; in fact according to a conjecture of
fredenhagen their innitesimal action on test functions should be described
by pseudo-dierential operators which are at most asymptotically geometric
near the horizon i.e. the spacetime border of the localization region).
in
the present paper we have studied the partially hidden symmetry groups
associated with thermal modular inclusions in chiral models. even though
in this case we do nd geometrical aspects, these symmetries are not imple-
mented by pointlike transformations in the underlying space-time and hence
are hidden in the quantization approach.

acknowledgement: one of the authors (b.s.) thanks d. buchholz for a

helpful correspondence concerning the thermal collapse of supersymmetry.

references

[bo1]

h.-j. borchers the cpt-theorem in two-dimensional theories
of local observables comm. math. phys. 143 p. 315 (1992)

[bo/yng] h.-j. borchers, j. yngvason modular groups of quantum fields

in thermal states. preprint (1998)

[b/g/l] r. brunetti, d. guido, r. longo, commun. math. phys. 156,

(1993) 201

[b-o]

d. buchholz and i. ojima, nucl. phys. b498, (1997) 228

2these lifted moebius transformations m oebn are called quasisymmetric of order n

in the mathematical literature.

10

d. buchholz, on the implementation of supersymmetry, hep-
th/98122000

[fr/ga]

j. frohlich, f. gabbiani, commun. math. phys. 155, (1993) 569

[g/l/w] d. guido, r. longo, h.-w. wiesbrock extensions of confor-
mal nets and superselection structures comm. math.phys. 192
p.217 (1998)

[ha]

[ja]

r. haag, local quantum physics, springer verlag 1992

ch. jaekel cluster estimates for modular structure hep 9804017

[s-w1]

b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrockmodular theory and geome-

try, math-ph/9809003.

[s-w2]

b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular theory and interac-
tions hep-th/9812251

[s/s-v] g. sewell, ann. of phys. 141, (1982) 201

s. summers and r. verch, lett. math. phys. 37, (1996) 145

[schr]

b. schroer, hep-th/9810080

[wie1]

h.-w. wiesbrock, commun. math. phys. 157, (1993) 83

[wie2]

h.-w. wiesbrock, lett. math. phys. 31 p.303 (1994)

11

