9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
5
2

 

 
 

2
v
0
4
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

use of meanders and train tracks for

description of defects and textures in liquid

crystals and 2+1 gravity

arkady l.kholodenko

abstract

in this work the qualitative analysis of statics and dynamics of de-
fects and textures in liquid crystals is performed with help of meanders
and train tracks.it is argued that similar analysis can be applied to
2+1 gravity.more rigorous mathematical justications are presented in
the companion paper (part ii) on quadratic dierentials and measured
foliations. meanders were recently introduced by v.arnold (siberian
j.of mathematics 29,36 (1988)) and are used originally in the combi-
natorial problem of nding the number of distinct ways given curve can
intersect another curve in prescribed number of points xed along this
auxiliary curve.train tracks were introduced by w.thurston (geome-
try and topology of 3-manifolds, princeton u.lecture notes,1979) in
connection with description of homeomorphisms of two dimensional
surfaces.train tracks alone are sucient for the description of stat-
ics and dynamics of liquid crystals and gravity .using train tracks
the master equation is obtained which could be used alternatively to
the wheeler-dewitt equation for 2+1 gravity.since solution of this
equation is possible but requires large scale numerical work, in this
paper we resort to the approximation of train tracks by the meanditic
labyrinths. this then allows us to analyse possible phases (and phase
transitions) of gravity and liquid crystals using peierls-like arguments

375 h.l.hunter laboratories,clemson university,clemson,sc 29634-1905,usa. e-mail

address:string@clemson.edu

1

1 introduction

1.1 motivations and background

the role of topology in solving physical problems is steadily increasing [1,2
].in some instances it has become dicult to decide wether physical argu-
ments are helping to solve topological problems or topological arguments
are helping to solve physical problems [2].here we would like to provide yet
another example of this sort.

in 3+1 dimensions the laws of newtons gravity and coulombic electro-
static look suspiciously similar:both are being described by the poisson-type
equation

2 = 

4


 ,

(1.1)

where  is the dielectric constant in the case of electrostatics while 1=g
is the gravitational constant in the case of gravity.the density of charges
(r)can be both positive and negative for electrostatics while only positive
in the case of gravity.the solution of eq.(1.1) for the potential (r) is given
by

(r) =

d3r

1

zv

(r)

p(x  x)2 + (y  y)2 + (z  z)2

where r={x,y,z}and v is the volume which encloses the charges.it is ex-
pected,that if the charges are conned within the domain v,then (r) 0
when |r|  . indeed, let (r) = q(r),then we obtain trivialy

(r) =

q


1
|r|

where q is the magnitude of charge placed at the orign.solution given by
eq.(1.2) is valid only in 3 dimensions,however.in two dimensions it should
be replaced by

(1.2)

(1.3)

(r) =

1

za



d2r

 (r) ln(

1

p(x  x)2 + (y  y)2

)

(1.4)

2

(with volume v being replaced by the area a) so that, instead of (1.3) ,we
obtain now

(r) = 

q

this time,for |r|   we obtain
(r)   (depending upon the sign
of q).the result (1.5) can be obtained directly from eq. (1.2) for a special
case of charges uniformly distributed along the innitely long and innitely
thin rod placed perpendicular to the x-y plane,i.e.

ln|r| .

(1.5)

1
2



ln(p(x  x)2 + (y  y)2) = lim

(
l

1
2

l

zl

dzs

1

(x  x)2 + (y  y)2 + (z  z)2  ln 2l)

(1.6)

instead of a rod we can imagine a particle living in 2+1 dimensions(i.e.particle
which evolves in time while moving in x-y plane).

the dierence of behaviors of potentials at innity in two and three di-
mensions leads to the profound dierence in the underlying physics. more-
over,this dierence forbids smooth dimensional continuation of the expression
for the potential, given in d-dimensions by

d(r) =

q


1

|r|d2 ,

(1.7)

. let
based on the well known limiting procedure ,e.g.
us explain why this is so.since the potential  is an auxiliary quantity in
both gravity and electrostatics,we shall use instead the forces f obtained in
a usual way through

lnx= lim
0



x  1

f =  ~

.

(1.8)

the forces create the vector elds and, in the case of 2 dimensions, we
have to consider the vector elds on surfaces.in particular,let us consider
the plane r2,the sphere s2 = r2  {} and the disc d2 of some radius

3

r.evidently,physically all three possibilities are almost indistinguishable:the
sphere s2can be obtained from the plane by one point compactication, the
plane can be obtained from the disc d2 by taking the limit r  .topolog-
ically,however,the above tree surfaces are completely dierent: the sphere s2
has the euler characteristic (s2) = 2,the disc (d2) = 1 and the plane r2
cannot be given any value of  [3]. for the time being we shall work with s2
and d2.the choice between these two surfaces is determined by the boundary
conditions.

vector elds on the surface(manifold m) obey the poincare-hopf (p-h)

index theorem [4]:

(m) =xi

i(xi),

(1.9)

where the index i(xi) of isolated singularity is dened as follows.consider the
vector eld v(x,y)={vx(x, y),vy(x, y)} around just one of the singularities and
let u  m be some (say ,circular) domain around this singularity. in this
domain we can construct a unit vector n(x,y) via

n(x, y) =

v(x, y)
|v(x, y)|

.

(1.10)

this vector provides the gauss map from m to s1.the degree of this mapping
is i(xi).more explicitly [5, 6],

i(xi) =

1

2ici

vxdvy  vydvx

v2
x + v2
y

.

(1.11)

i cases of both newtonian gravity and coulombic electrostatics the index of
an isolated singularity is equal to one as can be easily seen by introducing
the complex variable z = x +y =rei and by combining eqs (1.5),(1.8) and
(1.11).this means that the minimal number of charges which one can put on
the sphere is 2 while that on the disc is 1.the p-h theorem,eq.(1.9), does
not automatically leads to the requirement of electroneutrality: one can
place two charges of the same sign on s2 without violating this theorem.the
complications arise,however, if one would like to place more than 2 charges
on the sphere.in this case if initially we would have,say,2 pluses,we would be

4

unable to place the additional charges while if we would have initially +
and - charges,then such placement becomes possible if we add charges
pairvise while keeping the electroneutrality.this becomes possible only be-
cause the presence of two identical charges creates a saddle (e.g.see fig.1a
) which has an index -1,ref.[4]. hence,in the case of electrostatics the only
possible singularities are the sources/sinks (fig.1d )with index 1 and the in-
duced saddles (fig.1a)with index -1. the existence of multiple charges
in electrostatics and the electroneutrality are directly related to
the topology of the underlying manifold and to the emergence of
the induced saddles.

consider now the case of newtons gravity. let us place the same 2
charges (masses) on the sphere and let ,say,one of the charges be + so that
another is - and,since this is gravity ,the masses are naturally attracting
each other. let us try now to add one additional mass (charge).we imme-
diately run into problem:since all masses attract each other,there cannot be
saddles. if this is the case,we are unable to place an additional mass on s2
.hence,in such spherical universe we would have just 2 masses ! the situation
becomes even more dramatic if, instead of s2 we would consider d2 .in this
case we would not be able to put more than one mass while for the case of an
annulus(i.e.the disc with a hole)we would not be able to put on it even a single
mass! since the euler characteristic of an annulus is 0, ref.[3]. at the same
time,we can easily put e.g. 3 charges of the same sign on the annulus in the
case of electrostatics. these very simple arguments lead us to the conclusion
that there are some profound dierences between the coulombic electrostat-
ics and the newtonian gravity and that the above dierences alone are
sucient in order to arrive at the correct einstein formulation of
gravity.this is going to be demonstrated mainly in the accompanying paper
[7] while here we provide only the qualitative arguments .for this purpose
we also need to discuss systems other than electrostatic and gravitational
(in newtons sense).these are naturally occurring as defects and textures in
liquid crystals.

to study these defects it is helpful to recall some basic facts from the
qualitative theory of dynamical systems on surfaces[5,6].these are also de-
scribed in terms of ows of the vector elds.in two dimensions we are usually
dealing with the system of two equations

5

dx
dt
dy
dt

= vx(x, y),

= vy(x, y).

(1.12)

irrespective to the explicit form of the r.h.s. of eq.(1.12) ,it is known [5, 6]
that the singularities of the ow could only be of the type depicted on
fig.11*.these can be easily obtained by linearization of the eq.(1.12) around fig.1
the singularities of the vector eld.the whole phase portrait can then be
built out of these local pictures by gluing together the local pieces in some
consistent way.moreover,the topological considerations allow us to restore
the phase portrait with help of only partial knowlege of the existing sin-
gularities.this principle is very helpful for our case too but the situation is
complicated by the fact that,in the case of liquid crystals as well as in
2+1 gravity ,instead of vector elds on surfaces one has to deal with line
elds.this was demonstrated for liquid crystals in refs.[ 10,11] and will be
proven for the case of gravity in ref.[7] .the case of line elds has been
also studied in the theory of dierential equations on surfaces[5, 6] .in this
case,instead of the system of eqs (1.12),we have to consider

dx

vx(x, y)

=

dy

vy(x, y)

.

(1.13)

typical singularities of the line eld are depicted in fig.2 with the values
of the corresponding indices.for example,in the case of the line elds with fig.2
indices  1
polar r, coordinates)by[5]

2,the dierential equation which describes these elds is given (in

dr
d

= r tan(n


2

)

.

(1.14)

for n=1 we obtain the line eld with index - 1
cally by

2 which is described analyti-

a

r =

1*clearly,the ow directions on some of the gures could be reversed

2

3

(cid:0)cos 3
2 (cid:1)

6

with a being an arbitrary positive constant and  lying in the following
sectors

3 <  < 

3 , b) 

3 .

3 <  <  , c)  <  < 5

a) - 
similar analysis can be performed for n=-1 which produces the index
+ 1
2 as depicted in fig.2. although for the line elds it is impossible
to introduce consistently the global orientation[4  6],it is possible
,nevertheless, to introduce the indices of these elds [4] by analogy with
the vector elds.the absence of orientation for the line elds leads to the
absence of forces between the singularities (defects). this property is not
unusual for the theories of 2+1 gravity where it is impossible to introduce
the interaction forces between the massive particles[12]. in sections 4,5 of
part ii (ref.7) we shall demonstrate that both 2+1 gravity and the textures
in liquid crystals are described by the line elds. in this part (which we call
part i )we shall rely mostly on the intuitive arguments.

although it is impossible to introduce the interaction forces between de-
fects (or masses) it is possible,nevertheless,to talk about the total energy in
both 2+1 gravity [13] and in the theory of liquid crystals (e.g.see part ii and
section 5 below ).moreover,because of this fact,it makes also sense to talk
about the dierent phases (orders) at least for the case of defects in liquid
crystals [14] .although the connections between the defects and textures in
liquid crystals and 2+1 gravity were discussed before [15] , here we provide
completely dierent treatment of these connections.

1.2 organization of the rest of this paper

in section 2 we consider the role of topology in phase transitions in 2 di-
mensions.we argue,that in cases of the vector (coulomb-like) and line elds
on surfaces topological considerations alone are sucient for predicting the
kosterlitz-thouless type of phase transition[14] from gas to dipole phase
while in case of the line elds in liquid crystals ,the existence of hexatic
phase [16] can be easily established .clearly ,topological considerations alone
provide only sucient conditions for existence of ordered phases.the neces-
sary conditions require us to study the nature of the disordered phase in some
detail.this is accomplished in sections 3 and 4. in section 3 we provide an
explicit construction of the disordered phase using some ideas from the qual-
itative theory of ordinary dierential equations.superposition of these ideas
with topological arguments produces notions of labyrinths and meanders
.since neither labyrinths nor meanders are widely known in mathematical

7

physics literature ,to avoid repetitions ,we refer the reader directly to section
3 for precise denitions.here ,we only would like to mention that the de-
scription of labyrinths is closely related to the description of the maps of the
circle [17, 18] which should be more familiar to physically trained reader.the
notion of a meander has its origin in the work by arnold [19] who actually
invented this word. in the simplest case one can think about the meander
as a representative of the class of curves which intersect another curve in
the prescribed number of points.although from the above vague denition
it may not be clear that the meanders and the labyrinths may have many
things in common,nevertheless,this is the case as we demonstrate in section
3.

in section 4 we discuss yet another way of

looking at line elds through
the notion of
train tracks . this way of looking at line elds was proposed
originally by thurston [20] in connection with his studies of 3-manifolds. we
argue in this section that the train tracks can be used for description of
dynamics of textures in liquid crystals and 2+1 gravity.the master equa-
tion which describes the evolution of the train track could be used as an
alternative to more familiar wheeler-dewitt equation (in the case of grav-
ity).since the actual calculations which involve this equation resemble that of
the heisenberg-type quantum mechanics,they require a large scale numerical
work which we try to avoid (at this stage of research) by restricting ourself to
the approximation of train tracks by meandritic labyrinths. the legitimacy
of this approximation is discussed in the appendix.

use of the meandritic labyrinth approximation allows us to obtain addi-
tional quantitative information about the stability of the disordered phase
and the parameters of the order-disorder phase transition in the system of
meandritic labyrinths.this is accomplished in section 5.

all results of part i are provided without serious proofs (with few ex-
ceptions).part ii (ref.[7]) serves to some extent to correct this deciency by
providing the mathematical justications to the emerging picture .sucient
details (and references) are provided in both parts of this work to make this
presentation self-contained and accessible not only to the experts on gravity
but to the interested condensed matter researchers as well.

8

2 role of topology in phase transitions in 2

dimensions

we had already demonstrated (in section 1.1.) that the property of elec-
troneutrality is directly connected with the topology of the underlying man-
ifold, at least in the case of coulombic -like systems. here, we would like
to demonstrate that ,in addition,the topological considerations alone deter-
mine the nature of phase transitions in such systems.for the line elds the
sequence of arguments ,unfortunately,is considerably more complicated and
will be discussed in the rest of this paper and in part ii.

in the case of coulombic-like system, let us assume that under some
favorable conditions the incoming + and - have decided to stay to-
gether thus forming a dipole.the vector eld in this case is depicted in fig.3
along with a separate source (+) (or sink (-)).the index of the dipole is 2 fig 3.
so that p-h theorem is not violated if on the sphere we would have only 2
charges which have decided to form a dipole .let us place a source/sink in
the vicinity of such dipole.by direct inspection we can notice that topologi-
cally such source/sink cannot t the vector eld ow pattern coming from the
dipole unless it is combined with yet another charge thus forming yet another
dipole.formation of the second dipole will cause the formation of 2 additional
saddles so that p-h theorem is not violated. evidently,this procedure can be
extended to other charges. from here several conclusions could be drawn.
first,the transition to the dipole phase should be sharp. second,since in the
above arguments the density of charges  was not present, it means that
such transition cannot be considered in traditional thermodynamical sense
,that is for some critical temperature tc and critical pressure pc there is no
true critical density c .these conclusions are in complete accord with the re-
sults of hague and hemmer [21]who had provided more traditional statistical
mechanics treatment of this type of transition.obtained results are also in
complete accord with the results of more sophisticated treatment performed
by kosterlitz and thouless [22].

the above simple picture breaks down immediately if we are willing to
analyze possible transitions in the case of defects which produce the line
elds,e.g.liquid crystals or 2+1 gravity.unlike the coulombic case where the
vector eld picture is rather simple:or we have an independent charges or we
have dipoles, in the line elds case there are many more possibilities.since
the local and global analysis of the line elds had been a subject of intensive

9

research in mathematics for quite some time ,it is impossible to squeeze
the enormous amount of results accumulated to date in this work. for a
good summary,please,consult refs.[23-25 ].without even trying to make a
summary of these results,we shall,nevertheless,select those which ,we feel
,are of immediate physical relevance.

let us begin with the observation that in case of the coulombic-like elds
the regrouping of charges had not produced a violation of the p-h theorem.
evidently,we have to require the same in the case of line elds. the moves
which do not violate p-h theorem are depicted in fig.4 and are known in the
literature as whitehead moves[23] in addition,it is possible to imagine the fig.4
situations depicted in fig.5 .clearly,by looking at fig.4 we observe the case fig.5
of creation of new  defects with index 1 from the old ones with index
 1
2,while looking at fig.5 we eectively observe the case of destruction
of defects. the indices of a) and b) are + 1
2 while the index of c) is zero.
in principle,other situations are also possible but,for reasons which will be
explained in section 4 and part ii, we shall not be concerned here with more
complicated situations.

given these local moves, what one can say about the phase transitions
(as compared to the coulombic -like vector elds) in the system of such
defects ? for example,can we expect ,by analogy with coulombic case,that
the transition(s) is ( are) going to be density-independent? for this purpose
let us consider the case of a disc (d2) = 1.to be in accord with the p-h
theorem, eq.(1.9), we need to have at least four defects with half integer
indices (since only half integer types of defects are topologically stable [26])
:one with index - 1
2 .the resulting stable phase
is depicted in fig.6.this does not look like a dipole and,because of the p-h fig.6
theorem,we cannot just form another dipole and so on as in the coulombic
case and we cannot use the electroneutrality condition as well. so,what else
could we imagine? for example,should we have exactly 14 defects ,we could
have an orderly structure which resembles that depicted in fig.7 .we use the
word periodic to describe this phase following thurstons classication of
surface homeomorphisms [25] as will be explained in more details in section
4.

2 and 3 with the index + 1

fig.7

is it possible to obtain something else ? the answer depends upon how
many defects are at our disposal.consider the case of thermodynamic limit
,i.e.the case when the size r of our disc d2 is allowed to approach innity
.in this situation we can imagine the structure depicted in fig.8.how can fig.8
we check that this structure is actually in agreement with the p-h theorem?

10

this can be accomplished following the original arguments by hopf 4(see
also ref..27). let s be closed orientable surface of genus g . let a0 be the
number of vertices,a1 be the number of edges and a2 be the number of 2-cells
(e.g.hexagons). then,according to the euler theorem,we obtain ,

a0  a1 + a2 = 2  2g

(2.1)

looking at fig.8 and following the line of arguments made by hopf,let us
replace the original hexagonal lattice with the elementary cell depicted in
fig.9

the face of each cell has an index +1,the edge has an index 2(- 1

2) =
1 and each vertex has an index 1.whence,such construction holds for an
arbitrary g and,therefore,the hexagonal phase is consistent with the euler
theorem ,eq.(1.2) ,and,accordingly,with the p-h theorem,eq.(1.9).as in the
case of the kosterlitz and thouless transition earlier described ,the existence
of the above hexatic phase is already known in physics literature,e.g. see
ref.
[28], where this phase is obtained based on completely dierent set of
arguments.in section 4 of part ii we shall provide yet another arguments in
support of the existence of this phase.

the questions arise:
a)is such obtaned hexatic phase unique ?
b)can such phase occur for an arbitrary concentration of defects (as in

the

fig.9

coulombic phase case)?
the answer to the rst question is negative as can be easily seen from
the situation depicted in fig.10a) and the corresponding elementary triangle
given in fig.10b).taking into account that , in view of fig.5c) ,the eective fig.10
total index of singularities at the edge (a0a2) is zero,we obtain the situation
which coincides exactly with that described by hopf [4] .that is we have the
index of 2-cell the same as a2 vertex (i.e.+1),the index of the edge the same
as the index at a1 (i.e.-1) and the index of the vertex is the same as the index
at a0 (i.e.+1).hence,we are again in accord with the euler theorem, eq.(2.1).
since we have at least two types of hexagonal structures we may think
about some sort of phase transition between them.in addition,we have not
actually proved that only two hexagonal structures are possible .a similar
but much simpler problem of packing of hard hexagons on the triangular
lattice was considered by baxter[29]( and, more recently ,by monasson and

11

pouliquen) with partial success (since the solution of the hard hexagon model
is related to the solution of 2d ising model in the magnetic eld which is not
known in general ).

because of some similarities between the hard hexagons and the present
liquid crystal problem, it is useful to furnish some details since they will
eventually be used to provide an answer to the second question (about the
concentration dependence) posed above.to this purpose,in the case of hard
hexagons ,let us introduce the surface density  via

 =

n
n

(2.2)

(a similar problem which involves the one component plasma was considered
recently in refs [30,31]),where n is the total number of hexagons and n is
the total number of lattice sites (triangles).more useful quantity ,however,is
the packing fraction  = 3 .to understand the emerging factor of 3 , the
inspection of fig.11 is helpful (see also ref.32 ).by construction,the complete fig.11
packing corresponds to  = 1 .looking at fig .10 ,we easily can conclude
that,in the case of the packing depicted in g.10a),the packing fraction is 1
2
.even in the case of hard hexagons the packing problem is not completely
under control.that is the description of transition from one mode of partial
packing to another(e.g.loose  < 1 versus dense  = 1) is still lacking [29]
.at the same time,in the present case we are not even dealing with hard
hexagons.our hexagons can be easily destroyed as it will be discussed in
section 6 of part ii.to analyse this more complicated situation,quantities
other than  may be helpful. following ref.[30] ,let us introduce some cut-
o radius r0 (the size of the disclination core [14, 26])as well as the surface
density  via

 =

n
a

.

(2.3)

where a is the surface area and n is the total number of surface defects
(charges).next,we can introduce the wigner -seitz radius rws via

r2

ws =

1


.

12

(2.4)

finally,the lling fraction  can now be introduced via

 =(cid:18) r0

rws(cid:19)2

= r2

0 

.

(2.5)

by construction, 0   1 so that  can be used (instead of  )to characterize
the possible phase transitions.these results will be used in section 5.

3 labyrinths and meanders

the disordered phase of line eld defects is no less interesting than the or-
dered phase.let us consider the simplest possible case of just four defects in
d2 .the ordered phase is depicted in fig.6 .to get a feeling of the disor-
dered phase,following ref.[33], let us consider the foliation box f0 depicted
in fig.12a).the lines ,known in mathematical literature as foliations (mea- fig.12
sured foliations to be exact[10, 23 25]) are free of singularities in the box a)
and contain 2 singularities in the box b)(with account of the results depicted
in fig.5c)).following ref.[33] ,we call these singularities y and thorn re-
spectively.since the total index in the box b) is zero,we can ,evidently,place
in the line eld as many as we wish such y-thorn doubles without violat-
ing of the p-h theorem,eq.(1.9).this gives us a certain freedom of moving
such objects around.in particular,if for the moment we would like to forget
about the tail  of y-singularity,then,we can concentrate our attention at
the foliations in semicircle(s).we shall restore the tail afterwards ( to account
for the p-h theorem).in the meantime,let us consider collection of 3 foliated
semicircles as depicted in fig.13.

fig.13

the foliations for s1 are centered at a ,for s2 at b,and for s3 at c respec-
tively.the ratio of diameters ds3/ds1 =  is chosen to be some irrational
number. let x denote the location of an intersection of a given foliation
leave with the axis [0,1]. then,depending upon the direction from which the
foliation hits the x-axis ,one can distinguish between the following 3 possi-
bilities: 1)if the foliation hits [0,1] by coming from s1(e.g.see point b),then
let r1(x) =   x, 0  x  ; 2)if the foliation hits [0,1] by coming from
s2( e.g.see point c ) ,then let r2(x) = 1  x; 3) if the foliation hits [0,1]by
coming from s3 (e.g.see point 2), then let r3(x) = 1  (x  ),   x  1.
the meaning of thus introduced functions r1,r2,and r3 becomes clear if we
consider their compositions,e.g.
[r1 r2](x) and [r3 r2](x) . looking at

13

fig.13 ,we can notice ,that in both cases we are dealing with the second
return map of the closed interval [0.1],e.g. see the paths 1-2-3 (for r1 r2)
and 1-2-3 (for r3r2) . explicitly,we obtain :

[r1  r2](x) =   (1  x) ,

[r3  r2](x) =  + 1  (1  x) .

(3.1)

(3.2)

if now we identify the ends of the interval ,i.e.0 and 1 ,then both eq.(3.1)
and (3.2) are translations by  along the circle.the theory of circle home-
omorphisms is well documented [17, 18] and, for the sake of continuity, we
would like to remind to our readers several important facts which will help
us to clarify the results just obtained and those which will follow.

let us notice that the circle s1 is the quotient : s1 = r/z ,i.e.the circle
is the factor group of real numbers r modulo integers z .let f : s1 s1
be some circle homeomorphism and let f : r  r be a lift of f (e.g.
f (s1) = exp{2ix} and f : x = x +  ,that is f are translations in r).the
rotation number  (f ) can be dened via equation :

 (f ) = lim
|n|

1
n

(f n(x)  x) .

(3.3)

to dene f (x) we notice that ,in general,

f (x) = x + a(x),

a(x + 1) = a(x),

0  x < 1

.

(3.4)

in terms of a(x) the rotation number can be written as well as

 (f ) = lim
|n|

1
n

(a(x) + a(f (x)) + ... + a(f n1(x)))  lim

|n|

1
n

an(x) . (3.5)

let the mapping f has a xed point x

for some q:

f q(x) = x + aq(x) .

(3.6)

14

it can be shown that,

and

aq(x) = p

 (f ) =

p
q

.

(3.7)

(3.8)

that is q translations in the lifting space are equivalent to pure rotation of
the circle by the angle  = 2 p
q .accordingly ,if eq.(3.6) does not have xed
point(s) for any q,then  (f ) =  where  is irrational.with respect to the
situatioin depicted in fig.13 we have to conclude ,that the motion along
the line 1-2-3,etc will never stop or cross another line,i.e. we have obtained
the foliation which is actually a labyrinth. let us take now into account
the p-h theorem and make the situation more realistic.to this purpose we
attach the tail to s1semicircle and gently open the foliation leaf starting
at  in fig.13. the result of such opening procedure is depicted in fig.14
which represents the simplest example of a labyrinth: all incoming leaves are fig.14
being trapped inside the labyrinth forever.

the picture just described can be wasty generalized with help of the
following auxiliary observation.consider some nonintersecting line l (closed
or not) and place on the top of it a nite collection of foliated half cir-
cles(semicircles) provided that none of these half circles are touching each
other (unless the otherwise is specied).let us place the remaining half discs
on the bottom of l in the way depicted in fig.15. we have obtained in this fig.15
way an example of a meander labyrinth.let us explain now what actually
the word meander means.according to ref.[34] ,a meander of order n is a
closed nonselntersecting curve which intersects another straight line in ex-
actly 2n preassigned points(more exactly,an equivalence class of such closed
curves which leave the straight line l xed).evidently ,the line l need not
be straight in general.a few examples of the meanders of lower order and
the corresponding meandritic labyrinths are depicted in fig.16.although the fig.16
four last meandritic labyrinths are degenerate (two half discs are touching
each other),this may be still permissible (if other discs are not touching each
other),e.g.see example 2 of ref.[33] .this is so because we still have to attach
tails to some of the discs (e.g. see fig.14) to make them y-type in order
to be in accord with p-h theorem.trough the tails the external lines pene-
trate into the labyrinth and become trapped forever.moreover,because of the

15

tails,the symmetry between dierent labyrinths depicted in fig.16 becomes
broken so they all have to be considered,just like the underlying meanders.
the meandritic number mn (that is the total number of meanders of or-
der n) provides the degeneracy factor for the partition function of defects to
be discussed in section 5. its value is essential in the description of the di-
clination binding-unbinding melting transition [14]in the non -coulombic
two dimensional plasma of such defects. actually,the above description
is still incomplete since ,as it is well known from statistical mechanics of
two dimensional plasma[21] ,the clustering eects should also be taken into
account.this ,in particular,means that,instead of just one connected mean-
der,we may as well consider a collection of non-intersecting meanders. specif-
ically,for the multicomponent meander of order n we may choose k noninter-
secting lines (1kn) so that the total number of crossings on all lines is
2n. accordingly,one can introduce the meandritic number m(k)
to account
for this fact.[35, 36] .this number will be estimated and used in section 5.in
the meantime,it is useful to introduce ,yet another,set of meanders,the pro-
jective meanders [19, 37] .these are dened as follows.consider 2n points
on the circle s1.divide the points into n pairs so that the chords connecting
points in each pair will not intersect.identify the diametrically opposite points
on the circle,thus turning the disc into the projective plane(or sphere).such
formed set of curves in the disc is called the projective meander of order
n.evidently,the number of possible projective meanders of order n is equal
to the n-th catalan number

n

cn =

(2n)!

(n + 1)!n!

(3.9)

which obviously reects the combinatorics of the problem.we shall need the
notion of the projective meanders in order to demonstrate that the above
labyrinth construction is not articial but ,actually ,is intrinsic for the whole
description of the measured foliations on surfaces.in addition,there is yet
another way to look at the whole problem for the case of line elds. because
of its potential usefulness for the problems which involve 2+1 gravity ,we
discuss this other approach in the next section.

16

4 train tracks and pseudo-anosov homeomor-

phisms

the logical development of dynamical systems on surfaces goes from the
detailed treatment of the circle maps through the torus maps and then, to
consideration of ows (foliations)on the riemann surfaces of genus higher
than one .nevertheless,already the circle maps exhibit all qualitative fea-
tures of more complicated situations.moreover,as it was shown by thurston
[38] ,all surface homeomorphisms can be actually related to the circle maps
through the construction which he calls the earthquake.

let us briey explain why this is so.(in the appendix of part ii these
arguments will be extended to 3 dimensional hyperbolic manifolds).as in the
case of the circle maps discussed in the previous section,the surface homeo-
morphism f : r  r (where both r and r are some riemann surfaces)
can be lifted to the universal covering space which is either the poincare
upper halfplane h dened by

or the open unit disc d2

h={z=x+iy  c | y > 0}

d2 = {w=u+iv  c | u2 + v2 < 1}

which is related to h via mapping

w=

z-i
z+i

, z  h .

(4.1)

(4.2)

(4.3)

since every riemann surface r of genus g greater than one can be obtained
as the quotient r =h/ where  is some fuchsian group,i.e.the group of
linear fractional transformations of the type

(z) =

az + b
cz + d

, ad  bc = 1

(4.4)

with a, b, c, d being real numbers ,we can always lift the ow on surface
r to the ow on d2 where by means of earhquakes the description for ows

17

becomes connected with the description associated with maps of the circle.let
now c be some closed curve on r which is homotopically nontrivial(that is
it cannot be shrunk to the point).it can be proven 39 that,

theorem 4.1. c is freely homotopic to a unique closed geodesic l .
also,it is known [40] that,
theorem 4.2. for a closed riemann surface of genus g there are 3g-3

independent closed geodesics (please,see fig.5 of part ii ).

finally,following thurston [25] and casson and bleiler [41] ,we introduce
denition 4.1. disjoint union of geodesics is called lamination( l) ;the

geodesics contained in l are called leaves of l .

it can be very easily shown [17, 18] that,when lifted to h, the geodesics
look like that depicted in fig.17.that is they are either halfcircles with center
on the real axis or the lines perpendicular to the real axis .when transformed fig.17
from h to d2 ,the halfcircles go to halfcircles and the vertical lines to the
diameters of d2 as depicted in fig.18 .if we consider the case of lamination fig.18
l then,by construction,the geodesics are nonintersecting on r and,whence
on d2[42]. this means that in d2 they look like the projective mean-
ders(before identication of points on s1) described in the previous section.a
simple minded permutation of these geodesics in d2 produces the catalan
number cn ,eq.(3.9). in general,the situation is considerably more compli-
cated [25, 41] .

if for a given riemann surface of genus g with n punctures we have the
inequality 2g+n-2 >0,then the mapping class group m(r) is dened through
its action on l .if f  m(r) and c = {c1, ..., cr}  l ,then the mapping f
is reducible if

f (c) = c

(4.5)

alternatively,it is being said that f is reduced by c.

if, in accord with the theory of braids [43] ,we assume that eq.(4.5) holds
for any permutation of the set c (and this is indeed the case [41]) ,then the
catalan number ,eq.(3.9) ,naturally emerges .the reducible case is not the
only possibility however.if,say, f is reduced by c ,then let s = {s1 ,..., sm}
be the set of components of the complement of r  c e.g.see fig. 5 of part
ii . since f permutes si ,let ni be the smallest power of f such that

f ni(si) = si .

(4.6)

18

for any ni > 0 such mapping is called periodic .it could as well be that
eq.(4.6) does not have xed point(s) for any nite ni. in this case,if eq.(4.5)
still holds,then the mapping is still reducible , but if neither (4.5) or (4.6) hold
, then the mapping is called pseudo-anosov. this term will be explained
below.before doing so,we notice that eq.(4.5) can be lifted to d2 so that with
respect to the ends of geodesics lying on s1 we have some sort of a mapping
of a circle analogous to that discussed in the previous section.according to
thurston [38] ,every homeomorphism of the circle s1 extends to the home-
omorphism of the disc d2 .(in the appendix to part ii we shall discuss the
extension of this result to the case of 3-manifolds). evidently, the reverse
should be true as well.in which case , the lift of eq.(4.6) to d2 has its ana-
logue in eq.(3.6) and the case when eq.(3.6) does not have solution for any
q corresponds to the pseudo -anosov type of mapping. let us now explain
the meaning of the word pseudo-anosov. according to refs.[17,18] ,the
following theorem can be proven.

theorem 4.3.the geodesic ow on h/  is the anosov ow.
the best way to explain this is again pictorial .we lift the geodesics from

r to h in order to obtain the picture given in fig.19.accordingly,we can also fig.19
look at the same picture by using the disc d2 model.in this case we have the
situation depicted in fig.20.the circles tangent to x-axis at some point x0 (in fig.20
h-plane) are called horocycles.it can be shown,that the set of horocycles
(touching x-axis at x0) and the set of geodesics (emanating from x0) are
mutually orthogonal (thus forming stable and unstable manifolds,see below).
for the geodesics directed as in fig.19 it is intuitively clear that the ow is
expanding(unstable) .if we would change the direction of geodesics(i.e.if we
change the time evolution from t to -t),then the ow will be contracting.it
can be shown18 that the rate of expansion is e while the rate of contraction
is e1 (e=exp).now ,we are ready for a general denition of the anosov ow.
denition 4.2.if a : mm is some dieomorphism of compact manifold
m such that the tangent bundle t xm for any point x m is decomposable
into direct sum  of the type

so that in some (riemannian) metric ,and for some number  > 1

txm=xx  yx

(4.7)

the following inequalities hold

kak   kk

  xx

and

kak  1 kk

  yx

(4.8)

19

where a is the dierential of the operator a (acting in tangent space)and
k...k is the usual square of the length in some (riemannian) metric space,then
the ow txm is anosov.
remark 4.1. if ,in addition,the ow contains some singularities,then it
is called pseudo-anosov [44].the sets x x and y x are called (un)stable folia-
tions respectively.

remark 4.2. it can be shown,that the geodesic ow on h is ergodic[18]

.that is there is some measure (x) such that

z d(x)(x) = lim

t 

1
t

t

z0

dt(atx(t))

(4.9)

where at is some evolution operator (continuous analog of a in (4.8)).

in the case of pseudo-anosov ows it is customary to introduce the trans-
verse (vertical) measure which can be intuitively understood using the fol-
lowing picture,e.g.see fig.21 .that is, if locally the foliation looks like the fig.21
set of horizontal lines(away from singularities),fig.21a),then, when we try to
restore the global picture,the local charts should be glued in such a way that
the vertical distance  between the leaves on one chart is in agreement with
the vertical distance  on another. if this is the case,the foliation is called
measured .we shall be dealing only with measured foliations [10, 25] in the
rest of this work in accord with poenaru[10] and langevin [11] .

the above nice picture leaves us with no clues about the mechanisms
by which the ows can be changed from the reducible to periodic or from
the reducible to pseudo-anosov,etc. as in the case of circle homeomorphisms
(section 3),there must be some physical reasons of changing from one regime
to another.the best way to get some physical feeling of the processes which
cause phase transitions(i.e.changes in the ow regime) is through the no-
tion of train tracks introduced by thurston [20] and subsequently de-
veloped by many other mathematicians,e.g.see ref.[45].the idea behind the
train track is simple but very powerful. to appreciate it , it is helpful to
recognize that there is some similarity between the way knots(or links) are
described and the train tracks.
in the case of knots (links) one usually
studies a shadow of a knot obtained by projecting it onto some arbitrary
plane[46].the projection is a four-valent planar graph k without the dangling
(dead) ends.evidently,dierent knots may have the same projection for a
plane which orientation is xed. to distinguish between dierent knots(links)

20

one has to resolve each 4-valent vertex (i.e. to decide which strand is over
and which is under) and,in addition,to use the set of isotopy moves (the
reidemeister moves) to bring one projection in accord with the other.it is
believed,that ,at least in principle,one can decide if two knots are equivalent
by performing some nite (but could be very large !)sequence of the reide-
meister moves. in all these operations the physical nature of a knot is not
playing any role.in the case of train tracks one is also dealing with a graph t
without dead ends and also there are the isotopy moves(analogous to the rei-
demeister moves), but,in addition, and this is the most important,there
are moves which do not respect isotopy.these moves change the topology
of the graph t and could be associated with some physical processes as we
shall explain below and in part ii (section 6 and appendix).the graph t
has two basic building blocks which can be easily recognized,e.g. see fig.22 fig.22
.one can see from this gure that,instead of having all leaves and precise
angles ,one can actually survive only with topologically equivalent objects
which are smooth at joints.with the basic building blocks just dened ,we
can construct our rst train track.in particular,instead of having rather com-
plicated foliation pattern depicted in figs.13,14,we can draw the following
graph depicted in fig.23. of course,the r.h.s.of fig.23 provides still only a fig.23
coarse grained foliation pattern thus creating an illusion that the line is closed
(and this is indeed the case for the rational labyrinth).the numbers on the
graph are quite arbitrary but are subject to one restriction:at every switch
the sum of entering numbers is equal to the sum of the exiting  numbers
.the numbers are associated with the invariant transverse measures which
were formally introduced earlier. since one can construct from the collection
of 3-valent vertices the vertex of more complicated nature ,e.g. 4-vertex ,5-
vertex,etc., it makes sense to talk about given vertex vk (k=1-m) in general..
if {ain
j } is the set of output branches
,then for a given vertex vk the switch condition can be written as:

i } is the set of input branches and {aout

xi

vk(ain

i ) =xi

vk(aout

i

) .

(4.10)

the switch condition is analogous to the kirkho rule for currents known
in physics [47] .it could be proven [20, 44] ,that the assignment of weights
(transverse measures) (ai) for each branch of the train track which is sub-
ject to the switch conditions ,eq.(4.10), at each vertex is equivalent to the
reconstruction of the entire measured foliation (up to isotopies and white-

21

head moves,fig.4) [23]. the new feature which makes the train tracks more
complicated than knots (links) lies in additional moves which,unlike the
isotopy,do change the topological type of the track.these moves have the
major physical signicance as it will be demonstrated shortly.before doing
so ,we would like to provide a list of topology changing moves .they are
depicted in fig.24. the shift operation can be performed without reference fig.24
to weights but,of course,the switch condition, eq.(4.10),should be obeyed be-
fore and after the shift.the split (or collapse) is dependent ,however,upon the
particular distribution of weights.the shift does not destroy (or create) the
existing singularities while the split (collapse) may destroy (create) the sin-
gularities thus apparently violating the p-h theorem.this deciency can be
easily corrected if some physics is taken into consideration .to do so,several
steps are still required.first, following ref.[45] ,let us consider the process
of collapse as the matrix operation. that is, we form the column vector
made of weights a, b, ..., e and look for the transition matrix s1 such that
x = s1x or,more explicitly,when c < a ,we obtain,

a
b
c
d
e







=




1 0 0 0 0
0 1 0 0 0
0 0 1 0 0
0 0 0 1 0
1 0 0 1 1

a
b
c
d
e










(4.11)

this result can be easily understood based on eq.
(4.10) and fig. 24.
indeed,according to eq. (4.10) we have a+e = c (c > a) and also e+d = b
for the split diagram while a + b = e and c + d = e for the collapsed diagram.
at the same time, using eq.(4.11), we obtain: a = a; b = b; c = c; d = d
but e = a + d + e.the last result becomes an identity if the kirkho sum
rules ,just obtained, are utilized. evidently,the corresponding matrices can be
constructed for all elementary processes depicted in fig.24 and,furthermore,if
,for example, s is the split matrix, then s1 is the corresponding collapse
matrix,etc. second, instead of considering the individual (local) processes
,we can consider the state vector of the entire graph t which is just a column
vector of all transverse measures which we denote as ~ .the evolution of the
entire graph is determined then by some transition matrix t so that

~ = t~

22

(4.12)

third ,this equation is still unphysical.to make it physical,we have to ascribe
certain statistical weights to each of the diagrams depicted in fig.24. the
weights could be chosen either on the basis of statistical mechanics arguments
(e.g.
in the case of liquid crystals)or on the basis of quantum mechanical
arguments ( e.g.
in the case of gravity). for instance,in the case of liquid
crystals one can think of energy of the defect formation and destruction
(for more details ,please,see the next section and sections 4,6 of part ii)as
well as about the average energy (per defect) as a function of  (dened
by eq.(2.5)).irrespective of the specic form of the weights ,it is clear ,that
the time evolution of the graph t can be described in terms of the master
equation(as it is usually done in statistical mechanics)

i
t

=xi6=j

(wijj  wjii) .

(4.13)

the matrix wij is not symmetric unfortunately.this can be seen already
from the eq.(4.11).in the case of 2+1 gravity the above equation could ,in
principle,provide an alternative to the wheeler-dewitt equation[48] .eq.(4.13)
may have time -independent solution which (in terms of discrete maps,e.g.
see section 3) ,by analogy with eq.(4.5) ,we may call reducible .it may as
well have a periodic (in time )solution which we may (or may not) asso-
ciate with the previously dened periodic(in space) case. finally, it may
not have any stationary or periodic solutions.this then will be indicative of
the pseudo-anosov type of evolution.the actual analysis of eq.(4.13) would
require a large scale numerical work and,evidently,some drastic approxima-
tions will be required.therefore,for the time being,we would like to explore
yet another possibility.

before doing so,several remarks should be made.
remark 4.3. since in the case of train tracks there are no dead ends,this
concept should be applied to open surfaces,e.g.to the open disc d 2 ,with some
caution,e.g.see ref.[49].

remark 4.4. since the surface of non-negative euler characteristic con-
tains no train tracks[20,45] some care should be taken to by-pass this di-
culty.this is discussed to some extent in the appendix (see also refs.[33] and
[49])

remark 4.5.without use of the probabilities leading to the master eq.(4.13),

dierent outcomes of iteration had been studied already [45, 49, 50] .clearly,the

23

process is reducible ,periodic or pseudo-anosov depending upon what sequence
of moves,fig.24 ,had been used.for example, if only direct processes are being
considered,such as the right (r) and the left (l) splits and the shift (s), then
the matrix sequence could be associated with some words in the alphabet made
up of 3 letters [50]so that ,in general,eq.(4.13) describes a random walk on
the mapping class group m(r).

incidentally ,the 3 letters alphabet is being used for the meanders [34].
hence,we would like now to study how one can use the meanders in resolv-
ing the types of dynamical behaviour.this is accomplished to some extent in
the next section while in the appendix we provide some evidence that the
meandritic labyrinths are indeed associated with the pseudo-anosov homeo-
morphisms.

5 phase transitions in the system of mean-

dritic labyrinths

phase transitions in the system of meanders was recently considered in ref.[35]
in connection with the problem of folding of polymers.at the same time,the
arguments used in ref.[35] could be traced back to the arguments made by
peierls in connection with phase transintion in 2 dimensional ising model
[51] .to facilitate readers understanding of the development which follows
,we would like to provide here a summary of the arguments made by peierls.
in the case of planar ising model one is expecting to have droplets of spins
of the wrong sign embedded among the bulk which has the correct
sign (e.g. + for the correct and - for the wrong).the interface between
the correct and the wrong spins determines the interfacial energy el of the
droplet so that for the droplet of perimeter l the energy is given by el = lj
with j being known ,in principle,constant.the partition function zi for the
ising model can now be written as follows,



zi = 2

gl exp{jl} , 1 = kbt,

(5.1)

where kbt is the usual temperature factor.since the ising model is dened on
the lattice ,l is necessarily discrete and gl is the combinatorial entropic fac-
tor which determines the number of ways the droplets of the total perimeter
length l can be arranged on the lattice.

xl=0

24

the diculty in calculating zi lies in determining the factor gl correctly
.if, following peierls,we make a drastic approximation :gl  4l( since for
the square lattice the coordination number is 4),then zi can be calculated at
once with the result

zi  (1  4)1

(5.2)

,where  = exp{j}. the above expression makes sense only for  < 0.25
so that 0.25 determines the critical temperature of the ising model through
equation : 4 = 1 .this result is interesting to compare against the exact re-

sult [52] : =p2  1  0.64 (for j = 1) .obviously,the value 0.25 appears

to be too low even if compared with the bethe approximation[53] which yields
3 ()2 = 1 .this was noticed already by peierls 51 .nevertheless,the above
crude estimate can be systematically improved and the peierls arguments
are the most powerful tool in general study of phase transitions in discrete

spin systems as is well known [53] .the exact result ,()2 = 2  1, is valid
dierent:()2 =(cid:0)3(cid:1)1

only for the square lattice.in the case of triangular lattice the exact result is
,while for the hexagonal lattice ,it is dierent again :
()2 = (2 +3)1, e.g.see ref.[52].hence,the critical temperature is actually
a function of two variables :j and z ,where z is the coordination number of
the lattice.something similar will happen in our (meandritic )case too.

in the case of ising model we can eectively dene the notion of an or-
der parameter.this is less obvious in the case which we are going to con-
sider. what is important for us,however,is the fact that the partition func-
tion zi diverges.we shall ,by analogy with the ising model ,associate such
divergence with the phase transition,in our case from the meandritic(pseudo-
anosov,according to ref.[33] and appendix) to the periodic and/or reduced
phases (since these are the only existing possibilities).

using the results of section 2 ,eq.(2.5) and section 4 of part ii,eq.(4.49),the

total surface energy of n defects can be estimated as

en 

k
4

nq2 ln(cid:18) 1

(cid:19)  n j

(5.3)

where the charge q is equal to the index of the singularity,eq.(1.11),and k
is some known constant (dened in section 4 , part ii) related to the surface

25

tension. in arriving at eq.(5.3) we had assumed that only ys and thorns are
present (so that the magnitude of charges are all the same).to estimate the
combinatorial factor (analogous to gl in eq.(5.1)) the following arguments
are helpful.

according to ref.[36] ,any meander can be built by superposition of two
arc congurations of the same order :one is considered to be the top while an-
other is the bottom as depicted in fig.25.since both the top and the bottom fig.25.
are congurations of the same order,then by concentrating our attention,say
,on the top conguration,we can obtain a projective meander (e.g. see sec-
tion 3 )by identifying the beginning and the end of the horizontal straight
line.in this case we already know that the number of possible congurations
is cn .evidently,we can do the same for the bottom arc system thus obtain-
ing another cn. if we try all possible permutations,then,a priory,there is no
guarantee that if the top and the bottom are connected together we shall
obtain just one connected meander.more likely ,we shall obtain c 2
n meanders
some of them connected and some not.more exactly, let m(x) be the meander
generating function,i.e.



(5.4)

mnxn,

m(x)=

xn=0
cn mn  c 2

xn=0

26

where mn was dened in section 3.there is the following

theorem 5.1.
proof .the upper bound was just established.the lower bound can be
established if we associate the system of meanders with the 3 letter alpha-
bet (as was briey mentioned in section 4).for more details,please,consult
ref.[34]. (cid:3)

n

among all of c 2

n meanders of order n not all are topologically dierent.let
nn denote the number of topologically distinct congurations of meanders
which altogether pass through 2n points (which actually may belong to dif-
ferent lines),then the generating function for these numbers could be dened
as



n(x)=

nnxn.

(5.5)

if we disrespect the topological dierences,then the generating function for
the system of meanders can be written as

b(x)=

c 2

nxn.



xn=0

(5.6)

theorem 5.2. functions b(x) and n(x) are connected with each other

through the functional equation

b(x)=n(xb2(x))

(5.7)

proof.please,consult ref.[34]. (cid:3)
corollary 5.2 .the meandritic numbers m (k)

n

introduced in section 3 are

generated via the following generating function [35, 36]

mn(g)=

m(k)

n gk

n

xk=0

(5.8)

provided that m n(g=1)=c 2
n.

based on the results just described,we are ready now to write down the

partition function for the system of meandritic labyrinths. it is given by

zg(x) =



n

xn=0

xk=0

m(k)

n gkxn

, x=exp{- j},

(5.9)

where j is dened by eq.(5.3).this equation ,in principle,is exact but,it re-
quires knowlege of g.evidently,g is the fugacity which determines the average
number of meanders in the cluster <k> which is given by

< k >= g


g

ln zg(x) .

(5.10)

this quantity is hard to estimate (see,however ,some attempts in this di-
rection below).and,even if we would succeed,still,we would need to invert
the innite power series in order to write the fugacity g in terms of <k> .
therefore,we would like to make an approximation based on the exact result

27

coming from eq. (5.8) for g=1.thus ,we obtain the following approximation
for the partition function of the system of meanders:

z(x)=



xn=0

c 2

nxn

,

x=exp{- j}.

(5.11)

remarkably enough,this partition function admits the exact resummation[34]
with the result (t2 =x) :

z(t2) =

1

4t2 
1 +

1
2

2

z0

dp 1  8t cos  + 16t2
 .

(5.12)

at the same time,one can study the convergence of z(x) based on known
asymptotic value for cn :

cn  const

from here,we obtain,

4n
n

3

2

, n  .

c 2
n+1
n  16
c 2

(5.13)

(5.14)

and,therefore,0<x 1
nite result :

16 .substitution of x = 16 into eq.(5.12) produces -

1
4

z(

1
16

) =(cid:18)4  

 (cid:19) .

(5.15)

for x> 1

16 the partition function diverges,of course.

clearly,the condition 16x = 1 determines the critical temperature for the
xed value of  or determines the critical density  for a xed temperature
and the value of surface tension k in view of eq.(5.3).

the analysis presented above is still incomplete since one can calculate
now n(x) in view of eq.(5.7). following ref.[34] ,let us multiply both sides
of eq.(5.7) by t (t2=x).we obtain,

28

(t)=tb(t2) = tn(2(t)) .

(5.16)

let,furthermore,  = (t) so that t=1(). then,we obtain,

n(2) =



1()

.

(5.17)

 (cid:1)2
well.the radius of convergence for n(x) is equal to (cid:0) 4

from here it follows,that since using closed form result , eq.(5.12),(t)=tz(t2)
can be calculated,at least in principle, then n(2)
can be calculated as
.obtained results
are in formal qualitative accord with that known in physical literature on
liquid crystals [14]. but now we know that the disordered (liquid-like) phase
is actually pseudo-anosov while the ordered (hexatic) is periodic and the re-
ducible is solid-like. the phase transition mechanism ,however,has absolutely
nothing to do with the kosterlitz-thouless type of transition which was dis-
cussed in section 2. additional details related to this subject are provided in
section 4 ,part ii.

note added in proof: when this paper was completed we had found a
paper by ishikawa and lawrentovich (europhys. lett. 41,pp.171-176 (1998))
in which the whitehead moves depicted in our fig.4 had been detected ex-
perimentally. in addition, the paper by penner (adv.in math.101,pp31-49
(1993)) had also came to our attention. in this paper the train-tracks are be-
ing used to describe folding of rna. since in ref.[35] the folding of proteins
was considered with help of the meanders, the above references provide addi-
tional support to the results presented in sections 3-5 which relate meanders
to train tracks. more details could also be found in section 7.5 of part ii.

appendix

in this appendix we would like to provide some arguments in favor of the
statement made in section 4 that the meandritic labyrinths are associated
with the pseudo-anosov homeomorphisms.

to this purpose let us consider the simplest labyrinth which is made out
of two copies of the disc d2 both of which containing just two thorns (to be
in accord with p-h theorem).when glued properly,these two discs will form
a sphere s2 with foliation forming a labyrinth (e.g.see ref.[33],page 29).we
need now to explain why such foliation could be of pseudo-anosov type.

29

consider an auxiliary problem about the foliations on the torus[17, 18, 41]
.if we regard the torus t2 as a quotient of r2 by the integer lattice z2 ,then
the homeomorphisms h of t2 are generated by the group gl2(z) since any
element  of gl2(z) maps z2 into itself thus inducing the continuous map
h : t2 t2 .the homeomorphism is orientation preserving if
det () = 1
( gl2(z)) and,in this case ,gl2(z) becomes sl2(z) which is represented
by 22 matrix given by
c d (cid:19)  sl2(z)
(cid:18) a b

if ad  cb=1.

(a.1)

the eigenvalues of the above matrix are obtained, as usual, as the roots of
the characteristic polynomial

t2  (a + d)t + (ad  cb) = 0

or,in view of (a.1) ,

t2  (a + d)t + 1 = 0.

(a.2)

there are three possibilities in general:

1)the roots of (a.2) are complex (when a+d=0,1 or -1);
2)both roots of (a.2) are equal to 1 (when a+d=2 );
3)the roots of (a.2) are distinct reals (when |a + d| > 2) .

by analogy with the circle maps considered in section 3,it can be
shown[16, 41],that the rst possibility produces periodic maps of t2 ,the
second produces reducible maps of t2(that leave a simple jordan curve
xed (possibly with reversed orientation))while the third possibility is re-
sponsible for the anosov (not pseudo-anosov) type of ow [17, 18] on t2
which was dened in section 4.consider now our s2 ,made up of two copies of
d2,each containing two thorns. according to the results of part ii (section
3) thorns are singularities in the complex z-plane (or on s2 ) of the type
(z)1 .as it is usually done in the complex analysis,we can make branch
cuts (as depicted in fig.a1)in order to construct the two sheeted riemann fig.a.1
surface.in fig.a.1 these two sheets are depicted as onion-like sphere with
two layers.if the outer sphere is peeled o and placed opposite to the inner
sphere,as depicted in fig.a.2, then,by obvious identication of edges ,the sur-
face which is homeomorphic to t2 is formed.hence,t2 is a two-fold ramied

30

branched covering of s2 .the points of ramication are the above thorn-like
singularities.in general,one can prove the following

theorem a.1. every closed orientable surface (of nite genus) is two-

fold ramied branched cover of s 2 .

proof .please,consult refs.[55-57]. (cid:3) .
finally, if for t2 we have the case of the anosov ow,then it is being
transferred onto s2 in the form of pseudo-anosov ow (because of 4 singu-
larities placed on s2 ).more exactly,the foliation on s2 is the quotient of the
anosov homeo(or dieo)morphism on t2 via 2-fold ramied branched cov-
ering of s2 by t2 . for more than 4 defects in view of theorems a.1 and
4.3 of the main text ,it is also possible ,in principle,to establish connection
between the labyrinths and pseudo-anosov homeomorphisms.please,consult
expose11 and expose12 of ref[23] and section 4 of ref.[44] for additional
details.for more information on branched coverings,please,consult ref.[57].

31

figure captions

fig.1 typical singularities of the vector elds in the plane
fig.2 typical singularities of the line eld
fig.3 the eld lines around the dipole a) and the source b)
(in the case of a sink the directions of lines are changed into the opposite)
fig.4 the allowed whitehead moves for the line elds(creation)
fig.5 the additional congurations leading to destructionof defects
fig.6 possible periodic phase in the case of minimal number of line eld
defects in the disc
fig.7 possible periodic phase made up of 14 defects in the disc.
fig.8 possible hexatic-type phase obtained in the thermodynamic limit
fig.9 the elementary triangle used in p-h theorem calculations related
to the hexatic-type phase depicted in fig.8
fig.10 a)another possible hexatic phase which is permitted by the euler
theorem;
b)the elementary triangle used in hopf-like calculations of the
euler characteristic
fig.11 two dimensional plane can be covered by hexagons.at the same
time,one can cover the plane by the triangular lattice so that for the
complete coverage 3 hexagons should t together around each vertex
fig.12 simplest building blocks for measured foliations
fig.13 simplest nontrivial global foliation pattern made of simple
building blocks
fig.14 the structure of disordered phase (labyrinth) in the case
of minimal number of line defects (to be compared with the
ordered phase depicted in fig.6)
fig.15 the simplest example of the meander labyrinth
fig.16 the simplest meanders of order n=1-3
fig.17 geodesics on the poincare upper h- plane
fig.18 geodesics on the unit open disc d2
fig.19 anosov ow on h-plane
fig.20 anosov ow on the disc d2
fig.21 for the measured foliation the vertical distance between the
leaves on two adjacent patches (local charts) must be the same
fig.22 basic building blocks of the train track
fig.23 a simple train track and the foliation pattern which is

32

associated with it
fig.24 major topology nonpreserving moves for the train tracks
fig.25 construction of a typical meander
fig.a.1 two sheeted covering of s2 before glueing
fig.a.2 identication of cuts between the inner and the outer spheres
produces torus t2

33

references

[1] m.nakanara, geometry,topology and physics ,
adam hilger, bristol,1990 .
[2] j.moore, lectures on seiberg-witten invariants ,
springer-verlag, berlin ,1996
[3 ] g.hemion, the classication of knots and 3-dimensional spaces ,
oxford u.press,oxford ,1992.
[4 ] h.hopf, dierential geometry in the large , lnm no.1000,
springer-verlag, berlin,1989 .
[5] v.nemytskii and v.stepanov , qualitative theory of dierential
equations, princeton u.press , princeton,1960.
[6] g.godbillon, dynamical systems on surfaces ,springer-verlag,
berlin,1983.
[7] a.kholodenko, use of quadratic dierentials for description
of defects and textures in liquid crystals and 2+1
gravity (to be submitted).
[8] c.oseen, the theory of liquid crystals, faraday
transactions 29(1993) 883 -899.
[9] f.frank,on the theory of liquid crystals ,faraday
discussions 25(1958) 19- 28.
[10] v.poenaru, some aspects of the theory of defects in ordered
media and gauge elds related to foliations ,comm.math.physics
80 (1981)127 -136 .
[11] r.langevin, foliations,energies and liquid crystals,
asterisque107-108(1983)201-213 .
[12] s.deser , r.jackiw and g.t hooft ,three dimensional einstein
gravity:dynamics in at space, ann.physics 152(1984)220-235 .
[13] p. menotti and d.seminara ,energy theorem for 2+1
dimensional gravity,ann.phys.240(1995) 203-221.
[14] p.chaikin and t.lubensky, principles of condensed m atter physics,

cambridge u.press,cambridge ,1995 .
[15] m.katanaev and i.volovich ,theory of defects in solids and
three dimensional gravity, ann.phys.216(1992)1-28 .
[16] b.halperin and d.nelson, theory of two dimensional melting,
phys.rev.lett. 41(1978) 121-124 .
[17]v.arnold ,geometrical methods in the theory of ordinary

34

dierential equations , springer-verlag, berlin,1983 .
[18]a.katok and b.hasselblat, introduction to the modern theory
of dynamical systems , cambridge u.press.cambridge ,1997.
[19] v.arnold, branching covering cp2 s4, hyperbolicity and
projective topology ,siberian math.journal 29(1988)36-47 .
[20] w.thurston, the geometry and topology of three manifolds ,
lecture notes (princeton u.,1979) http://www.msri.org/gt3m/
[21] e.hague and p.hemmer , the two dimensional coulomb gas,physica
norvegica 5(1971) ,209-217. .
[22] j.kosterlitz and d.thouless,metastability and phase transitions
in two dimensional systems ,j.phys.c6(1973)1181-1203.
[23] a.fathi,f.laudenbach and v.poenaru, asterisque 66-67 (1979).
[24] j-p otal, le theoreme dhyperbolisation pour les varietes de
dimenson 3 , asterisque 235 (1996).
[25].w.thusrton , on the geometry and dynamics of dieomorphisms
of surfaces,bull.am.math.soc.19(1988) 417-432 .
[26] p.-g.de gennes ,the physics of liquid crystals ,clarendon press,
oxford,1979.
[27] l.kinsey, topology of surfaces , springer-verlag, berlin,1993 .
[28] b.halperin and d.nelson,errata, phys.rev.lett.41(1978)519 and ref.16.
[29] r.baxter, exactly solved models in statistical mechanics
,academic press, n.y.1982 ;r.monasson and o.pouliquen, entropy
of particle packings: an illustration on a toy model,
physica a236(1997)395 -410.
[30] a.kholodenko and th.vilgis ,the tube diameter in polymer melts,its
existence and its relation to the quantum hall eect,
j.phys.i(france) 4(1994) 843-862 .
[31] a.kholodenko and th.vilgis , some geometrical and topological
problems in polymer physics , physics reports 298(1998) 251-372 .
[32] w.thurston,three-dimensional geometry and topology ,vol.1,
princeton.u.press , princeton,1997.
[33] h.rosenberg,labyrinths in the disc and surfaces,
ann.math. 117(1983)1-32.
[34] s.lando and a.zvonkin ,meanders ,selecta mathematica
sovetica 11(1992)117 -144.
[35] p.di francesco,o.golinelli and e.guitter,meanders: a direct
enumeration approach, nucl.phys.b482 (1996) 497-535.
[36] p.di francesco,o.golinelli and e.guttier,meanders and the

35

temperley-lieb algebra, comm.math.phys.186(1997)1-59 .
[37] s.lando and a.zvonkin ,plane and projective meanders ,
theor.computer sci.117(1993) 227 -241.
[38] w.thurston , in low dimensional topology and kleinian groups ,
pp.91-112 ,cambridge u.press,cambridge ,1986.
[39] w.abiko, the real analytic theory of teichmuller space ,springer-
verlag,berlin,1989.
[40] p.buser, geometry and spectra of compact riemann surfaces ,birkhauser,
boston,1992 .
[41] a.casson and s.bleiler, automorphisms of surfaces after nielsen
and thurston ,cambridge u.press,cambridge,1988 .
[42] a.marden and k.strebel,in dierential geometry and complex
analysis ,pp. 195-204, springer-verlag, berlin,1985 .
[43] j.birman, braids,links and mapping class group, princeton u.press,
princeton,1975.
[44]a.marden and k.strebel ,pseudo-anosov teichmuller mapping,
j.danalyse mathematique 46 (1986)194-220.
[45] r.penner and j. harer,combinatorics of train tracks, princeton
u.press, princeton,1992 ; r.penner in low dimensional topology and
kleinian groups ,pp.77-90, cambidge u.press,cambridge, 1986 .
[46] l.kauman, on knots ,princeton u.press, princeton,1987.
[47] r.bott and m.dun,on the algebra of networks, trans.am.math.
soc.74 (1953) 99-109 .
[48] g.esposito , quantum gravity, quantum cosmology and lorentzian
geometries ,springer-verlag, berlin,1992.
[49] j.los , pseudo-anosov maps and invariant train tracks in the disc:
a nite algorithm, proc.london math.soc.66 (1993) 400-430 .
[50] a.papadopoulos and r.penner , a characterization of pseudo-anosov
foliations , pac.j.of math.130(1987) 359 -377 .
[51] r.peierls ,on isings model of ferromagnetism, proc.cambr.phil.soc.
32(1936) 477-481.
[52]c. itsykson and j.droue ,statistical field theory ,vol.1 ,
cambridge u. press,cambridge,1989.
[53] ya.sinai ,theory of phase transitions ,pergamon press,oxford,1982.
[54] d.rolfsen, knots and links ,publish or perish,houston,tx,1990.
[55] r.fenn, techniques of algebraic topology ,cambridge u.press,
cambridge,1983.
[56] j.stillwell,classical topology and combinatorial group

36

theory ,springer-verlag, berlin,1993 .
[57] i.berstein and e.edmonds ,on the construction of branched
coverings of low dimensional manifolds, transactions am.math.soc.
247(1979)87-124.

37

this figure "101.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "102.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "103.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "104.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "105.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "106.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "107.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "108.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "109.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "110.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "111.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "112.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "113.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "114.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "115.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "116a.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "116b.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "117.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "118.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "119.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "120.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "121.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "122.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "123.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "124.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "125.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "1ap1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

this figure "1ap2.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9901040v2

