bps domain walls in large n supersymmetric qcd

nyu-th/98/10/04, hutp-98/a065, nub 3187

gia dvali1,2, gregory gabadadze1 and zurab kakushadze3,4

1department of physics, new york university, 4 washington place, new york, ny 10003

2international centre for theoretical physics, 34100 trieste, italy

3lyman laboratory of physics, harvard university, cambridge, ma 02138

4department of physics, northeastern university, boston, ma 02115

(january 10, 1999)

abstract

we explicitly construct bps domain walls interpolating between neighbor-
ing chirally asymmetric vacua in the large n limit of pure supersymmetric
qcd. the bps equations for the corresponding zn symmetric order param-
eter eective lagrangian reduce to those in the an landau-ginsburg model
assuming that the higher derivative terms in the kahler potential are sup-
pressed in the large n limit. these bps domain walls, which have vanishing
width in the large n limit, can be viewed as supermembranes embedded in
a (3+1)-dimensional supersymmetric qcd background. the supermembrane
couples to a three-form supermultiplet whose components we identify with
the composite elds of supersymmetric qcd. we also discuss certain aspects
of chromoelectric ux tubes (open strings) ending on these walls which appear
to support their interpretation as d-branes.

9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

0
1

 
 

1
v
2
3
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

typeset using revtex

e-mail: gd23@scires.nyu.edu

e-mail: gg32@is9.nyu.edu

e-mail: zurab@string.harvard.edu

1

i. introduction

supersymmetric gauge theories provide opportunities to gain analytic control over cer-
tain complicated non-perturbative phenomena in (3+1)-dimensional strongly coupled gauge
models [18]. the closest supersymmetric cousin of qcd, n = 1 supersymmetric su(n)
gluodynamics (pure supersymmetric qcd), is believed to be a conning gauge theory with a
mass gap and chiral symmetry breaking [1,4,5]. one can therefore expect that a better under-
standing of pure supersymmetric qcd (sqcd)1 might shed some light on non-perturbative
phenomena in conventional quantum chromodynamics.

chiral symmetry breaking in sqcd is due to gluino condensation. the compos-
ite operator tr()   acquires a non-zero vacuum expectation value (vev) [1,4]:
hik = n exp(2ik/n)3, where  is the dynamically generated scale of sqcd. thus,
there are n inequivalent vacua related by zn discrete symmetry and labeled by the phase
of the gluino condensate k = 0, . . . , n  1. in each particular vacuum state the discrete zn
symmetry is broken. as a result, there should exist domain walls separating pairs of distinct
vacua.

in [9] it was shown that the n = 1 supersymmetry (susy) algebra admits a nontrivial
central extension if bps saturated domain walls are present in the theory. assuming that
such bps walls exist, their tension can be calculated exactly on the basis of the susy
algebra alone [9]. whether the bps saturated domain walls are indeed present in a given
model is a dynamical issue. the strong coupling nature of sqcd, however, makes it dicult
to study this problem in terms of colored elds. in order to circumvent this diculty, one
can use an order parameter eective lagrangian relevant for the chiral symmetry breaking.
thus, in the large n sqcd one could attempt to solve the corresponding bps equations in
terms of colorless composite variables (order parameters). this approach, as we will discuss
later, can be argued to be reliable in the limit of innitely large n. this is the route we are
going to follow in the present work. in particular, we will explicitly construct bps saturated
domain walls interpolating between neighboring chirally asymmetric vacua in the large n
sqcd. the width of these walls is vanishing in the large n limit. we argue that this is
precisely the property which gives rise to the wall tension consistent with the prediction of
the susy algebra [9].

having found the bps walls in the large n limit, we discuss more general questions
related to physics of extended objects in sqcd. in fact, we address the issue whether the
lowest-spin states of sqcd can be viewed as excitations of such extended objects. our
discussion is motivated by the relation of the large n gauge models and string theories.
indeed, in [10] it was shown that in the large n limit the gauge theory diagrams are organized
in terms of riemann surfaces with boundaries and handles, and addition of each extra handle
on the surface corresponds to suppression by a factor of 1/n 2. this observation leads to
the hope that the large n gauge theory might be described by some kind of string theory.
then the large n expansion of gauge theories would be mapped to the string expansion in
terms of properly weighted world-sheets of various topologies.

1throughout this paper sqcd refers to the n = 1 supersymmetric su (n ) gauge theory
without matter, i.e., pure supersymmetric gluodynamics.

2

the rst concrete realization of this idea in the context of weakly coupled gauge theories

(i.e., when the eective gauge coupling  = ng2
y m is xed at a value  < 1) was given in [11]
in the framework of three-dimensional chern-simons gauge theory where the boundaries of
the string world-sheet are topological d-branes2. more recently, in [13]3 string expansion
was shown to precisely reproduce t hoofts large n expansion for certain four dimensional
(super)conformal gauge theories.

in strongly coupled gauge theories, however, the story appears to be much more involved.
in particular, it is unknown what is the string theory that governs the dynamics of the qcd
string which is expected to arise as an eective description in the large n limit. this string
theory is expected to be non-critical [15], which makes it dicult to study. nonetheless, in
[16] witten has made an interesting observation that there might be a connection between
sqcd strings and domain walls in the large n limit. in particular, based on the assumption
that the sqcd domain walls are bps saturated [9], witten argued that in the large n limit
the domain walls connecting two vacua labeled by k and k = k + 1 appear to be objects that
look like d-branes [17] on which the sqcd string should be able to end. such d-brane-like
domain walls have also appeared in [18] in the context of large n non-supersymmetric qcd.
we argue in this work that in the large n limit the bps domain walls with the vanishing
width can be viewed as supermembranes embedded in an sqcd background. moreover,
the component elds of the three-form supermultiplet which couples to the supermembrane
can be identied in terms of the composite elds of sqcd. we also point out that some
of the lowest-spin states of sqcd can be viewed as excitations of a closed string which
propagates in the vacua separated by the supermembranes. a bps supermembrane can be
regarded as a d-brane in the large n limit if there are open strings ending on it. we discuss
certain aspects of chromoelectric ux tubes ending on the domain walls [19] which appear
to support the d-brane interpretation of these objects.

the rest of this paper is organized as follows. in section ii we discuss the large n behavior
of a generic sqcd conguration and point out why a bps state can exist in the large n
limit. then, we briey discuss the zn symmetric order parameter eective lagrangian for
sqcd (see [20,21] and [22]), and also give a general discussion of domain walls in n = 1
supersymmetric theories. in section iii we explicitly construct bps domain walls using the
zn symmetric order parameter eective superpotential by solving the corresponding bps
equations in the large n limit. note that large n bps domain walls have been constructed
in [23]. the idea of [23] is to avoid certain complications arising in sqcd by taking an
indirect route. in [23] it was argued that in the large n limit the problem eectively reduces
to the question of nding bps solitons in the large n an landau-ginsburg theory. in this
paper we construct the bps domain walls directly within the framework of large n sqcd.
we show that the corresponding system of bps equations indeed reduces to that in the
large n an landau-ginsburg model provided that higher derivative terms in the kahler
potential are suppressed in the large n limit. this way we derive the results of [23] which
in section iv we elucidate some relations to
were obtained via an indirect construction.

2for recent developments in these directions, see [12].

3this was subsequently generalized to include unoriented world-sheets in [14].

3

other works on the subject. in section v we present our discussions and conclusions.

ii. zn symmetric vacua and domain walls

in this section we review some facts about the large n limit of n = 1 supersymmetric
qcd. we argue that the sqcd domain wall congurations can saturate the bps bound
if the width of the walls vanishes in the large n limit. we will also discuss the zn sym-
metric order parameter eective superpotential of [22] which encodes dynamics relevant for
describing large n domain walls.

a. gaugino condensation and domain walls in sqcd

consider n = 1 supersymmetric qcd with su(n) gauge group and no matter. let 
be the dynamically generated scale of the model. in this theory the gluino condensate is
given by [4]

hik = n exp(2ik/n)3 .

(1)

here k = 0, . . . , n  1, that is, there are n inequivalent vacua corresponding to n dierent
phases for the gaugino condensate. note that the overall factor of n in (1) follows from
the fact that the gaugino condensate hi involves a trace over the gauge indices, and the
resulting vev should contain the corresponding second casimir factor.
according to (1), there are n inequivalent vacua with spontaneously broken discrete
symmetry in sqcd. hence, there should exist domain walls separating these dierent vacua
[9]4. on dimensional grounds we expect the tension of such a wall to be of order 3.
it is, however, possible to compute the tension exactly in terms of the gluino condensate
provided that they are bps saturated [9]. consider the domain wall separating the vacua
with hik = n exp(2ik/n)3 and hik = n exp(2ik/n)3. the tension of the wall
(provided that it is bps saturated) is dened by the central charge qkk in the corresponding
central extension of the n = 1 superalgebra. the central charge is proportional to the
absolute value of the dierence between the values of the superpotential in the two vacua:

we therefore have the following tension for the bps domain walls:

qkk  |wk  wk| .

(2)

(3)

tkk =

n 2

42(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

sin  (k  k)

n

3 .

!(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

it is, however, dicult to explicitly construct these domain walls (or even check that they
are bps saturated) in sqcd: the order parameter  is a composite operator, and we are
dealing with a strong coupling regime. instead, we will be able to explicitly nd bps domain

4a number of interesting properties of domain walls in various models were discussed in [2435].

4

walls in large n sqcd using the zn symmetric order parameter eective superpotential
[22].

the presence of bps saturated domain walls in large n sqcd has important implications
[16]. strongly coupled sqcd in the large n limit is believed to be described by a string
theory with the string coupling s  1/n. extended solitons in this string theory are
expected to have tension which goes as 1/2
s  n 2. let us, however, consider bps domain
walls with k = k + 1. in the large n limit their tension goes as  n  1/s. in [16] it was
suggested that such domain walls can be viewed as d-branes [17] rather than solitons in the
sqcd string context. open sqcd strings then can end on these d-branes [16].

b. domain walls at large n

let us consider the domain walls with k = k + 1 in the large n limit. according to (3)

the tension of such a domain wall (provided that it is bps saturated) is given by

td =

n
4

3.

(4)

the fact that td scales as n in the large n limit might appear a bit puzzling if one thinks of
such bps domain walls as sqcd solitons. indeed, the number of degrees of freedom (gluons
and gluinos) in sqcd scales as n 2 in the large n limit, so naively one expects the energy
density of a generic sqcd conguration to scale not as n but as n 2. if this argument were
precise, it would imply that the large n sqcd domain walls with k = k + 1 could not
be bps saturated. however, in the following we will argue that the n dependence of the
energy density td given by (4) is indeed correct for the corresponding bps saturated sqcd
solitons5.

in the large n limit the eective lagrangian is expected to have the following form:

l = n 2 l0(,,2, . . .) ,

(5)

where  collectively denotes composite colorless bound states of gluons and/or gluinos. the
corresponding elds  are rescaled in such a way that all the leading n dependence in
(5) is in the overall factor of n 2.
in particular, the equations of motions for  do not
contain any factors of n. thus, in the large n limit the volume energy density of any
solitonic conguration   n 24. this implies that the tension of a domain wall t  d is
proportional to n 23 if the width of the domain wall d  1/. however, if d  1/n,
then we have t  n3. this indicates that the domain walls with k = k + 1 should have
vanishingly small width d  1/n in the large n limit [23]. in section iii we will explicitly
show that this is indeed the case. here, however, we will give a simple explanation of why
d  1/n for such domain walls.
since all the elds  in l0 are such that ||  1 in the large n limit, solitonic solutions
with d depending on n might at rst seem impossible to accommodate. thus, naively one
might expect that l0 has no knowledge of n. this, however, is not the case provided

5we are grateful to m. shifman for useful conversations on the issues discussed in this subsection.

5

that the number of inequivalent vacua described by l0 scales as n [19], which is precisely
what happens in sqcd. this way the lagrangian l0 does know about n. as a simple
toy example of such a system consider a single chiral supereld  with the scalar potential
v() = n 2|1  n|2. there are n inequivalent vacua in this theory: k = exp(2ik/n),
k = 0, 1, . . . , n  1. thus, even though |k|  1 in v, we have |k+1  k|  1/n in the
large n limit.
in the following we will show that the order parameter eective lagrangian for super-
symmetric gluodynamics [22] possesses precisely the properties discussed above.
in fact,
among other things it describes n inequivalent vacua with the broken chiral symmetry. in
the large n limit it admits bps solitons with the width proportional to 1/n. these solitons
are the bps domain walls separating neighboring chirally asymmetric vacua of the theory.

c. the order parameter eective action

the n chirally asymmetric vacua in sqcd are dened by the vev of the order parameter
, the gluino bilinear. to construct the domain walls interpolating between dierent vacua
we can try to write down an eective lagrangian for this order parameter. the full eective
lagrangian (5) would contain innite number of elds corresponding to higher dimensional
operators of the theory and higher derivatives as well. however, in the large n limit we
expect certain simplications, in fact, the higher dimensional operator contributions should
be suppressed by extra powers of n. more precisely, we expect this to be the case for domain
walls interpolating between neighboring vacua; in this case the relative change in the gluino
condensate hi is o(1/n), so that we expect the adequate description in the large n limit
to be in terms of a truncated6 eective lagrangian containing a nite number of elds. on
the other hand, if we consider domain walls at nite n the relative change in the gaugino
condensate hi is no longer small, so that truncating the full eective action (5) to a nite
number of lowest dimensional operators may no longer be justied. a similar remark applies
to the case of large n domain walls with |k  k|  n. in the following, therefore, we will
focus on the large n limit where we will conne our attention to the domain walls with
k = k + 1.

thus, we are going to be interested in deducing the eective lagrangian adequate for
studying large n domain walls. it is reasonable to assume [20] that the order parameter
eective lagrangian should be constructed in terms of the chiral supereld

s  htr(ww )i = htr()i + . . .  hi + . . . ,

where s is regarded as a classical supereld, and the matrix elements are dened in the
presence of an appropriate background source (super)eld (for detail see [36]). note that
the gluino bilinear  is the lowest component of the chiral supereld tr(ww ). (here

6by truncated we mean that the corresponding eective action is obtained from the full eective
action (5) by keeping a nite number of elds  and neglecting the rest of the elds in the large
n limit.

6

w is the usual gauge eld strength chiral supereld.) then, the order parameter eective
superpotential reproducing all the anomalies of the model is given by [20]:

wv y = ns"ln  n3

s ! + 1# .

(6)

the corresponding scalar potential describes spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking with a
non-zero gaugino condensate [20].

the above eective superpotential, however, is not adequate for studying domain walls
in sqcd. this can be seen as follows. first, the superpotential (6) does not respect the zn
discrete symmetry [21]. this, in particular, implies that the use of (6) cannot be justied
when describing domain walls interpolating between dierent chirally asymmetric vacua of
the model [21]. thus, the superpotential (6) is only adequate for describing a given chirally
asymmetric vacuum. in fact, as it stands in (6), such a description is only appropriate for
the vacuum with k = 0. this is related to the strong cp violation. let us notice that there
is no cp violation in sqcd since the cp odd  angle can always be canceled by chiral
transformations of massless gluino elds. let us go back to the eective lagrangian and see
how this property is realized there. as we mentioned above, the lowest component of the
chiral supereld s is the gluino bilinear hi. the highest component of the supereld s is
formed by the composite glueballs: hgg + ig gi. as usual, these latter elds are
auxiliary components of the chiral supereld s, and, therefore, do not appear in the on-shell
scalar potential of the model7. thus, the eective scalar potential of the model is a function
of the gluino bilinear only. let us now suppose that we would like to deal with the vacuum
state of the model with a nonzero value of the imaginary phase of the gluino condensate.
for such a vacuum we have

im(hik) = n3 sin  2k

n ! 6= 0 .

(7)

the imaginary part of the gluino bilinear is a cp odd quantity. the non-zero vacuum
value of this quantity signals a strong cp violation in the eective potential. this cp odd
phase cannot be rotated away as there are no massless fermions in the eective lagrangian.
thus, if the scalar potential is written in terms of the gluino bilinear only, then it cannot
simultaneously describe the n dierent vacua and yet preserve the strong cp invariance
of the model. we must therefore generalize the eective superpotential (6) by including
additional elds such that the resulting eective superpotential respects the zn discrete
symmetry, and is also consistent with the absence of the strong cp violation. this can be
done by introducing the glueball order parameter elds in the eective lagrangian. thus,

7these auxiliary elds can appear in the eective lagrangian if higher superderivatives are present
in the corresponding kahler potential. in this case the f-terms become dynamical elds. however,
including these elds as dynamical degrees of freedom is accompanied by problems with positive
deniteness of the corresponding scalar potential (for details see [36]), and, therefore, it is assumed
that the kahler potential does not contain superderivatives. this is expected to be the case in the
large n limit

7

the observable eects of the cp odd phase in the gluino condensate should be compensated

by another cp odd quantity, the non-zero vacuum value of the eld g eg. moreover,

including the glueball elds should also restore the discrete zn symmetry.

the zn symmetric eective superpotential with both gluino and gluon bilinear order
parameters has recently been proposed in [22]. this superpotential involves two chiral su-
perelds s and x , where s is the same as before, whereas x is a new supereld whose
lowest component is related to the gluon bilinears hggi and hgegi [37,22]. the correspond-
ing scalar potential contains the gluino bilinear via the lowest component of the s chiral
supereld, and also glueballs via the lowest component of the x supereld. indeed, the
lowest component of x on mass-shell is related to the highest component of s, i.e., to the
gluonic operators discussed above. likewise, the f-component of x is related to the lowest
component of s, i.e., to the gluino bilinear. the explicit relations between these elds are
governed by an unknown kahler potential in the on-shell formulation of the model. how-
ever, one can think of x as a supereld introducing the necessary gluonic order parameters
into the description and removing the above mentioned diculties from the superpotential
(6). the eective superpotential for the s and x superelds is given by [22]:

cnenn x# .

1

n xn

wef f = ns"ln n3

s ! + 1  x +

(8)

here the coecients cn are o(1) in the large n limit, and satisfy the following constraints8:
pn cn = 0, andpn ncn = 1. the additional (compared with (6)) terms in (8) containing the
x supereld restore the discrete zn symmetry as well as cp invariance of the eective action
[22]9. in particular, the zn transformations read: s  s exp(2il/n), x  x  2il/n,
where l is an integer. thus, the superpotential (8) describes the n chirally asymmetric
vacua in sqcd10. these vacua are given by (s,x ) = (sk,xk), where sk = n3 exp(xk),
and xk = 2ik/n, k = 0, 1, ..., n  1.
here we would like to point out that the eective superpotential (8) can be regarded as
the veneziano-yankielowicz superpotential (6) where the parameter 3 has been promoted
to the x dependent chiral supereld 3(x ) [22]:
3(x )  3 exp x +
1

cnenn x! .

(9)

n xn

8the coecients cn are not uniquely determined within the eective lagrangian approach, but
should in principle be xed via the instanton calculus. if so, it is reasonable to expect that the
sum over the integer n in (8) should contain either only non-negative or only non-positive values
(albeit this cannot be seen solely on the grounds of the eective lagrangian arguments). without
loss of generality we can then assume that n  0 in (8).
9the corresponding eective action is zn symmetric as long as the kahler potential depends on
x and x  via zn symmetric combinations, such as x + x , enn x , enn x 
10 note that in the corresponding on-shell scalar potential ambiguities related to the dierent
branches of the logarithmic function are canceled as well.

, and so on.

8

then the dynamics of the x eld denes the phase of 3(x ) (or, equivalently, the phase of
the gaugino condensate) in accordance with (2), and the superpotential (8) can be rewritten
in the following useful form:

wef f = ns"ln  n3(x )

s

! + 1# .

the following notation will prove convenient in the subsequent discussions. let

the eective superpotential (8) can now be written as

x  nex .

wef f = ns"ln  3f (x)

s

! + 1# .

here f (x) is given by

f (x) = x exp

and has the following properties:

1

n xn0

cn(cid:18)x

n(cid:19)nn ,

f (xk) = 0 ,

f (xk) = xk  n exp(2ik/n) .

note that f (x) can be rewritten as a polynomial:

f (x) = n xn0

dn

nn + 1(cid:18)x

n(cid:19)nn +1

,

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

where the sum is over non-negative integers, and the coecients dn  1 are related to cns
and, as a result, satisfy the following constraints:

xn0

dn = 0 , xn0
in particular, d0 = exp(c0/n) = 1 + o(1/n).
it is not dicult to see that the superpotential (12) has zn discrete symmetry (with the
transformations s  s exp(2il/n), x  x exp(2il/n)), and the corresponding vacua
are given by

nn + 1

(16)

dn

= 1 .

s = sk = xk3 , x = xk ,

k = 0, 1, . . . , n  1 .

(17)

thus, the superpotential (12) can be used to describe large n bps domain walls inter-
polating between two dierent chirally asymmetric vacua (s, x) = (sk, xk) and (s, x) =
(sk, xk) with k = k + 1. since the eective superpotential (12) is a truncation of the full
eective lagrangian (which unlike (12) contains an innite number of elds), it is important
to understand the applicability limits of this approach. let the center of a domain wall so-
lution (which depends only on the z coordinate and is independent of the x, y coordinates)

9

be located at a point z = z0. then, the eective lagrangian approach should be applicable
to study the domain wall at distances

|z  z0|  d 

1
n

,

(18)

where d stands for the width of the wall which is vanishing in the large n limit. this is
the key simplication which allows us to explicitly construct bps domain walls in the large
n sqcd.

d. bps domain walls in n = 1 theories

before we turn to nding bps domain walls in the large n sqcd, in this subsection
we would like to review some useful details concerning generic properties of domain walls in
n = 1 supersymmetric theories.
consider an n = 1 supersymmetric theory with one chiral supereld x. let us assume
that the corresponding kahler potential does not contain superderivatives. this is a reason-
able assumption for an eective theory in the large n limit since higher derivative terms are
expected to be suppressed by powers of 1/n. let w(x) be the superpotential in this theory
such that the f-atness condition wx = 0 has a discrete set of non-degenerate solutions
x = xa, a = 1, . . . , n.
in such a theory we expect presence of domain walls separating inequivalent vacua x =
xa and x = xb, a 6= b. let z be the spatial coordinate transverse to the wall. then
asymptotically we have x(z)  xa as z  , and x(z)  xb as z  +. such domain
walls may or may not be bps saturated.
the problem of nding bps domain walls in four dimensional n = 1 supersymmetric
theories is really a two dimensional problem as the coordinates x, y along the wall play no
role in the discussion. thus, our problem eectively reduces to that of nding bps solitons
in two dimensional massive n = 2 quantum eld theories [38]. the corresponding bps
equation for the lowest component of the x supereld takes the following form:

zx (z) = eif 
x,

where fx denotes the f-component of the x supereld, and  is some constant phase (whose
precise value will be given in a moment). if the kahler potential contains no superderivatives,
then f 
x is related to the derivative of the superpotential via the following equation of motion:
x = wx, where g  g(x, x ) is the kahler metric dened through the kahler potential
gf 
k as g = kxx . combining the bps equation and the equation of motion for f 
x one
nds: gzx  = exp(i)wx. let us now turn to the calculation of the surface energy density
of a domain wall which satises this relation. for a general supersymmetric theory with
one chiral supereld and with no superderivatives in the kahler potential the energy of a
time-independent conguration is given by

eab =

1

2z +



dz(cid:16)g|zx|2 + v(cid:17) ,

(19)

where v = g1|wx|2 is the scalar potential of the theory. note that eab can be rewritten
as follows:

10

eab =

1

2z +



dzg1 |gzx   exp(i)wx|2 + re (exp(i)(wb  wa)) ,

(20)

where exp(i) is an arbitrary constant phase. note that eab is independent of . for the
choice  = ba we obtain the bound eab  |wb  wa| which is the bps bound. here

exp(iba) = wb  wa
|wb  wa|

.

(21)

the bps solutions (for which eab = |wbwa|) are those that satisfy the following equation:
(22)
subject to the boundary conditions x(z)  xa,b as z  . going back to the domain
walls in four dimensions, we have the exact same bps equation (22), and the tension of the
domain wall is given by

gzx  = exp(iba)wx

tab =

1
82|wa  wb| .

(23)

typically, one does not know the exact form of the kahler metric g. however, for the
case of a single supereld x we are considering here one can still make certain statements
about the corresponding soliton solutions. thus, let x be a function of a new coordinate z
such that it satises the following equation

(24)
with the boundary conditions x(z)  xa,b as z  . suppose we are able to nd the
corresponding solution for x(z). next, consider the following change of variables:

z x  = exp(iba)wx

z z(z) = g(x(z), x (z)) ,

(25)

where x(z) is the corresponding solution. note that if we express x as a function of z,
then x(z) will satisfy the original bps equation (22) with the corresponding boundary
conditions. the change of variables (25) is simply a dieomorphism which is one-to-one as
long as the kahler metric g is non-singular. throughout this paper we will assume that
the corresponding kahler metric g is indeed non-singular. moreover, we will always work
in the coordinate system parametrized by z, but we will drop the prime for the sake of
simplicity of the corresponding expressions. (this is eectively equivalent to the case where
g = 1.) note that as long as the kahler metric g is non-singular, the solution of (24) (with
the appropriate boundary conditions) implies that the corresponding solution of (22) exists.
moreover, this solution is bps saturated.

in the next section we will see that the problem of nding bps domain walls in the large
n sqcd is reduced to that of nding bps solitons in the so called an landau-ginzburg
model. the solitons in landau-ginsburg theories have been studied in detail [3840]. many
of these models are integrable. the general conditions for existence of bps solutions were
formulated in [40]. the superpotential in the an landau-ginsburg model (in our notations)
is given by

there are n distinct vacua in this model with x = xk = exp(2ik/n), k = 0, . . . , n  1.
the solitons interpolating between the vacua xk and xk are bps saturated [39].

(26)

w  3(cid:16)x 

x n +1

n + 1(cid:17) .

11

iii. large n domain walls

in this section we explicitly construct bps domain walls in the large n pure supersym-
metric qcd. our starting point is the eective superpotential (12). we will be looking for
bps solutions interpolating between neighboring vacua with phases k and k = k + 1. before
we turn to the technical details of the corresponding equations, we would like to make a few
observations which will lead to important simplications, and will elucidate some features
of the system we are dealing with.

to begin with, let us note that the following relation holds for the vacuum state labeled
by the phase k: s|k = 3f (x)|k. this relation is nothing but the denition of the gluino
condensate with the corresponding phase set by the vacuum value of the x supereld. it is
useful to introduce the chiral supereld ns/3f (x). in all the vacua this supereld takes
the same value equal n. let us now concentrate on interpolation between a pair of nearest-
neighboring vacua. in this case the relative change in the gluino bilinear is of order 1/n.
hence, the chiral supereld ns/3f (x) can only deviate from its vacuum value (which
equals n) by a quantity of order 1. thus, one can introduce the following parametrization:

ns

3f (x)

= n(cid:18)1 



n(cid:19) ,

(27)

with  being a new chiral supereld. thus, the s supereld is dened via the x and 
elds as far as the nearest-neighboring vacuum interpolation is concerned. note that both
real and imaginary parts of  are at most of order 1 in the large n limit. substituting the
expression (27) into the superpotential (12), one nds

wef f = n3f (x)"1 

2

n 2 + o(cid:18) 1

n 3(cid:19)# .

this is the superpotential describing the variation of the order parameter during the tran-
sition between nearest-neighboring vacua. the supereld  enters this superpotential in a
subleading order in 1/n. thus, it is the supereld x which is left in the leading order,
and which should describe domain walls between the adjacent vacua in the large n limit.
neglecting higher order terms, the superpotential is therefore given by:

wef f  n3f (x) .

(28)

before we go any further, notice that this description is valid only for a pair of adjacent
vacua, and a priori the approximations made in (28) cannot be justied for a pair of vacua
for which |k  k|  n.
let us now turn to the kahler potential describing transitions between a pair of nearest-
neighboring vacua. generically, the kahler potential is a function of the entire tower of
sqcd composite elds and their superderivatives. it is reasonable to expect, however, that
in the large n limit the superderivative terms are suppressed by extra powers of 1/n. thus,
we assume the following form for the kahler potential k = k(i, 
i , x, x ). here, i
denote all the elds which are generically present in the theory, but which do not appear
in the large n eective superpotential (28) describing the nearest-neighboring transitions.
notice that this set of elds includes the supereld  as well (in accordance with (27) one

12

of i can be dened as l  n  ). here we are normalizing all the i elds so that in
the large n limit they scale as  n (just as is the case for s and x). this, in particular,
implies that the corresponding components of the kahler metric are (at most) of order 1
in the large n limit. using the kahler potential and the superpotential (28) one can write
down both the equations of motion and the bps equations. let us start with the equations
of motion rst. for simplicity of presentation we write down only some part of the system
of equations of motion relevant for our purposes here. we must make sure, however, that
eventually all the equations of motion are satised. since there are no superderivatives in
k, one can write the following equations of motion in the leading order in 1/n:

(gi

j


gi
gxx f 

j ) + (gix x )  0 ,
x  0 ,
f 
i  wx ,

j + gix f 
f 
x + gx

j

i

(29)

where the sign  denotes equality in the leading order of the large n expansion. we
are going to argue below that the elds i are irrelevant for the description of the domain
walls interpolating between adjacent vacua. in other words, we will argue that the domain
walls between the neighboring vacua are described by the supereld x alone. to see how
this comes about let us recall that the discrete zn symmetry is spontaneously broken in
the theory. thus, there are domain walls separating adjacent vacua. the question we are
dealing with is whether these walls are bps saturated or not. in other words, there should
always exist a wall conguration which would satisfy the equations of motion. however,
the very same conguration might or might not satisfy the corresponding bps equations.
let us start with the equations of motion dened in (29). given the boundary conditions
() = 0 and x() = 0, and also taking into account non-singularity of the kahler
metric, one can rewrite the rst equation in (29) as follows:

gi

j



j + gix x   0 .

(30)

while making a transition from one vacuum state to the neighboring one along the solution,
the relative change in the elds i and x should be at most of order 1/n. we therefore will
be looking for solutions of the form i = i0 + 
i, where i0 (which, if non-vanishing, scale
as  n) denote some constants and 
i set the coordinate dependence of the elds in the
nearest-neighbor transitions. for instance, as we have already mentioned, the  eld enters
the equations via l = n(1  /n). likewise, the large n behavior of the x supereld is
set by the expression x = n(1  /n), where both the real and imaginary parts of  are
at most of order 1. given these relations the coecients of the kahler metric, which also
should be varying by an amount proportional to 1/n, can be written in the following form:

gi

j|solution = cij + o  
gix |solution = ci + o  

n

n

,

,



n! ,
n! ,



(31)

where cij and ci are some constants of (at most) order 1. substituting these relations into
(30) and taking into account the boundary conditions for the x supereld as well as those

13

i elds, 

for the 
i() = 0, one nds that (30) admits no solutions but the trivial one:

i = 0 provided that gix |solution  o(/n), that is, ci  0. note that since domain walls
must exists (regardless of whether they are bps saturated or not), the last condition on the
kahler potential must be satised. on the other hand, as we will show in a moment, once
this condition is satised, the corresponding walls do saturate the bps bound. next, to solve
for , or equivalently x, one should use the rest of the equations in (29). let us turn to the
second equation in (29). as we have shown above the o-diagonal components of the metric
gix  should be of the subleading order on the solution. thus, in the leading order of the
f 
j|solution  0.
large n expansion the second equation in (29) turns into the relation gi
consider the trivial solution fi  0. this is precisely the solution we would like to consider
for the purpose of nding bps domain walls. indeed, this solution implies that the set of
bps equations for i, namely, i  fi is automatically satised (recall that i  0 as
a result of the rst equation in (29)).
finally, let us discuss the third equation in (29). given the results of the rst equation

j

one nds in the leading order:

gxx f 

x  wx .

let us now turn to the corresponding bps equation. in accordance with our discussions
presented above the only nontrivial bps equation is that for x, zx (z) = exp(ik+1,k)f 
x,
where the phase k+1,k was dened in the previous section. as the next step, one can use
the equation of motion (32) to derive:

(32)

(33)

gxx zx   exp(ik+1,k)wx .

below, we will assume that the corresponding kahler metric gxx  is non-singular. then, as
we reviewed in the previous section, we can absorb the kahler metric into a redenition of
z. (more precisely, we will absorb gxx /2 which is dimensionless.) in fact, in the large n
limit this procedure is equivalent to the absorption of a nite constant in the redenition
of the variable z, or, equivalently, to the redenition of the width of the domain wall by a
nite number. the corresponding bps equation reads:

where we have introduced the inverse width

zx   exp(ik+1,k)f (x) ,

 = d1 = n .

(34)

(35)

the boundary conditions for x(z) are given by: x() = xk, x(+) = xk+1.
reduce formally to the system described by the superpotential

thus, the system of bps equations and equations of motion for this particular case

amended by the s eld dening condition

w  n3f (x)

(36)

s = 3f (x) (1 + o(1/n 2)) .

in addition, the values of the all other elds 
i (including ) on the solution vanish in the
leading order of the 1/n expansion. these relations are supposed to be satised on the
particular bps solution we are dealing with. in the following subsections we will discuss the
solution to the bps equation (34) and present the explicit form of the corresponding bps
domain wall.

14

a. a simple example

before solving the bps equation (34) for the most general form of f (x), in this subsec-
tion, for illustrative purposes, we will consider a simple example where we take the values
of the numerical coecients dn as follows: d0 = d1 = 1 + 1/n, and all the other dn (n > 1)
coecients are o(1/n). then in the leading order in 1/n one nds:

f (x)  d0(cid:16)x 

(37)

n

n + 1(cid:18)x

n(cid:19)n +1(cid:17) .

note that the eective superpotential (36) in this case reduces to that of the an model
discussed in the previous section.

next, let us solve the bps equation (34) in the large n limit for f (x) given by (37). (in
this subsection we will closely follow the corresponding discussion in [23].) let x = xky .
then we can rewrite (34) in terms of y :

zy   i exp(i/n)h1  y ni .

the boundary conditions on y read:

y (z  ) = 1 ,

y (z  +) = exp(2i/n) .

(38)

(39)

thus, in the large n limit arg(y ) changes by a small amount, namely, from 0 to 2/n. it
is convenient to parametrize y as follows:

y = (1  /n) exp(i( + )/n) .
here  and  are real. the boundary conditions then read:

(z  ) = 0 , (z  ) =  .

then (38) becomes a system of the following rst order dierential equations:

z =  [1 + exp() cos()] ,
z =  exp() sin() .

(40)

(41)

(42)
(43)

here we are taking the large n limit and only keeping the leading terms. in particular, we
have taken into account that (1  /n)n  exp() as n  .
the above system of dierential equations can be integrated. note that these equations
do not explicitly contain z. this implies that if (z) and (z) give a solution with the
appropriate boundary conditions, so will (z  z0) and (z  z0) for any constant z0. (this
is simply the statement that the system possesses translational invariance in the z direction.)
the general solution is given by

cos() = (  1) exp() ,
z (z)

dhexp(2)  (1  )2i 1

(z0)

2 = |z  z0| ,

(44)

(45)

where (z0) = 0( 1.278) is the solution of the following equation:

15

(0  1) exp(0) = 1 .

(46)

note that z0 is the center of the domain wall. these solutions have characteristic for a
domain wall behavior. the amplitude  changes from zero at  to zero at + with a
bell-shaped extremum at z = z0. likewise, the phase  changes monotonically from  at
 to + at + going through the origin at z = z0. the width of this wall d  1/n
vanishes in the large n limit.

b. the general case

in this subsection we construct the bps domain walls for the most general form of
f (x). in fact, as we will see in a moment, the corresponding bps equations are actually
reduced to those discussed in the previous subsection. that is, for the most general eective
superpotential w in (36) the problem of the large n domain walls can be reduced to that
of nding bps solitons in the large n an landau-ginsburg theory.
to begin with, let us simplify the form of the eective superpotential as follows. let us

make the following change of variables:

n

n + 1 fx

.

this transformation preserves the zn symmetry:

f (x) = ef (fx)  fx 

above non-linear change of variables is non-singular as long as the coecients dn satisfy

n!n +1
in terms of the new variable fx we still
have n non-degenerate vacua fx = xk = n exp(2ik/n), k = 0, 1, . . . , n  1. also, the
constraints (16). this implies that the resulting kahler metric eg(fx,fx ) is non-singular as
z. (more precisely, we will absorb eg/2 which is dimensionless.) the corresponding bps

well (provided that the original kahler metric g(x, x ) was non-singular). therefore, as
we reviewed in the previous section, we can absorb the kahler metric into a redenition of

equation reads:

(47)

(48)

zfx  = exp(ik+1,k)ef (fx) ,

where the phase k+1,k is the same as in the previous subsection. the boundary conditions

for fx(z) are given by: fx() = xk, fx(+) = xk+1. note that the bps equation

(48) is the same as that derived in [23] using a more indirect construction. in particular,
it coincides with the bps equation we just solved in the previous subsection for a simple
example corresponding to the an superpotential. thus, the problem of bps domain walls
in the large n sqcd is indeed reduced to that of nding bps solitons in the large n
an landau-ginsburg theory. in fact, this is a generic property of zn symmetric landau-
ginsburg theories - they are all related via non-linear change of variables which is non-
singular. this implies that if the kahler metric is non-singular for one choice of variables,
it is non-singular in the transformed variables as well. since the induced kahler metric can
always be absorbed into the redenition of z, this allows us to solve the bps equations
exactly (in the large n limit) in the suitable coordinate frame.

for completeness we note that the shape of the gaugino condensate is given by

16

thus, in the large n limit the gaugino condensate is controlled by the vev of the chiral

s = 3f (x) = 3ef (fx)  3fx .

(49)

as we explain in section iv, the additional singlet supereld used in [23] can be related to

supereld fx. this important simplication is the key observation of [23]. in particular,
fx. this point is central to the fact that the indirect construction of [23] gives bps domain

walls in the large n sqcd, and not in some other theory.

the tension of the above domain walls is given by:

td =

n
4

3 .

(50)

the width of these domain walls is  1 which goes as  1/n. thus, these domain walls
are innitely thin in the large n limit. moreover, they are bps saturated. note that there
are other domain walls in large n sqcd [23], namely, those with k 6= k  1. we refer the
reader to [23] for details.

c. domain walls and the three-form supermultiplet

the large n sqcd domain walls found in the previous sections can be viewed as mem-
branes which break half of susy generators and are embedded in a (3 + 1)-dimensional
sqcd background. if so, a three-form supermultiplet [41] must couple to such a membrane
to have world-volume -symmetry [42]11. if the domain walls are indeed 2-branes (mem-
branes), we must be able to identify the corresponding three-form supermultiplet with the
appropriate (3 + 1)-dimensional bulk physical elds of sqcd. in fact, in the following
we will argue that after gauge xing the three-form supereld reduces to component elds,
which in a given chirally asymmetric vacuum describe the corresponding gluon and/or gluino
composites of sqcd.

before we turn to this identication, let us make the following remark. consider the
domain wall separating two neighboring chirally asymmetric vacua. in each of these vacua
there are sqcd elds with a well dened particle interpretation in terms of colorless com-
posite bound states of gluons and/or gluinos. we would like to show that the sqcd elds
in each of the two vacua consistently couple to the membrane world-volume. note that the
corresponding couplings for these two vacua are dierent. a consistent sowing of these
couplings is guaranteed by the fact that the domain wall is a solution (interpolating between
these two vacua) of the order parameter eective action (8). in the following we will there-
fore identify the components of the three-form supermultiplet with sqcd colorless elds in
a given chirally asymmetric vacuum.

let us start with the supersymmetric green-schwarz action for a 2-brane (membrane)
embedded in the (3 + 1)-dimensional target space. the membrane action sm includes the
wess-zumino term corresponding to the three-form coupling to the world-volume of the
membrane:

11 as usual, -symmetry eliminates half of the world-volume fermionic degrees of freedom, which
is necessary for having a supersymmetric formulation of the membrane action.

17

sm = tdz d3(cid:18)

1
2

ggabei
aej

b ij +

1
2

g +

1
3!

abcea

a eb

b ec

c babc(cid:19) ,

(51)

where a (a = 0, 1, 2) denote the membrane world-volume coordinates, and gab is the induced
metric on the world-volume. here the pull-back ea
m , z m  (x, ) are the
target superspace coordinates, and ea
m denotes the supervielbein, where a = (i, ) are the
tangent superspace indices. the constraints [41,43] imposed by -symmetry on the three-
form supereld babc can be solved, and the remaining independent components of babc
can be combined into the following real tensor supereld:

a = az m ()ea

u = b + i  i  +

1
16

2a +

2a +

 c  +

1
16

1
48

2  2

8

1
2

 + ! +

2 2

8

1
2

   ! +

1
4

2 2(cid:18)1

4

  2b(cid:19) .

(52)

we would like to point out that the supermembrane action by itself gives rise to the real
tensor supereld (52) only dened up to a shift by a linear supermultiplet l satisfying
d2l = d2l = 0 [41,43]. if the membrane is considered in empty space, then this shift,
u  u  l, can always be used to remove half of the components in (52). however, in
our case the membrane is embedded in a space where composite colorless sqcd elds live.
some of these elds, as we are going to see shortly, couple to the membrane. thus, the total
classical action of the system is the sum of the membrane action sm and the eective action
for the bulk elds

s = sm + sbulk .

(53)

the action for the bulk elds sbulk is a rather complicated object and generically consists
of an innite number of elds. however, it was shown in [37] that lowest-spin sqcd exci-
tations (spin-zero glueballs, gluino-gluino mesons and their fermionic superpartners) can be
described by the components of the three-form supermultiplet u. it was also argued in [37]
that the shift u  u  l is not a symmetry of the bulk eective lagrangian sbulk. thus, all
the components in (52) should be retained as physical ones. if so, one can identify the elds
in (52) with the bulk composite massive elds of sqcd [37]. thus, the three-form eld
c is just the magnetic dual of the chern-simons current of sqcd, and is related to

the operator geg via c   geg. (note that c is a massive eld in this approach

with one physical pseudoscalar degree of freedom [37].) the two weyl fermion states  and
 in (52) correspond to (l, s) = (0, 1/2) and (l, s) = (1, 1/2) gluino-gluon bound states,
respectively (where l and s denote the orbital momentum and spin respectively). the a
eld denotes the  state, whereas the b eld is related to the  eld (on-shell) which
corresponds to the scalar glueball given by the g2

 composite operator.

to summarize, there are four real massive scalar degrees of freedom corresponding to the
scalar and pseudoscalar gluino-gluino composites, and the scalar and pseudoscalar glueballs.
in addition, there are four real (two weyl) fermionic degrees of freedom corresponding
to the gluino-gluon composites with dierent orbital momenta. these states are present
in the supereld (52) which necessarily appears in the supersymmetric formulation of the
membrane action.

one might wonder now what is the relation between the bulk eective action sbulk and
the order parameter eective action for two chiral superelds s and x used previously. as we

18

mentioned above, sbulk depends in general on an innite number of superelds corresponding
to dierent spin-orbital excitations of sqcd. if one restricts consideration to the lowest-spin
states only, then those states precisely t in the supermultiplet (52) [37], so that sbulk =
sbulk(u, ...). on the other hand, it has been known for some time [44,45] that the eld
content of the three-form supermultiplet u can be rearranged into two chiral superelds.
this property was used in [45,37] to rewrite the three-form supermultiplet u in terms of two
chiral superelds which in our case, in a given chirally asymmetric vacuum, correspond to
the chiral supereld s and some function of the chiral supereld x [22].
before we turn to the next section we would like to comment on sqcd strings and some
related phenomena. there are a number of indications, as we discussed in the introduction,
that in the large n limit qcd (or sqcd) can be viewed as some non-critical string theory.
thus, one might be able to describe all the sqcd states in the large n limit as string
excitations, without actually referring to the fundamental theory (sqcd). the question we
address here is whether some of the sqcd states discussed above could indeed be identied
with excitations of strings present in the bulk. in the string picture glueballs are identied
with excitations of a closed non-critical string: the scalar glueball in the sqcd string theory
would correspond to the string dilaton [48]. the pseudoscalar glueball is the analog of the
axion and, by supersymmetry, a gluino-gluon bound state corresponds to the dilatino.
these states, as we discussed above, along with the gluino-gluino bound states, are combined
in one massive tensor supermultiplet, similarly to what can happen in superstring theories
at the non-perturbative level (see discussions in the second reference in [45]). note that
the closed string itself, whose excitations we identify with the glueballs, can be viewed as
a limit of a closed membrane with the topology of a torus. this is consistent with the
results of [46] where a part of the low-energy glueball spectrum of qcd was calculated in
a closed bosonic membrane model and a good agreement with the lattice qcd predictions
was found12. these observations might provide some hints toward understanding the string
theory of strong interactions.

finally, we would like to comment on the possibility of sqcd open strings ending on
the domain walls. if the domain walls we found are to be interpreted as d-branes, there
should be open strings ending on the brane [16]. thus, in the d-brane picture, one should in
principle be able to identify the u(1) gauge eld in the membrane world-volume action [17].
one might wonder how this u(1) gauge eld arises in the eld theory context if the open
strings we discuss are viewed as sqcd chromoelectric ux tubes. an example of a wall on
which the ux tube can end was constructed in [9]. in that case, the corresponding theory
is in the conning phase outside of the wall. thus, all chromoelectric elds are squeezed
into ux tubes outside of the wall. it is energetically favorable for the tubes to end on the
wall and to spread the ux into the wall interior if the gauge theory inside the wall is in the
higgs phase [9]. thus, the original gauge group of the conning theory, being higgsed inside
the defect, could support ux tubes ending on the wall. the higgs phase inside the defect
can support the residual unbroken u(1) gauge group in the wall. in the large n limit the
wall becomes innitely thin. thus, the system of the ux tube and the wall can be regarded

12in [46], because of computational diculties, the spectrum of glueballs was actually calculated
for a bosonic membrane with the topology of a sphere.

19

in that limit as an sqcd string ending on a d-brane. the world-volume u(1) eld in that
case can be interpreted as a collective solitonic excitation in the soliton picture for the wall,
or, alternatively, as a mode of an open string ending on the d-brane, if the d-brane picture
is adopted. recently, some features of the system of n such domain walls with ux tubes
were discussed in [47]. it would be interesting to study these issues further.

iv. relations to previous studies

surprisingly enough, the solution of bps equations as well as superpotential (37) coincide
with the ones derived in [23] within a completely dierent approach. as we will argue below,
this coincidence is not an accident. in [23] bps domain wall solutions were found in the
theory obtained by integrating out heavy states in sqcd with nf heavy quark avors. the
method of gaining an analytic control over bps equations in pure sqcd by adding avors
and then integrating them out was used earlier in a number of papers, and, in that respect,
was not new in [23]. however, there is a crucial point which makes conclusions of [23] so
dierent from other approaches. let us explore this dierence in somewhat more detail. as
is well known, the supersymmetric qcd with nf < n avors possesses an anomaly free
r-symmetry under which avors carry the charge nf n
. adding a constant mass term for
nf
mesons m in the supersymmetric lagrangian

mtr(m)

(54)

explicitly breaks this symmetry. however, in the massive theory there still is an anomaly
free discrete zn symmetry. this group acts on the gaugino bilinear, and, in fact, coincides
in that respect with the anomaly free zn symmetry of pure sqcd. moreover, spontaneous
breaking of this discrete symmetry by meson vevs should produce domain walls which
after taking the limit m   are expected to transform continuously into the domain walls
of pure sqcd. this was the method used in [31]. it was shown in [31] that within this
approach the bps walls do exist for suciently small values of m, however, above some
critical m the walls cease to exist. thus, one would seemingly not have bps domain walls
in pure sqcd which is expected to be recovered in the limit m  . although per se there
is nothing wrong with solving equations for xed m and then extrapolating them into the
large m region, it seems to us that the domain wall solutions obtained this way cannot be
related to the walls in pure sqcd discussed in [9] and explicitly constructed in the present
work. the reason for this is as follows. the heavy mesons which are being integrated out
in this approach transform under the discrete symmetry which also acts on the degrees of
freedom of the corresponding low-energy theory. if so, a straightforward decoupling of these
elds cannot be justied for the problem of nding bps domain walls of the corresponding
low-energy theory. indeed, it was shown by kogan, kovner and shifman in [19] that when
the heavy elds are charged under the discrete symmetry (which is subsequently broken
spontaneously) the classical solutions that interpolate between dierent vacua cannot be
adequately described by simply integrating heavy elds out and solving equations of the
corresponding eective low-energy theory. this inadequacy arises due to cusp singularities
which emerge in the low-energy theory once the elds charged under the discrete symmetry
are integrated out [19]. now, in sqcd with avors and the regular mass term, mesons

20

necessarily transform under the remaining zn discrete symmetry group, and, thus, the cusp
crossing will always occur once the mesons are integrated out. in this case, albeit one can
consistently solve the bps equations and nd the wall solutions for a nite mass m [31],
this method would not allow one to account for the bps walls of pure supersymmetric qcd
which is reached in the m   limit. in order to avoid this diculty, the mesons which are
being integrated out should not transform under the discrete symmetry. this is possible to
accomplish if the mass term is not a constant, but rather is promoted into a dynamical eld.
this was the key observation of [23]. consider sqcd with nf = n avors. this theory has
an anomaly free u(1)r-symmetry under which mesons are neutral. to avoid the presence
of cusp singularities, one can postulate that the mass term for mesons arises due to
the vev of a new chiral supereld x, and takes the form xtr(m). in this case there is
a discrete zn symmetry under which the x eld and gauginos transform but mesons are
neutral. this group, in fact, is a subgroup of the anomaly free u(1)r. now, if the mesons
acquire large masses due to the vev of the x supereld, then these mesons can be safely
integrated out without encountering cusp singularities discussed above. thus, one should be
able to describe sqcd domain walls in this case. the necessary condition is that one should
work in the region where x is large. for this, one can add a small zn -conserving term in the
superpotential. the simplest one is x n +1/(n + 1). in this case, after integrating mesons
out, one recovers (37). another indication of a deeper connection between x in (12) and the
one in [23] is the fact that in the above context x essentially acts as a dilaton (plus axion)
eld. this can be seen in a number of ways. the simplest one is to point out that the vev
of x spontaneously breaks an anomalous u(1)-symmetry (the peccei-quinn symmetry [49])
and, thus, its imaginary part is an axion eld with a one-loop anomaly-induced coupling

the supersymmetric generalization of this coupling gives

one loop factor  im(x)f ef .

ln(x)ww  .

(55)

(56)

thus, ln(x) essentially sets the value of the inverse gauge coupling 1/g2. this precisely
matches (12) and the form of the eective superpotential derived from gaugino condensation
in the low-energy theory for large x. indeed, for large x the eective low-energy theory is
pure yang-mills (plus x) with a gaugino condensate. the eective superpotential is simply
hi  3 where  is a low-energy scale of the theory which from the one-loop matching of
the gauge couplings at the scale x is simply 3  x3
qcd. this is in agreement with the
dilaton superpotential induced by the gaugino condensation

x3

qcd  ec/g2

3

qcd .

(57)

according to [48], the dilaton of qcd is related to g2
 operator, which gives another way of
deriving why x should be interpreted as the eld responsible for gluonic (that is, glueball)
degrees of freedom in accordance with [22] and our analysis in this paper.

v. discussions and conclusions

in this section we briey summarize the main results of our discussions. before we turn

to the conclusions we would like to make the following comments.

21

first, we would like to point out that the superpotential (8) is just an order parameter
eective potential (which describes the n vacua of the model), so that the x eld has
no particle interpretation in (8). instead, the x supereld in (8) must be regarded as a
collective gluonic excitation over the n vacua. on the other hand, once a particular chirally
asymmetric vacuum state is selected, the supereld x interpolates the glueball excitations
of the model [37,22]. all the excitations described by the eld x (as well as those described
by s) in a particular vacuum state have nite   masses even in the large n limit. this is
consistent with what we expect in the large n sqcd. however, if we consider the excitations
of the x supereld inside of the domain wall, some of them have innitely large masses in
the large n limit. such a behavior is expected as the domain wall tension tends to innity,
and its width tends to zero in the large n limit. this indicates that the eective lagrangian
description for these modes is not reliable inside of the domain wall core. this is precisely
the conclusion we arrived at in section ii. nonetheless, since the wall width vanishes in the
large n limit, we were still able to construct the bps domain walls in the large n sqcd.
suppose we consider now domain walls at nite n. can we use an eective superpotential
(say, of the type we used here) to study them in this case? it appears that using any type of
truncated eective superpotential may not be justied. the reason why is that the gluino
condensate changes substantially inside of the domain walls, so that integrating out heavy
elds, let us call them ym, might not be justied. does this imply that sqcd domain
walls are not bps saturated at nite n? strictly speaking one cannot draw this conclusion
as the eective description in terms of s and x only may not be valid, and one might
have to include all of the innitely many elds x, s, ym to obtain an adequate description.
practically, this means that the problem may not be easily tractable at nite n.

to summarize, we have constructed the bps domain walls interpolating between neigh-
boring vacua with broken chiral symmetry in large n supersymmetric qcd. the tension of
these walls, saturating the bps bound, scales as  n, and the width of the walls vanishes as
 1/n in the large n limit. these walls can be interpreted as supermembranes embedded in
a (3+1)-dimensional sqcd background. the components of the three-form supermultiplet
that couples to the supermembrane were identied in terms of composite elds of sqcd.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank s. carroll, g. farrar, s. lukyanov, j. maldacena, j. polchinski,
s. rudaz, m. shifman, m. schwetz, t. taylor, a. vainshtein and m. voloshin for useful
discussions. the work of g.g. was supported in part by the grant nsf phy-94-23002. the
work of z.k. was supported in part by the grant nsf phy-96-02074, and the doe 1994
oji award. z.k. would also like to thank albert and ribena yu for nancial support.

22

references

[1] e. witten, nucl. phys. b202 (1982) 253.
[2] v.a. novikov, m.a. shifman, a.i. vainshtein and v.i. zakharov, nucl. phys. b229

(1983) 381.

[3] i. aeck, m. dine and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b241 (1984) 493; nucl. phys. b296

(1985) 557.

[4] m. shifman and a. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b296 (1988) 445.

v. novikov, m. shifman, a. vainshtein and v. zakharov, nucl. phys. b229 (1983) 407;
m. shifman and a. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b277 (1986) 456; nucl. phys. b359 (1991)
571.

[5] for a review, see

d. amati, k. konishi, y. meurice, g.c. rossi and g. veneziano, phys. rept. 162
(1988) 169.

[6] n. seiberg, phys. rev. d49 (1994) 6857.
[7] n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 19; erratum, ibid. b430 (1994)

485.

[8] for a recent review and references, see, e.g.,

k. intriligator, hep-ph/9811310.

[9] g. dvali and m. shifman, phys. lett. b396 (1997) 64; erratum, ibid. b407 (1997)

452.

[10] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b72 (1974) 461.
[11] e. witten, hep-th/9207094.
[12] r. gopakumar and c. vafa, hep-th/9811131.
[13] m. bershadsky, z. kakushadze and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b523 (1998) 59.
[14] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b529 (1998) 157.
[15] a. polyakov, nucl. phys. b486 (1997) 23; nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 68 (1998) 1.
[16] e. witten, nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 658.
[17] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724.
[18] e. witten, phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998) 2862;
m. shifman, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 021501.

[19] i.i. kogan, a. kovner and m. shifman, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 5195.
[20] g. veneziano and s. yankielowicz, phys. lett. b113 (1982) 231;

t.r. taylor, g. veneziano and s. yankielowicz, phys. lett. b114 (1983) 493.

[21] a. kovner and m. shifman, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 2396.
[22] g. gabadadze, hep-th/9808005; nucl. phys. b (in press).
[23] g. dvali and z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b537 (1999) 297.
[24] m. cvetic, f. quevedo and s.-j. rey, phys. rev. lett. 67 (1991) 1836;

e.r.c. abraham and p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b351 (1991) 313.

[25] g. dvali and m. shifman, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 127.
[26] a. kovner, m. shifman and a. smilga, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 7978.
[27] b. chibisov and m. shifman, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 7990.
[28] m. shifman, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 1258; hep-th/9807166.
[29] m.a. shifman and m.b. voloshin, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 2590.
[30] m. shifman, a. vainshtein and m. voloshin, hep-th/9810068.
[31] a. smilga and a. veselov, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 4529; nucl. phys. b515 (1998)

23

163; phys. lett. b428 (1998) 303;
a.v. smilga, hep-ph/9805214; hep-th/9807203.

[32] s.m. carroll and m. trodden, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 5189.
[33] a. campos, k. holland and u.-j. wiese, phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998) 2420; hep-

th/9807207;
t. matsuda, hep-th/9805134.

[34] v.s. kaplunovsky, j. sonnenschein and s. yankielowicz, hep-th/9811195.
[35] s.v. troitskii and m.b. voloshin, hep-th/9812116.
[36] g. shore, nucl. phys. b222 (1983) 446.
[37] g.r. farrar, g. gabadadze and m. schwetz, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 015009; hep-

th/9806204; hep-ph/9809276.

[38] for a partial list, see, e.g.,

e. martinec, phys. lett. b217 (1989) 431;
c. vafa and n. warner, phys. lett. b218 (1989) 51;
w. lerche, c. vafa and n. warner, nucl. phys. b324 (1989) 427;
w. lerche and n. warner, nucl. phys. b358 (1991) 571;
s. cecotti and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b367 (1991) 359;
s. cecotti, l. girardello and a. pasquinucci, int. j. mod. phys. a6 (1991) 2427;
k. intriligator, mod. phys. lett. a6 (1991)3543;
p. fendley and k. intriligator, nucl. phys. b372 (1992) 533;
a. leclair, d. nemeschansky and n.p. warner, nucl. phys. b390 (1993) 653.

[39] p. fendley, s.d. mathur, c. vafa and n.p. warner, phys. lett. b243 (1990) 257.
[40] s. cecotti and c. vafa, commun. math. phys. 158 (1993) 569.
[41] e. bergshoe, e. sezgin and p.k. townsend, phys. lett. b189 (1987) 75;

a. achucaro, j.m. evans, p.k. townsend and d.l. wiltshire, phys. lett. b198 (1987)
441.

[42] for a recent review, see, e.g.,

m.j. du, hep-th/9611203, and references therein.

[43] p. binetruy, f. pillon, g. girardi and r. grimm, nucl. phys. b447 (1996) 175;

b.a. ovrut and d. waldram, nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 236.

[44] s.j. gates jr., nucl. phys. b184 (1981) 381;

s.j. gates jr., m.t. grisaru, m. rocek and w. siegel, superspace or one thousand
and one lessons in supersymmetry, benjamin/cummings, massachusetts, 1983.

[45] c.p. burgess, j.-p. derendinger, f. quevedo and m. quiros, phys. lett. b348 (1995)

428;
p. binetruy, m.k. gaillard and t.r. taylor, nucl. phys. b445 (1995) 97.

[46] g. gabadadze, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 094015.
[47] n. arkani-hamed and m. schmaltz, hep-th/9812010.
[48] a. migdal and m. shifman, phys. lett. b114 (1982) 445.
[49] r.d. peccei and h.r. quinn, phys. rev. lett. 38 (1977) 1440.

24

