9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

3
1

 
 

1
v
3
5
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

2d yangmills theory as a matrix string theory1

dftt-2/99
kul-tf-99/3
january 1999

m. billo1,2, m. caselle2, a. dadda2 and p. provero2

1 instituut voor theoretische fysica, k.u. leuven,

celestijnenlaan 200d, b3001 leuven, belgium

2 dipartimento di fisica teorica delluniversit`a di torino and
i.n.f.n., sezione di torino, via p.giuria 1, i-10125 torino, italy

billo,caselle,dadda,provero@to.infn.it

abstract

quantization of twodimensional yangmills theory on a torus in the
gauge where the eld strength is diagonal leads to twisted sectors that are
completely analogous to the ones that originate long string states in matrix
string theory. if these sectors are taken into account the partition function
is dierent from the standard one found in the literature and the invariance
of the theory under modular transformations of the torus appears to hold
in a stronger sense. the twisted sectors are in one-to-one correspondence
with the coverings of the torus without branch points, so they dene by
themselves a string theory. a possible duality between this string theory and
the gross-taylor string is discussed, and the problems that one encounters
in generalizing this approach to interacting strings are pointed out. this talk
is based on a previous paper by the same authors, but it contains some new
results and a better interpretation of the results already obtained.

1 matrix string theory

this talk is based on ref. [1], but it also includes some new results and, we hope,
a better understanding of the results already contained in the original paper. this
work has its origin in an old puzzle that dates back to 1993 and in some recent
development. the puzzle consists in the following: while studying the functional
integral approach to quantization of ym2 on a torus (see ref.
[2]) some of us
noticed that in order to get the correct result for the partition function on the torus
in the gauge where the eld strength f is diagonal (unitary gauge) we would have

1talk presented by a. dadda at the 2nd conference on quantum aspects of gauge theories,
supersymmetry and unication, corfu, greece, 21-26 september 1998. work partially supported
by the european commission tmr programme erbfmrx-ct96-0045.

1

been obliged to neglect some contributions from twisted sectors that seem to arise
naturally in that gauge. the problem was put aside and ascribed to some lack
of understanding from us. recently however the same type of contributions were
considered in the matrix string theory model of ref. [3, 4] where they give origin
to string congurations of dierent lengths. to be more specic let us consider the
matrix string theory action:

1

s =

1
g2
s

1
gs

l and  

s f 2

 

[x m , x s]2 +

2 z dd tr (dx m )2 + t d/  + g2

t m [x m , ]!
(1)
where the elds x m ( m = 1, 2, ...8) are n  n hermitian matrices, as are the 8
fermionic elds 
r. the two dimensional world sheet is an innite cylin-
der parametrized by coordinates (,  ), with  between 0 and 2. this action can
be obtained from the ten dimensional super yang-mills theory by dimensional re-
duction and it features the same set of elds as green-schwarz action for type ii
superstring, except that here the elds are matrices. in the limit where the string
coupling constant gs goes to zero the elds x and  will commute and can be
simultaneously diagonalized. the eigenvalues xm
(i = 1, 2, ..., n) of x m can be
i
identied with string coordinates which describe the world sheets of a gas of n
green-schwarz light-cone strings. the key point is that the eigenvalues xm
can be
i
interchanged as one goes around the compact dimension :

xm ( + 2) = p xm ()p 1 ,

(2)

where p is an element of sn .
i () take value on the
orbifold space sn r8, with strings of dierent lengths associated to the cycles of p ,
and the corresponding hilbert space consists of twisted sectors in correspondence
with the conjugacy classes of sn .

in conclusion the elds xm

2 ym2 in the unitary gauge

the same twisted sectors appear naturally in ym2 in the unitary gauge, where the
eld strength f is diagonal. consider the partition function of ym2 in the rst
order formalism on a general riemann surface g of genus g:

z(g, t) = z [da][df ] exp(

t
2

trzg

d f 2 + i trzg

f (a)f) ,

(3)

where d is the volume form on g and f (a) = da  ia  a. it is always possible,
at least locally, to nd a gauge transformation g that diagonalizes f :

g1f g = diag() .

(4)

however g is not unique: if g diagonalizes f , so does any gauge transformation of
the form gp , with p  sn : in general, there are n! gribov copies of the gaugexed

2

eld strength f . as in the case of matrix string theory, the twisted sectors appear
because as we go around a homotopically non trivial loop on g, the eigenvalues
can be interchanged, namely we can go from one gribov copy to another. consider
now the case where g is a torus parametrized by coordinates (,  ) both ranging
from 0 and 2. the twisted sectors are labelled by the pair of permutations p
and q associated to the two homotopically non trivial loops, more precisely by the
boundary conditions

i( + 2, x) = p (i)(, x) ,
i(, x + 2) = q(i)(, x) ,

(5)

where consistency requires p and q to commute: p q = qp .

pairs of commuting permutations also dene n-coverings of the torus without
branch points, the n sheets of the covering at each point of the target space being
labelled by one eigenvalue of f . this argument is easily generalized to higher
genus riemann surfaces, and one can say in conclusion that twisted sectors are in
correspondence with the inequivalent n-coverings of g in absence of branch points.
however if the genus is greater than one the quantization in the unitary gauge leads
to divergences whose regularization, according to ref. [5], would amount to set to
zero all twisted sectors. the argument is as follows: the brst invariant action in
the unitary gauge consists of two terms, the rst, denoted by scartan, depends only
on the diagonal components of the gauge elds and is just the gauge action in the
rst order formalism for the residual u(1)n gauge invariance:

scartan = zg

n

xi=1(cid:20) t

2

2

i d  iida(i)(cid:21) ,

(6)

where a(i) is the i-th diagonal term of the matrix form a. the second term, named
sodiag, contains the ghost and anti-ghost elds and the nondiagonal components
of a:

sodiag = zg

dxi>j

(i  j)h aij

0

aji
1  aij

1

aji
0 + i(cijcji + cijcji)i ,

(7)

a = e

a aij

 and e

where aij
a denotes the inverse of the two dimensional vierbein.
sodiag has a fermionic symmetry, which exchanges gauge and ghost elds; hence
one would expect the contributions to the partition functions from the ghost elds
and the nondiagonal part of the gauge elds to cancel exactly.

however, this supersymmetry is in general broken by an anomaly in the func-
tional measure, due to the fact that on a curved surface the number of degrees of
freedom of a one-form (like a) and of two zero forms (like c and c) do not match
exactly. in fact the corresponding functional integral has been calculated exactly
in [5] and it is given by:

z yi>j

[dcij][dcij][daij

 ]esodiag = exp


1

8 zg

rxi>j

log(i  j)
 ,

(8)

3

where r is the curvature scalar: only on at riemann surfaces like the torus or the
cylinder the symmetry is preserved at the quantum level.

following [5] one nds, by gauge xing the residual u(1)n invariance, that in the
end only congurations where the eigenvalues i are constant and equal to integers
ni contribute. so the r.h.s. of (8) gives the standard dependence of ym2 partition
function from the genus, while the dependence from t is given by the u(1)n action
scartan thus reproducing the well known partition function of ym2 on a riemann
surface [6, 7, 8]:

z(g, t) = x{ni}

n2
i .

(9)

1

qi>j(ni  nj)2g2 e22tpi

however in the present derivation nothing forbids ni = nj for i 6= j, and such
terms, that we shall name non-regular terms following [5], are divergent for g > 1.
notice that non-regular terms always appear in the twisted sectors, where at least
two sheets of the n-covering are connected by going round some non contractible
loop. therefore the corresponding eigenvalues are given by the same integer. the
regularization proposed in [5] is done by adding mass terms to the non diagonal
part of the gauge elds; in this way the non-regular terms vanish due to the ghost
contribution which is proportional to (ni  nj)2, while the contribution from the
gauge elds is now nite and proportional to (ninjmij)2g. the limit mij  0 is
performed at the end. this regularization scheme, while preserving the u(1)n gauge
symmetry, violates the original brst invariance as well as the fermionic symmetry
between gauge elds and ghosts discussed above. a fully consistent treatment of
the non-regular terms in the unitary gauge for g > 1 is indeed lacking, and in our
opinion this is a problem worth looking into in the future. the case g = 1 is special:
non regular terms are nite, the fermionic symmetry is anomaly free and hence there
is no need of regularization. therefore we shall write the partition function as a sum
over all sectors labelled by commuting pairs of permutations (p, q), thus including
non regular terms. we will nd that the result does not coincide with the standard
partition function [6, 7], which can be reproduced only by limiting the sum to the
subset of sectors of the type (p, 1). this choice however is not invariant under
modular transformations on the torus.

3 free energy and partition function

the twisted sectors can also be labelled, as discussed earlier on, by the n-fold covers
without branch points of the torus. in order to sum over all sectors it is convenient
on one hand to work in the grand canonical formalism, in which n is not xed, and
introduce the grand-canonical partition function z(t, q) and the corresponding free
energy f (t, q):

z(t, q) = ef (t,q) = xn

zn (t)qn .

(10)

4

s

2ws

r

1ws
k

figure 1: a world-sheet torus in the case n = 12, k = 4, s = 3.

on the other hand it is convenient to work directly on the free energy f (t, q),
that receives contributions only from the connected coverings. the computation
of the free energy entails two aspects: an entropic one, i.e. the counting of the
inequivalent connected coverings, and the determination of the boltzmann factor
that the functional integral (3) implies for each covering. the counting of n-
coverings of the torus without branch points, namely of the n-fold maps of a world
sheet torus into the target torus, has already been discussed in the literature (see
for instance [9, 10] ) and its free energy is given by

fcov = xn xr|n

1
r

qn = 



xk=1

log(1  qk)

(11)

where r|n means that the sum is extended over the divisors r of n. the coecient
1
of qn in eq. (11), namely pr|n
r , enumerates the connected n-coverings of the
torus. this result can be derived as follows:
let the periods of the target space
torus be ~tar
2 = 2i, the most general connected n-covering is then a
torus of area 42n whose periods are given by

1 = 2 and ~tar

~ws
1 = 2k ;

~ws
2 = 2s + i 2r ,

(12)

with kr = n and s = 0, 1, . . . , k  1. an example with n = 12, k = 4 and s = 3
is given in figure 1. there are pk|n k = n pr|n 1/r choices of the integers k,r
and s that satisfy these conditions, but one has to divide by the symmetry factor
n to account for the fact that coverings corresponding to dierent labelings of the
sheets (i.e. of the eigenvalues) have to be identied. notice that the world sheet
torus has a modular parameter  = s/k + i r/k = s/k + in/k2 and that summing
over these tori with the weight 1/r = k/n is the discrete version of integrating over
the modular parameter  with the usual modular-invariant measure. in fact from

im = n/k2 and n xed we have r dim /(im )2  pk|n

k

n .

5

it is easy to see that in terms of the eld , the partition function (6) be-
comes the partition function of a u(1) theory on the world sheet torus. this
partition function depends only on the area; it is well-known to be 3(0|i 2nt)
= p
n= exp(22ntn2). this is the boltzmann weight to be associated to the
connected coverings of degree n.
we are now in the position of writing down the free energy, and thus automati-

cally the grand-canonical partition function:

f (t, q) = xn xr|n
yk=1

z (t, q) =

yn=





e22tn n2



1
r

xn=
(1  e22ktn2

qn = 





xn=

xk=1

log(1  e22tkn2

qk) ,

qk)1 .

(13)

we have allowed in front of the free energy f (t, q) a sign ambiguity, which
corresponds to dierent choices of the a priori undetermined weights with which
the contributions from the dierent twisted sectors are added. it is clear from (13)
that the plus sign leads to partition function z + of bosonic type (a state with
xed k and n may appear any number of times), while z  is fermionic (the
exclusion principle holds).

if we consider only the contribution of a subset of connected coverings, namely
those with k = 1, r = n, that are associated to permutations of the type (p, 1), we
obtain the following partition function:


z (t, q) =

(1  e22tn2

yn=

q)1 .

(14)

these expressions are known in the literature. z (t, q) is the grand-canonical ex-
pression that encodes, as shown in [2], the standard partition function for the u(n)
theory on the torus 2 [6, 7]. z + reproduces the partition function obtained in [11]
by quantizing on the algebra rather than on the group. by comparing eq.s (13)
and (14) we nd

z (t; q) =



yk=1z(kt; qk) .

(15)

an expansion in powers of q of both sides of eq. 15 leads for the fermionic case to
the following relation:

(1)n z 

n (t) = x{rk}

(

n

xk=1

krk  n)

n

yk=1

(1)rkz 

rk (kt) ,

(16)

2the coecient of qn in the power series expansion of z (t, q) coincides, up to a sign and
an overall normalization factor, with the standard partition function of u(n ) only for odd values
of n . for even values of n the integers ni are replaced by half-integers in the standard ym
partition function. this half-integer shift however can be re-absorbed by adding to the action a
term proportional to trf (which is entirely in the u(1) factor of u(n )). the expansion of z (t, q)
for even n gives such modied theory. notice that in the case of su(n ) the problem does not
arise and the sum over the (p, 1) sectors correctly reproduces the standard result for all values of
n .

6

n (t) is the u(n) partition function including all sectors and z 

where z 
rk(kt) is the
standard u(rk) partition function (see however the discussion in the footnote). as
an example we give the partition function for the case n = 3:

z 
3 (t) = z 

3 (t)  z 

1 (t)z 

1 (2t) + z 

1 (3t) .

(17)

the extra terms at the r.h.s. of (17) are related to the states with k > 1 and are
not present in the conventional approach.

3.1 modular invariance

one of the new features of our approach is that the ensemble of twisted sectors that
contribute to the partition function is invariant under modular transformation on
the cylinder, while the subset that reproduces the conventional result is not. in fact
for instance a dehn twist maps the sector labelled by (1, p ) into one labelled by
(p, p ). as a result the conventional formulation is not modular invariant. this does
not show in the partition function, which depends only on the area, but it should
appear at the level of correlation function. for instance correlation functions of
wilson loops that are mapped into each other by modular transformations on the
torus (like the two sets depicted in figure 2) should coincide in our approach but
not in the conventional formulation. work is in progress to verify this point.

w1

w2

w2

w1

figure 2: two sets of wilson loops that are related by a dehn twist.

3.2 quantization on the cylinder

the partition function on a torus is often calculated by rst considering a cylinder
with xed holonomies at the edges and then by sewing the two ends together.
this involves identifying the two end holonomies up to a gauge transformation,
namely identifying their eigenvalues up to a permutation p . hence a sum over
p appears in the nal result. it is clear that in this way only the (p, 1) sectors
are taken into account, and in order to consider also sectors corresponding to non
trivial commuting pairs (p, q), with q associated to the compact dimension of
the cylinder, one has somehow to generalize the possible boundary conditions at

7

the edges of the cylinder which in the conventional approach are just the u(n)
holonomies. in order to do that let us choose the unitary gauge on the cylinder as in
eq. (4), and consider a non trivial sector labelled by a permutation q that denes,
according to the second of eq.s (5), the boundary conditions for the eigenvalues
i(, x) as we go round the compact dimension parametrized by the coordinate x.
we refer to the original paper [1] for the details of the calculation and give here
only the main result. this can be summarized by saying that for non trivial q
there are as many independent invariant angles in the holonomies as the number of
cycles in q. more precisely, supposing that q has rk cycles of order k the invariant
angles i of a wilson loop winding round the compact dimension have the following
structure:

2i n

k

k,,n = k, +

,

(18)

where we have made the replacement i  (k, , n) with  = 1, . . . , rk and n =
0, 1, . . . , k  1 to denote that i is the n-th element of the -th cycle of order k. the
independent invariant angles are just the k,, and are associated to the cycles, the
other eigenvalues within each cycle being spaced like the k-th roots of 1. when
sewing the cylinder the invariant angles are identied up to a permutation p that
preserves the cycle structure, namely

(k, , n) p (k, k(), n + s(k, )) ,

(19)

where k  srk is a permutations of the rk cycles of order k and s(k, ) is an
integer shift mod k. eq.
(19) is equivalent to the statement that p commutes
with q, and hence it reproduces the by now familiar pattern of the twisted sectors.
from the previous discussion it is clear that the end states on the cylinder are not
parametrized by the u(n) holonomies but rather by the holonomies of u(r1) 
u(r2)  . . .. it is also clear that by considering just the u(n) holonomies one is
automatically projecting on the trivial sector q = 1. although this projection
appears the most natural thing to do in the framework of gauge theories, and it
is so far also the only approach that we know how to implement on a lattice, it
introduces an asymmetry between the two generators of the torus and ultimately
breaks the modular invariance in the sense mentioned above.

4 ym2 as a matrix string theory.

the grand canonical partition function z (t, q) given in eq. (13) describes in the
large t limit the coverings of the torus. in fact in that limit the boltzmann factor
given by the partition function of the u(1) gauge theory tends to 1 and we are left
with the partition function that simply counts the homotopically distinct coverings

of the g = 1 target space by a g = 1 world-sheet: z (t, q) t zcov(q). so in this

limit the twisted sectors dene a string theory, exactly in the same way as they
do in matrix string theory. it can also be argued, and in the fermionic case it is

8

obvious from the exclusion principle, that in this limit large values of k, namely long
strings, are relevant. quite the opposite happens in the limit t  0, in fact one
can see from the poisson re-summation formula that in this limit the boltzmann
weight behaves like 1/t, and so the leading contributions to the partition function
come from coverings that maximize the number of disconnected world sheets. so
only states with k = 1 survive in the t  0 limit, and the theory reduces to the
conventional one without twisted sectors. it is possible, but yet not proved, that a
phase transition separates the two phases dominated respectively by long and short
strings. the small t region is also the relevant one for the large n limit of ym2
studied by gross and taylor in a series of papers [9].
in fact the limit is done,
following the original idea of t hooft, by taking t = t/n and keeping t xed. gross
and taylor proved that the partition function of u(n) yang-mills theory on a two
dimensional riemann surface mg of genus g counts the homotopically distinct maps
from a world-sheet wg of genus g to mg. in particular if the target space is a torus
and one considers only the leading term in the large n expansion, which means
considering only world sheets of genus 1, one nds the partition function

zgt =



yk=1

(1  ekt)

(20)

this is the same string partition function that is found from the twisted sectors
in the large t limit, with q replaced by et. this coincidence is suggestive of some
kind of underlying duality in the theory. however for this duality to exists beyond
the rather trivial case of wg=1  mg=1 maps we should be able to extend the
twisted sectors introduced in [1] to include coverings with branch points, which
correspond to higher genus world sheets, namely to the possibility for strings to
split and join. these would be dual to the sub-leading terms in the 1/n expansion
of [9]. however branch points correspond to points where the curvature of the world
sheet becomes a delta function, leading through eq. (8) to terms coupling dierent
sheets of the coverings. the problem here is of the same nature as the one that is
encountered if one quantizes ym2 in the unitary gauge on a surface with g > 1,
namely the appearance of logarithmic interactions between dierent eigenvalues,
that eventually lead to divergences. a better understanding of this point is then
crucial also for a consistent formulation of ym2 as a matrix string theory on a
torus, so it is not yet clear to us if such formulation exists also at the level of string
interactions, or weather this can be done only by embedding ym2 in the more
general framework of the matrix string theory given by (1), where it is known that
string interactions can be consistently introduced [12]. in both cases the analysis
developed in [1] is relevant. in fact gauge degrees of freedom are crucial in matrix
string theory for the description of string interactions as well as for the relation of
non-trivial uxes with d-brane charges [4]. shortly after our paper appeared on
the hep-th archive, kostov and vanhove [13] calculated the partition function of
the matrix string theory of eq. (1). they took advantage of the fact that the
contributions to the partition function of the matter elds x m and  cancel due

9

to supersymmetry, so that in the end the only contributions come from the dierent
topological sectors of ym2. in fact their result coincides with ours, except that they
obtain our free energy rather than the partition function because the structure of
the fermionic zero-modes in the matter sector eectively kills the contributions from
disconnected world sheets. in [13] the dimensional reduction of this free-energy to
zero dimensions is shown to correctly reproduce the partition function for the ikkt
1
r2 . the latter [15] is related to the moduli space

of d-instantons or, by t-duality, to the counting of bound states of d0-branes.

model [14], namely zikkt  pr|n

references

[1] m. billo, m. caselle, a. dadda and p. provero, matrix string states in pure

2d yang mills theories, hep-th/9809095, to be published in nucl. phys. b.

[2] m. caselle, a dadda, l. magnea and s. panzeri, nucl. phys. b416 (1994)

751.

[3] l. motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring interactions,

hep-th/9701025.

[4] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, nucl. phys. b500 (1997) 43.

[5] m. blau and g. thompson lectures on 2d gauge theories- topological as-
pects and path integral techniques, proc. 1993 summer school in high energy
physics and cosmology, world scientic, hep-th/9310144.

[6] b. rusakov, mod. phys. lett. a5 (1990) 693.

[7] m. blau and g. thompson, int. j. mod. phys. a7 (1992) 3781.

[8] e. witten, j. geom. phys. 9 (1992) 303.

[9] d. gross, nucl. phys. b400 (1993) 161; d. gross and w. taylor iv, nucl.

phys. b400 (1993) 181.

[10] i. k. kostov and m. staudacher, phys.lett. b394 (1997) 75; i. k. kostov, m.

staudacher and t. wynter, commun. math. phys. 191 (1998) 283.

[11] j.e. hetrick, int. j. mod. phys. a9 (1994) 3153.

[12] s. b. giddings, f. hacquebord and herman verlinde, high energy scattering
and d-pair creation in matrix string theory, hep-th/9804121. g. bonelli,
l. bonora and f. nesti, matrix string theory, 2d instantons and ane toda
eld theory, hep-th/9805071; string interactions from matrix string theory,
hep-th/9807232.

10

[13] i. k. kostov and p. vanhove, matrix string partition functions,

hep-th/9809130.

[14] n. ishibashi, h. kawai, y. kitazawa and a. tsuchiya, nucl. phys. b498 (1997)

467.

[15] m. green and m. gutperle, jhep 01 (1998) 005.

11

