9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

1
1

 
 

1
v
7
3
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

from yangmills field to solitons and back again

l.d. faddeev

steklov mathematical institute, st.petersburg

helsinki institute of physics, helsinki

i am here in erice for the rst time in my life. of course i followed the activity
of this famous school during the last 35 years via its proceedings, some of which
certainly inuenced my scientic interests. but now i am able to watch the real
work of the school and this is a great revelation. i am very grateful to professors
zichichi, t hooft and veneziano for inviting me here.

when i got the invitation, i decided to come and use the opportunity to speak
in defence of quantum field theory. the fact that i was to be the last speaker is
certainly helpful for this goal. however, i found here that there is nobody present
at the school to argue with. all my colleagues theorists apparently are in the
mood of supporting qft, at least in the guise of qcd. so it remains for me just
to explain why i personally like qft. needless to say that my arguments will be
signicantly based on my own experience.

quantum field theory is only a little younger than quantum mechanics. the
realization of a eld as a system of innite number of oscillators was used to con-
struct the quantization of elds already in 1928 by fathers of qm  heisenberg,
pauli, jordan, dirac. my senior compatriot v. fock entered the eld almost
at the same time. the rst essential success of qft, which at that time was
quantum electrodynamics, was the resolution of the long standing contradiction
in connection with the origin of light. both wave and corpuscular aspects were
united naturally in the quantum description of the free electromagnetic led:
the quantized hamiltonian of the maxwell wave equations has the particle-like
excitations  photons. the subsequent calculations of the basic processes of in-
teracting electrons and photons was a great success. however the innities which
appeared in the radiative corrections, became the uncircumventable obstacles for
the following development and interest to qed temporarily declined in the end
of 30-ties.

new great success of qed is connected with the understanding of the radiative
corrections prompted by new experimental data during 19481953. advent of
the manifest lorentz invariant formulation and renormalization by tomonaga,
schwinger and feynman allowed to calculate the lamb shifts of atomic levels
and anomalous magnetic moment of electron with great precision and agreement

1

with experiment. the general renormalization procedure, developed by dyson,
salam, bogolubov among others and based on feynman diagrammatic approach
to perturbation expansion, became a new paradigm of qft. however, the (now
looking) naive generalization of qed to strong nuclear forces with meson eld
substituting the electromagnetic eld of qed, did not lead to satisfactory results.
even worse was the realization that the charge renormalization in qed leads to
the increasing of the interactions for high energies. the extremal position in this
respect was taken by landau, who pronounced the hamiltonian method (i.e. all
qft) dead in 1956. all this led to the second decline of qft with interests
of the theoreticians shifted to nondynamical smatrix theory.
in my country
the qft was virtually forbidden from the end of 50-ties for at least ten years.
fortunately for me i lived in leningrad (now st.petersburg, where i continue
to stay) and worked in the mathematical institute; so i was not subject to the
prevailing ideological trends in soviet theoretical physics. so when in the middle
of the 60-ties i decided to become seriously involved in qft, i had no inhibitions.
the search for a possible subject almost immediately led me to yang-mills eld.
there was no compelling physical reason to consider this eld being charged and
massless. however the beautiful geometric interpretation, which i learned from
lichnerowicss book on the theory of connections [1], was irresistible. one more
reason to do ym was the inuence of feynman lecture of 1962 on quantization
of einstein gravitation theory [2]. the ym eld was used there as a toy model,
and feynman found that the conventional diagrammatic rules of the perturbation
theory do not work.

for reasons not understandable to me feynman did not return to the funda-
mental source of his diagrammatic rules  namely, feynman functional integral.
indeed, it is in the functional integral formalism where the specicity of the
ym eld can be seen most transparent. the equivalence principle states, that
gauge equivalent elds are physically indistinguishable, so in the functional inte-
gral over all physical congurations one is to integrate over classes of equivalent
elds, choosing one representative in each class. in qed the gauge orbit

a  a

 = a +  ,

(1)

parametrized by a real function (x) on spacetime, is linear and typical gauge
condition like a = 0, serving for choice of representative, intersects all orbits
with a xed angle. in the case of nonabelian ym eld the situation is dierent:
the orbits

a  ag

 = g1ag + g1g ,

(2)

where g(x) is a function on spacetime with values in compact group g, are
nonlinear and intersect the gauge surface a = 0 with angle depending on
orbit. what measures this angle is a determinant

(a) = det  = det ((cid:3) + [a,  ])

(3)

2

which certainly is to be taken into account in the functional integral.

this geometrical idea was formally realized by my collaborator v. popov and
me in the fall of 1966 and led to the concrete proposal for the modication of the
diagrammatic rules for ym eld. due to the circumstances mentioned above, it
was not possible to publish a long paper on this subject in any soviet journal, so
we used a very new opportunity of relative liberalization to send a short letter
to physics letters [3] and published more extended version as a preprint [4] of
just organized kiev institute of theoretical physics. complete set of feynman
diagramatic rules as well as interpretation of additional action due to (3) in
terms of integral over ctitious fermions ( now called ghosts) is contained in
this preprint. also the equivalence of manifestly covariant gauge and coulomb
gauge, where only physical degrees of freedom entered the functional intrgral, was
established in this preprint. it showed the unitarity of the modied diagramatic
rules. more general discussion of the quantization of the constrained hamiltonian
systems (of which the yang-mills eld theory gives a prominent example) was
given by me in [5].

later, when ym theory came to vogue, the english translation of kiev preprint
was published by b. lee as a fermilab preprint. however, in the middle of the
60-ties our results did not attract much attention. the evident reason was the
lack of viable physical applications.

the situation changed drastically with t hoofts applications of yangmills
in the model with spontaneous breaking of the symmetry [6], which turns the
charged components of vector eld into the massive ones. the relevance of this
model to the theory of weak interactions immediatly attracted a lot of attention
of physicists.

the subsequent development including the dramatic history of the asymptotic
freedom is described in t hoofts lecture at this school and in recent talk of
d. gross [7], so i must not repeat it. as a result, qft was vindicated and
returned to its well deserved position of the fundamental base for the theory of
elementary particles. the standard model based on yangmills eld stands until
now as a satisfactory description of all interactions but gravity.

in what follows i shall concentrate on some new features of the third advent

of qft, which distinguishes it from two previous periods.

the obvious drawback of pure ym theory  the absence of mass parameter
in classical formulation  becomes, in fact, its asset. indeed, the only parameter
entering the theory is dimensionless coupling constant 1/g2, standing in front
of action very much like planck constant 1/. the asymptotic freedom can
be reformulated in the following way: the regularization introduces the cut-o
momentum l of dimension of mass (for example, l = 1/, where  is lattice
spacing) and with increase of l the coupling constant is to go to zero. the

3

explicit rule in the simplest approximation looks like

ln

l
 

c
g2 = ln

m


,

(4)

where  is an arbitrary scale and c is a positive constant depending on the gauge
group. two innities in the limit l  , g2  0 in lhs are to cancel each other
leaving nite rhs and introducing a new parameter m. the formula above can
be rewritten as

m = lec/g2

(5)

expressing m via g2 and l more explicitly.

thus, the divergence in quantum version of ym eld becomes the origin
of appearance of mass, which substitutes the classical dimensionless coupling
constant. this striking phenomenon was called dimensional transmutation by
s. coleman in his famous erice lectures of 1973 [8].

i believe that this is one of the most important lessons of the new period
of qft: some innities are not bad, on the contrary they are necessary for the
physical applicability of qft. at least one innity is good. of course the qcd
using pure ym eld without higgs eld is based on dimensional transmutation.
it is instructive to comment here, that there exists a simple example in ordi-

nary quantum mechanics where formula like (4) is exact.

the hamiltonian

h = 

2
x2 

2
y2  g2(x)(y)

(6)

for two-dimensional particle interacting with a point source of strength g2 is ap-
parently scale invariant. however, one encounters a divergence which is circum-
vented by renormalization of g2 exactly as in (4), thus trading it for dimensional
parameter breaking scale invariance.

the view on importance of innity for qft advertized above was stressed

also by r.jackiw in [9].

another paradigm of old qft states that one is to introduce a separate eld
for each elementary particle. in view of increasing a list of such particles a new
mechanism for mass spectrum allowing many particles to correspond to one or
a few elds is needed. of course, the standard model is quite happy with its
12 vector elds and 12 fermions; but any possible reduction of the number of
consistuents is certainly welcome.

a new mechanism of rich particle spectrum was found in quantum soliton
theory. i believe, that in spite of the fact that we know about solitons already 25
years, their application to the theory of elementary particles only begins.

the term soliton appeared in applied plasma physics and was introduced by
m. kruskal and n. zabuski to describe a solitary wave solution of one-dimensional
nonlinear evolution equation, so called korteweg-de-vries (kdv) equation.
in

4

spite of the fact that kdv equation is very far from relativistic physics, it surfaced
several times in hep-th in connection with conformal field theory (cft) and
matrix models. however another equation admitting solitons is more relevant
for us now. it is the socalled sinegordon equation

tt  xx +

m2


sin  = 0

,

(7)

which describes massive scalar eld (x) in 1+1 dimensional spacetime; param-
eter  is a coupling constant.

the pure step

0(x, t) = (cid:26) 0 x < x0

x > x0

2


(8)

is a formal stationary solution for all x 6= x0. there exists also a regular stationary
solution,

(x) =

arctan emx

(9)

4


which formally converges to 0 when m  . both solutions connect two
adjacent vacua  = 0 at x =  and  = 2/ at x = ; the solution (x) has
a nite mass (energy at rest)

(10)

(11)

and the running solution

ms =

8m
2

v(x, t) = (cid:18) x  vt
1  v2(cid:19)

evidently corresponds to a particle. let us stress that perturbative paradigm
states that equation (7) describes just a particle of mass m. equation (7) admits
also a family of periodic solutions (breathers), which can be interpreted as bound
states of two kinks with mass

mb = 2ms sin 

,

(12)

where , 0 <   /2 characterises the internal periodic motion.
quantization of this picture, performed quasiclassically by l. takhtajan and
me in 1973 [10], showed that variable  became quantized, so that breathers
produced the particle spectrum

mn =

2m


sin

n
2

, n = 1, . . . ,(cid:20)

(cid:21) ;  =

2
8

.

(13)

later r. dashen, b. hasslacher and a. neveu showed [11], that one loop correc-
tion leads to the nite renormalization

    =



  

5

(14)

which, in particular, shows, that  can not exceed . another interpretation
of this fact was proposed by s. coleman [12], who found a duality between sg
model and massive thirring model describing self interacting massive fermion.
soliton corresponds to basic fermion, whereas breather excitations are its bound
states. the most striking feature of this duality is exchange of weak and strong
interactions in two descriptions of the same physical system. it became prototype
for many dualities discussed subsequently in physical literature, beginning with
the paper of montonen and olive [13].

i have no time to discuss the development of quantum theory of solitons
with which i was connected for a long time since the beginning of the 70ties.
the achievements include the invention of quantum groups with their numerous
applications both in mathematics and cft. a lot of examples of 1+1 dimensional
models were quantized exactly, in particular the nonlinear model, where the
dimensional transmutation formula `a-la (5) was derived rigorously.

in more realistic 3+1 dimensional spacetime the success of solitons was less
impressive. however, for su(2) ym eld yang and wu [14] introduced a singular
soliton

(15)

aa

0 = 0; aa

k =

iakxi

r2

which is somehow an analogue of steplike soliton 0(x, t) of sg model. phys-
ically yangwu soliton describes magnetic monopole.
indeed, one can nd a
gauge transformation, singular along the dirac string, which will turn (15) into
the usual conguration of abelian magnetic monopole (more on this later).

there exists no smoothed solution of ym equation, analogous to kink soliton
(x, t) of the sg model. however, such smoothening appears for the model
including the higgs eld.
it was shown independently by t hooft [15] and
a. polyakov [16] in 1974. polyakov coined the name hedgehog for such a
soliton. the monopole charge characterizes the following topological situation:
the higgs eld of the static solution acquires dierent asymptotic values in dif-
ferent directions in 3space r3 (thus the hedgehog) and denes the map of the
sphere s2 of such directions into space of vacua moduli. in the case of su(2)
group this space is also s2. the map

s2

space boundary  s2

moduli

(16)

has a topological degree  number of times the base covers the target  which
is exactly the magnetic charge of the monopole. thus topology produces charge,
which conserves irrespectively of equations of motion. this feature is one more
substantial addition to qft brought in during the new period.

it is appropriate to remark here, that in his quest for nonquantum particles
einstein was eager to get such a picture [17]. so topological charges in some
sense realize the einsteins dream. however, in modern setting they stay against
quantum principles in no way. on the contrary, topological charge enter quantum
theory most naturally, e.g., via functional integral.

6

there is another possibility for the topological charges besides hedgehog-like
conguration. it corresponds to really localized solitons, for which the boundary
condition at innity in space do not depend on direction. in this way the space
r3 itself is compactied by addition of the point at innity and topologically
became a sphere s3 . the static eld then maps this s3 into the target space. as
soon as this latter is compact, one can expect appearance of topological numbers.
an explicit example is given by skyrme model, in which the target space is a
compact group, so that the eld corresponds to nonlinear model. it is relevant
to stress here, that skyrme was the pioneer of using particlelike solution in high
energy physics, his papers [18], appeared much before the solution fashion of mid
70ties, however, he did not discuss quantization.

the eld g(x) of skyrme model has values in compact group g. the boundary

condition is

where g0 is a xed element in g, i.e., just a unity. the lagrangian is described as
follows. introduce the current

g|r = g0

,

(17)

l = gg1 ,

(18)

which gets its values in the lie algebra of g. then the lagrangian is dened as

l = a trl2

 + b tr ([l, l])2

(19)

where a and b are coupling constants, a has dimension of (mass)2 and b is dimen-
sionless. the topological current

conserves j = 0 irrespective of equations of motion and topological charge

j =  trl [l, l]

(20)

q = z j0d3x

(21)

acquires integer values upon some normalization.

it is evident, that static hamiltonian density, corresponding to lagrangian (19)
is a sum of squares of entities, product of which denes the density of topological
charge. thus the estimate

hstatic  c|q|

(22)

is valid, showing the possibilities for nontrivial static solitons in sectors with
q 6= 0. indeed, the skyrme soliton for g = su(2) and q = 1 can be described
rather explicitly and higher sectors produce a very rich family of particlelike
solutions (see recent paper [19]).

one of additions to 3+1 dimensional solutions in mid 70ties was my proposal
to modify skyrme model using as a target the 2sphere s2, so that the eld is a
unit direction vector

~n = (n1, n2, n3)

, n2 = 1

.

(23)

7

the boundary condition is

thus static conguration denes a map

~n|r = n0 = (0, 0, 1) .

n :

s3

space  s2

target

(24)

(25)

which also can be characterized by some topological number  the hopf invari-
ant. its origin is rather dierent from the degree of map.

the characteristic feature of map (25) is that the dimension of target is smaller
than that of base by 1. so the generic point n in target has as a preimage a whole
closed line. for two dierent values n and n these lines have a denite linking.
for regular conguration n(x) such a linking does not depend on choice of n and
n. thus an integer appears  the linking number of two preimages of the map
n. this is a hopf invariant. it is already clear from this picture that interesting
congurations are not pointlike but rather stringlike.

let us elaborate on this a little more.

if our base is 2dimensional, the
eld n(x) denes the map s2  s2 with usual degree of map. embedding such
congurations into 3space one gets straight strings with innite energy. natural
idea is to close them into a bounded object. however, a simple closure will not
do.
indeed, the energy is proportional to the length and simple closed string
will collapse. however, if one twists the string and/or knots it before closing,
there is a chance, that such twist will increase with shortening of the string and
raise the energy. thus some stable conguration could appear. these simple
considerations were leading for me in my proposal.

to construct the lagrangian, consider rst the topological current correspond-

ing to hopf invariant. dene the antisymmetric 2tensor

which is closed

h = (n  n, n) ,

h + cycle = 0 ,

so that there exists a vector eld c such that

then the current

conserves and

h = c  c .

j = hc

q = z j0 d3x

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

is a hopf invariant. now the lagrangian is a natural variant for that of skyrme

l = a(n)2 + bh 2

 .

(31)

8

however, due to the nonlocality in the denition of hopf charge (one is to inte-
grate to get c from h), the simple estimate as (22) is not valid. it was shown
by kapitansky and vakulenko [20], that the following estimate is true

hstatic  c|q|3/4 .

(32)

this is enough to expect the stable solutions in sectors with q 6= 0.
eld n has the value opposite to the vacuum one (24), namely

it is natural to consider as a center of stringlike soliton the line on which

n = (0, 0,1) .

(33)

the simplest case is axial symmetric, when this line is a circle. the separation
of variables in axial symmetric case still leaves us with two variables on the base,
so that to nd a solution one is to solve nonlinear partial dierential equation
in two variables. in the 70ties it was beyond the possibilities of computers. in
contrast, for skyrme model the spherically symmetric ansatz exists, reducing the
problem to ordinary dierential equations. this is why the numerical realization
of my hypothetical stringlike solitons waited for more than 20 years.

the rst result in this direction is due to a. niemi, who agreed to learn basics
of modern programming and got the facilities of the supercomputing center in
helsinki. the ndings as well as conjectures were published by us in a paper in
nature with the title knots and particles. needless to say, we were to make
allusions to old ideas of lord kelvin [21].

during the last two years several more professional groups joined in the quest
for nding stringlike solitons and quite a rich picture appears now, see [22], [23],
[24].

thus a natural question appeared, namely, if it is possible to nd the appli-
cations for these results in qft. i shall nish my talk indicating a use of the
neld in description of the yangmills eld. this is a programme, which niemi
and me began to work on very recently [25].

one suggestive connection between neld and su(2) yangmills eld is via

yangwu monopole. indeed, if one puts

aa

 = abcnbnc

then for the hedgehog conguration

na = xa/r

(34)

(35)

one gets exactly yangwu monopole (15). the singular gauge transformation
mentioned above is that of rotating n from (35) into constant direction like (24).
this suggests that in a particular gauge neld may constitute part of parameters
for the yangmills eld. the eld n(x) is then to be interpreted as an order
parameter of the monopole condensate.

9

the next question is if it is possible to complete the formula (34) to include a
full set of independent eld degrees of freedom. after some deliberations niemi
and me came to the formula

~a = c~n + ~n  ~n +
~n + ~n  ~n ,

(36)

where c is abelian vector eld and  and   two real scalar elds. one must
consider this ~a as a yangmills eld in a partially xed gauge. the gauge
freedom left is the local rotation around vector ~n, so that the innitesimal gauge
parameter takes the form

it is easy to see, that gauge variation

~ = ~n .

corresponds to

 ~a = ~ + ~a  ~

~n = 0 ;  ~c = ~ ;  =  ;  =  ,

(37)

(38)

(39)

so that c transforms as abelian gauge eld and pair (, ) constitutes corre-
sponding charged scalar eld.
in fact, the rst line in (36) corresponds to a
particular connection and second line is a covariant vector eld.

connection of the rst line in (36) and its generalization for su(3) group was
considered in a series of papers of cho [26]. however, he did not consider the
problem of complete parametrization of ym eld.

let us show, why our parametrization can be complete in 3 + 1 dimensional
spacetime. indeed, usual counting gives 2 polarizations for every component of
the massless vector eld, thus su(2) yangmills theory has 23 = 6 independent
degrees of freedom. in our parametrization we have 2 degrees of freedom for c,
2 for eld n(x) and 2 for pair (, ). altogether it gives 6, as needed.

now let us briey discuss the relevance of the knot lagrangian (31) in this
it is clear that h from (26) enters into the curvature of full
new setting.
~a from (36), so that the second term in (31) is already present in yangmills
lagrangian 1/g2 trf 2
. the rst term from (31) is of course absent as well as
dimensional constant a. however, it can appear as an eective low energy term
after integration over all elds but n(x). indeed, it is the rst relevant term of
the gradient expansion. thus we propose the knot lagrangian (31) as an eective
infrared lagrangian for qcd with knots being candidates for qcd strings relevant
for connement.

returning to general parametrization (36) we see that according to our pro-
posal the degrees of freedom of the su(2) yangmills eld separate into abelian
vector eld, magnetic monopole condesate n(x) and charged scalar eld. this

10

sounds very consonant to t hooft proposal of late 70-ties [27], which now goes
with the name  abelian dominance . we also hope, that we have a denite
proposal for the origin of qcd strings, advertized by polyakov [28]. of course,
lots of work is needed to substantiate this rather ambitious claim.

i add here some comments on the development which happened already after

this lecture was given.

it was quite a satisfaction for niemi and me to realize, that our ansatz con-
tains the axialsymmetric ansatz of witten [29] in his search for manyinstanton
solutions. indeed, if one puts

na =

xa
r

, ck = f (r, t)

xk
r

, c0 = g(x, t)

(40)

formula (36) gives exactly wittens ansatz. we are indebted to w. kummer for
a very relevant question.

of course, to do qcd one needs su(3) yang-mills eld. some ansatz for
su(n) was proposed by periwal [30]. however, even for su(2) it diers from
ours. so niemi and me recently found a natural generalization of ansatz (36)
to su(n) [31]. the ingredients are n  1 abelian vector elds, n 2
complex
scalars and nonlinear eld with values in target of dimension n 2 n. altogether
it gives 2(n 21) independent degrees of freedom as is needed for 3+1 dimensional
space.
all this shows that solitons and yangmills eld are more intimately con-
nected and can go together into qcd. i hope, that this also explains the title of
my lecture.

n
2

i stop here my propaganda for qft in the guise of yangmills eld. i un-
derstand that i do it in time of one more decline of interest to qft due to the
exciting development of string theory. thus i deliberately take the conservative
stance (and alluding to gerards metaphor must be considered not as an agile rat
of the end of the 60-ties, but rather as clumsy dinosaur and should be extinct).
however i do it because i believe that qft is still a viable physical construction,
which did not show yet all its possibilities. if i conveyed this message to some
young people sitting here, i shall consider my mission successful.

references

[1] a. lichnerowicz, theorie globale des connections et des groupes

dholonomie, roma, ed. cremonese, 1955.

[2] r. feynman, acta physica polonica, 24 (1963) 697.

[3] l.d. faddeev, v.n. popov, phys. lett. b25 (1967) 30.

[4] v.n. popov, l.d. faddeev, preprint kiev inst. theor. phys. itp 67-36,

(1967).

11

[5] l.d. faddeev, theor. math. phys. 1 (1969) 3.

[6] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b35 (1971) 167.

[7] d. gross, preprint hep-th 9809060.

[8] s. coleman, lectures given at 1973 international summer school of physics
ettore majorana, erice, sicily, july 6-25 1973; publ. in erice subnuclear
physics 1973.

[9] r. jackiw, talk at the conference on foundations of qft, boston mass.

march 1996, hep-th 9602122.

[10] l.d. faddeev, l.a.takhtajan, uspehy math. nauk, 29(1974) 249;

theor. math. phys. 21 (1974) 160.

[11] r. dashen, b. hasslacher, a. neveu, phys. rev. d11 (1975) 3724.

[12] s. coleman, phys. rev. d11 (1975) 2088.

[13] c. montonen, d. olive, phys. lett. 72b (1977) 117.

[14] c.n. yang, t.t. wu in properties of matter under unusual condition

ed. h. mark and s. fernhach, interscience, ny, 1969.

[15] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b79 (1974) 2761.

[16] a. polyakov, jetp lett. 20 (1974) 430.

[17] a. einstein, on the methods of theoretical physics, spencer lecture de-

livered in oxford 10 june 1933; clarendon press 1933.

[18] t.h.r. skyrme, proc. roy. soc., london, ser. a; 247 (1958) 260; 260 (1961)

127; 262 (1961) 237.

[19] c.j. houghton, n.s. manton, p.m. sutclie, nucl. phys. b510 (1998) 507.

[20] a.f. vakulenko, l.v. kapitansky, sov. phys. doklady, 24 (1979) 433.

[21] l.d. faddeev, a. niemi, nature, 387 (1997) 58.

[22] l.d. faddeev, a. niemi, preprint hep-th 9705176.

[23] r.a. batlye, p.m. sutclie, preprints hep-th 9808129, 9811077.

[24] y. hietarinta, preprint hep-th 9811053.

[25] l.d. faddeev, a. niemi, preprint hep-th 9807069.

12

[26] y.m. cho, phys. rev. d21 (1980) 1080; phys. rev. d23 (1981) 2415; phys.

rev. lett. 46 (1981) 302.

[27] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b153 (1979) 141; nucl. phys. b120 (1977) 455.

[28] a. polyakov, nucl. phys. b120 (1977) 429.

[29] e. witten, phys. rev. lett., 98 (1977) 121.

[30] v. periwal, preprint hep-th 9808127.

[31] l.d. faddeev, a. niemi, preprint hep-th 9812090.

13

