9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

5

 
 

1
v
9
1
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

het1161
ta563

new numerical methods for iterative or perturbative solution of

quantum field theory1

stephen c. hahn2 and g. s. guralnik3

department of physics, brown university,

providence ri 029121843

abstract

a new computational idea for continuum quantum field theories is outlined.
this approach is based on the lattice source galerkin methods developed by
garca, guralnik and lawson. the method has many promising features in-
cluding treating fermions on a relatively symmetric footing with bosons. as a
spino of the technology developed for exact solutions, the numerical methods
used have a special case application to perturbation theory. we are in the pro-
cess of developing an entirely numerical approach to evaluating graphs to high
perturbative order.

1 general approach

conventional numerical evaluation of quantum eld theory involves evaluating the path

integral on a spacetime lattice using monte carlo integration methods. monte carlo

methods have been very successful for many problems and have served to at least

roughly conrm the standard model of particle interactions. however, many serious

issues are either not yet solved by this approach or not likely to be calculable at all.

these include dealing with actions that are not manifestly positive denite or which

have important eects from the details of fermionic interactions beyond the quenched

approximation. consequently, it is worthwhile to search for supplementary methods of

numerical calculation.

1to appear in proceedings of fourth workshop on quantum chromodynamics, american univer-

sity of paris, 16 june 1998.

2e-mail: hahn@het.brown.edu.
3e-mail: gerry@het.brown.edu.

1

the source galerkin method, although at a relatively primitive stage of devel-

opment, appears to work on both the lattice and the continuum while dealing with

fermions as easily as bosons. of course, the continuum version of source galerkin com-

pletely avoids the usual lattice problem of fermionic multiplicity and the tricks used

to minimize errors from this problem. furthermore, our source galerkin method is

less restrictive as to the class of allowed actions. source galerkin tends to use signif-

icantly less compute time than monte carlo methods but can consume signicantly

larger amounts of memory. the formulation of a source galerkin approximation to a

given eld theory can also require much more initial work and input to the calculation

than the usual monte carlo approaches.

we conne this discussion to the continuum analysis of 4 interactions; examples

of lattice calculations have been given elsewhere.[1, 2, 3] our continuum results to date

include non-linear sigma models and four-fermion interactions. we have gauge theory

calculations in progress.

we start with the dierential equations satised by the the vacuum function z for

a scalar eld  with interaction g4/4 coupled to a scalar source j(x) which satises

the equation:

(cid:0)2

d + m 2(cid:1)

z

j(x)

+ g

3z

j 3(x)

 j(x)z = 0

(1)

the source galerkin technique is designed to directly solve functional dierential equa-

tions of this type. before we proceed to outline a solution technique, it is essential

to point out that this equation by itself does not uniquely specify a theory.[4] since it

is a set of third order dierential equations at every point in space time, it possesses,

a priori, an innite solution set. the solution studied in this talk will be the usual

one which corresponds to the symmetry preserving solution obtained from evaluating

a path integral with real axis denitions for the regions of integration. this is the

solution that is regular in the coupling, g, as it approaches zero.

2

if we write (1) in the form:

ej z(j) = 0

(2)

the source galerkin method is dened by picking an approximation z (j) to the

solution z(j) such that

ej z (j) = r

(3)

where r is a residual dependent on j. we pick the parameters of our approximation to

make this residual as small as possible on the average. to give this statement a mean-

ing, we dene an inner product over the domain of j: i.e. (a, b) r d(j) a(j)b(j).

in addition, we assume we have a collection of test functions which are members of a

complete set: {i(j)}. the source galerkin minimization of the residual r is imple-

mented by setting the parameters of our test function z (j) so that projections of test

functions against the residual vanish so that ||z   z||2  0 as the number of test

functions  .

the equations dening the quantum eld theory are dierential equations in the

eld sources and spacetime. we can deal with the continuum by taking advantage of

our knowledge of functional integration to evaluate integrals of the form:

and use this to dene an inner product of sources on the continuum as follows:

i =z [dj] exp(cid:2)j 2(x)/2(cid:3) p (j)

(j(x1)    j(xn), j(y1)    j(ym))j =(n+m+{x1    xny1    ym} n + m even

otherwise

0

where we have absorbed a factor of 2 by redening . + is dened by

+{x    } = (x  )+{    } + (x  )+{    } +    ,

+{x} = (x  ).

3

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

in addition to this inner product denition, we need good guesses for approximate

form for z  and numerical tools to calculate, symbolically or numerically, various func-

tions and their integrals, derivatives, and so on. for most of our calculations, we have

found it very useful to choose a lesser known class of functions, with very suitable

properties for numerical calculation, known as sinc functions. we take our notation

for the sinc functions from stenger:[5]

s(k, h)(x) =

sin((x  kh)/h)

(x  kh)/h

(8)

sinc approximations satisfy many identities,[5] which make these functions very easy

to use for galerkin methods, collocation, integration by parts, and integral equations.

with the denition of a norm and set of expansion functions, we can postulate an

ansatz for z:

z  = exp(cid:20)xzxy

j(x)g2(x  y)j(y) +   (cid:21)

(9)

this ansatz with only free eld structure is very simple and one would not expect

to describe the entirety of a given theory with it. however, the strength of the galerkin

method to force convergence to correct answers is often strong enough to yield remark-

ably good results for the lowest state of a theory. extremely good approximations

to theories are obtained as additional source structure combined with the appropriate

spacetime structure is added to the ansatz.

in principle, it is possible to allow the functions multiplying the sources to be totally

arbitrary and then to x them by expanding in sinc functions and apply the galerkin

technique. the associated computations soon demand more memory than is available

from current computing systems.

instead we can use our knowledge of the spectral

representations of eld theory and graphical approaches (developed from perturbation

theory but we emphasize that our approach is not perturbative) to introduce a beautiful

4

and intuitive approach of regulated lehmann representations to produce candidates for

z . these build the appropriate spacetime lorentz structure into our approximations

and make the operational cost of our numerical approach independent of spacetime

dimension. since any exact two-point function can be represented as a sum over free

two-point functions an appropriate representation of the two-point function greatly

facilitates this approach. we choose as the basis of our numerical solutions a regulated

euclidean propagator structure:

(m; x) z (dp)

eipxp2/2

p2 + m2 =z (dp)z 
(2)dz 

=

1

ds eipxp2/2s(p2+m2)

0

0

ds (cid:20)



s + 1/2(cid:21)d/2

esm2

x2

4(s+1/2 )

(10)

(11)

this cuto in the galerkin test function as well as the denition of inner product

assures that we never have to address the issue of a divergence during the course of a

calculation, just as in the case of lattice calculation where the lattice spacing serves as

the cuto.

this integral can be approximated using sinc methods

(m; x) 

h

(2)d

n

xk=n

1

ekh (cid:20)



zk + 1/2(cid:21)d/2

exp(cid:20)zkm2 

x2

4(zk + 1/2)(cid:21) ,

(12)

here zk = ekh . for practical purposes, a sum over eighty terms with 2 = 10 gives

accuracy out to twelve digitsmore than adequate for most hardware oating-point

representations. thus we have a form for a two-point scalar green function, regulated

by the scale 2 with constant computational cost regardless of spacetime dimension.

we can take derivatives explicitly or by construction:

2(m; x) = m2(m; x)  (x)

(13)

where (x) = ex22/4

5

2.5

2

1.5

1

0

2

4

6

8

figure 1: one dimensional 4 mass gap versus coupling (dashed line gives exact from
hioe and montroll, 1975)

from this representation, we can directly construct a fermion two-point function:

s(m; x) = (    m)(m; x)

(14)

these representations mean that free scalar and free fermion results are exact and

immediate in any galerkin evaluation of these trivial cases.

2 results: 4

we itemize some results obtained using a regulated single propagator with parameters

set by the source galerkin method. at lowest order, our ansatz for the generating

functional is

z  = expz 1

2

jxgxyjy.

(15)

results for this ansatz are given in figure 1. these results are strikingly accurate and

can matched up essentially exactly with results of monte carlo calculations in two and

higher dimensions.

6

figure 2: additional connector-based ansatzen for the four-point function, h, in 4.
in the bottom row, we have two contact ansatzen on the left, followed by two mediated
ansatzen.

we can enhance these results by including additional 4 source terms in z . some

simple additional terms that we include with weights and masses to be calculated using

the source galerkin technique are the terms of the forms given in figure 2. the eect

of adding a fourth order term is shown in figure 3.

3 perturbation theory

the representation that we have given for the free propagator (10) provides the basis for

an entirely numerical expansion of any feynman graph. we have examined the possibil-

ity of of generating all graphs of a theory through automatic functional dierentiation

of a vacuum amplitude and then numerically analyzing the resultant expressions using

sinc expansions.[6, 7] this method generates and evaluates graphs at a speed which

to our knowledge far exceeds any method used in the past. we believe that it will be

possible to calculate to quite high orders in perturbation theory.

7

hhhh

exact

lowest order

2.4

2.2

2

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1

mass, m

0

2

4

6

8

coupling, 

figure 3: comparison of four-h approximation with lowest order and exact answer, in
one-dimension (2 = 70).

4 conclusions

we have discussed a method for numerical calculations for eld theories on the con-

tinuum; this method being based on the original lattice source galerkin technique.[1]

we presented a lorentz-invariant regulated representation derived from lehmann rep-

resentations. this approach has the computational advantages of minimal memory uti-

lization and parallelizable algorithms and also allows direct representation of fermionic

green functions. finally, a number of useful peripheral calculations can be made using

this approximate representation: one can calculate diagrams in a regulated pertur-

bation theory, as well as calculating dimensionally regularized loops numerically.

in

general, this technique of evaluating eld theories takes advantage of the symmetries of

the lorentz group; future work includes the extension of the method to more general

internal groups, such as gauge groups or supersymmetry.

8

acknowledgments

this work was supported in part by u. s. department of energy grant de-fg09-91-

er-40588task d. the authors have been the beneciaries of many valuable conver-

sations with r. easther, w.-m. wang, s. garca, z. guralnik, j. lawson, k. platt, and

p. emirdag. certain results in this work were previously published in hahn.[8] com-

putational work in support of this research was performed at the theoretical physics

computing facility at brown university.

references

[1] s. garca, g. s. guralnik, and j. w. lawson. a new approach to numerical quantum

eld theory. physics letters, b333:119, 1994.

[2] j. w. lawson and g. s. guralnik. source galerkin calculations in scalar eld theory.

nuclear physics, b459:589, 1996. hep-th/9507130.

[3] j. w. lawson and g. s. guralnik. new numerical method for fermion eld theory.

nuclear physics, b459:612, 1996. hep-th/9507131.

[4] s. garca, z. guralnik, and g. s. guralnik. theta vacua and boundary conditions

of the schwingerdyson equations. hep-th/9612079, 1996.

[5] f. stenger. numerical methods based on sinc and analytic functions. springer

series in computational mathematics. springerverlag, 1993.

[6] w.-m. wang. perturbative calculations in quantum eld theory using sinc func-

tions. scb thesis, brown university, 1998.

[7] r. easther, g. s. guralnik, and s. c. hahn. fast evaluation of feynman diagrams.

het1158, in preparation.

9

[8] s. c. hahn. functional method of weighted residuals and quantum eld theory. phd

thesis, brown university, 1998.

10

