dias-stp-99-01
ecm-ub-pf-99-02

on gauge invariant wilsonian flowsa

daniel f. litim

departament ecm & ifae, facultat de fsica, universitat de barcelona

diagonal 647, e-08028 barcelona, spain. e-mail: litim@ecm.ub.es

jan m. pawlowski

dublin institute for advanced studies, 10 burlington road

dublin 4, ireland. e-mail: jmp@stp.dias.ie

abstract

we investigate non-abelian gauge theories within a wilsonian renormalisation
group approach. our main question is: how close can one get to a gauge invariant
ow, despite the fact that a wilsonian coarse-graining seems to be incompatible
with gauge invariance? we discuss the possible options in the case of quantum
uctuations, and argue that for thermal uctuations a fully gauge invariant imple-
mentation can be obtained.

9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

5
1

 
 

1
v
3
6
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

abased on seminars presented at the workshop on the exact renormalisation group, faro,
september 1998. to be published in the proceedings.

1 introduction

the wilsonian renormalisation group 1 has proven itself to be a powerful tool
for studying both perturbative and non-perturbative eects in quantum eld
theory. it has been particularly successful for scalar theories, where a number
of new results have been obtained. one expects that a suitable formulation for
non-abelian gauge theories might provide new insight into non-perturbative
eects in qcd as well. however, the wilsonian approach is based on the
concept of a step-by-step integrating-out of momentum degrees of freedom
and one may wonder whether this concept can be adopted for gauge theories.
indeed, one of the main obstacles of the wilsonian approach to gauge theories
was precisely the question as to how gauge invariance can be controlled.

in this contribution we analyse this question in some detail. in particular,
we want to understand how close one might come to a gauge invariant im-
plementation of a wilsonian coarse-graining in the usual sense and which net
gains are related to such procedures.

this contribution is organised as follows: the rst parts consider generic
features of wilsonian ows for gauge theories. we discuss the modied ward
identities, in particular the resulting constraints for a construction of gauge
invariant ows, and we detail the link between the standard approach and
the background eld methods. finally we comment on the key features of
the dierent gauge invariant approaches. in the remaining part, we investi-
gate the application to thermal eld theory, and argue why a gauge invariant
implementation is possible for all scales in the case of thermal uctuations.

2 the ow equation

we investigate these questions in a path integral approach based on ideas of
polchinski 2. in this approach a momentum cut-o is achieved by adding a
cut-o term ks to the action which is quadratic in the eld. this results in
an eective action k where momenta larger than k have been integrated-out.
the change of k under an innitesimal variation of the scale k is described by
a ow equation which can be used to successively integrate-out the momenta
smaller than the cut-o scale k. thus given an eective action k0 at an initial
scale k0 the ow equation provides us with a recipe how to calculate the full
eective action .

the introduction of ks seems to break gauge invariance. however, k
satises a modied ward identity (mwi). this mwi commutes with the ow
and approaches the usual ward identity (wi) as k  0. consequently the
full eective action  satises the usual ward identity. in other words, gauge
invariance of the full theory is preserved if the eective action k0 satises

1

the mwi at the initial scale k0. let us see how close to a gauge invariant
description one might get even during the ow, that is for all k.

2.1 derivation of the ow equation

to that end let us outline the derivation of the ow equation. in the following
we employ the supereld formalism as introduced in 3. a more explicit version
of the following arguments may be found in 4,5,6,7. the starting point is the
infrared (ir) regularised schwinger functional

exp wk[j] =

1

nk z d exp{sk[] + tr j},

(1)

where the trace tr denotes a sum over momenta, indices and the dierent elds
, including a minus sign for fermionic degrees of freedom. (i) = (1, ..., s)
is a short-hand notation for all elds and  denotes its dual. the term sk[]
contains the (gauge-xed) classical action and a quadratic cut-o term ks[]
given by (e.g. 4 and references therein):

ks[] =

1
2

tr nr

k [p]o ,



where p 1
is proportional to the bare propagator of . the k-dependent
constant nk has been introduced to guarantee an appropriate normalisation of
wk. the ow of (1) related to an innitesimal change of k is given by (t = ln k)

t exp wk[j] = 

1

nk z d(cid:18) 1

2

tr r

k  +

tnk

nk (cid:19) esk[]+tr j .

(3)

eventually we are interested in the legendre transform of wk, the eective
action k:

(2)

(4)

(5)

(6)

k = tr j  wk[j]  ks[].

for the eective action k the ow equation (3) turns into

tk[] =

1
2

trng

k

with

[]tr

k [p]o + t ln nk
k,ij[p](cid:19)1

.

+ r

i j

g
k

[] =(cid:18) 2k[]

i j



2

the ow equation (5) and an initial eective action k0 may be read as a
proper denition of the path integral.
in order to have a well-dened ow
equation we use operators r
k with the following properties (x = p k2dd):

k2ddr

k [p] x0

xd/(2dd)p 1

 r

k [p]

xn
|x|
x 0,

,

n  1

(7)

(8)

where d are the dimensions of the elds . a very interesting subset of
operators rk with the properties (7),(8) is the set of operators which satisfy
n = 1 in (7) and decay exponentially for x  . these lead to very good
convergency properties if invoked for numerical calculations. a cut-o term (2)
with rk satisfying (7),(8) eectively suppresses modes with momenta p2  k2
in the generating functional. for modes with large momenta p2  k2 the
cut-o term vanishes and in this regime the theory remains unchanged.
in
the limit k  0 we approach the full generating functional  since the cut-o
term is removed. in the limit k   all momenta are suppressed and with a
suitably chosen nk the eective action approaches the (gauge xed) classical
action scl + sgf . hence k interpolates between the classical action and the
full eective action:

scl + sgf

k k

k0 .

(9)

note that tr
k serves as a smeared-out -function in momentum space peaked
at about p2  k2.
in this sense, a wilsonian ow is local, as only a small
window of momentum modes around k will contribute to the ow. by varying
the scale k towards smaller k according to (5) one successively integrates-out
momentum degrees of freedom.

3 control of gauge invariance

in this section we show how gauge invariance is in general controlled by
modied ward identities (mwi). for perturbative truncations to the eective
action k, the mwi can be maintained employing the quantum action princi-
ple. the more important point is that the mwi can also be satised within
non-perturbative truncations.

3.1 modied ward identities

when applied to gauge theories the cut-o term (2) generates additional terms
in the ward identity thus leading to a modied ward identity. for non-

3

abelian gauge theories formulated in general linear gauges la and gauge
xing parameter , one can derive the following mwi 4,8

wk[] = k[]  tr (ld)

1


la +

g
2

tr (cid:20),(cid:18)r

k + l 1


= 0,

l(cid:19)(cid:21) g

k

(10)

where we used the abbreviation  for the generator of innitesimal gauge
transformation on , e.g. a = d(a) for the gauge eld and  =
,  =  for fermions and scalars respectively. note also that  has
to be taken in the representation of the corresponding eld i. for the sake
of brevity we dropped any reference to possible ghost elds which have to be
added in general; however they have to be treated in a similar manner.

the cut-o dependent terms in (10) vanish for k  0. the compatibility

of the mwi (10) with the ow equation is given by 4,8

twk[] = 

1
2

i j

tr(cid:18)g

k

trj


k g
k

j l




l



i(cid:19) wk[].

(11)

eq. (11) ensures that if the initial eective action satises the mwi (10) than
the usual ward identity is satised for k = 0. it is now possible to employ
the quantum action principle. one can solve the mwi (10) order by order in
the coupling. this solution will remain a solution for any k due to (11). in
other words, an eective action k0 that solves the mwi up to order n in the
coupling stays a solution up to order n for any k0, in particular for k = 0. this
is how perturbation theory is included as one possible truncation scheme (see
also 9).

in general one may use another expansion parameter instead of the coupling

which is small in the regime of interest, e.g. p2/2
regime of qcd.

qcd in the deep infrared

3.2 numerical implementation

the ow equation (5), the mwi (10) and a suitably truncated (initial) eective
action are the starting points for numerical applications 3,10. the rst step is
to introduce a parametrisation of the eective action in terms of some cou-
plings . in an expansion in the powers of the elds, these couplings are just
the momentum-dependent vertex functions. the key point is that the mwi
introduces relations between the dierent couplings . thus only a subset of
couplings {ind} can be independently xed, whereas the other couplings dep

4

can be derived with the mwi and the set {ind}. it is worth mentioning that
the splitting {} = {ind, dep} is not unique.

now we chose a truncation of the ow equation such that only the cou-
plings  related to operators important for the problem under investigation
are included. for qcd, these typically include the gauge coupling, a gluonic
mass term, and the 3- and 4- point (and higher) vertices. in general, only a
(nite) subset of {dep(k)} is taken into account. the ow equation will then
be integrated as follows: after integration of an innitesimal momentum shell
between k + k and k we obtain couplings ind(k). with the mwi one derives
the (nite) subset of {dep(k)} which together with the ind(k) serve as the
input for the next successive integration step. by employing this procedure for
the integration of the (truncated) ow equation from the initial scale k0 to a
scale k one obtains a set of {(k)} = {ind(k), dep(k)} for any scale k. these
(k) parametrise an eective action k which by construction does satisfy the
mwi at any scale k, in particular for k = 0 (see section 3.1). thus the full
eective action trunc calculated with the truncated ow equation satises the
usual ward identity. the truncation does not imply a breaking of gauge invari-
ance but rather a neglecting of the back-reaction of the truncated couplings
on the ow of the system.

for a validity check of the truncation we have to employ the fact that
the system is overdetermined. the set {dep} may be also directly calculated
with the ow equation (5) itself. only for the full system both equations (ow
equation and mwi) are compatible, as shown in section 3.1, eq. (11). thus as
long as the results for the dep, which are obtained by either using (5) or using
(10), do not deviate from each other, the truncation remains valid. the validity
bound of a truncation is reached when these independently determined results
for dep no longer match. typically, this denes a nal cut-o scale kn  k0.
such a check has been done with the gluonic mass 3. even though this was only
a partial consistency check and thus not entirely satisfactory it essentially
gives the avour of what has to be done in practice: for non-perturbative
truncations the mwi is employed both for the consistency check and as a tool
in order to calculate the value of the dep. as mentioned in the last section, for
a fully controlled calculation one additionally has to nd a suitable expansion
parameter which can be employed for general validity checks of the truncation.

4 analytic methods

in this section we detail how the ow equation can be employed to derive non-
trivial analytic results. we make use of the background eld approach, and,
subsequently, of general axial gauges.

5

4.1 background eld formalism

let us rst show how the usual ward identity is obtained by using a back-
ground eld 8. the following derivation is strictly valid only for momentum
independent gauges; however a minor modication of it also applies to general
linear gauges 5. the background eld dependence in this approach is given by
an equation quite similar to the ow equation:


 a

tk =

1
2

ttr(cid:26)g

k

[, a]


 a

r

k(cid:27) .

(12)

this translates into the following equation for an innitesimal gauge transfor-
mation of a applied on the eective action:

k[, a] =

g
2

trn [, r

k ]g

k o ,

(13)

where  is dened by its action on the elds, e.g.  = d( a),  =
it follows from (10), (13) that k[, a]  sgf [a] is invariant under the
0.
transformation ( + ). as a consequence k[] := k[, a = a] satises
the usual wi without the cut-o dependent terms:

 k[] = tr [ld(a)]

1


la.

(14)

where the gauge eld derivative involved in (14) hits both the gauge eld a
and the auxiliary eld a = a. note however that the propagator gaa
is still
the one derived from 2
a2 k[, a] at a = a. the ow equation for k requires
the knowledge of gaa
k , thus slightly spoiling the advantage of dealing with an
eective action which satises the usual wi even for k 6= 0.

k

4.2 general axial gauges

general axial gauges have recently been studied within this approach 4,5,8.
it has been established that the spurious singularities of perturbation theory
are absent 4. this implies that the theory is well-dened without any further
regularisation in contrast to standard perturbation theory. other advantages
are the absence of gribov copies and the decoupling of the ghost sector. finally,
the gauge xing parameter  has a non-perturbative xed point at  = 0,
which makes this formulation very attractive for both analytical and numerical
computations.

6

in the following we refer to analytic calculations done in a general axial
gauge and using the background eld approach as briey discussed in sec-
tion 4.1. as a consequence of (14) we have gained gauge invariance apart
from the explicit breaking from the gauge xing even for k 6= 0. this simpli-
es the expansion of the eective action. the problem is now to distinguish
between the gauge eld a and the eld a = a which only serves as an auxiliary
variable. this is necessary since the ow equation still requires the knowledge
of gaa
as mentioned above, and which can be obtained at least in princi-
ple from (12). additionally the a-dependent of the eective action should
be dropped completely since in the present approach it is only an auxiliary
variable and for k = 0 there is no a-dependence at all.

k

proportional to (n  1)r f 2( a) to k

let us illustrate the importance of the latter point with the following
example of the 1-loop -function: it can be shown with (12) (apart from higher
order terms in a) that the ow equation on 1-loop level leads to a contribution
5, where n has been dened in (7). this
vanishes for operators rk with masslike ir limit (n = 1) even though it is in
general non-zero beyond 1-loop level. for these rk the 1-loop -function is
straightforwardly calculated. however for rk satisfying (7) with n 6= 1 this
term is non-vanishing and has to be subtracted from k as calculated with the
ow equation. in principle this can be done by using an appropriately dened

nk. subtracting the contribution proportional to (n1)r f 2( a) from the ow

equation leads to the correct 1-loop -function and other 1-loop quantities.

with (5), (10), (12) and (13) we can investigate the eective action ana-
lytically. it is worth noting that the ow equation is a 1-loop equation, even
though the loops depend on the full eld dependent propagator. thus heat ker-
nel methods can be employed, although not as a regularisation method, since
everything is nite from the onset. restricted to the perturbative regime, these
calculations 4,5,8 yield not only the perturbative -function for a non-abelian
gauge theory coupled to fermions for arbitrary gauge xing parameter , but
results beyond the 1-loop level as well.

5 gauge invariant ows

let us now come back to the question about gauge invariant ows. the stan-
dard formulation, based on the ow and mwi necessitates the introduction of
some gauge non-invariant operators for non-vanishing k, like a gluonic mass
term, in order to assure gauge invariant physical green function.
it would
be interesting to see under which circumstances gauge non-invariant operators
can be avoided.

the important observation to that end is, that usual gauge invariance for

7

any scale k can only be achieved by relaxing at least one of the key assumptions
leading to the ow equation itself. there are essentially three options available.
11, or
one either relaxes the constraints regarding the regulator function rk
starts with a completely dierent mechanism for introducing the regularisation
in the rst place 12, or introduces auxiliary elds 5,6,8,13. we shall now discuss
all these options in more detail.

5.1 momentum independent regulator

let us comment on the rst option, that is to change the requirements re-
garding rk. it is straightforward to observe that a necessary and sucient
condition for usual gauge invariance even during the ow is just the vanishing

k + l 1

 l, g

k

of the commutator (cid:2)r

[](cid:3) = 0 (see (10)). the only solution to

this constraint (apart from the necessity of a momentum independent gauge
xing) is r
k = kd2d thus introducing mass terms proportional to the cut-
o scale k. even though this choice satises (7) (with n = 1), the second
condition (8), which guarantees that the ultraviolet (uv) behaviour of the
theory is unaltered in the presence of the cut-o term, is no longer satised.

the kernel of the trace in the ow equation (5) is no longer peaked at
momenta about k, if (8) is violated. even more so, (5) is not well-dened as
it stands and needs some additional uv renormalisation. to be consistent,
this has to be done on the level of the eective action rather than on the level
of the ow equation. otherwise the connection between the ow equation
and the original even though only formal path integral becomes unclear.
furthermore, since this additional uv renormalisation has to be k-dependent,
one may ultimately lose the 1-loop structure of the ow equation. this depends
on how the actual renormalisation is done.

moreover the interpretation of the ow equation is now completely dierent
from the original wilsonian idea. the ow equation no longer describes a
successive integrating-out of momentum modes, but rather a ow in the space
of massive theories. even though the suppression of low momentum modes still
works at every step of the ow, all parameters of the theories change for all
momenta larger than k. this can be considered as a loss of locality, in the sense
mentioned earlier. it has also to be pointed out that the result is not what is
usually denoted by a massive gauge theory. the dierence stems from the fact
that the cut-o term in the wilsonian approach is introduced after the gauge
xing has been done. in the case of a massive gauge theory the fadeev-popov
mechanism is applied to the path integral, where the action already includes
the mass term. the dierence between these two approaches are those terms

stemming from r dg exp k2tr(ag)2, where g(x) is a space-time dependent

8

gauge group element. these are exactly the terms which usually are made
responsible for the breakdown of renormalisability in massive gauge theories.
a simple way to see this is as follows: introduce , g = e as a new eld and
do the usual power counting with respect to the elds (a, ). dropping these
terms changes the content of the theory, and although it looks supercially like
a massive gauge theory, it is not.

apart from these conceptual problems, it appears that a numerical im-
plementation is essentially out of reach. the momentum integrals involved
would receive contributions from all momenta larger than k instead of only
being peaked within a small momentum shell at about p2  k2. note that the
numerical applicability of the wilsonian ow equation may be seen as one of
its most attractive features, and losing it is a big loss for gaining formal gauge
invariance during the ow.

it should be mentioned that a mass-like regulator remains an interesting
option for a rst approximative computation, consistency checks or concep-
tional issues, as it typically simplies analytic calculations tremendously. for
more involved and non-trivial truncations in general, one has to use more elab-
orate regulators, though.

5.2 gauge invariant variables

a more attractive possibility is the proposal to change the starting point of
the derivation, but to stick to the 1-loop nature of the resulting ow equation.
this can only be done by mapping the degrees of freedom from the original
elds to another set in a non-linear way, e.g. to a representation in terms of
wilson loops 12. it is worth noting that this particular procedure 12 requires an
additional uv renormalisation which has been done explicitly by introducing
pauli-villars elds. it also requires the introduction of a second gauge eld.
all these auxiliary elds only decouple in the limit k  0. moreover, at least
one of these elds needs a mass-like cut-o which again spoils the locality of
the ow as dened earlier.

thus the same pitfalls concerning the applicability as in the other approach
do nally apply here as well. nevertheless even though for nite k the number
of eld degrees of freedom is considerably enlarged it seems to be possible to
track down the original degrees of freedom at any cut-o scale k.

5.3 background elds

finally, we will discuss the third option which has actually been used rst 6
 and which consists in introducing auxiliary elds 5,6,8,13. this is nothing but
the adaption of the well-known background eld formalism to a theory where

9

a cut-o term is present. the key point here is to introduce the covariant
derivative with respect to the background eld a wherever a plain derivative
was used in rk. as a consequence, the eective action now satises the usual
ward identity if all elds are gauge transformed (the particular gauge trans-
formations needed dier slightly in the various approaches).

even though the ow equation is still peaked at (covariant) momenta about
k it is obvious that the dependence of the eective action on the background
eld is non-trivial. one has to employ an additional equation to track down
this dependence, which adds up with the ow equation to a bigger set of non-
trivial equations. this is how in this approach the necessity of applying a
non-linear transformation in eld space shows up. at least the usefulness for
numerical implementations seems to be questionable.

in summary one may conclude that the price for gauge invariance during
the ow is rather high for all these approaches, in particular in comparison to
the standard approach using the mwi. when it comes to numerical applica-
tions the latter approach seems clearly preferable.

6 quantum elds at non-vanishing temperature

we will now discuss an application of the wilsonian renormalisation group
to thermal eld theory. the aim is to show that, in contrast to the previous
sections which dealt with quantum uctuations, for thermal uctuations a fully
gauge invariant ow can be constructed.

6.1 how does temperature enter a quantum eld theory

we shall start with some general remarks on quantum eld theories coupled
to a heat bath. the temperature is introduced via the compactication of the
(imaginary) time direction. this implies that the elds  live in the space
[1/t, 1/t ]  lr3 rather than lr4. in addition, this results in the imposition
of periodic (anti-periodic) boundary conditions for the bosonic (fermionic) de-
grees of freedom.

having said that, it follows that the modes with momenta much larger
than the temperature will not be aware of the altered boundary condition, i.e.
they will behave like modes living again in lr4, that is like zero temperature
modes. stated dierently, the uv physics is unaltered, and in particular, no
further uv divergences than those encountered for the bare action at vanishing
temperature will be observed. the low momentum or soft modes, however, do
feel the new boundary condition. it is precisely for this reason that temperature
has to be considered as an ir phenomenon.

10

6.2 how to detect thermal corrections

in order to identify the eects imposed by temperature, we have to introduce
a reference point. typically, a physical observable computed for some xed
temperature has to be compared to that very same observable computed at
some other temperature, say t = 0. only their dierence can be given the
desired physical meaning. thus, the eects of temperature are detected as a
dierence between observables measured for dierent boundary (temperature)
conditions. this amounts to the statement that the natural object to study is

t []  t =0[] ,

(15)

where t denotes the eective action of a given quantum eld theory at some
xed temperature t . note that the proper denition of (15) requires an appro-
priate denition of the space of elds . in other words, the nite temperature
elds  for which (15) makes sense have to be properly embedded in the zero
temperature space-time 17. also physical observables derived from t may be
of interest. a very important example is the thermal pressure

p [t ]  p [0] .

(16)

it is related to the minimum of the eective potential, which itself is the lead-
ing order term within a derivative expansion of t . for theories with their
potential minimum at vanishing eld, the pressure corresponds precisely to the
eld independent part of (15).

6.3 how to compute thermal corrections

the more dicult question is now how (15) actually can be computed. con-
sider for example the thermal pressure: a perturbative computation of the
pressure for a scalar eld theory faces strong ir divergences. a systematic
resummation has to be performed in order to obtain a nite result. even
worse is the case of qcd. its perturbative computation is severely limited due
to the non-perturbative magnetic sector of qcd. these are generic examples
for the problems of perturbative loop expansions at nite temperature, which
do typically encounter serious ir problems at some loop order. in addition,
it also has been observed that the convergence of the series for the thermal
pressure is rather poor even in the domain, where perturbation theory should
be applicable.

11

7 wilsonian ow for the thermal uctuations

we want to construct, based on wilsonian ideas, a non-perturbative resumma-
tion procedure to compute (15). applications of wilsonian ows to thermal
eld theories are not new 14. the usual approach is as follows: one constructs a
ow equation for k,t which has to be solved (in some approximation) to yield
t . within imaginary time, the ow equation is obtained from (5), replacing
the trace by

tr =x z

d3p

(2)3 t xn

(17)

i.e. a sum over all momenta, matsubara modes, and all (bosonic) elds and
their indices. the substitution p0  2nt for bosons is also understood.
then, one uses either the same ow but with t = 0, or some alternative
method like resummed perturbation theory, to compute t =0. combining
these results, one nally obtains (15).

7.1 flow equation for the thermal contribution

in contrast to the standard approach, we now aim at a ow equation not for
k,t , but directly for

k,t [] = k,t []  k,0[] .

(18)

the dierence (18) eectively projects-out the thermal uctuations. in the ir
limit k  0, (18) reduces to (15), which is precisely what we are looking for.
note that in order to evaluate (18), we have xed the temperature t for all
elds occurring in (18). given the ow (5), it is straightforward to write down
a corresponding ow for (18), which reads for bosonic elds

tk,t [] = t ln nk,t +

1

2x z

d3p

(2)3 nt xn
z dp0

2

g

k,t []tr

k

g

k,0 []tr

ko . (19)

it is worth pointing out the role of the normalisation constant nk,t for (18). in
the standard approach (5), it can simply be neglected because it corresponds
to a shift of the zero point energy. however we have already encountered an
example at zero temperature where it is essential to take into account the ow
of the normalisation nk (see section 4.1). there it was related to the particular
choice of the regulator rk. at nite temperature, however, k,t at vanishing

12

eld measures a zero point energy dierence, thus a physical observable. this
implies that the normalisation properly has to be taken into account.

however, up to now little has been gained while studying (19) instead of
(5). for a general regulator rk, the same qualitative problems regarding gauge
invariance for arbitrary scale k are encountered as at vanishing temperature.
we shall now argue, that studying (19) allows us to relax slightly one of the
condition on the regulator function.

7.2 momentum independent regulator

it was discussed earlier that a mass-like (i.e. momentum independent) regu-
lator, employed for (5), is not viable, the reason being the uncontrolled large
momentum contribution to the ow. in (19), the situation is now dierent.
consider a mass-like regulator r
k = k2 (and a momentum independent gauge
xing), for which the ow is given by 17

k,t []

k2

=

1

2x z

d3p

(2)3 (t xn

g

k,t [] z dp0

2

g

k,0 [])+k2  ln nk,t .

(20)
first of all, the ow (20) is well dened in the ir limit. this is so, because
using a mass-like regulator indeed cures the ir behaviour for the individual
ows in (20), and computing the dierence does not change this property. the
important observation is that the ow is also well-dened in the uv limit.
this is so because the remaining uv divergences, which are not eliminated
by the mass-term regulator, are eliminated through the subtraction of the
t = 0 counter part. note that this implies that also for the initial scale k0
the dierence k,t  has to be local in the sense as dened in section 2.1.
thus, for large momenta, the r.h.s. of (20) does not feel the presence of a
thermal bath. stated dierently, in the standard approach, the decay of trk
for large momenta ensures the uv niteness of the ow equation. for a mass-
like regulator trk is proportional to rk and in particular not suppressed for
large momenta. however, the suppression now comes from the cancellation at
high momentum between the two propagators. this establishes that (20) is a
well-dened wilsonian ow for thermal uctuations.

it is worth mentioning that the cancellation of uv divergences is quite
similar to the one employed in the bphz-procedure. the subtraction of pos-
sibly divergent terms takes place on the level the integrand rather than on the
level of the regularised full expressions. this is how the explicit introduction
of an uv renormalisation scale is avoided.

13

7.3 gauge invariance

let us now see what happens in the case of pure gauge theories. we consider a
su(n ) gauge theory in an axial gauge (ua). as mentioned before it is also
necessary to take a momentum independent gauge xing parameter , which is
known to have at  = 0 a non-perturbative xed point 4. the mwi for k,t [a]
is derived from (10) for a general regulator as

k,t [a] =z

d3p

(2)3 t xn (cid:18) 1

u 2

u ua 

g
2

[, ra

k ]gaa

k,t [a](cid:19) .

(21)

the mwi for (19) follows straightforwardly from (21) as

k,t [a] =

g

2z d3p

(2)3  z dp0

2

[, ra

k ]gaa

k,0 [a]  t xn

[, ra

k ]gaa

k,t [a]! .(22)

note, that the term in (21) generated from the gauge xing has canceled,
and the only remaining breaking of gauge symmetry comes from the regulator
function. within the derivation of (22) it is important to use the correct
boundary conditions for  (for details see 17). however, with the mass-like
regulator as used in (20), the mwi reads

k,t [a] = 0,

(23)

because the commutator [, ra
k ] vanishes for momentum independent regula-
tor. note, that the wi controls only the gauge invariance for the eld depen-
dent part of the eective action. as mentioned before the normalisation has to
be properly chosen which is a well-known problem in gauge theories at nite
temperature 18. as a result  ln nk[] is -dependent. it turns out that it is
precisely this -dependence which guarantees that the eld independent part
of (19) is -independent and thus gauge independent. this of course ensures
gauge independence for the eld independent part k,t [0].

we have established the following important result: the ow equation
(20) is a) a well-dened ow in the wilsonian sense and b) explicitly maintains
gauge invariance for arbitrary scale k.

7.4 remarks

we will nish this section with some remarks. note rst that studying (15)
makes an additional implicit assumption, which is that the physical degrees of
freedom describing the zero temperature theory are assumed to remain reason-
able degrees of freedom at temperature t . of course, this is the prerequisite

14

to give the dierence (18) a meaning. this does not exclude the introduction
of composite operators at some intermediate scale as well. in the present for-
mulation, this has to be done both for the t = 0 and the t 6= 0 theory at
some xed scale kb.

a second comment concerns the initial conditions. in contrast to the usual
approach, the ow for (18) can no longer be a functional dierential equation
for k,t only. this is evident from the denition of k,t in the rst place.
the r.h.s. will necessarily imply information about the underlying theory, for
which the thermal uctuations are computed. this is reected by the fact
that the ow equation will depend as well on k,0. alternatively, this can be
deduced from the initial condition. in the uv limit, we have

while the ir limit reads

lim
k

k,t [] = 0

lim
k0

k,t [] = t  t =0 .

(24)

(25)

eq. (24) implies, that, in order to specify the theory, one has to furnish some
information regarding the theory at vanishing temperature, that is on t =0.
this is very similar to another, but qualitatively dierent proposal within real-
time thermal eld theory by dattanasio and pietroni 15. there, the starting
point needs the renormalised t = 0 theory as an input as well.

finally, it is worth noting the similarity between our ow (20), and a recent
proposal to compute the thermal pressure for scalar theories 16. there, the
authors presented an ir nite resummation formula for the thermal pressure,
which is expressed in terms of a mass integral. if we restrict ourselves to scalar
elds only, and to the leading order in a derivative expansion, then our ow
(20) corresponds precisely to their proposal.
in this sense, our ow is the
generalisation to gauge theories and the entire eective action.

8 discussion and outlook

for the integrating-out of quantum uctuations, the present status is as follows:
there are several possibilities to rescue usual gauge invariance even during the
ow, but all of them have to face serious problems  at least when (numeri-
cal) applicability is demanded. the reason is that the only way to gain gauge
invariance within a wilsonian formulation is to employ non-linear transforma-
tions in eld space or even to lose locality as dened in section 5 of the ow
equation. the resulting formulations are quite dicult to handle if it comes
to non-trivial applications. the technical price for gauge invariance along the

15

ow is quite big as opposed to the approach using the mwi. the handling of
the latter, in particular, does not need other techniques than those already
used for the ow equation itself.

it is therefore feasible to employ for more involved questions the regu-
lators rk satisfying the conditions (7),(8) along with the mwi to guarantee
gauge invariance for physical green functions. after all, the ow equation
should rather be seen as a well-dened procedure as to how to calculate the
full quantum eective action. this does not necessitate usual gauge invari-
ance during the ow but the control of gauge invariance for the physical green
functions, that is, at k = 0.

all the approaches mentioned in section 5 certainly have their merits for
particular applications and conceptional issues. further investigations in these
directions are needed in order to clarify some outstanding conceptional ques-
tions, e.g. concerning perturbative -functions beyond 1-loop 5, the full-edged
inclusion of topological non-trivial congurations 13 and anomalies 19.

for the integrating-out of thermal uctuations, we have been able to con-
struct a gauge invariant renormalisation group equation, based on a mass-like
regulator term in combination with an axial gauge xing. the proposal is
very similar to and can be seen as a generalisation to gauge theories of an
approach advocated earlier for scalar theories16. this proposal diers qualita-
tively from another gauge-invariant thermal renormalisation group introduced
earlier 15.

the mass-like regulator typically allows analytic computations, as has been
done for the thermal pressure for scalar theories 16. further applications in
thermal eld theory should include the computation of the thermal pressure
for a gas of bosons and gluons. in a rst approximation, it suces to insert
the classical action s at t = 0 into the ow equation instead of k,t =0. the
higher order corrections are then obtained through the back coupling between
an improved action at vanishing temperature, and the ow equation.

more generally, it would be very interesting to see whether the hard ther-
mal loop eective action could be used as a starting point, rather than the
t = 0 one. this might be a good starting point to go beyond the htl ap-
proximation. we hope to report on these matters in the future.

acknowledgments

it is a pleasure to thank a. andrianov, b. dolan, u. ellwanger, f. freire,
j.i. latorre and c. wetterich for discussions, and the organisers for a stimu-
lating conference and nancial support.

16

references

1. k.g. wilson and i.g. kogut, phys. rep. 12 (1974) 75; f. wegner and

a. houghton, phys. rev. a 8 (1973) 401.

2. j. polchinski, nucl. phys. b 231 (1984) 269.
3. u. ellwanger, m. hirsch and a. weber, z. phys. c 69 (1996) 687; eur.

phys. j. c1 (1998) 563.

4. d.f. litim and j.m. pawlowski, phys.

lett. b 435 (1998) 181

[hep-th/9802064]; hep-th/9809023.

5. d.f. litim and j.m. pawlowski, under completion.
6. m. reuter and c. wetterich, nucl. phys. b 391 (1993) 147; b 408
(1993) 91; b 417 (1994) 181; f. freire and c. wetterich, phys. lett. b
380 (1996) 337.

7. m. bonini, m. dattanasio and g. marchesini, nucl. phys. b 421 (1994)

429; u. ellwanger, phys. lett. b 335 (1994) 364.
8. d.f. litim and j.m. pawlowski, hep-th/9809020.
9. m. dattanasio and t. morris, phys. lett. b 378 (1996) 213.
10. b. bergerho and c. wetterich, phys. rev. d 57 (1998), 1591.
11. m. simionato, hep-th/9809004, hep-th/9810117.
12. t. morris, these proceedings [hep-th/9810104].
13. j.m. pawlowski, phys. rev. d 58:045011 (1998).
14. d.f. litim, wilsonian ow equations and thermal eld theory,

hep-ph/9811272, and references therein.

15. m. dattanasio and m. pietroni, nucl. phys. b 472 (1996) 711, nucl.

phys. b 498 (1997) 443.

16. i.t. drummond, r.r. horgan, p.v. landsho and a. rebhan, phys.
lett. b 398 (1997) 326; nucl. phys. b 524 (1998) 579; d. bodeker,
p.v. landsho, o. nachtmann, and a. rebhan, hep-ph/9806514;
a. rebhan, hep-ph/9808480.

17. d.f. litim and j.m. pawlowski, under completion.
18. c.w. bernard, phys. rev. d 9 (1974) 3312.
19. m. bonini, f. vian, nucl. phys.b 511 (1998) 479; nucl. phys. b 532

(1998) 473; f. vian, these proceedings [hep-th/9811055].

17

