9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

3
2

 
 

3
v
1
3
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

looking beyond the thermal horizon: hidden

symmetries in chiral models

b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock

fb physik der fu berlin

arnimallee 14, 14193 berlin, germany

schroer@physik.fu-berlin.de

november, 1998

abstract

in thermal states of chiral theories, as recently investigated by
h.-j. borchers and j. yngvason, there exists a rich group of hidden
symmetries. here we show that this leads to a radical converse of of
the hawking-unruh observation in the following sense. the algebraic
commutant of the algebra associated with a (heat bath) thermal chiral
system can be used to reprocess the thermal system into a ground state
system on a larger algebra with a larger localization space-time. this
happens in such a way that the original system appears as a kind
of generalized unruh restriction of the ground state sytem and the
thermal commutant as being transmutated into newly created virgin
space-time region behind a horizon. the related concepts of a chiral
conformal core and the possibility of a blow-up of the latter suggest
interesting ideas on localization of degrees of freedom with possible
repercussion on how to dene quantum entropy of localized matter
content in local quantum physics.

1 introduction

in a previous paper we dened and illustrated the concept of a hidden sym-
metry [s-w1]. we remind the reader that we use the terminology hidden
for such symmetries of local quantum physics (lqp) which cannot be seen

1

and understood by (lagrangian-, functional integral-) quantization. they
simply do not exist on a classical level nor in a euclidean functional inte-
gral representation, and hence cannot be transposed into the noncommuta-
tive realm by e.g. adapting ( via quantization1) noethers theorem. one
rather needs the power of the modular theory, which is totally characteris-
tic of the noncommutative aspects of lqp (local quantum physics), and
which in addition to the classical space-time dieomorphisms (poincare- or
conformal- automorphisms) of minkowski space-time also reveals a host of
non-noetherian hidden symmetries of modular origin. the latter escape
the quantization approach to lqp (see the previous footnote), whereas the
modular approach to lqp shows both kinds of symmetries; in fact the hidden
symmetries may be considered in some sense as being the generalization of
the dieomorphisms of chiral conformal theory to higher dimensions [s-w1].
there are two mechanisms which reveal such hidden structures: the mod-
ular theories of (multiply) localized double cone algebras together with suit-
ably chosen states, and the symmetries constructed from modular inclusions
and modular intersections. the rst mechanism might lead to a fuzzy ac-
tion of the modular group for which the double cone situation for the free
massive theory is the simplest illustration. it is believed that such modu-
lar actions become asymptotically pointlike near the horizon (boundary) of
the localization region [s-w1]. we will use the word hidden in this paper
exclusively for the second inclusion/intersection mechanism which leads to
(partially) geometric transformations of localization regions (i.e. of the net)
which cannot be implemented as point transformations. for details see below
and [s-w1].

modular inclusions/intersections of von neumann algebras are signi-

cantly dierent from the well-studied v. jones inclusions (subfactors). whereas
by denition the latter have conditional expectations onto the smaller alge-
bra (shallow inclusions), the former, as a result of their modular structure,
cannot have conditional expectations (deep inclusions). in passing we men-
tion that there is a third type of deep inclusion which also has no conditional
expectation and is not modular; it is the so-called split inclusion which is

1if a quantization approach could lead to nonperturbative mathematically controllable
real time local quantum physics, then these symmetries would show up in modular prop-
erties of the local algebras generated by the elds. but as everybody should know, we
are (despite intense eorts for more than 40 years) still far away from such a goal, and
it appears presently much more plausible that this will be achieved by modular methods
[s-w2] instead of quantization.

2

related to a strong form of statistical independence in lqp [su].

it is well-known that the v. jones inclusions lead to vast generalizations of
compact group symmetry. on the other hand modular inclusions/intersections
have only been around for some years and very little is known about their
consequences except that noncompact groups (as the two parametric trans-
lation/dilation group as well as sl(2,r)) emerge already from the simplest
examples. although modular (hsm) standard inclusions are known to be in
one-to-one correspondence to strongly additive chiral quantum elds (and
thereby there are good reasons for expecting to be able to classify them), no
results and even no eorts in this direction is known today. these groups
act in a natural way on the two original algebras and their intersection and
generate a space-time indexed net. the considerations in this paper lead to
an increase in knowledge about modular inclusions/intersections.

in our previous work we commented among other things on a very reveal-
ing chiral illustration of such a situation which was found by borchers and
yngvason [bo/yng]. in this note we use their example as a starting point for
a furthergoing analysis of hidden symmetries in low-dimensional theories.

as was shown by those authors, it might happen that the modular group
acts only geometrically on a certain subregion. we show that in their case
this group acts geometrically in a much larger region! moreover there is a
much richer hidden symmetry behind.
in fact it turns out that in ad-
dition to the hidden symmetry generated by the two-parametric transla-
tion/dilation group [bo/yng] (with the dilation part being hidden), there is
a hidden sl(2,r) mobius symmetry with a dierently localized net which is
partially local relative to the old thermal net. in fact the thermal shadow
world associated with a heat bath state becomes converted into a piece
of real space-time which is to be localized behind the horizon! this is an
inversion from the hawking-unruh situation in a two-fold sense: not only
is the thermalization through localizing (unruh) horizons undone and the
thermal region returned as a piece of minkowski space to the vacuum world
(in analogy to the unruh eect [s/s-v]), but even the shadow world (the
apparently non-geometric thermal commutant) of a standard heat-bath ther-
mal situation becomes converted into virgin space-time behind the horizon,
thus giving additional weight to some speculative remarks of jaekel [ja]. al-
though we can presently illustrate this idea only in the chiral light ray setting,
we consider the potential possibility of a space time interpretation of heat
bath temperature, and a still unknown but expected ensuing conversion of a
(still missing) notion of quantum entropy as suciently intriguing in order

3

to justify publication.

using our recent ideas on the modular origin of the chiral dieomorphism
group which we illustrated with some computations on the weyl-algebra
[s-w1], it could be interesting to extend also these ideas about a modular
origin of chiral dieomorphism groups to the thermal setting. leaving this
for future investigations, we make some remarks on the existence of hidden
sl(2,r) symmetries in d=1+1 massive theories and we conclude with some
comments on higher dimensional theories. in all cases the modular method
is used to extend the hidden action of translation/dilation subgroup [s-w1]
to a hidden sl(2,r) action.

2 beyond the borchers-yngvason results

consider a chiral quantum eld theory given by a local net of observables.
the bisognano-wichmann property holds for the net, as it was in general
shown by [b/g/l, fr/ga]. for simplicity we also assume strong additivity
or equivalently, haag duality on the line, see [g/l/w]. this can always be
achieved by passing to the dual net. with borchers and yngvason we take
a thermal state on the net w.r.t. the lightlike translations. let n denote
the observable algebra to the half-line [0, [, then borchers and yngvason
showed that the modular group of n w.r.t. the thermal state transforms
local algebras on the half-line geometrically (see below). the global thermal
algebra is known to be of hypernite von neumann type iii1 and hence in-
equivalent to a ground state representation. this is the prerequisite for an
unruh-like interpretation in terms of a ground state representation thermal-
ized by local restriction.

we will show that this group also acts geometrically on the whole line
and that even more, there is a hidden conformal group su(2,r)/z2 acting
geometrically on intervals, but not pointwise in the sense of spatial automor-
phisms..

for describing our observation, let us rst recall the setting of borchers
and yngvason. denote by a the quasilocal algebra of the chiral model, by
+ the gns-vector to the thermal state w.r.t. the unitary group u(a) of
lightlike translations and by gn the c*-algebra of observables localized in
[0, [. let j0 be the cpt-symmetry of our model. then we easily have by
strong additivity [wie2]

j0gn j0  gn = a.

4

(1)

let us pass to the weak closure of these algebras w.r.t. the thermal state,
denoted by m and n . under these circumstances u is the modular group
associated with (m, +).
by the very denitions [wie1] we have (n 
m, +) is a -hsm inclusion. now j0gn j0  n   m, and it is easy to see
that therefore (n  m, +) is a standard -hsm inclusion. but we even have
m = n (n  m) , see [g/l/w]. now in general , we have due to borchers
result [bo1][wie1]

which easily implies that

[j0, u(a)] = 0,

a 7< +, j0aj0+ >, a  a

(2)

(3)

is again a thermal state of the chiral theory w.r.t.
the lightlike transla-
tions. the absence of phase transitions in chiral theories implies that we can
anti-unitarily implement the cpt-operator. then we immediately get with

j0fn j0 = n   a

j0n j0 = n   m .

(4)

this implies that the relative commutant of the observable algebra to a half-
line is the algebra to the opposite half-line.

in case of a -hsm standard inclusion we can always construct out of these
data a chiral vacuum net [wie2][g/l/w]. therefore, within the above ther-
mal situation we encounter a hidden vacuum theory. for this, let us sketch
the general construction in the context of this particular case. one starts by
associating the algebra m to the upper half-circle. then exploiting the fact
that the modular groups of m, n , and m  n  generate a positive energy
representation of the mobius group, we implement the covariance of the al-
gebra system by dening the various local algebras by mapping m according
to the modular representation of the space-time symmetry. in this way we
generate a mobius-covariant net.

let us now compare both theories from a more conceptual point of view.
first, they have the weak closure m of the quasilocal algebra a in common.
further, the modular theory u(a) to that algebra w.r.t. + acts geometri-
cally in both systems, namely as lightlike translations in the thermal case,
and as half-line dilations in the vacuum case.

secondly, they have the observable algebras n and n  m in common,
which in the thermal case are interpreted as the algebras to the two half-lines
beginning at origin, whereas in the vacuum case they are associated to [1, [,
and [0, 1].

5

now we notice that the physical symmetry in the thermal case is given by
the lightlike translations, whereas in the vacuum theory we have a natural
conformal symmetry sl(2, r)/z2 behind, where the lightlike translations of
the former theory are equal to the dilations in the latter.

let us exploit the common structures in order to compare the localizations
in both theories. for this we denote the local algebras by ath(a, b) if we refer
to the thermal theory, a0(a, b) in the vacuum case. so we can rephrase the
above remark by

ath(0, ) = n = a0(1, ),

ath(, 0) = n   m = a0(0, 1)

(5)

and u(2t) = it
m where we set the inverse temperature to be 2. (the
necessary modications for the general case is left to the interested reader.).
then we have

ath(a, ) = ad u(a/2)(ath(0, )) = ad u(a/2)(n )

(6)

= a0(e2a, )

and similarly

ath(, a) = a0(0, e2a).

now, by the very denition we have

a0(e2a, e2b) = a0(0, e2b)  a0(e2a, )

and similarly

ath(a, b) = ath(, b)  ath(a, )

(7)

(8)

(9)

holds due to the strong additivity of the thermal net. therefore we conclude

ath(a, b) = ath(, b)  ath(a, )
= a0(0, e2b)  a0(e2a, )
= a0(e2a, e2b).

(10)

but now we know, by the very denition, that the conformal group sl(2r)/z2
acts geometrically on the vacuum theory. and due to the above relation we
immediately get the action of that group on the thermal theory. there-
fore, restricting on vacuum localization intervals in the half-line [0, [ and
to group actions mapping this interval into another one contained in the
half-line, we can transfer this action onto a geometrical action in the thermal

6

theory. moreover we see, that there is a natural space-time structure also
on the shadow world i.e. on the thermal commutant to the quasilocal alge-
bra on which this hidden symmetry naturally acts. in conclusion, we have
encountered a rich hidden symmetry lying behind the tip of an iceberg, of
which the tip was rst seen by borchers and yngvason.

in fact using our previous result on the modular origin of the dieomor-
phism for the special case of the weyl-algebra [s-w1], it seems plausible that
there is even a much larger innite dimensional symmetry of modular origin
hidden in this thermal situation.

before we make some qualitative remarks about hidden sl(2,r) symme-
tries in the higher dimensional case, let us separately look at d=1+1 massive
theories.
it is clear that in this case we should use the two modular in-
clusions which are obtained by sliding the (right hand) wedge inside itself
(m  ma) by applying an upper/lower lightlike translation a and form-
ing the relative commutant (the size of a is irrelevant)

m(i)  m

a  m

(11)

where the notation indicates that the localization of m(i) is thought of as
the piece of the upper/lower light ray between the origin and the endpoint of
the a lightlike translation. by viewing this relative commutant as a lightlike
limiting case of a spacetlike shift of w into itself (and using haag duality),
on obtains the interval i as a limit of a double cone. the net obtained by
applying the modular transformation it
m to the m(i) via its ad action is
a chiral net with total algebra

fm  [

t

it

w (m(i))  m,

(12)

where we used the hsm standard inclusion (m(i)  fm, ) for the con-

struction, see the appendix below. since this net is chiral, it cannot create
the full space from the vacuum. rather the cyclically generated space is a

genuine subspace with projector p. since the modular group of ( fm, ) is
obtained from restricting it
m to ph, the projection is associated with a
conditional expectation of the algebra

e(m) = pmp = fm

(13)

although the two-dimensional conformal theory lives in the tensor-product
space of the two chiral theories on the upper/lower light ray, the two chi-
ral components constructed in the present way do not commute with each

7

other unless one also performs the massless limit m 0. indeed since the
upper/lower light ray have a relative time-like separation, one does not
expect huygens principle to become eective outside of m = 0. in fact a
simple straightforward calculation on algebras generated by massive cur-
rents or energy-momentum tensor reveals that the relative commutator is
proportional to a power of the mass but independent of the space-time coor-
dinates. the mechanism can be illustrated in the simplest way by looking at
the relative commutator of the 1-2 components of the fermion eld on the
upper/lower light ray

n(x), (y)o = (cid:16)i  m(cid:17) i(x  y)

(14)

i.e. {1(u)

2(v)}  m

where the last relation holds in the limit x,yupper/lower light ray. so
it appears that one has to distinguish between the tensorproduct algebra
m(i+)  m(i) associated with the full d=1+1 conformal theory (the zero
mass limit) and the combined m(i+)  m(i) subalgebra of b(h). in fact,
since one expects the vacuum to be cyclic in h with respect to m(i+) 
m(i), from the shared modular group structure with m we will take
m = m(i+)  m(i). for granted so modulo a ne point concerning the
dierence to a tensor product, the two conformal symmetries sl(2, r)/z2 of
the upper/lower light ray reductions are in fact inherited as hidden symme-
tries by the massive theory. the light ray reduction of the massive theory,
although being a chiral conformal theory in its own right, can be trans-
muted into the original massive theory by adjoining the opposite light cone
translation u(a) i.e. by extending m(i+) to alg {m(i+), u(a)} [s-w2].
one would expect that the relation between the thermal version and the
groundstate representation of the massive theory goes through the light ray
reduction. in addition to the proper conformal transformation which are al-
ready hidden in the massive theory there should be a thermal hiding for
all transformations except the translations.

3 qualitative remarks about higher dimen-

sions

in a previous paper we have shown how for d  1 + 2 one may use the
situation of modular intersections to come to hidden symmetries [s-w1].

8

in higher dimensions one expects that in general a conversion of thermal
nets into spatially extended ground state nets, if possible at all, will involve
sl(2, r)/z2 symmetries of modular origin with positive energy translation
operators i.e.symmetries which (since a massive theory does not possess such
pointwise acting symmetries) have hidden pieces already in their ground state
realization.

for this purpose we introduce the notion of a conformal core with the
blow-up property. let us start with a d=1+1 theory dened in terms
of algebraic net data i.e. a coherent map of space-time regions into von
neumann algebras. such theories have two light-like translations u(a) with
positive generators. we use the right upper light ray translation u+ in order
to construct a modular inclusion by sliding the standard wedge w at the
origin into itself w  w+  w using u+(a = 1) [s-w2]. consider the
modular inclusion dened in terms of the relative commutant of m+ 
u(1)a(w )u (1) in m = a(w )

(m

+  m  m, )

(15)

this inclusion leads to a full-edged chiral conformal theory on the line (the
light ray reduction) which generates from the vacuum its own hilbert space
which is a genuine subspace of the original space

  [
a>

t

w (cid:16)m
it

  m(cid:17)  m  a(w )

(16)

a>

 = h  h = m
a = a>

  ja>
j

note that the full conformal invariance is only realized on the reduced space
h

+  a>

since the modular theories of the combined upper/lower light ray reduc-
tions a>
 denes a 2-dim. net which lives on a bigger hilbert space
than the reduced one and since this combined algebra has the same modular
theory and the same light-like translations as m there exists according to
takesaki a conditional expectation from m to a>
 and the two algebras
are either identical (i the cyclically generated hilbert spaces are the same)
or the a>
 -algebra is obtain from m as a xed point algebra under
the action of an internal symmetry. a more ecient way to reconstruct the
original massive net from its light ray reduction is the following blow-up

+  a>

+ a>

9

of a light ray reduction, say a+, by use of the opposite positive (a > 0)
light-like translation

alg {a+, u(a) }

(17)

b+  _

a>0

intuitively one expects that m, a>

 and b+, b are all identical,
but without further detailed investigations, which go beyond the identity of
their modular structure, we cannot decide whether there are dierences due
to dierent internal symmetries.

+  a>

this light ray reduction supplemented by the blow-up idea can be gener-
alized to higher dimensions, where however it becomes more tricky. let us
explain the situation for d=2+1, using the notation of [s-w1]:

u12,13 for the galilean translations inside the lorentz group, which in

d=2+1 exhausts the isotropy (little) group to l1.

ul1 for the lightlike translations along l1, a([l1, l2]) for the wedge algebra

to w [l1, l2]

with this notational matter out of our way, we present now two interest-
ing proposals for the denition of candidates for a chiral conformal core
associated to a lightlike direction. the rst one leads to a construction which
by at is independent of the choice of the wedge and only depends on the
light ray l1. start from

ad ul1(1)(a([l1, l2])  a([l1, l2]).

(18)

this denes a conformal theory, see the appendix. the resulting transla-

tions, namely u1, commutes with the galilean translations. we dene:

r ad ul1l2,l1l3()(ad ul1(1)(a([l1, l2]))  a([l1, l2]).

(19)

this gives a modular standard inclusion in a canonical way, see appendix.
this proposal has the advantage to be covariant under the action of the
isotropy:

ul1l2,l1l3() r ad ul1l2,l1l3()(ad ul1(1)(a([l1, l2]))
= ad ul1(1)(rad ul1l2,l1l3()ul1l2,l1l3()((a([l1, l2])))
 ul1l2,l1l3()(a([l1, l2])).

(20)

where the galilean translation ul1l2,l1l3() simply turns w [l1, l2] into a w [l1, l
2].
the drawback of this construction could be that it is empty, as we will

argue in the sequel.

10

an equivalent construction based on the same intuition starts with the

modular inclusion

a([l1, l2])  a([l1, l3]))  a([l1, l2])

(21)

and suggests to represent the algebra (19) as a limiting intersection alge-

bra:

lim


ad ul1l2,l1l3()(a([l1, l2])  a([l1, l3]))

(22)

and this seems to be c  1, a multiple of the identity.

let us therefore mention another possible construction which starts with

the modular inclusion:

ad ul1(1)(a([l1, l2])  a([l1, l3]))  a([l1, l2])

(23)

again intuitively this might be interpreted as a conformal core to the light
ray l1. this denition depends on the lightlike directions, but it does so in a
covariant way since ul1l2,l1l3() commutes with ul1 and therefore the action
of the isotropy group is computable. moreover this modular inclusion is
only invariant under the lighlike translations ul1and not under the transversal
translations.

in a generic curved space-time situation with a bifurcated killing horizon
and in the absence of additional symmetries, one still can apply the methods
of lqp [s/s-v] and associate a chiral conformal theory as was shown recently
in a remarkable paper by guido, longo, roberts and verch [g/l/r/v]. in
that case the conformal theory is not associated to a particular light ray, but
rather is induced via a restriction of the theory onto the horizon.

before we apply the achieved results to our main theme, namely how to
convert heat bath temperature into unruh temperature (or how to pass from
the heat bath shadow world of the thermal commutant into new space-time
behind a horizon), we cannot resist to make some comments about a fasci-
nating but speculative connection of the blow-up picture of the chiral core
with another speculative problem which presently is attracting the attention
of many theoreticians: the problem of quantum entropy of algebras with a
horizon or (in the context of lqp) a quantum localization entropy. the
blow-up picture tell us that in the case of the wedge geometry we can rep-
resent the original wedge algebra m by the algebra generated by the chiral
conformal algebra augmented with certain symmetry generators which do the
blowing up (principally longitudinal and transverse translations). one would

11

expect that for the counting of degrees of freedom the poincare generators
do not contribute. if we now use our physical imagination for an attempt
to understand this picture beyond the wedge also for the rotationally sym-
metric double cone (in minkowski space), and take notice that if the higher
dimensional theory would be conformally invariant (zero mass), then there
is a well-known transformation which carries the previous wedge situation
into the double cone, then we obtain indeed a very attractive picture. the
more convincing part is the blow-up representation of the higher dimensional
conformal algebra in terms of a chiral core algebra on the surface (plus sym-
metry generators of the higher dimensional theory which do not participate
in the degree of freedom counting). the second, less rigorous step, is the
idea that the unknown fuzzy modular theory of the massive double cone
algebra is asymptotically (near the horizon) equal to the geometric modular
situation of the conformal double cone theory. however to convert this holo-
graphic degree of freedom picture into a bekenstein-hawking-like formula
for entropy expressed in terms of data of the chiral conformal core theory
(e.g. the structure constants of w-algebras) more needs to be done. there
is nally the problem of dening what we mean by localization entropy in
the chiral theory. the local algebras, whether chiral or higher dimensional,
are known to be of von neumann hypernite type iii1 which would lead to
diverging (undened) von neumann entropies. as physicists we would try
to regularize the situation. indeed there is a natural way to do this, which is
related to the phase space behavior of qft. the latter is dierent from the
behavior obtained by the box quantization at xed time in the sense that the
density based on the correct localization concept is bigger (nuclear) than
for the box case (nite) [ha], a fact overlooked in most relativistic entropy
discussions. closely related to the nuclearity property is the so-called split
property which suggests to dene a kind of fuzzy localized type i algebra.
this algebra has its support in the double cone plus a collar around it, so
that there is a bigger double cone containing both which the given double
cone and the collar [ha]. a type i algebra, unlike hypernite type iii1, has
no principle obstruction against the existence of a von neumann entropy.
such an entropy takes into account the quantum entaglement between the
inside of the smaller and the ouside of the bigger double cone across the col-
lar. with vanishing size of the collar the entropy diverges which corresponds
to the innite (but still nuclear) correct degree of freedom counting. filling
the double cone with dierent kind of matter, the strength of divergence
is expected to be the same but the leading coecients vary. the missing

12

and dicult part of the discussion is the use of the vacuum state, because
the modular simplicity of the doubly localized situation with the collar has
a geometrically simple modular theory only with respect to another state
[s-w1] whose connes cocycle relation to the vacuum has nit been studied.
an educated guess suggests that the divergence is logarithmic; also the claims
which appeared in the literature that for minimal models the coecient is
proportional to the to the central charge constant c, are certainly not in
contradiction with our blow-up picture of chiral cores and very suggestive
indeed if one looks at the aforementioned relation of the two states and the
role of the central term of the dieomorphism group in the construction of
the geometric modular state. note that these arguments, if they withstand
furthergoing detailed analysis, would interpret the holographic behavior as
a generic property of nonperturbative local quantum physics and not as a
particular behavior of special global properties2 (topological eld theories,
gauge theories etc.). this yet speculative scenario build on modular theory
has a some resemblance with walds recent more conservative ideas on en-
tropy [wa] and less so with string theory; although the results (but certainly
not the physical concepts) may be similar.

the reader may nd an earlier account of this picture on holographic
reduction of degrees of freedom from the viewpoint of lqp in section of
a book manuscript draft by one of the authors [schr1]; the present blow-up
mechanism of chiral light ray reduction lends considerably more credibility to
those earlier remarks. there is a history and a long list of references on light
cone holography in black hole physics by a variety of methods which seems
to be based on quite dierent ideas than those of this work [ca]. we hope
to return with more results to this interesting and conceptually important
entropy problem.

returning now to the thermal theme of this paper, the qualitative idea
of generalizing our discussion of the borchers-yngvason model to higher di-

2the present authors are aware of surprizing recent observations on entropy within
the setting of string theories. either string theories have locality properties (not known),
in which case they are special lqps; or they are something nonlocal in which case, as
a result of lack of physical interpretability which for all important properties (scattering
theory, superselected charges, statistics...) totally hinges on locality, they are remarkable
mathematical (but physically nonunderstood) observations. the fruitful conceptual cu-
riosity from the rst half of this century which was crucial to resolve such such interesting
situatios unfortunately seems to have been lost with the invention of the very string theory
which led to those observations.

13

mensions is quite simple: do the construction of the previous section on a
conformal core and then use the blow-up construction using the longitudinal
and transversal translations once in the ground state and once in the thermal
representation. whether this really works in higher dimensional model cases,
still remains to be seen.

finally we comment on the problem of spontaneously broken symmetries.
it is well-known that the change of temperature is often accompanied by a
transition of phase related to a change in global symmetry. the possibility
of a modular transmutation of a thermal into a ground state theory (with
spatial extension behind a horizon) creates all kinds of curious consistency
problems.

unfortunately the better understood chiral conformal theories do not al-
low for spontaneous symmetry breaking. the only exceptional case is the
thermal collapse of supersymmetry [b-o]. since the collapse mechanism
originates from the impossibility of annihilating a faithful state (any thermal
state is faithful) on a c-algebra by an antiderivation, it is independent of
space-time dimensions and holds in particular in chiral theories. although
it does not serve as a an illustration of spontaneous symmetry breaking,
its thermal aspects are interesting in their own right. assuming that our
transmutation mechanism also works for general chiral models including su-
persymmetric ones, and confronting it with the collapse mechanism one nds
a somewhat curious situation whose only resolution seems to be that the (un-
ruh) thermal restriction wrecks the action of the antiderivative on only one
side of the horizon and in this way explains the violent collapse. whether
this results allow for a deeper understanding of supersymmetry or only adds
to the growing suspicion that this symmetry is of an accidental nature [schr2],
remains to be seen.

4 concluding remarks

although the fully pointwise geometric symmetries which are well-known
from the quantization approach to relativistic qft are, with the exception
of chiral conformal qft, restricted to nite dimensional automorphisms as
poincare symmetry and (only for zero mass) conformal symmetry, the modu-
lar structure of lqp opens the gates for a vast variety of innite dimensional
groups. one may either vary the states and consider the modular groups gen-
erated by wedge- and double cone-algebras or one may investigate the mod-

14

ular inclusions/intersections generated from wedges with respect to natural
reference states od curved sace-time or the vacuum state in case of minkowski
space-time. as we argued in [s-w1], we expect in the rst case to obtain an
(innite dimensional) hidden analogue of the chiral dieomorphism group.
this is based on the fact that the chiral dieomorphism group can be build
up from innitely many mobius layers by lifting the vacuum mobius group
with a covering transformation and by realizing that each such nth layer lifted
mobius group3 is the modular group of a pair (a(i1)  ...  a(in), n). the
von neumann algebra n this case is n-fold localized and the lifted vacua
n are suitably chosen states such that the endpoints of the ik, k = 1...n are
xed points of the nth layer mobius transformation and n is its unique in-
variant state [s-w1]. the higher dimensional analogues of this construction
beyond the poincare resp. conformal group are expected to be fuzzy (non-
local) independent of the chosen state; in fact according to a conjecture of
fredenhagen their innitesimal action on test functions should be described
by pseudo-dierential operators which are at most asymptotically geometric
near the horizon i.e. the space-time border of the localization region). in the
present paper we have studied the partially hidden symmetry groups associ-
ated with thermal modular inclusions in chiral models. even though in this
case we do nd geometrical aspects, these symmetries are not implemented
by pointlike transformations in the underlying space-time and hence are hid-
den in the quantization approach. in addition the concepts of chiral core
and its blow-up property which led us to a holographic degrees of freedom
picture and gave some nice ideas about quantum entropy is obtained by the
extremely noncommutative modular theory. it is a generic property of local
quantum theory and cannot be seen by quantization procedures (and there-
fore is e.g. not related to dierential geometric properties of chern-simons
actions nor to gauge theory). the modular method based on real time non-
commutative lqp seems to develop into a viable alternative to the euclidean
functional integral approach to qft [s-w2].

acknowledgments: one of the authors (b.s.) thanks j. yngvason, d.

buchholz and r. verch for a helpful correspondence.

appendix
canonical construction which underlies the calculation of the

chiral core

3these lifted moebius transformations m oebn are called quasisymmetric of order n

in the mathematical literature.

15

let (n  m, ) hsm with non trivial relative commutant. then look
at the subspace (n   m)  h. the modular groups to n and m leave
m maps n   m into itself by hsm for say positive
invariant this subspace: it
t. look at the orthogonal complement of (n   m)  h. this orthogonal
complement is mapped into itself by it
m for positive t. let  be in that
subspace, then

(24)

d, it

m(n   m)e = 0 f or t > 0.

analyticity in t then gives the vanishing for all t.
due to takesaki theorem we can restrict m to (n   m) using a con-

ditional expectation to this subspace. then

(n   m)  m|(n m)

is a hsm on the subspace dened above. n also restricts to that sub-
space and this restriction is obviously in the relative commutant of (n  
m)  m|(n m) . moreover using arguments as above it is easy to see that
the restriction is cyclic w.r.t. on this subspace. therefore we arrive at a
hsm standard inclusion

(n |(n m)  m|(n m), )

(25)

.

references

[bo1]

h.-j. borchers the cpt-theorem in two-dimensional theo-
ries of local observables comm. math. phys. 143 p. 315 (1992)

[bo/yng] h.-j. borchers, j. yngvason modular groups of quantum

fields in thermal states. preprint (1998)

[b/g/l]

r. brunetti, d. guido, r. longo, commun. math. phys. 156,
(1993) 201

[b-o]

d. buchholz and i. ojima, nucl. phys. b498, (1997) 228

d. buchholz, on the implementation of supersymmetry, hep-
th/9812179

16

[ca]

s. carlip, black hole entropy from conformal field theory in
any dimension, hep-th/9812013, and references therein.

[fr/ga]

j. frohlich, f. gabbiani, commun. math. phys. 155, (1993) 569

[g/l/w] d. guido, r. longo, h.-w. wiesbrock extensions of conformal
nets and superselection structures comm. math.phys. 192
p.217 (1998)

[g/l/r/v] d. guido, r. longo, j. e. roberts and r. verch, a general
framework for charged sectors in quantum field theory on
curved spacetimes, in preparation

[ha]

[ja]

r. haag, local quantum physics, springer verlag 1992

ch. jaekel cluster estimates for modular structure hep
9804017

[s-w1]

b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrockmodular theory and geome-

try, math-ph/9809003.

[s-w2]

b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular theory and interac-
tions hep-th/9812251

[s/s-v]

g. sewell, ann. of phys. 141, (1982) 201

s. summers and r. verch, lett. math. phys. 37, (1996) 145

[su]

[schr1]

[schr2]

s. summers, on the statistical independence of algebras of ob-
servables, rev. math. phys.2/2 (1992) 201

b. schroer, localization and nonperturbative local quantum
physics, hep-th/9805093

b. schroer, qft at the turn of the century: old principles
with new concepts (an essay on local

quantum physics), hep-th/9810080

[wa]

r. m. wald, gravitation, thermodynamics and quantum the-
ory, gr-qc/9901033

[wie1]

h.-w. wiesbrock, commun. math. phys. 157, (1993) 83

17

[wie2]

h.-w. wiesbrock, lett. math. phys. 31 p.303 (1994)

18

