9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
1

 

 
 

2
v
6
4
1
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

two lectures on d-geometry and

noncommutative geometry

michael r. douglasa

department of physics and astronomy, rutgers university,

piscataway, nj 08855, usa

and

i.h.e.s., le bois-marie, bures-sur-yvette france 91440

this is a write-up of lectures given at the 1998 spring school at the abdus salam
ictp. we give a conceptual introduction to d-geometry, the study of geometry
as seen by d-branes in string theory, and to noncommutative geometry as it has
appeared in d-brane and matrix theory physics.

1 introduction

over the last few years, a new paradigm for thinking about fundamental the-
ories of physics has emerged, using the ideas of supersymmetry, eective the-
ory, and duality. the largest, perhaps all-encompassing example, is called m
theory, and subsumes the known superstring theories and eleven dimensional
supergravity. we now have a fairly good understanding of the moduli space of
m theory compactications with extended supersymmetry.

in contrast to some of the expectations raised by string theory in the
80s, geometry as already studied by the mathematicians: algebraic geometry,
dierential geometry, and so on, has played a central role. partly this has
been because of the choice of questions. one species an eective eld theory
by specifying a eld content and lagrangian; on very general grounds the
elds should be thought of as a set of coordinates on some conguration space;
the potential as a function; the kinetic term as a metric on this space. this
is true if we derive the theory in a conventional kaluza-klein picture, and
the geometry of this eective eld theory has much in common with that of
the internal manifold.
it is just as true if we derive the theory from some
generalization of the kaluza-klein picture in which the internal space is not
described by conventional geometry, say because it is too small, because it
is singular, because quantum uctuations are large, or perhaps because our
starting point is not geometrical. thus the language of dierential geometry
will always be useful; complex or kahler geometry will be useful given the
appropriate supersymmetry, and so on.

once we start studying the structure of the internal space itself we might

asupported in part by doe grant de-fg05-90er40559.

1

ask for an appropriate generalization of conventional geometry. although var-
ious proposals have been made, they tend to focus on quantities which appear
in the eective theory and which are not local functions of the geometry of
the target space, such as the cohomology ring, or volumes of supersymmetric
cycles. there is a good reason for this as m theory is not local in the same
sense as quantum eld theory (though the question of whether some denition
of locality can be made is still very much open; see 16 for a discussion of this).
can we nd analogs of the local invariants of conventional geometry such as
curvature, even in situations where conventional locality does not apply ?

in these two lectures i will give two examples of the types of geometry
we might want to think about. the rst, geometry as seen by d-branes or
d-geometry, is directly motivated by the physics of string theory, but is not
yet well understood by either physicists or mathematicians.

the problem of nding all backgrounds of string theory (say type ii for
deniteness) is a generalization of the corresponding problem for supergravity,
which can be phrased as the problem of solving certain non-linear pdes, the
equations of motion. the generalization involves two parameters: the string
coupling gs (related to h as h = g2
s ) and the string length ls. although no
general and precise denition of the problem for gs 6= 0 has been made (clearly
this brings in all of m theory) the case of ls 6= 0 can be phrased as the problem
of classifying conformal eld theories with an appropriate amount of world-
sheet supersymmetry.

a simple and general source of these is non-linear sigma models. this
starts from a target space metric but allows computing stringy corrections
to observables as an expansion in (ls/lr)2 where lr is the curvature radius.
however the results cannot be directly thought of as dening a new target
space metric.

more recently d-brane physics allows us to introduce local probes into
our string backgrounds. in particular a d0-brane moving in a sigma model
background sees a specic metric  the d0-metric. this is a uniquely dened
local invariant of the string background, and the rst lecture will discuss it in
some examples.

the second lecture will give a brief introduction to noncommutative geom-
etry, a mathematical framework with many applications. m theory is still one
of its more speculative applications but it appears that the noncommutative
torus does arise naturally in matrix theory and d-brane physics, as we will
discuss, and provides a new geometrical picture of t-duality.

2

2 what is d-geometry

d-geometry is the study of the geometry of m theory compactication as seen
by a d-brane. the prototypical problem of d-geometry  and the one we will
discuss for most of this lecture  is: what metric does a d0-brane moving in
the string background m see?

by m we mean a conformal eld theory which can be used in iia super-
string theory; by see a metric we want to say that the d0-brane has an
eective action of the form

s =

1

gsls z dt egd

ij (x)tx itx j + . . .

(1)

and we want to determine the space parameterized by x i and gij on this space.
already this point requires a bit of discussion as the d-brane is in itself a
quantum object and we should ask: how do we know this quantum mechanics
comes from quantizing a lagrangian? this should be true for suciently small
gs, but how small ?

intuitively, we need to be able to form wave-packets which are small com-
pared to the curvature length lr of the metric, to be able to claim that we can
unambiguously recover the metric from the quantum mechanics. this requires
h/p << lr (which is the same as the condition for a wkb treatment of (1) to
be justied). the mass of the d0 is m = 1/gsls and (in our conventions with
h = 1) we require 2mel2

r >> 1 or e >> gsls/l2
r.

this gives a minimum energy for the wave packets we need, but we also
expect (1), as an eective action, to be valid only up to some maximum energy.
an obvious criterion for integrating out massive string states is e << 1/ls.
in many examples (as we will see) there are also states associated with the
curvature radius, and we also require e << lr/l2
s. this second condition will
be stronger if lr << ls, i.e. in the substringy regime where we might look for
new phenomena.

the conclusion is that we can think of the d0-brane as seeing a well-
dened metric if l2
p11 the eleven-dimensional
planck length. as discussed in 17, one can think of the scale lp11 as dening
a size of the d-brane, a scale where its interactions become strong, and the
moduli space picture breaks down.

r >> gsl3

s = l3

r >> gsl2

s and l3

by taking gs suciently small we can explore the substringy regime, lr <<
ls. in the following we will do this by considering amplitudes from the sphere
and disk world-sheets.

3

2.1 general considerations from conformal eld theory

given a conformal eld theory dening a superstring compactication, our
rst problem is to identify the moduli space of boundary states corresponding
to d0-branes. the conditions for a boundary state to correspond to a bps
state in space-time are given in 43, while to decide that it is a d0-brane we
should compute its rr charge. dp-branes of dierent p are generally related
by dualities and it is interesting to consider the same questions for p 6= 0,
making contact with mirror symmetry (e.g. see 51), but that deserves another
lecture.

massless uctuations then correspond to boundary operators of dimension
1; call a basis for these oi. in the case that the moduli space is a manifold

with local coordinates xi, we can choose the basis such that an insertion of r oi

corresponds to the variation /xi. although this will be true in the examples
we consider, it is not always true, in cft terms because the operators oi can
gain anomalous dimensions. a counterexample is the minima of a potential
such as v = 2
2 such as would be found in the world-volume lagrangian of
a system of 0-branes and 4-branes.

12

the d0-brane metric will then be the zamolodchikov metric on the moduli

space. we can dene this as the two-point function on the disk,

gd
ij (x) = hoi(0)oj (1)i,

(2)

considered as a function on the moduli space. the choice of two distinct points
(here 0 and 1) on the boundary is conventional. heuristically the relation be-
tween this and the eective action is clear as gd
ij determines the normalization
of a state created by oi. to justify this from the string theory s-matrix one
must consider a four-particle scattering and relate this to the curvature r[gd],
but this relation is standard in eective eld theory.

many supersymmetric string compactications have been dened as non-
geometric conformal eld theories (free fermion models, gepner models, asym-
metric orbifolds, etc.), but some admit alternate geometric denitions (see 30
for an overview). it is an interesting question when this is possible, or to what
extent one can start with geometric models and by varying parameters (moduli
or even massive elds) reach all models. knowing the d0-metric would be a
real help in nding geometric counterparts of these models.

2.2 non-linear sigma models

a simple m to consider is the supersymmetric non-linear sigma model with
background metric gij(x). this will be a conformal eld theory if the beta
function for the metric vanishes. this can be computed using the covariant

4

background eld method.28 one writes the elds as a sum x = x0 +  where
x0 is a chosen background point and  is a quantum uctuation. in riemann
normal coordinates the action has an expansion whose coecients are tensors
constructed from g(x0):

s =

1
l2

s z d2 g(0)

ij (x0)ij + rijkl[g(0)]ikjl + . . .

(3)

the leading term in the beta function then comes from a one-loop diagram
in which the r interaction vertex has a single self-contraction, producing a
divergence proportional to the ricci tensor. thus one can obtain a conformal
theory to this order by taking g = g(0) a ricci at metric.

working to higher orders, one obtains31

0 = ij = rij [g] + l6

sr4

ij [g] + o(l8
s )

(4)

with r4
ij given in many references such as 2. the condition is no longer ricci
atness but it has been shown that by adding nite corrections to g(0) at each
order in l2

s one can obtain a solution g of (4).42

just as in at space, the allowed boundary conditions on bosons are those
with gij(x)x ix j = 0, either dirichlet or neumann. for dirichlet bound-
ary conditions x i|=0 = xi, the marginal operators are oi = g(0)
ij x j and
the zamolodchikov metric at leading order is just (g(0))ij .

we can proceed to compute ls corrections using the background eld
method. these have two origins a priori. one type of correction comes from
bulk renormalization (closed string eects). using the scheme of adding nite
corrections to g(0), these corrections produce the metric g
ij, which is thus a
better approximation to gd.

in principle there can be additional nite corrections to the correlation
function (2), which would naturally be tensors constructed from g(x0). these
are potentially important not just to get the correct result but also for the fol-
lowing reason of principle. the sigma model metric g
ij is not directly observ-
able and is in fact ambiguous. in renormalizing the theory we need to make
choices for the nite parts of counterterms at each order in l2
s; a renormaliza-
tion prescription. a priori these could be any local functionals of g(0). this
corresponds to the possibility to make local eld redenitions in the resulting
target space supergravity theory.

on the other hand, the d-brane metric gd

ij is a metric on a moduli space
and as such is observable.
its curvature will govern the scattering of small
uctuations on the world-volume. although there is an ambiguity of eld
redenition in its computation as well, this just corresponds to the freedom to

5

choose a coordinate system on the moduli space. of course if we considered
other terms in the world-volume lagrangian, for example the gauge kinetic
term, we would have additional eld redenitions to deal with, but these do
not aect gd.

thus any additional nite terms contributing to gd will be scheme depen-
dent, in a way which exactly compensates the scheme dependence of g. this
suggests the possibility that there exists a preferred renormalization scheme
in which gd = g. the best candidate for this scheme is the usual minimal
subtraction scheme (which subtracts only poles in dimensional regularization)
and so far it has been checked that in this scheme nite terms do not appear
at order l2

s and l4

s.26

the idea that gd = g in a preferred scheme would have a number of in-
teresting consequences. for one thing, it would be determined by an equation
of motion (4) expressed as a series in local tensors. using n = 2 perturba-
tion theory, another consequence is that the complex structure of gd would be
equal to that of the ricci at g(0).

in general observables can get non-perturbative corrections from world-
sheet instantons as well; the metric on d3-brane moduli space studied in 51 is
an example. one can show that at least some d0-metrics do not;26 in a case
where it does the conjecture might be that gd = g to all orders in ls with
nite computable corrections. it would be an interesting question whether the
result was governed by an equation analogous to (4).

the nonlinear sigma model approach provides a universal denition of gd
(at least for all models connected to the large radius limit). on the other hand
we expect any new qualitative features to appear in the substringy regime
where the series expansion in l2
r is at present an impractical approach.
rather, our knowledge of gd in the substringy regime comes entirely from
examples. let us discuss a few.

s/l2

2.3 orbifolds

d-branes on orbifolds give a large set of substringy examples. this has been
a much studied subject (see 22 and papers which cite it for a list of references)
and deserves a review of its own. here we focus on geometric aspects.

in general one denes string theory on an orbifold m/ by rst adding
to the theory twisted string sectors and then projecting on  invariant states.
for closed strings the twisted sectors are closed only up to an element of ,
while for open strings the twisted sectors start and end on d-branes which
will be identied after we make the projection. this problem is somewhat
simpler than that for closed strings as we can derive the complete d-brane

6

world-volume theory as a subsector of the theory of d-branes in m .

for m = rn this theory will be the usual maximally supersymmetric
super yang-mills so the entire construction is summarized in the projection.
this can be written

1(g)(g) = r(g)

for all g  ,

(5)

where  is the complete list of elds in the theory, r(g) is the action on
space-time, and (g) is an action of  in some representation r which we can
freely choose  string theory consistency conditions allow any r. the action of
r(g) can generally be deduced geometrically  for example if g preserves the
world-volume and takes a world-volume point z  z, it will act on a scalar
eld as (r(g))(z) = (gz), on a vector as (r(g))i = r(g)i
j in
the vector representation, and so on. because the action is geometric it will
preserve the supersymmetries which are singlets under , so we have the usual
relation between  considered as a reduced holonomy group and unbroken
supersymmetry. for example,   g2 would lead to three dimensional gauge
theories (and their dimensional reductions) with 2 supercharges.
in our d0-brane examples (5) leads to quiver gauge theories. let n =

jj with r(g)i

dim r; then the gauge group is the commutant of r in u (n ); if r = p nara is

the decomposition into irreducible representations ra this will be

g = ya

u (na).

(6)

the matter will be a sum of bifundamentals, one for each singlet in the product
of representations

r  r  r.

(7)

another way to express this is in terms of the action of the representation r(g)
in the representation ring: if

r  ra = bnabrb

(8)

there will be nab bifundamentals in the representation (na, nb).

for the d-brane scalars x i, r is the vector or fundamental representation.
a natural choice for r, corresponding to a single d-brane free to move on the

orbifold, is the regular representation rr = pa(dim ra)ra with basis vectors
|gi for each g   and matrix elements

(g)|hi  |ghi
hh|(g) = hg1h|
hg|hi = g,h.

7

(9)

this choice expresses the intuition that the d-brane will have an image for
each element of .
it is easy to show that the moduli space for this gauge
theory includes rn/, by writing the solution (for any constant xj )

x i = xh

|hihh|ri

j(h)xj .

(10)

since this is diagonal it will be a zero energy vacuum (this condition for the
n = 4 theory includes the conditions for the projected theories), while  is
realized by gauge transformations.
there is a famous relation between discrete subgroups   su (2) and the
ade extended dynkin diagrams. it appears here as the mckay correspon-
dance  for any , the ra can each be associated with nodes of a dynkin dia-
gram, and the links with non-zero nab in (8). actually the best diagrammatic
notation (called quiver diagrams) is slightly dierent  we write nab/nanb ori-
ented links between each pair of nodes a and b. this notation directly encodes
the spectrum of the resulting gauge theory, with each node now associated
with the gauge group u (na) and each link with a complex matter eld in the
bifundamental (na, nb).

the c2/ theories will have eight supercharges and can be written as
dimensional reductions of d = 4, n = 2 theories. the pseudoreality of the vec-
tor representation r guarantees that each dynkin diagram link will come once
with each of the two orientations, making up a hypermultiplet of n = 2. the
 = z2 theories are then u (n1)u (n2) gauge theory with two hypermultiplets
in the (n1, n2).
the c3/ theories can be written as dimensional reductions of d = 4,
n = 1 theories. if r is a complex representation of su (3), one can get chiral
gauge theories. the simplest example is  = z3 acting as z i  exp 2i/3 z i.
this produces u (n1)  u (n2)  u (n3) gauge theory with the chiral multiplet
spectrum 3(n1, n2) + 3(n2, n3) + 3(n3, n1).

2.4 resolved orbifolds

what makes these constructions interesting realizations of substringy geometry
is the possibility of explicitly blowing up the orbifold singularities in terms of
the world-volume gauge theory. it can be shown (e.g. see 22) that the closed
string twist sector modes couple to fayet-iliopoulos and other linear terms
in the d-brane world-volume lagrangians. the details depend on p but in
general the (c, a) elds (geometrically, corresponding to a kahler modulus) g
in the sector twisted by the conjugacy class of g produce the fayet-iliopoulos

terms r d4 ava with a = pg trra(g)g. here va is the vector supereld for

8

u (1)  u (na). this provides independent fi terms for all u (1)s with charged
matter, i.e. all but the overall diagonal u (1). similarly complex structure
moduli produce linear terms in the superpotential.

these modications will deform the d and f-atness conditions (schemat-

ically) as

[z, z] = 

(11)
and thus deform the moduli space  strongly for |z|2  , but negligibly
for |z|2 >> . the result for the regular representation is a moduli space
asymptotic to cn/ but which  for generic   turns out to be smooth and
topologically non-trivial. the metric on this moduli space is an example of a
d0-brane metric gd. physically one has realized this non-trivial moduli space
by embedding it in a larger but trivial conguration space, as the minima of a
linear sigma model potential. the additional degrees of freedom have masses of
order m  1/2/l2
s and thus one also sees an example of the bound e << lr/l2
s
we mentioned earlier.

in general one has an interesting quantum theory to solve at this point,
but in the case of d0-branes with blow up parameters which keep us in the
substringy regime l2
p the quantum corrections are subleading
and we can compute the eective action by classical methods. in particular,
computing the metric on moduli space reproduces the symplectic quotient
construction of kahler and hyperkahler metrics.33

s >>  >> l2

a simple way to do this computation is to rst write out the action in n =
1 supereld notation and substitute a solution of the f-atness conditions. one
then xs the complexied gauge invariance present before xing wess-zumino
gauge in some explicit way. finally one minimizes the action with respect to the
vector superelds, considered as complex variables. this procedure combines
the d-atness conditions with the xing of ordinary gauge symmetry to provide
an explicit kahler potential for the quotient metric.

let us do c2/z2 (following 18). the regular representation is n1 = n2 =
1; dropping the diagonal u (1) we have u (1) gauge theory with four chiral
superelds b0, b1, b0 and b1 with charges +2, 2, 2 and +2 respectively. the
gauged kahler potential is then

k = e2v (|b0|2 + |b1|2) + e2v (|b1|2 + |b0|2)  v

while the f atness condition is

b0b0  b1b1 = 0.

(12)

(13)

(in general a complex structure modulus appears on the right, but we set this
to zero.)

9

we rst relabel the variables q  e2v , b0 = z, b0 = w. we then make
the gauge choice b1 = 1. this makes the f-atness condition easy to solve,
b1 = zw. we then have

k = q(1 + |z|2) +
the condition k/q = 0 determines

1
q

(1 + |z|2)|w|2   log q.

0

q =

= q2  |w|2  q

1+|z|2

1

2(1+|z|2) (cid:16) p2 + 4(1 + |z|2)2|w|2(cid:17)

and after substituting back,

k = p2 + 4(1 + |z|2)2|w|2   log q

(14)

(15)

(16)

with q as in (15). the result is the kahler potential for the eguchi-hanson
metric, a ricci at metric asymptotic to c2/z2, but with the singularity re-
solved to an s2 of volume . actually it was clear without computation that
this would come out, as the n = 2, d = 4 supersymmetry guarantees that
the quotient metric will be hyperkahler; this implies ricci atness and in four
dimensions self-duality. this construction generalizes to the general ade case
(though the d and e metrics require nonabelian quotients and have not been
worked out explicitly to my knowledge).

we can repeat the same computation for c3/z3. the regular representa-
tion is n1 = n2 = n3 = 1 and this is a u (1)2 gauge theory with two fayet-
iliopoulos parameters 1 and 2. the computation is done in 18 and we can
thus quote an explicit substringy kahler potential producing a d0-metric gd:

k

with

= (cid:16)2 + 1

12(cid:17) v  1 log(v + 1)

2 log(v + 2) + (1 + 2) log(1 + |x|2 + |y|2),

v(v + 1)(v + 2) = (1 + |x|2 + |y|2)3|z|2.

(17)

(18)

this time there was no a priori reason for the metric to be ricci at, and indeed
it is not for  6= 0. the topology is that the singularity has been resolved to a
cp2 with kahler class  (this is z = 0) and sectional curvature 1/.
actually there was a hidden assumption in the previous analysis which
we now must justify. the metric resulting from the quotient construction
depends on the kahler potential of the original world-volume gauge theory 

at the orbifold point this will be k0 = pi |zi|2, but we should check whether

10

this receives corrections at non-zero . we might expect this to be true as for
kahler class  >> l2
s the metric must reduce to a ricci-at metric, and there
should be a sign of this even at small . an explicit world-sheet computation
is rather similar to a direct computation of gd in conformal eld theory and
it is not hard to see that corrections can appear at o(/l2

s).

this question is even more interesting as there do exist modied k 

0 for
which the quotient construction will produce a ricci-at metric.46 on the other
hand, these are nonanalytic in  and z and this is not what we expect to get
from conformal eld theory, which (since the orbifold point is non-singular)
will produce an eective action analytic in the elds. thus (17) is the leading
term in an expansion in positive powers of the curvature length (lr/ls)2.

2.5 the d0-d6 system

the metric around a d-brane will also be substringy. many examples have been
worked out and a particularly simple one is the d0-d4 system. this theory
has eight supercharges and the strings stretched between the branes live in
a hypermultiplet; integrating them out produces the expected (supergravity)
d4 metric at one loop. one can show using supersymmetry that this result
is exact.14 examples with less supersymmetry have no a priori reason to agree
with supergravity and an example which does not (and deserves more detailed
study) is given in 24.

another interesting example with no apparent supergravity interpretation
is the d0-d6 system. this is an interesting example because one can easily
work out the form of the interaction at all length scales (at least at order
gs) and see a non-trivial crossover. also interesting is that it preserves no
supersymmetry yet can be analyzed perturbatively  this is because the leading
interaction is a repulsive potential.

as is well known the supergravity interpretation of the d6-brane is as the
kk monopole of d = 11 supergravity reduced to the iia theory. from this point
of view the long range elds must fall o as 1/r. this includes the dilaton and
this means that the d0 world volume theory will include a potential (the mass
term 1
zero, corresponding to d   and an innite repulsive potential.
on the other hand, in gauge theory terms the interaction is mediated
by light open strings coming from the ramond sector (the ns strings are
massive). these form a fermion doublet under the so(3) rotational symmetry
of the transverse dimensions and their hamiltonian is simply

gsls r dt ed). at the core the radius of the eleventh dimension goes to

h = e0 + ix i = e0 + six i.

(19)

11

where si = i acting on the two-dimensional quantum hilbert space of the
fermions and e0 is a constant shift of the energy coming from the massive
open strings.

the ground state energy of this hamiltonian is e0|x| and this description
also leads to a repulsive potential  but with a dierent short distance behavior.
clearly these are two limiting behaviors of a continuous function which crosses
over at |x|  ls  this function has been computed in 38 and is monotonic.
another amusing aspect of this system is that it provides a very simple
way to check the dirac quantization of the rr charges of the two branes. 5
the d0 sees the magnetic rr potential produced by the d6 as a berry phase
associated with the hamiltonian (19), and it is easy to show that this phase is
given by the unit magnetic monopole potential.

2.6 problems involving several d0-branes

as is well known the moduli space metric for congurations of several static
d0-branes is at, due to cancellations between graviton, rr vector and dilaton
exchange. this has a simpler eleven-dimensional origin in the fact that pp-
wave solutions exist with an arbitrary momentum distribution in the transverse
dimensions.

as is also well known by now the leading interaction between a pair of
d0-branes in an expansion in relative velocity is non-zero and takes the form
cv4/r7. this is also the precise result at o(v4) for the induced potential com-
puted in n = 16 supersymmetric quantum mechanics, the description valid at
distances r << ls, as can be understood from supersymmetry  massive string
modes come in long multiplets and do not contribute to this amplitude. in
fact supersymmetry implies an exact non-renormalization theorem. 44

the matrix theory proposal of bfss leads to the conjecture that an in-
2 . . . v2
nite series of generalizations of this apply, which predict that the o(v2
k)
eective potential for k-graviton interactions will also reproduce classical su-
pergravity results. the original conjecture stated this for the limit in which
gravitons are described by large n bound states of d0-branes, a limit which is
as yet not accessible to direct computation. although logically not required,
the simplest way this could work is if the equivalence held at nite n as well.
(see 1 for discussion of this issue.) for historical reasons this is generally known
as the dlcq conjecture.

1 v2

some impressive computations have been done at two loops, in su (2)
and su (3) gauge theory, which establish this conjecture for three-graviton
interactions.4 however this is not really convincing evidence for the general
conjecture, because these amplitudes are strongly constrained by supersym-

12

metry. in particular, using an argument given in 40, one sees that the known
generalizations of supergravity with 16 real supersymmetries  the type i and
heterotic strings  have exact three-graviton scattering amplitudes identical
with those of pure supergravity. thus it appears quite possible that supersym-
metry and very weak consistency conditions force this result.

the four-graviton amplitudes come with ls corrections in all string theo-
ries, so we know that modications of supergravity exist at this order. thus
nding agreement here would constitute strong evidence for the dlcq con-
jecture, and conversely nding disagreement might give us ideas for a new
conjecture. straightforward three-loop computations look formidable but not
unimaginably dicult. they are simplied by introducing separations of scale
(e.g. one d0 far from the others) and in 15 some evidence for disagreement at
three loops is given.

another argument we could try to make for the dlcq conjecture is the
following. we might imagine that whatever the results may be, they should be
summarized by an eective action coupling the stress-energy of the d0-branes
to a modied supergravity action; say

smultid0

+pn

= r d10x ge2d(cid:0)r + cl6
sr4 + . . .(cid:1)
i=1r dti (x  x0i  viti)(cid:0)edgv
i v
i + c  v(cid:1) . (20)
although it is natural to suppose that this would be related to the action which
leads to the equations of motion (4) and thus c 6= 0, i dont have a convincing
argument for this, so let us regard it as dened by computation.
in the substringy limit r << ls, one can see from the relation to gauge
theory that the dependence on ls factors out into the overall coupling constant.
thus we appear to require a modied supergravity action whose leading term
is the einstein action, but with corrections independent of any additional di-
mensionful parameters. if we knew that s was generally covariant and local,
no such corrections would be possible.

conversely, it seems likely that if the dlcq conjecture is false, the sub-
stringy limit of smultid0 will be non-local. this is what we might expect in-
tuitively as it is a low energy eective action derived by integrating out strings
of size ls. despite its non-locality such a hypothetical new action might be
considered just as fundamental as the standard supergravity action, and it
would be extremely interesting to nd an explicit description of it.

another variation is to combine our two problems and consider d0-brane
interactions in a curved background. the cases which have been studied so
far are the leading v4 interactions of two d0-branes in a k3 or c2/ ale
background 23 and in a d4-brane background.13 in both cases it is fairly easy
to see that the interactions dier drastically from those of supergravity and

13

the leading eects in inverse powers of the separation r do not even behave
as 1/r7 as would be predicted by a local action. this certainly falsies the
dlcq conjecture in curved space and may even be evidence against the orig-
inal conjecture; however it does not disprove it at present as we do not know
that a universal action must exist in which both modications of the original
background g(0)

ij and the d0-brane sources enter in the same way.

this result has been extended to d2-brane interactions in a very pretty
work 11. following 45 one can compute the leading interaction exchanging p11
momentum as a 2 + 1-dimensional instanton process. this instanton is the t
hooft-polyakov solution (a 3 + 1 monopole) and the scalar elds vary in a way
which can see the induced ale geometry as the minimum of the potential.
despite this qualitative agreement one can show that the scalar eld kinetic
energy also contributes and the interaction still does not behave as 1/r7.

after all this one might wonder whether there is some universal obstruc-
tion to ever reproducing supergravity from nite n gauge theory in a curved
background. in some cases, it seems that there is. the most basic condition
for reproducing the 1/r7 interaction is that the mass of the degrees of free-
dom responsible for it (the strings stretched between the interacting pair of
d-branes) be m = r. one can study the problem of writing gauged sigma
model lagrangians for which this is true and in the specic case of a calabi-
yau three-fold target which is not ricci at (as we expect at substringy scales)
no such action with the required n = 1, d = 4 supersymmetry exists.21

2.7 conclusions

to summarize our rst lecture  there are a wide variety of d-geometry prob-
lems which provide a new and fascinating generalization of general relativity
and supergravity. in general these problems have both stringy and quan-
tum aspects. for example, one might consider spacetime-lling d3-branes
at points in the internal manifold; the results we discussed would provide a
classical limit of the space-time eective action. by considering d0-branes we
were able to emphasize the new stringy aspects.

particular examples can be studied by using the by-now familiar approach
of identifying new light degrees of freedom appearing at singularities, which
dominate the substringy physics. however this leads to a case by case analysis
and the common origin of these problems in string theory suggests that a more
unied framework can be developed. one approach is through non-linear sigma
models and it seems quite likely that there are universal equations of motion
which govern possible d-geometries, perhaps the beta function equations in
the minimal subtraction scheme. since they determine a physical observable,

14

it is not unreasonable to hope that the exact equations have some simple
description.

ultimately, we might hope to base d-geometry on some analog of the
general principles from which general relativity and supergravity were derived
and understood. such principles probably will not be formulated in the context
of either limit lr >> ls or lr << ls but instead assume nite ls, as do algebraic
approaches to conformal eld theory.

3 what is noncommutative geometry

much of mathematics is an interplay between geometry and algebra, two very
dierent ways of thinking about the same objects.

of the many algebras we can associate with a space, the most fundamental
is the commutative algebra of functions on the space. given a commutative
algebra a, one is often better o thinking about the corresponding space.
this is particularly true for algebras over c. simple axioms for a can often
guarantee that the space is nice. for example, if a is a commutative c
algebra (with a unit), it is isomorphic to the algebra c(xa) of continuous
complex functions on some compact space xa. the space is just the space of
homomorphisms  from a to c such that (1) = 1.

noncommutative geometry is a broad topic in which one tries to do the
same for general algebras. the rst examples to think about are the n -
dimensional matrix algebras mn (a) where a is a commutative c algebra,
i.e. matrices of functions on some xa. for n > 1 these algebras have no
non-trivial homomorphisms to c, so the previous strategy fails; however we
clearly want to associate to these algebras both the space xa and the number
n as interesting topological data.

we can do this by considering projections, elements e  a such that e2 = e.
clearly these will be matrix functions which at every point can be diagonal-
ized with eigenvalues 0 and 1. the number of unitary equivalence classes of
these determines n . given an e of rank 1, the subalgebra of elements em e is
isomorphic to a, from which we recover xa.

projections are also useful in formulating a generalization of the idea of
vector bundle. a vector bundle v over xa is determined by the algebra of
its sections sv . sv admits an action by multiplication by functions on x; in
other words it is a module over a. we can turn this around by considering
all modules over a satisfying certain conditions, which will enable them to
determine vector bundles. the condition is that sv is free and projective: it
can be obtained by taking n-component vectors with components in a, and
applying a projection in mn(a).

15

one can go quite far in reformulating topological notions in this way.
for example, one can generalize the formalism of characteristic classes to this
case, and prove index theorems for operators acting on vector bundles over
noncommutative spaces dened in this sense.8

there has also been much work in formulating geometric notions. what
is quite intriguing and useful is that much of this work takes as the central
concept gauge theory on a noncommutative space, in other words a theory
of connections on projective modules which allows writing an action, a dirac
operator and so forth. combining this with the idea that in d-brane physics,
coordinates are naturally promoted to matrices, we are motivated to study the
subject with this physical application in mind.

3.1 deformation quantization

it is probably more helpful at this point to give examples than to develop
abstract formalism, and a broad class of examples come from trying to deform
algebras of commutative functions into noncommutative algebras.3

in other words, given functions f, g  c(x), we seek a new multiplication

law f  g which is associative and reduces to the original one in some limit:

f  g = f g +

h
2{f, g} + o(h2)

(21)

here h is just a parameter characterizing the limit and {,} some bilinear
operation characterizing the deformation to rst order. imposing associativity
will constrain this operation and determine the o(h2) and higher terms. the
problem is to nd all such deformations, and was solved in 36,27.

one type of deformation which is not so interesting is to make linear
redenitions of our functions. in other words we choose an invertible linear
operator o, say with an expansion in h such as

f  of  f + hv(x)

f
x + o(h22f ).

we then dene a new multiplication

f  g  o1(o(f )o(g)).

(22)

(23)

clearly this is not going to give us anything essentially new, and we should
look for deformations modulo this gauge-like ambiguity.

after xing this ambiguity, it can be shown that associativity requires {,}
to be a poisson bracket, and then determines the higher order terms uniquely.

16

(the explicit expressions require making a choice of connection compatible
with the poisson bracket; this choice is related to the ambiguity).

in this sense of a series expansion  formal because we are not guaranteed
that the series converges, and in many examples it does not  the problem has
been solved. deformation quantization gives us a noncommutative algebra for
each choice of poisson structure on our manifold. this choice can be param-
eterized by a bivector (x) satisfying the jacobi identity, or when this is
non-degenerate by a closed two-form  = 1.

3.2 the noncommutative torus

an example where the series converges and this works perfectly is to start
with x = t n the n-torus. let this be coordinatized by xi with 1  i  n and
0  xi < 2. we take constant ij and dene the multiplication law as

(f  g)(x) = exp(cid:18)iij 

xi



yj(cid:19) f (x)g(y)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)y=x

this is the familiar rule for multiplying weyl ordered symbols of quantum
mechanical operators. we can present the same rule in terms of generators
and relations: any function can be written as a sum of monomials in the
variables

(24)

(25)

(26)

ui  eixi

,

and on these (24) becomes

ui  uj = eiij

ei(xi+xj ) = e2iij

uj  ui.

this gives us a purely algebraic denition and proves that the deformed multi-
plication is associative. it also shows that the noncommutative tori associated
with ij and ij + ij with ij any antisymmetric matrix with integral coef-
cients are in fact the same.

3.3 fuzzy spaces

a dierent sense in which a general algebra can approximate the algebra of
functions on a continous manifold is to propose a sequence of algebras an and
linear maps n : c(x)  an such that, as n  , we approximate the
conventional multiplication law arbitrarily well:

n (f )n (g) = n (f g) + o(

1
n

).

(27)

17

for example there is a well-known mapping of functions on s2 into m2j+1(c)
which works by identifying the embedding s2  r3 dened by v = x 2
1 + x 2
2 +
x 2
3 = j(j + 1) = (n 2 1)/4 satised by
3  1 = 0 with the relation l2
the generators of the su (2) representation of spin j. more explicitly, a given
f on s2 determines f on r3 up to adding an arbitrary function multiplied

2 + l2

1 + l2

by v ; thus if we replace xi  li/p(n 2  1)/4 we get a unique element
of m2j+1(c). the noncommutativity [x1, x2]  x3/n and goes away for
suitable test functions in the limit.
these constructions also have many physical applications (such as the
membrane construction of 12; see 39 for others) but it is worth keeping in mind
the essential distinction between algebras which are as large as the space
of functions on some starting manifold (like the deformation quantization)
and algebras which are smaller or even nite (see 47 for a precise version of
this distinction).
indeed the two ideas seem somewhat orthogonal and one
can pose for example the problem of nding sequences of nite dimensional
algebras which approximate (21) for some nite h.

having said this, we will return to algebras which are deformations of

function algebras.

3.4 gauge theory on the noncommutative torus

clearly to dene gauge theory we want notions of derivative, integral and
metric on our noncommutative space. although general denitions have been
proposed, working them out for deformation quantization of curved manifolds
seems to be tricky (e.g. see 29). of course the torus is simple: we can take

iuj
1 . . . u pn

z u p1

= iijuj

n = p1,0 . . . pn,0

(28)

and use a constant matrix gij as our metric.

the simplest denition of the gauge theory then proceeds as follows. first,
take the large n limit of yang-mills theory  the elds a, x i and  become
large matrices. at a generic point in their conguration space, they satisfy
no relations  therefore if we write a formula using the product a1a2, then
a1a2 it must stay throughout our formal manipulations. therefore gauge
invariance, supersymmetry, and all the other classical properties of large n
yang-mills theory must be equally true if we regard the elds as taking values
in an arbitrary noncommutative algebra.

such an approach will give an explicit gauge theory lagrangian which we
can use to quantize, derive feynman rules, and so forth. in terms of the multi-
plication law (24), one essentially nds the conventional yang-mills lagrangian

18

where every appearance of the commutator [a, a ] is replaced by the algebra
commutator a  a  a  a. in the case of pure deformation quantization
of functions (a u (1) theory) this is essentially the moyal bracket. we thus
nd a non-local theory of a very specic type, studied now in many works (i
found 6,34,35 especially illuminating).

one must also classify topological sectors of the gauge theory and the
formalism we just described is cumbersome for this purpose. it is better to start
from the beginning and classify projective modules on the noncommutative
torus, dene connections on these modules as derivations satisfying

i(f v) = (if )v + fiv

(29)

and then interpret these connections in terms of explicit gauge elds. this is
summarized for t p
 wit p = 2 in 10 and for higher p in 48 where a classication
of constant curvature connections is made.

3.5 quantizing noncommutative gauge theory

although it is somewhat out of the main line of these lectures it should be said
that at present the most pressing question regarding this theory is whether or
not the quantum theory is well-dened. the non-locality of (24) looks very
bad at rst but after deriving the feynman rules and studying the one loop
amplitude one sees that the situation is actually rather good.

the relation to conventional yang-mills we described means that the feyn-
man rules can be obtained by following the same procedure as for conventional
yang-mills with one of the standard gauge xings, and then replacing the
lie algebra structure constants fabc with momentum-dependent structure con-
stants coming from evaluating (24) in momentum space. at least in perturba-
tion theory, the gauge xing procedure does not care about the nonlocality of
the interactions. the result is

fabc  2i sin ijpaipbj

(30)

where pa and pb are the incoming momenta on these two lines. this expression
is cyclically symmetric thanks to momentum conservation pa + pb + pc = 0. of
course the momenta are quantized on the torus.

thus a one-loop two-point amplitude will take the general form

a(p) = xk

n (k, p)

k2(k  p)2 sin2 ijkipj.

(31)

where n (k, p) is a standard polynomial in the momenta. in the supersymmetric
case, one can use conventional supereld techniques as well. for example, the

19

one-loop contribution to the kinetic terms will be given by this expression with
n = 1.

what we see is that the extra factors associated with the non-locality of
the interaction do not worsen the uv behavior of perturbation theory and ac-
tually can improve it, by providing oscillatory factors. in the example at hand
one sees that there is a term with the conventional yang-mills uv behavior
(leading to a non-zero beta function in d = 3 + 1) and a new term in which the
oscillatory behavior cuts o the integral at the scale 2  (p)2. this leads
to a nite term p2 log p2 in the one-loop eective action which in itself is not
inconsistent (since we are on the torus, p is discrete and we need not address
the interpretation of the p  0 singularity). it is quite plausible that the usual
ward identities for gauge invariance will go through leading to one-loop renor-
malizability. this claim for the fermionic contribution is already implicit in
the literature  it just says that the log divergent part of det /d is proportional
to the nc yang-mills action, a point made in 8.

however the appearance of new non-local but nite contributions at one
loop suggests the possibility that similar divergent terms could be produced
at higher loop order. presumably a divergence proportional to p2 log p2 for ex-
ample would spoil renormalizability (unless such terms sum up to something
sensible at nite g, in which case it would presumably indicate that the uv
structure of the theory is quite dierent from conventional ym). since the the-
ory is non-local, we do not have the standard renormalization group arguments
to guide us, and it is important to understand this point.

for the particular case of noncommutative n = 4 sym, we can be fairly
hopeful. first, since conventional n = 4 sym is nite, to the extent that
amplitudes are given by conventional feynman diagrams plus more convergent
corrections, it will also be nite. furthermore, the theories appear as brane
world-volume theories in limits of string theory, as we discuss below, so if they
decouple from the rest of the string theory at energies low compared to the
string scale, we have another strong argument for consistency.

3.6 quotients

actually we already made a noncommutative geometry construction in our
rst lecture, in writing (5),

1(g)(g) = r(g)

for all g  .

(32)

this is a universal denition one could use to dene the quotient of any algebra
(with some unitary representation) by any group action. as we saw it produces
larger conguration spaces than our starting theory and for this reason this
construction is called the crossed product in the math literature.

20

an attractive aspect of this construction, much discussed in 8, is that it
allows dening quotients which would be extremely singular if we tried to use
the simpler denition f (x) = f (gx)  g  . the classic example is an ergodic
action of a group, for which the orbit of a point is dense in the whole set.
the simplest example is to take x  s1, say 0  x < 1, and consider the
action by z generated by g(x) = x+ for some constant . for  = p/q rational
of course the usual quotient makes sense and produces a circle of radius r/q.
for  irrational the only continuous functions on this quotient are constant so
we must consider the new denition.

the regular representation of z is of course g|ni = |n + 1i and thus we

can write solutions of (5) as matrices fmn(x) satisfying

f (x)m+1,n+1 = f (x + )m,n.

(33)

for every function f there is a solution mf , the diagonal matrix fm,n(x) =
m,nf (x + n  1). a new solution of (33) is
sm,n = m+1,n

(34)

as well as any power of s or product skmf .

this is somewhat like the familiar construction of d-branes on s1 from
those at a point 52 but here our starting point was already a gauge theory on
s1, so what do we end up with? in both cases we can interpret the expansion
of the solution in powers of s as the fourier expansion of a function in one
higher dimension. now we already started out with one dimension, which we

can also fourier expand writing f (x) = pn fnt n with t = e2ix. let us for

later use slightly generalize to s1 with circumference l, for which t = e2ix/l.
the result is that the quotient algebra is generated by the two operators

s and t satisfying

st = e2i/lt s.

(35)

the quotient in this sense of s1 by a shift  is the noncommutative torus t 2
 .
note that even for rational  the two denitions of quotient disagree. we
p/q = mq(t 2) so there is a close relation
will see in the next section that t 2
between them. a useful description of this relation is that they are morita
equivalent. one way to think about this equivalence is that the two algebras
must become isomorphic upon tensoring with matrices mn (c) in a suitable
large n limit (more precisely, with the algebra of compact operators).

a stronger and more useful relation would be that there exist linear maps
between the two algebras which we could use to show that the gauge theories
built on the two algebras are isomorphic  any conguration in the gauge theory
built on a has a corresponding conguration in b with the same action. such

21

a relation of complete morita equivalence has been dened and studied in
50. it would imply not just that the bps spectra in the two theories are the
same but presumably that the theories are identical even classically, making
duality between them manifest.

3.7 duality on the noncommutative torus

it is clear that the algebras t 2
the algebras t 2

 and t 2

1/ are morita equivalent.

 and t 2

+1 are isomorphic. we now argue that

this can be done by repeating the construction of the previous section but
by taking as the starting point an algebra dened using the quotient s1 = r/z.
thus we start with functions on r and again nd all solutions of the relation
(33). these are again the operator s and mf , but now with no periodicity
imposed on f .

the algebra generated by these operators is clearly larger than that of
functions on s1 with radius . however according to general theory8 the two
are morita equivalent which is good enough for present purposes.

a heuristic argument for this is to imagine starting not with r but with
s1 of radius l = n  for some integer n . by the previous section the result
is the nc torus with parameter 1/n  if we expand functions f in terms of
t = exp 2i/l, we have (35) with /l = 1/n . now we rewrite the expansion
in terms of u  t n as

f =

n 1

xm=0xn

t mu nfm,n.

(36)

the operator u generates the commuting algebra as 1 of functions on s1 with
radius , while the pair {s, t} as is well known have an explicit n -dimensional
clock and shift representation. thus the result is equivalent to mn (as 1 ),
and it should be plausible that the l   limit produces the large n limit of
our previous discussion.
let the radius in the rst quotient be 1; we can then take a second quotient
by x  x + 2 by repeating the discussion of the previous section, to produce
the algebra of matrices built on the noncommutative torus t2/1.
now the point of all this is that we made the two quotients in exactly the
same way  so we can do them in the opposite order to get another morita
equivalent algebra. this will be the algebra of matrices built on the noncom-
mutative torus t1/2.b

b actually we wanted 1/2. at the level we are working we cannot tell the dierence as
the two are related by redenition t  t 1.

22

xx(cid:0)(cid:18)

figure 1: a string excitation on a d1-brane (the thick line) on t 2. it is a bilocal object and
the resulting non-locality is precisely described by the nc gauge theory.

the upshot is that the symmetries   1/ and    + 1 have a
geometric origin very analogous to the familiar   1/ of elliptic curves.
we can dene the nc torus as the quotient of r by a two-dimensional lattice,
whose natural automorphism group is sl(2, z).

3.8 relation to m theory and prospects

the applications of the noncommutative torus to m theory at present follow
by combining existing results and dualities with the following: if we consider
d1-branes on a highly oblique torus, their world-volume theory is d = 2 + 1
noncommutative gauge theory.20 the main idea is expressed in gure 1.

by duality this tells us that d0-branes on a very small torus with non-zero
neveu-schwarz two-form eld are also described by noncommutative gauge
theory. in the large n limit this becomes the matrix theory description of m
theory with a non-zero background three-form cij .10

the duality we found in the previous section then has the natural inter-
pretation as the zero volume limit of the usual string theory sl(2, z) duality
acting on b +iv .c the element b  1/b thus is double t-duality (in matrix
theory it is double t-duality including the compactied null direction), which
is not a geometrical symmetry in the usual sense of supergravity. we see that
it has become a geometrical symmetry in this framework. a test of this idea
is that noncommutative t d should have so(d, d; z) symmetry and indeed it
does, as has been shown by rieel and schwarz.49

in four dimensions, a very interesting question is to understand the struc-
ture of the moduli spaces of self-dual nc gauge elds. the rst work on this
was 41 which studied instantons on r4 and showed that they can be obtained
from a pretty noncommutative deformation of the adhm construction: one
simply takes the matrices x  to be noncommuting in the same way as the

c the connection with zero volume limits was recognized in the early math work leading
to noncommutative spaces being called tiny spaces at rst. however it was soon realized
that this name could be a barrier to the subject being taken at all seriously and the present
name was adopted instead.9

23

original coordinates. this smooths out singularities in the moduli space and,
in contrast to the standard case, even the u (1) theory has smooth self-dual
solutions.

we can expect a similar story on tori  moduli spaces will be deformations
of those of conventional gauge theory  although details have not yet been
worked out yet. it seems very plausible that these moduli spaces will appear
as moduli spaces of string compactications, and in fact the recent work 7 uses
string dualities to argue that moduli spaces of (2, 0) theories in six dimensions
compactied on t 3 with wilson lines coupling to the r-symmetry currents are
moduli spaces of instantons on nc tori.

it seems quite likely that nc gauge theory and much of the setup also
works on curved base spaces. certainly the simple picture of gure 1 general-
izes and shows us that d-branes on general curved spaces will have a non-local
aspect to their world-volume theory which should be described by noncommu-
tative geometry. indeed a construction closely related to the crossed product
is that of the foliation algebra and this should be useful in describing families
of brane hypersurfaces. this may lead to gauge theories produced by deforma-
tion quantization, or it might lead to a better behaved version of deformation
quantization.

asymmetric orbifolds, their deformations and other theories now lacking
any geometric interpretation are also natural candidates to try to cast in this
language. discrete torsion provides an example in which noncommutativity
plays a clear role,25 and about which there is clearly more to say.

finally, on a more speculative side, it seems quite possible that the key
to understanding d-geometry will turn out to lie in a deeper understanding of
noncommutative geometry. d-geometry provides a set of problems in which
the non-locality of string theory and m theory  still dicult for us to treat
 is reduced to specic deformations of the traditional notions of geometry,
which can be described using formal series expansions in the operator ls.
deformation quantization involves an analogous expansion and it is probably
signicant that in kontsevichs construction its coecients are obtained as cor-
relation functions in an auxiliary string theory. furthermore, compatibility
with t-duality is known to lead to strong constraints on the sigma model rg
32, so if noncommutative geometry can provide a simple general description of
t-duality, it seems quite likely to be an appropriate language for this problem.

1. t. banks, nucl.phys.proc.suppl. 67 (1998) 180-224, hep-th/9710231;
s. hellerman and j. polchinski, hep-th/9711037. v. balasubramanian,
r. gopakumar and f. larsen, nucl. phys. b526 (1998) 415, hep-
th/9712077.

24

2. t. banks and m. b. green, j.high energy phys. 05 (1998) 002; hep-

th/9804170.

3. f. bayen, m. flato, c. fronsdal, a. lichnerowicz and d. sternheimer,

ann. phys. 111 (1978) 61.

4. k. becker and m. becker, nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 48, hep-th/9705091;
k. becker, m. becker, j. polchinski, a. tseytlin, phys. rev. d56 (1997)
3174-3178, hep-th/9706072; y. okawa, t. yoneya, nucl. phys. b538
(1999) 67; hep-th/9806108.

5. m. berkooz and m. r. douglas, phys. lett. b395 (1997) 196, hep-

th/9610236.

6. d. brace and b. morariu, hep-th/9810185.
7. y.-k. cheung, o. ganor, m. krogh and a. mikhailov, hep-th/9812172.
8. a. connes, noncommutative geometry, academic press, 1994.
9. a. connes, personal communication.
10. a. connes, m. r. douglas and a. schwarz, j.high energy phys. 02

(1998) 003; hep-th/9711162.

11. j. de boer, k. hori and h. ooguri, nucl. phys. b525 (1998) 257; hep-

th/9802005.

12. b. de wit, j. hoppe and h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b 305 [fs 23] (1988)

545.

13. d.-e. diaconescu and m. r. douglas, unpublished.
14. d.-e. diaconescu and r. entin, hep-th/9706059.
15. m. dine, r. echols and j. p. gray, hep-th/9810021.
16. m. r. douglas, nucl. phys. proc.

suppl.

68 (1998) 381; hep-

th/9707228.

17. m. r. douglas, d. kabat, p. pouliot and s. h. shenker, nucl. phys.

b485 (1996) 85; hep-th/9608024.

18. m. r. douglas and b. r. greene, adv.theor.math.phys. 1 (1998) 184;

hep-th/9707214.

19. m. r. douglas, b. r. greene and d. r. morrison, nucl. phys. b506

(1997) 84; hep-th/9704151.

20. m. r. douglas and c. hull, j.high energy phys. 02 (1998) 008, hep-
th/9711165; y.-k. cheung and m. krogh, nucl. phys. b528 (1998) 185,
hep-th/9803031; t. kawano and k. okuyama, phys. lett. b433 (1998)
29, hep-th/9803044.

21. m. r. douglas, hep-th/9703056; m. r. douglas, a. kato and h. ooguri,

hep-th/9708012.

22. m. r. douglas and g. moore, hep-th/9603167.
23. m. r. douglas, h. ooguri and s. h. shenker, phys. lett. b402 (1997)
36, hep-th/9702203; m. r. douglas and h. ooguri, phys. lett. b425

25

(1998) 71, hep-th/9710178.

24. m. r. douglas, j. polchinski and a. strominger; j.high energy phys.

12 (1997) 003; hep-th/9703031.
25. m. r. douglas, hep-th/9807235.
26. m. r. douglas, to appear.
27. b. fedosov, deformation quantization and index theory, akademie ver-

lag 1996.

28. d. friedan, ann. phys. 163, 318; l. alvarez-gaume and d. z. freedman,

phys. rev. d22 (1980) 846.

29. h. garcia-compean, hep-th/9804188.
30. b. r. greene, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 41 (1995) 92150.
31. m. grisaru, a. van de ven and d. zanon, nucl. phys. b277 (1986) 388

and 409.

32. p. haagensen, phys. lett. b382 (1996) 356; hep-th/9604136.
33. n. j. hitchin et. al., comm. math. phys. 108 (987) 535.
34. c. hofman and e. verlinde, hep-th/9810219.
35. a. konechny and a. schwarz, hep-th/9901077.
36. m. kontsevich, q-alg/9709040.
37. r. leigh, mod.phys.lett.a4 (1989) 2767.
38. g. lifschytz, phys. lett. b388 (1996) 720; hep-th/9604156.
39. j. madore, an introduction to noncommutative geometry and its appli-

cations, cambridge 1995.

40. e. martinec, phys. lett. 171b (1986) 189.
41. n. nekrasov and a. schwarz, comm. math. phys. 198 (1998) 689;

hep-th/9802068.

42. d. nemeschansky and a. sen, phys. lett. 178b (1986) 365.
43. h. ooguri, y. oz and z. yin, nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 407; hep-

th/9606112.

44. s. paban, s. sethi and m. stern, nucl.phys. b534 (1998) 137; hep-

th/9805018.

45. p. pouliot and j. polchinski, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 6601; hep-

th/9704029.

46. k. ray, phys. lett. b433 (1998) 307, hep-th/9803192.
47. m. rieel, quant-ph/9712009.
48. m. rieel, in lecture notes in math. 1132, springer 1985, pp. 456-467.
49. m. rieel and a. schwarz, math/9803057.
50. a. schwarz, nucl. phys. b534 (1998 720; hep-th/9805034.
51. a. strominger, s.-t. yau and e. zaslow, nucl. phys. b479 (1996) 243;

hep-th/9606040.

52. w. taylor, phys. lett. b394 (1997) 283; hep-th/9611042.

26

