preprint typeset in jhep style. - hyper version

sissa/5/99/ep/fm
hep-th/9901093

matrix string theory and its moduli space

g. bonelli, l. bonora, f. nesti, a. tomasiello

international school for advanced studies (sissa/isas)
via beirut 24, 34014 trieste, italy, and infn, sezione di trieste
e-mail: bonelli@sissa.it, bonora@sissa.it, nesti@sissa.it, tomasiel@sissa.it

abstract: the correspondence between matrix string theory in the strong coupling limit
and iia superstring theory can be shown by means of the instanton solutions of the former.
we construct the general instanton solutions of matrix string theory which interpolate
between given initial and nal string congurations. each instanton is characterized by
a riemann surface of genus h with n punctures, which are realized as plane curves. we
study the moduli space of such plane curves and nd out that, at nite n , it is discretized.
instead of 3h  3 + n its complex dimensions are 2h  3 + n, the remaining h dimensions
being discrete. it turns out that as n tends to innity, these discrete dimensions become
continuous, and one recovers the full moduli space of string interaction theory.

9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

0
2

 
 

1
v
3
9
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

contents

1.

introduction

2. matrix string theory: overview of problems and solutions

2.1 euclidean mst and hitchin systems
2.2 construction of instanton solutions
2.3 riemann surfaces as branched coverings of the cylinder
2.4 string interpretation
2.5 plane curves and moduli space
2.6 singularities and space-time dimensions

3. the unitary and dressing factors

3.1 the unitary factor
3.2 the dressing factor

4. branched coverings of riemann surfaces and plane curves

4.1 punctures on plane curves
4.2 some examples
4.3 plane curves and their representation
4.4 examples: smooth elliptic curves
4.5 examples: singular plane curves
4.6 the role of singularities

5. the moduli space of mst

5.1 discretization
5.2 the dimension of the moduli space of stringy instantons

a. singularities of plane curves

1

3
3
4
5
6
8
9

10
10
12

13
14
15
18
20
20
22

23
23
27

28

1. introduction

the n = (8, 8) sym on a cylindrical 2d space-time with gauge group u(n) (hereafter
referred to as matrix string theory (mst)) represents in the strong coupling limit a theory
of type ii superstrings. this had been conjectured with various degrees of plausibility in
several papers [1, 2, 3, 4] (see also [5, 6, 7] and the review article [8]). a step forward for
nding more compelling evidence for such a conjecture was made in refs. [9, 10, 11], where it
was pointed out that the mst contains bps instanton solutions which interpolate between
dierent initial and nal string congurations via suitable punctured riemann surfaces. we

1

often refer to them as stringy instantons. in a recent paper, [12], it was shown that, in the
strong coupling limit, mst in the background of a given classical bps instanton solution
reduces to the green-schwarz superstring theory plus a decoupled maxwell theory, and that
the leading term of the amplitude in such background is proportional to g
, where gs is
the string coupling constant and  = 2  2h  n is the euler characteristic of the riemann
surface of genus h with n punctures, which characterizes the given classical solution. this
is the result one expects from perturbative string interaction theory. needless to say this
is a strong conrmation of the abovementioned conjecture.

s

the results of [12], although striking (and conrmed by the present paper), were not
complete. they were essentially based on a small subset of instantons, those corresponding
to the so-called zn coverings. in this paper we intend to ll the gap by considering any kind
of coverings and constructing the corresponding instantons. any such instanton consists of
two ingredients, a group theoretical factor and a core. the latter corresponds to a branched
covering of the cylinder. the group theoretical factor contains elds that satisfy wznw-
like equations with delta-function sources. inside these instantons riemann surfaces appear
as branched coverings of the base cylinder in the form of plane curves, i.e. the zero locus
of polynomials of two complex variables of order n in one of them. this implies that, as
we consider string amplitudes beyond the tree level, we are bound to meet mostly singular
curves, which, in order to be classied, need to be desingularized. one can then set out
to study the moduli space of such curves. this problem is of utmost importance, not only
because one would like to make sure that the moduli space of type iia theory is actually
recovered within mst, but especially because one would like to know in what sense this
becomes true.

in mst there is indeed a dependence on the discrete parameter n :

it was already
noticed in [12] that for nite n the moduli space ensuing from mst is only an approx-
imation of the moduli space of type iia superstring theory; we are now in a position to
be more precise on this issue. we show below that, for nite n , the instantons of mst
reproduce exactly only the tree string amplitudes, while they cover only part of the moduli
space of higher genus riemann surfaces with punctures. more precisely, in a process with
n external string states mediated by a riemann surface of genus h, one expects 3h  3 + n
complex moduli; at nite n , mst reproduces only part of these parameters, and h of them
are anyhow discrete. the latter become continuous and we recover the full moduli space
of riemann surfaces only when n  .

in this paper we clarify also another issue of mst: an instanton seems to extend at rst
sight over four space-time dimensions of type iia superstring theory. however one can show
that the riemann surfaces corresponding to the string instantons only in particular cases
are contained in four dimensions; in general they extend over more physical dimensions
and they can actually ll up the ten dimensional space-time of type iia theory.

the paper is organized as follows. the second section is a rather detailed review
of previous results, as well as an overview of problems we want to clarify in this paper.
it also contains a summary of our main results while the details of their derivation are
deferred to the following sections. in section 3 we give the general construction of the rst

2

ingredient of a stringy instanton, i.e.
its group theoretical factor. the last two sections
are instead devoted to a description of the second ingredient, i.e. riemann surfaces as
branched coverings of the cylinder (section 4) and their moduli space (section 5).

2. matrix string theory: overview of problems and solutions

2.1 euclidean mst and hitchin systems

to start with let us summarize the results of [11, 12]. mst is a theory dened on a
cylinder1 c with coordinates  and  . its euclidean action is
g2
2

d2w tr dwx id wx i 

1
4g2 f 2

[x i, x j]2

w w 

s =

1

 zc

+ i(s d ws + +

c dw+

c ) + igt i[x i, ]!,

(2.1)

where we use the notation

w =

1
2

( + i),

w =

1
2

(  i),

aw = a  ia, a w = a + ia .

moreover x i with i = 1, . . . , 8 are hermitean n  n matrices and dwx i = wx i +
i[aw, x i]. fw w is the gauge curvature. summation over the i, j indices is understood.  rep-
resents 16 n n matrices whose entries are 2d spinors. it can be written as t = (s , +
c ),
where  denotes the 2d chirality and s , +
c are spinors in the 8s and 8c representations
of so(8), while t represents the 2d transposition. the matrices i are the 16  16 so(8)
gamma matrices.

the action (2.1) has n = (8, 8) supersymmetry. in [11] we singled out classical super-
symmetric congurations that preserve (4, 4) supersymmetry. in this congurations the
fermions are zero,  = 0, and x i = 0 for all i except two, for deniteness x i 6= 0 for
x = x 1  ix 2 = x, the
i = 1, 2. introducing the complex notation x = x 1 + ix 2,
conditions to be satised for such bps congurations are

fw w + ig2[x, x] = 0

dwx = 0,

d w x = 0 .

(2.2)

(2.3)

from a mathematical viewpoint (2.2), (2.3) can be identied with a hitchin system [15]
on a cylinder. hitchin systems are dened starting from a u (n ) vector bundle v over c,
associated with the fundamental representation of u (n ). they consist of couples (a, x)
where a is a gauge connection and x a section of endv  k, where k is the canonical
bundle of c, which satisfy (2.2) and (2.3), [15]. such systems can be lifted to an n -branched
covering of c, [16, 17, 18, 19]. such lifting was the basis of all the developments in [12].

1in [13, 14] the authors have considered related theories on the torus.

3

2.2 construction of instanton solutions

each solution of (2.2), (2.3) consists of two parts: a branched covering of the cylinder
via the relative x characteristic polynomial and a group theoretical factor. a few explicit
solutions, based on zn coverings, were presented and discussed in [11, 12]. zn coverings are
but a very restricted set of genus 0 coverings. consequently, the corresponding instantons
are only a limited set of all possible stringy instantons.

the aim of the present paper is to generalize the analysis of [11, 12] by considering
the most general possible coverings and constructing the corresponding instantons. the
purpose of this section is to provide a mostly qualitative overview of the problems involved
and of the main results.

let us start by recalling our construction of the solutions of eqs. (2.2), (2.3). by this
we mean a couple (x, aw) which are solutions of (2.2), (2.3) and are smooth everywhere
on c. we parametrize them as

x = y 1m y,

aw = iy 1wy .

(2.4)

the group theoretical factor y takes values in the complex group sl(n, c) while the
matrix m determines the branched covering (see below). the dependence on the yang-
mills coupling constant g is contained in the y factor, while m does not depend on g. in
[12] we have shown on several examples that y = ysyd, where yd, the dressing factor, tends
to 1 in the strong coupling limit outside the string interaction points, while ys is a special
s m ys and y s m(y s )1 are
matrix, independent of g, endowed with the property that y 1
simultaneously diagonalizable. the construction of ys and yd in the general case is rather
subtle. one rst diagonalizes m by means of a matrix s of sl(n, c). then one introduces
a matrix k such that ks = u is unitary. as it turns out, k may have singularities at the
points of c where any two eigenvalues of m coincide: these correspond to the branch points
of the spectral covering (k is also allowed to diverge in a prescribed way for w = ,
but we disregard this issue for the time being). therefore km k1 is in general singular
at these points. we therefore introduce into the game a new matrix l, with the purpose
of canceling the singularities of km k1 in such a way that lkm k1l1 is smooth and
satises (2.2), (2.3). in order for this to be true the entries of l must satisfy equations of
the wznw type with delta-function-type sources at the branch points. by construction
k is independent of g while l does depend on g. we will show that in fact l  1 as
g  . we therefore see that k1 plays the role of ys and l1 is to be identied with
the dressing factor yd, so that lk = y 1.

we will deal with the general construction of ys and yd in detail in section 3. here
we would like to stress the double miracle of the above construction: we construct an
everywhere smooth solution by means of two non smooth matrices k and l, which are
such that on the one hand l  1 as g   and on the other hand k form with s a
unitary matrix u = ks. this can be adequately appreciated in the light of ref. [12]. it
was shown there that, thanks to these properties, in the strong coupling limit, we can get
entirely rid of the non-diagonal background part. in order to deal with the singularities

4

that are exposed as the dressing factor tends to 1, one cuts out a small disc around any
string interaction point (i.e. one introduces a regulator), denes the theory on the cylinder
minus such discs (where, in the strong coupling limit, yd = 1) and get rid of the u factor
by means of a gauge transformation. at this point the analysis of [12] can be conveniently
carried out and, eventually, the regulator removed.

2.3 riemann surfaces as branched coverings of the cylinder

the second ingredient of an instanton solution is a branched covering of the cylinder. in
dealing with branched coverings it is however more convenient to map, by the standard
mapping z = e w, the innite cylinder c to the punctured complex z-plane c \ {0}, i.e. c.
1 (with two punctures). when
very often we will refer to it as the riemann sphere c
1 we always mean the riemann sphere with two punctures, unless a dierent
speaking of c
convention is explicitly stated.

let us consider the polynomial

px(y) = det(y  x) = yn +

yiai ,

n1

xi=0

where y is a complex indeterminate. due to (2.3), we have zai = 0 which means that the
set of functions {ai} are analytic on the complex plane,2 although they are allowed to have
poles at z = 0 and z = . therefore the equation

px(y) = 0

(2.5)

identies in the (z, y) space (i.e. c c, but often in the following for simplicity we denote
it c2 ) a riemann surface , which is an n-sheeted branched covering of the cylinder. for
later use we recall that eq. px (y) = 0 is tantamount to considering the matrix equation

x n + an1x n1 +  + a0 = 0 .

(2.6)

the explicit form of the covering map is given by the set {x(1)(z), . . . , x(n )(z)} of eigen-
values of x. each eigenvalue spans a sheet. the projection map to the base cylinder c
will be denoted  :   c. the points where two or more eigenvalues coincide are called
branch points. the identication cuts in the sheets start or end at these points. we would
like to warn the reader that with the term branch point we denote, in general, both the
points on the covering and their image in c under the projection . the context should
make clear which exactly we refer to.

2notice the change of convention with respect to [11, 12], which amounts to the exchange z  z. this

is in order to refer to the ais as analytic functions, rather than antianalytic.

5

a diagonalizable matrix m , which is solution of eq. (2.6), can always be cast in the

canonical form

m =

.

(2.7)

an1 an2





1
0
. . .
0

0
1
. . .
0

. . .
. . .
0
. . .
. . .

. . . a0
0
. . .
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
0
1





the branched covering structure is completely encoded in the {ai} analytic functions and
we have already stressed that it is independent of the coupling g.

2.4 string interpretation

this is a good point for reviewing the string theory interpretation of solutions (x, aw)
of (2.2), (2.3) that we presented in [11, 12], while enriching it with new remarks pertinent to
the present paper. we recall that we interpret the riemann surface dened by the relevant
branched covering of the cylinder as the classical carrier of a string process. the branch
points at z 6= 0, represent joining and splitting processes of the string. generically, when
the branch point is simple, we have the joining of two strings to form a unique string or
the splitting of one string into two. we may also have multiple branch points3 in which
more then two incoming or outgoing strings are involved. however in this paper, contrary
to [11, 12], the emphasis will be on simple branch points.4

the inverse images under  of z = 0, z =  are punctures in  with a denite string
interpretation: they represent incoming and outgoing strings, respectively. more precisely
they represent the points where incoming strings enter (outgoing strings leave) the process
represented by the riemann surface .

it has to be kept in mind that, in mst, the counterimages of z = 0 and z = 
are distinguished points with an associated physical meaning. this is to be contrasted
1, where these points
with the usual mathematical treatment of branched coverings of c
do not play any particular role. this remark will become extremely important below, in
connection with the discussion about moduli space.

let us discuss further properties of the punctures corresponding to z = 0 (an analogous
discussion holds for z = ), see for example [11]. the counterimages of z = 0 by  may
the solutions of the algebraic equation (2.5) at z = 0 may
be n distinct points, i.e.
be all distinct.
in such a case we say we have n small incoming strings (of length 1
each). however, in general, the inverse image of z = 0 may contain several branch points
1 , . . . , p in
p in
s , with multiplicity l1  1, . . . , ls  1, respectively (if z = 0 is a singular point
of the eq. (2.5) it has to be desingularized rst, see below).
in this case the process
represented by  involve s incoming strings of length l1, . . . , ls, respectively. the physical

3the multiplicity or ramication index of a branch point is dened as number of sheets which come

together at that point, minus one; therefore branch points that involve only two sheets are called simple.

4this is to simplify the exposition. multiple branch points at z 6= 0,  can also be analyzed. they

dene anyhow lower dimensional subspaces of the moduli space.

6

interpretation of the string length has been given in [4]. in the framework of the light-cone
quantization of type iia superstring, the string length is identied with the momentum
component p+ = p9 + p0 of the string in suitably normalized units. here 0, 9 are of course
the time and longitudinal direction of the ambient space, which do not explicitly appear
in (2.1).

let us summarize the string interpretation of the solutions of (2.2), (2.3). each such
solution is characterized by a punctured riemann surface realized as a branched covering of
the cylinder. the punctures represent the sites where strings enter or leave the interaction
process. the length of each string is associated to its p+ momentum component. this is
the picture of mst at strong coupling. at nite coupling g the string interpretation of the
instantons persists, but the dressing factor yd has the eect of blurring it by smearing the
string interactions and so on.

now, the question arises of how to transform this scenario into an eective calculational
tool. one denite suggestion has been made in [12]. one considers (2.1) and expands
it about a classical solution which spans a given string process (riemann surface with
punctures), then takes the g   limit.
it turns out that the dressing factor of the
instanton disappears and the unitary factor can be gauged away. the strong coupling limit
turns out to be well dened and, practically, to the lowest order in 1/g, the background
elds disappear, except for the notion of the covering surface . this can be seen by
splitting all the matrix elds into cartan (diagonal) and non-cartan modes. a suitable
gauge xing makes it clear that the non-cartan part can be integrated out, while the cartan
modes can be interpreted as elds on . the nal upshot is that mst at strong coupling
reduces to the green-schwarz superstring theory plus a decoupled maxwell theory, and
that the leading term of the amplitude in such background is proportional to g
, where
gs = g1 is the string coupling constant and  = 2  2h  n is the euler characteristic of
 if its genus is h and its punctures are n.
let us denote, as in [12], the elds in  with a tilde: x, a, , c are the small oscillations
of x, aw,  and the ghost c, respectively, which survive in the strong coupling limit. then,
in order to describe a complete string process, we can introduce the vertex operators
v1, . . . , vn corresponding to n incoming and outgoing strings, expressed in terms of x, ,
possibly the superstring reparametrization ghosts, and of the string transverse momenta,
and insert them into the path integral. the amplitude (in the strong coupling limit) will
schematically be:

s

hv1, . . . , vnih = g

s zm(h,n)

n

dm z d[x, , a, c]jb/f jc/ncv1 . . . vnesgssm axwell , (2.8)

where most of the symbols are the same as in [12]. here we have singled out the integration
over m(h,n)
n , namely over all distinct instantons which underlie the given string process for
xed n , that is to say with assigned incoming and outgoing strings and string interactions.
in ordinary string interaction theory m(h,n) is nothing but the moduli space of riemann
surfaces of genus h with n punctures, a complex space of dimension 3h  3 + n. what
actually m(h,n)

is in mst is the main subject of the present paper.

n

7

2.5 plane curves and moduli space

so far we have tacitly given for granted that any riemann surface with h handles and n
1. this point has to be carefully
punctures can be represented as a branched covering of c
handled.

let us start from eq. (2.5). this is the equation of a curve in the ane space c2 spanned
by the two complex coordinates y and z. a curve embedded in a two-dimensional ane
space is called a plane curve. therefore mst dynamically engenders riemann surfaces in
the form of plane curves.

an important role in the following is played by singular plane curves. if p (y, z) =
0 is the polynomial equation of the curve, a singular point is a point where p (y, z) =
yp (y, z) = zp (y, z) = 0. when no such points are present the curve is smooth. however
this can happen only when its genus is 1
2 (d 1)(d 2), where d is the degree of the curves,
i.e. the degree of the polynomial p (y, z): we will see later on that in our case the degree
is n , see section 4. we can lower the genus of the plane curve, while keeping the degree
constant, by allowing for singularities. this means two important things: rst, for nite
n there exists an upper bound ( 1
2 (n  1)(n  2)) on the genus of the riemann surfaces
which dene the core of the stringy instantons; second, far from discarding singular curves,
as one would be tempted to do as a rst approach, we have to take them into account,
they are bound to ll up most of the moduli space of plane curves. as we will see, singular
curves are a happy occurrence, not a nuisance.

the formulation of plane curves in terms of the variables y and z is at times ambiguous,
especially in connection with singularities. a possible way to resolve such ambiguities is to
2 by introducing three homogeneous coordinates
embed them in the projective space c
x0, x1, x2. simply set z = x1/x0, y = x2/x0 in eq. (2.5), and multiply by a suitable
2. this is
power of x0. the new equation refers to the same curve embedded in c
a cleaner representation and the one we use in the following. singular curves can be
desingularized, for example by (repeatedly) blowing up the singular points until we reach
smooth congurations. however the smooth curves one obtains this way are not plane
curves. in order to be represented as algebraic curves they need to be embedded in a larger
it is well-known that any compact riemann surface can be
ane or projective space.
3. however, if we try to project
represented as a smooth algebraic curve embedded in c
2, i.e. to represent it as a plane curve, we are bound to produce singularities.
it to c
the lesson we learn is that we have to count mostly on singular plane curves in order
to reproduce the moduli space of riemann surfaces which is needed in string interaction
theory. there is nothing arbitrary about this: all the information we need to reproduce
string theory (topology and moduli) is contained in the singular curve:
if we know the
singular curve we can reproduce a smooth counterpart with a standard algorithm. once
this point about plane curves is claried, we will not talk about singular or regular plane
curves but simply about plane curves. plane curves will be discussed in detail in section 3.
at this point it would seem that we are done: a theorem by clebsh, [20], guarantees
that any (compact) algebraic curve is birationally equivalent to a plane algebraic curve

8

which has at most ordinary double points as singularities. however this is too simplistic.
beside the upper bound for the genus we have mentioned above, we should remember
that in our case we do not have to do with compact riemann surfaces, but with riemann
surfaces with a certain number of punctures. therefore the above theorem is not conclusive.
actually we will nd out in section 4 that the presence of punctures on the riemann surface
entails the consequence that the moduli space of plane curves of genus h with n punctures is
a discretized version of the the moduli space of genus h riemann surfaces with n punctures,
whose complex dimension is 3g  3 + n. a good parametrization of the moduli space t
for string interaction theory is provided by mandelstams variables, [27, 26]. by making a
comparison with mandelstams parametrization, we will nd out that h of the mandelstam
complex parameters are actually discrete for the plane curves that appear in mst.

this point is rather technical and we only have a technical explanation for it (sec-
tion 4). its origin can be briey described as follows. the coordinate z we have introduced
above, can be naturally regarded as a meromorphic function on a given plane curve (it is
a realization of the projection  :   c). the counterimages of z = 0 and z =  form
a principal divisor in . this entails, by abels theorem, h discretizing conditions on the
parameters describing the plane curve. a detailed analysis shows that this imposes h of
the mandelstam parameters to be discrete. a conrmation of this result comes from an
estimate of the moduli space of stringy instantons. since in the y factor there no free
parameters, the moduli space of stringy instantons must coincide with the free parameters
contained in m , i.e. with the moduli space of plane curves. the estimate carried out in
section 5 conrms the above evaluation of the continuous dimension of the moduli space
of the latter.

however when n   these discrete parameters become continuous and, in addition,
the upper limit on the genus we mentioned above becomes ineective. therefore for large
n mst recovers the full moduli space of string theory. we recall that, for nite n , also
the p+ components of the momenta of the incoming and outgoing strings are discrete
and continuity is recovered only for n  . therefore, a complete description of string
interaction theory is truly achieved by mst only in the large n limit. it is nevertheless
remarkable that genus 0 processes (with discrete p+ components of the external momenta)
are exactly described by mst also for nite (but large enough) n .

2.6 singularities and space-time dimensions

singularities of plane curves provide a striking suggestion of how to resolve an unsatisfac-
tory aspect of the correspondence between mst and string theory. in (2.1) we see eight
ambient space dimensions and two world-sheet dimensions of the cylinder. we should now
remember that the correspondence mst string theory is established in the light-cone
gauge. therefore the two world-sheet dimensions are nothing but representatives of the
time and longitudinal dimensions, denoted 0 and 9, which bring the total of physical di-
mensions to ten. now, stringy instantons seem to span four out of these ten dimensions. in
other words it would seem that mst at strong coupling can only describe four-dimensional
string processes. however this is strictly true only for processes which are mediated by

9

smooth plane curves. as we have pointed out, singular curves become smooth if we en-
2 with nodes only,
large the space where they are embedded. for example, curves in c
3, that is by adding two dimensions, and
can be smoothed out by embedding them in c
so on. we interpret this by saying that the corresponding string process extend over six
(instead of four) dimensions. it is not dicult to envisage processes that extend over ten
dimensions. one can phrase it as follows: all these high dimensional processes are squeezed
to four dimensions in order to t into the instantons of the 2d eld theory (2.1), and this
projection gives rise to singularities.

3. the unitary and dressing factors

as explained in the previous section, the mst instantons consist of two pieces: a group
theory factor y and a branched covering (plane curve) parametrized by the matrix m . in
section 4 and 5 we will discuss the latter. let us now concentrate on the former. in the
derivation of the results of ref. [12] it is of paramount importance that y splits according
to y = ysyd, where yd  1 as g   outside the string interaction points (branch points
s m ys and y s m(y s )1
at z 6= 0,), and ys is a matrix independent of g such that y 1
commute.

in this section we prove that the above structure of the y factor holds for a general cov-
ering. in other words, we start from a general matrix m (2.7), construct the corresponding
y factor and show that it satises the requirements we have just mentioned.

3.1 the unitary factor

the factor ys can be constructed as follows. it is well-known, [9], that the matrix m can
be diagonalized

m = sds1,

d = diag(1, . . . , n )

by means of the following matrix s  sl(n, c):

s =  1

n 


n1
1
n2
1
. . .
1

n1
2
n2
2
. . .
1

. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .

n

. . . n1
. . . n2
n
. . .
. . .
. . .
1

,




where

 = y1i<jn

(i  j) .

(3.1)

(3.2)

(3.3)

we now introduce a matrix k such that u = ks is unitary. if such a matrix exists than
km k1 = u du1 and (k)1mk = u du1 do commute. then k can play the role
of y 1
. we refer to u = ks as the unitary factor in the construction of the background
solution x.

s

10

one such k can be constructed with the gram-schmidt procedure. the result is the

following upper triangular matrix belonging to sl(n, c):

k12
k22
. . .
0

. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .

k1n
. . .
k2n
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . . kn n

,




(3.4)

1  p  n

1
n ,

1  p < q  n  1 .

(3.5)

k11
0
. . .
0

k =

kpp = s q(np)

where

1
n ,

kpq =

q(np+1)||
q(np+1)
nq,np
pq(np)q(np+1)||

 y1lk1
n,m = (1)n+m x1j1<j2<...<jk1n

x1j1<j2<...<jkn

q(k) =

q(k)

the symbols in the previous formulae have the following meaning. for 2  k  n we set

|jl  jl+1|2|jl  jl+2|2 . . .|jl  jk|2
 ,

sk1n(j1, j2, . . . , jk1)sk1m(j1, j2, . . . , jk1) 


k,2 + y1lk2

|jl  jl+1|2|jl  jl+2|2. . .|jl  jk1|2
 ,

0  n  m  n  1

where sp(x1, . . . , xs) denotes the elementary symmetric polynomial of order p in x1, . . . , xs
(s  p):

sp(x1, . . . , xs) = x1j1<j2<...<jps

xj1 . . . xjp,

s0 = 1 .

(3.6)

moreover, by deniton, q(0) = 1, q(1) = n . notice that

q(n ) = ||2,

k11k22 . . . kn n = 1 .

n,m are homogeneous polynomials of order k(k1)

2  n in the variables i and of order
2 m in the complex conjugates i. q(k) are homogeneous polynomials of order k(k1)

2

the q(k)
k(k1)
in both i and i.

for example, in the case n = 3, the matrix k is given by

pi<j |ij|2

2
3

||
0

0

k =


pi<j (ij )|ij|2
pi<j |ij|2||
q
pi<j |ij|2||

2
3

3

1

0

3 

2
3

pi<j ij|ij|2
pi<j |ij|2||
3pi<j |ij|2||

pi i
||
3

1
3

1
3




,

1  i, j  3 .

11

this completes the construction of k. we remark that generally the entries of u = ks
contain as a factor some fractional power of ||. therefore they may vanish or diverge with
some fractional power whenever two of the eigenvalues of m coincide. this corresponds
to a simple branch point in the spectral covering, as we have seen above.5 outside these
points the unitary factor u is smooth. it is therefore justied to get rid of it by a gauge
transformation, as we have done in [12].

3.2 the dressing factor

let us come now to the yd factor. we have just noted that the entries of k are generically
singular whenever two eigenvalues of m coincide, that is at the site of a branch point
of the covering. then km k1 shares the same singularities and it is not a satisfactory
ansatz for our solution x of (2.2), (2.3), which we want to be everywhere smooth (except
perhaps at w = ). to this end we introduce a new matrix l with the requirement
that lkm k1l1 is smooth and is the desired solution x of (2.2) ,(2.3). while k is
independent of g, l will depend on g. l1 is our candidate for the dressing factor yd.

since l has to smooth out the singularities of k, it is enough to take for it an upper
triangular matrix belonging to sl(n, c). a possible parametrization for l is the following

l =





eu1
0
. . .
0
0

eu112
eu2u1

eu113

eu2u123

. . .
0
0

. . .
. . .
. . .

. . .
. . .
. . .

eu11n

eu2u12n

. . .

eun 1un 2

0

eun 1un 2n1n

eun 1





.

(3.7)

the elds u and  have to satisfy certain dierential equations in order to comply with
the requirements. we just plug the ansatz for x (and the connection) into (2.2) and work
out the relevant equations. we will not write them down here. a few examples were given
in [11, 12]. they are all equations of the wznw type and can be cast in the general form

w w + ...  w w ln|| = 


w

 
 w

() ,

(3.8)

where  denotes any eld u or , while dots represent all the other terms, which are
irrelevant in the cancellation of singularities. let us refer to these equations as the dressing
equations. on the right-hand side we see the typical delta-function type source which
characterizes them. the sources are point-like and located at the zeroes of the discriminant
, that is at the branch points of the covering.

naturally the solution x exists with the required properties only if the dressing equa-
tions admit solutions that vanish at w = . to our best knowledge, not much is known in
the literature concerning the existence of such solutions. some simple cases were discussed
in [12], where we also presented a few numerical solutions. we deem these sucient for us
to assume that the dressing equations do admit solutions that vanish at w = . once
5the entries of k contains other factors, beside , that may vanish when more than two eigenvalues

coincide. this corresponds to multiple branch points, which we disregard in this paper.

12

one assumes this, it is rather easy to argue, on a completely general ground, that in the
strong coupling limit, g  , such solutions vanish outside the zeroes of the discriminant.
the argument goes as follows. consider a candidate solution of (2.2) in which u =
 = 0 outside the zeroes of the discriminant. then, there, l = 1, and x = km k1. as
we have already noticed in section 2, in such a situation [x, x] = 0, since both x and x
are simultaneously diagonalized by the matrix u = ks. this is most welcome since, if
[x, x] were not to vanish (outside the zeroes of the discriminant), it would be impossible
to have any nite solution of (2.2). next, we have to show that also fw w vanishes in the
same region when l = 1. in fact when l = 1,

aw = ikwk1 = i(kss1)w(ss1k1) = iu (w + aw)u1 ,

where aw = s1ws. but ws  0 due to holomorphicity of the eigenvalues of m .
in conclusion (2.2) is identically satised by the ansatz l = 1 outside the zeroes of the
discriminant. since the solutions are uniquely determined by their boundary conditions, we
can conclude that, as g  , the only solution of the dressing equations outside the zeroes
of the discriminant, is the identically vanishing solution. we infer from this argument
that the solutions of the dressing equations for large g are concentrated around the branch
points and become more and more spiky as g grows larger and larger. therefore the matrix
l is just the dressing factor yd.

this conclusion, as pointed out in section 2, justies our approach in [12]. we warn
the reader, however, that the above argument is not entirely satisfactory, for it assumes
that, as g  , the only possibility is [x, x] = 0 and fw w = 0. one can envisage other
types of solutions. for instance, let aw and x be any g-dependent solution considered so
far. then call a(1)
w , x (1) their value at g = 1. the latter satisfy (2.2), (2.3) for g = 1. now
set xg = x (1)/g. then a(1)
w , xg satisfy the same equation, but, as g  , xg  0 while
f (1)
w w 6= 0. it seems however that these peculiar solutions are of no interest for string theory.
we call stringy instantons those solutions of the hitchin equations (2.2), (2.3) for which
at g =  we have both [x, x] = 0 and fw w = 0. in this paper we consider only this kind
of solutions.

4. branched coverings of riemann surfaces and plane curves

this section is devoted to the detailed analysis of the stringy instanton core, i.e. of branched
coverings of the riemann sphere. the latter appear in mst as solutions of ane equations

p (y, z) xp,q

ap,qyqzp = 0,

(y, z)  c2 ,

(4.1)

where p is a polynomial of degree n . actually this does not follow immediately from
what we said in section 2.2. from eq. (2.5) it follows that px has degree n in y, but the
ai(z)s could be any analytic functions on the punctured riemann sphere. this means that
they could be expressed by means of laurent series in z. however in order to preserve the
string interpretation we will limit ourselves to ai(z)s which are laurent polynomials and,

13

for simplicity, in this paper we will explicitly consider only ai(z)s which are polynomials
in z in such a way that p (y, z) has overall degree n .

the locus in c2 of the solutions (y, z) of (4.1) is a plane curve. the independent non-
vanishing coecients ap,q can be varied without changing, in general, the topological type
(h, n) of the curve. they are the moduli of the plane curve. counting them is an exercise
we have to do in order to see whether the moduli space of mst coincides with the moduli
space of iia superstring theory.

the literature on plane curves, and, more generally, on algebraic curves is vast, [20,
21, 22], and we will be using many well-known results. however one should bear in mind a
peculiarity of our problem which is not usually considered in the textbooks on the subject.
this is the question of punctures, which has already been introduced in section 2.4. let
us discuss it now in more detail.

4.1 punctures on plane curves

punctures are the sites on the embedded riemann surface, that is on the corresponding
plane curve, where the incoming strings enter and the outgoing strings exit.6 they are
the counterimages by  of z = 0 and z = , respectively. if any such point on the plane
curve is a branch point of multiplicity l  1, then the corresponding incoming or outgoing
string has length l. incidentally, since eventually we want to take the large n limit, we are
especially interested in the case when l is comparable with n . in the ordinary treatment
of compact riemann surfaces, if these points are regular, they are in no way special and
must be considered on the same ground as all the other regular points (this can be seen
for example by using projective coordinates).
in our approach, this is not allowed. as
we have already pointed out in section 2 the length of an incoming or outgoing string is
interpreted as the + component of the momentum in the light-cone framework. therefore,
non only the locations of the branch points in the inverse image of z = 0,, but also
their multiplicities have a precise physical meaning. two processes that dier by these
multiplicities must be kept distinct, even if, say, the topological type is the same.

let us see an example. suppose y = y1 is a branch point of multiplicity l  1 in
the counterimage of z = 0. this means that we have l roots of (2.5). for example,
y(i)  y1 + iz1/l, i = 0, . . . , l  1 and l = 1.
in other words l sheets of the covering
join along a cut starting at y1. the counterimage of a circle around z = 0 in the z-plane
contains a curve around y = y1 on the covering that closes after crossing the cut l times,
i.e. we have an incoming string of length l. therefore an easy rule to compute the length
of an asymptotic string at a branch point in the inverse image of z = 0 is to count the
number of sheets that meet there. alternatively such length can be seen as the period of
in fact y  y1 is a good
the dierential d ln z around the point y = y1 of the covering.
coordinate near y1 and d ln z = k d ln(y  y1). the same conclusion can be drawn if the
roots are like y(i)  y1 + izj/l, where j and l are relatively prime integers. a similar
discussion can be carried out for the counterimages of z =  as well.

6in all the gures below we show the incoming and outgoing strings not as punctures, but as macroscopic

strings in order to stress their dierent lengths.

14

at this point it is convenient to mention the concept of tameness. tameness was
introduced by c.t.simpson [24, 25].
it means the following. eq. (2.5) is an algebraic
equation of order n in y; if one solves for y one gets n (possibly coincident) roots as
functions of z, whose behaviour near z = 0 and z =  will be dominated by some (in
general, fractional) power of z. we say that the curve (more properly, the corresponding
hitchin system) is tame if these roots have at most a simple pole at z = 0,. tameness
guarantees the existence of a well-behaved bundle metric in the v bundle mentioned in
section 3.1.

if tameness is necessary from a mathematical point of view, there does not seem to
be any physical motivation for it. let us remark that a process is tame if the roots at
the punctures behave as y  const +  j/l, where  is the appropriate local coordinate at
z = 0, and |j/l|  1. now suppose that one of the roots of (2.5) is not branched at y1
which lies in the counterimage of z = 0, and behaves like y1 + z2. this process is not tame
but it represents an allowed string conguration. anyhow, in the light of the large n limit,
the problem of untameness becomes somewhat irrelevant. this is the reason why in this
paper we consider only tame curves.

4.2 some examples

before we continue the general discussion of plane curves, let us present some concrete
examples of cases which are not unfamiliar in the physical literature.

we would like rst to describe in detail how the genus zero(tree level) string interactions
can be reproduced with a suitable form of the coecients in the spectral equation (2.5)
or (4.1). in the genus zero sector any riemann surface  is a punctured sphere, realized
as a n -fold branched cover of the z-sphere.

assume we have n incoming and n outgoing strings of
lengths li and lj, (i = 1 . . . n, j = 1 . . . n), respectively (see
the gure). from a phyiscal point of view, we have seen that
the length of a string is interpreted as the + component of its
light cone momentum. we recall that the relation

xi

li =xj

lj = n ,

(4.2)

1l

2l

ln

1l

2l

ln

figure 1: tree level process
of n to n strings.

must hold due to conservation of the momentum. we have
also seen that the length of an incoming string i being li > 1
means that the cover has a branch of order li  1 at z = 0, and likewise for outgoing strings
at z = .

our aim here is to construct a polynomial p which underlies such a string process.
let us tackle this problem by studying the n -fold cover as a holomorphic projection from
1. as we have already noticed, the coordinate z does represent such a projection
 to c
as a meromorphic function on : punctures manifest themselves as zeroes or poles of
appropriate orders li, lj. the condition (4.2) means in this picture that the number of

15

zeroes minus the number of poles, with multiplicity,
divisor).

is zero (this is the degree of the

proceeding in this direction, we construct the generic meromorphic function in terms
of a global coordinate on , which we can take to be y itself. this is a useful simplication,
which is not possible in higher genus cases.

the generic meromorphic function satisfying the above requirements on zeroes and

poles is given by the following rational map:

z = k

(y  y1)l1(y  y2)l2  (y  yn)ln
2  (y  yn)l
(y  y1)l

1 (y  y2)l

n

.

(4.3)

this map depends on n + n parameters, in addition to the constant k: it xes the n + n
punctures on  to be located at the points yi and yj. the case of yi or yj =  is a limiting
case of the above formula when the relevant factor is absent. let us verify that (4.3) gives
the right behaviour at z = 0 and z = , see [11]. an example will suce. near y1 we can
write z  (y  y1)l1, therefore y  y1 + z1/l1, which is exactly the behaviour considered
above.

now we can make a rst exercise of moduli counting. let us recall that the moduli
space of the riemann sphere with p punctures is p  3. to count the moduli in (4.3), we
rst notice that we have n + n + 1 free parameters. of these, k corresponds to a rescaling
of the z coordinate; then we can use sl(2, c) to reabsorb three parameters among the
yi, yj. as a result the meromorphic function describes spheres with n + n  3 moduli, as
expected.

now, in order to see whether these curves are reproduced within mst, we try to
cast (4.3) in the form (2.6). one sees immediately that (2.6) corresponds to curves where
one of the outgoing punctures is at innity, say y1 = . given that, the above map is
indeed of the form of (2.6) with coecients ai which are at most linear in z:

yn + an1yn1 +  + a0 = 0 ,

ai = iz + i .

(4.4)

the generic polynomial of this form corresponds to a curve which has all l, l = 1, i.e.
it has no branches at the 2n punctures, and depends on 2n parameters. of these, three
can be ignored, since they correspond to transformations that leave y1 = : a rescaling of
z; a shift of y and a rescaling of y. they are the remnant of sl(2, c) which keeps y1 = .

therefore (2.6), or (4.1), contains the right 2n  3 moduli of spheres.
the cases when some punctures are branched, are limiting cases of the previous curve
when two or more punctures coincide. this can be easily seen from the meromorphic
map (4.3). therefore, for each li > 1, we have to enforce li1 conditions on the parameters
i, i of the spectral equation. thus the free parameters are, as expected:

n

n

2n 

xi=1
(li  1) 

xj=1
(lj  1)  3 = n + n  3 .

we conclude that at genus zero mst reproduces, via (4.1), the full n + n  3 moduli.

16

in the case of curves with non-vanishing genus, one would be tempted to proceed in
1 and then invert
the same way, that is to construct the meromorphic projection   c
it is rather easy to construct the meromorphic function z at genus 1. however we
it.
come immediately across a novel feature which was absent in genus 0, but has dramatic
consequences for the moduli counting.

the point is that the punctures on , represented as zeroes and poles of the meromor-
phic function, cannot be arbitrary. this is a feature of the torus and of higher genus curves.
there is a condition that they have to satisfy, which is the price we have to pay to be able
to represent the punctured surface as an algebraic curve. mathematically speaking, the
divisor of a meromorphic function, is not a generic divisor of degree zero, but is a principal
one, which amounts to some extra condition on the punctures. the same condition was
absent on the riemann sphere because there every divisor of degree zero is principal.

to see which condition appears, let us represent explicitly the meromorphic function
using a coordinate t taking values in the fundamental parallelogram. on a torus a mero-
morphic function can be represented as the ratio of products of translated theta functions:

z = k

(t  t1)l1 (t  t2)l2  (t  tn)ln
(t  t1)l1(t  t2)l2  (t  tn)l

n

,

(4.5)

now, for z to be single valued, the ti, tj have to satisfy a condition, that is the vanishing

of the abel-jacobi map:

xi

liti xj

ljtj = 0 mod  .

(4.6)

where  is the group of periods, which for the torus is the usual lattice of complex trans-
lations:  = c/.

it is instructive to look at the case of the propagator of
a long string at genus one. we require the insertion on the
torus of an incoming and an outcoming string of length l, at
two points. by translation we can bring one of them at the
origin and the other at, say, t. the above condition is in this
case:

lt = 0 mod  ,

(4.7)

and we see that t has to lie on the lattice /l indicated in the
picture.

we can see from here that at nite n we have some lim-
itations on the possible diagrams we can realize, however as
l and n become large, the lattice /l lls the plane and we
recover the continuous modulus.

0



0

_
t

_
t

1

figure 2: discrete modulus

in section 5 we will discuss in general the limitations of this kind. therefore we leave

this subject at this point and discuss other aspects concerning genus one curves.

17

the next thing we would like to do is to mimic the genus 0 case by inverting eq. (4.5).
this is certainly possible locally, but, unlike the genus 0 case, we will not nd in general
a polynomial equation of the type (2.5). therefore constructing the meromorphic projec-
tion (4.5) gives us only limited information about plane curves. in fact, what one expects
is that the plane curve corresponding to (4.5) is in general in a singular representation (see
below).

it is then necessary to study singular plane curves.

4.3 plane curves and their representation

at the beginning of this section we have called plane curves the locus of points which are
solution of an equation like (4.1) in c2. this denition is too generic and lends itself to
ambiguities. for example, we know the coordinates y and z are not on the same footing
in mst. a z rescaling (at strong coupling) is a symmetry of any process in mst, but no
other sl(2, c) transformation is a symmetry transformation of a string process (z  1/z
is a symmetry transformation of the theory, not of a single process). as for y it is not clear
which coordinate transformations are a symmetry.7

we resolve this and other ambiguities by embedding our curves in c

2: we introduce
the homogeneous coordinates x0, x1, x2 with z = x1/x0, y = x2/x0. by multiplying (2.5)
by a suitable power of x0 we obtain the equation of the curve in c

2 in the form

f (x0, x1, x2) = 0 .

(4.8)

then the coordinate transformations that do not change the curve are in general those
of p gl(3, c). however, as we said above, the points z = 0, should be xed in mst. this
means that x0 = 0 and x1 = 0 should not be modied by any transformation. in conclusion
the coordinate transformations that give rise to physically indistinguishable processes in
mst, are those of the subgroup h  p gl(3, c) dened by

 .

 =



 0
0 
 




x0
x1
x2

x0
x1
x2

0
0








(4.9)

in terms of y and z, these transformations include rescalings of y and z and linear transfor-
mations y  y + z + , with complex constants  and . they are acceptable coordinate
transformations which involve 4 complex parameters. this ts in our counting of the
independent parameters in the previous subsection.

from now on, although we keep speaking mostly in terms of y and z, we always under-
stand the corresponding formulation in terms of x0, x1, x2. for example, a transformation
2.
like z  1/z must be accompanied by y  y/z in order for us to remain within c
the latter is a compact space, therefore embedding the curves in it means compactifying
2. these points will always remain
them by lling the punctures with suitable points in c
distinct due to the particular form of the symmetry subgroup h we have chosen.

7for instance, a y inversion is not allowed, since it generates poles violating the holomorphicity the ais.

18

given a curve dened by (4.8), the points in it where all partial rst order derivatives
vanish are singular points. see appendix for a short summary on singularities. singularities
will play an important role in the following. for example, eq. (4.5) above, when written in
homogeneous coordinates reveals a singularity corresponding to the point z = .

the information about the branch points of a curve is contained in the discriminant.
the discriminant  of (2.5) is proportional to 2, where  was dened in (3.3). for a
denition of the discriminant in terms of the ais, see for example [23]. the zeroes of the
discriminant dene the branch points and their multiplicity gives the multiplicity of the
branch points.

a useful tool in studying plane curves is the newton polygon. let us consider the
polynomial p (y, z) in (4.1). we associate to each monomial zy in it a point p = , q = 
in a p, q plane. we obtain a set of points called the carrier: its convex hull is by denition
the newton polygon associated to the curve. from the newton polygon one can deduce a
lot of information concerning the curve. for the curves we consider the newton polygon
always contains the point (p = 0, q = n ) and is contained in the equilateral triangle formed
by the p and q-axis and by the line p + q = n .

q

if the curve is irreducible (we will always consider only irre-
ducible curves), the newton polygon must contain at least one
point in the p-axis. therefore for standard curves the newton
polygon will be formed by an upper broken line and a lower
broken line (the latter by denition may contain segments of
the q and p-axis). for example, if the point (p = 0, q = 0) is
not in the carrier it means that the point y = z = 0 belongs
to the curve. if, in addition, one of the points (p = 1, q = 0)
or (p = 0, q = 1) does not belong to the carrier, the point
y = z = 0 is obviously singular. if it is so, the lower line of
the polygon has more than three sides; then the singularity is
locally given by the product of the local curves corresponding
to the various sides. in addition to that, each side can contain
a number m of points of the integer lattice, beside the vertices,
which may or may not be present in the carrier. the number
of the components corresponding to this side is simply m + 1 .
if one wants to control what happens over z =  in a
given curve, one has to nd what the intersections with the line
x0 = 0 are; the polynomial which describes such intersection is
simply given by the points of the carrier which lie on the upper
line of the newton polygon. it is useful to see what the newton diagram looks like in new
ane coordinates around the point. this is easily done by means of transition functions:
z = 1/z, y = y/z. figure 3 shows an example: diagonal lines in the rst diagram become
the new vertical lines in the second one (one has to multiply by zn in order to recover a
polynomial).

figure 3: newton dia-
grams and transformation
of coordinates.

q

p

p

19

in addition to that, suppose for instance that the point p = n , q = 0 does not belong to
the carrier; the newton polygon around the point x0 = 0, x2 = 0, which now is in the curve,
after going to the ane chart in which x1 = 1, is simply given by a linear deformation and
a reection around the line p = n . in particular, in order for this point not to be singular,
one of the points p = n  1, q = 0 and p = n  1, q = 1 has to be in the carrier.

after this generic information about newton polygons, let us see some concrete exam-

ples of genus 1 processes.

4.4 examples: smooth elliptic curves

we start with the case n = 3, g = 1, for which there is already a good variety of examples.
these have the advantage that one can check the results by explicitly solving the cubic
algebraic equation by means of cardanos formula. we do not write down the algebraic
equations, but simply the corresponding polygons. the coecient of the monomials within
or on the border of the newton polygon are understood to be generic, unless otherwise
specied.

the simplest process one can imagine is the string self-
energy. this means that we have to look for a totally branched
curve over z = 0 and z = . remember that the polynomials
giving the solutions over these points are given by the points of
the carrier on the q = 0 and p + q = n lines respectively. so
one simple solution is given by the carrier shown in gure 4; the
generic case will be non-singular also at nite z and so the genus
will be one. the presence of the points (1, 0) and (2, 0) ensures
the nonsingularity of 0 and ; the local behaviour around them
is given by the upper side of the inner (shaded) triangle.

q

next we would like to describe a joining of strings. in this
case we keep z =  totally branched, while we add a point
on the q axis in order to have, at 0, a polynomial like y3 + y2
instead of y3, so that y = 0 appears twice as a solution and
y = 1 once.
it is now easy to construct all combinations:
gure 5 shows various examples and their newton polygons  as above, with generic
coecients.

figure 4: self-energy of a
string.

p

4.5 examples: singular plane curves

of course for some choice of the parameters a singularity may appear. in this case one has
simply to replace the nite hole in these gures by a hole shrunk to a point (for example
see g. 6); the curve becomes genus zero, i.e. a sphere with two identied points. this
singularity is the simplest one, it is characterized by a non-vanishing hessian and is called
a node. all nodes can be viewed as two points identied: blowing up a node amounts to
separating the points. for instance, consider our rst case (gure 4): the polynomial which

20

q

q

q

p

p

p

figure 5: examples of processes and their newton diagrams.

corresponds to the diagram can be written as

p = y3 + czy + z(z  a) , .

(4.10)

imposing that a point be singular, one nds that a necessary (but not sucient) condition
is that its discriminant,  = z2[27(z  a)2  4c3z], has a multiple root. the double root
at z = 0 just signals that this point is another triple branch point, as we already knew;
imposing that the remaining factor be a square, one nds several values, of which for
instance c = 0 gives a triple branch at z = a and no singular point, and c = 3a1/3 gives
instead a node.

this introduces us to our next task: to
show how it is possible to describe low-genus
highly branched curves. we will describe in de-
tail the self-energy case. we take n = 4; since
we want total branching we can choose a dia-
gram like that in gure 6. the corresponding
polynomial has the coecients corresponding
to the vertices of the polygon, and can also
have coecients corresponding to the points
on the sides or in the interior (by the way the
latter are always (n  1)(n  2)/2 in number
if there is no singular point at 0 and at  and
count the genus of the corresponding smooth
curve). now we can look for singular cases in
this family along the lines of the previous example; since already in this case computations
become complicated, we restrict ourselves to the biquadratic case.
in other words the
polynomial we start with is

figure 6: shrinking cycles: totally branched
quartics at genus two and one.

q

p

p = y4 + bzy2 + z(d + ez + f z2) ;

(4.11)

21

its discriminant is

 = 16z3(d + ez + f z2)(4d + 4ez + 4f z2  b2z)2 .

(4.12)

its discriminant can vanish in two cases:

as before, the term z3 shows that the branching at z = 0 is of order three, i.e. four
sheets meet there. the other two terms mean the following. solutions of a biquadratic
equation are in general y1,2.
if y1 = y2 or
y1 = y2  this is determined by the third term in (4.12)  in which case, at the
corresponding value of z, there is a couple of double branch points; if y1 = 0 or y2 = 0,
which is determined by the second term, there is a single node. if we choose the coecients
so that the third term is a fourth power, we have two nodes, and so genus one; if, instead,
the coecients are chosen so that the second term is a square, we have a single node, and
so genus two. the situation is shown in gure 6.

if one does not wish to restrict to this particular case, one can still nd examples of
genus 1 and 2 curves. one notes, for instance, that imposing a node rst and a total branch
in z = 0 afterwards is computationally easier. a totally branched, non biquadratic genus
one quartic is for instance given by

p = y4  5zy2 + 3z(z + 1)y 

(z + 1)2 ,

z
2

(4.13)

which has two nodes at {z = 1, y = 0} and {z = 1, y = 1}, and two regular branch
points:  = z3(z + 1)2(z  1)2(63z2 + 62z + 63).

4.6 the role of singularities

we believe the above examples are sucient to illustrate the problems connected with
the representation of riemann surfaces with punctures by means of plane curves.
it is
impossible in general to represent riemann surfaces by means of smooth plane curves
embedded in the two complex dimensional space spanned by the coordinates y and z. one
can say that singular plane curves within stringy instantons are the ordinary tools mst
uses in order to reproduce the string interaction congurations required by string theory
(actually, as will be seen in the next section, only in the n   limit is this completely
true).

far from representing a problem, singular plane curves are most welcome. they come
with a gratifying bonus: the solution of a serious problem for the identication of mst
at strong coupling with string theory. this identication is possible if string theory is
formulated in the light-cone gauge. in mst, (2.1), ten dimensions enter into the game,
two world-sheet dimensions plus eight transverse dimensions represented by the (diagonal)
x i. at rst sight they seem to have a dierent nature, however it is clear that in a light-
cone framework the two world-sheet dimensions are to be interpreted as representatives of
the time and longitudinal dimensions, denoted 0 and 9, which bring the total of physical
dimensions to ten. now, stringy instantons characterized by a smooth plane curve, extend
over four out of these ten dimensions. in other words it would seem that mst at strong

22

coupling can only describe four-dimensional string processes. if this were true it would be
hard to justify it in the light of the correspondence mst  string theory.

however here come singular curves to our rescue. singular curves become smooth if
one enlarges the space where they are embedded. the standard way to resolve a singularity
is to blow it up (see appendix), which means that a singular point is replaced by a two-
2 with
dimensional sphere. for example, we have already pointed out that curves in c
nodes (a node is the simplest possible type of singularity) only, can be smoothed out by
3, i.e. by adding two dimensions. it is natural to interpret this by
embedding them in c
saying that the corresponding string process extend over six (instead of four) dimensions.
it is not dicult to imagine processes that extend over more (up to ten) dimensions. to
better convince ourselves of this fact we can take the reverse point of view. suppose we
want to embed these higher (than four) dimensional processes within the instantons of the
2d eld theory (2.1). the only possibility is to squeeze (project) them to the appropriate
four dimensions: such operation of projecting gives rise to singularities. it goes without
saying that the true signicance of singular plane curves is given by their representing
higher (than four) dimensional processes.

this is in particular true for punctures. singularities that occur in the counterimage
of z = 0, represent overlapping punctures, and in order to disentangle them one has to
enlarge the embedding space. it is clear what happens: a high dimensional string process
squeezed to four dimensions may require that the locations of incoming and outgoing strings
overlap.

5. the moduli space of mst

we have seen in section 2 and 4 that for nite n the genus of the plane curves that
appear in mst has an upper bound given by 1
2 (n  1)(n  2). we also anticipated in
section 2 that the moduli space of plane curves of genus h with n punctures turns out to
be a discretized version of the moduli space of riemann surfaces with the same topological
type. in this section we want to examine this point. in the rst part we see the origin of
the discretization, in the second part we conrm this result by estimating the dimension
of the moduli space of stringy instantons on the cylinder.

5.1 discretization

a very convenient way to proceed is to make a comparison with the mandelstam param-
etrization of the moduli space of riemann surfaces with punctures [27]. to this end, let us
rst review some basic facts about the realization of mandelstam diagrams. we refer to
[26] for a complete account of the following very quick review, after which, we will examine
the consequence of the main new input from mst, that is holomorphicity of the covering
map which denes the mandelstam diagram. the result will be a set of constraints on
the kinematical data of the diagram which turn out to be a quantization condition for
some of the mandelstam parameters. in the large n limit these constraints loosen their
eectiveness and allow us to recover the full moduli space of the string diagrams.

23

 = 0 = rehi

i = ij , whilehj

now, let  be the dierential which is holomorphic on  \ d with simple poles at d

in [26] it was shown how the above dierential denes a nice procedure which allows
us to look at  as a topological covering of a cylinder: one can easily decompose  into

let  be a compact riemann surface of genus h and let i , i = 1, . . . , h be a set of
holomorphic dierentials on  normalized byhj
i = ij is the period
matrix. we x n punctures {q1, . . . , qn} on  and dene the divisor d = q1  . . .  qn.
we also introduce a set of n real numbers r = {r1, . . . , rn} such that pi ri = 0.
with resqi = ri and rehi
pants along the level lines of the function  (p )  rer p . in this sense,  induces on 
the structure of a mandelstam diagram. the mandelstam parameters are the twist-angles
b, b = 1, . . . 3h + n  3, along the junctures of the pants decomposition and the relative
coordinates a  0, a = 1, . . . , 2h + n 3, of the 2h + n 2 interaction points. h additional
real parameters are the internal light-cone momenta p+
. altogether they form a
set of 6h  6 + 2n real parameters. in [26] it was shown that these parameters represent
good coordinates on the moduli space of genus h riemann surfaces with n punctures mh,n.
to complete the picture we identify the set r with the + components of the external
the periods of  around the punctures. we
kbb, where w i are integer-valued matrices which
depends on the pants decomposition of the riemann surface and its intersections with the
 and  cycles.

light-cone momenta of the diagram, i.e.
kw i

also have the relations hi

 = i

2 p+

.

i = hi

our strategy now is the following. we rst construct an explicit form for , in terms of
the prime-form, the i s and the period matrix of . then we compare this  with the one
that comes from mst. the relevant new input consists in the fact that mst induces on 
the structure of a holomorphic covering of the riemann sphere (as usual we consider the
1 is the covering map in
latter instead of the cylinder). by this we mean that, if z :   c
the mst scheme, the coordinate z is a meromorphic function on . the role of  in mst
is played by dlnz, therefore we have to identify them. this condition becomes a constraint
on the data of the mandelstam diagram. in fact, it means that dr  qr1
n , being
the divisor of the meromorphic function z, is a principal divisor on , in particular ri  z.
as a consequence, some constraints appear in the data of the mandelstam diagram and
these conditions induce a complex codimension h slicing of the moduli space. this can be
seen as follows.

1  . . .  qrn

let p+p be the holomorphic dierential on  \ {p+, p} with simple poles at p

with residues 1 and imaginary periods. it can be written as8

p+p(p ) = d(p )ln(cid:20) e(p, p+)
e(p, p)  e

2iimr

p+
p

i (2) 1

ij r p j(cid:21) = d(p )lnh(p, p+, p) , (5.1)

where e(p, q) is the prime form on , (2) is the imaginary part of the period matrix and
d(p ) = dp  
p .

8h(p, p+, p) depends also on a base point which is irrelevant in this context and, for the sake of

simplicity, is not specied.

24

in terms of the above dierentials we can write

 =

klqlql+1 ,

(5.2)

n1

xl=1

n1

yl=1

where ki  ki1 = ri and k0 = 0 = kn; substituting (5.1) into (5.2) we obtain

(p ) = d(p )lnz(p )

where

z(p ) =

[h (p, ql, ql1)]kl .

(5.3)

now, as anticipated above, we make the identication  = d ln z. this requires that
z = z up to a multiplicative constant, which implies that z is a well dened meromorphic
function on . on the one hand this imposes that the residues rl be quantized in integer
values. on the other hand it requires that the dierential dz have vanishing periods along
 and  cycles. the latter condition is fullled i

n

xl=1

rlz ql

i = mi + nj ji

(5.4)

for some mi , ni  z. at this point the situation is clear: (5.4) is the vanishing condition
for the abel map and says that the divisor dr is principal.

conversely, let z be a meromorphic function on  and dr its divisor. by deni-

tion (5.4) holds and resqld(p )lnz = rl.

notice that the periods of  are quantized in integral values as

 = 2ini

and

ii

ii

 = 2imi ,

(5.5)

and this condition is equivalent to (5.4).

eq. (5.5) means that the internal light-cone momenta of the diagram are quantized and
that, in addition, there are h discretizing constraints on the twist-angles of the mandelstam
diagram. since these variables, together with the relative interaction times which have been
left untouched, are the coordinates of the moduli space, we are left with a discrete slicing of
the moduli space mh,n, each slice being of complex dimension 2g  3 + n. this discretized
moduli space is what we have called m(h,n)
of values9

in the large n limit, however, the quantization condition disappears in a continuum

in section 2.

n

limn

1

n hzhm zhi = ch .

(5.6)

simultaneously, for large n also the bound 1
2 (n  1)(n  2) on the genus of the plane
curves in mst, becomes ineective, and we recover the full moduli space of string theory.

it is interesting to review the genus 0 and 1 case in detail.

9in some sense, the topological reconstruction of the mandelstam diagram can be seen as an innitely-

sheeted holomorphic covering of the cylinder.

25

genus zero on the sphere the prime form is simply e(p, q) = p  q and then, up to
a multiplicative constant,

n

z =

yi=1
(p  qi)ri .

(5.7)

splitting the divisor dr = d0  d1
and d =qri<0 qri

i

are its positive and negative parts respectively  we get

 into its zero and polar parts  where d0 =qri>0 qri
z = qi|ri>0(p  qi)ri
qi|ri<0(p  qi)ri

(5.8)

i

and we recover the result (4.3). the counting of section 4.2 tells us that the independent
complex parameters are n  3. therefore in this case there is no moduli quantization at
all and the moduli of plane curves cover the full moduli space m0,n.

these curves correspond to tree level mandelstam diagrams with n external strings
each of light-cone momentum ri. therefore, in this case, mst gives exact results at nite
n (except for the fact that the + components of the external momenta are discrete).

genus one. the rst case in which moduli quantization becomes eective is at h = 1.
let us specialize to the torus the above construction.
in this case, the prime form is
proportional to the odd theta function e(p, q)  odd(p  q| ) and there is a unique
holomorphic dierential 1 = dp . therefore

q1p(p ) = d(p )ln(cid:20) odd(p  q1| )

odd(p  p)  exp(cid:0)2iim (p  p+) (im )1(p  po)(cid:1)(cid:21) ,

and we get

(p ) =

n1

xl=1

klqlql+1(p ) = d(p )ln

n

yl=1

[odd(p  ql| )]rl  erl2iim(ql)(im )1p = d(p )lnz .

using the standard modular properties of -functions one obtains that z is a well dened
meromorphic function on the torus t  c

<1, > i rl  z and

rlql = m + n

(5.9)

n

xl=1

for some integers n and m. this is the discretizing condition for the the genus one case. it
coincides with the condition already found in section 4, eq. (4.6).

one can verify that in all the genus one examples we have considered in secs. 4.4
and 4.5, the counting of independent parameters matches the formula 2h + n  3. we
believe that, for any topological type (h, n), one can construct plane curves with 2h + n 3
independent parameters.

26

5.2 the dimension of the moduli space of stringy instantons

in this section we verify the correctness of the result obtained above by counting the dimen-
sions of the solution space of hitchin equations on a cylinder up to gauge transformations
in the strong coupling limit. the method is based on zero modes counting, therefore it is
sensitive only to continuous dimensions. since the group factor y does not contain free
parameters we expect to nd a 2h + n  3 dimensional space of solutions.

the strategy is the following: rst we linearize the system by transferring the calcula-
tion to the tangent space, then we calculate the dimension of the subspace of the tangent
space which is orthogonal to innitesimal gauge transformations, in the strong coupling
limit g  . the equations in the g   limit are in a form which can be lifted to the
relevant spectral curve . this way the calculation reduces to a zero modes counting on
. the exact result is then obtained by taking into account the redundancy of parameters
in the plane curve representation of the spectral curve .

linearizing the hitchin equations (2.2), (2.3) gives

dwa w  d waw  ig2(cid:2) x, x(cid:3) + ig2(cid:2)x,  x(cid:3) = 0
dwx + i [aw, x] = 0 , d w x + i(cid:2)a w, x(cid:3) = 0 .

(5.10)

(5.11)

the condition that tangent vectors be orthogonal to gauge transformations can be

written in the form

dwa w + d waw + ig2(cid:2) x, x(cid:3) + ig2(cid:2)x,  x(cid:3) = 0

by making use of the scalar product

(5.12)

< (1a, 1x)|(2a, 2x) >=zcyl
let us now take the g   limit of the above equations. the limit background, labeled
with , is then a strong coupling limit instanton characterized by a denite spectral curve
, as explained in [12] and in section 2 above,

d2wtr(cid:2)1aw2a w + g21x2 x + h.c.(cid:3) .

(5.13)

aw = iu wu + , x = u xu +

(5.14)

and the equations for the tangent space to these instantons become the following ones

dw aw = 0 ,

(cid:2) x, x(cid:3) = 0,

dw x + i [aw, x] = 0 ,

(5.15)

(5.16)

(5.17)

together their hermitian conjugates. we specify that these equations characterize the tan-
gent space to the stringy instantons (see comment at the end of section 3.2), not necessarily
to the most general hitchin solutions. to solve these equations we use the lifting tecnique
we exploited in [12], which we refer to for notation and some technical points.

27

let t be the cartan subalgebra in u(n ) obtained as u tdu + where td is the diagonal
one. since x  t, then, by (5.16), also x  t. using (5.14) it is easy to see that also
dw x  t and, by (5.17) and x  t, we conclude that aw  t.

this means that all the variations are in the cartan subalgebra t, and the above

equations reduce to

dw aw = 0 , dw x = 0 where

aw , x  t ,

(5.18)

plus their hermitian conjugates.

to count the solutions of eq. (5.18), we lift them to the spectral surface dened by the

limit background eld (5.14). they can be shown to reduce to

z az = 0 ,

z x = 0 ,

(5.19)

where  azd z is therefore a holomorphic dierential on  and  x a holomorphic scalar.
following the doubling trick explained in [12] we get a total number of solutions equal to
h + 1 = (2h + n  1) + 1 = 2h + n.

finally, from this number we have to subtract 3;

in fact the 3 parameters of the
transformations of the variable y belonging to h (section 4.3) appear as genuine moduli in
the above counting, while, of course, they are not.

a. singularities of plane curves

singularities of plane curves are a classical subject. here we briey review the most useful
methods for their study, which we partially use in the text.

let us denote the curve dened by the polynomial p (y, z) = 0 with . a singular point
is a point of , in which yp and zp vanish. suppose, without loss of generality, that the
point we are interested in {y = 0, z = 0}. let us nd the local behaviour of the solutions
y(z) around it. this can be obtained from the puiseux expansion, which in turn can be
reconstructed from the newton polygon. a newton polygon may in general have several
sides: each side represents (locally) a factor of the curve, which can in turn be reducible,
depending on the number of points of the lattice that lie on it. consider now the steepest
of these sides near the origin: call it l0, and 0 its slope. l0 denes a grading according
to which y has the same weight as z0. now we approximate the solution of the equation
by the ansatz y = t0z0. if we insert this in p , the latter takes the form p = z0 g(t0) plus
other terms which are higher order terms with respect to the grading dened by l0; g is
a polynomial in t0. solving g(t0) = 0 we nd in general several values of t0. for each of
them we can now substitute y = t0(z0 + y1) in p and nd a new polynomial p1, together
with a new newton polygon. looking at its steepest side, say l1, with slope 1, we can
try a new solution in the form y1 = t1z1 , and so on.

this procedure needs not come to an end after a nite number of steps; however, the

series

y = t0(z0 + t1(z1 + . . .))

(a.1)

28

can be shown to converge to the solutions of f in a suciently small neighborhood of the
origin. the numbers 0, 1, ... are rational and increasing. a series like (a.1) is called a
puiseux expansion for p .

puiseux expansions can now be used to analyse how solutions twist around one anoth-
er, and to classify singularities up to topological equivalence; around z = 0 and z =  this
leads to nothing else than the string interpretation already discussed in the text - although,
from a mathematical point of view, there is something more to it. consider the rst term
0 of the puiseux expansion and suppose 0 > 0. let us write yq0 = zp0 (0 = p0/q0), and
let us follow the solutions y as z = e2i makes a small loop around zero. they lie on a
torus {|y| = 0, |z| = }, and wind around its two cycles q0 and p0 times respectively. we
can represent the union of various circles covered by the solutions in r3, and it turns out
to be a link of knots. we can simply represent such knots by rst drawing a braid with q0
threads which permute p0 times, and then connect initial with nal points, as in gure 7.

this knot is not in general the one that
describes our singularity; one has to take into
account the higher terms in the expansion. if
however 1 = p1/q1 and q1 = q0, this does not
really change the braid (nor the knot). if it is
not so, one is led to a more complicated gure,
a knot which winds around a little torus con-
structed around the previously dened knot;
this is called an iterated torus knot. this pro-
cess can be shown to stop - in fact in our case
we know that the number of threads of the
braid really is n - and the topological type of
the knot can be completely encoded in a nite
ordered set of pairs, of which the rst is {p0, q0}, called puiseux pairs. the knot in turn
classies the singularity; it is in fact homeomorphic to the intersection of the curve with a
suitably small sphere s3.

figure 7: knots corresponding to y2 = z 2
and y3 = z 2 singularities.

this latter fact means that the knot which classies the singularity is in fact the
projection of the physical string embedded in the target space, projected down to 3 + 1
dimensions. what is really of interest to us is the number of component, since all knots and
links can be undone in higher dimensions; and this is readily found also without drawing
knots.

in relation with our discussion in the text, perhaps the most useful thing one can
explore, is the contribution of a given singularity to the genus. for singular curves the
genus is dened as that of their resolution; given  and the set s of its singular points, a
resolution of  is a smooth curve , (usually embedded in a larger space than the original
  , such that its restriction
curve), together with a holomorphic projection  :
 :   1(s)    s is a biholomorphism, and 1(s).

in words, a resolution can be locally achieved by replacing the singular point by some
space; puiseux expansions are resolutions if we replace a singular point with all possible

29

behaviours near it. but this is not a very economical resolution since the resulting space
is huge. a handier way is to replace the singular point by a sphere - called exceptional
divisor. this is precisely the well known procedure of blowing up the singularity, which in
addition has the advantage of exhibiting the smooth curve in some c

k.

fortunately one needs not compute explicitely the blown-up curve; every singular point
simply gives a contribution that can be computed as follows. if we blow up the singularity,
we get an exceptional divisor, which meets the strict preimage   1(s) of the curve in
a number of points - called innitely near; some of these can be singular again, and we
can blow them up in turn, getting new innitely near points; it can be shown that this
procedure eventually comes to an end. now, if h is the genus of , the genus of the original
curve  is given by

h 

k(k  1) ,

(a.2)

1

2xk

where k runs over all the innitely near points pk of the singular point and k are their
multiplicity, i.e. is the order of the rst non-vanishing term of the taylor expansion of
p (y, z) at pk.

acknowledgments

we would like to acknowledge valuable discussions we had with e. aldrovandi, m. asorey,
m. bertola, m. bianchi, m. bochicchio, m. caselle, a. dadda, b.dubrovin, g. falqui,
t. grava, c. reina and a. zampa. this research was partially supported by ec tmr
programme, grant fmrx-ct96-0012, and by the italian murst for the program fisica
teorica delle interazioni fondamentali.

references

[1] l. motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring interactions, hep-th/9701025.

[2] t. banks and n. seiberg, strings from matrices,

nucl. phys. b 497 (1997) 41

[hep-th/9702187].

[3] w. taylor, d-brane field theory on compact spaces, phys. lett. b 394 (1997) 283

[hep-th/9611042].

[4] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, matrix string theory, nucl. phys. b 500 (1997) 43

[hep-th/9703030].

[5] r. dijkgraaf, g. moore, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, elliptic genera of symmetric products and

second quantized strings, comm. math. phys. 185 (1997) 197 [hep-th/9608096].

[6] h. verlinde, a matrix string interpretation of the large n loop equation, hep-th/9705029.

[7] l. bonora, c.s. chu, on the string interpretation of m(atrix) theory, phys. lett. b 410

(1997) 142 [hep-th/9705137].

[8] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, notes on matrix and microstrings, nucl. phys. 62

(proc. suppl.) (1998) 348 [hep-th/9709107].

30

[9] t. wynter, gauge elds and interactions in matrix string theory phys. lett. b 415 (1997)

349 [hep-th/9709029].

[10] s.b. giddings, f. hacquebord, h. verlinde, high energy scattering of d-pair creation in

matrix string theory nucl. phys. b 537 (1999) 260 [hep-th/9804121].

[11] g. bonelli, l. bonora and f. nesti, matrix string theory, 2d instantons and ane toda eld

theory, phys. lett. b 435 (1998) 303 [hep-th/9805071].

[12] g. bonelli, l. bonora and f. nesti, string interactions from matrix string theory, nucl.

phys. b 538 (1999) 100 [hep-th/9807232].

[13] m. bill`o, m. caselle, a. dadda, p. provero matrix string states in pure 2d yang mills theories,

hep-th/9809095.

[14] i.k. kostov and p. vanhove matrix string partition functions, phys. lett. b 444 (1998) 196

[hep-th/9809130].

[15] n.j. hitchin, the self-duality equations on a riemann surface, proc. london math. soc. 55

(1987) 59; lie groups and teichmuller space, topology 31 (1992) 449.

[16] n. hitchin, stable bundles and integrable systems, duke math. jour. 54 (1987) 91.

[17] e. markman, spectral curves and integrable systems, comp. math. 94 (1994) 255.

[18] r. donagi and e. witten, supersymmetric yang-mills theory and integrable systems, nucl.

phys. b 460 (1996) 299 [hep-th/9510101].

[19] m. bochicchio the large-n limit of qcd and the collective eld of the hitchin bration, jhep

01 (1999) 006 [hep-th/9810015].

[20] e. brieskorn and h. knorrer, plane algebraic curves, birkhauser verlag, basel 1986.

[21] p. griths and j. harris, principles of algebraic geometry new york 1978.

[22] f. kirwan, complex algebraic curves cambridge 1992.

[23] i.m.gelfand, m.m.kapranov, a.v.zelevinsky, discriminants, resultants, and multidimensional

determinants, boston, birkhauser, 1994.

[24] c.t. simpson, harmonic bundles on noncompact curves, jour.am.math.soc. 3 (1990) 713.

[25] i. biswas, p.a. gastesi and s. govindarajan, parabolic higgs bundles and teichmuller spaces

for punctured surfaces, alg-geom/9510011.

[26] s.b. giddings and s.a. wolpert, a triangulation of moduli space from light cone string theory

comm. math. phys. 109 (1987) 177.

[27] s. mandelstam, dual resonance models, phys. rep. 13 (1974) 259.

[28] m.b. green, j.h. schwarz, e. witten, superstring theory, cambridge univ. press, cambridge

1987, vol. ii.

[29] e. dhoker and d.h. phong, the geometry of string perturbation theory, rev. mod. phys. 60

(1988) 917.

[30] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. shenker and l. susskind, m theory as a matrix model: a

conjecture, phys. rev. d 55 (1997) 5112 [hep-th/9610043].

[31] l. susskind, another conjecture about m(atrix) theory, hep-th/9704080.

31

