9
9
9
1

 

n
a
j
 

2
1

 
 

1
v
6
4
0
1
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

a lie group structure underlying the triplectic geometry

hep-th/9901046

tamm theory division, lebedev physics institute, russian academy of sciences

m. a. grigoriev

we consider the pair of degenerate compatible antibrackets satisfying a generalization of the axioms
imposed in the triplectic quantization of gauge theories. we show that this actually encodes a lie group
structure, with the antibrackets being related to the left- and right- invariant vector elds on the group.
the standard triplectic quantization axioms then correspond to abelian lie groups.

1 introduction

triplectic geometry was introduced in [1] (see also [2, 3, 4, 5]) as the structure underlying the
geometrically covariant (triplectic) generalization of the sp(2)-symmetric lagrangian quantization
of general gauge theories [6, 2].

the most essential ingredient of the triplectic geometry is a pair of compatible and appropri-
ately degenerate antibrackets. the triplectic quantization prescription also makes use of additional
objects: the odd vector elds and a density appearing in the triplectic master equation and path-
integral. however, the most interesting features characteristic of the triplectic geometry originate
from the antibracket structure.

the triplectic antibrackets naturally encode two dierent geometrical structures [5]. the rst
is given by a complex structure and two transversal polarizations; these compatible structures
are induced on the space of marked functions of the antibrackets. the second geometric object
originating from the antibrackets is an abelian group structure, i.e., the structure of globally dened
nondegenerate commuting vector elds induced on the intersection l of the symplectic leaves of
the antibrackets (i.e., on the manifold of elds in triplectic quantization).

studied in [4, 5] were mutually commutative compatible antibrackets. the mutual commutativ-
ity condition states that the algebra of marked functions of the antibracket ( , )1 is commutative
with respect to the antibracket ( , )2, and vice versa. this condition is imposed for the consistency
with the sp(2)-invariant quantization in the canonical coordinates [6, 2, 1]. as we are going to
show, however, this condition turns out to be quite restrictive from the geometrical standpoint. we
will see that with this condition relaxed, the compatible antibrackets induce a lie group structure
on the submanifold l, and conversely, any lie group admits a triplectic bundle endowed with a
pair of compatible antibrackets. thus, the construction of the triplectic bundle over a lie group
is in some sense canonical, and a natural set of axioms may be thought to be the one that does not
lead to any further restrictions on this group. however, the mutual commutativity axiom implies
that the group is necessarily abelian.

this letter organized as follows: in section 2.1, we introduce the basic denitions and assump-
tions of the triplectic formalism and consider the simplest and most transparent example where
all the basis marked functions are grassmann-odd and hence the corresponding lie group is not a

super group. in the section 2.2, we allow the basis marked functions to have arbitrary grassmann
parity and construct the corresponding submanifold that carries a lie (super)group structure. in
section 3, we explain the inverse construction: given an arbitrary lie group, we construct the
triplectic antibrackets on a certain bundle over it. finally, we make same remarks regarding the
applications to the triplectic quantization and discuss possible generalizations of our construction.

2 from triplectic geometry to lie group structure

we begin with a brief reminder of the basic structures and their properties in the geometrically
covariant approach to the sp(2)-invariant quantization. in contrast to the geometry underlying
the covariant formulation of the standard bv formalism (see [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]), the triplectic
quantization prescription requires the antibrackets to be appropriately degenerate and to satisfy
some additional constraints which we consider momentarily. we start, however, with the mutual
commutativity condition removed; the marked functions of each antibracket are thus allowed to
have nonzero commutators with respect to the other antibracket.

let m be the triplectic manifold, i.e., a 3n -dimensional supermanifold endowed with a pair
of compatible antibrackets. we assume m to be connected (i.e., the body of m is connected
in the standard sense). let cm be the superalgebra of smooth functions on m. an antibracket
on m is a bilinear skew-symmetric map cm  cm  cm satisfying the leibnitz rule and the
jacobi identity. a pair of antibrackets ( , )a, where a = 1, 2, is called compatible if every linear
combination ( , ) = ( , )1 + ( , )2 with constant  and  is also an antibracket, i.e. satises the
jacobi identity. the compatibility condition is equivalent to

(1)((f )+1)((h)+1)((f, g){a, h)b} + cycle(f, g, h) = 0 , f, g, h  cm ,

(2.1)

with the curly brackets denoting the symmetrization of indices a, b. this condition is often referred
to as the symmetrized jacobi identity [6].

we take the antibrackets on m to be everywhere of rank 2n and to be jointly nondegenerate [4,
5]; the latter means that the corresponding odd poisson bivectors do not have common zero modes,
i.e. if a 1-form  is such that e1 = e2 = 0, then  = 0, where e1 and e2 denote the bivectors
corresponding to the antibrackets.

we denote by ia : ma  m the foliations of m into symplectic leaves of the respective
antibracket. we also assume for simplicity that the foliations ma  m are brations, and let
n1 = m/m2 and n2 = m/m1 be the corresponding base manifolds. then, we also have the
projections a : m  na.

a powerful tool in studying degenerate brackets is provided by their marked functions (the
casimir functions). a function   cm is a marked function of the antibracket ( , ) if (, f ) = 0
for any f  cm. an important property of the marked functions of compatible antibrackets is as
follows.

proposition 2.1 let ,   cm be marked functions of the rst antibracket ( , )1 (respectively, of
( , )2 ). then so is (, )2 (respectively, (, )1).

2

the proof is a direct consequence of the compatibility of the antibrackets.
it follows from the
proposition that the algebra of marked functions of the rst (the second) antibracket is closed with
respect to the second (respectively, the rst) bracket.

let 1i (respectively, 2) be (locally) a minimal set of basis marked functions of the second
(respectively, the rst) antibracket. for example, 1i can be the transversal coordinates to the
symplectic leaves of the second antibracket. the conditions imposed on the compatible antibrackets
naturally translate into the language of marked functions.
in particular, the rank assumption
imposed on the antibrackets implies that there are only n independent marked functions of each
antibracket; the nondegeneracy condition implies that all the functions 1i and 2 are independent.
recalling the assumption that the foliations ia : ma  m are brations, we see that 1i (2)
actually constitute a local coordinate system on n1 (respectively, n2). therefore, it is natural to
regard each na as the manifold of marked functions of the respective antibracket.

we now are in a position to study the noncommutative antibrackets. to avoid some technical

complications, we begin with the following instructive example.

2.1 an instructive example

for simplicity, we now assume all the basis marked functions 1i and 2 to be grassmann-odd. as
we have assumed the foliations of the symplectic leaves of the antibrackets to be brations, there
exist base manifolds n1 and n2, which we further assume to be connected. since all the basis
marked functions are grassmann-odd, n1 and n2 are odd superspaces. the algebra cn1 (cn2) is
actually a grassmann algebra generated by 1i (respectively, by 2).

it follows from proposition 2.1 that the rst antibracket determines a skew-symmetric mapping
( , )1 : cn1cn1  cn1 satisfying the jacobi identity. in fact, the antibracket makes cn1 considered
as a linear space into a lie superalgebra, with the antibracket being the supercommutator; here,
each even element from the grassmann algebra cn1 is to be considered as an odd element of the
lie superalgebra, and vice versa. however, we do not discuss this in more detail and concentrate
instead on some quotient of this lie algebra.1 we explicitly write the antibracket in cn1 as

(1i, 1j)1 = c k

ij1k + . . . ,

(2.2)

where the dots mean higher-order terms in . it follows from the skew-symmetry of the antibracket
that c k
ji. moreover, in the rst order in  the jacobi identity for the antibracket implies
that

ij = c k

c m

ij c n

mj = 0 ,

mk + c m

jkc n

mi + c m

ki c n

(2.3)

which is the jacobi identity for the lie algebra whose structure constants are c k
ij.

we now explicitly construct this lie algebra. to this end, we consider the vector elds on m

1while this letter was in preparation, we received the paper [13], where the antibracket on the grassmann algebra

corresponding to a given lie algebra is considered in a slightly dierent context.

li = (1i,  )1 ,

(2.4)

3

which form an n -dimensional lie algebra modulo the vector elds vanishing at 1i = 0,

[li, lj] = c k

ijlk + . . . .

(2.5)

proceeding similarly with the algebra cn2 of the marked functions of the rst antibracket, we arrive
at the vector elds

satisfying

r = (2,  )2 ,

(2, 2)2 = c 

2 + . . . .

(2.6)

(2.7)

in fact, li as well as r can be restricted to the submanifold l determined by the equations
1i = 0 , 2 = 0. this allows us to consider these vector elds as dened on l. as a consequence
of the rank conditions, li form a basis of t l, and so do r. they also satisfy the relations

[li, lj] = c k

ijlk ,

[r, r] = c 

r .

it follows from the compatibility of the antibrackets that

[li, r] = 0 .

(2.8)

(2.9)

relations (2.8) and (2.9) are precisely those of the left- and right-invariant vector elds on the
lie group corresponding to the lie algebra determined by the structure constants c k
ij. we thus
conclude that l is dieomorphic to g [14].

2.2 the general construction

we now turn to the general situation, where we allow the basis marked functions to have arbitrary
grassmann parities.

as mentioned above, we identify the marked functions of the rst (the second) antibracket
with functions on n2 (respectively, on n1). proposition 2.1 tells us that the antibracket ( , )1
(respectively, ( , )2) induces an antibracket on n1 (on n2), and therefore na , a = 1, 2, become odd
poisson manifolds. let p1  n1 be a point where the antibracket (, )1 vanishes,2 i.e., (, )1|p1 = 0
for all ,   cn1. this point is evidently a symplectic leaf of the antibracket (, )1 considered as an
antibracket on n1. let 1i be the some coordinates in a neighborhood up1  n1 of p1 such that
1i = 0 at p1. then we have

(1i, 1j)1 = c k

ij(1) 1k .

(2.10)

with some functions c k
some lie (super) algebra g1.

ij(0) as the structure constants of

ij(1). we will view the tensor c k

ij = c k

let p2  n2 be a vanishing point of the second antibracket on n2. the coordinate system 2

on up2  n2 is chosen such that 2|p2 = 0. similarly to (2.10), we have the equation

2we assume that the set of zeroes (i.e., the points where the corresponding odd poisson bivector vanishes) of the

rst (the second) antibracket on n1 (respectively, on n2) is non-empty.

(2, 2)2 = c 

(2)2 .

(2.11)

4

the structure constants c 
(0) also give rise to a lie algebra, which we denote by g2. thus,
we have associated a pair of lie algebras g1 and g2 to a pair of compatible antibrackets. note that
the lie algebras g1 and g2 are of the same dimensions.

 = c 

the vanishing points pa  na correspond to the submanifold l  m determined by the
equations 1i = 2 = 0, where 1i and 2 are considered as functions on m. in dierent words,
l = 1
2 p2. the functions a are well-dened in some neighborhood ul of l in m.
indeed, a are functions on 1
2 up2, which is evidently a
neighborhood containing l. thus the vector elds

a upa; we then choose ul = 1

1 p1  1

1 up1  1

li = (1i,  )1 ,

r = (2,  )2 .

(2.12)

are dened on the entire neighborhood ul. we now observe that the vector elds restrict to l.
indeed, it follows from eqs. (2.10)(2.11) that

(li1j)|l = (r2)|l = 0 ,

li2 = r1j = 0 ,

(2.13)

which are precisely the conditions for li and r to restrict to l.

next, we consider l as a submanifold in m1 = 1

1 p1  m. we have

proposition 2.2 l is lagrangian submanifold of m1. in particular, l is n -dimensional.

we consider the functions 1i and the vector elds li as being dened on m1. the proof of
the proposition follows immediately from relations (2.10) and the fact that 1i are independent
functions on m1. since m1 is odd symplectic (i.e., the antibracket ( , )1 is nondegenerate on m1)
we see that li are linearly independent on l, and therefore form a basis of t l. we can treat the
vector elds r similarly, which gives us another set of globally dened vector elds on l. to
summarize, we have

theorem 2.3 l is endowed with globally dened vector elds li and r that satisfy

[li, lj] = c k

ij(0)lk ,

[r, r] = c 

(0)r ,

[li, r] = 0 ,

(2.14)

therefore, l is dieomorphic to some lie (super) group g.

as a corollary of the theorem, we observe that the lie algebras g1 and g2 are isomorphic.

finally, we note that in the case considered in the previous subsection, there is only one zero
p1 (p2) of the rst (the second) antibracket on n1 (respectively, on n2). thus, there is only one
submanifold l = 1
2  m and the lie group associated to the antibrackets is uniquely
determined.

1  1

in the general case, however, we have families za  na of the vanishing points and hence a
family of super lie groups. this raises the question of whether dierent points from za actually
correspond to dierent lie groups. we do not address this question here, however, and turn instead
to the converse problem of constructing triplectic antibrackets corresponding to a given lie group.

5

3 the inverse construction

the above considerations provide us with the construction of triplectic antibrackets on the dupli-
cated odd cotangent bundle over any lie group.

let g be a lie group and g

bundle t g is trivial. there exist two natural ways to identify g  g
to view g
lie coalgebra of right-invariant 1-forms.

 the corresponding lie coalgebra. it is well known that the cotangent
 with t g; the rst one is
 as the

 as the lie coalgebra of left-invariant 1-forms on g and the second is to view g

since t g has a canonical symplectic structure, we can also equip g  g

 with a symplectic

structure and hence with the poisson bracket. we thus have canonical poisson brackets on g  g
l
 with t g.
and on g  g


r, with the subscripts r or l indicating the way in which we identify g  g

recall that by changing the parity of the bres, we can associate a supermanifold to every
vector bundle. in the present case we associate to t g the supermanifold t g (with  denoting
the parity reversing functor), which has the canonical antibracket (the one corresponding to the

canonical odd-symplectic structure). thus g  g
r) is also endowed with
a natural antibracket. let xa be a local coordinate system on g and li = la

xa a basis of gl
i

considered as the left-invariant vector elds. let also 1i be the coordinates on g
l corresponding
to the basis dual to li. then the canonical antibrackets on g  g


l (respectively, g  g




l are

(1i, xa)1 = la
i ,

(1i, 1j)1 = c k

ij1k ,

(3.1)

with all the other antibrackets vanishing.3 here we have introduced the structure constants via
[li, lj] = c k
ijlk. in this way, we can also obtain an explicit form of the canonical antibracket
on g  g


r.

we now take the direct sum of the bundles, m = (g  g


l )  (g  g


r). it can be equipped

with the canonical triplectic antibrackets.


proposition 3.1 the canonical antibrackets on g  g
r naturally induce a pair

of compatible antibrackets on m = (g  g
r). the antibrackets are compatible,
jointly nondegenerate and satisfy the rank condition formulated in section 2.2. thus, every lie
(super)group admits a canonical triplectic bundle.


l and g  g


l )  (g  g


l , which we denote by ( , )1, and the trivial (vanishing) antibracket on g


r; we then consider the canonical antibrackets on

r. we thus obtain

r. the second antibracket ( , )2 on


l  g

indeed, we can identify m with g  g
g  g
the product antibracket ( , )1 on the product g  g
g  g


r is constructed similarly.


l  g


l  g

it should be noted that in contrast to the group case, there does not exist, in general, a natural
triplectic bundle over an arbitrary manifold l. in fact, the construction of the triplectic bundle
essentially requires the base l to be parallelizable [5]. this fact may be viewed as a serious limitation
of the triplectic quantization in its present form.
indeed, the triplectic antibrackets cannot be

3a similar construction in the case of ordinary poisson bracket on g  g

 is well known. its generalization to the

case of antibracket has been considered in [15]

6

constructed (even formally) in a covariant way in the model whose target space is a non-at
manifold. over a curved manifold, the triplectic structure would be dened only locally and would
depend on the choice of coordinates. this is in contrast with the standard bv quantization [7],
where the canonical antibracket exists on the odd cotangent bundle over any eld space.

a remarkable feature of our construction is that it can be repeated for the standard (non-
in particular, there a exist a pair of compatible poisson brackets on m =

r) for every lie group. moreover, there exists a direct analogue of theorem 2.3

super) geometry.

(g  g
l )  (g  g
for a pair of appropriately degenerate compatible poisson brackets.

4 conclusions

we have shown that the triplectic structure (consisting of a pair of appropriately degenerate and
compatible antibrackets) induces the structure of a lie group on the intersection of certain symplec-
tic leaves of the antibrackets. the interest in the pairs of degenerate antibrackets originates from
the triplectic quantization of general gauge theories. in the triplectic scheme, however, one needs
mutually commutative antibrackets, and therefore the group has to be abelian, which appears to
be a strong geometrical constraint on the applicability of the triplectic quantization.

our approach to the lie group structures is somewhat reminiscent of the well-known fact that
in
one can naturally associate a lie algebra to every symplectic leaf of a poisson bracket [16].
the triplectic geometry, it is not only a lie algebra but also the corresponding lie group that is
associated with the zero-rank symplectic leaf of the antibracket induced on the algebra of marked
functions. an important point of our construction is that it has a direct analogue for the ordinary
(non-super) dierential geometry based on the standard poisson bracket.

we have considered the geometric structures induced on the intersection of symplectic leaves
of compatible antibrackets. this is only a half of the full triplectic geometry. the other part is
concentrated on the manifold of marked functions of the antibrackets; the corresponding geometry
was studied in the case of mutually commutative antibrackets in [5]. this is also interesting to
generalize to the case of non-commutative antibrackets.

another interesting aspect of the triplectic geometry is related to an additional structure, the
odd vector elds v a originating from the one-form f on m [3] that is compatible with the an-
tibrackets. in particular, f gives rise to a kahler structure on the manifold of marked functions
provided the appropriate nondegeneracy conditions are satised by f. this also endows l with
an even poisson bracket. in the case considered in this paper, it can be checked that we have a
left-right-invariant poisson bracket on l. it seems very probable that the present construction can
be generalized to include the poissonlie group structures.

i am grateful to a. m. semikhatov for his attention to this work and fruitful
acknowledgements
discussions and suggestions. i also wish to thank i. a. batalin, m. a. soloviev, and i. v. tyutin
and especially, o. m. khudaverdian and i. yu. tipunin for illuminating discussions. this work was
supported in part by the rfbr grant 98-01-01155 and by the intas-rfbr grant 95-0829.

7

references

[1] i. a. batalin, r. marnelius, and a. m. semikhatov, nucl. phys. b446 (1995) 249.
[2] i. a. batalin and r. marnelius, phys. lett. b446 (1995) 44.
[3] i. a. batalin and r. marnelius, nucl. phys. b465 (1996) 521.
[4] m. a. grigoriev and a. m. semikhatov, phys. lett. b417 (1998) 259268.
[5] m. a. grigoriev and a. m. semikhatov, hep-th/9807023
[6] i. a. batalin, p. m. lavrov, and i. v. tyutin, j. math. phys. 31 (1990) 1487.

i. a. batalin, p. m. lavrov, and i. v. tyutin, j. math. phys.32 (1990) 532.
i. a. batalin, p. m. lavrov, and i. v. tyutin, j. math. phys.32 (1991) 2513.

[7] i. a. batalin and g. a. vilkovisky, phys. lett. b vol.102 (1981) 27.
i. a. batalin and g. a. vilkovisky, phys. rev. d vol.28 (1983) 2567.

[8] i. a. batalin and i. v. tyutin, int. j. mod. phys. a8 (1993) 2333.

i. a. batalin and i. v. tyutin, mod. phys. lett. a8 (1993) 3673.
i. a. batalin and i .v tyutin, mod. phys. lett. a9 (1994) 1707.

[9] a. schwarz, commun. math. phys.155 (1993) 249260.
[10] h. hata and b. zwiebach, ann. phys. 229 (1994) 177216.

a. sen and b. zwiebach, commun. math. phys.177 (1996) 305.

[11] o. m. khudaverdian and a. nersessian, mod. phys. lett. a8 (1993) 2377.
[12] k. bering, almost parity structure, connections and vielbeins in bv geometry, mit-ctp-2682,

physics/9711010.

[13] v. a. soroka, linear odd poisson bracket on grassmann variables, hep-th/9811252.
[14] s. sternberg, lectures on dierential geomatry, prentice hall, inc. englewood clis, n.j. 1964.
[15] j. alfaro, p. h. damgaard, phys. lett. b369 (1996) 289294.
[16] m. v. karasev and v. p. maslov, nonlinear poisson brackets. geometry and quantization, nauka,

moscow, 1991.

8

