9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
8
1

 

 
 

1
v
2
3
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

hep-th/9902132
cern-th/99-35
eth-th/99-03
february 1999

symmetry breaking boundaries

i. general theory

jurgen fuchs

cern

ch  1211 gen`eve 23

and

christoph schweigert

institut fur theoretische physik

eth honggerberg
ch  8093 zurich

abstract
we study conformally invariant boundary conditions that break part of the bulk
symmetries. a general theory is developped for those boundary conditions for which
the preserved subalgebra is the xed algebra under an abelian orbifold group. we
explicitly construct the boundary states and reection coecients as well as the an-
nulus amplitudes. integrality of the annulus coecients is proven in full generality.

1

1 introduction and summary

the space of conformally invariant boundary conditions of two-dimensional conformal eld
theories is of interest in statistical mechanics, e.g. for the description of the kondo eect and the
theory of critical percolation, as well as in open string theory, where particular attention followed
the observation [1] that string perturbation theory in solitonic sectors can be formulated in
terms of world sheets with boundaries. in these applications it is crucial that the boundary
conditions preserve conformal invariance;
in contrast, additional symmetries that the bulk
theory may possess typically need not be respected.

the special case of boundary conditions that preserve the full bulk symmetry has been
considered already a long time ago [2]. in this case the consistent conformal boundary conditions
are in one-to-one correspondence with the irreducible representations of the fusion rule algebra
of the theory, the so-called (generalized) quantum dimensions. to be precise, this result holds
when the torus partition function is given by charge conjugation. more recently, it has been
observed [3, 4] that also in the case when the torus partition function corresponds to some
simple current automorphism of the fusion rules, one can nd a relative of the fusion algebra
whose irreducible representations precisely correspond to the boundary conditions that preserve
the full bulk symmetry. this algebra has been dubbed the classifying algebra.

the consideration of dirichlet boundary conditions for a free boson conformal eld theory
brought yet another insight. namely, for every conformal eld theory, say with charge conju-
gation modular invariant, one should also study boundary conditions that relate left and right
movers by some automorphism of the fusion rules [5, 6] that preserves conformal weights. for
a given fusion rule automorphism g, respectively the corresponding automorphism g of the
chiral algebra, there will typically exist several distinct conformally invariant boundary con-
ditions. they constitute the possible chan--paton types for the xed automorphism type g.
again, it is natural to construct these boundary conditions as irreducible representations of
some classifying algebra that generalizes the fusion rule algebra [5].

one goal of this paper is to identify these algebras; but to do so, it turns out to be convenient
to solve a more general problem. the boundary conditions of automorphism type g respect
only a subset of the bulk symmetries a, namely the subalgebra a(g) of those elements that
are xed under g. more generally, one may therefore address the following question. given a
subalgebra a of the chiral algebra a, determine all those boundary conditions that preserve
(at least) a, but not necessarily all of a. it should be appreciated that even when we ask this
question for the subalgebra a = a(g) associated to some automorphism g of nite order, it is by
no means clear that all the boundary conditions preserving a possess a denite automorphism
type. it will be a non-trivial result of our analysis that this is indeed true.

as long as a is completely arbitrary, at present this problem is still too general to be
tractable. we will therefore restrict our attention to a particular subclass of (consistent) subal-
gebras. namely, we require that a be the xed algebra ag of some group g of automorphisms
of the chiral algebra a. in other words, a = ag is the chiral algebra of an orbifold of the theory
that has chiral algebra a. the orbifold group g need not necessarily be a nite group; one
may even study orbifolds with respect to nite-dimensional lie groups. but for the present
purposes we assume that g is indeed nite, and we still specialize further to the situation that
g is a nite abelian group.

2

in this case, under some mild non-degeneracy assumption that is satised in all known
examples, the original chiral algebra a can be reassembled from its subalgebra a by an integer
spin simple current extension. this allows us to utilize simple current technology [7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12]. this way we have several nice structures at our disposal which have passed various rather
non-trivial checks in chiral conformal eld theory (see e.g. [12, 13, 14, 15]). they allow us to
write down a natural candidate for a classifying algebra. we then take this ansatz and compute
reection coecients and annulus coecients, and afterwards show that these quantities pass
the usual consistency checks. in particular, the annulus coecients are proven to be integral;
it should be noticed that this property is an outcome of our analysis rather than a requirement
we impose.

h = m



for the convenience of the reader, we present now a brief summary of our main results.
we assume full reducibility, i.e. that we can decompose the representation spaces h for all
primary elds of the a-theory as
(1.1)

  h
v 
into irreducible a-modules h. the degeneracy spaces v 
 introduced this way are modules of
the orbifold group g. we make the mild assumption that each of these g-modules is irreducible,
 = v where  g is a character of the orbifold group. as a consequence, we
so that v 
can label the primary elds of the orbifold theory by pairs (, ) where  is an a-primary
and  g. actually, at this point we have somewhat oversimplied the story. indeed, by
assumption we have an action of g on the chiral algebra, and thus on the vacuum primary
eld  = . while this does induce an action of g on the degeneracy spaces that arise in the
decomposition for other primaries as well, that action is in general only projective. thus in
general we must allow for v to be only a projective g-module. note that projective modules
of an abelian group do not necessarily have dimension one; accordingly, additional multiplicities
will occur in our analysis. that this eect is indeed realized in concrete models can already
be seen for orbifolds of a free boson, compactied at self-dual radius; when one orbifoldizes
by the dihedral group d2, then the dihedral group acts on the primary eld of conformal
dimension  = 1/4 only projectively, and those projective irreducible representations are, of
course, irreducible representations of the universal central extension of d2, the quaternion
group (for more details see [16]).

technically, we will proceed in this work in a manner that is opposite to the orbifold
philosophy, i.e. we express a-quantities in terms of quantities of the a-theory instead of the
other way round. it can be seen that under the above-mentioned non-degeneracy assumption
the primaries j = (, ) of the a-theory that come from the vacuum sector  of the original
theory form an ablian group g under fusion; in other words, they are simple currents. this
group is actually isomorphic to the character group of the orbifold group g, i.e. g = g.
equipped with this information, we are then in a position to apply simple current technology.
first, by its action through the fusion product, the simple current group g organizes the a-
primaries  into orbits. generically this action is not free, so one associates to every primary
eld  its stabilizer, i.e. the subgroup s of g whose elements leave  xed (as g is abelian,
the stabilizer is the same for all elds on the same g-orbit). further, for every simple current
jg we associate to each primary eld  the rational number
qj() :=  + j  j mod z ,

(1.2)

3

called the monodromy charge of , which is constant on g-orbits. in orbifold terminology, the
elds whose monodromy charge vanishes for every jg are those in the untwisted sector of
the orbifold. more generally, the function g  g(q)

 : g  c with

g(j) := exp(2iqj())

(1.3)

for all jg is an element of the character group g = (g) = g and can be identied with an
element of the orbifold group; g characterizes the twist sector to which the eld  belongs.

based on this description one might expect that it is possible to express the a-primaries 
in terms of a-quantities as follows. the label  is interpreted as a pair ([], ), consisting of a
g-orbit [] and a character  of the stabilizer s. this would correspond to the decomposition
(1.4)

h  m

jg/s

hj

of irreducible a-modules, with the character  s
 accounting for the fact that inequivalent
a-modules can be equivalent as a-modules. however, as established in [12], this ansatz is too
naive. the origin of the failure was actually already mentioned above; namely, the decomposi-
tion (1.4) would exclude the possibility of having only a projective action of the orbifold group
g on sectors other than the vacuum. in contrast, the formalism developped in [12], which is
briey reviewed in appendix a, correctly takes this eect into account. what is required as an
additional ingredient is to introduce for each  a certain subgroup u of s, called the untwisted
stabilizer of . this subgroup is of quadratic index; the positive integer

d := p|s| /|u|

(1.5)

is just the dimension of the relevant projective representation of g. the analysis of [12] shows
that the a-primaries are in fact described by pairs [, ], where  is a character of the untwisted
stabilizer rather than of the full stabilizer. the action of g/s is then implemented by an
equivalence relation that also involves the character  (see formula (a.8)). in [17], where some
of our results were announced, we have concentrated on the case where for all elds  the
untwisted stabilizer coincides with the stabilizer; in the present work, the whole structure is
displayed for the most general situation.

we can now exhibit the boundary conditions that preserve only the subalgebra a of the
bulk symmetries. due to factorization, boundary conditions are characterized [2, 18] by the
one-point correlation functions of bulk elds on the disk. the corresponding chiral blocks are
two-point blocks on the sphere. as only the symmetries in a are preserved, these blocks are,
however, not the ordinary chiral two-point blocks of the a-theory, but rather we should take the
chiral blocks of the a-theory and combine them in a way compatible with the decomposition
of the spaces h. since states in dierent a-modules that occur in such a decomposition are
possibly reected dierently at the boundary, this way we arrive at an independent chiral two-
point block for each pair (, ), where  is a eld in the untwisted sector of the orbifold theory
and  is a character of the untwisted stabilizer of . we must still be somewhat more careful,
though. such a chiral block is a linear form

h  h+  c ;

4

(1.6)

when d > 1, the specication of such a form requires also a linear form on the tensor product of
the d-dimensional degeneracy spaces. there are d2
 =|s|/|u| such forms. as a consequence,
for each primary  in the untwisted sector of the a-theory we get

nblock() = d2

 |u| = |s|

(1.7)

many independent chiral two-point blocks. as we will demonstrate in section 4, the labels
characterizing these blocks naturally combine into a pair (, ), where  is now a character
of the full stabilizer.

next we analyze also the way in which these blocks combine to correlation functions,
whereby we eectively characterize the boundary conditions. we rst observe that in the case
where the full bulk symmetry a is conserved and the torus partition function is given by charge
conjugation, the boundary conditions correspond to the (generalized) quantum dimensions of
the a-theory. quantum dimensions, in turn, are related to primary elds via the modular
s-matrix of the theory. (actually in this simple case the structure is somewhat obscured by
the fact that the modular s-matrix is symmetric so that there exists a natural identication
between quantum dimensions and primary elds.) the fact that a modular transformation re-
lates boundary blocks to boundary conditions has become even more apparent in the example
considered in [4].

it is therefore not too surprising that also in the more general situation considered here,
boundary blocks and boundary conditions are connected by a modular transformation. let
us explore heuristically this idea further. the labels  of the boundary blocks are subject to
g  0. in orbifold language, this means that we are only dealing with the untwisted sector of
the orbifold. thus along the space direction of the torus only the twist by the identity occurs.
it follows that after a modular s-transformation, only the identity appears as twist in the time
direction of the torus, which in turn means that the usual orbifold projection does not take
place. in simple current language, the corresponding statement is that the boundary conditions
are labelled by g-orbits [] of a-primaries rather than by individual primary elds. on the
other hand, after the modular s-transformation arbitrary twists in the space direction occur in
the orbifold; this means that in the labelling of the boundary conditions all g-orbits [] appear,
not just those with vanishing monodromy charges, i.e. not just the ones in the untwisted sector.
in fact in [19] we will show that the character g g = g furnished by the monodromy charges

of  can be naturally identied with the automorphism type of the boundary condition. this
in turn allows us to derive (rather than to assume ad hoc) that every boundary condition of
the form considered here possesses a denite automorphism type. finally, for the boundary
conditions there is an additional degeneracy, too, this time governed by the untwisted stabilizer.
as a matter of fact, in the structures we are going to exhibit, consistency is achieved through a
rather subtle (and beautiful) interplay between the untwisted stabilizer and the full stabilizer.
for the convenience of the reader, we now collect a few explicit formul. they are most
conveniently presented in terms of a certain square matrix s. this matrix diagonalizes the
structure constants of the classifying algebra; accordingly its rst index refers to a boundary
block (, ), while the second index corresponds to a boundary condition [, ]. the formula
for s is

s(,),[, ] =

(|s||u||s||u|)1/2 x

|g|

jsu

(j) (j) sj

, .

(1.8)

5

 and  u 
roughly, one has to sandwich certain matrices sj between the characters  s
 ;
these matrices are the modular transformation matrices for one-point chiral blocks with inser-
tion of the simple current j on the torus [15] and appear naturally in the study of simple current
extensions [12]. in terms of the matrix s the one-dimensional irreducible representations of the
classifying algebra which provide the reection coecients read

r[, ]((,)) =

s(,),[, ]

s ,[, ]

.

(1.9)

we will also see that there is a natural conjugation on the boundary conditions, a map of order
two that implements the reversal of the orientation of the boundary.

finally, we display the annulus amplitude for an annulus with boundary conditions [1, 1]
and [2, 2]. as we will see, it is natural to express the annulus amplitude as a linear combination

a[1, 1] [2, 2] = x

[, ]

a[, ]
[1, 1] [2, 2] x 

[, ]

(1.10)

of characters x 
by the simple currents in the subgroup

[, ] of the conformal eld theory that is obtained by extending the a-theory

g  g

12 := {jg | qj(1) = 0 = qj(2)}

(1.11)

of g. the annulus coecients a[, ]
the fusion rule coecients gn

[1, 1] [2, 2]
[,  ]

[, ],[, ]

a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

= n x


1u 
1

1 1

can then be written, up to a prefactor, as a sum of
of the g-extension:
x

[2, 2],j[, ]

x

(1.12)

g

n

[1, 1]

.

jg/g


2u 
2

2 2

here g is a certain subgroup of g which is intermediate between g and g, i.e. g g  g,
and i = i|uig. as an important consistency check we will present a general proof that the
prefactor n  n12, which is a quite complicated ratio involving the sizes of various subgroups
of g (see formula (6.41)), is always a non-negative integer, so that the annulus amplitude can
be consistently interpreted as a partition function for open string states.
more precisely, the number n can be written as a product of three separate integral fac-
tors, each of which possesses a natural group theoretic respectively representation theoretic
interpretation (see formul (6.50) and (6.51)). while this denitely implies that the annulus
coecients are non-negative integers (as bets the coecients of a partition function), the in-
terpretation of the prefactor n should also play a role in non-chiral eld-state correspondence.
one expects to be able to associate to every open string state a eld operator in the full con-
formal eld theory. now the partition function for these states is the annulus amplitude, and
the presence of additional multiplicities in the latter means that several distinct operators in
the full conformal eld theory must be built from one and the same chiral vertex operator.
an explicit construction of these operators is not known for the moment, but in any case the

6

information that the multiplicities all possess an interpretation in terms of fusion rules and
other representation theoretic objects seems to be a highly relevant.

the rest of this paper is organized as follows. we start in section 2 with a description of
our setup, i.e. boundary conditions which preserve a subalgebra of the bulk symmetries that is
xed under a nite abelian group of automorphisms. the analysis of such boundary conditions
proceeds in two steps, where in the rst step one works exclusively at the chiral level, while in
the second non-chiral quantities enter. the general features of the chiral part are collected in
section 3, while in section 4 a natural basis for the basic chiral ingredients, the boundary blocks,
is constructed. section 5 is devoted to the non-chiral level. first, in subsection 5.1, we show
that the boundary conditions of our interest are governed by a classifying algebra; in the rest of
this section we establish the precise form of this algebra and investigate its properties. while
we regard our arguments leading to these results as convincing, they are not mathematically
rigorous. as further evidence we therefore perform, in section 6, several additional consistency
checks based on properties of the annulus amplitudes, the most important one (subsection 6.4)
being a general proof of the integrality of the annulus coecients that appear in the open string
channel.

in a follow-up paper [19], we will address several complementary issues which concern the
structure of the space of symmetry breaking boundary conditions and display the boundary
conditions for various classes of conformal eld theories explicitly. more concretely, we start
by associating to each boundary condition its automorphism type, which arises as a direct
consequence of the general structure. then we show that boundary conditions of denite
automorphism type can be naturally formulated with the help of certain twisted boundary
blocks, obeying twisted ward identities, and that they carry their own individual classifying
algebra, which is a suitable quotient of the total classifying algebra. further we study the
realization of t-duality on the space of boundary conditions, show that this space carries an
action of the orbifold group (boundary homogeneity), and introduce the concept of a universal
classifying algebra for all conformally invariant boundary conditions. finally we will exhibit in a
large number of examples the concrete realization of various structures that we have uncovered.

acknowledgement
we are grateful to peter bantay and bert schellekens for very helpful correspondence.

2 broken bulk symmetries

in this paper we analyze the following situation. we start with some prescribed conformal
eld theory that is consistently dened on all closed orientable surfaces, and choose the charge
conjugation modular invariant as the partition function on the torus. this theory is, moreover,
assumed to be non-heterotic, i.e. for left and right movers we deal with one and the same sym-
metry algebra a, the chiral algebra, which contains the virasoro algebra vir. (this condition
in fact refers to the oriented schottky cover of the surface, which for a closed orientable surface
consists of two isomorphic disjoint sheets; the requirement is that we deal with one and the
same chiral conformal eld theory on both sheets.) we call a the algebra of bulk symmetries.
for technical reasons we will assume that the theory is rational, i.e. it contains only nitely
many a-primaries.

7

boundary conditions which respect the full bulk symmetry have been studied for quite a
while [2, 18]. in contrast, in the present work we are interested in boundary conditions which
do not preserve all bulk symmetries, but only a subalgebra a of a. this does not yet restrict at
all the kind of boundary condition we consider, since to any arbitrary boundary condition one
may associate the subalgebra of a that is preserved. further, we are interested in conformally
invariant boundary conditions only, so that a must in particular contain the virasoro subalgebra
of a. moreover, a must be consistent; by this qualication we understand that the algebra is
closed under charge conjugation and allows for the denition of sheaves of chiral blocks which
come with a projectively at knizhnik--zamolodchikov connection and which obey consistent
factorization rules.

a typical chiral algebra a will, however, possess very many, if not innitely many, consistent
subalgebras a. accordingly, the rst step towards a classication of all conformal boundary
conditions would be to classify all those subalgebras. this problem depends largely on the
specic bulk conformal eld theory under consideration, and (except for a discussion of a
possible limiting algebra of an inductive system of classifying algebras in [19]) we will not have
to say much about it. on the other hand, for suciently simple theories, such as the virasoro
minimal models or the free boson or its z2-orbifold, all consistent subalgebras are known.
more generally, once the problem of classifying the consistent subalgebras has been solved for
any single model, the methods presented below provide us (possibly modulo the existence of
so-called complex charges, compare [20]) with all conformal boundary conditions of that model.
here we rather concentrate on the task of classifying all boundary conditions that preserve
some specied consistent subalgebra a. as long as a is a completely arbitrary subalgebra,
this problem is still too general and cannot be solved with the methods that are available at
present. we will therefore restrict our attention to a particular subclass of consistent subalge-
bras. namely, we require that a be the xed algebra of some group g of automorphisms of the
chiral algebra a. in other words,

a = ag

(2.1)

is the chiral algebra of an orbifold of the original theory. in principle the orbifold group g
can be quite arbitrary; for instance, it need not even be nite, but rather could be some nite-
dimensional lie group. still, for the purpose of the present paper we restrict our attention to
the case when g is nite, and when moreover it is abelian.

this situation may seem rather special compared to the general problem sketched above,
but it nevertheless covers a variety of cases of practical interest. examples are provided by the
critical three-states potts model and, more generally, virasoro minimal models of (a, deven)
type, by dirichlet boundary conditions for a free boson for which only the chiral algebra of
the z2-orbifold of the boson theory is preserved, by d-branes in toroidal compactications at
generic positions, by charge conjugation in wzw theories, and by those boundary conditions
for a free boson that correspond to a change in the compactication radius.
(for a more
extensive list, see the nal sections in the follow-up [19] of this paper.) moreover, already with
this restriction we can gain a number of additional physical insights, e.g. concerning the relation
between boundary conditions that preserve subalgebras a1 and a2 of a which are contained in
each other.

let us briey recall how to describe boundary conditions in conformal eld theory on surfaces
c with boundaries. first [5], one must set up a chiral conformal eld theory on a closed oriented

8

twofold covering surface c of c, the schottky cover [21], from which c is obtained by dividing
out an anti-conformal involution. this amounts to specifying a system of chiral blocks that
has a knizhnik--zamolodchikov connection and obeys factorization rules; as a consequence of
factorization, the blocks most relevant to the boundary conditions are the chiral blocks for a
single bulk eld insertion on the disk, which are two-point blocks on the projective line p1. in
an independent second step we have to construct correlation functions as linear combinations
of these blocks which satisfy [2, 18, 3, 22, 23] locality and factorization constraints. as has been
emphasized in [5], these two conceptual levels should be carefully distinguished, and accordingly
we will divide our discussion in two parts. we start in the next two sections by analyzing the
chiral conformal eld theory on the schottky cover.

3 chiral theory for symmetry breaking boundaries

as just pointed out, for the thorough investigation of boundary conditions it is advisable to
distinguish clearly between the two conceptual levels of chiral conformal eld theory and full
conformal eld theory. in the chiral theory, boundaries are not yet present explicitly; but as a
prerequisite for analyzing the breaking of bulk symmetries by boundary conditions in the full
theory already at this stage various structures need to be understood. these chiral concepts
are the topic of the present and the next section.

3.1 simple currents versus orbifolds

as already outlined above, our general situation is as follows. we are given a rational conformal
eld theory with chiral algebra a, and we consider boundary conditions that preserve only a
consistent subalgebra a of a. let us assume that a can be obtained from its subalgebra a by
the extension with a simple current group g, some nite abelian group. each simple current
jg corresponds to an irreducible innite-dimensional representation space hj of a; moreover,
the vacuum module h  of a and the vacuum module h of a are related as

h = m

jg

hj ,

(3.1)

where the symbol = stands for isomorphism as a-modules; the identity element in g corre-
sponds to h .
in this situation the chiral algebra a is necessarily an orbifold subalgebra of a. namely,
we can obtain an action of the dual group g =g on h as follows. for every g  g, we dene
r(g) to act on the subspace hj of h as the multiple j(g) id hj
of the identity map, where j is
regarded as a character on g. field-state correspondence relates the vectors in h to operators
in the chiral algebra, and thus this prescription provides us with a group of automorphisms of
a that is isomorphic to g.

conversely, suppose we are given an action of a nite abelian group g on the chiral algebra
a that leaves the virasoro subalgebra vir a pointwise xed. then a contains as a subalgebra
the algebra ag of all elements that are left pointwise xed under the action of the orbifold group
g, and ag contains the virasoro subalgebra of a. again by eld-state correspondence, we then

9

also have an action of g on the vacuum module h, 1 and this action commutes with the action
of ag. assuming that h is completely reducible as an ag-module, which is the case in all
known examples, we can therefore decompose h into irreducible submodules of 2 g ag:

h = m



m

g

m,  v  h .

(3.2)

here h are irreducible ag-modules, v irreducible modules of g (and are thus one-dimen-
sional), and m, are vector spaces which account for possible degeneracies.
in all cases that are known to us there is in fact no degeneracy present at all, i.e. the spaces
m, all have dimension one. we will from now on assume that this property is satised. this
assumption implies that all ag-modules h that appear in (3.2) are simple currents. this holds
true because the fusion of these modules must be compatible with the decomposition of tensor
products of irreducible g-representations. the latter decomposition, in turn, is just described
by the dual group g = g, and hence we conclude that with respect to the fusion product the
modules h appearing in (3.2) form a simple current group isomorphic to g.

3.2 simple current extensions
that the boundary conditions of our interest preserve only the subalgebra a implies that
generically the elds corresponding to vectors in dierent a-submodules of a given a-module
are reected dierently at the boundary. accordingly we need to decompose every sector of
the chiral conformal eld theory, i.e. every irreducible representation of a, into irreducible
a-representations (again we impose full reducibility with respect to a).

fortunately, the decomposition of a-modules in terms of a-modules is a purely chiral issue,
i.e. is in particular independent of any boundary eects, and this chiral issue is well understood
in the simple current framework. we summarize some relevant information here; for more
details see appendix a and [9, 12]. the fusion product provides an action of the simple current
group g on the elds  of the a-theory. to each primary eld  one then associates a subgroup
of g, the stabilizer
(3.3)
stabilizer subgroups are constant on g-orbits (which we already anticipated by writing s in
place of s); conjugate a-elds have identical stabilizers, too.
in the decomposition of a given a-module h only a-modules on a single g-orbit appear.
however, one and the same g-orbit [] of primaries in the a-theory can give rise to several
distinct primaries of the a-theory. in other words, inequivalent a-modules can be isomorphic
1 here we make the assumption that the action of g on the vacuum module h is a honest action rather
than only a projective one. this condition should be regarded as part of the denition of the term orbifold. if
it were not satised, the structure to be divided out would no longer be a group.

s := {jg | j = } .

2 note that g commutes with the virasoro algebra so that it preserves the grading of the innite-dimensional
space h. thus each homogeneous subspace of xed conformal weight is a nite-dimensional g-module, which
is fully reducible. as g even commutes with all of ag, full reducibility with respect to g ag then follows
from full reducibility with respect to ag. we remark that it is known [24] that a vertex operator algebra
for which every graded representation is fully reducible possesses only nitely many inequivalent irreducible
representations and thus gives rise to a rational conformal eld theory.

10

as a-modules. this eect is controlled by a subgroup of the stabilizer, the so-called untwisted
stabilizer, which in turn is obtained with the help of the following structure. to each a-primary
 one can associate a bi-homomorphism

f :

g  g  c

(3.4)

that is alternating in the sense that f(j, j) = 1 for all jg, that again depends only on the
orbit, and that is the same for any two conjugate orbits (for the precise denition see appendix
b). every alternating bi-homomorphism is the commutator cocycle for some two-cocycle f on
g, i.e.
(3.5)

f(j1, j2) = f(j1, j2) /f(j2, j1) ,

and the cohomology class of f is uniquely determined by f.

3.3 the untwisted stabilizer

the commutator cocycle f allows us to single out the untwisted stabilizer [12] as the subgroup

u := {js | f(j, k) = 1 for all ks}

(3.6)
of the full stabilizer s. as shown in [12], those a-primaries that are isomorphic as a-modules
are naturally labelled by characters of the group u. as a consequence, the a-primaries can
be denoted by g-orbits [, ] of pairs consisting of a primary label  of the a-theory and a
character  of the untwisted stabilizer of . (the equivalence relation that denes the classes
[, ] involves both constituents of the pair, see formula (a.8).)

a second important piece of information that we can extract from the commutator cocycle
f is a collection of projective representations of s. they are characterized by the two-
cocycle f, or rather its cohomology class. the theory of projective representations of nite
abelian groups (for a brief summary see appendix b) tells us that the projective irreducible
representations are labelled by the characters  of the untwisted stabilizer u and, moreover,
that they all have the same dimension d that was dened in (1.5), i.e.

with

d = ps / u

s := |s| ,

u := |u| .

(3.7)

(3.8)

note that, even though not manifest from their denition, the numbers d are indeed integral
[12, 14]; they constitute the (additional) ground state degeneracy of the resolved xed point in
the a-theory [12].

taking all this information together, we arrive at the decomposition

h  h[, ] = m

jg/s

v  hj ,

(3.9)

where v is an irreducible projective s-module. in the special case of the vacuum  =  of the
a-theory the stabilizer is trivial, s ={ }; we then recover (3.2) with  = j  and  g =g

11

identied with the simple current j. it should also be kept in mind that on the right hand
side of these decompositions only such irreducible representations  of the a-theory arise for
which the monodromy charges qj() (1.2) with respect to all currents jg vanish; this holds
true simply because it is satised [9] for all irreducible representations  in the extension and
because monodromy charges are constant on g-orbits.

4 boundary blocks

we have now collected sucient background material so as to be able to address in more
detail the basic ingredient needed for the analysis of boundaries at the chiral level. as already
mentioned, as a consequence of factorization this ingredient is provided by the chiral blocks for
a single bulk insertion on the disk. we will refer to these basic objects as the boundary blocks
for broken bulk symmetries. (when all bulk symmetries are preserved, these blocks are also
called ishibashi states.)

by denition, such boundary blocks are two-point chiral blocks on a world sheet p1 with the
topology of the sphere. in more technical terms, they are elements of (hh+)  the algebraic
dual of hh+  i.e. linear forms h h+  c on the tensor product spaces h h+, which
satisfy the ward identities for a, i.e. are invariant under the symmetries in the chiral algebra
that are preserved.
in the special case when all bulk symmetries are respected, every such
two-point block is uniquely determined up to a scalar factor.

4.1 boundary blocks for broken symmetries
we are interested in the situation where only the symmetries in the prescribed subalgebra a of
the chiral algebra are preserved. from the decomposition (3.9) it follows that the linear forms
we are after are forms on

h  h+  h[, ]  h[, ]+ = v v+  m

j,kg/s

( hj  hk+) ,

(4.1)

and hence they are sums of tensor products of linear forms on the tensor product spaces vv +
and lj,k
hj hk+. moreover, since the a-symmetries are preserved, the latter forms satisfy
the ward identities of the a-theory and hence are precisely the two-point blocks for the relevant
a-elds. these blocks in turn can be non-vanishing only when one deals with tensor products
of conjugate a-modules, i.e. eectively we are working with forms on the subspace

v v+  m

jg/s

( hj  h(j)+)

(4.2)

of the space (4.1). moreover, when non-vanishing, then these forms on the subspaces h h+
are uniquely xed up to normalization, just as the two-point blocks for a are. thus, in short,
they are just the ordinary boundary blocks

b : h  h+  c

12

(4.3)

of the a-theory.

it follows that the boundary blocks can be written as linear combinations

x

j;i b ,(i)

 bj ,

(4.4)

i{1,2,...,d2
jg/s

}

where the maps b ,(i) constitute some basis of the linear forms

  :

(4.5)
the coecients j;i  c appearing in (4.4) are undetermined at the level of chiral conformal
eld theory, simply because the ward identities for the unbroken symmetries are satised
independently of the values of these coecients. at the level of full conformal eld theory,
however, we will be able to determine them; each consistent set of values then corresponds to
a boundary condition that preserves a.

v  v+  c .

now for the a-part we are already given a natural basis of linear forms, namely the ordinary
boundary blocks (4.3). on the other hand, at this point we are still lacking a concrete basis
for the linear forms   on the degeneracy spaces. therefore we now turn our attention to
those forms  . as already mentioned, the degeneracy spaces are projective modules of the
stabilizer group s, or more precisely, ordinary modules of that twisted group algebra cfs
which corresponds to (the cohomology class of) the two-cocycle f that was introduced in
formula (3.5). thus to every js there is associated a linear map r (j) on v, and these
maps represent s projectively in the sense that

(4.6)
for all j, j s. when the simple current j is even contained in the untwisted stabilizer u s,
which coincides with the center of the twisted group algebra cfs, then it is represented by
a multiple of the unit matrix:

r (j) r (j) = f(j, j) r (jj)

r (j) = (j) 11d

for ju .

(4.7)
we also note that for any set {k} of representatives of the quotient s/u, the matrices r (k)
form a basis of the full matrix algebra md(v) on v. (for further properties of twisted group
algebras and their representations, see appendix b.)
by employing these maps r (j) we will now construct a natural basis for the linear forms
  and thereby for the boundary blocks. to this end we rst establish an underlying basis
{o} for the endomorphisms of v. before doing so, however, we pause for a remark about the
character + that rst appeared in formula (4.1) above. it arises via the formula

[, ]+ = [+, +]

(4.8)
for the conjugation of a-representations, thus it comes from the g-orbit that is conjugate to the
g-orbit of . now the commutator cocycles of conjugate orbits are just each others complex
conjugates (see relation (a.27)), so + is a character of the same group u as . however, it
does not, in general, coincide with the complex conjugate character  (see formula (a.29) for
the precise denition). thus in particular in general the irreducible projective s-module v+
neither coincides with v itself nor with the module v 
that is dual to v in the sense that the
representation matrices are hermitian conjugate to those for v.



13

4.2 a natural basis for end(v)
as an intermediate step towards constructing the desired basis for the linear forms on v v+,
in this subsection we introduce a basis {o}{o( )
 } for the linear maps on the degeneracy
space v. to this end we rst introduce the following concept. for every character  of the
full stabilizer,  s

, the restriction of  to u s is an element ()u 

. we write

  

or

 = ()  |u

(4.9)

to characterize this situation. each u-character  has d2
 pre-images under the projection
. we will show how these pre-images label the desired basis of the endomorphisms of v,
according to {o |   }.
we start with the observation that for    the product (j)r (j) does not depend on
the choice of representative j of a class in the quotient s/u. for, if ku, then

(jk) r (jk) = (j)(k) r (j)r (k)

= (j) (k) r (j) (k) 11d = (j) r (j)

(4.10)

(4.11)

due to the identity (4.7). therefore for each    we can introduce the endomorphism

o := ( u

s

)3/2 x

js/u

(j)r (j)  end(v) ,

and these maps are well-dened. the following argument shows that the matrices o form
a basis of the full matrix algebra md = end(v). 3 we use the fact, derived in the appendix
after relation (b.35), that the partial sum over characters yields a non-zero result if and only
if ku, or more precisely, x

(k) = s
u

(4.12)

ku

(k) .

s 

 

the identity (4.12) implies that

x

s 

 

(k)o = ( u

s

)1/2 x

js/u

kj1u

(kj1) r (j) = d1



(kj1

k ) r (jk)

(4.13)

for all ks. here jk denotes the chosen representative in s/u that is in the same class as
k. these sums, of course, depend on k, and not just on k modulo u. however, for any set {k}
of representatives of s/u, we recover all elements in a basis of the space of endomorphisms
of v, because the operators r (j) span this space.
it follows that the operators o span the space end(v) of endomorphisms; for dimensional
reasons, they therefore constitute a basis of end(v), as claimed. furthermore, since its con-
struction is entirely specied in terms of the character  and the simple currents in s, this
basis is indeed completely natural.

3 naively one might also expect that these matrices are (proportional to) idempotents. but the non-triviality

of the cocycle f spoils this property.

14

later on we will also need the traces of the operators o and of a product of two of them,
for two s-characters ,  that restrict to the same u-character . to evaluate these traces
we observe that the trace of r (j) is given by

tr r (j) = ju

(j) tr 11d = d (j) ju

(compare the relations (b.29) and (b.30)). we then nd

tro = d3

 x
 x

js/u

js/u

= d2

(j) tr r (j)

(j) (j) ju = d2

 (j1) (j1) = d2



(4.14)

(4.15)

(here j1 is the chosen representative of the class of the unit element of s/u) as well as 4

tro

o = d3

= d3

j1,j2s/u

j1,j2s/u

 x
 x
 x
 x

js/u

= d3+1

= d2

(j1) (j2) tr r


(j1) r (j2)

(j1) (j2) tr r (j1

1 j2)  f(j1

1 , j2)

1 , j2) j1

1 j2u

(j1

1 j2)

(4.16)

j1,j2s/u

(j1) (j2) f(j1
(j) (j) f(j1, j) = u

s x

js/u

(j) (j) = , .

thus the basis {o |   } is orthonormal. also, combining the two results we learn that the
endomorphisms d2

 o form a partition of unity:

x

s 

 

o = d2

 11d .

(4.17)

4.3 a natural basis for the boundary blocks
our next aim is to associate to each of the endomorphisms o: v  v with    and to each
jg/s a linear form
(4.18)

:

b  b( ;j)



v v+  c ,

in such a way that the collection of these forms constitutes a basis. (thus these maps are
required to provide a concrete realization of the basis elements b ,(i) that were introduced in
4 in the last line we assume that the cocycle f has been chosen to be standard, which means (see formula
(b.14)) that for elements of the basis of the twisted group algebra the operations of forming the inverse and
of conjugating with an element of the center look the same as in the untwisted case. this property of f can
always be achieved by a suitable basis choice.

15

formula (4.4); in particular the label i appearing there turns out to be nothing but a character
 with   .) this is achieved by rst constructing a suitable non-degenerate linear form
 s
(4.19)

:

  ( ;j)



v v+  c

and then dening

b  b( ;j)



:=   (o  id) ,

(4.20)

i.e. b(vw) := (ov  w) for all v v and all w v+.
to obtain , we observe that when restricted to an isotypic component in the decomposition
(3.9), the boundary block b: hh+  c of the a-theory satises the ward identities of the
a-theory and therefore is proportional to the corresponding boundary block b: h h+  c
of the a-theory. this implies that upon choosing any two xed elements p and q of h and
h+ for which b(p  q) is non-zero, the prescription

(v  w) :=

b(vp  wq)

b(p  q)

,

(4.21)

yields a well-dened linear form on vv+. moreover, by the non-degeneracy and uniqueness
of b and b, it is non-degenerate. note that all forms in question are unique up to a scalar.
of course, the scalar factor for  can be dierent for dierent isotypic components of h, so
that for each jg/s we obtain a dierent map ( ;j)
. hence for arbitrary elements p, q of
ljg/s
h(j)+, respectively, we have

hj and ljg/s



b(vp(j)  wq(j)) = ( ;j)



(v  w)  bj(p(j)  q(j))

(4.22)

, where p =: pjg/s

p(j) with p(j)  hj and analogously for q.

for all jg/s
by the linear independence of the endomorphisms o, also the forms (4.20) are linearly
independent; since there are d2
 of them, they therefore indeed provide us with a basis of the
linear forms on vv+. we now combine this basis with the a-blocks (4.3) with  = j.
when doing so, we still have to allow for an arbitrary over-all normalization of the blocks,
which cannot be determined at the present stage. thus we arrive at the linear forms

b(,)  b

(,) := n, d2

 b  b

on hh+ with some non-zero n,  c, acting as
b(j,)(vp  wq) := nj, d2

 b(vw)  bj(p(j)q(j))

(4.23)

(4.24)

for all v  v, w v+, ph and q  h+. when  = [, ], then for  = j with j ranging
over g/s and  over all   , the forms b(,) constitute a natural basis for the boundary
blocks on hh+ that preserve a. in short, the boundary blocks are naturally labelled by
pairs (, ), one label referring to a primary eld  of the a-theory with vanishing monodromy
charge qg() = 0, the other a character of the full stabilizer,  s
.

16

we remark that with the help of the identity (4.17) 5 one checks that the ordinary boundary

blocks of the a-theory can be expressed in terms of the blocks b(,) as

b = m

s 

 

m

jg/s

(nj,)1 b(j,) .

(4.25)

moreover, it is easy to see that the form  satises a degeneracy space ward identity, i.e.

  (y  1  1  y) = 0

(4.26)

for every y  end(v). 6 this result, in turn, when combined with the ward identities of the
a-theory, immediately implies that the linear combination (4.25) indeed satises the ward
identities of the a-theory, i.e.

b  (yn  1 + (1)y 1 1  yn) = 0

(4.27)

for all y  a (y denotes the conformal weight of y ).

4.4 scalar products

for the computation of annulus amplitudes we need to deal with suitable scalar products of
the boundary blocks. as a matter of fact, the boundary blocks are not normalizable; but for
every t > 0 there exists a modied inner product

h b(,)| e(2/t)(l0 1+1l0c/12) | b(,)i

(4.28)

with respect to which they become normalizable. 7 to substantiate this statement and perform
the concrete calculation, we compare it to the analogous computation for the boundary blocks
of the a-theory. as usual [25, 3], we normalize the ordinary boundary blocks of the a-theory
by prescribing the over-all factor in their modied inner product, according to

hb| e(2/t)(l0 1+1l0c/12) |bi = 1
and analogously for the boundary blocks of the a-theory:
h b| e(2/t)(l0 1+1l0c/12) | bi = 1
s, 

s,

(2i/t) , ,

(2i/t) , .

(4.29)

(4.30)

5 the introduction of the explicit factor of d2


corresponding factor in (4.17).

in (4.23) was chosen with hindsight, so as to cancel the

  [r 
are suppressed.

6 note that in the two terms y acts on dierent spaces, i.e. in more pedantic notation the identity reads
(y)  1  1  r + (y)] = 0. just like in the usual ward identities, in (4.26) the representation symbols
7 while at this point this observation is a mere peculiarity without any particular application, these modied
in that

inner products indeed appear in the computation of annulus amplitudes, see subsection 6.2 below.
context, t is the modular parameter of the annulus.

17

what we need as an additional new ingredient is to construct an inner product on the space
of linear maps (4.20); this is achieved as follows. first we construct a scalar product on the
degeneracy space v, i.e. a sesquilinear map

  :

v  v  c .

(4.31)

the construction uses the invariant scalar products on the modules of a and a. namely, on a
we have an antilinear conjugation map c: y 7 y , and on each a-module h there is a scalar
product : hh  c which is invariant in the sense that
(ynp, p) + (p, (yn)p) = 0

(4.32)
for all p, p h and all yn  a. such a scalar product on an irreducible module is unique up to
a scalar. moreover, since the subalgebra a must be consistent, it is closed under c, and hence
there is an analogous structure on a-modules.

the scalar product on v can now be constructed as follows. the subspace v  h of h
inherits a scalar product from the scalar product  of h. for any two xed vectors v, v in the
degeneracy space v, the mapping (p, p)7 (vp, vp) for p, p  h provides a sesquilinear
form. this sesquilinear form is still unitary with respect to the restriction of the conjugation c
to the subalgebra a. thus it must be proportional to the standard scalar product  on h.
we call the constant of proportionality  (v, v). in formulae,

 (v, v) =

(vp, vp)

(p, p)

,

(4.33)

where any pair p, p  h of vectors can be chosen that obeys (p, p)6= 0. one veries that  
constitutes a non-degenerate scalar product on the degeneracy space v.
the scalar product   possesses an invariance property as well. consider the elements of
a that commute with the subalgebra a. since the conjugation c is an automorphism of a,
this commutant is mapped by c to itself, so that the commutant, too, comes with its own
conjugation. the scalar product is now invariant in the sense that

 (yv, v) =  (v, c(y)v)

(4.34)

for all y  end(v). (in case the commutant should be smaller than end(v), one simply extends
c to the rest of end(v).)
now since the degeneracy spaces v, and analogously also v+, carry an invariant scalar
product, also the space of linear forms on v v+ and the space of endomorphisms end(v) =
(v) v have a scalar product. for the latter, it is given by end(v)(y, y) = tr (yy). (notice
that the trace is independent of the scalar product on v; the latter does enter, however, through
the hermitian conjugation.) on the space of bilinear forms, the scalar product reads

b(b, b) :=

dx

i,j=1

b(viwj)  b(viwj)

(4.35)

where {vi} and {wj} are orthonormal bases of v and v+ with respect to the scalar products
  and  +, resp.

18

the non-degenerate form  dened in (4.21) provides us with an isomorphism

y 7   (y  id)

(4.36)

between end(v) and the space of linear forms on v v+. we would like to check that this
isomorphism is a homothety, i.e. preserves angles. with the orthonormal bases introduced
above we need to show that

dx

i,j=1

(yvi  wj)(yvi, wj) =  tr yy

for some non-zero number   [, ]  c, implying in particular that
o =  , .

hb|bi  b(b, b) =  tro

(4.37)

(4.38)

in components with respect to the two chosen orthonormal bases, the relation (4.37) amounts
ki()kj = ij, while without reference to the basis of v it means that for all v, v v

to pk()

one has

dx

j=1

(v, wj) (v, wj) =   (v, v) ,

(4.39)

where the sum is over any arbitrary orthonormal basis {wj} of v+. the validity of this relation
can be established by showing that (p, p)pj (vwj)(vwj) provides a non-degenerate
and invariant scalar product on h. this is indeed possible; the details are presented in
appendix c.

4.5 the normalization of the boundary blocks

we are now nally in a position to determine the value of the over-all normalization constant
n, that was left undetermined in the denition (4.23) of the boundary blocks b(,). to this
end we have to prescribe some normalization of the modied inner product of these blocks
analogously as was done in (4.29) and (4.30) for the ordinary boundary blocks. as it turns out,
a convenient prescription is

h b(,)| e(2/t)(l0 1+1l0c/12) | b(,)i =

1

(|g|/u) s, 

(2i/t) , , .

(4.40)

we also observe that the relation (4.16) amounts to the statement that the operators o with
   form an orthonormal basis of the space of endomorphisms end(v). it follows that the
(n,)1 are precisely the constants of proportionality between the scalar product
constants d2
on end(v) and on the space of bilinear forms that appear in the relation (4.37). this implies
in particular that n, actually only depends on the u-character  and not on the particular
 that extends it to a character of s.

19

to proceed, we combine formula (4.40) with the decomposition (4.25) of the ordinary bound-

ary blocks b of the a-theory. we then nd

hb| e(2/t)(l0 1+1l0c/12) |bi = x

s 

 

x

s 

 

jg/s

jg/s

(n 

x

j, )1(nj , )1

x
h b(j,)| e(2/t)(l0 1+1l0c/12) | b(j ,)i
j( 2i
t )

1

(|g|/u) sj, 

, x

s 

 

jg/s

x
|nj, |2
(|g|/u) s,  x

1

jg/s

=  , 

=  , 

, d2



(4.41)

|nj, |2 j( 2i
t )

= , d

1

(|g|/u) s,  |n, |2 ( 2i
t ) .

here in the last step we have used the information that according to formula (4.29) the result
must be proportional to the a-character , so that the relation (a.31) between the a-characters
and those of the a-theory tells us in particular that the normalizations nj,  in fact do not
depend on j, and hence only on  = [, ]. moreover, by inspection of formula (a.10) for the
modular matrix s of the a-theory we have

s[, ], = |g|su

s,  .

(4.42)

thus the normalization condition (4.29) also allows us to determine the explicit value of the

constants n, , namely |n, |2du/|g| =su/|g|, and hence simply 8

|n, | = 1 .

(4.43)

note that we determine these constants only up to a phase. manifestly, we cannot do better,
because the relations (4.29) and (4.30) determine the boundary blocks also only up to a phase.
to conclude this section, we summarize our results about the natural basis of boundary
blocks for symmetry breaking boundary conditions. for a every primary  = [, ] of the a-
 basis elements b(,) which are labelled by those a-primaries 
theory we have (|g|/|s|) d2
that are on the g-orbit of  and by the s-characters  that restrict to . these boundary
blocks obey the normalization condition (4.40).

5 the classifying algebra

in this section we turn to the level of full conformal eld theory. we explain how the rep-
resentation theory of a classifying algebra allows to determine the boundary conditions for a
given conformal eld theory, and we construct explicitly the classifying algebra for boundary
conditions that preserve a prescribed subalgebra a of the bulk symmetries.

8 we admit that our conventions were chosen with some hindsight.

20

5.1 boundary conditions and reection coecients

because of factorization, a boundary condition should essentially be characterized by a consis-
tent collection of one-point correlation functions for all bulk elds , on the disk [2, 18, 26, 3].
thus in order to classify the boundary conditions, one needs to nd all consistent one-point
correlation functions h,i for those elds. as explained in [5], the correlation functions on a
surface with boundaries are linear combinations of blocks on its schottky cover; for the disk
this oriented cover has the topology of the sphere, so that the relevant chiral blocks are those
studied in section 4. our task is now to determine the coecients that give the correct physical
correlators.

for a more detailed discussion it is convenient to use the language of vertex operators and
operator products. for every vector v  v h  h we have a vertex operator ,(vv; z).
such vertex operators are suitable linear combinations of pairs of chiral vertex operators, the
correlators of which are nothing but the boundary blocks discussed above.
in view of the
description (4.4) of the boundary blocks and their precise denition (4.23), we are thus looking
for the coecients , such that the value of the one-point correlator for ,(vv; z) on the
disk at z = 0 is

j,

b(j,)(vv) .

(5.1)

h,(vv; z=0)i = x

x

jg/s

s 

 

moreover, it follows from the results at the chiral level that this correlator can be non-vanishing
only for  = +, which we therefore assume from now on.

note, however, that the index structure of the vertex operator in formula (5.1) is tailored to
the case of a closed orientable surface, where the bulk elds , are the only elds present. in
contrast, for surfaces with boundaries, where there are also boundary elds (x), and allowing
for boundary conditions that break part of the bulk symmetries, the index structure can actually
be more complicated. accordingly we have to be careful when interpreting the formula (5.1).
what we have to implement correctly is the fact that, while chiral vertex operators can denitely
be extracted from the three-point chiral blocks on p1, their concrete form does depend on which
chiral symmetries are preserved. in the situation of our interest we are not allowed to employ
all symmetries of the bulk, but rather we must take the three-point blocks of the orbifold theory
with symmetry a for extracting the chiral vertex operators. in other words, we must take into
account that states in dierent a-submodules of h = ljg/s v  h(j, ) can cause dierent
excitations on the boundary and can thus be reected dierently. note that as compared to the
formula (3.9), here we have attached the label  also to the a-modules h, in order to indicate
that the reection at the boundary may also depend on the particular a-module into which
a given a-module is embedded. in addition, we have to account for the dimensionality of the
projective s-module v, which amounts to using characters  s
accordingly, when studying the behavior of bulk elds close to the boundary, for vectors
v  v  (v h(, )) (v + h(+, +))h h+ we must work with vertex operators that are
labelled as
(5.2)

 instead of  u 
.

(,),(+,+)(vv; z) .

as for the correlation functions, this means that in place of (5.1) we are interested in the

21

individual summands

h(,),(+,+)(vv; z=0)i = ,

b(,)(vv) .

(5.3)

to determine the coecients , in this relation, we study the operator product expansion
describing the excitation that a bulk eld causes on the boundary when it approaches the
boundary; this operator product reads

(,),(+,+)(rei) = x



(1r2)2+  ra

(,); aa

 (ei) + descendants

for r  1 .

(5.4)

comparing this expansion with the relation (5.3) we learn that

, = ra

(,);  haa
 i .

(5.5)

in words, up to a normalization given by the (constant) one-point correlator of a boundary
vacuum eld aa

 , the coecients , are equal to the reection coecients ra

(,); .

we pause to comment on the index structure of the boundary elds ab

 (x). the underlying
three-point blocks for the operator product (5.4) are those of the orbifold theory, because
boundary elds are involved and the latter only need to preserve the symmetries in a. as
a consequence, the boundary eld carries a chiral label  of the orbifold theory. in addition
there are two labels a, b which account for the fact that the insertion of a boundary eld can
change the boundary condition. (and nally, in order to account for annulus coecients that
are bigger than one  which can appear for 6=   one must allow for an additional degeneracy
label, which we suppress.) the presence of these boundary labels on the right hand side of (5.4)
tells us that, in contrast to conformal eld theory on surfaces that are closed and orientable, on
surfaces with boundaries the locality and factorization constraints for the correlation functions
do not, in general, possess a unique solution. rather, there are several consistent collections of
reection coecients ra

(,); , and as a consequence there are several solutions

h(,),(+,+)i = h(,),(+,+)ia

(5.6)

which are indexed by the boundary conditions.

note that up to this point it was not necessary to specify the values that the boundary label
a can take. to determine the possible boundary conditions, we analyze the factorization of bulk-
bulk-boundary correlators in much the same manner as [26, 20, 3] for boundary conditions that
preserve all of a. this is possible because, by the requirement that a is a consistent chiral
algebra, the orbifold chiral blocks obey the usual factorization rules. concretely, we consider
two dierent factorization limits of the disk correlation function

h(1,1),(+

1 ,+

1 )(z1) (2,2),(+

2 ,+

2 )(z2)ia

(5.7)

involving two bulk elds. on one hand we can use the operator product between bulk elds
(this is an operator product respecting the full a-symmetry, though for elds that are only a-
primaries but may be a-descendants) and afterwards the operator product (5.4) so as to express
the correlator in terms of bulk operator product coecients and a single reection coecient

22

ra
(3,3); . on the other hand, applying the expansion (5.4) twice expresses the correlator in
terms of two bulk-boundary operator products, i.e. two reection coecients. the latter are to
be understood as prefactors of a four-point block on the projective line p1, and since boundary
insertions are involved, these are four-point blocks of the orbifold theory. the two dierent
factorizations correspond to such blocks in dierent channels, so that for their comparison one
must relate them through fusing matrices, or to be precise, through fusing matrices of the
a-theory. such matrices exist because by assumption the orbifold chiral blocks come with a
knizhnik--zamolodchikov connection.

taking everything together we arrive at a relation of the form

ra

(1,1);  ra

(2,2);  = x

3,3

n
(1,1),(2,2) ra

(3,3)

(3,3);  ,

(5.8)

where the numbers n are combinations of bulk operator product coecients and fusing matrices
of the a- and of the a-theory. notice that the fact that quantities of both the original and the
orbifold theory appear is in accordance with the index structure of the vertex operators (5.2),
in which individual elds  of the orbifold theory rather than g-orbits of such elds appear,
but also a character  that keeps track of the information as submodule of which a-module a
given a-module occurs.

none of the constituents of the numbers n depends on the boundary label a. the result
(5.8) can therefore be interpreted as follows. the conformally invariant boundary conditions
that preserve a correspond to one-dimensional representations of some algebra, which we call
the classifying algebra and denote by c( a). it is expected [5] that the algebra c( a) shares most
properties of fusion algebras, i.e. it should be a commutative associative semisimple algebra,
so that in particular all its irreducible representations are one-dimensional. these properties
imply the existence of a diagonalizing matrix s through which the structure constants of c( a)
are expressible via an analogue of the verlinde formula.
it is worth stressing that the two labels of the diagonalizing matrix s are on a rather dierent
footing; the row index labels the basis of the classifying algebra c( a) which is given by the
allowed boundary blocks, while the column index labels the irreducible representations of c( a).
in the case of boundary conditions that preserve the full bulk symmetry (and where the pairing
for the labels of the bulk elds is given by charge conjugation, i.e.  = +), it has already been
argued long ago [2] that s is the modular matrix that implements the modular transformation
 71/ on the characters. in this case the classifying algebra is just the fusion rule algebra
and the reection coecients are the generalized quantum dimensions; in particular there is a
natural correspondence between the two types of labels.

in the general case, this natural correspondence does not persist. but it has been seen that
even in more general situations (see [3, 4] for an example) nevertheless the two sets of labels
are still related by modular transformations. moreover, it can be expected that the boundary
conditions are labelled by orbits of elds rather than individual elds, as in [4]. that this is
indeed the case can be seen as follows. as for the labels  of the boundary blocks, only those
occur which appear in the decomposition of some a-module, which means that they satisfy
qj() = 0 for every jg.
in orbifold terminology, we are only dealing with the untwisted
sector of the orbifold, or in other words, along the space direction of the torus only the trivial
twist by the identity occurs. this implies that after a modular s-transformation, only the

23

identity appears as twist in the time direction of the torus, which in turn tells us that we
must not perform the usual orbifold projection in the twisted sector. translating this back to
simple current terminology, we arrive at the statement that the boundary conditions must not
be labelled by individual primary elds of the a-theory, but rather by g-orbits of a-primaries.
on the other hand, in the time direction we start with arbitrary twists, since the labelling is
by individual primary elds; it follows that after the s-transformation arbitrary twists in the
space direction occur in the orbifold. thus in the labelling of the boundary conditions all
g-orbits appear, not just those with vanishing monodromy charges, i.e. not just the ones in
the untwisted sector. moreover, by comparison with the s-transformation of the a-characters
one is led to expect that these orbits are to be combined with the characters of the relevant
untwisted stabilizer; as we will see below, this provides us indeed with a consistent ansatz for
the classifying algebra.

5.2 the matrix s

as advocated above, the boundary blocks are in one-to-one correspondence with the elements
of a basis of the classifying algebra c( a), while the a-preserving boundary conditions are
in one-to-one correspondence with the (isomorphism classes of) one-dimensional irreducible
representations of c( a). thus a basis of c( a) is labelled by pairs (, ) consisting of a primary
label  of the a-theory in the untwisted sector (i.e. qj() = 0 for all jg) and a character
 of the stabilizer of , while the arguments at the end of the previous subsection tell
 s
us that the one-dimensional irreducible c( a)-representations are labelled by g-orbits [, ]
of pairs consisting of an arbitrary primary label  of the a-theory and a character  of the
untwisted stabilizer of .

according to our general expectations the classifying algebra c( a) should possess most
properties of fusion algebras, in particular there should exist a diagonalizing square matrix s.
note that according to the previous remarks the row and column labels of this matrix are on
a rather dierent footing, so that at this point it is still far from obvious that the two sets
of labels have indeed equal size. our strategy is now to start by making an educated ansatz
for the matrix s and then develop the classifying algebra and its representation theory along
analogous lines as one may study fusion algebras by starting from the modular s-matrix s.
we stress that, unlike the considerations in the previous section, here indeed we are making
an ansatz , and it will be necessary to support this ansatz by performing various consistency
checks, the most basic one being that s is manifestly a square matrix. but once one accepts
this ansatz, the arguments presented in the previous subsection allow us to learn more about
how the fusing matrices in an integer spin simple current extension are related to the fusing
matrices of the original theory.

as a matter of fact, by combining the considerations that relate symmetry breaking, orb-
ifolds and integer spin simple current extensions with the results about simple current extensions
obtained in [12], it follows that, up to normalizations, there is a natural candidate for the matrix
s. it reads

s(,),[, ] :=

susu x

|g|

jsu

(j) (j) sj

, .

(5.9)

here the matrices sj are those which appear [12] in the modular s-matrix of the simple current

24

extension; upon a canonical 9 normalization of the one-point chiral blocks with insertion j on
the torus, the matrix sj also represents the modular s-transformation on these blocks [15]. (for
the convenience of readers who are not familiar with the pertinent results of [12], we summarize
them in appendix a. for a brief account, see also section 3 of [17].)

note that at the chiral level, where one deals with conformal eld theory on a complex curve,
there is no direct inuence of boundaries [5]. the chiral conformal eld theory structures that
are related to the matrices sj which enter the discussion here are thus logically independent
of any boundary data; they have passed independent tests [12, 15] in the context of closed
in the present situation, where the a-theory can be regarded as an
conformal eld theory.
orbifold of the a-theory, as compared to [12] there is actually even further evidence for the
existence of the matrices sj. namely, under a niteness assumption on the codimension of a
certain subspace of the vacuum module, it has been proven in [27] (see also [28, 29]) that one
can associate a modular s-transformation matrix to the chiral blocks on the torus for arbitrary
descendants of the vacuum. in our case, we are precisely concerned with one-point blocks for
descendants of the vacuum of the a-theory (which are not descendants of the vacuum in the
a-theory, though). in connection with the reasoning of [12] one may say that if an extension
by integer spin simple currents is possible at all, then such matrices sj must necessarily exist
in order to comply with the general result of [27].

as a rst consistency check, we consider the special case where q() 0. these boundary
conditions correspond precisely to orbits that furnish primary elds in the extended theory. on
the other hand, the boundary conditions that respect the full bulk symmetry should also be
recovered from our ansatz, since a fortiori they preserve the subalgebra a. according to [2],
these boundary conditions correspond to primary elds of the a-theory. indeed, the following
consideration shows that for q() 0 we recover the modular s-matrix of the a-theory. the
latter can be expressed through the matrices sj as in (a.10), i.e.

s[, ],[, ] =

susu x

|g|

juu

(j) (j) sj

, ,

(5.10)

where both  and  have monodromy charge zero. because of the latter property, we know
that for every js\u there exists at least one ks such that

sj
, = sj

k, = f(k, j)  1  sj

,

(5.11)

with f(k, j)6= 1, from which we conclude that sj
, = 0 for all js\u. it follows that for
qg() = 0 the j-summations in the two expressions (5.9) and (5.10) actually extend over the
same range; moreover, we then have (j) = (j) for all j that appear in the sum, so the two
expressions indeed are equal, i.e.

s(j,),[, ] = s[, ],[, ]

(5.12)

for all jg and all   .

9 the canonical basis choice still leaves some residual freedom in the normalization, which remains to be

claried.

25

5.3 properties of s
let us now establish further properties of the matrix s that we dened in (5.9). as a matter
of fact, we rst need to check that s is well-dened, i.e. does not depend on the choice of
representative of the g-orbit of the pair (, ). to do so, we need the explicit form of the
equivalence relation, which reads (, )  j(, ) = (j , j ) (see formulae (a.8) and (a.9)).
we observe that

j (j)sj

,j  = [f(j, j) (j)]  e2iqj () f(j, j) sj

, = (j)sj

, ,

(5.13)

where we used the simple current property (a.12) of sj and the fact that  is in the untwisted
sector. this tells us that the corresponding part of formula (5.9), and hence the whole matrix
s, is indeed independent of the choice of representative.

we may dene an analogous transformation as in this equivalence relation also when dealing

with characters of full stabilizers, i.e. also for the row index of s, namely

j (, ) := (j, j)

(5.14)

for all jg, with
(5.15)
by the bi-homomorphism property of f , j is again a character of s. it then follows that s
satises the standard simple current relation, too, i.e. we have

j(j) := f(j, j) (j) .

(5.16)
for every j g. this holds because in each term in the j-summation on the right hand side of
(5.9) the factor of f(j, j) that comes from the action of j on  cancels against the factor
f(j, j) that accompanies the phase e2iqj () in the simple current relation for sj.

sj(,),[, ] = e2iqj ()  s(,),[, ]

next we note that the matrix s is (in general) not symmetric; in fact it does not even make
sense to talk about symmetry, because the label sets for the rows and columns are dierent. it
does, however, make sense to talk about invertibility and unitarity. direct calculation shows
that s is invertible, the inverse being given by

that (5.17) is a right-inverse is seen by

( s1)[, ],(,) = u
|g|

s
(,),[, ] .

(5.17)

x

[]

x

u 


s(,),[, ] ( s(,),[, ])

(j)(j) sj

, (sj

,)

[]

jssu

1
s

x
(j)(j)x



sj
, (sj

,)

=

|g|2

susu x
susu x
= |g|
su

, x

|g|

=

js

jss

(j)(j)

= |g|u  , ,  |g|u  (,),(,) .

(5.18)

26

here in the rst step we inserted the denition (5.9) and performed the -summation, while in
the second step we replaced p[] by p  (s/|g|), which is possible owing to qj () = 0 = qj ()
and the fact that ju, and furthermore we dropped taking the intersection with u in the
j-summation. to see that this change in the summation range is allowed, 10 let rst j6s;
then according to (a.11) we simply have sj
,. otherwise, i.e. when js\u, there
must exist a j s with f(j, j) 6= 1, and we have

, = 0 = sj

sj
, = sj

,j  = f(j, j) e2iqj () sj

, = f(j, j) sj

, ,

(5.19)

where again we use that q() = 0; thus in this case we have sj

, = 0 as well.

to check that the matrix (5.17) is also a left-inverse of s, we start by calculating
x

susu x

s
(,),[, ] =

(j) (j) sj

x

x

|g|

s(,),[, ]  u
|g|



juus

, (sj

,)



s 


qg ()=0

qg ()=0

=

susu x

|g|

juu

(j) (j) x



qg ()=0

sj
, (sj

,) .

(5.20)
here after rst performing the -summation, we dropped taking the intersection with s
in the j-summation, which is allowed for the same reason as above. 11 next we extend the
-summation to all sectors by inserting a projector and use the unitarity of sj (see formula
(a.34)), so as to obtain

x



qg ()=0

x

s 


s(,),[, ]  u
|g|

su x

jg

(,),[, ] = 1
s
s x
= 1

,j   ,j 

,j  x
s x
= 1

ju

jg

jg

(j) f(j, j) (j)

(5.21)

(, ),j(, ) = [, ],[, ] .

(here we also used that  = j already implies u =u and s =s.)
implies the sum rule

the fact that s has a two-sided inverse means in particular that s is a square matrix. this

x



|s| = x

[]

|u| .

(5.22)

qg ()=0

in words: the number of primary elds in the untwisted (i.e., charge zero) sector, counted with
their (full) stabilizer, is the same as the number of orbits in all sectors, counted with their
untwisted stabilizer.

it is also worth pointing out that s is (in general) not unitary. of course, we could redene
the matrix s so as to make it unitary; however, this would spoil some other nice properties of
s and hence we refrain from doing so.

10 compare also the remarks before eq. (c.2) in [12].
11 note, however, that in the present case we would not be allowed to drop the untwisted stabilizer u if it
were present, because for currents in s\u the reasoning above would not go through: in (5.19) one would
now have a factor of e2iqj (), which unlike e2iqj () is not necessarily equal to one, since  can be in any twist
sector.

27

5.4 conjugation
since the row and column labels of s are on dierent footings, there are two distinct matrices
which are candidates for conjugations, namely

c b := s st

(5.23)

and

(5.24)
here the subscripts b and b indicate that the entries of these two matrices are labelled by
boundary blocks and boundary states (i.e. boundary conditions), respectively. the presence of
the diagonal matrix u, dened as

c b := st u s ;

u(,),(,) := u
|g|

(,),(,) ,

(5.25)

in (5.24) accounts for the natural weight of the boundary blocks, cf. e.g. formula (5.17).

both matrices are manifestly symmetric. to establish further properties, we write them in

the form

c b

(,),(,) =

x



jss

(j)(j1) sj

, sj1

,

(j)(j1) ,+ j

 = |g|u

cb ()
, ,+ ,

=

=

|g|

|g|

|g|

jss

susu x
susu x
susu x
1susu x
x
1susu x
s x
= 1

cb ()

,k 

juu

qg ()=0

kg

=

=





,(k)+ .

kg

c b

[, ],[, ]

(j1) (j) sj1

, sj
,

juu

x
e2iqk() x
(j) (j1) x

juu

kg

(j) (j1) sj

, sj
,

f(k, j) j

 ,(k)+

(5.26)

(5.27)

(5.28)

here we used the identities (a.13) and (a.14), and introduced

cb ()
,

:= 1

s x

js

as well as 12

,  := 1
cb ()

u x

ju

(j) j

 (j)

(j) j


(j)

for any two characters ,  s
12 compare formula (c.3) of [12].

, respectively ,  u 
 .

28

to proceed, we need several properties of the matrices cb () and cb (). first, with the help

of the identity (a.20) we have

(cb ()

, )

s x
= 1

js

(j) (j

) (j) = 1

s x

js

(j1) j1

 (j1) = cb ()
, ,

(5.29)

i.e. cb () is real. second, combining this reality property with the identity (a.21) we see that

cb (+)
, = 1

s x

js

(j) j

+ (j) = 1

s x

js

(j) (j

) (j) = (cb ()

, )

i.e.

analogous computations yield

cb (+) = (cb ())t

.

(cb ())

= cb ()

and

cb (+) = (cb ())t

.

= cb ()
, ,

(5.30)

(5.31)

(5.32)

finally, implementing the identity (a.22), i.e. the fact that j

 is a character of u, we have

x

u 


cb ()
, 

(j) = 1

u x

ju

(j) j

 x

u 


(j) (j) = (j) j

 = +(j)

(5.33)

 (not to be mixed up with the complex conjugate character  u 
with the character + u 
 )
as dened by (a.29), which means that the map cb () on the boundary conditions is a permu-
tation. thus we can write

cb ()
,    , + =  , ( )

with some permutation . due to (5.32) we also have

+ = ()1 .

(5.34)

(5.35)

having obtained these properties of cb (), we can nally conclude that c b is a conjugation,

i.e. it is symmetric and each column and row contains just a single non-zero element:

[, ],[, ] = 1
c b

s x

kg

,(k)+ cb ()

,k 

= [, ],[, ]

+

(5.36)

+
with [, ]
have

= [+, +

 ] (and +

 (j) (j)j
).

in particular cb () is an involution, i.e. we

(c b)2 = 11 .

(5.37)

(the crucial property of  entering here is (5.35); that relation is not tied to the order of ,
so that in particular  need not have order two itself.)

for the map c b on boundary blocks, the conclusions are somewhat dierent. we still have

x

s 


cb ()
, (j) = (j) j


29

(5.38)

similarly to (5.33); but since  is only a character of u, but not necessarily of s, the expression
on the right hand side, seen as a function on s, is not a character any more. therefore c b
does in general no longer constitute a permutation. (of course, when u coincides with s,
it still does. in this case the arguments are completely parallel to those above, leading to the
conclusion that uc b is a conjugation as well.) as a consequence, the matrix c b is not, in
general, a (weighted) conjugation. nevertheless we can again conclude that c b is (weighted)
involutive. namely, we nd

x

s 


( x

s 


cb ()
, cb ()

,) (j) = 1

 x
 j1
j

s 


(j)(j)(j)

(5.39)

s x
js
j1

= j

 (j) = (j) ,

where in the last step we used the identity (a.23), and hence

((c b)2)(,),(, ) = |g|2
u2


, x

s 


cb ()
,cb (+)

, = |g|2
u2


, , = |g|2
u2


(,),(, ) .

(5.40)

we can also deduce that the inverse of c b is given in terms of the inverse of s as

(c b)1 = ( s1)t s1 .

(5.41)

let us point out that the existence of a conjugation c b on the boundary conditions does
not come as a big surprise. indeed, it implements precisely what one heuristically expects as
the result of changing the orientation of the boundary. the latter manipulation is e.g. required
when one wants to glue surfaces along boundaries. in contrast, for the boundary blocks such
a manipulation would not make any sense, and accordingly it is not too surprising that in the
most general case a genuine conjugation on the boundary blocks does not exist.

5.5 structure constants

according to our general expectations, the structure constants of the classifying algebra are to
be dened through a verlinde-like formula via the matrix s. we rst introduce a corresponding
quantity

n(1,1 ),(2,2 ),(3,3 ) := x

[, ]

s(1,1 ),[, ]

s(2,2 ),[, ]

s(3,3 ),[, ]

(5.42)

s ,[, ]

with only lower indices and then raise the third index with the inverse (5.41) of c b, so as to
arrive at the expression

(1,1),(2,2) = x
n

(3,3)

s(1,1),[ , ]

s(2,2),[ , ] ( s1)[ , ],(3,3)

s ,[ , ]

u 


[]

x
|g| x

u3

[]

=

x

u 


s(1,1),[ , ]

s(2,2),[ , ]

s ,[ , ]

s 
(3,3),[ , ]

30

(5.43)

for the structure constants. more explicitly, we nd

(1,1),(2,2) = |g|u3
n

(3,3)

s1u1s2u2s3 x
s1u1s2u2s3 x

u3

jisi
j3=j1j2

1(j1)2(j2)3(j3) x
1(j1)2(j2)3(j3) x

[]

1
s

=



jisi
j3=j1j2

sj1
1,sj2

2,(sj3

3,) / s ,

,1,sj2
sj1
,2

(sj3
,3

) / s , .

(5.44)

5.6 semisimplicity and irreducible representations
the following properties of the structure constants and of the classifying algebra c( a) now
follow directly:
the structure constants (5.43) are manifestly symmetric in the rst two indices. thus c( a)
is commutative.
we have

(cid:0)(1,1)  (2,2)(cid:1)  (3,3)
= x
x

x

x

[]

u 


4

4s 


qg (4)=0

s(1,1),[, ]

s(2,2),[, ]

s(3,3),[, ]

s2
,[, ]

( s1)[, ],(4,4) (4,4) .

(5.45)

this is totally symmetric in the three labels (i, i) for i = 1, 2, 3.
associative.
it is also immediately veried that c( a) is unital . the unit element is  = .
by construction, the matrix s simultaneously diagonalizes all matrices n(1,1 ). explicitly,
x

it follows that c( a) is

(3,3)
(1,1),(2,2)

s(3,3),[, 
]

x

2,2

3,3

( s1)[, ],(2,2) n
= x
x
x
x
3,3
s(1,1),[, ]
s(2,2),[, ]

x

2,2

4,4

[, ]

[, ]

( s ,[, ])1( s1)[, ],(2,2) s(3,3),[, 

]

(5.46)

s(4,4),[, ]( s1)[, ],(3,3)( s1)[, ],(4,4)

= [, ]
[, 
]

s(1,1),[, ] / s ,[, ] .

thus the regular representation of c( a) is fully reducible.
together these properties imply in particular that the associative algebra c( a) is semisimple.
the matrix c b can be expressed through the structure constants as

(1,1 ),(2,2 ) = n(1,1 ),(2,2 ),  = |g| n
c b


(1,1 ),(2,2 ) .

(5.47)

note, however, that generically this is not a conjugation. (recall that while the matrix c b
provides a conjugation on the boundary conditions, c b is in general only an involution, but not a
conjugation on the boundary blocks; for a given pair (1, 1) the matrix element c b
can be non-vanishing for several pairs (2, 2).)

(1,1 ),(2,2 )

31

the calculation in (5.46) implies that each equivalence class [, ] furnishes a one-dimen-
sional irreducible representation r[, ] of c( a). according to the result (5.8) these irreducible
representations are, in turn, precisely the reection coecients. thus we have

r[, ]

(,);  = r[, ]((,)) =

s(,),[, ]
s ,[, ]

.

(5.48)

moreover, due to the sum rule (5.22) and the result that the algebra is semisimple we can
conclude that in fact the reection coecients (5.48) even provide all inequivalent irreducible
representations and that the irreducible representations are all one-dimensional.

5.7 relation with chiral blocks

our next aim is to write the structure constants of the classifying algebra in terms of quantities
related to chiral blocks.
in connection with blocks, the natural quantities are the structure
constants with only lower indices. we nd that

n(1,1),(2,2),(3,3) = d1d2d3 |g| x

(j1,j2,j3)s1s2s3

j1j2j3=1

3y

i=1

i(ji)

si x



2, sj3
1, sj2
sj1
3, 
s , 

(5.49)

=:

d1d2d3 |g|
|s1 s2 s3|  bn(1,1),(2,2),(3,3) ,

where d = (s/u)1/2, and where in the second step we introduced projected fusion coecients

bn; also, s1 s2 s3 is by denition the subgroup of g that is generated by the three subgroups
si.
to rewrite the coecients bn in a more convenient form, we consider the group homomor-
phism p: s1 s2 s3  g that is dened by taking the product in g of three elements,

s1 s2 s3  (s1, s2, s3) 7 p(s1, s2, s3) := s1s2s3 .
by the homomorphy theorem, the number of elements in the kernel of p is

p :

(5.50)

(5.51)
thus we can replace the product over the si by the product of |ker(p)| and the number of
elements in the group generated by all si, so that

|ker(p)| = s1 s2 s3 /|s1 s2 s3| .

bn(1,1),(2,2),(3,3) = 1
|ker(p)|

x

3y

i=1

(j1,j2,j3)s1s2s3

j1j2j3=1

i(ji) x

2, sj3
1, sj2
sj1
3, 
s , 



.

(5.52)

we remark that |ker(p)| is precisely the number of elements of the group over which we have
to perform a fourier transformation in order to attain a projection on the chiral blocks. accord-
ingly |ker(p)| indeed needs to be absorbed into the denition of the coecients bn(1,1),(2,2),(3,3).
these relations suggest that the structure constants of the classifying algebra should be
related to an appropriate action of the simple current group g on the space of chiral blocks.
this feature is familiar from the situation studied in [4]. however, owing to the fact that the
action of g is only projective, here its precise realization is more involved and remains to be
uncovered.

32

6 annulus coecients
6.1 the g-extension

in this section we compute the annulus amplitude a1 2 for two arbitrary boundary conditions

i  [i, i]

(6.1)

(i = 1, 2) and study its properties. one way to obtain the annulus amplitude is to evaluate it
in the closed string channel, where it can be regarded as factorizing into two disk one-point
functions and a sphere two-point function, so that it corresponds to propagation between the
boundary states hb[i, i]|, according to

a[1, 1] [2, 2](t) = hb[2, 2]| e(2/t)(l0 1+1l0c/12) |b[1, 1]i .

(6.2)

here by a boundary state [2, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 5, 6] one means a linear form b[, ] on the space
l
h  h+ of all closed string states (which correspond to bulk elds) that is characterized
by the property that when applied to an element v  v v  h(, ) v + h(+, +) it yields the
one-point correlator of the corresponding bulk eld on the disk, i.e.

b[, ](vv) = h(,),(+,+)(vv; z=0)i[, ] .
it follows that b[, ] can be written as the specic linear combination
i b(,)

r[, ]
(,);  h[, ] [, ]

b[, ] = m

m



qg ()=0



s 


of boundary blocks b(,).

to each boundary condition i we associate the character
i  g = (g) = g

gi  g(q)

(6.3)

(6.4)

(6.5)

gi(j) := exp(2iqj(i))

of g that maps every simple current to the value of the corresponding monodromy charge (1.2),
i.e.
(6.6)
for all jg. as already mentioned in the introduction, this quantity can be regarded as an
element of the orbifold group g, and indeed it coincides with the so-called automorphism type
of the boundary condition (for details, see [19]). inspection shows that in the amplitude (6.2)
one deals with linear combinations of characters of that orbifold theory in which the cyclic
subgroup hg1
(these combinations are
known as twining characters [11, 12] of the a-theory.) this orbifold theory can equivalently be
described as an integer spin simple current extension of the a-theory by a subgroup of g which
is a proper subgroup when g1 6= g2.

1 g2i of g that is generated by g1

1 g2  g is broken.

in more precise terms the situation is described as follows. the exact sequence

0  hg1

1 g2i  g  g/hg1

1 g2i  0

(6.7)

33

of nite abelian groups implies the exact sequence

0  (g/hg1

1 g2i)  g  hg1

1 g2i  0

(6.8)

1 g2i). this is
of their character groups. therefore we can extend the a-theory by (g/hg1
the subgroup of those characters of g which descend to characters of the quotient, and these
are precisely those which are the identity on hg1
1 g2i, i.e. those simple currents j which obey
g1
1 g2(j) = 1, which in turn is the same as qj(1) = qj(2).
accordingly, one expects that the annulus amplitude can be expressed as a linear combina-

tion of characters of the extension of the a-theory by the subgroup

g  g

12 := {jg | qj(1) = qj(2)}

(6.9)

of g. as we will see, this is indeed possible; still, as it turns out, this is not the most natural
choice for the following reason. ultimately, our goal is to express the annulus amplitude as a
linear combination

a1 2 = x



a
1 2 x (k)



(6.10)



12 are integers, it has been observed in many situations [4, 35] that the multiplicities a

of irreducible characters x (k)
in some extension k of the a-theory. now the interpretation of
the annulus amplitude as an open string partition function imposes the requirement that when
we expand a12(t) as a function of q = exp(2i(it/2)), then the coecients in this expansion
are non-negative integers. while this does not necessarily imply that already all the numbers
a
12
possess a natural interpretation as the rank of (a subsheaf of) a sheaf of chiral blocks. (this
interpretation also enables one to establish the integrality property in full generality.) in order
to relate a
1 2 to such a rank of a chiral block, we need to work with an extended theory in
which both 1 and 2 are allowed elds, which is the case if their monodromy charges both
vanish. the g-extension does not meet this condition in general; rather, we need to consider
the extension by the subgroup

g  g

12 := {jg | qj(1) = 0 = qj(2)}

(6.11)

thus we dene the annulus coecients a

of g, which is the largest subgroup of g that has the desired property.
extension of the a-theory by g; in more precise notation,

1 2 as the multiplicities of characters in the

a[1, 1] [2, 2](t) = x

[]

a[, ]
[1, 1] [2, 2] x 

[, ]( it

2 ) ,

(6.12)

where [, ] is the g-orbit of (, ). we will demonstrate that these quantities can be
expressed as a sum of fusion rule coecients in the g-extension, and check that various con-
sistency requirements are satised. our rst task is to make sure that the characters of the
g-extension indeed appear in the expression of the annulus partition function in the closed
string channel. these characters read (compare formula (a.31))

[, ] = 1s
x 
u

 x

jg



(j, 

)  1s
u


(x

jg

j) 



.

(6.13)

34

here s

 =|s

| and u

| are the cardinalities of the full and untwisted stabilizer s
 =|u 
 = {js
u 

 | f(j, k) = 1 for all ks

} ,

 and

respectively, that are relevant in the g-extension, and 
one has

 is a character of u 

. note that while

there is no simple relation between u 
intersection ug, though it always contains it as a subgroup,

s
 = s  g ,
 and u. in particular, in general u 

 diers from the

ug  u 
 ;
in fact, already in simple examples it happens that u 

 is larger than u. 13

(6.16)

6.2 expressions for the annulus coecients

(6.14)

(6.15)

to proceed, we need more explicit expressions for the annulus coecients. to this end we insert
the result (4.40) for the regulated inner product (4.28) of the boundary blocks and the relation
(5.3) between one-point correlators and boundary blocks into formula (6.2). we also substitute
for the coecients in the latter relation the explicit expressions (5.5) and (5.48) as well as the
normalization

(6.17)

(6.18)

h[, ] [, ]



i = s ,[, ]

for the vacuum boundary elds. this yields

a[1, 1] [2, 2](t) = x

; s 

; s 


(r[1, 1]

(,);  h[1, 1] [1, 1]



i) (r[2, 2]

(,);  h[2, 2] [2, 2]



i)

h b(,)| e(2/t)(l0 1+1l0c/12) | b(,)i
s(,),[2, 2]

(,)( 2i

1

t ) .

(|g|/u) s, 

s
(,),[1, 1]

= x



qg ()=0

x

s 


this result is in agreement with the requirement that in the closed channel only elds (, )
are exchanged whose monodromy charges with respect to the currents in g vanish; indeed, the
summation even extends only over those elds for which all monodromy charges of currents in
the larger group g are zero. our next goal is to rewrite (6.18) entirely in terms of g-quantities;
13 an example occurs for the case of the d4 level 2 wzw theory. in this case for the xed point with stabilizer
z2  z2 the untwisted stabilizer is trivial, but when the second boundary condition is taken to be in a twisted
sector, then both s  and u  are equal to the corresponding z2 under which the twisted sector is xed.

35

rst we arrive at a sum over g-orbits []: 14
s
(j,),[1, 1]

a[1, 1] [2, 2](t) = x

x

x

[]

jg/s 


s 


s(j,),[2, 2]

qg ()=0

= x

[]

qg ()=0

x

s 


s
(,),[1, 1]

s(,),[2, 2]

1

(|g|/u) s, 

1

(|g|/u) s, 
 x
( 1
s

jg

(j,)( 2i
t )

(j,)( 2i

t )) .

in (6.19) we are still dealing with the characters  s
through the correct quantities 

 and 

 and i u 

i , analogously as in (4.9) we write

(6.19)
i . to express the amplitude

  u 

i u 
  



(6.20)

when the restriction of the g-character  to the subgroup g of g is equal to the g-character 
,
and similarly when we deal with other embedded pairs of groups, e.g. stabilizers and untwisted
stabilizers (however, for the i we will have to be careful because in general u 
i is not a subgroup
of ui). we then arrive at
a[1, 1] [2, 2](t) = x

s(,),([2],2))

s
(,),([1],1)

( x

[, ]( 2i

x

t ) .

(d

1

 |g|/u) s,  x 

[]

qg ()=0

u 




s 

 


(6.21)
we are now in a position to perform a modular transformation that involves the s-matrix s
of the g-extension; we get
a[1, 1] [2, 2](t) = x

s
(,),[1, 1]

( x

x

1

[]

qg ()=0

u 




s 

 


s(,),[2, 2])
x

u 




x

[]

 |g|/u) s, 
(d
[, ]( it

2 ) ,

s
[, ],[, ] x 

(6.22)

from which we nally can read o the annulus coecients as the coecients of the g-characters
x 
[, ]. thus we nally see that the annulus coecients are given by

a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

= x

[]

qg ()=0

|g|
|g|

 x

u
s

u 




s
(,),[1, 1]

x

s 

 


s(,),[2, 2] s

[, ],[, ] / s

[, ], .

(6.23)
as a check of the normalization of the annulus coecients, let us specialize to the case of
boundary conditions that preserve the full bulk symmetry, in which case g =g and the annulus
14 in the product of the two s-elements one is supposed to choose a representative of the orbit []; which one
does not matter because the monodromy charges vanish. if one worked with the larger group g instead of g,
one would again be able to show that only characters of the g-extension appear, as the monodromy charges of
1 and 2 are equal and hence cancel due to the complex conjugation. however, the two factors s separately
would depend on the choice of representative on the g-orbits, and for having a well-dened expression one
would have to choose one and the same representative in both matrix elements.

36

coecients coincide with the structure constants of the fusion rule algebra. as seen after (5.11),
in this case the matrix elements of s coincide with those of s = s where one takes the orbit
corresponding to . in addition we then have  = , so that the summation over    just
amounts to a factor of s/u, and we can use that (compare (4.42))

[, ], = |g|s
s
u

thus in the case g =g the result (6.22) reduces to

s,  .

a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

= x

[]

qg ()=0

x

u 


s
[, ],[1, 1] s[, ],[2, 2] s[, ],[, ] / s[, ], ,

(6.24)

(6.25)

from which by comparison with the verlinde formula for the a-theory we learn that indeed the
annulus coecients coincide with the structure constants of the fusion algebra.

let us mention one immediate consequence of the result (6.23). relabelling the summation
variable (, ) to j(, ) for an arbitrary current jg and inserting the simple current
symmetries (5.16) and (a.15) of s and s, respectively, one nds that

a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

= e2i[qj(2)qj(1)+qj()]  a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

.

(6.26)

it follows that a[, ]
annulus coecients are graded by the monodromy charge.

vanishes unless qj() = qj(1)  qj(2) for all jg. in short, the

[1, 1] [2, 2]

6.3 relation with fusion coecients of the g-extension
to proceed we insert the formul (5.9) for s and (the analogue for the g-extension of) (a.10)
for s into (6.23), leading to

a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

[]

= x
x

qg ()=0

x

j1su1
j2su2

j3u 

u 


u
|g| d



[ s, ]1 x

u 




x

(j1) 1(j1) (sj1
,1

s 

 

) (j2) 2(j2) sj2
,2

|g|2

su s1u1 s2 u2

|g|s

u

s

u



(j3) 

(j3) sj3

, .

(6.27)

this somewhat unwieldy expression simplies a lot when one performs the -summation (ob-
tained by combining the 
, is
non-zero only if qji() = 0 (which follows from the identities (a.11) and (a.5)), i.e. only if
ji g:

-summation) and implements the fact that sji

- and   

a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

=

 x

[]

u

1
s


|g||g|

s1u1 s2 u2 s
x

2u2g, j
1u1g, j
j
1=j
j

2j
3

3u 



37

qg ()=0

1(j

1) 2(j

2) 

(j

3) (sj
1
,1

)sj
2
,2

sj
, [ s, ]1 .

3

(6.28)

next we insert the analogue of (4.12) for the embedding uig u 
with u 

i-characters:

i to arrive at an expression

a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

=

|g||g|

s1u1 s2 u2 s

u

x

j
1u 

2u 
1, j
2, j
j
1=j
2j
3

3u 



here i denotes the character

 x

[]

qg ()=0

  |u1g|

1 x

u

1
s

2 x
|u2g|
u


1u 
1

 1
1


1(j

1) 

2(j

2) 

(j

3) (sj
1
,1

)sj
2
,2


2u 
2

 2
2
sj
, [ s, ]1 .

3

(6.29)

(6.30)

i := i|uig

of uig.
the -summation in formula (6.29) is still over all g-orbits that are even g-allowed. we
now rewrite it such that we sum over all g-orbits that are just g-allowed; we rst convert the
summation to a sum over all orbits by inserting the projector (a.33), and then restrict again
to g-allowed orbits, which means that the factor e2iqj() in (a.33) is equal to 1 for jg and
constant on the cosets of g with respect to g. this amounts to using the projector

|g| x
|g|

[j]g/g

e2iqj() .

(6.31)

afterwards we get rid of the phase factor e2iqj() by exploiting the simple current symmetry
(a.12) of the sj-matrices; this yields

a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

=

1

1

s
2

2 |u1g||u2g|
u

u
s1u1 s2 u2 u

2 x

u

1

s

x

jg/g

x


2u 
2

2 2

g

n

[1, 1]
[2, 2],[j][, ]

,

(6.32)


1u 
1

1 1

where [j] denotes the surviving simple current of the g-extension that comes from the simple
current j of the a-theory, and where

gn

[1, 1]

[2, 2],[, ] =

s

1

|g|2
u
s
2

1

u

2

 x

[]

s
u

1
s


x

j
1u 

1, j
2u 
2, j
j
=j
j

1
2

u 


qg ()=0

1) 
1(j

2(j

2) 

(j

) (sj
1
,1

)sj
2
,2

sj
, / s,  .

3

(6.33)

the numbers (6.33) are precisely the fusion coecients of the g-extension, as can be seen by
inserting (the analogue for s of) (a.10) into the verlinde formula.
we have thus succeeded in writing the annulus coecients as a linear combination of fusion
coecients of the g-extension. still we would like to manipulate our result further. to this
end we observe that in (6.32) we are free to let [j] act on the label of the g-fusion coecients

38

where we like it most. in particular for suitable [j] the action will then be trivial. to determine
these currents, consider rst the requirement

[j]  [, ]  [j, j 
]

!= [, ] .

(6.34)

this implies, rst, that we need j = j for some j g, which is solved by js g. in
addition we then need j 

, which is equivalent to

 = j 

f(j(j)1, j

3) = 1 for all j

3 u 
 ;

(6.35)

because of u 
that

  s, for the latter equality it is sucient (though not necessary, in general) 15
(6.36)

j  u g .

similar arguments apply to 1 or 2, but now we can also take into account the summations
over the 
i  i; accordingly, while the rst part of the argument is identical,
leading to the requirement that
(6.37)

i which satisfy 

j  si  g ,

in the second part the equality among characters only needs to hold for the restriction of the
i-characters to uig, so that the analogue of (6.35) gets relaxed to
u 

fi(j(j)1, j

i) = 1 for all j

i uig ,

(6.38)

which in turn is satised for every jsi g. thus we conclude that whenever j is in the group
(6.39)

12 := s1  s2  u  g
then [j] acts trivially. it follows that we can rewrite (6.32) as

g  g

12 ,

a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

= n x


1u 
1

 1
1

x

jg/g

x


2u 
2

 2
2

g

n

[1, 1]

[2, 2],j[, ]

(6.40)

with

n := |g|
|g|

s
s1

1

u
1
u1

s
2
s2

u
2
u2

|u1g||u2g|

u

1

u

2

.

(6.41)

note that both the fusion coecients and the prefactor n are manifestly non-negative,
and hence the result (6.40) shows that the annulus coecients are non-negative. for the
interpretation of the annulus amplitude as a partition function they must even be non-negative
integers. to establish this stronger property will require some more work. as the fusion
coecients are manifestly integral, we only have to show integrality for the prefactor n. as a
preparation we rewrite this number as a product

(6.42)
15 it is of course also sucient that j is in s 
, which in general is not a subgroup of u. however, we have
s 
  g, and hence because of the explicit appearance of g on the right hand side of (6.39) this is in fact not
relevant.

n = n   n1  n2

39

of three factors

and ni, where

n  := |g| s

1

s
2
|g| s1s2

n :=

s |ug|
u s
u


=

d
d


|ug|

u


.

(6.43)

(6.44)

as we will see in the next subsection, actually each of the three factors is already integral indi-
vidually; furthermore, those integers possess a natural representation theoretic interpretation.

integrality

6.4
we rst show integrality of n  (6.43). consider the map p: s1s2(ug)g that is
dened by
(6.45)

1 j2j3 ,
which of course we can also interpret as a map to the subgroup

(j1, j2, j3) 7 j := j1

p :

i := p(s1 s2 ug)  g

(6.46)

on which (6.45) is a surjection. we would like to determine when the image j is already in
g i. let us look at the monodromy charges for j. using the fact that the monodromy
charge of a xed point vanishes (see (a.5)) and the gradation property (6.26) of the annulus
coecients, we conclude that

qj1(1) = 0 ,

qj2(2) = 0 ,

qj1(2) = qj1() ,
qj2(1) = qj2() ,

qj3() = 0 ,

qj3(1) = 0 = qj3(2) .

(6.47)

additivity of monodromy charges then implies

qj(1) = qj2(1) ,

qj(2) = qj1(2) ,

qj() = qj1(2) + qj2(1) ,

(6.48)

which tells us that for having jg, i.e. qj(1) = 0 = qj(2), it is necessary and sucient that
qj1(2) = 0 = qj2(1), which in turn is equivalent to j1, j2 g. we conclude that the kernel of
the map (j1, j2, j3)7 [j1
2(ug) of s1s2(ug).
1 j2j3]i/g is the subgroup s
by the homomorphism theorem this in turn implies that

1s

|i| s

1s

2 = |g| s1s2 .

(6.49)

moreover, i is a subgroup (not just a subset) of g, so |g|/|i| is integral, and hence also

n   |g| s

s
2
|g| s1s2

1

= [g :i]  z>0 .

(6.50)

this proves the integrality of the number n ; it also provides us with a simple reason for the
integrality property, namely that n  is the index of the subgroup i = p(s1s2ug) in
the subgroup g of g.

40

note that for the case where all untwisted stabilizers are equal to the full stabilizers (which
immediately implies n = 1), this already settles the integrality problem. to establish integral-
ity of n as dened in (6.44) in the general case, we use information about the representation
theory of twisted group algebras (see appendix b for an introduction to twisted group algebras).
concretely, we just need to observe that the twisted group algebra cf s
 is a semisimple sub-
algebra of cfs, where f is the two-cocycle (determined uniquely up to a coboundary) whose
commutator cocycle is f|ss while f  is the analogous two-cocycle whose commutator cocycle
is f|s 
the results (b.47) and (b.52) about the decomposition of cfs-representations into irre-
ducible cf s
-representations then tell us that the number n has the natural interpretation
as the multiplicity  (b.52) that occurs in those branching rules, and hence in particular that

.
s 

n = (s 

s)  z0

(6.51)

as announced.

6.5 further consistency checks

[1, 1] [2, 2]

we would like to stress once more that the natural annulus coecients are the quantities
a[, ]
as dened in subsection 6.1, for which the upper and lower indices are, in general,
(in fact, they dier in a rather subtle way, as even the very meaning of
of dierent type.
the upper index depends, via the denition of the group g g
12, on the value of the two
lower indices.) in particular, it is the integrality of these numbers which guarantees that the
coecients in an expansion of a[1, 1] [2, 2](t) in powers of q = et are integral and therefore
allows for the interpretation of the annulus amplitude as a partition function. on the other
hand, for certain purposes it is also desirable to have at ones disposal some closely related
numbers a for which all three labels are on an equal footing, which means that the upper
index should be of the same form, i.e. [, ], as the labels for the boundary conditions. in this
subsection we show that numbers of the latter form can indeed be introduced, and that they
satisfy two interesting systems of relations, see (6.64) and (6.66) below. (further inspection
shows that in many cases the a-coecients are just multiples of the annulus coecients, though
the constants of proportionality are generically non-integral.)

let us start by inspecting the formula (6.23) for the annulus coecients. it may be noticed
that to derive that result, no other property of g was used than that it is a subgroup of
g. accordingly, analogous expressions are obtained when any other subgroup of g is used.
in particular, let us introduce the quantities a [, ]
as the coecients of the annulus
amplitude in the expansion

[1, 1] [2, 2]

a[1, 1] [2, 2](t) = x

[]

a [, ]
[1, 1] [2, 2] x 

[, ]( it
2 )

(6.52)

with respect to the characters x  of the extension of the a-theory by the simple currents in

41

the group g g that was dened in (6.9). we then have

= x

[]

qg ()=0

|g|
|g|

 x

u
s


u 



x

s 

 


a [, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

where

s
(,),[1, 1]

s(,),[2, 2] s

[, ],[, ] / s

[, ], ,

s
[, ],[, ] :=

|s |s

u

s

u

 x

ju 

u 



(j) 

(j) sj
,

(6.53)

(6.54)

is the modular s-matrix of the g-extension. while by construction the upper index of the
numbers a is a priori again of a dierent type as the two lower ones, we will now show that
actually they their values only depend on full g-orbits [, ].
to this end we compare the expressions (6.54) for s and (5.9) for s and take into account
the specic way in which s appears in (6.53). our aim is then to show that up to numerical
factors, we are allowed to replace s by s. to this end we observe that apart from the dierent
prefactors, we have to deal with the presence of dierent group characters and with the dierent
summation range for the simple currents. as for the characters, we simply need to implement
their restriction properties. concerning the simple current summation, the following reasoning
shows that in the expression (6.53) only terms with j in the intersection of the two groups
u 
u 
for js\u 
, we deduce from
the denition (6.9) of g that qj(1)6= qj(2), so that by the gradation property of the num-
bers (6.53) (that follows by an analogous consideration as for the annulus coecients) we can
assume that qj()6= 0; but then  cannot be a xed point of j, and hence sj
, = 0 so that
the corresponding contribution to the annulus tensor vanishes. second, when js
, then
there exists a ks

, we distinguish between two cases. first, when js\s

 and su give non-vanishing contributions.

\u 

 such that f(j, k)6= 0, and hence from
sj
, = sj

k, = e2iqk()f(j, k) sj

, = f(j, k) sj
,

(6.55)

we can again conclude that sj
that kg, so that we can again invoke the grading property so as to set qk() = 0.
 the same reasoning as in the rst part of the previous case applies.

, vanishes. here in the last equality we have also used the fact

\u, there exists a ks\s

 with f(j, k)6= 0, so that now

for ju\u 
for ju 

sj
, = sj

,k = e2iqk()f(j, k) sj

, = f(j, k) sj
,

(6.56)

tells us that sj

, must be zero.

furthermore, we can combine the summations over 

, while the []-summation can be converted to a sum over all  times a factor of s
follows that

 and  

 to a summation over all
/|g|. it

a [, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

= a x



qg ()=0

x

s 


u
|g|

s 
(,),[ 1, 1]

s
(,),[ 2, 2]
s(,),[ ]

s
(,),[,  ]

.

(6.57)

42

with

a  a12; :=

sus

u


.

(6.58)

note that, as indicated by the notation a12;, this prefactor not only depends on the upper
label  of the coecient (6.57), but implicitly on the values of the two lower labels 1 and 2
as well, namely via the relevant subgroup g g
12 of g. what is more interesting, however,
is that the prefactor is constant on the g-orbit of ; this implies that we can replace the upper
label according to

a [, ]
[1, 1] [2, 2]  a [, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

where  is any u-character satisfying

|uu 



= |uu 



.

,

(6.59)

(6.60)

thus, as announced, we are dealing with quantities where all three labels are on the same foot-
ing. by comparison with the formula (5.43) for the structure constants of c( a), the coecients
a are, up to the prefactor (6.58), just the opposite structure constants, i.e. those obtained
when summing over the other index of the non-symmetric s-matrix.

to see how the numbers a [, ]

, we
recall the denition (a.31) of extended characters. consider rst the situation that the relevant
untwisted stabilizer groups are related as u 

are related to the annulus coecients a[, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

 u 
; then we can immediately conclude that
s
s

[k][, |

 x
[k]g/g x 

u

u

] ,

u 


(6.61)


(j, ) =

[, ] = 1s
x 

u

 x

jg

-character  to the
where |u 
is the u 
subgroup u 
. this implies that the corresponding coecients of the annulus amplitude are
linearly related as well,

-character that is obtained by restricting the u 



.

(6.62)

s
s

u
u

a [, ]

=

[1, 1] [2, 2]

  a
 is not a subgroup of u 

]

[, |
[1, 1] [2, 2]

u 


in contrast, in the case where u 
, can happen
for the same reasons as in the case of u 
 versus u, see the remarks after formula (6.15)),
more complicated linear combinations arise that mix those characters of the g- and of the
g-extensions for which the group characters 
 have common restrictions
to the intersection u 
. as the precise form of this relation does not seem to play any
particular role, we refrain from writing it out here.

 (which, in spite of s

 and 

 u 

 u 

 s

 u 

having arrived at sensible coecients a with three labels of equal type, we are now in a
position to perform a few additional consistency checks. we rst compute the product of two
of these quantities, regarding them as matrices in their lower indices. by direct computation

43

a [1, 1]

[1, 1] [, ]

a1
1;1a1

2;2 a [2, 2]

[, ] [2, 2]

we nd

x

[]

u 


x
= x
= x



[3, 3]

qg ()=0

s 


x
x
x





qg ()=0

qg ()=0

u
|g|
x
x

s 


s 


[ s(,),]2 s(,),[1, 1]

s(,),[2, 2]

s
(,),[1, 1]

s(,),[2, 2]

s(,),[1, 1]

s(,),[2, 2]

(,),[3, 3][ s(,),]1
s

(6.63)

s(,),[3, 3]

s
(,),[1, 1]

s(,),[2, 2][ s(,),]1 .

u
|g|

u
|g|

1 a1

here we have introduced a weight factor a1
2 into the summation, which correctly accounts
for the number of chiral boundary labels (i.e. boundary blocks) that is subsumed in the upper
index ; because of the dependence of a on the lower labels, this weight factor need not be
constant. (of course one could avoid the presence of a weight factor by simply considering the
quantities a1
instead, but this appears to be less natural.) from formula (6.63) we
can read o that

 a [, ]

[1, 1] [, ]

x

[, ]

a [1, 1]

[1, 1] [, ]

with

a1
1;1a1

2;2 a [2, 2]

[, ] [2, 2]

= x

[3, 3]

m [1, 1],[2, 2]

[3, 3] a [3, 3]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

m [1, 1],[2, 2]

[3, 3] :=

a1;1 a2;2
a12;3 a12;3

a [3, 3]+
[1, 1]+ [2, 2]

.

(6.64)

(6.65)

thus the coecients a can be regarded as the basis elements of a nite-dimensional algebra
with structure constants (6.65). the presence of such an algebraic structure is often interpreted
as a completeness relation for the boundary conditions.

it is already apparent from the fact that the structure constants (6.65) are essentially equal
to suitable numbers a that in addition some kind of associativity relation holds, where one
sums over the upper index of these objects. indeed, by the same kind of calculation as above
one checks that

x

[]

x

u 


a [, ]

[1, 1] [2, 2]

34;+ a [, ]

[3, 3] [4, 4]

+

12;a1
a1
x

a [, ]

u 


= x

[]

+ a1

13;a1

24;+ a [, ]
[2, 2]

+

.

[4, 4]

+

(6.66)

[1, 1] [3, 3]

relations of the form (6.64) and (6.66) are expected on the basis of factorization argu-
ments [26, 20, 3]. but a rigorous derivation of these identities from factorization, in particular
for boundary conditions which do not preserve the full bulk symmetry, still remains to be
established. moreover, such relations are technically rather dicult to exploit in non-trivial
theories. in our opinion, they do not constitute an optimal starting point for the classication
of boundary conditions.

44

a simple current extensions

a.1 the spectrum of primary elds

this appendix summarizes the results about integer spin simple current extensions [9, 12]
that are needed in the main text. when some conformal eld theory with chiral algebra a
is obtained as an extension of a theory with chiral algebra a by a group g of integer spin
simple currents, then its primary elds are labelled by pairs [, ], where [] is a g-orbit with
vanishing monodromy charge qj() for all jg,  is a certain group character (see below),
and the square brackets refer to classes with respect to the equivalence relation that will be
given in (a.8). here by the monodromy charge of  with respect to j we mean the combination

qj() :=  + j  j mod z

(a.1)

of conformal weights; we write  rather than  for the argument because this quantity is
constant on g-orbits. the monodromy charges also satisfy
qj1() = qj() ,

(a.2)

and for every  the map

j 7 exp(2iqj())

(a.3)

furnishes a character of the simple current group g.
this is the subgroup

to explain the meaning of the character , we rst need to introduce the stabilizer of .

s := {jg | j   = }  g ,

(a.4)
which is again constant on g-orbits. (the symbol  stands for the fusion product, and for
brevity the basis elements of the fusion ring are just denoted by their labels .) when js,
then one says that  is a xed point of j; xed points of an integer spin simple current j clearly
have vanishing monodromy charge:

js  qj() =  + j   mod z = 0 .

(a.5)

now  is a character of a particular subgroup u of the full stabilizer s,  u 
subgroup is called the untwisted stabilizer of ; it is obtained as the subset

. this

on which a certain alternating bi-homomorphism

u := {js | f(k, j) = 1 for all ks}

f :

g g  u(1)

(a.6)

(a.7)

is trivial. the map f, in turn, is determined by the matrices sj described in the next subsection
through relation (a.12).

we remark that in [12] the notation ([], ) in place of [, ] was chosen. this is actually
slightly misleading. namely, in the equivalence relation that denes the classes [  ], the simple
currents j act both on the primary label  and on the character :

(, )  j (, ) = (j, j )

45

(a.8)

for all jg, with

j (j) := f(j, j) (j)

(a.9)
 is again a character
for all j u; by the multiplicative property of the fs, the quantity j
of u. (the crucial point here is that we consider f also for currents j which are not in the
stabilizer. when j is in the stabilizer, then f is equal to one by denition of the untwisted
stabilizer.)

a.2 the modular s-matrix

the modular transformation matrix s of the a-theory is given by

s[, ],[, ] :=

susu x

|g|

juu

(j) (j) sj

, ,

(a.10)

where s |s| and u |u|, and where {sj | jg} is a set of matrices which satisfy the
following relations.

sj is non-vanishing only on xed points:

sj
, = 0 = sj
,

for j6s .

(a.11)

the restriction of sj to the xed points of j is unitary, and together with the restriction t j
of the t-matrix it obeys the usual relations (sjt j)3 = (sj)2 and (sj)4 = 11 of the two-fold cover
sl(2,z) of the modular group.

for every element j g, sj satises the simple current relations

j , = f(j, j) e2iqj () sj
sj

, ,

sj
,j  = f(j, j) e2iqj () sj

, .

(a.12)

the matrices for inverse currents are transposed to each other:

sj1
, = sj

, .

(a.13)

the space of one-point chiral blocks with insertion of the simple current j on the torus
has a natural basis labelled by the xed points  of j. upon a suitable canonical choice of
normalization of the basis elements, sj plays the role of the modular s-transformation matrix
in particular, s  is the ordinary modular s-matrix of the a-theory,
for those blocks [15].
s  = s. there is some freedom left in the canonical basis choice, which is irrelevant for the
formula (a.10), but does play a role for the denition of the matrix s in (5.9). we expect that
the prescription given in [15] can be rened in such a manner that the remaining freedom in
the normalization of the blocks constitutes a character of the full stabilizer s.
ordinary s-matrix of another wzw theory that is determined by a and j [11, 12].

in the case of wzw theories, sj coincides, up to possibly a fourth root of unity, with the

the square of sj obeys

(sj)2 = j c j = c j (j) ,

(a.14)

46

where c j is the restriction of the charge conjugation of the a-theory to the xed points of j
and j is a diagonal matrix, with properties to be specied below.

when the extended theory has a surviving simple current [j] with j 6g, then the relations

(a.12) are still valid for that current. it follows that the matrix (a.10) satises

s[j][, ],[, ] = e2iqj ()  s[, ],[, ] .

(a.15)

in words, the monodromy charges with respect to [j] in the extended theory are the same as
those with respect to j in the original theory.

the properties (a.5) of xed points and (a.12) of sj can e.g. be employed to derive the
alternating property of the bi-homomorphisms f. indeed, for every j and every xed point 
of j there exists at least one  such that sj

, 6= 0. the fact that qj () = 0 then implies

sj
, = sj

j, = sj

,  e2iqj() f(j, j) = f(j, j) sj

, ,

from which it follows that

f(j, j) = 1 .

(a.16)

(a.17)

by the homomorphism property, one then concludes that the bi-homomorphism is trivial even
within the whole cyclic group generated by j, i.e.

f(jm, jn) = 1

(a.18)

for all m, n.

a.3 properties of the matrices j

the entries j

, of the matrix j which appears in (a.14) are constant on g-orbits,

k = j
j

for all kg. further, these matrices satisfy
j1
 = (j

)

as well as

+ = (j
j

) .

moreover, for every xed ,  constitutes a character of u, i.e.

j
 k

 = jk


(a.19)

(a.20)

(a.21)

(a.22)

for all j, ku; it is not necessarily a character of the full stabilizer s, though.
and hence has order two, it follows that

combining (a.13), (a.14) and the fact that c j is the restriction of a permutation matrix

j1

= (j) .

(a.23)

finally, based on results [36] about mapping class group representations, for self-conjugate xed
points  of j one can show that

 = x

j

,

qj() s ,

s , e4i(  ) n


, ,

(a.24)

where  is the frobenius--schur indicator for  [15].

47

a.4 conjugation properties

the relations (a.13), (a.14) and (a.20), (a.21) imply the conjugation properties

sj
+, = j

 (sj

,) ,

sj
,+ = j

 (sj

,)

(a.25)

of the matrices sj. when combined with the simple current symmetry (a.12), the result (a.25)
implies in particular that

e2iqk() f+(k, j) sj

+, = sj

k+, = sj

(k1 )+, = j

 (e2iqk1 () f(k1, j) sj

,)

,

(a.26)

from which with the help of the homomorphism property of f , the identity (a.2) for monodromy
charges, and once more formula (a.25) it follows that the bi-homomorphisms for conjugate
orbits are complex conjugate to each other,

f+(k, j) = f(k, j)

for all j, kg.

the conjugation of the primary labels of the extended theory is dened by

with

[, ]+ := [+, +
 ]

 (j) := (j) j
+
 .

(a.27)

(a.28)

(a.29)

because of the character property (a.22) of , the quantity +
 introduced this way is again
a character of u. that the prescription (a.28) is the right one can be checked by inserting
the relations (a.29) and (a.25) into the denition (a.10) of s, which leads to the correct
conjugation property

s[, ],[, ]+ = s

[, ],[, ]

(a.30)

of the modular s-matrix.

a.5 characters
the irreducible characters x[, ] of the a-theory are expressed in terms of the irreducible
characters  of the a-theory as
x[, ] = d x

(j, ) = d


(j, ) =

(j, ) .

(a.31)





1|s||u| x

jg

|s| x

jg

jg/s

the factor

d = ps/u ,

(a.32)

which is dierent from 1 when there is a genuine untwisted stabilizer, accounts for the presence
of the degeneracy space v in the decomposition (3.9).

48

we close this exposition with a remark on the a-theory. one may always extend a sum-
mation over the untwisted sector to a summation over all sectors by inserting the projection
operator

e2iqj() .

(a.33)

1

|g| x

jg

for instance we have

x



qg ()=0

sj
, (sj

sj
,(sj

,) = x
|g| x

= 1



jg

,)  1
x

,(sj
sj

e2iqj ()

|g| x
,j ) f(j, j) = 1

jg



f(j, j) ,j  .

(a.34)

|g| x

jg

b twisted group algebras and bi-homomorphisms

b.1 two-cocycles
let g be a nite group (not necessarily abelian), and f a two-cocycle on g with values in c,
i.e. a map
(b.1)

f : g  g  c

such that

f (g1, g2)f (g1g2, g3) = f (g1, g2g3)f (g2, g3)

(b.2)
for all g1, g2, g3  g. the cohomologically trivial two-cocycles, i.e. the coboundaries, are of the
form
(b.3)
with  an arbitrary function : g  c. when g is cyclic, all two-cocycles are coboundaries.
by setting g1 = e = g2, respectively g2 = e = g3 (with e the unit element of g), we learn that

f (g, h) = (g)(h)/(gh)

f (e, g) = f (g, e) = f (e, e) =: f

(b.4)

for every g  g. let now f be some given two-cocycle; we change f by multiplying it with a
coboundary obtained from any function  such that (e) = f 1. the so obtained cohomologous
cocycle f  satises

f (g, e) = f (g, e)(g)(e)(ge)1 = f (g, e) f 1 = 1 .

(b.5)

we will from now on assume this property, but for simplicity denote this cohomologous cocycle
f  just by f ; doing so, we have to keep in mind that we are now only allowed to modify it by
coboundaries coming from such  which in addition full (e) = 1. (sometimes this is also taken
as part of the denition of a cocycle.) further, by looking at the triple g, g1, g we learn that

f (g, g1) = f (g1, g)

(b.6)

for every g  g.

49

b.2 twisted group algebras

to any nite group g one associates its group algebra cg, which is an associative unital algebra
over the complex numbers. the dimension of cg is |g|, and it has a basis {bg} that is labelled
by group elements g  g and has multiplication

bg bg = bgg .

(b.7)

the elements bg are units of cg. the group algebra is commutative if and only if g is abelian.
given a two-cocycle f on the nite group g, one can also dene the f -twisted group algebra

cf g by modifying the multiplication (b.7) to

bgbg = f (g, g) bgg .

(b.8)

relation (b.2) ensures that cf g is still associative. twisted group algebras are unital; the
unit is given by f (e, e)1be. in particular, for every cocycle with property (b.5), be is still a
unit. we will assume from now on that f is such a cocycle.
the isomorphism type of cf g as an algebra over c depends only on the cohomology class
of f . the f -twisted group algebra cf g is isomorphic to the ordinary group algebra cg if and
only if f is a coboundary, and [37] if and only if there is a homomorphism of complex algebras
from cf g to c (i.e. if and only if cf g has a one-dimensional representation). further, a
twisted group algebra is abelian if and only if g is abelian and the cocycle is cohomologically
trivial.

every twisted group algebra is semisimple. let us list a few general properties of semisimple

associative algebras a over c:

every a-representation is fully reducible.
as an algebra over c, a is isomorphic to a direct sum

a = m

i

mdi(c)

(b.9)

of full matrix algebras, where the di are the dimensions of the inequivalent irreducible repre-
sentations of a.

the number of (equivalence classes of) irreducible a-representations equals the dimension of

the center of a.

the dimensions of the inequivalent irreducible representations are the square roots di of the

dimensions of the simple summands mdi(c) that appear in the decomposition (b.9).

b.3 representation theory of twisted group algebras

the representation theory of cf g is governed by the center of cf g. for an explicit description
of the center some additional concepts are required. first, for a given cocycle f , a group element
g  g is called f -regular if and only if

f (g, h) = f (h, g)

(b.10)

for all h in the centralizer cg(g) of g. this is equivalent to saying that the two elements bg
and bh of cf g commute:

bgbh = bhbg

for all h g with gh = hg .

(b.11)

50

the set of all f -regular elements of cf g will be denoted by greg  greg
f . with g every conjugate
element hgh1  g is f -regular, too; accordingly we also call a conjugacy class of f -regular
elements f -regular. further, if f  is a two-cocycle cohomologous to f , then every f -regular
element is also f -regular.
second, for many purposes it is convenient to choose special cocycles within a cohomology
class. a cocycle f is called standard if it satises both

and

f (g, g1) = 1

for all g  g

f (g, h)f (gh, g1) = 1

for all h greg, g  g .

(b.12)

(b.13)

in terms of the twisted group algebra this means that bg1 is the inverse of bg and that conju-
gation of f -regular elements works without additional factors, i.e.

bg1 = (bg)1

for all g  g ,

bgbh(bg)1 = bghg1

for all h greg, g  g .

(b.14)

by a suitable diagonal change of the basis of the twisted group algebra, validity of (b.14)
can always be achieved [37]. finally, a left transversal for a subgroup h of g is a set of
representatives for h\g, i.e. a subset of g that contains precisely one element from each left
coset hx.
the center of the twisted group algebra then corresponds to f -regular classes as follows
[37]. let {g1, g2, ..., g} be a set of representatives for the f -regular classes, and, for each i, ti
a left transversal for the conjugacy class cgi of gi. then the  elements

x

hti

bhbgi(bh)1

form a basis of the center. in particular, when f is standard, then the  sums

x

hcgi

bh

(b.15)

(b.16)

over the f -regular conjugacy classes constitute a basis for the center.
the number of inequivalent irreducible representations of a twisted group algebra is equal
to the dimension of the center (since the algebra is semisimple), and hence to the number of
regular conjugacy classes. notice, though, that there is no canonical correspondence between
irreducible representations and conjugacy classes.

b.4 commutator cocycles for abelian groups
we now consider nite groups g which are abelian. then the f -regular elements are charac-
terized by
(b.17)

f (g, h) = f (h, g)

for all h g .

51

further, in the abelian case the subset greg of f -regular elements of g is actually a subgroup.
namely, if both g1 and g2 are regular, i.e. if bgibh = bhbgi for i = 1, 2 and all h cgi = g, then
one has
(b.18)

f (g1, g2) bg1g2bh = bg1bg2bh = bg1bhbg2 = bhbg1bg2 = bh  f (g1, g2) bg1g2

for all h g, and hence bg1g2 is regular as well.

we will use the term bi-homomorphism for every function

f : g  g  c

(b.19)

that satises

f (g1g2, g3) = f (g1, g3)f (g2, g3)

and

f (g1, g2g3) = f (g1, g2)f (g1, g3)

(b.20)

for all g1, g2, g3  g.
it may be noted that every bi-homomorphism obeys (b.2) and hence
constitutes a two-cocycle on the abelian group g. but this property will not be important to
us. also, we are interested in denite bi-homomorphisms rather than their cohomology classes.
in particular one may have to deal with bi-homomorphisms that are non-trivial even though
cohomologically trivial. 16

a bi-homomorphism f on g is called alternating if

which via the bi-homomorphism property implies (without using abelianness of g) the anti-
symmetry property 17

f (g, g) = 1 for all g  g ,

(b.21)

f (h, g) = (f (g, h))1

for all g, h g .

(b.22)

every alternating bi-homomorphism f of an abelian group g can be written (see e.g. [38,

p. 127] and [39]) as the commutator cocycle of some two-cocycle f ff of g, i.e.

f (g, h) = f (g, h)/f (h, g)

(b.23)
for all g, h g. note that f determines only the cohomology class of f ; put dierently, f
depends on f only via the cohomology class of f . moreover, since only for cohomologically
trivial cocycles the twisted group algebra is isomorphic to the ordinary group algebra, only for
such cocycles the commutator cocycle is trivial (i.e.  1). it follows that distinct cohomology
classes of cocycles also possess distinct commutator cocycles.
the subgroup of f -regular elements can be expressed in terms of the commutator cocycle
(b.24)

greg

as

f = gf ,

where

gf := {h g | f (h, g) = 1

for all g  g} .

(b.25)

this is indeed a subgroup of g, and its denition is symmetric in the two arguments of f . (in
our application in the main text, gf =u is the untwisted stabilizer for the stabilizer subgroup
s g.)
16 an example is provided by g = z2  z2, with the bi-homomorphism f obeying f (1, j) = 1 = f (j, j) for all
j z2  z2, while all other values f (j, j) are 1. this situation is e.g. realized in the d4 level 2 wzw theory.
17 the function f that is present in the simple current relation (a.12) constitutes an alternating bi-homomor-
phism of the abelian simple current group g. in the application to simple current extensions, the antisymmetry
property holds for the reason described around (a.17).

52

b.5 representation theory and traces
the irreducible representations of cf g are labelled by the characters  of the center greg
f = gf .
now let r be a d-dimensional irreducible representation of the twisted group algebra cf g of
an abelian group g, and let r be an irreducible representation of g (in particular r is
one-dimensional). then r r which maps bg  cf g to

(r  r)(bg) := r(bg) r(g)

(b.26)

is again an irreducible representation of cf g of the same dimension d. it can be shown that
all irreducible representations of cf g are related this way, and thus in particular they all have
the same dimension. by the artin--wedderburn theorem we then have

|g| = dim(cf g) = d2  nirr.rep. .

(b.27)

now the number nirr.rep. of inequivalent irreducible representations equals the dimension of the
center. we thus learn that when g is abelian, then for all di in (b.9) one has

di = d = q[g : greg

f ] .

(b.28)

in particular, the index of greg

f in g is a complete square.

the elements of the center greg act as multiples of the identity in every irreducible repre-

sentation r :

(b.29)
next we show that if g  g is not regular, then it has vanishing trace in every irreducible
representation r  of cf g, i.e.

for all h greg .

r (bg) = (g) 11d

trr 

bg = 0

for all g 6 greg .

(b.30)

we rst consider the regular representation r of cf g. in this representation g  g acts by
mapping bh to a multiple of bgh. hence the only group element that has a trace in the regular
representation is the identity element e. we thus have

trr bg = |g| g,e .

(b.31)

now since greg is a subgroup of g, for g 6 greg also gh is not in greg for all h greg;
in
particular, gh is not the identity element, and therefore trr bgh = 0. now for a semisimple
algebra the regular representation is a direct sum of all inequivalent irreducible representations,
each appearing with multiplicity 1. therefore the identity

r (bgh) = r (bg) r (bh) = (bh) r (bg) ,

which follows with the help of (b.29), allows us to compute

0 = trr bgh = x

  greg 

trr 

bgh = x

  greg 

(h) trr 

bg

(b.32)

(b.33)

53

for all h greg. fourier transforming this relation over greg then nally yields trr 
all   greg and all g 6 greg, thus proving (b.30).

we also have

(g) = d ggreg (g)

x

g
reg
= 
|
g

bg = 0 for

(b.34)

for every g  g and every   greg. this is derived as follows. for g  greg the result follows
immediately from the fact that in any irreducible representation central elements are represented
by multiples of the unit matrix. suppose then that g 6 greg; then the completeness of the g-
characters implies that the sums
(b.35)

(gh) = 0

x

g

over all g-characters vanish for every h greg. this means that

x

(h) x

greg 

g
reg
= 
|
g

(g) = 0 .

(b.36)

we now multiply the relation (b.35) with (h) for some  greg and sum over h greg; by
the properties of greg-characters we then arrive at

0 = x

greg 

x

hgreg

(h) (h) x

g
reg
= 
|
g

(g) = x

g
reg
|
= 
g

(g) .

(b.37)

this nishes the proof of (b.34).

when considering the tensor product of two (nite-dimensional) projective representations
r1 and r2 of a nite abelian group g, one should allow for the possibility that the cohomology
classes of the two relevant two-cocycles fi are dierent. the tensor product representation
r1  r2 is again endowed with the structure of a projective g-representation via

(r1r2)(bg) := r1(bg) r2(bg) ,

(b.38)

and one immediately checks that the cocycle relevant for the tensor product representation ist
the product f1f2. the most interesting case is the one where the cohomology classes of f1 and
f2 are complex conjugate (i.e. when they contain representatives that are each others complex
conjugates). then the product f1f2 is cohomologically trivial, so that the tensor product is
a honest representation of g and hence fully reducible into a direct sum of one-dimensional
irreducible g-representations.

2 =: greg. it follows that in the case of irreducible projective modules v1  v 1
, both v1 and v2 have dimension d :=p|g|/|greg|, so that the tensor product module

one easily veries that for complex conjugate cocycles the set of regular elements coincide,
1 = greg
greg
and
v2  v 2
v1  v2 has dimension d2. further, for every g  greg one has
(r1r2)(bg) = 1 2 11 ,

(b.39)

54

which means in particular that only those irreducible g-representations appear in the de-
composition whose restriction to greg is the irreducible greg-representation with character
 = 1 2  greg. there are d2 inequivalent g-representations v with this property. to deter-
mine their multiplicity in the tensor product, we use the results (b.29) and (b.30) to compute

mult 1 2

() = x

gg

(g) tr (r1r2)(bg) = x

ggreg

(g) tr (r1r2)(bg) ,

(b.40)

which only depends on the restriction of  to greg. thus all of the d2 g-representations v with
g = 1 2 have the same multiplicity, and by comparing dimensions we
the same restriction |reg
learn that this multiplicity is equal to one, i.e. each of these representations appears precisely
once in the decomposition of r1r2:

r 1  r 2 = m

 1 2

r .

(b.41)

we conclude in particular that the trivial irreducible representation of g appears in the tensor
product of two projective irreducible g-representations if and only if the two cocycles are
complex conjugate and the two characters are complex conjugate as well, and then it appears
precisely once.

b.6 branching rules
consider now the situation that we are given a two-cocycle f on the abelian group g and in
addition a subgroup g  g. manifestly, the restriction
f  := f|gg

(b.42)

of f to the subgroup constitutes a two-cocycle on g. likewise, the commutator cocycles are
related by restriction as well,
(b.43)

f   ff  = ff|gg .

the twisted group algebra cf g is a semisimple subalgebra of cf g. hence every irreducible
representation r  of cf g is fully reducible into irreducible representations r  of cf g. our
goal in this subsection is to determine the corresponding branching rules

r  = m

greg





r  ,

(b.44)

where the symbol = stands for isomorphy of cf g-representations, explicitly for all   greg.

for ease of notation from now on we will use the abbreviations

u := greg  greg

f

and

u := greg  greg

f 

(b.45)

for the subgroups of regular elements of g and g, respectively. we remark that in general u
is not a subgroup of u. on the other hand, ug is a subgroup of u.

55

we rst observe that ug is contained both in u and in u, so that the representation
matrices r (bg) and r (b
g) are diagonal and act with the same eigenvalue (compare (b.29)).
thus a necessary condition for r  to appear in the branching of r  is that the restrictions of
 and  to ug coincide:



 6= 0  |ug = |ug .


(b.46)

for every   u there are |u|/|ug| many cf g-characters   u that satisfy the criterion
(b.46). we claim that each of the corresponding irreducible representations r  appears with
the same multiplicity in the branching of r  and that this multiplicity is the same for all
irreducible cf g-representations, i.e. that

r  =   m

greg 
 |

ug

r 

(b.47)

with  independent of  and .

to verify this assertion we consider an arbitrary cf g-representation r and dene

p  := 1

|u| x

gg

(g) r(b

g)

for every   u. direct computation shows that the operators p  are projectors,

p p  =  ,  p 

(b.48)

(b.49)

for all ,   u. moreover, combining the orthogonality relation for u-characters with the
result (b.30) about traces one nds that

trr  p  = d  , 

(b.50)

for every irreducible cf g-representation r  and every   u, where, as usual, d =p|g|/|u|.
together it follows that the multiplicity of r  in r is given by trrp /d. applying now this
result to the irreducible cf g-representation r  (considered as a, generically reducible, cf g-
representation) we nd

 


= 1

d trr 

p  = 1
|u|

d

d x

gug

(g) (g) = |ug|
|u|

d
d  |ug , |ug .

(b.51)

this means that only the restriction of  to ug matters, which nally proves our claim
(b.47). it also shows that the multiplicity  in the branching rule (b.47) is given by

  (gg) = |ug|
|u|

d
d .

(b.52)

56

c the homothety property of 

in this appendix we derive the identity (4.39) that is equivalent to the homothety property
of the mapping (4.36) and hence enters crucially in the calculation of inner products of the
boundary blocks. to this end we dene

(vp, v

p) := (p, p)

dx

j=1

(vwj)(v

wj)

(c.53)

for every pair p, p  h, where {wj} is an orthonormal basis of v+. note that by denition
the form  is sesquilinear and independent of the choice of orthonormal basis {wj}.

the relation (4.39) is equivalent to the assertion that

p)

(vp, v

p) =  (vp, v

(c.54)
for all p, p  h. this relation, in turn, is proven once we have shown that  is a non-
degenerate and invariant scalar product on h, since such scalar products are unique up to a
scalar. non-degeneracy is immediate. indeed, since the scalar product  is non-degenerate,
for every vpv h one can nd p  h such that (p, p)6= 0. furthermore, for v = v the
expression pj (vwj)(vwj) is non-vanishing.
to establish invariance, we rst choose a basis {y} of end(v) that consists of unitary
elements which is always possible. then we expand any y  a with respect to this basis, i.e.
we write
(c.55)

y  y () ,

y = x

s 

 

where the rst tensor factor acts on v and the second on h. to be precise, we also have to
account for the fact that y is in general not an endomorphism of h, but rather a map

y :

h  m

jg/s

hj .

(c.56)

by linearity we can concentrate on the individual summands in the expression (c.55), i.e.

on elements of a of the form

y = y  y .

(c.57)

for the second tensor factor we just envoke invariance of the scalar product  and are done. 18
concerning the rst factor we note that the grade of y is zero, just because the grade of
18 strictly speaking, because of (c.56) we cannot directly work with , but must consider a scalar product
tot = ljg/s j, where j is a scalar product on hj. note that tot is dened for the reducible module
ljg/s
hj and hence is not unique up to multiplication. but this is irrelevant, because in our considerations
always at least one of its arguments is a vector in h and because the two operations of restricting to a submodule
and taking the hermitian conjugate commute, so that eectively we still only work with . accordingly we
will refrain from using the notation tot below, but rather just assume that y only has a component in the
endomorphisms of h.

57

the degeneracy space v is zero. further we use the ward identity (4.27) for b and write
(1)y 1 =: y so as to obtain

| b(p, q)|2 (y (vp), v

p) = y

as well as

| b(p, q)|2 (vp, y (vp)) = y

dx

j=1

dx

j=1

b(vp  (ywj)q) b(v

p  wj q) ( y p, p)

(c.58)

b(vp  wj q) b(v

p  (y

wj)q) (p, y p) ,

(c.59)
where p and q are the elements of h and h+ used in the denition (4.21) of . next we
implement the fact that (p, y p) = ( y p, p). the nal step in establishing the invariance
relation then consists in using the identity

dx

j=1

b(vp  (ywj)q) b(v

p  wj q) =

dx

j=1

b(vp  wj q) b(v

p  (y

wj)q) ,

(c.60)
which holds because wj 7 ywj is a basis transformation between two orthonormal bases of v+
(recall that y was chosen to be unitary).

58

references

[1] j. polchinski, dirichlet-branes and ramond--ramond charges, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724

[2] j.l. cardy, boundary conditions, fusion rules and the verlinde formula, nucl. phys. b 324 (1989)

581

[3] g. pradisi, a. sagnotti, and ya.s. stanev, completeness conditions for boundary operators in

2d conformal eld theory, phys. lett. b 381 (1996) 97

[4] j. fuchs and c. schweigert, a classifying algebra for boundary conditions, phys. lett. b 414

(1997) 251

[5] j. fuchs and c. schweigert, branes: from free elds to general backgrounds, nucl. phys. b 530

(1998) 99

[6] a. recknagel and v. schomerus, d-branes in gepner models, nucl. phys. b 531 (1998) 185

[7] a.n. schellekens and s. yankielowicz, extended chiral algebras and modular invariant partition

functions, nucl. phys. b 327 (1989) 673

[8] k. intriligator, bonus symmetry in conformal eld theory, nucl. phys. b 332 (1990) 541

[9] a.n. schellekens and s. yankielowicz, simple currents, modular invariants, and xed points, int.

j. mod. phys. a 5 (1990) 2903

[10] m. kreuzer and a.n. schellekens, simple currents versus orbifolds with discrete torsion  a

complete classication, nucl. phys. b 411 (1994) 97

[11] j. fuchs, a.n. schellekens, and c. schweigert, from dynkin diagram symmetries to xed point

structures, commun. math. phys. 180 (1996) 39

[12] j. fuchs, a.n. schellekens, and c. schweigert, a matrix s for all simple current extensions, nucl.

phys. b 473 (1996) 323

[13] j. fuchs, a.n. schellekens, and c. schweigert, the resolution of eld identication xed points

in diagonal coset theories, nucl. phys. b 461 (1996) 371

[14] p. bantay, the untwisted stabilizer in simple current extensions, phys. lett. b 396 (1997) 183

[15] p. bantay, simple current extensions and mapping class group representations, int. j. mod. phys.

a 13 (1998) 199

[16] r. dijkgraaf, c. vafa, e. verlinde, and h. verlinde, the operator algebra of orbifold models,

commun. math. phys. 123 (1989) 485

[17] j. fuchs and c. schweigert, orbifold analysis of broken bulk symmetries, phys. lett. b 447 (1999)

266

[18] j.l. cardy and d.c. lewellen, bulk and boundary operators in conformal eld theory, phys.

lett. b 259 (1991) 274

[19] j. fuchs and c. schweigert, symmetry breaking boundaries ii. more structure; examples, preprint

in preparation

[20] a. sagnotti and ya.s. stanev, open descendants in conformal eld theory, fortschr. phys. 44

(1996) 585

[21] v. alessandrini, a general approach to dual multiloop diagrams, nuovo cim. 2a (1971) 321

[22] r.e. behrend, p.a. pearce, v.b. petkova, and j.-b. zuber, on the classication of bulk and

boundary conformal eld theories, phys. lett. b 444 (1998) 163

59

[23] i. runkel, boundary structure constants for the a-series virasoro minimal models, preprint hep-

th/9811178

[24] c. dong, h. li, and g. mason, twisted representations of vertex operator algebras, preprint

q-alg/9509005

[25] g. pradisi, a. sagnotti, and ya.s. stanev, the open descendants of non-diagonal su (2) wzw

models, phys. lett. b 356 (1995) 230

[26] d.c. lewellen, sewing constraints for conformal eld theories on surfaces with boundaries, nucl.

phys. b 372 (1992) 654

[27] y. zhu, modular invariance of characters of vertex operator algebras, j. amer. math. soc. 9 (1996)

237

[28] c. dong, h. li, and g. mason, modular-invariance of trace functions in orbifold theory, preprint

q-alg/9703016

[29] m. miyamoto, a modular invariance on the theta functions dened on vertex operators, preprint

math.qa/9809168

[30] j. polchinski and y. cai, consistency of open superstring theories, nucl. phys. b 296 (1988) 91

[31] c.g. callan, c. lovelace, c.r. nappi, and s.a. yost, loop corrections to superstring equations

of motion, nucl. phys. b 308 (1988) 221

[32] p. di vecchia, f. pezella, m. frau, k. hornfeck, a. lerda, and s. sciuto, n -point g-loop vertex

for a free bosonic theory with vacuum charge q, nucl. phys. b 322 (1989) 317

[33] n. ishibashi, the boundary and crosscap states in conformal eld theories, mod. phys. lett. a 4

(1989) 251

[34] m.b. green and p. wai, the insertion of boundaries in world-sheets, nucl. phys. b 431 (1994)

131

[35] j. fuchs and c. schweigert, completeness of boundary conditions for the critical three-state potts

model, phys. lett. b 441 (1998) 141

[36] p. bantay and p. vecsernyes, mapping class group representations and generalized verlinde for-

mula, preprint hep-th/9506186

[37] g. karpilovsky, induced modules over group algebras (north holland publishing company,

amsterdam 1990)

[38] k.s. brown, cohomology of groups (springer verlag, berlin 1982)

[39] n.j.s. hughes, the use of bilinear mappings in the classication of groups of class 2, proc. amer.

math. soc. 2 (1951) 742

60

