ift-uam/csic-99-03

hep-th/99mmnnn

9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
1

 

 
 

1
v
2
1
0
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

non-critical conning strings and the

renormalization group

enrique alvarez, 1 and cesar gomez, 2

 instituto de fsica teorica, c-xvi, universidad autonoma de madrid

e-28049-madrid, spain3

 departamento de fsica teorica, c-xi, universidad autonoma de madrid

e-28049-madrid, spain

 i.m.a.f.f., c.s.i.c., calle de serrano 113

e-28006-madrid, spain

abstract

string vacua for non critical strings satisfying the requirements of zig-zag invariance are

constructed. the liouville mode is shown to play the role of scale in the renormalization

group operation. dierences and similarities with the d-brane near horizon approach to

non supersymmetric gauge theories are discussed as well.

1e-mail: enrique.alvarez@uam.es
2e-mail: iffgomez@roca.csic.es
3unidad de investigacion asociada al centro de fsica miguel catalan (c.s.i.c.)

1

1 introduction

at present we can consider two dierent philosophies to approach the problem of dening

a string representation of non abelian four dimensional gauge theories. 2 one approach is

based on maldacenas conjecture [2] and on the so called ads-cft correspondence [3][4].

in this approach we start with a stack of d-3 branes in type iib string theory and we

perform a near horizon limit introducing a new blow-up variable that can be identied

with the scale of the gauge theory. in its strong version maldacenas conjecture stablishes

the equivalence between n=4 supersymmetric yang mills theory in at minkowski space-

time and type iib strings in ads5  s5 with a non vanishing ramond-ramond (r-r) ve
form background and dirichlet boundary conditions to be dened at penroses conformal

innity [5]. the main diculty with this approach is of course its extension to gauge

theories with non vanishing beta function. this extension requires working with stacks

of d-branes reproducing on their world volume non conformal theories, and performing

on them a similar bulk decoupling near horizon limit.

in this direction, two dierent

possibilities have recently been suggested. one due to witten [6] starts by considering the

near horizon limit of a stack of m5 branes in m-theory. the resulting six dimensional

conformal eld theory is subsequently compactied to four dimensions, breaking explicitly

supersymmetry. the other possibility due to klebanov and tseytlin [7] consists in working

from the begining with non supersymmetric dixon-harvey [8] type 0(b) strings. the

dierence between both approaches mainly refers to the relation between the string scale

and the breaking of supersymmetry scale.

in type 0(b) strings one starts with a superstring with world sheet supersymmetry that

contains closed string tachyons. the idea is to use the dynamics of these tachyons (that

contrary to what happens in the bosonic case now have non vanishing amplitudes for even

number of external legs only) to induce an eective central charge that will automatically

2both can be considered as dierent attempts to implement holographic ideas [1].

1

produce a non trivial dependence of the dilaton eld on the radial coordinate. 3

it would be this dependence the one to be identied with the renormalization group

equation for the non supersymmentric gauge theory dened on the stack of d3 branes.

it is interesting to observe that in both cases we dene a non conformal theory by

breaking completely supresymmetry.

the other approach, due to polyakov [9][10] [11] [12][13] to the string representation of

non abelian gauge theories is based on the so called zig-zag (zz) invariance of pure yang

mills wilson loops [14]. the main idea is to impose on open string amplitudes invariance

under generic reparametrizations that are not necessarily orientation preserving dieomor-

phisms. this requirement implies a priori both the absence of open string tachyons, which

can be achieved by working with a world sheet supersymmetric string theory [9] [15][10]

and an appropiate gso projection, and the truncation of the open string spectrum to pure

massless vector bosons. it is due to this truncation that zz invariant strings are naturally

describing pure gauge theories without performing any extra bulk decoupling limit.

in

order to describe a four dimensional gauge theory in the zz approach we should start with

a non critical open string theory in four dimensional at minkowski space-time. since

this theory is anomalous with respect to world-sheet weyl rescalings it is necessary to add

a liouville extra mode, that is eectively acting as an extra dimension. a zz invariant

background will correspond to a ve dimensional space-time metric of the type:

ds2 = a()2dx2

k + d2

(1)

(where xk  m4, the minkowski space in which the putative gauge theory lives) and
dirichlet boundary conditions on the liouville mode on the zz horizon:

a() = 0.

(2)

3given the fact that the rr repulsion is twice as strong as the nsns attraction, in [7] one is forced to

hope that the role of tachyons is to rst allow the stacking of branes by forming a bound state; so tightly

bound, in fact, that it would remain so even when the tachyon condenses.

2

if we nd such a solution we can try to reproduce from it the renormalization group

equation for the pure gauge theory dened by the open string sector. 4. since we are now

working in a non critical string in at minkowski space-time, the dilaton eld will depend

on the liouville coordinate and we can use this dependence to reproduce the running of

the coupling constant.

in the non critical case the identication of the extra liouville

coordinate with the scale of the theory dened by the non critical string in four dimensions

is quite natural.

in fact the very meaning of the liouville mode is to compensate two

dimensional weyl rescalings which in at space are equivalent to dilatations of the four

dimensional space-time coordinate:

xk  xk.

(3)

in this sense the renormalization group equation for the physical open string amplitudes

of the zig zag invariant theory would be formally dened as follows:

0 =

d
d

a = (xk


xk

+ 




)a.

(4)

it is important to stress the dierences and similarities between the zz approach and

the type 0(b) string approach. in both cases the reason for the running of the dilaton

eld appears as a consequence of the existence of an eective central charge; their origin

however is completly dierent. in the type 0(b) case the eective central charge stems

from the existence of a tachyon condensate while in the non critical case it is a consequence

of working o criticality.

let us now explain in what precise way zz invariance forces us to work o criticality.

if we work maldacenas near horizon limit, in the critical case, penroses conformal innity

will possess the general structure of m4  s5 and thus dirichlet open string boundary
conditions will be imposed on m4  s5 however zz invariant boundary conditions require
a truncation of all kaluza klein modes in order to enforce dirichlet boundary conditions

strictly on m4 , working in that way in a non critical string. the main dierence ,however,
4 the other possibility, consisting in working with a =  can be interpreted as some t-dual of (1.2) [9]

3

has its origin in the geometry of the bulk decoupling. in the case of a stack of d 3 branes we

need, following maldacena, to work out the near horizon limit while in the zz non critical

case the bulk decoupling is explicitely done by demanding dirichlet boundary conditions

on the zz horizon, i.e the region of space time where the four dimensional metric in the

string frame vanishes. moreover in the non critical case as pointed out above the liouville

coordinate appears as a natural scale of the theory. 5

in order to understand properly the dynamical role played by the liouville eld it

would be important to introduce the concept of liouville frame [3]. let us do it using for

that maldacenas example, where it is natural to identify the blow up coordinate with a

liouville coordinate. this identication can be understood as follows. let us parametrize

the transversal space to a d 3 brane in type iib in terms of the euler angles in s5 and

the radius of such sphere i.e using polar coordinates. let us now forget formally about

the radial coordinate and pretend that we are working in a non critical case where the

transversal space is simply ve dimensional and with the topology of the sphere. we know

that this string theory interpreted as non critical generates an extra liouville coordinate.

by denition liouville frame will mean to consider the string theory in the new coordinates

such that one of them is liouville itself. very likely the topology will change by going to

this new frame where what we get naturally is a transversal space of the type considered in

the bulk near horizon limit, namely s5 r, where r refers now to the liouville coordinate.

6

in summary it looks that the liouville frame is the natural one to capture the bulk

decoupling physics. in dening the liouville frame it is important the type of coordinates

5a dierent way of interpreting the blow-up coordinate stems from a t-duality r  

r , by taking the
r  u. notice that the resulting theory is a full edged string. in

double limit   0 and r  0, with 
this sense, this double limit denes a transformation between dierent string vacua.

6the combined result of the two operations implies rst, to forget about some coordinates, and more-

over, replacing them by a liouville mode which will in general dene a non-trivial transformation between

string vacua

4

we choose at the begining, in maldacenas example polar coordinates. the ones that

we keep are the ones related with global r symmetries. in liouville frame the liouville
coordinate is always playing the role of a scale of the non critical theory, this fact being one

of the reasons why this frame is the appropiated one to describe bulk decoupling limits.

in the same way as it happens for type 0(b) strings the zz approach is directly working

in the no space-time supersymmetric regime. this is in principle due to the fact that zz

invariant reparametrizations for open string amplitudes already truncate the open string

spectrum to the pure ns sector (cf. [10]). the vertex operators for fermionic r states are

manifestly not zz invariant, since they involve, in any picture, the path integration of the

space-time spinor eld (which lives in a frame related to a non-zero vierbein). due to this

fact and the already mentioned absence of open string tachyons in zz invariant strings

we are in the zz approach forced to work with gso projections that are not space time

supersymmetric. a more general question we can address at this point is whether space

time supersymmetry is or not consistent with non criticality, where by that we generically

mean non critical central charge. if we reduce the problem to the case of at space-time a

temptative answer can be given. in fact if we consider four dimensional non critical strings

and we add a super liouville mode, it seems dicult to get a space-time gso proyection in

ve dimensions since there are not superstrings in ve dimensions. 7 a dierent situation

will appears in the case we start with a three dimensional non critical string. in that case

we can get after adding super liouville a gso in four dimensions consistent with space

time supersymmetry.

concerning space-time supersymmetry let us just make the following general comment.

if by some dynamical procedure some condensation takes place in a critical string theory

that generates an eective central extension, we conjecture that such a dynamical process

will induce dynamical breaking of space-time supersymmetry. for instance if we think in

a type iib string any condensation leading to an eective central charge will inmediately

7that is, it is not known how to implement -symmetry there.

5

break the sl(2, z) duality invariance and consequently space-time supersymmetry.

in this paper we will work in the zz approach for non critical strings. next we shall

review our main results. first we consider the simplest case with no tachyon background

and non rr background and we look for zz invariant solutions. we nd a unique solution

that degenerates to the trivial one if the missing central charge is zero. this solution induces

a running for the dilaton eld that is of the asymptotically free type, with the coupling

decreasing in the ultraviolet. moreover we nd a phase transition with a conformal point.

since in order to achieve zz invariance we need to decouple r open string states it is

natural to turn on the tachyon. we do that qualitatively and we nd that the tachyon

expectation value can move the location of the conformal point leaving us with a pure

asymptotically free theory. in all our analysis we work in the string frame and we dont

add any form of r r background.

from our analysis we can suggest a generalization of maldacenas conjecture. in the zz

framework we can say that ve dimensional superstring vacua , enjoying a four dimensional

zz horizon and satisfying dirichlet boundary conditions on it are completly equivalent

to pure four dimensional gauge theories. this generalization of maldacenas conjecture

replaces critical string by non critical ones, near horizon limit by zz invariance, penroses

conformal innity by zz horizon and the standard ads-cft correspondence by imposing

dirichlet boundary conditions at the zz horizon. the main diculty, as already mentioned,

with the zz invariant approach is that due to the fact that r fermionic vertex operators

are not zz invariant we should deal with the presence of a closed string tachyon, and

that, since in this approach we are not dealing with any stack of branes, the information

about the specic gauge group should be included somehow in the particular way to x

the tachyon vacuum expectation value.

one possibility related with the particular examples we work out in this paper consists

in starting with open superstrings in four dimensions with the standard gso projection i.e.

without any form of tachyon and to consider the solution to the tachyonless beta function

6

equations. most likely this solution does not admit space time supersymmetry and if we

enforce dirichlet boundary conditions on the zz horizon then the spectrum of the open

string sector is reduced to the one corresponding to a pure gauge theory.

surprisingly enough we do not get the renormalization group behavior of a pure yang

mills theory indicating that something is missing in the whole argument.

2 non-critical conning strings and the renormal-

ization group

in the search for conning strings we are lead to consider a non-critical string, where the

would-be holographic coordinate is now interpreted as a liouville eld. the corresponding

two-dimensional action (including the necessary dilaton and tachyon elds) is:

s =z d2z[()2 + a2()(xk)2 + r(2)() + t ()]

(5)

in order to study the renormalization group equations of the yang-mills theory living on

the horizon, we need to examine how ordinary dilatations of the minkowskian coordinates

are implemented in the conning string framework.

k

ds2

k  1ds2
a()  a()

(6)

(this corresponds to translations of the liouville eld in the simplest case ). it is to be

stressed that the zz horizon itself remains invariant under these transformations.

in the at space case, this means

xk = xk

(loga) = 

7

(7)

this suggests that there is an identication between the logarithmic dilatation on the

horizon (which is identied up to a sign with a logarithmic variation of the renormalization

scale) and the logarithmic variation of the varying string tension itself:

xk
xk  




a()
a()

= 

(8)

this then implies unambiguosly that the infrared (ir) region is on the horizon itself (a = 0);

whereas the ultraviolet (uv) region is located on the boundary (a  ).curiously enough,
although our framework is not holographic sensu stricto, the geometrical identications of

the energy scales coincides with the holographic situation [16].

the transformation of the liouville eld does not then in general leave invariant the

kinetic term, nor the dilaton. the variation of the action is:

s = z d2z[aa(

a
a ) + (t () + ()r(2))

a
a ]

 z d2z

a
a (aa + (t () + r(2)()))

(9)

from this point of view, the universal behavior of the dilaton under weyl transforma-

tions would be:







a()
a()

= 

the condition for persistence of the horizon in the einstein metric is

lima0

2

3 a2 = 0

e

(10)

(11)

this means that the divergence of the coupling constant when reaching the horizon must

be smaller than a3. 8

8under this circumstances, we can equally well (by redening the liouville coordinate) interpret the

above ansatz as representing the metric in the einstein frame, which is sometimes convenient when studying

the equations of motion. those derive from the action principle

se =

1

16g5 z d5xge[re +

1
3

()2

8

owing to our identication above (8), between the renormalization group scale  ans

the string frame metric coecient a(), we shall continue working in the string frame for

ease of the physical interpretation.

the weyl anomaly coecients [19] in the said string frame read


 = r  
 = = 2 +


t = 2t  4t + t

2
3

(d  10) + ()2

(12)

we have taken into account the central charge defect  2
10 because the model ,as argued above, enjoys two-dimensional supersymmetry.

3 (d 10), where we use the value

in the presence of a tachyon eld, there are extra terms (formally of order 2), so that

the complete equations read 9

r   +
2 + c0  ()2 

1
4tt = 0
t 2 = 0

m2
4

2t  m2t + t = 0

(13)

and where now the tachyon mass is given by m2   d2
c0   d10



.

4 and the central charge defect is

+

10
3 e

2

3

 +

1
6

((t )2  m2e

2

3

t 2)]

the tachyon mass is given by m2 =  2
 .

for example, when the tachyon vanishes, the einstein equations of motion then reduce to:

 + 4 a
a

4

a
a

+

1
3

= 
()2 

3

2



20
3 e
2
a2 (2a + 3(a)2) +

1
6

()2 +

5
3 e

2

3

 = 0

aa + 3(a)2  4a  6(a)2 +

a2
6

()2 +

5a2
 e

2
3

 = 0

9those equations coincide with the ones in a footnote in page 12 of [7] with the identication kt   1
2 

9

2.1 tachyonless backgrounds

assuming that the tachyon (through the interaction with the rr backgrounds or otherwise)

develops a vacuum expectation value, in a rst approximation all its eect will be to change

the numerical value of the central charge defect c0 . putting by simplicity the tachyon eld
to zero and assuming the radial ansatz  = 0 where x  mk, yields:

a
a

 = aa

= 

r = 4
r = (aa + 3(a)2) = 
 + 4 a

a  c0 + ()2 = 0

where f   df
d .

there are now two subcases to consider. when a = 0, then necessarily

and

 = 0

 = c1/2

0

(14)

(15)

(16)

this is the well-known linear dilaton solution.

when a

6= 0, on the other hand,a linear combination of the above equations can be

expressed solely in terms of the function a():

a
a

 2

+ (

a
a )2  3(

a
a

)2  c0 = 0

which can be integrated by the substitution

this yields

a  er u

 4u2 + (

u
u

)2  c0 = 0

which can be easily integrated, giving:

u =

2[0 cosh 0(  0)  t0 sinh 0(  0)]

0  c0)

pc0(t2

10

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

where 2

0  c0, and when  = 0, u = u0  1

0  c0.

2pt2

given the fact that necessarily 0 < t0, there is a singularity at the value of the liouville

coordinate given by

sing = 0 +

1
0

th1(0/t0)

(only in the singular limiting case when t0 = 0 is sing pushed towards sing = ).

integrating again (21) leads to:

where

a() = 0s 1 + eo(0)
1  eo(0)

2 =

t0  0
t0 + 0

(21)

(22)

(23)

and when  = 0, a = a0  0q 1+

function explodes when  = sing.

1 . again, for positive values of the parameter , the

2.1.1 a zz invariant solution

when t0 = , taking the valuation  = 1, and changing  by  (which is a symmetry
of the equations (14)), 10 we get:

a() = 0s 1  eo(0)

1 + eo(0)

(24)

which is the only zz invariant solution in the whole family, that being in itself a remarkable

fact.

a curious thing is that solution attens itself down (i.e., reduces to the trivial one

a  0) when the central charge defect vanishes, that is c0 = 0.

this solution starts at a = 0 when  = 0  , and grows monotonically until
it reaches the asymptotic value a = 0 (which is arbitrary). this implies that, unless

0 = , it is not self (t)-dual; that is, there is no region in the spacetime (boundary) with
10this last step is neccessary in order to get a solution which starts, rather that ends at the horizon

11

a() = . this will have physicically important consequences, because, as we shall see,
one is led to identify the ultraviolet (uv) with the boundary, and the infrared (ir) with

the zz horizon.

incidentally, the zz invariant solution starting of the horizon, and the -reversal, ending

on it, would both be in a mutual t-dual relationship were it not for the dilaton eld [17].

2.1.2 gy m () from the dilaton

we would like to interpret 3/2gse  g2
theory living on the zz horizon [18]; but which coupling constant , bare or renormalized,

y m as the coupling constant of the putative gauge

and if the latter, at which scale?

apparently, the only possible thing we can identify the dilaton with is with the running

coupling constant, and the sense of the running is provided by our previous identication

in (8) of the string implementation of the yang-mills scale transformations.

on general grounds, even before integrating, we can write for our putative -function

a

de
da

aa
(a)2 + 3)e

= (

plugging there the former results from (4.25) one gets:

e = e0(

a0
a

)6 1  (0/a0)4
1  (0/a)4

it can be easily checked that this is a decreasing function of a as long as a > 0. 11

in the zz-invariant case, e0 diverges in such a way that

e 

1
a6( 4
a4  1)

0

(25)

(26)

(27)

this clearly decreases as a function of a up to a given value of a, namely amin  31/40,
after which point it starts to increase whithout bounds.12

11this actually covers the whole domain of the louville variable in the non zz-invariant situation when

 > 0 because then 0 < a0 always.

12 please note that owing to our identication (8) between the renormalization group scale  and the

12

the physical meaning of the turn-over point seems to stem from the fact that it has

horizontal tangent, that is, (g) = 0; it is a conformally invariant xed point .

incidentally, it is not dicult to show that in the vicinity of g the beta function reads

  

031/4

2

g3s 2
3 

3
6
0g2

(28)

on the other hand, even in the asymptotically free (af) regime, the dependence

with the putative  is not logarithmic. the generic (not zz-invariant) solutions ( >

0), although they are asymptotically free (af) in the whole allowed domain, also lack

logarithmic dependence.

it is plain that once the function a() is known, the dilaton can be easily extracted

from the second equation of (14). this leads at once in the generic case ( > 0) to 13

  0 = log

[1  e0(0)]3

e0(0) + e20(0)

1 + 
1  

and for the zz-invariant solution to

  3 log(1 + e0(0))  log(e0(0)  e20(0))

from here we can easily determine that the af regime ends up at

min  0 = 1

0

log(2 + 3)

3 the physics of tachyon condensates

(29)

(30)

(31)

it is a well known fact [19] that in the presence of arbitrary ns massless condensates

the spacetime eective action vanishes on shell because it is precisely proportional to the

dilaton beta function, .

conformal factor a, we do not have any freedom in choosing the coordinate upon which the dilaton depends.

this contrasts with the situation in most other treatments.

13we have explicitly veried that it also solves the rst equation of (14), which was only used as a

substitution up to now

13

when there is a tachyon condensate, it is easy to check that on shell

sef f  2z gddx (2c0 

m2
2

t 2)e2

(32)

in the range of spacetime dimensions between d = 2 and d = 10, then, the fact that the

tachyon mass is negative precisely enforces

sef f  0

(33)

thus implementing zamolodchikovs c-theorem in the present context, which physically

means [14] that

c = d  10 + sef f

(34)

3.1 tachyonful backgrounds

the full equations (13) with the tachyon turned on 14read:

a
a

=  +

(t )2

 = aa

1
4

r = 4
r = (aa + 3(a)2) = 
 + 4 a
t  + 4t  a

m2
a  c0 + ()2 +
4
a  m2t + t  = 0

t 2 = 0

(35)

the complete set of equations is quite dicult to solve exactly. what we can do instead

is to examine the behavior of a tachyon in the tachyonless background of the preceding

section, and then study how this tachyon back-reacts on the said background.

first of all, we can trace from (35) the origin of the turnover point in the behavior of

the dilaton as a function of a to the vanishing of the heaviside function (aa + 3(a)2).

now, the analogous to our previous equation (17) in the presence of a tachyon is:

a
a

 2

+ (

a
a )2  3(

a
a

)2  c0 

(t )2  m2t 2

4

= 0

(36)

14there are other terms, neglected here, which are of the same formal order in the -expansion.

14

this means that on the tachyonless geometry the quantity

aa

(a)2 + 3 = 4 s(e0(0) + e0(0))2 + (e0(0)  e0(0))2 (t )2  m2t 2

42
0

(where it should always be taken the negative valuation of the square root).

when the tachyon vanishes this gives:

aa
(a)2 + 3 = 4  e0(0)  e0(0)

(37)

(38)

which passes through a zero precisely at the value min quoted above after equation (27).

it is clear now that the eect of a free tachyon is always to approach the turnover point

to the origin, because the extra term in the square root is positive denite (this is a purely

tachyonic eect).

the only possibility for the tachyon dynamics to push the turnover point towards  = 
would be that a positive denite potential v (t ) is generated, in such a way that the term

m2t 2 is replaced by m2t 2 + v (t ).

to be specic, if we dene the quantity

v (t ) + m2t 2  (t )2

42
0

 

(39)

then the condition that the heaviside function  = 1 implies that (1 )(z2 + z2) + 2(1 +
) < 16, z  (0, ). this is clearly only possible when  = 1, which is the same as:

v (t ) = 4c0  m2t 2 + (t )2

which, in the tachyonless background reduces to

v (t ) = 4c0

(40)

(41)

our present understanding of the dynamics of non-critical conning strings does not

allow us to gauge what are the odds for such a potential to be generated in the present

context.

15

3.2 backreaction

if we plug this value for the tachyon potential back in our previous equation (36) we get

the simple equation

whose general solution is of the form

aa = (a)2

again, there is only one zz-invariant solution in the family, namely

a = a0p1 + 2u0(  0)

using (27), this gives the behavior of the dilaton as:

a  (  0)1/2

e  (  0)5/4.

(42)

(43)

(44)

(45)

this is again af in the whole allowed domain, although the dependence with the

variable we have argued before to be the correct implementation of the renormalization

group scale  in the present context, namely, a itself, is not logarithmic but rather

y m  5/2.
g2

(46)

it is interesting to notice that the renormalization group we get is of a power law type,

similar to the one considered in the accelerated unication. [20] this behavior is typical of

a full eged ve dimensional theory, pointing out to a potential problem in the zz scenario.

4 conclusions

in summary there are two dierent ways to perform bulk decoupling limits or in other words

to dene string vacua equivalent to non abelian gauge theories, namely near horizon limit

of an stack of d-branes and zz invariant solutions for non critical strings. zz invariance

16

is manifestly no space time supersymmetric and non critical and allow us to read the

evolution of the renormalization group directly from the liouville eld dependence of the

dilaton eld. bulk decoupling for non conformal eld theories with partial supersymmetry

breaking will require some dierent procedures.

acknowledgments

we thank a. delgado for pointing out reference [20]. this work

has been partially

supported by the european union tmr program fmrx-ct96-0012 integrability, non-

perturbative eects, and symmetry in quantum field theory and by the spanish grant

aen96-1655. the work of e.a. has also been supported by the european union tmr pro-

gram erbfmrx-ct96-0090 beyond the standard model and the spanish grant aen96-

1664.

references

[1] g. t hooft , dimensional reduction in quantum gravity gr-qc/9310026.

l. susskind, the world as a hologram, hep-th/9409089.

[2] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and supergravity,

hep-th/9711200.

[3] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from non-

critical string theory, hep-th/9802109.

[4] e. witten, anti de sitter space and holography, hep-th/9802150.

[5] r. penrose and w. rindler, spinors and space-time, cambridge university press,

1986.

17

[6] e. witten anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transition and connement in gauge

theories hep-th/9803131.

s. gubser, a. hashimoto, i. klebanov and m krasnitz, scalar absorption and the

breaking of the world volume conformal invariance, hep-th/9803023

[7] igor r. klebanov and arkady a. tseytlin, d-branes and dual gauge theories in

type 0 strings, hep-th/9811035,

asymptotic freedom and infrared behavior in the type 0 string approach to gauge

theory, hep-th/9812089.

a non-supersymmetric large n cft from type 0 string theory hep-th/9901101.

joseph a. minahan, glueball mass spectrum and other issues for supergravity duals

of qcd models, hep-th/9811156.

[8] l. dixon and j. harvey, string theories in ten dimensions without space- time super-

symmetry nucl. phys. b274 (1986),93.

[9] a.m. polyakov, conning strings, hep-th/9607049,

string theory and quark connement, hep-th/9711002,

the wall of the cave, hep-th/9808057.

[10] e. alvarez, c. gomez and t. ortn, string representation of wilson loops,

hep-th/9806075.

[11] i.i. kogan and o.a. soloviev, gravitationally dressed rg ows and zigzag-invariant

strings hep-th/9807223.

[12] m. c. diamantini, h. kleinert, c. a. trugenberger, strings with negative stiness

and hyperne structure hep-th /9803046

[13] g. ferreti and d. martelli, on the construction of gauge theories from non-critical

type 0 strings, hep-th/9811208.

18

[14] a.m. polyakov, gauge fields and strings (harwood academic).

[15] a. a. migdal, hidden symmetries of large n qcd hep-th/9610126

[16] l. susskind and e. witten, the holographic bound in ads-spaces, hep-th/9805114.

[17] a. giveon, m. porrati and e. rabinovici, target space duality in string theory,

phys.rept. 244 (1994) 77-202.

e. alvarez, l. alvarez-gaume, y. lozano, an introduction to t-duality in string

theory, nucl. phys. (proc. suppl.) 41 (1995),1 (hep-th/9410237).

[18] c.p. bachas, lectures on d-branes hep-th/9806199.

[19] c. callan, e. martinec, m. perry and d. friedan, strings in background fields nucl.

phys. b262 (1985),593.

g. curci and g. pauti, consistency between the string background equations of mo-

tion and the vanishing of the conformal anomaly, nucl. phys. b286 (1987),399.

[20] keith r. dienes, emilian dudas, tony gherghetta, grand unication at intermediate

mass scales through extra dimensions, hep-ph/9806292

c.p. bachas, unication with low string scale, hep-ph/9807415.

19

