9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
8

 

 
 

1
v
4
5
0
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

quantum generation of the non-abelian

su (n ) gauge fields

p. i. fomin, t. yu. kuzmenko

bogolyubov institute for theoretical physics,

national academy of sciences of ukraine,

14 b metrologichna str., kyiv-143, 252143, ukraine

e-mail: tanya@ap3.bitp.kiev.ua

abstract

a generation mechanism of the non-abelian gauge elds in the su (n ) gauge
theory is investigated. we show that the su (n ) gauge elds ensuring the local
invariance of the theory are generated at the quantum level only due to nonsmooth-
ness of the scalar phases of the fundamental spinor elds. the expressions for the
gauge elds are obtained in terms of the nonsmooth scalar phases.

pacs: 11.15.q

nowadays, the gauge principle occupies a signicant place in quantum eld theory.
according to this principle, the fundamental interactions of elementary particles are trans-
ferred by gauge elds. the existence of these elds is considered to be necessary for
ensuring the local gauge symmetries. the local u(1) gauge symmetry in quantum elec-
trodynamics was rst discovered by weyl [1]. the non-abelian local gauge symmetries
and corresponding gauge elds were introduced by yang and mills [2]. based on this
approach, later on the structure of weak and strong interactions was established [3,4].

it is commonly supposed that the gauge principle must necessarily be a consequence
of the requirement of the gauge symmetry locality. however, it was shown [5] that in
the framework of classical eld theory, the local gauge invariance can be ensured without
introduction of nontrivial gauge elds, i.e., vector elds with nonzero eld strengths. it is
sucient to introduce only gradient vector eld b(x), as a compensative eld, with
zero strength (  )b(x) = 0. such eld does not contribute to dynamics [5].
from the viewpoint of the classication of elds by spin, the scalar eld b(x) corresponds
to spin of zero and gradient vector eld b(x) is longitudinal. true vector gauge elds
a are transversal elds corresponding to spin of unity. gauge invariance of theory means
that the longitudinal part of vector gauge elds does not contribute to dynamics.

if so, what is the real cause of the existence of gauge elds and interactions? in
ref.[6], the quantum gauge principle was formulated in the context of quantum elec-
trodynamics. this principle holds that the abelian u(1) gauge elds are generated at
the quantum level only and the generation of these elds is related to nonsmoothness of
the eld trajectories in the feynman path integrals, by which the eld quantization is
determined. in this paper, we investigate the mechanism of non-abelian su(n) gauge
eld generation. it is shown that the non-abelian nontrivial vector elds are generated

1

because of nonsmoothness of the eld trajectories for the scalar phases of the spinor elds
in the su(n) gauge theory.

let us consider the lagrangian for free spinor elds

l = i

j

j  m

j

j,

where j = 1, 2, ..., n. in what follows the index j will be omitted.

the lagrangian (1) is invariant under global non-abelian su(n)-transformations

(x) = eitaa(x), 



(x) = (x)eitaa,

(1)

(2)

where ta are su(n) group generators, a = const, a = 1, 2, ..., n 2  1.

in the framework of classical theory, physical elds are known to be described by

suciently smooth functions. considering smooth local su(n)-transformations

(x) = eitaa(x)(x), 



(x) = (x)eitaa(x),

we obtain that the transformed lagrangian diers from the original one by the term:

 l = i(x)eitaa(x)(eitbb(x))(x).

(3)

(4)

in ref.[5], it was shown that the local gauge invariance of the transformed lagrangian
can be ensured by introducing scalar elds ba(x). to put it another way, the lagrangian

l = i + i(x)eitaba(x)(eitbbb(x))(x)  m

is invariant under the transformations (3) provided that the elds ba(x) transform as:

eitab 

a(x) = eitaba(x)eitbb(x).

the introduced scalar elds ba(x) do not contribute to dynamics, since they do not give
rise to nonzero strengths and can be excluded by means of the smooth point transforma-
tions of the eld variables   exp (itaba)  [5]. thus we need not compensate the term
(4) by introducing nontrivial vector elds aa
 that do not reduce to gradients of scalar
functions.

the situation changes in the quantum approach. in the feynman formulation of quan-
tum eld theory the transition amplitudes are expressed by the path integrals that are
determined on nonsmooth eld trajectories [7]. in this context the lagrangian (1) and
its symmetries are determined on the class of nonsmooth functions (x), corresponding
to nonsmooth trajectories in path integrals. in the strict sense, the derivatives involved
in the lagrangian (1) are discontinuous functions. from physics standpoint, eld trajec-
tory nonsmoothnesses are related to quantum uctuations of the local elds. feynman
integrals, as a rule, are additionally specied by the implicit switch to smoothed-out
approximations [8]. in this case the degrees of freedom corresponding to gauge vector
elds are lost. here we show that, as in quantum electrodynamics [6], in the non-abelian
su(n) gauge theory these degrees of freedom can be explicitly taken into account when
smoothing of nonsmooth elds is more carefully carried out.

2

let us approximate nonsmooth functions a(x) by smooth functions a(x):

a(x) = a(x) + ...

in order to write down the next term of the smoothed-out representation of the nons-
mooth functions a(x) it is necessary to consider the behaviour of the rst derivatives of
a(x). the derivatives a(x) at nonsmoothness points of a(x) are discontinuous func-
tions. since the derivatives a(x) are continuous functions, they approximate badly
the behaviour of the derivatives of the smoothed-out a(x). let us denote a dierence
between them by a

(x) and write a(x) as follows:

a(x) = a(x) + a

(x).

(5)

since the nonsmooth elds a
are the nontrivial vector elds that give rise to nonzero eld strengths:

(x) do not reduce to gradients of smooth scalar elds, they

a

 (x)  a

(x) 6= 0.

therefore the elds a(x) involve the additional degrees of freedom which are related
to nonsmoothness of the a(x). it should be noted that the elds a
(x) are ambiguously
determined due to ambiguity of choice of a(x).

on integrating the left and right sides of eq.(5) over space-like contour (p ) we obtain:

a(x) = a(x) +

x

z

(p )

dya

(y).

let us now consider a(x) as scalar phases of the spinor elds (x) realizing the
fundamental representation of the su(n) gauge group and separate out these phase
degrees of freedom in an explicit form:

(x) = eitaa(x)0(x),

(6)

where the spinor elds 0 are the representatives of the class of gauge-equivalent elds
[9], eitaa is a unitary n  n matrix. then, provided the lagrangian (1) is determined
on the class of nonsmooth functions (x), using eq.(6) we obtain:

l = i00 + i0eitaa (cid:16)eitbb(cid:17) 0  m00.

(7)

represent the matrix eitaa as a superposition of the unit matrix i and su(n) group
generators ta:

since ta are traceless matrices normalized by tr(tatb) = 1
eq.(8) are given by:

eitaa = ci + isata.

(8)
2ab, the coecients c and sa in

c =

1
n

tr(cid:16)eitaa(cid:17) , sa = 2itr(cid:16)taeitbb(cid:17) .

(9)

3

then taking into account the commutation rules for su(n) group generators [10] we can
write down:

eitaaeitbb = ita n csa  sac + (fabc  idabc) sbsco ,

(10)

where dabc (fabc) are totally symmetric (antisymmetric) structural constants of su(n)-
group, the overline denotes complex conjugation.
it should be noted that the terms
proportional to the unit matrix are absent in the right side of eq.(10) because
tr(cid:16)eitaaeitbb(cid:17) = 0.

since the matrix eitaa is unitary, the following equation is valid:

csa  sac + (fabc  idabc) sbsc = 0.

(11)

dierentiating the left and right sides of eq.(11) and using the property of antisymmetry
of fabc we conclude that the expression in curly brackets in eq.(10) is a real function.
thus this expression can be identied with the gauge elds:

aa

  csa  sac + (f abc  idabc) sbsc.

(12)

unlike the gauge eld in electrodynamics [6], the elds aa
 are nonlinear functions of
a(x). as a consequence of nonsmoothness of the phases a(x) the elds aa
 are also not
smooth. if we take into account only the rst term in the right side of relation (5) we
obtain that the elds aa
 do not contribute to the dynamics, as in classical eld theory
[5], and the degrees of freedom corresponding to gauge vector elds are lost. the account
of a
 as nontrivial vector elds that give rise to
nonzero eld strenghths:

(x) enables us to interpret the elds aa

aa

(x)  aa

(x) 6= 0.

by way of illustration let us consider the yang-mills su(2) gauge group. in conse-
quence of anti-commutativity of the su(2) group generators the coecients c and sa
(see eq.(9)) are given by:

where

c = cos (/2) , sa = 2na sin (/2) ,

 = qaa, na = a/,

a = 1, 2, 3.

from eqs.(13) and (14) it follows that the gauge elds aa

 can be written as:

aa

 = na + sin (na) + sin2(/2)[n  n]a.

(13)

(14)

(15)

expression (15) demonstrates explicitly the relation between the yang-mills gauge elds
and the nonsmooth scalar phases of the spinor elds.

let us obtain the transformation law for the vector elds (12). for this purpose we

consider the innitesimal smooth local transformations for the spinor elds:

0(x) = eitaa(x)0(x), 




0(x) = 0(x)eitaa(x).

(16)

4

then the lagrangian (7) can be written as:

l = i



0

0 + i



0eitaaeitbb (cid:16)eitcceitll(cid:17) 

0  m



0
0.

(17)

dening the gauge elds aa


(x) similarly to eqs.(10) and (12) by the following equation:

itaaa


(x) = eitaaeitbb (cid:16)eitcceitll(cid:17) ,

(18)

we nd that the transformed gauge elds aa


(x) are related to the elds (12) as follows:

aa


(x) = aa

(x)  a(x)  fabcb(x)ac

(x).

(19)

consequently, in the framework of considered scheme of the gauge eld generation we
derive the usual transformation law for the su(n) gauge elds, with the local gauge
invariance of the lagrangian (7) being not necessary.

using eqs.(10) and (12) we obtain that the lagrangian (7) takes the form:

l = i0 d0  m00,

(20)

where d   + iaa
(20) is invariant under the transformations (16) and (19).

ta is the covariant derivative. it is easy to verify that the lagrangian

therefore the gauge elds aa

 ensuring the local su(n) gauge invariance of the la-
grangian (20) are generated because of nonsmoothness of the eld trajectories in feynman
path integral. the nonsmoothness of the elds aa
 corresponds to their quantum nature
and means that these elds should also be quantized, i.e., continual integration is to be
carried out over the variables aa
 in the lagrangian (20) do not
exhibit all the properties of physical elds since they cannot propagate in space because
of the absence of the kinetic term.

(x). however the elds aa

an expression similar to the kinetic term can be obtained by the calculation of the
eective action for the spinor elds described by the lagrangian (20). using the results
of the calculations performed in ref.[11], we nd the following expression for the kinetic
term in the one-loop approximation

le =  ln


0

tr f 2

,

f = [ d, d],

(21)

where  and 0 are the momentum of the ultraviolet and infrared cut-o respectively; 
is the numerical coecient.

the formula (21) takes the usual form [10]

upon identifying

le =

hc
8g2 trf 2



g2 =

hc

8 ln 
0

.

5

(22)

the last equation relates the charge g with the parameters  and 0 as well as with the
worlds constants h and c, and thus demonstrates explicitly quantum origin of the charge.
we note in conclusion that the compensating gauge elds need not be articially
introduced for the local gauge invariance of the theory to be ensured. the vector gauge
elds are generated through nonsmoothness of the scalar phases of the fundamental spinor
elds. from the viewpoint of the described scheme of the gauge eld generation, the gauge
principle is an automatic consequence of eld trajectory nonsmoothness in feynman
path integral.

acknowledgement

this work is supported in part by swiss national science foundation grant
ceec/nis/96-98/7 ip 051219. one of the authors (pif) is thankful to professor h.
leutwyler for the kind hospitality at itp of bern university. we would like to thank yu.
shtanov for several helpful comments and a careful reading of the manuscript.

references

[1] h. weyl: z. phys. 56 (1929), 330.

[2] c. n. yang, r. l. mills: phys. rev. 96 (1954), 191.

[3] s. weinberg: phys. rev. lett. 19 (1967), 1264;

a. salam: elementary particle theory (ed. n. svartholm). almquist and weacsell,
stocholm 1968.

[4] h. fritzsch, m. gell-mann, h. leutwyler: phys. lett. 47 b (1973), 365.

[5] v. i. ogievetski, i. v. polubarinov: nuovo cimento 23 (1962), 173.

[6] p. i. fomin: about the nature of gauge fields and interactions. proc. 10 workshop
on problems on high energy physics and field theory, protvino 1987 (ed. s. n.
sokolov). nauka, moscow 1988, p. 229.

[7] f. a. berezin: sov. phys. usp. 23 (1981), 763.

[8] i. m. gelfand, a. m. yaglom: usp. mat. nauk 11 (1956), 77.

[9] l. d. faddeev, a. a. slavnov: gauge fields:

introduction to quantum theory.

benjamin-cummings, london 1980.

[10] c. itzykson, j. b. zuber: quantum field theory. mcgraw-hill, new york 1980.

[11] i. l. buchbinder, v. p. gusynin, p. i. fomin: yad. fiz. 44 (1986), 828.

6

