su-itp 99/9
nsf-itp-10-99

puzzles and paradoxes about holography

institute for theoretical physics, university of california

joseph polchinski

santa barbara, ca 93106-4030

leonard susskind

department of physics, stanford university

stanford, ca 94305-4060

abstract

the holographic connection between large n super yang mills
theory and gravity in anti desitter space requires some very paradox-
ical behaviors of the sym theory in the limit that the curvature of
the ads geometry becomes small. the paradoxes can be resolved by
assuming a very rich collection of hidden degrees of freedom of the
sym theory which store information but give rise to no local energy
density. these degrees of freedom are needed to make possible sudden
apparently acausal energy momentum ows. such behavior would be
impossible in classical eld theory as a consequence of the positivity of
the energy density . we believe these degrees of freedom are the key
to understanding the holographic coding of detailed bulk information.

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

m
1

 

 
 

2
v
2
8
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1 introduction and review

that there is some sort of holographic [1, 2] correspondence between maxi-
mally supersymmetric su(n) yang mills theory and supergravity or string
theory on ads5  s5 [3, 4, 5] has been established beyond reasonable doubt.
in this paper we will assume the correspondence in the strongest sense,
namely, that sym theory and iib string theory are equivalent for all val-
ues of n and gauge coupling constant.

equivalence between theories in dierent dimensions immediately raises
questions about how detailed bulk information in one theory can be com-
pletely coded in lower dimensional degrees of freedom. despite the large
amount of evidence that we have for the ads/cft correspondence, there is
not yet any direct translation of the congurations of one theory to the other.
we will see that the existence of such a dictionary requires behavior for the
large n limit of sym theory which seems very unusual and even unphysical,
but we will argue that it is neither.

the parameters of the sym theory are the gauge coupling constant g and
the number of colors n. these are related to the radius of curvature r of
the ads5  s5, the string length scale ls, and the string coupling gs by

gs = g2
r = ls(ng2)1/4 .

(1.1)

throughout we will neglect constants of order one.

the features of the correspondence that are most relevant to our discus-

sion are the following:

1. certain local gauge invariant sym operators correspond to bulk su-
pergravity elds evaluated at the boundary of the ads space. that is, the
expectation value of the sym operater is determined from the boundary
value of the eld, as explained more fully in section 3. for example the
energy momentum tensor t of the sym theory corresponds to the metric
perturbation h. similarly ff  corresponds to the dilaton eld .

2. the ultraviolet-infrared connection [6] relates the short wave length
ultraviolet modes of sym theory to the supergravity modes near the bound-
ary of ads space. to be more precise let us introduce cavity coordinates
in which the ads metric ds2 is written in terms of a dimensionless metric
ds2 and the radius of curvature r

ds2 = r2ds2
ds2 = (cid:18) 1 + r2
1  r2(cid:19)2

(dr2 + r2d) .

(1.2)

the coordinates t, r are dimensionless. the sym theory will be thought of
as living on the dimensionless unit sphere  times the dimensionless time
t. all quantities such as energy, distance, and time in the sym theory are

dt2  (cid:18) 2

1  r2(cid:19)2

2

regarded as dimensionless. to relate them to corresponding bulk quantities
the conversion factor is r. thus for example, a time interval t corresponds
to a proper interval rt in the bulk theory. similarly an energy esym in the
sym theory is related to the bulk energy by esym = ebulkr.

the uvir connection states that supergravity degrees of freedom at
1  r =  correspond to sym degrees of freedom with wavelength  . the
uvir connection is at the heart of the holographic requirement that the
number of degrees of freedom should be of order the area of the boundary
measured in planck units. it also suggests that physical systems near the
center of the ads space (r = 0) should be described by modes of the sym
theory of the longest wavelength, that is the homogeneous modes on .

3. the existence of a at space limit [7, 8]. this limit involves n  
but is not the t hooft limit in which g2n and the energy is kept xed. the
at space limit is given by

g2  xed
n   .

(1.3)

in addition, all energy scales are kept xed in string units. this means that
the dimensionless sym energy scales like r, or using eq. (1.1)

esym  n 1/4 .

(1.4)

as argued in [7, 8] an s-matrix can be dened in this limit in terms of sym
correlation functions.1 we will outline the construction but the reader is
referred to the references for details.

a bulk massless particle of energy k is is described by a sym excitation

of energy  given by

 = rk = (ng2)1/4lsk .

(1.5)

we require the particles to collide within a space-time region called the lab.
the lab is centered at t = r = 0 and has a large but xed size l in the bulk
theory.2 in terms of dimensionless coordinates the lab dimensions are

since l is xed in string units

t  r  l/r .

t  r  (ng2)1/4 .

(1.6)

(1.7)

creation and annihilation operators for emitting and absorbing particles
at the ads boundary can be dened. in order that the particles pass through

1see refs. [9] for further developments.
2for generic wavepackets the analysis in refs. [7, 8] shows that they grow as n 1/8 due to
geometric optics eects, but for simplicity we imagine special packets chosen to intersect
in a volume of order n 0. the size and duration of any collision process is determined by
the external energies and so is of order n 0.

3

the lab they must be emitted at time tin  /2. the collision process lasts
for a xed time in string units which means a dimensionless time of order
n 1/4. thus in the dimensionless time of the sym theory the duration of
the collision becomes negligible as n  . the outgoing particles will will
arrive at the boundary at time tout  /2. the graviton creation operator
corresponding to this situation are given by

ain = z dt d3x t(x, t)eitg(x  x0, t + /2)

(1.8)

where the integration is over the boundary and x0 is the point from which
the graviton is emitted. annihilation operators aout at t = /2 are dened
in a similar manner. in order to make sure that the particles pass through
the origin the functions g in eq. (1.8) must not be too sharply peaked at x0.
we refer the reader to [7, 8] for a discussion of this point.

let us consider a state involving a packet of gravitons emitted at t = /2
from the boundary at point x0, in a uniform state on the s5. the packet
is very well concentrated in the dimensionless coordinates t, r, . in order
to translate this into the sym theory we need to compute the gravitational
eld of such a source. fortunately this has been done in [10]. the result
is an ads generalization of the aichelburg sexl metric and like that metric,
it is described by a shock wave that propagates in the bulk with the parti-
cle. the thickness of the shock in dimensionless coordinates tends to zero
with the spread of the packet. the intersection of the shock wave with the
boundary forms a 2-sphere or shell which expands away from the point x0
with the speed of light. both in front of the shell and behind it hti van-
ishes. the shell expands to its maximum size at t = 0 and then contracts
to the antipodal point at t = +/2. thus the expectation value of the sym
energy momentum tensor has its support on such a moving shell and is zero
everywhere else.

the description given above is somewhat surprising in view of the uvir
connection. we might have expected that in the sym description the energy
would be transferred from the short wave length modes of the eld theory
to long wave lengths as the graviton moves toward r = 0. in this event the
sharp features of the shell should have dissipated. however the energy stays
concentrated in a thin shell whos thickness tends to zero with n. this in
itself is somewhat puzzling.

2 history of a collision

paradoxes become apparent when we consider the collision of two packets.
the packets are emitted from points x1, x2 at time t = /2. the rst
thing to notice is that from the viewpoint of the boundary sym theory the
behavior of the system after t = 0 becomes innitely sensitive to the details of

4

the the emission process. as an example suppose x1 and x2 are separated by
an angle of 90 degrees on the 3-sphere . if the two particles are emitted at
the same time they will reach r = 0 simultaneously and collide. but suppose
the emission processes are separated by time   1. in this case the arrivals
will be separated by a time in string units of order (ng2)1/4. this means
that if  > (ng2)1/4 the particles will miss each other and pass essentially
unscattered. on the other hand if  < (ng2)1/4 a collision will take place
leading to a very dierent nal state. in other words shifting the parameters
of the emission process by tiny amounts will lead to large dierences in the
outcome.

consider a process in which two packets of xed energy in string units
are emitted from diametrically opposing points in such a way that they pass
through the lab.
in the sym theory the process starts out as a pair of
expanding thin shells of energy. at time t = 0 the shells meet. now from
what was said above, one might expect the evolution just after t = 0 to be
supersensitive to to the initial conditions. however this is not true. in fact the
two shells just pass through one another without any apparent interaction.
the reason is that as r  , points near the boundary are so far (again in
string units ) from the sources that the gravitational eld equations linearize.
the energy-momentum continues to be concentrated on the thin shells which
are now contracting toward the points antipodal from where they originated.
not only is hti zero everywhere o the shells but so are all other sym
elds that correspond to classical supergravity elds.
we now come to a critical question. the vanishing of hti in classical
eld theory would indicate that the local state of the system is vacuum-like.
in other words all elds or functionals of elds supported o the shells should
have their vacuum values. as we shall see, this can not be true in the quan-
tum theory. we will nd that the after the shells pass through each other the
region between them must be excited away from the local vacuum congura-
tion despite the fact that the expectation value of the energy density (as well
as the value of every sym eld which corresponds to classical supergravity)
vanishes.

a simple illustrative example is the case where the two packets are pre-
pared so as to collide head-on at t = r = 0. assume the particles have a xed
energy which is much larger than the 10-dimensional planck mass. in this
case they will form a 10-dimensional schwarzschild black hole. not all the
energy will go into the black hole but much of it will continue to propagate
as gravitational bremsstrahlung. according to the assumption of a at space
limit [7, 8] the percentage of energy trapped in the black hole can be calcu-
lated in the at space limit [11]. the black hole quickly becomes spherically
symmetric and then decays by hawking evaporation. the entire history of
the black hole lasts a xed time in string units and therefore a dimensionless
time which tends to zero like n 1/4.

5

how does the creation and evaporation of the black hole aect the metric
and other supergravity elds at the ads boundary? the answer is that
it doesnt, at least at rst. in fact the supergravity elds do not respond
until light has had a chance to propagate from r = 0 to the boundary.
the evaporating black hole sends out a spherically symmetric signal which
arrives at the boundary at t = /2. the arrival of the signal is very sudden,
occupying a time t  (ng2)1/4. at this time the entire boundary suddenly
lights up with a spherically symmetric distribution of energy which in total
equals the mass of the black hole. in other words a fraction of the energy
originally stored in the collapsing shells very quickly ows and is redistributed
into a homogeneous component. we will call this phenomenon light-up.

this behavior seems extremely bizarre. the instantaneous rearrangement
of energy appears to violate causality. however this may not be so. to better
understand it we will give describe an analogous example involving a sudden
ow of electric charge. consider an example in which initially there is a
concentration of charge in some region r1. at time t = 0 the charge is found
to disappear from r1 and reappear at r2 which is outside the forward light
cone of r1. to see how this can happen, imagine a wire connecting r1 and r2.
the wire is full of electrons and positive ions so that it is electrically neutral.
now we prearrange observers at each point of the wire so that at t = 0 they
move each electron slightly toward r2. the result is a sudden appearance of
charge at the ends with no charge density ever occurring anywhere else. now
if there was already a charge at r1 it would be cancelled by the new charge
at that point. the net result would be a sudden redistribution of charge.

two ingredients are necessary for such behavior. the rst is that the
current vector j be spacelike. since the charge density on the wire is always
zero it is clear that the current is purely in the spacelike direction. this also
means that in some frame the charge density was negative. this of course is
not a diculty since charge density can be either positive or negative.

the other ingredient is prearrangement. the physical conditions along
the wire must include agents with synchronized clocks that instructed in
advance to act simultaneously.

the sudden ow of energy requires the same two ingredients. in order
that the energy is rearranged so suddenly the ux of energy ht 0ii must be
much larger than the energy density itself. this means that the energy
density can be made negative by a lorentz boost. however, unlike electric
charge, energy is not allowed to be negative in sym theory. since in classical
sym theory the energy density is positive this kind of ow of energy is
absolutely forbidden in the classical theory. however quantum theory allows
local negative energy densities as long as they are (over)compensated by
nearby positive energy density [12]. in the next section we will analyze this
in more detail and show that the bounds as in ref. [12] are consistent with
the behavior required of the sym theory.

6

a second puzzle concerns locality. let us suppose that before light-up
the region between the separating shells is physically indistinguishable from
the vacuum of the sym theory. by this we mean that all expectation values
of functionals of elds in this region are identical to their vacuum values.
then the light-up is impossible. to see this we consider a point (x, t) on
the boundary just after light-up. the point is not near the points where the
shells are localized. the sym heisenberg equations of motion can be used
to express the energy density at this point in terms of local elds at a time
just before light-up. furthermore, causality requires that the only elds that
can be involved are in the region between the shells where we have assumed
vacuum conditions. it follows that the energy density at (x, t) must be the
same as for the vacuum, that is, zero.

the resolution of these paradoxes, assuming the correspondence is really
as strong as we believe, must be that the region between the shells at time
0 < t < /2 must not be vacuum-like even though the expectation value
of the energy-momentum tensor vanishes. thus we are forced to postulate
that in a region in which hti = hf fi = . . . = 0, the vacuum is excited
to a non-vacuum-like local state which provides the precursor for the later
event that we called light-up. the precursor elds must play the role of
the prearranged agents which simultaneously move charges in the electric
example. furthermore there must be a very rich manifold of such precursor
congurations. to see this suppose we change the initial emission parameters
by a small amount of order n 1/4. as we have seen this can lead to a
very large change in the results of the collision. for example such a change
can cause an increase of the impact parameter so that a peripheral grazing
collision results. in this case the particles may get deected through a small
angle. again, the news of the collision does not arrive at the boundary until
t = /2. as before the energy must suddenly rearrange but this time the
result is not a spherically symmetric component but a new pair of localized
small shells at shifted positions. also as before, the information must be
locally stored in a conguration with vanishing expectation value for the
energy momentum tensor. evidently all the local physical processes that can
take place in the lab are coded in precursor congurations.

3 principal, interest, and causality

in this section we analyze further the necessary negative energy density and
prearrangement in the sym theory.

the gravitational eld after the collision can be regarded as a superpo-
sition of the spherically symmetric black hole eld with an outgoing pulse
of gravitational radiation. similarly the gauge theory is in an approximate
product state. the black hole corresponds to a static positive ht 00i, so the

7

negative ht 00i and seeming acausality must come from the outgoing pulse.
thus they should be seen already in the free eld approximation to the bulk
elds.

the correspondence between the bulk elds and boundary operators is of

the form [4, 5]

(cid:28)expzs 3r

ht (cid:29) = zg .

(3.1)

the bulk partition function zg is evaluated with the boundary condition

  g  g  (1  r)2r2h ,

(3.2)

with g being the unperturbed metric (1.2). varying both sides of (3.1)
with respect to h, the variation of zg is a surface term and so

t 

r
g

lim
r1

(1  r)2 ,

(3.3)

where divergent terms in the limit are dropped. this is the rough form, a
more precise result being given in ref. [13]. it holds as an operator relation [14,
15], at least in the classical limit.

consider now a linearized supergravity solution of frequency . the
relation (3.3) implies that the energy density in the sym theory is also
oscillatory, and so is negative as often as positive. intuitively this should not
happen, as a state whose space-time averaged energy density is zero should be
the vacuum. indeed, as explained in ref. [12], a loan in the form of negative
energy density must not only be repaid, but repaid with interest. to see this
from the gravity point of view we must include the rst correction to the
linearized solution. the oscillating solution has energy density, producing a
second order correction to the metric. the angle-averaged correction to tt
is ge(1 r)2/r where e is the energy in sym units. evaluating the energy
of the linearized solution,

e 
gives the interest

1

g z d4xgtt = o(22/gr) ,

i = t (2)

 = o(22

/gr) .

this is to be compared with the principal (3.3),

p = t (1)

 = o(r/g) .

the ratio

i
p 2 = o(2g/r3) = o(2g10/r8) = o(2/n 2)

8

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)

is independent of the size of the perturbation. we will see that this result
is quite consistent with general principles of quantum eld theory. the fact
that is decreases with the number n 2 of quantum elds ts with the fact
that negative energy density is a quantum eect. in particular, assume that
for a single quantum eld the ratio i/p2 is independent of the perturbation.
then

i
p 2 =

n 2i
(n 2p)2  n 2 .

(3.8)

now let us see in more detail that the behavior we have found in the sym
theory can be reproduced in a theory of n 2 free scalar elds ij. consider
the squeezed state

|i = exp(cid:20) 1

2 z d3k d3k f (k, k)a

ij(k)a

ji(k)(cid:21)|0i .

(3.9)

then

h|t|i =

n 2
2 (cid:18)

 

1
2



(cid:19)f (x, t, x, t)|x=x

,t=t + o(f 2n 2) (3.10)

where

f (x, t, x, t) = z

d3k d3k
(2k2k)1/2 f (k, k) exp(ik  x + ik  x  ikt  ikt) .
(3.11)
this eect of order f comes from contraction of two lowering operators in t
with two raising operators in |i or vice versa with h|; this is the principal
p. the interest i appears at order f 2, from terms in t with one raising
and one lowering operator, and has a positive average.
this free eld example displays the following features that were found to

be necessary in the sym case:

 the principal has nonzero frequency k + k and so averages to zero.
 the ratio i/p 2 is independent of the strength f of the perturbation,

and scales as n 2.

 the principal is acausal. the phase velocity
= |k| + |k|

k + k
|k + k|

|k + k|  1

(3.12)

is superluminal. moreover this relation is homogeneous so the group
velocity is the same. thus the principal can suddenly become nonzero
at a spacetime point even if it vanishes in and on the entire past light
cone.

9

thus the properties required of the sym theory, while unfamiliar, are con-
sistent with quantum eld theory; they are not even associated with large t
hooft parameter.

in this free eld example we can analyze the violation of causality. of
course there must be some departure from vacuum in the past light-cone of
any point where the principal is nonvanishing. how is this to be detected? it
is implausible that the interest is the key, as it is too small in magnitude and
in number of degrees of freedom. to see the answer, note that the squeezed
state consists of correlated pairs of particles, and the principal arises only
when these are coincident. if they are approaching one another in separated
packets, the principal vanishes. to detect the disturbance we need a nonlocal
but u(n) invariant observable such as

h|ij(x, t)ji(x, t)|i = f (x, t, x, t)|t=t .

(3.13)

moreover this precursor elds behaves causally, as f satises a massless wave
equation on both the unprimed and primed coordinates.

presumably similar nonlocal precursor elds are need in the sym case,
though it will be harder to construct them explcitly in a gauge invariant
way.
it should be noted that local elds evolve into these nonlocal elds
under the equations of motion. thus the operator t(x, t) is in a sense its
own precursor, but becomes nonlocal when expanded in terms of the local
elds at time t. this is consistent with the formalism of refs. [14, 15].

4 final remarks

we have shown that the ads/cft correspondence in the strong form that we
have assumed requires sudden rearrangements of energy density in the sym
theory which appear to defy causality. however on closer inspection they
do not if certain precursor elds exist in regions of vanishing energy density.
these precursors are responsible for storing the detailed information of what
is taking place deep in the interior of the ads space.
in particular they
contain all the local bulk information in the at space limit. the usual sym
quantities such as t which are connected with classical supergravity elds
are merely the very large distance infrared emissions (at the given time t),
which contain very little detailed information.

5 acknowledgements

we would like to thank v. balasubramanian, g. horowitz, n. itzhaki, a.
peet, m. peskin, s. ross and s. shenker for helpful conversations. this
work was supported in part by nsf grants phy94-07194, phy97-22022,
and phy98-70115.

10

references

[1] g.

t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, gr-

qc/9310026.

[2] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, hep-th/9409089.

[3] j. m. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories

and supergravity, hep-th/9711200.

[4] s. s. gubser, i.r. klebanov, a.m. polyakov, gauge theor.y correla-

tors from non-critical string theory, hep-th/9802109

[5] e. witten, anti de sitter space and holography, hep-th/9802150.

[6] l. susskind, e. witten, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter

space, hep-th/9805114.

[7] j. polchinski, s-matrices from ads spacetime, hep-th/9901076.

[8] l. susskind, holography in the flat space limit, hep-th/9901079.

[9] v. balasubramanian, s. b. giddings, and a. lawrence, what do cfts

tell us about anti-de sitter spacetimes? hep-th/9902052;
s. b. giddings, the boundary s-matrix and the ads to cft dictio-
nary, in preparation.

[10] g. t. horowitz, n. itzhaki, black holes, shock waves, and causality

in the ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9901012.

[11] p. death and p. payne, gravitational radiation in black-hole collisions

at the speed of light, phys. rev. d46(1992) 658.

[12] l. h. ford, thomas a. roman, the quantum interest conjecture,

gr-qc/9901074.

[13] v. balasubramanian and p. kraus, a stress tensor for anti-de sitter

gravity, hep-th/9902121.

[14] t. banks, m. r. douglas, g. t. horowitz, and e. martinec, ads dy-

namics from conformal field theory, hep-th/9808016.

[15] v. balasubramanian, p. kraus, a. lawrence, and s. p. trivedi, holo-

graphic probes of anti-de sitter spacetimes, hep-th/9808017.

11

