9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
8
1

 

 
 

2
v
8
8
0
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

brown-het-1167
hep-th/9902088

holography, cosmology

and the

second law of thermodynamics

richard easther1 and david a. lowe2

department of physics

brown university

providence, ri 02912, usa

abstract

we propose that in time dependent backgrounds the holographic
principle should be replaced by the generalized second law of thermo-
dynamics. for isotropic open and at universes with a xed equation
of state, the generalized second law agrees with the cosmological ho-
lographic principle proposed by fischler and susskind. however, in
more complicated spacetimes the two proposals disagree. a modied
form of the holographic bound that applies to a post-inationary uni-
verse follows from the generalized second law. however, in a spatially
closed universe, or inside a black hole event horizon, there is no sim-
ple relationship that connects the area of a region to the maximum
entropy it can contain.

1easther@het.brown.edu
2lowe@het.brown.edu

1

1 introduction

the holographic principle proposes that the maximum number of degrees of
freedom in a volume is proportional to the surface area [1, 2]. this principle is

based on earlier studies by bekenstein [3] of maximum entropy bounds within
a given volume. one argument used to motivate the holographic principle

is as follows. consider a region of space with volume v , bounded by an
area a, which contains an entropy, s, and assume that this entropy is larger

than that of a black hole with the same surface area. now throw additional
energy into this region to form a black hole. assuming that the bekenstein-

hawking formula, s = a/4, actually gives the entropy of the black hole,
we conclude that the generalized second law of thermodynamics [4] has been
violated. to avoid this contradiction, the holographic principle proposes that

the entropy inside a given region must satisfy s/a < 1. however, this line of
reasoning implicitly assumes that the black hole forms in an otherwise static

background.

in what follows, we examine how this argument changes in more gen-

eral, time-dependent, spacetimes, such as those encountered in cosmology.
we argue the holographic bound is replaced by the simple requirement that

physics respects the generalized second law of thermodynamics [4]. for static
backgrounds this reduces to the holographic bound but, in general, the max-
imum entropy permitted inside a region is not related to its area by a simple

formula.

fischler and susskind [5] have proposed a generalization of the hologra-

phic principle to certain cosmological backgrounds. this proposal has been
studied further in [7, 8]. for at and open universes with time independent

equations of state, we nd that their bound is in accord with the generalized
second law, and we propose a renement of the fischler-susskind bound that
applies to an inationary universe after reheating.

fischler and susskind found that closed universes violate their cosmolog-
ical holographic bound, and speculated that such backgrounds were either

2

inconsistent, or that new behavior sets in as the bound is violated. we argue
that the evolution of closed universes does not violate the generalized second

law, and that such backgrounds are thus self-consistent.

a related problem is the application of the holographic principle to a

volume inside the event horizon of a black hole. the nave holographic bound
can easily be violated in such a region. although this evolution respects the

generalized second law, it appears that the price an observer pays for violating
the holographic bound is to eventually encounter a curvature singularity.
however it is possible for this fate to be delayed for cosmologically long time

scales.

2 the story so far

fischler and susskind [5] realized that while the holographic bound, s/a < 1,

applies to an arbitrary region for the static case, its application to cosmolog-
ical spacetimes is more subtle. specically, the homogeneous energy density,

, of simple cosmological models implies a homogeneous entropy density,
inside a (spatial) volume v  r3, the total entropy is s = sv , but
s.
s/a  sr. consequently, for a xed s it is always possible to choose a vol-
ume large enough to violate the holographic bound. fischler and susskind
resolve this problem by stipulating that the holographic bound only applies

to regions smaller than the cosmological (particle) horizon [6], which corre-
sponds to the forward light-cone of an event occurring at (or innitesimally
after) the initial singularity. the comoving distance to the horizon, rh, is

rh = z t0

0

1

a(t)

dt

while the corresponding physical distance is

dh = a(t)rh = a(t)z t0

0

1

a(t)

dt.

(1)

(2)

3

here a(t) is the scale factor of the robertson-walker metric, and obeys the
evolution equations

2

(cid:18) a
a(cid:19)

= h 2 =

k
a2


3 
( + 3p)

a
a

= 

6

(3)

(4)

where k takes the values 1 and 0, for solutions with positive, negative and
zero spatial curvature.

for a perfect uid, in a at (k = 0) universe, whose pressure and density

satisfy  = p, the solution of equations (3) and (4) is straightforward

t0(cid:19)q
a(t) = a0 (cid:18) t

,

q =

2
3

1

1 + 

.

(5)

in particular, if  = 0 we recover the equation of state for dust, while  = 1/3
is the appropriate value for a hot (relativistic) gas or radiation. in general,

dh =

t

1  q

.

(6)

the comoving entropy density is constant, so with k = 0 it follows that when

measured over the horizon volume,

s
a  t13q.

(7)

if q < 1/3 ( > 1) the holographic bound is violated at late times but, as
fischler and susskind explain, such a cosmological model is not viable since
a perfect uid with  > 1 has a speed of sound greater than the speed of

light.

in realistic cosmological models the equation of state is far from that of a

perfect uid with constant . even simple models of the big bang combine
dust and radiation and make a transition between  = 1/3 and  = 0, since

the energy density of radiation drops faster than the density of dust as the
universe expands. more importantly, during an inationary epoch in the

4

primordial universe a is, by denition, positive; so the pressure and  must
be negative.

one of the original motivations for ination was that it endows the pri-
inationary models

mordial universe with a substantial entropy density.

generate entropy after ination has nished, when energy is transferred from
the scalar eld which drove the inationary expansion to radiation and ultra-

relativistic particles. this process is referred to as reheating, and the equation
of state usually changes from  < 1/3, to that of a radiation dominated
universe whose subsequent evolution is described by the standard model of

the hot big bang. the comoving entropy density is not constant, and s/a is
thus a more complicated function of time than it is in models with constant

.

the maximum temperature, t , attained after ination is model depen-
dent, and the resulting entropy density is proportional to t 3 only if we assume
a relativistic gas.
ination can make the cosmological horizon arbitrarily
large; for instance in a class of realistic models it may be 101000 times greater
than in the absence of ination. applying the original fischler-susskind
formulation of the holographic principle leads to a value of s/a massively

greater than unity for almost any realistic inationary model. this di-
culty is noted by rama and sarkar [8], and they propose various smaller

volumes over which to measure the entropy. in general, their formulation is
not consistent with the one we propose in the next section.

3 holography and the

generalized second law

one of the initial motivations for the holographic principle was based on
the generalized second law of thermodynamics. the generalized second law

states

smat + sbh  0 ,

5

(8)

where smat
is the entropy of matter outside black holes, and sbh is the
bekenstein-hawking entropy of the black holes. this law has not been

proven, but is expected to follow from most of the current approaches to
quantum gravity and has been tested in many non-trivial situations [3]. as-

suming that this law is correct, the holographic principle follows from it if
we consider a region of space embedded in an approximately static back-

ground (such as minkowski space, or anti-de sitter space), as discussed in
the introduction.

our main interest is to study the formulation of holographic style bounds

in a general background. in time dependent situations, we propose that the
general principle which replaces the holographic principle is simply: that the

generalized second law of thermodynamics holds.

in the examples considered below, we assume that changes are quasi-

static, so that at all times the entropy is maximized to an arbitrarily good
approximation, subject to constraints. in these situations we can make the

stronger statement:

for all time, the entropy is maximized subject to the

constraints.

for volumes embedded in certain backgrounds we may use these principles

to deduce holographic style bounds on the entropy, but this does not appear
to be possible in general. we will now illustrate these observations with a

number of examples.

3.1 flat universe

let us consider isotropic, homogeneous and spatially at cosmologies. the
comoving entropy density in these models is constant.1 in order to formulate

1this discussion, like that of fischler and susskind, assumes that a at or open uni-
verse necessarily expands indenitely, while a closed universe recollapses in a nite time.
however, a spatially at or open universe with a negative vacuum energy density (cos-
mological constant) can recollapse, just as a positive vacuum energy can cause a closed
universe to expand indenitely. our discussion can easily be generalized to these cases.

6

a holographic bound, we need to introduce a length scale that denes the size
of the spatial region under consideration. we argue that the relevant length

scale is the hubble length 1/h. physically, 1/h is the distance at which a
point appears to recede at the speed of light, due to the overall expansion of

the universe.

to see that this is the relevant length scale consider a small gravitational

perturbation of this background. small perturbations to a spatially at,
homogeneous and isotropic universe with wavelengths larger than 1/h do
not grow with time [9], provided the equation of state remains constant. if
perturbations do not grow, black holes cannot form, sbh = 0, and the gen-
eralized second law reduces to smat  0, which is satised by any physically
reasonable equation of state.

perturbations with wavelengths shorter than the hubble length will tend

to collapse and form black holes via the jeans instability. thus consistency
with the generalized second law suggests a holographic bound may hold for

regions smaller than the hubble volume.

if  is constant the particle horizon, dh, and 1/h are related to one
another by a factor of order unity, and we recover the fischler-susskind

formulation. however, if ination has taken place the particle horizon is
much larger than 1/h, which depends only on the instantaneous expansion

rate, and not on the integrated history of the universe. as we will see later,
the hubble volume is the relevant region to consider in this case.

in principle, any initial value of s/a is consistent with the generalized
second law. however, if s/a < 1 initially, this condition is satised at all
later times, provided  is xed and less than unity [5]. with some additional

assumptions, we can also bound s/a at early times.

as an example, consider the energy density and entropy density of a

relativistic gas at temperature t :

 =

nt 4,

2
30

7

(9)

s =

22
45

nt 3,

(10)

where n is the number of bosonic degrees of freedom plus 7/8 times the
number of fermionic degrees of freedom. using equation (3) to relate  and

h, we nd

s

a  nt,

(11)

up to constant factors. since the density must be less than unity for quantum

gravitational corrections to be safely ignored, the maximum temperature
is proportional to n1/4
, and the maximum value of s/a inside a hubble
volume is proportional to n1/4
. violating s/a < 1 signicantly at a sub-
planckian energy requires an enormous value of n. thus, in the absence





of ne tuning the holographic bound originally proposed by fischler and
susskind is satised at all post-planckian times.

3.2 closed universe

for an isotropic closed universe with xed equation of state, fischler and
susskind found [5] that even if s/a < 1 initially on particle horizon sized

regions, it could be violated at later times. this violation is possible even
while the universe is still in its expansion phase.

on the other hand, the generalized second law is expected to hold over
regions the size of the particle horizon in a closed universe. to be denite,

suppose this violation occurs while the universe is still in its expansion phase.
one certainly expects that a region with an excessive entropy density could
begin to collapse via the jeans instability and form a black hole. however,

if the size of this region is similar to that of the particle horizon, its collapse
will necessarily take at least a hubble time. consequently, a violation of

the holographic bound of fischler and susskind remains consistent with the
second law for cosmologically long time-scales.

of course, in order to nd s/a > 1 well before the closed universe reaches
its nal singularity, we must consider a volume that is a substantial fraction

8

of the overall universe. the collapse of this region into a single black hole
is not a small perturbation of the background friedmann universe. thus,

the evolution equations for the unperturbed universe are not expected to
accurately describe the entropy density of the collapsing region.

3.3 open universe

the behavior of isotropic open (negative spatial curvature) universes is sim-
ilar to that of isotropic at universes. if s/a < 1 initially, it remains so at

later times [5]. an argument that s/a < 1 remains valid at earlier times can
likewise be made in a similar way to the at case.

3.4

inside a black hole

another interesting time dependent background is the region inside the event
horizon of a black hole. the generalized second law will apply to a spatial
volume inside the event horizon if the volume is out of thermal contact with

other regions. however it is straightforward to argue that the entropy can
exceed the surface area in such a volume whose size is on the order of the

horizon size. consider a large ball of gravitationally collapsing dust. the en-
tropy of the ball is approximately constant during the course of the collapse.

however, the size of the ball can contract to zero at the singularity, giving
rise to a violation of the holographic bound.

we see no reason why an observer inside such a region should not be
able to actually measure a violation of the holographic bound. a direct
measurement is dicult since the observer will typically hit the singularity

within a light-crossing time of the black hole horizon. however, if the observer
has the additional information that the entropy density is constant, s/he can

infer a violation of holography via local measurements.

9

3.5 the inationary universe

we can view an inationary universe as a friedmann universe with a time de-
pendent equation of state. during the reheating phase at the end of ination

there is a sharp change in the equation of state, as energy is transferred from
the inaton eld to radiation (or ultra-relativistic particles). this raises the
entropy of the universe in a homogeneous way. after this sudden increase

in the entropy density it is possible to violate fischler and susskinds bound
when it is applied to regions the size of the particle horizon. of course,

a sharp homogeneous increase in the entropy density is permitted by the
generalized second law.

the process of reheating is model dependent. to simplify the discus-
sion assume that reheating takes place instantaneously. after reheating, the

equation of state need not change signicantly. the post-inationary uni-
verse closely resembles a homogeneous and isotropic universe which never
inated, with the exception that the particle horizon of the universe after

ination is much larger than that of a universe which did pass through an in-
ationary phase. we may therefore adopt the results for friedmann universes

with a constant equation of state.

the post-inationary universe is accurately approximated by an isotropic

friedmann spacetime, so if s/a < 1 when measured over a hubble volume
at the end of ination, this inequality will continue to be satised at later

times. moreover, immediately after reheating the energy density is typically
well below the planck scale so s/a  1 in the absence of extreme ne-
tuning, as discussed above. this bound diers from that of rama and sarkar

[8], and we obtain no specic constraints on inationary models beyond the
usual assumption that the energy density is sub-planckian during and after

ination.

10

4 conclusions

we have proposed that the holographic principle should be replaced by
the generalized second law of thermodynamics [4] in time dependent back-

grounds. in static backgrounds, the generalized second law reduces to the
holographic principle of t hooft and susskind [1, 2]. in cosmological back-

grounds corresponding to isotropic at and open universes with a xed
equation of state the second law implies the entropy bound of fischler and

susskind [5] over regions the size of the particle horizon. however for closed
universes, and inside black hole event horizons, a useful holographic bound

cannot be deduced from the second law. finally, we proposed a modied
version of the holographic bound which applies to spatial regions of the post-
inationary universe that are smaller than the hubble volume.

acknowledgments

we thank robert brandenberger for useful comments. this work was sup-
ported in part by doe grant de-fe0291er40688-task a.

references

[1] g. t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity,

gr-qc/9310026.

[2] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, j. math. phys. 36, 6377 (1995),

hep-th/9409089.

[3] j. d. bekenstein, entropy bounds and black hole remnants, phys. rev

d 49 1912, and references therein.

[4] j. d. bekenstein, black holes and entropy, phys. rev. d 7, 2333 (1973).

11

[5] w. fischler and l. susskind, holography and cosmology,

hep-th/9806039.

[6] w. rindler, mon. not. r. astron. soc. 116, 662 (1956).

[7] d. bak and s.-j. rey, holographic principle and string cosmology,

hep-th/9811008; a.k. biswas, j. maharana, and r.k. pradhan, the
holography hypothesis and pre-big bang cosmology, hep-th/9811051;

r. dawid, a speculative remark on holography, hep-th/9811243; m.
maggiore and a. riotto, d-branes and cosmology, hep-th/9811089.

[8] s. k. rama and t. sarkar, holographic principle during ination and

a lower bound on density fluctuations, hep-th/9812043.

[9] v. mukhanov, h. feldman, and r. h. brandenberger, phys. rep. 215,

203 (1992).

12

