9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
5
1

 

 
 

2
v
1
0
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

snust 99-001
uostp 99-003
hep-th/9902101

holographic view of causality and locality

branes in ads/cft correspondence 1

via

dongsu bak1

&

soo-jong rey2

physics department, university of seoul, seoul 130-743 korea1

physics department, seoul national university, seoul 151-742 korea2

dsbak@mach.uos.ac.kr,

sjrey@gravity.snu.ac.kr

abstract

we study dynamical aspects of holographic correspondence between d = 5 anti-de sitter su-
pergravity and d = 4 super yang-mills theory. we probe causality and locality of ambient
spacetime from super yang-mills theory by studying transmission of low-energy brane waves
via an open string stretched between two d3-branes in coulomb branch. by analyzing two
relevant physical threshold scales, we nd that causality and locality is encoded in the super
yang-mills theory provided innite tower of long supermultiplet operators are added. massive
w-boson and dual magnetic monopole behave more properly as extended, bilocal objects. we
also study causal time-delay of low-energy excitation on heavy quark or meson and nd an
excellent agreement between anti-de sitter supergravity and super yang-mills theory descrip-
tions. we observe that strong t hooft coupling dynamics and holographic scale-size relation
thereof play a crucial role to the agreement of dynamical processes.

1 work supported in part by kosef interdisciplinary research grant, krf international collaboration
grant, ministry of education grant 1998-015-d00054, uos academic research program, snu acacemic re-
search grant, and the korea foundation for advanced studies faculty fellowship.

1

introduction

it is now widely believed that an anti-de sitter (ads) supergravity is dual to large n limit of

conformal eld theory (cft) [1]. a particularly interesting case of this so-called ads/cft

correspondence is between semiclassical limit of type iib superstring compactied to ve-

dimensional anti-de sitter spacetime and large-n limit of super yang-mills theories in four

dimensions. as exemplied by this case, one of the most important features is that the holo-

graphic principle [2, 3, 4] underlies all ads/cft correspondences: semi-classical gravity in

(d + 1) dimensions is holographically is described by degrees of freedom of large-n quantum

eld theory in d-dimensions. the ads/cft correspondence has been test extensively and ev-

idence for it has been drawn mainly from agreement between the two sides of various static

quantities, such as symmetries, particle spectrum, correlation functions, and black hole entropy

[5, 6, 7].

the holographic principle, however, refers to the correspondence not just for static properties
only but also for all dynamical ones 2. this raises an immediate puzzle: how can possibly

local and causal dynamics on anti-de sitter spacetime be recovered from a lower-dimensional

quantum eld theory? large-n super yang-mills theory is certainly a well-dened quantum

eld theory [15] with locality and causality of four-dimensional minkowski spacetime built in.

so is the supergravity in anti-de sitter spacetime, in the semi-classical limit at the least. given

the apparent locality and causality of physics, it seems virtually impossible to describe what

happens in the bulk of spacetime by dynamical variables located at the boundary. in this paper,

taking the correspondence between type iib superstring on d = 5 anti-de sitter spacetime and

d = 4 super yang-mills theory as a setup, we will try to provide an answer to this puzzle.

more specically, we will pose and study the following question: in order to encode causality

and locality of semi-classical supergravity in d = 5 anti-de sitter spacetime, what precise pre-

scription does one need in formulating the d = 4 super yang-mills theory? our main conclusion

will be that neither conventional (keeping dimension-four operators only) nor dirac-born-infeld

form is sucient and only after innite tower of higher-dimensional operators encompassing

long supermultiplets are included, causality and locality can be decoded out of the super yang-

mills theory.

we will address the posed question in the coulomb branch of the super yang-mills theory,
viz. consider su(n)  s[u(n  2)  (u(1)  u(2))] by separating two d3-branes out of the
(n2) remainder and place them at r1,2, respectively, in the coulomb branch moduli space. we
2 minkowski description of ads/cft correspondence has been studied extensively in [8]. various dynamical

issues on anti-de sitter spacetime has been address in [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].

1

will then place a macroscopic open string (either fundamental or dirichlet) stretched between

the two d3-branes and study transmission of localized brane waves from the rst d3-brane to

the second through the string. the stretched open string is identied with a massive w-boson
with mass mw = (r1  r2)  r. as the string is stretched over a distance r, under suitable
circumstance, one would expect to detect causal time-delay out of the transmitted brane-waves.

this process, which is a sort of thomson scattering [16] (alias compton scattering at low-
energy) of brane waves o a massive w-boson, is closely related to much-studied, f 4 brane-

wave interaction [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22]. cutting the one-loop diagram of the latter across

two internal w-boson lines, one obtains a pair of tree-level, thomson scattering diagram. in

so far as probing causality and locality, the only dierence between the two would be that
the f 4 brane-wave interaction describes inter-brane interaction via exchange of closed string

states, while the thomson scattering interaction describes interaction via virtual excitation of

the massive w-boson. in eect, the stretched open string serves as a sort of one-dimensional

waveguide of the radiation, which would otherwise have propagated out all over ambient

spacetime.

comparison of thomson scattering with known results regarding f 4 brane-wave interaction

brings up another important lesson drawn throughout this work: static and dynamic informa-

tion are closely related in at spacetime, but not in anti-de sitter spacetime. in at spacetime
(corresponding to n = 2), it is well-known that the f 4 brane-wave interaction is exact at

one-loop by the non-renormalization theorem of [18]. douglas and taylor [23] have argued
that, by taking a coincident (n  2)-brane limit from a generic point in the coulomb branch,
the non-renormalization theorem should also hold in anti-de sitter spacetime. as an evidence

for this assertion, they have noted that, the supergravity interaction for zero-momentum brane

waves is the same for both at and anti-de sitter spacetime. through careful analysis, das
[24] has conrmed the result further 3. the interaction at zero-momentum, however, is always

instantaneous and retarded interaction will show up only if nonzero momentum conguration

is considered, a well-known fact of nonrelativistic expansion in covariant perturbation theory.

for brane waves with nonzero momentum, corrections to the leading order result in yang-

mills theory is controlled by the string scale, s [23], hinting that stringy corrections somehow
ought to be taken into account to the supergravity description. douglas and taylor have in-

terpreted these corrections as a manifestation of the spacetime uncertainty principle [25]. das

has sketched calculation of retarded interaction between nonzero momentum brane waves in

at spacetime and have argued that the non-renormalization theorem assures the same result

3 intuitively, the result may be interpreted as a consequence of the fact that operators involved are short

supermultiplets and that the massive w-boson running through the loop is a bps state.

2

in anti-de sitter spacetime. underlying to their arguments seems that the massive w-boson,

which is a stretched open string of length r, is a good ruler for measuring distance and hence

causality of the bulk spacetime, both at and anti-de sitter.

from thomson scattering process, we will nd contrasting results. underlying to the pro-

cess, the w-boson, being an open string stretched between the two d3-branes, sets two com-

peting threshold scales: winding and oscillation energy of the string. we will nd that causality

and locality of the ambient spacetime is visible in super yang-mills theory only if the oscillation

threshold is lighter than the winding threshold. the winding threshold remains the same for

both at and anti-de sitter spacetime but, quite importantly, the oscillation threshold turns
out to change signicantly 4. in at spacetime, crossover between the two threshold takes place
when r  o(s), conrming from dynamical side the well-known result on d-brane world-
volume dynamics [26]. in anti-de sitter spacetime, however, crossover takes place when (using
maldacenas scaling variable u  r/2
s)
(u)2
u1u2

gstn! .

(1.1)



o  1

it shows that, everywhere in the coulomb branch (possibly except at the origin), stong t

hooft coupling limit ensures that the oscillation threshold is lower than the winding threshold

and hence enables the large-n super yang-mills theory to encode causality and locality of

semi-classical supergravity in the anti-de sitter spacetime.

with light oscillation threshold, the super yang-mills theory is given in a rather dierent

form from conventional (retaining dimension-four operators only) or dirac-born-infeld theories.

the massive w-bosons and dual magnetic monopoles are more suitably described as a sort of
extended, bilocal object 5. remarkably, particle lagrangian of the w-boson takes (an extended

form of) pais-uhlenbeck [28] model with transcendental, innite-order kernels, which is one of

the few known examples satisfying convergence, positive-deniteness and strict causality.

this paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we will study brane-wave transmission via

thomson scattering, rst in at spacetime. in section 3, we will study the holographic relation

between energy and size in ads/cft correspondence, but now from dynamical point of view.

we will be studying causal time delay of low-energy excitations added to a macroscopic string

representing quark or meson [30, 31]. we will nd an excellent agreement between anti-de

sitter supergravity and super yang-mills theory results. in section 4, we will study brane-wave

transmission via thomson scattering, but now in anti-de sitter spacetime. in appendix a and

b, we will explain technical details of covariant green-schwarz action for open string stretched

4 recall that a winding string is a bps state, but not when oscillator excitations are added.
5rather reminiscent of yukawas old idea [27].

3

between the two d3-branes, in particular, consistent gauge-xing of -symmetry. we will also

derive a low-energy eective lagrangian for bilocal w-boson, for both at and anti-de sitter

spacetimes.

2 causality and locality in flat spacetime

before dwelling into anti-de sitter spacetime, we will rst study causality and locality in at

spacetime. to make a direct comparison with anti-de sitter spacetime later, as a probe, we will

use a system consisting of two d3-branes and a open f- or d-string stretched between them.
consider, in type iib string theory, two parallel d3-branes in at spacetime x = r9,1.
the d3-branes are oriented along 0, 1, 2, 3 directions and are located along 4,   , 9 directions
at (r1, 0,   , 0) and (r2, 0,   , 0), respectively. low-energy dynamics on the d3-brane world-
volume is governed by d = 4,n = 4 super yang-mills theory with gauge group g = u(2). we
will denote generators of u(2) gauge group as ta (a = 1, 2, 3, 4), where t1,2,3 = 1,2,3 belong to
the su(2) and t4 = id to the diagonal u(1) subgroups. as the two d3-branes are separated by
a distance r = |r1 r2|, the su(2) gauge group is spontaneously broken to u(1) generated by
t3 cartan subalgebra. together with the diagonal u(1), the gauge group on the two d3-branes,
which we label by 1 and 2, is then given by h = u (1)(1) u (2)(1), generated by diagonal linear
combinations, (t3  t4)/2. a massive w-boson (or dual magnetic monopole) associated with
the spontaneous symmetry breaking is represented by an open f-string (or d-string) stretched

between the two d3-branes. the static mass of the w-boson and the dual magnetic monopole

is given by

mw = t r,

mm =

t
gst

r.

(2.2)

they are part of an isospin triplet under g (or its dual gauge group) and hence, under h, carry
electric (or magnetic) charges (q,q) where q = 1 6.

to investigate causality and locality of the at minkowski spacetime over the distance scale

r, one will need to excite slightly, say, the rst d3-brane and follow subsequent propagation

of the excitation, which will eventually arrive at and excite the second d3-brane. in the limit
gst  0, semi-classical dynamics of the type iib supergravity ought to obey both locality
and causality. for low-energy excitation, the leading order process in this limit will be such

that the excitation is transmitted from the rst d3-brane to the second through an open f- or
d-string stretched between them 7. when exciting brane-wave on the rst d3-brane, there are

6charge conjugation on the d3-brane worldvolume is generated by worldsheet parity reversal of the attached

open strings.

7processes involving more than one open strings or closed strings are at least o(gst). at weak coupling,

gst  0, their contribution is negligible.

4

two channels available: massless higgs or u (1)(1) gauge eld waves. in what follows, we will
consider exclusively adding a weak amplitude, plane-wave of the u (1)(1) gauge eld on the rst
d3-brane 8. the entire dynamical process is then viewed as the classic, thomson scattering of
the u (1)(1) radiation eld o the open string.

the open string stretched between the two d3-branes is casually identied with a massive w-

boson. this sounds paradoxical since the open string is an extended object whose characteristic

scale is the string scale, s, while the massive w-boson is a point-like object. an answer to this
is well-known [26] ever since the advent of the d-branes. in this section, from the dynamical

point of view, we will revisit this issue as it is intimately tied with understanding causality and

locality of the ambient spacetime in which the d-branes are embedded. specically, we will

study the thomson scattering process in two opposite limits of the massive w-boson, rst in a

point-particle limit and second in a stretched open string limit. we will nd shortly that, over

the distance scale r, super yang-mills theory will perceive nonlocality and acausality in the

limit the w-boson may be treated as a point-particle. in order to recover locality and causality,

the w-boson ought to behave more like an extended, bilocal object. crossover between the
two limits takes place, as anticipated, at r  o(s), the minimum distance scale of the
ambient spacetime probed by a f-string. somewhat surprisingly, we will nd that the same

conclusion holds for a massive magnetic monopole, viz. an open d-string stretched between

the two d3-branes.

2.1 scattering of flat brane-wave by point-like w-boson

as is set up, a plane-wave of monochromatic radiation of u (1)(1) gauge eld is incident on a

free, massive w-boson of charge q and mass mw. the w-boson will be accelerated and emit
radiation and, if the energy of the incident radiation is low enough compared to the mass m,

the emitted radiation will have the same frequency as the incident radiation. the whole process

then can be described by conventional thomson scattering process, for which the w-boson is

treated as a point-particle. as the w-boson is charged under h, the emitted radiation will
consist of both u (1)(1) and u (2)(1) gauge elds eld. in terms of the d3-branes, this means that

both d3-branes will be excited by dipole oscillation of the stretched open string (interpreted
as the massive w-boson) after the incident u (1)(1) radiation on the rst d3-brane scatters o

it, as depicted in gure 1.

8 the higgs eld interactions can be included analogously from that of gauge elds, as they are related by

underlying n = 4 supersymmetry.

5

2

1

figure 1: thompson scattering of brane wave o a w-boson. the incident u (1)(1) brane wave,
whose wave front is denoted by dashed lines, is scattered o a point-like massive w-boson at
rest. the scattered spherical brane waves of both u (1)(1) and u (2)(1) gauge groups, labelled as
1,2, are emitted instantly and simultaneously.

2.1.1 scattering equation of motion

we will study dynamics of a massive w-boson, located at x(t), interacting with gauge elds

of the gauge group h. from the d3-brane point of view, the w-boson is realized by an open

f-string stretched between the two d3-branes. denote spatial position (on the two d3-branes)

of its endpoints as x1,2(t). in the limit the w-boson is treated as a point-particle, the position
of the w-boson x(t) ought to coincide with the two endpoint positions, x1,2(t) all the time.
consider an incident plane-wave radiation of the u (1)(1) gauge eld, whose wave vector and
frequency are denoted by k and , respectively. as the w-boson is charged with charge (q,q)
under h, electric eld of the incident radiation:

e(x, t) = e(1)(t) eikx,

e(1)(t) = e(1)

0 eit,

(2.3)

according to the lorentz force equation, will exert an instantaneous acceleration to the massive

w-boson:

x1(t) = x2(t) =

q
mw

e(1)(t)eikx.

(2.4)

throughout this paper, we will consider the weak eld-strength limit. in this case, the w-boson

is in nonrelativistic motion and, at leading order, the spatial dependence of the electric eld on

the right-hand side of eq.(2.4) may be ignored.

the eq.(2.4) shows that the two ends, even though separated by a distance r, accelerates

in an identical manner, viz. the stretched open f-string behaves like a rigid rod. it indicates

that, should the open f-string be treated as a point-particle, super yang-mills theory on the

d3-brane worldvolume would entail inevitably nonlocality over the distance scale r in the

6

direction perpendicular to the d3-brane. this is of course as it should be, in order for the

perpendicular direction to be interpreted as color isospin direction.

2.1.2 transmission rate

to appreciate the signicance of the eq.(2.4), we will now calculate the rate of energy transmis-

sion t from the rst d3-brane to the second through the stretched open string. from eq.(2.4),

one can determined the instantaneous power p (t) radiated into a polarization state  by the
w-boson is 9

(2.5)

dp
d2

=

q2
4c2|  x(t)|2.

averaging over a period 2/, during which the charged particle moves a negligible fraction of

one wavelength,

d dp
d2e = c

2

e(1)
0

8   q2

mwc2!2

|  e(1)

0 |2.

(2.6)

the rst factor (e(1)
0
poynting vector for the plane wave. hence, dierential transmission rate for an unpolarized

/8)c is nothing but the incident energy ux, viz. the time-averaged

2

incident radiation is given by

d2!classical
  dt

=   q2

mwc2!2



1

2 (cid:16)1 + cos2 (cid:17) ,

(2.7)

in which  denotes the scattering angle in the laboratory frame. the total transmission rate t

obtained thereof is

tclassical =

8

3   q2

mwc2!2

.

(2.8)

characteristic feature of the classical thomson scattering is that the cross-section is inde-

pendent of the frequency of the scattered radiation. the result eq.(2.7) is valid only at low
frequency limit,   mc2, for which the gauge eld can be treated as a classical wave. as
the energy of the incident radiation becomes larger and, especially, comparable to the w-boson

mass, the scattering process should be treated quantum mechanically, viz. treating the radi-

ation as photons. treated in the coulomb gauge for which the transition matrix element is

identical to the classial amplitude, the modication is from the phase space factor and hence

is purely kinematical. the result is

d2!quantum
  dt

=   q2

 !2
mwc2!2  

1
2



(1 + cos2 ),

(2.9)

9for a weak eld limit of the incident radiation, the w-boson may be treated as heavy enough. in this case,
spin and charge degrees of freedom decouple each other. we will henceforth treat the w-boson as a spinless
particle.

7

where the ratio of the outgoing to the incident frequency is given by the well-known compton

formula:




=  1 + 2



mwc2 sin2 

2!1

.

for low frequency limit,   mwc2, one easily obtains the transmission rate as

tquantum =

8

3   q2

mwc2!2

(cid:18)1  2



mwc2 +   (cid:19) .

(2.10)

(2.11)

had we have considered a point-like limit of the magnetic monopole dual to the w-boson,

represented by an open d-string stretched between the two d3-branes, the transmission rate

would be essentially the same as above except that mw is to be replaced by the mass of the
magnetic monopole mm and that the charge q is interpreted as the dual magnetic charge [32].
to recapitulate, in the limit the w-boson is point-like, viz. the stretched f-string moves

rigidly, the transmission of radiation energy from the rst d3-brane to the second through

w-boson is instantaneous and is a consequence of the standard eld theory result, eq.(2.4).

based on this fact, we conclude that the d3-brane worldvolume dynamics, if treated in terms

of conventional super yang-mills theory and point-like w-bosons, would perceive nonlocality

and acausality over a distance scale r in the six-dimensional transverse space in x. from

the super yang-mills theory point of view, this conclusion should be hardly surpring as the

color isospin space is only an internal space and is not part of the four-dimensional spacetime

(worldvolume of the d3-branes).

2.2 scattering of flat brane-wave by charged open string

from the underlying string theory point of view, nonlocality and acausality over the distance

scale r are extremely bizzare. the transverse to the d3-branes is six-dimensional subspace in

x and string theory ought to exhibit locality and causality, at least over a long distance limit.

for example, energy transfer from the rst d3-brane located at r = r1 to the second at r = r2
through the open string between them ought to take a causal time delay

t 

1
c

(r2  r1) =

r
c

,

(2.12)

as depicted in gure 2.

resolution of the puzzle is quite simple. as nonlocality and acausality has arisen from

the point-particle limit of the w-boson, one expects that locality and causality will become

transparent in the opposite limit, viz.

the w-boson (realized as an open string stretched

between the two d3-branes) is treated as a full-pledged string. this turns out correct and

8

||x

t

0

r1

r2

r

(1)
d
3

d

(2)
3

figure 2: a stretched f- or d-string connecting two probe d3-branes in at spacetime back-
ground. vibration of the stretched string causes retarded signal propagation between the two
d3-branes only when the separation is bigger than the string scale.

means that one will now need to study the thomson scattering of the incident u (1)(1) radiation

o a string-like w-boson. in fact, in this section, we will nd that the w-boson dynamics is

drastically modied from that in the point-particle limit and that the modied dynamics is

precisely what allows to restore locality and causality of x.

2.2.1 scattering equations of motion

consider again the thomson scattering of the u (1)(1) eld radiation o the w-boson, but

now in the limit the w-boson is treated as a full-edged open string. dynamics of the string

is governed by type iib green-schwarz action, supplemented by an appropriate boundary

action for the open string attached to the d3-branes. in nambu-goto formulation, which is

sucient for the thomson scattering process, the action is constructed in appendix a. after

xing the -symmetry in a gauge compatible with the boundary conditions and worldsheet

reparametrization symmetries in static gauge, whose steps are explained in detail in appendix

a, one nds that the action for the string transverse coordinates x(r, t) is reduced to the form:

t

2 (cid:18) 1
istring = z dt(cid:20)mw +
+ xi=1,2z dt qi(cid:20)a(i)

0 (r, t) +

c2 (tx)2  (rx)2(cid:19) +     (cid:21)
xi  a(i)(r, t)(cid:21)r=xi(t)

1
c

,

(2.13)

(q1 = q2 = 1).

the rst term in the expansion represents the static mass of the string, t r, which equals

to the w-boson mass, mw (see eq.(2.2)). consider, as posed above, thomson scattering of a
low-energy, monochromatic plane-wave of the u (1)(1) gauge eld o the string endpoints. the

boundary condition of the string coordinates x(t, r) is given by

t rx(t, r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=r1

9

= qe(1)(t)

t rx(t, r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=r2

= 0 .

(2.14)

according to the rst boundary condition, the string endpoint x1(t) (on the rst d3-brane)
will undergo a dipole oscillation and generate a pulse that will propagate subsequently along

the string. the pulse may be decomposed into spectral components

x(t, r) = z d

2 h a() ei(tr/c) + a()ei(t+r/c) i .

(2.15)

the spectral amplitudes a(), a() are determined uniquely by the thomson scattering bound-

ary condition eq.(2.14):

a() = a() =

qe(1)
0
2t

(cot t  i) .

(2.16)

from eqs.(2.15, 2.16), one immediately obtains an equation of motion for the string endpoint

x1(t) on the rst d3-brane:

mw  tanh tt

tt ! x1(t) = qe(1)(t).

(2.17)

one rst nds that the inertia mass of the open string equals to the static mass, mw, as is
dictated by the underlying lorentz invariance. compared to the point-particle limit of the

w-boson, eq.(2.4), equation of motion of the endpoint x1(t) is changed to the one involving a
kernel of innite-order time derivatives. as will be shown in section 2.3, the extra kernel, which

has originated from taking into account of the string oscillations, is what enables low-energy

dynamics of the d3-brane worldvolume to reproduce locality and causality of the ambient

spacetime x. for now, note that, due to the kernel, one may interpret the endpoint x1(t) to
behave heavier than the point-like w-boson mass mw.

what about the dynamics of the second endpoint x2(t) attached to the second d3-brane?
for point-particle limit of the w-boson, we have seen that the two endpoints behaves identically,

see eq.(2.4). what one now nds, however, is that the dynamics of the second endpoint is

governed by a dierent equation of motion:

mw sinh tt

tt ! x2(t) = qe(1)(t).

(2.18)

comparison with eq.(2.17) shows that the innite-order kernel associated with the second

endpoint is dierent from that of the rst one. in particular, the kernel lets us to interpret that

the seocond endpoint x2(t) behaves lighter than the point-like w-boson mass mw.

the eqs.(2.17, 2.18) constitute dening equations for the thompson scattering o the open

f-string. compared to the thomson scattering o the massive w-boson, new eects have

10

entered through d3-brane-separation-dependent (see eq.(2.12)), innite-order kernels. as the

two endpoints obey dierent equations of motion, at any moment, one would expect that
x1(t) 6= x2(t). therefore, from the super yang-mills theory perspective, it suggests to view
the w-boson more naturally as a sort of an extended, bi-local object.

2.2.2 transmission rate across open string

following the same steps as in section 2.1.2, it is straightforward to calculate the transmission

rate t (dened earlier in section 2.1.2) from the new equation of motion, eq.(2.18) of the string

endpoint on the second d3-brane.

actually, one will need to take into account of another important corrections to the trans-

mission rate: virtual w-boson pair and radiation reactive force eects. they are entirely of

eld-theoretic origin and have nothing to do with string oscillations. because of these eects,

in eld theory treatment, the w-boson might be viewed roughly as a particle with an eective

size set by the w-boson compton wavelength. heuristically, the eects may be understood

as follows [33]. low-energy dynamics of a single w-boson may be described by taking a non-

relativistic limit of the w-boson gauge eld w:

w0 =

w =

1

2mw
2mw

1

i

eimwc2t d  (r, t)

mwc
eimwc2t(r, t),

(2.19)

in which charge-conjugate, anti-particle part is suppressed. expanding the super yang-mills

lagrangian in the non-relativistic limit, one nds

lsym = 

1
4

f f + i  dt +

1

2mw

  d2  i

q

mwc

b     +    .

(2.20)

this can be reduced further to a single particle lagrangian of the w-boson:

lw =

1
2

mw x  x + q(cid:18)a0 +

 z dr(cid:18)1

4

f f(cid:19) .

1
c

x  a(cid:19) + s  b +   

(2.21)

here, parts containing classical spin dynamics and interaction with higgs eld are suppressed

for brevity. following abraham-lorentz-type approach [16], it is straightforward to derive an

eective equation of motion that takes into account of radiative reaction force. one obtains

mw 1 

q2
4

t
mw

+   ! x(t) = qe0(t).

(2.22)

if one takes into account of virtual w-boson pair corrections, one also obtains a term similar

to the second on the left-hand side. at low frequency, the second term is suppressed compared

11

to the rst by o(/mw) and hence, according to eq.(2.5), gives rise to o(2/m 2
to the transmission rate.

w) correction

taking into account of the above eects, one obtains the transmission rate for f-string as:

tfstring =

2

3   q2

mwc2!2

(cid:18)1  2



mwc2 +   (cid:19)  1 (cid:18) 

mwc2(cid:19)2

+   ! (cid:20) t
sin t(cid:21)

2

.

(2.23)

the rst two brackets represent the result derived from the limit the w-boson is treated as

a point-particle. the third bracket is the correction due to virtual w-boson and radiation

reactive force eect estimated above. the last bracket comes from the string oscillation eects,

viz. from the fact that the massive w-boson is actually a stretched open string.

it is instructive to consider the transmission rate for, instead of a f-string, a d-string is

stretched between the two d3-branes. from super yang-mills point of view, the open d-string

corresponds to a magnetic monopole dual to w-boson. in this case, scattering of the brane wave

takes place from interaction of the open d-string with magnetic component of the radiation

eld. the corresponding transmission rate is obtained straighforwardly:

tdstring =

2

3   q2

mmc2!2

(cid:18)1  2



mmc2 +   (cid:19)  1 (cid:18) 

mwc2(cid:19)2

+   ! (cid:20) t
sin t(cid:21)

2

,

(2.24)

where q should now be interpreted as magnetic charge of the dual w-boson. one again nds
that, apart from the kinematical, compton scattering correction, corrections of o(2/m 2
w) arise
from the classical nite-size of the magnetic monopole, set by the compton wavelength of the

w-boson, and radiation reactive force eects [33].

we emphasize that, for both w-boson and its dual magnetic monopole, the correction due

to nite-size and radiation reactive force eects is set by the w-boson mass, mw. given that
it is the only low-energy threshold scale in the system at weak coupling limit, the fact that the

correction for both w-boson and magnetic monopole is governed by the same low-energy scale
should not be surprising 10.

2.3 locality and causality in flat spacetime

having analyzed transmission of brane waves across open string at two dierent limits, we will

now study causality and locality of ambient spacetime as seen by super yang-mills theory.

2.3.1 retarded dynamics of string endpoints

we have already seen from eq.(2.4) that, in the limit the massive w-boson behaves like a point

particle, the string endpoint on the second d3-brane, despite being separated by a distance
10 incidentally, the correction also entails an interesting deviation from s-duality of the d = 4,n = 4 super

yang-mills theory [33].

12

r, responds to the incident brane wave localized on the rst d3-brane instantaneously. as

such, scattered brane wave will come out of both isospin components of t3 (labelling the
two d3-branes) simultaneously, with no apparent causal time-delay between the two isospin

components. see gure 1.

indeed, the transmission rate, eq.(2.11), is exactly the same as

the classic thomson scattering cross-section. as a result, one will conclude that any super

yang-mills theory with pointlike w-bosons will not be able to encode causality and locality of

ambient spacetime.

in the opposite limit where the w-boson is a full-edged oscillating string, eq.(2.15) shows

that a pulse propagating along the string is described by characteristic functions of the form
f (t  r/c). clearly, it will take a causal time delay t, eq.(2.12), for the pulse, induced by
the incident brane wave on the rst d3-brane, to reach the second d3-brane. to appreciate

the causal time-delay more transparently, let us rewrite the equation of motion of second string

endpoint, eq.(2.18), into an integral equation form:

mw x2(t) = z dt (t  t)(cid:28)t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

tt

sinh tt(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

t(cid:29)  qe(1)(t),

(2.25)

where the heaviside step function follows from convergence requirement, as is usual in any

nonrelativistic dynamics. the integral kernel shows manifestly that the time-delay between

note that the integral kernel has innitely many poles but no zeros.

the equation of motion, eq.(2.18), can be put into an equivalent to eq.(2.25), but even

more suggestive form by observing the fact that the innite-order kernel is in fact a dierence

operator:

x2(t + t)  x2(t  t) = 2tz t

dt qe(1)(t),

(2.26)

displaying manifestly that it takes causal time-delay t for the brane wave on the rst d3-
brane, e(1), to arrive at the second. the fact that the time-delay is exactly t as estimated from

the geometric distance between the two d3-branes, eq.(2.12) also implies that the boundary

interactions between f-string and d3-branes are local.

while encoding causality and locality quite successfully, the massive w-boson in this limit is

far from the point-like object one casually take in yang-mills theory. rather, the two endpoints

x1,2(t) of the open string evolves independently. hence, projected on d3-brane worldvolume,
the w-boson is now replaced by a sort of extended, bilocal object whose dynamics is captured

by the equations of motion, eqs.(2.17, 2.18).

2.3.2 physical thresholds: winding versus momentum

as is evident from the transmission rates, eqs.(2.23, 2.24), frequency-dependent corrections

are characterized by two distinct physical threshold scales inherent to the problem. the rst is

13

set by the w-boson mass, mw = t r, dening a physical threshold (of eld theoretic origin)
above which description in terms of abelian gauge theory with gauge group h breaks down.

the second is set by energy gap of string oscillation, 1/t = c/r, above which a point-

particle description of the w-boson breaks down. being proportional to r and inversely to

r, respectively, we shall be referring the rst threshold as winding threshold w and the
second as momentum threshold, m:

w = mw = t r,

m =

1
t

=

hc
r

.

(2.27)

as there are two distinct physical thresholds, depending on which one sets the lower scale, low-

energy dynamics of the super yang-mills theory will become quite dierent. as the winding and

momentum thresholds depend on the spatial separation r inversely, the two will competes each

other as r is varied. the competition may be summarized into a form of string uncertainty
relation (t  1/2
s)

s ! .
wm  o hc

2

(2.28)

note that the right-hand-side, a combination of fundamental constants only, depends crucially

on the string scale, s. it implies that any eects related to causal retardation, which arises
from oscillation threshold corrections, will inevitably depends on it, as /m  2
smw. this
explains the observation of douglas and taylor [23] on f 4 interaction between brane waves with
nonzero momentum. as mw  r  t, one again nds that successive power corrections in
oscillation threshold are nothing but the retardation time expansion of eq.(2.25).

hence, if w  m, threshold eects to low-energy processes dominated by the winding
threshold. as string oscillation excitations are completely irrelevant, the stretched open string

behaves literally like a rigid-rod, to which the d3-branes serve as a pair of guiderail. behaving

as a rigid body, the open string may be treated as a point-particle, massive w-boson. as the

condition

w  m  r  s,

(2.29)

one nd that the limit in which the d3-brane worldvolume dynamics is best approximated by

super yang-mills theory, either in conventional (renormalizable dimension-four operators) or

dirac-born-infeld form, is when the d3-brane separation is over a sub-stringy scale, reproducing

well-known result [26].

exactly the same condition applies if the stretched f-string is replaced by a d-string. an

open d-string stretched between two d3-branes is casually identied with a magnetic monopole

dual to the massive w-boson. its classical size is set by the compton wavelength of the massive

14

w-boson mw = t r 11 and denes the eld theoretic, winding threshold scale w. requirement
that this scale is much less than the oscillation threshold scale m, which is the same for both
f- and d-string, again set the condition, eq.(2.29).

3 dynamical aspect of energy-size relation

an important feature of the ads/cft correspondence is holographic relation between the

radial position, energy scale, in anti-de sitter spacetime and size in super yang-mills theory.

as this relation will be playing a crucial role for foregoing discusssions, we will be studying

rst dynamical aspect of the relation. more specically, for heavy quark and meson studied in

[30, 31], we will estimate causal time-delay for a pulse generated by a quark either along the

string in anti-de sitter spacetime or in minkowski spacetime, using the harmonic uctuation

lagrangian of the string studied previously [29, 30, 34]. we will nd that, after utilizing the

holographic energy-size relation, the two estimates agree perfectly with each other.

a charged probe necessarily accompany long-range coulomb eld, so it will be necessary to

control the eld conguration in the infrared. a convenient way is to move into the coulomb

branch, viz. separating some of the d3-branes and then study a state charged under the gauge

group of the separated d3-branes. the n coincident d3-branes sitting at the conformal point

then generates the anti-de sitter spacetime as a near-horizon geometry [1]

ds2 = 2

s" u 2

ge (cid:18)

1
c2 dt2 + dx2

||(cid:19) + ge

du 2
5# ,
u 2 + ged2

(u  t r, t = 1/2
s).

(3.30)

in this coordinate, the energy-scale holographic relation asserts that the scale position u in the

anti-de sitter spacetime is related directly to the scale size r in the super yang-mills theory:

r =

ge
u

.

(3.31)

this relation has been rst derived from evaluation of the wilson loop [30, 31] and later

extended to more general contexts [7].

3.1 holography of heavy quark dynamics

consider a heavy quark of large-n super yang-mills theory at zero temperature. we will

separate a single d3-brane to the coulomb branch and consider a quark coupled to it. denote

the location of the displaced probe d3-brane as u. then, a heavy quark (monopole) of the

11at weak coupling, classical size of the stretched d-string t r is much larger than the compton wavelength

of the monopole t r/gst and hence a semi-classical treatment of the monopole is justiable.

15

super yang-mills theory is realized by a macroscopic f- (d-) string ending on the displaced d3-

brane at u = u and stretched outward along the u-direction. dynamics of the macroscopic
string may be studied using nambu-goto action in the anti-de sitter spacetime, eq.(3.30).

taking static gauge (, ) = (t, u) and expanding string transverse coordinates (x||, 5) up to
harmonic uctuations, one nds [30]

where

l(2) =

1

u 4
g2
e

x
||

2! + u 2  g2

e
u 4

1
c2

2
5  

5

2!# +   

du +z 

u

dul(2) + lboundary

u

lng = z 
2 "  1

x2
|| 

c2

(3.32)

(3.33)

and lboundary species boundary conditions at u = u.

let us begin with static properties of the macroscopic string. the rst term in eq.(3.32)

represent the static mass of the string

mstring(u) = z uv

u

du,

u v  .

(3.34)

the static mass diverges as the cuto uv is removed. as shown rst in [30, 31] and discussed
further [7, 10], this is nothing but anti-de sitter space manifestataion of divergent self-energy

of a heavy quark. a physically meaningful, nite quantity would be a residual static mass

between strings ending on dierent locations of u, which we may dene as

mstring(u)  z u

0

du

dmstring

du

= u.

(3.35)

coulomb
branch

geff
u*

figure 3: coulomb branch view gauge eld generated by a test quark (monopole)

using the scale-size relation eq.(3.31), one then nds immediately that mstring(u) =
ge/r corresponds to the coulomb eld energy measured at radius r. to understand this
scale better, let us interpret the macroscopic string from the super yang-mills theory side. at

the origin of the coulomb branch (viz. u = 0), the macroscopic string creates not only a

16

heavy quark (transforming as the dening representation of su(n)) itself but also long-range

color coulomb eld around it, as depicted in the left of figure 3. away from the origin of the



coulomb branch, one might expects that the long-range coulomb eld is cut-o at the compton
wavelength u 1
of the massive gauge bosons 12. however, as pointed out in [30, 31], the strong
t hooft coupling dynamics cuts o the long-range eld at a larger scale, geu 1
 . thus, we
nd that mstring is nothing but the eld energy, the energy associated with coulomb eld
outside radius r = ge/u in the yang-mills theory. summarizing, static property (such as

static mass) of the macroscopic string is determined by the quantity r du.

x
||

0

u*

u

figure 4: string attached to a probe d3-brane in anti-de sitter space

what about dynamical properties? consider exciting a low-energy pulse at the outer end of

the string, as depicted in figure 4.. the pulse will then propagate at the speed of light (which

has been explicitly checked in [30]) along the string toward u. according to the energy-size
relation, in super yang-mills theory, the pulse travelling along the string is mapped, in super

yang-mills theory, to a spherical brane wave generated at the position of the heavy quark and

then propagating outward. for the spherical wave to propagate over a radial size r, it will
take yang-mills time:

(t)ym =

r.

(3.36)

1
c

if causality is implied by the holographic energy-size relation, then the time-delay for the

pulse propagation along the string should be the same as that for the spherical brane wave

propagating outward. let us check this explicitly. the string pulse propagates along the

string, viz. a null geodesic in (u, t) subspace:

12recall that the massive gauge bosons are bps particles

u 2
ge

t2 =

ge
u 2 u 2.

(3.37)

17

thus, measured from anti-de sitter spacetime in yang-mills time unit, causal time-delay for
the pulse to travel from u =  to u = u along the string is given by

(t)ads =

1
c

ge z 

u

du
u 2 =

1
c

ge
u

.

(3.38)

remarkably, the holographic energy-size relation, eq.(3.31), permits the causal time delay in

the anti-de sitter spacetime agrees exactly with that along the boundary!

3.2 holography of heavy quark dynamics at finite temperature

consider next the super yang-mills theory at nonzero temperature. the near-horizon geometry

of near extremal d3-branes is described by the anti-de sitter-schwarzschild spacetime, whose

(t, u) subspace is given by:

ds2 = 2

s


1

c2  1 

u 4
0

u 4! u 2

ge

dt2 +

ge

u 2  1 

u 4
0

u 4!1

du 2
 .

(3.39)

from nambu-goto lagrangian, one again nds that the static mass of the string is given by

m = z 

u0

du,

(3.40)

the same as the value at zero temperature.

let us introduce a heavy quark to the yang-mills theory at nite temperature. the quark is

described by a macroscopic f-string stretched along u-direction [34, 35], as depicted in figure

5. in the present case, the string terminates at the schwarzschild horizon, u = u0, where it
will dissipate the f-string ux into the inner horizon region.

x
||

0

u
0

u

figure 5: pulse propagation along semi-innte string in anti-de sitter schwarzschild spacetime.

this phenomenon has a direct counterpart in super yang-mills theory. at zero temperature,

coulomb eld of the static quark extends everywhere, as depicted at the left in figure 4. at

18

nite temperature, however, the coulomb eld becomes debye-screened and is expected to
extend to the scale of debye wavelength u 1
0 = (get )1. using the holographic energy-size
relation, one nds that the coulomb eld is cut o at a larger scale geu 1
0 , again due to strong
t hooft coupling dynamics. see figure 6.

t > 0

geff
u0

figure 6: aerial view of an isolated quark in super yang-mills theory at nite temperature

in fact, by demanding causality, one can understand the fact that string must end at u = u0.
consider a weak pulse injected at u =  and propagating inward. the time-delay for the pulse
to reach the position u(u0  u  ) is easily estimated:
dx

(3.41)

(t)ads =

ge

u0 z u0/u

0

1  x4 .

the time-delay diverges logarithmically as u  u0. so, evolved in terms of yang-mills theory
time, which is an asymptotic observers time in the anti-de sitter spacetime, the super yang-

mills theory covers spacetime region only outside the horizon.

if a dierent global time is

chosen as an evolution operator, then the string might be able to enter inside the horizon. in

this case, howeve, the string would not be in a static conguration [9]

at nite temperature, the scale r0 = geu 1

0

corresponds to a physical threshold scale in

yang-mills theory. at weak t hooft coupling limit, matsubara mass scale associated with

dimensionally reduced fermions (satisfying anti-periodic boundary condition around euclidean
time) is o(t ), which equals to u0/ge. if this observation somehow holds also for super yang-
mills theory at zero temperature, then we are prompted to expect that the scale r  geu 1
actually corresponds to a new physical threshold scale. recall that this scale is not a threshold
of an elementary excitations as the compton wavelength of massive gauge bosons u 1
 . never-
theless, the fact that the scale r is ge times compton wavelength of massive gauge bosons is
tantalizingly similar to the observation of shenker made in a dierent context [36].



19

||x

0

*u

d/2

u

figure 7: a pulse propagatiing along the wilson loop in anti-de sitter spacetime.

3.3 holography of heavy meson dynamics

a more intricate bulk probe is the macroscopic string conguration corresponding to the heavy

meson [30, 31]. in the static gauge, the string conguration is specied by a rst-integral of

motion:

g2u 2 + g =

g2
e
u 4


.

(3.42)

again, consider a pulse propagating along the string, u = u(). the time delay for the pulse
to travel between the quark and anti-quark (both located at u = ) along the string is again
calculated straightforwardly by solving string equation of motion along the null geodesic:

gdu 2 =

this yields

1

g (cid:16)dt2 + d2(cid:17) .
dgu 2 + 1.

(t)ads = z +d/2

d/2

using eq.(3.42), one nds immediately that

(3.43)

(3.44)

(t)ads = 2

1

qu 4/u 4

  1

ge
 z 
du
u 2
2(5/4)

u

(3/4)

ge
u

=

.

(3.45)

from the super yang-mills theory side, natural scale of the meson is the inter-quark distance

d. hence, one expects that

(t)ym = a

1
c

d,

(3.46)

where a is a o(1) numerical coecient, which should reect the details of the dipole eld
conguration produced by the quark-antiquark pair at strong t hooft coupling limit. for

20

mesons, precise form of the holographic energy-size relation has been derived [30, 31]:

(3/4)
(1/4)

ge
u

,

d
2

=

(3.47)

hence, equating t of anti-de sitter spacetime with that of yang-mills theory, one nds that

a =

(5/4)(1/4)

2(3/4)

= 2.188...

(3.48)

d

figure 8: aerial view of the quark anti-quark pair and dipole eld conguration produced
thereof.

the numerical factor, a = 2.188..., associated with the dipole electric eld conguration of

the quark antiquark pair as depicted in gure 8, may be viewed as a prediction for the strong

t hooft coupling dynamics from anti-de sitter supergravity.

4 causality and locality in anti-de sitter spacetime

having understood dynamical aspect of the energy-size relation better, we will now revisit the

thomson scattering of brane waves by an open string and consequent implications to the issue

of causality and locality, but now all in anti-de sitter spacetime.

we will be showing that momentum threshold of the open string stays always below the

winding threshold everywhere in the anti-de sitter spacetime. moreover, quite importantly,

both thresholds does not depend on the string scale, s. thus, in sharp contrast to the at
spacetime situation, we will be able to encode causality and locality of semi-classical super-

gravity in anti-de sitter spacetime in terms of large-n super yang-mills theory, at least in the

strong t hooft coupling limit. the resulting super yang-mills theory is not the standard one,
however. at at generic point of the coulomb branch moduli space13, we will be nding that

13except possibly at the origin, on which we will be discussing later

21

innite tower of long supermultiplet operators should be included to be able to encode the bulk

causality and locality. once again, this conclusion is drawn from the fact that w-bosons are

more suitably described by a sort of extended, bilocal objects.

4.1 d3-branes in the coulomb branch

the anti-de sitter spacetime is generated as near-horizon geometry of innitely many (n  )
d3-branes when they become coincident one another. therefore, to explore causality and

locality of the anti-de sitter spacetime, from the viewpoint of super yang-mills theory, one will

need to examine low-energy dynamics near the origin of the coulomb branch moduli space,

where the higgs expectation values are interpreted as positions of individual d3-branes in

anti-de sitter spacetime [1, 23].

as in at spacetime, we will be considering two d3-branes out of n coincident oneses

are located at positions u1, u2, respectively, and a macroscopic open string stretched between
them. we will again excite the displaced probe d3-branes with low-energy brane waves and

study thomson scattering o the open string. the conguration corresponds to the following

sequential symmetry breaking:

su(n)  g = s [u(n  2)  u(2)]  h = s [u(n  2)  (u(1)  u(1))] .

(4.49)

from super yang-mills theory perspectives, this appears quite a complicated problem, as

the excitation of, say, rst d3-brane will reach to the second d3-brane not only through the
prescribed open string stretched between them but also indirectly through the coincident (n2)
d3-branes, with which the two d3-branes interact. at the least, because the number of possible
transmission channels through the background (n  2) d3-branes is humongous, o(n 2), one
might be tempted to conclude that, in the super yang-mills theory, brane wave transmission is

not mediated through the massive w-bosons but by some sort of complicated large-n, strong

t hooft coupling dynamics.

this, however, shouldnt be a problem. the point is that interaction between the probe
yang-mills theory with gauge group u(2) or u(1)  u(1) and that of conformal sector with
gauge group su(n  2) are controlled by the mass scales, u1,2. taking u = |u1  u2| much
lighter and gst suciently small, dynamics of the two probe d3-brane sector can be studied in
a controllable manner. thus, starting from the super yang-mills theory with gauge group g,
we will be integrating out over the higgs branch, viz. open strings transforming in (n  2, 2)
and its complex-conjugate representations. in the gst  0, n   and large t hooft coupling
limit, the integration amounts to resummation of large-n feynman diagrams. as have argued

22

in [1] (see also discussions in [23]), the result is to produce anti-de sitter spacetime, inside which

the two displaced probe d3-branes are localized.

intuitively, the above assertion may be understood by observing that variance of positions
of the (n  2) coincident d3-branes and two displaced d3-branes are of order (gstn)1/4 and
(gst)1/4, respectively. that is, in the large-n limit, position of the two probe d3-branes is
sharply localized inside the anti-de sitter spacetime. it should also become clear that, even

after adding a stretched open string between the two displaced d3-branes (associated with the
symmetry breaking g  h), integration over the higgs branch yields essentially the same
result, viz. dynamics of both the two probe d3-branes and the stretched open string between

them will perceive the ambient background as anti-de sitter spacetime.

henceforth, at gst  0, n   and strong t hooft coupling regime, we will be able to
study causality and locality of the anti-de sitter spacetime in a controllable manner by focusing

only to low-energy excitations of massive w-bosons in quantum corrected super yang-mills
theory with symmetry breaking pattern u(2)  u(1)  u(1).

4.2 scattering of brane wave by charged open string

dynamics of the open f-string stretched between the two d3-branes is governed by the type

iib green-schwarz action in the anti-de sitter spacetime. in appendix b, for nambu-goto

form of the action, details of gauge xing of local - and reparametrization symmetries are

explained. it turns out the gauge-xing as well as analysis of string dynamics thereof become
enormously simplied once one adopts a new coordinate, r  ge/u. according to the energy-
size holography relation, eq.(3.31), the new coordinate r is seen nothing but the size variable

of super yang-mills theory. it is interesting that, in analyzing a bulk process in anti-de sitter

spacetime, description in terms of a boundary variable turns out more suited and ecient.

indeed, in terms of the size coordinate r, the metric of the anti-de sitter spacetime is given

in poincare coordinates:

ds2

ads =

ge

r2h  dt2 + dx2

5i.
|| + dr2 + r2d2

(4.50)

as elaborated in appendix b, this coordinate choice leads the green-schwarz action to an

almost identical form, after gauge xing, to the one in at spacetime, for both bosonic and

fermions parts. moreover, as has been observed in [30], harmonic dynamics of the open string

turns out considerably simplied in the poincare coordinate system. after the gauge-xing, the

open string action is given by

istring = z dt "mw +

ge

2 z r2

r1

dr

r2 (cid:18) 1

c2 (tx)2  (rx)2(cid:19) +   #

(4.51)

23

+ xi=1,2z dt qi(cid:20)a(i)

0 (r, t) +

1
c

xi(t)  a(i)(r, t)(cid:21)r=xi(t)

.

(4.52)

||x

t

0

u1

u

u2

(1)
d
3

d

(2)
3

figure 9: a stretched f- or d-string connecting two probe d3-branes in the coulomb branch.
vibration of the stretched string causes retarded radiation between the two d3-branes.

first, one notes that static mass of the string as measured in anti-de sitter spacetime,

the rst term in eq.(4.51), ge r dr/r2 equals to (u2  u1) in terms of the original energy

coordinate. similar result holds also for an open d-string stretched between the two d3-branes.

hence,

mw = u,

mm =

1
gst

u.

(4.53)

recalling that u = t r (cf. eq.(3.30)), one discovers that static mass of the string in anti-de

sitter spacetime is the same as that in at spacetime. this is, from the super yang-mills theory

perspective, as it should be. both w-boson and dual magnetic monopole are bps-saturated

states and hence their masses are not renormalized as one interpolates from weak to strong t

hooft coupling regime.

from thomson scattering process in at spacetime, we have observed that the static mass

of the w-boson and the causal time-delay are governed by one and the same length scale, r,

the separation between the two d3-branes. as the w-boson is a bps state, one might have

guessed that it will be the same in anti-de sitter spacetime. after all, the distance between

the two d3-branes is the only relevant length scale inherent in the problem. this expectation,

however, turns out not quite right. we will be showing below that the causal time-delay is

governed not by the scale u, but by

 

1
c

r =

1
c

.

(4.54)

1
u1 

ge(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

1

u2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

it is clear that  has no simple functional relation to u, the scale that has set the w-boson

mass for both at and anti-de sitter spacetime and the energy variance that the spacetime

24

uncertainty relation [25] utilizes. in fact, the reason why (ge/u), not u, should be the
relevant variable for the time-delay may be gleaned from the fact that so(4, 2) invariant line

element between two points (t, u, x)1,2 is given by

s2

ads = u1u2"(t1  t2)2 + g2

e (cid:18) 1

u1 

1

u2(cid:19)2

+ (x1  x2)2# .

(4.55)

4.2.1 scattering equation of motion

consider excitation of a low-energy, monochromatic plane-wave of the u (1)(1) gauge eld on

the rst d3-brane. as in at spacetime, we will be studying thomson scattering of the brane-
wave o the open string. we have argued above that, in so far as gst = g2
ym  0, low-energy
processes between the two probe d3-branes can be trusted. actually, the thomson scattering

process depends on the combination of gyme0/mw. thus, even in the situation where gym
itself may not be suciently small, the foregoing calculations will be completely controllable

by taking the brane waves suciently weak.

in static gauge, the boundary condition of the transverse string coordinates x(t, r) is given

by

ge

ge

r2 rx(t, r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=r1
r2 rx(t, r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=r2

= qe(1)(t),

= 0 .

(4.56)

from eq.(4.51), one nds that a weak pulse propagating along the string is given by

x(t, r) = z d

2 (cid:20) a() (cid:18)1  i

r

c (cid:19) ei(tr/c) + a() (cid:18)1 + i

r

c (cid:19) ei(t+r/c)(cid:21) .

(4.57)

again, the boundary condition, eq.(4.56), xes the spectral amplitudes a(), a() uniquely:

a() = a() =   r1/ge

 !


qe(1)
0

 


eir2/c
2i sin 

.

(4.58)

substituting eq.(4.58) into eq.(4.57), one obtains equation of motion for the string endpoint

x1(t) on the rst d3-brane:

mw 1 +

r1

r2    t

tanh  t  1!!1

x1(t) = qe(1)(t).

(4.59)

comparison with the corresponding equation eq.(2.17) in the at spacetime indicates that the

innite-order kernal has been changed completely both in functional form and in dependence on

25

the d3-brane positions, u1,2. moreover, the kernel does not respect translational invariance in
u-coordinate as it depends on individual positions u1,2 separately. if probed the anti-de sitter
spacetime using a static ruler such as the w-boson, one would have concluded incorrectly

the translational invariance from the w-boson mass, eq.(4.53). dynamic information such as

causal time-delay eq.(4.54) does not exhibit translational invariance, either in energy or scale

coordinates. despite these dierences, the fact that the kernel makes the endpoint eectively

heavier holds the same in anti-de sitter spacetime as well.

proceeding similarly, one also nds an equation of motion for the string endpoint x2(t) on

the second d3-brane:

mw  sinh  t

 t ! x2(t) = qe(1)(t).

(4.60)

interestingly, in this case, functional form of the innite-order kernel is exactly the same as in

the at spacetime, eq.(2.18). however, argument of the kernel, which will set the causal time-
delay, is completely changed: in at spacetime, it was r = 2

su proportional to the w-boson
mass, while, in anti-de sitter spacetime, it is r = (ge/u) and has no apparent functional
relation with the w-boson mass. as r is the natural size variable in super yang-mills theory

(see eq.(3.31), one again nds a hint from eq.(4.60) that causality and locality of the anti-de

sitter spacetime ought to be encoded in super yang-mills theory as a dierence in size of brane

waves.

4.2.2 transmission rate across open string

it is straightforward to estimate the transmission rate of the brane-wave in anti-de sitter space-

time. as argued above, the transmission has taken place eectively via the stretched open string

in the anti-de sitter spacetime background. compared to the at spacetime, the equation of

motion eq.(4.60) of the second endpoint depends on  = r/c (dened in eq.(2.12)), sepa-

ration between the two d3-branes measured in terms of size variable in the super yang-mills

theory. apart from this, as the equation of motion has exactly the same form as in at space,

eq.(2.18), from eq.(2.5), one nds straightforwardly the transmission rate across f-string as

tfstring =

2

3   q2

mwc2!2

(cid:18)1  2



mwc2 +   (cid:19)  1 (cid:18) 

mwc2(cid:19)2

+   ! (cid:20) 

sin (cid:21)2

.

(4.61)

again, the rst two terms represent classical and quantum results, and the third summarizes

radiation reactive force and virtual w-boson pair eects. as the w-boson is a bps state, its

mass is protected in strong t hooft coupling limit. this explains for no change of the rst

three terms from the result in at spacetime. the last term, the string oscillation correction,

26

is not protected by supersymmetry, even though its functional form has remained the same, at

least in the weak brane wave limit.

similarly, the transmission rate tdstring for a d-string in anti-de sitter spacetime is obtained

as

tdstring =

2

3   q2

mmc2!2

(cid:18)1  2



mmc2 +   (cid:19)  1 (cid:18) 

mwc2(cid:19)2

+   ! (cid:20) 
sin (cid:21)

2

.

(4.62)

one again nds that the rst three terms are protected against strong t hooft coupling cor-

rections, as both both magnetic monopole and w-boson masses are bps saturated.

it should be emphasized again that derivation of the above results is suciently controllable,

despite the large-n super yang-mills theory is in the strong t hooft coupling regime. the

expansion parameter gyme0/mw is controllably small in so far as the brane wave is kept weak
enough.

4.3 locality and causality in anti-de sitter spacetime

4.3.1 retarded dynamics of string endpoints

as in at spacetime, one can observe the causal time-delay, eq.(2.12), in various ways. first,

a pulse propagating along the sring in anti-de sitter spacetime is described by characteristic
functions of the form g(t r/c), see eq.(4.57). as such, it will take a causal time delay  , as
claimed in eq.(2.12), for the pulse to propagate across the two d3-branes. alternatively, the

equation of the second string endpoint, eq.(4.60), written in an integral equation form:

or in a dierence equation form:

 t

sinh  t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
mw x2(t) = z dt(t  t)(cid:28)t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
x2(t +  )  x2(t   ) = 2 z t

t(cid:29)  qe(1)(t)

dt qe(1)(t)

(4.63)

(4.64)

displays manifestly the causal time-delay  for brane-wave transmission. agreement of the

time-delay with the geometric distance, eq.(2.12) implies that the boundary interaction between

f-string and d3-branes are local, even in the strong t hooft coupling limit.

compared to that in at spacetime, an important distinction of causal time-delay in anti-de

sitter spacetime is the fact that  does not depend on the sting scale at all. in at spacetime,
as t = 2
smw, oscillation threshold and hence causal time-delay has disappeared completely
in the supergraivty limit, s  0. this has now changed fundamentally in anti-de sitter
spacetime. the fact that oscillation threshold is nite, independent of string scale, everywhere

on the coulomb branch moduli space suggests that they will play an important role in dening

the precise nature of the super yang-mills theory, to which we now turn.

27

4.3.2 physical thresholds in anti-de sitter spacetime

from the discussion of the last subsection, especially the transmission rate formulae eqs.(4.61,

4.62), one nds that two physical threshold scales in the super yang-mills theory are winding

threshold scale set by the w-boson mass and the momentum threshold scale set by the yang-

mills scale size:

w = mw = u ;

m =

1


=

u1u2
ge

1
u

.

(4.65)

as discussed already, the winding threshold scale w keeps the same value as in the at
spacetime, as it is protected by supersymmetry. the momentum threshold scale m, however,
has changed signicantly. in particular, it has survived miraculously the scaling limit, s  0,
in obtaining the supergravity regime in anti-de sitter spacetime. in this sense, the stretched

open string is a sort of non-critical string, whose tension is governed by a low-energy scale in

the super yang-mills theory.

a new uncertainty relation for anti-de sitter spacetime is then given by

wm



ge ! .
o  u1u2

(4.66)

note that, in contrast to the at spacetime situation, the uncertainty relation does depend

on the location of the two d3-branes, u1,2, viz.
branch. thus, in any eects related to causal retardation, the size of the threshold correction
will depend on the location, as /m  (ge/u1u2)mw. for a xed mw, the correction is
parametrically pronounced as the probe d3-branes zoom into the origin.

location in the moduli space of the coulomb

stating dierently, one nds that, as the winding threshold scale w is held xed at a
generic point in the coulomb branch moduli space (away from the origin), the momentum
threshold m becomes smaller than w in the strong t hooft coupling limit, ge  . causality
and locality of the semi-classical supergravity in anti-de sitter spacetime will be then encoded

to the super yang-mills theory provided

w  m



u  o s u1u2
ge ! .

(4.67)

as noted above, on top of the suppression in the strong t hooft coupling limit, the condition

is better satised near the origin of the coulomb branch moduli space.

what about at the origin of the coulomb branch? as the momentum threshold depends
both on ge and on u1,2, the answer clearly depends on the order one takes the limits ge  
and u1,2  0. if one takes ge  0 rst and then u1,2  0, it is clear that the momentum
if one takes oppositely, for example, u  0 rst and
threshold stays light all the time.

28

u1,2  0 afterward, the winding threshold always dominates and the non-critical string states
will disappear at the conformal point.

4.3.3 holographic encoding in super yang-mills theory

we have now seen that, in large-n super yang-mills theory, strong t hooft coupling limit is

what enables to encode causality and locality of the anti-de sitter spacetime. let us now ask

how the thomson scattering process would look like in the super yang-mills theory side. as the

momentum threshold stays always lighter than the winding one, the w-boson is described

more properly as an extended, bilocal object. super yang-mills theory is not the one dened

either in conventional (dimension-four operators) or in dirac-born-infeld form, as they certainly

do not contain such an object.

as the two endpoints can move independently, the two isospin components of the scattered

brane waves can carry the causal time-delay information. let us see how this looks like in

the super yang-mills theory. the open string is now holographically projected to a shell of

spherically symmetric yang-mills eld conguration, as depicted in gure 10. the inner and

outer radii are r1 = ge/u1 and r2 = ge/u2, respectively. once the w-boson is hit by
the incident brane wave on the rst d3-brane, concentric spherical waves of the two isospin

components will emanate. an observer sitting at spatial innity on d3-branes will then perceive

the radiation as originating from the same point in space (the center in gure 10), but with a

time delay  . as is dictated by eq.(2.12), the dierence in size coordinate of the wave-fronts

in the super yang-mills theory equals exactly to  .

t

1

2

figure 10: yang-mills theory view of the thompson scattering

having concluded that super yang-mills theory dened either in renormalizable or in dbi

lagrangians is not capable of encoding causality and locality of anti-de sitter spacetime, we

now ask what modications, if possible, can do so. the answer to this question can be drawn

29

again from eq.(4.63). expanding the innite-order kernel for low-energy brane-wave, one nds

mwx2(t) =

+

xn=
xn=

()nztt
xm=0

+



= q

1

2

dt(cid:28)t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
t + (n/ )2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
()m+n(cid:18)
n (cid:19)

2m+2

o2m(t)

t(cid:29) qe(1)(t).

where

o2m = 2m

t e(t).

(4.1)

(4.2)

thus, the interaction of massive w-boson with the brane waves is governed by an innite tower
of higher-dimensional operators, o2ms. brane waves can be gauge or higgs elds, so there
in d = 4,n = 4 super
will be similar higher-derivative operators including higgs scalars.

yang-mills theory, operators of these structures are classied as long supermultiplets.

perhaps, it should not be surpring that long supermultiplets are responsible for encoding

causality and locality. after all, we have argued that string oscillator excitations are what is

needed to for probing causality and locality. it has been already known [5, 6] that the long

supermultiplets arise precisely from the massive string excitations, but the novelty of the above

argument is that they can be seen explicitly even at the level of single w-boson.

30

appendix: eective field theory of string endpoints

in this appendix, using covariant green-schwarz formalism, we will explain derivation of

gauge-xed, open string worldsheet action, eqs.(2.13, 4.51). the derivation turns out somewhat

nontrivial, as two majorana-weyl spinors of the covariant green-schwarz action are constrained

both by -symmetry gauge-xing and by open string boundary conditions. we will show that

both requirements lead to so-called d-brane gauge as a unique choice of the spinor projection.

the d-brane gauge has been proposed previously as a natural gauge-xing condition of the 

symmetry. interestingly, we nd that exactly the same condition also arises from the analysis

of open string boundary conditions.

we will also derive, after integrating out string excitations, an eective eld theory describ-

ing low-energy dynamics of two endpoints of the string. as pointed out in sections 2 and 4, the

dynamics is described by a lagrangian with innite-order kernels, which turns out exactly the

same as (two particle generalization of) the pais-uhlenbecks model. remarkably, according to

the analysis of pais and uhlenbeck, the particular innite-order kernel is the one compatible

with convergence, positive-deniteness and causality.

a green-schwarz action in flat spacetime

dynamics of an open f- or d-string stretched between the two parallel d3-branes, as depicted in

figure 2, is governed by the covariant green-schwarz action [37]. denote bosonic and fermionic
string coordinates as (x m ; a
 ) (m = 0,   , 9; a = 1, 2;  = 1,   , 32), which map worldsheet
 (spanned by i (i = 0, 1)) to coset superspace p oincare(9, 1|2)/so(9, 1). in type iib string
theory, 1,2 are majorana-weyl spinors of same chirality. in the nambu-goto formulation, the

worldsheet action is given by

istring = igs + id3q

igs = t z

d dhqdetla

i la

j + izm3

i

la  l

3 a  lj .
 ij

(a.1)

here, id3q is a boundary action of the string endpoints, m denotes a three-dimensional
manifold whose boundary equals to the string worldsheet, and

la = a

m dx m  iaada,

li = di.

(a = 0, 1,   , 9)

(a.2)

are invariant cartan one-forms of the coset superspace. the wess-zumino term in eq.(a.1) is

given by

lwz = 2idx a(cid:16)

1

2

ad1  

ad2(cid:17)  2(cid:16)

31

1

ad1(cid:17)(cid:16)

2

ad2(cid:17) .

(a.3)

apart from the boundary lagrangian, the covariant green-schwarz action eq.(a.1) is in-

variant under n = 2 global supersymmetry (a = 1, 2):

a = a;

x a = iaaa,

and local  symmetry, when expressed in terms of worldsheet scalar spinors  14,

where

 a = (cid:16)1 + ()ap(cid:17) a,
la  lb
h

p =

1
2

ab,

 x a = iaaa,

p 2 = 1.

(a.4)

(a.5)

(a.6)

a.1 open string boundary conditions

the last term in eq.(a.1) is the lagrangian describing interaction of the open string endpoints
with gauge and higgs elds on the worldvolume of the two d3-branes. denoting the d = 4,n =
4 vector supermultiplet as (a, ), the boundary lagrangian in the lowest order in derivative

expansion reads

ld3q = qi

d x a(cid:16)aa(x)  (x)a(cid:17) .

(a.7)

the boundary action represents turning on gauge and higgs elds on the d3-brane worldvolume.
the boundary conditions, derived from variation of the green-schwarz action, are given by 15

d

n

:

:

x  = 0,

||

 = 0,

11 + 22 = 0
1||1  2||2 = 0,

(a.8)

(a.9)

for dirichlet and neumann directions, respectively. to proceed further with gauge xing, one

will need to nd linear boundary conditions for fermions that are consistent with eqs.(a.8,

a.9). because of sign dierence between a = 1, 2 terms in eqs.(a.8, a.9), a unique choice of

the linear boundary condition is of the form

a = 5ma

bb,

5  01    3,

(a.10)

where (22) matrix m is determined to be mab = ab by the requirement that the boundary
condition is compatible with majorana and weyl conditions and with invertibility of eq.(a.10).

14the worldsheet vector  and worldsheet scalar  are related each other by 1,2
15once, on the d3-brane worldvolume, higgs and gauge elds are turned on, boundary conditions are expected
to be modied. it is easy to show, however, that higgs eld background does not modify the dirichlet boundary
condition at all, while gauge eld background aects the neumann boundary condition. as we will be considering
background elds that are weak enough, these modications will be ignored throughout.

i = iaa

i 2,1.

32

hence, for open green-schwarz superstring attached between the two d3-branes, the boundary

conditions are:

x  = 0,
(ab  5ab) b = 0

x || = 0
(ab + 5ab) b = 0.

(a.11)

a.2 gauge fixing

due to the local -symmetry, half of the degrees of freedom of 1,2s are redundant. since
the spinors 1,2 have the same chirality, the -symmetry may be gauge xed conveniently by
setting 1 = 52  1
2. using equation of motion for las, a straightforward calculation
yields the -gauge-xed action

dx a  (ad)(cid:21) .
in the gauge-xed action, half of n = 2 supersymmetry is realized linearly

igs = t zz d d (cid:20)qdetix ajx a +

i
2

x a = ia,

 = 

1
2

dx a  dxb
||dx  dx||

ab,

and the other half as a nonlinear fermionic symmetry

x a = 0,

 = .

(a.12)

(a.13)

(a.14)

for the reparametrization invariance, we will choose the static gauge 0 = t, 1 = r. after

expanding the action to quadratic order and reinstating the speed of light c, one obtains the

gauge-xed action of the open string as:

where

igs = istring + id3q

istring = z dt (cid:20)mw +
id3q = xi=1,2z dt qi(cid:20)a(i)

0 (r, t) +

t

2 z r2

r1

dr (cid:18) 1

c2 (tx)2  (rx)2(cid:19) +   (cid:21)
xi(t)  a(i)(r, t)(cid:21)r=xi(t)

,

1
c

(a.15)

(a.16)

(q1 = q2 = 1).

(a.17)

33

a.3 low-energy eective lagrangian of string endpoints

we will begin with solving the equations of motion for x(t, r), subject to xed but arbitrary

location of the string endpoints, x1,2(t). consider a fourier transformed, harmonic solution

x(, r) = z dte+itx(t, r)

= a()ei(tr/c) + a()ei(t+r/c).

the boundary condition specied,

= x1(),

= x2(),

(a.18)

x(, r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=r1

x(, r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=r2

relates the spectral amplitudes a(), a() uniquely to the (fourier transformed) string end-
points x1,2(). using the relation, it is possible to express normal derivatives at the string
endpoints

r x1()  r x(, r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=r1

,

in terms of x1,2(). the result is (t  r/c)

x2()  r x(, r)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r=r2
sin t   x1() cos t  x2()
!
sin t   x1()  x2() cos t
! .

t

t

ct

ct

r x1() = 
r x2() = 

(a.19)

(a.20)

in order to obtain an eective action for the string endpoints, we will need to integrate out

massive string excitations. as the string action, istring, is quadratic in x(r, t) at leading order,
it amounts to imposing the equation of motion of x(r, t) back to the action, eq.(a.16). one

then obtains, after fourier-transform back to x1,2(t),

istring = z dt (cid:20)mw 

t

2(cid:16)x2(t)  rx2(t)  x1(t)  rx1(t)(cid:17) +   (cid:21) .

(a.21)

the string action is now expressed entirely in terms of boundary data of the open string

positions on the two d3-branes.

inserting eq.(a.20) to eq.(a.21), one nally obtains the low-energy eective action of the

string endpoints:

igs = istring + id3q

(a.22)

t

istring = z dt 
mw 
id3q = xi=1,2z dt qi(cid:20)a(i)

2 xi,j=1,2

0 (r, t) +

ij (tt) xj(t) 
xi(t)kat

1
xi(t)  a(i)(r, t)(cid:21)r=xi(t)
c

34

,

(q1 = q2 = 1).

in the action, istring, the innite-order kernels are dened by:

kat
11 = kat

22 = +

kat
12 = kat

21 = 

1

r   tt
r   tt

tanh tt!
sinh tt! .

1

(a.23)

let us now focus on the thomson scattering by d3-brane waves, studied in section 2.
0 = a(2) = 0. in this

initially, the radiation eld is present only for the rst d3-brane, viz. a(2)
case, the equation of motion for x2(t) is reduced simply to

viz. a retardation relation

(cosh tt) x2(t) = x1(t),

(a.24)

(a.25)

x2(t) = z dt(cid:28)t(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

1

cosh tt(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

t(cid:29) x1(t).

after x2(t) is integrated out of istring using eq.(a.24), the low-energy eective lagrangian for
the thomson scattering process is obtained:

lthomson =  mw +

mw
2

x1(t)  tanh tt

tt ! x1(t) +   

+ q(cid:20)a(1)

0 (r, t) +

1
c

x1  a(1)(r, t)(cid:21)r=x1(t)

.

(a.26)

the eqs.(2.17, 2.18) follow immediately from the above eective lagrangian and the retardation

relation eq.(a.24).

b green-schwarz action in anti-de sitter spacetime

the green-schwarz action in ads5  s5 can be obtained in a closed form via super-coset space
construction [38] 16. in nambu-goto form, the action reads

iads = t zz d d (cid:20)qdetla

i la

j + 4iz 1

0

dsla

i (s)3alj(s)(cid:21) .

(b.27)

here, a = (a, a) = (0, 1,   , 4, 5,   , 9), i, j = 1, 2 and 1,2,3 are pauli matrices. the invariant
worldsheet one-forms li(s) and la(s) are given by

li (s) =  sinh sm

m d!i
m dx m  4iia  sinh2 1
m2

la(x) = ea

2sm

d!i

,

(b.28)

16 for a d-string, the action can be constructed similarly [39].

35

where (x m , i) are the bosonic and fermionic f-string coordinates and

(i2)ij a

(cid:16)m2(cid:17)ij
= ha
1
(d)i = (cid:18) +
2
also, li  li(s = 1), la  la(s = 1).

abab(cid:19) i +

1
4

 a(i2)ij ai +
e aa (2)i .

1

2 hab

i(i2)j ab

 abi(i2)j abi

(b.29)

the action is invariant under the n = 2 global supersymmtry and local -symmetry. ex-
pressing again in terms of worldsheet scalar spinors, the symmetry transformations rules are
essentially the same as eqs.(a.5, 6), except now the indices are repeated over ads5 and s5. :

b.1 gauge fixing

in order to x the local -symmetry, it turns out most convenient to make a change of vari-

able r = ge/u and use the poincare coordinates. up to the conformal rescaling, the ten-
dimensional spacetime is at. to proceed in an analogous manner to the at spacetime situa-
tion, we will follow the observation of kallosh [40, 41, 42] and take the gauge-xing 17

i

 = 0

where

i
  (p)i, p ij

 =

1
2

(0  i52)ij .

(b.30)

the -gauge-xed action is quartic in fermions. however, if one makes a change of variable

to the size variable, r = ge/u, as mentioned in seciton 4, the quartic fermon terms are
turned into quadratic ones only. moreover, in the r-coordinates, as we will see below, the
reparametrization gauge-xed action also simplies considerably 18.

again, choosing the static gauge 0 = t, 1 = r, one nds that the gauge-xed green-

schwarz action of the open string in anti-de sitter spacetime is given by:

iads = (lstring + ld3q)

where

(b.31)

(b.32)

ge

istring = z dt "mw +
ld3q = xi=1,2z dt qi(cid:20)a(i)

2 z r2

r1

0 (r, t) +

dr

c2 (tx)2  (rx)2(cid:19) +   #

r2 (cid:18) 1
xi(t)  a(i)(r, t)(cid:21)r=xi(t)

1
c

,

(q1 = q2 = 1).(b.33)

and the boundary interaction action is exactly the same in the at spacetime.

17dierent gauge-xing choice has been advocated recently [43].
18in [42], closely related observation has been made but was interpreted as the eect of t-duality along all
directions of d3-brane worldvolume. according to the present argument, this interpretation seems unnecessary.

36

b.2 low-energy eective lagrangian of string endpoints

one can obtain low-energy eective lagrangian of the string endpoints repeating steps of at

spacetime case, section a.2. after fourier transformation, a harmonic solution of the string
coordinate x(, r) now takes a form

3/2 (r). elimi-

(b.34)

(b.35)

(b.36)

x(, r) = z dte+itx(t, r)

r

r

= a()(cid:18)1  i

c (cid:19) ei(tr/c) + a()(cid:18)1 + i

c (cid:19) ei(t+r/c),
where the harmonic modes are expanded in terms of the hankel functions, h ()
nating a(), a() between x1,2() and z x1,2(), one nds relations (  z/c)
x2()(cid:21)
cos (cid:19) x2()(cid:21) ,

n (cid:20)(cid:18)sin  + 
n (cid:20)

cos (cid:19) x1()  

r x1() =

r x2() =

1
r1
1
r2

r2
c

r1
c

r2
c

2

2

where

r1
c

x1() +(cid:18)sin   
c2 (cid:19) sin    cos .

n = (cid:18)1 + 2 r1r2

imposing the equation of motion for x(t, z) to the action eq.(b.32), one obtains

istring = z dt "mw 

ge

2   1

r2
2

x2(t)  rx2(t) 

1
r2
1

x1(t)  rx1(t)! +   # .

inserting eq.(b.34) to the action eq.(b.36), after fourier-transforming back, one nally arrives

at the low-energy eective action of the string endpoints in anti-de sitter spacetime:

iads = (istring + id3q)

(b.37)

ge

istring = z dt 
mw 
id3q = xi=1,2z dt qi(cid:20)a(i)

2 xi,j=1,2

0 (r, t) +

xi(t)  kads

ij ( t)  xj(t) +   

(q1 = q2 = 1).

,

1
c

xi(t)  a(i)(r, t)(cid:21)r=xi(t)

the innite-order kernels in the action istring are now given by:

kads
11 = 

1

r1  1 +

r2/c


 t

tanh  t! 1 

r1r2
c2 2

t 

kads
22 = +

1

r2  1 

r1/c


 t

tanh  t! 1 

r1r2
c2 2

t 

12 = kads
kads

21 = +

1

r    t

sinh  t! 1 

r1r2
c2 2

t 

37

 t

 t

tanh  t!1
tanh  t!1
tanh  t!1

 t

.

(b.38)

let us again consider thomson scattering of d3-brane wave, studied in section 4, by setting

a(2)

0 = a(2) = 0. from eq.(b.37), equation of motion for x2(t) yields a retardation relation

 1 +

r1

r2    t

tanh  t  1!!  sinh  t

 t ! x2(t) = x1(t).

(b.39)

integrating out x2(t) from the action istring, using eq.(b.39), one nally obtains the low-energy
eective lagrangian for the thomson scattering of d3-brane waves:

lthomson =  mw +
+ q(cid:20)a(1)

0 (r, t) +

1
c

x1(t)  a(1)(r, t)(cid:21)r=x1(t)

.

mw
2

x1(t) 1 +

r1

r2    t

tanh  t  1!!1

x1(t) +   

(b.40)

from the eective lagrangian eq.(b.40) and the retardation relation eq.(b.39), one gets easily

the equations of motion of string endpoints, eqs.(4.44, 4.45).

references

[1] j. maldacena, adv. theo. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231.

[2] g. t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, in salamfest, eds. a. ali and

j. ellis, pp. 284 - 296 (world scientic co. singapore, 1993).

[3] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377.

[4] c.b. thorn, reformulating string theory with the 1/n expansion, in sakharov con-

ference, eds. l.v. keldysh and v.ya. fainberg, pp. 447 - 454 (nova science, 1992).

[5] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, phys. lett. 428b (1998) 105.

[6] e. witten, adv. theo. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253.

[7] l. susskind and e. witten, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter space,

hep-th/9805114.

[8] v. balasubramanian, p. kraus and a. lawrence, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 46003; v. bala-

subramanian, s. giddings and a. lawrence, what do cfts can tell us about anti-de

sitter space-times?, hep-th/9902052.

[9] t. banks, m.r. douglas, g.t. horowitz and e. martinec, ads dynamics from conformal

field theory, hep-th/9808016.

38

[10] j. polchinski and a. peet, uv/ir relations in ads dynamics, hep-th/9809022.

[11] g.t. horowitz and n. itzhaki, black holes, shock waves, and causality in the ads/cft

correspondence, hep-th/9901012.

[12] j. polchinski, s-matrices from ads spacetime, hep-th/9901076.

[13] l. susskind, holography in the flat space limit, hep-th/9901079.

[14] d. kabat and g. lifschytz, gauge theory origins of supergravity causal structure,

hep-th/9902073.

[15] g. t hooft, comm. math. phys. 86 (1982) 449; ibid 88 (1983) 1.

[16] see, for example, j.d. jackson, classical electrodynamics, 3rd edition, (addison-wesley,

reading, 1998).

[17] s.j. gates, m.t. grisaru, m. rocek and w. siegel, superspace (benjamin cummings,

1987).

[18] m. dine and n. seiberg, phys. lett. 409b (1997) 239.

[19] j. maldacena, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 3736.

[20] v. periwal and r. von unge, accelerating d-branes, hep-th/9801121.

[21] m. berkooz, a proposal of some microscopic aspects of ads/cft correspondence,

hep-th/9807230.

[22] d. lowe and r. von unge, j. high energy phys. 9811 (1998) 14.

[23] m.r. douglas and w. taylor iv, branes in the bulk of anti-de sitter space,

hep-th/9807225.

[24] s.r. das, brane waves, yang-mills theories and causality, hep-th/9901004.

[25] t. yoneya, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 1587.

[26] e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 335.

[27] h. yukawa, phys. rev. 77 (1950) 219; ibid 80 (1950) 1047.

[28] a. pais and g.e. uhlenbeck, phys. rev. 79 (1950) 145.

39

[29] s.-j. rey and j.-t. yee, nucl. phys. b526 (1998) 229.

[30] s.-j. rey and j.-t. yee, macroscopic strings as heavy quarks in large-n gauge theories

and anti-de sitter supergravity, hep-th/9803001.

[31] j. maldacena, phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 4859.

[32] d. bak and c. lee, nucl. phys. b403 315 (1993); ibid 424 (1994) 124.

[33] d. bak and h. min, phys. rev. d56 6665 (1997).

[34] s.-j. rey, s. theisen and j.-t. yee, nucl. phys. b527 (1998) 171.

[35] a. brandhuber, n. itzhaki, j. sonnenschein and s. yankielowicz, phys. lett. 434b (1998)

36.

[36] s.h. shenker, another length scale in string theory?, hep-th/9509132.

[37] m.b. green and j.h. schwarz, phys. lett. 136b (1984) 367.

[38] r.r. metsaev and a.a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 109.

[39] j. park and s.-j. rey, j. high energy phys. 9811 (1998) ppp.

[40] r. kallosh, superconformal actions in killing gauge, hep-th/9807206.

[41] r. kallosh and j. rahmfeld, phys. lett. 443b (1998) 143.

[42] r. kallosh and a.a. tseytlin, j. high energy phys. 9810 (1998) 16.

[43] a. rajaraman and m. rozali, on the quantization of gs string on ads5  s5,

hep-th/9902046.

40

