9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

4
2

 
 

2
v
3
8
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

quantum global structure of de sitter space

raphael bousso

department of physics

stanford university

stanford, california 94305-4060

su-itp-99-7

25 february 1999

hep-th/9902183

abstract

i study the global structure of de sitter space in the semi-classical
and one-loop approximations to quantum gravity. the creation and
evaporation of neutral black holes causes the fragmentation of de sit-
ter space into disconnected daughter universes.
if the black holes
are stabilized by a charge, i nd that the decay leads to a necklace
of de sitter universes (beads) joined by near-extremal black hole
throats. for sucient charge, more and more beads keep forming on
the necklace, so that an unbounded number of universes will be pro-
duced. in any case, future innity will not be connected. this may
have implications for a holographic description of quantum gravity in
de sitter space.

bousso@stanford.edu

1

1 introduction

1.1 why study de sitter space?

in an explicit realization of the holographic principle [13], it has recently
been argued that type iib string theory in anti-de sitter space is dual to a
conformal eld theory on its boundary [46]. anti-de sitter space is the max-
imally symmetric solution of the vacuum einstein equations with a negative
cosmological constant  < 0. one would expect dierent implementations of
the holographic principle to apply to minkowski ( = 0) and de sitter space
( > 0), but explicit prescriptions have yet to be found.

an important open question in the latter cases is the location of the sur-
faces onto which the gravitational theory should be projected. de sitter space
contains no boundaries at spatial innity, but it has spacelike boundaries at
past and future innity (see fig. 1). witten has suggested [7] that these
boundaries may provide the holographic surfaces for de sitter space.

future infinity

r=0

r=0

past infinity

figure 1: penrose diagram of classical de sitter space. the vertical lines are the
origins of polar coordinates on opposite poles of the spatial three-spheres. the
diagonal lines are the event horizons of observers on these poles.

it is therefore crucial to understand whether the simple global structure of
de sitter space persists when quantum eects are included. because de sitter
space is at a non-zero temperature, black holes will necessarily form through

2

non-perturbative quantum uctuations of the metric [8, 9]. therefore the
future endpoints of some geodesics fail to lie on future innity; instead, some
will end on black hole singularities. moreover, the evaporation of some of
these black holes will cause the spacelike surfaces to fragment into large,
disconnected pieces [10]. this means that future innity will not even be
connected. since the daughter universes are locally de sitter, one might
expect the process to repeat there. this would cause the proliferation into
an innite number of separate de sitter universes, and thus the complete
fragmentation of future innity.

the proliferation eect exploits a local instability of the maximum-size
neutral black holes created in de sitter space. the present paper will expose
a similar instability in maximal black holes carrying magnetic charge. they
also nucleate spontaneously in de sitter space. similar to the uncharged case,
the instability leads to a necklace of de sitter regions connected through black
hole throats. since the black holes will be stabilized near the extremal limit,
however, they will not evaporate completely. in the charged case, therefore,
the necklace will not break up into separate de sitter spaces; instead, the
daughter universes will remain connected through near-extremal black holes.
if the process repeats in them, a network of such necklaces will emerge.
moreover, if the black holes are suciently charged, they will not evaporate
at all. in this case the near-black hole regions will remain forever classically
unstable. they will produce an unbounded number of black hole interiors
and de sitter beads. the inclusion of charge thus makes the semi-classical
global structure of de sitter space even richer.

in order to avoid cluttering the equations with factors of (d  i), only
four-dimensional de sitter space will be considered here. maximal black hole
solutions exist for all de sitter spaces with spacetime dimension d  4, and
should lead to the same instabilities and global structure.

de sitter space is an important solution of einsteins equations, and the
semiclassical investigation of its quantum properties is useful both in its
own right and as a potential guide in the search for a complete quantum
description. an additional motivation was emphasized in refs. [913]: the
universe presumably underwent a primordial inationary era, during which
it behaved much like de sitter space. if ination was suciently long (and
it is, in fact, generically eternal [14]), such quantum eects will determine
the global structure of the universe. recent supernova measurements [15,
16] indicate, moreover, that the universe has once again entered a vacuum-
dominated era, albeit with a much smaller (eective) cosmological constant.

3

if this vacuum energy is stable, the results found here will be of relevance
also for the distant future of the universe.

1.2 proliferation

the fragmentation of de sitter space was found in ref. [10] for four-dimensional
einstein gravity with a positive cosmological constant and no maxwell eld.
related eects were later investigated for other theories in refs. [1719].
it involves three steps, which can be qualitatively described as follows (see
fig. 2):

1. in de sitter space, a non-perturbative, instanton-mediated uctuation
of the gravitational eld changes the spatial topology from s3 to s1s2.
this transition occurs at a rate of e/ and leads to the maximal
schwarzschild-de sitter solution (a.k.a. nariai), in which the s2 radius
is independent of the s1 coordinate.

2. quantum uctuations will break the degeneracy of the two-sphere ra-
dius. the nariai geometry is unstable under such perturbations. re-
gions along the s1 in which the two-spheres are smaller than the de-
generate size will collapse and form interiors of black holes. where
the two-spheres are greater, they will grow into exponentially large,
asymptotically de sitter regions. the geometry can now be thought of
as a necklace, with large de sitter beads connected through black hole
interiors. the number of beads depends on the number of oscillations
of the initial perturbation.

3. the inclusion of quantum radiation at the one-loop level shows that the
black holes radiate and decrease in size. for neutral black holes, there is
no known obstruction to their complete evaporation. this pinches the
necklace, leaving only the disconnected beads, i.e., separate de sitter
universes.

the causal structure that results from this process is shown in fig. 3 for

n = 2.

1.3 outline and summary

i will assume that there are no magnetically charged particles, or at least
none of smaller mass than the black holes. this means that magnetic black

4

s3

s  x s1

2

necklace

c

b

c

b

s s+3

3

figure 2: the three-step process by which de sitter space proliferates into discon-
nected daughter universes. on a de sitter background with s3 spacelike sections,
a neutral nariai solution (s1  s2) nucleates (the arrows indicate that opposite
ends should be identied, to form the s1). by a classical instability, the degenerate
nariai geometry decays into a necklace of n black holes and n de sitter regions
(beads). here n = 2, and the spatial section was chosen so that it penetrates
neither the black hole interiors nor the de sitter regions; this means that the
minimal two-spheres correspond to the black hole horizons (b), and the maximal
two-spheres correspond to the cosmological horizons (c). when the black holes
evaporate, the beads disconnect, and n separate de sitter universes remain. the
corresponding penrose diagram is shown in fig. 3.

holes cannot radiate away their charge. if magnetic ux was threaded around
the s1, the black holes could no longer evaporate completely, because they
would have to retain at least the minimum mass necessary to support their
charge. in other words, the necklace could not be pinched. the large de sitter
universes would have to remain connected through near-extremal black hole
throats.

my aim is to show that ordinary de sitter space decays into this type

5

fut. inf. 1

fut. inf. 2

surface of horizon freezing

surface of handle nucleation

past infinity

figure 3: penrose diagram for the proliferation process depicted in fig. 2. singu-
larities are indicated by dashed lines. in the region marked by the square brackets
the spatial topology is s1  s2, and opposite ends should be identied. per-
turbations of the two-sphere radius rst oscillate, then freeze out, seeding black
hole interiors (light gray) and de sitter regions (dark grey). after the black holes
evaporate, two separate de sitter universes remain.

of stable necklace conguration. this will be an additional, charged de-
cay mode complementing the proliferation eect that is mediated by neutral
black holes. for this purpose, i will investigate the stability of a class of
charged black holes in de sitter space. the two-parameter family of reissner-
nordstrom-de sitter solutions will be reviewed in sec. 2.1. for a black hole
to nucleate spontaneously (step 1), its geometry must contain a smooth eu-
clidean sector (see ref. [20] for a discussion and possible exceptions from this
rule). this restricts to a solution subspace comprising three one-parameter
families, the cold, lukewarm, and charged nariai black holes [21].

multiple black hole interiors and de sitter regions (step 2) can only form if
the spatial topology contains an s2 factor of constant radius. in the cold and
lukewarm solutions, the two-sphere size will vary. its single minimum will be
distinctly smaller than its single maximum. when one starts with classical

6

solutions of this type, small quantum uctuations can have no inuence on
the number of oscillations about the degenerate two-sphere size. the necklace
will contain only one bead, whose opposite ends will be connected by a single
black hole interior. the production of such black holes is certainly interesting;
it aects the quantum structure of de sitter space in the sense that not all
world-lines will end on future innity. but it is not new. here, therefore,
the focus will be on the charged nariai solutions, for which the two-sphere
size is classically constant, and the number of oscillations is determined only
by quantum uctuations. their metric and causal structure are presented in
sec. 2.2 (in the neutral case, both step 1 and step 2 restrict the schwarzschild-
de sitter solutions to the one with the largest black hole size, the neutral
nariai solution.)

it is important to distinguish between the classical and the quantum in-
stability of the charged nariai solutions. classically, they are perturbatively
unstable to the transition into a reissner-nordstrom-de sitter solution rep-
resenting a black hole of nearly maximal mass (sec. 3.1). this solution, in
turn, may decay into a lower mass black hole by emitting quantum radia-
tion. in sec. 3.2 i will argue, on thermodynamic grounds only, that maximal
black holes of suciently large, yet sub-extremal charge will not possess the
quantum instability.

classically, the constraint equations allow only uctuations that lead to
in a one-loop eective model that
the formation of a single black hole.
includes quantum radiation (sec. 4), however, this restriction is lifted.
in
sec. 5, i will show that higher-mode perturbations of a charged nariai solu-
tion rst oscillate, then freeze out and form multiple black holes and de sitter
regions. the model includes the back-reaction to the quantum radiation. it
predicts that the horizons do not, at rst, behave according to expectations
developed in sec. 3.2. at later times, however, they do follow the thermody-
namic behavior. in fact, the one-loop model turns out to reproduce exactly
the value of the critical charge, beyond which maximal black holes no longer
evaporate.

the dierent evolution of sub- and supercritically charged black holes
leads to a drastic dierence in their global structure. black holes of subcritical
charge simply radiate mass away until they are nearly extremal. the nal
picture is similar to neutral proliferation, except that the large de sitter beads
will still be connected through small black holes; see fig. 4 (left branch). the
corresponding penrose diagram is shown in fig. 5. like in the neutral case,
the number of nal de sitter universes is determined by the mode number of

7

3s

s  x s1

2

c

b

c

b

 

  

 

  


 

 


q<qc

q>qc

figure 4: charged nariai black holes nucleate semiclassically in de sitter space.
their spacelike sections are s1  s2. the one-sphere expands exponentially, and
the two-sphere has a constant radius. the magnetic eld loops around the one-
sphere and prevents it from being pinched. quantum uctuations lead to the
formation of n black holes and n de sitter regions (here n = 2). if the charge is
small, the black holes evaporate until they are nearly extremal (see fig. 5 for a
penrose diagram). for supercritical charge, the black holes will grow, approaching
the radius of the charged nariai solution. the regions between a black hole and a
cosmological horizon remain nearly degenerate. small perturbations can produce
more black hole interiors and de sitter regions there. iteratively, an innite number
of beads will form. the corresponding penrose diagram is shown in fig. 6.

the dominant perturbation when the charged nariai solution nucleates.

for charged nariai solutions of supercritical charge, an amusing new ef-
fect occurs. they will still form large de sitter beads as well as black hole in-
teriors with singularities. but the black holes do not evaporate. instead, their
horizon size asymptotically approaches the charged nariai value. therefore
there will always be regions where the two-sphere size is nearly constant,
namely the regions between each black hole horizon and the cosmological
horizon surrounding it. random quantum uctuations of the two-sphere

8

fut. inf. 1

fut. inf. 2

surface of horizon freezing

surface of handle nucleation

past infinity

figure 5: penrose diagram for the decay of de sitter space into n de sitter regions
(dark grey) separated by n lukewarm black holes (light gray); here n = 2. singu-
larities are indicated by dashed lines. the upper part of the diagram is a sequence
of n reissner-nordstrom-de sitter diagrams (fig. 7). future innity fragments,
but in contrast to the neutral case (fig. 3), space remains topologically connected.
this diagram corresponds to the subcritical branch of fig. 4.

size in such regions will include perturbations which have a maximum on
the black hole side and a minimum on the side of the cosmological horizon.
if the uctuation is strong enough, the two-spheres will be larger than the
charged nariai radius at the maximum, and smaller at the minimum. as
it crosses the apparent cosmological horizon, the minimum will freeze out
and collapse, forming a new black hole interior. similarly, the maximum
will freeze out as it crosses the apparent black hole horizon; it then grows
exponentially, seeding a new de sitter region. eectively, a new bead will
have been inserted into the necklace. the process continues iteratively, so
that innitely many black holes and de sitter regions will form around the
s1. the result is an unbounded number of de sitter universes, topologically

9

(but not causally) connected by charged wormholes (see fig. 4, right branch).
the corresponding penrose diagram is a fractal; it is sketched in fig. 6.

s xs1
2

s3

figure 6: nucleation of a supercritically charged nariai solution. black holes
form but do not evaporate. between a black hole and a cosmological horizon, the
s2 size remains nearly constant, and small uctuations can produce more black
holes (light grey) and de sitter regions (dark grey). in this way, an innite number
of beads form on the s1. with better resolution, one would see more and more
diamonds and triangles towards the top. this penrose diagram corresponds to the
supercritical branch of fig. 4.

one might have expected the proliferation of de sitter space via charged
black holes to oer nothing new beyond the additional rule that the daughter
universes never quite disconnect. the above argument shows, however, that
in fact a genuinely new phenomenon arises. when a neutral or subcritically
charged nariai solution nucleates semiclassically, at most a nite number
of de sitter universes can develop. innite proliferation occurs only if the
process repeats iteratively inside the daughter universes. this is plausible,
but not entirely obvious (see sec. 6). but in the supercritical case, an innite
number of de sitter beads forms on a single s1 necklace.

10

in sec. 6, i will question the global viewpoint that pervades this paper.
i will argue that at least some of my results are independent of its validity,
and examine how its abandonment may aect the location of holographic
surfaces.

2 reissner-nordstrom-de sitter black holes

2.1 general lorentzian solution

the four-dimensional lorentzian einstein-hilbert action with a cosmological
constant, , and a maxwell eld, f, is given by:

s =

1

16 z d4x (giv)1/2"riv  2  ff  

1
2

(ivfi)2# ,

n

xi=1

(2.1)

where riv and giv are the four-dimensional ricci scalar and metric determi-
nant. the scalar elds fi will be needed later to carry the quantum radiation;
classically, they can be set to zero.

the charged, static, spherically symmetric solutions of the vacuum ein-
stein equations with a cosmological constant  are given by the reissner-
nordstrom-de sitter metric

ds2 = v (r)dt2 + v (r)1dr2 + r2d2,

where

v (r) = 1 

2
r

+

q2
r2




3

r2;

(2.2)

(2.3)

d2 is the metric on a unit two-sphere, q is the charge, and  is a mass
parameter. the black holes can be either magnetically charged,

f = q sin  d  d

(whence f 2 = 2q2/r4), or electrically charged,

f =

q
r2 dt  dr

(2.4)

(2.5)

(whence f 2 = 2q2/r4). electrically charged black holes can lose their
charge by emitting electrically charged particles. but the aim here is to

11

i

i

iii

ii

r
1

ii

r
2

ii

naked
singularity
(r=0)

future infinity

iv

r
3

iv

i

i

ii

iii

ii

ii

figure 7: penrose diagram of a generic reissner-nordstrom-de sitter solution.
every point represents a two-sphere of radius r. thus the spatial topology is
s1  s2. the spacetime contains an asymptotically de sitter region (dark grey,
iv), bounded by the cosmological horizon at r3. the black hole interior (light
grey) is bounded by an outer horizon at r2. back-reaction truncates the diagram
at the inner horizon, r1. the fully extended classical diagram is indicated by thin
lines.

stabilize the black holes through their charge. therefore only magnetically
charged black holes will be considered below.

within appropriate ranges for the black hole mass and charge, v has
three positive roots, r1 < r2 < r3, which may be interpreted as the inner
and outer black hole horizons and the cosmological horizon. figure 7 shows
the causal structure of a generic reissner-nordstrom-de sitter solution. in
the fully extended classical solution the black hole is traversable. it contains
a naked singularity at r = 0 in region iii, beyond the inner horizon (r1).
consider an observer in region i, between the black hole and the cosmological

12

horizon, and located where the cosmological acceleration and the black hole
attraction balance exactly. this observer exists for an innite proper time,
during which he always sees radiation coming from the cosmological horizon
and falling into the black hole. (at late times, he also sees an equal amount
radiation coming out of the black hole, which explains why the back-reaction
remains small in region i.) an observer in region ii, however, will see only
the radiation emitted by the cosmological horizon, and it will take him only a
nite proper time to cross this innite amount of radiation. this means that
back-reaction to the quantum radiation eectively places a null singularity
on the inner horizon, and truncates the spacetime there.

 
2

2/9

neutral nariai

schwarzschild-

de sitter

de sitter

0

0

c

ultracold

charged nariai

cold

lukewarm

rnds

q 2

3/16

1/4

figure 8: reissner-nordstrom-de sitter solutions exist for all points on or within
the thick line. the plot is of the dimensionless quantities 2 vs. q2. the
lukewarm solutions lie on the dashed line, 2 = q2. they are stable endpoints of
black hole evaporation. they meet the charged nariai solutions at the point c,
corresponding to the critical charge qc. maximal black holes with higher charge
are stable.

the reissner-nordstrom-de sitter solution space is shown in fig. 8. it
is a roughly triangular region in the charge-mass plane. the square of the
charge is obviously bounded from below by zero; this boundary corresponds
to the neutral, schwarzschild-de sitter solutions. from above, it is bounded
by the extremal (or cold) reissner-nordstrom-de sitter solutions. these

13

solutions also form a lower bound on the mass at any given charge. as
the mass is increased at xed charge, the black hole radius, r2, grows, un-
til the black hole is as large as the cosmological horizon that surrounds
it. this bound corresponds to the charged nariai solutions. the usual
reissner-nordstrom-de sitter metric, eq. (2.2), breaks down in this limit.
as this paper is concerned mainly with the peculiar stability properties of
the charged nariai solutions, their metric will be given explicitly below.

2.2 charged nariai solution

the charged nariai solutions are the black holes of maximal mass for a given
charge. geometrically, they are obtained in the limit as the outer black hole
horizon radius approaches the radius of the cosmological horizon. therefore
r will no longer be a suitable coordinate to describe the region between the
two horizons.
instead, one may set r2 = r0  , r3 = r0 + . with the
transformation

r = r0 +  cos , t =

, .

(2.6)

1

v (r0)

the reissner-nordstrom-de sitter metric, eq. (2.2), becomes the charged
nariai metric,

1

ds2 =

a (cid:16) sin2d2 + d2(cid:17) +

1
b

d2
2,

(2.7)

in the limit   0. (this limiting procedure is discussed in more detail, for
the neutral case, in the appendix of ref. [11].) here a and b are given by

a = lim
0

v (r0)

2

, b = lim
0

1
r2
0

.

(2.8)

the maxwell eld is still given by eq. (2.4), and therefore f 2 = 2b2q2 in
the magnetic case. the parameters a and b are given by

a =

1

2q2 (cid:18)1 q1  4q2(cid:19) , b = 2  a.

(2.9)

therefore a < b except in the neutral case, when a = b. the geometry can
be visualized as a direct product of 1+1-dimensional de sitter space with a
two-sphere.

note that 0  q2 < (4)1  q2

max. at the upper bound the inner and
outer black hole horizons would coincide, but the metric will be dierent

14

from eq. (2.9) [21, 22]. thus all charged nariai solutions are subextremal;
they do, however, closely approach extremality as q2  q2
max. their causal
structure is shown in fig. 9.

future

infinity

0

/2



3/2

2

figure 9: penrose diagram for a charged nariai solution. it is identical to the
diagram for 1+1-dimensional de sitter space, except that every point represents a
two-sphere of equal radius, b1/2. there is no black hole. instead, any observer
will see two cosmological horizons: one in each direction on the s1. they are
shown here for observers at /2 and 3/2. the solution is classically unstable
to perturbations of the two-sphere size. this causes two-spheres to collapse into
black hole interiors or grow into de sitter regions. if n black holes are formed, the
upper part of the diagram will be a sequence of n reissner-nordstrom-de sitter
diagrams (fig. 7). this is shown in fig. 5.

for the decay of charged nariai black holes to have an eect on the
global structure of de sitter space, they must rst be produced. this occurs
through gravitational tunneling and can be described using instantons, or
euclidean solutions of the einstein-maxwell equations [8, 9, 11, 21, 23]. some
issues specic to compact, disconnected instantons are discussed in refs. [23]
and [24]. for general values of q and , the reissner-nordstrom-de sitter
metric, eq. (2.2), has no regular euclidean section. unless special boundary
conditions are selected [20], such black holes cannot nucleate semiclassically
on a de sitter background. a smooth instanton does exist, however, for
the charged nariai solutions (as well as for the cold, and the lukewarm
solutions, which will be discussed later) [11, 21, 22, 25, 26].

the euclidean charged nariai solution can be obtained straightforwardly

15

by wick-rotation: with  = i, eq. (2.7) describes a euclidean metric
corresponding to the direct product of two round two-spheres of radii a1/2
and b1/2. this solution has a euclidean action of 2/b. in order to obtain
the rate at which charged nariai black holes are produced in de sitter space,
this action must be normalized by subtracting o the de sitter action [8, 9,
23, 27].

the euclidean de sitter solution is given by eq. (2.2), with  = q = 0
and  = it. this yields a euclidean four-sphere of radius (/3)1/2.
its
action is 3/; therefore the charged nariai nucleation rate, neglecting a
prefactor, is given by

(2.10)

exp 


b

1 + 2q2b

1  q2b ! .

this is less than one, and in fact ranges from exp(/) to exp(2/)
as the charge increases from 0 to q2
max. therefore, black hole production is
suppressed, and more suppressed the higher the charge. the suppression is
weak if the cosmological constant is close to the planck value. if it is smaller,
the suppression becomes huge. in an eternal de sitter space, however, the
process is bound to occur nevertheless.

3 preliminary stability analysis

the aim of this section is to gain an understanding of the type of instabilities
that may be expected in a charged nariai geometry. because the spacelike
sections are arbitrarily similar to the submaximal reissner-nordstrom-de sit-
ter solutions, the metric is classically unstable to the formation of black hole
interiors and large de sitter regions. the resulting nearly maximal reissner-
nordstrom-de sitter black holes are classically stable. however, thermody-
namic considerations suggest that some (but not all) of them will decay by
emitting hawking radiation.

in sec. 5 these expectations will be veried, and additional instabilities
found, by considering a variety of metric perturbations in a model that ex-
plicitly includes quantum radiation and back-reaction.

3.1 classical instability

the limit leading to eq. (2.7) has made the s1  s2 topology of the spacelike
sections of reissner-nordstrom-de sitter spaces manifest;  is the coordinate

16

along the one-sphere. the charged nariai solutions are precisely those for
which a slicing can be found in which the two-sphere radius, r, is independent
of the s1-coordinate, x. for other reissner-nordstrom-de sitter black holes,
the s2 size varies around the s1; one can nd a slicing in which the maximal
two-sphere corresponds to the cosmological horizon, and the minimal two-
sphere to the outer black hole horizon. in this sense, it will be helpful to think
of the spacelike section of a charged nariai solution as a perfect doughnut,
while it would be a wobbly doughnut for a generic reissner-nordstrom-
de sitter solution.

in terms of its space-time geometry, the charged nariai solution is the
direct product of 1+1-dimensional de sitter space with a round two-sphere.
there is no black hole interior; instead the black hole horizon has become a
second cosmological horizon. looking in either direction of the s1, an ob-
server will see a cosmological horizon. this is shown in the penrose diagram,
fig. 9. however, the charged nariai solutions are classically unstable. any
region in which the two-spheres are slightly smaller will collapse to form the
interior of a black hole. larger two-spheres will grow exponentially to form
asymptotically de sitter regions.

a simple way to understand this instability is to remember that the

charged nariai solutions form a set of measure zero in the reissner-nordstrom-
de sitter solution space; yet they have a completely dierent causal struc-
ture. for all , except  = 0, the coordinates given in eq. (2.6) describe a
generic reissner-nordstrom-de sitter solution with the causal structure of
fig. 7. even if at a given moment a spacelike section has  = 0 exactly,
a small -perturbation would destroy the degeneracy and lead to reissner-
nordstrom-de sitter space.

this perturbation is really the only one allowed by the classical constraint
equations. when quantum matter will be included in sec. 4, however, more
general perturbations with multiple minima and maxima will become possible
(a doughnut with many wobbles). in sec. 5 i will show that this leads to
necklace congurations: along the s1, the charged nariai spacelike section
will develop a number of asymptotically de sitter regions separated by black
hole interiors.

3.2 thermodynamics

gibbons and hawking have shown that the cosmological horizon emits ther-
mal radiation in de sitter space [28]. its temperature is given by the horizons

17

surface gravity, over 2, as it would be for black holes. indeed, if a black
hole is present, it will exchange radiation with the cosmological horizon. as
a result, it will grow or shrink, depending on the net inux.

in the particular case of charged nariai solutions, the two horizons are
of equal temperature, and will be in thermodynamic equilibrium. one would
not expect this equilibrium to be stable. as discussed above, a small per-
turbation will turn the charged nariai solution into a submaximal reissner-
nordstrom-de sitter geometry. for the uncharged case, the following argu-
ment was given in ref. [29]: in the perturbed geometry, the black hole will
be slightly smaller than the cosmological horizon. correspondingly, it will be
hotter, and it will lose more radiation than it absorbs. thus it will continue
to shrink at an ever-increasing rate.

one would expect the charged nariai solutions to contain a similar quan-
tum instability. there are some important dierences, however. for exam-
ple, the black hole mass cannot become smaller than the extremal value.
below, the thermodynamic argument is re-examined for the charged case. it
will turn out that for sucient charge, black holes actually anti-evaporate,
asymptotically approaching the charged nariai size.

in at space, a charged black hole does indeed evaporate until it becomes
extremal.
in the early stages of evaporation, the charge will be negligi-
ble, and the temperature will increase as the black hole loses mass. in the
extremal limit, however, the temperature approaches zero and evaporation
ceases. therefore there is a turnaround point: as the black hole evaporates,
the temperature rst increases, then decreases to zero.

the dierence in de sitter space is that the black hole cannot become ar-
bitrarily cold. as it approaches the extremal limit, its temperature eventually
drops to that of the cosmological horizon. at this level the black hole will be
stabilized by the gibbons-hawking radiation bath it is immersed in. indeed
there are two families within the reissner-nordstrom-de sitter solution space
for which the black hole is in thermodynamic equilibrium with the cosmolog-
ical horizon. the rst is the unstable charged nariai family, for which the
black holes are large. the second is the family of lukewarm solutions [25],
which are characterized by the condition q2 = 2 in the metric, eq. (2.2). as
shown in fig. 8, the lukewarm solutions meet the charged nariai solutions
at the point c, corresponding to a critical charge q2
max/4.
c). if q2 < 2,
the black hole is hotter than the cosmological horizon, and will evaporate
until it becomes a lukewarm solution. this includes the case of a perturbed

first consider black holes with subcritical charge (q2 < q2

c = 3/(16) = 3q2

18

now consider the black holes of supercritical charge (q2 > q2

charged nariai solution. subcritical black holes with q2 > 2 are colder
than the lukewarm solution and will absorb radiation from the cosmological
horizon until they reach the lukewarm level. thus the lukewarm black holes
form the stable endpoints of the evolution of subcritically charged black holes.
c). there
are no equilibrium solutions between the charged nariai solutions, in which
the black hole is as hot as the cosmological horizon, and the cold solutions,
in which the black hole temperature (but not the cosmological temperature)
vanishes. therefore the black hole is colder than the cosmological horizon for
all but the charged nariai solutions. it will absorb cosmological radiation
and grow, asymptotically approaching the charged nariai limit.

in summary, all charged nariai solutions are expected to be classically
unstable to the formation of a black hole interior. if q2 < q2
c, the black hole
is expected to be thermodynamically unstable; for larger charges, it should
be stable.

4 including radiation

4.1 model construction

the production of a charged nariai geometry, described in the previous
section, requires only semiclassical techniques. the process can be thought
of as a non-perturbative uctuation of the gravitational eld, mediated by
instantons. to continue with the description of the fragmentation process,
however, it is necessary to work in a model that includes the quantum radi-
ation exchanged between the black hole and cosmological horizons.

black holes in asymptotically at space have been shown to radiate [30];
they will lose mass, shrink, and unless they are stabilized by charge, they will
eventually disappear. for black holes in de sitter space, the consequences
of this radiation are less obvious, since the cosmological horizon also radi-
ates [28]. for the nariai solution the two horizons are initially of equal size
and temperature, so the black hole suers no net loss of energy. in ref. [29]
we investigated the stability of this equilibrium, considering only perturba-
tions corresponding to the formation of a single black hole. for this purpose,
a spherically symmetric model was introduced that included the one-loop
eective action of n scalar elds. the same model was employed in ref. [10]
to demonstrate the proliferation eect arising from higher mode perturba-

19

tions of the nariai solution. here it will be used to investigate whether
the charged nariai solutions contain a similar instability. (the stability of
the neutral nariai solution was investigated using more elaborate models in
refs. [31, 32].)

restricting to spherically symmetric elds and quantum uctuations, the

metric may be written as

ds2 = e2(cid:16)dt2 + dx2(cid:17) + e2d2,

(4.1)

where x is the coordinate on the s1, with period 2. using this ansatz, and
the on-shell condition for magnetic elds,

ff  = 2q2e4,

(4.2)

the angular coordinates and the maxwell eld can be integrated out in
eq. (2.1), which reduces the action to

s =

1

16 z d2x (g)1/2e2"r + 2()2 + 2e2  2  2q2e4 

1
2

(fi)2# ,

n

xi=1

(4.3)
the scalars couple to the dilaton in the two-dimensional action. thus,
to include the back-reaction from quantum radiation, one should nd the
classical solutions to the action s + w , where w  is the scale-dependent
part of the one-loop eective action for dilaton coupled scalars [3341]:

w  = 

1

48 z d2x(g)1/2(cid:20) 1

2

r

1


r  6()2 1



r  wr(cid:21) .

(4.4)

in the large n limit, the contribution from the quantum uctuations of the
scalars dominates over that from the metric uctuations. in order for quan-
tum corrections to be small, one should take n  1. for small perturba-
tions of the charged nariai solutions, the ()2 term may be neglected [29].
the coecient w will not be specied here.
it will later drop out of the
calculation; thus, the r term will not aect any results at the present level
of approximation.

one can obtain a local form of this action by introducing an independent
scalar eld z which mimics the trace anomaly. with the classical solution
fi = 0 the n scalars can be integrated out. thus the action of the one-loop

20

model will be given by:

s =

1

16 z d2x (g)1/2(cid:20)(cid:18)e2 +

n
3

(z + w)(cid:19) r



n
6

(z)2 + 2 + 2e2 ()2  2e2  2q2e2(cid:21).

(4.5)

4.2 equations of motion

dierentiation with respect to t (x) will be denoted by an overdot (a prime).
for any functions f and g, dene:

f g   f g + f g,

2g  g + g,

f g  f g + f g,

2g  g + g.

(4.6)

(4.7)

variation with respect to ,  and z yields the following equations of motion:

(cid:18)1 

wn
6

e2(cid:19) 2 + 2()2 +
(cid:18)1 

wn
6

the constraint equations are:

2z  22 = 0.

n
6

e22z + e2+2(cid:16)e2 + q2e2  1(cid:17) = 0;

(4.8)

e2(cid:19) 2  2 + ()2 + e2  q2e2+4 = 0;

(4.9)

(4.10)

wn
6

(cid:18)1 
(cid:18)1 

wn
6

e2(cid:19)(cid:16)2  2 (cid:17)  ()2 =
e2(cid:19)(cid:16)      (cid:17)   =

n
12

e2h(z)2 + 22z  4zi ;
e2h zz  + 2 z   2(cid:16) z  +  z(cid:17)i .

(4.11)

n
12

(4.12)
from eq. (4.10), it follows that z = 2 + , where  satises 2 = 0. the
remaining freedom in  can be used to satisfy the constraint equations for
any choice of , ,  and  on an initial spacelike section [29].

5 linear perturbations and back-reaction

21

5.1 quantum charged nariai solution

using the model established in the previous section, the stability of the
charged nariai solutions can now be investigated. the analysis will fol-
low the procedure set forth (for neutral black holes) in refs. [10, 29], where
more details can be found. here the emphasis will be on the eects of charge.
the charged nariai solution, eq. (2.7), may be rewritten in the form of

eq. (4.1). this yields

e2 =

1
a

1

cos2t

,

e2 = b,

(5.1)

with a and b given by eq. (2.9).

the next step is to nd the quantum corrections to the unperturbed
solution. they take the form of small corrections to a and b, and can be
obtained by substituting eq. (5.1) into the one-loop equations of motion,
eqs. (4.8) and (4.9). this yields the following cubic equation for b:

b"(cid:18)1 

wn
6

b(cid:19)  q2b 1 

(w  2)n

6

b!# = "1 

(w + 2)n

6

b# , (5.2)

while a is given by

a =

  q2b2
1  wnb/6

.

expanding in the small parameter n, one obtains to rst order:

a = a0"1 +
b = b0(cid:18)1 

nb0

nb0

1  2q2b0

3   2q2b0
3 (cid:19) ,

+

w

2!# ,

(5.3)

(5.4)

(5.5)

where a0 and b0 refer to the classical solution, eq. (2.9). note that in the
near-extremal limit, one has 2q2b0  1, and the expansion in n breaks
down.

5.2 metric perturbation

quantum uctuations will destroy the degeneracy of the charged nariai
solution. this means that the two-sphere radius, e, will no longer be
constant.
instead, it will be a function of the one-sphere coordinate, x,

22

and time, t. it can be decomposed into fourier modes with time-dependent
coecients. it simplies the analysis considerably to assume that one mode
dominates over all others; in this case the black holes will be distributed
evenly around the one-sphere. the probability for the n-th mode to dominate
will be of the order of exp(n2). the corresponding perturbation may be
written as

e2 = b [1 + 2n(t) cos nx] ,

(5.6)

this simple ansatz is sucient to illustrate various evolutionary possi-
bilities for black hole-de sitter solutions which ultimately aect the global
structure of de sitter space, including the formation of one or several charged
or uncharged black holes on a necklace, their evaporation or anti-evaporation,
and their fragmentation. nevertheless, it has limitations. most importantly,
the perturbation can be considered linear only as long as the two-sphere size
does not dier signicantly from the charged nariai value anywhere on the
s1. yet the perturbations soon become non-linear in the black hole interi-
ors, where the two-spheres collapse to zero size, and in the de sitter regions,
where they expand indenitely. even considering only the regions between
the black hole and cosmological horizon, the linear approximation eventually
breaks down, if the black hole evaporates.
(this is only a problem if its
charge is small; otherwise a large lukewarm endpoint will preclude further
evaporation, or, for supercritical charge, evaporation never begins.)
it is
fair to assume, of course, that a very small black hole will hardly notice the
cosmological horizon and can be treated like a schwarzschild black hole. nu-
merical work is currently underway to verify the smooth transition between
the perturbative and non-perturbative regimes [42]. we will also investigate
more general perturbations and examine the conditions for domination of
certain modes.

i will not consider the constant mode perturbation (n = 0) in detail,
but most of the analysis for general n will apply to it. if the two-spheres
are all larger than the charged nariai value, they will expand exponentially
everywhere. the resulting spacetime will be locally de sitter, with no black
holes and a connected future innity. globally its topology will be s1  s2.
if the two-spheres are smaller, they will collapse to a singularity everywhere,
unless they are stabilized by quantum radiation at a small radius. it is not
clear whether this should be interpreted as the collapse of the entire de sitter
space; related questions are discussed in sec. 6.

in order to obtain an equation of motion for the metric perturbation, n,

23

one may eliminate 2 and 2z from eq. (4.8). this yields

"1  (w + 1)
= e2(cid:26)(cid:18)1 

wn
6

n
3

e2 +(cid:18)wn

6

e2(cid:19)

2# 2 +(cid:20)2  (w + 1)

n
3

e2(cid:21) ()2 =

e2(cid:19) e2 (cid:20)1  (w  2)

n
6

e2(cid:21) q2e4 (cid:20)1  (w + 2)

n
6

e2(cid:21) (cid:27) .

(5.7)
note that the left- and right-hand sides of this equation vanish separately in
the unperturbed case ( = 0). therefore, perturbations of  will drop out at
rst order in  and will not be considered here. insertion of the perturbation
ansatz, eq. (5.6), yields

n
n

=

a

cos2t

 n2,

(5.8)

where

a =

2 [62wnb 12q2b +3(w 2)nq2b2+(w+2)n] (6wnb)b

[3612(w+1)nb +w2n 2b2] (q2b2)

.

(5.9)

the value of a is crucial in determining whether a black hole grows or
shrinks; in the neutral case it can be expressed in terms of , n, and w
only [29]. in order to evaluate a for q2 > 0, however, one would need to
solve the cubic equation (5.2) for b. it seems preferable to evaluate a only
to rst order in n. this gives a surprisingly simple result:

a = 2 +(cid:18)2nb0

3 (cid:19)  1  4q2b0
1  2q2b0! .

(5.10)

as advertised, this expression is independent of w. the rst factor will be
small as long as n  1, which must be assumed anyway for the one-loop
eective action to make sense. the second factor will be of the order of 1,
except in the near-extremal limit, when 2q2b0  1. there the expansion in
n cannot be trusted, and should be supplemented by a numerical calcula-
tion of a. fig. 10 shows a plot of a as a function of the black hole charge.
note that 4q2b0 < 1 for q < q2
c = 3/(16), and 4q2b0 > 1 for q > q2
c.
therefore, a will be greater (less) than 2 for subcritical (supercritical) black
hole charge.

24

2

1.5

a

1

0.5

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

figure 10: a typical plot for the parameter a as a function of q2. a > 2 for
small charges. a passes through 2 at the critical charge, near q2 = 3/16. black
holes with larger charge will anti-evaporate. a becomes zero exactly in the limit
where the charged nariai solutions become extremal, near q2 = 1/4.

5.3 horizon perturbation

the metric perturbations considered above lead to the formation of black
hole and cosmological horizons. the condition for an apparent horizon is
()2 = 0. eq. (5.6) yields


t

=  n cos nx,


x

=  n n sin nx.

(5.11)

therefore, there will be 2n black hole horizons, and 2n cosmological horizons,
located at

x(k)
b (t) =

1

n (cid:18)2k + arctan(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

25

(cid:19) ,

n

nn(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(5.12)

x(n+k)
b

(t) =

1

c (t) = x(l)
x(l)

n (cid:18)2k + arctan(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

b (t) +

,

n

nn(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:19) ,

(5.13)

(5.14)


n

where k = 0 . . . n  1 and l = 0 . . . 2n  1.

by inserting these values of x back into the metric perturbation, eq. (5.6),

one nds the size of the black hole horizons:

rb(t)2 = e2[t,x(l)

b (t)] = b [1 + 2(t)] ,

(5.15)

where

  n cos nx(l)

b = n 1 +

2

n
n22

n!1/2

.

(5.16)

will be called the horizon perturbation.

if  grows, the black hole is shrinking; this corresponds to evaporation.
to see whether this happens, one needs to nd solutions for n for given
initial conditions, and plug them into eq. (5.16).

5.4 early time evolution

exact solutions to eq. (5.8) have not been found for general values of a. var-
ious approximations can be used, however, to investigate the initial behavior
of the black holes, and to determine whether they ultimately evaporate, or
grow.

the possible initial conditions for n can be parametrized by writing:

n(0) =  sin ,

n(0) =  cos .

(5.17)

to obtain the early-time behavior of the horizons, one may solve the equa-
tion of motion, eq. (5.8), for a power series in t, and use the result in the
equation for the horizon perturbation, eq. (5.16). writing down the general
expressions for its coecients would not be very illuminating. it suces to
say that the coecients i can be positive or negative, depending on a, ,
and n, and not all of them will have the same sign generically.

this makes the early-time behavior quite complicated. the main point,
however, is that black holes with q < qc, which are thermodynamically
unstable, will not necessarily evaporate initially. and supercritically charged
black holes, which ought to be stable according to sec. 3.2, may initially

26

become smaller. this can be demonstrated by choosing  = /2 and n = 1.
(note that this choice corresponds to vanishing time-dependence.
it thus
gives the initial conditions most similar to a slightly submaximal reissner-
nordstrom-de sitter black hole.)

for  = /2, the linear coecient, 1, vanishes. the early time evolution

is determined by the quadratic coecient, and is given by

(t) = (cid:20)1 

1
2

(a  1)(a  2)t2(cid:21) .

(5.18)

by eq. (5.10), a > 2 for black holes of subcritical charge. thus the horizon
perturbation begins to decrease. therefore, contrary to thermodynamic ex-
pectations, such black holes will initially grow, or anti-evaporate. on the
other hand, if the charge is supercritical (but suciently non-extremal), a
will lie between 1 and 2, and the horizon perturbations begin to increase.
these black holes evaporate initially.

this behavior may be counterintuitive, but it is not obviously absurd. in
de sitter space, the quantum radiation is distributed on a compact spatial
manifold. through the constraint equations, (4.11) and (4.12), the initial
metric perturbation completely determines the distribution of the quantum
radiation around the s1. this distribution may correspond to energy heading
towards the black hole even when it is thermodynamically hotter, and vice
versa. this does not violate the second law. it means only that the radiation
eld is initially out of equilibrium with the horizons.

but what happens at later times? does the radiation eld relax and the
thermodynamic evolution prevail? to answer this question fully a numerical
study is called for, work on which is underway [42]. analytically, two things
can be done. first, i will give asymptotic solutions to the linear perturbation
equation at late times. second, i will investigate the particular initial con-
ditions selected whenever the nariai geometry emerges from a semiclassical
transition.

5.5 late time evolution

it will be useful to rescale the time variable in eq. (2.7) as cosh v = 1/ cos t.
then the nariai metric takes the form

ds2 =

1

a (cid:16)dv2 + cosh2v dx2(cid:17) +

1
b

d2.

(5.19)

27

in the new time coordinate, the metric perturbation equation (5.8) becomes

d2n
dv2 + tanh v

dn
dv

+  n2

cosh2 v

 a! n = 0.

(5.20)

at late times (v  1), one can take tanh v  1 and neglect the n2 term.

asymptotic solutions are therefore given by

n(v) = + exp(c+v) +  exp(cv),

(5.21)

where  are arbitrary constants and c are the two solutions to c(c+1) = a.
unless + is exactly 0, which would be unphysical ne-tuning, the mode with
the larger exponent, c+, will eventually dominate no matter how small its
initial excitation.

neglecting the weaker mode, the horizon perturbation can be found from

eq. (5.16):

 = 2+nc1

+ exp [(c+  1)v] .

(5.22)

the exponent is positive (negative) for c+ > 1 (c+ < 1). thus black holes will
evaporate if a > 2, and they will anti-evaporate if a < 2. but by eq. (5.10),
a goes through 2 precisely when the charge becomes critical. this means
that charged nariai black holes will evolve according to thermodynamic
expectations at late times, even if they initially fail to do so. the conclusion
holds for generic  and all n. therefore, the anti-evaporation eect found
for neutral black holes in ref. [29] is transitory, and eventually gives way
to evaporation. similarly, the evaporation found for supercritically charged
black holes will give way to growth.1

equation (5.10) and the full expression for a, eq. (5.9), arise from com-
plicated combinations of one-loop terms in the equations of motion. yet they
give perfect agreement with the thermodynamic analysis, and even predict
the same critical charge beyond which evaporation is replaced by black hole
growth. this is a non-trivial check. it shows that this two-dimensional ef-
fective model is capable of accurately reproducing the thermodynamic prop-
erties of the four-dimensional solutions. in addition, of course, it also incor-
porates back-reaction eects.

1before this argument was found, the black hole turnaround was rst demonstrated

numerically by jens niemeyer [42].

28

5.6 euclidean boundary conditions

so far, i have considered general linear perturbations of the charged nariai
geometry. when this solution nucleates by semiclassical tunneling, however,
it will emerge from a compact euclidean solution. any perturbation has to
be regular in the entire euclidean region. otherwise the geometry would not
be a solution.
it would fail to dominate the path integral, and would be
semiclassically forbidden.

the regularity condition eectively selects a particular value of the phase,
, on the t = 0 surface. the perturbation amplitude can still be chosen freely,
but the relative strength of n and n is xed. in ref. [10], an approximate
solution to eq. (5.8) was found which is everywhere regular and extends far
beyond the nucleation surface, so that the late-time evolution of the black
hole can be seen. the solution depends only on a and n, and was found for
general a, so that only a brief review will be given here.

wick-rotation, u = 
nariai metric, eq. (5.19):

2 + iv, yields the euclidean version of the charged

ds2 =

1

a (cid:16)du2 + sin2u dx2(cid:17) +

1
b

d2.

(5.23)

this s2  s2 instanton describes the spontaneous nucleation of a degenerate
handle in de sitter space. a suitable nucleation path runs from the south
pole of the rst two-sphere, at u = 0, to u = /2, and then parallel to the
imaginary time axis (u = /2 + iv) from v = 0 to v = . geometrically,
this corresponds to cutting the rst two-sphere in half, and joining to it a
lorentzian 1+1-dimensional de sitter hyperboloid.

on the south pole, the s1 factor of the spacelike sections degenerates into
a point. therefore, the perturbation may not depend on the angular variable
x there. this means that the condition n(u = 0) = 0 must be imposed when
eq. (5.8) is solved. for any n  2, the family of solutions, parametrized by
a real prefactor , is given by [10]

n(u) = 2ei(c+n)/2(cid:18)tan

u

2(cid:19)n

(n + cos c+u) ;

(5.24)

for n = 1, it is [29]

1(u) = 2ei(c+1)/2 sin c+u.

(5.25)

the choice of phase ensures that n will be real at late lorentzian times, when
measurements are made. as before, c+ is the larger root of c(c + 1) = a.

29

the solutions are exact only for c+ = 1 (which corresponds to no quantum
matter) but are a good approximation for the whole range of c+ attained by
charged black holes.

this solution is particularly useful because it describes the entire evo-
lution, from the creation of the charged nariai geometry to the evapora-
tion of the black holes, in a single expression. for small lorentzian times,
0  v  arsinh n, the metric perturbation is contained within a single hub-
ble volume, and oscillates. when the s1 size has expanded by a factor of
n, at v  arsinh n, the perturbations leave the horizon and freeze out. the
n maxima run away to form asymptotically de sitter regions, while the n
minima collapse to form black hole interiors. thus a necklace conguration
develops. for larger v, the solution asymptotes to

n(v) =  exp(c+v).

(5.26)

by eq. (5.21), this agrees with the late time attractor found above, as it
should.

a discussion of the corresponding evolution of the horizon perturbation
has already been given after eq. (5.22). subcritically charged nariai solutions
become a necklace with n beads, as expected. a nite number of de sitter
universes results (see figs. 4 and 5). supercritically charged nariai solutions
also decay into a necklace, but the black holes do not become small. instead
they anti-evaporate and approach the charged nariai limit. there will be 2n
regions in which the two-sphere size is nearly constant across a hubble length
on the s1, namely each region between a black hole horizon and its neighbor-
ing cosmological horizon. classically, the geometry is locally nariai in such
regions. higher-mode uctuations continue to push the two-sphere size over
and under the degenerate value locally. as these perturbations freeze out,
more black hole and cosmological regions will be seeded. ultimately, this
eect leads to the formation of an innite number of de sitter beads along
the same s1 (see figs. 4 and 6).

6 discussion: global vs. local perspective

in ref. [10] i showed that de sitter space is unstable to the proliferation
into disconnected daughter universes. this fragmentation is mediated by
spontaneously nucleated neutral black holes. in the present paper, i have
investigated the consequences of charged black hole creation in de sitter

30

space, and found that it leads to the formation of a necklace of de sitter
universes. unlike the neutral case, the necklace does not fragment. instead,
the de sitter universes remain connected by charged black hole throats. the
most signicant dierence to the neutral case is an iterative eect occuring
if the black holes contain more than a certain critical charge. in this case, a
single nucleation event results in the formation of an unbounded number of
daughter universes.

sec. 1.3 contains a more detailed summary of the processes found in this

paper. here i will discuss some open questions.

during ination, the universe was eectively in a de sitter state. in most
models, the proliferation eect occurs; this means that we live in one of a
large or innite number of universes that originated in the same inationary
region [10]. but unless the other universes lead to subtle, non-local quantum
eects, we cannot verify their existence even in principle, because they will
never intersect our causal past. one may ask, therefore, whether occams
razor should not be applied to the whole scenario. i believe this would be
a mistake. occams razor applies to theories, not to their solutions. a
theory can be simple and successful in describing every single experiment
we can perform, and yet it may predict many phenomena outside our range
of observation. for quantum gravity, this is actually to be expected. one
cannot consider a theory complete, and yet reject the picture it gives us for
the global structure of spacetime. (euclidean quantum gravity, of course,
is neither complete nor consistent, but it may give a good semi-classical
approximation to the full theory.) otherwise it would also be wrong, for
example, to speak of the present universe, or think of it as a homogeneous
constant curvature space; all we can observe, after all, is our past lightcone.
but what if genuine reasons are found for abandoning the global point
of view in studying de sitter space? would this render the eects of frag-
mentation and proliferation irrelevant? a local observer cannot see all of the
spacetime; half of it will be hidden behind an event horizon.
if quantum
eects are included and de sitter space fragments, the daughter universes
will be causally disconnected; a local observer will never know about more
than one of them. she may notice an endpoint of black hole evaporation;
but she has no way of telling whether the black hole throat really was a con-
nection to a dierent de sitter region, or whether it merely wrapped around
to the other end of her own, as in the classical reissner-nordstrom-de sitter
solution. is there any way, then, that a local observer can nd out about the
global structure? this question is one reason why the new process of innite

31

bead production in the supercritically charged nariai geometry is important.
an observer in a region between a black hole and cosmological horizon will
actually notice the constant production of new daughter universes. from
her perspective, this corresponds to ipping the direction in which the black
hole lies, i.e., in which the two-sphere radius decreases. so at least in the
supercritical case, the fragmentation of future innity can be inferred even
by a local observer.

the transition from de sitter to charged nariai is a topology change,
s3  s1  s2; it is like punching a hole through the three-sphere. asymp-
totic de sitter regions develop in the resulting spacetime. from a local point
of view, they are indistinguishable from the de sitter background on which
the transition rst happened, so one would expect more topological transi-
tions to occur in the daughter universes. this argument is crucial for the
production of an innite number of disconnected universes in the neutral
case (proliferation). but if one tries explicitly to specify surfaces onto which
the de sitter instanton can match, one nds that they necessarily cross the
original nucleation surface, and are therefore globally distinct from a de sit-
ter background2. the supercritical case of innite bead production on the
same s1 circumvents this problem, which is another reason why i consider it
signicant.

related questions arise for other instanton-mediated processes in de sitter
space, such as the nucleation of cosmic strings [43] or the hawking-moss
transition [44]. from a global point of view, there should only ever be one
such transition, occurring at a minimal three-sphere (the waist) of de sitter
space. this is because no minimal three-sphere background for additional
transitions is ever available thereafter if the global picture is taken at face
value. but from a local point of view there will be many hubble volumes in
which the space is asymptotically indistinguishable from the background. it
would seem absurd that the process should not be allowed there. similarly, in
the hawking-moss case, it has been debated [4446] whether the whole space,
or just one hubble volume, tunnels into the new state. in pure de sitter space
such distinctions may just be meaningless. but for tunneling events in an
inationary universe the dierence is signicant. a post-inationary observer
will be able to see widely separated regions of the eective de sitter space,
and will be able to determine whether tunneling occured more than once.

as mentioned in the introduction, it has been suggested that past and

2i am indebted to ted jacobson for discussions of this question.

32

future innity form the holographic surfaces of de sitter space [7]. this
conjecture takes a global point of view. in ref. [10] and the present paper
i have shown that it would be inconsistent with quantum theory to assume
future innity to be connected.
if future innity is indeed a holographic
surface, this result will have consequences for the implementation of the
holographic principle in de sitter space.

the conjecture was motivated by the compactness of space, and the lack
of a null innity, in fully extended de sitter space. from a local point of view,
however, one should not consider the whole of de sitter space. the geometry
is eectively bounded by a null surface, the observers event horizon (see
fig. 1). could this horizon be a holographic surface? then the fragmentation
of future innity would not cause any complications; a local observer can only
reach a single point of future innity anyway.

acknowledgments

i would like to thank dieter brill, andrew chamblin, ted jacobson, stephen
hawking, andrei linde, jens niemeyer, steve shenker and lenny susskind
for interesting discussions and feedback. i am grateful to andrei linde and
jens niemeyer for their comments on a draft of this paper. this work was
supported by the german national scholarship foundation and basf.

references

[1] c. r. stephens, g. t hooft and b. f. whiting: black hole evapora-
tion without information loss. class. quant. grav. 11, 621 (1994), gr-
qc/9310006.

[2] l. susskind: the world as a hologram. j. math. phys. 36, 6377 (1995),

hep-th/9409089.

[3] l. susskind and e. witten: the holographic bound in anti-de sitter

space, hep-th/9805114.

[4] j. maldacena: the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and
supergravity. adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231 (1998), hep-th/9711200.

33

[5] e. witten: anti-de sitter space and holography. adv. theor. math.

phys. 2, 253 (1998), hep-th/9802150.

[6] e. witten: anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transition, and conne-
ment in gauge theories. adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 505 (1998), hep-
th/9803131.

[7] e. witten: baryons and branes in anti-de sitter space. talk given at

strings 98, santa barbara (1998),
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/strings98/witten/.

[8] p. ginsparg and m. j. perry: semiclassical perdurance of de sitter space.

nucl. phys. b222, 245 (1983).

[9] r. bousso and s. w. hawking: the probability for primordial black

holes. phys. rev. d 52, 5659 (1995), gr-qc/9506047.

[10] r. bousso: proliferation of de sitter space. phys. rev. d 58, 083511

(1998), hep-th/9805081.

[11] r. bousso and s. w. hawking: pair creation of black holes during in-

ation. phys. rev. d 54, 6312 (1996), gr-qc/9606052.

[12] r. bousso: charged nariai black holes with a dilaton. phys. rev. d 55,

3614 (1997), gr-qc/9608053.

[13] r. bousso: pair creation of dilaton black holes in extended ination.

phys. rev. d 55, 4889 (1997), gr-qc/9610040.

[14] a. linde: eternally existing selfreproducing chaotic inationary uni-

verse. phys. lett. b175, 395 (1986).

[15] s. perlmutter et al.: measurements of omega and lambda from 42 high-

redshift supernovae, astro-ph/9812133.

[16] a. v. filippenko and a. g. riess: results from the high z supernova

search team. phys. rept. 307, 31 (1998), astro-ph/9807008.

[17] s. nojiri and s. d. odintsov: quantum (in)stability of 2-d charged
dilaton black holes and 3-d rotating black holes. phys. rev. d 59, 044003
(1999), hep-th/9806055.

34

[18] s. nojiri and s. d. odintsov: can quantum corrected btz black hole

anti-evaporate? . mod. phys. lett. a13, 2695 (1998), gr-qc/9806034.

[19] a. a. bytsenko, s. nojiri and s. d. odintsov: quantum generation of
schwarzschild-de sitter (nariai) black holes in eective dilaton-maxwell
gravity. phys. lett. b443, 121 (1998), hep-th/9808109.

[20] r. bousso and s. w. hawking: lorentzian condition in quantum gravity.

phys. rev. d 59, 103501 (1999), hep-th/9807148.

[21] r. b. mann and s. f. ross: cosmological production of charged black

hole pairs. phys. rev. d 52, 2254 (1995), gr-qc/9504015.

[22] l. j. romans: supersymmetric, cold and lukewarm black holes in cos-
mological einstein-maxwell theory. nucl. phys. b383, 395 (1992), hep-
th/9203018.

[23] r. bousso and a. chamblin: patching up the no-boundary proposal
with virtual euclidean wormholes. phys. rev. d 59, 084004 (1999), gr-
qc/9803047.

[24] p. m. brano and d. r. brill: instantons for black hole pair production,

gr-qc/9811079.

[25] f. mellor and i. moss: black holes and gravitational instantons. class.

quant. grav. 6, 1379 (1989).

[26] f. mellor and i. moss: stability of black holes in de sitter space. phys.

rev. d 41, 403 (1990).

[27] s. coleman: the fate of the false vacuum. 1. semiclassical theory. phys.

rev. d 15, 2929 (1977).

[28] g. w. gibbons and s. w. hawking: cosmological event horizons, ther-

modynamics, and particle creation. phys. rev. d 15, 2738 (1977).

[29] r. bousso and s. w. hawking: (anti-)evaporation of schwarzschild-

de sitter black holes. phys. rev. d 57, 2436 (1998), hep-th/9709224.

[30] s. w. hawking: particle creation by black holes. commun. math. phys.

43, 199 (1974).

35

[31] s. nojiri and s. d. odintsov: quantum evolution of schwarzschild-de

sitter (nariai) black holes, hep-th/9804033.

[32] e. elizalde, s. nojiri and s. d. odintsov: possible quantum instability

of primordial black holes, hep-th/9901026.

[33] e. elizalde, s. naftulin and s. d. odintsov: covariant eective action
and one loop renormalization of 2-d dilaton gravity with fermionic mat-
ter . phys. rev. d 49, 2852 (1994), hep-th/9308020.

[34] v. mukhanov, a. wipf and a. zelnikov: on 4-d hawking radiation

from eective action. phys. lett. b332, 283 (1994), hep-th/9403018.

[35] t. chiba and m. siino: disappearance of black hole criticality in semi-

classical general relativity. mod. phys. lett. a12, 709 (1997).

[36] r. bousso and s. w. hawking: trace anomaly of dilaton-coupled scalars

in two dimensions. phys. rev. d 56, 7788 (1997), hep-th/9705236.

[37] s. nojiri and s. d. odintsov: trace anomaly and nonlocal eective ac-
tion for 2-d conformally invariant scalar interacting with dilaton. mod.
phys. lett. a12, 2083 (1997), hep-th/9706009.

[38] s. nojiri and s. d. odintsov: trace anomaly induced eective action
for 2-d and 4-d dilaton coupled scalars. phys. rev. d 57, 2363 (1998),
hep-th/9706143.

[39] s. ichinose: weyl anomaly of 2-d dilaton-scalar gravity and hermiticity

of system operator , hep-th/9707025.

[40] w. kummer, h. liebl and d. v. vassilevich: hawking radiation for
nonminimally coupled matter from generalized 2-d black hole models.
mod. phys. lett. a12, 2683 (1997), hep-th/9707041.

[41] j. s. dowker: conformal anomaly in 2-d dilaton scalar theory. class.

quant. grav. 15, 1881 (1998), hep-th/9802029.

[42] r. bousso and j. niemeyer: the non-linear evolution of de sitter space

instabilities, in preparation.

[43] j. garriga and a. vilenkin: quantum uctuations on domain walls,

strings, and vacuum bubbles. phys. rev. d 45, 3469 (1992).

36

[44] s. w. hawking and i. g. moss: supercooled phase transitions in the very

early universe. phys. lett. 110b, 35 (1982).

[45] s. w. hawking and i. g. moss: fluctuations in the inationary universe.

nucl. phys. b224, 180 (1983).

[46] a. linde: quantum creation of an open inationary universe. phys.

rev. d 58, 083514 (1998), gr-qc/9802038.

37

