cern-th/98-375
outp-98-81-p
spin-98-7
hep-th/9902058

9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
8

 

 
 

1
v
8
5
0
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

string thermodynamics in d-brane backgrounds

s.a. abela,1, j.l.f. barbonb,2, i.i. koganc,3, e. rabinovicid,4

a theory division, cern, ch-1211 geneva 23, switzerland

b spinoza institute, leuvenlaan 4, 3584 ce, utrecht, the netherlands

c theoretical physics, 1 keble road, oxford ox1 3np, uk

d racah institute of physics, the hebrew university, jerusalem, israel

abstract

we discuss the thermal properties of string gases propagating in various d-brane back-
grounds in the weak-coupling limit, and at temperatures close to the hagedorn temper-
ature. we determine, in the canonical ensemble, whether the hagedorn temperature is
limiting or non-limiting. this depends on the dimensionality of the d-brane, and the size
of the compact dimensions. we nd that in many cases the non-limiting behaviour man-
ifest in the canonical ensemble is modied to a limiting behaviour in the microcanonical
ensemble and show that, when there are dierent systems in thermal contact, the energy
ows into open strings on the limiting d-branes of largest dimensionality. such energy
densities may eventually exceed the d-brane intrinsic tension. we discuss possible impli-
cations of this for the survival of dp-branes with large values of p in an early cosmological
hagedorn regime. we also discuss the general phase diagram of the interacting theory, as
implied by the holographic and black-hole/string correspondence principles.

cern-th/98-375
february 17, 2014

1steven.abel@cern.ch
2j.barbon@phys.uu.nl
3i.kogan@physics.ox.ac.uk
4eliezer@vms.huji.ac.il

1 introduction and background

models in which the particle spectrum has the hagedorn form [1],

(m)  ma ebm

(1)

are of great interest because of their thermodynamic properties. for example, for a <
5/2 (in four dimensions) and, at sucient energy density, a system like this has a
negative specic heat. thermodynamic quantities are not extensive and two such sytems
cannot establish an equilibrium [2].

this type of spectrum rst arose in the context of statistical bootstrap models [1, 3]
and, for hadrons, such behaviour indicates that they are composed of more fundamental
constituents [4]. in fundamental string theories we nd the same kind of spectrum [5, 6,
7, 8], and a search for hints to the existence of string constituents is of great interest.

on a more practical level, regimes of hagedorn behaviour of weakly-coupled strings are
interesting in the context of stringy cosmological models [7]. in particular, there has been
much work recently in models where the string scale can be signicantly lower than the
planck scale [9], perhaps even as low as the tev scale [10, 11]. these models involve string
theory in backgrounds in which the gauge sector is conned to extended topological defects
(branes) of various kinds. particularly tractable are models constructed with dirichlet
p-branes [12]. the visible universe could, for example, correspond to a d3-brane, and the
cosmological behaviour of such systems is only beginning to be studied [10, 11, 13].

in this paper we study various aspects of the thermodynamics of fundamental strings
in backgrounds with webs of intersecting d-branes. for any particular brane structure
(i.e. number and spatial arrangement of the d-branes), there are open strings in dierent
sectors, labeled by the d-brane sets to which they are attached, as well as closed strings
propagating in the bulk. we determine the thermodynamic properties of the dierent
d-brane sectors at energy densities larger than the fundamental string scale, to leading
order in string perturbation theory, and paying special attention to the dependence on the
various t-moduli (volumes). for early work on various aspects of hagedorn behaviour
with d-branes see for example [14, 15, 16, 17, 18].

one particularly interesting fact is that for ordinary ten-dimensional superstrings (in-
cluding the heterotic) the closed-string sector has a hagedorn temperature which is non-
limiting (in that it requires a nite amount of energy to reach it, in the description
provided by the canonical ensemble), whilst typei open strings have a limiting hage-
dorn temperature [5, 11]. it was pointed out recently in ref. [18] that open-string sectors
in dp-branes show limiting behaviour provided p  5. on the other hand, for p < 5,
open strings seem to show non-limiting behaviour, similar to that of closed strings. it
should be noted that dierent sectors have the same hagedorn temperature in perturba-
tion theory, since the critical behaviour can be related to the onset of infrared divergences
due to a closed-string state becoming massless at the hagedorn temperature [19, 20].
provided this tachyonic closed-string state couples to all d-branes, all the topologically
distinct open-string sectors will share the same critical temperature.

we begin our discussion in section 2 by calculating the canonical (single-string) density
of states of an open string propagating in various d-brane backgrounds. in particular we
generalize the analysis to the case where the dimensions are large but compact and pay

1

special attention to whether the hagedorn temperature appears to be limiting or non-
limiting. when dealing with nite and large dimensions, the experience with closed
strings (c.f. [8]) tells us that the thermodynamic properties ought to change as the energy
is raised through thresholds. these thresholds correspond to the string being able to
feel extra dimensions by producing winding or heavy momentum modes and we shall
nd that this is indeed the case with open strings. any dependence on the nite size
of extra dimensions is of particular interest because phenomenologically viable d-brane
scenarios typically require large compact dimensions in order to explain why the weak
scale is so much lower than the planck scale.

in section 3 we derive the thermodynamic properties in the microcanonical ensem-
ble. as with closed strings, this analysis is required once the canonical ensemble exhibits
esoteric features such as supposedly negative specic heat, and leads to a better under-
standing of the thermodynamic properties. the more limited information encoded in the
free energy (the canonical ensemble) concerning the properties of non-limiting strings is
greatly enhanced by studying the microcanonical ensemble.

most importantly the universal presence of gravity in any string system means that
the innite volume limit (the thermodynamic limit) at nite energy density does not exist
in a strict sense, due to the jeans instability [21, 20], and the holographic bound [22].
thus, consistency requires working in nite volume, and investigating whether there are
regimes of approximate thermodynamic behaviour for each individual case.

to do this, we shall work in the simplest nite-volume backgrounds, i.e. toroidal com-
pactications. for closed strings in the ideal-gas approximation, it was found in [7, 8] that
winding modes tend to work in favour of positive specic heat. indeed, if winding modes
carry a sizeable proportion of the energy, a supercially non-limiting behaviour according
to the canonical ensemble may turn into a limiting behaviour in the true microcanonical
analysis.

we nd many examples of this phenomenon in the brane backgrounds. as the micro-
canonical discussion can be rather technical, it is worth previewing the resulting physical
picture.
imagine heating up open-string excitations on a thermally isolated d-brane
wrapped on a nite-volume torus. consider a dp-brane for which the canonical ensem-
ble predicts a non-limiting behaviour. eventually the critical hagedorn energy density is
reached on the brane and open strings begin looping into the bulk volume although their
ends must stay attached to the brane. the d-brane is now surrounded by an open-string
cloud which spreads as we raise the temperature. at some point a few energetic strings
emerge and, as we raise the temperature still further, the spectrum of a canonically non-
limiting open-string system becomes resolved into a peak of low-energy excitations and
a few energetic excitations which carry most of the energy. eventually these modes are
able to wind in the dirichlet directions and their number grows rapidly once they start
winding. the thermal properties begin to resemble those of the system in a small, totally
compact volume. as we approach the hagedorn temperature, the specic heat increases
dramatically, and we nd that we cannot supply enough energy to raise the temperature
to the hagedorn temperature. the limiting behaviour has been restored.

in the more general multibrane congurations there are several types of open strings
depending on how these strings stretch between branes attached at their end-points. we
calculate the entropy for each such class. we nd a hierarchy of entropies favouring in
particular the open strings attached to a single brane.

2

the thermal interaction of two or more hagedorn systems then follows directly (in
section 4) from the microcanonical discussion and turns out to be quite unusual.
in
particular, we will show that systems which are non-limiting tend to give their energy
up to limiting systems. thus if we take our previously isolated d-brane and place it
in a bath of closed strings, the energy of the former increases in the manner described
above, almost without limit. this curious and possibly violent disequilibrium is due to
dierently diverging specic heats and is reminiscent of systems with negative specic heat
(although we stress that most specic heats are found to be positive below the hagedorn
temperature).

we then speculate on how such a process might end. we suggest that eventually
the energy density of the open-string gas becomes greater than the d-brane tension.
at this point the system is unstable towards the thermal nucleation of d-braneantid-
brane pairs of various dimensions and topological structures. we make some estimates of
the production rate under the assumption that the braneantibrane pairs form a dilute
plasma.

finally, in section 5, we suggest a phase diagram including the eects of string inter-
actions. most notably, we use the correspondence principle of [23] to derive high-energy
generalizations of previously studied phase diagrams in the context of the sym/ads cor-
respondence [24, 25, 18, 34]. it is suggested that, at weak string coupling, the hagedorn
regime is always bounded by a black-hole-dominated phase, which subsequently saturates
the holographic bound [22].
indeed, black holes seem to emerge quite often when the
hagedorn regime is probed [6, 26, 27, 23, 18].

2 the canonical ensemble in the presence of d-

branes

we shall consider models of typeii strings on tori, with a number of d-branes wrapped
in a possibly complicated intersection pattern, together with orientifold planes ensuring
the appropriate cancellation of tadpoles and anomalies.

in addition to the closed strings propagating in the bulk, we have dierent sectors of
open strings, dened by the classes of branes to which they are attached. a given class
of open strings will be labeled (p, q) if they connect a dp-brane and a dq-brane. the
relative orientation of the branes is in principle arbitrary, although we will only consider
supersymmetric intersections, i.e. those for which the (p, q) strings propagating along the
intersection submanifold have a supersymmetric ground state.

each (p, q) system is characterized by a dierent partition of the 10 space-time di-
mensions into neumannneumann (nn), dirichletdirichlet (dd), or mixed (dirichlet
neumann (dn) plus neumanndirichlet (nd)):

10 = dn n + ddd + dn d + ddn ,

(2)

where dn d + dn n = p + 1 and ddn + dn n = q + 1. accordingly, we denote the radii of the
torus in these directions by rn n , rdd, rn d and rdn (some of which could be innite).
notice that this labeling of the torus radii depends on the particular (p, q) system of open
strings we focus on.

3

the total number of directions with mixed boundary conditions for a given (p, q)

system is denoted by

and for a supersymmetric intersection it must take values

  dn d + ddn ,

 = 0 (mod 4).

(3)

(4)

the simplest case of  = 0 corresponds to parallel branes. intersections with  = 4 are
all dpd(p + 4) systems and their t-duals. finally, a prototype of  = 8 system is the
d0d8 intersection and all t-duals. so, for example a typei model with wrapped d5-
and d1-branes contains closed strings and open strings in all  = 0, 4, 8 sectors.

we always assume that the system is at weak coupling so that the mass of the d-branes
is large and perturbation theory around the d-brane background is a good approxima-
tion.
in particular in this limit we can neglect brane creation in the vacuum and can
neglect the eects of perturbations of the brane itself on the thermodynamics. in later
sections we discuss the meaning of this assumption in more detail, and in particular the
thermodynamic systems in which it might be expected to break down.

one additional point. for calculations in purely perturbative closed-string theories, an
important question was whether to take winding number and momentum to be conserved
in the compact dimensions. indeed, the thermodynamic properties are typically found
to be qualitatively dierent if these quantum numbers are conserved. in this paper we
are ultimately interested in the thermodynamic properties of two or more systems in
equilibrium in a d-brane background. hence in all of our calculations we do not conserve
winding number or momentum in the compact dimensions, since for example d-branes
can absorb and emit momentum, and winding number can be transferred from a gas of
open strings on the brane to a gas a closed strings in the bulk.

2.1 single-string density of states

the open strings in the (p, q) sector have nn momenta, dd windings, and oscillators in all
transverse directions. notice that they do not have momentum or winding quantum num-
bers in the nd or dn directions. as a result, the thermodynamic quantities of the (p, q)
system are independent of the nd, dn moduli rn d, rdn . using t-duality, we assume
that all radii are larger or equal than the t-selfdual radius: rn n , rn d, rdn , rdd  1
in string units.1 in fact, when the radii are of stringy size, the nn or dd character is
not sharply dened, but then we shall see that thermodynamics depends only on  as a
dimensional parameter, which is t-duality invariant.

the single-string energy is given by

2 = (~p )2 + (osc  a) .

(5)

the constant a is the normal ordering intercept with the spin structure : a = 1 for
bosonic strings, ans = 1/2 for neveuschwarz spin structure and ar = 0 for the ramond

1we shall use throughout the paper string units with regge slope parameter  = 1, which has the

property that the t-selfdual radius is rselfdual = 1.

4

sector, in the case of superstrings. here ~p is the momentum in the spatial nn directions
plus the contributions from the open-string windings in the dd directions,

(~p )2 = xin n

n2
i
r2
i

i r2
l2
i ,

+ xidd

(6)

where ri are the torus radii.

the number of states with a particular value of the oscillator level, osc = n, is obtained

from

with the function

d(n) =

1

2i i dq

qn+1 f (q),

f (q) = trosc qosc

(7)

(8)

denoting the oscillator trace generating function. for a superstring sector with 10 space-
time dimensions we have f (q) = 4
2(q)/12(q). the analysis is standard although for
completeness we shall take a few lines to describe it. using the modular properties of
f (q) the integrand can be approximated for q  1 [28]. if we dene q = 1   then

f (q)

qn+1    

2!2

(9)
there is a saddle point at 0 = 2/n + 1. upon expanding about this and doing
the gaussian integral which results, one nds that the level-density depends only on the
number of eective dimensions for the string oscillations dosc = 10  2 [5, 6, 8],

exp(cid:16)22/ + (n + 1)(cid:17) .

(10)
where c = 22. the level density tells us the number of oscillator modes in a given
momentum and winding sector. the single-string density of states is then obtained by
summing over all zero-mode quantum numbers, with the constraint of eq. (5)

d(n, ni, li)  n11/4 ecn,

9/2ecn() d,

()d  xli,ni

(11)

with the function n() dened by (5) upon setting osc = n(). note that, since all
dimensions are taken to be compact, there are no integrations over continuous momenta
and no volume factors2. these are recovered once we let the dimensions become large
and perform a large- expansion of n();

qn() =   xin n

n2
i

2  r2

i  xidd

l2
i r2
i
2 

+ . . .

(12)

the summations over ni and li can be approximated by gaussian integrals when each
successive term in eq. (12) is small and the summations are nearly continuous, which
requires

2our separation of quantum numbers between oscillators and momentum/winding is natural in the
context of backgrounds with a clear geometric interpretation, such as tori or other sigma-models. however,
it is not strictly necessary, and similar results can be obtained for more general cfts.

(13)

r2
n n  1/
r2
dd   .

5

the rst condition is always satised (by assumption, since we have t-dualized the small
directions and since   1 for the asymptotic approximation (11) to be accurate at all).
the second condition gives a threshold energy, above which the string is energetic enough
to wind around dirichlet directions which we shall dene (for later convenience) as,

(14)
when   0 the dirichlet directions can only contribute when li is zero. the single-string
density of states in the limits of high and low energy is

dd/c.

0 = 2r2

()d = 


c vn n (c )(dn n10)/2 ec  d

  0
f c (c )(dn n +ddd10)/2 ec  d   0.

(15)

where vn n is the reduced volume of the spatial neumann directions, and where we have
dened the ratio of volumes as

f =

.

(16)

vn n
vdd

note that the density of states changes as we go through the energy threshold and strings
are able to wind in the dirichlet direction. the exponent in eq. (15) counts the number
of dd directions in which strings are not able to wind and hence it can be generalized
to the case where the dirichlet directions have varying sizes; one instead nds a series
of thresholds and an () which interpolates between the two extremes in eq. (15). to
accomodate this possibility, we dene an eective dimension for open strings do() which
is the number of dd dimensions around which the strings cannot wind (i.e. which do not
obey eq. (13)),

we dene the volume of these dimensions to be vo and then have

0  do  ddd.

() = c f vo

ec

(c )o+1 ,

where the critical exponent o is given by

o =

 + do

2  1.

(17)

(18)

(19)

we can, at this point, also dene an eective number of large space-time dimensions which
is a function of ,

do() = dn n + do() +   10.

(20)

notice that, in this denition, the notion of large is dened by the absence of winding
modes. for this reason we include the  directions of nd and dn character in the
denition of do, irrespective of their actual size in the background of interest.

examples

for what is normally meant by a dp-brane (i.e. a (p + 1)-dimensional world-volume
with 9  p non-compact dirichlet directions and p spatial non-compact neumann direc-
tions), we would recover dn n = p + 1 and always have  < 0 = , and hence
() d = c vn n (c )(10dn n )/2 ec  d = c vp (c )(p9)/2 ec d,

(21)

6

in accord with ref.
[18]. however eq. (18) carries useful additional information about
what happens to the density of states as dimensions expand or contract. in particular
we see a kind of behaviour that is familiar from closed-string thermodynamics. when
a dirichlet direction becomes suciently small or strings become suciently energetic
(given by eq. (13)), open strings are able to wind around it. this is reected in the
density of states by that dimension becoming compact; when all the dirichlet directions
are compact, and   0 we instead nd
() d = c

ec  d.

(22)

vp

vdp1

open strings in typei theories propagate through the whole neumann volume, and
hence the calculation is the same as for open strings on the (dn n  1)-brane in type
ii theory; if the space is non-compact we would again take   0 in which case we
recover the non-compact result of ref. [11] when o = (do  dn n )/2  1 = 1. however
when any of the dimensions are compact, there is an energy dependence in the density
of states in this case as well. in particular, we could consider the case where there are
3+1 directions which are much larger than the string scale, c compactied directions of
order the string scale and 6  c compactied directions which are much smaller than
the string scale. (after a duality transformation these become 6  c dirichlet directions
much larger than the string scale with heavy winding modes.) in this case the density
of states depends on how many of the compact dimensions the strings are able to probe.
that is, when the internal energy is very large the open strings are able to propagate
throughout the whole space and we have o + 1 = 0. however, when   0 we instead
have o + 1 = ddd/2 = 3  c/2 (since in the t-dualized theory the very small neumann
directions have become dirichlet directions with winding modes which are too heavy to
excite). for cases of phenomenological interest there may be varying radii and hence a
complicated energy dependence in o.

free energy

the canonical free energy f =  1

 log z is now given by the laplace transform of ().
the dierent energy thresholds in (15) translate into analogous thresholds in temperature,
since hi  (  c)1, we can regard vo as the volume of the dd directions satisfying

c 
in this region, we have the approximate behaviour

1 

  c

1
r2

dd

.

log z  z d () e
c !
= f vo     c

do+

2 1

.

(23)

notice that, as soon as we assume compact dimensions, we require additional information
about the system as a whole (i.e. its total energy) in order to calculate the free energy.
when all dimensions are assumed to be non-compact from the outset this problem of

7

course never arises since it would require an innite amount of energy for a string to wind
so that the above is always valid. however, the thermodynamic limit means taking an
innite volume and lling it with a nite energy density. consequently, in a compact
space of any size, there can in principle be enough energy available for strings to wind.

2.2 euclidean approach

this question of the eect of compact dimensions on the thermodynamic limit (which was
just stated in rather simple minded terms) is of central importance and was addressed for
closed strings in ref.
[8]. it will require a proper understanding of the microcanonical
ensemble which will be the main goal of the next section. as a rst step, let us recalculate
the density of states using the method of refs.
[14, 16, 18] in which the free energy is
determined by compactifying in an imaginary time direction with periodicity . the par-
ticular benet of this method is that it identies the leading and subleading contributions
to the free energy as singularities of the partition function in the complex  plane, as a
result of massless closed-string exchange between the branes. our main task therefore
is to nd the structure of these singularities.

in the (p, q) sector the free energy is a sum of terms for dierent spin structures {},

each one of the form

log z(p,q,) =

1

2 z dt

t

tropen o()

gso etopen,

(24)

where ogso is (a piece of) the gso projector, i.e. 1 or (1)f depending on the
particular spin structure. the open-string world-sheet hamiltonian is

open = 42n2

/2 + (~n/rn n )2 + (~l rdd)2 + (osc  a),

(25)

with n an integer or half-integer depending on the bosonic or fermionic statistics of the
space-time states being traced over. for notational simplicity, we are assuming here equal
radii within each nn or dd class of directions. the generalization to arbitrary radii is
straightforward.

upon poisson resummation in n, ~n and ~l we nd

log z(p,q,)    f z dt

t

t(dn n +ddd)/2 trosc o()

gso et(osca) 
(1)nf e 22
xn,~n,~l

t (0)

closed,

(26)

where n is now an integer and f is the space-time fermion number. the zero-mode action
now reads

2 (0)

closed = (~n rn n )2 + (~l/rdd)2 + n22/42.

(27)

this notation suggests that the appropriate modular transformation to the closed-string
channel is given by the change of variables t = 22/s, which acts on the theta functions
from the oscillator traces in the following universal form:

tropen osc o()

gso et(osca)  sdosc/2 hdposc|o()

gso es(oscl+oscralar)|dqosci.

(28)

8

the power of sdosc/2 = s4 in this formula comes from the modular transformation of
eight-dimensional transverse oscillator traces, i.e. dosc = 10  2 = 8 eective dimensions
in which the string oscillates. the closed strings propagating between d-brane boundary
states (as given for example in [29]) do not have windings and momenta at the same time
in any direction, so that we can assume trivial level matching for all spin structures when
evaluating eq. (28):

now, putting everything together, one obtains an expression of the form

(osc  a)l = (osc  a)r.

log z  +f z ds s/2 x

g es,

where the quantities

2  = n22/42 + (~l/rdd)2 + (~n rn n )2 + 4 (osc  a)

(29)

(30)

(31)

are those eigenvalues of the full closed-string kernel, closed, with non-vanishing overlap
with both d-brane states:

h|dp, dqi 6= 0

(32)

and g denotes the multiplicity of a given eigenvalue. the spectrum is discrete at nite
volume, which justies writing the free energy as a discrete sum.

this result admits some simple generalizations. in the presence of orientifold planes,
analogous considerations hold, replacing the d-brane boundary states by orientifold bound-
ary states |opi, and introducing the orientation projection in the open-string sector. the
result is an expression of the same general form as eq. (30), with a dierent modding
of quantum numbers in the closed-string sector (see ref. [16]). for example, a crosscap
restricts the winding numbers to be even.

one can also generalize the previous formulas to the case where various d-branes
and orientifold planes have some transverse separation ldd. this simply introduces a
stretching energy for the open strings of the form ldd/2, which translates into a new
(30), an insertion of el2/2s in the
term in the closed-string channel expression eq.
proper-time integral.

critical behaviour

formula (30) is ideally suited for estimating the critical behaviour of the free energy.
at nite volume, singularities appear only when some eigenvalue vanishes as a function of
the temperature, which in turn can be extracted from the behaviour of the integral (30)
for large proper times s  . a natural ultraviolet cut-o for the s-integral corresponds
to s  1 in string units, leading to a representation in terms of an incomplete gamma
function
(33)


2

; (cid:21) .

log z  f x

g 1+/2 (cid:20)1 

the case  = 0 simplies to

log z=0  f x

e  f x<o(1)

g


.

g


9

(34)

notice that the cut-o in the schwinger parameter at s  1 eectively restricts the
eigenvalue sum to || < o(1) in string units.
from eq. (31), we nd that  is an increasing function of 2. in all cases of interest,
the nsns scalar with thermal winding number n = 1 [19, 20, 7] survives the gso
projection, and therefore has a tadpole on the d-brane state:

hdp|n = i 6= 0

(35)

with degeneracy g = 2. in this sector, there is a negative casimir energy (from ans = 1/2)
and the thermal scalar becomes massless at the leading (lowest temperature) zero of the
eigenvalues (n = 1). the origin of the thermal scalar in the closed-string sector is
responsible for the universality of this singularity:

2
c = 82,

(36)

the standard hagedorn temperature of typeii strings. the most important subleading
terms correspond to a family of nearby singularities for rdd  1 given by

2
c (l) = 2

c  1 

l2
2r2

dd! .

the multiplicity for large l is given by3

gl  2 vol(sddd1) lddd1.

(37)

(38)

notice that the large world-volume of the d-brane, rn n  1, does not introduce any
new singularities at low temperatures.

if a given eigenvalue vanishes at  = ,

critical = 2n2 

c!2     

 ! + o (  )2 ,

(39)

the free energy in the vicinity of  has a leading singular piece (from the analytic structure
of the incomplete gamma function)

log zsing,  f    

 !1+/2 "log    

 !#

,

(40)

with  = 0 for  = 0 and  = 1 for  = 4, 8. the taylor expansion of the regular
part around  =  is of some interest for the calculations in the next section. it can be
parametrized in the form

log zreg,  a vn n   vn n (  ) + o(cid:16)vn n (  )2(cid:17) ,

(41)

where a and  respectively have dimensions of number and energy density on the world-
volume of the intersection. it is convenient to extract a power of vn n when studying large
world-volumes, so that a,  = o(1) in string units. in particular, this is also true when
3notice that the multiplicity of any critical eigenvalue is even because   2n2 and n = 0 states do

not produce critical behaviour.

10

the transverse volume is also large in string units vdd  1, since both a and  get
most of their contribution from the sum over non-critical eigenvalues in eqs. (33) and
(34). the eigenvalues (31) are densely distributed with spacing   1/r2
dd, and the
sum over non-critical eigenvalues is itself of o(vdd). furthermore, although a and 
can be complex in general, explicit inspection of eqs. (33) and (34) shows that the critical
density at the leading hagedorn singularity  = c is real and positive c > 0 in the
same limit, as well as the critical entropy density ac > 0 (one uses the fact that all  6= 0
are positive at c, and that the function

1+/2 (cid:20)1 


2

; (cid:21)

is positive and monotonically decreasing for  > 0).

it is worth emphasizing, since this will be crucial later on, that all the quantities
which govern the physics are dened on the world-volume of the intersection. thus, for
an isolated brane, hagedorn behaviour (long string dominance for example) switches on
when critical densities are reached on the brane.

the appearance of branch-cut singularities of the free energy for compact space is
somewhat surprising. the analogous situation for closed strings leads to pure logarithmic
singularities [7], which translate into poles of the partition function. only in non-compact
space do we get branch-cut singularities for the canonical free energy of closed strings. in
the present case, the partition function has essential singularities without branch-cut for
 = 0, and true branch-cuts for  6= 0. this behaviour can be traced back to the absence
of zero modes (either winding or momentum) in the nd and dn directions, producing a
net non-trivial power of the proper time in the measure of the schwinger representation
of eq. (30).

if the transverse space in dd directions is non-compact the singularity structure dis-
played in eq. (40) changes. the singularities (40) coalesce with the hagedorn singularity,
changing the analytic properties of the free energy. going back to eq. (30) and converting
the sum over ~l into a continuous integral, we obtain the result of eq. (23) with do = ddd,

log zsing  (1  (ddd + )/2)    c

c !1+(ddd+)/2

,

(42)

with a logarithmic correction if ddd is an even integer. this is in accord with our previous
estimate from () with   0. in particular, for  = 0, we recover the result of ref.
[18];  = (7  p)/2.
these results contain all the required information to pass to the microcanonical en-
semble, including the dependence on energy thresholds. for example in a compact space
with  = 0 we can simply leave the free energy as a sum;
gl

(43)

log z  f 2

2  c(l)2 .

c xl<o(rdd)

cl

the analytic structure is characterized by a set of isolated singularities at  = l.

it can be veried that upon taking the inverse laplace transform of eq. (43) one
recovers the full single-string density of states, (), of eq. (45). the relevant contour in
 may be deformed to give a sum over poles, so that () may be written

() = c ec f xl

gl el2/0.

11

(44)

only the rst term contributes when   0. when   0 we can instead approximate
the sum over l by an integral which gives a factor (/0)ddd/2 = vdd(c)ddd/2 as re-
quired. at intermediate energies we recover the full energy-dependent eective dimensions
of eq. (18).

2.3 summary

we complete this section by collecting the expressions for the densities of states of single
strings. for the open strings we found

where

() = c f vo

ec 

(c )o+1 ,

o =

 + do

2  1 =

do  dn n

2

 1,

(45)

(46)

and do is the eective number of large dimensions we dened above (i.e. the total number
of dimensions minus the dimensions in which open strings have sucient energy to wind).

the analytic structure of the free energy at the hagedorn singularity is given by

log zsing  


() f (  c) ,
(1)+1
(+1) f (  c) log (  c) ,

 / z+  {0}
  z+  {0}.

(47)

with the critical exponent  = 1+/2. if a number d of dd dimensions are strictly non-
compact, the form (47) is still valid with the replacements    + d/2 and f  f  v.
the density of states in the closed-string sector has already been calculated in the
context of weakly-coupled strings [5, 6, 7, 8]. for this we need to dene another energy-
dependent eective space-time dimension, dc, which is the total number of dimensions
minus the number of dimensions around which closed strings can wind (given by the
equivalent of eq. (13)). if we also dene the volume of this dimension, vc, we then have

where

() = c vc

ec 

(c )c+1 ,

c =

dc  1

2

(48)

(49)

is the -dependent critical exponent for the closed strings4.

according to [8], the analytic structure of the partition function at nite volume is

given by a set of poles of even multiplicity g = 2k:

zsing,cl  y   

  !k

,

(50)

if d space-time
with k = kc = 1 for the leading hagedorn singularity  = c.
dimensions are non-compact, one obtains the same expression as in (47) with   (d 
1)/2 and f  v.

4the density of states of closed strings in a nite volume has an extra relative factor of 1/ with
respect to the open-string counterparts. it originates when dividing by the translations of the world-
sheet parameter along the closed string:    + const.

12

3 thermodynamic properties from the microcanon-

ical ensemble

we now progress to a discussion of the thermodynamic properties of isolated and coupled
systems in the hagedorn regime. the rst part of this section will be mostly taxonomy; we
shall categorize the systems according to the classical (non-stringy) analysis of carlitz [2]
into those for which the hagedorn temperature is a limiting temperature in the canonical
(gibbs) approach, and those for which the temperature is non-limiting. the non-limiting
systems should be further analyzed since it is these systems for which the canonical and
microcanonical ensembles are found to be inequivalent. indeed in general (although not,
as it turns out, for most of the cases we shall be examining here) the microcanonical
ensemble can have regions of negative specic heat, indicating the possible onset of some
phase transition.

clearly then, in order to discuss the thermodynamic behaviour of string gases, we
ought to work in the microcanonical ensemble and this is the subject of the second part
of this section. for this we shall have to tackle some additional, purely stringy aspects of
the thermodynamics. the most important question, as we have already mentioned, is how
to take the thermodynamic limit when the space has compact but large dimensions [8].
the thermodynamic limit involves letting the volume go to innity whilst keeping the
energy density nite. the analysis of ref. [8] shows that for closed strings there is a rather
peculiar dependence on dimension; when there are more than two space dimensions which
are just large rather than non-compact, taking the thermodynamic limit always results
in winding modes. consequently the thermodynamic properties depend on whether one
assumes space to be compact and supporting winding modes, or assumes space to be non-
compact from the outset (see however [30]). for open strings attached to d-branes we
shall see that the issue is further complicated by the fact that the strings can only wind in
the subspace with dd boundary conditions. we shall nd an additional parameter, the
ratio of nn to dd volumes, which plays a central role, determining the eects of winding
modes.

various results for the dierent brane backgrounds obtained in both the canonical and
microcanonical ensembles are tabulated. table (1) shows the dependence on (  c) of
the internal energy, e, and the pressure, p , for both cases, where  stands for o and
c (the entries are the values of x in (  c)x whenever the thermodynamic function
diverges as a power, and denote the value of the function itself otherwise, i.e. logarithmic
for x = 0 and constant for x > 0). thus, for example, the pressure for open strings
scales with temperature at a xed volume in the same way as the free energy;

p      c

c !o

=     c

c !(do2dn n )/2

.

(51)

we stress that the table is written for the thermodynamic limit where do and dc dimen-
sions are non-compact with the rest of the dimensions being string scale. thus, no eects
of winding modes are reected in the table. the leftarrows in the table indicate that
the non-stringy microcanonical ensemble has the same internal energy as the canonical.
in addition the microcanonical ensemble expression for  > 1 is valid at high internal
energies [2]; approximately

c e  1.

13

(52)

at lower energies the microcanonical and canonical ensembles coincide. note that param-
eter a appearing in eq. (1) is given by

a = o,c 

do,c + 1

2

.

(53)

the dierence between open and closed strings can be understood as being due to inte-
grating (m) only over dimensions in which the centre of mass of the strings can propa-
gate [18]. this dimension can be dierent for open and closed strings as we saw in the
preceding section.



 < 0
 = 0

 = 1
 > 1

0 <  < 1 do  2 > dn n > do  4

open

closed

p  (  c)x

ec

emc

dn n > do  2
dn n = do  2
dn n = do  4
dn n < do  4

dc < 1
dc = 1

1 < dc < 3

dc = 3
dc > 3


log

constant
constant
constant


  1

  1
  1

log

constant 1

table 1: thermodynamic regimes for open and closed strings with do and dc non-compact
space-time dimensions. the remaining dimensions are string scale.

according to the table, all systems which have   1 are unable to reach the hagedorn
temperature since they require an innite amount of energy to do so. in these cases the
hagedorn temperature is limiting, and this is true for all open strings with dn n  do 4.
in addition, from this table, one might conclude that the hagedorn temperature is non-
limiting for the closed strings in any realistic model (i.e. one which has dc  4). when
we place a system with   1 in a heat bath, it will however behave as a normal gas in
the sense that it is able to come to equilibrium with it.
on the other hand, when  > 1, the canonical and microcanonical expressions disagree
at high internal energies. this is an indication that there are large uctuations in the
microcanonical system. for these systems, carlitz estimates

e 

 + 1
(c  )

,

(54)

and so we see that the specic heat is negative. in addition the energy itself is negative
below tc. thus in these cases it is dicult to ascertain what is going on as we approach the
hagedorn temperature from below, and this is where stringy eects become important.

in the original carlitz analysis, it was suggested that the temperature rises above
the hagedorn temperature at some intermediate energy and approaches it from above.
however, for stringy systems at least, the picture must be very dierent since the string
ensemble in contact with a heat bath above tc is not well-dened [6]. systems which are
non-limiting can be taken up to tc by a heat bath but, in the case of an ensemble of strings
in a non-compact space, additional energy simply goes into one very long string. in either
picture of course the broad conclusion is the same  the non-limiting string ensembles
cannot come into equilibrium, and conventional thermodynamics breaks down near tc.
however when, as here, we wish to consider two or more such systems in thermal contact,
a detailed understanding is required.

14

the problems in dening a reasonable thermodynamics of non-limiting systems can be
bypassed by working in nite volume. in fact, string interactions contain gravity, which
necessarily ruins any thermodynamic limit due to the jeans instability. thus, consistency
also demands that we work in a suciently small volume, which still could be large enough
to admit an approximate thermodynamic description. we shall address the question of
string interactions and their eects on the spectrum of the theory in the last section of the
paper. for the time being, we shall work in nite volume and investigate to what extent
purely perturbative stringy eects aect the denition of the thermodynamic limit.

for weakly-coupled closed-string theories, a more complete physical picture in this vein
was provided by deo et al
[8] who pointed out the pitfalls in taking the thermodynamic
limit. the main argument of ref. [8] can be understood as follows. consider attempting
to recover table (1) by letting d space-time dimensions become much larger than the
string scale. (we stress that d is not to be confused with do or dc; it is not a function of
string energy .) by giving the large dimensions a common radius r  1 whilst keeping
the density  constant, we might expect to obtain behaviour consistent with dc = d
in the table. however, on letting the radius become large, the energy scales as rd1,
whereas the (sucient) condition that there should be no windings in the d  1 large
dimensions is that the total energy obeys e  0 = 2r2/c. clearly this condition is
always violated when d > 3 in the innite volume limit, and it seems that the larger
the radius becomes the more energy there is to excite winding modes. this argument
indicates that we should instead nd behaviour consistent with dc = 1 in a large but
compact space with d > 3 space-time dimensions. (this is why we stressed that the
table is only correct for do and dc non-compact eective dimensions.)

what goes wrong with the naive expectation for the above example of closed strings,
is that it gives the wrong value of , which depends on the macroscopic properties of the
system such as windings. these heuristic arguments can only be conrmed by looking at
the multiple string density of states where, for example, we can nd the energy distribution
and count the number of winding modes.

so, it is clear that there are two important issues that we should now address. the
rst, which we tackle in the following subsection, is how to calculate the density of states
for a given value of . a method based on analytic continuation to complex temperatures
was developed in ref. [8] in order to nd the density of states of closed strings. we shall
extend this method to include d-branes by introducing two approximations (the saddle
point and the branch-cut approximations) which can be used in dierent volume and
energy limits.

the second issue, which is more subtle, is of course the correct value of  for partic-
ular physical systems in particular limits. this is discussed in subsections 3.2-3.4 where
we consider examples of various dierent closed- and open-string systems with dierent
intersections.
in particular in 3.3 we study open strings in a nite box (equivalent to
 = 1) where we can also nd a more complete expression for the density of states
(i.e. one which is valid for any choice of volumes and energies).

3.1 complex temperature formalism

in order to have a well-dened system, we consider a nite-volume nine-torus with d  1
large space dimensions of radius rlarge  1, and 10  d remaining spatial dimensions of

15

string-scale size rsmall  o(1). the total volume is then

vd1  ylarge

rlarge.

(55)

in the presence of intersecting d-brane congurations, the string hilbert space splits into
dierent sectors: closed strings propagating in the full torus of volume vd1, and open-
string sectors characterized by the number of nd+dn directions, the t-duality invariant
index , in addition to the world-volume dimensionality dn n , and the remaining ddd dd
directions. for each open-string sector, we denote by dk  dn n  1 the number of nn
directions which are also large, and likewise d  ddd the number of large dd directions.
one always has
(56)

dk + d = d  1

and the corresponding volumes satisfy

vd1  vk  v  (rk)dk  (r)d.

(57)

it is important to keep in mind that each open-string sector has a particular factorization
of the total volume of the form (57).

on general grounds, the microcanonical density of states of a gas of strings with total
[6] for a

energy e can be obtained as an inverse laplace transform of z() (see ref.
review);

(e) = zc

d
2i

ee z(),

(58)

with the contour c encircling  =  clockwise. given the analytic structure of the
canonical partition function as explained in the previous section, we can estimate (e) in
a high-energy expansion by contour deformation through the singularities of z(). the
original contour c can be split into pieces running close to the singularities (encircling
counter-clockwise the singularities if they are isolated, as in gure (1), or the cuts if they
are branch-points), c = c().
sectors:

in the ideal-gas or one-loop approximation the total density of states factorizes in

 = closed  y(p,q)

dpdq + 2 loop.

(59)

in a given sector, the density of states is then written as a sum  = p , each term

being dominated by the behaviour of z() near the singularity 

  e e+a vk zc

d
2i

e()(e vk) zsing,

(60)

where we have used the taylor expansion (41) of the regular part of the free energy
log zreg, to leading order5

log zreg,  a vk   vk (  ) + o(cid:16)vk (  )2(cid:17) .

5when considering the closed-string sector, all volume factors in the formulas apply with the replace-

(61)

ments vk  vd1 and v  1.

16

the quantity   o(1) in string units, is a critical hagedorn density on the relevant
volume for each sector. the smallness of the neglected higher order terms in (61) must
be checked in each situation.

the singular part for open-string systems takes the form

log zsing, 

1
2

c g f (  ) [log (  )] ,

(62)

with g is the degeneracy of the critical eigenvalue ,  = 1 if  is a positive (or zero)
integer, and  = 0 otherwise. the constant

the volume factor

() ,
(1)+1
(+1) ,

c  


f =

vk
v

 / z+  {0}
  z+  {0}.

,

(63)

(64)

and the critical exponent  = 1 + /2. formula (62) may also be used for closed strings,
where  = 0,  = 1, and the absolute normalization is obtained setting f = 1.

the dominance rule of the hagedorn singularity

the condition that the full density of states is dominated by the contribution from

the hagedorn singularity 0 = c = 22 is

log (c/1)  1,

(65)

with 1 the contribution to the density of states from the closest singularity to c, which
we shall denote 1. in all the situations considered in the present work, 1 is real and
1 < c. a necessary condition is obtained from the leading exponential behaviour of (60)

c e + ac vk  1 e + re(a1) vk

(66)

or, estimating the coecient re(a1)  a0 + c (c  1) in a taylor expansion around c,
with c = o(1) in string units,

(c  1)(e  c vk)  1.

(67)

this is a necessary condition, albeit not sucient, as we will learn later on in this sec-
tion. again note that this is a condition involving the energy density on the brane (or
intersection).

if the next-to-leading singularity 1 is independent of the t-moduli, then c  1 
o(1) and condition (67) reduces to the requirement of large energy densities in the relevant
world-volume (vd1 for closed strings or vk for open strings):

 

e

vk  o(1)

(68)

in string units. we shall always work in this regime.

17

however, in many cases 1 depends on the t-moduli. for example, if some r  1 in
open-string systems, we have c  1  1/r2
as in (37), and (67) depends non-trivially

on the dd moduli. if r is suciently large for a given total energy, the condition (67)
is violated. in this case, it is a better approximation to evaluate the density of states in
the non-compact limit r  , which corresponds to the radius-dependent singularities
coalescing with the hagedorn singularity, changing the critical exponent according to

   =  +

d
2

,

(69)

with d the number of such non-compact dimensions. the volume factor in (62) also
changes by removing from v the volume of the non-compact dimensions. for example,
if all d large dd directions are to be approximated as non-compact, we have

f  f  vk.

(70)

thus, we handle the violation of (67) by a change in the critical exponent . after this, the
remaining closest singularity is independent of the dd radius and is separated a distance
of o(1) in string units.
in the context of these approximation techniques, we shall discuss the evaluation of
the basic integral (60) for a general value of the critical exponent . a change of variables
gives the following expression for the hagedorn singularity contribution:

c  ec e+ac vk   zc(c)

dz
2i

expnx (z + c z [log (z )])o ,

where

    x

f !1/

z =

  c


and the parameter x is dened by6

x  f  e  c vk

f

!



1

= f [v (  c)]



1 .

(71)

(72)

(73)

it is important to keep in mind that, while c is a universal constant for all open and
closed sectors, the ground state degeneracy ac, and the critical energy density c are
sector-dependent, both dimensionally and numerically.

the representation (71) of the hagedorn singularity contribution is well-suited for the
presentation of the two most useful approximation techniques in the evaluation of (e),
which we now discuss.

saddle point

written in the form (71), we see that the saddle-point approximation is good if x  1,
provided the neglected terms in the taylor expansion of the regular free energy, of order

vk (  c)2+n  vk 

(74)

6the case  = 1 is excluded from the present discussion and will be dealt with separately below.

(x)2+n

(e  c vk)2+n z2+n

18

are small. these terms produce a negligible shift of the saddle point at z = zs  o(1) if

vk (x)1+n
(e  c vk)2+n  v [v (  c)]

2+n

1  1.

(75)

so, given that we are interested in hagedorn densities in the world-volume  > c, and
v  1 by construction, we see that, as soon as  > 1, (75) is violated at suciently high
order in the taylor expansion. thus, the saddle-point approximation is not applicable to
the full integral for  > 1, even if x  1.
on the other hand, for  < 1 and x  1, the analytic corrections are under control
and the saddle-point approximation is good, leading to a hagedorn-dominated density of
states of the form

( < 1)saddle 

 ec e+ac vk+ 1

 zs x +s

x

"1 + o  s

x ! + o  1

x!#

for  6= 0. the quantity s in the exponent is of order
vk(  c)2 

s  vk (s  c)2 

(x)2

[v(  c)]

vk

,

2
1

(76)

(77)

and accounts for the small shift (75) of the saddle-point at s by the neglected analytic
corrections to the free energy. the rst correction term in square brackets comes from
the eect of these analytic terms in the evaluation of the saddle-point integral, while the
second one is a two-loop correction term, controlled by the small parameter 1/x.

the saddle-point approximation leads to the equivalence with the canonical ensemble,
so that these results are compatible with the contents of table (1), where  = 1 is the
maximum critical exponent admitting a canonical analysis.

by explicit inspection of the saddle-point equation, one can check that the dominant
saddle point (the one with largest real part) for all values of  < 1 of the form (69) has
zs real and positive, so that there are large exponential contributions to c for  < 0 in
the saddle-point, x  1, limit. this implies a renement of the condition (67). the
contribution from the next-to-leading singularity  = 1 to the entropy is also linear in
x and it diers from the hagedorn one by the replacement

x  (g1)1/1 x,

(78)

with g1 the multiplicity of the singularity at 1. for the dd-moduli-dependent singulari-
ties (43) we have g1 > 1 and the condition (67) must be rened to

(c  1)(e  c vk)  ( max (1, x)

1

if
if

 < 0
  0.

(79)

we shall refer to this condition as the hagedorn-dominance-rule (h.d.r.). notice that it is
equivalent to the requirement that the saddle-point (canonical) temperature be close to
the hagedorn temperature: |c  s|  |c  1|. if condition (79) is violated, one has to
change the critical exponent  according to (69) and the conditions for single-singularity
dominance in the new regime must be considered.

19

if  = 0, the loop-expansion parameter x0 = x=0 = f , independent of the energy,

and we nd

( = 0)saddle 

ec e+ac vk+f +s

f

  e  c vk

f

!f1

(cid:20)1 + o(cid:18)s

x0 (cid:19) + o(cid:18) 1

x0(cid:19)(cid:21) ,

(80)

with s as in (77) with  = 0.

all the systems with  < 1, whose behaviour is well approximated by a saddle point,
x  1, show canonical thermodynamic behaviour, as in table (1). for these systems
the internal energy diverges at the hagedorn temperature, which can be considered as
limiting. we shall denote these systems as l[].

no saddle point

if the conditions for the saddle-point approximation are not satised, that is, we have
 > 1 or we have x  1 for  < 1, then we can try a complementary approximation to the
integral, with eective expansion parameter (x)1. that is, we have an expansion which
is good if x  1 for  < 1, and x  1 if  > 1. in all cases of interest except  = 1,
the partition function has a branch-point at the hagedorn singularity. by evaluating the
discontinuity of the integrand across the cut, we can transform the z-integral (71) into
(for  not an integer)

1

x z u1

0

du


expnu + c (x)1 cos () uo sin nc sin () (x)1 uo ,

with

u1  (c  1)(e  c vk)  1,

(81)

(82)

within the hagedorn-singularity-dominance regime. on approximating (71) by (81) we
are neglecting the contribution of a small circle in the contour around  = c. this is
justied for  > 0, where the partition function is bounded near the singularity. the
cases  = 1, 0 will be dealt with exactly below, while x1/2  1 in all practical cases
treated below, so that  = 1/2 is calculable in the saddle-point approximation.
the integral (81) admits a perturbative expansion in (x)1 with a leading term of
order 1/(x). the result is equivalent to the single-long-string picture in table (1), with
a density of states:

1

f

long  f 

ec e+ac vk

(e  c vk)1+ "1 + o 

(e  c vk)!# .
if the critical exponent is an integer,  = k  2, the integral (81) is replaced by
!) sin n (xk)1k uko ,

exp(u + (xk)1k uk log  e  c vk

vk(  c)2! + o 

1

xk z u1

u

du


0

(83)

(84)

with the same leading behaviour as (83), but now with corrections of

o(cid:16)(xk)1k log (e  c vk)(cid:17)  o 

f

(e  c vk)k log (e  c vk)! .

20

this regime is equivalent to eq. (54), or table (1) with  > 1. the formally dened
temperature  = log()/e is larger than the hagedorn temperature. although the
thermodynamics of these systems is ill-dened, there is nothing wrong in principle with
the density of states (83) at nite volume, and we will use the thermodynamic language
and denote these systems as non-limiting, or nl[].

as well as these approximations, there are a number of special cases which can be
evaluated for all x. the rst and most interesting for our discussion is  = 1. since
this case corresponds to open strings in a nite volume, which is naturally of central
importance to our discussion, we shall evaluate this case separately in subsection 3.3.
the two other interesting cases we shall consider now; they are  = 0 and  = 1.

special case  = 0

the special case  = 0 admits exact evaluation of the integral (71), resulting in

( = 0)c 

1

(f )

ec e+ac vk

(e  c vk)1f "1 + o 

f

v (  c)2!  o(cid:16)eu1(cid:17)# ,

(85)

the rst correction factor coming from the analytic terms around the hagedorn singu-
larity, and the second one coming from the next-to-leading singularity 1. this formula
interpolates between the saddle-point result (80), l[0], valid at x0 = f  1, and the form
(83) of nl[0] type, for f  1.
in the marginal case f = 1, corresponding to closed strings, the limiting or non-limiting
behaviour is controlled by the sign of the correction terms. in this case, the singularities
are isolated poles of the partition function, and the sign of the next-to-leading singularity
correction should be negative, leading to a weakly limiting behaviour that will be studied
in more detail in the next subsection.

special case  = 1

finally, we consider the special case  = 1, where the parametrization (71) fails. the

singular part of the free energy takes the form

in the saddle-point approximation, the critical point is located at

log zsing  f (  c) log (  c).

log (s  c) = 

e  c vk

f

 1,

(86)

(87)

and the resulting canonical determination of the density of states is:

( = 1)saddle 

1
f

exp (c e + ac vk  f e

ec vk

f

1 

1

2  1 +

e  c vk

f

! + s) .

(88)
on evaluating , one nds the marginal case of logarithmically limiting behaviour seen
in table (1). we shall refer to this type of density of states as l[1].

21

in fact, the saddle-point approximation has a limited range of applicability, since
higher-loop corrections are of o(1/f (s  c)) and thus we may dene the saddle-point
control parameter x1  f (s  c):

x1  f e

ec vk

f = f ev(c),

(89)

the saddle-point approximation being good for x1  1. the analytic corrections are of
order

s

x1  o(cid:16)v ev(c)(cid:17) .

in the opposite limit, x1  1, a similar treatment to the one in eq. (84) gives

( = 1)long 

f

(e  c vk  f log f )2 expnc e + ac vko ,

(90)

which is of non-limiting type: nl[1], with corrections of

o 

1

vk(  c  v 1


log (f ))2! + o" 

f

e  cvk  f log(f )! log e  cvk  f log(f )

f

!# .

3.2 closed strings in a finite box

using these methods, we can now review the results of ref. [8] for closed strings. let us
consider a box of radius r  1, with volume vd1  rd1. the corresponding analytic
structure is given in eq. (50), and we can explicitly evaluate the integral (60) with the
result

closed = x

()k e e+a vd1
(k  1)!

(e   vd1)k1 "1 + o  (k  1)(k  2)

vd1(  )2 !# .

(91)

the corrections come from the analytic terms around each pole, and are absent for the
leading hagedorn singularity, since kc = 1. from the analysis of ref.
[8] we learn that
the next-to-leading singularity of the partition function 1 is a pole of order k1 = 2d  2,
located at
(92)
with   +o(1) in string units. the hagedorn-dominance-rule (h.d.r.) of eq. (79) is
given by
(93)
which is satised for moderately high energy density  > c and large radius, provided
d > 3, or for small radius but very high energy density   1. in these conditions, the
density of states is approximated by

(  c) rd3  1,

c  1 = /r2,

closed  c ec e+ac vd1"1 

(c vd1)2d3
(2d  3)!

2d3 expn rd3 (  c)o# ,

(94)

now, in accord with our heuristic argument, in the limit of large r and provided
that the energy density is larger than the hagedorn density, the energy dependence of

22

the microcanonical density of states always resembles that for a small compact system no
matter how large the volume we consider. eq. (93) is precisely the condition e  0, and
tells us the energy scale above which some of the strings are able to feel the compactness
of the large dimensions by winding.

on using the microcanonical density of states to nd the temperature (from  =

 log /e) we nd

e  cvd1  r2 log(cid:16)(ce)32d r2(  c)(cid:17) .

in particular the specic heat,

(95)

(96)

cv 

r2
  c

,

is always positive and the hagedorn temperature is approached monotonically from below.
therefore, for closed strings in nite volume, the hagedorn temperature is logarithmically
limiting, even in the thermodynamic limit for d > 3. notice that this limiting behaviour
is very weak, since we can rise the temperature arbitrarily close to the hagedorn temper-
ature, while maintaining a moderately low energy density, provided r is large enough.
for future reference, we shall denote this behaviour as marginally limiting: ml.

when d  3 the h.d.r. is violated at suciently large r. in this case we must use the
approximation of non-compact d  1  2 dimensions, the saddle-point approximation
is good, and we get standard l[(d  1)/2] behaviour, in agreement with the canonical
ensemble, and the results of table (1). for these lower-dimensional systems there is not
enough energy available to excite winding modes.

3.3 open  = 0 strings in a finite box

now we are ready to present new results for d-brane systems. for  = 0, corresponding
to open-string sectors with both end-points on the same d-brane, we have  = 1, the
lower bound in the critical exponent for this kind of systems. the control parameter for
the saddle-point approximation is

x1  x = vks   c
v

and the h.d.r. (79) for x  1 is
1 

u1

x    c (r)2+d/2 .

so, for the very high-energy regime

max 
c ,

v
v 2
k

, r4d

 

  

we nd l[1] behaviour. in particular, this includes all systems with d = 0.

on the other hand, for x  1, the  = 1 h.d.r. condition reads

1  u1 

(  c) vk

r2


,

23

(97)

(98)

(99)

(100)

so that the intermediate range

max  c ,

r2


vk !   

v
v 2
k

(101)

shows a new behaviour characterized by  = 1 but x  1. in fact, we can study the
density of states at all values of x, since the integral (71) can be evaluated in closed form
by deforming the contour to the steepest descent contour as shown in gure 1:

( = 1)c = c f x1 i1(2x) ec e+ac vk "1 + o 

x2

vk(  c)2! + o(cid:16)eu1(cid:17)# ,

(102)

where i1 is the modied bessel function of the rst kind. the saddle-point regime x  1
is equivalent to (76), and is therefore of l[1] type, whereas the x  1 region is marginal
from the point of view of the long string picture (83).
in fact, the exact expression
(102) leads to rather standard thermodynamics in both extreme regimes in terms of the
parameter x, with x  1 marking a cross-over from long-string dominance on the brane
to many windings in the transverse directions.

we can see this when we calculate the temperature. dening

y =

  c
f c

,

we nd

y =

1

2x  i0(2x) + i2(2x)

i1(2x)

1

x! .



this function, shown in gure (2), has a tail towards large x giving

c e 

f 2
c

(  c)2 .

(103)

(104)

(105)

in the notation of table (1), this is equivalent to  = 1 or do = dn n . it is the behaviour
of an open-string system which has all dd directions small and compact (d = 0), with
both the energy and specic heat diverging as we approach the hagedorn temperature.
this was to be expected from the closed-string case, however small x gives us a region of
dierent behaviour.

when x < 1, we nd

e  c vk +

6
f c  12

(  c)
f 22
c

.

(106)

this has a small specic heat as we approach the hagedorn temperature provided we can
maintain small x. this new type of behaviour is equivalent to keeping the o(x2) + o(x4)
corrections in (83), and can be described as weakly limiting, due to its small specic
heat at hagedorn temperatures. we shall denote it by wl[1].
we can obtain a microscopic understanding of this behaviour by examining the fraction
of strings which have energy greater than the single-string threshold energy 0, and hence
are able to wind. the energy distribution (i.e. the average number of strings in the gas

24

with an energy in the interval    + d when the total energy of the system is e) is
given by [8]

d(; e) d =

()(e  )

(e)

d.

(107)

the exponent appearing in  depends on the eective dimension and hence on whether 
is greater than or less than 0. below 0, the distribution is peaked with a power law decay
that is familiar from the closed-string case. above 0 and for x  1 we can approximate
(108)

d(; e) = f c e x/e.

integrating this expression from 0 to e gives the total number of energetic strings;

x e0 x/e.

(109)

eq. (79) is equivalent to e  0 and x  e/. thus the total energy must always
be larger than the nominal threshold energy required to excite winding modes. however
the number of energetic strings is roughly proportional to x and for x  1 there are no
winding modes, with all the energy being concentrated in short string excitations close
to the d-brane. as we increase the value of x, by raising the energy for example, we nd
that a few of the open strings on the brane accumulate most of the energy in a manner
which is similar to closed-string behaviour. as we increase x still further, these strings are
able to wind, and the spectrum becomes increasingly resolved into a low-energy peak and
highly energetic winding modes. the average energy carried by strings in the low-energy
peak becomes saturated as x becomes large and x  1 marks a cross-over in behaviour.
it is interesting to see what happens if we increase the volume of the brane. since
 is a monotonically increasing function of vk, there is always an entropic advantage in
maximizing it. hence the string gas is expected to spread itself over the whole available
d-brane volume and the volume is expected to increase. as one might have expected
(since there are no winding modes in the nn directions), for 9-branes the result is in
accord with ref.
[11] (based on minimizing the free energy for 9-branes). however the
windings in the dd-directions play an interesting role as can be seen by the fact that
there is an entropic disadvantage in increasing v. winding modes (and more generally
nite size eects) are seen to prevent dd-directions expanding. a natural proposal is
then that an interplay of these eects can stabilize some directions whilst allowing others
to expand without limit. this is a topic we shall leave for future study.

if the h.d.r. with  = 1 is not satised, i.e. if the inequalities (98) and (100) are
violated, then we must approximate the density of states by that of a  = 1 + d/2
system. in this case, the control parameter for l/nl behaviour is

x  


vk (  c)/1
vk e(c)

 6= 1
 = 1.

(110)

one has nl[  1] if x  1, and l[  1] if x  1. on the other hand, for
 > 1, one always has x  1 and nl[ > 1].

there are two main regimes of this kind. the range

max 
c ,

v
v 2
k


    r4d



,

25

(111)

which is only possible for 0 < d < 4, leads to l[1 + d/2] with the exception of the
regime   vk in d = 3, which is nl[1/2] instead. finally, for low densities

c    min 


v
v 2
k

,

r2

vk




(112)

one gets nl[1+d/2] for d > 4 and l[1+d/2] for 0 < d  4, with two exceptions:
the regimes   vk in d = 3 and   log (vk) in d = 4, where one nds also nl[1 +
d/2] behaviour.

3.4 open  = 4, 8 strings in a finite box

finally, we address the case of open-string systems localized on non-trivial d-brane inter-
sections.

 = 4

open-string sectors of type  = 4 comprise for example the d5d9 intersection in a
typei model, and in general any dpd(p + 4) system and t-duals. the number of large
dd directions is then bounded by d  5  dk. the critical exponent is marginal  = 1,
with saddle-point control parameter

x1 = f ev(c),

and the h.d.r. takes the form

u1 

  c
r2


 1.

if violated, we get a  = 1 + d/2 > 1 system. thus, if the energy is very large

max (cid:18)c , r2



,

1
v

log (f )(cid:19)  ,

we have a nl[1] system. in the intermediate range

max (cid:16)c , r2

(cid:17)   

1
v

log (f ),

(113)

(114)

(115)

the behaviour is l[1] (this case includes the thermodynamic limit with d = 0). finally,
if

c    r2


,

as occurs, for example, in the thermodynamic limit with d > 0, one is dealing with
nl[1 + d/2] behaviour. we see that, with the exception of the d = 0 case, the
thermodynamic limit of  = 4 systems tends to dene a nl behaviour.

 = 8

26

for  = 8, there are essentially only two systems:

the d0d8 intersection, with
d = 0, 1, and the d1d9 intersection in a typei model, with d = 0. the critical
exponent is of non-limiting type  = 3, and the h.d.r. reads

u1 

  c
r2


 1.

(116)

thus, we have two cases. if

max (cid:16)c , r2

(cid:17)  ,

we satisfy the h.d.r. with  = 3 and we get nl[3] behaviour. on the other hand, if

c    r2


,

then we get nl[3 + d/2] behaviour. this last case is only realized in the d0-d8 system
with d = 1.

3.5 summary

we may summarize the broad lines of our analysis by distinguishing the two main high-
energy limits of interest.

extreme high-energy limit

the extreme high-energy regime can be analyzed in simple terms for all systems.
physically, we expect that at energies much larger than any scale formed from the t-
moduli parameters, the physics should be similar to the one of a nine-torus of string-
scale size and c e  1. then, the h.d.r. condition (79) is trivially satised, since
1  c  o(1). in such a situation, there is no clear distinction between nn and dd
directions, as both are of the order of the string scale and are exchanged by t-duality.
the only t-duality invariant parameter is , and we have  = 1+/2 for the three basic
systems of supersymmetric intersections:  = 0, 4, 8. the high-energy regime c e  1
corresponds to the l[1] regime for  = 0 and to the single-long-string regime nl[3] for
 = 8. in the case  = 4, corresponding to  = 1, we learn from (89) and (115) that
it is of type nl[1]. closed strings are described by the ml form (94). therefore the
entropies s = log(c) read

s=0  c e + 2qf e + const.  o(log e)
s=4  c e  2 log (e) + const. + o(1/e)
s=8  c e  4 log (e) + const. + o(1/e)
sclosed  c e + const.  e16 ee + o(e15 ee),

(117)

with f,   +o(1). so, the  = 0 systems clearly dominate the asymptotic entropy. the
degeneracy of closed strings is intermediate between the dierent open-string systems,
and we nd the hierachy:

s=0  sclosed  s=4  s=8.

(118)

27

thermodynamic limit

in the thermodynamic limit, we scale vk   with   e/vk xed and large in
string units. although this limit does not exist in a strict sense, we shall see in section 5
that very stringent conditions can be imposed on the string coupling constant such that
regimes of approximate thermodynamic behaviour can be dened. so we proceed with
the analysis and nd a large variety of behaviours, depending on the role played by the
winding modes. roughly speaking, if the winding modes are suciently quenched, one
gets agreement with the results presented in table (1). on the other hand, if the scaling
of the dd directions is such that winding modes store a sizeable portion of the energy,
the behaviour diers from table (1) and one nds a general tendency towards restoration
of limiting behaviour.

for  = 8, the only system with thermodynamic limit is the d1d9 intersection, which
does not allow any dd winding modes, and thus we get a nl behaviour in accord with
the value of the critical exponent  = 3. the entropy density   s/vk of such systems
(we keep only the leading terms in the thermodynamic limit)

nl[]  c  

1 + 
vk

log ().

(119)

for  = 4 one generically nds nl behaviour again, for d > 0. however, if d = 0,
winding modes are copiously excited and change the behaviour to the marginally limiting
case l[1]. in general, the entropy density in the thermodynamic limit of limiting systems
is (up to positive constants of o(1) in string units):

l[] 




c  + 2q/v
 

c  + 1



1

c  + log ()

c   e

if

if

if

if

 = 1
 =  1
 = 0

2 , 1

2

 = 1.

(120)

in  = 0 systems, the case d = 0 is always l[1]. there is universal agreement with
the canonical ensemble results of table (1) for 0 < d < 4, (for example, a dp-brane in ten
dimensions with p  6). for d > 4 however (dp-branes in ten dimensions with p < 5),
it matters whether the winding modes are quenched, vk  r2
, giving nl behaviour, or
v. there is an interesting intermediate window,

activated into a l[1] system for vk
r2


< vk  v, of wl[1] behaviour (101), with entropy density

>

wl[1]  c  +

c f
2

 

2
c vk f 2
24

2.

(121)

the critical case d = 4 (a d5-brane in ten dimensions), is l[1], as in table (1) for
suciently large transverse volume, namely vk  v, and is l[1] in the opposite
regime v
finally, closed strings in the thermodynamic limit have a critical dimension d = 3. for
d  3, we get standard canonical behaviour as in the table (1), l[(d1)/2]. on the other

< vk.

28

hand, for d > 3 winding modes are important enough to turn the naive nl behaviour
announced in table (1) into the marginally limiting behaviour ml with entropy density

ml  c   2d3 (vd1)2d4 e rd3

.

(122)

we see a tendency of the microcanonical, nite-volume analysis to restore limiting
behaviour in the thermodynamic limit, even if the naive canonical ensemble determination
predicted non-limiting features. there are a number of exceptions though, in which
nl behaviour survives. because negative specic heat systems are often signals of the
breakdown of a given microscopic picture, it is worth collecting here all instances in which
they appear. nl behaviour is present in all cases with  = 8. for  = 4, we also have
generically nl behaviour, except the thermodynamic limit with d = 0. finally, in
the more interesting  = 0 systems, nl behaviour only shows up for moderately low
energies, such that winding modes are quenched. the most interesting examples are dp-
branes with p  4 in an eectively non-compact transverse space (these are thus analogous
to closed strings: nl without windings, and l with windings).
we would like to note that the l behaviour, in which many long strings form, could

indicate that, in an eective manner, the string tension vanishes.

4 thermodynamic balance

in this section we consider the behaviour of these systems when two or more of them are
in thermal contact. for a given total energy etot, we would like to nd the most probable
partition into components ei, with

in the free approximation, we must maximize the total entropy

ei = etot.

xi

s(etot) = xi

si(ei)

(123)

(124)

under the constraint (123).

we have presented in the previous sections approximations for the functions si(ei),
valid in a given range of energies, so that the maximization problem is further restricted
by the constraints:

(125)
conditions (123) and (125) determine the set d where a given form of the entropy func-
tions is valid, and the maximization problem is dened. for example, we always restrict
our treatment at least to the hagedorn regime, i > c for all components.

emin,i  ei  emax,i.

if a local maximum exists in the interior of d, we have s = 0 and the standard

equilibrium condition of equality of temperatures,

ti = tj,

(126)

with t 1
i = i = si/ei. in addition 2s < 0, i.e. the specic heats are positive. if
no local maximum is found in the interior of d, the total entropy is maximized then on

29

the boundary d. in this case, one or several components are pushed to extreme values
of the energy, and the maximization process must be continued with the extension of the
entropy functions to a dierent patch.

in principle, thermodynamic equilibrium of a single component with negative specic
heat is possible when it is suciently large in magnitude, |cv | > c +
v , compared with
that of normal systems [31]. examples of this situation are familiar: large stars and black
holes in equilibrium with radiation in a nite volume.

therefore, it is tempting to suppose that our nl systems, with negative specic
heats, can be in equilibrium with the normal systems under some conditions. however,
the formally computed temperatures satisfy

tl < tc < tnl.

(127)

thus, they cannot be in equilibrium and the maximum entropy must occur on the bound-
ary of d. in particular, for the combined system with stot = sl + snl:

stot
enl

= nl  l < 0,

(128)

and stot is a monotonically decreasing function of enl throughout the entire hagedorn
regime. therefore, the entropy is maximized by depleting nl energy in favor of the l
system. since we have at least one universal limiting system in any background: the
closed strings, we can say that nl systems will have energy densities of the order of
the string scale, which is the minimum energy density for which formula (119) holds. at
this point the system of nl strings matches to the gas of massless states at hagedorn
densities.

given that nl systems will be suppressed, we now turn to discuss the equilibrium
conditions for the various l systems. from (120) we nd the energy densities, as a
function of the temperature

l[] 




(  c)2

v 1

(  c)1
log (  c)

if

 = 1

if 1 <  < 1
if

 = 1.

(129)

so, close to the hagedorn temperature, the l[] systems with smaller  have hierarchically
larger energy densities.

the energy density of the wl[1] system

wl 

v
v 2
k

 2

v 2

v 3
k

(  c)

(130)

has a maximum of order v/v 2
k  1, according to (101). if this limit is exceeded, the
density of states of such  = 0 systems takes the l[1] form. so, ultimately, very close
to the hagedorn temperature, the energy density in the form of wl systems is negligible
compared to that in l systems.

30

the remaining system with a weak limiting behaviour is the closed-string sector with

d > 3, whose energy density satises

ml  (2d  3)r3d log (vd1 ml)  r3d log (cid:16)r2(  c)(cid:17) .

(131)

this system is by far the weaker limiting system if r is large enough, since hagedorn
temperatures can be achieved with  > c  o(1). the same condition for all the other
systems requires l   or wl  v/v 2
k  1. therefore, we nd the following
hierarchy of energy densities in the thermodynamic limit:

o(1)  nl  ml  wl  l.

(132)

within l systems, the one with smaller  wins. similarly, within nl systems, the one
with larger  is expected to lose energy faster when put in thermal contact with a l
system.

in the extremely high-energy regime, we have to consider the asymptotic forms in
(117), with the result that  = 4, 8 systems lose energy in favour of closed strings and
 = 0 open strings. between these two l systems, we have again a clear dominance of
the open-string sector. the energies in equilibrium satisfy

e=0 

e2  ecl
(ecl)34 ,

so that we get the hierarchy

o(1)  e=4,8  eclosed  e=0,

(133)

(134)

for e > o(102). in the conclusions we shall discuss the possible implication for models
of early cosmology.
there is another situation not covered by the previous discussion with some theoretical
interest. suppose we can completely decouple the closed-string and d-brane sectors at all
energy scales (in particular at hagedorn energy densities). this can be achieved by taking
n dp-branes in the large n limit, with gs n < 1 and xed. the eective open-string
coupling remains nite while the open-closed and closed-closed coupling vanishes. in this
case all extensive quantities in the open-string sector scale to leading order as o(n 2) in
the large n limit. then, if the transverse space is eectively non-compact and  > 1 we
have a truly dominating nl system, because now it makes sense to concentrate only on
the open-string sector, as totally decoupled from closed strings. in this situation we can
consider the balance between two such nl systems. for example, in d1d9 or d0d4
intersections there is a balance between  = 0 strings and  = 4, 8 strings, all of them
nl in innite transverse volume.

the maximization of the entropy of such a pair

s(e)  c e  (1 + 1) log e1  (1 + 2) log e2,

(135)

under the condition e1 , e2 > o(1), at xed e = e1 + e2, is achieved with almost all the
energy in the component with smallest . so, in the previous examples,  = 0 systems
still store almost all the energy even if they are nl.

31

5 beyond the ideal gas regime

in the previous sections we have studied aspects of hagedorn regimes in various string
systems, always in the ideal-gas approximation, given by the one-loop string diagrams.
the question of the eect of interactions in the string thermodynamic ensemble is a
notorious one. from a fundamental point of view, it is important to know what lies
beyond hagedorn, under the assumption that there is some analogy with the qcd
deconning transition. namely, is there a phase transition to a regime where string
constituents are liberated?

in the context of fundamental string theories this question is particularly elusive. for
example, the presence of gravity automatically invalidates any naive discussion based
on the canonical ensemble, or even the microcanonical ensemble in the thermodynamic
(innite volume) limit. gravitational forces have long range and cannot be screened,
so that extensivity cannot be taken for granted. also, a nite energy density causes a
back-reaction of the geometry. for a given total energy e, the largest volume that can
be considered approximately static is the jeans volume:

vjeans  (gd e)

d1
d3

(136)

in d  1 spatial dimensions, with eective newton constant gd. the associated length
scale (vjeans)1/d1 is the equivalent schwarzschild radius for this energy. so, the idea that
a black-hole phase lies beyond hagedorn (in the sense of large coupling or large energy)
is rather natural. we shall pursue here this line of thought, without a precise specication
of what the implications would be for a constituent picture of the string.

a step in this direction is the correspondence principle of ref. [23]. a wide variety of
black holes in string theory can be adiabatically matched to various perturbative string
states by appropriately choosing the string coupling constant. the matching point can
be locally dened by the condition that the supergravity description of the black-hole
horizon breaks down due to large -corrections. then, both the mass and the entropy
of the black hole can be matched at this point within o(1) accuracy of the coecients.
under this correspondence, schwarzschild black holes match onto highly excited (long)
fundamental strings, whereas d-branes match onto qualitatively dierent kinds of black
holes depending on the amount of energy on the d-brane world-volume. for a system of
n dp-branes at the same point in transverse space, the classical black-brane solution is
characterized by two radii: a charge radius

(rq)7p = gs n

(137)

in string units, and the standard horizon radius r0. in the near-extremal regime, r0  rq,
the black-brane state matches onto a thermal state of open-string massless excitations,
i.e. the yangmills gas on the d-brane world-volume. on the other hand, in the opposite
schwarzschild limit r0  rq, the black brane matches onto a long-open-string state on
the d-brane world-volume. the correspondence principle works in a variety of cases, and
agrees with exact microscopic determinations of the black-hole entropy in those cases
protected by supersymmetry.

these arguments are intended to apply to nite-energy states of the string theory
dened by an asymptotic minkowski vacuum. in particular, the perturbative long-string

32

states are assumed to be mostly single-string states. on the other hand, the single-string-
dominance picture of a stringy thermal ensemble suggests that perhaps the correspondence
principle could be applied to the full thermal ensemble. strictly speaking, such a state-
ment cannot be literally true because of the ill-dened nature of the thermal ensemble
in the presence of gravity. however, the microcanonical density of states calculated for
all hagedorn ensembles studied in this paper shows a leading linear behaviour for the
entropy:

s(e)hag = c e + subleading,

(138)

just as in the single-string picture. based on this, we shall propose that the correspondence
principle applies provided the typical thermal state in the hagedorn regime can be dened
as an approximately stable state. the minimal requirement for this is to work at nite
volume, well within the jeans bound, and to use the microcanonical description. one
then nds that at suciently high energy, for a given xed value of the string coupling,
the most likely state of the system is a black-brane or black-hole state. the condition
that the energy does not exceed the jeans bound is then equivalent to the requirement
that a black hole of that mass ts inside the given volume. thus, the jeans bound,
when applied to a nite-volume system, becomes roughly equivalent to the holographic
bound (a black hole lls all the available volume, and the corresponding entropy gives the
maximal information capacity of this background):

e < ehol 

d3
d1

v
gd

.

(139)

the interesting aspect of this mild extension of the correspondence principle is that
the matching point (the transition from the perturbative string states to the black-states)
is dierent from the jeans bound. the correspondence point is dened by the matching
of the entropies:

s(e)hag  s(e)black.

(140)

this condition denes a critical energy as a function of the string coupling, dierent from
the jeans curve. naively, this curve is just the transition line between a single long string
and a single black hole. in the thermal gas however, we have seen many instances in which
the thermal ensemble is not dominated by a single long string but the energy is distributed
in a gas of long strings. in these cases, it may be reasonable to apply the correspondence
principle to each individual string in the thermal gas. however, these subtleties are
irrelevant to the level of accuracy we can achieve, because the correspondence matching
itself is only known up to o(1) factors in the entropy and the energy. the distinctions
between single-long-strings and multi-long-strings (nl versus l), or single- versus multi-
black-holes, only show up in the subleading terms in the entropy, and are thus beyond
our matching accuracy.

for a system of n dp-branes with longitudinal volume vk in a torus of nine-volume
v = vkv, there are a number of phases that can be identied on the basis of the
correspondence principle, applied to the typical states both in the bulk and in the world-
volume. that is, we label a phase by those degrees of freedom with highest entropy,
among those that coexist in the thermal ensemble for a given value of the moduli and the
total energy.

33

5.1 bulk phase diagram

a supergravity gas in ten dimensions has entropy

s(e)sgr  v 1/10 e9/10
and can be matched to a bulk black hole with entropy

s(e)bh  e (g2

s e)1/7.

(141)

(142)

the coexistence line ssgr  sbh gives a black hole in equilibrium with radiation in a nite
volume, with energy of order

e(sgr  bh) 

1
g2
s

(g2

s v )7/17,

and microcanonical temperature

t (sgr  bh)    1

g2

s v !1/17

.

(143)

(144)

since the black-hole-dominated region has negative specic heat, this temperature is max-
imal in the vicinity of the transition. this conguration is microcanonically stable in nite
volume, in a range of energies between the matching point and the jeans bound [32].

the graviton gas can also be matched to a gas of long closed strings. the coexistence
curve ssgr  shag at temperatures t  o(1) in string units, is independent of the string
coupling and is given by the hagedorn energy density:

e(sgr  hag)  v.

(145)

this hagedorn phase can be exited at high energy or large coupling through the corre-
spondence curve shag  sbh (140):

e(bh  hag) 

1
g2
s

,

(146)

into a black-hole dominated phase at lower temperatures. the resulting phase diagram
for the bulk or closed-string sector is depicted in gure (3).

an interesting feature of this diagram is the existence of a triple point at the inter-
section of the phase boundaries of the massless supergravity gas, hagedorn, and black-
hole-dominated regimes. this point lies at hagedorn energy density ec  v , string scale
temperatures t  o(1), and considerably weak coupling gs  1/v and, somewhat
optimistically, we would like to interpret its existence as evidence for completeness of
this phase structure. namely, we are not missing any major set of degrees of freedom.
according to this picture, the hagedorn phase goes into a black-hole-dominated phase at
large energy or coupling, well within the jeans or holographic bound:

e < ehol 

v 7/9
g2
s

,

34

(147)

provided we are at weak string coupling gs < 1. we see that the hagedorn regime has
no thermodynamic limit whatsoever.
if we scale the total energy e linearly with the
volume, we run into the black-hole phase, which ends when the horizon crushes the walls
of the box (i.e. the black hole lls the box). moreover, if the string coupling is larger
that 1/v , we miss the hagedorn phase altogether, as the supergravity gas goes into the
black-hole-dominated phase directly. in this case, the system has a sub-stringy maximum
temperature

tmax  t (sgr  bh) < 1.

(148)

5.2 world-volume phase diagram

similar remarks apply to the open-string sector in the vicinity of the d-branes. here, the
details of the correspondence principle depend on the excitation energy of the d-brane,
i.e. in the geometric picture, we must distinguish between the near-extremal (r0  rq)
and non-extremal or schwarzschild (r0  rq) regimes.
before proceeding further, it is important to notice that dp-branes with p > 6 can-
not be considered as well-dened asymptotic states in weakly-coupled string theory. the
massless elds specifying the closed-string vacuum, including the dilaton, grow with trans-
verse distance to the d-brane. as a consequence, introducing a p > 6 dp-brane in a given
perturbative background inevitably results in a non-perturbative modication of the vac-
uum itself. thus, consistency with the requirement of weak string coupling throughout
the system means that such branes are never far from orientifold boundaries, and should
be better considered as part of the specication of the background geometry.
in the
following, we shall restrict to p < 7, unless specied otherwise.

the matching of the near-extremal (r0  rq) black-brane entropy or anti- de sitter

(ads) throats7

s(e)adsp+2  n 1/2 (vk)

5p

2(7p) g

p3

2(7p)
s

e

9p

2(7p)

to a weakly-coupled yangmills gas on the world-volume:

s(e)symp+1  n

2

p+1 (vk)

1

p+1 e

p

p+1 ,

(149)

(150)

is the content of the generalized sym/ads correspondence [24], and was studied in detail
in [25, 18, 34].

there are interesting nite-size eects at low temperatures, t < 1/rk, in the form of
large n phase transitions of the gauge theory. for p = 3 and spherical topology of the
brane world-volume, the gravitational counterpart is the hawkingpage transition [35,
36] between the ads black-hole geometry and the ads vacuum geometry (intermediate
metastable phases can be found [37]). for our case (p < 7 and toroidal topology of the

branes) the nite-size eects setting in at the energy threshold e < n 2/rk are associated

to the transition to zero-mode dynamics in the yangmills language and to nite-volume
localization [38] in the black-hole language. at suciently low temperatures one must
use a t-dual description of the throat, resulting in an eective geometry of smeared

7we denote the throat geometries that control the entropy by ads, even if they are not strictly ads
unless p = 3. one can nd a conformal transformation mapping the throat geometry to an adsp+2 for
any p, [33].

35

d0-branes. when these d0-branes localize as in [38] the description involves an ads-type
throat with p = 0, which we denote by ads2. in this case of toroidal topology, there is
no regime of vacuum ads dominance, provided n is large enough [18, 39]. we refer the
reader to [18, 34, 39] for a detailed discussion of such low-temperature phenomena.

at temperatures t > 1/rk these nite-size eects can be neglected, and the sym/ads
transition is determined by the matching of (149) and (150). the transition temperature,

t (symp+1  adsp+2)  (gs n)

1

3p ,

(151)

is smaller than the hagedorn temperature as long as stringy energy densities are not
reached in the world-volume.

at this point, it should be noted that the interpretation of the ads throats as sym dy-
namics at large t hooft coupling (the standard ads/sym correspondence) is problematic
for p = 5, 6. for p = 5, the ads regime has a density of states typical of a string theory,
with renormalized tension te = 1/ gs n (see [40]). for p = 6 the qualitative features of
the thermodynamics of the near-extremal and schwarzschild regimes are essentially the
same, so that the boundary r0  rq does not mark a signicant change in behaviour. the
holography properties required to interpret the ads physics only in terms of gauge-theory
dynamics seem to break down for these cases [41, 42, 43, 18, 44]. however, the sym/ads
correspondence line in the sense of [23] can always be dened, independently of whether
there is a candidate microscopic interpretation for the entropy (149) in the ads regime.
at stringy energy densities e  n 2 vk, the sym/ads correspondence line joins the
open-string hagedorn regime. the transition from a yangmills gas on the world-volume
to a hagedorn regime of open strings (ssym  shag) occurs at the energy

e(symp+1  hag)  n 2 vk.

(152)

this line joins the sym/ads correspondence curve at a triple point (see gure (4)), the
other phase boundary being the correspondence curve between the long open strings in
the hagedorn phase, and the non-extremal black-brane phase. black dp-branes in the
schwarzschild regime (r0  rq) have entropy:
s(e)bp  e   g2

(153)

7p

1

.

se

vk !

and match the world-volume hagedorn phase along the curve:

e(hag  bp) 

vk
g2
s

.

(154)

notice that the boundary line separating the near-extremal (ads) and schwarzschild

(bp) regimes of the black branes, given by r0  rq, or
e(adsp+2  bp)  n

vk
gs

,

(155)

also joins the triple point located at e  n 2 vk and gs n  1. the temperature along
this line is

1

7p

.

(156)

t (adsp+2  bp)    1

gs n!

36

this temperature is locally maximal for small energy variations if p < 5.

all these phases lie well within the holographic bound, dened by the condition that

the horizon of the black brane saturates the available transverse volume:

e < ehol 

vk
s  (v)
g2

7p

9p .

(157)

notice that this holographic condition is numerically equivalent to the bulk holographic
bound (147) for an isotropic box v  r9.
a major dierence from the closed-string sector studied in the previous subsection is
the possibility of dening a world-volume thermodynamic limit, provided the holographic
bound (157) is satised, i.e. if the world-volume energy density k = e/vk satises

1  k 

1
g2
s

,

(158)

there is a thermodynamic limit vk   with v xed and a hagedorn regime in the
world-volume. on the other hand, if

1
s  k 
g2

(r)7p

g2
s

,

(159)

there is a thermodynamic limit with the open-string system described by an innite black
brane. as pointed out before, the closed-string sector does not have such thermodynamic
limits at xed coupling, and there is no way we can decouple it completely unless we also
scale the string coupling to zero. therefore, the combined system does not have ther-
modynamic limits at xed string coupling, no matter how small. an eective decoupling
of open- and closed-string sectors can be achieved however in the large n limit with the
eective open-string coupling gs n held xed.

a brane plasma phase?

notice that the transition between the near-extremal and non-extremal metrics (155),
if continued into the hagedorn regime, leads to a line where the energy density on the
d-brane world-volume is of the order of the intrinsic tension of the brane:

e  n

vk
gs

.

(160)

the accumulation of energy in the d-brane world-volume at the expense of the bulk is
more ecient for the case of limiting dp-branes with  < 1. for these systems, the world-
volume energy density in long open strings near the hagedorn temperature diverges as
in eq. (129),   (  c)1. comparing with the intrinsic tension [12] (in string units
 = 1)

tdp =

1

,

(2)p gs

we can see that at

    c

c !1

1
gs



37

(161)

(162)

the thermal energy is of the same order of magnitude as the rest mass. at this point
our treatment of d-branes as semiclassical objects, quantized in a non-relativistic ap-
proximation, may break down. so, any physical picture of this region is neccesarily very
conjectural.

a possible mechanism setting in at these energy densities is the production of a plasma
of branes and antibranes eectively screening the r-r charge. in principle this screening
could be described by a higgs-like phase in the low-energy theory of forms. however, since
we are at weak coupling, creating such a plasma would seem to be an energetically very
expensive way to disperse the charge. nevertheless one can see that it might be possible,
at least for d-branes with divergent free energy near the hagedorn temperature. the
thermodynamic condition for chemical potentials of d-branes + and anti d-branes 
in equilibrium d + d  x, where x are massless ns-ns and r-r elds, is determined
in a standard way
(163)

+ +  = 0,

because chemical potentials for massless elds in equilibrium are zero. if we have a large
number of pairs produced we can assume that + =  = 0, so our plasma must have
zero chemical potential. treating branes as some kind of particles with internal structure
(which is given by an excitation spectrum of open strings) one can calculate the chemical
potential

(164)

  log 


v
n x~p,n

ee(~p,n)
 ,

where we have assumed that branes are described by boltzman statistics [45]. one can
show that fermi or bose statistics are not going to qualitatively change the picture in the
weak-coupling limit. here the sum is over all quantum numbers of a single brane including
momentum ~p in dd directions and open-string quantum numbers n. e(~p, n)  mdp +
~p 2
/2mdp + n, where mdp = tdpvk is the rest mass of the dp-brane. if  = 0 we have

n

v  emdp xn

e n z d~p e ~p 2

 /2mdp,

(165)

where pn e n = efp is a statistical sum of open strings on the dp-brane we are

considering. after integration we have

n

v  e(mdp+fp)   mdp

 !d/2

.

(166)

because both mdp and fp are proportional to vk they both survive in the thermodynamic
limit of large world-volume and may be suppressed only when mdp + fp is positive. it
is clear that for all systems with divergent fp (which is negative !) this is not true near
the hagedorn temperature and we can have unsuppressed production of pairs. this is
the case of p > 6 branes. the situation with other branes depends on a balance between
mdp and fp  in a very similar way (but not exactly the same) as for the energy density.
we can speculate that for some still small couplings there is unsuppressed production of
other branes too.

the present analysis of pair-production processes used a dilute-gas picture in the trans-
verse directions. therefore, in the light of the comments at the begining of section 5.2,

38

it might require very stringent conditions on the string coupling in order to consistently
apply to p > 6 dp-branes.

5.3 thermodynamic balance

with these results at hand we can discuss the general features of the thermodynamic bal-
ance between the bulk and world-volume components in the full weak-coupling parameter
space.

when the combined system enters the hagedorn phase in equilibrium, at temperatures

of order t  o(1), our main result in the previous sections

shag open  shag closed,

(167)

implies that most of the energy is stored in long open strings, with the energy density of
> v (if the volume is large enough).
closed strings kept close to the critical density eclosed
thus, as long as the temperature is of the order of the string scale, the closed-string sector
has a maximal energy density of the order of the string scale. this means that the system
will have a tendency to exit the hagedorn phase with most of the energy concentrated
in the world-volume sector, into the black-brane phase rather than the bulk black-hole
phase.

since the black-phases have negative specic heat, the maximal temperature of the
combined system is achieved in the hagedorn regimes and is tmax  o(1). the condition
for the combined system to enter the hagedorn phase is that the coupling be suciently
small:

gs < min   1
v

,

1

n! .

topen max  max (cid:16)(gs n)1/3p , (gs n)1/p7(cid:17) < 1.

since both sectors are supposedly in equilibrium, which of the two maximal temperatures
is attained depends on the detailed values of the moduli and coupling.

for phenomenological applications based on weakly-coupled brane-models we always
demand the brane sector to be perturbative, due to the phenomenological requirement of
weak gauge couplings in the standard model gauge group, and the technical requirement
of calculability. so, in this context we always work with brane sectors satisfying gs n < 1.
under these conditions, the bound (168) depends only on the total volume for closed-
string propagation. the critical point at g2
s v  1 was derived in subsection 5.1 for
in fact, it is independent of the number of large dimensions
a nine-dimensional box.

39

if the string coupling violates this bound, the combined system fails to enter the hagedorn
regime and have a sub-stringy maximal temperature as we increase the total energy. the
maximal temperature of the bulk is

tclosed max    1

g2

s v !1/17

< 1

if (168) holds, while the maximal temperature of the boundary sector is

(168)

(169)

(170)

available for closed-string propagation. the equilibrium between a supergravity gas in d
space-time dimensions with entropy

and a black hole,

occurs at energies

s(e)sgr  (vd1)

1

d e

d1

d

s(e)bh  e (g2

s e)

1

d3 ,

e(sgr  bh) 

1
g2
s

(vd1)

d3

2d3 ,

and the resulting maximal temperature is of order

t (sgr  bh)   

1

s vd1!

g2

1

2d3

,

(171)

(172)

(173)

(174)

leading to the same critical coupling for all values of d. thus, we see that a cosmolog-
ical weakly-coupled hagedorn regime, with temperatures of o(1) in string units, is only
possible for a suciently small universe. we would be led then to a scenario of the type
studied in [7], with the dierence that  = 0 open strings dominate the hagedorn regime.

6 concluding remarks

in this paper we have presented a general study of the thermodynamics of strings prop-
agating in d-branes backgrounds. particular attention has been paid to the hagedorn
regime and the associated long-string behaviour at weak string coupling where the free
(ideal gas) approximation is accurate.

we have stressed that, in any well dened ensemble, winding modes are central to
the behaviour of the system. this is because the classic problems one faces in dening
a satisfactory thermal ensemble (the jeans instability for example) can only be bypassed
by working at nite volume. only at nite volume does it make sense to dene an
approximate thermodynamic limit.

we discussed the thermodynamic behaviour in a toroidally compactied space by
applying the powerful calculational techniques of ref.
[8] to general string sectors in
d-brane backgrounds. as expected we nd that a pivotal role is played by the eect of
winding modes. for example, in a gas of open strings on an isolated d-brane, if the volume
of large winding-supporting dimensions (dd directions) is sucently large compared to

the world-volume (nn directions), namely vk < v, then the windings are deactivated
and the thermodynamics is well described by the non-compact approximation [18], with
limiting behaviour for dp-branes with p  5, and non-limiting, negative specic heat
for p < 5. on the other hand when vk > v windings tend to be activated and the
hagedorn temperature is limiting with positive specic heat. moreover, the hagedorn
behaviour switches on when a critical density is reached on the brane (or intersection).

we also compared the thermodynamics of dierent systems and showed that those
which are approximated by a non-limiting density of states are thermodynamically sub-
leading compared to limiting systems. since closed strings are a universal limiting system

40

(in a nite volume), we nd that all non-limiting transient behaviour is suppressed in
the full thermal ensemble. also we found that open strings on parallel branes ( = 0)
dominate over both closed strings and open strings on  = 4, 8 intersections.

armed with the correspondence principle of ref.

[23] and its generalizations, we
ventured into the speculative terrain beyond the ideal-gas approximation. under some
assumptions, we were able to build a consistent qualitative phase diagram, which used
the degrees of freedom present in weakly-coupled string theory (fundamental strings and
d-branes), together with the necessary ingredient to satisfy the holographic bound (i.e. a
black-hole-dominated phase). the main feature of these phase diagrams is that hagedorn
phases are bounded by black-hole-dominated phases at large energy or coupling.

a remaining bone of contention is the fact that the non-relativistic approximation
for the d-brane quantization could break down within the hagedorn regime, before the
energy density is large enough to match to a black brane. this question might depend
on a detailed study of the contribution of collective coordinates of the d-branes to the
thermodynamics. such a study is for the moment beyond our capabilities, although some
ingredients were laid out at the end of section 5. we argued that, for suciently small
string coupling, a plasma of brane-antibrane pairs might be produced, with local screening
of r-r charge.

our results may have some relevance to cosmology of d-brane backgrounds so let us
conclude with some more speculative remarks concerning earlier and possible future work
in this area. one interesting issue which was discussed in the context of closed strings
was the possibility of explaining the choice of four dimensions from hagedorn behaviour.
how does the presence of d-branes eect this question? first, we should emphasize that
the dominance of open strings is true even in the most extreme case of an initially small
universe where all the dimensions are of o(1). such a case was examined in ref. [7] where
it was suggested that a small universe dominated by closed-string winding modes would
have been unable to expand unless the winding modes annihilated. for closed strings,
annihilation is virtually impossible unless d  4 space-time dimensions are large. here
we have seen that when there are d-branes, at least in the weak coupling approximation
that we have been using here, most of the energy ows into open strings on the brane
even for modest energies. in addition, it is only possible to be in the long-string regime
at very weak coupling where the cosmology is expected to be dominated by the tension
of the d-brane itself. hence there seem to be no regions where this type of scenario is
applicable.

this is probably the appropriate point to introduce an alternative (and equally spec-
ulative) idea to explain four (or at least the low number of) space-time dimensions. this
might be called the melting scenario. we have seen that when the dd directions are
large, the thermodynamic behaviour is very dierent for p < 5 and p  5 branes. hence,
in a universe full of dierent dimensionality d-branes, the higher-dimensional limiting
d-branes attract all the energy of the system until they melt, when the energy density
in their world-volumes is suciently large. this would leave only the low-dimensional
p < 5 branes which, as we have seen, are non-limiting in the hagedorn regime (i.e. they
can be close to the hagedorn temperature with only a nite energy density) and there-
fore able to survive. there are however two possibly fatal objections to this scenario.
first, for it to make sense one should be able to build the d-branes themselves as bound
states of fundamental strings. the r-r charge could disappear if it has only a dynamical,

41

low-energy, meaning. a nice example of this would be the thermal un-wrapping of the
magnetic charge of a t hooftpolyakov monopole gas at suciently high temperatures.
unfortunately, in the case of r-r charge and d-branes, we have no evidence that the
corresponding conserved charges can be dynamically unwrapped, at least in a context
where the bare string coupling is kept small. the reason is that r-r charges are related
to kaluzaklein momenta through dualities, and the unwrapping of kaluzaklein mo-
menta requires some non-perturbative background dynamics (topology change). as well
as this technical problem, there is a more serious conceptual problem with the melting
idea. if we are willing to believe that d6-branes melt as the universe contracts and en-
ergy densities become very large, we have to accept that d6-branes can condense out as
the universe expands and cools down from a very dense stage. hence, without a rigorous
knowledge of what happens to the d-branes after they melt, this idea remains extremely
speculative.

more generally, however,

it is clear that the hagedorn regime is a rich source of
cosmological possibilities and in particular gives an interesting new kind of disequilibrium;
a d-brane formed in a hot gas of closed strings will inevitably attract all the bulk entropy
onto its surface. any new source of disequilibrium is of great interest for both baryogenesis
and ination.

acknowledgements

we would like to thank karim benakli, keith dienes, emilian dudas, sanjay jain, keith
olive, graham g. ross, subir sarkar and miguel a. vazquez-mozo for conversations.
the work of e. r. is partially supported by the israel academy of sciences and hu-
manities centres of excellence programme, and the american israel bi-national science
foundation.

references

[1] r. hagedorn, suppl. nuovo cimento 3 (1965) 147.

[2] s. frautschi, phys. rev. d3 (1971) 2821; r.d. carlitz, phys. rev. d5 (1972) 3231.

[3] s. fubini and g. veneziano, nuovo cimento 64a (1969) 1640; k. huang and s.

weinberg, phys. rev. lett. 25 (1970) 895.

[4] n. cabibbo and g. parisi, phys. lett. b59 (1975) 67.

[5] e. alvarez, phys. rev. d31 (1985) 418; nucl. phys. b269 (1986) 596; m. bow-
ick and l.c.r. wijewardhana, phys. rev. lett. 54 (1985) 2485; b. sundborg,
nucl. phys. b254 (1985) 883; s.n. tye, phys. lett. b158 (1985) 388; e. alvarez
and m.a.r. osorio, phys. rev. d36 (1987) 1175; p. salomonson and b. skagerstam,
nucl. phys. b268 (1986) 349; physica a158 (1989) 499; d. mitchell and n. turok,
phys. rev. lett. 58 (1987) 1577; nucl. phys. b294 (1987) 1138; i. antoniadis, j.
ellis and d.v. nanopoulos, phys. lett. b199 (1987) 402; m. axenides, s.d. ellis
and c. kounnas, phys. rev. d37 (1988) 2964; a.a. abrikosov jr. and ya. i . kogan
int. j. mod. phys. a6 (1991) 1501 (submitted 1989), sov. phys. jetp 69 (1989) 235;

42

f. englert and j. orlo, nucl. phys. b334 (1990) 472; s.a. abel, nucl. phys. b372
(1992) 189

[6] m.j. bowick and s.b. giddings, nucl. phys. b325 (1989) 631; s.b. giddings,

phys. lett. b226 (1989) 55.

[7] r. brandenberger and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b316 (1989) 391.

[8] n. deo, s. jain and c.-i. tan, phys. lett. b220 (1989) 125; phys. rev. d40 (1989)

2646; n. deo, s. jain, o. narayan and c.-i. tan, phys. rev. d45 (1992) 3641.

[9] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506, hep-th/9510209;
nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 94, hep-th/9603142; e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996)
135, hep-th/9602070.

[10] see the following and citations thereof: j.d. lykken, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 3693,
hep-th/9603133; k.r. dienes, e. dudas and t. gherghetta, phys. lett. b436
(1998) 55, hep-ph/9803466; nucl. phys. b537 (1999) 47, hep-ph/9806292;
hep-ph/9807522; g. shiu and s.h.h. tye, hep-th/9805157; i. antoniadis, n.
arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, hep-ph/9806292; n. arkani-hamed,
s. dimopoulos and j. march-russell, hep-th/9809124.

[11] k.r. dienes, e. dudas, t. gherghetta and a. riotto, hep-ph/9809406.

[12] for reviews see: j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9611050;
string theory, vol 1,2. (cup) 1998; c. bachas, lectures on d-branes,
hep-th/9806199.

[13] see for example: a. lukas, b.a. ovrut, k.s. stelle and d. waldram,
hep-th/9803235; r. sundrum, hep-ph/9805471; hep-ph/9807348; k. benakli,
hep-ph/9809582; k. benakli and s. davidson, hep-ph/9810280; m. maggiore and
a. riotto, hep-th/9811089; d. lyth, hep-ph/9810320; n. kaloper and a. linde,
hep-th/9811141.

[14] m.b. green, nucl. phys. b381 (1992) 201; phys. lett. b282 (1992) 380,

hep-th/9201054.

[15] d.a. lowe and l. thorlacius, phys. rev. d51 (1995) 665, hep-th/9408134; s. lee

and l. thorlacius, phys. lett. b413 (1997) 303, hep-th/9707167.

[16] m.a. vazquez-mozo, phys. lett. b388 (1996) 494, hep-th/9607052.

[17] j.l.f. barbon and m.a. vazquez-mozo, nucl. phys. b497 (1997) 236,

hep-th/9701142.

[18] j.l.f. barbon, i.i. kogan and e. rabinovici, hep-th/9809033.

[19] i.i. kogan, jetp. lett. 45 (1987) 709; b. sathiapalan, phys. rev. d35 (1987) 3277.

[20] j. atick and e. witten, nucl. phys. b310 (1988) 291.

43

[21] d.j. gross, m.j. perry and l.g. yae, phys. rev. d25 (1982) 330.

[22] g.

t hooft, gr-qc/9310026; j. bekenstein, phys. rev. d49 (1994) 1912,

gr-qc/9307035; l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377, hep-th/9409089.

[23] g.t. horowitz and j. polchinski, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 6189, hep-th/9612146.

[24] j.m. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200;
s.s. gubser,
i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, phys. lett. b428 (1998)
105, hep-th/9802109; e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253,
hep-th/9802150.

[25] n. itzhaki, j.m. maldacena, j. sonnenschein and s. yankielowicz, phys. rev. d58

(1998) 046004, hep-th/9802042.

[26] g. veneziano, in hagedorn festchrift.

[27] l. susskind, hep-th/9309145.

[28] g.h. hardy and s. ramanujan, proc. london math. soc. 17 (1918) 75.

[29] m.b. green, phys. lett. b266 (1991) 325; phys. lett. b329 (1994) 435,

hep-th/9403040.

[30] m. laucelli meana, m.a.r. osorio and j. puente penalba, phys. lett. b400 (1997)

275, hep-th/9701122; phys. lett. b408 (1997) 183, hep-th/9705185.

[31] w. thirring, quantum mechanics of large systems, springer verlag, 1983, chap-

ter 2.

[32] s.w. hawking, phys. rev. d13 (1976) 191.

[33] h.j. boonstra, k. skenderis and p.k. townsend, hep-th/9807137.

[34] m. li, e. martinec and v. sahakian, hep-th/9809061; e. martinec and v. sahakian,

hep-th/9810224; hep-th/9901135.

[35] s.w. hawking and d. page, comm. math. phys. 78b (1983) 577.

[36] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 505, hep-th/9803131.

[37] t. banks, m.r. douglas, g.t. horowitz and e. martinec, hep-th/9808016.

[38] r. gregory and r. laamme, phys. rev. lett. 70 (1993) 2837, hep-th/9301052.

[39] a.w. peet and s.f. ross, hep-th/9810200.

[40] j.m. maldacena, nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 168, hep-th/9605016.

[41] j.m. maldacena and a. strominger, j. high energy phys. 12 (1997) 008,

hep-th/9710014.

[42] j.l.f. barbon and e. rabinovici, hep-th/9805143.

44

[43] o. aharony, m. berkooz, d. kutasov and n. seiberg, hep-th/9808149.

[44] a.w. peet and j. polchinski, hep-th/9809022.

[45] l.d. landau and e.m. lifshitz, statistical physics, pergamon, 1994, chapters 4,

10.

45

      


 

 

 

 


  
  

 

 


  

  


  

  


 

 


 

 


 

 

 


figure 1: contour deformation for isolated singularities.

46

 - c fc

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

2

4

6

8

x

10

figure 2: variation of   c with x = qf (e  c vk) for  = 0 open strings.

47

gs

holographic

bound

black

hole

sugra

hag

e

figure 3: bulk phase diagram. only the region gs < 1 is represented. the triple point
separating the supergravity gas, black hole, and hagedorn-dominated regimes is located

at gs  1/v , and e  v . the rightmost region is excluded by the holographic bound

(147).

48

gs

ads

p+2

black
dp-brane

holographic

bound

ads
2

 sym

p+1

hag

sym
1

e

figure 4: world-volume phase diagram for gs < 1. thick lines represent semiclassical
phase transitions or correspondence curves with a major change in the degrees of freedom,
whereas dashed lines represent smooth cross-overs within the same basic description. the
triple point at low energies was studied in [18]; it lies at gs  rp3
/n, e  n 2/rk, and is
k
due to nite-size eects in the yangmills theory. the triple point at hagedorn energies
is located at gs  1/n and e  n 2 vk. the dotted line within the hagedorn region
represents the d-brane bare-mass threshold, e  n vk/gs. again, the rightmost region
is excluded by the holographic bound (157).

49

