9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
1
1

 
 

3
v
0
0
2
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

supergravity, ads/cft correspondence, and matrix models

tamiaki yoneya)

institute of physics, university of tokyo

komaba, meguro-ku, tokyo 153-8902

the recent developments towards the possible non-perturbative formulation of string/m
theory using supersymmetric yang-mills matrix models (syms) are discussed. in the rst
part, we give a critical review on the status of our present understanding, focusing on the
connection of the d0-brane matrix models to supergravity and its relevance to the so-called
matrix-theory conjecture. we also discuss some problems concerning the conjectured re-
lation between supergravity in ads background and sym from the viewpoint of d-brane
interactions. we present a qualitative argument showing how the boundary condition at ads
boundary dictates the correlators on the large n system of source d-branes. then, in the
nal part, we turn to the question how to formulate the condensation of graviton in matrix
models, taking the simplest example of type iib matrix model. we argue the emergence of
a hidden symmetry gl(10, r), beyond the manifest lorentz symmetry so(9,1), by embed-
ding u(n ) model into models with higher n and by treating the whole recursive series of
models simultaneously. this suggests a possible approach toward background independent
formulations of matrix models.

1.

introduction

one of the most remarkable insights gained through the recent developments
in the studies of duality symmetries of string theory is the possibility of formulat-
ing nonperturbative string theory in terms of supersymmetric yang-mills theories.
from an ordinary viewpoint of perturbative string theory, yang-mills theories are re-
garded as the low-energy eective theories for describing interactions of gauge-eld
excitations of strings. the discovery of crucial roles 1) played by dirichlet branes
(d-branes) for realizing string dualities, however, paved a way toward possible refor-
mulations of string theory using new degrees of freedom other than the fundamental
strings, on the basis of an entirely dierent interpretation of yang-mills elds. since
string eld theories assuming the fundamental strings themselves to be the basic
degrees of freedom do not seem to be appropriate for nonperturbative studies of
the theory, such an alternative possibility has long been sought, but has never been
materialized in concrete form.

in the present report, i would like to review the status of yang-mills matrix
models from the viewpoint of asking the question, why could the models be the
theory of quantum gravity? in this written version of the talk, some of the subjects
which i have presented in the yitp workshop, held in succession to the nishinomiya
yukawa symposium, will also be included and expanded.

we will start from the so-called matrix theory which was proposed rst and
has been a focus of most intensive studies. next we will turn to the so-called
ads/cft(sym) correspondence. the purpose of this rst part is to review the

) e-mail address: tam@hep1.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp

2

t. yoneya

known results critically and provide a few new observations on some unsolved is-
sues. we will then proceed to the issue why yang-mills matrix theories could be
the models for quantum gravity. a special emphasis will be put on possible hidden
symmetry structure which would ensure the emergence of general covariance at long
distance regime. the last part discussing the problem of background independence
is a preliminary report from a still unnished project and will be of very speculative
character.

2. yang-mills matrix models and supergravity

the d-branes are objects carrying ramond-ramond (rr) charges. they are
necessary for realizing duality symmetry among various perturbative vacua of string
theory, since the transformations associated with duality interchange neveu-schwarz-
neveu-schwarz (ns-ns) and rr charges. in the case of perturbative closed-string
theories, it is known that the type iia or iib theory allows even or odd (spatial)
dimensional d-branes, respectively. in particular, the lowest dimensional objects are
d0-brane (d-particle) in iia and d(-1)-brane (d-instanton) in iib.

in low-energy eective eld theory, namely, iia or iib supergravity, d-branes
are represented as solitonic classical solutions. from the viewpoint of ordinary world-
sheet formulation of the theories, they are described as collective modes of fundamen-
tal strings, in which the collective coordinates can be identied with the space-time
coordinates at the boundaries of open strings with dirichlet condition. in old per-
turbative string theory, it has been thought that open strings cannot be coupled
to closed strings consistently, since they necessarily break the n=2 supersymmetry
of closed-string sector.
in our new understanding, the partial breakdown of su-
persymmetry just indicates the existence of d-branes as physical objects, and the
remaining supersymmetry is reinterpreted as the manifestation of the bps property
of d-branes.

to describe the dynamics of d-branes, we have to therefore study coupled sys-
tems of closed strings and open strings with dynamical dirichlet boundary condi-
tions. here it is worthwhile to recollect an old but well-known formulation of open
strings, namely, wittens string eld theory 2). the latter only uses open-string elds
as the dynamical degrees of freedom. nevertheless, it includes the whole dynamics
of interacting closed-open strings. namely, it is possible to describe the dynamics
of closed strings in terms of open-string degrees of freedom without explicitly intro-
ducing elds corresponding to closed strings. this remarkable property is actually
a consequence of the old s-t duality which is the basis for conformal invariance of
the world-sheet string dynamics. furthermore, if there were circumstances where
we can neglect the excitation modes of open strings higher than the lowest yang-
mills degrees of freedom, we can even imagine situations where the whole dynamics
including quantum gravity eect can be described by yang-mills theories. let us
briey review some representative proposals along this line.

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

3

2.1. d-particle model or matrix theory

the rst such model is called matrix theory. the model is based on the 1+0-
dimensional yang-mills theory with maximum (n=16) supersymmetry, which is ob-
tained by the dimensional reduction from 10 (=1+9) dimensional n=1 supersym-
metric yang-mills theory.

s=z dt tr(cid:18) 1
=z dt tr(cid:18) 1

2r

2gss

dtxidtxi + idt +

dtxidtxi + idt +

1

[xi, xj]2 
r
3
p

[xi, xj ]2 

4gs5
s
r
46
p

1
2
s

i[, xi](cid:19) (2.1)
(2.2)

i[, xi](cid:17) ,

where s and gs are string length and coupling constants, respectively. in the second
line, we have introduced the 11 dimensional parameters of m-theory, compacti-
cation radius r = gss along the 11th direction (10th spatial direction) and the
11 dimensional planck length p = g1/3
s. the higgs eld xi (i = 1, 2, . . . , 9) are
dimensionally reduced u(n ) gauge-eld matrices whose diagonal components are
identied with the collective coordinates of n d-particles, while the o-diagonal
components are the elds of lowest open string modes connecting the d-particles.
the 16 component grassmann (hermitian) matrices  transforming as so(9) spinor
are the super partner of the higgs elds.

s

in the matrix theory conjecture proposed in ref. 3), this action is interpreted as
the eective action of the theory in the innite-momentum frame (imf) where the
11th total momentum p11 is taken to be innitely large. following the m-theory
identication of the 11th momentum with the rr 1-form charges of d-particle, it is
assumed that

p11 = n/r .

(2.3)

thus, for any nite xed r, the imf limit corresponds to taking the large n limit,
n  . in other words, this requires that the imf hamiltonian p  = p 0p 11 must
have nontrivial dynamics in the part which scales as 1/n . one of the reasonings for
this conjecture is that in the imf frame (the part of) the (super) poincar`e symmetry
is reduced to (super) galilean symmetry in the 9 dimensional transverse space and
the above action precisely exhibits that symmetry.
in particular, to be a theory
in 11 dimensional space-time, it should exhibit the n = 1 supersymmetry in 11
dimensions which amounts to n = 2 supersymmetry in 1+9 dimensions. indeed the
model has, in addition to the n = 16 supersymmetry in 1+0 dimensions inherited
from 10 dimensional n = 1 supersymmetry

(1) =

1
2

(

1
r

dtxii +

i
23
p

[xi, xj]ij)(1),

a trivial supersymmetry under

(2) = (2),

(2.4)

(2.5)

where (1) and (2) are two independent constant majorana spinors. the algebra of
these two supersymmetry transformations closes with central charges up to a eld-
dependent gauge transformation. for a single d-particle state at rest as the simplest

4

t. yoneya

example, the rst symmetry is unbroken, corresponding to the bps property of the
state, while the second is broken. furthermore, the dimension of the multiplet of sin-
gle particle states ts to the desired multiplet corresponding to the rst kaluza-klein
mode of the 11 dimensional multiplet containing massless graviton and gravitino :
the 16 component grassmann coordinate  leads to 216/2 = 256 = 128 + 128 dimen-
sional representation of transverse so(9) ( spin(9)) group, which is precisely the
physical dimension of the 11 dimensional supergravity multiplet.
of course, the galilean symmetry is not sucient to justify the decoupling of
the higher string modes. that is the crucial dynamical assumption of the model. a
piece of evidence for this conjecture comes from the old observation made long time
ago in connection with the theory of membrane. namely, the same model can be
interpreted as a special regularized version of the membrane action 4) in the light-
cone gauge in 11 dimensions. the large n limit in this interpretation is nothing
but the continuum limit. the fundamental string of 10 dimensional type iia the-
ory is identied with the membrane which is wrapped along the compactied 11th
direction.
if this really works, it is quite natural to expect that after taking the
appropriate large n limit the model would reproduce the whole dynamics including
the eect corresponding to higher string modes. the crucial new observation here is
that the model should be interpreted as describing the arbitrary multi-body systems
of membranes or d-particles. this solves the long-standing problem in the formu-
lations of supersymmetric membranes, namely, the diculty of continuous energy
spectrum. the energy spectrum of the system must be continuous from zero, to be
the theory of multi-body system including the massless particles. for the validity
of this interpretation, it is necessary that there exists one and only one threshold
bound state which is identied with the single-particle graviton supermultiplet for
each xed n of u(n ). at least for n = 2, this is consistent with the witten index
of the model 5).

another impetus for this model is the proposal that the model might be mean-
ingful even for nite n . that is, susskind 6) suggested that the model for nite n
should be interpreted following the framework of the so-called discrete light-cone
quantization (dlcq), in which the compactication is made along the light-like di-
rection x = x11  x0 instead of the space-like direction. such a formalism has often
been discussed to regularize gauge eld theories. in fact, this proposal can be re-
lated to the imf interpretation by considering the limit of small r keeping n xed,
which is another way of making p11 large. if we boost the system simultaneously
with taking this limit, we can keep the longitudinal momentum p nite and the
condition of compactication is imposed on the x direction with nite compacti-
cation radius in the small r limit. this is essentially the argument given in ref. 7).
equivalently, using the original frame with suciently small r, the compactication
condition x  x + 2r in the space-lime 11th dimension can be approximated
by the light-like condition (x, x+)  (x + 2r, x+), since in the limit we are only
interested in the small longitudinal energy p+  p 2
i /2p proportional to r while
p  p11  o(1/r) becomes large.
now since the limit forces the 11 dimensional planck length small compared
to the string length, p  s, we expect that the interaction of d-particles can be

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

5

described by lowest open string modes at least at distance scales shorter than the
string length, according to the result of ref. 8). also, the 11 dimensional newton
s 9
constant g11  g3
s becomes small in this limit. thus from the viewpoint of closed
strings or membranes, the interaction of d-particles should be approximated well by
classical supergravity at least for distance scales much larger than the string length
s. if one naively assumes that matrix theory is correct and that the justication
of matrix theory comes solely from the innite momentum limit, one might expect
that matrix theory for suciently small r with nite n must reproduce the classical
supergravity at all distance scales which are larger than the 11 dimensional planck
length. this would in particular require that the lowest open string mode alone
describes correctly the gravitational interaction of d-particles for such wide ranges
of distance scales, namely, from the innite large distances all the way down to
near the 11d planck length which is far below the string scale. this would be
quite a surprising conclusion, since we usually think that the duality between open
and closed strings is due to the existence of full tower of higher string modes on
both sides of closed and open strings. in particular, the eective dynamics near the
string length after eliminating the higher-string modes would necessarily be non-local
either in terms of the lowest graviton elds alone or of the lowest gauge modes alone
. before discussing further the meaning of this and where this naive expectation may
be invalidated, let us briey review known results related to this issue.

2.2. matrix theory vs. supergravity

in fact, as discussed in ref. 8), supersymmetry ensures that the above conclu-
sion is indeed true at least in the one-loop approximation in terms of open string
computation. the two-body interaction, v4/r7, of d-particles in the leading approx-
imation with respect to the expansion in velocity is correctly reproduced by only
the lowest open string modes. namely, the same expression is valid for the large
r region where the only lowest modes of the closed string couple, as described by
supergravity. furthermore, at least for two-body interactions, a non-renormalization
theorem 9) is established demanding that the one-loop result for the leading term is
not renormalized by higher order eects. this theorem can be generalized to the
next order v6 for the two-body interaction and is consistent with the result of explicit
two-loop computation 11) of the two-body interactions.

whether similar non-renormalization theorem is valid for more general multi-
body interactions is not known. extension of the argument given in 9) to general
n - body interactions 10) is dicult. in general, however, we hope that some sym-
metry together with certain additional inputs would x the theory of gravity com-
pletely. for example, we believe that general covariance and locality uniquely lead
to general relativity at suciently large distances. so the question is whether the
supersymmetry of the matrix model (2.2) is sucient to ensure the general coor-
dinate invariance at large distances as interpreted in 11 dimensional space-time. if
we assume the existence of massless graviton supermultiplet and lorentz symmetry
in the at background in 11 dimensions, only consistent low-energy eective theory
is believed to be supergravity. establishing lorentz invariance of the model in the
limit r, n   would thus be most desirable. at least for membrane approxima-

6

t. yoneya

tion, this is very plausible. however, the membrane approximation is not sucient
to establish the lorentz symmetry, since the interpretation of the matrix model is
really very dierent from membrane as emphasized already. unfortunately no con-
crete proposal for general case has been given. it is thus desirable to perform explicit
computations for multi-body interactions.

let us here briey review the result of explicit computations of 3-body interac-
tion of d-particles at nite n . a scaling argument shows that the eective lagrangian
of the 3-body interaction must take the following form

l3 

g2
11
r5

v6
r14 ,

(2.6)

where the factor v6/r14 only indicates power behaviors with respect to relative veloc-
ities (v) and to relative distances (r). the power r5 with respect to the compacti-
cation radius is required by boost invariance along the 11th direction. note that in
terms of the yang-mills coupling g2
ym corresponds to
the two-loop contribution. for small gs, the compactication radius is small, but the
11/r5 is arbi-
newton constant is also vanishing such that the expansion parameter g2
trarily small. this indicates that the regions of validity of classical supergravity and
perturbative computation in the matrix model might overlap, if only the parameters
are concerned neglecting the real roles of the dynamical variables. therefore it is
not unreasonable if the matrix model with nite n is able to reproduce supergravity
results to some nite orders with respect to the newton constant.

ym  gs the factor g2

11/r5  g2

in classical supergravity, we can derive the following explicit form for the inter-

action lagrangian

l3 = lv + ly .

lv =  xa,b,c

(15)2nanbnc

64r5m 18

v2
abv2

ca(vca  vab)

1
r7
ab

1
r7
ca

.

bcv2

ca(vcb  c)(vca  c)

1
2

(15)3nanbnc
96(2)4r5m 18(cid:20)v2
ly =  xa,b,c
ca(vcb  c)2 +
v4
v2
bav2
bc(vba  b)(vca  c)(cid:21)(a, b, c)
v4

ac(vcb  c)(vbc  b)

v4
bc(vca  c)2

1
2
1
2
1
4

+


+

(2.7)

(2.8)

(2.9)

where

=

64(2)3

(15)3 z 

0

(a, b, c)  z d9y

1

|xa  y|7|xb  y|7|xc  y|7

d3(12+23+31)3/2 exp(cid:16)1|xaxb|22|xbxc|23|xcxa|2(cid:17)

(2.10)

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

7

and the indices a, b, c, . . . label the d-particles whose masses are na/r, nb/r, nc/r, . . ..
the planck mass m = 1/p is dened by g11 = 25/m 9. the above separation into
v-part and y-part roughly corresponds to the contributions from the seagull-type
diagrams and the diagrams with one 3-point self-interaction of graviton, respectively.
because of the bps property, the contribution from the y-part vanishes whenever
any two d-particles have parallel velocities.

on the side of matrix theory, we compute the scattering phase shift in the
eikonal approximation. each of the d-particles with masses na/r, nb/r, nc/r, . . .
is approximated as a cluster of corresponding number (na, nb, nc, . . .) of d-particles,
moving parallel within each cluster, with the smallest unit of mass 1/r. we can again
separate the two-loop contributions into v-and y- types. the y type contribution
only comes from the diagrams with two 3-point vertices. the v-type contribution
comes from the diagrams with one 4-point vertex and also from the diagrams with
two 3-point vertices in which one of the propagators is canceled by the derivatives
acting on the 3-point vertices. for more details, the reader should consult our original
papers 12) 13). it turns out that the v-type contribution to the eikonal phase shift
can be written as the time integral of the above lagrangian lv . for the y-type
contribution which is vastly more complicated, we have conrmed that the result of
explicit time integration of the lagrangian ly precisely agrees with the phase shift
obtained from the matrix model. we can also show the precise correspondence at
the level of the equations of motion on both sides including the eect of recoil 13) to
the present order of approximation.

in the absence of general arguments which may guarantee the agreement be-
tween matrix theory with nite n and supergravity in the long-distance limit, the
above 3-body computation is the strongest evidence so far for the validity of ma-
trix theory conjecture in its dlcq interpretation. a related computation involving
the nonlinear graviton interaction has also been done for graviton scattering in an
orientifold background 14) and exact agreement is veried. extension of these com-
putations to higher-loop/body interactions is not dicult at least conceptually, but
is technically formidable and no complete computations for higher cases have been
reported yet, except for a partial computation 15) which indicates some signal for a
possible discrepancy with supergravity at 3-loop order.

it should be emphasized here that given only the connection between the matrix
model as the low-energy eective theory for d-particles in type iia theory, on one
hand, and the connection of supergravity and closed strings on the other hand,
the agreement of d-particle scatterings between supergravity and matrix model at
arbitrary large distances is in no sense a logical consequence. remember that the
argument of ref. 7) is not applicable at distances near and larger than the string
scale. suppose that the original bfss conjecture that in the large n limit (and
for xed r) the agreement is achieved is true. then the disagreement between
supergravity and matrix theory at nite n with small r, if it indeed occurs, must
be due to the neglect of bound-state eect in forming the states of d-particles with
large longitudinal momentum. namely, no matter how r is small, only for suciently
large n we would expect that the eect of higher string modes which would ensure
the validity of the s-t duality between open and closed strings is correctly taken into

8

t. yoneya

account. to check whether matrix theory can give sensible results in this way is,
however, a very dicult problem, since for large n the size of graviton is known to
grow indenitely 3) in the limit, and hence we have to deal with complicated many
body dynamics of d-particles (or partons).

if that is the case, it is desirable to have denite criteria on the basis of which we
can assess various situations such that agreements or disagreements between super-
gravity and matrix theory can be predicted by general arguments. for example, if we
assume the correspondence between supgergravity and d0-matrix model following
maldacenas general conjecture 19) which will be the subject of the next subsection,
the validity of the classical 10 dimensional supergravity description is expected for
the distance scales 20) p n 1/7  r  p n 1/3 , where the rst and the second in-
equalities come from the weak coupling condition and the small curvature condition,
respectively. at the lower end, the eective radius along the 11th direction becomes
of the same order as p . thus from the viewpoint of 11 dimensions, it should not
be regarded as the limit of the supergravity description as long as the curvature
radius is much larger than the planck length, although 10 dimensional description is
no more valid. however the upper limit indicates that the agreement with classical
supergravity at arbitrarily large distances can only be achieved in an appropriate
large n limit. namely, the parameter n plays eectively a role of infrared cuto
for the theory, not only with respect to the 11th direction but also to the transverse
space in the bulk, as we have argued before from the correspondence between the
matrix model and a regularized theory of membranes. in other words, the low-energy
long distance physics of supergravity is governed by the high-energy physics of open
strings where in general we cannot neglect higher string (or membrane) modes.

however, we should also keep in mind that the near-horizon limit, approximating
the factor 1 + q/r7 by q/r7, is only valid if r  (gsn )1/7 where q  gsn , and hence
the argument cannot be extended to the upper limit p n 1/3 in the strong coupling
region. thus strictly speaking we can not be sure whether matrix theory reproduces
the large distance behavior of classical supergravity in the large n limit for xed
gs when gsn  1, even if we assume the validity of the maldacena correspondence
in its origianl form. of course, the maldacena conjecture only proposes sucient
conditions, and hence does not necessarily exclude the possibility that the region
of validity extends beyond these conditions because of some (hidden) symmetry
constraints depending on the type of physical quantities in question. we should also
expect from a more general viewpoint that some (but perhaps already built-in)
symmetry must be responsible for the matrix model to reproduce supergravity in
spite of the rapid growth of the size of graviton in the large n limit. perhaps the
precise agreement of 3-body interaction in the above nite n calculation should be
interpreted as a partial indication for the existence of such higher symmetry.

concerning the question on why the matrix model can be the theory of gravity,
one of the other crucial unsolved problems is how to extend the model to general
curved backgrounds. it has been argued that any simple modication of the quantum
mechanical lagrangian (2.2) for the curved space cannot reproduce the supergravity
result even at the order v4 for the d-particle interaction in curved space for nite n .
this seems to indicate that the curved background cannot, in general, be described

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

9

by nite n models.
indeed, this is not unreasonable since to really modify the
background in a self-consistent fashion within the framework of m-theory, we must
consider the condensation of gravitons. it is dicult to treat nite condensation of
graviton in the present framework of matrix theory which assumes xed n however
it is large. in the last part of this talk, i will give a preliminary consideration on
the graviton condensation in a simpler case of type iib matrix model 41). for the
possibility of modifying the action to curved backgrounds, an axiomatic approach
called d-geometry 16) has been suggested. we have to await to see whether this
approach can resolve the above issues. we also mention a recent important work 17)
discussing the change of the background in matrix theory, on the basis of one-loop
computations of the interactions between an arbitrary pair of extended objects in
the theory. for an earlier approach from the viewpoint of membrane dynamics in
curved background, see 18) and references therein.

2.3. ads/sym correspondence

as already mentioned, another recent development closely related to matrix
theory is the conjectured correspondence 19) between supergravity in anti de sitter
background on one hand and super yang-mills theory of d-branes on the other. this
is essentially based on the following two observations. firstly, the low-energy (low-
velocity) dynamics of many d-branes which are situated almost on top each other
is well described by the eective super yang-mills theory for any nite n , since we
can assume the decoupling of higher modes of open strings for the same reason as we
have argued in the case of matrix theory. secondly, the eld-theory description in
terms of supergravity is expected to be simultaneously eective when the curvature
near the horizon becomes suciently small compared with the string length. in the
case of d3-brane, in particular, the curvature radius at the horizon is of order

rc  (g2

ymn )1/4s.

(2.11)

d3-brane is special in that the background dilaton is constant, and thus can be
made arbitrarily small by keeping rc large (g2
ymn  1) if n is suciently large.
then by the duality between open and close strings, we naturally expect that the
descriptions of the dynamics of d3-branes in terms of supersymmetric yang-mills
theory or type iib supergravity are both valid. in other words, super yang-mills
theory in the large n limit is expected to be dual to supergravity with the d3-
background in the near horizon limit. the d3-brane metric in the near horizon limit
is the direct product, ads5s5, of the ve dimensional anti de sitter space-time ads5
and ve dimensional sphere s5. thus the metric has isometric symmetry under the
group so(4, 2)  so(6). correspondingly, yang-mills theory for d3 branes are the
n = 4 superconformal yang-mills theory which has the same conformal symmetry
so(4, 2) and global r-symmetry so(6). using this correspondence, we can for
example predict the spectrum of the superconformal yang-mills theory in the large
n limit by analyzing the kaluza-klein spectrum around the ads5s5.
a more concrete prescription which allows us to connect correlators of both sides
has been proposed in 21). it essentially says that the eective action of supergrav-
ity for the supergravity elds which satisfy appropriate boundary condition at the

10

t. yoneya

boundary of the ads space (opposite to the horizon) is the generating functional for
the correlators of super yang-mills theory. the external elds for the latter gener-
ating functional coupled to operators of the yang-mills theory are nothing but the
boundary value of the bulk elds in supergravity. many computations of correlators
have been done based on this conjecture. however, it seems that this prescription
has never been derived logically from the duality between open and closed strings.
for example, it is not clear why the boundary condition at the boundary of the
ads space-time can dictate the choice of operators of the large n yang-mills theory,
since naively the d-branes as the heavy source producing the ads background seem
to be situated at the opposite boundary of the ads space. in the following, we
will rst discuss some interesting aspect related to the correspondence of conformal
symmetries on both sides, and then come back again to the issue of correlators later.

the metric of the ads5s5 is given by

ds2 = (cid:18) r2

c

u 2 (du 2 + u 2d2

5 ) +

u 2
r2
c

4(cid:19),
dx2

(2.12)

where u = r/ (  2
s) is the energy of an open string stretched from the source
d3-branes at the origin to a probe d3-brane. the four dimensional at metric dx2
4 is
interpreted as describing the world-volume of the source consisting of n d3-branes
which are almost coincident to each other. the special conformal transformation in
the so(4,2) isometry is

k xa = 2  x xa + ax2 + a r4
u 2 ,
k u = 2  x u.

c

(2.13)
(2.14)

as noted originally in ref. 19), the existence of the last term r4
c /u 2 leads to a nonlinear
and eld-dependent transformation for the dynamical coordinates of the probe d3-
brane. the latter property constrains the action to be the dirac-born-infeld action
for the probe d3-brane in the background of the source d3-branes, with a help of
a supersymmetric nonrenormalization theorem. if the conjectured relation between
yang-mills theory and supergravity is valid, it must be possible to derive the same
property on the side of d3-brane yang-mills theory. however, the special conformal
transformation of the world-volume yang-mills theory is the standard one,

k xa = 2  x xa + ax2

(2.15)

without the last term of eq. (2.13). on the yang-mills side, the coordinate u is the
radial component of the diagonal part of the 6 higgs elds xi (i = 1  6) which, on
the side of supergravity, correspond to the space described by {u, s5}.
the solution of this puzzle is the following. to study the dynamics of a probe
d3-brane in the background of the source d3-branes, we have to derive eective
theory for the diagonal higgs elds by integrating over the o-diagonal components
corresponding to the elements of the quotient group u(n )/u(n  1)u(1).
in
performing this integration, we have to impose the gauge condition, most conve-
niently, the familiar background gauge condition. however, it turns out that the

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

11

background gauge condition (or any other reasonable gauge condition) is not invari-
ant under the special conformal transformation, and therefore we have to make a
eld-dependent gauge transformation which compensates the violation of the con-
formal invariance. thus the transformation law of the diagonal higgs elds receives
a correction in a eld-dependent manner.
in the large u approximation, we can
easily evaluate the correction by performing a one-loop calculation. the nal result
precisely takes the form (2.13) including the numerical coecient. for details, we
refer the reader to ref. 23). that the correct transformation law is obtained in the
one-loop approximation including the precise coecient suggests that some sort of
the non-renormalization theorem is at work here, demanding that the lowest order
result for the metamorphosed transformation law on the yang-mills side gets no
higher oder corrections at least in the large n limit.

since the derivation of the isometry almost amounts to the derivation of the
background metric of the ads5, the above result provides a strong support to the
conjecture on the general relation between supergravity and supersymmetric yang-
mills theory. in particular, the corrected transformation law explains the appeare-
ance of the natural scale (gsn )1/4 from the side of yang-mills theory. if this result is
not corrected by the higher order eect, it would be the rst derivation of the scale
which goes as n 1/4 in the large n limit from a purely yang-mills point of view.

this result also provides further evidence on our view about the relation between
the source and the probe. namely, the probe d3-brane is at somewhere far away from
the horizon, while the ads space itself is produced by the large number (=n  1)
of the source d-branes at somewhere near (or inside ?)
the horizon. from this
viewpoint, the operators corresponding to the boundary value of the bulk eld for
u   are not, at least directly, the operators of the world-volume theory which
corresponds to the large n yang-mills theory. this raises a puzzle mentioned in
the beginning of this subsection : why and how does the boundary condition for
large u dictate the operators of the large n yang-mills theory which corresponds to
the source of the ads space-time? in the following, we suggest a simple argument
which justies the prescription of 21) 22) under the assumption that the maldacenas
conjecture is true.

the breaking of the gauge group u(n ) into u(n  m )u(m)

(n  m ) by
assigning the large vacuum expectation value for the higgs eld corresponding to
the radial direction amounts to introducing a heavy source and a light probe at a
distance scale u in the energy unit. we assume that the position of probe is at
somewhere outside the near horizon limit, u > rc/. on the supergravity side, in
the limit of large n with xed m , we can treat the eect of the probe as a small
perturbation around the background of the heavy source. we thus decompose the
metric as

g = g + h

(2.16)

where the rst term g is the classical metric produced by the source d3-branes and
h is the metric produced by the probe in the background g(n ). the perturbative
metric h satises the linearized equation in the lowest order approximation.

dn h (u) = 22

10t p

(u)

(2.17)

12

t. yoneya

where t p

 is the energy-momentum tensor of the probe

t p
(u, x) 

1

g

(6)(u  u )t p

 (x)

(2.18)

and dn is the kinetic operator for the linearized theory in the background of the
source d3-branes. we denote by u the variable corresponding to the radial transverse
coordinate in the bulk, while the coordinate along the d3-branes is denoted by x.
for notational simplicity, we suppress the angle variable corresponding to s5. for
the perturbative metric polalized along the direction parallel to the world volume,
the kinetic operator essentially takes the following form

 dn = (1 + 2g2

ymn 2/r4)1/2r6 ,

ymn 2/r4)1/2k + (1 + 2g2

(2.19)
where k is the laplacian for the at four dimensions along the world volume and r6
is the at six dimensional laplacian corresponding to the six dimensional transverse
space. note that the laplacian for the transverse part is proportional to the at space
laplacian as noted in 25) even before taking the near horizon limit. the boundary
condition for the linearized eld (in the euclidean formulation )) is that it vanishes
21) as u  0, since otherwise the solution diverges at the origin. by assuming that
the states of the probe d3-brane can be chosen arbitrarily, the perturbative metric
can also be assumed to induce an arbitrary boundary value f(x) at some large
value of u. it is natural to set the boundary at u = rc/ where the near-horizon
limit loses its validity :

h (u, x)  0 (u  0)

h (u, x)  f (x) (u  rc/).

(2.20)

in the low-energy limit along the direction of the world-volume, we neglect the
laplacian along the d3-brane (quasi static approximation) and we can approximate
the boundary value as

f(x)  2

10

t p
 (x)

(u  u )4(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)u=rc/

,

(2.21)

since the laplacian for the transverse part of six dimensions is proportional to the
at space laplacian even outside the near horizon limit. the eective action for the
boundary value is obtained by substituting the perturbed metric into the supergrav-
ity action,

ssg
e = s[g + h] ,

(2.22)

using the ads metric for the background. g. what we have done is essentially
to replace the eect of the probe in arbitrary given states at somewhere outside the
near horizon region by the boundary condition f for the perturbation h around
the background of the source at the boundary of the ads space-time.

now, on the yang-mills side, we construct the eective theory for the unbroken
part u(n  m )u(m) after integrating over the heavy higgs and w-bosons cor-
responding to the o-diagonal matrix elements whose mass is of order u for large

) for a lorentzian formulation, see 26).

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

13

u corresponding to the broken part of the gauge group. this leads, again in the
low-energy limit, to the eective action

sym
e  2

10 z dx4 t s

 (x)

(x)t p
(u  u )4

(2.23)

where t s
  trn m (ff) is the energy-momentum tensor of the source d3-
branes on the yang-mills side. this one-loop result is exact because of the non-
renormalization theorem 27) and hence is valid even for the probe at somewhere
outside the near horizon region. note that this is consistent with the fact that the
laplacian is proportional to that of the at space in supergravity. here we have
assumed that the distance between the source and probe is suciently large and is
order of |u  u|. it seems natural to assume that u is of the same order as rc/.
the source d3-branes cannot be considered to be at rest at the origin. they are
expected to extend to the whole range of the near-horizon region. then the average
position of the source d3-branes would be determined by the scale rc which is the
only scale in this region. apart from a proportinal factor, we can replace the above
expression by

e  z dx4 f(x)t s
sym
the equivalence between (2.22) and (2.24), es sg
e [f ]i , is essentially the
statement of the usual prescription 21) 22). we have only discussed the metric pertur-
bation, but the general idea can be easily extended to other massless elds. details
remain to be seen.

 (x) .
e [f ]  hesym

(2.24)

our discussion clearly shows that the correlators we compute using the prescrip-
tion 21) 22) are those of the unbroken part u(n  m ) corresponding to the source,
in spite of the fact that we use boundary conditions at the boundary of the ads
space-time. it is not correct to think that the large n yang-mills system is literally
on the boundary. in order to derive the correlators from the boundary, we need in
general denite rules which allow us to connect the operator insertions at the probe
and the source. this is somewhat analogous to the lsz relation between s-matrix el-
ements and the corresponding green functions.) in our argument above, the heavy
higgs and w bosons play the role of a mediator for connecting the probe and
the source. a similar reasoning also justies the method for computing the wilson
loop expectation value, proposed in 24) which naturally treats heavy w-bosons as
quarks by utilizing the breaking u(n ) u(n  1)u(1) of gauge group as in our
argument. in this case, the fundamental open string corresponding to the innitely
heavy w-boson, treated as a heavy point-like test particle, is playing the role of
mediator.

our argument is based on the quasi-static approximation. this is justied for
suciently large distances between the source and the probe, since the mass scale in
terms of the world volume theory is very large and hence the characteristic distance
scale with respect to the world volume is small. this is a manifestation of the space-
time uncertainty relation explained in the next subsection. the correction to the

) during writing the present manuscript, several works which are related to this issue appeared

28) 29). note, however, that the context of these recent works is slightly dierent from ours.

14

t. yoneya

quasi-static approximation can also be interpreted on the basis of the uncertainty
relation, as discussed in 25): an uncertainty in the momenta along the world-volume
is proportional to the uncertainty with respect to the transverse positions of the
probe. including this eect, more precise understanding on the correlators and also
the extension to general d-branes are very important, since they may provide oth-
erwise scarce information on the physics of the matrix models in the large n limit.
for example, it would be extremely interesting if we can obtain some useful infor-
mation on the large n behavior of matrix theory in this way 33). in our argument,
it is very crucial that the lowest order interaction between the source and the probe
is equivalently described by both supergravity and matrix model even outside the
near horizon region. for the validity of this property, the supersymmetric nonrenor-
malization theorem is important on the matrix side, while the laplacian must be
essentially proportional to the at space laplacian on the supergravity side. it is not
dicult to see that, from the viewpoint of 10 dimensions, the latter is satised for
d-particles after taking into account the nontrivial behavior of dilaton. from the
viewpoint of 11 dimensions, we have already seen this in the previous subsection.

2.4. generalized conformal symmetry and space-time uncertainty principle

next let us consider the question whether the conformal symmetry which is
so important in the ads/sym relation has any generality beyond the special case
of d3-branes. one of the characteristics of yang-mills theories interpreted as the
dynamical theory of d-branes is of course that the elds on the world-volume now
represent the collective motion of d-branes in the bulk space-time. this in particular
implies that the dimensionalities of the elds on the world-volume and of the base-
space coordinates are opposite, as is seen from the transformation law (2.13) and
(2.14), or more simply from the scale transformation

xi(xa)  x 
xa  x

a) = xi(xa),

i(x
a = 1xa.

(2.25)

(2.26)

as is emphasized in ref. 30), this indicates a general qualitative property that the
long-distance phenomena in the (transverse) target space is dual to the short dis-
tance phenomena in the world volume and vice versa. this property has also been
emphasized independently (named as uv-ir correspondence) from the context of
establishing the holographic bound for the entropy using the ads/sym correspon-
dence in 31). for a recent discussion on holography 32), we refer the reader to 29).

qualitatively, such a dual correspondence between the two dierent distance
scales is precisely the prediction of the space-time uncertainty principle 34) 36) which
has been proposed long ago as a possible space-time interpretation of the world-sheet
conformal symmetry of perturbative string theory. as already reviewed in some pre-
vious publications 35) 37), to which i would like to refer the reader for the explanation
of the original motivation and examples, the statement can be summarized as follows:

let

1. t : uncertainty in probing the distance scales in the longitudinal directions

along the world volumes of d-branes including time.

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

15

if the world-volume coordinates of d-branes in the static gauge are denoted by
xa (a = 0, . . . , p),

t = |x|

where |  | is the length in the euclidean metric. if we use the minkowski metric,
the original derivation of the relation requires that t should be measured
along the time-like direction along the world volume.

2. x : uncertainty in probing the distance scales in the bulk along the transverse

directions orthogonal to d-branes.

then the following uncertainty relation is universally valid,

t x > .

(2.27)

note that this relation survives in the maldacena limit (t u > 1), since

x  |r| = |u|.

s

this explains the dual relation between the two dierent length scales determined
by the mass of the open strings stretched between d-branes, on one hand, and the
transverse distance between the branes, on the other. as discussed in 25) and 37), this
elementary property is responsible for explaining some important qualitative aspects
of d-brane dynamics in connection with the ads/cft(sym) correspondence and
holography. furthermore, if this relation is applied to d-particles, we can immedi-
ately derive the characteristic planck scale p = g1/3
s of 11 dimensions given only
that the mass of a d-particle is of order 1/gss by combining with the ordinary quan-
tum mechanical uncertainty relations. this also leads to the holographic property
that the minimum bit of information of the quantum state of a d-particle is stored
in a cell of the order of the planck volume in the transverse space in 11 dimensions.
in particular, as is suggested in 37), the space-time uncertainty relation can be
regarded as an underlying principle behind the ultraviolet-infrared relation 31) which
is on the basis of the ads/cft(sym) correspondence. since the previous account
given in 37) was ambiguous in some point, i would like to repeat the discussion here
very briey by taking into account the important observation made in 38). our
discussion on the correspondence between ads5s5 and the type iib string theory
suggests that the uncertainty of the positions of the d3-branes in the radial direction
u is of order the ads radius rc  (g2
ymn )1/4  x in the string unit s = 1. the
space-time uncertainty relation then demands that the uncertainty with respect to
the time-like length scale along the world volume is of order t  1/rc. thus
as the ads radius increases, the dynamics of the d3-banes are probing the high-
energy region of the order rc of the ads space-time. this is due to the fact that the
typical mass scale of the open strings mediating the source d3-branes are growing
as rc. does this imply that the length scale along the space-like directions on
the world volume also decreases? naively it might look so if we assume lorentz
invariance on the world volume. however, the ads/cft relation leads to a contrary
conclusion. from the viewpoint of the d-brane dynamics, the energy of the open
strings mediating the interaction among the d3-branes can also be regarded as the
self-energy of the heavy charged elds (u(1)). let the uncertainty of the spatial

16

t. yoneya

position of such a charged eld be xs. the self energy of the eld in the large n
strong coupling region can be estimated from the behavior of the wilson loop 24),
which tells us that it is of order r2
c /xs. note that this is dierent from the
weak coupling behavior which would be proportional to r4
c : coulomb force is still
there corresponding to conformal symmetry but with the dierent eective charge.
equating this result with the energy scale determined by the space-time uncertainty
relation, we have

xs  rc.

(2.28)

thus the world volume of the source d3-branes can be regarded as the collection of
cells with volume r3
c in the space-like directions with a continuous ow of time, and
hence the degrees of freedom of the theory is given, in terms of the 10 dimensional
newton constant g10  g2

s  g4

ym, as

ndof  n 2 l3

r3
c

=

l3r5
c
g10

where we have assumed that the source d3-branes wrap around a 3-torus of the
length l and also that the degrees of freedom is proportional to n 2 even in the
strong coupling regime in view of the result 39) for the entropy at nite tempera-
ture. the nal result is consistent with the beckenstein-hawking formula and is
equivalent with the original result derived in 31). the relation (2.28) is at rst sight
quite surprising, but is an essential property ensuring holography. the above ar-
gument is consistent with the recent analysis 28) 29) of holography in the at space
limit. it should however be kept in mind that the space-time uncertainty relation
or ultraviolet-infrared relation alone is not sucient to derive holography. we have
to combine it with some dynamical information, as exemplied by the assumptions
needed in the argument.

although the space-time uncertainly relation might look at rst sight too simple
in order to characterize the short-distance space-time structure, it indeed captures
the most important characteristics of quantum string theory including d-branes. we
hope that it plays some role as one of the guiding principles toward nonperturbative
formulation of string/m theory.

the conformal symmetry can be regarded as a mathematical structure which
characterizes the space-time uncertainty relation (2.27) : clearly, the relation is
invariant under the scale transformations t  t, x  1x. the in-
variance can be extended to full conformal symmetry for general dp-branes, if we
identify the uncertainty with the innitesimal variations of the coordinate and elds,
as

k t = 2  xt,

k x = 2  xx

(2.29)

using the relation

(xa + k xa) = 2  xxa + 2(ax  dx  xa  x) ,

where the second term is orthogonal to the rst term and therefore we have the
rst equality of eq. (2.29). thus it seems that the conformal symmetry plays an

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

17

analogous role in the target space-time as that of the canonical structure in the
phase space of classical mechanics. this strongly suggests that the noncommutative
nature of the space-time coordinates which characterizes the matrix models should
be understood as a realization of the quantization of space-time and the conformal
symmetry is a signature of certain unknown symmetry structure behind it.

these considerations motivate us to generalize the conformal symmetry of d3-
brane to general d-branes. let us rst consider the d-particle model. the action
(2.2) is invariant under the scale transformation

xi(t)  x 

t  t = 1t

i(t) = xi(t),
gs  g

s = 3gs.

(2.30)

(2.31)

one might wonder whether this can be regarded as symmetry since we transformed
the coupling constant simultaneously. but this is not unreasonable if we remember
that the string coupling constant, being given by the vacuum expectation value
of dilaton at innity, is not really a constant supplied by hand. ultimately the
string coupling should be eliminated from the theory. from the viewpoint of 11
dimensions, the string coupling is replaced by the compactication radius, and the
scale transformation can be reinterpreted as the boost transformation along the 11th
direction as follows. in the above scale transformation, we have assumed that the
string length is invariant. however, from the point of view of m-theory, we should
x the 11 dimensional planck length instead of the string length. this is achieved
by redening the unit of length as

s  1s,

t  1, xi  1xi, a  1a

where a is the gauge u(n ) gauge eld. combining the change of unit, which does
not change the action, with the above scaling transformation, the net transformation
becomes

t  2t, r  2r,

(2.32)

while the transverse coordinates and gauge eld are scalar. this is precisely the
boost transformation provided we identify the time as the light-cone time x+ and
the compactication radius as that along the light-like direction x. from this 11
dimensional viewpoint, it is more appropriate to express the space-time uncertainty
relation in the form rt x > 3
p which suggests some tripod-like interpreta-
tion, possibly connected with the membrane structure, of the relation as already
emphasized in 37).

once we allow the variation of the string coupling, we can easily extend the sym-
metry to so(2,1) group by considering the trivial time translation and the special
conformal transformation whose innitesimal form is

kxi = 2txi, k a = 2ta, k t = t2, k gs = 6tgs .

(2.33)

in all these transformations, the fermionic variables are assumed to be scalar.

the above transformation property of the string coupling is essentially equiva-
lent to the fact that the characteristic spatial and temporal scale of the dynamics

18

t. yoneya

s

s

s and g1/3

of d-particle is proportional to g1/3
s, respectively. of course the in-
verse powers with respect to gs in these length scales just reects the space-time
uncertainty relation. in contrast with this, there is no xed characteristic scale in
the case of d3-brane, because the dynamics is conformal invariant and all scales are
equally important with respect to both t and x. of course, if we assume some
particular background, the dynamics around the background can have characteristic
scales. the scales which appeared in the case of d3-branes should be interpreted as
such. we emphasize that this dual nature of two dierent scales in time and space
explains the simultaneous appearance of the short distance scale x and small en-
ergy scale e  1/t in the weak coupling dynamics of d-particles, ensuring the
decoupling of the higher string modes in the short distance regime contrary to the
naive intuition.

the argument discussed in the previous section connecting the d-brane yang-
mills theory and supergravity should equally be valid for d-particles. then we expect
that the conformal symmetry of d-particle yang-mills theory must be reected in
the metric produced by a heavy source of d-particles. the 10 dimensional metric
around the d-particle is given, in the maldacena limit   0, u = r/, by

10 = (cid:18)
ds2

u 7/2
q

dt2 +

q
u 7/2(cid:16)du 2 + u 2d2

8(cid:17)(cid:19),

where

q = 603()3/2gsn = 2405g2

y m n.

in the case of d-particle, the dilaton is not constant and is given as

e = gs(cid:18) q

7u 7 )3/4 = g2

y m(cid:18) q

u 7(cid:19)3/4

.

(2.36)

both the metric and the dilaton are invariant under the dilatation

u  u,

t  1t,

gs  3gs.

(2.37)

furthermore, they are also invariant under the innitesimal special conformal trans-
formation

(2.34)

(2.35)

(2.38)

(2.39)

kt = (t2 +

k u = 2tu,

g2
y m n
965u 5 ),
kgs = 6tgs .

just as in the yang-mills case, these transformations with the time translation form
an so(2,1) algebra. the additional term g2
ymn/965u 5 in the special conformal
transformation plays the similar role as in the case of d3-brane: the nonlinear eld
dependence is equally powerful to determine the eective action of the probe d-
particle in the background of source d-particles. we can derive this modication
of the transformation law in the bulk, extending the similar mechanism as we have
discussed for d3-brane in the previous subsection. for details about this, we refer the
reader to refs. 30) 40). it is straightforward to extend the conformal transformations
of the above type to general dp-branes ( 0  p  4), as discussed in the second of

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

19

the latter references. the case of d-instanton matrix model, the so-called type iib
model 41), is very special in this respect, since here all of the space-time coordinates
are treated as matrices. for an interpretation of the model from the point of view
of the space-time uncertainty relation and conformal symmetry, we refer the reader
to 42).

finally, one might wonder what is the relation of the space-time uncertainty
relation and the associated conformal symmetries to supersymmetry. we can perhpas
say that the supersymmetry is necessary to ensure some of prerequisites for applying
the principle. for example, to discuss the scattering of d-branes meaningfully, it
is necessary that the clusters far apart from each other should be free except for
the weak gravitational forces among them. if the supersymmetry is not there, the
quantum zero-point energy induces the forces which do not decay at large distances.

3. graviton condensation in type iib matrix model

as the nal topic of this report, i would like to present some preliminary con-
siderations on the treatment of graviton condensation in matrix models. we have
already seen some evidence that supersymmetric yang-mills models indeed describe
the gravitational interactions of d-branes to certain extent. however, it is clear that
we do not have denite general principles which might explain the emergence of grav-
ity from yang-mills theory. from the viewpoint of symmetry, the existence of n = 2
supersymmetry in space-time in 10 dimensions is the strongest argument for the
existence of supermultiplet containing graviton, since only massless representation
of the maximal n = 2 supersymmetry in 10 dimensions is indeed the supergravity
multiplet. however, it is dicult to decide the presence of massless particles only
from the logical structure of the yang-mills theory. in other words, without making
concrete computations of d-brane scattering, we cannot decide whether the n = 2
global symmetry is really elevated to the consistent local symmetry ensuring the
emergence of gravity in the long-distance regime. since in general we expect that
the matrix models are only sensible after taking appropriate large n limit and then
various questions can only be answered by solving complicated dynamics, it is very
important to establish the symmetries of the models as far as possible.

now after seeing some evidence for the emergence of gravity in the yang-mills
matrix models, we should be able to identify the local space-time supersymmetry
directly within the models. the purpose of the following preliminary consideration is
to start an initial discussion toward such a possibility taking the simplest toy example
of the type iib matrix model. we hope that our discussion will be a useful starting
point for exploring possible higher symmetry structure in matrix-model approaches
to non-perturbative string/m theory from a more general viewpoint.

in the case of usual perturbative string theory, that the theory is indeed a dy-
namical theory of space-time geometry is reected on the fact that we can deform an
allowed space-time background by insertion of the vertex operator corresponding to
physical graviton modes of strings. or, if we use the language of string eld theory,
the change of background is compensated by an appropriate redenition of the string
eld corresponding to a shift of its graviton component. in particular, the general

20

t. yoneya

coordinate transformation is compensated by such a eld redenition.) that is
how the string theory can be generally covariant and in principle be a background
independent formulation even if the theory is formulated without introducing the
space-time metric explicitly as an independent degree of freedom.
in the case of
general yang-mills matrix models, on the other hand, we cannot identify graviton
modes directly in the classical action of the model. they only appear as a part of
loop eect in the t-channel. for this reason, they can neither be treated as ordinary
bound states, in general. in the special case of matrix theory, only the kaluza-klein
mode with non-zero 11th momentum can be directly treated, and the graviton with
zero 11th momentum can only appear as the loop eect.

let us now concentrate on the case of matrix model of d-instantons. the model
is already lorentz invariant and thus we can immediately ask a question, how is
the symmetry extended to general coordinate invariance?. the action of the model
is

sn = trn(cid:18) 1

4g2 [x , x  ]2 +

1
2

  [x ,  ](cid:19).

(3.1)

of course, it is not obvious what we mean by the general coordinate transformation
for the matrix variables x ,  . in the usual interpretation, only the diagonal com-
ponents of x  have the meaning of the space-time coordinates and the o-diagonal
components are really elds corresponding to the lowest open string modes.
in
general, the space-time coordinate and the elds of open strings can have dierent
transformation property. however, at least for the general linear transformations
gl(10, r) which is globally dened, it is natural to suppose that the transformation
law is the standard one

x   a

 x  ,

(3.2)

where a
 are arbitrary 1010 coecients. the action is manifestly invariant under
the subgroup so(9,1), if the spinor matrix  transformed as usual. our question
is then whether it can be made invariant under the transformations belonging to
the remaining broken quotient group gl(10, r)/so(9,1). of course, the standard
procedure is to introduce the metric (or viel-bein) degree of freedom which absorbs
the noninvariant piece of the action. but as the metric degrees of freedom is supposed
to be contained in the loop eect, there must exist dierent way of compensating
the transformation without introducing the metric explicitly.

now we will present briey an argument showing 44) that this can be achieved
by embedding a model with xed n into models with larger n . the idea is to
add more instantons to the model with appropriate information on the state of
the added instantons such that they eectively produce the metric insertion for the
original action with lower n . if we perform the embedding for all n recursively,
we naturally expect that the set of all such models as a whole, which we denote as
{. . . , u (n ), u (n + 1),}, can in principle describe all possible backgrounds of the
model. in this way, it should ultimately be possible to reconstruct the model in a
background independent fashion.

) for an initial discussion of this phenomenon, see 43).

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

21

let us study the simplest embedding from n to n + 1. we will use the following

notations for the embedded matrices.

x 

a,n +1 = 

a , x 


n +1,a = 

a , x 

n +1,n +1 = x,

a,n +1 = a,  n +1,a = a, n +1,n +1 = .

(3.3)

(3.4)

thus the n  n matrices x 
1)  (n + 1) matrices as

n n , n n are embedded into the corresponding (n +

x 
n n 

n n 








.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.

.
.
. x 
.
.
.

.
.
h|
.
.

.
.
h|

.
.
.
.
.
.



.
.
|i
.
.
x

.
.
.
.
|i
.
.
.
.
.
. 

,

(n +1)(n +1)
(n +1)(n +1)



.

here we use diracs bra-ket notation for the vector part. since the information on
the state of the added instanton is specied by using the n -th diagonal elements x, 
(collective coordinates of the added instanton), we can rst integrate over the vector
parts to derive the eective action for the insertion of graviton. then we can further
integrate over the collective coordinates by inserting an appropriate function (x, )
whose form is determined later. let us call the result of this n (x,  ; ). then
by combining with the original u(n ) model exp(sn )  exp(sn ) + n (x,  ; ),
we can dene the new partition function of the (n, n + 1) system.

zn [] = n 1z d10n 2

xd16n 2

 exp(cid:18)sn [x,  ] + xi

cizn [x,  ; i](cid:19)

(3.5)

to the rst order in the strengths {ci} of the insertion, where the sum is over all
independent wave functions of added instanton. it would be more appropriate to
regard the wave functions as the scalar products of two wave functions.

in the one-loop approximation, we can show that the following special choice
of , which is the simplest candidate corresponding to the degree of freedom of
symmetric tensor, gives the innitesimal (rst order) deformation of the action sn
which compensates the change of the action by the innitesimal gl(10,r)/so(9,1)
coordinate transformation a =  + s where s is an arbitrary innitesimal
symmetric tensor.

(x, )  (  0)ab(  0)cd s



a


b


c



d

0

(3.6)

22

with

t. yoneya

0 =

16

ya=1

a ,

(z d16 0 = h0|0i = 1).

(3.7)

namely, apart from the proportional constants, the rst order deformations of the
bosonic and fermionic part of the action are, respectively,

strn(cid:18)[x , x  ][x , x ](cid:19), st rn(cid:18)  [x ,  ](cid:19)

which are nothing but the change of the bosonic and fermionic actions corresponding
to the quotient group gl(10,r)/so(9,1). the one-loop approximation is justied
for the wave functions which are constant with respect to the space-time coordinates,
since then the infrared region x   is dominant in the integral over the collective
coordinate of the added instanton implying the innite mass limit in the propagator
of the uctuating elds: the coecients of the above deformation are proportional

to an infrared-divergent integral r d10x/x10, which is cancelled by choosing the nor-

malization of the wave function.

our result suggests how to describe the change of background using only the
degrees of freedom of the model itself, if we treat all possible embeddings simul-
taneously.
in particular, we have seen that the model indeed has full gl(10, r)
symmetry. thus the metric degrees of freedom appearing as a loop eect can be
regarded as the goldstone boson associated with the spontaneously broken part
gl(10,r)/so(9,1) of the innitesimal symmetry gl(10,r) of the recursively embed-
ded model { , u (n ), u (n + 1),}. together with the space-time supersymmetry,
this explains how the model can indeed be the theory of gravity.

4. concluding remarks

in principle, the formalism suggested in the last section should be extended to
arbitrary changes of background and hence to the denition of the model for general
curved space-times. for example, the wave function

(  0)abh



a


b

0

describes the innitesimal condensation of the antisymmetric tensor eld b with
constant eld strength h. also, it is not dicult to derive the susy transformation
law corresponding to the shift of the background. but, technically, computations
required for such a generalization become increasingly dicult. i feel that we need
some entirely new framework for developing the idea in a tractable way. what we are
pursuing amounts to investigating the condensation of goldstone bosons using the
conguration space formalism. something which can play the role of the eld-theory
like formalism must be a desired language, by which we can treat the matrix models
with dierent sizes of matrices in a much more unied and dynamical manner. only
by using such a formalism, we would be able to discuss the major questions related
to the present approach, such as the proof of s-duality symmetry, the background

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

23

independent formulation, and so on. if we symbolically represent the whole recursive
series { , u (n ), u (n + 1),} by h[] as the functional of all possible background
elds , background independence of the theory amounts to something like



h[]


= 0 

(4.1)

which should simultaneously play the role of the eld equation in a perturbative
approximation. we also note that our idea is intimately related to that) of large-
n renormalization group, in which we try to derive the equation of motion for the
background by imposing the xed point condition in the sense of the renormalization
group with respect to n . in the latter, it is not clear how to dene the model in
curved space-time, and also how to treat the zero modes in formulating the renor-
malization group. unless we insert wave functions as we have done, the result of
embedding would only lead to a null result. in the approach suggested here, it may,
at least in principle, be possible to develop the procedure in a more constructive
fashion.

finally, it may be worthwhile to mention possible connection ) of the present
idea with the k-theory formulation 46) of bound states of brane-anti-brane systems,
which has been discussed to describe the stable non-bps states 48). we should gen-
eralize the above construction such that the formalism includes not only variable
number of d-instantons but also of anti-d-instantons simultaneously. obviously,
the system with a xed number of both d-branes and anti-d-branes cannot be su-
persymmetric. it would be extremely interesting if we could recover supersymmetry
by some similar mechanism as we have suggested for recovering the full gl(10,r)
symmetry beyond manifest lorentz symmetry. such must also be crucial for devel-
oping covariant or background-independent formulation of matrix theory. i hope to
report some progress along this line in near future.

acknowledgements

during the preparation of this report, i have enjoyed stimulating conversations
with m. ikehara, a. jevicki, y. kazama, y. okawa, y. sekino and w. taylor.
the present work is supported in part by grant-in-aid for scientic research (no.
09640337) and grant-in-aid for international scientic research (joint research,
no. 10044061) from the ministry of education, science and culture.

references

[1] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724.
[2] e. witten, nucl. phys. b268 (1986) 253.
[3] t. banks, w. fischler, s. h. shenker and l. susskind, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112.
[4] b. de witt, j. hoppe and h.nicolai, nucl. phys. b305[fs23] (1988) 545.

) for example, such a possibility has been suggested in 45).
) i would like to thank j. polchinski for calling my attention to wittens work 46) at the
nishinomiya-yukawa symposium. after submitting the present report to hep-th archive, i learnt
the work 47) of horava which also suggested a possible connection of the k-theory formulation to
matrix theory. i would like to thank p. horava for pointing out his recent works to me.

24

t. yoneya

[5] p. yi, hep-th/9704098.

s. sethi and m. stern, hep-th/9705046.

[6] l. susskind, hep-th/9704080.
[7] n. seiberg, phys. rev. lett. 79(1997) 3577.

a. sen, hep-th/9709220.

[8] m. douglas, d. kabat, p. pouliot and s. shenker, nucl. phys. b485(1997)85.
[9] s. paban, s. sethi and m. stern, hep-th/9805018, hep-th/9806028.
[10] d. lowe, hep-th/9810075.
[11] k. becker and m. becker, nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 48

k. becker, m. becker, j. polchinski and a. tseytlin, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3174.

[12] y. okawa and t. yoneya, nucl. phys. b538(1998) 67.

see also,
m. dine and a. rajaraman, phys. lett. b425 (1998) 77.
m. fabbrichesi, g. ferretti and r. iengo, j. high energy phys. 06 (1998) 002; hep-
th/9806166.
w. taylor iv and m. v. raamsdonk, hep-th/9806066.
r. echols and j. p. gray, hep-th/9806109.
j. mccarthy, l. susskind and a. wilkins, hep-th/9806136.

[13] y. okawa and t. yoneya, hep-th/9808188.
[14] ulf h. danielsson, m. kruczenski and p. stjernberg, hep-th/9807071.
[15] m. dine, r. echols and j. p. gray, hep-th/9810021.
[16] for a review and further references, see m. douglas, hep-th/9901146.
[17] w. taylor iv and m. v. raamsdonk, hep-th/9812239.
[18] b. de wit, k.peeters and j. plefka, hep-th/9803209.
[19] j. maldacena, hep-th/9711200.
[20] n. itzhaki, j. maldacena, j. sonnenshain and s. yankielowicz, hep-th/9802042.
[21] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov and a. m. polyakov, hep-th/9802109.
[22] e. witten, hep-th/9802150.
[23] a. jevicki, y. kazama and t. yoneya, phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998) 5072.
[24] j. maldacena, hep-th/9803002.
[25] m. douglas and w. taylor iv, hep-th/980725.

see also,
s. r. das, hep-th/9901004.

[26] v. balasubramanian, p. kraus and a. lawrence, hep-th/9805171.
[27] m. dine and n. seiberg, hep-th/9705057.
[28] j. polchinski, hep-th/9901016.

v. balasubramanian, s. b. giddings and a. lawrence, hep-th/9902052.

[29] l. susskind, hep-th/9901079.
[30] a.jevicki and t. yoneya, nucl. phys. b535 (1998) 335.
[31] l. susskind and e. witten, hep-th/9805114.
[32] g. thooft, gr-qc/9310026.

l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36 (1995)6377.
[33] y. sekino and t. yoneya, work in progress.
[34] t. yoneya, duality and indeterminacy principle in string theory in wandering in the
fields, eds. k. kawarabayashi and a. ukawa (world scientic, 1987), p. 419: see also
string theory and quantum gravity in quantum string theory, eds. n. kawamoto and
t. kugo (springer, 1988), p. 23; mod. phys. lett. a4, 1587(1989).

[35] t. yoneya, hep-th/9707002 (to appear in the proceedings of the apcpt-ictp joint

international conference 97);

[36] m. li and t. yoneya, phys. rev. lett. 78 (1997) 1219
[37] m. li and t. yoneya, hep-th/9806240.
[38] a. w. peet and j. polchinski, hep-th/9809022.
[39] s. s. gubser, i. klebanov and a. a. tseytlin, hep-th/9805156.
[40] a. jevicki, y. kazama and t. yoneya, hep-th/98010146.

see also a recent calculation which went beyond the eikonal approximation,
h. hata and s. moriyama, hep-th/9901034.

[41] n. ishibashi, h. kawai, y. kitazawa and a. tsuchiya, nucl. phys b498(1997)467.
[42] t. yoneya, prog. theor. phys. 97(1997) 949.

supergravity, ads/sym correspondence and matrix models

25

[43] t. yoneya, phys. rev. lett. 55(1985) 1828; phys. lett. 197b(1987) 76.
[44] t. yoneya, in preparation.
[45] see, e.g., m. douglas, hep-th/9707228.
[46] e. witten, hep-th/9810188.
[47] p. horava, hep-th/9812135, and a talk at aps meeting, ucla, jan., 1999.
[48] a. sen, hep-th/9805019; hep-th/9808141.

o. bergman and m. r. gaberdiel, hep-th/9806155.

