hep-th/9902160
calt-68-2215

9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
4
2

 

 
 

1
v
0
6
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

brane transfer operations and t-duality

of non-bps states

oren bergman, eric g. gimon and petr horava

california institute of technology, pasadena, ca 91125, usa

bergman, egimon, horava@theory.caltech.edu

using the relation between d-brane charges and k-theory, we study non-bps d-branes and

their behavior under t-duality. we point out that in general compactications, d-brane

charges are classied by relative k-theory groups. t-duality is found to act as a symmetry

between the relative k-theory groups in type ii and type i/ia theories. we also study

type fia theory (which contains an o8 plane and an o8+ plane), using k-theory and

t-duality to identify its stable d-branes. comparison with string theory constructions

reveals two interesting eects. one of them involves the transfer of branes between o-

planes, while in the other, a d-brane charge which seems conserved near one o-plane in

fact decays due to the presence of another type of o-plane.

february 1999

1. introduction

a closer look at the dynamics of various unstable d-brane systems (such as brane-antibrane

systems) has recently opened a new perspective for understanding d-branes and their

conserved charges. traditionally, d-branes are understood as rr-charged stringy solitons

on which strings can end; in the new framework [1,2,3,4], d-branes appear as topological

defects in the worldvolume of unstable brane systems of higher dimension.

a crucial role in this construction is played by our improved understanding of the

string theory tachyon [1] (see also [5-10]). string theory has been plagued with tachyons

since its early days, but whether they represent an incurable instability of the theory or have

a more subtle role in the dynamics was not known. it is now believed that the tachyonic

mode of the open string stretching between a d-brane and a d-antibrane (or between a pair

of unstable d-branes) is really a legitimate higgs eld, and therefore does not represent

an incurable instability. instead, it tends to develop a stable vacuum expectation value,

leading to the decay of the unstable state into a stable state. depending on the details

of the original unstable conguration, the resulting stable state can contain topological

defects that correspond to stable d-branes.

any such construction can be related through a hierarchy of embeddings to bound

states in the unstable system of a number of spacetime-lling d9-branes. the worldvolume
dynamics of this system contains u (n ) u (n ) yang-mills theory and a higgs eld (a.k.a.
tachyon) in the (n, n) representation in the case of type iib theory [1], and u (n )

yang-mills theory with an adjoint higgs in the type iia case [3]. all possible stable

d-branes  both supersymmetric and non-supersymmetric  appear as topological defects

in the worldvolume higgs eld on these spacetime-lling d-brane systems. in this sense,

the spacetime-lling brane system provides a universal medium in which all stable d-

brane charges are carried by conventional topological defects, similar to vortices in type

ii superconductors or magnetic monopoles of grand unied theories.

the precise dynamics of these unstable d-brane systems is not known, but the topo-

logical information needed for the complete classication of d-brane charges can still be

determined. this information is usefully encoded in k-theory [2,3,11] (see also [12]). once

one identies the k-theory group relevant to a given compactication, one can use meth-

ods developed in the mathematical literature to compute it, and thereby determine the

spectrum of conserved d-brane charges. having classied the charges, one can then look

for a string theory construction of the corresponding d-branes.

1

one of the dening qualities of d-branes, which in fact is how they were discovered

[13,14], is their transformation under t-duality. because t-duality exchanges neumann

open string boundary conditions with dirichlet ones, it exchanges wrapped branes and

unwrapped branes. one of the purposes of this paper is to determine how t-duality is

manifested in the bound state construction above. we shall therefore study compactica-
tions on x  s1, and orientifolds thereof.

in section 2 we discuss the k-theory realization of t-duality in type ii string theory.

as one of the central points of the paper, we show that in general string theory compacti-
cations, d-brane charges are classied by relative k-theory groups, such as k(sp y, y ),
where y is the compactication manifold. in the case of type ii strings compactied on

a circle, the relative k-theory group of d-brane charges splits into the sum of two groups,

whose elements reect the split of the d-brane charges between wrapped d-branes and
unwrapped d-branes. the k-group for iib on a circle, k(x  s1, s1), is isomorphic to
the k-group for iia on a circle, k1(x  s1, s1), clearly in line with t-duality. moreover,
the isomorphism exchanges the subgroup associated with wrapped d-branes on one side

with the subgroup for unwrapped d-branes on the other side. in the rest of this paper,

we would like to see if this clear split between wrapped and unwrapped d-branes holds

generically in k-theory.

our rst test case, discussed in section 3, involves looking at the t-duality between

type i strings on a circle and the type ia orientifold with two o8 orientifold planes.

unlike in the type ii theory, there are now new non-bps d-branes with z2 valued charges.

at rst, the situation looks quite similar to the type ii case: the k-group for type i on a
circle, ko(xs1, s1), is again found to be isomorphic to the type ia k-group kr1(x
s1, s1), and it splits into two parts which one may naively interpret as corresponding to

wrapped branes and unwrapped branes.

this interpretation raises two puzzles. first, some of the non-bps d-branes that were

stable in at space are now only stable for a certain range of the circles radius, even though

they carry a conserved charge. second, in type ia we expect to nd unwrapped branes

localized on each of the two orientifold planes, yet the corresponding charges seem to be

missing from the subgroup we naively associate with unwrapped branes. section 3 will

demonstrate how these two puzzles are resolved. a key element in this resolution involves

processes that we refer to as brane transfer operations.

our second test case, presented in section 4, deals with the more exotic typeei open

2

orientifold plane. the k-group associated with these theories, which turns out to be

string theory, which is t-dual to the type fia orientifold with both an o8 and an o8+
equivalent to a certain k-theory group known in the mathematical literature as gksc(x),

does not split naturally into the of sum of two sub-groups. the split between wrapped

branes and unwrapped branes is totally defeated. we will show that the root of this

problem is linked to the fact that some non-bps brane congurations locally stable at the
o8 orientifold plane become unstable due to the presence of the o8+ plane and vice versa.

this phenomenon can have important consequences for the piecewise analysis of the stable

non-bps d-brane spectra in various compactications, such as when one approximates

singularities in k3 orientifolds by ale spaces [15].

many technical details required for our analysis have been relegated to an appendix,

which also serves as a collection of basic facts in k-theory, and can therefore be of some

independent interest.

while this paper was being written, two papers [16,17] appeared in which some over-

lapping results on t-duality in k-theory were obtained. the connection between kr-

theory and orientifolds has also been discussed in [18].

2. type ii theories

as a warm-up exercise, we set the stage for our later analysis of stable d-branes in various

orientifold models by rst analyzing the case of type ii theories compactied on a circle

to nine dimensions. (as we will see, this procedure can be easily iterated to understand
tn compactications). it turns out that all stable d-brane states predicted by k-theory

in these compactications carry conventional ramond-ramond charges. therefore, we do

not expect any surprises; the main goal in this brief section is to see that t-duality of type

ii theories is indeed a manifest symmetry in k-theory.

2.1. d = 10

stable dp-brane charges in type iia and type iib theory on r10 are classied by the

k-theory groups k1(s9p) and ek(s9p) respectively, where the sphere s9p represents

the dimensions transverse to the worldvolume of the p-brane, compactied by adding a

point at innity. this result can be derived by realizing supersymmetric type ii d-

branes as stable topological defects in the higgs eld on the worldvolume of a system of

spacetime-lling d9-branes [2,3]. central to this derivation is the relation (reviewed in the

3

appendix) between homotopy theory, which classies topological defects, and k-theory,

which classies congurations of spacetime-lling branes up to creation and annihilation.

according to this relation, the k-theory groups of spheres are equal to the homotopy

groups of the vacuum manifold of the higgs eld that appears in the worldvolume of the

corresponding system of spacetime-lling branes. in type iib theory [2], the higgs eld
is in the (n, n) of the u (n )  u (n ) gauge group, and its vacuum manifold is a copy of
u (n ). its homotopy groups are related to k-theory via

ek(sn) = n1(u (n )).

(2.1)

in type iia theory [3], the higgs eld is in the adjoint of the u (2n ) gauge group, and
the vacuum manifold is given by the group coset u (2n )/u (n )  u (n ). this is in turn
related to k-theory groups by

k1(sn) = n1 (u (2n )/u (n )  u (n )) .

(2.2)

these k-theory groups, shown in table (2.3), reproduce the known spectrum of bps
dp-branes in the type ii theories in r10, with p = 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 in type iia and p =
1, 1, 3, 5, 7 in type iib.1

dp-brane

transverse x

ek(x)

k1(x)

d9 d8 d7 d6 d5 d4 d3 d2 d1 d0 d(1)
s10
s0

s2

s4

s8

s5

s6

s7

s1

s3

s9

z

0

0

z

z

0

0

z

z

0

0

z

z

0

0

z

z

0

0

z

z

0

(2.3)

2.2. general compactications

the next step would be to consider type ii theory compactied on s1. before we discuss

this case in detail, it seems worthwhile to rst study classication of d-brane charges in the

case of a general compactication on y . we are interested in nding all d-brane charges of

codimension n in the remaining non-compact dimensions. in the microscopic theory, such

1 we have included the charge of the spacetime-lling type iia d9-branes in table (2.3) (and
will do so systematically in similar cases throughout the paper), even though the absence of a net

9-brane charge in type iib theory is forced by the condition of tadpole anomaly cancellation.

4

charges correspond to d-branes that may wrap non-trivially around some of the compact
dimensions. the transverse space in the eective lower-dimensional theory is rn, which

is again compactied by adding a point at innity. in the full theory, this corresponds

to adding a copy of the compactication manifold y at innity. thus, the proper way

of understanding the spectrum of d-brane charges in this case is to introduce relative k-

theory groups, dened for bundles which are trivialized on the compactication manifold
y at innity (cf. the appendix). these relative groups are denoted by k(sn  y, y ) and
k1(sn  y, y ) for type iib and type iia, respectively.

this argument is essentially independent of the type of string theory considered. it

suggests the following prescription for identifying stable d-brane charges in general string
theory compactications on rm  y , at least when no rr backgrounds or non-trivial
b backgrounds are excited: stable charges carried by d-branes of codimension n in the
non-compact dimensions are classied by the relative k-theory groups kq(sn  y, y ).
the value of q and the type k of k-theory depends on the type of string theory and the
compactication manifold y .

2.3. d = 9

having claried the appearance of relative k-theory groups in the classication of d-brane

charges in general compatications, we can now return to type ii theory on a circle. using

(a.8) and arguments presented in the appendix, the relative groups that classify d-brane
charges in type iib and type iia theory on s1 can be shown to decompose as follows:

and

k(x  s1, s1) = k1(x)  ek(x),
k1(x  s1, s1) = ek2(x)  k1(x),

(2.4)

(2.5)

where in both cases the rst term is the contribution of unwrapped branes to the nine-

dimensional d-brane charge, and the second term is the contribution of wrapped branes.

since by bott periodicity ek2(x) = ek(x), the above groups are isomorphic

k(x  s1, s1) = k1(x  s1, s1),

(2.6)

and we recover the result that the spectrum of d-brane charges in nine dimensions is
identical for type iia and type iib. in fact, for each x = sn, the relative k-theory group

of d-brane charges is z  the rr charge of the corresponding dp-brane.

5

furthermore, since the above isomorphism maps the rst (second) term in (2.4) to the

second (rst) term in (2.5), and therefore exchanges unwrapped and wrapped d-branes, it

corresponds precisely to t-duality. more rigorously, this follows from a derivation of (2.6)

that keeps track of the multiplicative structure of k-theory (see (a.11) of the appendix

and the discussion therein).

2.4. d < 9

we can iterate the steps of the previous subsection, and extend our results to higher toroidal

compactications. thus, the relative group of d-brane charges in type iib theory is

k(x  tm, tm) =

mmn=0

(cid:18) m
n(cid:19)ekn(x) = 2m1ek(x)  2m1k1(x),

(2.7)

where the second equality follows by bott periodicity. an analogous calculation on the

type iia side (cf. the appendix) reveals

k1(x  tm, tm) = k(x  tm, tm).

(2.8)

this proves t-duality of d-brane charges in type ii theory on tm, and gives the expected

degeneracy of dp-brane charges arising from wrapping all higher supersymmetric branes

on various cycles of the torus. all in all, this shows that in the case of type ii theory
on tm, d-brane charges predicted by the more precise k-theory arguments coincide with

those predicted by the somewhat cruder argument that relates d-brane charges to rr

charges (and therefore to the cohomology of the compactication manifold).

3. type i theory and its t-duals

our next case study is type i string theory. here we encounter two new features: z2-

charged non-bps d-branes, and discrete z2-valued wilson lines on some of the wrapped

d-branes. the latter would seem to require additional z2 charges in the d-brane spectrum,

naively absent in k-theory. surprisingly, we shall see that the z2 charges of unwrapped

non-bps d-branes already incorporate the z2 wilson lines of wrapped d-branes. in t-

dual orientifolds this is seen via brane transfer operations, whereby an unwrapped brane

at one orientifold plane is transferred by a wrapped brane to another orientifold plane.

6

3.1. d=10

in type i theory, the full spectrum of d-brane charges can be determined from the dy-

namics of unstable systems of multiple d9-brane d9-brane pairs. since the action of the

orientifold group is antilinear on chan-paton bundles, the k-theory that arises in such

systems is the ko-theory of real virtual bundles [2]. the ko-groups of spheres take the

following values,

dp-brane

d9 d8 d7 d6 d5 d4

transverse x

s0

s1

s2

s3

s4

s5

d3 d2 d1 d0 d(1)
s10
s6

s7

s8

s9

0

0

0

z

0

z

z2

z2

gko(x)
the values for gko(sn) reproduce the known bps dp-branes of ten-dimensional type i
string theory, namely those with p = 1, 5, 9. in addition, we encounter z2-charged non-
bps dp-branes with p = 1, 0, 7 and 8. the former carry rr charge and correspond to
boundary states of the form

(3.1)

z2

z

z2

|dpi =

1
2

(|bpin sn s  |bpirr),

(3.2)

where the relative sign dierentiates brane from antibrane, whereas the latter do not carry

rr charge, and therefore correspond to states of the form

|dpi = |bpin sn s,

(3.3)

and are their own antibranes. all the properties of the non-bps d-branes can be obtained

from these boundary states via tree-level overlaps with other boundary states [19,4,1] (for

an extension to higher loops, see [2]). this construction proves that all charges from table

(3.1) are carried by d-branes, i.e., spacetime defects on which strings can end.

the most useful description of the non-bps d-branes is often in terms of bound states

of a single bps d-brane d-antibrane pair with lowest possible dimension. in this approach,

the d0-brane and d8-brane simply correspond to topologically stable kinks in the tachyon

(higgs) eld living on the worldvolume of the d1-d1 and d9-d9 systems, respectively [1].
the d(1)-brane and d7-brane, on the other hand, correspond to the d(1)-d(1) and
d7-d7 systems in type iib, respectively, projected by  [2]. this approach allows one

7

to easily deduce the worldvolume theories of the non-bps d-branes, and in particular the

worldvolume gauge groups:

dp-brane

gauge group

d0

z2

d1

z2

d5

d7

u sp(2)

u (1)

d8

z2

d9

z2

(3.4)

3.2. d = 9

as in the type ii case, d-brane charges of type i compactied on a circle are classied
by the relative k-theory group ko(x  s1, s1). this group is evaluated in the appendix,
giving:

thus, we obtain the following nine-dimensional stable d-brane charge spectrum:

ko(x  s1, s1) = gko1(x) gko(x).

dp-brane

transverse x

1

gko(x)
gko

(x)

d8 d7 d6 d5 d4 d3 d2 d1 d0 d(1)
s9
s0

s1

s4

s2

s3

s5

s6

s7

s8

z

z2

z2

z2

z2

0

0

z

z

0

0

0

0

0

0

z

z

z2

z2

z2

(3.5)

(3.6)

note that the relative k-theory groups correctly include the nine-dimensional dp-brane

charges that correspond to unwrapped dp-branes as well as wrapped d(p + 1)-branes in

the ten-dimensional theory.

under t-duality, type i string theory is mapped to an orientifold of type iia of the
form r9  s1/  i, known as type ia (or type i); here  acts as a reection on the
worldsheet, and i acts as a reection on the compact direction. the compact direction is
therefore an interval, rather than a circle. the associated relative k-theory group is given
by kr1(x  s1,1, s1,1) [2,3].2 (this follows directly from the action of the orientifold
group on the system of unstable d9-branes of type iia theory, as was briey pointed out

in [3].) we show in the appendix that the type ia k-group decomposes as follows:

kr1(x  s1,1, s1,1) = gko(x) gko1(x).

(3.7)

2 here we use standard mathematical parlance [25] to denote by s1,1 the unit circle inside the
plane r1,1 where the kr involution leaves the rst coordinate invariant and reects the second

(cf. the appendix).

8

therefore, as in the type ii case, t-duality between type i and type ia theory manifests

itself as an isomorphism between the relative k-theory groups,

ko(x  s1, s1) = kr1(x  s1,1, s1,1),

(3.8)

whose elements correspond to d-brane charges of the orientifold compactication.

the isomorphism (3.8) again maps the rst term of the relative ko-group in (3.5)

to the second term of the relative kr-group in (3.7), and vice versa.

it is therefore

tempting to identify the respective terms as the contributions to nine-dimensional d-brane

charges coming from unwrapped and wrapped ten-dimensional d-branes. for example,

nine-dimensional 0-brane charge in type i receives a z2 contribution from the unwrapped

non-bps d0-brane, and a z contribution from wrapped bps d1-branes.

in the type

ia description, it receives contributions from the t-dual congurations, i.e., z2 from the

wrapped non-bps d1-brane, and z from unwrapped bps d0-branes. however, on the

face of it, there seems to be a problem with this interpretation: the non-bps d-branes are

not stable for all radii, and therefore cannot contribute conserved charges everywhere in

moduli space. what is then responsible for the z2 charges when the non-bps d-branes

are unstable? to answer this question, let us rst recall how non-bps d-branes decay.

3.3. d-brane decay

consider for example the non-bps d0-brane in type i. the spectrum of open strings

beginning and ending on the d0-brane is tachyon-free in ten dimensions. once we com-

pactify on a circle however, the ground state at winding number 1 will have a classical

mass squared given by ( = 1)

1
2

+ r2,

(3.9)
and will therefore become tachyonic when r < 1/2. as a result, the d0-brane should
then decay into a wrapped d1-d1 system. recall, however, that in describing the d0-

m2 = 

brane as a d1-d1 bound state one requires the tachyon (higgs) eld of the d1-d1 system

to condense into a kink. this implies anti-periodic boundary conditions for the tachyon,

achieved by turning on a z2 wilson line on either the d1-brane or the d1-brane. the

z2 charge of the d0-brane is not lost when it decays, but rather reappears as a z2-valued

wilson line on its decay products. the unwrapped d8-brane and d7-brane meet a similar
fate when r < 1/2; they decay into a wrapped d9-d9 and d8-d8 system, respectively,
also with a non-trivial z2 wilson line.

9

z   dp-brane

2

r

r  <<

1

2

t-dual picture:

1

r = 

r

r

d(p+1)-brane

r

d(p+1)-brane

r

2z  d(p+1)-brane

r  >>

2

dp-brane

dp-brane

fig. 1: decay of non-bps d-branes in type i and type ia

conversely, after t-duality the above unwrapped non-bps dp-branes become wrapped

non-bps d(p + 1)-branes of type ia with p + 1 = 1, 8, 9. these develop a tachyon of unit
momentum when the dual radius becomes too large (r > 2), and consequently decay
into an unwrapped dp-dp system restricted to the orientifold planes. the non-trivial z2

wilson line in the type i description reects the presence of the resulting d-brane and

d-antibrane on dierent orientifold planes. we conclude that in the type ia picture the

z2 charge of the decaying d-brane is encoded in the z2 choice of locations for its decay

products. these decay processes are summarized in fig. 1.

for the euclidean wrapped z2 d0-brane and the z2 d-instanton, compactication on

a circle again introduces regions of stability on the moduli space of the circle, but since

these are instantonic congurations, we now compare the values of the instanton action.

3.4. d-brane transfer

the picture of d-brane decay described above oers insight for the resolution of another
puzzle which is most clearly illustrated in the type ia picture. when r < 2, there seem
to be two distinct sources of z2 charge associated with d0-branes in the nine-dimensional

theory. the rst one is due to the possibility of locating a single d0-brane at either

orientifold plane, while the second is due to the stretched non-bps d1-brane. however,

10

k-theory indicates that there is only one d0-brane z2 charge.

as we saw above, when r > 2 the d1-brane decays into a d0-brane at one o8-
plane, and a d0-brane at the other o8-plane. this is a crucial clue for the resolution of

our puzzle. consider a conguration consisting of a stuck d0-brane (half d0-brane) at one

orientifold plane and a wrapped non-bps d1-brane. as far as conserved d-brane charges

are concerned, this conguration is completely equivalent to a stuck d0-brane at the other

orientifold plane, and in fact unstable to decay into it. the same is true for the unwrapped

d7 and d8-brane. in each case, a d-brane stuck at one orientifold plane is transferred

by a wrapped d-brane of one higher dimension to the other orientifold plane. thus we

see that the puzzle of missing z2 charges in k-theory is resolved by a brane transfer

operation (fig. 2).

o8-

o8-

o8 -

o8-

1
2

dp-brane

z2

d(p+1)-brane

brane transfer

operation

1
2

dp-brane

fig. 2: d-brane transfer operation in type ia

3.5. d < 9

our analysis can be straightforwardly extended to t-duality of type i theory on higher
tori. d-brane charges in type i theory on tm correspond to the relative k-theory group

(calculated by iterating (a.16))

ko(x  tm, tm) =

mmp=0

(cid:18) m
p (cid:19)gkop(x),

(3.10)

to be compared to the corresponding group on the t-dual side.

the t-dual orientifold theory is iia/  im if m is odd, and iib/  im if m is even,
with im the involution (times appropriate factors of (1)fl) that reects m compact
dimensions. d-brane charges in these theories will therefore be classied by the relative
kr-group krn(x  tm, tm) (for some n), where the involution of kr-theory acts
trivially on x, and reects all the dimensions of tm. an interesting subtlety arises when
we try to determine the value of n that corresponds to tm. in type ia theory, i.e., for

11

m = 1, one could use the alternative string theory denition of kr1(x) to demonstrate

that the appropriate value of n is in fact n = 1 [3]. for m > 1, however, we do not seem

to have that option. instead, we will proceed as follows.

agreement with the known spectrum of supersymmetric d-branes determines that

n = m mod 4. since the bott periodicity of ko-theory is eight, this leaves an uncertainty

as to whether n equals m or m + 4. we claim that the correct value is n = m, and the

d-brane charges in the type i t-dual models are classied by the relative group

indeed, iterating (a.22), and using the (1, 1) bott periodicity of kr-theory, one can show

krm(x  tm, tm).

(3.11)

that

krn(x  tm, tm) =

mmp=0

(cid:18) m
p (cid:19)gkrn,p(x) =

mmp=0

(cid:18) m
p (cid:19)gkopn(x);

this coincides with (3.10) for n = m.3 thus, we again get a t-duality isomorphism

krm(x  tm, tm) = ko(x  tm, tm).

(3.12)

(3.13)

the corresponding spectrum of both the bps and the (z2) stable non-bps d-branes is

in precise agreement with the degeneracies of various wrapped branes. still, the precise

bookkeeping of d-brane charges will involve various higher-dimensional analogs of the

brane transfer operation studied above. as a particularly interesting example, consider the
classication of d-instantons in type iib on t 2/  i2, in terms of kr2(s8  t2, t2) =
z  z2  z2  z2. this group contains fewer charges than naively expected; this is again
resolved by brane transfer operations, which now involve objects that wrap zero, one, or
both dimensions of the compact t2. we leave details as an exercise to the interested

reader.

4. typeei theories

when considering theories in nine dimensions, there exists a natural extension of type
ia which involves replacing one of its two o8 planes with an o8+ plane [20]. we will

3 heuristically, the exponent m in the relevant kr-group has to do with the fact that s1
with the reection i behaves eectively as a sphere of dimension minus one in kr-theory: while
the wedge product with s1 with trivial involution lowers the exponent of the kr-group by one,
the wedge product with s1 with the reection raises the exponent by one; cf. the appendix.

12

refer to it as type fia theory. this theory requires no d8-branes, and so has no gauge

group, yet it still contains interesting non-bps stable d-branes in its spectrum. we will

demonstrate that some charges which are locally stable at one type of orientifold plane will

now become unstable due to the possibility of moving to another type of orientifold plane

and annihilating there. also, stretched z2 charged d-branes will no longer be connected

with the transfer of stuck branes from one plane to the other.

tachyon backgrounds of unstable d9-branes using k-theory. for this purpose, it is easier

to classify the possible d-brane charges of typefia we will once again analyze possible
to start with the t-dual of type fia, typeei theory. this t-dual was worked out in [26],

and consists of gauging a z2 symmetry of iib on a circle which is realized by composing

worldsheet parity reversal () with a half-circumference shift along the circle. the natural

k-group of d-brane charges for type ei is then the relative group kr(x  s0,2, s0,2).4

since s0,2 is just a circle in r2 with both dimensions reected, the involution of kr-
theory indeed acts on s0,2 by the required shift.

the type ei k-group, kr(x  s0,2), is known in the mathematics literature to be

isomorphic to the k-group ksc(x) of self-conjugate bundles on x(see [25,27,28] and the

appendix). we bring this up because ksc(x) has several nice features. first of all, using

the relation to ksc-theory, we can show for the relative groups that

kr(x  s0,2, s0,2) = kr4(x  s0,2, s0,2).

(4.1)

the appearance of kr4(x  s0,2) is very interesting here, as this group associates a
symplectic projection to . thus, the period of four indicated by (4.1) ts nicely with
having both an o8 plane and o8+ plane in type fia  indeed, it means that orthogonal

and symplectic groups appear on the same footing in this model.

second, ksc groups have been calculated for all spheres sn [27], which means we can

immediately read o the complete nine-dimensional spectrum of typeei and fia d-branes:

dp-brane

gksc(s8p)

d8 d7 d6 d5 d4 d3 d2 d1 d0 d(1)
z2
z

z2

z2

z

z

0

0

z

z

(4.2)

(note that d8-branes appear on this list, even though the tadpole cancellation argument

will restrict the net number of d8-branes in the type fia vacuum to zero.)

4 we are again using the sp,q notation reviewed in the appendix.

13

unlike the relative k-theory groups that appeared in the previous sections, ksc(x)

does not naturally split into subgroups related to wrapped and unwrapped branes. unde-

terred, we will try to analyze the physical spectrum listed above in terms of the wrapped

when this strategy becomes inadequate.

and unwrapped dp-branes of type fia string theory, hoping to learn an interesting lesson
4.1. unwrapped d-branes of type fia
d-branes of type fia (which are point-like along the interval) is to use our knowledge

of type ia theory to list the stable d-brane spectrum near an o8 plane, and to use
a simple period shift to list the stable d-brane spectrum near an o8+ plane (cf. [18]).

our strategy for determining which nine-dimensional dp-branes come from unwrapped

modulo some identications, this gives all the d-branes in table (4.2) which come from

unwrapped branes of type fia. it will be instructive to follow this piecewise analysis of

the compactication manifold; its eventual inability to explain the detailed spectrum of

non-bps states leads to interesting conclusions.

in the vicinity of the o8 plane, the d-brane spectrum is:

dp-brane

gko(s8p)

d8 d7 d6 d5 d4 d3 d2 d1 d0 d(1)
z2
z

z2

z2

z

z

0

0

0

0

(4.3)

the o8+ plane diers from o8 by interchanging so and sp projections. due to bott
periodicity between ko- and ksp-theory, the switch from o8 to o8+ corresponds to

swapping dp-branes with d(p + 4)-branes, and leads to the following spectrum near the
o8+ plane:

dp-brane

gksp(s8p)

d8 d7 d6 d5 d4 d3 d2 d1 d0 d(1)
z

z

z

0

0

0

0

0

z2

z2

(4.4)

now we need only combine the last two tables and compare with table (4.2).

looking rst at the zvalued d-brane charges, we see that we can correctly account

for the bps d0-branes and d4-branes of type fia. the fact that these appear in both

table (4.3) and table (4.4) reects the fact that two half-d0-branes on the o8 plane can

combine to make a single d0-brane in the bulk which then becomes a d0-brane on the
o8+ plane, and similarly for the half-d4-branes on the o8+ plane. since half-d-branes

14

are now limited to living on only one of the o8 planes, there is no need of extra z2 charges

for brane transfer operations.

having been successful with the bps d-branes that carry conventional rr charges,

we now turn to the z2-charged non-bps d-branes of tables (4.3) and (4.4). here we run
into an interesting puzzle: while these tables correctly account for the z2-charged d(1)-
brane, d3-brane and d7-brane of table (4.2), they also predict a z2-charged d2-brane and

d6-brane, which are however absent in table (4.2). the resolution of this puzzle reveals

an interesting new eect. take, for example, the stable z2-charged non-bps d6-brane

identied in table (4.3) near the o8 plane.

it consists of a d6-brane and its mirror

d6-brane, where the usual tachyon between the two has been removed by the orientifold

projection. just like the type i non-bps d7-brane in section 3, this system carries a u (1)

gauge group, and can separate in a symmetric fashion and transfer over to the other o8

plane. in type fia, however, the orientifold projection is dierent at the other o8 plane,

and therefore the tachyon is no longer removed. this implies that the non-bps d6-brane

locally stable near the o8 plane is no longer stable in the global theory.

this eect has important consequences for the analysis of non-bps d-branes on com-

pact manifolds. typically, when looking at the bps spectrum of d-branes near singularities

of a compact manifold such as k3 orientifolds, one can look piecewise at the singularities

(i.e., approximate them with ale spaces) and add the corresponding spectra (being care-

ful to match the bulk d-branes). we now see that for stable non-bps d-branes this is a

dangerous procedure, as d-branes locally stable near one kind of singularity can become

unstable due to other singularities in the complete space.

now that we have successfully accounted for the unwrapped d-branes, we can move

on to look at the charges in table (4.2) which come from wrapped d-branes of type fia.
4.2. wrapped d-branes of type fia
to examine how the wrapped d-branes of type fia contribute to the nine-dimensional
spectrum listed in table (4.2), it is more convenient to shift to the t-dual typeei point of
view. we can now use a simple construction to build their dual typeei d-branes, which
are now unwrapped. the iib z2 symmetry we gauged to get typeei strings included a

half-shift along a circle. requiring that we respect the z2 symmetry means we match each

unwrapped dp-brane with another dp-brane at the opposite position along the circle for
p = 1 or 5, and with a dp-brane for p = 1, 3, or 7. the rst conguration is bps,
and correspondingly yields the stable z-charged d1-brane and d5 brane in table (4.2).

15

note that these d-branes will carry a u (n ) gauge group, and will correspond to doubly

wrapped bps d2-branes and d6-branes in the type fia theory.

the second kind of conguration above is more interesting, as it yields stable non-bps

d-branes. it is clear that these states carry a z2 charge, since when two of them are present

there is an allowed motion which enables the d-branes and d-antibranes to annihilate, as

can be seen in fig. 3. consequently, there appear to be two sources of z2 p-brane charge

in typeei for p = 1, 3, 7; the rst is due to wrapped (p + 1)-branes (the t-duals of the
unwrapped type fia d-branes discussed in the previous subsection), and the second is due
to the above p  p combinations. there is no contradiction with the fact that k-theory
predicts only a single z2 (4.2), since the above states are stable in complementary regions

of moduli space (fig. 4).

dp-brane

dp-brane

stable

configuration

unstable

configuration

fig. 3: z2 annihilation of d-branes in typeei

r

r

stable configuration
at large values of r

dp-brane

dp-brane

wrapped d(p+1)-brane

unstable configuration
at small values of r

fig. 4:

instability of the dp-brane dp-brane system

16

5. conclusions

in this paper, we used the picture of stable d-branes as topological defects in unstable

brane systems to study the charges of stable non-bps d-branes in string compactications.

k-theory turns out to be a useful tool in this pursuit.

we have seen that t-duality appears to be a manifest symmetry in k-theory. in type
ii and type i on tm, we have identied the relative k-theory groups on both sides of

t-duality, and have demonstrated that they are isomorphic. in the slightly more exotic

typeei type fia t-duality, we have identied the k-theory group of d-brane charges only
on the typeei side, and then demonstrated that it exactly corresponds to d-brane charges
on the type fia side. of course, one should be able to identify the k-groups on both sides

of t-duality from rst principles, by studying how the orientifold group acts on unstable

systems of spacetime-lling branes. we certainly expect that such a direct analysis will

conrm our ndings, and will provide an extra check that t-duality is a manifest symmetry

in k-theory. it would also be instructive to extend our analysis of typeei to all type i

models without vector structure [26].

in the process of identifying the d-branes which carry the charges predicted by k-

theory, we have come across several interesting eects. an apparent abundance of some z2

charges in the string theory construction is resolved by brane transfer operations. other

z2 charges, apparently conserved locally near an orientifold plane, dissipate in the full

theory due to the presence of another o-plane. we believe that these phenomena occur in

a more general class of compactications, indicating that the piecewise analysis of stable

non-bps d-brane spectra should only be trusted when these phenomena are taken into

account.

t-duality is to be contrasted with other string theory dualities, such as s-duality of

type iib string theory; whether or not there is an extension of k-theory that incorporates

type iib s-duality  and in particular explains ns states  remains one of the many

intriguing open questions of this framework. (for a possible step in this direction, see

[29].)

we would like to thank joe minahan, jan nekovar, rahul pandharipande, and edward

witten for useful conversations. this work has been supported by doe grant de-fg03-

92-er 40701. p.h. is also supported by a sherman fairchild prize fellowship.

17

appendix a. useful facts in k-theory

in this somewhat extensive appendix, we present a summary of some basic notions

of k-theory (and its connection to string theory), as well as technical details of various

k-theory calculations needed for some of our arguments in the body of the paper. for

a more comprehensive introduction to k-theory, the reader should consult [21,23,22,24].

some elementary k-theory facts that arise in the string theory context can also be found

in [2,3].

unitary k-theory kn(x)

the unitary k-theory group k(x) is dened, for a given compact manifold x,5 as

the group of equivalence classes of pairs of unitary bundles (e, f ) on x, where two pairs

are declared equivalent if they can be made isomorphic to each other by adding pairs of

isomorphic bundles (h, h).

the reduced group ek(x) is dened as the kernel of the natural map k(x)  k(x0)
to the k-theory group k(x0) = z of a point x0 in x, induced from the map x0  x. the
full k-theory group splits canonically as k(x) = ek(x)  z. in type iib string theory on
x, e and f are the chan-paton bundles of branes and anti-branes wrapping x, and ek(x)

classies invariant charges that can be carried by general tadpole-cancelling congurations

of brane-antibrane pairs, modulo pair creation and annihilation.

higher (reduced) k-theory groups ekn(x) are dened by

ekn(x) = ek(x  sn).

(a.1)

here the wedge product is dened for two manifolds x and y with a marked point x0 in
x and y0 in y , as the (topological) coset6

x  y = x  y /(x  y0)  (y  x0).

(a.2)

5 unless explicitly stated otherwise, x in this paper is always a compact connected manifold.
k-theory can be extended to non-compact manifolds, as k-theory with compact support; one

essentially denes k(z) = ek(ez), where z is the one-point compactication of z. thus, k-theory

with compact support can be related to k-theory of compact manifolds, and we will not use it

explicitly in this paper.

6 given a closed submanifold y in a compact manifold x, the topological coset x/y is dened

by shrinking y  as a subset in x  into a point.

18

(for example, s1  s1 = s2, sn  s1 = sn+1.) the higher reduced groups are related to
the unreduced groups by kn(x) = ekn(x)  kn(x0).
the denition of the higher k-theory group k1(x) (which classies type iia theory
d-branes) in terms of the p+1-dimensional extension x s1 of the p-dimensional manifold
x is rather awkward for string theory purposes, as it invokes an extra spacetime dimension
s1. there is an alternative denition of k1(x), in terms of pairs (e, ) where e is a

bundle on x and  is an automorphism on e (see, e.g., [21], ii.3.3). it is, in fact, this

alternative denition that appears directly from the worldvolume dynamics of spacetime-

lling unstable d9-branes in type iia theory [3].

k-theory is intimately related to homotopy theory. k-theory groups of any compact

manifold x can be understood as the groups of homotopy classes of maps from x to

certain classifying spaces,

ek(x) = [x, bu ],

k1(x) = [x, u ].

(a.3)

here u and bu are the n   limits of the unitary group u (n ) and the (group) coset
u (2n )/u (n )  u (n ), respectively.7

given a closed submanifold y in a compact manifold x, one denes the relative k-

theory group k(x, y ) as follows. just like in the denition of k(x), we start with a

pair of bundles (e, f ) on x. in addition, we choose a trivialization along y , i.e., an
isomorphism  : e|y  f|y between the restrictions of e and f to the submanifold
y . one denes a certain equivalence relation on such triples (e, f, ), declaring two such

triples equivalent if they can be made isomorphic by creation or annihilation of triples

(h, h, idh ) (see [21], ii.2.29 for the mathematicians denition). similarly, higher relative

k-groups are dened by

kn(x, y ) = k(x  bn, x  sn1  y  bn),

(a.4)

where bn is the unit ball in rn, and sn1 is its boundary sphere. the relative groups (a.4)

kn(x, x0) with x0 a point in x. also, relative groups are related to the reduced groups

represent a generalization of the reduced groups ekn(x), since one can write ekn(x) =
by kn(x, y ) = ekn(x/y ) whenever both sides of this equation make sense.
7 more generally, ekn(x) = [x, nbu ], where ny is the n-th iterated loop space of y . one

can prove that bu is homotopically equivalent to u , and 2bu is homotopically equivalent to
bu . in conjunction with (a.3), this fact leads to bott periodicity, kn2(x) = k n(x).

19

the relative groups kn(x, y ) are important because they connect the groups of x

and y via the exact sequence

kn1(y )  kn1(x)  kn(x, y )  kn(y )  kn(x)

(a.5)

(valid for any n  0), which is reminiscent of similar exact sequences from cohomology
theory. in fact, k-theory is a generalized cohomology theory  it satises all the axioms of

cohomology theory except for the dimension axiom.

in the case of relative k-theory groups k(w, y ) that appear in this paper, the pairs
w , y are of a very special type, with w = x  y for some manifold y . for such pairs
(or more generally, whenever w is a retract of y ), (a.5) can be reduced to the following

split exact sequence (cf. [21], ii.2.29),

0  kn(x  y, y )  kn(x  y )  kn(y )  0,

thus leading to

kn(x  y ) = kn(x  y, y )  kn(y ).

(a.6)

(a.7)

this formula allows one to evaluate the relative group kn(x  y, y ) once kn(y ) and
kn(x  y ) are found.

so far we have reduced the calculation of the relative k-theory group kn(w  y, y )
to the calculation of the k-theory groups of w  y . the latter can be expressed through
k-theory groups of x and y with the use of the following formula ([24], 2.4.8),

ekn(x  y ) = ekn(x  y )  ekn(x)  ekn(y ).

the case of our primary interest in section 2 is y = s1. using (a.8) together with

(a.8)

(a.9)

ekn(x  s1) = ekn1(x) and bott periodicity, we get
ek(x  s1) = k1(x)  ek(x),
k1(x  s1) = ek(x)  k1(x)  z.

this allows us to determine k(x  s1, s1) and k1(x  s1, s1) using (a.7), leading to
(2.4) and (2.5).

alternatively, we can calculate kn(x  s1) in a manner that keeps track of the
multiplicative structure of the theory. dene k#(x) = k(x)  k1(x). k#(x) is a

20

graded ring, with the obvious z2 graded structure. we have a k-theory analog of the

kunneth formula,

k#(x  y ) = k#(x)  k#(y ),

(a.10)

which is valid if either k#(x) or k#(y ) is freely generated (see, e.g., [21], proposition
iv.3.24). since s1 has freely generated k-theory groups, we can set y = s1. (notice that
this strategy for calculating k-groups of x  s1 would not work in the case of ko-theory
relevant for type i, as the ko-groups of s1 are not freely generated.) from (a.10) we get

k(x  s1) = (k(x)  k(s1))  (k1(x)  k1(s1)),
k1(x  s1) = (k(x)  k1(s1))  (k1(x)  k(s1)).

(a.11)

using k(s1) = z and k1(s1) = z, we again recover (a.9), which is instrumental in our

proof of t-duality between type iia and type iib theories in section 2. with the insight

from (a.11), type ii t-duality can thus be traced back to the fact that k-theory groups
of s1 have shortened periodicity, km(s1) = km1(s1) = z. also, using (a.11), the

fact that t-duality swaps wrapped and unwrapped branes corresponds to the fact that

under the isomorphism (2.6) of the k-groups, ek(x)  k(s1) maps to ek(x)  k1(s1)

(and similarly for k1(x)), with k(s1) factors and k1(s1) factors interchanged.

orthogonal k-theory kon(x) and symplectic k-theory kspn(x)

ko(x) is the group of virtual real bundles, dened by replacing complex bundles with

real bundles in the denition of k(x) groups. higher ko groups are again dened via

just like in the unitary case, the full ko-groups are related to the reduced groups

gkom(x) = ek(x  sm).

(a.12)

(a.13)

gkom(x) by

kom(x) = gkom(x)  kom(x0),

with x0 a point in x. the key to the appearance of ko-theory in the bound-state con-

struction of type i d-branes is again its relation to homotopy theory. just as in the
unitary case, we have kon(x) = [x, nbo],8 where bo is dened as the large-n limit
of o(2n )/o(n )  o(n ), and bo = o can be similarly approximated by o(n ). in this
8 more exactly, the classifying space of ko-theory is bo  z, where the extra factor of z is

needed to explain ko(pt) = z (see, e.g., [21], ii.1.34).

21

case, the statement of bott periodicity kom(x) = kom8(x) follows from the fact
that m+8bo is homotopically equivalent to mbo.

by replacing o(n ) with sp(n ), and real bundles with symplectic bundles, one can
similarly dene the symplectic k-theory groups kspn(x). bott periodicity can be rened
to show that kon(x) = kspn4(x) for any n, which means that any calculation in

ksp-theory can be done in ko-theory; therefore, we will not discuss ksp-theory separately

in this appendix.

relative k-theory groups kon(z, y ) are dened by replacing compex bundles with
real bundles in the denition of kn(z, y ) reviewed above. for our purposes, we will again
be interested in relative groups for a special class of pairs, kon(x y, y ); for such pairs,
one can relate the relative group to kon(x  y ) and kon(y ) via the following split
exact sequence,

0  kon(x  y, y )  kon(x  y )  kon(y )  0,

leading to

kon(x  y ) = kon(x  y, y )  kon(y ).
the basic formula for calculating ko groups of products is again

gko(x  y ) = gko(x  y ) gko(x) gko(y ).

(a.14)

(a.15)

(a.16)

in the case of our main interest, y = s1, we obtain (usinggko(s1) = z2, andgko(xs1) =
gko1(x))

(a.17)

1

gko(x  s1) = gko

(x) gko(x)  z2.

this formula is used in section 3 on the type i side of the proof of t-duality between

d-brane charges.

real k-theory krp,q(x)

kr-theory (introduced, under the name of real k-theory, by atiyah [25]) is a

generalized theory that includes unitary k-theory, ko-theory and ksp-theory (as well as

the self-conjugate ksc-theory to be discussed below) as special cases. the corresponding

groups kr(x) are dened for x a manifold with a selected involution  . basic objects are

now pairs of bundles (e, f ) with antilinear involution on both e and f that commutes

with  on x. thus, kr(x) would be the group of virtual bundles with involutions on x.

22

just like in ko-theory, one can dene higher groups krm(x), by

gkrm(x) = gkr(x  sm);

the involution  of x is extended to the involution of x  sm that acts trivially on sm.
more generally, we can consider replacing sm in (a.18) by spheres with non-trivial
actions of the involution. consider rp,q, as a real manifold of dimension p + q with coor-
dinates (x1, . . . , xp, y1, . . . , yq), and with involution that takes (x, y)  (x, y). similarly,
one denes sp,q as the unit sphere (of dimension p + q  1) in rp,q with respect to the at
euclidean metric.9

now, we can dene a two-parameter set krp,q(x) of higher kr-theory groups, by

(a.18)

(a.19)

gkrp,q(x) = gkr(x  erp,q),

where erp,q is the one-point compactication of rp,q (i.e., erp,q is topologically a p + q-

sphere). by denition, (a.18) are related to (a.19) by krm(x) = krm,0(x). one
can dene relative k-theory groups krn(z, y ), again by repeating steps used in the

denition of relative k-groups in k-theory and ko-theory.

bott periodicity in kr-theory states that krp,q(x) = krp+1,q+1(x), and krm(x) =
krm8(x). due to the rst relation, krp,q(x) depends only on the dierence p  q,
and one has krp,q(x) = krqp(x). it is interesting to notice that in kr-theory, spheres

with antipodal involutions play the role of negative-dimensional spheres.

kr-theory is a generalization of both k-theory and ko-theory. for any given x with

trivial involution, we have

km(x) = krm(x  s0,1),
kom(x) = krm(x).

(a.20)

in particular, one can derive bott periodicity in k(x), ko(x) and ksp(x) from the

periodicities of kr-theory.

now we are equipped to calculate the relative group kr1(x  s1,1, s1,1) that clas-
sies d-brane charges in type ia theory. (the orientifold z2 acts as a reection on the
circle s1,1, and trivially on x.) this relative group is again related to kr(x  s1,1) via
(a.21)

kr1(x  s1,1) = kr1(x  s1,1, s1,1)  kr1(s1,1).

9 notice that our convention for rp,q and sp,q coincides with that of atiyah [25], and is

opposite to that of karoubi [21].

23

by repeating steps already familiar from the k and ko case, one obtains

gkr1(x  s1,1) =gkr1(x  s1,1) gkr1(x)  z

=gkr1,1(x) gkr1(x)  z = gko(x) gko1(x)  z,

(a.22)

where we have used the (1, 1) periodicity of kr-theory, and the fact that kr(x) =
(s1,1) = kr1+1(pt) =

1

ko(x) for the trivial orientifold action on x. since gkr

ko(pt) = z, our result (3.12) follows from (a.21) and (a.22).

self-conjugate k-theory kscn(x)

given a compact manifold x, one denes a self-conjugate bundle on x as a bundle e
equipped with an antilinear automorphism  : e  e. self-conjugate k-theory ksc(x)
(see [27,28,25] and [21] iii.7.13-15) is then dened by imposing a stable equivalence relation

on self-conjugate bundles (i.e., on pairs (e, )), whereby two pairs are equivalent if their

sums with a third self-conjugate bundle are isomorphic (as self-conjugate bundles). higher

ksc groups are again dened via gkscn(x) = gksc(x  sn). the classifying space bsc

of self-conjugate k-theory is described in [27]; ksc-groups are then related to homotopy

theory via ksc(x) = [x, bsc].

one can prove that bott periodicity of the self-conjugate k-theory is four. this can

be shown either by a direct analysis of the homotopy properties of the classifying space

[27,28] (and showing that it is homotopically equivalent to its fourth loop space), or by

proving a relation between ksc-theory and kr-theory,

and using bott periodicity of kr-theory (see [25] for details).

gksc(x) =gkr(x  s0,2),

(a.23)

the relation (a.23) between ksc and kr groups plays a central role in our analysis

of t-duality between typeei and type fia in section 4.

24

references

[1] a. sen, stable non-bps states in string theory, jhep 06 (1998) 007, hep-
th/9803194; stable non-bps bound states of bps d-branes, jhep 08 (1998) 010,
hep-th/9805019; tachyon condensation on the brane antibrane system, jhep
08 (1998) 012, hep-th/9805170; so(32) spinors of type i and other solitons on
brane-antibrane pair, jhep 09 (1998) 023, hep-th/9808141; type i d-particle
and its interactions, jhep 10 (1998) 021, hep-th/9809111; bps d-branes on non-
supersymmetric cycles, hep-th/9812031.

[2] e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, hep-th/9810188.
[3] p. horava, type iia d-branes, k-theory, and matrix theory, hep-th/9812135.
[4] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, non-bps states in heterotic  type iia duality,

hep-th/9901014.

[5] m. srednicki, iib or not iib, jhep 08 (1998) 005, hep-th/9807138.
[6] t. banks and l. susskind, brane  antibrane forces, hep-th/9511194.
[7] m.b. green and m. gutperle, light-cone supersymmetry and d-branes, nucl.

phys. b476 (1996) 28, hep-th/9604091.

[8] g. lifschytz, comparing d-branes to black-branes, phys. lett. b388 (1996) 720,

hep-th/9604156.

[9] v. periwal, antibranes and crossing symmetry, hep-th/9612215.

[10] e. gava, k.s. narain and m.h. sarmadi, on the bound states of p- and (p + 2)-

branes, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 214, hep-th/9704006.

[11] h. garca-compean, d-branes in orbifold singularities and equivariant k-theory,

hep-th/9812226.

[12] r. minasian and g. moore, k-theory and ramond-ramond charge, jhep 11

(1997) 002, hep-th/9710230.

[13] p. horava, strings on worldsheet orbifolds, nucl. phys. b327 (1989) 461; back-

ground duality of open string models, phys. lett. b231 (1989) 251.

[14] j. dai, r.g. leigh and j. polchinski, new connections between string theories,

mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2073.

[15] e.g. gimon and c.v. johnson, k3 orientifolds, nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 715,

hep-th/9604129.

[16] k. hori, d-branes, t-duality, and index theory, hep-th/9902102.
[17] e.r. sharpe, d-branes, derived categories, and grothendieck groups,

hep-th/9902116.

[18] s. gukov, k-theory, reality, and orientifolds, hep-th/9901042.
[19] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, stable non-bps d-particles, phys. lett. b441

(1998) 133, hep-th/9806155.

25

[20] e.g. gimon and j. polchinski, consistency conditions for orientifolds and d-

manifolds, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 1667, hep-th/9601038.
[21] m. karoubi, k-theory. an introduction (springer, 1978).
[22] d. husemoller, fibre bundles (1st ed., mc graw-hill, 1966; 3rd ed., springer, 1994).
[23] h. b. lawson, jr. and m.-l. michelsohn, spin geometry (princeton, 1989).
[24] m.f. atiyah, k-theory (benjamin, 1964).
[25] m.f. atiyah, k-theory and reality, quart. j. math. oxford 17 (1966) 367;

reprinted in [24].

[26] e. witten, toroidal compactication without vector structure, jhep 02 (1998)

006, hep-th/9712028.

[27] p.s. green, a cohomology theory based upon self-conjugacies of complex vector

bundles, bull. amer. math. soc. 70 (1964) 522.

[28] d.w. anderson, the real k-theory of classifying spaces, proc. nat. acad. sci.

51 (1964) 634.

[29] p. yi, membranes from five-branes and fundamental strings from dp-branes,

hep-th/9901159.

26

