hep-th/9902105
mri-phy/p990203

descent relations among bosonic d-branes

ashoke sen 1

mehta research institute of mathematics

and mathematical physics

chhatnag road, jhoosi, allahabad 211019, india

abstract

we show that the tachyonic kink solution on a pair of d-p-branes in the bosonic string
theory can be identied with the d-(p  1)-brane of the same theory. we also speculate
on the possibility of obtaining the d-(p  1)-brane as a tachyonic lump on a single d-p-
brane. we suggest a possible reinterpretation of the rst result which unies these two
apparently dierent descriptions of the d-(p  1) brane.

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

m
4

 

 
 

3
v
5
0
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1e-mail: asen@thwgs.cern.ch, sen@mri.ernet.in

1

contents

1 introduction and summary

2 pair of d-strings wrapped on a circle

3 cft at r = 1
2

4 taking the radius back to 

5 d-particle as a tachyonic lump on a single d-string?

6 reconciling the two dierent descriptions of d-branes

1

introduction and summary

2

5

10

14

17

18

during the last year various relationships between the d-branes of type ii and type i string

theories have been discovered. in particular, it was found that quite often a d-brane can
be realised as a soliton solution associated with the tachyon eld on a brane-antibrane

pair of higher dimension[1, 2, 3, 4]. this fact has been used to show that the d-branes of
type ii and type i string theories can be classied by elements of the appropriate k-group
of space-time[5, 6, 7, 8]. various other applications / generalisations of these results have

also been proposed[9, 10, 11].

in this paper we shall extend these results to the d-branes of bosonic string theory[12].

this theory contains d-branes of all dimensions, unlike type iia (iib) string theory which
contains d-branes of even (odd) dimensions only. there is a tachyonic mode even on a

single d-brane in the bosonic string theory; but when we bring two parallel d-branes
close to each other, we get extra tachyonic modes from open strings stretched between

the two d-branes. it is this tachyonic mode which will be of interest to us. the potential
involving this tachyonic mode is even; and according to one possible interpretation of
our results, it has a (local) minimum at non-zero value of the tachyon eld. thus there

are two degenerate minima, and we can have tachyonic kink solution which interpolates
between the two minima. we shall show that this kink solution describes a d-brane of one

lower dimension. thus if we start with a pair of d-p-branes, the tachyonic kink solution
describes a d-(p  1)-brane.

before we outline the steps involved in our analysis, let us briey discuss the motiva-

2

tion. since bosonic string theory itself is unstable due to the presence of the tachyon in
the closed string sector; and since the d-branes themselves are also unstable due to the

presence of the tachyon in the open string sector, it is natural to question the usefulness
of the results of this paper. we propose the following reasons for our study:

 quite often bosonic string theory provides a simpler setting compared to superstring

theories for the study of various issues. since there are several issues which are ill
understood in regarding d-branes as solitons in type ii / type i string theories,

studying these issues in bosonic string theory might be of help. one such issue
involves studying the fate of the diagonal u(1) gauge eld living on the brane-

antibrane pair after tachyon condensation[9, 5]. yet another issue is an explicit
construction of the soliton / vacuum conguration on the brane-antibrane pair as

a classical solution of the open string eld theory living on the pair. these issues
might be simpler to study in the bosonic string theory.

 on a more speculative side, we would like to point out that in view of recent devel-

opments in the subject of string duality, it seems unlikely that the bosonic string
theory will forever remain outside the scheme that unies all string theories as dif-

ferent limits of the same underlying theory. already some explicit proposals have
been made which relate bosonic string theory to other theories with world-sheet

supersymmetry[13]. study of d-branes in the bosonic string theory is certainly go-
ing to be important if we are to study such duality relations; although due to lack

of supersymmetry our task will be much more dicult.

the steps involved in proving the equivalence of a tachyonic kink solution and a lower
dimensional d-brane are very similar to the ones used in [3], where we derived a similar
result for type i / type ii string theory.2 however, there is a crucial dierence: unlike in
[3] where the boundary conformal eld theory interpolating between the p-brane pair and

the (p  1)-brane was a free fermionic eld theory, in the present case it corresponds to a
level one su(2) current algebra theory. we now outline the basic idea of the proof:

1. first we compactify one of the directions (x) tangential to the p-brane pair along
a circle of radius r, and switch on half a unit of wilson line along x on one of the

p-branes. this makes the open string states with two ends lying on two dierent

2related issues have been discussed in [14].

3

branes anti-periodic under x  x+ 2r. as a result, the zero x-momentum mode is
absent from this open string sector, and at a critical radius rc, the lowest momentum
mode of the tachyon associated with such an open string becomes massless. the
critical radius turns out to be half of the self-dual radius where the conformal eld
theory associated with the scalar eld x develops an su(2)l  su(2)r current
algebra.

2. by exploiting the su(2)l  su(2)r current algebra, one can show that the vertex
operator associated with the massless mode of the tachyon represents an exactly
marginal deformation. switching on a vacuum expectation value  of this mode gives

rise to a solvable boundary conformal eld theory (bcft), so that the spectrum
and correlation functions in this bcft can be calculated for all values of .
in
particular we show that at  = 1, the bcft is identical to the one describing a
d-(p1)-brane located on a circle of radius rc (with the directions tangential to the
d-(p  1)-brane being orthogonal to the circle.) on the other hand, by explicitly

examining the form of the tachyon background, we nd that it corresponds to a
tachyonic kink on a circle of radius rc. this allows us to identify the tachyonic kink
on a circle of radius rc to a d-(p  1)-brane on a circle of radius rc.

3. in the nal step, we increase the radius r back to innity. although at r = rc all
values of  are allowed, we nd that as soon as r increases beyond rc, the tachyonic
mode which was massless at r = rc develops a tadpole for a generic value of . this
shows that a generic  is no longer a solution of the equations of motion. however,

there are two inequivalent values of  where the tadpole vanishes   = 0 and
 = 1. if we take the radius back to innity keeping  = 0, we recover the original

d-p-brane pair, whereas if we do so at  = 1, we expect to recover the tachyonic
kink solution. on the other hand, by examining the bcft corresponding to this
conguration, we nd that it describes a d-(p1)-brane of the bosonic string theory

in 26 dimensional minkowski space. this proves the identication of the tachyonic
kink solution on the d-p-brane pair with the d-(p  1)-brane.

the paper is organised as follows. for simplicity of notation we shall consider the case

p = 1, although generalisation to arbitrary p is completely straightforward. also we shall
work in units where the fundamental string tension is given by 1/(2), i.e.  = 1. in
section 2 we discuss some general properties of a pair of d-branes wrapped on a circle,

4

and carry out the step 1 of our analysis. we also outline in slightly more detail the logic
of our analysis in steps 2 and 3. in sections 3 and 4 we explicitly carry out steps 2 and 3

of our analysis. in section 5 we speculate on the possibility of constructing the d0-brane
as a tachyonic lump on a single d-string. again, this result can be easily generalized to
the case of a d-p-brane. in section 6 we suggest a possible reinterpretation of the results

of sections 3 and 4 which unies the two apparently dierent descriptions of the lower
dimensional d-brane.

2 pair of d-strings wrapped on a circle

our starting point will be a coincident pair of d-p-branes in bosonic string theory. the

open strings living on this system are described by 2  2 chan paton (cp) factors. the
massless sector of the open string contains a u(2) gauge eld living on the brane world-

volume. all open string states transform in the adjoint representation of u(2)  i.e. they
are neutral under the u(1) and transform in the singlet plus a triplet representation of

su(2). states with cp factor i (the 2  2 identity matrix) are in the singlet represen-
tation of su(2), whereas those with cp factors i (the pauli matrices) are in the triplet
representation of su(2).

the ground state of the open string in each sector describes a tachyon eld with

m2 = 1 .

(2.1)

the rst excited states correspond to the u(2) gauge elds as well as (25  p) massless
scalars in the adjoint representation of u(2). higher excited states correspond to massive
modes. we shall denote the tachyonic state with cp factor 1 by t . let v (t ) denote
the classical eective potential for this tachyon obtained after integrating out the other

massive string modes. since the su(2) gauge transformation corresponding to the group
element exp(i3/2) takes t to t , v (t ) must be an even function of t .3 we shall argue
shortly that v (t ) has (local) minimum at some values t0 such that

v (t0) + 2tp = 0 ,

(2.2)

where tp denotes the tension of the d-p-brane. thus for t = t0, the total energy
density on the brane pair vanishes and the system is indistinguishible from vacuum.

3if we also consider the tachyonic modes coming from cp factors 2 and 3, then there is an su(2)

triplet of tachyon eld, and the potential is invariant under the su(2) transformation.

5

if t0 6= 0, we can dene the tachyonic kink solution on the d-p-brane pair as a solution
of the equations of motion of classical open string eld theory, subject to the following

conditions:

1. only those open string elds which carry cp factors i and 1 are present as back-

ground.

2. the conguration is time independent, as well as independent of (p  1) of the

spatial directions along the brane.

3. t depends on the remaining spatial direction  which we shall denote by x  such

that

t (x)  t0

as

x   ,

 t0

as

x   .

(2.3)

t(x)

0

0

x

figure 1: the tachyonic kink on the pair of d-p-branes.

this has been illustrated in fig.1 and describes a kink. from eqs.(2.2) and (2.3) we see
that the energy density vanishes as x  , and is concentrated near the core at x = 0.

thus this describes a (p  1) dimensional brane. we shall argue that this kink actually
describes the d-(p  1)-brane of the bosonic string theory.

6

note that if (2.2) had not been true, the tachyonic kink dened this way would have
innite tension when regarded as a (p  1)-brane, since the energy density, integrated

along x, will not give a nite answer. thus proving that the tachyonic kink describes the
d-(p  1)-brane  which is known to have nite tension  automatically proves (2.2).

a somewhat dierent scenario, which is also consistent with the results of sections 3,
4 will be suggested in section 6. in this description t0 vanishes and the d-(p  1)-brane
is regarded as a tachyonic lump on a pair of d-p-branes. the argument leading to the
vanishing of v (t0) is still valid, but in this case the negative contribution to the potential
energy, cancelling the tension of the pair of d-p-branes, comes from the vev of the tachyon
associated with the cp factor i.4

t



0



r c

2r

c

x

figure 2: the tachyonic kink on the pair of d-strings on a circle.

from now on we shall focus our attention on the case p = 1, and also compactify the
direction x tangential to the d-string pair on a circle of radius r. associated with each

d-string is a u(1) gauge eld which forms part of the full u(2) gauge group. we now
switch on half a unit of wilson line on one of the d-strings. this breaks the u(2) gauge
symmetry to u(1)u(1). presence of this wilson line does not aect the spectrum of

4since v (t ) denotes the eective action obtained after integrating out the other elds, including the

tachyon eld from the identity sector, it is automatically minimized with respect to this tachyon.

7

open string states with cp factors i and 3, which represent strings with both ends lying
on the same d-string. but for open strings with cp factors 1 and 2, corresponding
to open strings with two ends lying on two dierent d-strings, the wave function is now
required to be anti-periodic instead of periodic under x  x + 2r. in particular the
tachyon t coming from cp factor 1 now has a mode expansion of the form:

t (x) = xnz

tn+ 1

2

the eective mass2 of tn+ 1

2

is given by:

ei(n+ 1

2 ) x

r .

m2

n+ 1

2

=

(n + 1

2 )2

r2  1 .

this shows that at the critical radius

rc =

1
2

,

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

the modes t 1

2

become massless. in the next section we shall show that the combination

s  t 1

2

+ t 1

2

(2.7)

has vanishing potential as well, so that it represents an exactly marginal deformation of

the bcft describing the d-string pair. we can parametrise a general vacuum expectation
value (vev) of this marginal operator as:5

t 1

2

+ t 1

2

= ,

t 1

2

 t 1

2

= 0,

tr = 0

for

|r| >

1
2

.

from (2.4) we see that this corresponds to

t (x) =  cos

x
2rc

=  cos x .

(2.8)

(2.9)

this has been plotted in fig.2, and clearly represents a tachyonic kink on a circle of radius
rc = 1

2.6

after switching on the tachyon vev, we would like to take the radius back to innity.
we shall see in section 4 that as soon as we make r > rc, the eld s develops a tadpole

5once the interactions are taken into account, the higher modes of the tachyon will also acquire

non-zero vev, but t (x) will continue to have the shape of a kink.

6it actually represents an anti-kink, but since bosonic d-branes do not carry any charge, there is no

distinction between a kink and an anti-kink.

8

for a generic value of . this is not surprising since s represents an exactly marginal
deformation only for r = rc. however, we nd that the tadpole vanishes for two inequiv-
alent values of , namely,  = 0 and  = 1. thus it is natural to identify the  = 1
conguration as the tachyonic kink on a circle of radius r. we show in section 4 that the
bcft corresponding to this conguration is identical to the one describing a d-particle

on a circle of radius r. this equivalence continues to hold in the r   limit as well.

r

1/2

1



figure 3: the marginal ow in the r   plane interpolating between a pair of d-strings
and a d-particle.

thus we see that there is a series of marginal deformations which relate a pair of

d-strings to the d-particle. in the r   plane, this marginal ow has been depicted in
fig.3.

as a consistency check for this proposal, let us note that the mass of the wrapped pair

of d-strings on a circle of radius 1

2 is given by,

using the relation[12]

2  2 

1
2

 t1 .

tp =

1
2

tp1 ,

(2.10)

(2.11)

wee see that (2.10) is identical to the mass t0 of a single d-particle.

9

3 cft at r =

1
2

the world-sheet eld that will be important for our analysis is the scalar eld x associated
with the coordinate along the d-string. besides this, there are 25 other scalar elds
x 0, . . . x 24, and the ghost elds b, c, b, c. although x has radius 1
2, it will be more
convenient for our analysis to regard this as a scalar eld of radius 1, and then mod out

the theory by the transformation:

hx : x  x + 

(3.1)

all closed string states, as well as open string states with cp factors i and 3 are required
to be even under hx, whereas open string states with cp factors 1 and 2 are required
to be odd under hx.

we shall express x as a sum of the left and the right-moving parts:

with hx acting on xl and xr as

x  xl + xr ,

hx : xl  xl +


2

, xr  xr +


2

.

(3.2)

(3.3)

at unit radius, the cft describing x possesses an su(2)lsu(2)r current algebra. this
allows us to introduce two other bosons:

  l + r,

through the relations:

  

l + 

r ,

e2ixl = l + i
l,

e2ixr = r + i

r .

(3.4)

(3.5)

the set of left-moving currents (xl, l, 
l) transform as a triplet of su(2)l; similarly
the right-moving currents transform as a triplet of su(2)r. from (3.5) we can also write
down the su(2) rotated version of these relations:7

e2il = xl  i
l,
e2i

l = xl + il,

e2ir = xr  i
e2i

r = xr + ir .

r,

(3.6)

7there is some freedom in writing down these relations, since eq.(3.5) only denes ,  up to a

constant shift.

10

we have already introduced the transformation hx. we now introduce a new trans-

formation:

gx : x  x .

(3.7)

we also introduce the transformations g, h, g and h in an identical manner. then,
using eqs.(3.5), (3.6) we see that,

hx = g = g,

gx = h = hg .

(3.8)

we shall use the convention where the open string world-sheet corresponds to the
upper half plane spanned by a complex coordinate z, and the right-moving currents are
holomorphic in z. the operator product expansion of the currents are given by,

xr(z)xr(w)  r(z)r(w)  

r(z)

r(w)  

1

2(z  w)2 ,

(3.9)

where  denotes equality up to non-singular terms. there are similar relations involving
the left-moving currents.

since both the d-strings are stretched along x, we impose neumann boundary condi-

tion on x:

(xl)b = (xr)b 

1
2

xb ,

(3.10)

where the subscript b denotes boundary value. using eq.(3.5) this translates into neu-
mann boundary condition on  and :

(l)b = (r)b 

1
2

b,

(

l)b = (

r)b 

1
2


b .

the vertex operator for the mode tn+ 1

2

dened in (2.4) is given by:

vn+ 1

2

= ie2i(n+ 1

2 )xb  1 .

thus the vertex operator for s  (t 1

2

+ t 1

2

) is given by:

vs = i(eixb + eixb )  1 = ib  1 .

(3.11)

(3.12)

(3.13)

in deriving the right hand side of (3.13) we have used eq.(3.5). at this stage, the overall
normalization of vs is arbitrary. from (3.13) we see that vs represents the vertex operator
of a zero momentum gauge eld a along  with cp factor 1,  in other words a wilson

11

line along . this clearly is an exactly marginal deformation. we parametrize it by a
parameter , normalized such that it corresponds to inserting an operator

exp(i

1i tbdt) ,


4

(3.14)

on the boundary of the world-sheet. t denotes a parameter along this boundary.

we shall now study the eect of switching on this wilson line on the open string

states. using the relations

[1, i] = 0 = [1, 1] ,

(3.15)

we see that open string states with cp factors i and 1 are neutral under this gauge eld,
and hence the spectrum of these open string states is not modied upon switching on the

tachyon vev. on the other hand, since

[1, 3  i2] = 2(3  i2) ,

(3.16)

open string states in these sectors carry charge 2 under a. thus the momentum p
along the  direction gets shifted;

p  p 


2

.

(3.17)

eq.(3.17) can be restated by saying that the h quantum number of the state is multiplied
by a factor:

exp(i

) .

(3.18)


2

using the identication of h with gx (eq.(3.8)) and the fact that the open string spectrum
has no gx projection, we see that before switching on the tachyon vev, the open string
states in each cp factor contains both h even and h odd states. if  = 2, then, as
seen from eq.(3.18), the h quantum numbers get multiplied by 1. but this means that
the complete spectrum of open strings in each cp sector remains unchanged. thus the
bcft at  = 2 is equivalent to that at  = 0, and we conclude that  is a periodic
variable with period 2.

although at the critical radius r = rc, all values of  describe consistent bcft, in
anticipation of the results of the next section let us pay special attention to the spectrum
at  = 1. we begin by tabulating the h and g eigenvalues of various open string states
at  = 0:

12

cp factors

gx = h hx = g

i
1
2
3

1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1

table 1: spectrum at  = 0

for  = 1, the quantum numbers in sectors i and 1 remain unchanged, but the h
eigenvalues in sectors 3  i2 get multiplied by i. thus the above table is modied to:

cp factors h = hg

g = g

i
1
2
3
table 2: spectrum at  = 1

1
 1
i
i

1
1
1
1

combining the open string spectrum from all sectors we see that in the fock space,

 there is no g projection, and

 all  momentum of the form:

p =

n
2

,

n  z ,

are allowed.

let us dene a new eld  related to  by t-duality transformation:


l = 
l,


r = 

r ,

(3.19)

(3.20)

if w denotes the winding charge along  (dened as /2), and g denotes the
transformation   , then we have the relations:

p = w,

g = g .

(3.21)

we now note that in  coordinate,

1. the boundary condition (3.11) takes the form:

(

l)b = (

r)b .

(3.22)

in other words, we have dirichlet boundary condition along .

13

2. the full spectrum of open strings from all cp sectors has no g projection in the

fock space.

3. the  winding charge is quantized as:

w =

n
2

,

n  z .

(3.23)

this is precisely the spectrum of open strings living on a single d-particle on a circle of
radius 1
2.

one can ask whether the interaction among these open strings is also identical to that

among open strings living on a d-particle. the dierence between the interaction rules
in the two theories comes from the cp factors. in the bcft under consideration various
open string vertex operators are accompanied by cp factors, and there could be extra

selection rules, as only those products of cp factors with non-vanishing trace will give
non-zero amplitude. this requires, for example, that either each i come in pairs, or they
appear in the combination 123. but upon examining the h and g quantum numbers
carried by these states, we see that these selection rules are automatically imposed by h
and g conservation laws, which are present also for the open string living on d-particle
on a circle. this shows that non only the spectrum, but also the correlation functions of

the bcft obtained here agrees with those in the bcft describing d-particle on a circle
of radius 1
2.

this shows the equivalence between the tachyonic kink on a pair of d-strings on a
circle of radius 1
2, and the d-particle on a circle of the same radius. in the next section we
shall show that this identication of the two boundary conformal eld theories persists

even when we increase the radius back to .

4 taking the radius back to 

the analysis in this section will follow closely that of ref.[3]. the eect of increasing the
radius is achieved by perturbing by the closed string vertex operator:

z d2zxlxr  z d2zvr .

(4.1)

first we shall show that even at rst order in (r  rc), the eld s develops a tadpole at
a generic value of . this one point function is proportional to the two point function at

14

r = rc of the open string vertex operator vs and the closed string vertex operator vr in
the presence of the tachyonic background parametrised by . this is given by8

hvsvri  t rcphdxlxr(p )b(q)  1 exp(i


4

1i tbdt)ei .

(4.2)

in the left hand side of this equation h i denotes the correlation function in the presence
of the tachyonic background. in the right hand side h i denotes the correlation function
at  = 0; the eect of the tachyonic background has been taken into account by explicitly

putting the exponential factor inside the correlator. p denotes a point in the interior of
the world-sheet, q denotes a point on the boundary, and t rcp denotes trace over the
chan paton factors. by explicitly carrying out the trace over the cp factors, and using
the relations (3.6), we can rewrite the right hand side of (4.2) as

1

2d sin (


2

w)(cid:16)e2i(l+r) + e2i(l+r) + e2i(l r) + e2i(lr)(cid:17)(p )b(q)e ,

where,

w =

1

2 i tbdt .

(4.3)

(4.4)

w measures the total  winding charge carried by the closed string vertex operators
inserted in the interior. since exp(2i(l + r)) has w = 0, whereas exp(2i(l  r))
has w = 2, we can rewrite (4.3) as

1
2

(sin )d(cid:16)e2i(lr)  e2i(lr)(cid:17)(p )b(q)e .

(4.5)

using the fact that  satises neumann boundary condition, one can easily show that

the correlation function appearing in (4.5) is non-zero. this shows that the one point
function of s for r > rc is non-zero. it vanishes at  = 0 and at  = 1, as stated earlier.
we shall now focus our attention on the  = 1 point, and analyse a general correla-
tion function of open string vertex operators at a general radius r. this would require
summing over arbitrary number of insertions of vr with appropriate weight factors. thus
a typical correlation function to be analysed has the form:

dyi

v i

open(qi)ym

vr(pm) exp(cid:16)i


2

w1(cid:17)e ,

(4.6)

8ghost number conservation requires that we also insert appropriate number of ghost elds in the
vertex operators. but the correlation function factors into a matter part and the ghost part, and non-
trivial information comes from analysing the matter part. hence we focus on the matter part of the
correlator.

15

where w has been dened in eq.(4.4). here qi are points on the boundary of the world-
sheet and pm are points in the interior. the eect of the exponential factor on the open
string vertex operators is to shift their  momentum, which has already been taken into
account in the previous section. thus we can interprete w appearing in (4.6) as the sum
of the  winding charges of all the closed string vertex operators inserted in the interior.
expressing vr as

vr =

1

4(cid:16)e2i(l+r) + e2i(l+r) + e2i(lr) + e2i(lr)(cid:17) ,

(4.7)

we see that the rst two terms carry w = 0 whereas the third and the fourth terms carry
w = 2. since all terms have w even, we have the relation:

exp(i


2

w1) = (1)w/2 .

this transforms vr given in (4.7) to

1

4(cid:16)e2i(l+r) + e2i(l+r)  e2i(l r)  e2i(lr)(cid:17) = 

l

r = 

l
r ,

(4.8)

(4.9)

l

where  has been dened in eq.(3.20). perturbing by the operator 
r has the eect
of increasing the  radius (or, equivalently, decreasing the  radius). thus we see that
the eect of increasing r in the presence of a tachyon background is achieved by increasing
the  radius in the same proportion, and ignoring the tachyon background. since for
r = rc = 1
2, the open string spectrum corresponds to a d-particle on the  circle of
radius 1
2, this would correspond to a d-particle on
the  circle of radius   1
2 = r. as r  , this corresponds to a d-particle in the
(25+1) dimensional minkowski space.

2 , we see that if we increase r to   1

this proves the equivalence of the bcft describing the tachyonic kink solution on a

pair of d-strings, and that describing a d-particle. note that the marginal deformation
interpolating between the two congurations does not involve the elds x 0, . . . x 24 at any
step. thus by putting neumann boundary condition on (p1) of the elds x 1, . . . x 24 we
can make our initial conguration into a pair of d-p-branes, and the nal conguration

into a d-(p  1)-brane.

16

~
t



0

-

r~

x
~
r2

figure 4: the tachyon eld on the d-string which produces a pair of d-particles.

5 d-particle as a tachyonic lump on a single d-

string?

following ref.[4], we can study a t-dual version of our analysis. in this case the massless

mode of the tachyon interpolates between a pair of d-particles situated at diametrically

the same radius. running the marginal ow backwards, we can conclude that tachyon

opposite points on a circle of radius er = 2, and a single d-string wrapped on a circle of
condensation on a d-string on a circle of radius er produces a pair of d-particles at

diametrically opposite points on the same circle. from the point of view of the d-string,

the particular mode which condenses corresponds to:

,

(5.1)

et (x) = e cos x = e cos

2x

er

where et is the tachyonic eld living on the d-string. this has been plotted in fig.4. this
can be viewed as a pair of lumps on the circle, one spanning the range 0  x   er, and
the other spanning the range  er  x  2 er. although this conguration is symmetric
under et  et (together with a translation along x), this symmetry will be destroyed

once interactions are taken into account.

this suggests that we can identify a single d-particle in 26 dimensional minkowski

17

ev (et0) + t1 = 0 .

this relation guarantees that the lump has a nite mass.

~
t

~
t
0

space as a tachyonic lump on an innite d-string as shown in fig.5. in this gure et0
denotes the minimum of the tachyonic potential ev (et ) satisfying,

(5.2)

x

figure 5: the tachyonic lump on a d-string, representing a single d-particle.

this analysis can be generalised by starting from a d-string compactied on a circle of

radius n for any integer n (including 1), and condensing the mode proportional to cos x.
this will produce n lumps on the circle, which can be identied as n uniformly spaced

d-particles on a circle of radius n.

6 reconciling the two dierent descriptions of d-

branes

the analysis of the previous sections suggests two dierent ways of viewing a d0-brane

(d-(p  1)-brane),  as a kink on a d-string anti-d-string (d-p-brane anti-d-p-brane)
pair, and also as a lump on a single d-string (d-p-brane). in this section we shall show
that we can reinterprete the results of sections 3 and 4 in such a way that the second
description can explain all the results of this paper. to do this let us denote by fl(x) the

18

function shown in fig.5. thus on a single d1-brane, the conguration

denotes a d0-brane. on the other hand, et = et0 denotes the vacuum solution. thus if bt

denotes the 2  2 matrix valued tachyon eld on a pair of coincident d-branes, then the

conguration:

et (x) = fl(x)

bt (x) = (cid:18) et0

fl(x)(cid:19)

(6.1)

(6.2)

(6.3)

will denote a single d0-brane. (6.2) can be rewritten as,

1
2

bt (x) =

(fl(x) + et0)i +

1
2

(et0  fl(x))3 .

finally, using the u(2) gauge symmetry on the coincident d-string pair, we can replace
3 in eq.(6.2) by 1. this gives,

1
2

bt (x) =

(fl(x) + et0)i +

1
2

(et0  fl(x))1 .

(6.4)

the coecient of 1 is the tachyon eld t (x) of sections 2-4. from fig.5 we see that this
has the form given in fig.6. this appears to be a lump rather than a kink, as suggested

by the analysis of sections 4 and 5.

t

x

figure 6: coecient of 1 in eq.(6.4).

19

t

- rc

rc

x

figure 7: a redrawing of the conguration of fig.2.

t

r-

r

x

figure 8: a possible r   limit of the conguration of fig.7. this provides an
alternative to the possibility shown in fig.1.

we shall now show that it is in principle possible to reinterprete the tachyonic congu-
ration of sections 4, 5 to be a lump rather than a kink. for this we need to note that fig.2
can be redrawn as fig.7 by changing the range of x parametrizing s1 from (0, 2rc) to
(rc, rc). in this form the tachyon conguration does appear as a lump rather than

20

a kink. the main question is: as we take the r   limit, does most of the circle get
covered by the conguration t  t0 for some t0 6= 0 (shown in fig.1), or does it get
covered by the conguration t  0 (as shown in fig.8)? in the rst case the conguration
is to be interpreted as a kink, whereas in the second case it is to be interpreted as a lump
as shown in fig.6.

note that in the second case t (x)  0 as x  . in the case of the d-string -
anti-d-string pair of type iib string theory this was unacceptable, since for t = 0 the

energy per unit length of the pair is nite, and hence the resulting solution would not
represent a localised lump of energy. in the present case however there is a tachyon from

the identity sector as well, and condensation of this tachyon can make the energy density
vanish far away from the core even though the tachyon associated with the cp factor 1
has no vev in this region. indeed, this is precisely what happens for the conguration of
eq.(6.3). thus if we reinterprete the results of section 3 and 4 this way, all the results of
this paper would be consistent with the hypothesis that the tachyonic lump on a single

d-string represents a d0-brane.

references

[1] a. sen, jhep08(1998)012 [hep-th/9805170]; jhep08(1998)010 [hep-th/9805019];

jhep10(1998)021 [hep-th/9809111].

[2] o.bergman and m. gaberdiel, [hep-th/9806155]; [hep-th/9901014].

[3] a. sen, jhep09(1998)023 [hep-th/9808141].

[4] a. sen, [hep-th/9812031].

[5] e. witten, [hep-th/9810188].

[6] p. horava, [hep-th/9812135].

[7] h. garcia-compean, [hep-th/9812175].

[8] s. gukov, [hep-th/9901042].

[9] m. srednicki, jhep08(1998)005 [hep-th/9807138].

[10] m. gutperle and v. periwal, [hep-th/9812003].

21

[11] p. yi, [hep-th/9901159].

[12] j. polchinski, s. chaudhury and c. johnson, [hep-th/9602052];

j. polchinski, [hep-th/9611050].

[13] o. bergman and m. gaberdiel, nucl.phys. b499 (1997) 183 [hep-th/9701137].

[14] a. recknagel and v. schomerus, [hep-th/9811237].

22

