nyu-th/99/2/02
april 5, 2008

9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
5
2

 

 
 

1
v
1
9
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on field/string theory approach to theta dependence in large

n yang-mills theory

gregory gabadadze

department of physics, new york university, new york, ny 10003, usa

email: gabadadze@physics.nyu.edu

abstract

the theta dependence of the vacuum energy in large n yang-mills theory has been studied
some time ago by witten using a duality of large n gauge theories with string theory
compactied on a certain space-time. we show that within the eld theory context vacuum
uctuations of the topological charge give rise the vacuum energy consistent with the string
theory computation. furthermore, we calculate 1/n suppressed corrections to the string
theory result. the reconciliation of the string and eld theory approaches is based on the
fact that the gauge theory instantons carry zerobrane charge in the corresponding d-brane
construction of yang-mills theory. given the formula for the vacuum energy we study
certain aspects of stability of the false vacua of the model for dierent realizations of the
initial conditions. the vacuum structure appears to be dierent depending on whether n
is innite or, alternatively, large but nite.

1. introduction

a great deal of information can be learned on nonperturbative phenomena in four-
dimensional gauge theories by obtaining these models as a low-energy realization of certain
d-brane congurations [1], and/or using a duality of large n superconformal gauge theories
and string theory compactied on certain spaces (see refs. [2] and [3,4]). this duality, being
a powerful technique, has also been generalized for the case of non-supersymmetric models
[5]. this was applied to study various dynamical issues in large n pure yang-mills theory
[611]. in fact, it was used by witten [12] to derive the expression for the theta dependence
of the vacuum energy in the large n pure yang-mills (ym) model. the expression for the
vacuum energy density associated with the cp odd part of the theory has the form [12]:

e0() = c mink ( + 2k)2 + o(cid:18) 1

n(cid:19) ,

(1)

where c is some constant independent of n and k stands for an integer number. this
expression has a number of interesting features which might seem a bit puzzling from the
eld theory point of view. indeed, in the large n limit there are n 2 degrees of freedom
in gluodynamics, thus, naively, one would expect that the vacuum energy density in this
theory scales as  n 2. however, the leading term in eq. (1) scales as  1. as a natural
explanation, one could conjecture that there should be a colorless massless excitation which
saturates the expression for the vacuum energy density (1). however, pure gluodynamics
generates a mass gap and there are no physical massless excitations in the model. thus, the
origin of eq. (1) seems to be a conundrum.

in this work we intend to elucidate the eld-theoretic origin of eq. (1). in fact, we identify
a very special composite eld which denes the vacuum energy given in (1). moreover, we
show that this composite eld does not propagate physical degrees of freedom. thus, we
clarify the puzzle mentioned above: the composite eld sets the background energy density
but does not appear in the spectrum as a physical state. using this eld we calculate 1/n
suppressed corrections to (1).

in section 2, after a brief discussion of the theta dependence in pure gluodynamics we
derive the expression (1) within the eld theory context. then, we elucidate why the com-
posite eld dening the background energy (1) does not propagate dynamical degrees of
freedom. in section 3 the same derivation will be given by starting with qcd with massive
quarks and recovering pure gluodynamics in the limit when the quark masses go to inn-
ity. doing so we establish the limits of applicability of the results of section 2 and, most
importantly, we calculate the 1/n corrections to the vacuum energy density (1). in section
4 we discuss the fate of the false vacua emerging in the theory as a result of the energy
dependence given in (1). we study this issue for both, the large but nite n and innite
n cases. dierent realizations of the initial conditions for the model will be considered. in
section 5 we discuss the origin of the vacuum energy as it appears in the string theory and
eld theory approaches. in fact, we analyze certain relations between these two calculations
using the arguments of the ads/cft correspondence [24]. section 6 is devoted to brief

it has been conjectured long time ago in [13].

2

discussions and conclusions.

2. derivation in gluodynamics

the aim of this section is to derive eq. (1) in pure ym model and, in fact, to identify the

degrees of freedom which are responsible for the theta dependent vacuum energy density.

in the quasi-classical approach the theta dependence can be calculated using instantons
[14]. in a simplest approximation of non-interacting instantons the theta angle enters the
euclidean space partition function in the following form:

exp(cid:16) 

82
g2  i(cid:17)  exp(cid:16)  n

82
  i(cid:17) ,

(2)

where g stands for the strong coupling constant.  denotes the t hoofts coupling   n g2
which is kept xed in the large n limit. the expression above vanishes in the large n
limit, so does the theta dependence in (2). however, this conclusion cannot be extrapolated
to the infrared region of the model. the limitations of the expression (2) prevent one to
do so.
indeed, the quasi-classical approximation is valid in the limit of small coupling
constant (see, for instance, discussions in ref. [15]). once quantum corrections are taken
into account the coupling constant g2 in (2) becomes a scale dependent quantity. in fact,
it will depend upon an instanton size g2 = g2(). for small size instantons the running
coupling is small and the quasi-classical approximation in (2) holds. however, for large size
instantons, i.e. large couplings, it is not even clear whether the notion of a single instanton
is a legitimate approximation. the overlap between instantons can be big in this case and
some more complicated eld congurations should be relevant for the description of physical
phenomena [16]. in any event, the expression (2) is no longer reliable in the strong coupling
limit. thus, the conclusion that the theta dependence goes away in the large n limit cannot
be justied. one way to study the infrared region is to look for some appropriate composite
colorless excitations for which the notion of an asymptotic state can be used. we will start
by searching for these excitations in pure yang-mills theory. to proceed, let us recall that
the topological susceptibility, x , is a nonzero number in pure gluodynamics:

x = i z  h0|t k(x)k(0)|0i d4x 6= 0 .

(3)

here, k denotes the chern-simons current which is related to the topological charge density
322 f f   f f , and the dual strength-tensor is dened as f  =
as q = k = g2
1
2 f. all quantities above are dened in minkowski space. the value of x in large
n pure ym theory determines the  meson mass in full qcd with massless quarks. this
relation, called the witten-veneziano formula, can be written as m2
  x , with f being

f 2

though in minkowski space-time q does not have the meaning of the topological charge density
and, moreover, diers from the euclidean denition of the topological charge density by i, we
formally keep the same name and letter for simplicity.

3

the  meson decay constant [17,18].

in what follows it will prove convenient to introduce a new variable by rewriting the
expression for the topological charge density q in terms of a four-index (four-form) tensor
eld h :

f f = q =

h 

4!

,

where the four-form eld h  is the eld strength for the three-form potential c:

h = c  c  c  c.

the c eld is dened as a composite operator of the gluon elds aa
:

c =

1
162 (aa

aa

  aa

aa

  aa

aa

 + 2fabcaa

ab

ac

).

(4)

(5)

(6)

here, fabc denote the structure constants of the corresponding su(n) gauge group. the
right-left derivative in this expression is dened as ab  a(b)  (a)b. notice, that
if the gauge transformation parameter
the c eld is not a gauge invariant quantity;
is a, the three-form eld transforms as c  c +     , where
a. however, one can check that the expression for the eld strength
  aa
h is gauge invariant.

a  aa

it has been known for some time [22] that the c eld propagates long-range correla-
tions if the topological susceptibility is nonzero in the theory. the easiest way to see this
is to turn to the notion of the kogut-susskind pole [23]. let us consider the correlator of
the vacuum topological susceptibility at a nonzero momentum. in this case x is dened as
the zero momentum limit of the correlator of two chern-simons currents multiplied by two
momenta:

x = i lim

q0

qq z eiqxh0|t k(x)k(0)|0id4x.

(7)

since this expression is nonzero, it must be that the correlator of two chern-simons currents
develops a pole as the momentum vanishes, the kogut-susskind pole [23].

given that the correlator of two chern-simons currents has a pole and that the chern-
simons current and the three-form c eld are related, one concludes that the c eld
also has a nonzero coulomb propagator [22]. thus, the c eld behaves as a massless
collective excitation propagating a long-range interaction [22]. these properties, in the large
n limit, can be summarized in the following eective action for the c eld:

sef f = 

1

2  4! x z h 2

 d4x 



3! z

c dx  dx  dx + high dim.

(8)

the numerical value for x can also be found within the framework of qcd sum rule [19] calcula-
tions [20], as well as in lattice studies [21]. below, unless otherwise stated, we will not distinguish
between x and its large n limit. the constant contact term in the denition of x will also be
omitted for simplicity.

4

the rst term in this expression yields the correct coulomb propagator for the three-form
c eld. the second term is just the usual cp odd  term of the initial ym action
written as a surface integral at spatial innity . notice that higher dimensional terms are
not explicitly written in this expression. there might be two types of higher dimensional
contributions in (8). first of all, there are terms with higher powers of derivatives of the
elds. these terms are suppressed by momenta of the massless three-form eld and do not
contribute to the zero momentum vacuum energy of the system. in addition, there might be
higher dimensional terms with no additional derivatives. in the next section we will present
some of these contributions and show that they are suppressed by higher powers of 1/n.

in what follows we are going to study the large n eective action given in eq. (8) .
in particular, we will calculate the ground state energy of the system in the large n limit
using the eective action (8). in fact, we will derive eq. (1).

before we turn to this calculation let us mention that maxwells equations for a free four-
form eld-strength h yield only a constant solution in (3 + 1)-dimensional space-time
[27]. the reason is as follows. a four-form potential has only one independent degree of
freedom in four-dimensional space-time, let us call it . then, the four maxwells equations
written in terms of the  eld require that this eld is independent of the all four space-time
coordinates, thus the solution can only be a space-time constant. as a result, the free h
eld propagates no dynamical degrees of freedom in (3 + 1)-dimensions. however, this eld
can be responsible for a positive vacuum energy density in various models of quantum field
theory (see ref. [28]). thus, studying classical equations of motion for the h eld one
can determine the value of the ground state energy given by congurations of h. we are
going to solve explicitly the classical equations of motion for the eective action (8). then,
the energy density associated with those solutions will be calculated.

let us start with the equations of motion. taking the variation of the action (8) with

respect to the c(z) eld one gets

h(z) =  x z

(4)(z  x) dx  dx  dx.

(9)

this equation can be solved exactly in four-dimensional space-time [27]. the solution is the
sum of a particular solution of the inhomogeneous equation and a general solution of the
corresponding homogeneous equation:

h(z) =  x z (4)(z  x) dx  dx  dx  dx + b .

(10)

the integration constant b, if nonzero, induces an additional cp violation beyond the existed
 angle. however, periodicity of the  angle with respect to shifts by 2  (integer) allows
for some nonzero b proportional to 2z. as a result, the general solution to the equation of
motion reads as follows:

the action (8) is not an eective action in the wilsonian sense.
it is rather related to the
generating functional of one-particle-irreducible diagrams of the composite eld in the large n
limit. the eective action in eq. (8) is not to be quantized and loop diagrams of that action are
not to be taken into account in calculating higher order greens functions. the analogous eective
action for the cp even part of the theory was constructed in refs. [24], [25], (see also ref. [26]).

5

h = ( + 2k) x  .

(11)

thus, the dierent vacua are labeled by the integer k and the order parameter for these
vacua in the large n limit can be written as:

hf fik = ( + 2k) x .

(12)

as a next step let us compute the vacuum energy associated with the solution given in eq.
(11). the density of the energy-momentum tensor for the action (8) takes the form

 = 

1
3! x

using the expression (11) one calculates the corresponding energy density ek

(cid:18)h h 



1
8



gh 2

(cid:19) .

ek() =

1
2

( + 2k)2 x .

(13)

(14)

since the h eld does not propagate dynamical degrees of freedom the expression above
is the total energy density of the system given by the action (8) .

before we go further let us stop here to discuss some of the consequences of eq. (14).
first of all, let us notice that the result (14), as well as eq. (1), is only valid in the limit
of innite n.
in the next section we will calculate subleading order corrections to eqs.
(1,14) and argue that these expressions can also be used as a good approximation for large
but nite n. the constant c emerging in (1) is related to the topological susceptibility as
follows:

x|n = 2c.

thus, the vacuum energy (1,14) is dened by vacuum uctuations of the topological charge
measured by x .
is obtained by minimizing (14) with respect to k as in (1):

the crucial feature of (14) is that it denes an innite number of vacua. the true vacuum

e0() =

1
2 x mink ( + 2k)2 .

this expression is periodic with respect to shifts of  by 2z and is also a smooth function
of  except for  =  [12] (see also discussions below). thus, there are an innite number

 notice that the total ym energy density should contain some negative constant related to the
nonzero value of the gluon condensate [19]. this constant is subtracted from the expression for
the energy discussed in this work. the energy density (14) is normalized as e0( = 0) = 0, and for
k = 0 was discussed in [29].

one might wonder whether the same result is obtained if one treats  not as a constant multiply-
ing q in the lagrangian, but as the phase that the states acquire under a topologically non-trivial
gauge transformations. in this case the arbitrary integration constant in eq. (10) has to be chosen
in such a way which would guarantee a proper  dependence of the vev of the topological charge
density. this would leave the results of our discussion without modications.

6

of the false vacua in the theory [12]. the fate of these states will be discussed in section 4.

3. large n qcd calculation

in this section we consider full qcd with three quark avors. we are going to write
down a low-energy eective lagrangian for this case and then gradually decouple quarks by
taking the quark masses to innity. the resulting eective lagrangian should be giving the
energy density for pure yang-mills theory.

in the large n expansion the eective lagrangian of qcd with three avors takes the

form [3032,13]:

l(u, u , q) = l0(u, u ) +
q2(x) +  q(x) +

1
2 x

1
i q(x) tr (cid:16)ln u  ln u (cid:17) +
2
b
tr (mu + m u ) + . . . ,
22

(15)

where u denotes the avor group matrix of pseudoscalar mesons, l0 denotes the part of
the lagrangian which contains the meson elds only [3032,13], b is some constant related
to the quark condensate, and m stands for the meson mass matrix (for recent discussions
of the eective chiral lagrangian approach see ref. [34]). higher order terms in (15) are
suppressed by quadratic and higher powers of 1/n. in order to study vacuum properties,
we concentrate on the low-momentum approximation. the lagrangian presented above can
be used to solve the u(1) problem [17,18]. indeed, the eld q enters the lagrangian in a
quadratic approximation and can be integrated out. as a result, the avor singlet meson, the
, gets an additional contribution into its mass term. this leads to the witten-veneziano
relation and the solution of the u(1) problem without instantons [17,18]. in the present case
we would like to follow an opposite way. namely, we are going to make quarks very heavy
and integrate them out keeping the eld q in the lagrangian. in the limit mq   one
nds that m  . thus, the low-energy eective lagrangian which is left after the mesons
are integrated out will take the form:

le(q) =

1
2 x

q2(x) +  q(x) + o (cid:16)2

qcd

m 2 ,

2q2
6

qcd

,

1
n 2(cid:17) .

(16)

rewriting the eld q in terms of the massless tensor c as in the previous section, one
nds that the expression (16) is nothing but the lagrangian presented in (8). thus, the
higher order terms neglected in (8) which could contribute to the vacuum energy at zero
momenta would correspond to higher corrections in 1/n. in fact, the subleading corrections
to the eective lagrangian (15) can also be found [33]. these terms are proportional (with
the corresponding dimensionful coecients) to the following expressions:

const.
n 2 q2 tr (u u ),

const.
n 2 q4 .

(17)

the terms listed above are suppressed in the eective lagrangian by the factor 1/n 2. as a
next step, we can include the terms (17) into the full eective lagrangian and then integrate
the heavy meson elds out. the net result of this procedure is that the terms proportional
to q4 appear in the eective lagrangian for pure ym theory. this, in its turn, modies the

7

equation of motion for the single component of h considered in the previous section.
performing the calculation of the vacuum energy in the same manner as in section 2 we nd
the following result for the energy density:

ek() =

1

2 x (cid:16) + 2k(cid:17)2

+

const.

n 2 x (cid:16) + 2k(cid:17)4

+ o(cid:16) 1

n 3(cid:17).

(18)

in this expression the arbitrary constant emerges as a result of integration of the equation
of motion. notice that the topological susceptibility in the expression above is also dened
in the corresponding order in the large n expansion: x = 2c + x1/n + x2/n 2. thus,
the expressions (14,18) could in principle give a reasonable approximation for big enough
but otherwise nite n. the true vacuum energy density, e0(), can be obtained by min-
imizing the expression (18) with respect to k as in (1). then, e0() satises the relation
2
e0() |=0 = x , no matter what is the value of the arbitrary constant in (18).
4. dynamics of the false vacua

in this section we will discuss the dynamics of the false vacua present in the theory. in
accordance with (14,18) there are an innite number of vacua for any given value of the
theta angle [12]. clearly, not all of these are degenerate. the true vacuum state is dened
by minimizing the expressions (14,18) with respect to k. all the other states are false vacua
with greater values of the energy density. there is a potential barrier that separates a given
false vacuum state from the true one. thus, a false vacuum can in general decay into the
true state through the process of bubble nucleation [35]. the decay rates for these vacua
were evaluated recently in ref. [36]. in this section we analyze the fate of the false vacua
for dierent realizations of the initial conditions in which the system is placed. for the sake
of simplicity we will be discussing transitions between the vacuum states labeled by k and
k for dierent values of these integers. the rst two cases considered in this section were
studied in refs. [12] and [36], we include them here for completeness.

4.1. the false vacua with k  1

in this subsection we consider the system which in its initial state exists in a false vacuum
with k of order  1. let us start with the case when n is a large but nite number so
that the formula (14) (or (18)) is still a good approximation. since there exists the true
vacuum state with less energy, the false vacuum can decay into the true one via the bubble
nucleation process. that is to say, there is a nite probability to form a bubble with the
true vacuum state inside. the shell of the bubble is a domain wall which separates the false

it is not clear, however, what is the numerical value of this constant, and whether in fact it is
nonzero.

this decay can go through the euclidean bounce solution [37]. though the existence of the
bounce for this case is not easy to understand within the eld theory context, nevertheless, one
could be motivated by the brane construction where this object appears as a sixbrane bubble
wrapped on a certain space [12].

8

state from the true one. the dynamical question we discuss here is whether it is favorable
energetically to create and expand such a bubble. let us study the energy balance for the
case at hand. while creating the shell of the bubble one looses the amount of energy equal
to the surface area of the bubble multiplied by the tension of the shell. on the other hand,
the true vacuum state is created inside the bubble, thus, one gains the amount of energy
equal to the dierence between the energies of the false and true states. the energy balance
between these two eects denes whether the bubble can be formed, and, whether the whole
false vacuum can transform into the true one by expanding this bubble to innity. let us
start with the volume energy density. the amount of the energy density which is gained by
creating the bubble is:

e =

1
2 x h( + 2)2  2i = 2 x ( + ).

thus, e scales as  1 in the large n limit as long as the volume of the bubble is nite.
let us now turn to the surface energy which is lost. this energy is dened as:

es = td  (surface area) .

(19)

the tension of the wall between the adjacent vacua, td, should scale as td  n in the large
n limit [12]. hence, the surface energy will also scale as  n. thus, the process of creation
of a nite volume bubble in the large n limit is not energetically favorable. indeed, the
amount of energy which is lost while creating the shell is bigger than the amount which is
gained. in terms of the false vacuum decay width this means that the width of this process
is suppressed in the large n limit [36]:



volume  exp(cid:16)  an 4(cid:17),

(20)

where a stands for some positive constant [36]. thus, one concludes that in the limit n  
the false vacua with k  1 are stable [12,36].
4.2. the false vacua with k  n

here we study the fate of the false vacua with k  n. we discuss a possibility that
these vacua can decay into a state k with k  k  n and k + k  n. as in the previous
subsection, we are going to study the energy balance for the bubble nucleation process. the
amount of the volume energy density which is gained by creating such a bubble in the large
n limit scales as follows:

e  x n 2.

thus, the volume energy which is gained increases as  n 2. let us now turn to the surface
energy which is lost while nucleating a bubble. this is dened as e
d  (surface area),
where t 
d denotes the tension of the domain wall interpolating between the vacua labeled by

s = t 

in this subsection we assume that  6= . the case  =  will be considered below.

9

k and k. since k  k  n these vacua are not neighboring ones. thus, in general, there is
no reason to expect that the tension of the wall interpolating between these vacua scales as
d might scale as  n 2 at most (as the energy of a generic conguration in a model
 n. t 
with n 2 degrees of freedom). however, even in the case when t 
d  n 2 the volume energy
which is gained is at least of the same order as the surface energy which is lost. hence, it
is energetically favorable to increase the radius of such a bubble (since the volume energy
scales as a cubic power of the radius while the surface energy scales only as a quadratic
power of the eective size). thus, the bubble nucleation process will not be suppressed and
the false vacua with k  n will eventually decay into the true ground state. note, that the
state k = n can as well decay into the neighboring vacuum k = n  1 which subsequently
is allowed to turn into the ground state.

4.3. parallel domain walls

in this subsection we consider the special case when all the vacua are present simulta-
neously in the initial state of the model. this can be achieved, for instance, by placing
in space an innite number of parallel domain walls separating dierent vacua from each
other. it is rather convenient to picture these walls as parallel planes. each vacuum state is
sandwiched between the corresponding two domain walls (two planes) separating this state
from the neighboring vacua. each domain is labeled by k and in accordance with (14,18)
is characterized by the corresponding value of the vacuum energy. furthermore, the order
parameter hf fi takes dierent values in these vacua in accordance with (12). let us turn
to the true vacuum state. for simplicity we assume that this state is given by k = 0 (which
corresponds to || being less than ). the corresponding vacuum energy is the lowest one.
consider the two states which are adjacent to the true vacuum. these states have the energy
density bigger than that of the true vacuum. thus, there is a constant pressure acting on the
domain walls separating the true vacuum from the adjacent false ones. this pressure will
tend to expand the domain of the true vacuum. in fact, for large but nite n, the pressure
will indeed expand the spatial region of the true vacuum by moving apart the centers of the
domain walls sandwiching this state. the very same eect will be happening between any
two adjacent vacua. indeed, let us calculate the jump of the energy density between the two
vacua labeled by k and k:

ekk = 2 x (k  k) (cid:16) + (k + k)(cid:17) .

(21)

as far as n is large but nite, the walls will start to accelerate. farther the wall is located
from the true vacuum (i.e. larger the sum k + k), bigger the initial acceleration of the wall
is going to be; i.e., the walls will start to move apart from each other with the following
initial acceleration:

akk  ym

(k  k) [ + (k + k)]

n

.

(22)

for nite n all the walls will be moving to spatial innity and the whole space will eventually
be lled with the true vacuum state. on the other hand, when n   the picture is a bit
dierent. there are a number of interesting cases to consider:
first of all let us set kk = 1 and k , k  1. then, in the limit n   the acceleration
akk  0. thus, the neighboring walls stand still if they had no initial velocity. the physical

10

reason of this behavior is as follows: though there is a constant pressure of order  1
acting on the wall, nevertheless, the wall cannot be moved because the mass per unit surface
area of the wall tends to innity in the limit n  .
the second interesting case would be when the constant pressure produced by the energy
jump between some neighboring vacua is of order  n. in this case it will be possible to
accelerate these walls up to the speed of light and send them to spatial innity. indeed, if
k  k = 1 but k + k  n, then the wall between these two vacua starts moving with a
non-vanishing acceleration which scales as follows:

akk  ym

(k + k)

n

 o(1).

(23)

thus, these walls will eventually be approaching spatial innity with a speed of light even
in the limit of innite n.

in addition to the eects emphasized above there might also be decays of the false vacua
happening in each particular domain. as we discussed in the previous subsections, for
large but nite n all the false vacua will be nucleating bubbles with energetically favorable
phases inside and expanding these bubbles to innity. thus, for large but nite n, there
are two eects which eliminate the false vacua: the moving walls are sweeping these states
to innity, and, in addition, these vacua are decaying via bubble nucleation processes.

what happens for an innite n? as we learned above there are an innite number
of domains which will stay stable in that limit and the corresponding false vacua would
not decay because of the exponential suppression. thus, there are an innite number of
inequivalent spatial regions which are separated by domain walls. consider one of the
regions sandwiched between two domain walls. the three-form eld c will couple to the
walls and the large n eective action for this case will look as follows:

s = se + xi=k, k+1

i zwi

c dx  dx  dx,

(24)

where se is dened in (8), i stands for the coupling of the three-form potential to a corre-
sponding domain wall; wi denotes the worldvolume of the wall. in this case the domain wall
can be regarded as a source of the corresponding three-form potential. this is reminiscent
to what happens in the large n supersymmetric ym model [38].

4.4. domain walls at  = 

if  = , the initial classical lagrangian is cp invariant. indeed, under cp transforma-
tions  =  goes into . since  and  angles are equivalent, cp is a symmetry of the
lagrangian. however, in accordance with (12), this symmetry is spontaneously broken by
the vacuum of the theory. thus, one nds the following two degenerate true vacua:

ek=0 = ek=1 =

1
2 x 2 .

(25)

i am grateful to gia dvali who pointed this out to me.

11

these two vacua are labeled by the order parameter (12). in the k = 0 state hf fi = x
and in the k = 1 state hf fi = x . as a result of the spontaneous breaking of a discrete
symmetry there should be a domain wall separating these two vacua. let us consider the
case discussed in the previous section. namely, let us choose the initial condition of the
system as a state where all the possible vacua are simultaneously realized in space. that is,
there are an innite number of domain walls (parallel planes) dividing space into an innite
number of domains with dierent values of the vacuum energy density labeled by k. as
we mentioned above, only two of these domains have equal minimal energy density given
in (25). the domain wall separating these two vacua, as we will see below, is somewhat
special. in accordance with the discussions in the previous subsection, for large but nite
n, all the walls merging with the false vacua will tend to rush to spatial innity. the nal
stable state of the model can be described as a space separated into two parts by a single
domain wall. to the left (right) of the wall one discovers the phase with k = 1 with the
corresponding order parameter hf fi = x , and, to the right (left) of the wall one nds
the state with k = 0 and hf fi = x . vacuum energies of these two states are degenerate.
in the case of innite n the picture is slightly dierent. as elucidated in the previous
subsection, there will be an innite number of stable vacua. the domain wall separating the
two true vacua can be regarded in this case as the xed plane under z2 transformations of
the coordinate transverse to the plane. the three-form eld c will be able to couple to
this wall in a manner discussed in the previous subsection. the picture, being interpreted
in the string theory approach, looks much like the one with an orientifold plane separating
mirror d-branes on its both sides [39].

5. a comment on string theory vs. field theory approach

we found in section 2 that the theta dependent vacuum energy (1) is related to the
correlator (3) measuring the vacuum uctuations of the topological charge. the question
which arises here is whether this can be seen from the original string theory computation
[12]. we are going to discuss below how the string theory calculation indicates that the
vacuum energy (1) should indeed be related to the vacuum uctuations of the topological
charge. in fact, we argue that this is related to the instantons carrying d0-brane charge in
the type iia fourbrane construction of the four-dimensional ym model.

to begin with let us recall how the theta dependent vacuum energy appears in the brane
construction of the four-dimensional ym model [12]. one starts with type iia superstring
theory on m  r4 s1 r5, with n coincident d4-branes [5]. the d4-brane worldvolume
is assumed to be r4  s1 and the fermion boundary conditions on s1 are chosen in such a
way that the low-energy theory on the worldvolume is pure non-supersymmetric u(n) ym
theory [5]. in the dual description, the large n limit of the su(n) part of this theory can
be studied by string theory on a certain background [25]. it was shown in ref. [12] that
the theta dependent vacuum energy (1) arises in the dual string description due to the u(1)
gauge eld bm , m = 1, .., 5. to nd out what this corresponds to in the original gauge
theory language recall that this u(1) eld is nothing but the ramond-ramond (rr) one-
form of type iia theory. furthermore, once the gauge theory is realized in the type iia
fourbrane construction, the wess-zumino-witten (wzw) term present in the worldvolume
eective action denes the correspondence between the gauge theory operators on one side
and the string theory ramond-ramond elds on the other side. in the case at hand the

12

worldvolume wzw term looks as follows:

swzw =

1

82 zv

b  trf  f,

(26)

where v denotes the worldvolume of a wrapped fourbrane, v  r4 s1. in accordance with
the general principles of the large n ads/cft correspondence [24] the classical action
for the rr one-form on the string theory side denes the ym correlation functions of the
composite operator f f (since this is the operator which couples to the corresponding rr
eld in (26)). moreover, the two-point correlator of the topological charge density f f ,
which coincides with x in (3) up to some contact term [17], was recently calculated using
the ads/cft correspondence and the supergravity analyses for the rr one-form bm [40].
thus, it is not surprising that the theta dependent vacuum energy which is dened by the
rr one-form in the string theory calculation is related to the nonzero value of the topological
susceptibility (3) in the gauge theory studies. the physical reason for this correspondence,
as we have mentioned above, is the special property of the gauge theory instantons in the
fourbrane construction. indeed, in accordance with (26) the rr one-form couples to the
topological charge density f f , on the other hand the rr one-form couples by denition to
d0-branes. thus, the gauge theory instantons in this case carry zerobrane charge. this is
the physical reason for the correspondence discussed above.

6. conclusions

let us summarize briey the results of this work. the expression for the theta dependent
vacuum energy derived in ref. [12] in a string theory calculation was obtained in large n pure
ym theory. this energy is dened by vacuum uctuations of the topological charge. the
eld-theoretic approach allows one to clarify the puzzle why the theta dependent vacuum
energy is of order  1 in the large n limit. the eld which saturates the expression for the
energy has very specic properties, it produces the background energy density but does not
propagate any dynamical degrees of freedom in the large n limit. within the eld theory
framework subleading corrections to the large n result (1) were calculated (see eq. (18)).
given the expression for the theta dependent vacuum energy we studied the issue of
stability of the false vacua for dierent realization of the initial conditions of the system.
the large but nite n and innite n cases were considered. the structure of the vacuum
state in these two cases is rather dierent.

the string theory calculation provides important clues on what the theta dependent
vacuum energy should be related to within the eld theory approach. we discussed this
issue arguing that the reconciliation of the eld theory result with the original string theory
calculation is based on the fact that instantons carry d0-brane charge in the d4-brane
construction of pure ym model.

acknowledgments

the author is grateful to gia dvali for reading the manuscript and for useful discussions

and suggestions. the work was supported in part by the grant nsf phy-94-23002.

13

references

[1] for a recent review, see:

a. giveon, d. kutasov, brane dynamics and gauge theory, hep-th/9802067.

[2] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and supergravity,

adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231; hep-th/9711200.

[3] s.s. gubster, i.r. klebanov, a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from noncrit-

ical string theory, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105; hep-th/9802109.

[4] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998)

253; hep-th/9802150.

[5] e. witten, anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transitions, and connement in

gauge theories, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 505; hep-th/9803131.

[6] d. j. gross, h. ooguri, aspects of large n gauge theory dynamics as seen by string

theory, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 106002; hep-th/9805129.

[7] c. csaki, h. ooguri, y. oz, j. terning, glueball mass spectrum from supergravity,

hep-th/9806021.

[8] h. ooguri, h. robins, j. tannenhauser, glueballs and their kaluza-klein cousins,

phys. lett. b437 (1998) 77.

[9] i.r. klebanov, from threebranes to large n gauge theories, hep-th/9901018.
[10] i.r. klebanov, a.a. tseytlin, d-branes and dual gauge theories in type 0 strings,

hep-th/9811035.

[11] j. minahan, glueball mass spectra and other issues for supergravity duals of qcd

models, hep-th/9811156.

[12] e. witten, theta dependence in the large n limit of four-dimensional gauge the-

ories, phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998) 2862; hep-th/9807109.

[13] e.witten, large n chiral dynamics, ann. of phys. 128 (1980) 363.
[14] a.m. belavin, a.m. polyakov, a.s. schwartz, yu.s. tyupkin, pseudoparticle solutions

of the yang-mills equations, phys. lett. 59b (1975) 85.

[15] s. coleman, aspects of symmetry, cambridge university press, 1985.
[16] e.v. shuryak, the role of instantons in quantum chromodynamics. 1. physical vac-

uum, nucl.phys. b203 (1982) 93;
d.i. diakonov, v.y. petrov, instanton based vacuum from feynman variational prin-
ciple, nucl.phys. b245 (1984) 259;
t. degrand, a. hazenfratz, t.g. kovacs, topological structure in the su(2) vac-
uum, nucl. phys. b505 (1997) 417; hep-lat/9705009.

[17] e. witten,  current algebra theorems for the u(1) goldstone boson , nucl. phys.

b156 (1979) 269.

[18] g. veneziano, u(1) without instantons, nucl. phys. b159 (1979) 213.
[19] m.a. shifman, a.i. vainshtein, v.i. zakharov, qcd and resonance physics. theo-

retical foundations, nucl. phys. b147 (1979) 385.

[20] g. grunberg, qcd sum rule determination of the topological susceptibility, phys.

rev d30 (1984) 1570.

[21] b. alles, m. delia, a. di giacomo, topological susceptibility at zero and finite t

in su(3) yang-mills theory, nucl. phys. b494 (1997) 281; hep-lat/9605013.

[22] m. luscher, the secret long range force in quantum field theories with instan-

tons, phys. lett. 78b (1978) 465.

14

[23] j. kogut, l. susskind, how to solve the   3 problem by seizing the vacuum ,
[24] j. schechter, eective lagrangian with two color singlet gluon fields, phys. rev.

phys. rev. d11 (1975) 3594.

d21 (1980) 3393.

[25] a.a. migdal, m.a. shifman, dilaton eective lagrangian in gluodynamics, phys.

lett. 114b (1982) 445.

[26] t. fugleberg, i. halperin, a. zhitnitsky, domain walls and theta dependence in qcd

with an eective lagrangian approach, hep-ph/9808469.

[27] a. aurilia, the problem of connement: from two to four dimensions, phys.

lett. 81b (1979) 203.

[28] a. aurilia, h. nicolai, p.k. townsend, hidden constants: the  parameter of qcd
and the cosmological constant of n = 8 supergravity, nucl. phys. b176 (1980)
509.

[29] g. gabadadze, modeling the glueball spectrum by a closed bosonic membrane,

phys. rev. d58 (1998) 094015; hep-ph/9710402.

[30] p. di vecchia, g. veneziano, chiral dynamics in the large n limit, nucl. phys.

b171 (1980) 253.

[31] r. arnowitt, pran nath, the u(1) problem: current algebra and the theta vacuum,

phys. rev. d23 (1981) 473;
eective lagrangians with u(1) axial anomaly. 1, 2, nucl. phys. b209 (1982) 234,
251;

[32] c. rosenzweig, j. schechter, c.g. trahern, is the eective lagrangian for qcd a

sigma model?, phys. rev. d21 (1980) 3388.

[33] p. di vecchia, f. nicodemi, r. pettorino, g. veneziano, large n, chiral approach to

pseudoscalar masses, mixings and decays, nucl. phys. b181 (1981) 318.

[34] a. pich, chiral perturbation theory, rept. prog. phys. 58 (1995) 563; hep-

ph/9502366.

[35] m. b. voloshin, i. yu. kobzarev, l. b. okun, bubbles in metastable vacuum, yad.

fiz. 20 (1974) 1229 (sov. j. nucl. phys. 20 (1975) 644);
s. coleman, the fate of the false vacuum. 1. semiclassical theory, phys. rev d15
(1977) 2929; erratum-ibid. d16 (1977) 1248.

[36] m. shifman, domain walls and decay rate of the excited vacua in the large n

yang-mills theory, phys. rev d59 (1999) 021501; hep-th/9809184.

[37] s. coleman, the fate of the false vacuum. 1. semiclassical theory, phys. rev d15

(1977) 2929; erratum-ibid. d16 (1977) 1248;
c. callan, s. coleman, the fate of the false vacuum. 2. first quantum corrections,
phys. rev. d16 (1977) 1762.

[38] g. dvali, g. gabadadze, z. kakushadze, bps domain walls in large n supersym-

metric qcd, hep-th/9901032.

[39] j. polchinski, s. chaudhuri, c.v. johnson, notes on d-branes, hep-th/9602052;

j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9611050.

[40] a. hashimoto, y. oz, aspects of qcd dynamics from string theory, hep-

th/9809106.

15

