cern-th/99-22
hep-th/9902097

inflating, warming up,

and probing the pre-bangian universe

gabriele veneziano

theoretical physics division, cern

ch - 1211 geneva 23

e-mail: venezia@nxth04.cern.ch

abstract

classical and quantum gravitational instabilities, can, respectively, inate and warm up a
primordial universe satisfying a superstring-motivated principle of asymptotic past trivial-
ity. a physically viable big bang is thus generated without invoking either large ne-tunings or
a long period of post-big bang ination. properties of the pre-bangian universe can be probed
through its observable relics, which include: i) a (possibly observable) stochastic gravitational-
wave background; ii) a (possible) new mechanism for seeding the galactic magnetic elds; iii)
a (possible) new source of large-scale structure and cmb anisotropy.

9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
7
1

 

 
 

2
v
7
9
0
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

cern-th/99-22
february 1999

1 introduction

i would like to begin this talk by asking a very simple question: did the universe start small?
the naive answer is: yes, of course! however, a serious answer can only be given after dening
the two keywords in the question: what do we mean by start? and what is small relative
to? in order to be on the safe side, let us take the initial time to be a bit larger than plancks
time, tp  1043 s. then, in standard friedmannrobertsonwalker (frw) cosmology, the
initial size of the (presently observable) universe was about 102 cm. this is of course tiny
w.r.t.
the horizon at that time, i.e. w.r.t.
lp = ctp  1033 cm. in other words, a few planck times after the big bang, our observable
universe consisted of (1030)3 = 1090 planckian-size, causally disconnected regions.

its present size ( 1028 cm), yet huge w.r.t.

more precisely, soon after t = tp , the universe was characterized by a huge hierarchy be-
tween its hubble radius and inverse temperature on one side, and its spatial-curvature radius
and homogeneity scale on the other. the relative factor of (at least) 1030 appears as an in-
credible amount of ne-tuning on the initial state of the universe, corresponding to a huge
asymmetry between time and space derivatives. was this asymmetry really there? and if so,
can it be explained in any more natural way?

it is well known that a generic way to wash out inhomogeneities and spatial curvature
consists in introducing, in the history of the universe, a long period of accelerated expansion,
called ination [1]. this still leaves two alternative solutions: either the universe was generic at
the big bang and became at and smooth because of a long post-bangian inationary phase; or
it was already at and smooth at the big bang as the result of a long pre-bangian inationary
phase.

assuming, dogmatically, that the universe (and time itself) started at the big bang, leaves
only the rst alternative. however, that solution has its own problems, in particular those of
ne-tuned initial conditions and inaton potentials. besides, it is quite dicult to base standard
ination in the only known candidate theory of quantum gravity, superstring theory. rather,
as we shall argue, superstring theory gives strong hints in favour of the second (pre-big bang)
possibility through two of its very basic properties, the rst in relation to its short-distance
behaviour, the second from its modications of general relativity even at large distance. let
us briey comment on both.

2 (super)string inspiration

2.1 short distance

since the classical (nambugoto) action of a string is proportional to the area a of the surface
it sweeps, its quantization must introduce a quantum of length s through:

s/h = a/2

s .

1

(1)

this fundamental length, replacing plancks constant in quantum string theory [2], plays the
role of a minimal observable length, of an ultraviolet cut-o. thus, in string theory, physical
quantities are expected to be bound by appropriate powers of s, e.g.

h 2  r  g < 2
s
kbt /h < c1
s
rcomp > s .

(2)

in other words, in quantum string theory (qst), relativistic quantum mechanics should solve
the singularity problems in much the same way as non-relativistic quantum mechanics solved
the singularity problem of the hydrogen atom by putting the electron and the proton a nite
distance apart. by the same token, qst gives us a rationale for asking daring questions such
as: what was there before the big bang? certainly, in no other present theory, can such a
question be meaningfully asked.

2.2 large distance

even at large distance (low-energy, small curvatures), superstring theory does not automatically
give einsteins general relativity. rather, it leads to a scalar-tensor theory of the jbd variety.
the new scalar particle/eld , the so-called dilaton, is unavoidable in string theory, and
gets reinterpreted as the radius of a new dimension of space in so-called m-theory [3]. by
supersymmetry, the dilaton is massless to all orders in perturbation theory, i.e. as long as
supersymmetry remains unbroken. this raises the question: is the dilaton a problem or an
opportunity? my answer is that it is possibly both; and while we can try to avoid its potential
dangers, we may try to use some of its properties to our advantage . . . let me discuss how.

in string theory  controls the strength of all forces, gravitational and gauge alike. one

nds, typically:

l2
p /2

s  gauge  e ,

(3)

showing the basic unication of all forces in string theory and the fact that, in our conventions,
the weak-coupling region coincides with   1. in order not to contradict precision tests of
the equivalence principle and of the constancy of the gauge and gravitational couplings in the
recent past (possibly meaning several million years!) we require [4] the dilaton to have a mass
and to be frozen at the bottom of its own potential today. this does not exclude, however, the
possibility of the dilaton having evolved cosmologically (after all the metric did!) within the
weak coupling region where it was practically massless. the amazing (yet simple) observation
[5] is that, by so doing, the dilaton may have inated the universe!

a simplied argument, which, although not completely accurate, captures the essential

physical point, consists in writing the (k = 0) friedmann equation:

3h 2 = 8g ,

(4)

and in noticing that a growing dilaton (meaning through (3) a growing g) can drive the growth
of h even if the energy density of standard matter decreases in an expanding universe. this

2

v (f) 

weak coupling

strong coupling

initial f

present f

 = f 0

figure 1:

new kind of ination (characterized by growing h and ) has been termed dilaton-driven
ination (ddi). the basic idea of pre-big bang cosmology [5, 6, 7] is thus illustrated in fig.
1: the dilaton started at very large negative values (where it is massless), ran over a potential
hill, and nally reached, sometime in our recent past, its nal destination at the bottom of its
potential ( = 0). incidentally, as shown in fig. 1, the dilaton of string theory can easily
roll-up rather than down potential hills, as a consequence of its non-standard coupling to
gravity.

ddi is not just possible. it exists as a class of (lowest-order) cosmological solutions thanks
to the duality symmetries of string cosmology. under a prototype example of these symmetries,
the so-called scale-factor duality [5], a frw cosmology evolving (at lowest order in derivatives)
from a singularity in the past is mapped into a ddi cosmology going towards a singularity in
the future. of course, the lowest order approximation breaks down before either singularity
is reached. a (stringy) moment away from their respective singularities, these two branches
can easily be joined smoothly to give a single non-singular cosmology, at least mathematically.
leaving aside this issue for the moment (see section v for more discussion), let us go back
to ddi. since such a phase is characterized by growing coupling and curvature, it must itself
have originated from a regime in which both quantities were very small. we take this as the
main lesson/hint to be learned from low-energy string theory by raising it to the level of a new
cosmological principle [8] of asymptotic past triviality.

3

3 asymptotic past triviality

the concept of asymptotic past triviality (apt) is quite similar to that of asymptotic
flatness, familiar from general relativity [9]. the main dierences consist in making only
assumptions concerning the asymptotic past (rather than future or space-like innity) and in
the additional presence of the dilaton. it seems physically (and philosophically) satisfactory
to identify the beginning with simplicity (see e.g. entropy-related arguments concerning the
arrow of time). what could be simpler than a trivial, empty and at universe? nothing of
course! the problem is that such a universe, besides being uninteresting, is also non-generic.
by contrast, asymptotically at/trivial universes are initially simple, yet generic in a precise
mathematical sense. their denition involves exactly the right number of arbitrary integration
constants (here full functions of three variables) to describe a general solution (one with some
general, qualitative features, though). this is why, by its very construction, this cosmology
cannot be easily dismissed as being ne-tuned.

it is useful to represent the situation in a carterpenrose diagram, as in fig. 2. here past
innity consists of two pieces: time-like past innity, which is shrunk to a point i, and past
null-innity, i represented by a line at 45 degrees. note that this region of the diagram is
non-physical in frw cosmology, since it lies behind (i.e. before) the big bang singularity
(also shown in the diagram). instead, we shall be giving initial data innitesimally close to i
and i, and ask whether they will evolve in such a way as to generate a physically interesting
big bang-like state at some later time. generating so much from so little looks a bit like a
miracle. however, we will argue that it is precisely what should be expected, owing to well-
known classical and quantum gravitational instabilities.

4 ination as a classical gravitational instability

the assumption of apt entitles us to treat the early history of the universe through the classical
eld equations of the low-energy (because of the small curvature) tree-level (because of the weak
coupling) eective action of string theory. for simplicity, we will illustrate here the simplest
case of the gravi-dilaton system already compactied to four space-time dimensions. other
elds and extra dimensions will be mentioned below, when we discuss observable consequences.
the (string frame) eective action then reads:

ef f =

1
22

s z d4xg e (r + ) .

(5)

in this frame, the string-length parameter s is a constant and the same is true of the curvature
scale at which we have to supplement eq. (5) with corrections. similarly, string masses, when
measured with the string metric, are xed, while test strings sweep geodesic surfaces with
respect to that metric. for all these reasons, even if we will allow metric redenitions in
order to simplify our calculations, we shall eventually turn back to the string frame for the
physical interpretation of the results. we stress, however, that, while our intuition is not frame
independent, physically measurable quantities are.

4

i +

post - bb

today

i +

time

bb

i 0

space

pre - bb

i (cid:13)

at data given here

i (cid:13)

figure 2:

even assuming apt, the problem of determining the properties of a generic solution to the
eld equations implied by (5) is a formidable one. very luckily, however, we are able to map
our problem into one that has been much investigated, both analytically and numerically, in
the literature. this is done by going to the so-called einstein frame. for our purposes, it
simply amounts to the eld redenition

in terms of which (5) becomes:

g = g(e)

 e0 ,

ef f =

1
2l2

p z d4xqg(e) (cid:16)r(e)  1

(e)(cid:17) ,
2 g

(6)

(7)

where 0 (lp = se0/2) is the present value of the dilaton (of plancks length).

our problem is thus reduced to that of studying a massless scalar eld minimally coupled
to gravity. such a system has been considered by many authors, in particular by christodoulou
[10], precisely in the regime of interest to us. in line with the apt postulate, in the analogue
gravitational collapse problem, one assumes very weak initial data with the aim of nding
under which conditions gravitational collapse later occurs. gravitational collapse means that
the (einstein) metric (and the volume of 3-space) shrinks to zero at a space-like singularity.
however, typically, the dilaton blows up at that same singularity. given the relation (6) between
the einstein and the (physical) string metric, we can easily imagine that the latter blows up
near the singularity as implied by ddi.

5

how generically does this happen? in this connection it is crucial to recall the singularity
theorems of hawking and penrose [11], which state that, under some general assumptions,
singularities are inescapable in gr. one can look at the validity of those assumptions in the
case at hand and nds that all but one are automatically satised. the only condition to
be imposed is the existence of a closed trapped surface (a closed surface from where future
light cones lie entirely in the region inside the surface). rigorous results [10] show that this
condition cannot be waived: suciently weak initial data do not lead to closed trapped surfaces,
to collapse, or to singularities. suciently strong initial data do. but where is the border-line?
this is not known in general, but precise criteria do exist for particularly symmetric space-
times, e.g. for those endowed with spherical symmetry. however, no matter what the general
collapse/singularity criterion will eventually turn out to be, we do know that:

 it cannot depend on an over-all additive constant in ;
 it cannot depend on an over-all multiplicative factor in g.

this is a simple consequence of the invariance (up to an over-all factor) of the eective action
(7) under shifts of the dilaton and rescaling of the metric (these properties depend crucially on
the validity of the tree-level low-energy approximation and on the absence of a cosmological
constant).

we conclude that, generically, some regions of space will undergo gravitational collapse, will
form horizons and singularities therein, but nothing, at the level of our approximations, will
be able to x either the size of the horizon or the value of  at the onset of collapse. when
this is translated into the string frame, one is describing, in the region of space-time within the
horizon, a period of ddi in which both the initial value of the hubble parameter and that of
 are left arbitrary. these two initial parameters are very important, since they determine the
range of validity of our description. in fact, since both curvature and coupling increase during
ddi, at some point the low-energy and/or tree-level description is bound to break down. the
smaller the initial hubble parameter (i.e. the larger the initial horizon size) and the smaller
the initial coupling, the longer we can follow ddi through the eective action equations and
the larger the number of reliable e-folds that we shall gain.

this does answer, in my opinion, the objections raised recently [12] to the pbb scenario
according to which it is ne-tuned. the situation here actually resembles that of chaotic
ination [13]. given some generic (though apt) initial data, we should ask which is the
distribution of sizes of the collapsing regions and of couplings therein. then, only the tails
of these distributions, i.e.
those corresponding to suciently large, and suciently weakly
coupled regions, will produce universes like ours, the rest will not. the question of how likely a
good big bang is to take place is not very well posed and can be greatly aected by anthropic
considerations.

in conclusion, we may summarize recent progress on the problem of initial conditions by
saying that [8]: dilaton-driven ination in string cosmology is as generic as gravita-
tional collapse in general relativity. at the same time, having a suciently long period
of ddi amounts to setting upper limits on two arbitrary moduli of the classical solutions.

6

l
l

f
f

li
li

l
l

i
i

+
+

i
i

l
l

i
i

i
i

v
v

u
u

figure 3:

weak-field expansion
weak-field expansion

cosmological regime
cosmological regime

our scenario is illustrated in figs. 3 and 4, both taken from ref.[8]. in fig. 3, i show, for
the spherically symmetric case, a carterpenrose diagram in which generic (but asymptotically
trivial) dilatonic waves are given around time-like (i ) and null (i ) past-innity.
in the
shaded region near i ,i , a weak-eld solution holds. however, if a collapse criterion is met,
an apparent horizon, inside which a cosmological (generally inhomogeneous) pbb-like solution
takes over, forms at some later time. the future singularity of the pbb solution at t = 0 is
identied with the space-like singularity of the black hole at r = 0 (remember that r is a time-
like coordinate inside the horizon). figure 4 gives a (2 + 1)-dimensional sketch of a possible
pbb universe: an original sea of dilatonic and gravity waves leads to collapsing regions
of dierent initial size, possibly to a scale-invariant distribution of them. each one of these
collapses is reinterpreted, in the string frame, as the process by which a baby universe is born
after a period of pbb inationary pregnancy, with the size of each baby universe determined
by the duration of its pregnancy, i.e. by the initial size of the corresponding collapsing region.
regions initially larger than 1013 cm can generate universes like ours, smaller ones cannot.

a basic dierence between the large numbers needed in (non-inationary) frw cosmology
and the large numbers needed in pbb cosmology should be stressed at this point.
in the
former, the ratio of two classical scales, e.g. of total curvature to its spatial component, which
is expected to be o(1), has to be taken as large as 1060. in the latter, the above ratio is initially
o(1) in the collapsing/inating region, and ends up being very large in that region thanks
to ddi. however, the common order of magnitude of these two classical quantities is a free
parameter, and is taken to be much larger than a classically irrelevant quantum scale.

we can visualize analogies and dierences between standard and pre-big bang ination
by comparing figs. 5a and 5b. in these, we sketch the evolution of the hubble radius and

7

-
-
weak-field

phase

t

i

collapse = inflation

string and

0

friedmann phases

t

8

f
i
g
u
r
e

4
:

1
0

 
 
1
 
 
3
 
 
 
c
m

1

0

-

2

c

m

-
of a xed comoving scale (here the one corresponding to the part of the universe presently
observable to us) as a function of time in the two scenarios. the common feature is that the
xed comoving scale was inside the horizon for some time during ination, and possibly
very deeply inside at its onset. also, in both cases, the hubble radius at the beginning of
ination had to be large in planck units and the scale of homogeneity had to be at least as
large. the dierence between the two scenarios is just in the behaviour of the hubble radius
during ination: increasing in standard ination (a), decreasing in string cosmology (b). this
is what makes pbbs wine glass more elegant, and stable! thus, while standard ination is
still facing the initial-singularity question and needs a non-adiabatic phenomenon to reheat the
universe (a kind of small bang), pbb cosmology faces the singularity problem later, combining
it to the exit and heating problems (discussed in sections v and vib, respectively).

in the end, what saves pbb cosmology from ne-tuning is (not surprisingly!) supersym-
metry. this is what protects us from the appearance of a cosmological constant in the weak-
coupling regime. even a relatively small cosmological constant would invalidate our scale-
invariance arguments and force ddi to be very short [5]. thus, amusingly, while an eective
cosmological constant is at the basis of standard (post-big bang) ination, its absence in the
weak coupling region is at the basis of pbb ination. this may allow us to speculate that the
absence (or extreme smallness) of the present cosmological constant may be related to a mys-
terious degeneracy between the perturbative and the non-perturbative vacuum of superstring
theory.

5 the exit problem/conjecture

we have argued that, generically, ddi, when studied at lowest order in derivatives and coupling,
evolves towards a singularity of the big bang type. similarly, at the same level of approximation,
the non-inationary solutions emerge from a singularity. matching these two branches in a
smooth, non-singular way has become known as the (graceful) exit problem in string cosmology
[14]. it is, undoubtedly, the most important theoretical problem facing the whole pbb scenario.

there has been quite some progress recently on the exit problem. however, for lack of space,
i shall refer the reader to the literature [14] for details. generically speaking, toy examples have
shown that ddi can ow, thanks to higher-curvature corrections, into a de-sitter-like phase,
into a phase of constant h (curvature) and constant . this phase is expected to last
i.e.
until loop corrections become important (see next section) and give rise to a transition to a
radiation-dominated phase. if these toy models serve as an indication, the full exit problem
can only be achieved at large coupling and curvature, a situation that should be described by
the newly invented m-theory [3].

it was recently pointed out [15] that the reverse order of events is also possible. the coupling
may become large before the curvature. in this case, at least for some time, the low-energy
limit of m-theory should be adequate: this limit is known [3] to give d = 11 supergravity and
is therefore amenable to reliable study. it is likely, though not yet clear, that, also in this case,

9

e
m
t

i

now

here

normal(cid:13)
expansion

inflation

space

t= tex

big bang?

e
m
t

i

now

here

post big bang(cid:13)
expansion

pre big bang(cid:13)
inflation

 p 

space

t = tex

start of(cid:13)
collapse/inflation

towards triviality

figure 5:

10

(cid:13)
strong curvatures will have to be reached before the exit can be completed. in the following,
we will assume that:

 the big bang singularity is avoided thanks to the softness of string theory;
 full exit to radiation occurs at strong coupling and curvature, according to a criterion

given in section vib.

6 observable relics and heating the pre-bang universe

6.1 pbb relics

since there are already several review papers on this subject (e.g. [16]), i will limit myself to
mentioning the most recent developments, after recalling the basic physical mechanism under-
lying particle production in cosmology [17]. a cosmological (i.e. time-dependent) background
coupled to a given type of (small) inhomogeneous perturbation  enters the eective low-energy
action in the form:

1

i =

2 z d d3x s()h2  ()2i .

(8)

here  is the conformal-time coordinate, and a prime denotes /. the function s() (some-
times called the pump eld) is, for any given , a given function of the scale factor a(),
and of other scalar elds (four-dimensional dilaton (), moduli bi(), etc.), which may appear
non-trivially in the background.

while it is clear that a constant pump eld s can be reabsorbed in a rescaling of , and
is thus ineective, a time-dependent s couples non-trivially to the uctuation and leads to the
production of pairs of quanta (with equal and opposite momenta). one can easily determine
the pump elds for each one of the most interesting perturbations. the result is:

gravity waves, dilaton : s = a2e
heterotic gauge bosons
kalb  ramond, axions

: s = e
: s = a2e .

(9)

a distinctive property of string cosmology is that the dilaton  appears in some very specic

way in the pump elds. the consequences of this are very interesting:

 for gravitational waves and dilatons, the eect of  is to slow down the behaviour of
a (remember that both a and  grow in the pre-big bang phase). this is the reason
why those spectra are quite steep [18] and give small contributions at large scales. thus
one of the most robust predictions of pbb cosmology is a small tensor component in

11

the cmb anisotropy1. the reverse is also true: at short scales, the expected yield in a
stochastic background of gravitational waves is much larger than in standard inationary
cosmology. this is easily understood:
in standard ination the gw spectrum is either
at or slowly decreasing (as a function of frequency). since cobe data [19] set a limit
on the gw contribution at large scales, this bound holds a fortiori at shorter scales, as
those of interest for direct gw detection. thus, in standard ination, one expects

gw < 1014 .

(10)

since the gw spectra of pbb cosmology are blue, the bound by cobe is automatically
satised, with no implication on the gw yield at interesting frequencies. values of gw in
the range of 106107 are possible in some regions of parameter space, which, according
to some estimates of sensitivities [20], could be inside detection capabilities in the near
future.

 for gauge bosons there is no amplication of vacuum uctuations in standard cosmology,
since a conformally at metric (of the type forced upon by ination) decouples from
the electromagnetic (em) eld precisely in d = 3 + 1 dimensions. as a very general
remark, apart from pathological solutions, the only background eld which, through its
cosmological variation, can amplify em (more generally gauge-eld) quantum uctuations
is the eective gauge coupling itself [21]. by its very nature, in the pre-big bang scenario
the eective gauge coupling inates together with space during the pbb phase. it is thus
automatic that any ecient pbb ination brings together a huge variation of the eective
gauge coupling and thus a very large amplication of the primordial em uctuations
[22, 23, 24]. this can possibly provide the long-sought origin for the primordial seeds of the
observed galactic magnetic elds. notice, however, that, unlike gw, em perturbations
interact quite considerably with the hot plasma of the early (post-big bang) universe.
thus, converting the primordial seeds into those that may have existed at the proto-
galaxy formation epoch is by no means a trivial exercise. work is in progress to try to
adapt existing codes [25] to the evolution of our primordial seeds.

 finally, for kalbramond elds and axions, a and  work in the same direction and
spectra can be large even at large scales [26]. an interesting fact is that, unlike the
gw spectrum, that of axions is very sensitive to the cosmological behaviour of internal
dimensions during the ddi epoch. on one side, this makes the model less predictive. on
the other, it tells us that axions represent a window over the multidimensional cosmology
expected generically from string theories, which must live in more that four dimensions.
curiously enough, the axion spectrum becomes exactly hz (i.e. scale-invariant) when
all the nine spatial dimensions of superstring theory evolve in a rather symmetric way
[23]. in situations near this particularly symmetric one, axions are able to provide a new
mechanism for generating large-scale cmb anisotropy and lss.

1this, however, refers just to rst-order tensor perturbations; the mechanism described below of seeding
cmb anisotropy through axions would also give a tensor (and a vector) contribution whose relative magnitude
is being computed.

12

a recent calculation [27] of the eect gives, for massless axions,

l(l + 1)cl  o(1)(cid:18)hmax
mp (cid:19)

4

(0kmax)2 (l + )
(l  )

,

where cl are the usual coecients of the multipole expansion of t /t

ht /t (~n) t /t (~n)i = xl

(2l + 1)clpl(cos ) ,

(11)

(12)

and the parameters hmax, kmax,  are dened by the primordial axion energy spectrum
in critical units as:

ax(k) = (cid:18)hmax
mp (cid:19)

2

(k/kmax) .

(13)

in string theory, as repeatedly mentioned, we expect hmax/mp  ms/mp  1/10 and
0kmax  1030, while the exponent  depends on the explicit pbb background with the
above-mentioned hz case corresponding to  = 0. the standard tilt parameter n = ns
(s for scalar) is given by n = 1 + 2 and is found, by cobe, to lie between 0.9 and
1.5, corresponding to 0 <  < 0.25 (a negative  leads to some theoretical problems).
with these inputs we can see that the correct normalization (c2  1010) is reached
in other words, unlike
for   0.2, which is just in the middle of the allowed range.
in standard ination, we cannot predict the tilt, but when this is given, we can predict
(again unlike in standard ination) the normalization.

our model, being of the isocurvature type, bears some resemblance to the one recently
advocated by peebles [28] and, like his, is expected to contain some calculable amount
of non-gaussianity, which is being calculated and will be checked by the future satellite
measurements (map, planck).

 many other perturbations, which arise in generic compactications of superstrings, have
also been studied, and lead to interesting spectra. for lack of time, i will refer to the
existing literature [23, 24].

6.2 heat and entropy as a quantum gravitational instability

before closing this section, i wish to recall how one sees the very origin of the hot big bang
in this scenario. one can easily estimate the total energy stored in the quantum uctuations,
which were amplied by the pre-big bang backgrounds. the result is, roughly,

quantum  nef f h 4

max ,

(14)

where nef f is the eective number of species that are amplied and hmax is the maximal
curvature scale reached around t = 0. we have already argued that hmax  ms = 1
s , and
we know that, in heterotic string theory, nef f is in the hundreds. yet this rather huge energy
density is very far from critical, as long as the dilaton is still in the weak-coupling region,

13

justifying our neglect of back-reaction eects. it is very tempting to assume [23] that, precisely
when the dilaton reaches a value such that quantum is critical, the universe will enter the
radiation-dominated phase. this pbbb (pbb bootstrap) constraint gives, typically:

eexit  1/nef f ,

(15)

i.e. a value for the dilaton close to its present value.

the entropy in these quantum uctuations can also be estimated following some general

results [29]. the result for the density of entropy s is, as expected

s  nef f h 3

max .

(16)

it is easy to check that, at the assumed time of exit given by (15), this entropy saturates a
recently proposed holography bound [30]. this also turns out to be a physically acceptable
value for the entropy of the universe just after the big bang: a large entropy on the one hand
(about 1090); a small entropy for the total mass and size of the observable universe on the
other, as often pointed out by penrose [31]. thus, pbb cosmology neatly explains why the
universe, at the big bang, looks so ne-tuned (without being so) and provides a natural arrow
of time in the direction of higher entropy.

7 conclusions

 pre-big bang (pbb) cosmology is a topdown rather than a bottomup approach to

cosmology. this should not be forgotten when testing its predictions.

 it does not need to invent an inaton, or to ne-tune its potential; ination is natural

thanks to the duality symmetries of string cosmology.

 it makes use of a classical gravitational instability to inate the universe, and of a quan-

tum instability to warm it up.

 the problem of initial conditions decouples from the singularity problem; it is classical,
issues of ne tuning can be addressed and, i

scale-free, and unambiguously dened.
believe, answered.

 the spectrum of large-scale perturbations has become more promising through the invisi-
ble axion of string theory, while the possibility of explaining the seeds of galactic magnetic
elds remains a unique prediction of the model.

 the main conceptual (technical?) problem remains that of providing a fully convincing
mechanism for (and a detailed description of) the pre-to-post-big bang transition. it is
very likely that such a mechanism will involve both high curvatures and large coupling
and should therefore be discussed in the (yet to be fully constructed) m-theory [3]. new
ideas borrowed from such theory and from d-branes [32, 15] could help in this respect.

14

 once/if this problem will be solved, predictions will become more precise and robust, but,
even now, with some mild assumptions, several tests are (or will soon become) possible,
e.g.

 the tensor contribution to t /t should be very small (see, however, footnote section

vi);

 some non-gaussianity in t /t correlations is expected, and calculable.

 the axion-seed mechanism should lead to a characteristic acoustic-peak structure,

which is being calculated;

 it should be possible to convert the predicted seed magnetic elds into observables

by using some reliable code for their late evolution;

 a characteristic spectrum of stochastic gravitational waves is expected to surround

us and could be large enough to be measurable within a decade or so.

references

[1] e. w. kolb and m. s. turner, the early universe (addison-wesley, redwood city, ca,
1990); a.d. linde, particle physics and inationary cosmology (harwood, new york,
1990).

[2] g. veneziano, europhys. lett. 2 (1986) 133; the challenging questions, erice, 1989, ed.

a. zichichi (plenum press, new york, 1990), p. 199.

[3] see, e.g., e. witten, nucl. phys. b443 (1995) 85;

p. horawa and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506.

[4] t.r. taylor and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b213 (1988) 459.

[5] g. veneziano, phys. lett. b265 (1991) 287.

[6] m. gasperini and g. veneziano, astropart. phys. 1 (1993) 317, mod. phys. lett. a8

(1993) 3701, phys. rev. d50 (1994) 2519.

[7] an

updated

collection

of

papers

on

the pbb scenario

is

available

at

http://www.to.infn.it/gasperin/.

[8] a. buonanno, t. damour and g. veneziano, pre-big bang bubbles from the gravitational
instability of generic string vacua, hep-th/9806230; see also, g. veneziano, phys. lett.
b406 (1997) 297; a. buonanno, k.a. meissner, c. ungarelli and g. veneziano, phys.
rev. d57 (1998) 2543, and references therein.

[9] r. penrose, structure of space-time, in battelle rencontres, ed. c. dewitt and

j.a. wheeler, benjamin, new york, 1968.

[10] d. christodoulou, commun. pure appl. math. 56 (1993) 1131, and references therein.

15

[11] r. penrose, phys. rev. lett. 14 (1965) 57; s. w. hawking and r. penrose, proc. roy.

soc. lond. a314 (1970) 529.

[12] m. turner and e. weinberg, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 4604; n. kaloper, a. linde and r.
bousso, pre-big bang requires the universe to be exponentially large from the very beginning,
hep-th/9801073.

[13] a. linde, phys. lett. 129b (1983) 177.

[14] r. brustein and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b329 (1994) 429; n. kaloper, r. madden and
k.a. olive, nucl. phys. b452 (1995) 677, phys. lett. b371 (1996) 34; r. easther, k.
maeda and d. wands, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 4247; m. gasperini, m. maggiore and g.
veneziano, nucl. phys. b494 (1997) 315; r. brustein and r. madden, phys. lett. b410
(1997) 110, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 712.

[15] m. maggiore and a. riotto, d-branes and cosmology, hep-th/9811089;

see also t. banks, w. fishler and l. motl, duality versus singularities, hep-th/9811194.

[16] g. veneziano, in string gravity and physics at the planck energy scale, erice, 1995,
eds. n. sanchez and a. zichichi (kluver academic publishers, boston, 1996), p. 285; m.
gasperini, ibid., p. 305.

[17] see, e.g., v. f. mukhanov, a. h. feldman and r. h. brandenberger, phys. rep. 215

(1992) 203.

[18] r. brustein, m. gasperini, m. giovannini and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b361 (1995) 45;

r. brustein et al., phys. rev. d51 (1995) 6744.

[19] g. f. smoot et al., ap. j. 396 (1992) l1; c. l. bennet et al., ap. j. 430 (1994) 423.

[20] p. astone et al., phys. lett. b385 (1996) 421; b. allen and r. brustein, phys. rev. d55

(1997) 970.

[21] b. ratra, astrophys. j. lett. 391 (1992) l1.

[22] m. gasperini, m. giovannini and g. veneziano, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 3796;

d. lemoine and m. lemoine, phys. rev. d52 (1995) 1955.

[23] a. buonanno, k. a. meissner, c. ungarelli and g. veneziano, jhep 1 (1998) 4;

[24] r. brustein and m. hadad, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 725.

[25] r. m. kulsrud, r. cen, j. p. ostriker and d. ryu, ap. j. 480 (1997) 481.

[26] e.j. copeland, r. easther and d. wands, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 874; e.j. copeland, j.e.

lidsey and d. wands, nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 407.

[27] r. durrer, m. gasperini, m. sakellariadou and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b436 (1998) 66,
phys. rev. d59 (1999) 043511; m. gasperini and g. veneziano, phys. rev. d59 (1999)
043503.

16

[28] p. j. e. peebles, an isocurvature cdm cosmogony. i and ii, astro-ph/9805194, and astro-

ph/9805212.

[29] m. gasperini and m. giovannini, phys. lett. b301 (1993) 334; class. quant. grav. 10
(1993) l133; r. brandenberger, v. mukhanov and t. prokopec, phys. rev. lett. 69 (1992)
3606; phys. rev. d48 (1993) 2443.

[30] w. fischler and l. susskind, holography and cosmology, hep-th/9806039; see also
d. bak and s.-j. rey, holographic principle and string cosmology, hep-th/9811008;
a. k. biswas, j. maharana and r.k. pradhan, the holography principle and pre-big bang
cosmology, hep-th/9811051.

[31] see, e.g., r. penrose, the emperors new mind, (oxford university press, new york, 1989),

chapter 7.

[32] a. lukas, b.a. ovrut and d. waldram, phys. lett. b393 (1997) 65; nucl. phys. b495
(1997) 365; f. larsen and f. wilczek, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 4591; n. kaloper, phys.
rev. d55 (1997) 3394; h. lu, s. mukherji and c.n. pope, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 7926;
r. poppe and s. schwager, phys. lett. b393 (1997) 51; a. lukas and b. a. ovrut, phys.
lett. b437 (1998) 291; n. kaloper, i. kogan and k. a. olive, phys. rev. d57 (1998)
7340.

17

