tpi-minn-99/08-t
umn-th-1743/99
hep-th/9902018

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

5

 
 

2
v
8
1
0
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

instantons versus supersymmetry:

fifteen years later

mikhail shifman and arkady vainshtein

theoretical physics institute, university of minnesota, minneapolis, mn 55455

abstract

an introduction to the instanton formalism in supersymmetric gauge theories is
given. we explain how the instanton calculations, in conjunction with analyticity
in chiral parameters and other general properties following from supersymmetry,
allow one to establish exact results in the weak and strong coupling regimes. some
key applications are reviewed, the main emphasis is put on the mechanisms of the
dynamical breaking of supersymmetry.

contents

1 introduction and outlook

3
3
4
5
7
8
9
instantons vs. supersymmetry: literature travel guide . . . . . . . . . 10

1.1 dynamical susy breaking: what does that mean? . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 hierarchy problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3
instantons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.4 the higgs mechanism en route . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.5 chiral versus nonchiral models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.6 what will not be discussed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.7

2 supersymmetric theories: examples and generalities

2.3.1
2.3.2

12
2.1 superspace and superelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2 the generalized wess-zumino models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2.1 the minimal model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.2.2 the general case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3 simplest gauge theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
supersymmetric quantum electrodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . 16
supersymmetric qcd with one avor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.4 the vacuum manifold: generalities
2.5 the vacuum manifold: examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
su(5) model with one quintet and one (anti)decuplet . . . . . 25
the 3-2 model of aeck, dine, and seiberg
. . . . . . . . . 25
su(5) model with two quintets and two (anti)decuplets . . . . 28
2.6 the impact of the superpotential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
2.7 the impact of quantum eects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
2.8 anomalous and non-anomalous u(1) symmetries . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.9 eective lagrangian and the anomalous u(1)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
2.10 wittens index: where to look for the dynamical supersymmetry

2.5.1
2.5.2
2.5.3

breaking? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

3 fermion-boson degeneracy: magic backgrounds

42
3.1 a prototype  supersymmetric domain walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
3.2 superpotential and anomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
3.3 digression: solitons in two-dimensional theories with the minimal susy 49
3.4

instanton tunneling transitions in gauge theories  continuation to
the euclidean space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
3.4.1
instanton solution in the spinor notation . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
instanton calculus in supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
3.5.1 collective coordinates
3.5.2 the symmetry transformations of the moduli
. . . . . . . . . 64
3.5.3 the measure in the moduli space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
3.5.4
including matter: sqcd with one avor . . . . . . . . . . . . 71

3.5

1

3.5.5 orientation collective coordinates as the lorentz su(2)r ro-

tations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
3.5.6 the instanton measure in the one-avor model . . . . . . . . . 76
3.5.7 verication of the t hooft term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
3.5.8 the instanton measure: general gauge group . . . . . . . . . . 79
3.5.9 the instanton measure: general matter content
. . . . . . . . 80
. . . . . . . . . 82

3.6 cancellation of quantum corrections to the measure

4 sample applications

84
4.1 novikov-shifman-vainshtein-zakharov  function . . . . . . . . . . . 85
4.1.1 exact  function in supersymmetric gluodynamics . . . . . . . 85
4.1.2 theories with matter:  function via anomalous dimensions
. 86
4.1.3 nsvz  function and wilsonean action . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
4.1.4 making contact with the perturbative denition of  . . . . . 89
4.1.5 perturbative versus nonperturbative  functions . . . . . . . . 91
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
4.2 gluino condensate in susy gluodynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
4.3 one-avor model
4.4 two-avor model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
4.5 how eective is the eective lagrangian? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
4.6 when one instanton is not enough? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101

5 spontaneous supersymmetry breaking in weak coupling

105
5.1 traditional tree mechanisms (brief look at the old guide book) . . . . 106
5.2 dynamical mechanisms: preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
5.3 dynamical susy breaking in the 3-2 model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
5.4 su(5) model with two generations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
5.5 the 4-1 model: susy breaking through gluino condensation . . . . . 117
5.6 a few words on other calculable models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118

6 spontaneous supersymmetry breaking in

strong coupling
120
6.1 su(5) model with one generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
6.2 the intriligator-seiberg-shenker model
6.3 the intriligator-thomas-izawa-yanagida model
. . . . . . . . . . . . 126

7 impact of the chirally symmetric vacuum

8 concluding remarks

acknowledgments

129

131

132

references

133
recommended literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140

2

1 introduction and outlook

most theorists rmly believe that the underlying theory of fundamental interactions
is supersymmetric. if so, at energies below 100 gev supersymmetry (susy) must
be broken, since no traces of the fermi-bose degeneracy were detected so far. one
can speak of two alternative patterns of the susy breaking: explicit or sponta-
neous. although the former pattern is sometimes discussed in the literature, this
direction is obviously peripheral. for aesthetical and theoretical reasons the main
trend is the spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry. various mechanisms of the
spontaneous susy breaking were worked out; a common feature of all of them is
the occurrence of the massless goldstino. when the supergravity is switched on
the phenomenon analogous to the higgs mechanism occurs  the goldstino mixes
with the gravitino and is eaten up by the latter  the gravitino becomes massive.
therefore, phenomenology of the spontaneous susy breaking cannot be considered
in isolation from gravity.

to us, the most interesting question is dynamics lying behind the spontaneous
susy breaking. more exactly, our prime topic is the nonperturbative gauge dynam-
ics which, in certain supersymmetric theories, creates non-supersymmetric vacua.
why this happens in some models and does not in others? which features of the
supersymmetric yang-mills theories are crucial for this phenomenon and which are
secondary?

these and other similar questions were rst posed in the beginning of the 1980s.
many breakthrough discoveries were made then, approximately fteen years ago. in
the subsequent decade the issue was in a dormant state. it was revived recently in
connection with new breakthrough discoveries in nonperturbative gauge dynamics.
the present review is an attempt to give a unied big picture of the development
of the subject spanning over 15 years.

several reviews and lectures published recently are devoted to the dynamical
susy breaking. usually the main emphasis is made on general aspects and phe-
nomenological consequences. not much attention is paid to theoretical tools devel-
oped over these years, which allow one to obtain exact results in strongly coupled
gauge theories, in certain instances. the formalism of the supersymmetric instan-
tons is one of such tools. a signicant part of this review is devoted to in-depth
studies of the supersymmetric instantons. more exactly, we focus on the aspects
of superinstanton calculus that are important for the mechanisms of the dynamical
susy breaking. the second part of the review presents a survey of such mechanisms.

1.1 dynamical susy breaking: what does that mean?

logically, there are two possibilities for the spontaneous breaking of supersymme-
try. it could be broken at the tree (classical) level by virtue of one of two known
mechanisms: the fayet-iliopoulos mechanism or the oraifeartaigh mechanism (see
sec. 5.1). both were most popular in the 1970s and early 1980s. they are out of

3

fashion now. if one believes that the only genuine mass scale in the fundamental
theory is that of grand unication,  1016 gev, or the planck scale,  1019 gev,
then it is natural to expect that the tree-level breaking would produce the splittings
between the masses of ordinary particles and their superpartners of the same order
of magnitude. then, next-to-nothing is left of supersymmetry as far as physics of
our low-energy world is concerned. in particular, susy will have nothing to do with
the hierarchy problem  its main raison detre in the model-building.

if supersymmetry is unbroken at the tree level, it remains unbroken at any nite
order of perturbation theory. if the susy breaking still occurs in this case, it must
be exponential in the inverse coupling constant,  ec/g2, where c is a positive
constant. a natural very small parameter appears in the theory. the exponent
ec/g2 suppresses all susy breaking eects. starting from the fundamental scale
 1019 gev, one can expect to get in this case the mass splitting between the
superpartners of order of the human scale,  102 gev. then supersymmetry
may be instrumental in the solution of the hierarchy problem and in shaping the
major regularities of the electroweak theory. it is just this scenario that is called
the dynamical susy breaking, that will be in the focus of the present review. the
term was put into circulation by witten [1]. the models where the phenomenon
occurs are rather sophisticated in their structure and are not so abundant. the
searches that eventually led to the discovery of such models present a dramatic
chapter in the history of supersymmetry. we will dwell on various aspects of this
story and on nuances of the dynamical susy breaking in due course. whether
the models developed so far may be relevant to nature is a big question mark.
since supersymmetry is not even yet observed, it seems premature to submerge
too deeply into the phenomenological aspects. our prime emphasis will be on the
underlying dynamics which is beautiful by itself. it is inconceivable that such an
elegant mechanism will not be a part of the future theory in this or that form.

from the ample ow of the literature devoted to the dynamical supersymmetry
breaking we have chosen only one little stream. the early works [25] established the
basic principles of the construction and set the framework and formalism that are
universally used at present in this range of questions. the ideas elaborated in these
works were further advanced and supplemented by new discoveries, of which most
important are two mechanisms: one of them is due to specic features of connement
in susy gauge theories [6] and another is due to a quantum deformation of the
moduli space [7]. it may well happen that only one of several competing dynamical
scenarios will survive in the future. but which one? since the answer is unknown,
we should get acquainted with all of them.

1.2 hierarchy problem

as we have mentioned, the dynamical susy breaking could explain how supersym-
metry could survive down to energies constituting a tiny fraction of the planck mass
mpl. this is only one aspect of the hierarchy problem. one can ask oneself why w

4

and z bosons are so light compared to mpl? or, in other words, why the expecta-
tion value of the higgs eld triggering the su(2) breaking in the standard model is
so small?

one needs the higgs doublet to be essentially massless on the scale of mpl. the
elementary charged scalars are not protected against large quadratically divergent
corrections pushing their masses to mpl, except in supersymmetric theories. super-
symmetry pairs elementary scalars with elementary spinors that could be naturally
massless because of their chirality. in fact, susy propagates the notion of chiral-
ity to the scalar elds. it is quite possible then that the same exponentially small
nonperturbative eects, which are responsible for the dynamical susy breaking,
provide the higgs eld with an exponentially small (on the scale mpl) expectation
value and mass. we do not know exactly how this could happen but a priori this is
conceivable.

1.3

instantons

many mechanisms of the supersymmetry breaking to be discussed below refer to
the weak coupling regime. in a sense, the smallness of the coupling constant is a
prerequisite in our explorations. in the weak coupling regime the mystery surround-
ing nonperturbative eects in the gauge theories fades away  we know that certain
nonperturbative phenomena are due to instantons [8]. thus, the instantons are the
most important technical element of the whole construction.

the instantons were discovered in [8] in the context of quantum chromodynam-
ics (qcd). in qcd they are instrumental in revealing a topologically nontrivial
structure in the space of elds. they can not be used, however, for quantitative
analyses of the nonperturbative eects since the instanton-based approximations in
qcd are not closed: typically the instanton contributions are saturated at large dis-
tances, where the coupling constant becomes of order unity, and the quasiclassical
(weak coupling) methods become inapplicable. as was noted by t hooft [9], in the
models where the gauge symmetry is spontaneously broken, e.g.
in the standard
model (sm), the instanton calculations become well-dened, the integrals over the
instanton size  are cut o at   v1 where v is the expectation value of the higgs
eld. the running coupling constant is frozen at distances of order v1, and if it
is small at such distances, as is the case in the standard model, all approximations
that go with the instanton analyses are justied.

from the calculational side everything is okey with the instantons in the higgs
regime. however, the exponentially small instanton contribution is usually buried in
the background of much larger perturbative contributions, which mask it and make
it totally negligible. the only exception known so far is the baryon number violating
eects in the standard model. these eects identically vanish to any nite order in
perturbation theory, but are generated by instantons [9].

instantons in supersymmetric theories are very peculiar. many susy models
possess the so called vacuum valleys, or at directions, or moduli spaces of vacua.

5

there are innitely many physically inequivalent degenerate vacuum states. as
a matter of fact, the degeneracy is continuous. the degeneracy is protected by
supersymmetry from being lifted in perturbation theory to any nite order. the
instantons may or may not lift the vacuum degeneracy.
if they do, a drastic re-
structuring of the vacuum state occurs. the instantons are the leading driving force
in the vacuum restructuring; the perturbative background is just absent. thus,
we encounter here with the situation similar to the baryon number violation in the
standard model, except that the baryon number violation is an exotic process, while
the instanton-generated superpotentials in the vacuum valleys of the susy models
are quite typical.

the distinguished role of the instantons in the phenomena to be discussed below
is not the only special circumstance. another remarkable feature of the supersym-
metric instantons, with no parallels in nonsupersymmetric models, is the fact that
their contribution can be found exactly [3]. in conventional theories a perturbative
expansion is built around the instanton solution, so that the corresponding contri-
bution takes the following generic form

ec/(c0 + c1 + c22 + ...) ,  

g2
4

.

(1.1)

the series in  never terminates, although practically, of course, it is hard to go
beyond the one-loop approximation. the supersymmetric instanton is unique: the
general loop expansion (i.e. the expansion in powers of ) trivializes. no  series
emerges in the instanton-generated quantities. all quantum corrections around the
instanton solution cancel each other [10, 11], and the problem reduces to consider-
ation of the classical solution itself, and the zero modes it generates [12, 13]. the
zero modes are associated with the symmetries of the problem that are nontrivially
realized on the instanton solution. the cancellation of the quantum corrections is
due to the fact that the instanton eld is a very special eld conguration: each
given instanton preserves one half of the original supersymmetry.

even though the  series does not appear one may pose a question of the iteration
of the exponential terms, i.e. multi-instantons. it turns out that in many cases these
iterations do not take place  the one-instanton results are exact. in other instances
the multi-instantons can be summed up exactly.

quite often the instanton calculations are performed by brute force, by using
methods that are essentially non-supersymmetric. such an approach is quite pos-
sible, especially in those instances when the authors are not interested in overall
numerical constants, while the general structure of the result is known a priori, say,
from r symmetries. our approach is dierent. about one half of the review is
devoted to building a superinstanton formalism which takes maximal advantage of
susy, at every stage. although it takes some eort to master it, once this is done
various instanton calculations can be carried out with ease. in this way the reader
gets a much better insight in technical and conceptual aspects of nonperturbative
gauge dynamics.

6

1.4 the higgs mechanism en route

at rst sight, the supersymmetric gauge theories look very similar to ordinary qcd.
in the simplest case of susy gluodynamics the only dierence refers to the represen-
tation of the color group to which the fermions belong. in susy gluodynamics the
fermions (gluinos) transform according to the adjoint representation of the group,
as the gluons, and are the majorana elds. if one adds the matter superelds in
the fundamental representation, one gets the quarks, and, in addition, their scalar
partners, squarks. keeping in mind this similarity, it was tempting to interpret the
supersymmetric gauge dynamics in parallel to that of qcd. as a matter of fact, in
some of the rst works (e.g. [14]) devoted to nonperturbative eects in supersymmet-
ric qcd (sqcd) attempts were made to closely follow the pattern of qcd, which
gave rise to paradoxes. the paradoxes are resolved as follows:
in many instances
the spontaneous breaking of the gauge symmetry takes place. the theory one deals
with is in the higgs phase: the gauge bosons are heavy which freezes the gauge
coupling constant. this is in clear contradistinction to what happens in qcd. the
higgs regime is a common phenomenon in the susy gauge theories with matter.

the higgs phenomenon is very well known from the standard model. in sm the

potential energy associated with the higgs eld is

uh() = c(   v2)2 .

(1.2)

it is obvious that the minimum of the energy corresponds to a nonzero expectation
value

= v2 .

(1.3)

if v is large, we deal with the classical eld and can speak of the average value not
only of the square of the eld (1.3), but of the eld itself.

in contrast to the standard model, however, where the potential (1.2) is usually
postulated, in the susy gauge theories of interest, similar potentials are generated
dynamically, by instantons, and are fully calculable in the models where the ex-
pectation values of the scalar elds are large. one may ask how large parameters
can appear. the set of dimensional parameters in the microscopic sqcd is the
same as in qcd. the basic parameter is , the scale parameter which determines the
value of the running gauge coupling constant. in addition, the set of the dimensional
parameters includes the masses of the matter elds, quarks and squarks,

 , m1 , m2 , ... .

(1.4)

d evac

in the simplest case of one avor the vacuum expectation value of the scalar eld
can be estimated as

hivac  (cid:18) 
m1(cid:19)

1/4

,

(1.5)

and hivac is large provided m1  . there is nothing of the kind in qcd where the
masses of the u and d quarks can be assumed to vanish and no vacuum condensates
become innite in this limit.

7

the crucial distinction between qcd and sqcd arises due to the existence of
the at directions in the latter. the vacuum state can be at any point from the
bottom of the valley. classically, all these points are degenerate. that is why
small perturbations (say, the mass terms, yukawa couplings or instanton-generated
superpotentials) can drastically change the values of the vacuum condensates.

in the supersymmetric theories with the fundamental matter there is no phase
transition between the higgs and connement regimes [15]. by continuously chang-
ing some parameters (for instance, the mass parameters mi) one passes from the
weak coupling higgs regime to the strong coupling connement regime. susy has
a remarkable property: it enforces holomorphic dependences of chiral quantities on
chiral parameters. moreover, general features of the theory can often prompt one
the structure of the analytic function. then, performing calculations in the weak
coupling regime allows one to establish exact results referring to the strong coupling
regime. this is the reason why the higgs phenomenon in susy gauge theories is of
paramount importance in the technical aspect.

1.5 chiral versus nonchiral models

all gauge theories with matter can be divided in two distinct classes: chiral and non-
chiral matter. the second class includes supersymmetric generalization of qcd, and
all other models where each matter multiplet is accompanied by the corresponding
conjugate representation.
in other words, the gauge symmetry does not forbid a
mass term for all matter elds.

models with the chiral matter are those where mass terms are impossible (more
exactly, at least for some of the matter elds the quadratic terms in the superpo-
tential are forbidden by gauge invariance). the matter sector in such theories is
severely constrained by the absence of the internal anomalies in the theory.

for a long time susy practitioners were convinced that the dynamical susy
breaking can occur only in rather exotic models where the matter sector is chiral.
the conclusion that the chirality of the matter is a necessary condition seemingly
followed from wittens index [2]. needless to say that this constraint drastically
narrows down the class of models to be examined.

recently it was realized, however, that nonchiral models may also experience
the dynamical susy breaking. the intriligator-thomas-izawa-yanagida (itiy)
mechanism [7] and its derivatives [16] are nonchiral. the fact that nonchiral models
of the dynamical susy breaking exist was an unexpected discovery.
it is highly
probable that the future searches for new mechanisms will focus on the nonchiral
models. the vast majority of the mechanisms established so far are chiral, though.
in particular, all models found in the 1980s are chiral.

8

1.6 what will not be discussed

at the early stages it was believed that a dynamical susy breaking could be built in
directly into the supergeneralization of the standard model (minimal supersymmet-
ric standard model, or mssm), or into the su(5)-based theory of grand unication
(gut), with a minimal set of quintets and decuplets. it was realized rather quickly
that a reasonable pattern of the mass splittings between the superpartners was not
attainable in this way.
in particular, gauginos came out unacceptably light. at
present no model is known where the dynamical susy breaking would act directly
in the more or less established sm-related sector and would lead to no contradictions
with phenomenology. the word established is used above as opposed to hypothet-
ical. to solve the problem theorists invented a totally new sector  a part of the
world which is pure fantasy so far  and dubbed it supersymmetry breaking sector.
it consists of some hypothetical elds, none of which is discovered, whose sole role in
todays theory is to break supersymmetry. then this breaking is communicated to
our world through yet another sector, a messenger sector. two alternative scenarios
of how this communication could be achieved are elaborated in the literature. in the
rst scenario, which was most popular in the 1980s, the contact between the two
worlds  ours and the supersymmetry breaking sector  is realized only through grav-
ity. the gravity is universal. once it is switched on, the supersymmetry breaking
sector generates a mass m3/2 6= 0 to the originally massless gravitino,

m3/2 

m2
br
mpl

,

(1.6)

where mbr is the scale of supersymmetry breaking. the coupling of gravitino to the
elds belonging to our world then generates susy breaking terms in the lagrangian,
which from the point of view of the human observer look as an explicit supersym-
metry breaking by soft terms. the mass splittings between the superpartners is

m  m3/2 

m2
br
mpl

.

(1.7)

the susy breaking scale is the geometrical average between m and mpl; if we
want m to be of order 100 gev, mbr  1011 gev. this scenario is called gravity-
mediated.
in the second scenario gauge elds play the role of the messenger interaction.
messenger (heavy) quarks and leptons are introduced, that are coupled directly to
the supersymmetry breaking sector on the one hand, and to our gauge bosons, on
the other. since the gauge coupling constant is much stronger than the gravitational
constant, the scale of supersymmetry breaking need not be so large as in the previous
case. in the gauge-mediated scenario mbr is of order 10 tev.

both scenarios have their virtues and shortcomings.

in the gravity-mediated
models the suppression of the avor changing neutral currents does not come out
naturally while in the gauge-mediated models one typically ends up with a horrible

9

messenger sector. moreover, the gauge-mediated approach is not closed, one needs
supergravity anyway. indeed, the spontaneous susy breaking inevitably produces a
massless fermion, the goldstino. no such massless fermions seem to exist; therefore,
one should make the goldstino massive which can only be achieved through its
coupling to gravitino.

it seems that neither of the approaches is fully phenomenologically acceptable
and aesthetically appealing. the issue remains a challenge for the future theory.
the question of implementation of the dynamical susy breaking in realistic models
will not be discussed at all. it will just assumed that this dynamical phenomenon
is somehow realized in a consistent way, either through a supersymmetry breaking
sector and messengers, or somehow else. we will limit ourselves to the internal
structure of possible mechanisms of the dynamical susy breaking. many excellent
reviews are devoted to phenomenological aspects of gravity-mediated and gauge-
mediated scenarios. the reader is referred to e.g. ref. [17].

1.7

instantons vs. supersymmetry: literature travel guide

the subject we are going to discuss is vast, its development spans almost two
decades. the advancement is not always straightforward. therefore, it is conve-
nient to provide a brief literature travel guide.

the importance of the dynamical susy breaking was rst realized by witten in
1981 [1] who started considering general aspects of the phenomenon and provided
many insights. the rst instanton calculations in supersymmetric gauge theories
ascend to 1982: in ref. [18] certain three-dimensional models were considered, while
in ref. [19] the four-dimensional theories were addressed for the rst time. in the
latter work the question was raised as to the compatibility of the instanton-induced
t hooft vertex with supersymmetry. shortly after, the problem was solved in [3]
where basic elements of super-instanton calculus were introduced. the formalism
was applied in calculation of appropriately chosen n-point functions of chiral su-
perelds (all elds of one and the same chirality).
it was shown that, thanks to
supersymmetry, the result could only be a constant, and in many instances this
constant turned out to be non-vanishing due to the instanton contribution. by
exploiting the cluster decomposition at large distances the gluino condensate was
found. as a byproduct, the exact novikov-shifman-vainshtein-zakharov (nsvz)
 function emerged [11]. then, this approach was generalized [4] to include susy
gauge theories with matter. this line of research culminated in the very beginning
of 1984 when the su(5) model with m (anti)decuplets and m quintets was con-
sidered [20]. the instantons were shown to generate the gluino condensate, which
under certain conditions on the yukawa couplings is incompatible with supersym-
metry. the conict was interpreted as a dynamical susy breaking.

in fact, a few weeks before this work, the su(5) model with one decuplet and one
anti-quintet was analyzed in ref. [21]. the model is strongly coupled; the analysis
was based on indirect (symmetry) arguments and the t hooft matching. this was

10

the rst example ever where the dynamical susy breaking was indicated.

meanwhile, it was realized [5, 22] that in a wide class of models with matter and
classically at directions the gauge symmetry was implemented in the higgs regime.
by an appropriate adjustment of parameters (masses, yukawa couplings, etc.) one
could guarantee the theory to be weakly coupled. then the heavy gauge bosons
could be integrated out and the vacuum structure could be inferred from the eec-
tive low-energy theory of the moduli. the equivalence between the two approaches
 calculation of the condensates and the low-energy lagrangian for the moduli 
was established in [23]. being formally equivalent, the method of the eective la-
grangians for the moduli turned out to be more user-friendly. the underlying
physical picture is transparent, an advantage that can hardly be overestimated. in
the quest for the dynamical susy breaking the eective lagrangian approach of
aeck, dine and seiberg became standard; some ideas and technical elements of
the condensate calculations were later incorporated, though.

aeck, dine and seiberg were the rst to realize [24] that in su(5) model with
two or more generations (i.e. m (anti)decuplets and m quintets where m  2)
the dynamical susy breaking occurs in the weak coupling regime, provided the
yukawa couplings are small, and the model, being fully calculable, presents a great
theoretical laboratory. their paper [24] was submitted for publication on february
10, 1984  the next day after [20], where the very same model was analyzed, with
the same conclusion of the dynamical susy breaking.

the basic elements of the superinstanton formalism (the one-instanton problem
in the theories with matter) were worked out by 1985 [13]. some additional elements
were elaborated in [25]. signicant improvements were later made in ref. [26], in
connection with the instanton calculations in extended supersymmetries. a continu-
ous progress in the multi-instanton calculations 1 culminated in the explicit construc-
tion [27] of the n-instanton measure for arbitrary n. much work was done to make
this achievement possible; the interested reader can turn to the review paper [28]
for references and comments.

drawing the picture in broad touches one may say that in 1984 and 1985 the rst
stage was completed  although work continued and some novel important results
were obtained in the following two or three years (e.g. [29]), the interest to the issue
have been rapidly drying out. the subject was in a dormant state for about a decade;
it was revived in 1993, after breakthrough observations due to seiberg [30,31]. new
models exhibiting the dynamical susy breaking were constructed. some of them
continue the trend established in the 1980s, others are based on new ideas. the
rst class is represented by the so-called 4-1 model and its relatives [32, 33].
in
the second class the most prominent is the itiy model [7], which is nonchiral and,
nevertheless, ensures the susy breaking. the model is strongly coupled, by default,
and is noncalculable. another novel mechanism is the intriligator-seiberg-shenker
(iss) model [6], which also takes place in the strong coupling regime. both have

1the problems where the multi-instanton calculations are needed will not be discussed in this

review.

11

numerous descendants.

2 supersymmetric theories: examples and gen-

eralities

our rst task is to reveal general features of the supersymmetric theories instrumen-
tal in the dynamical susy breaking. we start from a brief review of the simplest
models, intended mainly in order to introduce our notations and highlight some basic
formulas. the feature we will focus on is the existence of continuum of degenerate
classical vacua, the so called d-at directions (in the absence of the superpotential).
these vacua dene physically inequivalent theories. the fermion-boson cancellation
inherent to supersymmetry guarantees that no superpotential is generated to any
nite order of perturbation theory, i.e. the d-atness is maintained. the vacuum
degeneracy can be broken only by nonperturbative eects which will be discussed
in sec. 4. traveling over the d-at directions one nds oneself, generally speaking,
in the higgs phase. we will dwell on peculiarities of the higgs mechanism in su-
persymmetric gauge theories. anomalous and non-anomalous r symmetries play a
special role in the analysis, and we will dwell on them too. finally, we will consider
issues related to wittens index.

2.1 superspace and superelds

the four-dimensional space x can be promoted to superspace by adding four grass-
mann coordinates  and  , (,  = 1, 2). the coordinate transformations
x  = 2i     2i  

{x,  ,  } :

(2.1)

 =  ,

   =   ,

add susy to the translational and lorentz transformations 2.

here the lorentz vectorial indices are transformed into spinorial according to the

standard rule

where

a  = a()  ,

a =

1
2

a ()

 ,

()  = {1, ~}  ,

()  = ()  .

(2.2)

(2.3)

we use the notation ~ for the pauli matrices throughout the paper. the lowering
and raising of the indices is performed by virtue of the  symbol ( = i(2),
2our notation is close but not identical to that of bagger and wess [34]. the main distinction is
the conventional choice of the metric tensor g = diag(+  ) as opposed to the diag( + ++)
version of bagger and wess. for further details see appendix in ref. [35]. both, the spinorial
and vectorial indices will be denoted by the greek letters. to dierentiate between them we will
use the letters from the beginning of the alphabet for the spinorial indices, e.g. ,  and so on,
reserving those from the end of the alphabet (e.g. , , etc.) for the vectorial indices.

12

two invariant subspaces {x

l , } and {x

()  =     ()  = {1,~}  .

(2.4)
r ,  } are spanned on 1/2 of the grass-

12 = 1). for instance,

mann coordinates,
{x
{x

l , } :
r ,  } :

where

(2.5)

(2.6)

(2.7)

 =  ,
   =   ,

(xl)  = 4i    ;
(xr)  = 4i   ,

(xl,r)  = x   2i 

  .

the minimal supermultiplet of elds includes one complex scalar eld (x) (two
bosonic states) and one complex weyl spinor (x) ,  = 1, 2 (two fermionic states).
both elds are united in one chiral supereld,

(xl, ) = (xl) + 2(xl) + 2f (xl) ,

where f is an auxiliary component. the eld f appears in the lagrangian without
the kinetic term.

in the gauge theories one also uses a vector supereld,

v (x, , ) = c + i  i  +
i
2  v  +(cid:26)2i2  (cid:20)  
4

2 m

i
2

2m 

i
2
 (cid:21) + h.c.(cid:27) + 2 2(cid:20)d 

1
4

2c(cid:21) .

(2.8)

the supereld v is real, v = v , implying that the bosonic elds c, d and v =

 v /2 are real. other elds are complex, and the bar denotes the complex
conjugation.

the transformations (2.5) generate the susy transformations of the elds which

can be written as

v = i(cid:16)q + q(cid:17) v

(2.9)

where v is a generic supereld (which could be chiral as well). the dierential
operators q and q can be written as

q = i


 +  

  ,

q  = i


      ,

nq , q o = 2i  .

(2.10)

these dierential operators give the explicit realization of the susy algebra,

{q , q} = 0 ,

nq , q o = 2p  ,
where q and q  are the supercharges while p  = i  is the energy-momentum
operator. the superderivatives are dened as the dierential operators d, d 
anticommuting with q and q ,

n q  , q o = 0 ,

hq , p i = 0 ,

(2.11)

d =


  i 

  ,

d  = 


   + i  ,

nd , d o = 2i  .

(2.12)

13

2.2 the generalized wess-zumino models

the generalized wess-zumino model describes interactions of an arbitrary number
of the chiral superelds. deferring the discussion of the general case, we start from
the simplest original wess-zumino model [36] (sometimes referred to as the minimal
model).

2.2.1 the minimal model
the model contains one chiral supereld (xl, ) and its complex conjugate (xr, ),
which is antichiral. the action of the model is

s =

1

4 z d4x d4   +

1

2 z d4x d2 w() +

1

2 z d4x d2  w( ) .

(2.13)

note that the rst term is the integral over the full superspace, while the second and
the third run over the chiral subspaces. the holomorphic function w() is called
the superpotential. in components the lagrangian has the form

l = ( )() + i 

  + f f +(cid:26)f w () 

1

2w ()2 + h.c.(cid:27) .

(2.14)

from eq. (2.14) it is obvious that f can be eliminated by virtue of the classical
equation of motion,

so that the scalar potential describing self-interaction of the eld  is

f = 

 w()



,

(2.15)

(2.16)

2

.

v (, ) = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

 w()

 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

in what follows we will often denote the chiral supereld and its lowest (bosonic)
component by one and the same letter, making no distinction between capital and
small . usually it is clear from the context what is meant in each particular case.
if one limits oneself to renormalizable theories, the superpotential w must be
a polynomial function of  of power not higher than three. in the model at hand,
with one chiral supereld, the generic superpotential can be always reduced to the
following standard form

w() =

m2


 


3

3 .

(2.17)

the quadratic term can be always eliminated by a redenition of the eld . more-
over, by using the r symmetries (sec. 2.8) one can always choose the phases of the
constants m and  at will.

let us study the set of classical vacua of the theory, the vacuum manifold. in the
simplest case of the vanishing superpotential, w = 0, any coordinate-independent

14

eld vac = 0 can serve as a vacuum3. the vacuum manifold is then the one-
dimensional (complex) manifold c 1 = {0}. the continuous degeneracy is due
to the absence of the potential energy, while the kinetic energy vanishes for any
constant 0.

this continuous degeneracy is lifted by the superpotential.

in particular, the

superpotential (2.17) implies two classical vacua,

vac = 

m


.

(2.18)

thus, the continuous manifold of vacua c 1 reduces to two points. both vacua
are physically equivalent. this equivalence could be explained by the spontaneous
breaking of z2 symmetry,   , present in the action (2.13) with the superpo-
tential (2.17).

2.2.2 the general case

in many instances generalized wess-zumino models emerge at low energies as eec-
tive theories describing the low-energy behavior of fundamental gauge theories,
much in the same way as the pion chiral lagrangian presents a low-energy limit
of qcd. in this case they need not be renormalizable, the superpotential need not
be polynomial, and the kinetic term need not be canonic. the most general action
compatible with susy and containing not more than two derivatives  is

s =

1

4 z d4x d4 k(i, j) +(cid:26)1

2 z d4x d2 w(i) + h.c.(cid:27) ,

(2.19)

where i is a set of the chiral superelds, the superpotential w is an analytic
function of all chiral variables i, while the kinetic term is determined by the function
k depending on both chiral i and antichiral j elds. usually k is referred to as
the kahler potential (or the kahler function). the kahler potential is real.

in components the lagrangian takes the form

l =

where

w
i

n

xi,j=1(gij i  j hg1iij
2 k
i j

gij =

 w
 j ) + fermions

(2.20)

(2.21)

plays the role of the metric on the space of elds (the target space), and g1 is the
inverse matrix.

what is the vacuum manifold in this case? in the absence of the superpotential,
i of constant elds is a possible vacuum. thus, the vacuum

w = 0, any set 0

3by coordinates we mean here coordinates in superspace, x, ,  .

15

manifold is the kahler manifold of the complex dimension n and the metric gij
dened in eq. (2.21). if w 6= 0 the conditions of the f -atness

w
i

= 0

(2.22)

single out some submanifold of the original kahler manifold. this submanifold may
be continuous or discrete.
if no solutions of eq. (2.22) exist, supersymmetry is
spontaneously broken, see examples in sec. 5.

to illustrate this general construction let us consider the model with two super-

elds  and x, and

k =  + xx , w(, x) =

m2


 


3

3  x 2 .

(2.23)

in this simple case the kahler manifold is two-dimensional complex space c 2. if
m2/ = 0 and  = 0 but  6= 0 the vacuum manifold is one-dimensional space,
x = 0 and  arbitrary. switching on all three coecients in w reduces the vacuum
manifold to four points. the rst pair is at  = m/ , x = 0; another pair is at
 = 0 , x = m/. inside each pair the vacua are equivalent due to z2  z2
symmetry of the model.

2.3 simplest gauge theories

now let us proceed to the gauge models, which constitute the main contents of this
review.

2.3.1 supersymmetric quantum electrodynamics

supersymmetric quantum electrodynamics (sqed) is the simplest and, historically,
the rst [37] supersymmetric gauge theory. this model supersymmetrizes qed.
in qed the electron is described by the dirac eld. one dirac eld contains two
chiral (weyl) elds: left-handed and right-handed, both with the electric charge 1.
its complex conjugate contains left-handed and right-handed weyl spinors with the
electric charge 1. so, in terms of weyl spinors the electron is described by two
left-handed elds, one with charge +1, another with charge 1, complex conjugated
elds are right-handed.
in sqed each weyl eld is accompanied by a complex
scalar eld, selectron. thus, we get two chiral superelds, s and t of the opposite
electric charges.

apart from the matter sector there exists the gauge sector which includes the
photon and photino. in the superspace one uses the vector supereld v , see eq. (2.8).
the sqed lagrangian is

l = (cid:26) 1

8 e2 z d2 w 2 + h.c.(cid:27) +

1

4 z d4(cid:16) sev s + t ev t(cid:17) +(cid:26)m

2 z d2 st + h.c.(cid:27) ,

(2.24)

16

where e is the electric charge, m is the electron/selectron mass, and w is the
supergeneralization of the photon eld strength tensor,

w =

1
8

d2 dv = i(cid:16) + id   f  i2  (cid:17) .

(2.25)

this supereld is chiral, w = w(xl, ). its form as well as the form of interaction
is xed by the susy generalization of the gauge invariance [38],

s(xl, )  ei(xl,) s(xl, ) ,
s(xr, )  ei (xr,) s(xr, ) ,
v (x, , )  v (x, , )  ih(xl, )  (xr, )i .

t (xl, )  ei(xl,) t (xl, ) ;
t (xr, )  ei (xr,) t (xr, ) ;

(2.26)

the gauge parameter which was a function of x in qed is now promoted to the
chiral supereld (xl, ). using this gauge freedom one eliminates, for example, all
terms in the rst line in eq. (2.8),

vwz = 2  v   2i2() + 2i2() + 2 2d .

(2.27)

this is called the wess-zumino gauge.

if we take into account the rules of integration over the grassmann numbers
we immediately see that the integration d2 singles out the 2 component of the
chiral superelds w 2 and st , i.e. the f terms. similarly, the integration d2d2 
singles out the 2 2 component of the real superelds sev s and t ev t , i.e. the
d terms. the fact that the electric charges of s and t are opposite is explicit in
eq. (2.24). the theory describes conventional electrodynamics of one dirac and two
complex scalar elds. in addition, it includes photino-electron-selectron couplings
and self-interaction of the selectron elds of a very special form, to be discussed
below.

in the abelian gauge theory one is allowed to add to the lagrangian the so-called

 term,

l =



4 z d2d2  v (x, , ) 

2 z dw  d .



(2.28)

it plays an important role in the fayet-iliopoulos mechanism of the tree-level spon-
taneous susy breaking (sec. 5.1). although this term is specic for the abelian
theories, one can nd some analogs in the non-abelian gauge theories too.

the d component of v is an auxiliary eld (similarly to f ); it enters the la-

grangian without derivatives,

l =

1
2e2 d2 + d ( ss  t t ) + d + . . .

(2.29)

where the ellipses denote d-independent terms. thus, d can be eliminated by
substituting the classical equation of motion. in this way we get the so-called d-
potential, describing the self-interaction of selectrons,

ud =

1
2e2 d2 , d = e2( ss  t t + ) .

(2.30)

17

this is only a part of the potential energy. the full potential is obtained by adding
the part generated by the f terms of the matter elds, see eq. (2.16) with w 
mst ,

e2
2

u(s, t ) =

( ss  t t + )2 + |ms|2 + |mt|2 .

(2.31)

this expression is sucient for examining the structure of the vacuum manifold (we
do not give here the full component expression for the sqed lagrangian, deferring
this task till sec. 2.3.2, where the transition to components is elaborated in more
complicated non-abelian gauge theories).

the energy of any eld conguration in supersymmetric theory is positive-
denite. thus, any conguration with the zero energy is automatically a vacuum,
i.e. the vacuum manifold is determined by the condition u(s, t ) = 0. assume at
rst that the mass term and the  term are absent, m =  = 0, i.e. we deal with
massless sqed. then,

u(s, t ) =

e2
2

( ss  t t )2  0 ,

modulo gauge transformations the general solution is

s =  , t =  ,

(2.32)

(2.33)

where  is a complex parameter. one can think of the potential u as of a mountain
ridge; the d-at directions then present the at bottom of the valleys. this explains
the origin of the term vacuum valleys. the (classical) vacuum manifold is one-
dimensional complex line, parametrized by . each point at the manifold can be
viewed as a vacuum of a particular theory.

considering the parameter  as a chiral supereld (xl, ), we arrive at the
wess-zumino model with the kahler potential . the model describes the super-
multiplet containing one massless scalar and one weyl fermion.

it is not dicult to verify that there is no other light excitations at the generic
point on the vacuum manifold. indeed, at  6= 0 the theory is in the higgs phase:
the photon supermultiplet becomes massive. the photon eld eats up one of the
real scalar elds residing in s, t , and becomes massive, along with another real
scalar eld which acquires the very same mass. the photino teams up with a linear
combination of two weyl spinors in s, t , and becomes a massive dirac eld, with
the same mass as the photon. one weyl spinor and one complex scalar (two real
elds) remain massless.

the consideration above was carried out in the wess-zumino gauge. the gauge
invariant parametrization of the vacuum manifold is given by the product st . this
product is a chiral supereld, of zero charge, so it is gauge invariant. every point
from the bottom of the valley is in one-to-one correspondence with the value of
st = 2.

the occurrence of the at directions is the single most crucial feature of the
susy gauge theories instrumental in the dynamics of susy breaking. the issue

18

will be discussed in more detail in secs. 2.4 and 2.5. we started from the simplest
example, sqed, to get acquainted with the phenomenon.

introducing the mass term m 6= 0 one lifts the vacuum degeneracy, making the
bottom of the valley non-at. the mass term pushes the theory towards the origin of
the valley. indeed, with the mass term switched on the only solution corresponding
to the vanishing energy is s = t = 0. the vacuum becomes unique. if, in addition,
 6= 0, supersymmetry is spontaneously broken, see sec. 5.1.
2.3.2 supersymmetric qcd with one avor

as the next step, we consider susy generalization of qcd (to be referred to as
sqcd). here we limit ourselves to the gauge group su(2) with the matter sector
consisting of one avor. the gauge sector consists of three gluons and their su-
perpartners  gluinos. the corresponding supereld now is a matrix in the color
space,

(2.34)
where t a are the matrices of the color generators. in the su(2) theory t a =  a/2
where  a are the pauli matrices, a = 1, 2, 3.

v = v at a ,

similarly to sqed, the matter sector is built from two superelds. instead of the
electric charges now we must pick up certain representations of su(2). in sqed the
elds s and t have the opposite electric charges. analogously, in sqcd one super-
eld must be in the fundamental representation and another in anti-fundamental.
the specic feature of su(2) is the equivalence of doublets and anti-doublets. thus,
the matter is described by the set of superelds q
f where  = 1, 2 is the color index
and f = 1, 2 is a subavor index. two subavors comprise one avor.

the lagrangian of the model is

l = ( 1

4g2 z d2 tr w 2 + h.c.) +

1

4 z d2d2  qf ev qf +(cid:26) m

4 z d2 qf

q

f + h.c.(cid:27) .

(2.35)
the chiral supereld w which includes the gluon eld strength tensor, is the non-
abelian generalization of eq. (2.25),

w =

1
8

d2 (cid:16)evdev(cid:17) = i(cid:16) + id   g  i2d  (cid:17) .

(2.36)

unlike the situation in the abelian case, now w is not (super)gauge invariant,
eq. (2.36) refers to the wess-zumino gauge.

note that the su(2) model under consideration, with one avor, possesses a
global su(2) (subavor) invariance allowing one to freely rotate the superelds qf .
all indices corresponding to the su(2) groups (gauge, lorentz and subavor) can
be lowered and raised by means of the  symbol, according to the general rules.

the lagrangian presented in eq. (2.35) is unique if the requirement of renormal-
izability is imposed. without this requirement the last term in eq. (2.35), the su-
perpotential, could be supplemented, e.g., by the quartic color invariant (qf qf )2.

19

the cubic term is not allowed in su(2). in general, the renormalizable models with
a richer matter sector may allow for the cubic in q terms in the superpotential.

it is instructive to pass from the supereld notations to components. we will
do this exercise once. start from w 2. the f component of w 2 includes the kinetic
term of the gluons and gluinos, as well as the square of the d term,

1

4g2 z d2 tr w 2 = 

1

8g2 (cid:16)ga

ga  iga



ga(cid:17) +

1
4g2 dada +

i
2g2 ad

a .

(2.37)
note that the inverse coupling constant 1/g2 can be treated as a complex parameter,

1
g2 

1
g2  i


82

(2.38)

where  is the vacuum angle. for the time being the occurrence of the  angle is
not important.

the next term to be considered is r d2d2  qevq. calculation of the d compo-

nent of qev q is a more time-consuming exercise since we must take into account the
fact that q depends on xl while q depends on xr; the both arguments dier from x.
therefore, one has to expand in this dierence. the factor ev sandwiched between
q and q covariantizes all derivatives. taking the eld v in the wess-zumino gauge
one gets

1

4 z d2d2  qf evqf = d f df + f f ff + da f t af

+if d
finally, we present the superpotential term,

f +hi2(f ) f + h.c.i .

m

4 z d2 qf

q

f = m f

f 

f 

m
2


f
f .

(2.39)

(2.40)

the elds d and f are auxiliary and can be eliminated by virtue of the equations

of motion. in this way we get the potential energy,

u = ud + uf , ud =

1
2g2 dada , uf = f f

 f 
f ,

where

da = g2 f t af , f 

f =  m 
f .

(2.41)

(2.42)

the d potential ud represents a quartic self-interaction of the scalar elds,
of a very peculiar form. typically in the 4 theory the potential has one  at
most several  minima. the only example with a continuous manifold of points
of minimal energy which was well studied in the context of non-supersymmetric
theories is the spontaneous breaking of a global continuous symmetry, say, u(1). in
this case all points belonging to the vacuum manifold are physically equivalent. the

20

d potential (2.41) has a specic structure  there is a continuous vacuum degeneracy,
the minimal (zero) energy is achieved on an innite set of the eld congurations
which are not physically equivalent.

to examine the vacuum manifold let us start again from the case of the vanishing
superpotential, i.e. m = 0. from eq. (2.42) it is clear that the classical space of
vacua is dened by the d-atness condition

da = g2 f t af = 0 ,

a = 1, 2, 3 .

(2.43)

the notion of d-atness is specic for the wess-zumino gauge description of the
vacuum manifold. later on we will present a more general (and more geometrical)
construction of the vacuum manifold (sec. 2.4).

in the case at hand it is not dicult to nd the d at direction explicitly. indeed,

consider the scalar elds of the form



f = v  1 0

0 1 ! ,

(2.44)

where v is an arbitrary complex constant. it is obvious that for any value of v all
ds vanish. d1 and d2 vanish because  1,2 are o-diagonal matrices; d3 vanishes
after summation over two subavors.

it is quite obvious that if v 6= 0 the original gauge symmetry su(2) is totally
indeed, in the vacuum eld (2.44) all three gauge bosons acquire mass
higgsed.
mv = g|v|. needless to say that supersymmetry is not broken.
it is instructive
to trace the reshuing of the degrees of freedom before and after the higgs phe-
nomenon. in the unbroken phase, corresponding to v = 0, we have three massless
gauge bosons (6 degrees of freedom), three massless gauginos (6 degrees of freedom),
four matter weyl fermions (8 degrees of freedom), and four complex matter scalars
(8 degrees of freedom). in the broken phase three matter fermions combine with the
gauginos to form three massive dirac fermions (12 degrees of freedom). moreover,
three matter scalars combine with the gauge elds to form three massive vector
elds (9 degrees of freedom) plus three massive (real) scalars. what remains mass-
less? one complex scalar eld, corresponding to the motion along the bottom of the
valley, v, and its fermion superpartner, one weyl fermion. the balance between the
fermion and boson degrees of freedom is explicit.

thus, we see that in the eective low-energy theory only one chiral supereld 
survives. this chiral supereld can be introduced as a supergeneralization of eq.
(2.44),

q

f =   1 0

0 1 ! .

substituting this expression in the original lagrangian (2.35) we get

le =

1

2 z d2d2   +(cid:26)m

2 z d2 2 + h.c.(cid:27) .

21

(2.45)

(2.46)

here we also included the superpotential term assuming that |m|  g|v|. thus, the
low-energy theory is that of the free chiral supereld with the mass m. we hasten to
add that eq. (2.46) was obtained at the classical level. the quantum corrections do
modify it as we will see later. in particular, the kinetic term receives perturbative
corrections. the expansion parameter is 1/ log||/. the superpotential term is
also renormalized but only at the nonperturbative level, see sec. 4.3. in this way
we arrive at an eective low-energy lagrangian of the general form (2.19) with one
chiral supereld.

2.4 the vacuum manifold: generalities

in this section we present a general approach to the construction of the vacuum
manifold in the gauge theories. particular applications will be given in the subse-
quent sections. we start from a historical remark. a gauge invariant description of
the system of the vacuum valleys was suggested in ref. [39] and extensively used
in refs. [5, 40]; recently the issue was revisited in ref. [41].
in these works it is
explained that the set of proper coordinates parametrizing the space of the classical
vacua is nothing else but the set of independent gauge invariant polynomials con-
structed from the chiral matter elds. another name for these coordinates, often
used in the literature, is the moduli. the vacuum manifold is referred to as the
moduli space.

in the previous sections we considered the u(1) and su(2) theories in the wess-
zumino gauge. this gauge is extremely convenient in the unbroken phase. at
the same time, for the general analysis of the higgs phase, a superanalog of the
unitary gauge is more suitable. to illustrate the statement we turn again to the
same su(2) theory with one avor. as was just explained, in this theory only one
physical higgs supereld  survives. correspondingly, eq. (2.45) can be viewed
as the unitary gauge condition, rather than the parametrization of the vacuum
manifold; any eld conguration q
f can be cast in the form (2.45) by an appropriate
gauge transformation. in this gauge the lagrangian becomes

l = ( 1

4g2 z d2 tr w 2 + h.c.) +

1

4 z d2d2   tr ev .

(2.47)

(we omit the mass term for the time being.)

to verify that this is indeed the analog of the unitary gauge one can rewrite the

lagrangian in components keeping the terms up to quadratic in v ,

lquad = 

ga +

1

2g2 dada + ||2

1
4g2 ga
1
m am a(cid:21) + 2   + fermionic part .
2

2 (cid:20)va

+

va + c ada +

1
4

c ac a

(2.48)

note that the term linear in v drops out in tr ev . eliminating the auxiliary elds d
and m we arrive at the theory containing the massive vector triplet plus the scalar

22

triplet (their common mass is g||), plus the massless modulus eld , plus their
fermionic partners.
the following general construction extends this example. consider a generic
gauge theory, based on the gauge group g, with matter q = {qi} in the repre-
sentation r, which can be reducible. the index i runs from 1 to n where n is the
dimension of the representation r. the lagrangian has the form

l = (

1

8t (r)g2 z d2 tr w 2 + h.c.) +

1

4 z d2d2  qev q ,

(2.49)

where the group theory coecient t (r) is dened after eq. (2.90). in particular,
t (r) = 1/2 if the generators are in the fundamental representation of su(n), which
is usually assumed. for the time being the superpotential is set to zero. the theory
is invariant under the (super)gauge transformations

ev (x,,)  ei (xr,) ev (x,,) ei(xl,) , w(xl, )  ei(xl,) w(xl, ) ei(xl,) ,
q(xl, )  ei(xl,) q(xl, ) ,
it is seen that for the spatially constant elds these gauge transformations elevate
the original group g to its complex extension gc. the group gc acts in the n-
dimensional complex space c n. all points of c n belonging to one and the same
gauge orbit of gc are physically identical. after this identication is done, we get
the space m of physically distinct classical vacua as a quotient

q(xr, )  q(xr, ) ei (xr,) .

(2.50)

m = c n/gc .

in fact, the space m is not a manifold but, rather, a sum of manifolds,

m = xi mi ,

(2.51)

(2.52)

where each mi is characterized by a subgroup hi of g which remains unbroken. for
instance, in the su(2) model with one avor discussed above the original complex
space is c 4, its complex dimension is four. the group gc which is a complexied
su(2) is three-dimensional. moreover, the space m is the sum of two manifolds:
the zero-dimensional m1 consisting of one point,  = 0, and the one-dimensional
manifold m2 which is  6= 0. the stability group h1 coincides with su(2) (the
entire su(2) remains unbroken). for m2 the stability group is trivial (all vector
bosons are higgsed).
returning to the generic gauge theory let us consider the case when all vector
bosons are higgsed. it implies that n  dg, where dg is the dimension of the group
g (the number of the generators). we pick up such mi in eq. (2.52) whose stability
group is trivial. the dg degrees of freedom are eaten up in the process of higgsing
the gauge bosons. then the complex dimension of mi is n  dg.

23

to determine the kahler metric on m we do the following. first, introduce

n  dg complex coordinates on m in some way,

q = q(1, . . . , ndg) .

(2.53)

one of the possible ways of parametrizing m is exploiting the set of gauge invariant
chiral polynomials constructed from the elds q. generally speaking, their number
is larger than n  dg, but the number of independent invariants is equal to n  dg.

second, the condition of the vanishing energy, (i.e. da = 0, cf. eq. (2.48)) is



c a

q( )ecq( ) = 0 .

(2.54)

here we get dg equations for dg quantities c a, so the solution c a(,  ) is unique 4.
once the solution is found the kahler metric is obtained,

k = q( )ec(, ) q( ) .

(2.55)

in the mathematical literature the procedure of constructing the kinetic term for
the moduli, after integrating out all heavy gauge bosons, goes under the name the
kahler quotient, e.g. [42].

although the construction described above solves the issue of the kahler metric
on the moduli space in principle, in practice solving eqs. (2.54) is a dicult technical
task. therefore, it is instructive to see how the general procedure is related to the
d-atness conditions in the wess-zumino gauge. to pass to this gauge we perform
the gauge transformation (2.50) with  = ic/2,

q = ec/2 q ,

q = q ec/2 ,

e v = ec/2 ev ec/2 .

(2.56)

q depend on the parameters
note that, after this transformation, the elds q and
i in a non-holomorphic way, unlike q and q, whose dependence was holomorphic.
the gauge transformed c vanishes, and eqs. (2.54) take the form

q t a q = 0 .

=

(2.57)


 c a

qe c q(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ca=0

this is precisely the d-atness conditions in the wess-zumino gauge.

what happens if n < dg? in this case it clear that the group g cannot be fully
higgsed. a part of the group g can be realized in the higgs mode, however, while a
subgroup h of g remains unbroken. then the consideration above can be repeated
with the substitution of dg by dg  dh. the gauge orbit which identies the points
on c n is that of the quotient g/h. even at n > dg for each manifold mi with
nontrivial hi the situation is similar.

4if the solution is non-unique it means that q( ) belongs to mi with a nontrivial stability

group hi.

24

the technical diculty of solving eqs. (2.54) explains why the kahler metric
on the moduli space is explicitly found only in several relatively simple models.
usually one analyzes the d-atness conditions in the wess-zumino gauge, rather
than the general relations (2.54). this strategy proves to be simpler. one tries to
nd a particular solution of the d-atness conditions containing a suciently large
number of parameters. once found, the particular solution is then promoted to the
general solution by virtue of the avor symmetries of the model under considera-
tion. an instructive example is discussed in sec. 2.5.3. it is customary to use the
gauge invariant polynomials as the moduli parameters. this corresponds to a par-
ticular choice of the moduli parameters  introduced above. the use of the gauge
invariant polynomials makes absolutely transparent the realization of the quotient
space (2.51). on the other hand using more general parametrizations (2.53) may
result in algebraically simpler expressions for the kahler potentials.

2.5 the vacuum manifold: examples

2.5.1

su(5) model with one quintet and one (anti)decuplet

the approach based on the chiral polynomials is very convenient for establishing
the fact of the existence (non-existence) of the moduli space of the classical vacua,
and in counting the dimensionality of this space. as an example, consider the su(5)
model with one quintet and one (anti)decuplet. this is the simplest chiral model
with no internal anomalies. it describes grand unication, with one generation of
quarks and leptons. this example of the non-chiral matter is singled out historically
 the dynamical supersymmetry breaking was rst found in this model [20, 21].

the matter sector consists of one quintet eld v , and one (anti)decuplet an-
tisymmetric eld x. one can see that in this case there are no chiral invariants
at all. for instance, v v x, vanishes due to antisymmetricity of x. another
candidate, xxxv , vanishes too. this means that no d at direc-
tions exist. the same conclusion can be reached by explicitly parametrizing v and
x; inspecting then the d-atness conditions one can conclude that they have no
solutions, see e.g. appendix a in ref. [43].

thus, the classical vacuum manifold reduces to the point v = x = 0.

2.5.2 the 3-2 model of aeck, dine, and seiberg

the aeck-dine-seiberg (ads) model [22], also known as the 3-2 model, is based
on the direct product of two gauge groups, su(3)su(2) (that is where the name
comes from). it can be obtained from the standard model by eliminating from the
latter certain elements inessential for the dynamical susy breaking. following [22]
we retain only one generation of matter, discard the hypercharge u(1) and the
eld el, singlet with respect to su(3)su(2) (color and weak isospin). thus,
altogether we will be dealing with 14 weyl fermions.

25

in terms of the su(3) color group we deal with sqcd with three colors and
two avors, u and d. the quark sector includes the following chiral (left-handed)
superelds:

qf  {u, d} ,

q f  {u , d} ,

( = 1, 2, 3; f, f = 1, 2) .

(2.58)

the avor su(2) (the superscript f ) of the left-handed particles, qf , is gauged 
this is our weak interaction. as for the antiparticles q f , the subscript f is the index
of a global su(2) which remains ungauged.

the gauge bosons w  and w 0, and their superpartners, transform according to
the adjoint representation of the group su(2) of the weak isospin. it is here that
the asymmetry appears between the right- and left-handed matter. in addition, to
avoid the internal (global) anomaly [44] we must add to the matter sector one more
doublet of chiral superelds, the lepton doublet

lf = {, e} .

(2.59)

no mass term that would be invariant with respect to both su(3) and su(2) can
be built. thus, the model is indeed chiral. in search of the valleys we will rst count
the dimension of the moduli space. to this end one must construct all independent
chiral invariants. there are no bilinear invariants, as was just mentioned. two cubic
invariants exist, however,

i f = qf q f lg f g ,

( f = 1, 2) .

(2.60)

they form a doublet of the global su(2). one more chiral invariant is quartic,

j = (qf q f ) (qgqg) f g  f g  det{qq} .

(2.61)

we conclude that the moduli space has complex dimension three. out of 14 elds
11 (the dimension of the su(3)su(2)) are eaten up by the higgs mechanism.
in the case at hand it is not dicult to nd an explicit parametrization of
the d-at directions. the two-parametric family of eld congurations for which
qt aq = 0 for all a has the form

qf = 


1
0
0

0
2
0

,




q f = 


1
0
0

0
2
0




, l = (cid:18)0 , q|1|2  |2|2(cid:19) .

(2.62)

in terms of the general construction of sec. 2.4 the elds above correspond to q.
they satisfy the wess-zumino d-atness conditions qt aq = 0.

for this conguration the gauge invariants i f and j are

i1 =  2

1q|1|2  |2|2 ,

i2 = 0 ,

j =  2

1  2
2 .

(2.63)

26

the expressions above demonstrate that the vacuum family (2.62) is general modulo
the global su(2) rotations,

q
g = u

f
g q f ,

(2.64)

where u is a matrix from su(2). the u(1) part of this su(2) is irrelevant (it
changes the phases of 1,2 which are arbitrary anyway); therefore, we deal with
the su(2)/u(1) quotient in the avor space. this quotient is equivalent to the
sphere which is parametrized by one complex parameter. altogether, we have three
complex parameters  exactly the number we need. we do not write out the avor
parametrization explicitly since we will use a round-about way to account for the
avor symmetry.

now we are ready to get the kahler potential,

q q = 311 + 22 ,

k =

(2.65)

where i are the moduli elds depending on xl and  (correspondingly, i depend
on xr and ), and we set the matrix of the global su(2) rotation to unity, u = 1.
as was already mentioned, in the literature it is customary to use the gauge
invariants as the moduli elds. in the given problem the gauge invariants i f and j
are related to i by virtue of eq. (2.63). we can rewrite the kahler potential (2.65)
in terms of i f and j. because of the avor su(2), the invariants i1 and i2 can only
enter in the combination

a =

1

2 (cid:16) i1i1 + i2i2(cid:17) =

1
2

(11)2 (11  22) .

as for j, it is convenient to introduce

b =

 jj =

1
3

1
3

1122 .

then

11 = (cid:16)a  a2  b3(cid:17)1/3

+(cid:16)a + a2  b3(cid:17)1/3

,

22 =

3b
11

.

thus, the kahler potential takes the form

k = 3(cid:20)(cid:16)a  a2  b3(cid:17)1/3
(cid:16)a  a2  b3(cid:17)1/3

+

+(cid:16)a + a2  b3(cid:17)1/3(cid:21)
+(cid:16)a + a2  b3(cid:17)1/3 .

3b

(2.66)

(2.67)

(2.68)

(2.69)

for an alternative derivation of the kahler potential in the 3-2 model see [45].

27

2.5.3 su(5) model with two quintets and two (anti)decuplets

this model was the rst example of the instanton-induced supersymmetry breaking
in the weak coupling regime [20,24]. it presents another example of the anomaly-free
chiral matter sector. unlike the one-family model (one quintet and one (anti)decu-
plet) the d-at directions do exist. generically, the gauge su(5) symmetry is com-
pletely broken, so that 24 out of 30 chiral matter superelds are eaten up in the
super-higgs mechanism. therefore, the vacuum valley should be parametrized by
six complex moduli.

denote two quintets present in the model as v 

f (f = 1, 2), and two (anti)decu-
plets as (xg) where g = 1, 2 and the matrices xg are antisymmetric in color indices
, . indices f and g reect the su(2)v  su(2)x avor symmetry of the model.
six independent chiral invariants are

mg = vkxgvlkl ,

bgf = xgxkxlvf kl ,

(2.70)

where the gauge indices in m are convoluted in a straightforward manner v xv ,
while in b one uses the  symbol,

xgxkxlvf = (xg)(xk)(xl)(vf ) .

the choice of invariants above implies that there are no moduli transforming as
{4, 2} under the avor group (such moduli vanish).
in this model the explicit parametrization of the valley is far from being obvious,
to put it mildly. the most convenient strategy of the search is analyzing the ve-
by-ve matrix

d

 = v 
f

v f
 + ( x g)(xg) .

(2.71)

if this matrix is proportional to the unit one, the vanishing of the d terms is
guaranteed. (similar strategy based on analyzing analogs of eq. (2.71) is applicable
in other cases as well).

a solution of d-atness conditions (2.71) containing three real parameters was
suggested long ago in ref. [46]. recently, four-parametric solution was found [47].
it has the form

v1 =

,

(2.72)

0
v2
2
0
v2
4
0









c
0
v1
3
0
d







,






v2 =





, x2 =

28

x1 =





0
0
x1
0
0

0 x1
0
13
0
0
0
13 0
0
0
0
0
0
0 x1
0

45

0
0
0
x1
45
0

0
a
a
0
0 x2
0
0
0 x2

23

25

0
0
x2
0
23
0
b
b
0
0 x2

45

0
x2
25
0
x2
45
0

,





where

v1
3 = 

v2
2 =

a

c

c
b

a2  c2 qb2  (a2  c2) ,
bqb2  (a2  c2)s b2
a2  c2 +
a2  c2s b2
d2
a2 ,
a2  c2 +
a2  c2 qb2  (a2  c2) ,
a2  c2qb2  (a2  c2) .

d
ba

c

x1
13 =

x2
23 =

x2
45 =

d2
a2 ,

x1
45 =

v2

4 = a2  c2s b2
a2  c2s b2

a2  c2 +
d2
a2 ,

a2  c2 +

a
b

x2
25 = 

cd
a

,

d2
a2 ,

(2.73)

the most general valley parametrization depends on 12 real parameters. never-
theless, the four-parametric solution above is sucient for the full reconstruction of
the kahler potential provided that the avor symmetry is taken into account. in-
deed, the avor symmetry requires the kahler potential to depend on the following
four combinations:

i1 = m gmg , i2 =

1
2

b gf bgf , i3 = mg b gf bkf m

k , i4 =

b

kh b gf bghbkf . (2.74)

1
2

substituting the solution (2.72) in the original kinetic term

v f vf +

x gxg ,

1
2

(2.75)

one nds the kahler potential in terms of four parameters a, b, c, d, which can then,
in turn, be expressed in terms of four invariants ii. in this way one arrives at

k(ii) =

3
5

b
cos(cid:18)1

3

arccos

a

b3/2(cid:19) +

1
4

1

cos(cid:16) 1

b3/2(cid:17)
3 arccos a


 ,

where

a = 125i1 ,

b =

25

9 "ri2 +qi4  i 2

2# .
2 +ri2 qi4  i 2

(2.76)

(2.77)

this kahler potential was obtained in ref. [47]. the remarkable feature of the result
is the absence of the invariant i3. the fact that k does not depend on i3 implies
some extra su(2) avor symmetry of the moduli space, in addition to the obvious
su(2)v  su(2)x. the extra avor symmetry of k was not expected a priori.

29

2.6 the impact of the superpotential

so far we discussed the structure of the classical vacua in the theories without
superpotential. we saw that in a large class of such theories there is a continuous
manifold of physically inequivalent vacua  moduli space. what is the physical way
to pick up a particular point in this space?

to this end one can introduce a small perturbation in the form of a superpotential
w which lifts the vacuum degeneracy. a few distinct scenarios of what happens then
exist. for a suciently general superpotential no continuous degeneracy survives.
the vacuum manifold shrinks to several isolated points determined by the extremal
points of w.
in some particular cases it may happen that no supersymmetric
vacua exist. then, logically there are two possibilities: there may exist a non-susy
vacuum with a positive energy density (supersymmetry is spontaneously broken, see
sec. 5.1), or there may be no vacuum at all at nite values of the elds. the latter
case is called the run-away vacuum. let us discuss in more detail this phenomenon,
which is an interesting animal in the zoo of the supersymmetric models.

consider, e.g., the minimal wess-zumino model with the superpotential w =
3 ln(/). certainly, this is a nonrenormalizable model. never mind; assume that
this model is nothing but a low-energy eective description of some fundamental
theory which is renormalizable and well-dened.

the scalar potential emerging from the logarithmic superpotential is

u =

6

||2 .

(2.78)

3


u = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

+ m(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

for any nite  the vacuum energy density e is positive; the supersymmetric state
e = 0 is achieved only asymptotically, at ||  . the theory has no vacuum state
in the regular sense of the word. to trace the fate of the sliding vacuum we can
stabilize the theory by introducing extra terms in the superpotential, for instance,
w = m2/2 with an arbitrarily small m. the scalar potential becomes

,

(2.79)

and the supersymmetric vacuum is located at 2 = 3/m. the limit m  0
makes the notion of the run-away vacuum explicit. the run-away vacuum could be
of interest in the cosmological context, but we do not touch this subject here.

the most famous example of the gauge theory with the run-away vacuum is
sqcd with nf = nc  1 in the limit of the strictly massless matter (sec. 4.3).
the stabilization can be readily achieved in this case by adding a mass term to the
matter elds. other examples with a similar behavior will be considered too.

2.7 the impact of quantum eects

in the discussion above we did not touch yet the quantum eects. they can be of
two types, perturbative and nonperturbative. let us discuss them in turn.

30

the perturbative corrections do not renormalize the superpotential  this is the
essence of the non-renormalization theorem for the f -terms [48]. therefore, the f -
atness conditions, f = 0, remain intact. what the perturbative corrections aect
is the kahler potential. in the higgs phase the parameter governing the amplitude
of corrections is the gauge coupling constant ()  (log /)1 where  is the
scale of the moduli elds and  is the scale parameter of the gauge theory. for large
moduli,   , the coupling is weak and the corrections to the kahler potential are
calculable. if   , however, the corrections explode, and the kahler potential is
not calculable.
the crucial role of the nonperturbative eects is that they can show up in the
superpotential. thus, they can aect the f -atness conditions. in particular, even
if the tree-level superpotential vanishes, a superpotential can be generated nonper-
turbatively, lifting the vacuum degeneracy. that is how the run-away vacuum occurs
in sqcd with nf = nc  1.
similarly to the perturbative corrections, in the higgs phase in the weak coupling
range the nonperturbative corrections to the superpotential are calculable. the tool
allowing one to do the calculation is instantons. many interesting phenomena occur
at this level, for instance, the dynamical susy breaking, see sec. 5.4. this happens
because the nonperturbatively generated superpotentials have a dierent structure
compared to the tree-level superpotentials allowed by renormalizability.

moreover, since we deal with the f -terms which are severely constrained by
the general susy properties, some results can be propagated from the weak to
the strong coupling regime. this is apparently the most interesting aspect of the
supersymmetric gauge dynamics.

2.8 anomalous and non-anomalous u(1) symmetries

an important role in the analysis of susy gauge theories belongs to global symme-
tries. we encountered some examples of the avor symmetries in the discussion of
the d-at directions in the 3-2 and su(5) models. in this section we focus on u(1)
symmetries.

one global u(1) symmetry, usually called the r symmetry, is inherent to any
supersymmetric theory because of its geometrical nature. in the superspace this r
transformation is expressed by the phase rotation of ,

r :

  ei  ,

  ei  ,

x  x .

(2.80)

the commutator of this transformation with the susy transformation (2.1) is

[q, ] = q ,

[ q , ] =  q  ,

(2.81)

where  is the generator of the transformation (2.80). these transformations gen-
erate the following transformations of the superelds:

(x, , )  eir  (x, ei, ei ) ,

(2.82)

31

where r is the corresponding r charge of the eld .

to get acquainted more closely with this u(1) symmetry let us consider rst
supersymmetric gluodynamics, the simplest non-abelian gauge theory. the la-
grangian is obtained from eq. (2.35) by omitting the part with the matter elds,

l =

1

4g2 z d2 tr w 2 + h.c. ,

(2.83)

where w = w at a, and t a are the generators of g in the fundamental representa-
tion. the gauge group g can be arbitrary. in components

l =

1

g2 (cid:26)

1
4

ga + iad 
ga

a (cid:27) .

(2.84)

with the massless gluino eld, the lagrangian (2.84) is invariant under the
chiral rotations   ei. this corresponds to the chiral transformation of super-
elds (2.82) with the r charge of v equal to zero and that of w equal to one. the
classically conserved r current is [49]

r =

1
2

() r  = 

1

g2 a a ,  = z d3x r0 .

(2.85)

from the commutation relations (2.81) it follows that this current enters the same
supermultiplet as the supercurrent and the energy-momentum tensor [50]. in other
words, the axial current r is the lowest component of the supereld j 

j  = 

4

g2 trhev wev w i

= r  nij  + h.c.o  2  

    +

(2.86)

1

2 n   i  r  + h.c.o + . . . ,

where j  is the supercurrent, and    is the energy-momentum tensor,

j  = ()  j 

 =

4i
g2 tr g   ,

(2.87)

   = () ()   =

2

g2 trhi {d} 

   id{   } + g g  i .

the symmetrization over ,  or ,  is marked by the braces. note that all com-
ponent expressions we presented above refer to the wess-zumino gauge.

the classical equation for j 

d j  = 0 ,

besides the conservation of all three currents, contains also the relations


 = 0 ,

() j  = j 

  = 0 ,

32

(2.88)

(2.89)

which express the classical conformal and superconformal symmetries. at the quan-
tum level these symmetries are broken. the conservation of the r current is also
lost at the quantum level  this is the celebrated chiral anomaly. in particular, the
one-loop result for r is

r =

tg
162 ga



ga .

(2.90)

the group factors tg (and t (r) to be used below) are dened as follows. let t a be
the generator of the group g in the representation r. then tr (t at b) = t (r)ab.
moreover, t (r) in the adjoint representation is denoted by tg. according to the
terminology used in the mathematical literature t (r) is one half of the dynkin index
for the representation r; another name is the dual coxeter number. for su(n) one
has tg = n and t (fund) =1/2.

the supereld generalization of eq. (2.90) is

d j  = 

tg
82 dtr w 2 .

(2.91)

equation (2.90) is nothing but one of the components of this superrelation. what
are other components? they present the anomalies in () j 

 and 
,

() j  = j 

  = i

tg

42 trh g  

 i ,


 =

tg
162 tr [gg] .

(2.92)

besides,  and j 
combining it with complex conjugate one arrives at

 cease to be conserved. indeed, acting by d on eq. (2.91) and

j = i

tg

322 trhd2 w 2  d2 w 2i .

(2.93)

in perfect parallel with the axial current the right-hand side is in fact a full derivative,

r =

tg
162 k ,

j =

tg
162 k ,

where the supereld k generalizes the chern-simons current k,

k = 4  tr(cid:26)aa 

i

3a[aa](cid:27) .

(2.94)

(2.95)

here we introduced the supereld a which generalizes the standard vector potential
a,

a = 

1
8

()  [d, d ]v .

we can return to the conserved currents by dening

r = r 

tg
162 k ,

j = j 

tg
162 k .

33

(2.96)

(2.97)

the price we pay is that the corrected current j is not a supergauge invariant
object. nevertheless, in the wess-zumino gauge it is only the lowest component of
k (equal to k) which is explicitly gauge non-invariant.
energy-momentum tensor  as the  and   components of j,

following a standard route one denes the conserved supercurrent j  and the

j 
  = j 

   i
 =  



 trh g  

tg
i ,
22 
tg
162 g tr [gg] .

(2.98)

these currents are conserved, but the conformal and superconformal anomalies are
still there.

j 
  = 3i

tg

42 trh g  

 i ,


 = 3

tg
162 tr [gg] .

(2.99)

compared with eq. (2.92) we got an extra coecient 3. we stress once more that
eq. (2.99) gives the anomalies in the conserved supercharge and energy-momentum
tensor.

the supermultiplet structure of the anomalies in r, the trace of the energy-
  (the three geometric anomalies) was revealed

 and in j 

momentum tensor 
in [51].

inclusion of the matter elds in the model-building typically results in additional
global symmetries, and, in particular, in additional u(1) symmetries. some of them
act exclusively in the matter sector. these are usually quite evident and are im-
mediately detectable. somewhat less obvious are u(1) symmetries which act on
both, the matter and gluino elds. they play a distinguished role in the analysis of
possible instanton-induced eects. here we intend to present a classication of the
anomalous and non-anomalous u(1) symmetries.

the general lagrangian of the gauge theory with matter is given in eq. (2.49)
in the absence of the superpotential. the matter eld q consists of some number
of irreducible representations of the gauge group. every irreducible representation
will be referred to as avor, {q} = {q1, . . . qnf}. it is clear that additionally to
u(1) discussed above one can make the phase rotations of each of nf matter elds
independently. thus, altogether we have nf + 1 chiral rotations. adding a general
superpotential w eliminates, in principle, all these u(1) symmetries. however, if
the classical conformal symmetry is unbroken, at least one u(1) survives [50]. the
conformal invariance implies the absence of dimensional parameters; in other words,
it limits the superpotential to be cubic in q. then the action is invariant under the
following transformation:

v (x, , )  v (x, ei, ei ) , q(xl, )  e2i/3 q(xl, ei) .

(2.100)

the cubic form of the superpotential xes the r charge of the matter to be 2/3. in
components the same transformations look as

a  a ,   ei , f

  ei/3f

 , f  e2i/3f .

(2.101)

34

the corresponding chiral current, which can be viewed as a generalization of the
current (2.85), is denoted r0

 and has the form

r0
 = 

3 xf (cid:18)f  f  2i f
this current is the lowest component of the supereld j 0
 ,

1
g2 aa +

1



d f(cid:19) .

(2.102)

j 0
  =



4

g2 trh w  ev w ev i
3 xf

qf (cid:18)

1

  ev   ev d  +



 



d ev(cid:19) qf ,

(2.103)

where the background-covariant derivatives are introduced,

q = ev d(cid:16)ev q(cid:17) ,

  q = ev d (cid:16)ev q(cid:17) .

(2.104)

the supereld current j 0
  plays the same geometrical role as j  in susy glu-
odynamics. in particular, the   component contains the total energy-momentum
tensor of the theory.

the remaining nf currents are due to the phase rotations of each avor supereld

independently,

qf (xl, )  eif qf (xl, ) .

(2.105)

note that  is not touched by these transformations  we deal with the genuinely
avor symmetry. the corresponding chiral currents are

in the supereld language, rf
rents [52]

 = f  f  f
rf
 is the   component of the so called konishi cur-

(2.106)


d f .

j f = qf ev qf ,

(2.107)

to make the situation similar to j  we can form another supereld j f
 ,

j f
  = 

1
2

[d, d ]j f = 

1
2

[d, d ] qf ev qf ,

(2.108)

of which rf
 is the lowest component. there is a deep dierence between the avor
current j f
  and the geometric current j 0
 : the latter contains the supercurrent and
the energy-momentum tensor in the higher components while higher components of
the former are conserved trivially.

with all these denitions in hands we are ready to discuss the non-conservation
of the currents both due to the classical superpotential and the quantum anomalies.

35

d j 0

  one has

for the geometric current j 0
d

3w xf

3tg pf t (rf )

  =

162

2
3

 


qf

qf
w


tr w 2 +

1

8 xf


f d2( qf ev qf )



,

(2.109)

where f are the anomalous dimensions 5 of the matter elds qf . the rst line
is purely classical.
it is seen that the classical part vanishes for the cubic in q
superpotential, as it was discussed above. the second line is the quantum anomaly.
being understood in the operator form, this anomaly is exact [53]. higher loops
enter through the anomalous dimensions f . let us memorize this relation  it will
play an important role in what follows.

the anomaly in the konishi currents j f is expressed by the formula [52]

d2j f = d2 ( qf ev qf ) = 4 qf

w
qf

+

t (rf )
22 tr w 2 .

(2.110)

the rst term on the right-hand side is classical, the second term is the anomaly.
note that in this operator relation there are no higher-order corrections, in contrast
with the situation with the geometric anomalies, eq. (2.109).

 j 0

by combining the konishi currents with the r0

 current, with the appropriate
coecients, one establishes all conserved anomaly-free r currents of the theory under
consideration (provided that they exist, of course). to this end it is convenient to
write the anomaly relations in the form of divergences of j 0
qf
w

 tr w 2

162 tr w 2) + h.c. ,

d2

3w xf (cid:18)1 +

162 
3tg xf
w
qf

2 (cid:19) qf
(1  f ) t (rf )

  = i d2(1

  and j f
 ,

  = 

 j f

qf

2

+ h.c. ,

(2.111)

t (rf )

+

(2.112)

i
3

1

and



f

where we used eqs. (2.108), (2.109) and (2.110) plus the algebraic relation

 [d, d ] = 

i

4 (cid:16)d2 d2  d2d2(cid:17) .

(2.113)

from the equations above it is clear that there exist nf linear combinations of
nf + 1 chiral currents which are free from the gauge anomaly. the choice is not

5for the denition of f s see eq. (4.7).

36

unique, of course. in particular, we can choose one of such currents in the form

j 0f
  = j 0

  

3tg pf (1  f ) t (rf )

3pf t (rf )

  ,

xf j f

(2.114)

the coecient in front of the second term is proportional to the  function, see
sec. 4.1. in the extreme ultraviolet, where   0, the anomalous dimensions f ()
vanish, and we are left with the one-loop expression for the current j 0f
 . the
formula (2.114) is valid, however, for any . thus, it smoothly interpolates to the
strong coupling range [54]. in particular, if the theory is conformal in the infrared
the second term vanishes and the current j 0f
  coincides with the geometrical current
j 0
 .
the remaining nf  1 currents can be chosen as

j f g
  = t (rg)j f

   t (rf )j g
  ,

(2.115)

where one can x g and consider all f 6= g. for nonvanishing superpotential the
classical part in the divergence of currents (2.114) and (2.115) can be simply read o
from eqs. (2.111) and (2.112). generically, no conserved current survive. for specic
superpotentials it happens that one can nd conserved combinations of currents. it
is certainly the case if the theory with the given superpotential has at directions.
the surviving moduli can be classied according to the conserved r charges. the
examples will be given below.

2.9 eective lagrangian and the anomalous u(1)

let us return for a while to susy gluodynamics, in this theory a single chiral
current (2.85) exists. as well-known, the anomaly in this current, see eq. (2.90),
does not lead to the breaking of u(1) in perturbation theory.
indeed, one can
build a conserved (but gauge non-invariant) current r given in eq. (2.97). the
corresponding charge is gauge invariant in perturbation theory.

at the nonperturbative level, the u(1) symmetry is lost [9]. the only remnant

of the continuous chiral symmetry that survives [2] is a discrete subgroup z2tg,

  eik/tg  ,

k = 1, 2, ..., 2tg .

(2.116)

the fact that susy gluodynamics is invariant under the discrete z2tg can be ver-
ied, for instance, by analyzing the instanton-induced t hooft interaction  the
number of the gluino zero modes on the instanton is 2tg, as will be discussed in
more detail in sec. 3.

one can visualize all anomalies, as well as the discrete invariance ztg via the

veneziano-yankielowicz eective lagrangian [55],

lv y =

tg

3 z d2  ln(cid:18)
(cid:19)

tg

+ h.c. + invariant terms ,

(2.117)

37

where  is a composite color-singlet chiral supereld,

 =

3

322tg

tr w 2 ,

and  is expressed via the scale parameter of the theory  as

 = e3 ,

e = 2.718 . . . .

(2.118)

the superpotential term in lv y is the only one non-invariant under the geometrical
transformations discussed in the previous section. the omitted terms, including the
kinetic one, must be invariant. to see how the superpotential term generates the
anomalies let us consider its variation under the chiral transformation (2.82)

(xl, )  e2i(xl, ei) .

(2.119)

(2.120)

then

lv y = i

2t 2
g

3 z d2  + h.c. ,

in full accord with eq. (2.90). one can easily check that all other geometrical
anomalies are reproduced as well.

note that the logarithmic term in the lagrangian (2.117) is not fully dened
since the logarithm is a multivalued function. the dierences between the branches
is not important for the generation of the anomalies  this dierence resides in the
invariant terms of lv y . this dierence is important, however, for the large chiral
transformations (2.116) forming the z2tg subgroup.
the proper denition was suggested in ref. [56]. for the n-th branch one must

dene a corresponding lagrangian,

ln =

tg

3 z d2 "ln(cid:18)
(cid:19)

tg

+ 2in# + h.c. ,

(2.121)

where a specic branch is ascribed to the logarithm. in terms of the original theory
the parameter n shifts the vacuum angle    + 2n. the discrete transforma-
tions (2.116) act on  as in eq. (2.119), with the substitution   k/tg. thus,
these transformations convert ln  lnk. this implies the ztg invariance of the
theory provided that the partition function sums over all n,

z =



xn=z d  e ir d4x ln .

(2.122)

the invariance group is ztg = ztg/z2 because  is quadratic in , thus identifying
 and .
the construction of ref. [56] determines the number of the vacuum states to
be tg. the zero energy states are obtained from the stationary of points of the
superpotential. they lie at

hik = 3e2ik/tg ,

k = 0, . . . , tg  1 .

(2.123)

38

summarizing, we see that the theory consists of tg sectors exhibiting the sponta-
neous breaking of z2tg  z2.
one should keep in mind that the lagrangian (2.117) is not wilsonean, it cannot
be used for obtaining the scattering amplitudes and other information of a similar
nature. its only raison detre is the explicit realization of the anomalous and non-
anomalous symmetries of susy gluodynamics and the vacuum structure compatible
with these symmetries.

the point  = 0 requires a special considerations. if one takes the lagrangians
(2.121) literally, there exists [56] a chirally symmetric vacuum at  = 0. it was over-
looked in the original analysis [55]. if this is indeed the case, the chirally symmetric
vacuum drastically aects various mechanisms of the dynamical susy breaking.
we will dwell on this issue in sec. 7.

2.10 wittens index: where to look for the dynamical su-

persymmetry breaking?

the answer to this question experienced a dramatic evolution over the last decade. in
the 1980s people believed that only the chiral gauge theories are suitable candidates
for the dynamical susy breaking. correspondingly, the searches were limited to
this rather narrow class of models. at present it became clear that, under certain
conditions, some nonchiral gauge theories can do the job too.

first, we will introduce the notion of wittens index, one of the most impor-
tant theoretical tools in this range of questions, and explain why initially theorists
attention was attracted exclusively to the chiral gauge theories. we also discuss a
deeper theoretical understanding achieved in the 1990s. novel elements, introduced
into circulation recently, allow one to construct mechanisms of the dynamical susy
breaking, based on the nonchiral gauge theories, although the chiral ones still remain
the most important supplier of such mechanisms.

wittens index is dened as

e=0 and nf
where nb
states, respectively.

e=0 are the numbers of the bosonic and fermionic zero-energy

iw = nb

e=0  nf

e=0

(2.124)

as was emphasized in [2], iw is an invariant that does not change under any
continuous deformations of the theory  such as the particle masses, the volume in
which the theory is dened, the values of the coupling constants and so on. under
such deformations the levels of the system breathe, they can come to and leave zero,
but as long as the hamiltonian is supersymmetric, once, say, a bosonic state comes
to zero, it must be accompanied by its fermionic counterpartner, so that iw does
not change. if iw 6= 0 the theory does have at least iw zero-energy states. the
existence of the zero-energy vacuum state is the necessary and sucient condition
for supersymmetry to be realized linearly, i.e. stay unbroken. thus, only the iw = 0
theories could produce the dynamical susy breaking.

39

group su(n) so(n) sp (2n) g2

f4

e6 e7 e8

tg

n

n  2 n + 1

4

9

12

18

30

table 1: the dual coxeter number (one half of the dynkin index) for various groups.

wittens index can be calculated for the gauge theories based on arbitrary lie
group (for the time being let us forget about matter). its value is given by tg. the
values of tg for the semi-simple lie groups are collected in table 1. in the theories
where the gauge group is a product of semi-simple groups, g = g1  g2  . . .,
wittens index iw = tg1  tg2  . . . .
two alternative calculations of iw are known in the literature. the rst was
wittens original calculation who deformed the theory by putting it in a nite three-
dimensional volume v = l3. the size l is such that the coupling (l) is weak,
(l)  1. the eld-theoretical problem of counting the number of the zero-energy
states becomes, in the limit l  0, a quantum-mechanical problem of counting the
gluon and gluino zero modes. in practice, the problem is still quite tricky because
of subtleties associated with quantum mechanics on the group spaces.

the story has a dramatic development. the result obtained in the rst paper
in [2] was iw = r + 1 where r stands for the rank of the group. for the unitary and
simplectic groups r + 1 coincides with tg. however, for the orthogonal (starting
from so(7)) and exceptional groups r + 1 is smaller than tg. the overlooked zero-
energy states in the so(n) quantum mechanics of the zero modes were found by
the same author only 15 years later! (see the second paper in [2]). further useful
comments can be found in [57] where additional states in the exceptional groups
were exhibited.

an alternative calculation of iw [58] resorts to another deformation which, in
a sense, is an opposite extreme. a set of auxiliary matter elds with small mass
terms is introduced in such a way that the theory becomes completely higgsed and
weakly coupled. moreover, for a certain ratio of the mass parameters the pattern of
the gauge symmetry breaking is step-wise, e.g.

su(n)  su(n  1)  . . . su(2) nothing,

in the weakly coupled theory everything is calculable. in particular, one can nd
the vacuum states and count them. this was done in [58]. it turns out that the
gluino condensate is a convenient marker of the vacua  it takes distinct values in
the various vacua 6. the gluino condensate hi was exactly calculated in [58]; the
6actually, using the gluino condensate as an order parameter was suggested by witten [2], he

realized the mismatch for the orthogonal groups.

40

result is multiple-valued,

hi  e2ik/tg ,

k = 0, 1, ..., tg  1 ,

(2.125)

cf. eq. (2.123). all vacuum states are, of course, bosonic in this theory, implying
that iw = tg. in the limit when all mass parameters tend to innity the auxiliary
matter elds decouple and we return to the strongly coupled susy gluodynam-
ics. since iw is invariant under this deformation, the result iw = tg stays valid
irrespective of how large or small the mass parameters are.

the crucial element of the index analysis is the assumption that no vacuum
state runs away to innity in the space of elds in the process of deformation. for
instance, in wittens analysis [2] it was tacitly assumed that at l   no elds
develop innitely large expectation values. the analysis based on higgsing of the
theory by virtue of the auxiliary matter
[58] conrms this assumption. however,
as it was found recently, when physical (rather than the auxiliary) matter elds are
introduced, it is not always true that in the process of deformation no elds develop
innitely large expectation values.

if all matter elds are massive, nothing changes in the calculation of wittens
index, it remains the same. thus, what remains to study is the massless matter
sector. (remember: technically, such models are divided in two classes: chiral and
nonchiral. the matter which allows one to introduce a mass term for every matter
eld is called nonchiral, otherwise the model is called chiral.)

a natural deformation in the nonchiral models is the introduction of the mass
term [2]. then the index is the same as in susy gluodynamics, iw = tg 6=
0. for this reason, for a long time it was believed that the nonchiral models do
not provide for the opportunity of the dynamical susy breaking. recently it was
demonstrated [7], however, that in some particular models the limit m  0 leads to
the situation where some vacua run away to innity in the space of elds (sec. 2.6).
this means that the index determined by the m 6= 0 deformation is unphysical.
the physically relevant index must count only those zero energy states which lie in
a nite domain in the space of elds. the index dened in such a way could be
zero even in the nonchiral models [7]. thus, with this remark in mind, there is no
conceptual distinction between the nonchiral and chiral models. in addition to the
formal wittens index one should check whether there are run-away vacua in the
limit of vanishing deformation. for instance, it is conceivable that in some chiral
theory with the formal index zero the physical index (i.e. nb
e=0 calculated
for the eld congurations belonging to a nite domain in the space of elds) could
be nonzero, provided that some fermionic states run away.

e=0  nf

historically, the rst examples of the dynamical susy breaking were found in
the chiral theories. the class of such models is strongly constrained. building the
chiral matter sector, one has to proceed with caution, in order to avoid internal
chiral triangle anomalies (in the theories with the vector-like couplings, i.e.
the
nonchiral theories, the anomalous triangles do not appear, automatically). since
matter fermions have both the vector and axial-vector couplings, the set of the

41

fermion elds must be arranged in such a way that all chiral triangles coupled to the
gauge bosons of the theory cancel in the total sum. otherwise, the gauge invariance
is lost, and the theory becomes ill-dened, intractable. the best-known example is
the standard model. if one considers, say the zz eective vertex, arising due to
fermionic loops, the u-quark contribution is anomalous. the anomaly is canceled
after summation over all fermions belonging to the rst generation.

the easiest way to build a chiral theory that will be automatically anomaly-
free is to start from a larger anomaly-free theory, and to pretend that the gauge
symmetry of the original model is somehow spontaneously broken down to a smaller
group. the gauge bosons corresponding to the broken generators are frozen out.
the matter elds that are singlets with respect to the unbroken subgroup can be
discarded. the remaining matter sector may well be chiral, but there will be no
internal anomalies. for instance, to get the su(5) theory, we may start from so(10),
where all representations are (quasi)real, so this theory is automatically anomaly-
free. assume, we introduce the matter in the representation 16 of so(10). now,
we break so(10) down to su(5). the representation 16 can be decomposed with
respect to su(5) as a singlet, a quintet plus an (anti)decuplet. drop the singlet.
we are left with the su(5) model with one quintet and one (anti)decuplet. we can
further break su(5) down to su(3)su(2), a cascade which eventually leads us to
the 3-2 model of aeck, dine and seiberg.
in some of the chiral models obtained in this way one nds a self-consistent
weak coupling regime  under a certain choice of parameters the original gauge
group is completely higgsed (sec. 5.4). others are intrinsically strongly coupled
(sec. 6.1). the latter case could be connected to the former one by introducing
auxiliary nonchiral matter. this program (similar to that of ref. [58]) was carried
out in several models, see secs. 5.6 and 6.1.

the discovery of the nonchiral models of the dynamical susy breaking is ex-
tremely important since it expands the class of the susy-breaking theories. the
initial ndings [7] were further generalized in ref. [16]. the development was wel-
come by builders of the susy-breaking mechanisms.
let us comment on another recent development.

in ref. [56] arguments were
given in favor of the existence of the chirally symmetric phase in susy gluodynam-
ics. if such phase does exist, it is not ruled out that in some chiral gauge models
that are known to have no supersymmetric vacuum in the weak coupling regime,
a susy preserving vacuum may exist in the domain of strong coupling. for more
details see secs. 6.1 and 7.

3 fermion-boson degeneracy: magic backgrounds

if supersymmetry is unbroken, i.e.

q|0i = 0 ,

q |0i = 0 ,

(3.1)

42

then, from the supersymmetry algebra (2.11), it follows that the vacuum energy
vanishes. moreover, all states at nonzero energy are degenerate: each boson state
is accompanied by a fermion counterpartner. these statements are exact.
it is
instructive, however, to trace how they manifest themselves in perturbation theory.
in the previous sections we have constructed the classical vacua in various models.
the corresponding eld congurations have zero energy and, hence, are invariant
under the susy transformation. the vanishing of the vacuum energy persists when
(perturbative) quantum eects are switched on. this miracle of supersymmetry,
which was discovered by the founding fathers, is due to the cancellation between the
bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom. indeed, at one loop the vacuum energy is
the sum of the frequencies of the zero-point oscillations for each mode of the theory,

e vac =

1

2 xi nboson

i

 ferm

i

o .

(3.2)

this expression implies that the spectrum is discretized. for instance, the system
is put in a three-dimensional nite box with the periodic boundary conditions. the
boson and fermion terms enter with the opposite signs. equation (3.2) is general,
this formula is not specic for supersymmetry.

the special feature of supersymmetry is the fermion-boson degeneracy of the
for all nonvanishing frequencies boson
. at
excitations over the vacuum:
one-loop level the frequencies are those of free particles i = (m2 + ~k2
i )1/2, where ~ki
is the discretized three-momentum. the cancellation of quantum corrections to the
vacuum energy continues to take place in two loops, three loops, and so on; in fact,
it persists to any nite order in perturbation theory.

= ferm

i

i

a nonvanishing result for evac can appear only nonperturbatively. from the
general arguments above it follows that this can happen only provided that the set
of the classical vacua contain both, the boson and fermion congurations. in four-
dimensional theories this means the presence of massless fermions at the classical
level (note that we discuss now perturbation theory). only if there is an appro-
priate massless fermion prefabricated in the spectrum, can it assume the role of
goldstino.

the calculation of the vacuum energy is equivalent to the calculation of loops in
the empty space. when we speak of the instanton calculations, they are carried
out in the background instanton eld. the presence of a given background eld,
generally speaking, breaks supersymmetry, the supercharges are not conserved any-
more, and the degeneracy between the eigenfrequencies boson
is gone.
gone with it is the cancellation of the quantum corrections. in some special back-
ground elds, however, a part of supersymmetry is preserved. some supercharges
are broken while some others remain conserved. this is sucient for the cancella-
tion of loops, order by order. in the beginning of the section we referred to such
backgrounds as magic.

and ferm

i

i

the simplest example of the background preserving a part of supersymmetry can
be found in the wess-zumino model. let us consider the background superelds of

43

the form

qi(xl, ) = ai + b
qi(xr, ) = 0 ,

i  + ci2 ,

(3.3)

where ai, b
i , ci are constants. it is clear that this conguration is invariant under the
action of the supercharges q  but is not invariant with respect to the q-generated
transformations. the residual invariance is sucient to ensure the boson-fermion
degeneracy and, hence, the cancellation of the quantum corrections.

substituting the background eld (3.3) into the classical action one sees that
the kinetic term vanishes while the superpotential term survives and is expressed
via the constants ai, b
i , ci (of course, the resulting action is proportional to l3t ).
correspondingly, nothing can be said about the kinetic term (and, as we know,
it is renormalized perturbatively). at the same time, the absence of perturbative
quantum corrections implies that the superpotential w is not renormalized. this is
an alternative way of proving the non-renormalization theorem [48].
two comments are in order here. first, the conguration (3.3) implies that
the background is not invariant under the complex conjugation; we treat the back-
ground elds qi and qi as independent. such a treatment presents no problem
in perturbation theory. second, if some elds are massless one should be careful:
certain infrared singular d terms could arise in loops. they are not forbidden by
the general argument above. however, in the continuous limit, l  , they are
indistinguishable from f terms [59].
in the gauge theories any self-dual (or anti-self-dual eld) gluon eld preserves
one half of susy. the instanton eld is a particularly important example of such
congurations. another example is given by spatially constant self-dual elds (to-
rons [60]). in the self-dual backgrounds the fermion-boson cancellation takes place.
this phenomenon generalizes the fermion-boson cancellation in the static back-
grounds. at one loop this property was rst noted in [10]. the theorem extending
the cancellation to all loops was established in [11].

thus, nding the instanton contribution to certain quantities becomes a purely
classical problem, much simpler than a general instanton analysis and calculations
in non-supersymmetric gauge theories. below we will explain in more detail how
it works.
it is instructive, however, to start from a non-gauge theory where a
similar phenomenon  conservation of one half of supersymmetry and the subsequent
cancellation of the loop corrections  takes place. this will allow us to have a
closer look at the basic ingredients of this phenomenon peeled o of conceptually
irrelevant technicalities, such as the analytic continuation to the euclidean space,
gauge freedom and so on. we will deal with all these issues in due course, but for
now it seems reasonable to defer them.

44

3.1 a prototype  supersymmetric domain walls

let us return to the minimal wess-zumino model discussed in sec. 2.2, see eqs.
(2.13), (2.17). as was mentioned, the model has two degenerate vacua (2.18). field
congurations interpolating between two degenerate vacua are called the domain
walls. they have the following properties: (i) the corresponding solutions are static
and depend only on one spatial coordinate; (ii) they are topologically stable and
indestructible  once a wall is created it cannot disappear. assume for deniteness
that the wall lies in the xy plane. then the wall solution w will depend only on
z. since the wall extends indenitely in the xy plane, its energy ew is innite.
however, the wall tension ew (the energy per unit area ew = ew/a) is nite, in
principle measurable, and has a clear-cut physical meaning.
the wall solution of the classical equations of motion is known from the ancient

times,

w =

m


tanh(|m|z) .

(3.4)

note that the parameters m and  are not assumed to be real. a remarkable feature
of this solution is that it preserves one half of supersymmetry. indeed, the susy
transformations (2.1) generate the following transformation of elds,

the domain wall we consider is purely bosonic,  = 0. moreover,

 = 2 ,

f = 

where

 = 2hf + i  ()   i .
 w
  (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) =

= ei zw(z) ,

w

 = arg

m3
2 .

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

the relation (3.6) means that the domain wall actually satises the rst order
dierential equation, which is by far a stronger constraint than the classical equations
of motion. due to this feature

vanishes provided that

   + i ei (z)   

 = i ei (z)    .

this condition singles out two supertransformations (out of four) which do not act
on the domain wall (alternatively it is often said that they act trivially).

now, let us calculate the wall tension at the classical level. to this end we rewrite

the expression for the tension as

e = z +



dzhz  z + f fi  z +



dz(cid:26)hei zw + h.c.i +(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2(cid:27) ,
z + ei f (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(3.10)

45

where f =  w/  and it is implied that  depends only on z. this form makes
it clear why the domain wall satises the rst order dierential equation (3.6). as
a result the wall tension ew coincides with the modulus of the topological charge z
(3.11)

ew = |z| ,

where z is dened as

z = 2{w((z = ))  w((z = ))} =

8 m3
3 2 .
note that the phase of z coincides with  introduced in eq. (3.7).
such states are called bps or bps-saturated. bps stands for bogomolny, prasad
and sommereld. the works of these authors [61] have nothing to do with su-
persymmetry; they considered the abrikosov vortices and monopoles in the non-
supersymmetric models and observed that in certain limits these objects satisfy the
rst order equations and their masses coincide with the topological charges.
in
the context of supersymmetry we see that the bps saturation is equivalent to the
residual supersymmetry.

(3.12)

how come that we got a nonvanishing energy for the state which is annihilated

by some supercharges? this is because the superalgebra (2.11) gets modied,

where

{q , q} = 4  z ,

n q  , q o = 4    z ,

1

 = 

2 z dx[dx] () () 



(3.13)

(3.14)

is the wall area tensor. all other commutation relations remain intact.
in the
context of the modied susy algebra, the topological charge z bears the name of
the central charge 7.
the connection between the bps saturation and the central extension of the
superalgebra was revealed long ago by olive and witten [63], shortly after the
advent of supersymmetry. in centrally extended superalgebras the fact that a state
is annihilated by a supercharge does not imply the vanishing of the energy of the
state  instead its mass is equal to the central charge of the state.

to derive this relation let us consider the representations of the centrally ex-
tended superalgebra. in the problem of the domain walls we are interested not in
a generic representation but, rather, in a special one where one half of the super-
charges annihilate all states. the existence of such supercharges was demonstrated
above at the classical level. the covariant expressions for the residual supercharges
q are

q = ei/2 q 

2
a

ei/2  n


q  ,

(3.15)

7for a recent discussion of the general theory of the tensorial central charges in various super-

algebras see [62].

46

where

n  =

p 
ewa

(3.16)

(3.17)

is the unit vector proportional to the wall four-momentum p ; it has only the time
component in the rest frame. the subalgebra of these residual supercharges in the
rest frame is

we will refer to this subalgebra as stationary.

n q , qo = 8  {ew  |z|} .

the existence of the stationary subalgebra immediately proves that the wall
indeed, q|walli = 0 implies that
tension ew is equal to the central charge z.
ew  |z| = 0. this equality is valid both to any order in perturbation theory and
nonperturbatively.
an interesting question is the supermultiplet structure of the domain walls, i.e.
the representations of the centrally extended algebra. the minimal representation
in the sector where q is realized trivially is two-dimensional [64].

from the non-renormalization theorem for the superpotential [48] we additionally

infer that the central charge z is not renormalized. thus, the result

for the wall tension is exact [65].

ew =

8

3 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

m3

2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(3.18)

the wall tension ew is a physical parameter and, as such, should be expressible in
terms of the physical (renormalized) parameters mren and ren. one can easily verify
that this is compatible with the statement of nonrenormalization of ew. indeed,

m = z mren

 = z 3/2ren ,

where z is the z factor coming from the kinetic term. consequently,

m3
2 =

ren

m3
2

ren

.

thus, the absence of the quantum corrections to eq. (3.18), the renormalizability
of the theory, and the non-renormalization theorem for superpotentials  all these
three elements are intertwined with each other. in fact, every two elements taken
separately imply the third one.

what lessons have we drawn from the example of the domain walls? in the
centrally extended susy algebras the exact relation evac = 0 is replaced by the
exact relation ew  |z| = 0. although this statement is valid both perturbatively
and nonperturbatively, it is very instructive to visualize it as an explicit cancellation
between bosonic and fermionic modes in perturbation theory  we will do the exercise
in sec. 3.3, where we consider 1+1 dimensional models with minimal supersymmetry.
the nonrenormalization of the central charge is not a general feature. in the
domain wall problem it is due to the extended supersymmetry in the eective 1+1

47

dimensional theory to which the minimal four-dimensional wess-zumino model re-
duces, in a sense.
in the two-dimensional models with minimal supersymmetry
(sec. 3.3) the central charge gets quantum corrections.

3.2 superpotential and anomaly

the domain walls make the superpotential observable. more exactly, the central
charge is related, on the one hand, to the wall tension, and on the other hand, to
the jump of the superpotential in passing from one spatial innity to the other,
through the wall. in the wess-zumino model the central charge is proportional to
the tree-level superpotential, see eq. (3.12). a natural question one should ask is
whether the central charge exists in n = 1 susy gauge theories, and if yes, what
replaces the tree-level superpotential in eq. (3.12). we will see that the answer to
this question is important for understanding of the nonperturbative gauge dynamics.
a hint of the existence of the central extension can be obtained from the analysis
of susy gluodynamics (sec. 2.9). in this theory there are tg distinct supersym-
metric vacua. hence, there should exist eld congurations interpolating between
them, the domain walls. we know already that the domain walls go hand in hand
with occurrence of the central charge in n = 1 susy.
the actual calculation of the central charge in the gauge theories requires a
careful treatment of the anomalies: besides the tree-level superpotential, z contains
an anomalous term [66]. we will not dwell on details of the derivation here  they
will lead us far astray, and, after all, we need only the nal result. it is not dicult
to show that the anomaly in the central charge is not a new one  it is related [35] to
the supermultiplet of anomalies (2.109). equation (3.13) is still valid, being general;
for the central charge z, instead of z = 2(w), one gets

qf

qf
w




3w xf

3tg pf t (rf )

162

2
3

z =
 


tr w 2 +

1

8 xf


f d2( qf ev qf )

=0

.

(3.19)

we hasten to make a few comments concerning this relation. the rst term in the
second line is of purely quantum origin: it presents the gauge anomaly in the central
charge. the second term in the second line is a total superderivative. therefore,
it vanishes after averaging over any supersymmetric vacuum state. hence, it can
be safely omitted. the rst line presents the classical result. at the classical level
qf (w/qf ) is a total superderivative too (cf. eq. (2.110)). if we discard it for a
short while (forgetting about the quantum eects), we return to z = 2(w), the
formula obtained in the wess-zumino model. at the quantum level qf (w/qf )
it is still
ceases to be a total superderivative because of the konishi anomaly.
convenient to eliminate qf (w/qf ) in favor of trw 2 by virtue of the konishi

48

relation (2.110). in this way one arrives at

z = 2(w 

tg pf t (rf )

162

tr w 2)=0

.

(3.20)

we see that the superpotential w is amended by the anomaly; in the operator form
(3.21)

tr w 2 .

w  w 

tg pf t (rf )

162

the anomaly may or may not materialize as a nonperturbative correction in the
low-energy eective superpotential. for instance, in the su(2) sqcd with one
avor the anomalous term tr  in eq. (3.21) materializes at low energies as a 2
term, see sec. 4.3. on the other hand, in the two-avor model (sec. 4.4), where

tg pf t (rf ) = 0, the anomalous contribution vanishes. this explains why in the

two-avor model the superpotential is not generated beyond the tree level even after
the mass terms of the matter elds are switched on.

in the next section we will see how the anomaly modies the operator of the
central charge in a much simpler setting of a nongauge theory. we will consider a
two-dimensional analog of the wess-zumino model, with a minimal supersymmetry.
the model is instructive in two aspects:
it very transparently demonstrates the
occurrence of the anomaly in the central charge and the boson-fermion cancellations
in perturbation theory.

3.3 digression: solitons in two-dimensional theories with

the minimal susy

as was mentioned in sec. 3.1, in some aspects the problem of the domain wall is obvi-
ously two-dimensional 8. the remnant of the original four-dimensional formulation is
the extended supersymmetry of the emerging two-dimensional model. indeed, four
supercharges imply n = 2 supersymmetry in 1+1. considering two-dimensional
models on their own right, we can descent to the minimal n = 1 supersymmetry,
with two supercharges, by deforming the n = 2 model obtained as a dimensional
reduction of the four-dimensional wess-zumino model.
to perform the reduction to two dimensions it is sucient to assume that all
elds are independent of x and y, and depend on t and z only. in two dimensions
the lagrangian (2.14) can be presented in the following form 9:

1

2 (i i + i ii + fifi + 2fi

w
i 

2w
ij

ij) .

l =

(3.22)

we introduced real elds i, i and fi, where i = 1, 2. up to normalization, they
are just the real and imaginary parts of the original elds, e.g,  = (1 + i2)/2.

8the presentation in this section is based on ref. [67].
9to distinguish between the superpotentials in four and two dimensions the latter is denoted

by w as opposed to the calligraphic w in four dimensions.

49

summation over i is implied. the fermionic eld i is a two-component majorana
spinor, a convenient representation for the two-dimensional  matrices is

0 = 2 , 1 = i3 .

we will stick to it in this section. the superpotential w = 2 rew is a function of
two variables 1 and 2,

w (1, 2) = 2"m2



1 


6

3

1 +


2

12

2# ,

(3.23)

where m and  are now assumed to be real.

the presence of extended supersymmetry is reected in the harmonicity of this

superpotential,

2w
ii

= 0

for n = 2 .

(3.24)

to break n = 2 down to n = 1 we consider a more general case of nonharmonic
functions w (1, 2),

w (1, 2) = 2" m2



1 


6

3

1 +


2

12

2 +


2

2

2# ,

(3.25)

where at  6= 0 the n = 2 susy is broken down to the minimal n = 1.

the two supercharges q of the model are

q = z dz j 0

 ,

j  = xi=1,2

[(i)i  ifii] .

(3.26)

the original wess-zumino model contained two more supercharges transforming
1  2 and 2  1. this invariance is broken at  6= 0.

the canonical commutation relations imply that

nj 
, qo = 2 () 

 + 2i (5)   ,

(3.27)

where 

 is the energy-momentum tensor and   is the conserved topological current,

  = w .

(3.28)

the notation 5 = 01 = 1 is used.
eq. (3.27) over space gives the susy algebra:

integrating the  = 0 component of

{q, q} = 2 () p + 2i (5) z .

(3.29)

here p = r dz 0

central charge,

 are operators of the total energy and momentum, and z is the

z = z dz  0 = z dz zw () = w [(z = )]  w [(z = )] ,

(3.30)

50

which coincides with the topological one.

the classical kink solution for 1 is the same, up to normalization, as in eq.

(3.4), while the second eld 2 vanishes,
m2


1 = kink =

tanh mz , 2 = 0 .

(3.31)

the solution is annihilated by q2, the corresponding supersymmetry is preserved
in the kink background. the action of q1 produces the fermion zero mode  the
fermion kink. the classical mass of the kink is

m = z =

8
3

m3
2 .

(3.32)

now let us move from the classical to the quantum level and study quantum
corrections to the kink mass. the issue of quantum corrections to the soliton mass in
two-dimensional models with n = 1 supersymmetry has a long and dramatic history.
as was noted in ref. [63], in the models with central extensions topologically stable
solitons can be bps saturated. the mass of the bps saturated solitons must be equal
to the central charge. the simplest case of the model with one real scalar eld and
one two-component real spinor (such models are often called the supersymmetric
ginzburg-landau models) was considered in [10].
it was argued [10] that, due
to a residual supersymmetry, the mass of the soliton calculated at the classical
level remains intact at the one-loop level. a few years later it was noted [68] that
the non-renormalization theorem [10] cannot possibly be correct, since the classical
soliton mass is proportional to m3/2, and the physical mass of the scalar eld gets
a logarithmically innite renormalization (there is no ultraviolet logarithm in the
correction to ). since the soliton mass is an observable physical parameter, it must
stay nite in the limit of the innite ultraviolet cut o. this implies, in turn, that
the quantum corrections cannot vanish  they dress m in the classical expression
(3.32), converting the bare mass parameter into the renormalized one. the one-loop
renormalization of the soliton mass was rst calculated in [68].

since then a number of one-loop calculations were carried out [6977]. the re-
sults reported and the conclusion of saturation/non-saturation oscillated with time.
although all authors clearly agree that the logarithmically divergent term corre-
sponds to the renormalization of m, the nite term comes out dierently, varying
from work to work. the resolution of the paradox came recently [67]: the mass stays
equal to the central charge to all orders, but the latter gets modied by a quantum
anomaly. we will illustrate this assertion below.

the exact equality of the mass and the central charge follows from the susy
algebra (3.29). moreover, a similar relation is true for the densities (i.e. local rather
than integrated quantities),

hsol|h(x)   0(x)| soli = 0 ,

(3.33)

where h(x) = 0
 = 0,  = 2,  = 1 and the residual supersymmetry q2|soli = 0.

0(x) is the hamiltonian density.

it follows from eq. (3.27) with

51

let us show how the fermion-boson cancellation in h  0 manifests itself in the
language of modes. in the one-loop approximation we need a quadratic expansion
of the hamiltonian around the soliton,

hh   0iquad

=

1

2 n 2

1 + [p1 1]2  i 1 p 
2 + [p 

+ 2

2 2]2 + i 2 p2 2  i 2 p 

1 1 + i 1 p1 1

2 2o ,

where the following notation is used:

1 = 1  kink , 2 = 2 ,   i

i ! = i ,

and the dierential operators p1,2 are dened as

p1 = z +

f1
1

,

p2 = z 

f2
2

.

(3.34)

(3.35)

(3.36)

(3.37)

here the derivatives of fi = w/i are evaluated at the kink solution,

= 2  kink ,

f1
1

f2
2

2  kink  2 .

= 

from the expression (3.34) it is easy to see that a convenient basis for the mode
expansion of 1 and 1 is provided by the eigenfunctions vn(z) of the hermitian
dierential operator p 

1 p1,

p 
1 p1 vn(z) = 2

n vn(z) .

as for 1 it is the operator p1p 

1 that denes the mode composition,
p1p 

1 vn(z) = 2

n vn(z) .

(3.38)

(3.39)

similarly, the mode decomposition for 2 runs in the eigenmodes wn of the operator
p 
2 p2 while the mode decomposition for 2, 2 runs in the eigenmodes wn of the
operator p2p 
2 ,

p 
2 p2 wn(z) = 2

n wn(z) ,

p2p 

2 wn(z) = 2

n wn(z) .

(3.40)

to discretize the spectrum of the modes let us put the system in a large box, i.e.
impose the boundary conditions at z = l/2 (at the end l  ). it is convenient
to choose the boundary conditions in a form which is compatible with the residual
supersymmetry implemented by the action of q2. the suitable boundary conditions
are

(z1 + f1)|z=l/2 = 0 ,
(z + f1/1) 1|z=l/2 = 0 ,
1|z=l/2 = 0 ,

2|z=l/2 = 0 ,
2|z=l/2 = 0 ,
(z  f2/2) 2|z=l/2 = 0 .
52

(3.41)

it is easy to verify the invariance of these conditions under the transformations
generated by q2. they are also consistent with the classical solutions, both for
the at vacuum and for the kink. in particular, the soliton solution kink satises
zkink + f1 = 0 everywhere, and the boundary conditions (3.41) do not deform it 
we can indeed place the kink in the box.

the boundary conditions for the modes in the box follow from the linear expan-

sion of eq. (3.41),

p1 vn|z=l/2 = 0 ,
vn|z=l/2 = 0 ,

p2 wn|z=l/2 = 0 ,
wn|z=l/2 = 0 .

(3.42)

with these boundary conditions all eigenvalues of the operators p 

are the same, with the exception of the zero modes. the operators pip 
zero modes, while p 
vn and vn (and wn and wn) are algebraically related

i pi and pip 
i
i have no
i pi do have. moreover, for nonzero modes the eigenfunctions

vn =

wn =

1
n
1
n

p1 vn ,

vn =

p 

1 vn ,

1
n
1
n

p2 wn ,

wn =

p 

2 wn .

(3.43)

the expansion in the eigenmodes has the form,

1(x) = xn6=0
2(x) = xn6=0

1n(t) vn(z) ,

2n(t) wn(z) ,

1(x) = xn6=0
2(x) = xn6=0

2n(t) wn(z) ,

1n(t) vn(z) ,

1n(t) vn(z) ,

1(x) = xn6=0
2(x) = xn6=0

2n(t) wn(z) .

(3.44)

note that the summation above does not include the zero modes v0 and w0.
the mode v0  zkink is due to the translational invariance of the problem at
hand, it reects the possibility of shifting the kink center. we x the center to be
nailed at the origin. that is why this mode should not be included in the mode
decomposition. the same mode v0 in 1 corresponds to the fermion partner of the
bosonic kink, it is generated by the action of q1. the zero mode w0 in 2 coincides
with v0 at  = 0. setting  = 0 we ensure extended supersymmetry, so that the
bosonic kink has two fermionic zero modes. at  6= 0 the extended susy is gone
but the zero mode in 2 survives, due to the jackiw-rebbi index theorem [78]. it is
curious to note that at  < m this mode sits on the kink while at  > m it runs
away to the boundary of the box.

the coecients in, in and in are time-dependent operators. their equal time

commutation relations are determined by the canonical commutators,

[im, kn] = iikmn ,

{im, kn} = ikmn ,

{im, kn} = ikmn .

(3.45)

53

the anticommutators of  and  vanish. thus, the mode decomposition reduces
dynamics of the system under consideration to quantum mechanics of an innite set
of supersymmetric harmonic oscillators. the ground state of the quantum soliton
corresponds to setting each oscillator from the set to the ground state.

constructing the creation and annihilation operators in the standard way we
nd the following nonvanishing expectations values of the bilinears built from the
operators in, in and in in the ground state:

h 2

1nisol =

h 2

2nisol =

n
2

n
2

,

,

h2

1nisol =

h2

2nisol =

1
2n

,

1
2n

,

h1n 1nisol =

h2n 2nisol =

i
2

;

i
2

.

(3.46)

the expectation values of other bilinears obviously vanish. combining eqs. (3.34),
(3.44) and (3.46) we get

hsol|hh(x)   0iquad | soli
n  v2
= xn6=0

4 nv2

n  v2

n + v2

n

no + xn6=0

n

4 n w2

n + w2

n  w2

n  w2

no  0 .

(3.47)

the eight terms in eq. (3.47) are in one-to-one correspondence with the eight terms
in eq. (3.34), the terms with the plus sign come from bosons while those with the
minus sign from fermions. in proving the vanishing of the right-hand side we did
not perform integrations by parts  this is essential to guarantee that no surface
terms arise from such integrations. the vanishing of the right-hand side of (3.34)
demonstrates explicitly the residual supersymmetry (i.e. the conservation of q2) at
work. note that the sums over the modes are quadratically divergent in the ultra-
violet if considered separately for bosons and fermions, therefore a regularization is
required. any regularization preserving the residual supersymmetry will maintain
the above cancellation.

equation (3.33) must be considered as a local version of bps saturation (i.e.
conservation of a residual supersymmetry). the nonrenormalization of the expec-
tation value of h   0 over the soliton state is the main lesson we draw; a similar
result will be exploited later in the instanton calculations.
the equality between the kink mass and the central charge renders the calcula-
tion of the quantum corrections to the mass a simple task reducing it to calculating
hwi in the at vacuum, see eq. (3.30). in one loop
1
2

hwi0 = w0 +

2w0
2

2w0
2

(3.48)

1
2

+

,

1 d2
1e 0

2 d2
2e 0

where the subscript 0 marks the at vacua
m2


1vac = 

, 2vac = 0 ,

54

(3.49)

in this form the result is valid for any superpotential w with the property

at z = . the average quadratic uctuation is given by a simple tadpole graph,

d 2
i e 0

= z d2p

(2)2

i

i )2 =

1
4

ln

m 2
uv

(2w0/2

i )2 ,

(3.50)

p2  (2w0/2

where muv is the ultraviolet cut-o, it drops out in z. the result has the form
m =z ="w +

2w /2
2
2w /2

2w /2
1

4

(3.51)

1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
#{}={vac(z=+)}[(z = +)  (z = )] .
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12){}={vac(z=+)}
ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12){}={vac(z=)}
ln(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
  m(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

= xi=1,2

2  m2

m3
2 

2w
2
i

 + m

(3.52)

(3.53)

m
2


2



(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

m2

.

.

2w
2
i

xi=1,2

m =

8
3

in the particular case of eq. (3.25) the explicit expression is

at  = 0 we are back to extended supersymmetry. the one-loop correction
vanishes as was expected. this also explains the niteness of the correction to the
soliton mass at  6= 0. indeed, at virtual momenta much larger than  the extended
susy is recovered. in the opposite limiting case   m the elds 2 and 2 become
very heavy and can viewed as the ultraviolet regulators for the light elds. in this
limit

m =

8
3

m3
2 

m

2 "ln

2

m2 + 2# .

(3.54)

this formula has a clear interpretation in the theory with one supermultiplet {1, 1}
of light elds 10. namely, the denition (3.30) of the central charge z should be
modied by the substitution

where

w (1)  w (1) +

w (1)

4

,

w (1) = 2"m2



1 


6

3

1# .

(3.55)

(3.56)

the logarithmic term in eq. (3.54) is the quantum correction to the expectation
value of w (1) over the at vacuum. the nonlogarithmic term in the square brackets
presents the quantum anomaly w /4 in the central charge. this anomaly is a

10although we say that the interpretation is transparent, quite remarkably, it was not discovered

until recently.

55

superpartner to the anomalies in the trace of the energy-momentum tensor 
 and in
j, see ref. [67] for details. it is instructive to compare eq. (3.55) with eq. (3.21).
summarizing, although the two-dimensional model we have considered is no
more than a methodical example, it allows one to draw two important parallels with
the gauge theories. first, the presence of the residual supersymmetry guarantees
the fermion-boson cancellations in certain quantities, both in perturbation theory
and nonperturbatively. second, some nonrenormalization theorems are modied by
anomalies. here the eect showed up in the superpotential at one loop.
in the
gauge theories similar phenomena manifest themselves in the eective low-energy
superpotentials nonperturbatively.

3.4

instanton tunneling transitions in gauge theories  con-
tinuation to the euclidean space

the soliton examples above teach us that there exist certain coordinate depen-
dent background elds in which one half of supersymmetry is preserved. in such
magic backgrounds the quantum corrections vanish, order by order. instantons in
four-dimensional gauge theories belong to this class too. physical interpretation
of solitons and instantons is very dierent, however. solitons are extended objects
that have a particle-like interpretation in the minkowski formulation of the theory.
instantons, on the other hand, are related to the tunneling amplitudes connecting
the vacuum state to itself. in the gauge theories this is the main source of nonper-
turbative physics shaping the vacuum structure.

in the semiclassical treatment of the tunneling transitions instantons present the
extremal trajectories (classical solutions) in the imaginary time. thus, the analytical
continuation to the imaginary time becomes necessary. the theory in the imaginary
time often can be formulated as a eld theory in the euclidean space. this is
the standard starting point of the instanton practitioners. however, the euclidean
formulation does not exist in the n = 1 susy theories because they contain the
weyl (or majorana) fermions. the easy way to see that this is the case is as follows.
one observes that it is impossible to nd four real four-by-four matrices with the
algebra {} =  necessary for constructing the euclidean version of the theory
with the majorana spinors. only the theories with the extended superalgebras,
n = 2 or 4, where all spinor elds can be written in the dirac form, admit the
euclidean formulation [79].
the main statement of the present section is that by no means the euclidean
formulation of the theory is necessary for the imaginary time analysis. we start
with the original (minkowski) formulation of the theory and show how it denes the
imaginary time continuation. to this end let us turn to the basics of the functional-
integral representation [80]. it starts from a quantum hamiltonian h(pi, i, k, k)
which is an operator function of the bosonic coordinates i and their conjugate
momenta pi, and the fermionic variables k and k. the hat marks the operators.

56

then one can represent the evolution operator exp(i ht ) as the functional integral

hout, | exp(i ht )|in, i = z yi,t
 exp(iz t

0

dthx(cid:16)pj j + i k k(cid:17)  h(p(t), (t), (t), (t))i) , (3.57)

di(t)dpi(t)yk,t

dk(t)d k(t)

where h is the symbol of the operator h corresponding to a certain operator order-
ing, and the integration runs over all trajectories with the given boundary conditions.
the variables , p are the c-numbers while ,  are the anticommuting grassmann
numbers.

now, the euclidean continuation reduces to the rotation of the time parameter,

t  i . instead of exp(i ht ) we consider exp( h ),
dj(t)dpj(t)yk,t
k(cid:17) + h(p(t), (t), (t) (t))i(cid:27) . (3.58)

hout, | exp( h )|in, i = z yj,t
 exp(cid:26)z 

dthix(cid:16)pj

dk(t)d k(t)

0

j + i k

no redenition of elds is made, the integration runs over the same variables as in
eq. (3.57). the hamiltonian symbol is also the same. for the bosonic variables
one can perform the integration over pj (assuming the quadratic dependence of the
hamiltonian on p). one then arrives at the standard functional integral over  with
the exponent

z 

0

dthx 2

j + hbos(i (t), (t))i = z d4xleucl .

(3.59)

here leucl is an invariant euclidean lagrangian, it is obtained from the original
minkowski lagrangian by the substitution

t = ix4 .

(3.60)

as for the fermion part we leave it as is: there is no way to cast it in the
explicitly invariant euclidean form. the problem is due to the fact that the fermionic
integration runs over the holomorphic variables, and the operation of involution (i.e.
complex conjugation) which relates  and  has no euclidean analog. in spite of
this the representation (3.58) is fully suitable for the semiclassical analysis of the
tunneling transitions. with this representation in hands, we can nd the extremal
trajectories (both, bosonic and fermionic), solving the classical equations of motion.
to illustrate the procedure we will consider below the bpst instanton and the
gluino zero modes in susy gluodynamics.

57

3.4.1 instanton solution in the spinor notation

here we develop the spinorial formalism in application to the instantons. all con-
ventional vectorial indices are replaced by spinorial. it is particularly convenient in
susy theories where bosons and fermions are related. an additional bonus is that
there is no need to introduce the t hooft symbols.

the spinor notation introduced in sec. 2.1 is based on su(2)lsu(2)r algebra
of the lorentz group (the undotted and dotted indices, correspondingly).
in the
minkowski space the su(2) subalgebras are related by the complex conjugation
(involution).
in particular, this allows one to dene the notion of a real vector,
(a ) = a . as it was mentioned above, the property of involution is lost after
the continuation to imaginary time. for the same reason the notion of the majorana
spinors is also lost.

consider the simplest non-abelian gauge theory  supersymmetric su(2) glu-
odynamics. the lagrangian is given in eq. (2.37). as was explained above, the
classical equations are the same as in the minkowski space with the substitution
t = ix4 (no substitution is made for the elds). in particular, the duality equation
has the form

g    

1
2

g() ()

  (ea + i ba)(a)   = 0 .

(3.61)

here we introduce two triplets of matrices

(a)

 = ( a) ,

(a) 

 = ( a)   ,

a = 1, 2, 3 ,

(3.62)

which represent the generators of su(2)l and su(2)r subalgebras of the lorentz
group. this expression shows that g   is the (0, 1) representation of this group,
while g dened similarly is the (1, 0) representation.

the four-potential which is the solution of eq. (3.61) is

a{}
  = 2i

1

x2 + 2 (cid:16)
 x

 + 

(cid:17) .
x

(3.63)

where is the familiar color index a = 1, 2, 3? it is traded in for two spinorial indices
{},

the symmetric in ,  tensor a{} is the adjoint representation of the color su(2).
the instanton presents a hedgehog conguration which is invariant under the simul-
taneous rotations in the su(2)color and su(2)l spaces, this invariance is explicit in
eq. (3.63). we will do the trade-in (3.64) frequently. the braces will remind us that
this symmetric pair of spinorial indices is connected with the color index a.

all the denitions above are obviously taken from the minkowski space. the
euclidean aspect of the problem reveals itself only in the fact that x0 is purely

58

a{}  aa (i2 a) .

(3.64)

imaginary. as a concession to the euclidean nature of the instantons we will con-
sistently imply that

x2  xx = ~x2  x2

0 = ~x2 + x2
4 .

(3.65)

the minus sign in eq. (3.65) is by no means necessary; it is obviously a compromise,
which turns out to be rather convenient, though.

we can check that the eld conguration (3.63) reduces to the standard anti-

instanton of belavin et al. [8]. indeed,

aa

 =

1
4

a
 (i a2)()

 = 


2i xa(x2 + 2)1
at  = 0 ,
2 (amjxj  amx4) (x2 + 2)1 at  = m .

(3.66)
this can be seen to be the standard anti-instanton solution (in the non-singular
gauge), provided one takes into account the fact that

aa

0 = iaa
4 .

let us stress that it is a with the lower vectorial index which is related to the
standard euclidean solution, for further details see ref. [81]. the time component
of aa
 in eq. (3.66) is purely imaginary. this is alright  in fact, a0 is not the
integration variable in the canonical representation (3.58). the spatial components
aa

m are real.

from eq. (3.63) it is not dicult to get the anti-instanton gluon eld strength

tensor

g{}
  

1
2

g{}

 () () 

  (ej  i bj){}(j)
2

(x2 + 2)2 .

= 8i (cid:16)


 + 

(cid:17)


this expression implies that

ea

n = 4i a
n

2

(x2 + 2)2 ,

ba
n = 4 a

n

2

(x2 + 2)2 .

(3.67)

(3.68)

this completes the construction of the anti-instanton. as for the instanton it
presents the solution of the constraint g = 0, it can be obtained by the replace-
ment of all dotted indices by undotted and vice versa.

the advantages of the approach presented here become fully apparent when the
fermion elds are included. below we briey discuss the impact of the fermion elds
in su(2) supersymmetric gluodynamics.

the supersymmetry transformations in susy gluodynamics take the form

a

 = ga

 .

  

(3.69)

a

 = ga

  ,

59

since in the anti-instanton background g   = 0, the supertransformations with the
dotted parameter   do not act on the background eld. thus, one half of susy
is preserved, much in the same way it occurs in the problem of the domain walls,
although in the instanton problem it is a dierent combination of the supercharges
that does not act on the classical solution.

on the other hand, the supertransformations with the undotted parameter 
do act nontrivially. when applied to the gluon background eld, they create two
fermion zero modes,

{}
()  g{}

  (cid:16)


 + 

(cid:17)


2

(x2 + 2)2 ,

(3.70)

the subscript () = 1, 2 performs numeration of the zero modes.

these two zero modes are built basing on supersymmetry, hence they are called
supersymmetric. somewhat less obvious is the existence of two extra zero modes.
they are related to the superconformal transformations (see sec. 3.5 for more expla-
nations) and are called superconformal. the superconformal transformations have
the same form as in eq. (3.69), with the parameter  substituted by a linear function
of the coordinates x

in this way we get

  x



  .

(3.71)

(3.72)

2

(x2 + 2)2 ,

( )  g{}
{}

 x

  (cid:16)
x

 + 

(cid:17)
x

where the subscript ( ) = 1, 2 enumerates two modes.

thus, we constructed four zero modes, in full accord with the index theorem
following from the chiral anomaly (2.90). it is instructive to verify that they satisfy
the dirac equation d  = 0. for the supersymmetric zero modes (3.70) this
equation reduces to the equation dg = 0 for the instanton eld. as for the
     vanishes
superconformal modes (3.72) the additional term containing 
upon contraction with g.
all four zero modes are chiral (left-handed). there are no right-handed zero
modes on the anti-instanton, i.e. the equation d   = 0 has no solution. this
is another manifestation of the loss of involution, the operator d  ceases to be
hermitian.
we use the anti-instanton eld as a reference point throughout the review. in
the instanton eld the roles of  and  interchange, together with the dotted and
undotted indices.

x

this concludes our explanatory remarks regarding the analytic continuation nec-
essary in developing instanton calculus in n = 1 susy gauge theories. we hope
that the basics of the formalism are now clear. some further aspects related to the
proper introduction of the collective coordinates and the cancellation of non-zero
modes are elucidated in the following sections.

60

3.5

instanton calculus in supersymmetry

in this section we discuss the basic elements of instanton calculus in supersym-
metric gauge theories  abc of superinstantons. these elements are: collective
coordinates (instanton moduli) both for the gauge and matter elds, the instanton
measure in the moduli space, the cancellation of the quantum corrections. in the
recent years instanton calculus evolved in a rather contrived formalism, especially
in the multi-instanton problems [28]. our task is limited to basics. we will focus on
the one-instanton calculations in various models. the presentation in this section
essentially follows refs. [13, 26].

3.5.1 collective coordinates

the instanton solution (3.63) has only one collective coordinate, the instanton size
. in fact, the classical bpst instanton depends on eight collective coordinates: the
instanton size , its center (x0), and three angles that describe the orientation of
the instanton in one of the su(2) subgroups of the lorentz group (or, equivalently, in
the su(2) color space). if the gauge group is larger than su(2), there are additional
coordinates describing the embedding of the instantonic su(2) corner in the full
gauge group g, we will treat them separately.

the procedure allowing one to introduce all these eight coordinates is very well
known (see [81]); here our focus is mainly on the grassmann collective coordinates
and on the way supersymmetry acts in the space of the collective coordinates.

the general strategy is as follows. one starts from nding all symmetries of
classical eld equations. these symmetries form some group g. the next step is to
consider a particular classical solution (instanton). this solution denes a stationary
group h of transformations  i.e. those that act trivially, do not change the original
solution at all. it is evident that h is a subgroup of g. the space of the collective
coordinates is determined by the quotient g/h. construction of this quotient is a
convenient way of introducing the collective coordinates.
an example of the transformation belonging to the stationary subgroup h for the
anti-instanton (3.63) is the su(2)r subgroup of the lorentz group. an example of
the transformations acting nontrivially is given by the four-dimensional translations
which are a part of the group g.
an important comment is in order here. in susy gluodynamics the construction
sketched above generates the full one-instanton moduli space. however, in the multi-
instanton problem, or in the presence of matter, some extra moduli appear which
are not tractable via the classical symmetries. an example of this type is the t
hooft zero mode for the matter fermions. even in such situations supersymmetry
acts on these extra moduli in a certain way, and we will study the issue below.

following the program outlined above let us start from identifying the symmetry
group g of the classical equations in susy gluodynamics. the obvious symmetry
is the poincare invariance extended to susy by inclusion of the supercharges q,

61

q . the poincare group includes translations p , and the lorentz rotations m,
m  . additionally the fermions bring in the chiral rotation .

in fact, the classical lagrangian (2.37) has a wider symmetry  the supercon-
formal group (a pedagogical discussion of the superconformal group can be found
in [82]). the additional generators are dilatation d, special conformal transforma-
tions k , and superconformal transformations s and s .

thus, the superconformal algebra includes sixteen bosonic generators and eight
fermionic. they all are of the geometric nature  they can be realized as transfor-
mations of the coordinates in the superspace. correspondingly, the generators are
presented as the dierential operators acting in the superspace, in particular,

p  = i  ,

m   = 

 +   

d =

i

2 "x   +  

 +    ,

q = i
s = (xr)  q   22d ,

1
2

{  }  { 
x
  # ,
q  = i



,

  }
 =  

    
   ,


      ,
s  = (xl) q + 22 d  .

(3.73)

here the symmetrization in ,  is marked by the braces. the generators as written
above act on the superspace coordinates. in application to the elds the generators
should be supplemented by some extra terms (e.g. the spin term in m , the conformal
weight in d).

the dierential realization (3.73) allows one to establish the full set of the (anti)-
commutation relations in the superconformal group. the set can be found 11 in [82].
what we will need for the supersymmetry transformations of the collective coordi-
nates is the commutators of the supercharges with all generators,

{q , q } = 2p  , {q , s } = 0 , { q  , s } = 4i m   + 2d    + 3i     ,
[q , d] =

[q , ] = q ,

[ q  , d] =

q  , ,

q ,

[ q  , ] =  q 

i
2

i
2

1
2

[q , m] = 
[q , k ] = 2i  s  .

(q  + q ) ,

[ q  , m] = 0 ,

(3.74)

now, what is the stationary group h for the anti-instanton solution (3.63)? this
bosonic solution is obviously invariant under the chiral transformation  which acts
only on fermions. besides, the transformations k  + (2/2)p  does not act on
this solution. the subtlety to be taken into account is that this and other similar
statements are valid modulo the gauge transformations. a simple way to verify

11warning: our normalization of some generators diers from that in ref. [82].

62

group

bosonic

fermionic

g
h

p  , m , m   , d ,  , k  q , q  , s , s 

 , k  + (2/2)p  , m

q  , s

table 2: the generators of the classical symmetry group g and the stationary
subgroup h.

that k  + (2/2)p  does not act is to apply it to the gauge invariant objects like
tr gg. another possibility is to observe that the conformal transformation is a
combination of translation and inversion. under the inversion the instanton in the
regular gauge becomes the very same instanton in the singular gauge.

unraveling the gauge transformations is particularly important for the instan-
ton orientations. at rst glance, it seems that neither su(2)r nor su(2)l lorentz
rotations act on the instanton solution. the expression (3.67) for the gluon eld
strength tensor contains no dotted indices, which explains the rst part of the state-
ment, while the su(2)l rotations of g can be compensated by those in the gauge
group. this conclusion is misleading, however.
in sec. 3.5.5 we will show that
the instanton orientations are coupled to the su(2)r lorentz rotations, i.e. to m  
generators, while the su(2)l rotations are indeed compensated by the gauge trans-
formations.

thus, we count eight bosonic generators of the stationary group h. it contains
also four fermionic generators q  and s. it is easy to check that these twelve gen-
erators indeed form a graded algebra. to help the reader we collected the generators
of g and h in table 2.
now we are ready to introduce the set of the collective coordinates (the instanton
moduli) parametrizing the quotient g/h. to this end let us start from the purely
bosonic anti-instanton solution (3.63) of the size  = 1 and centered at the origin,
and apply to it [12] a generalized shift operator v(x0, , , 0, ).

(x, , ; x0, , , 0, ) = v(x0, , , 0, ) 0(x, , ) ,
v(x0, , , 0, ) = eip x0eiq0ei s ei m eid ln  ,

(3.75)

where 0(x, , ) is a supereld constructed from the original bosonic solution (3.63).
moreover, p , q, s , m, d are the generators in the dierential form (3.73) (plus
nonderivative terms related to the conformal weights and spins of the elds) . the
dierential representation appears since we deal with the classical elds, in the
operator language the action of the operators at hand would correspond to the
standard commutators, e.g. [p , ] = i .

to illustrate how the generalized shift operator v acts we apply it to the super-

63

eld tr w 2,

tr (w w)0 = 2

96

(x2 + 1)4 = 2

96
l + 1)4 .

(x2

applying v to this expression one gets
tr (w w) = v(x0, , , 0, )

96 2
l + 1)4 =

(x2

96 2 4

[(xl  x0)2 + 2]4 ,

where

 = (  0) + (xl  x0)    .

(3.76)

(3.77)

(3.78)

in deriving this expression we used the representation (3.73) for the generators. note
that the generators m act trivially on the lorentz scalar w 2. as for the dilatation d,
the nonderivative term should be added to account for the nonvanishing dimension
of w 2, equal to 3. the value of trw 2 depends on the variables xl and  and on the
moduli x0, , 0 and . it does not depend on  because we consider the lorentz
and color singlet.

of course, the most detailed information is contained in the matrix supereld v
which is the supergeneralization of the gauge four-potential. applying the general-
ized shift operator v to v0,
v {}
0

(3.79)

 + x



= 4i

1

x2 + 1 (cid:16)x





(cid:17) ,

we obtain a generic instanton conguration which depends on all collective coor-
dinates. one should keep in mind that, in distinction with trw 2, the supereld
v {} is not a gauge-invariant object. therefore, the application of v should be
supplemented by a subsequent gauge transformation

ev  ei  ev ei ,

(3.80)

where the chiral supereld  must be chosen in such a way that the original gauge
is maintained.

3.5.2 the symmetry transformations of the moduli

once all relevant collective coordinates are introduced, it is natural to pose a ques-
tion of how the classical symmetry group acts on them. although the complete
set of the superconformal transformations of the instanton moduli could be readily
found, we focus on the exact symmetries  the poincare group plus supersymmetry.
only the exact symmetries are preserved by the instanton measure, and we will use
them for its reconstruction.

the following consideration shows how to nd the transformation laws for the
collective coordinates. assume we are interested in translations, x  x + a. the

64

operator generating the translation is exp(ip a). let us apply it to the conguration
(x, , ; x0, , , 0, ), see eq. (3.75),

eip a(x, , ; x0, , , 0, ) = eip aeip x0eiq0ei s ei m eid ln  0(x, , )

= (x, , ; x0 + a, , , 0, ) .

(3.81)

thus, we obviously get the original conguration with x0 replaced by x0 + a with no
change in other collective coordinates. alternatively, one can say that the interval
x  x0 is an invariant of the translations; the instanton eld conguration must not
depend on x and x0 separately, but only on the invariant combinations.
passing to supersymmetry, the transformation generated by exp(iq) is the
(3.82)

simplest to deal with,

0  0 +  .

other moduli stay intact.

for the supertranslations with the parameter , we do the same: act by exp(i q)

on the conguration ,

ei q(x, , ; x0, , , 0, ) = ei qeip x0eiq0ei s ei m eid ln  0(x, , ) . (3.83)
our goal is to put exp(i q) to the rightmost position  when exp(i q) acts on
the original anti-instanton solution 0(x, , ) it reduces to unity.
in the process
we get various commutators listed in eq. (3.74). for instance, the rst nontrivial
commutator we encounter is [ q, q0]. this commutator produces p which eec-
tively shifts x0 by 4i0 . proceeding further in this way we arrive at the following
results [12] for the susy transformations of the moduli:

(x0)  = 4i(0)   ,
(0) =  ,

2 = 4i( )2 ,

 

 = 4i(cid:20)    +

   = 4i   ( ) ,
 ( )(cid:21)  
 ,

1
2

 

where we have introduced the rotation matrix  dened as

 

i .
 = exphi 

(3.84)

(3.85)

this denition of the rotation matrix  corresponds to the rotation of spin-1/2
objects.

once the transformation laws for the instanton moduli are established one can
it is easy to verify that such

construct invariant combinations of these moduli.
invariants are


2 ,

2 f () ,

(3.86)

where f () is an arbitrary function of .

65

a priori, one could have expected that the above invariants could appear in
in fact, the transformation
the quantum corrections to the instanton measure.
properties of the collective coordinates under the chiral u(1) preclude this from
happening. the chiral charges of all elds are given in sec. 2.8. in terms of the
collective coordinates it implies that the chiral charge of 0 and  is unity while that
of x0 and  is zero. this means that the invariants (3.86) are chiral nonsinglets and
cannot appear in the corrections to the measure.

the chiral u(1) symmetry is anomalous in susy gluodynamics. it has a non-
anomalous discrete subgroup z4, however (see sec. 2.9). this subgroup is sucient
to forbid the presence of the invariants (3.86) nonperturbatively.

a dierent type of invariants are those built from the superspace coordinates
and the instanton moduli. an example from the non-susy instanton is the interval
x  x0 which is the invariant of translations. we elevate the notion to superspace.

the rst invariant of this type evidently is

(  0)

(3.87)

furthermore, xl  x0 does not change under translations and under a part of su-
pertransformations generated by q. it does change, however, under the q  trans-
formations. using eqs. (2.1) and (3.84) one can built a combination of   0 and
xl  x0 that is invariant,

2 =

2 h(  0) + (xl  x0)   i .

(3.88)

1

the supereld tr w 2 given in eq. (3.77) can be used as a check. it can be presented
as

2

4 f   (xl  x0)2

2

! .

tr w 2 =

(3.89)

although the rst factor is invariant, the ratio (xl  x0)2/2 is not. its variation,
however, is proportional to ; therefore the product (3.89) is invariant (the factor
2 acts as ()).

3.5.3 the measure in the moduli space

now, that the proper collective coordinates are introduced, we come to the impor-
tant ingredient of superinstanton calculus  the instanton measure, or the formula
of integration in the space of the collective coordinates. the general procedure of
obtaining the measure is well known, it is based on the path integral representation
in the canonical form (3.57). in terms of the mode expansion this representation
reduces to the integration over the coecients of the mode expansion. the inte-
gration measure splits in two factors: integration over the zero and nonzero mode
coecients. it is just the zero modes coecients that are related to moduli.

66

we follow the route pioneered by t hooft [9]. in one-loop approximation the

functional integral, say, over the scalar eld can be written as

" det (l2 + m 2

det l2

pv)

#1/2

(3.90)

where l2 is the dierential operator appearing in the expansion of the lagrangian
near the given background in the quadratic approximation, l2 = d2. the numer-
ator is due to the ultraviolet regularization. following [9] we use the pauli-villars
regularization  there is no alternative in the instanton calculations. the mass term
of the regulator elds is mpv. each given eigenmode of l2 with the eigenvalue 2
contributes mpv/. for the scalar eld there are no zero eigenvalues. however, for
the vector and spinor elds the zero modes do exist, the set of the zero modes cor-
responds to that of moduli, generically to be denoted in this section as i. for the
bosonic zero modes the factor 1/ (which, of course, explodes at   0) is replaced
by the integration over the corresponding collective coordinate db, up to a normal-
ization factor. similarly, for the fermion zero mode   df , see the discussion
the zero modes can be obtained by dierentiating the eld (x, , ; ) over the
collective coordinates i at the generic point in the space of the instanton moduli.
in the instanton problem {i} = {x0, , , 0, }. the derivatives /i dier from
the corresponding zero modes by the normalization. it is just these normalization
factors that determine the measure:

below.

d = e82/g2 yi

db
i

mpv2 (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

()

b

i (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

df
k

yk

1

1

mpv (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

()
f

i (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

,

(3.91)

where the norm kk is dened as the square root of the integral over ||2. the
superscripts b and f mark the bosonic and fermionic collective coordinates, respec-
tively. note that we have also included exp(s) in the measure (the instanton
action s = 82/g2). in the expression above it is implied that the zero modes are
orthogonal. if this is not the case, which often happens in practice, the measure is
given by a more general formula

d = e82/g2

(mpv)nb 1

2 nf (2)nb/2 yi

di (ber * ()

j

1
2

()

k +)

,

(3.92)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

where ber stands for the berezinian (superdeterminant). the normalization of the
elds is xed by the requirement that their kinetic terms are canonic.

we pose here to make a remark regarding the fermion part of the measure. the
fermion part of the lagrangian is id  . for the mode expansion of the eld
 it is convenient to use the hermitian operator

(l2)

 = d d  ,
67

l2  = 2 .

(3.93)

  =

i
 d 

  .

z d4x (i)(j) ,

(3.95)

(3.96)

the operator determining the  modes is

( l2) 

 = d d  ,
 are not identical  we have already encountered with

(3.94)

l2

 = 2 .

the operators (l2)
a similar situation in the analysis of the solitons, sec. 3.3.

 and ( l2) 

in the anti-instanton background the operator l2 has four zero modes, discussed
above, while l2 has none. as for the nonzero modes, they are degenerate and related
as follows:

the parallel with the discussion of the fermion modes in the two-dimensional soliton
problem in sec. 3.3 is quite transparent.

taking into account the relations above, we nd that the modes with the given

 contribute the term r d4x 2 into the fermion part of the action. for the given

mode 2 =  vanishes, literally speaking. however, there are two modes, (1)
and (2), for each given  and it is, actually, the product (1)(2) that enters. this
consideration provides us with the denition of the norm matrix for the fermion zero
modes,

which should be used in calculating the berezinian.

the norm factors depend on i, generally speaking; eq. (3.92) gives the measure
at any point of the instanton moduli space. thus, the relation (3.92) conceptually
solves the problem of the construction of the measure.

in practice, the measure comes out simple in certain points on the moduli space.
for instance, instanton calculus always starts from the purely bosonic instanton.
then, to reconstruct the measure everywhere on the instanton moduli space one can
apply the exact symmetries of the theory. by exact we mean those symmetries which
are preserved at the quantum level  the poincare symmetries plus supersymmetry,
in the case at hand, rather than the full superconformal group. as we will see,
this is sucient to get the full measure in supersymmetric gluodynamics but not in
theories with matter.

in non-susy gluodynamics the measure was found in [9]. let us briey re-
mind t hoofts construction, then we will add the fermion part specic to susy
gluodynamics.

translations
the translational zero modes are obtained by dierentiating the instanton eld
a/g over (x0) where  performs the numeration of the modes: there are four of
them. the factor 1/g reects the transition to the canonically normalized eld, a
requirement mentioned after eq. (3.92). up to the sign, dierentiation over (x0) is
 = g1a obtained in this way
the same as dierentiation over x. the eld a()
does not satisfy the gauge condition da = 0. therefore, it must be supplemented

68

by a gauge transformation, a = g1d. in the case at hand the gauge function
() = a. as a result, the translational zero modes take the form

 = g1 (a  da) = g1g .
a()

(3.97)

note that now the gauge condition is satised. the norm of each translational mode

is obviously q82/g2.

dilatation
the dilatational zero mode is

a =

1
g

a


=

1
g

g x ,

kak =

4
g

.

(3.98)

the gauge condition is not broken by the dierentiation over .

orientations
the orientation zero modes look as a particular gauge transformation of a [9],

where the spinor notation for color is used and the gauge function  has the form

(a)

 = g1 (d )
 ,

(3.99)



 = (cid:16)u  u t(cid:17)



= u 

 u


  
 ,

where

u 

 =

x

x2 + 2

,

(3.100)

(3.101)

and  
 are three orientation parameters. it is easy to check that eqs. (3.99), (3.100)
do indeed produce the normalized zero modes, satisfying the condition da = 0.
the gauge function (3.100) presents special gauge transformations which are absent
in the topologically trivial sector.

the procedure that led to the occurrence of  

 as the orientation collective
coordinates is described above, probably, too sketchy. we will return to the issue of
the geometrical meaning of these coordinates in sec. 3.5.5, after we introduce the
matter elds in the fundamental representation.
note that the matrix u satises the equation

d2u  = 0 ,

(3.102)

where the undotted index of u is understood as the color index. correspondingly,
d in eq. (3.102) acts as the covariant derivative in the fundamental representation.
equation (3.102) will be exploited below, in considering the matter elds in the
fundamental representation. note also that

d2 = 0 .

69

(3.103)

this construction  making a string built from several matrices u  can be
extended to the arbitrary representation of su(2). the representation with spin j
is obtained by multiplying 2j matrices u in a manner analogous to that exhibited
in eq. (3.100).

calculating d explicitly, we get the following expression for the orientation

modes and their norm:

a{}
  =

1
4g

g{}

 x     ,

supersymmetric modes
we started discussing these modes in sec. 3.4.1,

{}
() = g1g{}



,

(cid:28)(1)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

=

2

g

.

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

aa


 b(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

(2)(cid:29) =

322
g2

.

(3.104)

(3.105)

up to a numerical matrix, the supersymmetric modes coincide with the translational
ones. there are four translational modes and two supersymmetric. the factor two,
the ratio of the numbers of the bosonic to fermionic modes, reects the dierence
in the number of the spin components. this is, of course, a natural consequence of
supersymmetry.

superconformal modes
these modes were also briey discussed in sec. 3.4.1,

{}
( ) = g1x

g{}



,

( 2)(cid:29) =

6422

g2

.

(3.106)

(cid:28)( 1)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

the superconformal modes have the same x g form as the orientational and dilata-
tional modes. again we have four bosonic and two fermionic modes.

the relevant normalization factors, as well as the accompanying factors from
the regulator elds for all modes, are collected in table 3. assembling all factors
together we get the measure for a specic point in the moduli space: near the original
bosonic anti-instanton solution (3.63),

d0 =

1

2562 e82/g2

(mpv)6  82

g2 !2 d3 

82 d4x0 d20 d2 d2  .

(3.107)

how this measure transforms under the exact symmetries? first, let us check
the susy transformations (3.84). they imply that d4x0 and d20 are invariant. as
for the last two dierentials,

d2  d2 [1  4i( )] ,

d2   d2  [1 + 4i( )] ,

(3.108)

so that the product is invariant too.

70

boson modes

fermion modes

4 t  s2(2)2m 4

p v d4x0

2 ss  s1(4mp v )1d20

1 d  s1/2()1/2mp v d

2 sc  s1(8mp v )12 d2 

3 gcr  s3/2()1/2m 3

p v 3

2 mf  (mp v )1(82|v|22)1d2 0

table 3: the contribution of the zero modes to the instanton measure. the notation
is as follows: 4 t stands for the four translational modes, 1 d one dilatational mode,
3 gcr three modes associated with the orientations (the group volume is included),
2 ss two supersymmetric gluino modes, 2 sc two superconformal gluino modes,
2 mf two matter fermion zero modes, s  82/g2.

the only noninvariance of the measure (3.107) is that of d3  under the su(2)r
lorentz rotation generated by m  . it is clear that for the generic instanton orienta-
tion  the dierential d3  is replaced by the su(2) group measure d3su(2) = d3 g
where g is the determinant of the killing metric on the group su(2) and the matrix
 dened in eq. (3.85) is a general element of the group. in fact, this determinant
is a part of the berezinian in the general expression (3.92). the su(2) group is
compact: the integral over all orientations yields the volume of the group 12 which
is equal to 82. performing this integration we arrive at the nal result for the
instanton measure in su(2) susy gluodynamics:

d su(2) =

1

2562 e82/g2

g2 !2
(mpv)6   82

d4x0 d20 d2 d2  .

(3.109)

note that the regulator mass mpv can be viewed as a complex parameter. it
appeared from the regularization of the operator (3.93) which has a certain chirality.

3.5.4 including matter: sqcd with one avor

now we extend the analysis of the previous sections to include matter. a particular
model to be considered is su(2) sqcd with one avor, see sec. 2.3.2.

in the higgs phase the instanton conguration is an approximate solution. a
manifestation of this fact is the  dependence of the classical action [9]. the solution
becomes exact in the limit   0. for future applications only this limit is of
12 actually, the group of the instanton orientations is o(3)=su(2)/z2 rather than su(2). this

distinction is unimportant for the algebra, it is important, however, for the group volume.

71

importance, as we will see later. a new feature of the theories with matter is the
occurrence of extra fermionic zero modes in the matter sector, which gives rise to
additional collective coordinates. supersymmetry provides a geometrical meaning
to these collective coordinates.

as above, we start from a bosonic eld conguration and apply supersymmetry
to build the full instanton orbit. in this way we nd a realization of susy in the
instanton moduli space.

we have already learned that sqcd with one avor classically has a one-dimen-

sional d-at direction,

(

f )vac = v 
f ,

(  

f )vac = v 
f

(3.110)

where v is an arbitrary complex parameter, the vacuum expectation value of the
squark elds. here  is the color index while f is the subavor index, , f = 1, 2.
the color and avor indices get entangled, even in the topologically trivial sector,
although in a rather trivial manner.

what changes occur in the instanton background? the equation for the scalar

eld 

f becomes

d2
f = 0 ,

d =   iaa

 a/2 .

its solution in the anti-instanton background (3.63) has the form


f = v u 

f = v

x

fx2 + 2 .

asymptotically, at x  ,
f  u 


f v , a  i u  u  ,

u 

f =

x

fx2

,

(3.111)

(3.112)

(3.113)

i.e.
the conguration is gauge equivalent to the at vacuum (3.110). note that
the equation for the eld  is the same. with the boundary conditions (3.110) the
solution is


f = v u 

f = v

.

(3.114)

x

fx2 + 2

to generate the full instanton orbit, with all collective coordinates switched on,
we again apply all generators of the superconformal group to the eld conguration
0 which presents now a set of the superelds v0, q0 and q0. the bosonic compo-
nents are given in eqs. (3.63), (3.112) and (3.114), the fermionic ones vanish. the
superconformal group is still the symmetry group of the classical equations. unlike
susy gluodynamics now, at v 6= 0, all generators act nontrivially. at rst glance
one might suspect that one needs to introduce 16+8 collective coordinates.
in fact, a part of the generators act nontrivially already in the at vacuum with
v 6= 0. for instance, the action of exp(i) changes the phase of v. since we want
to consider the theory with the given vacuum state such transformation should be

72

excluded from the set generating the instanton collective coordinates. this situation
is rather general, for a more detailed discussion see sec. 3.5.5 and ref. [83].

as a result, the only new collective coordinates to be added are conjugated to
q . the dierential operators q , dened 13 in eq. (2.10), annihilate v0 (modulo
a supergauge transformation) and q0.
it acts non-trivially on q0 producing the
t hooft zero modes of the matter fermions,

q  (q0)

f = 2   

xl  ia! 

 hv u 

f (xl)i = 4  

f v

2

l + 2)3/2 .

(x2

(3.115)

we remind that the superscript of q0 is the color index, the subscript is subavor,
and they got entangled with the lorentz spinor index of the supercharge. note that
only the left-handed matter fermion elds have zero modes, similarly to gluino. we
see how the t hooft zero modes get a geometrical interpretation through super-
symmetry. it is natural to call the corresponding fermionic coordinates (0) . the
supersymmetry transformations shift it by .

in order to determine the action of susy in the expanded moduli space let us

write down the generalized shift operator,

v(x0, 0, , , , ) = eip x0eiq0ei s ei qei m eid ln  .

(3.116)

here new grassmann coordinates   conjugated to q  are introduced. repeating
the procedure of sec. 3.5.2 in the presence of  we obtain the susy transformations
of the moduli. they are the same as in eq. (3.84) plus the transformations of ,

   =    4i   ( ) .

(3.117)

in the linear order in the fermionic coordinates the susy transformation of  is the
same as that of  but the former contains nonlinear terms. the combination which
transforms linearly, exactly as , is

(0)  =  [1  4i(  )] ,

(0)  =   .

(3.118)

a more straightforward way to introduce the collective coordinate 0 is to use a

the variable 0 joins the set {x0, 0} describing the superinstanton center 14.
dierent ordering in the shift operator v,

v(x0, 0, 0, inv, inv, inv) = eip x0eiq0ei q0ei s invei m inveid lninv .

(3.119)

13the supercharges and the matter superelds are denoted by one and the same letter q. we
hope that this unfortunate coincidence will cause no confusion. the indices help to gure out what
is meant in the given context. for the supercharges we usually indicate the spinorial indices (the
greek letters from the beginning of the alphabet). the matter superelds carry the avor indices
(the latin letters). moreover, q0 and q0 (with the subscript 0) is the starting purely bosonic
conguration of the matter superelds.

14in the original work [13] the notation 0 was used for what is called here . the combina-

tion (3.118) was not introduced, it rst appeared in ref. [26].

73

coordinates

0

 

0

x0

r charges

1

1

1 1

0



0

table 4: the r charges of the instanton collective coordinates.

needless to say that this reshuing changes the denition of the other collective
coordinates. with the ordering (3.119) it is clear that x0, 0, and 0 transform as
xl,  and , respectively, while the other moduli are the invariants of the susy
transformations. for this reason we marked them by the subscript inv. certainly
we can nd the relation between the two sets of the collective coordinates,

inv =  [1 + 4i (  )] =

inv = 2 [1 + 4i (  )] =
2



1  4i (  0)

2

1  4i (  0)

,

,

[inv] 

  heiinvi 



= exp(cid:26)4i(cid:20)    +

1
2

 

 ( )(cid:21)(cid:27)  
 ,

(3.120)

it is worth emphasizing that all these susy invariants, built from the instanton
moduli, are due to introduction of the coordinate  conjugated to q.

let us recall that in the theory with matter there is the non-anomalous r sym-
metry, see sec. 2.8. we did not introduce the corresponding collective coordinate
because it is not new compared to the moduli of the at vacua. nevertheless, it
is instructive to consider the r charges of the collective coordinates. we collected
these charges in table 4.

from this table it is seen that the only invariant with the vanishing r charge
is 2
inv. this fact has a drastic impact. in susy gluodynamics no combination of
moduli was invariant under susy and u(1) simultaneously. this fact was used, in
particular, in constructing the instanton measure; the expression for the measure
comes out unambiguous. in the theory with matter, corrections to the instanton
measure proportional to powers of |v|22
inv can emerge, generally speaking. actually,
they do emerge, although all terms beyond the leading |v|22
inv term are accompanied
by powers of the coupling constant g2.

let us now pass to the invariants constructed from the coordinates in the su-
perspace and the moduli. since the set {x0, 0, 0} transforms the same way as the
superspace coordinate {xl, , } such invariants are the same as those built from
two points in the superspace, namely

z  = (xl  x0)  + 4i (  0) (0)  ,

  0 ,

  0 .

(3.121)

74

all other invariants can be obtained by combining the sets of eqs. (3.121) and
(3.120). for instance, the invariant combination x2/2 where

x  = (xl  x0)  + 4i 

  ,

which frequently appears in applications can be rewritten in such a form,

x2
2 =

z2
2
inv

.

(3.122)

(3.123)

one can exploit these invariants to immediately generate various superelds
with the collective coordinate switched on, starting from the original bosonic anti-
instanton conguration. for example [13],

tr (w w)  96 2

4

(x2 + 2)4 ,

q f q f  2

v2x2
x2 + 2 ,

q f q f  2

v2z2
z2 + 2

inv

.

(3.124)

the dierence between x and xl  x0 is unimportant in tr w 2 because of the factor
2. thus, the supereld tr w 2 remains intact: the matter elds do not alter the
result for tr w 2 obtained in susy gluodynamics. the dierence between x and
xl x0 is very important, however, in the supereld q2. indeed, putting 0 =  = 0
and expanding eq. (3.124) in 0 we recover, in the linear approximation, the same
t hooft zero modes as in eq. (3.115)

 = 22iv(0) f 
 f



2

((x  x0)2 + 2)3/2 .

(3.125)

note that the supereld q f q f contains a fermion component if 0 6= 0. what
is the meaning of this fermion eld? (we keep in mind that the dirac equation for 
has no zero modes.) the origin of this fermion eld is the yukawa interaction () 
generating a source term in the classical equation for , namely, d 
3.5.5 orientation collective coordinates as the lorentz su(2)r rotations

   

.

in this section we focus on the orientation collective coordinates  
 , in an attempt
to explain their origin in the most transparent manner. the presentation below is
adapted from ref. [83]. the main technical problem with the introduction of the
orientations is the necessity of untangling them from the nonphysical gauge degrees
of freedom. introduction of matter is the most straightforward way to make this
untangling transparent.

75

to begin with, let us dene a gauge invariant vector eld w

(w) f g =

i

|v|2 h  fd g  (d  f ) gi ,

(3.126)

where f, g are the su(2) (sub)avor indices,  g is the lowest component of the
supereld q g, the color indices are suppressed. in the at vacuum (2.44) the eld
w coincides with the gauge eld a (in the unitary gauge).

what are the symmetries of the at vacuum? they obviously include the lorentz
su(2)lsu(2)r. besides, the vacuum is invariant under the avor su(2) rotations.
indeed, although 
f is not invariant under the multiplication by the unitary
f
g , this noninvariance is compensated by the rotation in the gauge su(2).
 in the model

matrix s
another way to see this is to observe that the only modulus eld 
at hand is avor singlet.

f  

f  f

for the instanton conguration, see eq. (3.63) for a and eq. (3.112) for , the

eld w  reduces to

(w inst
  )

f g = 2i

2

(x2 + 2)2 (cid:18)x g



(cid:19) .
f
f
 g
 + x

(3.127)

.



the next task is to examine the impact of su(2)lsu(2)rsu(2)avor rotations
on the w inst
it is immediately seen that eq. (3.127) remains intact under the
action of su(2)l. it is also invariant under the simultaneous rotations in su(2)r
and su(2)avor. thus, only one su(2) acts on w inst
nontrivially. we can choose it
to be the su(2)r subgroup of the lorentz group. this explains why we introduced
the orientation coordinates through m .



note that the scalar elds play an auxiliary role in the construction presented,
they allow one to introduce a relative orientation. at the end one can consider the
limit v  0 (the unbroken phase).
another comment refers to higher groups. extra orientation coordinates describe
the orientation of the instanton su(2) within the given gauge group. considering
the theory in the higgs regime allows one to make analysis again in the gauge
invariant manner. the crucial dierence, however, is that the extra orientations,
unlike three su(2) ones, are not related to the exact symmetries of the theory in
the higgs phase. generally speaking, the classical action becomes dependent on the
extra orientations, see examples in sec. 3.5.9.

3.5.6 the instanton measure in the one-avor model
the approximate nature of the instanton conguration at v 6= 0 implies that the
classical action is -dependent. from t hoofts calculation [9] it is well known that
in the limit v  0 the action becomes

82
g2 

82
g2 + 42|v|22 .

76

(3.128)

the coecient of |v|22 is twice larger than in t hoofts case because there are two
scalar (squark) elds in the model at hand, as compared to one scalar doublet in
t hoofts calculation. let us remind that the |v|22 term (which is often referred
to in the literature as the t hooft term) is entirely due to a surface contribution in
the action,

z d

d d4x = z d2d4x +z d(cid:16) d(cid:17) d4x = z d (cid:16) d(cid:17) d4x .

(3.129)
since the t hooft term is saturated on the large sphere a question immediately
comes to ones mind as to a possible ambiguity in its calculation.
indeed, what
would happen if from the very beginning one started from the bosonic lagrangian
with the kinetic term  d2 rather than d d? or, alternatively, one could
start from an arbitrary linear combination of these two kinetic terms. in fact, such
a linear combination naturally appears in supersymmetric theories from r d4 qev q.

these questions are fully legitimate. in sec. 3.5.7 we demonstrate that the result
quoted in eq. (3.128) is unambiguous and correct, it can be substantiated by a
dedicated analysis.

the term 42|v|22 is obtained for the purely bosonic eld conguration. for
non-vanishing fermion elds an additional contribution to the action comes from
the yukawa term () . we could have calculated this term by substituting the
classical eld  and the zero modes for  and . however, it is much easier to do the
job by using the susy invariance of the action. since 2
inv (see eq. (3.120)) is the
only appropriate invariant which could be constructed from the moduli, the action
at 0 6= 0 and  6= 0 becomes

82
g2 + 42|v|22

inv .

(3.130)

to obtain the full instanton measure we proceed the same way as in sec. 3.5.3.
besides the classical action, the only change is due to the additional integration over
d2 0. from the general formula (3.92) we infer that it brings in an extra power of
m 1
pv and a normalization factor which could be read o from the expression (3.125).
overall, the extra integration takes the form (see table 3),

1

mp v

1

82v22 d2  =

1

1

mp v

82v22

inv

d2 0 .

(3.131)

note, that the susy transformations (3.84) and (3.117) leave this combination in-
variant. note also, that the t hooft zero modes are chiral, it is 1/v2 that appears,
rather than 1/|v|2. the instanton measure remembers of the phase of the vac-
uum expectation value of the scalar eld. as we will see shortly, this is extremely
important for recovering the proper chiral properties of the instanton-induced su-
perpotentials.

77

combining the d2 0 integration with the previous result one gets

1

g2 !2
pv 82

exp 

82
g2  42|v|22

inv! d2

done =

2114v2 m 5

2 d4x0 d20 d2 inv d2 0 .
(3.132)
this measure is explicitly invariant under the susy transformations. indeed, d2/2
reduces to d2
inv (up to a subtlety at the singular point 2 = 0 to be discussed
later).

inv/2

let us remind that the expression (3.132) is obtained under the assumption that
the parameter 2|v|2  1 and accounts for the zero and rst order terms in the
expansion of the action in this parameter. summing up the higher orders leads to
some function of 2

inv|v|2 in the exponent.

3.5.7 verication of the t hooft term

in the previous section we mentioned the ambiguity in the t hooft term due to its
surface nature. the surface terms call for the careful consideration of the boundary
conditions. instead, we suggest an alternative route via the scattering amplitude
technique [84]. calculation of the scattering amplitude takes care of the correct
boundary conditions automatically.

as a simple example let us consider the non-supersymmetric su(2) model with
one higgs doublet . our task is to demonstrate that the instanton-induced eec-
tive interaction of the  eld is

l = z d expn222h (x)(x)  |v|2io ,

(3.133)

where d is the instanton measure of the model, it includes, in particular, the factor
exp(222|v|2).
we want to compare two alternative calculations of one and the same amplitude
 one based on the instanton calculus, and another following from the eective
lagrangian (3.133). let us start from the emission of one physical higgs by a given
instanton with the xed collective coordinates. the interpolating eld  for the
physical higgs can be dened as

the lagrangian (3.133) implies that the emission amplitude a is equal to

(x) =

1

2|v| h (x)(x)  |v|2i .
a = 22 22|v| .

(3.134)

(3.135)

on the hand let us calculate the expectation value of (x) in the instanton

background. in the leading (classical) approximation,

h(x)iinst =

1

2|v| h inst(x)inst(x)  |v|2i =  |v|2

2

x2 + 2 .

(3.136)

78

considering x   we arrive at

h(x)iinst  22 22|v| 

1

42x2 .

(3.137)

the rst factor is the emission amplitude a, while the second factor is the free
particle propagator.

thus, the eective lagrangian (3.133) is veried in the linear in  order. to verify
the exponentiation it is sucient to show the factorization of the amplitude for the
emission of arbitrary number of the  particles. in the classical approximation this
factorization is obvious.

3.5.8 the instanton measure: general gauge group

by the general case we mean generalization of the su(2) model with one avor to
arbitrary gauge groups g and arbitrary matter sector. passing to higher groups we
still consider the same su(2) instanton of belavin, polyakov, schwarz and tyupkin.
what we need to do is to specify its orientation in the group g. correspondingly,
new collective bosonic coordinates emerge. to introduce them we start from iden-
tifying a stationary subgroup h of the group g which does not act on the given
instanton solution. the generators of h do not give rise to new moduli. therefore,
the number of additional orientations is dg  dh  3 where we subtracted 3 to take
into account three su(2) orientation already considered (the corresponding moduli
are   ). here dg and dh stand for the number of the generators of the groups g
and h, respectively, i.e. dimensions of the groups. note, that for any group g the
following relation takes place:

dg  dh  3 = 4tg  8 ,

(3.138)

where the dual coxeter number tg is dened after eq. (2.90).

the color generators can be classied with respect to the instanton su(2) as
follows: dh singlets of su(2), one triplet, and (dg  dh  3)/2 doublets. the sin-
glets produce no collective coordinates, the triplet was already accounted for, what
should be added is the collective coordinates due to the doublets. the additional
orientational modes can be found along the same line of reasoning as in sec. 3.5.3
(see in ref. [85] where the issue is discussed in detail),

2 

a

 = g1hd u  
 satisfying the equation d2u = 0 is given in eq. (3.101). we
here the matrix u 
 and   are su(2) doublets. as a result,
remind that in the case at hand both a
the dg  dh  3 extra orientations bring in the following extra factor in the measure

(3.139)

=

g

.

,

i

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

a


  (cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)

"

g

 mpv#4tg8 g

82 h

,

79

(3.140)

where g and h are volumes of the groups g and h, respectively. the factor 82
in the denominator is due to fact that (su(2)/z2) = 82 is already included in the
measure.

the gauge group su(n) is of most practical importance. in this case the groups

g and h are

g =

su(n)

zn

,

h =

su(n  2)

zn 2

u(1)
zn

,



(3.141)

with dimensions dg = n 2  1 and dh = (n  2)2. the ratio of the volumes is [85]

g
h

=

24n 52n 2

(n  1)! (n  2)!

.

(3.142)

we accounted for the fact that the center of the group does not act in the adjoint
representation. this is important in the calculation of the volume of the group.

in full analogy with the su(2) model, the bosonic orientation modes have gluino

counterpartners of the same form,

=

4 

g

.

(3.143)

(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)



(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:13)



 = g1(cid:20)d



 u (cid:21)

=

4
g


 2

(x2 + 2)3/2 ,

it is not dicult to verify directly that it is a zero mode, indeed. there are 2n  4
such zero modes, the corresponding collective coordinates will be denoted 15 by i.
by normalizing this mode in the way similar to the orientation modes, in essence, we
gave a geometrical interpretation to the coordinates i. note that the u(1) charge
of i is the same as that of 0 and , i.e. equal to one.

assembling all pieces, we arrive at the nal expression for the instanton measure

in su(n) susy gluodynamics,

d su(n ) =

2n 6 e82/g2

28 (n  1)! (n  2)!

g2 !n
(mpv)3n   82

d2 d4x0 d20 d2 

2n 4

yi=1

 di .

(3.144)

it is useful to present also the measure for the arbitrary gauge group g,

dg =

e82/g2
2 4tg+3 4

g
h

(mpv) 3tg  82

g2 !tg

d2 d4x0 d20 d2 

2tg4

yi=1

 di .

(3.145)

3.5.9 the instanton measure: general matter content

in su(2) sqcd we have discussed the matter in the fundamental representation. we
found that for each doublet supereld there appeared one fermionic zero mode, i.e.
one fermionic collective coordinate. we related this mode to the scalar component
of the same supereld in the higgs phase (the solution of the equation d2 = 0
15these fermionic coordinates are marked by bar to emphasize that they are partners to the
color orientations carrying the dotted indices. note that the origin of  is similar.

80

with a nontrivial asymptotic behavior). this procedure can be easily generalized to
arbitrary representation r(j) of su(2) where j is the color spin. in this case the
solution for the scalar eld in the anti-instanton background can be written as

1,...,2j = v u 1

1    u 2j
where c 1 2j is a symmetric tensor, c = c, normalized to unity

1    u 2j

1,...,2j = v u 1

2j c 1 2j ,

2j c 1 2j ,

c 1 2j c 1 2j = 1 .

(3.146)

(3.147)

the particular form of c is determined by the choice of the vacuum conguration
from the vacuum manifold.

the total number of the matter fermion zero modes is equal to

2t (j) =

2
3

j (j + 1)(2j + 1) ,

(3.148)

where t (j) is the dual coxeter number for the representation r(j). correspondingly,

2t (j) fermionic coordinates i must be introduced. the extra factor q di appears
in the measure. besides, if v 6= 0, i.e. we are in the higgs phase, the classical action
gets modied. our task is to establish the form of the |v|22 term in the action.

the modication of the bosonic part is pretty obvious,

s = 42 j |v|2 2 .

(3.149)

this is a generalization of the t hooft term. it worth stressing that this term in the
action is proportional to j. this is a topological feature, due to the fact that s is
expressible as a surface integral, see eq. (3.129). since   u 2j the surface integral
is proportional to j.
as previously, the impact of the fermion zero modes reduces to the replacement
inv. what remains to be claried is the denition of 0 in

of 2 in eq. (3.149) by 2
terms of i. out of all 2t (j) fermion zero modes only 2j zero modes of the form

1,...,2j



=

i

42j d 1

 hu 1

{ 1    u 2j

2j }i  2 2j

(3.150)

are involved in the problem at hand. here  2 2j present 2j fermionic collective
coordinates. the explicit form of the fermion zero modes displayed in eq. (3.150)
shows that these particular modes can be understood as the susy transformation
of the 2j + 1 bosonic solutions of the equation d2 = 0. the latter have the
form (3.146), with the xed coecients c replaced by an arbitrary symmetric tensor.
the parameter 0 is introduced through the susy transformation of the bosonic
conguration (3.146) with the parameter  = 0. performing this transformation
and comparing the result with eq. (3.150) we nd

(0) 1 =

1

4vj

c 1 2j  2 2j

(3.151)

81

if the matter sector contains several irreducible representations, then s is the
sum over all representations, each one enters with its own v and c. in the simplest
case of two doublets considered in sec. 3.5.6 the d-atness implies that vs are the
same, and the color orientations given by cs are opposite. then the summation
over two doublets returns us to eq. (3.130), with 2

inv dened in eq. (3.120).

the resulting measure is

d = d su(2) yr(j)

(mpv)t (j) e42 j |vj|2 2

inv

where d su(2) is given in eq. (3.109).




2t (j)

yi=1

,

d i


(3.152)

what changes in passing to higher groups? not much. one should decompose the
matter representation in the group g with respect to the instanton su(2) corner.
the su(2) singlet elds can be dropped out, other elds contribute according to
eq. (3.152) where v should be replaced by its su(2) projection v su(2). therefore,
the 2 terms in the action certainly depend on the orientation of the instanton
su(2) subgroup within the group g. the measure dierential with respect to this
orientation is

d = dg

dg/h
g/h

(mpv)t (r) yr(j)

e42 j |v su(2)|2 2

inv

here an obvious relation t (r) = p t (j) is used.




2t (j)

yi=1

.

d i


(3.153)

3.6 cancellation of quantum corrections to the measure

so far, our analysis of the instanton measure was in essence classical. strictly speak-
ing, it would be better to call it semiclassical.
indeed, let us not forget that the
calculation of the pre-exponent is related to the one-loop corrections. in our case
the pre-exponent is given by the integral over the collective coordinates. in non-
supersymmetric theories the pre-exponent is not exhausted by this integration 
non-zero modes contribute as well. here we will show that the non-zero modes
cancel out in susy theories. moreover, in the unbroken phase the cancellation of
the non-zero modes persists to any order in perturbation theory and even beyond,
i.e. nonperturbatively. thus, we obtain the extension of the non-renormalization
theorem [48] to the instanton background. the specic feature of this background,
responsible for the extension, is preservation of one half of susy. note that in the
higgs phase the statement of cancellation is also valid in the zeroth and rst order
in the parameter 2|v|2.
in the rst loop the cancellation is pretty obvious. indeed, in susy gluodynamics
the dierential operator l2 dening the mode expansion has one and the same form,
see eq. (3.93), for both the gluon and gluino elds,

n = 2
n = 2

n a 
n ,
n 
n .

 d d  a 
d d  
82

(3.154)

the residual supersymmetry (generated by q ) is reected in l2 in the absence
of free dotted indices. therefore, if the boundary conditions respect the residual
supersymmetry  which we assume they do  the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions are
the same for a 1, a 2, and . for the eld   the relevant operator is d d  =
 

 d d /2,

(3.155)
this equation shows 16 that the modes of  coincide with those of the scalar eld 
in the same representation of the gauge group,

 d d 

 
n = 2
n

 
n .

 d d  n = 2

n n .

(3.156)

moreover, all nonzero modes are expressible in terms of n (this nice feature was
noted in ref. [86]). this is quite evident for  1 and  2. as for the non-zero modes
of a and  they are

n

n

( )
n =

1

nd  n .

(3.157)

1

=

a 1( )

= a 2( )

nd  n ,
thus, the integration over a produces 1/4
tion over  and  produces 2
scalar ghosts which provides the remaining 2
n.

n for each given eigenvalue. the integra-
n. the balance is restored by the contribution of the

the same cancellation is extended to the matter sector. in every supermultiplet
each mode of the scalar eld  is accompanied by two modes in  and  , see
eq. (3.157). correspondingly, one gets 2

n for each eigenvalue.

n/2

from the one-loop consideration it is clear that the cancellation is due to the
boson-fermion pairing enforced by the residual supersymmetry of the instanton back-
ground. the very same supersymmetry guarantees the cancellation in higher loops.
first of all, on general symmetry grounds, corrections, if present, could not be func-
tions of the collective coordinates:
it was shown previously that no appropriate
invariants exist. therefore, the only possibility left is a purely numerical series in
powers of g2.

in fact, even such series does not appear. indeed, let us consider the two-loop
supergraph in the instanton background (fig. 1). this graph has two vertices. its
contribution is the integral over the supercoordinates of both vertices, {x, , } and
{x, , }, respectively. let us integrate over the supercoordinates of the second
vertex and over the coordinates x and  (but not !) of the rst vertex. then
the graph can be presented as the integral r d2  f (). the function f is invariant

under the simultaneous susy transformations of  and the instanton collective
coordinates. as it was shown in sec. 3.5.2, in susy gluodynamics there are no
invariants containing . therefore, the function f () can be only a constant, and
then the integration over  yields zero [11].

16the equality d d  = (1/2)  

 d d  exploits the fact that g   = 0 for the anti-instanton.

83

x, ,

 , 

x ,

figure 1: a typical two-loop supergraph. the solid lines denote the propagators
of the quantum superelds in the (anti)instanton background. we rely only on
the most general features of the supersymmetric background eld technique. for
a pedagogical introduction to supergraphs and supersymmetric background eld
technique the reader is referred to ref. [87].

the proof above is a version of the arguments based on the residual supersymme-
try. indeed, no invariant can be built of  because there is no collective coordinate
0. the absence of 0 is, in turn, the consequence of the residual supersymmetry.
introduction of matter in the higgs phase changes the situation. at v 6= 0 no resid-
ual supersymmetry survives. in terms of the collective coordinates this is reected
in the emergence of 0. correspondingly, the function f () becomes a function of
the invariant   0 (see eq. (3.121)), and the integral does not vanish.
therefore, in the theories with matter, in the higgs phase, the instanton does
get corrections. however, these corrections vanish [88] in the limit |v|22  0.
technically, the invariant above containing  disappears at small v because 0 is
proportional to 1/v.

summarizing, the instanton measure gets no quantum corrections in susy glu-
odynamics and in the unbroken phase in the presence of matter. in the higgs phase
the corrections start from the terms g2|v|22.
one important comment is in order here regarding the consideration above. our
proof assumes that there exists a supersymmetric ultraviolet regularization of the
theory. at one-loop level the pauli-villars regulators do the job. in higher loops
the regularization is achieved by a combination of the pauli-villars regulators with
higher derivatives terms. we do not use this regularization explicitly; rather, we
rely on the theorem of its existence. that is all we need. as for the infrared
regularization, it is provided by the instanton eld itself. indeed, at xed collective
coordinates all eigenvalues are nonvanishing. the zero modes should not be counted
when the collective coordinates are xed.

4 sample applications

the stage is set, and we are ready to apply the formalism outlined above in concrete
problems that arise in susy gauge theories.
in this section we start discussing
applications of instanton calculus which are of practical interest. first, we will
derive the nsvz  function. then in su(2) sqcd with one avor we will obtain

84

an instanton-generated superpotential [5]. in the theory with two avors we will
calculate the quantum deformation of the moduli space. both eects are due to the
one-instanton contribution. the two-avor su(2) model is a major component of
the itiy mechanism [7] on which we will dwell in sec. 6.3.

4.1 novikov-shifman-vainshtein-zakharov  function

the exact results for the instanton measure obtained above, in conjunction with the
renormalizability, can be converted into exact relations for the  functions.

4.1.1 exact  function in supersymmetric gluodynamics

consider rst supersymmetric gluodynamics. the gauge group g can be arbitrary.
the expression for the instanton measure is given in eq. (3.145). what are the
input theoretical parameters in this expression? there are two such parameters:
the bare coupling constant g and the regulator mass mpv. although the instanton
measure is a theoretical construction it will be directly related, as we will see, to the
physically observable quantities. the renormalizability of the theory implies that
the latter, as well as the former, depends only on a special combination of g and
mpv: the ultraviolet cuto mpv must conspire with the bare coupling g to make the
instanton measure expressible in terms of the renormalized coupling gren(). this
means that g should be understood as a function g(mpv) such that the combination
entering the instanton measure does not depend on mpv,

(mpv)3tg  

1

g2(mpv)!tg

exp 

82

g2(mpv)! = const .

(4.1)

the dimensionful constant on the right-had side is related to the physical scale
parameter  dened in the standard perturbative schemes, see sec. 4.1.4 for a more
detailed discussion.

the independence of the left-hand side on mpv gives the exact answer for the

running coupling (in the pauli-villars scheme)

() =

g2()

4

.

the result can be formulated, of course, in the form of the exact  function. taking
the logarithm and dierentiating with respect to ln mpv, we arrive at

() 

d (mpv)
d ln mpv

= 

3tg 2

2 (cid:18)1 

1

tg 

2 (cid:19)

.

(4.2)

we pause here to make a remark regarding the complexied structure of the
objects considered.
in the derivation above it was assumed that both the gauge
coupling g and the pauli-villars regulator mass mpv are real. as we know, see

85

eq. (2.38), the gauge coupling is complexied, 82/g2  82/g2  i. in the in-
stanton measure the regulator mass mpv and the fermion collective coordinates are
complex too. therefore, it is instructive to study the phase dependence related
to the (anomalous) u(1) transformation of the elds. under these transformations
every fermion collective coordinate is multiplied by exp(i). correspondingly, the
instanton measure (3.145) is multiplied by exp(2itg). this is an explicit manifes-
tation of the chiral anomaly. the phase factor can be absorbed into the phase of the
regulator mass mpv, it is the regulators mass terms which break the u(1). thus,
the chiral properties of the measure are consistent with the anomaly.

alternatively, instead of rotating mpv, one can shift the vacuum angle  
 + 2tg in the complexied exponent, exp(82/g2 + i), in the measure. the
subtlety is that the factors 82/g2 in the pre-exponent are not shifted. in fact, it
is re(82/g2) that enters in the pre-exponent. this is is the so-called holomorphic
anomaly [89]. have we used (82/g2 i)2tg in the pre-exponent we would obtain a
 dependence of the  function starting from the fourth loop. this obviously cannot
happen in perturbation theory.

the holomorphic anomaly is related to supersymmetric regularization of the
higher loops. as we mentioned it is done through higher derivative d terms. the
corresponding ultraviolet regulator is not chiral, unlike the pauli-villars regulators
used in the rst loop. in our derivation of the  function we tacitly assumed that
the absolute values of all regulator masses are the same.

4.1.2 theories with matter:  function via anomalous dimensions

now, let us introduce the matter elds in arbitrary representation r. this repre-

sentation can be reducible, r = p ri. besides the gauge interaction, the matter

elds can have arbitrary (self)interactions, i.e. an arbitrary renormalizable super-
potential is allowed. the possible superpotential does not explicitly show up in our
nal formula, eq. (4.8). it is hidden in the anomalous dimensions which certainly
do depend on the presence/absence of the superpotential.

the instanton measure is given in eq. (3.153). it assumes that the kinetic terms
of the matter are normalized canonically, i.e. the matter part of the lagrangian is

lmatter =

1

4 xi z d2d2  qiev qi +

1

2 (cid:26)z d2 w(qi) + h.c.(cid:27) .

(4.3)

as we know the superpotential is not renormalized but the kinetic terms are. there-
fore, it is more convenient to allow for arbitrary z factors in the bare lagrangian,

lmatter =

1

4 xi

ziz d2d2  qiev qi +

1

2 (cid:26)z d2 w(qi) + h.c.(cid:27) .

(4.4)

these z factors are bare ones, normalized at the ultraviolet cut o, zi(mpv). they
can be xed by the condition that the z factors become unity in the infrared. as a

86

result the measure (3.153) acquires the extra factor

(zi)t (ri)

yi

(4.5)

this makes the formulas symmetric with respect to the z factors of the gauge
elds zg = 1/g2. the integration in the measure over each collective coordinate is
accompanied by z 1/2 (plus for bosonic, minus for fermionic moduli).

note, that in the instanton calculations the infrared cut o is provided by the
instanton size . thus, we can choose z() = 1 at the infrared scale, adjusting
zi(mpv). this is similar to the gauge coupling: we treat g() as a physical xed
coupling allowing the bare coupling g to oat.

then the generalization of eq. (4.1) is

(mpv)3tgp t (ri)  1

g2!tg

exp 

82

g2 ! yi

(zi)t (ri) = const .

(4.6)

the right-hand side is independent of mpv; the factor (mpv)3tgp t (ri) on the

left hand side must be compensated by an implicit mpv-dependence of g and zi.
dierentiating over ln mpv one gets the  function.

in distinction with the pure gauge case eq. (4.6) does not x the running of the
gauge coupling per se; rather, it expresses the running of the gauge coupling via the
anomalous dimensions of the matter elds,

i  

d ln zi
d ln mpv

.

taking the logarithm and dierentiating over ln mpv we arrive at

() 

d  (mpv)
d ln mpv

= 

2

2 "3 tg xi

t (ri)(1  i)#(cid:18)1 

1

tg 

2 (cid:19)

(4.7)

.

(4.8)

this is the nsvz  function.

it is worth noting that one can readily derive it in perturbation theory too, from a
one-loop calculation, using some general properties of supersymmetry. a pedagogical
discussion of the one-loop perturbative calculation leading to eq. (4.8) and related
ideas are presented in ref. [90]. the relation between the nsvz  function and
those obtained in other schemes (for instance, the standard dimensional reduction,
and so on) was the subject of a special investigation [91].

it is interesting to examine how the general formula (4.8) works in some particular
cases. let us start from the theories with the extended susy, n = 2. they
can be presented as n = 1 theories containing one matter eld in the adjoint
representation which enters the same extended supermultiplet as the gluon eld.
therefore, its z factor z = 1/g2 and  = /.
in addition, we allow for some
number of the matter hypermultiplets in the arbitrary color representations (let us

87

remind that every hypermultiplet consists of two n = 1 chiral superelds). the
n = 2 susy leads to z = 1 for all hypermultiplets. indeed, for n = 2 the kahler
potential is in-one-to-one correspondence with the superpotential. the latter is not
renormalized perturbatively owing to n = 1 susy. hence, the kahler potential for
the hypermultiplets is not renormalized too, implying that z = 1.
taking into account these facts we derive from eq. (4.8) the following gauge

coupling  function:

2

 n =2() = 

(4.9)

t (ri)# .

we can now make one step further passing to n = 4.

2 "2 tg xi
here the summation runs over the n = 2 matter hypermultiplets. this result proves
that the  function is one-loop in n = 2 theories.
in terms of n = 2
this theory corresponds to one matter hypermultiplet in the adjoint representation.
substituting p t (ri) = 2 tg in eq. (4.9) produces the vanishing  function. thus,
the n = 4 theory is nite.
in fact, eq. (4.9) shows that the class of nite theories is much wider. any n = 2
theory with the matter hypermultiplets satisfying the condition 2 tgpi t (ri) = 0
is nite. an example is provided by tg hypermultiplets in the fundamental repre-
sentation.

the nsvz  function allows one to nd nite theories even in the class of
n = 1. the simplest example was suggested in ref. [92], further developments
are presented in [93]. the general idea is to have the matter sector such that the
conditions 3 tgpi t (ri) = 0 and i = 0 are met simultaneously. for instance [92],
consider the su(3) gauge model with nine triplets qi and nine antitriplets qi and
the superpotential

w = h(cid:16)q1q2q3 + q4q5q6 + q7q8q9 + q1 q2 q3 + q4 q5 q6 + q7 q8 q9(cid:17) , (4.10)

where an implicit contraction of the color indices by virtue of ijk is implied. the
avor symmetry of the model ensures that there is only one z factor for all matter

elds. since the condition 3 tg  pi t (ri) = 0 is satised, the niteness is guar-

anteed provided that the anomalous dimension  vanishes. at small g and h the
anomalous dimension (g, h) is determined by a simple one-loop calculation,

(g, h) = 

g2

32 + |h|2
42 .

(4.11)

this shows that the condition (g, h) = 0 has a solution, at least in the vicinity of
small couplings.

4.1.3 nsvz  function and wilsonean action

in the instanton derivation of the  function presented above the zero modes play
a crucial role.
if they were absent the  function would vanish. the impact of

88

zero modes is two-fold: rst, they determine the power of mpv, i.e. the one-loop
coecient b of the  function,

b = nb 

1
2

nf ,

(4.12)

where nb and nf are the numbers of bosonic and fermionic zero modes, respectively.
second, the higher loop coecients in the  function are completely determined by
the renormalization of the zero modes.

in terms of the perturbation theory the latter implies that the rst loop is fac-
tored out from higher loops. it is instructive to trace this phenomenon in perturba-
tion theory per se. let us examine the two-loop graph of fig. 1. the graph refers
to the covariant background eld technique [87]. the dierence with the instanton
calculation is that the gauge background eld is assumed to be weak, the gauge
coupling renormalization is determined by the quadratic in the external eld term
w w. performing the integration over the primed supercoordinate {x, , } we
nd that the eective action generated by this graph takes the form

s = z d4xd2d2 f [w ] ,

(4.13)

where the gauge invariant functional f depends on w and w . if there were no
infrared singularities f would be expandable in powers of w , and the quadratic
terms w 2, w 2 would obviously drop out. this would mean the vanishing of the
second loop in the  function, which certainly cannot be true. the loophole is in
the infrared singularities, f is nonlocal. the nonlocality is of the type

f  w

d2
2 w ,

(4.14)

which leads to the local expression w 2 after the integration over d2 . note, that
the proof of the nonrenormalization theorem in the instanton background in sec. 3.6
does not suer from this problem  the instanton eld itself provides the infrared
regularization.

thus, we see that all higher loops penetrate in the  function through the in-
frared, the rst loop is factored out. in the wilsonean action, where the infrared
eects are excluded by construction, the gauge coupling is renormalized at one loop
only [53]. higher loops are absorbed into matrix elements and produce the relation
between the wilsonean and the standard gauge coupling 17.

4.1.4 making contact with the perturbative denition of 

the expressions (4.1) and (4.6) establish combinations of the bare lagrangian pa-
rameters and mpv which are cut-o independent. then it is natural to relate these

17the wilsonean coupling is often referred to as the holomorphic coupling in the current litera-

ture.

89

combinations to the physical scale parameter  of the type used in perturbative
qcd.

the standard convention used by the qcd practitioners [94] is

b

pt = b  162

b g2()!b1/b

exp 

82

g2()! ,

(4.15)

where b and b1 are the rst and and the second coecients in the  function and
the third and higher loops are neglected.

let us start from susy gluodynamics. then,

b = 3tg ,

b1 = 3t 2
g ,

and the expression for  takes the form

g = mpv  162

3tg g2!1/3

exp 

82

3tg g2! ,

(4.16)

(4.17)

where we substituted  by mpv and g2() by the bare coupling g2. in distinction
with the general qcd case the expression (4.17) is exact rather than two-loop. this
can be seen from comparison with the exact relation (4.1). let us stress that, due to
factorization, the coupling constant and the group factors enter in the combination
tg g2 for any gauge group. this scaling is well-known in the large n limit of su(n).
in the supersymmetric theory factorization makes the scaling exact. later on we
will calculate the gluino condensate and express it in terms of this g.

in the theories with matter the situation becomes more complex. in this case
the gauge coupling constant is not the only parameter dening the renormalization
procedure. the parameters of the superpotential (masses and the yukawa couplings)
are also involved in the renormalization procedure. they are renormalized through
the z factors of the matter elds. thus, besides the running gauge couplings one
has to take into account the running masses and the yukawa couplings.

unlike susy gluodynamics where the general formula (4.15) was in fact exact, in
the theories with matter it looses its exact nature. for this reason, it is inconvenient
to use eq. (4.15) as a starting denition. the exact renormalization group invariant
combination is displayed in eq. (4.6). we will invoke it to introduce the scale
parameter,

b = (mpv)b 162

bg2 !tg

exp 

82

g2 ! yi

z t (ri)

i

,

(4.18)

(4.19)

where

b = 3tg x t (ri) .

this denition assumes that zi = 1 in the infrared. certainly, this  can be
related to pt, eq. (4.15), at the two-loop level. for example, one may consider
the theory with purely gauge interactions, i.e. the superpotential reduces to the

90

mass terms. for the two-loop comparison, it is sucient to know zi in the one-loop
approximation,

zi = " g2

g2(v)#2c2(ri)/b

,

where c2 is the quadratic casimir

c2(ri) = t (ri)

dim(g)
dim(ri)

,

(4.20)

(4.21)

and dim stands for dimension of the representation. it is implied that the theory is
fully higgsed and v is the scale of all moduli. comparing with the denition (4.15)
we nd

 = pt" 162

bg2(v)#2p c2(ri)t (ri)/b2

.

(4.22)

4.1.5 perturbative versus nonperturbative  functions

the nsvz  function derived above was shown to be exact in perturbation theory. a
natural question arises about nonperturbative eects in the  function. in some cases
it is known for a long time that such eects are present. the most famous example
is n = 2 gluodynamics where seiberg found [29] the one-instanton exponential term
in the gauge coupling. later on the full answer containing all exponential terms was
obtained by seiberg and witten [95].

although our consideration does not include the nonperturbative corrections to
the  function we present here symmetry arguments which prompt us in which
theories the nsvz  function is nonperturbatively exact and in which cases non-
perturbative corrections are possible. the symmetry we keep in mind is the r
symmetry.

one can formulate a general theorem. consider a generic point on the moduli
space of vacua. assume that this point corresponds either to the higgs phase or to
the abelian coulomb phase, in the weak coupling regime. then, if no combination
of moduli (respecting the avor symmetry of theory) has the vanishing r charge,
then the nsvz  function is nonperturbatively exact.

the proof is quite straightforward. under the assumption above, we deal essen-
tially with one (avor symmetric) modulus m of a nonzero r charge. if two or more
such moduli existed one could always organize an r neutral combination. then, for
each given chiral quantity the r symmetry uniquely xes its dependence on the
modulus. this dependence is of the form k/m n where  is the scale parameter of

the theory. since   exp[82/(3tg p t (ri))g2] no iteration of the exponential

terms occur. we will further elaborate this topic in a slightly dierent, although
related context, in sec. 4.6.

an example is provided by sqcd with the gauge group su(n) and the number of
avors nf = n1. the appropriate chiral quantity to consider is the superpotential

91

w which depends on

m = detnqf qgo .

(4.23)

the r charge of m is equal to 2 which xes w to be w = 2n +1/m.
on other hand, in the n = 2 gluodynamics with the gauge group su(2) the only
modulus tr 2 has the vanishing r charge  thus, the series in 4/(tr 2)2 is not
ruled out, and, sure enough, it actually emerges [95].

note, however, that these nonperturbative eects in the gauge coupling physi-
cally are due to monopoles which are heavy in weak coupling. for this reason the
nonperturbative eects do not contribute to the running of the coupling  the run-
ning is governed by the one-loop  function. the situation is similar to the eect of
the heavy quark in the qcd gauge coupling, the heavy quark does not contribute
to the running below the heavy quark threshold.

4.2 gluino condensate in susy gluodynamics

as a rst example of the nonperturbative phenomenon let us consider the calculation
of the gluino condensate in su(2) gluodynamics [3]. to this end we consider the
two-point function

supersymmetry xes the superspace coordinate dependence of this correlator to be

h0|t ntr w 2(xl, ), tr w 2(x

l, )o|0i .

(4.24)

const + (  )2f (xl  x

l) .

(4.25)

we see that the correlator of the lowest components tr 2 can only be constant,
which, due clusterization, implies

 = h0|t ntr 2(xl, ), tr 2(x

l, )o|0i = h0|tr 2|0i2 .

(4.26)

it is obvious that  vanishes in perturbation theory. the one-instanton contri-
bution to  does not vanish, however. this is readily seen from the balance of the
zero modes. the calculation is quite straightforward,

 = z dsu(2) tr w 2

inst(xl,  = 0) tr w 2

inst(x

l,  = 0) ,

(4.27)

where the instanton measure dsu(2) is displayed in eq. (3.109) and tr w 2
in eq. (3.77). integrating over the fermionic coordinates 0 and  we arrive at

inst is given

(x  x)2 z d2d4x0

8

[(x  x0)2 + 2]4 [(x  x0)2 + 2]4 .

(4.28)

the integral over x0 and  is well-dened. on dimensional grounds it is proportional
1/(x  x)2, the integral over 2 is totally saturated at 2  (x  x)2. thus, the
expression (4.28) is just a number, 2/45.

92

collecting all numericals, we get

h0|tr 2|0i2 =

2104

5

e82/g2 m 6

pv

g4 =

144
5

6

g ,

(4.29)

where the scale parameter g is dened in eq. (4.17). the gluino condensate,
which is obviously a nonperturbative eect, is expressed here in terms of the scale
parameter g introduced through a standard perturbation theory formula. note a
relatively large (30) numerical coecient in eq. (4.29). note also that the gluino
condensate comes out double-valued. this is in agreement with the existence of
two bosonic vacua in the theory. two vacua correspond to iw = 2 and to the
spontaneous breaking z4  z2, see sec. 2.9.
what is the theoretical status of this derivation performed in the strong coupling
regime? formally, one can start from the correlator at (x  x)2  2
g where
the coupling is small and the semiclassical analysis should by reliable. inside the
instanton calculation of the correlator  we see no corrections, either perturbative,
or nonperturbative.

on the other hand, there are still unresolved issues. one may ask, for instance,
how the result (4.29) is compatible with the fact that the one-instanton calculation
of h0|tr 2|0i yields zero.
it looks as an apparent contradiction with the cluster
decomposition. the answer to this question is not yet clear. a possible explanation
was suggested in ref. [43]: it was argued that the instanton calculation refers to an
average over the two bosonic vacua of the theory. this averaging makes h0|tr 2|0i
to vanish while the square is the same for both vacua.
unfortunately, it is not the end of the story. one can calculate the same gluino
condensate starting from the one-avor model (sec. 4.3) in the weak coupling regime.
proceeding from the small to large quark mass and using the holomorphic depen-
dence of h0|tr 2|0i on m we return back to strong coupling. the gluino condensate
found in such a way, see eq. (4.39), contains an extra factor q5/4 compared to the

condensate following from eq. (4.29). within the hypothesis [43] about averaging
over vacua the discrepancy can be interpreted as a signal of the existence of an extra
chirally symmetric vacuum (see sec. 7).

there is, however, one more relevant test: the n = 2 theory softly broken to
n = 1 by a small mass of the matter elds. the seiberg-witten solution [95] then
gives the value of gluino condensate which is larger than what follows from the
correlator calculation, again by the same factor q5/4 (for details see [96]). there is

no extra vacuum in this problem, which shows that the vacuum averaging hypothesis
does not work in the case at hand. the problem of instanton calculations in strong
coupling remains unsolved.

the correlator (4.24) is the simplest in its class. one can extend the approach to
include more chiral operators: n-point functions of w 2 and/or chiral operators con-
structed from the matter elds [4]. all correlators of this type are of the topological
nature  this feature was revealed in the most transparent way in the topological
eld theories constructed later by witten [97].

93

4.3 one-avor model

the classical structure of sqcd with the gauge group su(2) and one avor was
discussed in sec. 2.3.2. the model has one modulus

 = qqf

q

f /2 .

(4.30)

in the absence of the superpotential all vacua with dierent  are degenerate. the
degeneracy is not lifted to any nite order of perturbation theory. as shown below
it is lifted nonperturbatively [5] by an instanton generated superpotential w().
far away from the origin of the valley, when ||  , the gauge su(2) is
spontaneously broken, the theory is in the higgs regime, and the gauge bosons are
heavy. in addition, the gauge coupling is small, so that the quasiclassical treatment
is reliable. at weak coupling the leading nonperturbative contribution is due to
instantons. thus, our task is to nd the instanton-induced eects.

the exact r invariance of the model is sucient to establish the functional form

of the eective superpotential w(),

w() 

5

one
2

,

(4.31)

where the power of  is determined by its r charge (r = 1) and the power of 
is xed on dimensional grounds. here we introduced the notation

5

one =

e82/g2

zg4

(mpv)5 ,

(4.32)

which coincides with the general denition (4.18) up to a numerical factor.

to see that one instanton does induce this superpotential, we consider the instan-
ton transition in the background eld (xl, ) weakly depending on the superspace
coordinates. to this end one generalizes the result (3.132), which assumes  = v at
distances much larger than , to a variable supereld ,

d =

1
25

5

one

2(x0, 0)

exp(cid:16)42  2

inv(cid:17) d2

2 d4x0 d20 d2  d2 0 .

(4.33)

there exist many alternative ways to verify that this generalization is indeed
correct. for instance, one could calculate the propagator of the quantum part of
 = v + qu using the constant background  = v in the measure, see sec. 3.5.7 for
more details.

the eective superpotential is obtained by integrating over ,  and 0. since
these variables enter the measure only through 2
inv, at rst glance the integral
seems to be vanishing. indeed, changing the variable 2 to 2
inv makes the integrand
independent of  and 0. this is not the case, however. the loophole is due to
the singularity at 2
inv = 0. to resolve the singularity let us integrate rst over the
fermionic variables. for an arbitrary function f (2
inv) the integration takes the form

2 d2  d2 0 f (2[1 + 4i  0]) = z d2
z d2

2 164f (2) = 16 f (2 = 0) .

(4.34)

94

the integration over 2 was performed by integrating by parts twice. it was assumed
that f (2  ) = 0.
it is seen that the result depends only on the zero-size
instanton. in other words,

d2
2 d2  d2 0 f (2

inv) = 16 d2

inv (2

inv)f (2

inv) .

the instanton generated superpotential is 18

winst() =

5

one
2

.

(4.35)

(4.36)

it does not depend
the result presented in eq. (4.36) bears a topological nature:
on the particular form of the integrand f (2
inv) since the integral is determined by
2 = 0. the integrand is given by the exponent only at small 2. no matter how it
behaves as a function of 2, the formula for the superpotential is the same, provided
that the integration over 2 is convergent at large 2. we advertised this assertion
 the saturation at 2 = 0  more than once previously. technically, the saturation
at 2 = 0 makes the calculation self-consistent (remember, at 2 = 0 the instanton
solution becomes exact in the higgs phase) and explains why the result (4.36) gets
no perturbative corrections in higher orders.

we see that in the model at hand the instanton does generate a superpotential
which lifts the vacuum degeneracy. the result is exact both perturbatively and
nonperturbatively.

in the absence of the tree-level superpotential the induced superpotential leads
to a run-away vacuum  the lowest energy state is achieved at the innite value
of . one can stabilize the theory by adding the mass term m2 in the classical
superpotential. the total superpotential then takes the form

w() = m2 + winst() .

(4.37)

one can trace the origin of the second term to the anomaly in eq. (3.21) in the
original full theory (i.e. the theory before integrating out the gauge elds).

minimizing energy we get two supersymmetric vacua at

h2i = " 5

one

m #1/2

.

(4.38)

to obtain the gluino condensate one can use the konishi relation (2.110) which in
the case at hand implies

htr 2i = 162mh2i = 162hm5

onei1/2

= 162"m e82/g2

zg4

(mpv)5#1/2

.

(4.39)

18a dedicated analysis of various one-instanton eects has been carried out recently [98], with the
aim of collecting numerical factors that had been usually ignored in the previous works. equation
(3.1) in [98] coincides with eq. (4.36), provided we restore the factor g4z 1 omitted (deliberately)
in ref. [98].

95

with our convention (4.4) the bare quark mass mbare is m/z, therefore the gluino
condensate dependence on mbare is holomorphic. in fact, the square root dependence
on mbare is an exact statement [58]. this allows one to pass to large mbare where the
matter could be viewed as one of the regulators. setting mbare = mpv we return
to supersymmetric gluodynamics. comparing the square of htr 2i from eq. (4.39)
with eq. (4.29) we nd [13] a mismatch factor 4/5 (eq. (4.39) yields a larger result).
in addition to the holomorphic dependence on mbare, the gluino condensate de-
pends holomorphically on the regulator mass m. as for the gauge coupling, 1/g2 in
the exponent can be complexied according to eq. (2.38), but in the pre-exponential
factor it is reg2 that enters. this is the holomorphic anomaly [89]  the dependence
on the wilsonean coupling constant gw of susy gluodynamics

1
g2
w

=

1
g2 

1

42 ln"re

1

g2#

(4.40)

is holomorphic.

let us stress the statement of the holomorphic dependence refers to the bare
parameters. for instance, if one expresses the very same gluino condensate in terms
perturbative scale pt and the physical mass of the modulus eld m = 2m one
would get at the two-loop level

htr 2i2  m 5

pt(cid:20)ln

3/10

pt

m(cid:21)

.

(4.41)

not only the holomorphy in m is lost  this ugly expression is only approximate,
higher loops result in further logarithmic corrections.

4.4 two-avor model

the two-avor model presents a new phenomenon: although the superpotential is
not generated, some points of the classical moduli space become inaccessible.
in
other words, the geometry of the moduli space is changed [30].

compared to the previous section we add one extra avor, i.e. now we deal with
four chiral superelds qf where f = 1, 2, 3, 4 is the subavor index. the d-at
direction is parametrized by six chiral invariants,

mf g = mgf = q

f q

g  .

(4.42)

the matrix mf g is antisymmetric in f, g and is subject to one classical constraint,

pf(m) 

1
2

f gpqmf gmpq = 0 .

(4.43)

the combination on the right-hand side is called pfaan. the avor rotations
allow one to render the matrix mf g in the form where m12 and m34 are the only

96

nonvanishing elements. then the constraint (4.43) means that the classical moduli
space m consists of two manifolds m1 and m2,
m1 = {m34 = 0 , m12 arbitrary} , m2 = {m12 = 0 , m34 arbitrary} .
our task is to nd a superpotential on each branch.

in the absence of tree-
level superpotential wtree the eective superpotential is not generated, unlike the
one-avor model. let us introduce a classical mass term which can be chosen as

(4.44)

wtree = m12m12 + m34m34 ,

(4.45)

without loss of generality. the theory is dened as a limit when the parameters mf g
go to zero. the instanton-generated eects should be calculated separately on two
manifolds m1 and m2.
calculation is

for the manifold m1 the matter eld conguration appropriate for the instanton

(xl)
1,2

l + 2

+ 4(0)1,2

(x2

2

l + 2)3/2


,

q

q

qx2

1,2(xl, ; 0) = v

qx2
r + 2
2


3,4(xl, ; 3,4) =

1,2(xr, ) = v

(xr)
1,2

q

,

3,4 



l + 2)3/2 ,

(x2

q

3,4 = 0 .

(4.46)

1,2 contain the boson component, corresponding to m12 = v2 and the
the elds q
fermion zero modes. the elds q
3,4 contain only the zero fermion modes. substitut-
ing this conguration into the classical action we arrive at the following expression
for the instanton measure:

d = done exp(cid:16)m34 3 4(cid:17) d3d4

mpvz

,

(4.47)

where done is given in eq. (3.132). this can be compared with general for-
mula (3.152). in the general formula we put vj = v3,4 = 0 but accounted for the
eect of the mass term m34m34. the mass term m12m12 is neglected  we are looking
for the eects which do not vanish in the limit m12  0.
over  can be carried out. it yields

the dierence with the one-avor case is factorized in eq. (4.47). the integration

d = done

m34
mpvz

.

(4.48)

combining this with eq. (4.36) we get for the total eective potential on the manifold
m1 the following expression:

m34 4
m12

two

w = m12m12 +

97

.

(4.49)

here

4

two =

5
one
mpvz

=

e82/g2
z 2g4

(mpv)4 .

(4.50)

in fact, eq. (4.49) is exact, both perturbatively and nonperturbatively. this can be
proven by analyzing the r charges.

the superpotential (4.49) xes the vacuum value of the modulus m12,

hm12ivac = s m34

m12 2

two .

(4.51)

the modulus m34 classically was zero. nonperturbative eects shift its vacuum
value from zero. it can found by virtue of the nonanomalous konishi relation (see
eq. (2.110))

d2( q1ev q1  q3ev q3) = 4 (cid:16)m12m12  m34m34(cid:17) .

the vacuum average of the left-hand side vanishes implying

hm34ivac =

m12

m34 hm12ivac = s m12

m34 2

two .

(4.52)

(4.53)

the remarkable phenomenon we encounter here is the change of the geometry
of the moduli space. classically, the product m12 m34 vanishes while at the nonper-
turbative level m12 m34 = 4

two. invariantly, this can be written as

pf(mf g) = 4

two .

(4.54)

the analysis we performed referred to the manifold m1 under the assumption
that m12  m34. this assumption was crucial to ensure the weak coupling regime.
note that we could not perform the weak coupling analysis on m2 if m12  m34.
however, once established in the weak coupling, the constraint (4.54) remains valid
everywhere on the moduli space including the domain of the strong coupling. note
that the origin of the moduli space which was the singular point of intersection
of m1 and m2 disappears from the quantum moduli space (4.54) whose metric is
smooth everywhere.
note also that the vacuum average of the superpotential (4.49) can be rewritten

as

hw ivac = dm12m12 + m34m34evac

,

(4.55)

which is exactly equal to the vacuum average of the original superpotential (4.45).
this is in distinction with the one-avor model and can be understood given the
expression for the central charge discussed in sec. 3.2. in the two-avor model the
anomaly vanishes, see eq. (3.21), which forces the superpotential in the low-energy
theory of the moduli to coincide with the tree-level superpotential of the original
full theory.

98

4.5 how eective is the eective lagrangian?

the notion of the eective lagrangian was used above to determine the vacuum
structure in the moduli space. it was assumed that the theory is in the higgs phase
and the only light elds are the moduli. all heavy elds, massive gauge bosons and
gauginos, were integrated out. as a result we get an eective lagrangian for the
light degrees of freedom in the form of expansion in their momenta. in particular,
the instanton-generated superpotential, see e.g. eq. (4.36), gives rise to terms of
the zeroth order in momentum.

such terms obviously describe the amplitudes at momenta below mw . the
question is what happens above mw . the point is that the scale mw is not a
relevant parameter in the instanton calculations. indeed, the integral over instanton
size is saturated at   v1 which is parametrically smaller than m1
w (remember, we
are in the weak coupling regime, g2 is a small parameter). moreover, the instanton-
generated scattering amplitudes do not depend [99, 100] on the particle momenta
at all (on mass shell). this means that the scale v  mw /g is also irrelevant.
technically, this is reected in the possibility of rewriting the integral over  in such
a form that only the  = 0 contribution survive.

as a result the cross sections of the instanton-generated processes, e.g.

the
baryon number violation in the standard model, grow with the energy and reach the
unitary limit [101] at energies  v/g. this scale is the only one relevant physically for
the nonperturbative eects. at this scale new physics comes into play  production
of sphalerons [102] or monopoles. here we enter the strong coupling regime even
at small g2: multi-instanton eects become as important as one-instanton, their
summation is needed [103].

in the interval of energies gv <

 e  v/g one can limit oneself to one instanton;

the heavy elds should be kept, they should not be integrated out, however. our
task is constructing an eective lagrangian (or action) which includes both, the
chiral superelds and those of gluons/gluinos. thus, the problem we face is a super-
generalization of the baryon number violation at high energies (but not superhigh,
though, we stay much below the sphaleron energy).

in non-supersymmetric models the one-instanton eective action is known for a
long time. in the su(2) model with one scalar and one dirac eld in the fundamental
representation it has the form,

se = z d exp(222 (   |v|2)  2     + 4i2 2
g2  


 


  ) ,
g{  }

(4.56)

where the instanton measure d should be modied to include the nonzero modes
and  is the instanton orientation matrix dened in eq. (3.85). the elds in the
exponent present the interpolating elds for the particles which are scattered in
the instanton background. in order to get the scattering amplitude with the given
number of external particles one expands the exponent to the appropriate power of
the appropriate eld.

99

let us generalize se to sqcd with one avor. this can be readily done by

applying the collective coordinate technique we have presented,

2v2
sone = z d
qf
q
f
+ 42 2

inv

g2  


 

expn222
(cid:20)i   w {  }

inv ( qf ev qf  2|v|2)
(cid:21)) ,

+ 8( inv)  w {  }





(4.57)

inv and inv are dened in eq. (3.120), and the background-eld-covariant

where 2
spinor derivative   is dened as

  w = ev h d (cid:16)ev w ev(cid:17)i ev .

(4.58)



this result can be extracted from ref. [26], where the n = 2 case was considered,
by dropping o irrelevant for n = 1 terms.
a few comments are in order about the origin of various terms in eq. (4.57). the
rst term in the exponent is a straightforward generalization of the rst two terms in

eq. (4.56), susy combines interactions of squarks and quarks. the term   w {  }

generalizes the last term in eq. (4.56), it includes also a part of the gluino interaction
(related to the supersymmetric zero modes). finally, the last term presents the
remaining part of the gluino interactions (due to the superconformal zero modes).
indeed, if in the non-supersymmetric case we considered the matter in the adjoint
representation we would have four zero modes instead of two. the supersymmetric
, while the superconformal ones

modes would generate the fermion part in   w {  }
the fermion part in ( inv)  w {  }

the measure d contains integrations over x0, 0 and 0, as well as over 2
inv
and inv (note the absence of the nonzero modes in distinction with the non-
supersymmetric case). the external elds q, q, and w are taken at the point
inv and inv can be done explic-
x0, 0, 0 in the superspace. the integrations over 2
itly. let us start with the integration over inv. if it were not for the last term in
the exponent, explicitly proportional to inv, the result of the inv integration would
be naively zero. in fact, as was discussed previously, the integral does not vanish
due to the singularity at 2
inv = 0 coincides with
eq. (4.36), because the exponent vanishes at 2
inv = 0. this contribution is an f
term. the only part which comes from the domain 2
inv 6= 0 is due to the last term
in eq. (4.58). at 2
and keep the term
of the second order. performing then integrations over inv and 2
inv we get the d
term. overall,

inv 6= 0 we need to expand in ( inv)  w {  }

inv = 0. the contribution from 2

.







100

z d4x d2

1
qf
q
f

sone = 5

one

+8z d4x d2 d2 

d3
82

1
qf
q
f

g4  


w {  }
(cid:20) qf ev q  2ig2 



w{  }    

  


  w {  }



(cid:21)2

. (4.59)




this instanton-generated action contains the superpotential term (the rst line),
which describes the scattering of the matter elds, and the d term (the second
line) which involves both the matter and the gauge elds.
it contains two extra
derivatives (or two extra fermions). the expression we obtained sums up all tree-
level instanton-generated interactions. at the quantum level the superpotential term
stays intact, while the d term gets corrected.

4.6 when one instanton is not enough?

the vast majority of calculations in supersymmetric gauge theories that are clas-
sied as reliable are based on the strategy ascending to the 1980s: the matter
sector is arranged in such a way that the non-abelian gauge group is spontaneously
broken, and the running of the gauge coupling in the infrared is aborted at the scale
correlated with the expectation values of the moduli elds. perturbative physics
plays no dynamical role; nonperturbatively induced superpotentials (if they are ac-
tually induced) are saturated by a single instanton. this is a typical situation in all
the cases when the r charges of the moduli involved are nonvanishing (e.g. sec. 4.3).
however, there is an important class of models where the multi-instanton contribu-
tions are instrumental in shaping dynamics of the at directions. these models are
peripheral in the range of questions related to supersymmetry breaking  they are
important in other aspects of nonperturbative susy gauge dynamics. therefore,
there are no reasons why we should dwell on them in this review. nevertheless, such
models deserve a brief discussion from the point of view of the instanton formal-
ism. we will outline some general features and explain why one-, two-, three-, ... ,
n-instanton contributions are equally important.

the pattern of the gauge symmetry breaking in the models at hand is dierent
 the non-abelian gauge group is spontaneously broken down to an abelian u(1)
(sometimes, one deals with several u(1)s; for simplicity we will limit ourselves
to a single u(1)). the theory is said to be in the coulomb phase (more exactly,
abelian coulomb phase). this pattern is sucient for preventing the gauge coupling
constant from growing in the infrared. the moduli elds are assumed to be large.
one more requirement is the vanishing of the r charges of at least some moduli
elds.

the most famous example of this type is the su(2) model with the extended
in terms of n = 1

supersymmetry, n = 2, solved by seiberg and witten [95].

101

superelds one can view this theory as susy gluodynamics plus one chiral mat-
ter supereld a in the adjoint representation of su(2). the vacuum valley is
parametrized by one complex invariant, 2  aa; the gauge su(2) is obviously
broken down to u(1). thus, a photon eld and all its n = 2 superpartners remain
massless, while all other states acquire masses (there are some exceptional points on
the valley where some extra states become massless, though).

the conserved anomaly-free r current in this model has the form

a


a
  a



a


(4.60)

where  is the matter fermion. in fact, this current is vector rather than axial. thus,
the r charge of s is 1 while that of the supereld a is zero. the r charge of
aa vanishes too, which implies that no superpotential can be generated 19. does
this mean that there are no nonperturbative eects in the low-energy limit, when all
massive states are integrated out? the answer is negative. nonperturbative eects
show up in the kinetic term of the photon eld which takes the form

l =

1

8 z d2 f (2) w 2 + h.c.

(4.61)

where f is an analytic function of 2. the n = 2 susy relates this term with d
terms of the moduli eld . in perturbation theory

f =

1
g2 

1
42 ln

m 2
pv
22 = 

1
42 ln

2
22 ,

only one loop contributes. nonperturbatively, an innite series of the type

4!n
cn  4

xn

is generated on the right-hand side, so that

f = 

1
42 ln

2

22 +xn

4!n
cn  4

.

(4.62)

(4.63)

(4.64)

since 2 has zero r charge, all n are allowed. the factor 4 comes from the instanton
measure (the rst  and the only  coecient in the  function is four), so the index
n actually counts the number of instantons. the one-instanton term in this series
was found a decade ago [29]. instead of summing up the innite series the exact
answer was found [95] by applying holomorphy and duality. later on it was subject
to scrutiny of direct multi-instanton calculations (e.g. [27, 28]). the seiberg-witten
result passed all tests.

19if one adds a mass term to the matter eld a superpotential is generated. it is proportional

to the mass parameter.

102

in view of the importance of the issue of one instanton vs. many, we would like
to exhibit pictorially the dierence between the instantons in distinct models. as
a representative of the rst class of models (the one-instanton saturation) we will
consider su(2) sqcd with one avor, see sec. 4.3. the counterpart from the second
class (the multi-instanton saturation) is the su(2) n = 2 theory.
the instanton contribution in sqcd is depicted symbolically in fig. 2. the solid
lines attached to the anti-instanton ( i) indicate the fermion zero modes. the dashed
lines marked by the crosses stand for the squark condensate in the vacuum, h i = v.
the anti-instanton has four gluino and two quark (left-handed) zero modes. two
gluino zero modes and two quark modes are paired by virtue of h i. there is no
way to neutralize the remaining two, although it is possible to transform the modes
of  into those of . we see that one instanton inevitably produces two fermion
zero modes. that is why it generates the interaction vertex of the type 20

5v48

char 

(4.65)

where char is a characteristic value of the instanton size, 2
char  1/(vv). this
interaction is exactly what one needs for the generation of the superpotential w 
5/2 (remember, r d2 2   v4). on the other hand, the two-instanton
conguration will have four fermion zero modes non-neutralized, three instantons
six zero modes and so on.
it is obvious that neither of them contribute to the
superpotential.





-
i













figure 2: one-instanton contribution in the su(2) model with one avor.

in the n = 2 theory with no matter hypermultiplets the instanton has four
gluino and four quark zero modes attached to it (fig. 3). one can neutralize them
all by virtue of the insertion of h i. that is why in the model at hand two, three, etc.
instantons manifest themselves essentially in the same way as one. none contributes
to the superpotential. rather, they generate (4.61)  the integral r d2 w 2f (2)

does not vanish on purely bosonic elds.

20all powers in eq. (4.65) miraculously t each other. the fourth power of v is xed by the
number of the zero modes, while the eighth power of char follows from dimensional arguments.
after all, eq. (4.65) contains only v, while v cancels. the cancellation of v ensures the proper
analytic structure of the (anti)instanton-induced interaction.

103









i









figure 3: one-instanton contribution in the n = 2 theory (with no matter hyper-
multiplets).

the issue of one instanton vs. many was briey touched in sec. 4.1.5, in connec-
tion with the nsvz  function. in the models where the one-instanton results are
exact, this  function is exact not only perturbatively, but at the nonperturbative
level too. on the other hand, in those models where the summation of the multi-
instantons is needed, the nsvz  function ceases to be exact at the nonperturbative
level. the function f in eq. (4.64) can be considered as a generalized (inverse) cou-
pling constant. just this function f (2) was the central object of the seiberg-witten
analysis based on holomorphy and duality. this novel approach provides a wealth
of breakthrough insights regarding the nonperturbative susy gauge dynamics [95].
this interesting topic is outside the scope of this review.

the only question to be raised in connection with instanton calculus is whether
one can construct n = 1 rather than n = 2 theories with the similar properties 
the coulomb phase, the vanishing r charge of the relevant moduli, and an innite
series for the generalized coupling constant saturated by multi-instantons.

a systematic search for n = 1 theories with the simple gauge group and the
coulomb phase everywhere on the moduli space was carried out in ref. [104]. the
necessary condition on the matter sector was shown to be

t (ri) = tg ,

xi

(4.66)

where the sum runs over all matter elds. note that the basic n = 2 model
considered by seiberg and witten does obey this condition, automatically, since the
matter eld is in the adjoint representation. the number of models satisfying eq.

104

a


a
 

i


i

 ,

n 2

xi=1

(4.66) is limited. one has to examine all of them in order to determine whether
the pattern of the gauge symmetry breaking is indeed such that one is left with the
unbroken u(1) irrespective of the values of the moduli. a general solution turns
out to be unique  the so(n) models with n  2 vector matter elds (exceptional
solutions exist also for su(6) and sp(6)). the conserved r current in this model
has the form

so the r charge of s is 1, and the r charge of the matter superelds vanishes.
the generalized inverse coupling constant has the form similar to (4.64). the series
can be summed up to produce a hyperelliptic curve, much in the same way as in the
seiberg-witten solution of the n = 2 model.

5 spontaneous supersymmetry breaking in weak

coupling

in this and subsequent sections we will review what is known today regarding the dy-
namical supersymmetry breaking. the material covered in the previous part can be
viewed an extended introduction to this critically important topic, which, in a sense,
is the raison detre of multiple susy-based theoretical constructions. the sponta-
neous susy breaking can be realized by virtue of tree-level mechanisms discovered
in the early 1970s and described in text-books, and by virtue of nonperturbative
mechanisms which are divided, in turn, in two classes  weak coupling and strong
coupling mechanisms. there is no clear-cut boundary between the classes since
some of the mechanisms under discussion in the current literature combine elements
inherent to both classes. some of the nonperturbative mechanisms were discov-
ered in the 1980s, others present a relatively recent development, dating back to
seibergs results of 1993/94. finally, certain ideas are still controversial, and not all
implications for the dynamical susy breaking are clear at the moment. the most
notable example of this type is the chirally symmetric vacuum in susy gluodynam-
ics [56]. if this vacuum indeed exists (we hasten to add that the nal conrmation is
still pending) then this would have a drastic impact on many conclusions regarding
the dynamical susy breaking. theories with no supersymmetric vacuum of the
old type could develop one, of the kovner-shifman type, in the domain of strong
coupling. this is especially transparent, for instance, in the one-generation su(5)
model (sec. 6.1). since the situation with the chirally symmetric vacuum is not
yet settled, we will discuss the known mechanisms of the dynamical susy breaking
forgetting for a while about its possible existence. comments on the possible role of
the kovner-shifman vacuum are collected at the very end (sec. 7); a few marginal
remarks are scattered in secs. 5.5 and 6.1.

many models exhibiting the dynamical susy breaking reduce in the low-energy
limit to an eective theory of light degrees of freedom in which one of the known

105

tree-level mechanisms acts. therefore, to begin with, we briey review them.

5.1 traditional tree mechanisms (brief look at the old guide

book)

before submerging into nonperturbative dynamics it seems instructive to outline the
conventional tree-level mechanisms leading to the spontaneous susy breaking. our
task here is to refresh memory and to emphasize common features and distinctions
with the dynamical mechanisms.

two such mechanisms are familiar for a long time. the rst one, usually referred
to as the oraifeartaigh, or f term mechanism [105], works due to a conict of
interests between f terms of various matter elds belonging to the matter sector.
the necessary and sucient condition for the existence of the susy vacuum is the
vanishing of all f terms. in the oraifeartaigh approach, the superpotential is ar-
ranged in such a way that it is impossible to make all f terms vanish simultaneously.
one needs minimally three matter elds in order to realize the phenomenon in the
renormalized models with the polynomial superpotentials. with one or two mat-
ter elds and the polynomial superpotential the supersymmetric vacuum solution is
always possible. with three superelds and the generic superpotential, supersym-
metric solution exists too; it ceases to exist for some degenerate superpotentials.

consider the superpotential

w(1, 2, 3) = 11(2

3  m 2) + 23 .

(5.1)

(5.2)

then

fi = 

w
i

3  m 2) ,

1(2
3 ,
2113 + 2 ,

i = 1 ,
i = 2 ,
i = 3 .

= 


the vanishing of the second line implies that 3 = 0, then the rst line cannot vanish.
there is no solution with f1 = f2 = f3 = 0  supersymmetry is spontaneously
broken.

what is the actual minimal energy conguration?

it depends on the ratio
1m/. for instance, at m 2 < 2/(22
1), the minimum of the scalar potential
occurs at 2 = 3 = 0. the value of 1 can be arbitrary: an indenite equilibrium
takes place at the tree level. (the loop corrections to the kahler potential lift this
degeneracy and lock the vacuum at 1 = 0.) then f2 = f3 = 0, and the vacuum
energy density is, obviously, e = |f1|2 = 2
since f1 6= 0 the corresponding fermion is goldstino, m1 = 0. it is not dicult
to calculate the masses of other particles. assume that the vacuum expectation value
(vev) of the eld 1 vanishes. then the uctuations of 1 remain massless (and
degenerate with 1). the weyl eld 2 and the quanta of 2 are also degenerate;
their common mass is . at the same time, the elds from 3 split: the weyl spinor

1m 4.

106

3 has the mass , while

a = 2  22
m2

1m 2 , m2

b = 2 + 22

1m 2 ,

where

3 

1
2

(a + ib) .

note that in spite of the splitting

m2

a + m2

b  2m2

3 = 0 ,

(5.3)

(5.4)

as if there is no susy breaking. equation (5.4) is a particular example of the general
supertrace relation [106]

strm2  xj

(1)2j (2j + 1)m2

j = 0 ,

(5.5)

where str stands for supertrace, m2 is the mass squared matrix of the real elds in
the supermultiplet; the subscript j marks the spin of the particle. equation (5.5)
is valid only at the tree level  quantum corrections arising due to susy breaking
do modify it. it also gets modied in the theories where (a part of) susy breaking
occurs due to the fayet-iliopoulos mechanism, speaking of which we must turn to a
rather narrow subclass of theories that possess a u(1) gauge symmetry.

the fayet-iliopoulos mechanism [107], which is also called the d term susy
breaking, applies in the models where the gauge sector includes an u(1) subgroup.
the simplest and most transparent example is sqed (sec. 2.3.1).

in order to launch the spontaneous susy breaking a (lorentz scalar) eld trans-
forming nontrivially under supersymmetry must acquire a vev. in the oraifear-
taigh mechanism this role was played by an f component of a chiral supereld.
the d component of the vector superelds is also non-invariant under susy trans-
formations. if it develops a non-vanishing vev, supersymmetry is spontaneously
broken too.
in order to make d develop a vev, a  term, which is called the
fayet-iliopoulos term, must be added in the action, see eq. (2.28).

although the fayet-iliopoulos term literally does not exist in the non-abelian
gauge theories an analog of the phenomenon does exist: the kinetic part of the action
qev q determines the form of the d term in the higgs phase. the conict between
the requirements of vanishing of the d and f terms may lead the spontaneous susy
breaking.

returning to sqed, eq. (2.31) shows that with the massive matter (m 6= 0) the
zero vacuum energy is not attainable. indeed, the mass term requires s and t to
vanish in the vacuum, while the d term in the potential requires |t|2 = |s|2 + . if
 6= 0 both conditions cannot be met simultaneously.

if  > m2/e2 the minimal energy is achieved at

s+s = 0 , t +t =  

m2
e2 .

107

the minimal energy

e = m2  

m2

2e2!

is positive, so that susy is spontaneously broken. in addition, the gauge u(1) is
broken too. the phase of t is eaten up in the higgs mechanism, the photon becomes

massive, m = eq  (m2/e2). a linear combination of the photino and t is the

goldstino; it remains massless. another linear combination, as well as the scalar
and spinor elds from s are massive.

if 0 <  < m2/e2 the scalar elds develop no vevs, the vacuum conguration

corresponds to

s+s = t +t = 0 ,

while the vacuum energy is e = e22/2. the gauge u(1) remains unbroken: the
photon is massless, while the photino assumes the role the goldstino. the fermion
part of the matter sector does not feel the broken supersymmetry (at the tree level),

while the boson part does

ms = mt = m ,

m2

s = m2 + e2 , m2

t = m2  e2 .

5.2 dynamical mechanisms: preliminaries

in the majority of examples discussed so far the gauge symmetry is typically spon-
taneously broken [5, 22, 23] (it would be more exact to say that it is realized in the
higgs regime). instantons are instrumental in this phenomenon, which provides a
number of evident advantages; the weak coupling regime and calculability of the
nonperturbative eects are the most important ones. the phenomenon is quite uni-
versal. in almost any model with matter there are classically at directions, vacuum
valleys, and together with them there arises a potential possibility for destabiliza-
tion of the unbroken vacuum at the origin (vanishing values of the moduli). roughly
speaking, the theory is pushed away from the origin by instantons.

our main subject here is the dynamical susy breaking. among a vast variety of
models with the spontaneously broken gauge symmetry we will choose those where
susy is broken too. this will provide us with calculable scenarios of dynamical
susy breaking. in a few instances it was argued that susy is broken in the strong
coupling regime, where direct calculations are impossible. one then relies on indirect
arguments. we will discuss such scenarios too. our strategy is pragmatic: starting
from simpler scenarios we will be moving towards more complicated ones.

the very same aspect  weak vs. strong coupling susy breaking  can be viewed
from a slightly dierent angle. let us discuss a generic hierarchy of scales inherent
to a typical supersymmetric theory with matter. first, there exists an intrinsic scale

108

g of the underlying gauge theory 21. the scale of the dynamical susy breaking
dsb can be of order g or much lower than g. in the latter case when one descends
below g all gauge degrees of freedom can be integrated out, and one is left with
the dynamics of the would-be moduli. this eective low-energy dynamics can be
described by generalized wess-zumino models which can be studied relatively easily.
susy is dynamically broken if a generalized oraifeartaigh mechanism takes place.
the most common scenario of this type is as follows. assume that in a model
with chiral matter (so that wittens index vanishes) there are classically at di-
rections in the limit of vanishing yukawa terms. if instantons generate a repulsive
superpotential, if the model can be completely stabilized by the yukawa terms, so
that the exits from all valleys are blocked (the run-away vacua totally excluded), if
all yukawa couplings are small (dimensionless couplings  1, dimensional  g) 
if all these ifs are satised  then dynamical susy breaking will most certainly
occur in the weak coupling regime.

there is an alternative version of the weak coupling scenario. in some models
(e.g. sec. 5.5) the original gauge group is only partly broken, and the superpotential
for the moduli is generated by the gluino condensation in the unbroken subgroup,
rather than through the one-instanton mechanism. these models are still calcula-
ble because (i) so is the gluino condensate, and (ii) the susy breaking is due to
dynamics of the moduli elds at a low-energy scale dsb  g, where all (strongly
interacting) degrees of freedom associated with the unbroken subgroup can be inte-
grated out.

on the other hand, if dsb  g, relevant dynamics is that of the strong coupling
regime. here one can hope, at best, to establish the very fact of susy breaking
using global symmetry arguments and/or t hooft matching [108].

two criteria are known in the literature [22,109], each of which guarantees spon-

taneous susy breaking.

criterion 1. suppose that the yukawa terms in the superpotential introduced for the
sake of stabilization at large values of moduli do not contain some matter supereld
q, or a linear combination of several superelds. in this case the gluino condensate
is an order parameter  a non-zero vev of the gluino density, htr 2i 6= 0, implies
the spontaneous susy breaking. this statement is quite transparent. assume some
supereld q enter in the original action only through its kinetic term qev q(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)d
. in

this case the anomalous konishi relation [52] takes the form (sec. 2.8)

d2( qev q)  tr w 2 .

(5.6)

then the vacuum expectation value of tr w 2 is equivalent to the vacuum expectation
value of the operator d2( qev q). taking the spinor derivative is equivalent to the
(anti)commutation with the supercharge. hence in the theories with the unbroken
susy no vevs of full superderivatives can develop. thus, for htr 2i 6= 0 we
observe a contradiction.

21in weak coupling the relevant scale is g|v| rather than g.

109

criterion 2. suppose that in a theory under consideration the vacuum valleys are
completely absent, i.e. they are non-existent from the very beginning (as in the
su(5) theory with one quintet and one (anti)decuplet), or the vacuum degeneracy is
fully lifted by the tree-level superpotential. if in such a theory some exact continuous
global symmetry is spontaneously broken, so is susy.

a sketch of the proof [110] is as follows.

if a continuous global invariance is
spontaneously broken, there is a massless goldstone boson, call it . suppose,
susy is unbroken. then  must be accompanied by massless superpartners, in
particular, a scalar particle  with spin 0. since the eld , being the goldstone
boson, appears in the lagrangian with a zero potential, the potential for  must
vanish too, and, as a consequence, the vacuum expectation value hi is not xed.
in other words,  + i is a modulus, which can be varied arbitrarily, corresponding
to a continuously degenerate vacuum manifold 22. this contradicts, however, the
initial assumption of no at directions. the only possibility of getting rid of the
contradiction is to conclude that susy is spontaneously broken.

the above two criteria are not completely independent. in fact, if some super-
eld does not enter into the classical superpotential (criterion 1), then there exists
an axial r current  a linear combination of the matter current and gluino current
 which is strictly conserved. further, the operator tr 2 is obviously noninvari-
ant with respect to the transformations generated by this current. therefore, the
gluino condensation, htr 2i 6= 0, automatically implies spontaneous breaking of the
corresponding axial symmetry.

5.3 dynamical susy breaking in the 3-2 model

the simplest model where dynamical susy breaking takes place is the 3-2 model
of aeck, dine and seiberg [22]. this chiral model was discussed at length in sec.
2.5.2 where a description of the classical moduli space (its complex dimension is
three) was given. the kahler potential on the moduli space was calculated.

two chiral invariants, i1 and i2, where i1,2 were dened in eq. (2.60), are cubic;
a combination thereof can be used as a (renormalizable) tree-level superpotential.
its purpose is to block the valleys and spare us of the run-away vacua. note that
the kinetic part possesses a global avor su(2) symmetry: u and d elds can be
freely rotated into one another. in addition to this global su(2), the theory has two
strictly conserved u(1) currents. one of them is that of the hypercharge (= 2the
mean electric charge in the weak su(2) multiplet). in sm this current would be
coupled to the u(1) gauge boson, but since we remove the latter from the model,
the corresponding symmetry is just a global u(1) invariance. the second u(1) is
the anomaly-free r current involving gluinos.

the fastest way of establishing the u(1) charges is through instantons themselves.

22the argument above shows that the global symmetries in the superpotential are always com-

plexied

110

q





q

q

-
isu(3)

q











l

-
isu(2)

q

q







q

figure 4: the 3-2 model: the zero mode structure in the eld of the anti-instanton
in the gauge groups su(3) and su(2), respectively.  denotes the su(3) gluinos in
the rst case and su(2) gluinos in the second.

the instanton in the su(3) gauge group has six gluino zero modes, two q and two
q. (a concise mnemonical formula is 6 2
q , see fig. 4. we will consistently
use similar formulas below). the instanton in su(2) has four gluino zero modes,
three q and one l, i.e. 4 3
q l for a shorthand. it is convenient to choose the
conserved anomaly-free konishi current in the form

q 2

1
3

qf qf 

1
3

q f q f  lf lf ,

where the summation over the su(3) indices in the rst two terms is implicit. as
for the r current, we conveniently dene it in such a way that r(l) = 0. then,
r(l) = 1 and r(q) = 1 too (the latter is immediately seen from the 43
ql
structure of the su(2) instanton). hence, r(q) = 0. from the 62
q structure of
the su(3) instanton we conclude that r(q) = 2 which entails, in turn, r(q) = 1.
the konishi and r charges of the superelds and invariants i f and j are summarized
in table 5

q2

by an appropriate global su(2) rotation one can always arrange that the tree-

level superpotential has the form

wtree = hqf dlgf g = hi2 ,

(5.7)

so that i1 does not appear in the superpotential. this means, in turn, that u does
not appear in w; we will make use of this fact later.
than the su(2) gauge coupling g2, and, in addition,

as in mssm it will be assumed that the su(3) gauge coupling g3 is much larger

h  g2  g3.

111

(5.8)

field

q

q

l

i f

u(1)k 1/3 1/3 1 1
u(1)r

0

1

0 1 2

j

0

table 5: the u(1) charges of the superelds q, q, l and invariants i f and j dened
in eqs. (2.60), (2.61) in the 3-2 model.

the smallness of h will automatically ensure that dsb  3,2 where 3,2 are the
scale parameters of su(3) and su(2), respectively.
a generic point on the moduli space corresponds to complete breaking of all
gauge symmetries; the theory is totally higgsed. it is not dicult to check that the
tree-level superpotential (5.7) locks all exits from the valleys  escape to large values
of the moduli is impossible since there the energy is positive rather than vanishing.
(this exercise is left for the reader.)

now we switch on nonperturbative eects taking into account only instantons
in the gauge su(3) and neglecting the su(2) instantons whose impact is much
weaker because g2  g3. what is the general constraint on the instanton-induced
superpotential? first, it cannot depend on i f since i f is not singlet with respect
to global su(2), and it is impossible to built any singlet from i f . on the other
hand, j is singlet and its konishi charge vanishes. thus, it is a suitable candidate.
examining the r charge of j we conclude that the only possible superpotential has
the form

2(3)7

winst =

j

.

(5.9)

the factor 2 is singled out for convenience; the power of 3 is established on dimen-
sional grounds, it exactly matches the rst coecient of the  function in the su(3)
model with two triplets and two anti-triplets.

is the superpotential (5.9) actually generated by the su(3) instanton? to answer
this question it is not necessary to perform the calculation anew  the problem can
be readily reduced to that of our reference model, su(2) sqcd with one avor
(sec. 4.3). indeed, let us assume that |1|  |2| in eq. (2.62). then the pattern
of breaking of su(3) is step-wise: rst one breaks su(3)su(2) at a high scale,
and then at a much lower scale su(2) is broken down completely. below the higher
scale the elds q and q with the su(2) index f = f = 1 disappear  they are eaten
up by ve su(3) gauge bosons 23 which become very heavy and, in their turn, also
disappear from the light spectrum. we are left with the su(2) theory with one avor,

23the gauge bosons from the coset g/h, where g is the original gauge group and h is the un-
broken subgroup, are sometimes referred to as elephants in the russian literature. this emphasizes
the fact that they become heavy while the gauge bosons  h remain light.

112

q2 , q2 ,  = 2, 3. in this corner of the moduli space the invariant j becomes
j   2
1 q2 q2 where the summation over  runs over  = 2, 3. then, confronting
eq. (5.9) with eq. (4.36) we immediately conclude that the superpotential (5.9) is
indeed generated, the relation between the scale parameter of su(2) and 3 being
3 = ( 2

one)1/7.

1 5

q 2

the instanton-induced superpotential pushes the scalar elds away from the
origin and launches the spontaneous breaking of susy in the weak coupling regime.
to prove the dynamical susy breaking quickly, we can use criterion 1 (sec. 5.2),
since u does not appear in wtree. from the 6 2
q structure of the zero modes it
is perfectly clear that the condensate of tr 2 actually develops. (two gluino zero
modes are neutralized by the operator tr 2 whose vacuum expectation value we
calculate. the remaining four gluino zero modes are paired with q and q, as in
fig. 3.). the run-away vacuum is impossible. since tr 2 6= 0, supersymmetry is
broken.
to obtain a more detailed information on the particle spectrum it is necessary
to investigate the eective low-energy wess-zumino model for the moduli. one can
either use the explicit parametrization of the moduli elds given in eq. (2.62), with
the canonic kinetic terms 24, or, instead, deal directly with the moduli i f , j. in the
latter case the superpotential term is trivial, but the kinetic term acquires the kahler
potential k. both methods have their advantages and disadvantages; the second
approach is more common, however. one of the reasons is that it automatically
takes care of the global symmetry on the moduli space.

the total superpotential is

w = wtree + winst .

(5.10)

the subsequent procedure is standard: one minimizes the scalar potential u ob-
tained from the given superpotential and the kahler potential presented in eq. (2.69),

where

u = hg1iij

w
i

 w
 j

gij =

2 k
i j

(5.11)

(5.12)

is the kahler metric, g1 is the inverse matrix, and 1,2,3 are the lowest components
of the moduli i f and j.

unlike the superpotential, which is exact both perturbatively and nonperturba-
tively, the kahler metric is renormalized in higher loops. however, if the solution
for the vacuum lies at large values of the moduli  which is the case, as we will see
a posteriori, provided h  1  then all gauge bosons are heavy, the gauge coupling
is small, and the corrections to k are negligible.
24more exactly, the parametrization (2.62) must be generalized to include the avor rotations
associated with the global su(2) in {u, d}.

113

minimizing u one gets [22]:

(1)vac  1.29

3
h1/7 , (2)vac  1.25

3
h1/7 , e  3.59 h10/7 4
3 .

(5.13)

in the limit h  0 the parameters 1 and 2 tend to innity, as was expected. this
justies the assertion of the weak coupling regime. the masses of the gauge bosons
are m  g3h1/7  .
the (former) massless moduli either remain massless or become light particles.
one weyl fermion, goldstino, is exactly massless. the role of goldstino belongs to
the electron, as can be seen either directly from the eective low-energy lagrangian
or indirectly, from the t hooft matching.

the relevant anomalous triangle is that of three hypercharges. remember, the
hypercharge is not gauged in the model at hand, so that this is an external anomaly
eligible for the t hooft matching. the anomalous triangle does not vanish due to
the fact that the positron was removed from the matter sector in passing from sm
to the 3-2 model under consideration. in addition, we get a neutral fermion with
mass  11.3h6/73.
among the scalar partners there is one strictly massless goldstone boson, cor-
responding to the spontaneous breaking of the r symmetry, and one charged and
three neutral scalars with masses  h6/73.
the 3-2 model presents a standard pattern of the dynamical susy breaking
in the weak coupling regime. analyses of other models with the same dynamical
behavior go in parallel.

5.4 su(5) model with two generations

the analysis of this model at the classical level was carried out in sec. 2.5.3 where
an explicit parametrization of the d-at directions was presented and the kahler
potential on the moduli space built. a few additional remarks are necessary in order
to complete the treatment of the model. first of all, in accordance with the general
strategy, the exits from the valleys must be locked by a tree-level superpotential
term. if one limits oneself to renormalizable theories, this term can only contain the
m invariants cubic in the chiral superelds (see eq. (2.70)). the chiral invariants of
the b type are quartic and, hence, if added, would ruin renormalizability. of course,
if one considers the model as an eective low-energy approximation, one is free to
add the quartic invariants too. this has no qualitative impact on the dynamical
picture, however, and we will not do that.

the most generic form of the tree-level cubic superpotential is

wtree = m1 .

(5.14)

it is always possible to rotate the elds to eliminate the m2 term by using the global
su(2)x invariance of the kinetic term. the superpotential (5.14) breaks su(2)x;
the global su(2)v remains intact. two anomaly-free axial u(1) symmetries also

114

survive as exact symmetries of the model (see below). the coupling constant  is
assumed to be small,   1, to ensure calculability. away from the origin of the
moduli space the theory is in the higgs regime. generically, the gauge group su(5)
is completely broken. if we are far away from the origin, the gauge bosons are very
heavy in the scale , and the theory is weakly coupled. small  will eventually lead
to a vacuum located far away from the origin.

it is not dicult to check, using the explicit parametrization (2.72), that the
tree-level term (5.14) locks all exits, so that the run-away vacuum is impossible.
the next question one must address is whether instanton generates a superpotential
pushing the theory away from the origin.

again, as in 3-2 model, we rst examine what can be said of the superpotential
on general grounds. the instanton-induced superpotential term (in the limit   0)
must involve both quintets and both (anti)decuplets, since there is one zero mode
in each quintet and three zero modes in each decuplet (in addition to ten gluino
zero modes, of course). moreover, the above numbers of the zero modes imply that
each v supereld must be accompanied in the superpotential by three x super-
elds. second, the instanton-induced superpotential term must respect the global
su(2)xsu(2)v invariance. this leaves us with a unique choice

winst = const 

(5)11

bgf bgf ggf f  ,

(5.15)

where the power of  in the numerator is established from dimensional counting,
and the invariants bgf are dened in eq. (2.70). the expression in the denominator
is nothing but the invariant i2 dened in eq. (2.74).

equation (5.15) goes through additional checks. first, the power of , eleven,

matches the rst coecient of the  function 3tg  pi t (ri). we remind that 25
t (v ) = 1/2 and t (x) = 3/2. in su(5) with two generations 3tg pi t (ri) = 11.

the second test of eq. (5.15) comes from counting the u(1) charges. as was
mentioned, the model has two conserved anomaly-free u(1) currents. the konishi
current requires each v to be accompanied by three xs. we already know this. as
for the r charges, it is convenient to dene the conserved r current in such a way

25incidentally, instanton calculus is the easiest and fastest way of calculating the dynkin index,
if you do not have handy an appropriate text book where they all are tabulated, of course. the
procedure is as follows. assume, a group g and a representation r of this group are given. then
one must pick up an su(2) subgroup of g and decompose r with respect to this su(2). for each
irreducible su(2) multiplet of spin j the index t = j(j + 1)(2j + 1)/3. hence, the number of
zero modes in the su(2) instanton background is (2/3)j(j + 1)(2j + 1). in this way one readily
establishes the total number of the zero modes for the given representation r. this is nothing but
the dynkin index. the value of t (r) is one half of this number. for instance, in su(5) a good
choice of su(2) would be weak isospin. each quintet has one weak isospin doublet; the remaining
elements are singlets. each doublet has one zero mode. as a result, t (v ) = 1/2. moreover,
each decuplet has three weak isospin doublets while the remaining elements are singlets. hence,
t (x) = 3/2.

115

field

x

v

r charge

0

5

x

1

v

4

b

1

table 6: the r charges in the su(5) model with two generations.

that r(x) = 0. then, the r charges of other elds are unambiguously xed 26,
they are collected in table 6.

with the given r charges of the x, v superelds the r charge of winst in
eq. (5.15) is two, in full accord with the exact r invariance (in the limit   0).
what remains to be done is to verify, by a straightforward one-instanton calcula-
tion, that the dimensionless numerical constant in eq. (5.15) does not vanish. there
are no reasons for it to vanish, and it does not. technically, one can exploit the very
same trick we described in connection with the 3-2 model. choose a corner of the
moduli space corresponding to a two-stage breaking of the gauge group, su(5) 
su(2)  nothing. if the scale of the rst breaking is much higher than that of the
second breaking, the elephant gauge bosons (i.e. those belonging to su(5)/su(2))
become very heavy and decouple, and the problem again reduces to the su(2) model
with one avor, sec. 4.3. we urge the reader to go through this calculation, and
nd the value of the numerical constant, this is a good exercise.

the resulting dynamical picture in the su(5) model is very close to that in
the 3-2 model of sec. 5.3. the instanton-induced superpotential pushes the theory
away from the origin of the valley. the tree-level superpotential does not allow
the vacuum to run away. an equilibrium is achieved at large values of the chiral
invariants, where the theory is in the weakly coupled (calculable) regime.

it is not dicult to check that the gluino condensate develops, much in the same
way as in the 3-2 model. since the supereld x2 does not participate in the tree-
level superpotential, criterion 1 of sec. 5.2 tells us that supersymmetry must be
spontaneously broken. the su(5) model under consideration is singled out from
the zoo of others by its special feature: this is the only one in the class of models

with the simple gauge group, tg > pi t (ri), and purely chiral matter, which leads

to the spontaneous breaking of susy in the weak coupling regime [111].

if one wants to know the light particle content of the theory in the susy breaking
vacuum, one must work out an eective low-energy description. again, this could
be done either in terms of the explicit parametrization or by analyzing the eective
lagrangian for the moduli. the kahler potential on the moduli space is presented
in eq. (2.76).

analysis of the vacuum and light excitations was carried out in ref. [112]. in

26 again, the easiest way of establishing the form of the anomaly-free r current is instanton
x2 v2 . hence, the anomaly-free r current

calculus per se. the zero mode formula is 10 3
is obtained provided that the ratio of the r charges is r(v )/r() = 5.

x1 v1 3

116

a

q

q

2 3 1

s

4

m

4

p

4

table 7: the r charges in the 4-1 model.

the vacuum the values of the moduli scale as v  1/11, while the vacuum energy
density scales as evac  18/114. the model has four massless goldstone bosons
corresponding to the spontaneously broken global symmetries. note that with the
tree-level superpotential switched on, the global avor symmetry is su(2)xu(1)2.
it is spontaneously broken down to u(1). in addition, there are eight bosons with
masses proportional to v  10/11.

5.5

the 4-1 model: susy breaking through gluino con-
densation

this model was treated in refs. [32,33]. the eld content of the matter sector is easy
to memorize: one starts from the su(5) model with one generation and pretends
that su(5) is broken down to su(4)u(1). then

x  a + q , v   q + s .

in other words, we deal with 6 + 4 + 4 + 1. as we will see shortly, with this matter
set the theory is not fully higgsed, an unbroken su(2) subgroup survives, it is in
the strong coupling regime. nevertheless, the light elds surviving at energies below
2 are weakly coupled, their dynamics is described by a wess-zumino model which
is fully calculable and ensures the spontaneous susy breaking.

as a warm-up exercise let us turn o the u(1) coupling and focus on the su(4)
theory (our intention is to take into account the u(1) later). in the su(4) theory
there are three moduli,

m = q q , p = pf(a) , and s .

(5.16)

we collected in table 7 the r charges of the elementary elds and the moduli.

a generic point from the vacuum valley corresponds to the su(4)  su(2)
pattern of the gauge symmetry breaking. thus, in the low-energy limit one deals
with su(2) susy gluodynamics, supplemented by three gauge-singlet moduli elds.
below the scale of su(2) theory only the moduli survive; a nonperturbative super-
potential for them is generated through the gluino condensation,

w  (2)3 

(4)5
mp

,

117

(5.17)

where 2,4 are the scale parameters of su(2) and su(4), respectively.

now it is time to turn on the u(1) coupling. then the d-atness conditions with
respect to u(1) eliminate one moduli eld out of three. the remaining moduli are

i1 = mp and i2 = ms .

the superpotential (5.17) does not depend on i2; it pushes i1 towards innity. to
lock the valleys one can introduce a tree-level superpotential, much in the same way
as in the 3-2 model. an appropriate choice of the superpotential is

wtree = hi2  hsm .

(5.18)

it is not dicult to show [32, 33] that adding hsm one locks all d-at directions,
su(4) and u(1), simultaneously, eliminating the possibility of the run-away behav-
ior.

the resulting low-energy theory presents a close parallel to the 3-2 model and can
be analyzed in the weak coupling regime. basically, the only dierence is the origin of
the nonperturbative superpotential. in the 3-2 model it was provided by instanton,
here by the gluino condensation. the gluino condensate is known exactly [58].
the procedure of the vacuum state searches is straightforward, albeit numerically
tedious, as in the 3-2 model itself. we will not go into details here referring the reader
to the original publications. the conclusion is that supersymmetry is dynamically
broken. a non-supersymmetric vacuum is found at
v  4h1/5  4

where v is the scale of the typical expectation value of the matter elds, so that all
corrections (say, to the kahler function) turn out to be small. the vacuum energy
density scales as

evac  h6/5(4)4 .

the 4-1 model is only the simplest representative of its class.

it can be gen-
eralized in various directions. the basic idea  a nonperturbative superpotential
through the gluino condensation in an unbroken subgroup, plus a cleverly chosen
tree-level superpotential  persists. in particular, 2k-1 models (k > 2) were consid-
ered in [32, 33].

5.6 a few words on other calculable models

using the strategy outlined above one can construct more complex calculable models
with the spontaneously broken susy. the models based on products of unitary
groups, su(n)su(m), are listed in table 8.
simplectic and some other subgroups were considered too (e.g. [32, 114, 115]). it
is hardly necessary to dwell on these examples since, with a single exception, they
do not go beyond the range of ideas that are already familiar. the interested reader
may consult the original publications.

118

model

matter

n -2

n -(n1)

n-(n2)

{n, 2} + 2{ n, 1}
+{1, 2}

{n, n  1}
+(n  1){ n, 1}
+n{1, n  1}}

{n, n  2}
+(n  2){ n, 1}
+n {1, n  2}

comments,
references

n odd, at n > 5 quar-
tic superpotential re-
quired, [32]

non-renormalizable
wtree, [113]

via duality relat-
ed to n-2 models,
[113]

table 8: the su(n)su(m) models, usually referred to as the n-m models.

the exception mentioned above is the use of seibergs duality [31]. assume
that we have a dual pair such that the electric theory is weakly coupled while
the magnetic theory is strongly coupled. assume that one can establish that
under a certain choice of parameters the electric theory spontaneously breaks
supersymmetry. then, susy must be broken in the magnetic theory too, and
one learns something about this noncalculable breaking from consideration in the
weak coupling regime. the information is not too abundant, though, since the full
mapping between the electric and magnetic theories is not known. the best-
known problem belonging to this class is the n-(n2) model analyzed along these
lines in [113]. its dual strongly coupled partner is the n-2 model.

another issue worth mentioning is a device, dating back to the 1980s [58], al-
lowing one to convert non-calculable models into calculable. the main idea is as
follows. given a model where susy is broken in the strong coupling regime, one
introduces in this model, additionally, non-chiral matter (i.e. a set of matter elds
with mass terms that are assumed to be small). such an expansion denitely does
not change wittens index. the extra matter elds may result in the emergence of
the d at directions. if they do, and if a repulsive superpotential is generated, su-
persymmetry may be spontaneously broken in the weak coupling regime. the best
known example of this type [33, 116] is the su(5) theory with one anti-decuplet,
one quintet plus one or two extra {5 + 5}. one may call it a non-minimal one-
generation su(5) model (non-minimal, because of the extra nonchiral matter). if
the mass term of the extra avor is small, the corresponding dynamics turns out
quite similar to that of the 3-2 model: the theory is fully higgsed, instanton does
generate a superpotential term repulsing the theory from the origin, the exits from
the valleys are locked. when the mass terms are small, the vacuum lies far away
from the origin. everything is calculable.

when the mass terms of the non-chiral matter elds increase, the vacuum moves
towards the origin of the valley, and the coupling constant becomes stronger. even-
tually, when all mass terms become of order 5, the calculability is lost. (one still

119

can argue, following an indirect line of reasoning, based on criterion 2 in sec. 5.2
and holomorphy, that susy stays broken. but this is a dierent story.)

one last remark in conclusion of this mini-survey. a class of promising calculable
models based on the novel idea  the itiy nonchiral mechanism of the dynamical
susy breaking  was engineered by dimopoulos et al. [16]. the itiy model per se
is noncalculable, and is considered in sec. 6. the modication necessary in order
to make it calculable, sometimes called the plateau mechanism, logically belongs to
the current section, but it would be hardly possible to consider it here, prior to the
discussion of the itiy model. therefore, we postpone a get acquainted with the
plateau mechanism part till sec. 6.3.

6 spontaneous supersymmetry breaking in

strong coupling

6.1 su(5) model with one generation

this is the simplest model where the dynamical susy breaking may occur, as was
understood shortly after the search began [20,21]. in fact, this is the simplest simple-
gauge-group model with the nonchiral matter. it is truly strongly coupled, the only
relevant parameter is , no small parameters exist, and if susy is broken, the scale
of the breaking has to be  .
we are already familiar with many features of this model. it has no at direc-
tions, no superpotential is possible, and it possesses two conserved u(1) currents 
the konishi current and the r current. the corresponding charges of the matter
elds are

qk(x) = 1, qk(v ) = 3 ;

r(x) = 1 , r(v ) = 9 ,

(6.1)

where our convention regarding the r charge of x is r(x) = 0, the same as in
the su(5) model with two generations. the zero mode formula is 10 3

x v .

both criteria of the dynamical susy breaking formulated in sec. 5.2 are appli-

cable. here is how it works.

(i) gluino condensation
following [20] (see also sec. 4.2) one can consider the correlation function

where

(x, y, z) = ht (2(x), 2(y), (z))i ,
 )(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0

 = xx (v x

(6.2)

(6.3)

,



and the greek letters are used for the su(5) gauge indices (the lorentz indices of
the gluino eld are suppressed).

120

x

y









i

x

v





x

x

z

figure 5: the instanton saturation of the correlation function (6.2) in the one-
generation su(5) model.

all operators in the correlation function (x, y, z) are the lowest components of
the chiral superelds. then supersymmetry tells us that, if this correlation func-
tion does not vanish, it can only be an x, y, z independent constant [3].
it goes
without saying that (x, y, z) vanishes in perturbation theory. the one-instanton
contribution is non-vanishing, however, (see fig. 5) and does,
indeed, produce
  (5)13 (the exponent 13 coincides with the rst coecient of the  func-
tion.) if x, y, z  1 one expects that the one-instanton contribution saturates
(x, y, z), so that the constant obtained in this way is reliable. if so, one can pass
to the limit x, y, z   and use the property of clusterization at large x, y, z to
argue that the gluino condensate develops 27, h2i 6= 0. since the superpotential
is absent, the gluino condensate is the order parameter for susy breaking. one
concludes that supersymmetry is spontaneously broken [20].

(ii) breaking of global symmetries
an alternative line of reasoning [21] is based on criterion 2. assume that neither
of the two u(1) symmetries of the model (see eq. (6.1)) is spontaneously broken.
then one has to match six t hooft anomalous triangles [108]:

tr qr = 26,
tr q3

r = 4976, tr qrq2

tr q3
k = 450, tr q2

tr qk = 5,

k = 125,

rqk = 1500 .

(6.4)

solutions of these matching conditions do exist [21] but they look rather awful. for
instance, a minimal solution requires ve massless composite weyl fermions with
the following assignment of the {qk, qr} charges:

(5, 26), (5,20), (5,24), (0, 1), (0,9) .

27the solution with h2i = 0 and hi   is ruled out due to the absence of the at directions

(vacuum valleys).

121

since the solution is so complicated it is then natural to conclude (natural but
not mandatory) that at least one of the axial symmetries is spontaneously broken,
which, according to criterion 2, would entail the spontaneous susy breaking. the
spectrum of the theory must include at least several composite massless particles:
the goldstino, and one massless boson for each broken axial symmetry.

(iii) adding nonchiral matter
finally, the third alternative route providing an additional argument that susy
is broken follows the strategy of [58]  adding nonchiral matter with a small mass
term m makes the theory more manageable by higgsing (a part of) the gauge group
and creating a theory whose dynamical behavior is simpler than that of the original
one. the pattern of susy breaking/conservation can be established in this auxiliary
model; then one can return back to the original model by sending m  . if no
phase transition in m happens en route one gets an idea of the vacuum structure of
the original model.

this strategy was applied to the su(5) model in [116] and [33], where one and two
additional avors, respectively, were introduced. for instance, with one extra avor
(q, q) one arrives at a four-dimensional moduli space parametrized by four chiral
invariants xx q, q q, xv q, and v q. a generic point from the vacuum valley
corresponds to the breaking of the gauge su(5) down to su(2), with four color-
singlet moduli. the low-energy theory for these moduli represents a generalized
wess-zumino model. a nonperturbative superpotential is generated through the
gluino condensation in the su(2) theory. if the most general renormalizable tree-
level superpotential is added, one arrives at a typical oraifeartaigh model of the
spontaneous susy breaking [116]. certainly, the limit m   that returns us to
the original theory and the strong coupling regime, cannot be achieved in a rigorous
manner. the very fact of the susy breaking is a rigorous statement, however.
indeed, the gluino condensate hi depends on m linearly 28. therefore, if hi 6= 0
at small m, it cannot vanish at large m.
concluding this section let us note that the s0(10) model with a single spinor
(i.e. 16-plet) representation is very similar to the one-generation su(5). it is both
chiral  no mass term is possible  and free from the internal anomalies. the
model was treated along the same lines as the one-generation su(5) model in the
1980s [22]. calculable deformations obtained by supplementing the original model
by one nonchiral matter supereld in the representation 10 were considered by
murayama [116].

6.2 the intriligator-seiberg-shenker model

the mechanism suggested by these authors [6] is the su(2) gauge theory with a
single matter supereld q in the representation 3/2, i.e. q, symmetric in all
three indices (, ,  = 1, 2). this theory is chiral since no mass term is possible.

28the proof that hi  m is suggested to the reader as an exercise.

122

indeed, it is easy to see that the only quadratic invariant one could write qq
vanishes identically. obviously, there are no cubic invariants. the rst (and the
only) nontrivial invariant is quartic,

u = qqq  q   .

(6.5)

thus, a one-dimensional vacuum valley exists; it is parametrized by the modulus u.
at the origin of the valley, u = 0, the classical theory exhibits massless elds (the
gauge bosons and gauginos). at u 6= 0 the gauge su(2) is fully broken, the theory
is fully higgsed. if u  , the gauge bosons are heavy, and the theory is weakly
coupled.
the model possesses a single anomaly-free r current 29, with the following r

charges:

r(q) = 

2
5

, r(q) =

3
5

.

(6.6)

the r charge of u is 12/5 while that of u is 7/5. the r charge conservation is
spontaneously broken at u 6= 0.
following [6] let us assume that a (nonrenormalizable) tree-level superpotential
is added, w = u/m0, where m0 is some ultraviolet parameter, m0  . this su-
perpotential should be considered as a low-energy limit of some fundamental theory
dened at the scale m0. what exactly this fundamental theory is need not concern
us here. the tree-level superpotential is treated in the rst nontrivial order in /m0.
it is not iterated  the iterations cannot be considered without the knowledge of the
fundamental theory because of the nonrenormalizable nature of w = u/m0. higher
order eects in /m0 are discarded.

classically the eective lagrangian for the moduli eld takes the form

l =

1

4 z d4(uu)1/4 +(cid:26) 1

2 z d2

u
m0

+ h.c.(cid:27) .

(6.7)

it has a unique supersymmetric vacuum state at u = 0. the tree-level superpo-
tential pushes the theory towards the origin of the valley. the existence of the
supersymmetric vacuum at u = 0 is entirely due to the fact that the kinetic term
for u in eq. (6.7) is singular at u = 0.

while the kinetic term (uu)1/4 is denitely correct at large u, at small u the
singularity could be smoothed out provided that the theory at small u is in the
conning phase. then, generally speaking, there are no reasons to expect that there
are massless physical states, other than those described by the moduli eld u, and,
if so, one can expect the kahler function to be regular at the origin,

k = (uu)1/4  k = 6(uu) + ... ,

(|u|  ) .

29the specic form of the r current depends on the group factors. the expression in eq. (6.6)

takes into account that t (3/2) = 5, and the zero mode formula is 410
q .

123

let us accept this assumption as a working hypothesis. then the would-be super-
symmetric vacuum at u = 0 disappears. indeed, at small u

fu =

6
m0

and e =

6
m 2
0

.

(6.8)

the vacuum energy density is very small being measured in its natural units,
e/4  1, but is denitely non-zero. since at large u the valley is locked and there is
no supersymmetric solution either, one arrives at the conclusion of the spontaneous
supersymmetry breaking in the model under consideration.

what are the arguments in favor of the hypothesis of the conning regime at

small u and no massless elds other than u itself?

in essence, there is only one argument [6]: the t hooft matching at u = 0.
at the origin of the valley the r charge is conserved provided the small tree-level
superpotential is switched o. there are two t hooft triangles: tr qr and tr q3
r.
if the theory is in the conning regime, with no massless composites, both triangles
must be matched by the contribution of u. and they do match! indeed, it is easy
to see that

tr qr =

7
5

,

tr q3

5(cid:19)3
r = (cid:18) 7

.

since the r charge of u is 7/5, the matching is automatic.

is this argument suciently conclusive in order to say that the theory is in the
conning regime, and the intriligator-seiberg-shenker mechanism works? perhaps,
not. in fact, one can give a rather strong argument pointing in the opposite direction.
although the model at hand is asymptotically free, it is barely so. the rst
coecient of the  function is abnormally small, 0 = 6  5 = 1. the second co-
ecient of the  function is of a normal size and positive. so it is very likely that
the  function has a zero at a small value of , and the theory is conformal and
relatively weakly coupled in the infrared, much in the same way as qcd with nf
close to 11nc/3 [117, 118] or sqcd with nf slightly lower than 3nc, i.e. near the
right edge of the conformal window [31]. the only distinction is that in the latter
case, by sending nc  , we can approach to the edge of the conformal window
arbitrarily closely, so that the infrared xed point of the  function occurs at an ar-
bitrarily small value of , and higher order eects are parametrically suppressed. in
the intriligator-seiberg-shenker model one has to rely on the numerical suppression
of the higher order eects in . in order to give the reader the idea of the degree of
suppression let us do this simple numerical exercise. the numerator of the nsvz 
function in the model at hand is proportional to

3tg  t (3/2)(1  ()) = 1 + 5() ,

(6.9)

where () is the anomalous dimension of the eld q. the infrared xed point
occurs at  such that

.

(6.10)

1
5

() = 

124

in the leading order

() = c2(r)




,

(6.11)

where

c2(r) = t (r)

dim (adj)
dim(r)

=

15
4

for r = 3/2 .

the coecient c2 is rather large by itself; what is important, this numerical en-
hancement does not seem to propagate to higher order coecients in . combining
eqs. (6.10) and (6.11) one arrives at 30




=

4
75

.

(6.12)

it seems rather unlikely that, with this small value of the critical coupling constant,
the higher-order corrections are so abnormally large that they eliminate the infrared
xed point altogether.

what if the infrared xed point exists in the weak coupling regime? then, the
infrared limit is conformal (the non-abelian coulomb phase). needless to say that
the t hooft matching becomes uninformative: if the theory is in the non-abelian
coulomb phase, the t hooft triangles are trivially saturated by the unconned
gluino and quark elds themselves. moreover, the singularity in the kahler function
need not be smoothed out, and the conclusion of the dynamical susy breaking
becomes unsubstantiated. it is natural then to nd a supersymmetric vacuum at
u = 0.

everything seems self-consistent, except a single question: why then the two
r, are successfully saturated by the

t hooft triangles of the model, tr qr and tr q3
composite u? can this matching be a mere coincidence?

we cannot be sure.

it is worth adding, though, that at least one example of
such a coincidental matching was found in a rather similar model [119]. the model
consists of the so(n) gauge sector, plus a single matter (chiral) supereld in the
(two-index symmetric traceless) tensor representation of so(n). the moduli elds
of this model are known to saturate the t hooft triangles corresponding to all
unbroken global axial symmetries at the origin of the moduli space. one would
then naturally expect to nd the conning phase at the origin. at the same time,
in ref. [119] it was argued that the origin of the moduli space belongs to the non-
abelian coulomb phase rather than to the conning phase, and the above matching
by the moduli fermions is coincidental. the essence of the argument is beyond the
scope of this review. the interested reader is referred to [119].

in summary, the intriligator-seiberg-shenker model was designed to provide a
new mechanism of the dynamical susy breaking. it remains to be seen whether it
actually does the job. even if the original su(2) model is in the infrared-conformal
phase and preserves supersymmetry one can try to construct other, more compli-
cated models based on the same idea which, hopefully, do not fall in the conformal

30for comparison: in qcd with fteen massless avors / = 1/22.

125

window. a promising candidate of this type is an su(7) model [120] with two
anti-symmetric tensors, six (anti)fundamentals and an appropriate tree-level super-
potential, believed to be s conning.

6.3 the intriligator-thomas-izawa-yanagida model

the model is nonchiral, wittens index is two. nevertheless, supersymmetry is
dynamically broken, in a manner briey discussed in sec. 2.10. here we explain in
detail how the itiy mechanism works.

the model [7] is a close relative of the su(2) model considered in sec. 4.4. the
matter chiral superelds q
f are four color doublets ( = 1, 2 and f = 1, 2, 3, 4 are
color and subavor indices). in addition to the quark superelds q
f , six color-
singlet chiral superelds sf g = sgf are introduced. their interaction with qf is
due to the superpotential,

w =

h
2

sf g q

f q

g  .

(6.13)

the theory is globally invariant under the su(4) rotations of the subavors. it also
has a conserved r charge: q

f is neutral while the r charge of sf g is two.

let us start from the case h = 0 when the superpotential (6.13) is switched
o and the singlet elds sf g are decoupled. this case is well studied [30], see also
sec. 4.4. the classical moduli space is spanned by the gauge invariants

mf g = mgf = q

f q

g 

(6.14)

the matrix mf g is antisymmetric in f, g, its six elements are subject to one classical
constraint (4.43). nonperturbative quantum corrections change the geometry of the
moduli space, the constraint pf(m) = 0 is replaced by pf(m) = 4
two, so that the
origin is excluded.

let us now switch on the interactions (6.13). it is clear that the consideration
of sec. 4.4 remains valid, with the substitution mf g  hsf g (the lowest component
of sf g is implied). thus one gets,

hmf gi = 

1

162h (cid:20) 1

s(cid:21)f gdtr w 2e ;

dtr w 2e = const hqpf(s) 2

two . (6.15)

now the elds sf g are dynamical; to determine the vacuum state one has to take
into consideration their f terms,

hfsf gi = * 

sf g w+ = hhmf gi .

(6.16)

since hmf gi does not vanish, hmf gi  h2, this leads to a clear contradiction with
the presumed supersymmetry of the vacuum state.

126

to get a clearer picture of the phenomenon (and, in particular, to answer the
question how susy can be broken in the theory where wittens index does not
vanish, iw = 2) let us add a small mass term to the elds s. to keep our presentation
as transparent as possible we will assume that

s12 = s34  s, all other components vanish.

in fact, for any general set of sf g one can always perform a global su(4) rotation
to eliminate all components other than s12 and s34.

the part of the superpotential containing s consists of the tree-level term ms2,

plus the nonperturbative term due to the gluino condensation 31,

ws =

1
2

m s2  const h s 2

two .

we nd two supersymmetric vacua at

s = const h m12

two ,

(6.17)

(6.18)

in full accord with wittens index. in the limit of small m, however, these super-
symmetric vacua lie very far in the space of elds. let us see what happens at a
nite distance in the space of elds.

if |s|  h m12

two, the vacuum energy density e is just a constant,

e = |fs|2 = const h24 .

(6.19)

we get a plateau, or indenite equilibrium.

the equilibrium is destroyed by the perturbative corrections to the kahler func-
tion [121]. assume that h1  |s|  h m12. then the renormalization of the
kinetic term is weak; at one loop it is given by the following z factor

z = 1 + c

h2
162 ln

muv
h|s|

,

(6.20)

where c is a positive constant and muv is the ultraviolet cut o. inclusion of this
correction tilts the plateau,

e = |fs|2 z 1 = const2 h2 4 1 + c

h2
162 ln

muv

h|s|!1

,

(6.21)

making the theory slide towards smaller values of |s|. a minimum (or minima) is
achieved somewhere at h|s| <
 . at h|s|   eq. (6.21) becomes inapplicable,
of course. perturbation theory becomes useless for the calculation of the kahler
potential. one can show [122], however, that at |s| <
  noncalculable terms in

31the ambiguity in the sign of the constant in eq. (6.17) is in one-to-one correspondence with

the  sign in eq. (4.53).

127

the kahler potential are suppressed by powers of h and are negligible provided that
h  1. one gets a stable non-supersymmetric vacuum at hsi = 0. besides the gold-
stino, at hsi = 0 the theory exhibits ve massless goldstone bosons corresponding
to the spontaneous breaking of the global su(4) down to sp(4). of course, the
analysis of ref. [122] has nothing to say about the possibility of nding a still lower
non-supersymmetric vacuum at h|s|  . in this domain the kahler potential is
noncalculable.
for nite values of m the non-supersymmetric vacua are quasistable because of
the tunneling into the supersymmetric vacuum at hsi  1/m. in the limit m  0
the tunneling probability vanishes, and the non-supersymmetric vacuum becomes
stable.

an elegant idea of how to make the itiy mechanism fully calculable by stabi-
lizing the theory on the plateau at suciently large values of s was suggested in
ref. [16]. assume that a part of the global su(4) of the itiy model is gauged. the
original gauge su(2)  call it strong  is thus supplemented by additional weaker
gauge interactions, with the gauge coupling a, such that a   (the subscript
a means additional). the particular pattern considered in [16] was su(2) su(2)
weak gauge group. note that the yukawa coupling h is a free parameter, so that
the ratio of a/h can be arbitrary.

then the z factor of the gauge elds gets a contribution both, from the yukawa
if a  h the tilt of the plateau
interactions and the weak gauge interactions.
is reversed (since the signs of these two contributions are opposite), |s| is pushed
towards large rather than small values. this drive towards large values of |s| even-
tually stops since the running of a makes this coupling constant smaller at large
|s| while h gets larger. sooner or later h wins over a. the theory can be stabilized
at arbitrarily large values of |s|, where the z factor is calculable to the degree of
precision we want.
as an additional bonus one nds that at large values of |s| the supersymmetry
breaking eects can be as small as we want. at rst sight this conclusion seems
rather paradoxical since evac  h24 and is seemingly s independent. one should
not forget, however, that the natural unit of energy is set by the gluino condensate,
h2i  s2  3. being measured in these natural units, the vacuum energy is
very small,

evac  s2h2i2 ,

and the spitting between the glueball/glueballino masses is of order s2h2i. the
ratio of the splitting to the masses themselves tends to zero as s2. the s supereld
acts as a phantom axion/dilaton  asymptotically massless and non-interacting 
much in the same way as the invisible axion of qcd [123].

concluding this section let us note that a straightforward generalization of the
itiy mechanism based on su(n) sqcd with n quark avors and n 2 + 2 gauge
singlets was considered in ref. [122].

128

7 impact of the chirally symmetric vacuum

the existence of tg distinct (but physically equivalent) chirally asymmetric vacuum
states in susy gluodynamics is a well-established fact. we have already mentioned
in passing, that a physically inequivalent chirally symmetric state at h2i = 0, the
kovner-shifman vacuum, is not ruled out; moreover, certain arguments make one
believe [56] that chirally symmetric regime is attainable, the h2i = 0 phase of susy
gluodynamics exists. if this is indeed the case, and if this vacuum does not disappear
in the presence of suciently light (or massless) matter, it would lead to absolutely
drastic consequences in many mechanisms of the dynamical susy breaking: they
will simply disappear.

let us rst briey review the arguments in favor of the kovner-shifman vacuum.
first, it is present in the veneziano-yankielowicz eective lagrangian (see sec. 2.9)
which encodes information on the anomalous ward identities in susy gluodynamics
and is expected to properly reect its vacuum structure. second, the instanton
calculations of the correlation function h2(x)2(0)i at small x, performed in the
strong coupling theory and in the weak coupling theory (i.e. adding matter in
su(2) susy gluodynamics, higgsing the theory, and then returning back by using
holomorphy in the matter mass parameter) do not match each other (secs. 4.2, 4.3).
the rst method yields a smaller value for the gluino condensate than the second

one [13]. the mismatch is q4/5 for su(2). the mismatch could be explained
if one invokes a hypothesis of amati et al. [43], according to which the strong
coupling calculation of the correlation function h2(x)2(0)i in fact yields a result
if the h2i = 0 vacuum exists, it
averaged over all vacuum states of the theory.
would contaminate this correlation function, explaining in a natural way the 4/5
suppression factor compared to the calculation in the weak coupling regime. the
evidence for the chirally symmetric state is admittedly circumstantial. in particular,
as it was discussed in sec. 4.2, the hypothesis of amati et al. [43] is in contradiction
with the strong coupling solution of the n = 2 gluodynamics softly broken to n = 1.
the kovner-shifman vacuum must give zero contribution to wittens index since
the latter is fully saturated by the chirally symmetric vacua. if so, it is potentially
unstable under various deformations. for instance, putting the system in a nite-size
box lifts the vacuum energy density from zero [124]. this vacuum disappears in nite
volume 32. this instability  the tendency to escape under seemingly harmless
deformations  may explain why the kovner-shifman vacuum at htr2i = 0 is
not seen in wittens d-brane construction [125] . perhaps, this is not surprising
at all. indeed, there is a good deal of extrapolation in this construction, against
which the chirally asymmetric vacua are stable (they have no choice since they have
to saturate wittens index) while the htr2i = 0 vacuum need not be stable and
may not survive the space-time distortions associated with the d-brane engineering.
neither it is seen in the seiberg-witten solution [95] of n = 2 susy gluodynamics
32it goes without saying that massless fermions are mandatory in the h2i = 0 phase of susy

gluodynamics.

129

slightly perturbed by a small mass term 33 of the matter eld mtr 2, (m  ). if
at all, it can exist only at large values of m, i.e. m  .
one may ask a question: are we aware of any other examples of supersym-
metric theories where wittens index vanishes, and the supersymmetric vacuum
appears/disappears under deformations of parameters that do not change the struc-
ture of the theory, e. g. variations of mass parameters or putting the theory in a
box of size l and considering the theory at large but nite l instead of the limit
l  ?
the answer is yes. surprisingly, the simplest two-dimensional theory with the
minimal supersymmetry, n = 1, is of this type. the model we keep in mind (to be
referred to as the minimal model) is similar to that described in detail in sec. 3.3,
but simpler. assume that instead of two chiral superelds we deal with one (i.e.
omit 2 and 2 from eqs. (3.22) and (3.23)). this cubic superpotential model has
wittens index zero. this can be seen in many ways. say, if the mass parameter
m2 in the superpotential is made negative, the equation w/ = 0 has no real
solutions. alternatively, one can consider the theory with positive m2 in a nite
box, of length l. if l  1, it is legitimate to retain only the zero momentum
modes discarding all others. then one gets a quantum-mechanical system known to
have vanishing wittens index [2].

the minimal model at positive (and large) values of m2 has two physically equiv-

alent vacua, at  = 2m/. the vanishing of wittens index implies that if one

of the vacua is bosonic, the other is fermionic.

although wittens index in the minimal model does vanish, supersymmetry
is not spontaneously broken, provided m2 is large and positive, i.e. m2  2.
the supersymmetric vacuum with the zero energy density exists. indeed, one can
show that v2 = m2/2 is the genuine dimensionless expansion parameter in the
theory at hand (the expansion runs in powers of 1/v2). at large v2 the theory is
weakly coupled. since there are no massless elds in the lagrangian, (and they
cannot appear as bound states in the weak coupling regime), there is no appropriate
candidate to play the role of goldstino, and, hence, susy must be realized linearly.
at large negative m2 the eld  does not develop a vacuum expectation value.
susy is broken. the  eld is massless, and is the goldstino of the spontaneously
broken susy. in fact, one can argue that the susy breaking takes place at positive
but small values of m2, m2  2. the classical potential for such values of parame-
ters has an underdeveloped peak at  = 0 plus two shallow minima at   1. the
quantum corrections are likely to completely smear this structure, leaving no phys-
ical states at zero energy. the switch from the unbroken to spontaneously broken
susy occurs as a phase transition in the mass parameter.

this example teaches us that it is not unreasonable to think of the existence of
the h2i = 0 phase of susy gluodynamics, even if neither the d-brane perspective
nor the seiberg-witten solution of n = 2 at small m carry indications on such a
33 the chirally symmetric state h2i = hm2i = 0 resembles sphaleron: it realizes a saddle point

of the energy.

130

solution. assuming that it exists, one may ask what are its implications on the
susy breaking mechanisms we discussed.

the mechanisms that are based on the weak coupling regime are least aected.
formally, it may well happen that, apart from the susy-breaking vacua at large
values of elds, there exists a susy-conserving vacuum at small values. these
vacua are well-separated in the space of elds. the susy-breaking vacua remain as
quasistable. under an appropriate choice of relevant parameters the barrier may be
arbitrarily large, and if the theory initially nds itself in the susy-breaking vacuum,
it will never leak to the susy-conserving one, for all practical purposes. it is worth
noting that the possibility of susy-conserving vacua, separated by a large distance
in the space of elds from the susy-breaking vacuum, where the theory actually
resides, was incorporated from the very beginning in the plateau models of ref. [16].
the possibility of existence of the susy-conserving vacua in the domain of strong
coupling in the 3-2 model or the two-generation su(5) model just puts them in the
same class as the plateau models.

the most aected are the mechanisms based on the gluino condensation in the
strong coupling regime, e.g. the one-generation su(5) model or the itiy model.
for them, the kovner-shifman vacuum may be a fatal blow. the iss mechanism
and its derivatives are neutral. as far as we see it now, they are independent of this
phenomenon, and remain intact.

8 concluding remarks

the instanton calculus proved to be a powerful tool in analyzing supersymmetric
theories.
in this review we focused mainly on formal aspects of the method and
several applications.

although the instanton calculus score an impressive list of results, still some
conceptual issues remain unclear. two points are most disturbing. first, the result
obtained via instantons as a rule are of the topological nature: they do not depend
on specic details. for example, in the one-avor model the nonperturbative super-
potential is totally determined by the zero-size instantons. second, the vev scale
v inherent to the instanton calculations in the higgs phase has no direct physical
meaning. it is clear that instanton results are an indirect reection of physics at the
monopole/sphaleron scale v/g. the whole story reminds a famous andersons fairy
tail where a soldier cooked a soup from an axe.

an example where the relation to the monopole scale is established is provided
by n = 2 theories [95] where one and the same function determines both the
scattering amplitudes in the infrared and the monopole/dyon spectrum. we believe
that a similar relation exists in n = 1 theories. an important task is to reveal it.

131

acknowledgments

this review is, in a sense, a remake of the review [46] we wrote in collaboration with
v. zakharov in 1985. the material was also presented by one of the authors (m.s.) at
the 1985 bakuriani school on high energy physics. we are grateful to v. zakharov
for valuable insights. while working on this review we had fruitful discussions with
a. yung whom we would like to thank for comments and cooperation. we are
grateful to a. faraggi, v. khoze, jr., m. marinov, m. mattis, a. ritz, and t. ter
veldhuis for helpful discussions. we are grateful to x. hou for careful reading of
the manuscript.

the work was supported in part by the doe under grant number de-fg02-

94er40823.

132

references

[1] e. witten, nucl. phys. b185 (1981) 513 [reprinted in supersymmetry, ed.
s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic, amsterdam  singapore, 1987),
vol. 1, page 443].

[2] e. witten, nucl. phys. b202 (1982) 253 [reprinted in supersymmetry, ed.
s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic, amsterdam  singapore, 1987),
vol. 1, page 490]; j. high energy phys. 9802:006, 1998 (see appendix).

[3] v.a. novikov, m.a. shifman, a.i. vainshtein, and v.i. zakharov nucl. phys.
b229 (1983) 407 [reprinted in supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north hol-
land/world scientic, amsterdam  singapore, 1987), vol. 1, page 606].

[4] g.c. rossi and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b138 (1984) 195 [reprinted in
supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic, amsterdam
 singapore, 1987), vol. 1, page 620].

[5] i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b241 (1984) 493.

[6] k. intriligator, n. seiberg, and s.h. shenker, phys. lett. b342 (1995) 152.

[7] k. intriligator and s. thomas, nucl. phys. b473 (1996) 121;
k. izawa and t. yanagida, prog. theor. phys. 95 (1996) 829.

[8] a.a. belavin, a.m. polyakov, a.s. schwartz, and yu.s. tyupkin, phys. lett.
b59 (1975) 85 [reprinted in instantons in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman
(world scientic, singapore, 1994), page 22].

[9] g. t hooft, phys. rev. d14 (1976) 3432; (e) phys. rev. d18 (1978) 2199
[reprinted in instantons in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic,
singapore, 1994), page 70; note that in the reprinted version the numerical
errors summarized in erratum above are corrected.]

[10] a. dadda and p. di vecchia, phys. lett. b73 (1978) 162 [reprinted in in-
stantons in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic, singapore,
1994), page 293].

[11] v.a. novikov, m.a. shifman, a.i. vainshtein, and v.i. zakharov nucl. phys.

b229 (1983) 381; phys. lett. b166 (1986) 329.

[12] v.a. novikov et al., nucl. phys. b229 (1983) 394 [reprinted in instantons
in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic, singapore, 1994), page
298].

[13] v.a. novikov, m.a. shifman, a.i. vainshtein, and v.i. zakharov nucl. phys.
b260 (1985) 157 [reprinted in instantons in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman
(world scientic, singapore, 1994), page 311].

133

[14] g. veneziano, phys. lett. b128 (1983) 199.

[15] t. banks and e. rabinovici, nucl. phys. b160 (1979) 349;

e. fradkin and s. shenker, phys. rev. d19 (1979) 3682.

[16] s. dimopoulos, g. dvali, g. guidice, and r. ratazzi, nucl. phys. b510 (1997)

12.

[17] r. arnowitt and p. nath, in proceedings of summer school jorge andre
swieca: particles and fields, ed. o.j.p. eboli and v.o. rivelles (world sci-
entic, singapore, 1994) [hep-ph/9309277]; g. guidice and r. rattazzi, the-
ories with gauge mediated supersymmetry breaking, hep-ph/9801271 [phys.
rep., to be published].

[18] i. aeck, j. harvey and e. witten, nucl. phys. b206 (1982) 413.

[19] v.a. novikov et al., nucl. phys. b223 (1983) 445.

[20] y. meurice and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b141 (1984) 69.

[21] i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b137 (1984) 187 [reprinted in
supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic, amsterdam
 singapore, 1987), vol. 1, page 600]; phys. rev. lett. 52 (1984) 1677.

[22] i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b140 (1984) 59; nucl. phys.

b256 (1985) 557.

[23] a.i. vainshtein, v.i. zakharov, v.a. novikov, and m.a. shifman, pisma

zhetf 39 (1984) 494 [jetp lett. 39 (1984) 601].

[24] i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, phys. rev. lett. 52 (1984) 1677.

[25] j. fuchs and m. schmidt, z. phys. c30 (1986) 161; j. fuchs, nucl. phys.

b272 (1986) 677;
v. novikov, yad. fiz. 46 (1987) 656; 967 [sov. j. nucl. phys., 46 (1987) 366;
554].

[26] a. yung, nucl. phys. b485 (1997) 38.

[27] n. dorey, v. khoze, and m. mattis, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 2921; d54 (1996)
7832; nucl. phys. b513 (1998) 681; n. dorey, t. hollowood, v. khoze, and
m. mattis, nucl. phys. b519 (1998 ) 470.

[28] v. khoze, m. mattis, and m. slater, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 69.

[29] n. seiberg, phys. lett. b206 (1988) 75.

[30] n. seiberg, phys. rev. d49 (1994) 6857.

134

[31] n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b435 (1995) 129.

[32] m. dine, a. nelson, y. nir and y. shirman, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 2658.

[33] e. poppitz and s. trivedi, phys. lett. b365 (1996) 125.

[34] j. bagger and j. wess, supersymmetry and supergravity, (princeton university

press, 1990).

[35] b. chibisov and m. shifman, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 7990; (e) d58 (1998)

109901.

[36] j. wess and b. zumino, phys. lett. b49 (1974) 52 [reprinted in supersymme-
try, ed. s. ferrara, (north-holland/world scientic, amsterdam  singapore,
1987), vol. 1, page 77].

[37] yu.a. golfand and e.p. likhtman, jetp. lett. 13 (1971) 323 [reprinted in
supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara, (north-holland/world scientic, amsterdam
 singapore, 1987), vol. 1, page 7].

[38] j. wess and b. zumino, nucl. phys. b70 (1974) 39.

[39] f. buccella, j.-p. derendinger, c. savoy, and s. ferrara, phys. lett. b115
(1982) 375, and in proc. europhys. study conf. unication of the fundamen-
tal particle interactions ii, eds. j. ellis and s. ferrara (plenum press, new
york, 1983), page 349.

[40] t.r. taylor, phys. lett. b125 (1983) 185; b128 (1983) 403.

[41] m. luty and w. taylor, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 3399.

[42] n. hitchin, a. karlhede, u. lindstrom and m. rocek, commun. math. phys.

108 (1987) 535.

[43] d. amati, k. konishi, y. meurice, g. rossi and g. veneziano, phys. rep.

162 (1988) 557.

[44] e. witten, phys. lett. b117 (1982) 324 [reprinted in instantons in gauge

theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic, singapore, 1994), page 230].

[45] j. bagger, e. poppitz and l. randall, nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 3.

[46] a. vainshtein, v. zakharov, and m. shifman, usp. fiz. nauk, 146 (1985) 683

[sov. phys. uspekhi, 28 (1985) 709].

[47] t. ter veldhuis, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 015010; unexpected symmetries in

classical moduli spaces, hep-th/9811132.

135

[48] j. wess and b. zumino, phys. lett. b49 (1974) 52;

j. iliopoulos and b. zumino, nucl. phys. b76 (1974) 310;
p. west, nucl. phys. b106 (1976) 219;
m. grisaru, m. rocek, and w. siegel, nucl. phys. b159 (1979) 429.

[49] a. salam and j. strathdee, nucl. phys. b87 (1975) 85;

p. fayet, nucl. phys. b90 (1975) 104.

[50] s. ferrara and b. zumino, nucl. phys. b87 (1975) 207.

[51] m. grisaru, in recent developments in gravitation (cargese lectures, 1978),
eds. m. levy and s. deser (plenum press, new york, 1979), page 577, and
references therein.

[52] t.e. clark, o. piguet, and k. sibold, nucl. phys. b 159 (1979) 1;

k. konishi, phys. lett. b135 (1984) 439;
k. konishi and k. shizuya, nuov. cim. a90 (1985) 111.

[53] m. shifman and a. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b 277 (1986) 456.

[54] i. kogan, m. shifman, and a. vainshtein, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 4526.

[55] g. veneziano and s. yankielowicz, phys. lett. 113b (1982) 231;

t.r. taylor, g. veneziano, and s. yankielowicz, nucl. phys. b218 (1983)
493.

[56] a. kovner and m. shifman, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 2396.

[57] a. keurentjes, a. rosly, and a. smilga, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 081701; v.

kac and a. smilga, hep-th/9902029.

[58] m. shifman and a. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b296 (1988) 445;

a. morozov, m. olshanetsky and m. shifman, nucl. phys. b304 (1988) 291.

[59] l. dixon, v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, nucl. phys. b355 (1991) 649;

m. shifman and a. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b277 (1986) 456; b359 (1991)
571;
i. jack, d.r.t. jones, and p. west, phys. lett. b258 (1991) 382.

[60] g. t hooft, commun. math. phys. 81 (1981) 267.

[61] e. bogomolnyi, sov. j. nucl. phys. 24 (1976) 449;

m.k. prasad and c.h. sommereld, phys. rev. lett. 35 (1976) 760.

[62] s. ferrara and m. porrati, phys. lett. b423 (1998) 255.

[63] e. witten and d. olive, phys. lett. b78 (1978) 97.

136

[64] p. fendley and k. intriligator, nucl. phys. b372 (1990) 533.

[65] g. dvali and m. shifman, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 127.

[66] g. dvali and m. shifman, phys. lett. b396 (1997) 64; (e) b407 (1997) 452;

a. kovner, m. shifman, and a. smilga, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 7978.

[67] m. shifman, a. vainshtein and m. voloshin, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 045016.

[68] r.k. kaul and r. rajaraman, phys. lett. b131 (1983) 357.

[69] c. imbimbo amd s. mukhi, nucl. phys. b247 (1984) 471.

[70] a. dadda, r. horsley, and p. di vecchia, phys. lett. b76 (1978) 298;

r. horsley, nucl. phys. b151 (1979) 399.

[71] j.f. schonfeld, nucl. phys. b161 (1979) 125.

[72] s. rouhani, nucl. phys. b182 (1981) 462.

[73] a. uchiyama, nucl. phys. b244 (1984) 57; prog. theoret. phys. 75 (1986)

1214; nucl. phys. b278 (1986) 121.

[74] h. yamagishi, phys. lett. b147 (1984) 425.

[75] a.k. chatterjee and p. majumdar, phys. rev. d30 (1984) 844; phys. lett.

b159 (1985) 37.

[76] a. rebhan and p. nieuwenhuizen, nucl. phys. b508 (1997) 449;

h. nastase, m. stephanov, p. nieuwenhuizen, and a. rebhan, nucl. phys.
b542 (1999) 471 [hep-th/9802074].

[77] n. graham and r.l. jae, nucl. phys. b544 (1999) 432 [hep-th/9808140].

[78] r. jackiw and c. rebbi, phys. rev. d13 (1976) 3398.

[79] b. zumino, phys. lett. b69 (1977) 369.

[80] f. berezin, the method of second quantization, (academic press, new york,

1966).

[81] a. vainshtein et al., usp. fiz. nauk, 136 (1982) 553 [sov. phys. uspekhi,
25 (1982) 195 [reprinted in instantons in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman
(world scientic, singapore, 1994), page 468].

[82] p. fayet and s. ferrara, phys. reports 32 (1977) 249.

[83] m. shifman and a. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b362 (1991) 21 [reprinted in
instantons in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic, singapore,
1994), page 97].

137

[84] m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, nucl. phys. b163 (1980) 46;

b165 (1980) 45.

[85] c. bernard, phys. rev. d19 (1979) 3013 [reprinted in instantons in gauge

theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic, singapore, 1994), page 109].

[86] l. brown, r. carlitz, d. creamer, and c. lee, phys. rev. d17 (1978) 1583
[reprinted in instantons in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic,
singapore, 1994), page 168].

[87] s.j. gates, m.t. grisaru, m. rocek, and w. siegel, superspace, or one thou-
sand and one lessons in supersymmetry (the benjamin/cummings, read-
ing, ma, 1983).

[88] v. novikov, m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov phys. lett. b217

(1989) 103.

[89] m. shifman and a. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b359 (1991) 571.

[90] m. shifman, int. j. mod. phys. a11 (1996) 5761.

[91] i. jack, d.r.t. jones, and a. pickering, phys. lett. b435 (1998) 61, and

references therein.

[92] a. parkes and p. west, phys. lett. b138 (1984) 99;

d.r.t. jones amd l. mezincescu, phys. lett. b138 (1984) 293;
s. hamidi, j. patera and j. schwarz, phys. lett. b141 (1984) 349.

[93] r. leigh and m. strassler, nucl. phys. b447 (1995) 95; c. lucchesi and g.
zoupanos, fortsch. phys. 45 (1997) 129; a. hanany, m.j. strassler, and a.m.
uranga, j. high energy phys. 06 (1998) 011 [hep-th/9803086]; a. hanany
and yang-hui he, j. high energy phys. 9902 (1999) 013 [hep-th/9811183].

[94] i. hinchlie, eur. phys. j. c3 (1998) 81.

[95] n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 19, (e) b430 (1994) 485;

b431 (1994) 484.

[96] a. ritz, a. vainshtein, in preparation

[97] e. witten, commun. math. phys. 117 (1988) 353.

[98] d. finnell and p. pouliot, nucl. phys. b453 (1995) 225.

[99] a. ringwald, nucl. phys. b330 (1990) 1;
o. espinosa, nucl. phys. b343 (1990) 310;
l. mclerran, a. vainshtein and m. voloshin, phys. rev. d42 (1990) 171.

138

[100] l. mclerran, a. vainshtein and m. voloshin, phys. lett. b249 (1990) 261;

phys. rev. d42 (1990) 180.

[101] for reviews see m. p. mattis, phys. rept. 214 (1992) 159; v.a. rubakov and
m.e. shaposhnikov, usp. fiz. nauk 166 (1996) 493 [phys. usp. 39 (1996 )
461], [hep-ph/9603208].

[102] r. dashen, b. hasslacher and a. neveu, phys. rev. d10 (1974) 4138,

f.r. klinkhamer and n.s. manton, phys. rev. d30 (1984) 2212,
l.g. yae, phys. rev. d40 (1989) 3463;
f. klinkhamer, sphalerons and energy barriers in the weinberg-salam model,
in proc. xxv int. conf. on high energy physics, singapore, 1990, ed.
k.k. phua and y. yamaguchi (world scientic, singapore, 1991) p. 913.

[103] v. zakharov, nucl. phys. b353 (1991) 683;

m. maggiore and m. shifman, nucl. phys. b371 (1992) 177; phys. rev. d46
(1992) 3550;
g. veneziano, mod. phys. lett. a7 (1992) 1661.

[104] c. csaki and w. skiba, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 045008.

[105] l. oraifeartaigh, nucl. phys. b96 (1975) 331.

[106] s. ferrara, l. girardello, and f. palumbo, phys. rev. d20 (1979) 403.

[107] p. fayet and j. iliopoulos, phys. lett. b51 (1974) 461.

[108] g. t hooft, in recent developments in gauge theories, eds. g. t hooft et

al., (plenum press, new york, 1980).

[109] d. amati, g.c. rossi, and g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b249 (1985 ) 1.

[110] i. aeck, m. dine and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b137 (1984) 187.

[111] g. dotti, a. manohar, and w. skiba, nucl. phys. b531 (1998) 507.

[112] t. ter veldhuis, phys. lett. b367 (1996) 157.

[113] e. poppitz, y. shadmi and s. trivedi, nucl. phys. b480 (1996) 125;

phys. lett. b388 (1996) 561.

[114] k. intriligator and s. thomas, nucl. phys. b473 (1996) 121.

[115] c. csaki, w. skiba, and m. schmaltz, nucl. phys. b487 (1997) 128.

[116] h. murayama, phys. lett. b355 (1995 ) 187.

139

[117] a. belavin and a. migdal, pisma zhetf 19 (1974) 317 [jetp lett. 19
(1974) 181]; scale invariance and bootstrap in the non-abelian gauge theo-
ries, landau institute preprint-74-0894, 1974 (unpublished).

[118] t. banks and a. zaks, nucl. phys. b196 (1982) 189.

[119] j. brodie, p. cho, and k. intriligator, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 319.

[120] c. csaki, m. schmaltz, and w. skiba, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 7840.

[121] y. shirman, phys. lett. b389 (1996) 287.

[122] z. chacko, m. luty and e. ponton, j. high energy phys. 9812 (1998) 016

[hep-th/9810253].

[123] j. kim, phys. rev. lett. 43 (1979) 103;

m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, nucl. phys. b166 (1980) 493.

[124] i. kogan, a. kovner, and m. shifman, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 5195.

[125] e. witten, nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 658.

recommended literature

books

d. bailin and a. love, supersymmetric gauge field theory and string theory (iop
publishing, bristol, 1994).

a brief introduction to supersymmetric instanton calculus is given in

instantons in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman, (world scientic, singapore, 1994),
chapter vii.

a brief survey of those aspects of supersymmetry which are most relevant to the
recent developments can be found in

j. lykken, introduction to supersymmetry, hep-th/9612114.

reviews on susy instantons and instanton-based mechanisms of super-
symmetrty breaking

d. amati, k. konishi, y. meurice, g. rossi and g. veneziano, phys. rep. 162
(1988) 557.

v.v. khoze, m.p. mattis and m.j. slater, nucl. phys. , b536 (1998) 69.

l. randall, in proc. int. workshop perspectives of strong coupling gauge theo-
ries, nagoya, japan, 1996, eds. j. nishimura and k. kamawaki (world scientic,
singapore, 1997), page 258 [hep-ph/9706474].

140

w. skiba, mod. phys. lett. a12 (1997) 737.

e. poppitz, int. j. mod. phys. a13 (1998) 3051.
s. thomas, in proc. int. workshop perspectives of strong coupling gauge theo-
ries, nagoya, japan, 1996, eds. j. nishimura and k. kamawaki (world scientic,
singapore, 1997), page 272 [hep-th/9801007].

e. poppitz and s. trivedi, dynamical supersymmetry breaking, hep-th/9803107
[ann. rev. nucl. part. sci., to be published].

141

