outp-99-09p, upr-831t, pupt-1837

hep-th/9902071

9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
0
1

 

 
 

2
v
1
7
0
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

boundary ination

andre lukas1, burt a. ovrut2 and daniel waldram3

1department of physics, theoretical physics, university of oxford

1 keble road, oxford ox1 3np, united kingdom

2department of physics, university of pennsylvania

philadelphia, pa 191046396, usa

3department of physics, joseph henry laboratories,

princeton university, princeton, nj 08544, usa

abstract

inationary solutions are constructed in a specic vedimensional model with boundaries mo-

tivated by heterotic mtheory. we concentrate on the case where the vacuum energy is provided

by potentials on those boundaries. it is pointed out that the presence of such potentials necessarily

excites bulk kaluzaklein modes. we distinguish a linear and a nonlinear regime for those modes.

in the linear regime, ination can be discussed in an eective fourdimensional theory in the con-

ventional way. we lift a fourdimensional inating solution up to ve dimensions where it represents

an inating domain wall pair. this shows explicitly the inhomogeneity in the fth dimension. we

also demonstrate the existence of inating solutions with unconventional properties in the nonlinear

regime. specically, we nd solutions with and without an horizon between the two boundaries.

these solutions have certain problems associated with the stability of the additional dimension and

the persistence of initial excitations of the kaluzaklein modes.

1

introduction

two important theoretical developments, the advent of mtheory and the discovery of branes have

recently stimulated new ideas in early universe cosmology. there has been considerable activity on

various cosmological aspects of mtheory over the past two years [1][24]. the cosmology of horava
witten theory [25, 26, 27, 28], which describes mtheory on the orbifold s1/z2, however, is much
less studied so far [29, 30, 31, 32, 33]. this theory describes the strong coupling dual of the e8  e8
heterotic string and is, therefore, of great importance for mtheory particle phenomenology. clearly,

this property makes it a very interesting starting point for cosmology as well.

various aspects of branes might be important in early universe cosmology, such as their ability to

smooth out singularities [5, 6, 11, 21, 22] and their thermodynamical properties [10, 12, 34, 35]. most

obviously, however, they play a role in the cosmology of particle physics models that have branes in their

vacuum structure and, more specically, that lead to lowenergy theories arising from the worldvolumes

of branes. such models appear in the context of brane boxes [36, 37], type i string theory [38, 39, 40, 41]
and mtheory on s1/z2 [42, 43, 44, 45]. a characteristic feature of many of those models is the
possibility of one or more compact dimensions being large compared to the fundamental length scale

of the theory. such a situation can be described by a kaluzaklein theory with gravity and possibly

other elds in the bulk coupled to a fourdimensional branelike object with the standard model

elds on its worldvolume. a wide spectrum of scales has been proposed for such models. these range

from fundamental scales around the gut scale with the energy scale associated with the additional

dimensions being an order of magnitude or so smaller, to models with a fundamental scale of order a

tev with macroscopic additional dimensions [46]. it is clearly interesting to explore the cosmology of

these models and, recently, some work in this direction [47, 21, 31, 33, 48] has been done.

in this paper, we would like to study the important issue of how ination relates to these new

theoretical ideas. for recent related work on ination see [20, 49, 50, 23, 24, 51]. rather than presenting

a general scenario, we will concentrate on a specic model which incorporates the mtheory as well as

the brane aspects. this model can be interpreted as a part of the vedimensional eective action of
mtheory on s1/z2 [42, 52, 43, 53] obtained by reducing the 11dimensional theory on a calabiyau
threefold. the vedimensional space of this theory has the structure m5 = s1/z2m4 and contains
two fourdimensional orbifold xed planes (or boundaries) m(1)
4 . it consists of gauged n = 1
supergravity plus vector and hypermultiplets in the bulk coupled to n = 1 theories with gauge and
chiral multiplets on the orbifold xed planes. the vacuum solution of this theory [42] is a bps double

4 and m(2)

threebrane (domain wall) with the threebrane worldvolumes identied with the orbifold planes. upon
reduction to four dimensions on this vacuum solution, one arrives at an n = 1 supergravity theory which
is a candidate for a realistic particle physics model from mtheory. the hidden and observable elds

in this model arise from the threebrane orbifold planes. the theory, therefore, allows us to study

cosmology in a potentially realistic particle physics environment and provides a concrete realization of

1

the general idea of getting the standard model from a brane. simple cosmological solutions of this

theory have been found in ref. [31, 33]. in ref. [44, 45] nonperturbative vacua of heterotic mtheory

containing vebranes have been constructed. in the vedimensional eective theory, these vebranes

appear as threebranes which, in addition to the two orbifold planes, are coupled to the bulk. it would

clearly be interesting to study cosmological solutions of these more general theories with additional

threebranes. in this paper, however, we restrict ourselves to the simple setting of two orbifold planes.

for the application to cosmology, we have (consistently) truncated this theory to a minimal eld

content suitable for inationary models. specically, in the bulk we have kept gravity and a scalar eld

 (the volume modulus of the internal calabiyau space) with a potential v of nonperturbative origin.

in addition, on each orbifold plane we have also kept a scalar eld i with a potential v4i. the theory
is characterized by three scales, namely the fundamental scale m5 of the vedimensional theory, the
separation r of the orbifold planes and a scale v that sets the height of certain explicit potentials for

the bulk eld . these potentials are responsible for the existence of the domain wall solution.

hence, we have a very simple setting with one additional dimension and one candidate inaton

with potential in each part of the space. in addition to the mtheory relation, we, clearly, also have a

simple starting point to study ination in the general context of models with large additional dimensions.

the goal of this paper is not to construct explicit inationary models by choosing specic potentials

for the scalar elds in the theory. rather, we are interested in how the specic structure of the theory,

that is, the coupling of the vedimensional bulk to fourdimensional boundary theories, eects ination.

we distinguish two dierent types of ination, which we call bulk (or moduli) and boundary (or matter

eld) ination. for bulk ination the vacuum energy is predominantly provided by the bulk potential

v , whereas for boundary ination the boundary potentials v4i dominate. in this paper, we concentrate
on the second case of boundary ination. this option is particularly interesting in that it directly relates

to the presence of the characteristic boundary theories. moreover, ination from matter elds seems

to be in better accord with current directions in fourdimensional inationary model building [61] than

modular ination.

let us summarize our main results. one of the main themes of this paper is that energy density

on the orbifold planes provides source terms localized on the xed points in the additional dimension

and, hence, excites bulk elds. in particular, this applies to vacuum energy on these planes as needed

for boundary ination. our rst conclusion is that boundary ination is necessarily inhomogeneous

in the additional dimension, or, in other words, excites kaluzaklein modes. the magnitude of those
excitations is controlled by the dimensionless parameter i = v4ir/m 3
5 . for |i|  1 the excitations
can be described by linearized gravity. this approximation breaks down if |i|  1. one then has to
use the full nonlinear theory. using the cobe normalization and the typical magnitude of heterotic

mtheory scales, we argue that ination in this theory may take place in both regimes. interestingly, if

the orbifold and calabiyau scales during ination are at their physical values [28], the theory becomes

2

linear for v 1/4

4i  6  1016 gev, right below the cobe scale.

the proportionality of i to the size r of the additional dimension can be understood from the
linear behaviour of the onedimensional greens function. for more than one additional dimension,

the greens function is logarithmic or follows an inverse power law. as a consequence, in those cases,

the theory is always in the linear regime. the case of heterotic mtheory with one large dimension is,

therefore, the only one where ination may take place in the nonlinear regime.

in the linear regime, we can compute a sensible fourdimensional eective theory by integrating

out the kaluzaklein modes induced by the boundary sources. we show explicitly how this leads to

corrections in the fourdimensional theory. our basic statement is that, in the linear regime, ination
can essentially be treated in the eective fourdimensional n = 1 supergravity theory. nevertheless,
to get a physical picture, we nd it useful to lift a generic fourdimensional inating solution up to a

vedimensional one. this vedimensional solution represents a pair of inating domain wall three

branes and it has inhomogeneities in the additional dimension caused by the boundary potentials. on

the other hand, initial inhomogeneities not induced by boundary sources are damped away in the linear

regime due to the inationary expansion and should not play any role.

the situation is quite dierent in the nonlinear regime, i  1, where one has to solve the full
vedimensional theory. to do so, we assume that the bulk scalar eld  has been stabilized by its

potential and the boundary potentials allow for slow roll behaviour of the boundary scalars. under

these assumptions we nd, in a rst attempt, a simple solution by separation of variables that exhibits

ination. this solution represents the heterotic mtheory version of an old fourdimensional domain

wall solution [62, 63], recently advocated [50] in a somewhat dierent approach to brane ination. both

boundaries expand in a de sitterlike manner with the hubble parameters hi related to the potentials
in an unconventional way, hi  |v4i|m 3
5 . the physical size rphys of the additional dimension is
constant in time and xed in terms of the boundary potentials. for h1 and h2 of the same order,
h1  h2  h, one has rphys  1/h. the hubble parameter, therefore, equals the orbifold energy
scale during ination. we nd solutions with and without an horizon at some point on the orbifold.

the solutions without horizon require potentials with opposite sign satisfying v41 + v42 < 0. signals
travel from one boundary to the other in a nite time and every signal emitted somewhere in the bulk

will eventually reach one of the boundaries. for the solutions with horizon one needs both potentials

to be positive, v4i > 0. in this case, the two boundaries are causally decoupled. a signal emitted on
one boundary will never reach the other one.

in a second approach, we then nd the general solution of the model without assuming separation

of variables. this is done exploiting the similarity of our equations to those of twodimensional dilaton

gravity [70]. we recover the previous inating solution as a special case if a certain continuous parame-

ter in the general solution is set to zero. for all other values of this parameter, however, the solution is

noninating and has a collapsing orbifold. this indicates an instability of the solution which might be

3

cured by stabilizing the modulus of the additional dimension. the construction of a viable inationary

background in the nonlinear regime is, therefore, tied to the question on how precisely such a stabi-

lization is realized. we discuss various options and their consequences in our context. another problem

with the inating solution which is made visible by its generalization is the appearance of an arbitrary

periodic function in the solution. this function encodes the initial inhomogeneities in the additional

dimension. unlike in the linear case, here these inhomogeneities are not damped away. this seems to

be in contradiction with the inationary paradigm that all initial information should be wiped out. on

the other hand, if suciently small, these inhomogeneities may lead to interesting predictions. given

those problems, we point out that conventional ination in the linear regime remains a perfectly viable

option for heterotic mtheory. for models with more than one large dimension it is the only possibility.

based on the results of this paper, we would like to propose three scenarios for ination in heterotic

mtheory.

 the orbifold and the calabiyau scales during ination are at the specic values that at low-
energy lead to coupling unication. in this case, the theory becomes linear for boundary potentials
satisfying v 1/4
lin  6  1016 gev. at the unication point the calabiyau scale and the
fundamental 11dimensional planck scale are also of the order 1016 gev. this theory undergoes
a transition from a pure mtheory regime at energies above 1016 gev (where no description in

4i  v 1/4

terms of 11dimensional supergravity applies) directly to the linear regime. ination can then

take place in the conventional way, presented in this paper. in this scenario, the energy density

at the beginning of ination is directly linked to the fundamental scales of the theory and is, in
this sense, explained. it ts the cobe normalization v 1/4
4  1/4 6.7  1016 gev if the slowroll
parameter  is not too small, or, in other words, if the inaton potential is not too at.

an alternative possibility is that the orbifold and calabiyau scales are not be at the coupling unication
values during ination. rather, they are such that the linear regime starts signicantly below 1016 gev,
v 1/4
lin  1016 gev. in this case, there are two options.
 ination takes place in the nonlinear regime and is based on the corresponding solutions given in
this paper. this option is somewhat speculative as it depends on the successful stabilization of the

orbifold modulus. it would have very unconventional properties. these include a linear relation

between the hubble parameter and the potential and inhomogeneities in the orbifold direction.

since spacetime in this context is genuinely vedimensional, analyzing density uctuations

requires some care and the standard equations may not apply.

 nonlinear ination does not take place. this might happen for a number of reasons. for example,
the potentials might not have the required properties, the initial conditions may not be appropriate

or, simply, nonlinear ination might not work at all. ination could then start when the energy

4

density drops below vlin and the linear regime is reached. this could be consistent with the cobe
normalization for a very small slowroll parameter , that is, a very at inaton potential.

2 the action

in this section, we would like to present the vedimensional action that we are going to use in this paper

along with its most important properties. this includes a discussion of its origin and interpretation,

its vacuum solution and the related fourdimensional eective lowenergy theory that is obtained as

a reduction on this vacuum solution. making contact with the fourdimensional theory is particularly

useful, in our context, whenever the relation to conventional fourdimensional ination is analyzed.

our starting point is the vedimensional action 1

s5 = 

1
22

5 (cid:26)zm5

g(cid:20)r +
xi=1zm

(i)
4

2

1
2

 + u ()(cid:21)

g(cid:20) 1

2

ii + ui(i, )(cid:21))

where the potentials are given by

+

1
3

u () =

v2e2 + v ()

ui(i, ) = 22ve + vi(i, ) .

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

here 5 is the vedimensional newton constant. coordinates x with indices , , , = 0, . . . , 3, 5
are used for the vedimensional space m5. we consider a spacetime with structure m5 = s1/z2m4
where s1/z2 is an orbifold and m4 a smooth fourmanifold. the coordinates x on m4 are labelled
by indices , , , = 0, . . . , 3 while the remaining coordinate y  x5 parameterizes the orbifold. it is
chosen in the range y  [r, r] with the endpoints identied, where r =  and  is the radius of the
orbicircle. the z2 symmetry acts as y  y and leaves two fourdimensional planes, characterized by
y1 = 0 and y2 = r, xed. these planes, separated by a distance r, are denoted by m(i)
4 , where i = 1, 2.
the action (2.1) describes vedimensional gravity plus a scalar eld  with potential u in the bulk

coupled to fourdimensional theories on the orbifold xed planes each carrying a scalar eld i with
potential ui. the bulk elds have to be truncated in accordance with the z2 symmetry. specically,
one should require

(y) = (y)
g (y) = g (y)
g5(y) = g5(y)
g55(y) = g55(y) .

(2.4)

1we have changed somewhat the notation with respect to ref. [42] to be in better accord with conventions in cosmology.

the scalar eld  is related to the eld v of ref. [42] by v = e. the constant v was called 0 there.

5

hence, , g , g55 are even under the z2 symmetry while g5 is odd. also note that the yderivative
of an even eld is odd and vice versa. whereas even elds are continuous across the orbifold planes,

odd eld jump from a certain value on one side to its negative on the other side. an alternative and

equivalent way to think about the vedimensional space, in contrast to the orbifold picture which we

have used so far, is the boundary picture. in this picture, the coordinate y is restricted to one half of
the circle, y  i = [0, r] and vedimensional spacetime is written as m5 = i  m4. the orbifold
xed planes then turn into the boundaries of this vedimensional space. we will sometimes nd it

more convenient to work in this boundary picture.

the potentials (2.2) and (2.3) have been split into explicit, exponential potentials for  with a height
set by the constant v and potentials v and vi which, at this point, are arbitrary. the  sign in (2.3)
refers to the plane i = 1, the + sign to the plane i = 2. the reason for writing the potentials in this

form will be explained shortly. it is useful to collect the mass dimensions of the various objects that we
have introduced. in ve dimensions, the newton constant 2

5 has dimension three and we write

2
5 = m 3
5 .

(2.5)

here m5 is the fundamental scale of the vedimensional theory.
equations simpler, we have pulled the newton constant in front of the complete action. hence, the bulk

in order to make subsequent

potentials u , v have dimension two whereas the boundary potentials ui, vi and the constant v have
dimension one.

let us now discuss the interpretation of the action (2.1)(2.3) in terms of mtheory. more specically,
we will consider horavawitten theory; that is, 11dimensional supergravity on the space s1/z2 m10
where m10 is a smooth tendimensional manifold. the two 10dimensional orbifold xed planes of this
theory carry additional degrees of freedom that couple to the bulk supergravity, namely two e8 gauge
multiplets, one on each plane. now consider reducing this theory on a calabiyau threefold assuming

that the radius of the calabiyau space is smaller than the orbifold radius. for the present values

of these radii, such a relation is suggested by coupling constant unication [28]. we then arrive at a
sensible vedimensional theory on the spacetime m5 = s1/z2m4, where the two fourdimensional
xed planes of the orbifold result from the original 10dimensional planes. for the standard embedding

of the spin connection into one of the e8 gauge groups, this eective action has been computed in
ref. [42, 52, 43]. the generalization to nonstandard embedding has been described in ref. [54].
it
turns out that the bulk theory is a vedimensional n = 1 gauged supergravity coupled to vector
and hypermultiplets. this bulk theory is coupled to two fourdimensional n = 1 theories that reside
on the now fourdimensional orbifold planes. more specically, these boundary theories contain gauge

multiplets as well as chiral (gauge matter) multiplets. upon appropriate reduction on the orbifold to
four dimensions (in a way to be specied below), one obtains a candidate for a realistic n = 1
supergravity theory with the observable sector coming from one plane and the hidden sector from the

6

other.

the action (2.1) is a universal version of this vedimensional eective theory truncated to the

eld content that seems essential to discuss cosmology. let us try to make this statement more precise

by explaining the meaning of the various objects in (2.1)(2.3) in terms of the underlying 11dimensional

theory. in terms of the 11dimensional newton constant  and the calabiyau volume vcy the ve
dimensional newton constant is given by

2
5 =

2
vcy

.

(2.6)

the bulk eld  is simply the modulus associated with the calabiyau volume such that the physical
volume is given by evcy. clearly, the calabiyau space has, in general, many more moduli associated
with its shape and complex structure. for simplicity, we have kept the volume modulus only, since it

is the geometrical modulus common to all calabiyau spaces. it is in this sense that we are referring

to the action as universal. also, for simplicity, we have dropped a number of other bulk elds such

as the axions associated with  and the vector elds in the vector multiplets. all these elds can be

consistently set to zero in the full equations of motion. therefore, our solutions will be solutions of the

complete action of heterotic mtheory as well. we have, however, kept a feature of the action that arises

from the gauging of the bulk supergravity and is essential to discuss cosmology; namely, the explicit

bulk potential for  in eq. (2.2). the constant v in this potential is given by



v = 

2(cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3 n

v2/3
cy

(2.7)

where n is an instanton number related to the tangent space and gauge instantons in the internal

calabiyau space. we have added another potential v () in the bulk which one expects to arise from

nonperturbative eects like internally wrapped membranes. the explicit computation of this potential

for mtheory is not very well understood at present (see however [55, 56]). it is, however, clear that

such a potential is eventually needed to stabilize the moduli. given the lack of theoretical knowledge,

we will not assume any specic origin for v but, rather, try to specify what properties it should be

required to have from a cosmological viewpoint.

let us now move on to the fourdimensional theories on the orbifold planes and their mtheory

origin. as already mentioned, these planes arise directly from the 10dimensional planes of horava

witten theory upon reduction on the calabiyau space. on each of these planes, we have introduced

a scalar eld i with potential ui that represents the scalar partners of the matter elds. in fact, for
nonstandard embedding such matter elds generally arise on both planes. of course, restricting to

one scalar eld on each plane is a tremendous simplication from the particle physics point of view.

cosmologically, however, it seems reasonable to choose such a model with one candidate inaton on

each orbifold plane, especially in a rst study of ination in such models. although the potentials vi
in eq. (2.3) are known in principle for a given calabiyau compactication, here we will not attempt

7

to be more specic about their form. instead of going into such detailed questions of model building,

we will assume that they have the cosmologically desired properties. there is another, explicit part

of the boundary potential in eq. (2.3) which depends on the projection of the bulk eld  onto the

orbifold planes. these potentials originate directly from horavawitten theory and are related to the

explicit bulk potential for . note that, in particular, the height is set by the same constant v, dened

in eq. (2.7). as we will see, they support a threebrane domain wall solution of the vedimensional

theory. in the following, we, therefore, refer to them as domain wall potentials. of course, there will be

gauge multiplets on the orbifold planes as well which we have not written in (2.1). they could play a

role in cosmology via gaugino condensation. however, we will not consider this explicitly in the present

paper. to summarize, the action (2.1)(2.3) can be viewed as part of the vedimensional eective

theory of heterotic mtheory and it contains the basic cosmologically relevant ingredients of this theory.

the mtheory context is not obligatory here.

instead, the action (2.1) could be viewed in the

general context of theories with large additional dimensions where the standard model arises from a

brane worldvolume.

in fact, in this context, our action is about the simplest appropriate to study

inationary cosmology. we have one large dimension (the orbifold) and two fourdimensional brane

like theories corresponding to an observable and a hidden sector. in addition to bulk gravity, we have a

bulk scalar eld with potential and a scalar eld with potential on each plane; in other words, a minimal

setting for ination. the explicit potentials in (2.2), (2.3) that originate from mtheory can always be

switched o by setting v = 0, if desired. our results are, therefore, not limited by their presence. what

does limit our results is the presence of only one additional dimension, something that is appropriate for

heterotic mtheory but not necessarily otherwise. we will comment on the modication of our results

in the case of two or more large dimensions as we proceed.

for later reference, let us collect the equations of motion derived from the action (2.1). we have the

einstein equation

r 

1
2

gr = t +

2

xi=1

t (i)
 (y  yi)

with the bulk and boundary energy momentum tensors

t = 
t (i)
 = 
t (i)
5 = 0 ,

1

2(cid:18) 
55 (cid:18)i i 

g1/2

1
2

t (i)
55 = 0 .

1
2

g()2(cid:19) +

1
2

gu

1
2

g (i)2  g ui(cid:19)

8

(2.8)

(2.9)

(2.10)

(2.11)

for the scalar elds we nd

5  u  g1/2

55

2

xi=1

ui(y  yi) = 0
4i  ivi = 0

(2.12)

(2.13)

where 5 and 4 are the laplacians associated with the vedimensional metric g and its four
dimensional part g projected onto one of the orbifold planes.

which types of solutions to these equations are we interested in? for a cosmological solution,

one would like to have a threedimensional maximally symmetric subspace which, for simplicity, we

take to be at. studying open and closed universes would be clearly interesting as well. later, we

will distinguish between a linear and a nonlinear case. while the generalization to include spatial

curvature is straightforward in the linear case, the nonlinear case is signicantly more complicated.

still, we do not expect our main conclusions to depend on the choice of spatial curvature. clearly, the

maximally symmetric subspace cannot contain the orbifold. hence, the solutions are independent of
x = (x1, x2, x3). they can, however, depend on the time  = x0 as well as on the orbifold coordinate y.

as we will see in a moment, the presence of elds and potentials on the boundaries in fact forces us to

consider orbifold dependence. therefore, we start with the ansatz

ds2

5 = e2d 2 + e2dx2 + e2dy2
 = (, y)

 = (, y)

 = (, y)

 = (, y)

i = i( ) .

(2.14)

(2.15)

(2.16)

(2.17)

(2.18)

(2.19)

here  is the scale factor of the threedimensional universe and  is an additional scale factor that

measures the orbifold size.

in some cases, we will choose the conformal gauge  =  in the above

metric. note that we can choose this gauge in the (, y) subspace in such a way that the boundaries

are mapped to hypersurfaces y = const. usually, then, we can shift the boundaries back to y = 0, r so

that our conventions for the coordinate system remain intact. a special case occurs if a boundary has

been mapped to innity due to a singularity in the reparameterization. to be able to deal with this

case, we keep  arbitrary in the subsequent formulae.

the equations of motion for the above ansatz are given by

3e2 ( 2 +  )  3e2(   + 22) =

e2 2 +

1
4

1
4

e22 +

1
2

u +

e

1
2

9

2

xi=1(cid:20) 1

2

e2 2

i + ui(cid:21) (y  yi)

(2.20)

e2 (2 +  + (3  + 2   2 )  + (   ) ) 

e2(2 +   + (3  2 + 2 ) + (   ) )
xi=1(cid:20) 1
= 

e22 +

e2 2 +

u 

e

1
2

1
4

1
2

1
4

2

e2 2

2

i  ui(cid:21) (y  yi)

(2.21)

3e2 (    + 2 2)  3e2(2 +  ) = 
3(  +      ) = 

1
4

e2 2 


1
4
1
2

e22 +

1
2

u (2.22)

(2.23)

e2 (  + (3  +   ) )  e2( + (3   +  )) = u  e

i + (3   ) i + e2 ivi = 0

2

xi=1

ui(y  yi)(2.24)

(2.25)

where the dot and the prime denote the derivatives with respect to  and y. alternatively, one can

formulate these equations in the boundary picture. then all  function terms in the above equations

have to be dropped and are replaced by the following boundary conditions

e |y=yi

= 

e  |y=yi
e |y=yi

= 

= 

1
2

e2 2

1

2

12(cid:20) 1
12(cid:20)

1

5
2

i + ui(cid:21)y=yi
i + ui(cid:21)y=yi

e2 2

[ui]y=yi

.

(2.26)

(2.27)

(2.28)

here the upper (lower) sign applies to the rst boundary at y = y1 (the second boundary at y = y2). the
function terms, or equivalently the right hand sides of the boundary conditions, are nonvanishing

if there is any kinetic or potential energy on the boundaries. hence, in this most interesting case, the

solution is necessarily inhomogeneous in the orbifold coordinate y.

for the application to cosmology, one is also interested in the fourdimensional eective action

of (2.1) that is, roughly speaking, valid when all energy scales are smaller than the orbifold scale 1/r.

normally, this action could be derived by a simple truncation where all the bulk elds are taken to be

independent of the orbifold coordinate. while, in our case, this gives the correct answer to lowest order,

it neglects higher order corrections that can be relevant. these corrections appear because, strictly, we

are not allowed to take the bulk elds independent of the orbifold coordinate, thereby neglecting all

contributions from kaluzaklein modes. instead, as we have just seen, every nonvanishing term in the

boundary actions produces an orbifold dependence that needs to be integrated out and, typically, leads

to corrections to the eective action. let us explain how this works in our case, taking into account

corrections up to the rst nontrivial (linear) order. for a more detailed account see [57]. first, we

10

split the bulk elds as

g = g + g

 =  + 

into their orbifold average plus an orbifolddependent variation. specically, we have dened

g =< g >5 ,

 =<  >5

(2.29)

(2.30)

(2.31)

where < . >5 denotes the average in the orbifold direction. hence, the average of the variations vanishes;
that is,

< g >5= 0 ,

<  >5= 0 .

(2.32)

the averaged elds are in one to one correspondence with the low energy moduli elds. aside from the
modulus , we have the orbifold modulus  and the fourdimensional einsteinframe metric g4 . the
latter two quantities are related to the averaged metric by

e2  = g55

g4 = e

 g .

(2.33)

(2.34)

note that we have no graviphoton zero mode since g5 is odd under z2 and, hence, g5 = 0. after
expanding to linear order in the variations, the equations of motion can be decomposed into an averaged

part and a part for the variations. the latter equations have the following solutions in the boundary
picture 2

where

g = e2 rhp1(z) s(1)

i
 + p2(z) s(2)
r(cid:2)p1(z)u1 + p2(z)u2(cid:3)

 =

1
2

e

 = t (i)
s(i)

 

1
3

ggt (i)


(2.35)

(2.36)

(2.37)

is the modied boundary stress energy. the bar indicates that the corresponding expressions are under-
stood with the bulk elds replaced by their zero modes. furthermore, we have dened the polynomials 3

p1(z) = 

1
2

z2 + z 

1
3

,

p2(z) = 

z2 +

1
2

1
6

(2.38)

2this solution applies to the part of the boundary stress energy which is homogeneous and constant in time on scales of
the order r. slowly varying potential energy, the most important case for this paper, typically satises this requirement.

for boundary processes on scales smaller than r the associated bulk elds are suppressed and decay exponentially away

from the boundary [58].

3these polynomials are characterized by the properties < p1(z) >5=< p2(z) >5= 0, p 

1(0) = 1, p 

1(1) = 0, p 

2(0) = 0

and p 

2(1) = 1.

11

which depend on the normalized orbifold coordinate

z =

y
r  [0, 1] .

(2.39)

this solution shows that each energy source on the boundary leads to a certain, generally quadratic,

zdependent variation of the bulk elds across the orbifold. this corresponds to coherent excitations

of the kaluzuklein modes in the orbifold direction. let us consider an explicit example. we would

like to determine the zdependence of the bulk elds that arises from the explicit boundary potentials

in (2.3) proportional to v. inserting the corresponding part of the boundary stress energy into eq. (2.35)

and (2.36) we nd

ds2

5 = (g + g)dxdx =(cid:18)1 +

1
3

(cid:19) e g4 dxdx +(cid:18)1 +

4
3

(cid:19) e2 dy2

 =  + 
 = 2e

 dw(cid:18)z 

where

1

2(cid:19)

dw = 

vr
2

.

(2.40)

(2.41)

(2.42)

(2.43)

note that the explicit potentials have the same height but opposite sign on the two boundaries. there-
fore, the zdependent part of the solution is proportional to the dierence (p1  p2)(z) of the polynomi-
als (2.38) and, hence, is linear in z. this is to be contrasted to the general case of unrelated boundary
potentials which leads to a quadratic variation. for constant moduli g4 ,  and , eq. (2.40)(2.43)
represent the linearized version of an exact bps domain wall (threebrane) solution of heterotic m
theory 4 in ve dimensions that was found in ref. [42]. more precisely, the solution represents a pair

of domain walls stretched across the orbifold planes and it can be viewed as the vacuum solution of

the theory. at the same time, it is the vedimensional version of wittens 11dimensional linearized

background [28]. in this way, the fourdimensional orbifold planes are identied with threebrane world-

volumes which carry the observable (and hidden) low energy elds as their zero modes. in this sense,

our picture oers a concrete realization of the general idea that the world arises from the worldvolume

of a brane. observe that the size of the correction (2.40) is set by the dimensionless quantity dw
in eq. (2.43), which is just the product of the boundary potential (measured in units of 2
5 = m 3
5 )
times the size of the orbifold dimension. therefore, the linearized approximation that led us to the
solution (2.35), (2.36) is only sensible as long as |dw|  1. we will discuss this in more detail in the
next section.

4the exact solution of ref. [42] has the form ds2

1
2 )
and a0, b0 and c0 are constants. in fact, it also constitutes an exact solution of the action (2.1). upon linearizing in dw,

0h 4dy2, e = b0h 3 where h = c0 

5 = a2

0h dxdx + b2

2
3 dw(z 

setting g4   in (2.40) and appropriately matching the moduli this coincides with (2.40)(2.42).

12

by inserting the solution (2.29)(2.36) into the action (2.1) and promoting the moduli g4 ,  and
 to fourdimensional elds, we can now compute the rst order corrected action of the zero modes.
we introduce the elds

s = e

 ,


t = e

(2.44)

which are just the real parts of the ordinary s and t moduli 5. note that s measures the volume of

the internal calabiyau space in units of vcy whereas t measures the size of the orbifold in units of r.
we also introduce the fourdimensional newton constant

and the rescaled boundary elds

gn =

2
5

16r

=

1

16rm 3
5

ci =rm 3

5
3

i .

then the fourdimensional eective action is given by

s4 = 

1

16gn zm4
g4" 1
zm4

g4(cid:20)r4 +
xi=1

2

2

3
2

t 2t t +

1
2

s2ss(cid:21)

kicici + v4#

with the kahler metrics

ki =

3
2t 

dw
2s

and the fourdimensional potential

v4 =

1
2t 2

v4i +

dw
2st

2

xi=1

2

xi=1(cid:18)

2
3

v4i   v4i(cid:19) +

1
t

rm 3

5 v

where the boundary potentials v4i normalized to four mass dimensions are dened by

v4i = m 3

5 vi .

(2.45)

(2.46)

(2.47)

(2.48)

(2.49)

(2.50)

note that the kahler metrics and the potential have corrections linear in dw that originate from
the domain wall. had we performed a simple truncation of the vedimensional theory by taking the

bulk elds independent of the orbifold we would have missed these corrections. what happened to the

explicit potentials proportional to v in the vedimensional action, eq. (2.2) and (2.3)? these potentials

were actually responsible for the existence of the domain wall solution in the rst place. performing

5the imaginary parts are absent because we have omitted the corresponding elds in the vedimensional action (2.1)

for simplicity. the complete reduction can be found in ref. [43].

13

a reduction on this solution, they are canceled so that there is no remnant potential for the s and t

moduli in four dimensions. given the form of our vedimensional action (2.1)(2.3), the bulk potential

v only depends on s but not on t . the fourdimensional eective potential (2.49) shows that, in this

case, the modulus t cannot be stabilized. for the solutions based on the fourdimensional eective

action we, therefore, have to slightly generalize our setup and assume that v is a function of the orbifold

modulus t as well.

an alternative way to deal with the orbifold dependence of bulk elds in a reduction to four di-

mensions is to keep all the kaluzaklein modes instead of integrating them out. recently, this has

systematically been carried out in ref. [59]. in such a fourdimensional action, the zero mode part does

not have the above corrections.

instead, there exist terms in the action which couple kaluzaklein

modes linearly to zero mode elds. hence the kaluzaklein modes cannot be set to zero consistently.

in fact, solving for these kaluzaklein modes would lead to the fourier decomposition of our orbifold

dependent corrections (2.35), (2.36).

besides being useful to calculate the fourdimensional action, the method described above can also

be used to nd approximate solutions of the vedimensional theory. this is actually the main reason

why we have presented it here in some detail. concretely, suppose one has found a solution of the

fourdimensional theory with action (2.47). then, by inserting this solution into eq. (2.29)(2.36), we

can simply lift it up to obtain a solution of the vedimensional theory. of course, for this solution to

be sensible, the linearized approximation that led us to eq. (2.35), (2.36) should be valid. the condition

for that to be true will be discussed in the next section in some detail.

3 types of ination and scales

which type of ination for the action (2.1) do we want to consider? first of all, in this paper we are

interested in conventional potentialdriven ination rather than in a prebigbangtype scenario [60].

some solutions of vedimensional heterotic mtheory that might provide a basis for a prebigbang

scenario have been found in ref. [31, 32, 33]. given that we want to focus on potential energy, there are

two obvious options.

 bulk potential energy: the potential energy is provided by the bulk potential v and the eld  is

the inaton. this can also be called modular ination.

 boundary potential energy: the potential energy is due to the boundary potentials vi (one of

them or both) and the elds i are the inatons. this can be called matter eld ination.

clearly, in general, one could also have a mixture of both types. in this paper, we concentrate on

the second option of boundary potential energy, which appears to be more interesting for a number of

reasons. most importantly, the presence of the boundaries is the truely new ingredient in the action (2.1).

14

ination from the boundary also seems to be in accord with the current mainstream in fourdimensional

inationary modelbuilding [61]. on the other hand, modular ination faces a number of problems

associated with the steepness of typical nonperturbative moduli potentials [64, 65]. from the viewpoint
of the recently proposed models [46] with a very low fundamental scale m5  tev, bulk ination
might not be desirable because reheating from a bulk eld might leave the additional dimension too

inhomogeneous to be consistent with standard cosmology [47]. none of these arguments, of course,

disproves bulk ination and it might still be an interesting option. this will be discussed elsewhere.

let us, from now on, concentrate on the case of potential energy on the boundary. our assumption

is, hence, that the bulk potential v () is zero or negligible for all eld values  relevant during ination

(which does not mean, however, that v is identical to zero). the potential energy is then dominated

by the boundary potentials vi and the fourdimensional eective potential is given by

v4 

1
2t 2

2

xi=1

v4i + o(dw) ,

v4i = m 3

5 vi .

(3.1)

in the previous section, we have given a method to obtain approximate vedimensional solutions

from solutions of the fourdimensional eective action. therefore, if we can nd a fourdimensional

inationary solution (which we can if v4 satises the usual slow roll conditions), we can lift it up to a
solution of the d = 5 action. when is this eective fourdimensional approach sensible? in the domain

wall example of the previous section we have seen that the condition

|dw| = |v|r

2  1

(3.2)

which involves the height v of the domain wall potentials should be satised in order for the linearized

solution to be valid. in the context of heterotic mtheory, the relation (3.2) is required anyway since

the formulation of the theory is not well known beyond the linear level in dw. in any case, (3.2) should
be satised for the eective fourdimensional action (2.47) to be sensible.

inspection of the general linearized solution (2.35), (2.36) shows that we should have a similar

condition for the boundary potentials vi; namely, for

we should have

i  vir =

v4ir
m 3
5

|i|  1.

(3.3)

(3.4)

what is the interpretation of these conditions? we have generally seen that boundary potentials (and

any other form of boundary energy) lead to inhomogeneities in the additional dimension or, in other
words, excite kaluzaklein modes associated with this dimension. if |i|  1 this can be described

15

in a linearized approximation, either by integrating out the kaluzaklein modes at the linear level as

we have done to arrive at our fourdimensional action for the zero modes, or by keeping the linearized
kaluzaklein modes in the fourdimensional action as in ref. [59]. if, on the other hand, |i|  1 this
linearized approximation breaks down. then the simplest possibility is probably to work with the full

vedimensional action. hence, we distinguish two cases.

 |i|  1, the linear regime: we can solve the fourdimensional eective action (2.47) for the zero
modes and lift up the solutions to ve dimensions using the results of the previous section. we

will discuss this case in the following section.

 |i|  1, the nonlinear regime: we should solve the full vedimensional theory (2.1). this case

will be considered in section 5 and 6.

what seems surprising about this criterion, at rst, is that the quantities i are linear in the size
r of the additional dimension. the larger the additional dimension, the earlier the system enters the

nonlinear regime. this can be understood as follows. consider the onedimensional space associated

with the additional dimension. the orbifold planes appear as points sources in this space. on the linear

level, the elds generated by these point sources are roughly described by the onedimensional greens
function which is simply the linear function |y|. the proportionality of i to the orbifold size r simply
reects this linear increase in y of the onedimensional greens function. this picture also suggests how

the above criterion should be modied for more than one additional dimension. for example, for two

additional dimensions the greens function is a logarithm and, hence, roughly a constant. therefore, i
should be independent of the size of the additional dimensions. generally, for d additional dimensions,

one expects the corresponding parameter d (suppressing the index i) to be given by

d =

v4
m 2+d

4+d rd2

(3.5)

where m4+d is the fundamental scale of the 4 + ddimensional theory. since one would generally require
4+d and r1  m4+d to have a eldtheoretical description, it follows that |d|  1 as
that v4  m 4
long as d > 1. we see, therefore, that the case of one additional dimension, which is the relevant one

for heterotic mtheory, is special in that it is the only case where ination might take place in the

nonlinear regime.

we would like to be somewhat more explicit about scales in order to get a feeling for when the

above linearity criterion might be satised. in the horavawitten context, one reference point is the

physical point at which the gauge and gravitational couplings are matched [28]. at this point, one

16

nds to lowest order

2/9  x 4  1016 gev
v1/6
 x 2  1016 gev
cy
r1  x3 2  1015 gev

(3.6)

for the energy scales associated with the 11dimensional theory, the calabiyau space and the orbifold.

here x is a quantity of order one which depends on the shape of the calabiyau space and parameterizes

our ignorance of the precise relation between the calabiyau volume and the unication scale. using

eqs. (2.5) and (2.6), we nd for the mass scale of the vedimensional theory

the linearity criterion (3.4) then translates into

m5  x 2  1017 gev .

v 1/4
4i  x3/2 6  1016 gev .

(3.7)

(3.8)

hence, if during ination the calabiyau volume and the orbifold radius are at the values that lead

to coupling constant unication, the kaluzaklein modes behave linearly as long as the boundary

potentials satisfy the bound (3.8). this has to be compared with the cobe normalization which

implies for the (fourdimensional) inationary potential that

where

v 1/4
4  1/4 6.7  1016 gev

 =

4)2
(v 
2gn v 2
4

(3.9)

(3.10)

is the usual slow roll parameter. the prime denotes the derivative with respect to the inaton. compar-

ison of eq. (3.9) and eq. (3.8) shows an interesting coincidence of scales suggesting that ination might

start just when the theory leaves the nonlinear regime. the bound (3.8) is, however, very close to the
physical orbifold and calabiyau scales in (3.6). beyond energies of v1/6
cy the eective vedimensional
theory breaks down. also, beyond energies of 2/9 the description via 11dimensional supergravity

is no longer viable. clearly, beyond those scales our analysis does not apply and there is no sense to

talk about a nonlinear regime as dened above. most likely, therefore, the theory undergoes a tran-

sition from an mtheory regime directly into the linear regime. of course, the coincidence of scales

is due to the fact that the fundamental scales of our theory are much closer to the scale suggested by

cobe than, for example, the planck scale. to make this observation really meaningful one has to more

closely analyze the transition to the linear regime, something that is beyond the scope of this paper.

in any case, all these statements relate to the physical point associated with the present values of

17

the calabiyau volume and the orbifold radius. clearly, those values could have been dierent in the

early universe, so that we really do not know in which regime ination took place. consequently, in the

context of horavawitten theory, as well as in a wider context, we should investigate both the linear

and the nonlinear possibility.

finally, we would like to discuss which part of the space should be allowed to inate from a phe-

nomenological point of view. there are two options. first, while the usual threedimensional space

inates the additional dimension is basically xed. secondly, both the threedimensional space and the

additional dimension inate. while there is obviously no problem with the rst option, inating the full

space might lead to an additional dimension that is too large. in particular, inating it for the full 55 or

so e-folds leaves one with a radius r that would typically be some 24 orders of magnitude larger than
the fundamental length scale m 1

of the theory. this is clearly unacceptable. it might be acceptable

5

to inate the additional dimension for a short period (depending on the precise value of the scales)

and then stabilize it to its low energy value. this stabilization of an inating modulus might, however,

be hard to achieve theoretically. in this paper, we therefore favor the rst option of a noninating

additional dimension.

4 linear case: the inating domain wall

in this section, we would like to construct inationary solutions in the linear case

|i|  1 .

(4.1)

following the general method presented in section 2, we should rst nd an inating solution of the

fourdimensional eective theory (2.47). the existence of such a solution depends, of course, crucially

on the properties of this theory and its potential in particular. rather than going into model building,

we will simply assume suitable properties. since we are interested in boundary ination, we assume

that the moduli s and t have been stabilized by the fourdimensional eective bulk potential (2.49).

as discussed earlier, this requires a nonperturbative bulk potential v that depends on s and t . to

simplify formulae, we choose the coordinate calabiyau volume vcy and the coordinate orbifold radius
r such that this stable point is at

 = ln s = 0 ,

 = ln t = 0 .

(4.2)

furthermore, since we would like the vacuum energy to be dominated by the boundary potentials, we

assume that the bulk potential vanishes at this point; that is

v (  = 0,  = 0) = 0 .

(4.3)

18

finally, we need our candidate inatons, the boundary elds ci, to be slowly rolling. this requires the
inequalities

(ci v4)2
gn v 2

4  1 ,

cicj v4
gn v4  1

to be satised for all i, j = 1, 2. then, starting with the usual fourdimensional metric

ds2

4 = g4 dxdx = d 2 + e24dx2

(4.4)

(4.5)

for a spatially at robertsonwalker universe with scale factor 4, the fourdimensional equations of
motion from the action (2.47) reduce to

h 2  2
ci = 

4 =
1
v4

8gn

3

v4

civ4 .

the usual inating solution is then

4 = h(  0)

(4.6)

(4.7)

(4.8)

with an arbitrary integration constant 0. the slow roll motion ci( ) of the inatons can be obtained
from eq. (4.7) once an explicit potential has been specied. note that with the conventional relation (4.6)

between the potential and the hubble parameter and using eq. (2.45), the quantities i can be written
as i  h 2r2. the condition i  1 then corresponds to the intuitive criterion that the hubble
parameter h should be smaller than the mass r1 of the rst kaluzaklein excitation.
in ref. [49]

this criterion has been used to constrain the hubble parameter during ination for tevscale gravity

models.

we can now lift this solution up to ve dimensions using the formulae of section 2, in particular

eq. (2.29)(2.36). we nd 6

5 = e2d 2 + e2dx2 + e2dy2
ds2
 = h(  0) + 
 = 

 = 4
 = 

(4.9)

(4.10)

(4.11)

(4.12)

(4.13)
6a subtle point has to be taken into account if one wants to explicitly verify that this solution satises the ve

explicitly assumed that the orbifold modulus t = e

dimensional equations of motion (2.20)(2.25) to linear order. for the underlying fourdimensional solution, we have
 has been stabilized at t = 1. the eective fourdimensional
potential (2.49) shows that this requires a t dependence of the bulk potential v . since t v4(t = 1) = 0 and v (t = 1) = 0,
i=1 vi + o(dw). moreover, in the vedimensional equations of
motion we have not considered a  dependence of the bulk potential v . to incorporate such a case, the potential u in

one concludes from eq. (2.49) that  v (t = 1) = r1p2

eq. (2.22) has to be replaced by u + v . using this modication and the above expression for v one can indeed verify

that the vedimensional equations of motions are satised.

19

where the orbifold dependent corrections  and  are given by

dw

3 (cid:18)z 
 = 
 = 2dw(cid:18)z 

1

2(cid:19) 
2(cid:19) +

1

r

12m 3
5

r

2m 3
5

2

xi=1
xi=1

2

pi(z)v4i(  = 0, ci( ))

pi(z)v4i(  = 0, ci( )) .

(4.14)

(4.15)

recall that pi(z) are quadratic polynomials in the normalized orbifold coordinate z = y/r  [0, 1] that
have been dened in eq. (2.38). in the metric (4.9) we should, of course, only consider terms linear in
 and , in accordance with our approximation.

let us discuss the form of this solution. first we note that, neglecting the very mild time dependence

introduced by the slow roll of the inatons for the moment, the solution separates into a timedependent

and an orbifolddependent part. the timedependent part just corresponds to the inationary expan-

sion of the threedimensional universe. this expansion does not occur just on one boundary, as one

might naively expect, but uniformly across the whole orbifold. to discuss the corrections, let us con-

centrate on the scale factor . although it expands at the same hubble rate h everywhere across

the orbifold, its actual value depends on the orbifold point as specied in eq. (4.14). the rst term

in this equation is the familiar linear contribution from the domain wall proportional to dw. the
second term arises from the boundary potentials and is proportional to i, as expected. it has a mild
timedependence through the slowroll change of the potentials.

the bottom line of this section is, that the problem of nding inationary backgrounds in the linear

regime can be adequately approached in the fourdimensional eective action obtained by integrating

out the kaluzaklein modes. for our simple model, this action is given in (2.47). more realistic four

dimensional eective actions from horavawitten theory can be found in [66, 58, 68, 54, 69]. the

full vedimensional solution is then obtained by lifting the fourdimensional solution up, using the

correspondence established in section 2. this leads to the corrections (4.14) and (4.15) corresponding

to kaluzaklein modes that are coherently excited by the nonvanishing sources on the orbifold planes.

one might also worry about other excitations of the kaluzaklein modes unrelated to the orbifold

sources, such as remnants from an initial state. this could be described by adding the tower of kaluza

klein modes to the fourdimensional eective action (2.47). since we have integrated out the orbifold

sources, those modes would be free sourceless particles with masses n/r, where n is an integer. during

ination, oscillations of these modes are simply damped away by the expansion. the condition for this
to happen eciently coincides with our linearity criterion |i|  1 and is, hence, satised.
linear regime, the only relevant excitations of kaluzaklein modes after a short period of ination are,

in the

therefore, the ones caused by the orbifold sources computed above. as we will see, this changes in the
nonlinear regime where |i|  1.

we would briey like to mention some generalizations. it is clear that the above method can be

applied to other types of fourdimensional cosmological solutions, for example to a preheating solu-

20

tion with the energy density dominated by coherent oscillations or to a radiation dominated solution,

straightforwardly. basically, all one has to do is to replace the potentials in eq. (4.14) by the appropriate

energy density. what about the case of more than one large dimension? in such a case, the variation

across the orbifold would not increase as a polynomial any more, as we have seen earlier. instead, for

two additional dimensions we expect a logarithmic behaviour and for more than two dimensions a power

law fallo. common to all these cases is, however, that energy density on the fourdimensional plane

coherently excites the bulk modes.

5 nonlinear case: a solution by separation of variables

we would now like to study the nonlinear case; that is, we assume

|i|  1 .

(5.1)

in this case, we should solve the full vedimensional equations of motion given in eq. (2.20)(2.28). we

will use the boundary picture to do this. in general, we have two types of potentials on the boundaries,

namely the domain wall potentials and the potentials vi, corresponding to the two terms in (2.3). we
have already stated that dw, the dimensionless quantity that measures the strength of the domain
wall corrections, should be smaller than one in order for the mtheory description via supergravity

to be valid. the condition (5.1), therefore, states that the potentials vi will be dominating over the
domain wall. to simplify our problem, we will therefore neglect the domain wall potentials. certainly,

there will be an intermediate region between the nonlinear and linear regime where both potentials

are signicant. it will, however, be very dicult to nd explicit solutions in this regime. we, therefore,

concentrate on the case (5.1). as a further simplication, let us assume that the calabiyau volume

modulus  has been stabilized by the bulk potential v ; that is

 = const .

(5.2)

of course, we have to be careful that this assumption is consistent with the boundary condition on ,

eq. (2.28). we have already neglected the rst term in this condition which originates from the domain

wall. the second term is related to the boundary potentials vi and vanishes if those are taken to be
independent of . we will assume this in the following. in accordance with our general assumption of

boundary ination, the potential energy from the bulk potential should be negligible,

v ()  0 .

(5.3)

finally, we assume that the boundary potentials vi(i) are suitable slowroll potentials so that the
boundary elds i act as the inatons. practically, this means that we treat vi simply as constants.
we recall from section 2 that the metric has the form

ds2

5 = e2d 2 + e2dx2 + e2dy2

21

(5.4)

where  and  are the scale factors of the threedimensional universe and the orbifold respectively. we

also remark that, from eq. (2.26), (2.27), the boundary conditions take the form

e |y=yi

= e  |y=yi

= 

1
12

vi .

(5.5)

even though the equations of motion (2.20)(2.28) have now considerably simplied, they are still

not easily soluble. the reason is, of course, that we are dealing with partial dierential equations as

opposed to ordinary ones that one usually encounters in cosmology. the simplest strategy to solve

partial dierential equations is separation of variables and this is what we are going to do next. the

general solution will be given in the following section.

to simplify the problem we rst choose the conformal gauge  = . we will assume for the time

being that the coordinate transformation that led to conformal gauge leaves the boundaries at nite

values of the coordinate y. in this case, we can restore the conventions for our coordinate system by

shifting the boundaries back to y = 0, r. we are, then, looking for all solutions of (2.20)(2.28) (subject

to the above assumptions) consistent with the separation ansatz

 = 0( ) + 5(y)

 = 0( ) + 5(y) .

the general solution to the equations of motion (2.20)(2.23) in the boundary picture is

 = k(y   ) + a
 = k((1  k)y  k ) + b

(5.6)

(5.7)

(5.8)

(5.9)

where k, k, a and b are integration constants. we still have to apply the boundary conditions (5.5).
this leads to

k =

1
r

ln(cid:18)

v1

v2(cid:19) ,

k = 0 ,

b = ln(cid:18)

12k

v1 (cid:19)

(5.10)

while a remains arbitrary. for the arguments of the logarithms to be positive, we have to further

demand that v1 and v2 have opposite signs such that v1 + v2 < 0. it is not yet clear, whether these
restrictions on vi are general or whether they are related to our choice of the coordinate system. we
have assumed that in conformal gauge the boundaries are at nite values. this need not be the case if

the coordinate transformation that led to conformal gauge had a singularity. to cover such a case, we

introduce a general orbifold coordinate y by

y =

1
k

ln(kg(y))  b ,

(5.11)

where g(y) is a monotonic, continuously dierentiable function for y  [y1, y2]. rewriting the solu-
tion (5.8), (5.9) in terms of this new coordinate and applying the boundary conditions (5.5) leads

to

ds2

5 = k 2g(y)2d 2 + k 2g(y)2e2k( 0)dx2 + g(y)2dy2 ,

(5.12)

22

where g should satisfy at the boundaries

g(y1) = 

12
v1

,

g(y2) = 

12
v2

.

(5.13)

the upper (lower) sign applies to an increasing (decreasing) function g. here k and 0 are arbitrary
constants 7.

let us discuss some properties of this solution. as is well known [62, 63], the metric (5.12) is

at everywhere in the bulk. what makes the metric nevertheless nontrivial is the presence of the

boundaries. while those boundaries are hypersurfaces with y = const in our coordinate frame, they

would be mapped to de sitter hypersurfaces in coordinates where the metric (5.12) takes minkowski
i = k 2g(yi)2d 2, the

indeed, if we dene comoving times ti on each boundary by setting dt2

form.

fourdimensional boundary metrics take the form

ds2

4,i = dt2

i + k 2g(yi)2e2hi(titi0)dx2

with the hubble parameters hi given by

hi = 

vi
12

= 

v4i

12m 3
5

.

(5.14)

(5.15)

the above linear relation between the hubble parameters and the potentials is quite unconventional.

usually the square of the hubble parameter is proportional to the potential, as in our linear case,

eq. (4.6). we should distinguish two cases for the function g.

 g(y) 6= 0 for all y  [0, r]: in this case, the metric (5.12) is regular everywhere on the orbifold, as
in our original form (5.8), (5.9) of the solution in conformal gauge. since g is continuous, g(y1)
and g(y2) have to have the same sign. from eq. (5.13), it then follows that

v1v2 < 0 ,

v1 + v2 < 0 .

(5.16)

this are indeed the relations we found in conformal gauge above.

 g(y0) = 0 for some y0  [0, r]: in this case, the metric (5.12) has a horizon at y = y0. now g(y1)

has to be negative and g(y2) positive (or vice versa) and we conclude from (5.13) that

v1 > 0 ,

v2 > 0 .

(5.17)

this case could not be obtained from the solution in conformal gauge.

7choosing g(y) = 1
k

 y, we obtain a form similar to the fourdimensional domain wall solution of [62, 63] and its

vedimensional counterpart in [50].

23

in g. 1 twodimensional minkowski space corresponding to the (, y) plane is depicted. we have in-

dicated the portions of this space that correspond to the above two types of solutions. as explained

earlier, if the metric (5.12) is written in minkowsi form by applying an appropriate coordinate transfor-

mation the y = const orbifold planes are mapped into de sitter hypersurfaces. in the twodimensional

pictures they appear as hyperbolas. the space between those hyperbolas in g. 1 represents the orbifold

and the lines indicate the locations of constant time,  = const. in case 1 (left gure 1), both bondaries

are on the same side of the light cone. signals that travel in the bulk will always reach the boundary

after a nite time. in particular, a signal sent from one plane will always reach the other one in a nite

time. these causal properties are somewhat counterintuitive in that one would expect the existence of

signals that travel exclusively in the bulk without ever hitting a boundary. the gure shows that, in

fact, such signals do not exist. on the other hand, in case 2 (right gure 1), a signal emitted from one of

the boundaries will never reach the other one. in this sense the two boundaries are causally decoupled.

again, this property is somewhat unexpected intuitively.

y = 0

y = r

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

 = const

       

       

       


                        


     

     


     

     

     


     

     

     

     


       

       

       

       

       

       


y = r

                     

y = 0
                     

                  

                     

                  

                     

                  

                     

                  

                     

                  

                 

                     

                  

 =
                 

                     

                  

                 

                     

                  

                        

                 

                     

                  

                 

                     

                  

                 

                     

                  

                 

                     

                  

                 

                     

                  

                 

                     

                 

                     

                 

                     

                 

                     

                 

                     

                     


               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               

               


         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

            

         

         

            

         

         

            

         

         

             

            

         

         

             

            

         

         

             

            

         

         

             

            

         

         

             

         

         

             

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         

         


const

figure 1: parts of minkowski space corresponding to the solution in case 1 (left gure) and case 2 (right

gure).

the physical length of the orbifold (obtained by integrating g55 over the coordinate interval [0, r],

as usual) is static and in both cases given by

rphys = 12(cid:18) 1

v1

+

1

v2(cid:19) .

24

(5.18)

this is positive due to the conditions (5.16) and (5.17), as it should. in view of eq. (5.15), this leads to

hi 

1

rphys

(5.19)

for potentials vi of the some order of magnitude. this relation is quite promising, since it directly
relates the hubble parameters to the size of the additional dimension. we would like to point out that,

unlike in the linear case, we did not assume the nonperturbative bulk potential v to depend on the

orbifold modulus. nevertheless, the orbifold size rphys turns out to be timeindependent. moreover, it
is xed by eq. (5.18) in terms of the boundary potentials.

we have already mentioned that the above solution is the only separating solution compatible with

our initial assumptions of a stabilized modulus  and slow roll of the boundary elds i. there is
yet another sense in which this solution is unique. suppose one is interested in solutions where the

bulk moduli elds  and  are constant in time or slowly moving (with a negligible contribution from

the bulk potential v to the vacuum energy), the boundary elds are slowly rolling in their potentials
vi and the hubble parameter h   changes only slowly in time. practically, one can then neglect
terms containing ,
i and h in the equations of motion. heuristically, these properties are what
one expects from an inating solution in ve dimensions, in analogy with the fourdimensional case.

,

then, one can show that all solutions with these properties are approximated (in the sense that slowroll

corrections have been neglected) by (5.8)(5.10). to do this, one does not need the technical assumption

of separability that we have used so far. in this sense, we have found the unique solution with boundary

ination in ve dimensions.

can this solution, then, be used as the basis for an inationary model in ve dimensions? we have

to keep in mind that we have not solved the equations of motion in general yet, but rather found a

specic solution by imposing separability or, equivalently, reasonable physical conditions of what an

inationary solution should look like. therefore, our solution might be very special in the sense that it,

perhaps, can only be obtained from a set of initial conditions with measure zero. in other words, the

solution could be unstable against small perturbations. we will analyze this question in the following

section.

6 nonlinear case: general solution

in this section, we present the general solution. we start with the same setup as in the beginning of

section 5. since we are in the nonlinear regime

we can neglect the domain wall potentials. furthermore, we assume that  has been stabilized by the

bulk potential v at a point with vanishing potential energy v () = 0 (also, as a technical assumption,

|i|  1

(6.1)

25

we have to require the boundary potentials to be independent on ). furthermore, the boundary

potentials vi should lead to slow roll of the elds i. we will, however, not assume separability or slow
time evolution of any other eld.

it is useful to introduce lightcone coordinates

and rewrite the equations of motion (2.20)(2.23) in terms of these coordinates choosing conformal

gauge  = . using the simplications that follow from the above setup, one nds

x =   y

(6.2)

2
+  2++ + +2 = 0
2
  2 + 2 = 0
+ + 3+ = 0

2+ + + + 3+ = 0 .

the boundary conditions (2.26) and (2.27) specialize to

e |y=yi

= e |y=yi

= 

vi
12

,

(6.3)

(6.4)

(6.5)

(6.6)

(6.7)

where the upper (lower) sign applies to the boundary at y = y1 (y = y2). the equations of motion (6.3)
(6.6) are quite similar (although not identical) to those of twodimensional dilaton gravity [70] with

vanishing cosmological constant. in fact, (6.3)(6.6) can be obtained from the twodimensional action

s2 = z g2e3 [r2  24 aa]

(6.8)

with the twodimensional metric in conformal gauge given by gab = e2ab. here we have used indices
a, b, = 0, 5 for the space (, y). using the methods of ref. [70], we can nd the following general
solution of (6.3)(6.6)

3 ln u

 = 1
u = u+(x+) + u(x)

,

,

 = w  1
w = w+(x+) + w(x)

3 ln u

(6.9)

where u and w are free elds, as indicated. the left and rightmovers u(x) and w(x) are
not completely independent but, rather, subject to certain relations that originate from the constraint

equations (6.3) and (6.4). three cases can be distinguished

 case 1: if +u+ 6= 0 and u 6= 0 then
w =

 case 2: if +u+ 6= 0 and u = 0 then
w+ =

and w is arbitrary.

1
2

1
2

ln(u) + c .

ln(+u+) + c+ .

26

(6.10)

(6.11)

 case 3: if +u+ = 0 and u 6= 0 then
w =

1
2

ln(u) + c .

and w+ is arbitrary.

(6.12)

here c are arbitrary integration constants.

in each of the three cases, we still have two arbitrary

functions at our disposal. while this constitutes the most general solution of the equations of mo-

tion (6.3)(6.6), we have not yet taken into account the boundary conditions (6.7). as we will see, this

determines one of the functions and imposes a periodicity constraint on the other one. before we come

to that, we observe that in case 1 we have the relation

 = 2 +

1
2

ln(9+) + c+ + c

(6.13)

between the scale factors  and . suppose that we have found a solution with an inating three

dimensional universe in this case. neglecting ydependence, the scale factor  is then roughly given
by   h where h is the hubble parameter. in this case, the second term on the right hand side of
eq. (6.13) is approximately constant since  should be related to the hubble parameter. hence, up to
an overall normalization we have   2. this shows that, without assuming any initial netuning, at
the end of ination, the orbifold orbifold has expanded twice as much as the threedimensional universe.

for the reasons discussed at the end of section 3 we, therefore, disregard this possibility. we remark

that solving the boundary condition (6.7) for case 1 leads to periodicity constraints in terms of elliptic

functions.

let us now turn to cases 2 and 3. fortunately, the boundary conditions can be explicitly solved in

these cases. we nd that  and  can be expressed in terms of a single real function f as

 =

1
3

ln f (x)

 = ln" 4(f (x))1/2(f (x))1/2
(v1)(f (x))2/3(f (x))1/3#

(6.14)

(6.15)

where f  denotes the derivative of f and, as usual, x =   y. the function f should have the
periodicity property

for all x, where

f (x + 2r) =he2rk (f (x))1/3 + ki3

k =

1
r

ln(cid:18)

v1

v2(cid:19)

(6.16)

(6.17)

and k is a constant. the condition (6.16) can be solved in terms of a periodic function p(x) satisfying

p(x + 2r) = p(x)

(6.18)

27

for all x. one nds

f (x) = (cid:2)p(x)ekx + k(cid:3)3

f (x) = [kx + p(x)]3

for k 6= 0
for k = 0

(6.19)

(6.20)

where k is another constant. the upper sign in the above solutions always corresponds to case 2, the

lower one to case 3. the denition of k, eq. (6.17), shows that the boundary potentials need to have

opposite sign for the solution to exist. we are, therefore, in the rst case (5.16) of the previous section

which is as expected since we have used conformal gauge. we will stick to this case, for simplicity, in

the following. the analog of the second case (5.17) can again be obtained by employing a more general

coordinate system. our main conclusions apply to this case as well. furthermore, the periodic function

p(x) and the constant k have to be chosen such that the logarithms in (6.14) and (6.15) are welldened.

apart from those restrictions, p(x) and k are arbitrary. eq. (6.14)(6.20) is the most general solution

of the system (6.3)(6.7) for the cases 2 and 3 which, as we have seen, are the interesting ones in the

present context. since we can more or less freely choose one periodic function we have, in fact, found a

very large class of solutions.

depending on the value of k we have two dierent possible forms of the function f , given in

eq. (6.19) and (6.20). the second option, k = 0, is realized for a vanishing total potential energy,

v1 + v2 = 0. not surprisingly, in this case, the scale factor  does not inate but (roughly) shows
a power law behaviour, as can be seen by inserting (6.20) into eq. (6.14). consequently, this second
option is only of limited interest to us and we will concentrate on the rst one, k 6= 0. this case should
contain our simple separating solution (5.8)(5.10) of the previous section. indeed, if we choose

p(x) = const ,

k = 0

(6.21)

in eq. (6.19) we recover this solution. what happens for other choices? let us consider the case k 6= 0
and p(x) periodic but otherwise arbitrary. if the argument of the exponential in eq. (6.19) is negative

(the case that would lead to an inationary expansion if k were zero) then, after a very short time f will

be approximately constant, unless k is exponentially small. inserting such an approximately constant

f into the expressions (6.14), (6.15) for the scale factors  and  shows that the threedimensional

universe becomes static while the orbifold collapses. in the opposite case, where the argument of the

exponential is positive, f falls exponentially and, hence, from eq. (6.14), the threedimensional universe

collapses. either way, to have a stable conguration, we should choose k = 0. in this case, the scale

factors read explicitly

 = kx  ln p(x)
 = ky + ln"(cid:18)12

v1 (cid:19)(cid:18)k 

p
p

(x)(cid:19)1/2(cid:18)k 

p
p

(p(x))1/2# .
(x)(cid:19)1/2 (p(x))1/2

28

(6.22)

(6.23)

we still have the freedom to choose the periodic function p. in the above expressions this function always
depends on x =   y. it, therefore, leads to an oscillation in time with a period 2r. if we do not
want the scale factor  to be signicantly eected by this, we should choose the maximum amplitude of
p to be suciently small, so that p(x)  const. this basically brings us back to our separating solution
of the previous section. in essence, this solution is the only one with the desired properties within our

setup.

the discussion of this section has revealed two serious problems with the separating solution. first

of all, it corresponds to a very specic choice of initial conditions satisfying either k = 0 or k being

exponentially small. all other values of k lead to a collapsing solution. this implies that the case k = 0,

as it stands, corresponds to an unstable situation. a small perturbation that leads to a nonvanishing

k will cause a collapse of the universe. the other problem is related to the presence of the periodic

function p. this function, in fact, encodes the information about the initial inhomogeneity in the orbifold

direction and this inhomogeneity survives the whole period of ination. of course, this is related to

the fact that we are not inating the orbifold as well which would dilute those inhomogeneities.

in

the eective fourdimensional linear case of section 4, oscillations of kaluzaklein modes were damped

away quickly due to the inationary expansion. apparently this is no longer true in the nonlinear

vedimensional regime. although those modes do not aect the homogeneity of the threedimensional

universe directly, they could potentially be harmful. for example, eq. (6.22) shows that the hubble
parameter  contains the periodic function p(  y) and consequently oscillates in times. hence, the
modes could have some inuence on density uctuations. also, their eventual decay into gravitons could

leave unwanted relics. in any case, the presence of the function p contradicts somewhat the philosophy

of ination which is supposed to wipe out any initial information.

is there a possible cure for the stability problem? so far, we did not attempt to stabilize the orbifold

in any way. it is clear that this fact is related to the instability that we encounter. while stabilizing

the orbifold modulus in a fourdimensional eective theory by simply inventing a potential is relatively

straightforward (although understanding the origin of this potential is not), this is not the case in ve

dimensions. the orbifold size in ve dimensions is basically measured by the component g55 of the
metric. a bulk potential for this component would break general vedimensional covariance in a very

strong way. also, since g55 typically varies across the orbifold it could not be everywhere in a minimum
of that potential. alternatively, one could postulate a bulk potential that only depends on the zero

mode of g55; that is, the length of the orbifold. this would break general covariance not more seriously
than it already is broken by the presence of the orbifold. suppose such a potential had a minimum for

a certain orbifold length r0. could an orbifold modulus stabilized at this minimum be made consistent
with our solution? the apparent problem is that the orbifold size is already xed by eq. (5.18) in terms

of the boundary potentials vi. there is no obvious reason why r0 and rphys should, a priori, coincide.
if we assume they do, for some reason, at a certain time, this situation could only be maintained if the

29

boundary inatons slowroll in a very specic way so as to leave

r0 = 12(cid:18) 1

v1(1)

+

1

v2(2)(cid:19)

(6.24)

unchanged. this would correspond to a strong correlation of the motion of the two inatons. without

a detailed analysis of the dynamics, which probably has to be carried out numerically, it is hard to tell

whether this would actually happen or whether, instead, the orbifold modulus would start to strongly

oscillate around its minimum thereby destroying ination.

another way to stabilize the orbifold which avoids these problems is to have a potential for g55 on
the boundary. although such a potential cannot appear directly in the boundary actions in (2.1), it may

appear in one of the bianchi identities of heterotic mtheory in ve dimensions [27, 71, 68] which contain

sources located on the orbifold plane. particularly, a potential from gaugino condensation would mani-

fest itself in the bianchi identity. generically, however, it seems to be dicult to stabilize moduli with

potentials from gaugino condensation, in particular in the context of cosmology [64] (see however [72]).

in ref. [73] stabilization of the orbifold was achieved by a combination of gaugino condensation and other

nonperturbative eects resulting from internally wrapped membranes. although worth investigating

in our context, all those options go beyond our simple toy model and will not be explicitly considered

here.

to summarize, while there seem to be interesting solutions with boundary ination in the non

linear, vedimensional regime, a closer investigation shows that they have problems related to the

stabilization of the orbifold and to inhomogeneities in the orbifold direction that are not diluted. the

stabilization problem is, of course, very general and we should not be surprised to encounter it in our

cosmological context. it is conceivable that whatever eventually stabilizes the orbifold, also saves our

nonlinear cosmological solution. while the persistence of the orbifold inhomogeneities appears to be

in contradiction with the inationary paradigm they might, under certain conditions, be acceptable

and give rise to interesting predictions. it certainly needs more work to nally decide these questions.

probably one also has to go beyond the simple model we have used in this paper.

acknowledgments a. l. would like to thank bruce bassett, arshad momen and graham ross

for helpful discussions. a. l. is supported by the european community under contract no. fmrxct

960090. b. a. o. is supported in part by doe under contract no. de-ac02-76-er-03071 and by a

senior alexander von humboldt award. d. w. is supported in part by doe under contract no. de-

fg02-91er40671.

references

[1] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, phys. lett. b393 (1997) 65.

[2] n. kaloper, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 3394.

30

[3] h. lu, s. mukherji, c.n. pope and k.w. xu, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 7926.

[4] r. poppe and s. schwager, phys. lett. b393 (1997) 51.

[5] f. larsen and f. wilczek, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 4591.

[6] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, nucl. phys. b495 (1997) 365.

[7] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, nucl. phys. b509 (1998) 169.

[8] h. lu, s. mukherji, c.n. pope, from pbranes to cosmology, ctp-tamu-65-96, hep-th/9612224.

[9] e. j. copeland, r. easther and d. wands, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 874; nucl. phys. b506 (1997)

407.

[10] s. k. rama, phys. lett. b408 (1997) 91.

[11] k. behrndt, stefan forste and s. schwager, nucl. phys. b508 (1997) 391.

[12] c. park, s. sin, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 4620.

[13] h. lu, j. maharana and s. mukherj, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 2219.

[14] e.j. copeland, j. e. lidsey, d. wands, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 625.

[15] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, phys. lett. b437 (1998) 291.

[16] n. kaloper, i. i. kogan and k. a. olive, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 7340.

[17] s. forste, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 44.

[18] e.j. copeland, j. e. lidsey, d. wands, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 043503.

[19] e.j. copeland, j. e. lidsey, d. wands, phys. lett. b443 (1998) 97.

[20] j. ellis, n. kaloper, k. a. olive and j. yokoyama, topological r4 ination, cern-th-98-217,

hep-ph/9807482.

[21] m. maggiore and a. riotto, dbranes and cosmology, cern-th/98-361, hep-th/9811089.

[22] t. banks, w. fischler, l. motl, dualities versus singularities, ru-98-58, hep-th/9811194.

[23] g. dvali and s. h. h. tye, brane ination, nyu-th-12-98-01, hep-ph/9812483.

[24] c. kolda and d. h. lyth, dterm ination and mtheory, lbnl-42577, hep-ph/9812234.

[25] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506.

31

[26] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 94.

[27] p. horava, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 7561.

[28] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 135.

[29] k. benakli, cosmological solution in mtheory on s1/z2, hep-th/9804096.

[30] k. benakli, scales and cosmological applications of mtheory, hep-th/9805181.

[31] a. lukas, b.a. ovrut and daniel waldram, cosmological solutions of horava-witten theory,

hep-th/9806022.

[32] a. lukas, b.a. ovrut and daniel waldram, cosmology and heterotic mtheory in five dimensions,

upr-825t, hep-th/9812052.

[33] h. s. reall, open and closed cosmological solutions of horavawitten theory, damtp-1998-133,

hep-th/9809195.

[34] j. l. f. barbon, i.i. kogan and e. rabinovici, on stringy thresholds in sym/ads thermodynamics,

cern-th-98-206,hep-th/9809033.

[35] s. a. abel, j. l. f. barbon, i.i. kogan and e. rabinovici, string thermodynamics in dbrane

backgrounds, cern-th-98-375, hep-th/9902058.

[36] a. hanany and a. zaeroni, j. high energy phys. 05 (1998) 001.

[37] a. hanany and a. m. uranga, j. high energy phys., 05 (1998) 013.

[38] g. aldazabal, a. font, l.e. ibanez and g. violero, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 29.

[39] j. lykken, e. poppitz and s. p. trivedi, branes with guts and supersymmetry breaking, ucsd-

pth-98-16, hep-th/9806080.

[40] z. kakushadze and s. h. h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 126001.

[41] c. burgess, l.e. ibanez and f. quevedo, strings at the intermediate scale or is the fermi scale

dual to the planck scale?, ftuam-98-21, hep-ph/9810535.

[42] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k.s. stelle and d. waldram, the universe as a domain wall, upr-797t,

hep-th/9803235, to be published in phys. lett. b.

[43] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k. s. stelle and d. waldram, heterotic mtheory in five dimensions,

upr-804t, hep-th/9806051.

32

[44] r. donagi, a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, nonperturbative vacua and particle physics

in mtheory, upr-823t, hep-th/9811168.

[45] r. donagi, a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, holomorphic vector bundles and non

perturbative vacua in mtheory, upr-827t, hep-th/9901009.

[46] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and gia dvali, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263.

[47] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phenomenology, astrophysics and cosmology of

theories with submillimeter dimensions and tev scale quantum gravity, slac-pub-7864, hep-

ph/9807344.

[48] k. r. dienes, e. dudas, t. gherghetta and a. riotto, cosmological phase transitions and radius

stabilization in higher dimensions, cern-th-98-259, hep-ph/9809406.

[49] d. h. lyth, ination with tevscale gravity needs supersymmetry, lancs-th/9821, hep-

ph/9810320.

[50] n. kaloper and a. linde, ination and large internal dimensions, su-itp-98-60, hep-th/9811141.

[51] o. bertolami and r. schiappa, modular quantum cosmology, df-ist-1-98, gr-qc/9810013 and

references therein.

[52] j. ellis, z. lalak, s. pokorski and w. pokorski, fivedimensional aspects of mtheory and super-

symmetry breaking, cern-th-98-118, hep-ph/9805377.

[53] j. ellis, z. lalak, s. pokorski and w. pokorski, fivedimensional gauged supergravity and super-

symmetry breaking in m theory, cern-th-98-359, hep-th/9811133.

[54] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, nonstandard embedding and fivebranes in heterotic

mtheory, upr-815t, hep-th/9808101.

[55] e. witten, nucl. phys. b474 (1996) 343.

[56] r. donagi, a. grassi and e. witten, mod. phys. lett. a11 (1996) 2199.

[57] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, the ten-dimensional eective action of strongly coupled

heterotic string theory, upr-789-t, hep-th/9801087, to be published in phys. rev. d.

[58] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, on the four-dimensional eective action of strongly

coupled heterotic string theory, upr-771t, hep-th/9710208, to be published in nucl. phys. b.

[59] t. han, j. d. lykken and r. zhang on kaluzaklein states from large extra dimensions,

madph-98-1092, hep-ph/9811350.

33

[60] m. gasperini and g. veneziano, astroparticle phys. 1 (1993) 317; for an introduction see for

example: g. veneziano, a simple/short introduction into prebigbang physics/cosmology, cern-

th-98-43, hep-th/9802057.

[61] for a recent review see: d. h. lyth and a. riotto, particle physics models of ination and the

cosmological density perturbation, lancs-th-9720, hep-ph/9807278.

[62] a. vilenkin, phys. lett. b133 (1983) 177.

[63] j. ipser and p. sikivie, phys. rev. d30 (1984) 712.

[64] r. brustein and p. j. steinhardt, phys. lett. b302 (1993) 196.

[65] t. banks, m. berkooz, s.h. shenker, g. moore and p.j. steinhardt, phys.rev. d52 (1995) 3548.

[66] h. p. nilles, m. olechowski and m. yamaguchi, phys. lett. b415 (1997) 24.

[67] h. p. nilles, m. olechowski and m. yamaguchi, supersymmetry breakdown at a hidden wall,

bonn-th-97-10, hep-th/9801030.

[68] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k.s. stelle and d. waldram, heterotic mtheory in five dimensions,

upr-804t, hep-th/9806051.

[69] a. lukas, b.a. ovrut and daniel waldram, five-branes and supersymmetry breaking in m theory,

upr-828t, hep-th/9901017.

[70] c. g. callan, s. b. giddings, j. a. harvey and a. strominger, phys. rev. d45 (1992) 1005.

[71] a. lukas, b.a. ovrut and daniel waldram, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 7529.

[72] t. barreiro, b. de carlos and e.j. copeland, phys.rev. d58 (1998) 083513.

[73] k. choi, h. b. kim and, h. kim, moduli stabilization in heterotic m theory, kaist-th-98-02a,

hep-th/9808122.

34

