9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
2

 

 
 

1
v
2
2
0
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

two lectures on ads/cft correspondence

ic/99/7
ru-99-06

michael r. douglasa

department of physics and astronomy, rutgers university,

piscataway, nj 08855, usa

and

i.h.e.s., le bois-marie, bures-sur-yvette france 91440

the abdus salam international centre for theoretical physics,

s. randjbar-daemi

trieste, italy

this is a write-up of two lectures on ads/cft correspondance given by the authors
at the 1998 spring school at the abdus salam ictp.

1 introduction

the best candidate theories of quantum gravity, maximal supergravity and su-
perstring theory, are formulated in more than four dimensions. traditionally
four-dimensional physics is derived using the kaluza-klein approach, which
assumes space-time is a product of a non-compact manifold m and a com-
pact manifold k. einsteins equations in the full space-time then relate the
curvature of these manifolds: if m is to be at minkowski space, k must be
ricci-at (or related to a ricci-at manifold in a simple way). massless elds
on m arise as zero modes of dierential operators on k.

these models are easily studied for k an n-torus, and candidate ks exist
with reduced supersymmetry. however their ricci-at metrics are not known
explicitly and studying them requires tricky, indirect methods. rather, the
next simplest possibility is to take k to be a homogeneous space such as
the n-sphere sn. the isometries of k lead to vector elds on m , so these
compactications produce gauged supergravity.

these models were much studied in the 1980s 10; solutions exist but the
positive curvature of k forces m to have equal and opposite negative curva-
ture, making them at rst sight phenomenologically irrelevant. the simplest
possibility is m of constant negative curvature, i.e. anti-de sitter space adsd.
these models also have maximal supersymmetry and thus are too good
not to nd a place in the web of theories known as m theory. a clear ap-

asupported in part by doe grant de-fg05-90er40559.

1

plication emerged with the study of extremal black hole solutions 12. such
solutions of supergravity in minkowski space can preserve up to half of the
global supersymmetry, but it was observed that in the near horizon limit they
often preserve maximal supersymmetry. this comes about because the near
horizon geometry is equivalent to an ads compactication.

black hole physics underwent a revolution with the advent of the d-brane
as one could now nd congurations with the same long range elds as an
extremal black hole, but whose microscopic degrees of freedom are known ex-
plicitly. this led to the rst generally accepted computation of the bekenstein-
hawking entropy of a black hole, by strominger amd vafa 26. certain extremal
black holes in type iib superstring theory compactied on t 5 can be repre-
sented as bound states of d1 and d5-branes wrapped on the torus  both ob-
jects have exactly the same long-range elds, and are identied in string theory.
on the other hand the d-brane system can also be described in world-volume
terms  from open string theory one derives a two-dimensional conformal eld
theory, for which the entropy can be computed exactly. this entropy, certain
hawking emission rates, and many other observables agree exactly between
the two descriptions.

the essential reason that conformal eld theory appears in the discussion
is to reect the additional near-horizon symmetry visible in the space-time
description. by d-brane considerations to be reviewed below, the near horizon
limit in space-time is reected in the low energy limit of the world-volume
theory, which takes it to a xed point with conformal symmetry. such a d-
dimensional conformal theory will then have so(d, 2) space-time symmetry.
this symmetry enhancement is exactly parallel to the enhancement of the
black hole symmetry to the isometry group of adsd+1, so(d, 2). the same
relation holds in the superconformal case.

another example of this type in type iib superstring theory is the d3-
brane. a conguration of n coincident d3-branes in minkowski space is iden-
tied with another extremal black hole, as we discuss below. on the other
hand, its low energy world-volume theory is n = 4 four-dimensional super-
symmetric yang-mills theory. thus we might conjecture that the entropy of
this extremal black hole is equal to the entropy of n = 4 yang-mills theory.

thus it was something of a surprise when it was found that  in distinction
to the d1d5 black hole  these entropies, computed in conventional pertur-
bation theory, did not agree 14. further work found many quantities that do
not agree, even in the d1d5 system  for example, the metric as seen by a
probe brane 7,19.

of course the simplest resolution of all such issues is to argue that conven-
tional perturbation theory is not accurate for these questions. in fact the gauge

2

theory limit which must reproduce supergravity is large n and large t hooft
coupling g2n , where perturbation theory fails, and not much was known. so
how does one proceed ?

recently maldacena has reversed this identication in a fruitful way 20. in-
stead of trying to derive the properties of a black hole from the d-brane theory,
one makes a precise conjecture stating that the d-brane theory is equivalent to
the black hole and indeed all of the gravitational dynamics needed to describe
it. assuming this conjecture, one can derive results for the large t hooft
coupling limit of gauge theory, by doing computations in ads supergravity.
even better, by simple modications of the background geometry, one can get
results in gauge theories with reduced or no supersymmetry.

this relation has the same spirit as previously conjectured dualities: here
there exists a single theory which reduces to perturbative gauge theory for weak
coupling and to supergravity for strong coupling. there are a few observables
constrained by supersymmetry to be independent of the coupling, and the basic
test of the hypothesis is that these agree. explicit computation has revealed
that additional quantities agree in the two limits; no compelling statement has
yet been made as to what should be expected to agree and why.

on the other hand the entropy and indeed almost all observables are ex-
pected to disagreeb and thus one interprets these as non-trivial functions of
the coupling for which one now has results in both limits.
in general, one
has as yet no direct way to test these predictions from either gauge theory or
string theory; however even qualitative agreement can be regarded as evidence.
in the case of the d3-brane, large n four-dimensional gauge theory was much
studied over the years and numerous guesses made for its behavior. as it turns
out the predictions from ads/cft contradict some of these guesses, but in
ways which appear to form a new consistent picture of large n n = 4 gauge
theory; the better motivated guesses (e.g.
for a deconnement transition in
pure yang-mills at nite temperature) are conrmed.

the aim of these lectures was to introduce this subject at an elementary
level. we shall mostly be concerned with the case of the d3 brane in type iib
theory.

2 the 3-brane of type iib

the massless sector of iib string theory is iib supergravity, which is described
in many references including 28,29. on general grounds a p-brane will be a

b the agreement for the d1-d5 system turns out to depend on a result special to
two-dimensional conformal eld theory; the invariance of central charge under marginal
deformations.

3

source of a p + 1-form gauge potential and thus the minimal subsector of the
theory required to describe a 3-brane will be the metric gmn and the four-form
potential c. this potential has a self-dual ve-form eld strength f for which
the action is somewhat complicated but for our purposes we will only need the
equations of motion

1
2 rmn =

1
6

fmijklf ijkl
df = 0

n

f = f ;

and supersymmetry transformations of the gravitino

m = (dm +

i
5!

fabcdeabcdem )

(1)

(2)

where  and m are complex ten-dimensional weyl spinors (representing the
sum of two majorana-weyl spinors), and  is the ten-dimensional newtons
constant.

we write the 3-brane ansatz

ds2 = e2a(y)dxdx  + e2b(y)dy2

and

f = (1 + )de4c(y)dx0dx1dx2dx3

(3)

(4)

where  , 0  ,   3 is the usual 3 + 1 minkowski metric, while yi parame-
terize the six dimensions transverse to the brane. ultimately the functions a,
b and c will be taken to depend only on r = |y| to describe a single 3-brane.
the brane solution will preserve supersymmetries corresponding to param-
eters  for which the gravitino variation is zero. we can decompose  into the
product of four and six dimensional spinors of each chirality

 = f+(y)(4+)(6+) + f(y)(4)(6)

(5)

and substituting the ansatz into (2) only 0123 appears, so up to 1/2 the bulk
supersymmetry can be preserved, say the components (4+)(6+) giving the
equivalent of n = 4 supersymmetry in d = 4. requiring (2) to have solutions
we can derive the relation a = b = c and substituting this into df = 0 we
nd that e4c  f (y) must satisfy laplaces equation in six at transverse
dimensions.

the nal three-brane solutions are

ds2 = f 1/2dxdx  + f 1/2dy2

(6)

4

and

with

f = (1 + )d(f 1)dx0dx1dx2dx3

(7)

(8)

f (y) = 1 +

qi

|y  yi|4 .

n

xi=1

the charges qi are quantized as one can see by an extension of the dirac
argument: consider a second three-brane which extends in x0 and (say) y4,
y5 and y6; from its point of view (7) is a magnetic gauge potential, and by
moving it in the three remaining transverse dimensions we can rerun diracs
argument. there is actually a subtle factor of two coming from the self-duality
of f but the nal quantization condition is

qi = 4gsnil4
s

(9)

with ni integer.

let us take n = 1 and y1 = 0 to get a solution symmetric under so(6)
rotations of y. dene r = |y|. the parameter gsn appearing in (9) will play
a central role, so we dene  = 4gsn and write

f (y) = 1 +

l4
s
r4 .

(10)

on general grounds in iib string theory we believe the supergravity description
of this solution only for r >> ls, because at shorter distances we cannot justify
ignoring the massive closed string modes. this is good as brane solutions in
supergravity are typically singular (the extreme three-brane is an exception)
but leads us to ask: how do we describe the regime r << ls ?

3 the 3-brane as a d3-brane

as is well-known by now, we can dene the same solution of iib string theory
by introducing boundaries in our world-sheet theory, constrained to live on
the plane y = 0. the charge n is represented by allowing an n -valued chan-
paton factor; the multi-center solutions correspond to allowing several types
of boundaries ending on the planes y = yi. we can compute the long-range
supergravity elds around this plane at leading order in gs by doing world-
sheet path integrals on a disk with a graviton or rr vertex operator inserted;
we can also verify that the dirichlet boundary conditions linearly relate the left
and right-moving world-sheet operators generating space-time supersymmetry
as

ql = 0123qr

5

(11)

and thus preserve the same supersymmetries as the supergravity solution (6).
these considerations lead us to identify the d-brane as the unique object in
string theory corresponding to the eld conguration (6).

this description is non-singular and in contrast to the supergravity descrip-
tion becomes simpler as we consider short transverse distance scales r << ls.
fluctuations of the d-brane are described by exciting open strings ending on
the d-brane, and eects described by open strings stretched to the radius r will
be associated with the mass scale m = tsr = r/2l2
s (the usual string tension
energy). in general excited open strings will also contribute but if r << ls
these will be much heavier than the lightest open strings.

thus we can simplify our brane theory by taking a scaling limit of short
distances and large string tension: r  0 and ls  0, and work in the energy
units set by the stretched strings: u = r/l2
s xed. this is the low energy limit
of the world-volume theory, which is n = 4 u (n ) super yang-mills theory
(sym) with gauge coupling g2

y m = 4gs.c

we review some well-known facts about this theory. the n = 4 gauge
multiplet contains besides the gauge eld six real adjoint scalars y i and four
majorana gauginos i. the action can be obtained by dimensional reduction

from n = 1, d = 10 sym and contains the potential v = pi<j [y i, y j]2.

it respects an so(6) r symmetry which is simply inherited from the original
rotational symmetry in d = 10 sym and acts on y i as a vector.

as a eld theory on r3,1, the moduli space of supersymmetric vacua is
parameterized by commuting matrices [y i, y j] = 0 up to gauge transforma-
is r6n/sn. this is identical to the parameter space for the most
tion; i.e.
general harmonic function (10) with all qi = 1 so the moduli space is identical
in the two descriptions.

if we take all y i = 0 we have an unbroken conformal invariance so(4, 2) in
the classical theory and (unusually) even after quantization, because the beta
function vanishes. this directly implies scale invariance and indirectly implies
conformal invariance in the quantum theory.d in fact we have a superconfor-
mal quantum theory in four dimensions. now the superconformal algebra is
generated by the product of the conformal and supersymmetry algebras, but is
larger  we can apply conformal inversion to the supercharges qi, to obtain
partners si, leading to a total of 32 fermionic generators. the full algebra is
su (2, 2|4) and given in 27. we shall come back to this algebra in section 5 and
give a brief descrption of some of its unitary irreducible representations.

c our conventions are such that s-duality is gs  1/gs.
d actually, when we are taking the low energy limit, any starting theory will ow to a
conformal theory. examples in which the theory only becomes conformal in this limit include
the d1-d5 black hole, the 2-brane in m theory, and many others.

6

clearly this is a very interesting point in the moduli space, however it
was never too clear what its physics might be. in particular, the usual particle
and s-matrix interpretation for quantum eld theory is problematic as greens
functions are not expected to have the required analytic structure.

on the other hand there are numerous qualitative consequences of con-
formal invariance which are well known in two dimensions and which we can
expect to hold here. one of these is the operator-state correspondence. this
is most clearly formulated by using radial quantization: we choose a point, say
x = 0 in euclidean r4, and dene the state on surfaces of constant |x|. we
then develop the canonical formalism with |x| as time and quantize; the role
of hamiltonian is then played by the dilatation operator d. the conformal
invariance prediction for the two-point function
ciij
|x|2i

hi(x)j (0)i =

(12)

then (by spectral decomposition) implies that each primary eld i(x) is asso-
ciated with a distinct state |ii = i(0)|0i of energy d |ii = i |ii.

superconformal invariance also leads to constraints on short multiplets of
supersymmetry. the generic n = 4, d = 4 supersymmetry multiplet with 256
components must be annihilated by all of the si. this requires the multiplet
to belong to the appropriate representation of so(6) to allow both sides of
{q, s} = d + j (where j are the so(6) charges) to vanish. since so(6)
charges are quantized, the dimensions and spectrum of short multiplets are
independent of continuous parameters such as the coupling constant. thus
chiral operators of n = 4 which create states in these multiplets can be
completely enumerated in perturbation theory.

one way to do this is to pick an n = 1 subalgebra of n = 4 as chiral

operators in n = 1 are those which can be written asr d2 in superspace; each

n = 4 multiplet will contain a unique sub-n = 1 chiral multiplet of largest
u (1)r charge.

the n = 4 theory in n = 1 superspace has three chiral adjoints z i and
a eld strength w , and superpotential w = trz 1[z 2, z 3]. a representative
set of chiral operators (not all) is
oi1i2...in

= trz i1 z i2 . . . z in

(13)

1n

note that this set of operators is huge as we need to distinguish all possible
orderings of the indices ik in the large n limit. on the other hand we need
to remove descendant operators such as those predicted by the equations of
motion,

w
z i = ijk[z j, z k] = d dz i  0

(14)

7

in terms of the chiral ring. in other words, any operator in (13) which includes
a commutator is a descendant.

the result is that n = 4 superconformal theory, for any value of the
yang-mills coupling constant, contains a sequence of chiral operators o1n of
dimension  = n which transform in the n-fold symmetric tensor of so(6)r.
the complete spectrum of chiral operators can be worked out 1.

note by contrast that we cannot make any statement about the spectrum

of non-chiral operators at strong coupling. an operator such as pi try iy i

will have dimension 2 in the free theory but can gain an arbitrary anomalous
dimension, presumably computable as a power series in g2
y m and n . when
these corrections are large, we have little direct control on these dimensions or
indeed any generic observable from the gauge theory point of view.

4 large n

another limit which is believed to simplify the gauge theory is that of large n .
although we can imagine dierent such limits, the best studied (and probably
best) is that of t hooft where we hold the t hooft coupling g2
y m n =  xed in
the limit. as is by now classic (and reviewed in 4) the perturbative expansion
in this limit reduces to the sum of planar diagrams where a diagram with v
vertices is weighed by the factor (g2
y m n )v . furthermore, corrections in 1/n
are organized in a topological expansion, with diagrams which can be drawn
on a genus g surface weighed by n 22g.

this gives us a formal relation to string theory, in which each operator
written as a single trace of a product of adjoints corresponds to an operator
creating or destroying a single closed string, and 1/n plays the role of the
closed string coupling constant gs. specically,

htro1i = n [o1]disk + n 1[o1]punctured torus + . . .

(15)

htro1 tro2i = n 2[o1]disk[o2]disk + n 0[o1o2]annulus

+n 0[o1]disk[o2]punctured torus + n 0[o2]disk[o1]punctured torus + . . . (16)

where each term [o1 . . .]surf ace corresponds to the contribution of a string
world-sheet with that topology and the specied operators inserted at each
boundary (or puncture).

this relation is very direct in weak coupling perturbation theory, so when
this series converges, as was true for the old matrix models 13, we can con-
dently say that large n eld theory is equivalent to a string. we might hope
to prove (16) for general g2n by analytic continuation.

8

however, we should recognize that the story for most eld theories is not so
simple  the weak coupling perturbation theory is more typically asymptotic.
this leads to many potential diculties with the string interpretation. the
simplest appears in asymptotically free theories, where g2n is dimensionful,
and the dynamically generated mass gap is known to be non-analytic at g2n =
0. in the solvable example of n = 2 sym, (16) can be seen explicitly to fail 8.
a dierent approach to string theory starts with a strong coupling ex-
pansion around g2n  . (this is a subject with a long history; see 9 and
references there.) this can at present be made precise only in two dimensions
or on the lattice but in these cases leads directly to a string with nite string
tension, computable in an expansion with nite radius of convergence. how-
ever these expansions generically predict large n transitions and a critical g2
c n
below which the string expansion breaks down.

the situation may well be better in a superconformal theory and there is no
strong argument against analyticity on the positive g2n axis in this case (but
see 18). one could then assume (16) to obtain a non-perturbative description
of the theory, as we explain in the last section.

5 near-horizon geometry and ads5 supergravity

the p-brane solutions were originally found as generalizations of the extreme
reissner-nordstrom solution of einstein-maxwell theory and this leads us to
ask whether the solutions have event horizons and should be considered as
black holes. the story is dierent for dierent solutions but what we need to
do is consider the limit r = 0 and understand the behavior of the metric there.

this limit of the (single center) metric (6) is

ds2 =(cid:18) r2

1/2l2

s(cid:19) dx2 +(cid:18) 1/2l2

r2 (cid:19)(cid:0)dr2 + r2d2
5(cid:1)

s

(17)

where we have written yi = ryi; yi is a unit vector in r6 parameterizing the
sphere s5, and d2
5 is the round metric on s5. this limit will be justied (we
can drop the 1 term in (6)) when

r << r  1/4ls.

(18)

the rst thing to notice is that the r dependence cancels out in the s5
metric, leaving us with a solution m  s5. flux quantization for the ve-form
eld strength tells us that its restriction to s5 must also be independent of r,
while the equation of motion tells us it will be a harmonic form on s5. the
stress tensor for this special case is easily computed and is invariant under

9

so(4, 1)  so(6), leading to a constant curvature solution in both s5 and
in m . the so(d  1, 1) lorentzian metric of constant negative curvature is
anti-de sitter space adsd and in fact admits an action of so(d  1, 2), as we
will see below.

now that we have obtained ads5  s5 as a near-horizon limit we can also
think in ve-dimensional terms, by making the kaluza-klein reduction of iib
supergravity on s5. this was worked out in detail in 15,16; we summarize here.
according to the kaluza-klein program we must expand all the ten dimen-
sional elds in harmonics of the isometry group so(6) of s5. in this way we
generate an innite number of ads5 elds with spins ranging from 0 to 2. each
eld has a denite so(6) content. one should then solve the linearized type
iib supergravity equations for these modes to determine the mass spectrum of
the physical states and their behaviour under the isometry group so(4, 2) of
ads5. for the ads5  s5 solution the analysis has been caried out in detail in
15.

an alternative route to obtain information about the spectrum is to use
the supersymmetry algebra su (2, 2|4) of the ads5 s5 background. let mab,
a, b = 1, 2, 3, 4 or 0, 1 denote the generators of its so(4, 2) bosonic subgroup
of isometries of ads5, and let bm
n with 1  m, n = 4 denote generators
of su (4) = so(6), the isometry group of s5. supersymmetry generators
correspond to solutions of the killing spinor equations (which set (2) to zero).
half of these were discussed in section 2: the d3-brane solution preserves an
so(3, 1) subgroup of so(4, 2), generated by the subset mab, 0  a, b  3, and
16 real supersymmetries, a 4-plet of weyl spinors of so(3, 1) which we denote
by qm with m = 1, ..4 a vector of su (4).

the commutators of qm with ka = ma4  ma,1 now produce another
4-plet of weyl spinorial charges sm , enlarging the total number of unbro-
ken supersymmetries to 16 complex. the set mab, bm
n , qm , sm generates
su (2, 2|4).e as we commented in section 3 this symmetry group follows from
combining n = 4 supersymmetry with the enlargement so(4, 2)  so(3, 1)
and is also the superconformal symmetry of n = 4 sym.

being the symmetry group of the background manifold, the kk spectrum
will be a discrete unitary (reducible) representation of su (2, 2|4). we will
discuss this representation theory in some detail shortly. the masses of 5-
dimensional modes will be given in terms of the eigenvalues of the generator
e = m0,1. this operator generates translations along a global timelike killing
vector eld of ads and therefore is a useful choice for the ads energy operator.
the simplest way 16,17 to construct the lowest weight unitary irreducible
representation (uir) of su (2, 2|4) is to introduce a set of superoscillators

e this group has an extra u (1) factor which should be factored out.17

10

s , {,  } = 

a = {ai, } and m = {br, x}, where i, , r and x = 1,2. they satisfy
the usual algebra of the creation and annihilation operators, viz, [ai, aj] = i
j,
[br, bs] = r
y . all other commutators or
anticommutators are zero. here we have denoted the hermitian conjugate
of ai by ai, etc. the su (2, 2|4) generators are constructed as bilinears in
these oscillators. for example the 16 generators bm
n of u (4) are given by
, xy, x and y.

 and {x, y} = x

the fock space of the oscillators provides the vector space on which one
particular class of lowest weight uir of su (2, 2|4) are realized. these rep-
resentations are called the doubleton representions, because only one pair of
superoscillators are used in their construction. furthermore, although the dou-
bleton representations are not part of the kk spectrum of the iib supergravity
on the ads5  s5 background, some of them can be given an interpretation of
massless states in a conformal eld thery in 4 dimensions. they are massless
because the entire set of doubleton representations are in the kernel of the
4-dimensional mass operator m2 = p apa, 17 where the momentum is dened
by pa = ma,0 + ma,1, a = 0, 1, 2, 3.

the simplest doubleton representation is built using the fock vacuum |0 >
as the lowest weight vector of su (2, 2|4). it can be shown that the multiplet
contains 24 physical states: 6 real scalars, 4 weyl spinors and a vector potential,
transforming respectively in the vector, spinor and the singlet representations
of so(6). this is the n = 4 super yang mills multiplet in d = 4.

as another example we consider the direct sum of the two doubleton repre-
sentations built on the lowest weight vectors |0 > and |0 >. the resulting
states correspond to the spectrum of the n = 4 superconformal gravity in
d = 4. the full list of the doubleton representations have been given in 17.

by taking tensor products of doubletons one builds other repesntations
of su (2, 2|4). an equivalent way to do this is to ax an index k = 1, ..., p
to the oscillators and write them as ai(k), br(k), .... the commutators then
become [ai(k), aj(k )] = i
jkk , etc. the generators of su (2, 2|4) are again
bilinear invariants of the o(p) group acting on the index k. for example,
the u (4) generators are given by (k)(k), x(k)y(k), (k)x(k) and
(k)y(k), where we sum over the repeated k label from 1 to p.

by choosing dierent values of p and dierent lowest weight spaces, one
can obtain many uirs of su (2, 2|4). each of these will contain a nite number
of uirs of so(4, 2)  so(6), and each mass shell physical mode in ads5 will
come in such a uir. however, states in the kk spectrum of iib supergravity
on ads5  s5 will correspond to using the fock vacuum |0 > as the lowest
weight vector, and live in short multiplets of su (2, 2|4). this follows simply
because kk reduction will only produce states with spins not exceeding 2.

11

other choices of the lowest weight vectors such as ...|0 > will produce a
longer spin range and thereby also longer multiplets.f

restricting attention to this choice, the multiplets are conveniently char-
acterized by their lowest weights (jl, jr, e) under the subgroup so(4) 
so(2)  so(4, 2). for example, for each p > 1, the so(4, 2) representations
dened by the lowest weight vector (1, 1, 2p + 4) contain all spin 2 modes in
ads5 transforming in the representations characterized by the dynkin label
(0, p  2, 0) of so(6). the complete multiplet contains 128 p2(p21)
fermionic
and the same number of bosonic states (see table i of 16).

12

for p = 2 the spin 2 mode is the 5-dimensional graviton which is a singlet
of so(6).
in addition this multiplet (the massless supergraviton multiplet)
contains four complex gravitini, 15 vector elds in the adjoint of so(6), plus
spin zero and spin 1/2 objects for a total of 128 + 128 physical states.

the p > 2 representations will correspond to the massive kk towers. in
fact, the complete kk spectrum on ads5  s5 is obtained by taking a single
copy of each p  2 representation. again with each so(4, 2) lowest weight
we can associate a particular mass shell mode in ads5 in a denite so(6)
representation.

to close this section we remark that since the supersymmetries transform
under so(6), so will the gravitinos. the presence of vector elds in the adjoint
of so(6) thus means that the 5-dimensional theory is one of the known gauged
supergravities 28.

6 more on ads

the so(d  1, 2) symmetry of adsd is directly analogous to the so(d + 1)
action on sd and can be realized linearly in the same way, by embedding as a
surface in one higher dimension. thus we introduce a d + 1 dimensional at
space with a lorenzian metric of signature (2, d  1) and coordinates x a, and
represent adsd as the surface satisfying

x 2

1 + x 2

0 

x 2

i = r2.

d1

xi=1

(19)

with the curvature radius r given in (18). this construction also provides
global coordinates on adsd: the relation between the d-brane coordinates
(x, r) and the x a is

f for p = 2 a complete classication of these has been given in 17.

r = x1 + x4

12

x = x r

r

.

(20)

we see that the full metric is non-singular for r  0. this region is behind an
event horizon from the point of view of an asymptotic observer in the original
d-brane metric (6).

the global structure of the ads metric is better visualized by solving the

constraint (19) in a dierent way (take r = 1):

x1 = cos t
cos 
x0 = sin t
cos 
xi = zitan
i = 1

pi z2

which leads to the metric in the form

(21)

(22)

ds2 =

1

cos2 (cid:0)dt2 + d2(cid:1) + tan2  d2

d2.

these are usually called global coordinates as they cover all of ads as
a single copy of the region 0  t  2, 0    /2 and zi  sd2. (for
d = 2 we take s0 as the two points z1 = 1). furthermore, the metric is
conformally at in the t plane, so the causal structure is easy to understand,
and is depicted in figure 1. the shaded region is the region described in the
original (minkowski) coordinates.

note that the coordinate t is periodic and thus ads space contains closed
time-like curves. often these are problematic and to avoid this we can work
instead on the universal cover by simply ignoring the periodicity of t. if we do
so, the future boundary of the shaded region is a horizon, but only because the
infalling observer is forced to leave through a copy of the original asymptotic
region. the physics is quite dierent from that of a black hole horizon.

rather, the striking feature of ads geometry is that the limit r  
(equivalently   /2) takes us to a time-like boundary, with geometry (on
the cover) sd2  r.

the presence of the timelike boundary leads to major dierences with
physics in minkowski space. for one thing, we do not have a well-posed initial
value problem unless we put boundary conditions there. of course we always
need boundary conditions at innity, but for minkowski space the boundary
conditions can be decomposed into incoming and outgoing waves, leading to
the usual idea of particle and s-matrix.

by contrast in ads a small uctuation can typically be decomposed into
normalizable and nonnormalizable components; the correct way to proceed
in such situations 25,2 is to quantize the normalizable uctuations (each such

13

t=pi

t=pi/2

 t=0

t=-pi/2

rho=0

pi/2

figure 1: penrose diagram for ads space-time

14

mode is associated with a creation and annihilation operator) while the non-
normalizable modes are instead considered to be a static background. the two
types of modes are distinguished by their asymptotics as   /2 and so the
background can be determined from boundary conditions at  = /2 uniquely
up to a choice of normalizable component.

thus we can regard all observables in adsd quantum gravity as functions
of a set of d  1 dimensional elds, in one-to-one correspondence with non-
normalizable modes and thus with elds on adsd.

7 the ads/cft correspondence

as we saw in the previous sections, superstring theory admits a class of bps
solitons  n parallel coincident d3-branes  with two very dierent descriptions
in the near-horizon limit r << r.

on the one hand, we have the dynamics of small uctuations of iib super-
gravity around the ads5  s5 background. in general this is only an approx-
imation to iib string theory. first of all, we need gs << 1 to justify ignoring
quantum correctionsg (which are ill-dened in pure supergravity). furthermore
we have stringy corrections  in an eective lagrangian language, we know that
sr4 in the pure gravity sector,
higher order corrections exist at leading order l6
and presumably at all higher orders in ls. however when the background cur-
vature radius r >> ls and all energy scales of interest satisfy els << 1, iib
supergravity is a good approximation. using (18) this corresponds to

gsn >> 1

and

gs << 1

(23)

so evidently we require n >> 1.

on the other hand, for gsn << 1 we are more tempted to regard the
d3-branes as a small perturbation of at space. from this point of view the
full dynamics is the open strings attached to the d3-branes, coupled to the
closed strings in the bulk.
if we then restrict attention to the near-horizon
limit r << r, since we have r << ls in this regime we are in the substringy
regime r << ls and can restrict attention to the lightest open strings, in other
words n = 4 sym coupled to supergravity.

actually, if gsn << 1, this is a redundant description. as was argued
in 6, by considering world-sheet duality as it works in the perturbative string
expansion, all closed string eects, including supergravity, in this limit are
actually contained in the dynamics of the open string theory. on the other

g we can treat the s-dual limits gs   and so on by rst applying iib s-duality before
making our analysis. we would reach the same conclusions in terms of the s-dual coupling
which is going to zero.

15

hand, supergravity predictions will obtain large corrections due to the massive
closed string modes.

the upshot of all this is that we have two descriptions of the 3-brane which

appear to have non-overlapping regimes of validity.

we can now consider the question: what happens when we extrapolate
this second, gauge theory description to the regime gsn >> 1 ? as long as we
consider low energies and r << ls, all of the conditions for the gauge theory
description appear to be met. but we can also fulll the condition for the
applicability of supergravity, r >> ls. could it be that both descriptions are
simultaneously valid ? if so, could it be that we can interpret the gauge theory
at nite gsn as iib string theory on ads with the ls corrections included ?

as we saw in detail, the two descriptions have a lot in common  for
example, the symmetry groups are the same. however the crucial remaining
ingredient in making such a claim is that we need to argue that the description
involving gauge theory coupled to supergravity is also redundant for gsn >> 1
 that the gauge theory includes all of the states of supergravity in this regime
as well.

using the operator-state correspondence of the gauge theory, we can re-
phrase this as follows:
if there is a one-to-one correspondence between the
operators of d = 4, n = 4 sym and the states of the ads5  s5 compact-
ication of type iib theory (including their transformation properties under
su (2, 2|4)), then gauge theory must contain the states of supergravity already
 we do not need to add them as separate degrees of freedom. since the large
n limit at xed  corresponds to weak string coupling, we expect this to work
for single string states: that these are in correspondence with single trace
operators in the gauge theory.

without results for the gauge theory at large , we can only check this for
the short multiplets, whose dimensions are unrenormalized. happily all the
states of this kk supergravity lie in short multiplets and the check for these
states works 30,1. from the arguments above we might regard this as proof;
a skeptic might reply that the one-to-one correspondence for these operators
was also required by the gauge theory coupled to supergravity picture, which
already required a gauge theory current to couple to each supergravity eld.

we can extend the conjecture to any n and  and in the large n limit
we should make contact with the classical (genus zero) limit of the iib theory.
the (polyakov) bosonic string action in the metric (17) is

s

= 1
2l2

s r d2 g(x)x x 

u2 + 1/2u2(x)2

= 1

2 r d2 1/2 (u)2

+1/2gs 5(y)( y)2.

16

(24)

after substituting u = r/l2
s, we can take the limit ls  0, and still get a
non-trivial closed string theory, whose action depends on 1/2, the curvature
radius squared (of both ads and s5) in string units. stringy corrections to
supergravity results will be naturally computed as a series in 1/1/2. the
superstring action also includes the fermions and their coupling to the back-
ground rr eld. various forms of this action have been proposed 22 though
as yet none have been quantized.

in a way the case for this stronger conjecture is better  we know there is
more than one candidate classical theory with su (2, 2|4) symmetry and this
spectrum of short multiplets (indeed taking dierent  produces dierent the-
ories) but if we could assert that all such theories fall into this one parameter
family the equivalence would be proven. this type of assumption underlies
all duality arguments but we should recognize that except in the most inten-
sively studied cases (e.g. supersymmetric gauge theory) it is at some level an
argument from ignorance, especially because we cannot assume the theory is
local in ten-dimensional space-time. thus it is worthwhile to look for further,
concrete tests of the conjecture.

for nite , we now have massive string states as well with masses de-
termined by the string tension and these would correspond to gauge theory
operators with dimension 1/2 14. the simplest picture is thus that all nonchi-
ral gauge theory operators acquire such an anomalous dimension at large , a
prediction which remains to be tested.

a more general statement of the conjecture can be made by considering the
possibility of non-trivial boundary values of the elds in ads, as we explained
in section 6. it is quite natural to associate these with non-trivial couplings to
the corresponding operators in the gauge theory. we then can conjecture the
equivalence of the complete generating functionals

z [da, y, ] e n
=zlimr i(x,r) i(x)

 sn =4+pir d4x i(x)oi(x)

[dg, , . . .] esiib

(25)

in the two quantum theories. in the large n limit, the iib side reduces to genus
zero string theory which is dominated by a single master eld; in the large
 limit this reduces to iib supergravity. thus any gauge theory correlation
function can be computed in this limit by a corresponding computation in
classical eld theory. for more details on this we refer to 30.

perhaps the most striking result which has been obtained in this direction
is 24,5 in which three-point functions of chiral operators are compared and found
to agree at large n in the two limits of large and small .

17

8 wilson loops

quite a lot of work has been done on the correspondence following 20 and we
will not even try to summarize it all here. however as of this writing it seems
fair to say that while some striking agreements and no denite contradictions
have been found, no convincing microscopic argument has been made for why
it should work.

by a microscopic argument we mean some identication in one limit (say,
perturbative gauge theory) of the degrees of freedom which control the other
limit, as we have in the earlier examples of superstring duality. for example,
the d0-branes of iia superstring theory clearly become the lightest bps states
in the strong coupling limit, leading to the conjecture that this is eleven di-
mensional supergravity; furthermore we have a very explicit denition of the
d0-branes in the weak coupling limit, which we could in principle extrapolate
to dene the supergravity, as in 3. making this extrapolation in practice is
dicult as it seems to require understanding bound states of large numbers of
d0-branes, but at least we know the bound states exist.

in the present case, the analogous object would seem to be the iib string
in the n = 4 gauge theory, and a convincing argument that the string is
present in the gauge theory would remove any doubt. although it has been
repeatedly conjectured over the years that gauge theories contain strings in
the large n limit, based on the formal correspondence we described in section
4, all attempts to make this concrete so far have run into problems.

all attempts we know about have identied the wilson loop operators
in the gauge theory as string creation operators and so we should start by
making sense of this identication for ads5  s5. now a wilson loop in gauge
theory is a four-dimensional object and to formulate an operator which creates
a superstring in the nine-dimensional boundary of ads5  s5 we clearly need
to include the operators y i as well. in general we also need to specify the spin
state of the string and thus insert operators ; however this should not aect
the leading results in an expansion in the inverse string tension 1/1/2, which
are plausibly given just by minimizing the nambu-goto action in ads5  s5
for a world-sheet with the specied boundary. we thus arrive (for large ) at
the conjecture 21

1
n

htrp erl

ia+y ig.t. = esn.g.|=l.

(26)

let us consider a boundary at a single point in s5 and a rectangular wilson
loop l in r4 with two sides at distance x 1 = l extending for a time x 0 =
t . this loop will be spanned by a world-sheet which in the large t limit will be

18

independent of x 0, so the amplitude will be determined by a static potential,
exp t v (l, ). the string can then be described by world-sheet coordinates
 = x 0 and  = x 1; its embedding in ads is determined by u(). the
nambu-goto action then reduces to

sn.g. = 1/2tz dsu2 +

1

(cid:19)2
u2 (cid:18) u

.

minimizing this action is a solvable problem 21 and the result is

v 

()

l

=

421/2
( 1
4 )4l

(27)

(28)

conformal invariance guaranteed that the amplitude would be a function of
t /l and thus the non-trivial information is in the eective coupling ().

we can compare this to the gauge theory at weak coupling, at least on
a qualitative level. there the leading contribution comes from exchange of a
single gluon or scalar, giving

 =


2

+ . . .

(29)

we can easily imagine a continuous, monotonic function () with these two
asymptotic behaviors, giving us a consistent picture.

from the iib string point of view, the dependence   1/2 at large 
comes just because the string tension ts  1/l2
s. on the other hand it is
quite surprising from the gauge theory point of view, so conrming this would
provide strong new evidence for the conjectured string. however, no eective
techniques for this gauge theory computation exist at present.

a natural starting point which takes the large n limit but keeps  nite is
the loop equation approach, rst formulated for pure ym theory by migdal
and makeenko 23. let

so that the complete set of wilson loop operators is trw (l) for all loops l
starting and ending at a point x. (this is in pure gauge theory; adding the
additional elds of sym and including loops such as (26) is easy at this formal
level.)

w (l)  p eirl

a

(30)

the starting point is the schwinger-dyson equations,

0 =r [da] tr (cid:16)

a(x) w (l)(cid:17) e n
= hpl1l2=l trw (l1)trw (l2)i

 trf 2



19

 n

 htrw ( f w (l)i.

(31)

using techniques described in 23, the second term can be rewritten as a dif-
ferential operator on loop space, a dierence of w (l) and w (l) where l
is obtained from l by adding innitesimal pieces of loop at x. the large n
limit is then taken by using (16) on the rst term and keeping only the o(n 2)
part. the nal result is a closed equation for the o(n ) expectation values of
all wilson loops (or master eld),

htrw (l)i  htrw (l)i =

xhtrw (l1)ihtrw (l2)i.

(32)

setting the left hand side to zero would just be the classical equation of motion;
if l intersects itself at the point x we also obtain a quantum source term which
is a sum over all ways of intercommuting the loop l at x.

all this is precise for a regulated gauge theory and one can argue that
area law is a natural ansatz which solves it (this sounds good for pure ym);
furthermore one can reproduce conventional weak coupling perturbation theory
by expanding the w (l)s in powers of the elds. however its non-linearity
makes direct contact with string theory  e.g. checking whether a concrete
rst quantized string wave functional [x()] is a solution  quite dicult.

furthermore we know no regulated form of pure n = 4 sym which pre-
serves the supersymmetry, so using this probably requires postulating a renor-
malized form of the equation. in addition we run into all of the old problems
of qcd string 11 such as the great dierence between a loop functional w [l] of
continuous loops l, and all known superstring loop functionals [x()] which
have support on discontinuous loops.

nevertheless, now that we have a precise and better motivated conjecture
for the appropriate string in this case, we can hope that progress along these
lines will be made in the near future.

references

1. l. andrianopoli and s. ferrara, phys. lett. b430 (1998) 248; hep-

th/9803171.

2. v. balsubramanian, p. kraus and a. lawrence, hep-th/9805171.
3. t. banks, w. fischler, s. h. shenker, l. susskind, hep-th/9610043.
4. s. coleman, 1/n , 1979 erice lecture, reprinted in aspects of symmetry.
5. e. dhoker, d. z. freedman and w. skiba, hep-th/9807098.
6. m. r. douglas, d. kabat, p. pouliot and s. h. shenker, nucl.phys. b485

(1997) 85; hep-th/9608024.

20

7. m. r. douglas, j. polchinski and a. strominger, jhep 9712 (1997) 003;

hep-th/9703031.

8. m. r. douglas and s. h. shenker, nucl.phys. b447 (1995) 271; hep-

th/9503163.

9. m. r. douglas, large n gauge theory  expansions and transitions,

in nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 41 (1995) 66; hep-th/9409098.

10. m. j. du, b. e. w. nilsson and c. n. pope, phys. rept. 130 (1986)

1-142.

11. gauge fields and strings, a. m. polyakov, harwood 1987. let us also
mention some comments on qcd string by m. r. douglas, pp. 205
213 in the proceedings of strings 93, world scientic, hep-th/9401073;
and p. horava, hep-th/9811028.

12. g. w. gibbons, nucl. phys. b207 (1982) 337; r. kallosh and a. peet,

phys. rev. d46 (1992) 5223; hep-th/9209116.

13. p. ginsparg and g. moore, 1992 tasi lectures, hep-th/9304011.
14. s. gubser, i. klebanov and a. peet, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 3915; hep-

th/9602135.

15. h. j. kim, l. j. romans and p. van nieuwenhuizen, phys. rev. d32

(1985) 389.

16. m. gunaydin and n. marcus, class. and quantum gravity, 2 (1985) l11
17. m. gunaydin, d. minic and m. zagermann, hep-th/9806042 and hep-

th/9810226.

18. m. li, hep-th/9807196.
19. j. maldacena, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 68 (1998) 17; hep-th/9709099.
20. j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231; hep-th/9711200.
21. j. maldacena, phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 4859; hep-th/9803002.
22. r. r. metsaev and a. a. tseytlin, hep-th/9806095; r. kallosh and a.

a. tseytlin, hep-th/9808088.

23. a. a. migdal, phys. rept. 102 (1983) 199-290.
24. s. lee, s. minwalla, m. rangamani and n. seiberg, hep-th/9806074.
25. n. seiberg and s. shenker, phys. rev. d45 (1992) 4581.
26. a. strominger and c. vafa, phys. lett. b379 (1996) 99, hep-th/9601029.
27. superspace, s. j. gates et. al., benjamin/cummings 1983.
28. supergravities in diverse dimensions, eds. a. salam and e. sezgin,

world scientic 1989.

29. superstring theory, m. b. green et. al., cambridge univ. press 1987.
30. e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253; hep-th/9802150.

21

