mit-ctp-2831
hep-th/9902179

9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
4
2

 

 
 

1
v
9
7
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

five-branes, seven-branes and

five-dimensional en eld theories

oliver dewolfe, amihay hanany, amer iqbal, emanuel katz

center for theoretical physics,
laboratory for nuclear science,

department of physics

massachusetts institute of technology

cambridge, massachusetts 02139, u.s.a.

e-mail: odewolfe, hanany, amikatz@mit.edu, iqbal@ctpa04.mit.edu

february 1999

abstract

we generalize the (p, q) 5-brane web construction of ve-dimensional eld theories
by introducing (p, q) 7-branes, and apply this construction to theories with a one-
dimensional coulomb branch. the 7-branes render the exceptional global symmetry of
these theories manifest. additionally, 7-branes allow the construction of all en theories
up to n = 8, previously not possible in 5-brane congurations. the exceptional global
symmetry in the eld theory is a subalgebra of an ane symmetry on the 7-branes,
which is necessary for the existence of the system. we explicitly determine the quantum
numbers of the bps states of all en theories using two simple geometrical constraints.

1 introduction

five-dimensional n = 1 gauge theories have been much explored in the last few years.
those theories with a one-dimensional coulomb branch have a particularly rich variety of
descriptions in string theory. they were rst described by the dynamics of d4-branes in a
type i background of d8-branes and orientifold o8-planes, where it was determined that
they possess enhanced exceptional global symmetry at the origin of parameter space, which is
a superconformal xed point [1]. these theories also appear in m-theory compactications
on a calabi-yau threefold with a vanishing four-cycle [2, 3]. such complex surfaces, called del
pezzo manifolds, are in one-to-one correspondence with the ve-dimensional theories with
a single coulomb modulus. the bps spectrum can be obtained by using the intersection
properties of various curves in the del pezzo [4, 5].

finally, some of the ve-dimensional theories appear as the eective eld theory on a web
of (p, q) 5-branes in type iib [6, 7, 8, 9]. the web has a single face, whose size corre-
sponds to the parameter of the coulomb branch. bps states come from (p, q) strings and
string junctions stretched between the 5-branes. this realization is appealing, as parameters
(such as masses and the gauge coupling) and moduli of the theory may be easily read o
the 5-brane geometry. however, it has its drawbacks. the exceptional global symmetry
is not particularly evident, and must be inferred from the correspondence with other pre-
sentations. moreover, this setup becomes problematic beyond the e3 conguration. those
brane congurations producing e4 and e5 involve parallel external legs, which could result
in six-dimensional modes. those corresponding to e6, e7 and e8 are worse, for the external
legs would cross, and the congurations cannot exist. this is related to the lack of a toric
description for the corresponding del pezzos [10].

in this paper we generalize the (p, q) 5-brane setup so as to resolve these problems. we do
this by introducing (p, q) 7-branes to the picture. this can be done at no additional cost
in supersymmetry. the external (p, q) 5-branes are allowed to terminate at nite distance
on the appropriate (p, q) 7-brane. motion of each 7-brane along the direction of the 5-brane
does not aect the ve-dimensional theory. one may then bring the 7-branes within the
5-brane face, so that the external legs vanish altogether. the bps states of the theory are
hypothesized to switch from being 5-5 string junctions to 5-7 junctions for certain regions of
parameter space.

from this point of view the global symmetries are manifest, as the technology of enhanced 7-
brane algebras can be brought to bear [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. the symmetry algebras that
appear on 7-brane congurations have been classied [16, 17], and it is possible to determine
the weight vector associated to any string junction with support on such a conguration [13].
moreover, the string junctions have a natural intersection form inherited from curves in k3
[14, 18], which may be used to determine the bps spectrum in a fashion similar to the del
pezzo case. in fact, the symmetries of the 7-branes turn out to be not just en, but the ane

algebras ben, rst observed in [15]. we will show how the constraint that a junction end on

the 5-branes reduces the eective symmetry to just en, consistent with our expectations for
the eld theory. the ane character of the 7-branes is not irrelevant, however; the 5-branes

2

themselves have an associated weight vector corresponding to the imaginary root of the ane
algebra, and in fact a 7-brane conguration must be ane in order to support a 5-brane web
with a single face.

moreover, with both 5-branes and 7-branes we can describe any of the en theories, all the
way up to e8. this is because there is no obstruction to placing certain additional 7-branes
inside the 5-brane web, thereby forming the entire en series. then for n  4, these 7-
branes simply cannot be brought out of the 5-brane web and moved o to innite distance
without creating the problem of parallel/crossing legs. when the face shrinks to zero size,
we nd that for n  3 the conguration reverts to having no 7-branes within the face before
reaching the superconformal point. for precisely the n  4 cases where no conguration
existed without 7-branes, the xed point occurs when the face collapses around a subset of

the 7-branes. the nite algebra en  ben is restored on this subset of branes.

in the section 2 we will recapitulate the (p, q) 5-brane web setup and the nature of the ve-
dimensional gauge theories. then in section 3 we discuss placing 7-branes in the background
and allowing 5-brane external legs to end on them, and section 4 describes how when the
7-branes are moved inside the face, the 5-5 strings can be replaced by 5-7 strings. section 5
reviews the way string junctions realize algebras on 7-branes, and shows how the en theories

correspond to ben brane congurations. the fact that only a nite symmetry is realized on

the spectrum is explained. in section 6 we detail the case of e1 explicitly. we then compare
5-7-brane techniques to the del pezzo realization of ve-dimensional theories and explore
the predictions for bps spectra in section 7. finally section 8 discusses the approach to the
superconformal point. we conclude with some speculative remarks.

2 five-dimensional theories and (p,q) 5-brane webs

we are concerning ourselves with the study of ve-dimensional gauge theories with 8 super-
charges. the vector multiplets contain one real scalar, and we are interested in those theories
with a one-dimensional coulomb branch associated to a single vector multiplet. we denote
the various theories by their associated exceptional global symmetry, en. for a discussion
of more general ve-dimensional theories with 8 supercharges, see [19, 20].

most of these theories, the ones with 1  n  8, can be realized as the low-energy limit of
su(2) with nf = n  1 hypermultiplets. the exceptional symmetries were found by seiberg
[1] using type i arguments. the restriction nf  7 was motivated from eld theory as
well. two additional theories, e1 and e0, were identied by owing from the e2 theory [3].
the former has a u(1) global symmetry, and is identied as the ir limit of a pure su(2)
gauge theory with nontrivial zz 2 -angle [2], while the latter has no global symmetry and no
interpretation as a gauge theory since there are no w-bosons on the coulomb branch.

five-dimensional gauge theories are characterized by a gauge coupling 1/g2 with the dimen-
sions of mass, as well as (real) masses for possible hypermultiplet matter. the prepotential
is restricted to be cubic. even in the absence of a cubic term classically, one is generically

3

generated at one-loop. a classical cubic term is an additional parameter, and can be thought
of as having arisen from matter already integrated out. the bps spectrum includes not just
w-bosons and quarks, but also instantons, which are particles in 5d. furthermore, the bps
spectrum also features magnetic strings.

let us review the (p, q) 5-brane setup. the (p, q) 5-branes ll the common directions 01234,
which is the spacetime of the eective ve-dimensional theory.
in addition each 5-brane
occupies 1-dimensional support in the 56 plane, with the slope of the curve determined at
each point by the charges (p, q) of the 5-brane and the expectation value of the complexied
coupling  =  + ie:

x5 + ix6 || p +  q .

(2.1)

the 5-branes occupy a point in the 789 directions, which will not play a role in what follows.

three 5-branes can meet at a point as long as charge is conserved: pi(pi, qi) = 0. thus we

obtain a (p, q) 5-brane web.

the slope condition stems from the requirement of supersymmetry. (together with charge
conservation, it can also be thought of as the condition for mechanical equilibrium.) type
iib string theory has 32 supercharges, organized into two 16-component majorana-weyl
spinors ql, qr with the same chirality: ql = ql, qr = qr, where  = 0    9. if we
place a d5-brane (= (1,0)-brane) in the 012345 directions, the supersymmetries preserved
are lql + rqr with the constant spinors  satisfying

l = 012345r ,

(2.2)

which as usual preserves 1/2 of the supersymmetry of the vacuum. if in addition we place
an ns 5-brane (= (0, 1)-brane) in the 012346 directions, we have the additional constraints

l = 012346l ,

r = 012346r ,

(2.3)

if any (p, q) 5-brane is added to
and a total of 1/4 of the supersymmetry is preserved.
the conguration, no additional supersymmetry will be broken as long as it lls the 01234
directions and a line in the 56 plane determined by (2.1). thus the (p, q) 5-brane web has
an eective ve-dimensional eld theory with 8 supercharges, or n = 1. each face of the 5-
brane web corresponds to a modulus on the coulomb branch, and thus we will be considering
congurations with one face.

the bps particles in the spectrum arise from strings and string junctions stretching between
the 5-branes, while the bps strings are 3-branes wrapping the face.
iib strings are also
characterized by charges (p, q), and they form junctions and webs in the plane as 5-branes
do. a (p, q) string can end on a (p, q) 5-brane, and they must be perpendicular at the contact
point; thus the slopes of string segments are rotated 90 degrees from those of 5-branes (2.1).

in fig. 1a, we show the 5-brane web for the e1 theory, with the value  = i chosen to
make the slopes of the 5-branes agree with their charge vectors; in the absence of 7-branes
 is a constant, and its value is a superuous parameter from the point of view of the

4

figure 1: a. the 5-brane web corresponding to the e1 theory. b. the 5-brane web corre-
sponding to the e2 theory, with horizontal external leg (d5-brane) generating a avor.

ve-dimensional theory [6, 7]. the face is made of two d5-branes and two ns5-branes; the
external legs have charges (1, 1) and (1, 1). the basic bps states are the w-boson, realized
as a f-string connecting the d5-branes, and the instanton, a d-string stretching between
ns5-branes; these are a doublet of the e1 = su(2) global symmetry, and other bps states
can be thought of as linear combinations of these. this eld theory is pure su(2) gauge
theory (with vanishing -angle); avors are associated with d5-brane external legs, as in the
realization of e2 in fig. 1b.

let us demonstrate that 7-branes may be added to the conguration without breaking any
more supersymmetry. combining (2.2) and (2.3), we obtain

l = (012345)(012346)r ,

= 56r ,

but since ql,r = ql,r and 2 = 1, we have l,r = l,r as well, and then

l = 56r ,

= 01234789r ,

(2.4)

(2.5)
(2.6)

which is recognized as the constraint on the preserved supersymmetries in the presence of
a d7-brane at a point in the 56 plane and lling the other directions.
in fact, all (p, q)
7-branes preserve this same supersymmetry. thus we can introduce 7-branes to the 5-brane
web without breaking any additional supersymmetry. this is reminiscent of the introduction
of d3-branes to a dierent d5/ns5 system with a three-dimensional eective eld theory
[21]. since 7-branes are a source for  the condition (2.1) will become a complicated function
of position in the 56 plane.

3 7-branes and 5-brane webs

5

figure 2: a d7-brane added to the e1 conguration, adding a avor and producing e2.

3.1 ending the 5-brane web on 7-branes

consider the e1 web conguration with a d7-brane inserted; we have placed the 7-brane
branch cut where it will not aect the 5-brane system, as shown in fig. 2a. fundamental
strings can stretch between the d7-brane and the d5-branes, creating quark hypermultiplets
in the fundamental representation of su(2), the gauge group of the 5d theory. the length
of these strings corresponds to the mass of the quarks, and thus the vertical position of the
d7 is the quark bare mass parameter. moving the d7 brane horizontally within the face
does not change the length of the strings, and therefore does not aect any parameters of
the theory [21].

in fact, one can even move the d7 brane horizontally past the ns5 brane. via the familiar
brane creation [21], a d5-brane prong will form, going to the right of the ns5-brane and
ending on the d7-brane, as in fig. 2b. the quarks now result from strings going between
the original d5-branes in the face and the newly-created d5, and as we move the d7-brane
horizontally, the quark length and hence the mass parameters do not change. thus horizontal
motion of the d7 is irrelevant to the eld theory everywhere. since we can move the d7-
brane to innity, we conclude that from the point of view of the 5d theory a semi-innite
d5-brane is equivalent to a nite d5-brane ending on a d7. this is consistent with the fact
that both the d7 brane and the semi-innite d5 brane are innitely massive from the 5d
perspective. this makes their vertical motion a parameter of the theory.

one can tune the locations of the external legs such that as the face shrinks, the ns5-branes
collapse together before the d5-branes do. in this case the situation can be interpreted as
an su(2) living on the ns5-branes, rather than the d5-branes, thanks to s-duality; this is
known as continuation past innite coupling [6, 7]. quarks in the ns5 theory can be provided
by external ns5 legs, which we can analogously end on (0, 1) 7-branes, again expecting that
motion of the 7-brane along the path of the ns5 will not aect the parameters of the 5d
theory; these parameters are related to the parameters and moduli of the theory before
continuation past innite coupling. thus in general, we may take both ns5 and d5-branes
to end on (0, 1) and (0, 1) 7-branes respectively, and motion along the external legs should

6

figure 3: a. the external 5-branes of the e1 web can end on 7-branes. b. the 7-branes move
within the 5-brane face, removing the external 5-branes entirely.

not aect any parameters or moduli of the d5 brane theory.

since this is true for both types of 7-branes, we propose that any semi-innite (p, q) 5-brane
leaving the (p, q) web may be replaced with a nite 5-brane ending on the appropriate (p, q)
7-brane. this 7-brane can be moved along its prong without changing the 5d eld theory.
for example, the pure su(2) theory conguration can be modied so that all external legs
end on 7-branes, as in fig. 3a. the dashed lines represent the 7-brane branch cuts, which
point away from the web so as not to disturb the charges of the 5-branes. the dotted lines
show the web at the origin of the coulomb branch. note that the presence of 7-branes
creates a non-trivial metric. thus the 5-branes follow curved geodesics, rather than straight
lines of a given slope, and we will use the slopes merely to indicate the 5-brane charges.

let us now ask what would happen if we move all the 7-branes, along their prong directions,
into the center of the web. as each brane passes the corner to which it is connected, brane
creation will occur and the 5-brane prong will disappear. the result will be a single 5-brane
loop going around the 7-branes, with its (p, q) nature changing as it passes the various branch
cuts, as in fig. 3b. since the loop is closed, this is indeed a ve-dimensional theory.

evidence for the existence of such a loop may be found by taking the parameter 1/g2 to be
very large, resulting in a short and wide web, and then taking the size of the face suciently
large. the four 7-branes become two (1, 1) and (1, 1) pairs, each of which is the quantum
resolution of the o7 orientifold [22]. for suciently large modulus they can be treated as
two o7-planes, and in this limit the geodesic corresponding to the loop may be explicitly
constructed. indeed, its length is found to be independent of the size of the face, as expected
from a modulus deformation of the web. in addition, performing a t-duality transformation
along the 5-brane direction, one obtains seibergs iia setup of the same gauge theory. here,
the d5 brane becomes a d4 brane, and the two o7-planes merge into a single o8-plane.

7

figure 4: the w-boson (top) and instanton (bottom) can be continuously deformed from
being 5-5 stings to 5-7 string junctions.

3.2 bps states as 5-7 strings

in the case of the familiar transition of a pronged d7 brane across an ns5 brane, it is
known that certain states of the 5d theory (namely the quarks) which came from d5-d5
strings, instead originate from d5-d7 strings. we would like to show that upon moving the
7-branes into the face of the su(2) web, every bps state described by 5-5 strings may be
alternatively described by 5-7 strings. here, a description entails understanding of a states
quantum numbers under the local and global symmetries. since the states we consider are
bps, this information is also enough to proscribe their masses.

the map between 5-5 and 5-7 strings is achieved through the continuous deformation of
the 5-5 string junctions. once the 7-branes are inside the face, the web consists of a single
5-brane loop. hence, one may drag the endpoints of each 5-string junction until they lie, for
example, entirely on the top (d5-brane portion) of the loop. as the junction is deformed
in such fashion, prongs on 7-branes will form via brane creation. the result is a 5-7 string
junction, starting at the 7-branes and ending on the top of the 5-brane loop. for the cases
of the instanton and the w-boson this process is displayed in fig. 4.

let us stress that metric around the 7-branes is nontrivial, and therefore for generic locations
of the 7-branes we do not know if the actual bps (geodesic) junction is a 5-5 or a 5-7 string.
rather, we do not expect these deformations to change the quantum numbers associated
to the bps state. one way to see this is to note that type iib-theory with 7-branes on a

8

sphere is dual to m-theory on a k3-surface, and string junctions correspond to membranes
wrapping complex curves in k3. the quantum numbers of a junction are determined by the
homology cycle wrapped by the membrane and its intersection numbers, which are invariant
under continuous transformations. hence, to describe the junction curve we may choose any
convenient homology representative, whether it is the bps (area minimizing) one or not.

the advantage of representing the states of the theory as 5-7 string junctions is that the action
of the global symmetry becomes more transparent. each 7-brane has a u(1) gauge theory
living on its worldvolume. when 7-branes of various types are able to become coincident,
gauge symmetry enhancement will occur in their worldvolume theory. the string junctions
leaving the 7-branes will thus fall naturally under representations of this enhanced symmetry
group. therefore, this enhancement translates into a global symmetry in the 5d theory. this
is the subject of the next section.

4 string junctions and 7-branes

we now turn to a review of the symmetries arising on (p, q) 7-brane congurations, and
how they are realized on (p, q) strings ending on the 7-branes. using the notation of [11],
we will often refer to 7-branes with charges [1, 0], [1, 1] and [1, 1] as a, b and c-branes,
respectively.

a conguration of (p, q) 7-branes generates an eight-dimensional worldvolume gauge theory,
whose gauge group g is determined by the charges of the 7-branes when their branch cuts
are given a well-dened ordering, generalizing the familiar u(n) gauge group that arises
when n 7-branes with the same (p, q) charge coincide. in addition, g appears as a global
symmetry on the worldvolume of some probe brane or branes brought near the 7-brane
conguration. thus in our example, we expect the 7-branes to induce a global symmetry in
the ve-dimensional theory.

the objects charged under the symmetry of the 7-branes are various strings and string
junctions; those beginning and ending on the 7-branes are the adjoint representation, while
various other representations appear as string junctions beginning on the 7-branes and ending
on another object, such as a 5-brane. only a (p, q) string can end on a (p, q) 7-brane. string
junctions stretch in the plane orthogonal to the 7-branes, and may end on one another in
agreement with charge conservation to form webs just as the 5-branes do. the slopes are a
ninety-degree rotation from those of the 5-branes, as discussed in section 2.

a given string junction j with support on n 7-branes is characterized by n invariant charges
qi, where i labels the 7-branes. the qi are integers, and are a combination of the number
of string prongs ending on a given brane and the number of string segments passing that
branes branch cut. they measure how much charge ows out of each 7-brane into j, and
are invariant under brane creation transformations.

the space of junctions is a lattice, and it has an inner product dened on it, the intersection

9

number. this quantity can be thought of as being inherited from the intersection of curves
in k3. (for more details, see [13].) as discussed in [13], the intersection of two junctions j
and j receives contributions from each brane on which both have prongs, and from points
where a string segment with charges (p, q) belonging to one junction crosses a segment with
charges (r, s) belonging to the other:

(j, j) = 

nxi=1

nin

i + xcrossings

p r
q s

,

(4.7)

where ni is the number of prongs leaving the ith brane minus the number entering it, and the
(p, q) and (r, s) segments are ordered in a counterclockwise fashion. this can be expressed
entirely in terms of the qi and qi, but we shall not do so here.

alternately, a junction can be specied by its lie algebra weight vector  with respect to
the group g, which includes possible u(1) charges and is given by n  2 dynkin labels, and
the asymptotic charges carried away from the 7-branes, p and q. in terms of these quantities
the intersection form is just

(j, j) =    + f (p, q; p, q) ,

(4.8)

where    is exactly the usual lie algebraic inner product on weight vectors, and f is a
certain expression quadratic in the charges and symmetric between (p, q) and (p, q), which is
specied by the total monodromy of the 7-branes [16]. for the root junctions the asymptotic
charges vanish, and the intersection of the simple root junctions is just minus the cartan
matrix of g.

a necessary condition for a junction to be bps is that it obey [14]

(j, j)  2 + gcd(p, q) .

(4.9)

this is because bps junctions are associated to holomorphic curves in k3, and hence must
satisfy (j, j) = 2g + b  2 where g  0 is the genus and b = gcd(p, q) is the number of
boundaries of the curve.

7-brane congurations realizing the simply laced algebras an, dn4 and e6, e7, e8 corre-
spond to kodaira singularities of k3 when the branes are brought to a point. other brane
congurations cannot be so collapsed, such as the dn3 associated to seiberg-witten probe
theories and en5. there are distinct 7-brane congurations for e1 and e1 with su(2) and
u(1) symmetry, respectively, as well as e0 with no symmetry, exactly as in the 5-brane case.

perhaps surprisingly, there also exist 7-brane congurations whose associated string junctions
ll out the adjoint representation of an innite-dimensional algebra. these cases are never
collapsible, so the algebra should not be thought of as being a familiar gauge symmetry. in

[15], it was shown how the ane versions of all the exceptional algebras, ben, appear when a

certain new 7-brane is added to the regular en groupings. interestingly, these are the only
ane algebras realized on 7-branes [17].

10

returning to the problem of the 7-branes in the 5-brane web, we now ask the question of
what symmetry is associated to the 7-branes with the same (p, q) charges as the external
5-brane legs they replaced.

the answer is that for the en 5d theory, the full global symmetry of the 7-branes turns out

the conguration bcbc. there are two obvious root junctions, the bb and cc strings,
which we will call 0 and 1. they have self-intersection (i, i) = 2, and intersection

to be ben. let us return to the example of the e1 theory. the four associated 7-branes form
(0, 1) = 2, and thus are simple roots for an dsu(2) = be1 algebra.
have ben symmetry, even for the cases e4 and e5 where there were parallel external legs and
continued all the way up to an be8 conguration, which will realize the e8 ve-dimensional

for the other cases where 5-brane webs realize an en theory, the associated 7-branes also

the ve-dimensional theory was ill-dened. as we shall see, the sequence of 7-branes may be

theory.

one might be tempted to conclude from this that the 5d theories should realize an innite-
dimensional global symmetry. however, this proves not to be the case. before explaining
why this is so, let us briey review a few properties of ane algebras.

each nite simple compact lie algebra g has an ane extension bg. if t a generate g, bg has

n , k, d} where the grade m  zz, and the commutation relations are

the generators {t a

ht a

m2i = f ab

m1, t b
[d, t a
[k, t a

m1+m2 + ab m1 m1+m2k ,
c t c
m] = m t a
m ,
m] = [k, d] = 0 ,

(4.10)

where f ab

c and ab are the structure constants and killing form of g, respectively.

0, k, d}. in addition to an innite number of roots associated to the generators e

let {h i, e} be a set of cartan and root generators for g. the cartan subalgebra of bg is

{h i
m, there
are also roots associated to h i
m, m 6= 0. these are all integer multiples of the imaginary
root . the imaginary root has a few interesting properties, including   i = 0 for any root,
including  itself.

ane algebras have highest weight representations as nite algebras do, but dier in having
no lowest weight. the level k()     is a constant over a representation, as subtracting
simple roots will not change it.

when ane algebras are realized on junctions, the level turns out to be a linear combination
of p and q. (ane congurations are in fact the only ones where the asymptotic charges
correspond to a lie algebraic quantity.) the level can be determined by intersection with the
imaginary root junction , k(j) = (j, ). the imaginary root junction obeys (, ) = 0,
and since for a general junction with no asymptotic charges j2 = 2g  2, we see that unlike
the usual root junctions with g = 0,  is a genus one object. as such it can be realized as
a closed loop surrounding the 7-branes. the (p, q) charge of a segment of the loop changes
as it passes each branch cut, but after passing all the branch cuts it comes back to itself, a

11

situation only possible when the 7-branes realize an ane algebra. the intersection is

(j, j) =    + f (p, q; p, q)  mk  mk ,

(4.11)

where    and f are the same as for the conguration realizing the corresponding nite
algebra, and m is the grade of the junction, given by the number of  factors it contains.
for the en case we have

f (p, q; p, q) =

1

9  n (cid:16)pp  1

2(n  3)(pq + qp) + (2n  9)qq(cid:17) .

(4.12)

rst b branch cut, becoming a (0, 1) string, and then cross the rst c cut, becoming (1, 0).
the second pair of cuts turn it into (0, 1) and then (1, 0) again, after which it is free to loop

let us present  for the bcbc conguration, which is be1. a (1, 0) string may cross the
around and join itself. higher ben congurations are obtained by adding a-branes, whose
branch cuts do not aect the (1, 0) string, so  exists as before. be1 and e0 are slightly

dierent, but  still starts and ends as a (1, 0) string; details can be found in [15, 17].

now consider the 5-brane web conguration. once a 7-brane moves inside the face, the
external leg vanishes, and instead it is the 7-brane branch cut that changes the (p, q) character
of the 5-brane. when all 7-branes are inside the face, the entire 5-brane conguration now
forms a loop around them, changing (p, q) labels at each branch cut but coming back to
itself after all branch cuts. in fact, the 5-brane web in each case traces the same curve with
the same charges as the imaginary root junction .

this is an interesting result. recall that only ane 7-brane congurations can support
nontrivial loops with one face; the ane character is thus essential for the existence of the 5-
brane web. this provides an oblique reason why only exceptional ane algebras are realized
by 7-brane congurations; others would lead to new ve-dimensional theories with other
global symmetries, which are not seen in the other string realizations of these theories. in
particular, the ane exceptional 7-brane congurations are in one-to-one correspondence
with del pezzo surfaces.

we have suggested that there should be regions in parameter space where the bps states
are 5-7 strings; this turns out to be a useful way to obtain the quantum numbers of states,
since the 7-branes make the global symmetry manifest. however, we must explain why the
ane character of the 7-branes is invisible to the eld theory.

a junction leaving an ben conguration of 7-branes is characterized by its nite en weight

vector , a grade m, and charges p and q; one linear combination of these charges determines
the level k. however, there is a restriction on the possible quantum numbers of a junction
that appears in the 5d theory: its (p, q) charges must match those of the segment of 5-brane
on which it ends. but since the 5-brane loop traces the same curve as , the level of a
junction j that can end on the 5-brane is, from (4.7):

k(j)  (, j) =

p p
q
q
= 0 .

12

,

(4.13)

thus the restriction on junctions which can end on the 5-brane conguration is precisely
that they have vanishing level. this will be the reason why only a nite remnant of the
ane algebra survives as a global symmetry in the ve-dimensional spacetime.

for deniteness, let us consider junctions that end on the top (1, 0) 5-brane; as before,
junctions ending elsewhere on the 5-brane loop can be slid along until they end at the top,
possibly crossing branch cuts or undergoing brane creation along the way. to end on this
5-brane the junctions must satisfy q = 0, and in fact in this presentation k = q [15]. now
p is related to the electric charge of the state under the cartan generator of the 5d su(2)
gauge theory ne [7], by

ne = p/2 .

(4.14)

note that ne is properly thought of as being a linear combination of the u(1) factors on each
5-brane, which is why it is invariant as the ends of the junction are moved around the inside
of the face.

the en weight vector  will characterize the (nite) global symmetry quantum numbers of
the state. we are still left with the grade m, which we now claim is irrelevant to the 5d
theory.

consider a junction with p (1, 0) prongs on the top d5-brane. take any one of these prongs
and slide it along the loop of 5-brane until it has gone once around and returns to the top.
during this process, it must pass through all the branch cuts, and thus its invariant charges
change exactly by the addition of the charges of ; in other words m changes by 1 with other
quantities xed. however, we do not expect any of the eld theory quantum numbers to be
changed under this process. hence when a junction ends on a 5-brane loop, the quantity m
ceases to be an invariant, but instead can be changed through continuous transformations.
the nal value of m will be determined simply by the junction minimizing its length. hence
this parameter does not exist in the 5d eld theory, consistent with the fact that it has
not been observed by other methods. note how in the junction intersection form (4.11), all
dependence on m drops out when k = 0, and it reduces to the same intersection form as the
nite case (4.8).

a d3-brane in the vicinity of an en 7-brane conguration will realize a four-dimensional
n = 2 theory with en global symmetry. the junctions leaving the 7-branes with q = 0 are in

one-to-one correspondence with the ones realizing the bps spectrum from ben congurations

in the ve-dimensional case; thus the electric spectrum in the four-dimensional theory is
the same as that in the ve-dimensional theory. this is as we would expect from the del
pezzo picture, since both come from wrapping 2-branes on 2-cycles in the del pezzo, either
in m-theory or type iia string theory.

5 e1 states from junctions

let us see in detail how the bps states of the e1 theory are realized as junctions.

13

the basic states are the w-boson and the instanton, which we converted into 5-7 junctions
in fig. 4. we can read o the invariant charges qi and obtain the quantum numbers using
the techniques of [13, 15]:

we nd

p = qb1 + qb2 + qc1 + qc2 ,
a = qc1  qc2 + 2qb2 .

w-boson:
instanton:

,

p = 2
p = 2 ,

a = 1 ,
a = 1 ,

(5.15)

(5.16)

where a is the single e1 = su(2) dynkin label characterizing . we see both have ne =
1, and that they fall into a doublet of the global symmetry, exactly as we expect. both
junctions have j2 = 0, with g = 0 and b = 2. the instanton number used in [7] is given by
i = 1

2(p/2  a).

other bps states are linear combinations of these two. under such combinations, the invari-
ant charges add, and since quantities p and a are linear in the invariant charges, they will
also add. hence the charges and global symmetry representations of arbitrary bps states
can be deduced easily from the junction perspective.

which junctions j are permitted as bps states? the most important constraint is (4.9),
which becomes

8p2  2 + p .
in terms of the ve-dimensional parameters ne and i, this is

(j, j) =  1

2a2 + 1

ne(i  1)  (i + 1)(i  1) ,

(5.17)

(5.18)

and the set of permitted states precisely coincides with those given by [9]. in addition, here
we have shown denitively that bound states of m w-bosons, m > 1, with no instantons are
not bps, without having to appeal to reducibility.

it should not be too surprising that the results coincide. the spectrum was determined in [9]
using the intersection numbers of curves in del pezzo surfaces, which we will describe further
shortly. our results come ultimately from intersection numbers determined by curves in k3.
once the basis curves are identied in each geometrical setup, and their intersection numbers
shown to agree, the inner product on both homology lattices agrees and so the constraints
should coincide. however, [9] used a mutual intersection condition, while we employ a self-
intersection condition. in other cases (such as e1) we must supplement the self-intersection
constraint with a mutual intersection constraint. this is described in the next section.

6 del pezzo surfaces and bps spectra

the ve-dimensional theories we have been studying can be obtained by compactifying
m-theory on a calabi-yau threefold containing a shrinking four-cycle called a del pezzo

14

surface. the e0 theory is obtained when the del pezzo is just pi 2, and the e1, e2n8
theories correspond to pi 2 blown up at n generic points, denoted bn. finally, for e1 the
four-cycle is pi 1  pi 1. the bps particle states in the eld theory are obtained by wrapping
m2-branes on various 2-cycles within the del pezzo. hence the second homology lattice of
del pezzo surfaces determines the bps spectrum. the intersection of these curves coincides
with the intersection of the junctions associated to the same bps states.
an n + 1-dimensional basis for the 2-cycles in bn is {, e1, .., en} where  is a pi 1 inside pi 2
and the ei are the exceptional divisors of the blown-up points. the intersection matrix in
i=1 ei.
for pi 1  pi 1 the basis is 1 and 2, with 1  1 = 2  2 = 0, 1  2 = 1, and canonical class
kp 1p 1 = 2(1 + 2). we denote a general del pezzo by x.

this basis is diag (1, 1, ..., 1) and the canonical class is given by kbn = 3 + pn

the degree dc of a curve c is dened by intersection with the canonical class kx,

dc = c  kx .

(6.19)

we will identify d with the electric charge of the corresponding state, d = p = 2ne.

in each case the homology lattice contains the root lattice of the corresponding en algebra.
the set of roots is dened as curves with vanishing degree and self-intersection 2,

{i} = {c  h 1,1(x)|(c  c) = 2, (c  kx) = 0} ,

(6.20)

and as such they generate a degree-preserving en weyl group action on all curves.

explicitly the simple roots for en, {3  n  8} are

i = ei  ei+1 ,

i = 1, . . . , n  1

and n =   e1  e2  e3 .

(6.21)

for e2 the su(2) root is e1  e2 and for e1 it is 1  2. the dynkin labels ai of a curve
characterizing its en weight  are given by

ai = c  i , i = 1, . . . , n .

(6.22)

in the e2 and e1 cases the u(1) factor is not associated with a root, but a curve not satisfying
(6.20) can be chosen to give the appropriate generalized dynkin label. an arbitrary curve
c thus can be specied by its n dynkin labels and its degree d, in terms of which the
intersection of two curves c and c  is

(c  c ) =    +

d d
9  n

.

(6.23)

with the identication p  d, this coincides exactly with the inner product on junctions
given in (4.11) with f given in (4.12) and k = q = 0. thus with each bps state in an

en ve-dimensional theory, we can associate both a junction on a ben set of 7-branes and a

holomorphic curve in the corresponding del pezzo surface.

15

6.1 mutual intersection constraint

unlike in k3, in a del pezzo surface x self-intersection number alone is not sucient to
determine if a given homology class has a holomorphic representative or not. holomorphic
curves must satisfy the adjunction formula:

c  c + c  kx = 2g  2 ,

(6.24)

which corresponds to (4.9), with d substituted for gcd(p, 0) = p. since k3 is calabi-yau and
its canonical class vanishes, a corresponding expression (6.24) would have no term c  k,
but it is compensated for exactly by the inclusion of curves with boundary components.

in addition, del pezzo surfaces have a mutual intersection constraint: holomorphic curves
have positive degree and are required to have positive intersection with all curves of degree
one and self-intersection number minus one [5, 25]. (curves of negative degree can be an-
tiholomorphic, and are just the negative of the holomorphic curves.) we will now derive a
single constraint ensuring this requirement, simplifying the multiple constraints of [5].

curves with c  c = 1 satisfying (6.24) with positive degree are necessarily g = 0 and
d = 1. by (6.23), they fall into a representation r(n) of en with

2 =

10  n
9  n

.

(6.25)

for e3n8 these representations are (3, 2), 10, 16, 27, 56, 248. they can be thought of as
the fundamental representations of en. no such curves exist for e0 and e1 theories, so the
mutual intersection constraint is trivial. for e1 and e2 there are u(1) factors rendering the
denition of  conventional; we shall consider these theories individually.

in general it is tedious to check the positivity of the intersection of some curve c = (, d)
with every curve in r(n). however, we can simplify the task as follows. we wish to ascertain

(c, ci) =   i +

d

9  n

 0

for all i  r(n), or in other words,

d  (9  n)  i .

(6.26)

(6.27)

since the multiplication of weights is just the euclidean inner product, the most stringent
condition arises when  and i are in the same weyl chamber. by a weyl rotation we
can make this the fundamental weyl chamber, and thereby ascertain (6.26) for all  in a
given representation r by checking the intersection of the highest weight h(r) with just
the highest weight of r(n):

d  (9  n) h(r)  h(r(n)) .

(6.28)

one must be careful to notice that for the curves with g = 0, d = 1 themselves, the mutual
intersection constraint becomes self-intersection, which is less stringent. for example for the

16

(1,-2)

(1,-2)

(-1,1)

(1,0)

(-2,1)

(0,1)

(1,1)

(-1,1)

(0,1)

(0,1)

(1,0)

(1,1)

(1,0)

(-1,1)

figure 5: a. the toric skeleton for pi 2, which gives the e0 theory; the slopes are the degener-
ating cycles. this is identical to the corresponding (p, q) 5-brane web. b. the toric skeleton
for b1, pi 2 blown up at a generic point, here chosen to be on the boundary.

case n = 8, r = 248 (6.26) seems to imply we need d  2, but in fact since r = r(8) itself
this is not a mutual intersection constraint, and we can have d  1.

we can translate this directly into a mutual-intersection constraint to be imposed on string
junctions j = (, p) in the (p, q) 5-brane/7-brane setup:

p  h(r)  h(r(n)) .

(6.29)

6.2 relating d7-branes to geometrical blow-ups

in this section we will relate the geometric picture with the brane picture by establishing a
correspondence between blowing up points and the addition of d7-branes.

the del pezzos which admit a description in toric geometry are the ones associated to e0,
e1, e1, e2 and e3, precisely those theories which can be realized as a (p, q) 5-brane web
without 7-branes. consider pi 2 and its one-dimensional homology lattice generated by  with
2 = 1. this manifold admits a toric description, with a toric skeleton looking exactly like
the 5-brane web, fig. 5a. we can blow up a generic point of pi 2 and obtain the b1 del pezzo
surface, introducing the new 2-cycle e, with e2 = 1,   e = 0, as fig. 5b.

notice to obtain b1 we blew up a point on the boundary of the face. this is not a special
point on pi 2, only in our toric description of it. it is not possible to represent torically a
blown up generic point inside the face; only the corners of the toric diagram of pi 2 can be
blown up by replacing the point with a pi 1 which would be represented by a line segment in
the toric diagram. but due to an sl(3, c) symmetry of pi 2 any point can be mapped to the
point on the corner, and thus a generic blow-up of pi 2 can be represented by a toric diagram
after this sl(3, c) transformation. however, this process cannot be continued indenitely
since the sl(3, c) symmetry is exhausted after three blow-ups. therefore there is no toric

17

(1,-2)

(-2,1)

(1,1)

figure 6: adding a d7-brane to the (p, q) 5-brane web of e0 corresponds to blowing it up
to e1 at an interior point, with a new avor appearing as a string ending on the d7; moving
the d7-brane outside the face returns us to the usual blow-up at the edge.

description of pi 2 blown up at more than three points; this creates the familiar parallel
external legs in the toric skeleton, which in a toric description means the manifold no longer
can go to zero size inside the calabi-yau [10].

adding 7-branes to the 5-brane web, we can avoid this problem, eectively blowing up points
on the interior of the face and constructing all the en theories.

we claim that adding a d7-brane in the interior of the 5-brane web corresponds to blowing up
a generic point on the del pezzo. geometrically, a blow-up introduces a genus zero homology
cycle of self-intersection minus one. correspondingly, adding a d7-brane introduces a new
dimension to the junction lattice, generated by the string leaving the d7-brane, which indeed
has genus zero and self-intersection 1. moving this d7-brane outside the 5-brane web
generates an external d5-brane (fig. 6) and returns to the picture with the blow-up on the
boundary of the toric diagram. however, we are now free to add more d7-branes beyond
the point where we are able to bring them outside the face, corresponding to blowing up
points beyond b3. we can continue to add d7-branes inside the face all the way to e8, thus
solving the problem of a brane description of these theories.

a more precise geometrical interpretation of a general (p, q) 7-brane in the toric picture is
still unknown, and would be very interesting to determine. the obstruction to proceeding
beyond e8 will be explored in section 7.

6.3 bps spectra for en theories

here we summarize the bps spectra for all the ve-dimensional en theories. for e0, e1 and
e1 this has already been discussed in [9]. related work on e6, e7 and e8 spectra can be

18

found in [5]. we will review the results for the rst few theories, and then concentrate on
en2.

as discussed previously, there is no additional mutual intersection constraint for e0 and e1,
and the self-intersection constraint (4.9) suces. the basic bps state of the e0 theory is
the state  with ne = 3/2, corresponding to the cycle . all states m  for integer m are
permitted by (4.9). the lack of a w-boson demonstrates this is not a gauge theory.
e1 is pure su(2) with  = 0, and the del pezzo is pi 1  pi 1. the basic states are the
w-boson and the instanton, corresponding to the two curves 1 and 2, each with ne = 1
and the latter with unit instanton number i. the self-intersection constraint evaluates to
(5.18), permitting any state n1 + m2 with n, m the same sign, except when either integer
vanishes, in which case the other must be 1.
e1 is the pure su(2) theory with  = , but the del pezzo is that of the e0 theory blown
up at a point.  appears as the curve , and the curve e arises, the associated state being
the instantonic quark iq with ne = 1; the w-boson is the linear combination   e. one
characterizes the states by ne and the instanton number i, with i = 0 for the w-boson and
i = 1 for , iq. the mutual intersection constraint with the single curve e, combined with
the self-intersection constraint, forces all bps states to be of the form n + m(  e) with
n, m of the same sign, with the exception of e itself, which is also bps, and the states with
n = 0, which must have m = 1.
in [9], the identical e1 spectrum was obtained by imposing two mutual intersection con-
straints, positivity of intersection with e and in addition with   e, and no self-intersection
constraint; the states n = 0, |m| > 1 were then argued not to be bps states since they
are reducible. it is gratifying that we can reproduce these results with our methods, which
apply equally well to every en theory, and which need not be supplemented by appeals to
reducibility.

states in the en2 theories are characterized by electric charge ne, instanton number i,
and n  1 global symmetry charges associated to quarks, qfi. these should correspond to
junction/del pezzo quantities. we have stated that p = ne/2; the instanton number i and
the qfi will be determined by the weight vector .

specically, it is easy to see from fig. 6 that the quarks all end on the d7-brane that adds
the avor. thus, the quark charge qfi is just the invariant charge qai on the appropriate
d7-(or a-)brane:

qfi = qai .

(6.30)

for e1 we had i = 1
2(p/2  a) where a was the su(2) dynkin label. we can think of
all junctions in en2 theories as the sum of an e1 junction je1 with some p and a, thus
determining i, and various strings from the a-branes, determining qfi: the total charge is

then ne = p/2 = (p +pi qfi)/2. the total self-intersection is given by (4.7)

j2 =  1

2a2 + 1

(6.31)

8(p)2 pi (qfi)2 ,

19

where the determinants vanish since the asymptotic strings are mutually local. then in
terms of ne, i and qfi the self-intersection constraint (4.9) is

or

i(2ne  2i xi

qfi) xi

(qfi)2  2(ne  1) ,

2ne(i  1)  2(i + 1)(i  1) + ixi

qfi +xi

(qfi)2 .

(6.32)

(6.33)

the mutual intersection constraint is most easily evaluated for an entire representation. to
this end, we provide the explicit map between i, qfi and , and then list the constraint on
the weight vector.

for en3, we have

a1 = ne  2i  1
a2 = qf1 + qf2 + i ,
ak = qfk1  qfk2 ,

2pi qfi ,

k = 3 . . . n .

(6.34)

for all these cases, the mutual intersection constraint (6.29) becomes

p  2a1 + 4a2 + 3a3 + 6a4 + 5a5 + 4a6 + 3a7 + 2a8 ,

(6.35)

where for n < 8 one merely ignores the terms with ai, i > n. these numbers are exactly
the coxeter labels of e8; for the other en the truncated set is the highest weight of r(n)
expanded in the basis of simple roots. plugging in (6.34), we obtain that the highest weight
must satisfy

qfn1  0 .

(6.36)

the result (6.36) is transparent from the junction point of view, using (4.7) and the fact that
the highest weight state of r(n) is simply the open string beginning on the last d7-brane.

for e2, we have

a1 = ne  2i  1
q = 2qf + i ,

2 qf ,

(6.37)

where q is the u(1) charge. however the u(1) factor destroys our ability to classify the
states by the weyl orbits of a root system. instead we give the allowed states explicitly. the
basis states are the w-boson 1 with ne = 1, the instanton 2 with ne = 1 and i = 1, and
the quark e with ne = 1

2 and qf = 1.

the self-intersection constraint is

2(ne  i  qf /2)(i  1)  qf (qf + 1) ,

(6.38)

and mutual intersection constrains i > 0, qf < 0, and 2ne  2i + qf ; the negative of any
state is also bps.

20

figure 7: as the e1 system approaches the xed point, only two 7-branes can collapse,
restoring the global symmetry.

7 approaching the xed point and global symmetry

thus far, we have described how one may use 7-branes to learn about the global symmetry
representations of the 5d states. however, we have not commented on how these symme-
tries are realized in the 5d theory. we recall that symmetry enhancement occurs only when
7-branes are coincident; this is reminiscent of the situation in [21], where symmetry enhance-
ment was only explicit from the string point of view when the d5-branes were coincident. in
the k3 language, coincident branes correspond to colliding degenerate bers forming a sin-
gularity. the types of possible deformable singularities where classied by kodaira. since it
is clear that ane groups do not appear in kodairas classication, none of the 7-brane con-
gurations we have considered are fully collapsible [17]. on the other hand, at the conformal
xed point theory no distance scales should be present.

to solve this puzzle let us return to the e1 conguration of fig. 3. the 7-branes may move
along certain geodesics, corresponding to the path that was followed by the external 5-brane
legs as modied by the nontrivial metric, without aecting the 5d theory. hence, we may
attempt to put the 7-branes on top of one another by sliding them along these geodesics. by
inspecting the conguration in fig. 3, it is clear that 7-branes may encounter each other only
at innite coupling, when the parameters are tuned such that the face is a square. we may
choose the two c-branes to be coincident, and ask what happens to the remaining b-branes.

since bcc is not collapsible, once the two c-branes are placed in middle of the face, the
other branes must always remain a nite distance away. as the modulus is decreased, with
the face closing towards the xed point, 5-brane prongs will inevitably form on the b-branes
(fig. 7). the bps states of the 5d theory will either be 5-5 strings or 5-7 strings emanating
from the c-branes. when the face closes, all these become massless. on the other hand, the

21

b-branes seem supercially to provide a distance scale, spoiling the conformal xed point.
however, since the theory (as before) is insensitive to the position of the b-branes along
their geodesics, the 5d theory is ignorant of this scale.

this is a crucial point for product group symmetry, as in e3 for instance. there, the global
su(2)  su(3) is achieved by 2 branes of one type coinciding and 3 branes of another
type coinciding (happening only at innite coupling and zero bare masses). the two types
are mutually non-local and non-collapsible. therefore, it is not possible for both sets of
coincident branes to be in the center of the face.
instead, the face will close in between
the two sets, with external 5-brane legs on the two sets of branes. again, the 5d theorys
ignorance of the distance along the external legs ensures that the symmetry is in fact the
full product, rather than just one of its components. because the legs may be extended
to innity, the xed point picture is essentially the original 5-brane web without 7-branes.
more generally, since there are no product groups in kodairas classication, we see that
a product group xed point is possible, only if there is a 5-brane web without 7-branes to
realize it.

as discussed, the higher en series (n  4) have no description solely in terms of 5-branes,
and as a result as the theory approaches the origin of the coulomb branch we do not expect
the 5-7 brane system to revert to the 5-brane web without 7-branes. instead, the global sym-
metry must originate from a loop closing on a fully collapsible portion of the original ane
conguration. in particular, this implies that there should not be product groups among the
higher en series, which is the case. indeed, all n  4 congurations may be represented by a
single set of collapsible branes responsible for the symmetry, and a few remaining branes; as
this is somewhat technical we present it in an appendix. these remaining branes, although
essential to allowing a closed 5-brane loop (and thus a 5d theory) to exist, play no role in the
symmetry. for these cases, the xed point picture has the face closing upon a single point
- the location of the global symmetry branes. the remaining branes will be connected by
external legs to the 5-brane loop. this picture makes it manifest that the states becoming
massless indeed transform under the expected global symmetry.

in addition, one may use the above picture to understand why the maximum number of
avors is 7. adding avors is achieved by adding a-branes to the e1 conguration. first,
we must ask if there are restrictions in constructing a 7-brane background with any number
of a-branes. asymptotically, the monodromy around an ane conguration prescribes the
complex parameter to be

 (z) =

(8  n) log(z) + 0.

(7.39)

i
2

here, n is the number of a-branes, |z| > 1, and 0 is a constant. the metric around the
7-branes is proportional to im , which therefore must always be positive. this requires
n  8.

anized e8 algebra [15, 17], with trivial monodromy and the ability to support a string loop
of any charge winding around the conguration. only the e8 part is collapsible; in addition

the case of n = 8 is more subtle. this is the so-called be9 conguration, realizing a doubly-
there is the anizing brane that made be8 and the a-brane associated to the eighth avor

22

a

e8

figure 8: a conguration with 8 avors is not associated with a new xed point, as an e9
conguration of 7-branes cannot collapse, and a scale associated to a d7-brane (a) remains.

that made be9, and these two branes stay a nite distance from the e8. as the face shrinks

upon the collapsed e8 point, the loop will form an external leg on the anizing brane as
in the 7-avor (e8) case, but will completely ignore the a-brane, since they are mutually
local. thus, the distance of the a-brane, corresponding to the mass parameter of the eighth
avor, stays as a scale in the 5d theory and can never be set to zero. one can only reach a
conformal xed point by integrating out this avor, thus returning to the e8 case.

acknowledgements

we are grateful for conversations with tamas hauer, andreas karch, barak kol, lisa ran-
dall, cumrun vafa, and barton zwiebach. this work was supported by the u.s. department
of energy under contract #de-fc02-94er40818.

23

appendix: 7-brane technology

in this section we will review some of the properties of the 7-brane congurations realizing

the ben symmetry. we will show that it is always possible to nd a sub-conguration of

7-branes realizing en symmetry which can be collapsed.

a [p, q] 7-brane has an sl(2, zz) monodromy matrix given by

k[p,q] = (cid:18) 1 + pq p2

1  pq(cid:19) .

q2

(7.40)

an ( r

s )-string crossing the branch cut of the [p, q] 7-brane is converted into an k[p,q]( r

s )-string.
the canonical presentation of 7-brane congurations is the one in which the branes are
located along the real axis with branch cuts going downwards. this is convenient for dis-
cussing symmetry properties. with this convention the total monodromy around the brane
conguration

is given by

x[p1,q1] . . . x[pn1,qn1]x[pn,qn] ,

k = k[pn,qn]k[pn1,qn1] . . . k[p1,q1].

(7.41)

(7.42)

because of the sl(2, zz) symmetry of type iib string theory and the arbitrariness of the
location of branch cuts, two congurations of 7-branes are equivalent if they can be trans-
formed into each other via sl(2, zz) transformations and branch cut moves. equivalent
congurations naturally realize the same algebra.

global transformation: the monodromy matrix k of a 7-brane can also be expressed in
a charge-vector notation. if zt  [p, q] is the 7-brane charges,

kz = 1 + zt z s, where s = (cid:18) 0 1

0 (cid:19) .

1

(7.43)

under a global transformation g  sl(2, zz), we have z  g z. it is easy to see from (7.43)
that the monodromy undergoes a conjugation by g,

kgz = gkzg1

(7.44)

branch cut moves: the labeling of branes actually depends on the placement of branch
cuts. we can move the branch cut of one 7-brane xz1 across another 7-brane xz2, thus
2 and exchanging their order in the canonical presentation, as
changing the latter to xz
explained in [12], and in the canonical presentation they become

xz1xz2 = xz2 x (z1 + (z1  z2) z2 )
= x (z2 + (z1  z2) z1 ) xz1 ,

(7.45)

24

ben = an1bccx[3,1] = an1bcbc .

(7.47)

where we have dened

z1z2  zt

1 s z2 = zt

2 s z1 = det (cid:18) p1

q1

p2

q2(cid:19) .

(7.46)

equation (7.45) indicates the xed brane acquires an extra charge equal to the charge of the
moving brane times the determinant of the relative charges.

the 7-brane congurations associated with en symmetry will be denoted by en. one useful
presentation of en is an1bcc for n > 0 [11]. the intersection of junctions supported on
en is given by (4.8) with f (p, q; p, q) given in (4.12).

for n  2, the conguration an1bcc is equivalent to anx[2,1]c [16]. for n = 1 the
equivalence does not hold; e1 = bcc and e1 = ax[2,1]c are distinct congurations.
furthermore we have e0 = x[2,1]c which can be blown up only to e1 by adding an
a-brane.

the en conguration can be anized by adding another 7-brane to obtain ben symmetry:

the anizing brane can never be collapsed onto the others, so the ben symmetry cannot be

restored.

the anizing brane is a spectator in the equivalence between the two presentations of

en, so we can analogously construct be1 = a1x[2,1]cx[4,1] and be0 = x[2,1]cx[4,1] =

x[2,1]x[1,2]c.

we summarize the correspondence of these brane congurations with the geometry of del
pezzos in the following table.

5d field theory

brane conguration

geometry

e0
e1
e1

e0 = x[2,1]x[1,2]c

ax[2,1]x[1,2]c

bcbc

pi 2
b1

pi 1  pi 1

en, n  2

an1bcbc = anx[2,1]cx[1,2]

bn

notice that while the 7-brane congurations for en as given are natural from the point of view
of blowing-up by adding a-branes as discussed in section 6, some equivalent conguration
may be natural when the 7-branes are moved outside the 5-branes.

in section 7, we stated that for each ben there existed a sub-conguration of collapsible
7-branes realizing the nite symmetry en. we are now in a position to describe these
explicitly. an equals sign denotes a branch cut move, while a = with an sl(2, zz) matrix
above it denotes a global sl(2, zz).

25

singularities and are collapsible.

for be6, be7 and be8, the full nite subcongurations e6, e7, and e8 correspond to kodaira
for be5 we expect a collapsible sub-conguration realizing e5 = d5. the usual presentation
and global sl(2, zz) that d5 is indeed present in be5.

of 7-branes realizing d5 is a5bc = d5. we can see from the following branch cut moves

a4bcbc = a5x[2,1]cx[4,1]

= ca5bx[2,1] = (x[0,1])5cbx[2,1]

t 2
= a5x[4,1]bx[2,1]
s= a5bcx[1,2] .

(7.48)

following branch cut moves and global sl(2, zz) makes it clear that such a subconguration

for be4 we expect a sub-conguration realizing a4. the usual presentation of a4 is a5. the
is indeed present in be4:

a3bcbc = a4x[2,1]cx[4,1] = a4x[2,1]x[1,2]c = a4x[5,1]x[2,1]c =

ba4x[2,1]c = bx[2,1]b4c = b5x[2,3]c

g= a5x[2,1]x[1,2].

(7.49)

with g = (cid:16) 1 0

1 1(cid:17). for be3 we have,

a2bcbc = a3x[2,1]cx[4,1] = a3x[2,1]x[1,2]c

b(x[0,1])3x[1,2]x[2,1] = b2(x[0,1])3x[2,1]

t= a3bx[1,2]x[2,1] =
= a2(x[0,1])3x[2,3] ,

g

(7.50)

conguration realizing e3 = a1  a2.

with g = (cid:16) 1 0
1 1(cid:17). from the above presentation of be3 we see that it has a collapsible sub-
for be1 and be2 there is a manifest su(2) when two c-branes come together, as in section
7. the u(1) factors in be2 and be1 are not associated with collapsing branes.
references

[1] n. seiberg, five dimensional susy eld theories, non-trivial xed points and string

dynamics, phys. lett. b388 (1996) 753, hep-th/9608111.

[2] m.r. douglas, s. katz and c. vafa, small instantons, del pezzo surfaces and type i

theory, nucl. phys. b497, 155 (1997), hep-th/9609071.

[3] d.r. morrison and n. seiberg, extremal transitions and ve-dimensional supersymmet-

ric eld theories, nucl. phys. b483, 229 (1997), hep-th/9609070.

[4] a. klemm, p. mayr and c. vafa, bps states of exceptional noncritical strings, hep-

th/9607139.

26

[5] j.a. minahan, d. nemeschansky and n.p. warner, investigating the bps spectrum of

noncritical en strings, nucl. phys. b508, 64 (1997), hep-th/9705237.

[6] o. aharony and a. hanany, branes, superpotentials and superconformal xed points,

nucl. phys. b504, 239 (1997), hep-th/9704170.

[7] o. aharony, a. hanany, b. kol, webs of (p, q) 5-branes, five dimensional eld theories

and grid diagrams, jhep.01 (1998) 002, hep-th/9710116;.

[8] b. kol, 5-d eld theories and m theory, hep-th/9705031.

[9] b. kol and j. rahmfeld, bps spectrum of 5 dimensional eld theories, (p, q) webs and

curve counting, jhep.9808 (1998) 006, hep-th/9801067.

[10] n. c. leung and c. vafa, branes and toric geometry, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998)

91, hep-th/9711013.

[11] m. r. gaberdiel, b. zwiebach, exceptional groups from open strings, nucl. phys. b518

(1998) 151, hep-th/9709013.

[12] m. r. gaberdiel, t. hauer, b. zwiebach, open string-string junction transitions,

nucl. phys. b525 (1998) 117, hep-th/9801205.

[13] o. dewolfe and b. zwiebach, string junctions for arbitrary lie algebra representations

hep-th/9804210, to appear in nucl. phys. b.

[14] o. dewolfe, t. hauer, a. iqbal and b. zwiebach, constraints on the bps spectrum
of n=2, d=4 theories with a-d-e flavor symmetry, hep-th/9805220, to appear in
nucl. phys. b.

[15] o. dewolfe, ane lie algebras, string junctions and 7-branes, hep-th/9809026.

[16] o. dewolfe, t. hauer, a. iqbal and b. zwiebach, uncovering the symmetries on [p,q]

seven-branes: beyond the kodaira classication, hep-th/9812028.

[17] o. dewolfe, t. hauer, a. iqbal and b. zwiebach, uncovering innite symmetries on

[p, q] 7-branes: kac-moody algebras and beyond, hep-th/9812209.

[18] a. mikhailov, n. nekrasov, s. sethi, geometric realizations of bps states in n=2

theories, hep-th/9803142.

[19] k. intriligator, d.r. morrison and n. seiberg, five-dimensional supersymmetric gauge
theories and degenerations of calabi-yau spaces, nucl. phys. b497, 56 (1997), hep-
th/9702198.

[20] a. brandhuber, n. itzhaki, j. sonnenschein, s. theisen, and s. yankielowicz, on the
m theory approach to (compactied) 5-d eld theories, phys. lett. b415, 127 (1997),
hep-th/9709010.

27

[21] a. hanany and e. witten, type iib superstrings, bps monopoles, and three-

dimensional gauge dynamics, nucl. phys. b492 (1997) 152, hep-th/9611230.

[22] a. sen, f-theory and orientifolds, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 562-578, hep-th/9605150.

[23] j. a. minahan and d. nemeschansky, an n=2 superconformal xed point with e6 global

symmetry, nucl. phys. b482 (1996) 142, hep-th/9608047;
j. a. minahan and d. nemeschansky, superconformal xed points with en global sym-
metry, nucl. phys. b489 (1997) 24, hep-th/9610076.

[24] j. minahan, d. nemeschansky, c. vafa and n. warner, strings and n=4 topological

yang-mills theories, nucl. phys. b527 (1998) 581, hep-th/9802168.

[25] r. hartshorne, algebraic geometry, springer-verlag (1977).

28

