tmup-hel-9902

9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
1
1

 

 
 

1
v
8
7
0
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

on matrix description of iia center of mass

noriaki ano 

department of physics, tokyo metropolitan university,

minamioosawa, hachiooji, japan

abstract

the correspondence between the ground states of the bfss matrix model and the type

iia string is investigated through the 11th direction. we derive the type iia string

from 11d supermembrane wrapped around the 11th direction of periodicity without a
procedure of the double dimensional reduction, but by taking the limit r11  . it is
shown that the center of mass of this string as a function on the 11th coordinate x 11

has the same matrix description as the bfss matrix model in the at direction. the

fact shows that the matrix model at the strong string coupling in the at direction of

large distance regime is directly connected with the 11d supermembrane theory in the

transverse light-cone frame.

feb. 1999

 e-mail: ano@phys.metro-u.ac.jp

1

1 introduction

the bfss matrix model [1] is regarded as a suitable candidate for realizing the eleven

dimensional m theory. the most solid ground for this conjecture is the fact that the

model contains the excitations of both the basic 11-dimensional supergravity multiplet

with 256 degrees of freedom, and large classical supermembrane in the light-cone frame.

the contents of 256 degrees of freedom are 44 gravitons, 84 components of a 3-form

eld and 128 gravitinos, i.e., the supergraviton. the supergraviton degrees of freedom

are equivalent to the lowest states of type iia string which can be obtain by the di-

mensionally reduced supermembrane wrapped around the eleventh direction from the

11d view point[5][6]. moreover, we know that by compacting the ninth transverse

direction (i.e., the 11-th direction of m theory with an 11-9 ip) on a circle of small

radius r9, the matrix model of weak string coupling can be reduced to a multiple of the

light-front type iia string on the dual torus, on the assumption that all the matrices are

dened all over the ninth direction [2], based on the works by motl [3] and by sethi and

susskind [4]. the matrix model in this case is modied as noncommuting membrane

theory extended in the ninth direction. we can see that the perturbatively interacting

type ii string spectrum which the matrix model may originally contains, become visible

through this compactication procedure.

clearly, these features indicate that the matrix model is intrinsically related to the

iia string. originally the matrix model conjecture is motivated by this relation.

in

fact, the model is founded upon the n d0-branes mechanics with nonperturbative r-

r charge of the type iia string. on the other hand, the correspondence between the

matrix model and the eleven dimensional m theory is not very strict. that is because

the matrix model formulation is based only on the weakly coupled iia string theory
with small radius r11 of compactied 11th direction. in case of the limit r11  ,
i.e., the strong string coupling regime, it seems not sure that this conjecture could be

correct for describing the nature of the 11 dimensional m theory.

in this paper, we will show that the matrix model in the at direction has a relation
with the 11 dimensional supermembrane wrapped around the 11th direction in r11  

2

limit, or in string theory words, the strong coupling regime. in the ordinary kaluza-

klein (kk) mechanism, the radius r of some periodic coordinate is set to small to

obtain physics in the transeverse space-time. thus, it is found that the heavy kk

nonzero-modes turn out to decouple from the massless sector. we instead discuss the

large r limit. taking this limit leads us to the massless kk nonzero-modes. all the

kk modes then correspond to the massless degrees of freedom. we can see that the

massless nonzero-modes in the large r limit could not be neglected. henceforce, we will

nd that the 11d supermembrane in this limit has a matrix description.

the paper is organized as follows. in the next section 2, the 11d supermembrane

wrapped around the 11th direction is considered. it is shown that by taking the limit
r11  , the type iia string is obtained without using the double dimensional reduc-
tion. it is found that this iia string is on the periodic coordinate x 11. in section 3, we

study the center of mass of the x 11-dependent type iia stirng obtained in section 2,

which corresponds to the lowest states of the type iia string. in order to deal with the

physical degrees of freedom, we take the light-cone gauge. furthermore, we next make

the reduction of one of the unwrapped coordinates on the membrane world-volume to

obtain the action of the center of mass of the x 11-dependent type iia string. we are

then lead to the action describing the center of mass on loop. in section 4, the matrix

description of the x 11-dependent action obtained in the previous section is presented

through the fourier expansion with respect to the periodic x 11 direction. in the nal

section 5, some discussions thought to be useful for justing the results are given.

2 x 11-dependent type iia string

in the kk-compactication of certain space direction with its small radius r, the kk

nonzero-modes become very heavy and decouple from the massless zero-mode in the

result. thus, it is allowed to pick up only the massless kk zero-mode in low energy

theory. this procedure means the dimensional reduction in general. we know that the

type iia strings can be derived from 11d supermembrane wrapped around the 11th

direction by using the double dimensional reduction along this direction [5].

in this

3

section, if we are concerned with only the elimination of the mass terms of the kk

nonzero-modes, we will see that there could be another way to eliminate all the mass

terms without decoupling the kk nonzero-modes. we must remind that the procedure

of the double dimensional reduction amounts to pick up the type iia string as the kk

zero-mode which decouples from the kk nonzero-modes in the small r11 limit.

2-1. iia string from supermembrane

let us rst recall the derivation of the type iia string from the supermembrane wrapped

around the compactied eleventh direction via double dimensional reduction of the world

volume theory in 11d space-time to the world sheet theory in 10d space-time [5]. let

us suppose that the world volume coordinates are , 1 and 2. the coordinate 2 is set

identical to the compactied eleventh space direction as a gauge choice; 2 = x 11. the
11d supermembrane action ssm without a 3-form gauge eld coupling can be presented
as follows;

ssm = tsm z d d1dx 11q| det gsm

ab

|,

(2.1)

where gsm
ab

is an induced metric on the world-volume of the supermembrane(sm),

and the factor tsm denotes the membrane tension; t sm = 1/(2)2l3
sgs.
the letters a, b denote the world-volume coordinates (, 1, x 11). the induced met-
can be described by using super-space coordinates of supermembrane z m =
ric gsm
ab
(x m, x 11, ) (m = 0, 1,  , 9 and  = 1,  , 32) and the 11d supergravity background
metric g m n ;

p = 1/(2)2l3

ab = az m bz n g m n .
gsm

(2.2)

the kk massive modes on the  -1 world sheet are eliminated by the dimensional

reduction of x 11, leaving only the kk massless zero mode on the world sheet. this

procedure can be yielded by putting the following condition;


x 11 ( all fields ) = 0.

(2.3)

the condition (2.3) which corresponds also to setting all elds independent of x 11, leads

us to the reduction of gsm
ab

to the metric ggs

ab on the  -1 world sheet. we can read the

4

reduced ggs

ab by using the super-coordinates z m (, 1) = (x m, ) as follows;

ggs
ab = az m bz n gm n ,

(2.4)

where gm n is a reduced background metric from the 11d supergravity. we therefore

reach at the gs-string (gs) action of type iia;

sgs = 2r11tsm z d d1q| det ggs

ab

|,

(2.5)

where r11 is a radius of the compactied x 11 coordinate, and the following condition

on the string tension ts must be fullled;

ts = 2r11tsm .

(2.6)

consequently, the type iia theory coupled with the 10d supergravity background is

obtained by this procedure of the double dimensional reduction.

2-2. iia string without double dimensinal reduction

we have now arrived at a subtle, but rather essential point. we would like to focus on

eliminating the mass terms of kk nonzero-modes. we can see that there is another way

to vanish the mass of all the kk-modes beside setting the condition (2.3), i.e., without

vanishing the x 11 dependence. as will be seen in the following context, we will nd

that in this case, the kk nonzero-modes could not decouple from the massless sector.

the periodic x 11 coordinate is an s1 coordinate with its radius r11, and we nat-

urally introduce a dimensionless angle parameter  , which satises x11 = r11 . the

dierentiation associated with x 11 is written by using r11 as follows;


x 11 =

1
r11




.

(2.7)

it is well-known that the mass of the kk-modes is yielded from this factor 1/r11, and
that in the limit r11   the mass of all the kk-modes vanishes. that is, all the
kk-modes turn out to be the massless modes. the very important point we would like

to emphasize is that in this limit, all the terms operated by /x 11 vanish. on the other

hand, the terms which do not contain them survive with no change. thus, we obtain

5

the massless kk nonzero-modes without putting the condition (2.3). in this procedure,

we see that the x 11 dependence of all the elds is preserved in contrast to the result

by making the ordinary dimensional reduction, that is, all the elds can be regarded as

functions dened on x 11. therefore, starting with the supermembrane action (2.1), we
then obtain the following action by taking the limit r11  ;

lim

r11ssm = z d sgs( )
sgs( ) = r11tsm z d d1q| det ggs

ab ( ) |.

(2.8)

(2.9)

sgs( ) describes the x 11-dependent type iia gs-string. in this case, the mass of all
the modes turns out to be very small. we therefore see that the kk nonzero-modes

could not decouple from the massless sector.

3 iia center of mass on loop

in order to consider the lowest states of the x 11-dependent type iia string (2.9), we

next deal with the string center of mass. thus in the following procedure, we need to

take the light-cone gauge and the dimensional reduction along the 1 coordinate on the

world-sheet. in case of the type iia string, the center of mass corresponds to the lowest

state, and this fact is in contrast to the case of the type iib string. before going ahead

with our discussion, let us now consider the lowest states of the gs-strings to specify a

type of the gs-strings, which has supermultiplet of the string center of mass with 256

degrees of freedom.

3-1. lowest states of center of mass

we rst recall that the contents of the gs-string degrees of freedom corresponds to the
d=10 super yang-mills multiplet, i.e., eight bose states | i i of the vector representation
8v of spin(8) labeled by the letters i, j, and eight fermi sates | a i (or | a i in opposite
chirality) of the spinor representation 8s (or 8c) of spin(8) labeled by a, b (or a, b). the

spin(8) contents of type iia massless multiplet is given by the tensor product of two

supermultiplets of opposite chirality which is described by 256 states; 128 bose states

6

| i i | j i  | a i | a i and 128 fermi states | i i | a i  | a i | j i. in case of type iib
massless multiplet, the tensor product of two supermultiplets is given by fermi states
of the same chirality; 128 bose states | i i | j i  | a i | b i and 128 fermi states
| i i | a i  | b i | j i. on the other hand, the type iia and iib equations of motion of
supermultiplets of the center of mass in the light cone frame are as follows;

type iia :

type iib :

2
 2 x i( ) = 0,
2
 2 x i( ) = 0,






s1a( ) = 0,

s1(2)a( ) = 0,




s2a( ) = 0,

(3.1)

where s1 and s2 belong to dierent spinor representations of 8s and 8c. these super-

multiplets correspond to zero modes of the gs-strings in each case. thus from eq.(3.1),

we see that the iia eld contents of supermultiplet of the center of mass is composed

of elds of three dierent representations of spin(8), i.e., 8v, 8s and 8c, while in case

of type iib, supermultiplet of the center of mass contains two dierent representations

of spin(8), i.e., 8v and 8s (or, 8c). then we nd that the supersymmetric lowest states

composed of the above supermultiplets of the center of mass are as follows; in case of

type iia, 256 states which are identical to type iia massless multiplet (that is, 128
bose states | i i | j i  | a i | a i and 128 fermi states | i i | a i  | a i | j i), and
in case of type iib, 16 states which are identical with type i massless multiplet (that
is, 8 bose states | i i and 8 fermi states | a i (or | a i)). as a consequence, we nd
that only in case of type iia, the supermultiplet of the center of mass has 256 degrees

of freedom which is the same contents as the massless multiplet of the 11d supergravity.

3-2. action of x 11-dependent iia center of mass

let us here take the light-cone gauge and the dimensional reduction on the x 11-

dependent iia string (2.9), in order to study its lowest states which correspond to the

string center of mass. we rst take the light-cone gauge. in this gauge, the world-sheet

parameter  is usually described as

  x +/ l2

s p+,

(3.2)

7

where x + (and x ) denotes the light-cone coordinate

x  =

x 0  x 9

2

,

(3.3)

and ls is the string length. here, we are free to set both x + and p+ independent of x 11

together with taking the light-cone gauge, although all elds can be thought dependent

upon x 11 as discussed above. it is natural to take this choice because  is independent

of x 11 in the above equation (3.2). the other light-cone coordinate x  can also be

eliminated due to the virasoro constraint equations as usual. thus, we can obtain the

reduced type iia string action in the light-cone gauge from the 11d supermembrane

action.

let us next perform the dimensional reduction to obtain the center of mass. this

procedure corresponds to reduce the iia string action (2.8) along the 1 direction to one

dimensional action. by taking this procedure, it is meant vanishing of 1-dependence

of all the elds. the procedure of the reduction can be done by putting the condition;

/1 = 0. because the world sheet parameter 1 is dimensionless, the integration with

respect to 1 turns out to yield 2 alone.

finally, we obtain the following  -dependent light-cone action of type iia center of

mass in the at background coming from the 11d supergravity;

s( ) =

z dtd 


  x i(t,  )

t

!2

+ i s1a(t,  )

s1a(t,  )

t

+ s2a(t,  )

s2a(t,  )

t

!
 ,

(3.4)

where s1 and s2 are the 8 component spinors labeled by the letter a, and redened as

s  lsp+s. the letter i runs from 1 to 8. the coecient  is read as follows;

 = 2l2

sp+r11tsm

=

p+r11
lsgs

.

(3.5)

8

4 matrix description

the bfss matrix model is a description of a system in the innite momentum frame

along the longitudinal direction. the situation corresponds to taking the small r11

limit. this model contains n d0-branes as well as very short open strings attached to

d0-branes. specically under the large distance scale, the string sector becomes very

massive and decouple largely from the parton sector. in this distance scale, all the ma-

trices are commutative. we will show that the bfss matrix model in this large distance

regime can be derived from 11d supermembrane wrapped around the 11th direction in

the large r11 limit. the discussions on the consistency of resulting matrix description

with the bfss model in the large r11 limit are given in the next section 5.

4-1. iia center of mass as diagonal matrices

due to the periodicity of  , we have the fourier mode expansions of x i(t,  ), s1(t,  )

and s2(t,  ). here we must set the reality conditions on x i, s1, s2;

x i

n = x i

n , s1

n = s1

n , s2

n = s2
n ,

(n > 0).

(4.1)

we are free to set the additional reality conditions on the modes x i

n, s1

n, s2

n as follows;

x i

n = x i

n , s1

n = s1

n , s2

n = s2
n ,

(n > 0).

(4.2)

therefore, we have the following mode expansions;

x i(t,  ) =

s1(t,  ) =

s2(t,  ) =

1
2
1
2
1
2





xn0
xn0
xn0



x i

n(t) cos n

s1

n(t) cos n

s2

n(t) cos n

(4.3)

in ordinary treatment of fourier expansion, the conditions which we need here are the

reality conditions (4.1) on the original functions x i( ). by setting the additional reality

conditions (4.2), it is meant that these functions can be regarded as the space coordinates

in the scheme of the matrix model.

9

let us present matrix description of the resulting  -dependent action of the previous

section. we rst substitute eq.(4.3) into eq.(3.4), and integrate the action with respect

to  . we then obtain the action;

s = lim

n

= lim
n

n

n

n

x i

xn=0(cid:20)z dt(cid:16) x i
n + i(cid:16)s1a
z dt tr{( x i x i) + it }.

s1a
n + s2a
n

s2a

n (cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:21)

(4.4)

x i denotes nn real matrix where the index i runs from 1 to 8, and  is a 16-component
spinor which is a direct product of two 8-component spinors s1, s2;

 = (s1, s2)t .

(4.5)

4-2. correspondence with matrix model

clearly, all these matrices x i,  do not have nonzero o-diagonal elements. henceforce,

we can see that the direction described by these matrices is at, and that the action (4.4)

is the same form as the well-known bfss model in the at direction of large distance

regime, except for matching of the number of components of x i. that is, the bfss

model has nine x is, while the action of (4.4) contains eight x is. it seems that the

dierence is supercial one, because both cases have the same degrees of freedom, 256.

in the matrix model, this number comes from a representation of the algebra of the 16

fermionic eld s with 28 components.

to study this dierence between the two matrix descriptions, let us remember the

original theory upon which the bfss model is founded, that is to say, the d = 10 super

yang-mills theory. all of what we need here is instead the conserved energy-momentum

tenser t  of d = 10 yang-mills theory with no supersymmetry.

t    tr f f 

 +

1
4

tr gf f.

(4.6)

we note here that the matrix model in the at direction of long distance regime could
be obtained by dimensional reduction of d = 10 u(1)n super yang-mills theory to no

space direction. after dimensional reduction of t  (4.6) associated with the broken
u(1)n gauge symmetry, all the components of t  are reduced to the following nontrivial

components; t 00 and t ij alone. the letters i, j and 0 label the nine space directions

10

and the time direction, respectively. furthermore, only one non-trivial conservation

equation of t  can survive;

where t 00 
this amounts to the dimensionally reduced t 

tr ( ai)2. we then nd that

xi=1

9

xi=1

0 t 00 = 0,
9

(4.7)

tr ( ai)2 must be a constant number.

. here we must recall that the trace

t 
 can be a non-zero value in contrust to the case of four dimensions. thus, the ninth
component tr ( a9)2 can be obtained in terms of eight other components, so that only

the transverse eight components are left as independent components;

tr ( a9)2 = const. 

( ai)2.

8

xi=1

(4.8)

in the matrix model, ai is regarded as the position coordinate x i of n bounded d0-

particles. thus, it is then possible to say that the bosonic matrix coordinate x i has

actually eight components rather than nine.

moreover, we suppose that the action of the matrix model describing a system of

low energy n d0-particles in large distance regime at weak string coupling could be pre-

served further in the large r11 limit, we can see that the action (4.4) actually corresponds

to the matrix model in the at direction of the large distance regime at strong string

coupling. henceforce, we can also identify the coupling  (3.5) with the d0-particle

mass 1/lsgs;

p+r11
lsgs 

1
lsgs

,

(4.9)

and we have the relation with the string tension ts on the assumption that the wrapped
supermembrane after taking the limit r11   must be identied with the type iia
string as in case of [5]; ts = 2r11tsm (2.6). we therefore obtain the following relation;

p+ 

1
lsgs

.

(4.10)

thus, the light-cone momentum p+ becomes zero in the large r11 limit. therefore, the

momentum of the only 8 space directions can be thought to have non-zero value. the

theory turns out to be free to set the 9-11 ip in the space directions in this limit as

expected.

11

5 discussions

in this paper, it is shown that the matrix model in the at direction of large distance

regime can be directly connected with the 11d theory of 256 degrees of freedom in the
transverse light-cone frame by taking the limit r11  . first, let us consider the
meaning of this large r11 limit in the matrix model. by taking account of the relations
r11  g2/3
coupling and short string scale region. the constant lp denotes the 11 dimensional

p, it seems that the large r11 limit leads us to both the strong string

s

s l3
lp  l2

planck length. this means that the string sector is restricted to some local regions in

the space-time. we need not take account of any eects of the strings in this limit.

thus, it is possible to say that the string sector substantially decouple from the parton

sector. the situation seems to be the same one as in the at direction condition of the

large distance regime. therefore, the fact shows that the large r11 limit yields the at

direction in the matrix model. on the other hand, we have shown that the center of

mass of the type iia string obtained from the 11d supermembrane in the large r11

limit has the same matrix description as the bfss model. taking these matters into

consideration, we can see that the two matrix descriptions are consistent with each other
under the limit r11  .

we would next like to comment on the large n limit with the large r11 limit. in this
limit r11  , the energy of the whole system of the matrix model has innite energy.
in order to obtain the nite energy of the whole system at strong string coupling, it is
necessary to take the limit n  , so that the energy of each state vanishes like 1/n
[1]. taking this large n limit is equivalent to treating the whole fourier modes. thus,

the energy of the matrix description derived from 11d supermembrane in the previous

section naturally remain nite in spite of the strong string coupling.

finally, let us make a remark about the 11th direction. this direction is a crucial

one to bring the longitudinal momentum p11 to the 10d theory as a nonperturbative

r-r charge. in the scheme of the so-called matrix string theory [2], the role of the 11th

direction is thought to be dierent from other direction which leads us to get a type

iia string, e.g., x 9. we can see that in this paper, the dierent roles of these directions

12

belong to only one of all directions in the strong string coupling, i.e., the 11th direction

x 11. in the weak coupling region, the situation is dierent from the case in the strong

string coupling ? our inference is that the situation have no change. but we need to

have an appropriate interpretation about the kk nonzero-modes which are very massive

in turn, while the zero-mode corresponds to a single iia string [5]. it seems undeniable

that the kk nonzero-modes correspond to the matrix model in the small r11 limit. in

fact, we can see that the correspondence with the zero-mode is not mentioned in the

matrix theory.

acknowledgment: the author would like to thank professor s.saito for helpful discus-

sions and careful reading of the manuscript.

references

[1] t. banks, w. fishler, s. h. shenker and l. susskind, m theory as a matrix

model: a conjecture, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112, hep-th/9610043.

[2] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, matrix string theory, nucl. phys.

b500 (1997) 43, hep-th/9703030.

t. banks, lecture at the jerusalem winter school on strings and duality, jan.5,

1997.

t. banks and n. seiberg, string from matrices, nucl. phys. b497 (1997) 41,

hep-th/97021187.

[3] l. motl,

proposals on nonperturbative superstrings

interactions, hep-

th/9701025.

[4] s. sethi and l. susskind, rotational invariance in the m(atrix) formulation of

type iib theory, phys. lett. b400 (1997) 265, hep-th/9702101.

[5] m. j. du, p. s. howe, t. inami and k. s. stelle, superstrings in d=10 from

supermembrane in d=11, phys. lett. b191 (1987) 70.

13

[6] p. k. townsend, the eleven-dimensional supermembrane revisited, phys. lett.

b350 (1995) 184, hep-th/9501068.

14

