uostp 99-105
snust 99-02
hep-th/9902173
revised version

cosmic holography1

dongsu bak1 and soo-jong rey2

physics department, university of seoul, seoul 130-743 korea1

physics department & center for high-energy physics

seoul national university, seoul 151-742 korea2

dsbak@mach.uos.ac.kr,

sjrey@gravity.snu.ac.kr

abstract

a version of holographic principle for the cosmology is proposed, which dictates that the particle
entropy within the cosmological apparent horizon should not exceed the gravitational entropy
associated with the apparent horizon. it is shown that, in the friedmann-robertson-walker
(frw) cosmology, the open universe as well as a restricted class of at cases are compatible
with the principle, whereas closed universe is not. it is also found that inationary universe
after the big-bang is incompatible with the cosmic holography.

0
0
0
2

 

p
e
s
0
2

 

 
 

2
v
3
7
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1 work supported in part by bk-21 initiative program and krf international collaboration grant 1998-

010-192.

the holographic principle in quantum gravity is rst suggested by t hooft[1] and, later,
extended to string theory by susskind[2]. the most radical part of the principle is that the
degrees of freedom of a spatial region reside not in the bulk but in the boundary. further,
the number of boundary degrees of freedom per planck area should not exceed unity. re-
cently, the holographic principle is applied to the standard cosmological context by fischler
and susskind[3]. this fischler-susskind version of cosmological holographic principle demands
that the particle entrophy contained in a volume of particle horizon should not exceed the area
of the horizon in planck units. the string cosmology is also tested by the fischler-susskind
holographic principle[4]. in both cases, the matter contents as well as the spacetime geometry
of the universe are restricted by the holographic principle alone and the results appear to be
consistent with the recent measurement of the redshift-to-distance relation and the theory of
the large scale structure formation[5].

in applying the holography in the cosmological context, several outstanding questions still
remain unanswered. one of them is concerning a natural choice of the holographic boundary.
fischler and susskind have chosen it to be the particle horizon, but it is not clear if the
choice is consistent with other physical principles.
in this note, we will propose a simple
choice of the boundary surface based on the concept of cosmological apparent horizon that is
a boundary hypersurface of an anti-trapped region and has a topology of s2. it turns out that
there is natural gravitational entropy associated with the apparent horizon and the associated
holographic principle demands that the particle entrophy inside the apparent horizon should
not exceed the apparent-horizon gravitational entropy. moreover, the holography based on the
apparent horizon obeys the rst law of thermodynamics, in sharp contrast to that based on the
particle horizon.

we shall apply the proposed principle to the frw cosmology and show that, in both the
standard cosmology and the string cosmology, the open universe as well as restricted class of
at universe are compatible, while the closed universe is not. we shall further show that the
inationary senario for the standard cosmology is not compatible with the cosmic holography.

cosmological apparent horizon and gravitational entropy: we shall consider the spatially

homogeneous and isotropic universe described by the frw metric,

ds2 = dt2 + a2(t)

dr2

1  kr2 + a2(t)r2d2

d1 ,

(1)

where k = 0,1, +1 correspond to a at, open or closed universe respectively. using the
spherical symmetry, the metric can be rewritten as

ds2 = habdxadxb + r2(x)d2

d1 ,
where x0 = t, x1 = r and the two metric hab = diagh1,
1kr2i is introduced. a dynamical
apparent horizon is dened by habarbr = 0, which implies that the vector r is null (or

(2)

a2

1

degenerate) on the apparent horizon surface. the explicit evaluation of the condition reads

rah =

,

(3)

where h = a/a is the hubble parameter. the expansion in (out) of the ingoing (outgoing)
null geodesic congruence are given by

1

qh 2 + k

a2

kr2
a2

1

rs1 
rs1 

1

in = h 

out = h +

kr2
a2 .

(4)

the region of spherically symmetric spacetime is referred to as trapped (antitrapped) if the
expansions of both in- and out-going null geodesics, normal to the spatial d  1 sphere with
a radius r centered at the origin, are negative (positive). the region will be called normal if
ingoing rays have negative expansion but the outgoing rays have positive expansion. the region
2 is normal
(assuming h > 0). the boundary hypersurface of the antitrapped spacetime region is nothing
but the apparent horizon surface. the ingoing rays outside the horizon actually propagate in
the direction of the growing r, whereas the ingoing rays inside the horizon are moving toward
the origin.

2 is, then, antitrapped, whereas the region of r < (cid:16)h 2 + k

of r > (cid:16)h 2 + k

a2(cid:17) 1

a2(cid:17) 1

in general, the radius of the apparant horizon, rah, changes in time. but, for example, in
the de sitter universe where a(t) = a0eht with a constant h and k = 0, the apparent horizon,
rah = 1
h , is constant in time and agrees with the cosmological event horizon of the de sitter
space. the antitrapped region outside of the apparent horizon in the de sitter space can never
be seen in the comoving observer located at the origin. however, in generic situation, the
apparent horizon evolves in time and visiblity of the outside antitrapped region depends on
the time developement of the apparent horizon. in case the rah becomes smaller in time, the
spatial region outside the horizon can never be seen. on the other hand, if it grows, the spatial
region outside of the horizon at a given time may be observed at later time. the situation here
is reminiscent of what is happening with the black-hole apparent horizon. namely, the trapped
region can never be seen by an outside observer if the horizon of the black grows by an infalling
matter, while once-trapped region may become normal if the apparent horizon shrinks by an
evaporation of the black hole in presence of the hawking radiation.

for the total energy inside a sphere of radius r, we introduce an energy dened by

e 

d(d  1)vd

16g

rd2(1  habarbr) ,

(5)

d
2

where vd = 
(cid:16) d
2 +1(cid:17)
direct (d + 1) dimensional generalization of the (3 + 1) dimensional one given by misner and

denotes the volume of the d-dimensional unit ball. this is actually the

2

sharp[7]. it is interesting to note that the energy surrounded by the apparent horizon is given
by e  d(d1)vd
ah , which agrees with the expression for the mass in the d + 1 dimensional
schwarzschield black hole once the apparent horizon is replaced by the event horizon of the
black hole.

16g rd2

in terms of the energy-momentum tensor of matter t ab that is the projection of the d + 1
energy-momentum tensor t  to the normal direction of the d  1 sphere, one may dene the
work density by

and the energy-supply vector by

w  

1
2

t abhab ,

(6)

(7)

a  ta

bbr + war .

as noted in ref. [8], the work density at the apparent horizon may be viewed as the work done
by the change of the apprent horizon and the energy-supply at the horizon is total energy ow
through the apparent horizon.

the einstein equation relates these quantities by

e = a + wv .

(8)

where a = dvdrd1 and v = vdrd. this equation may be interpreted as unied rst law. the
entropy is associated with the energy-supply term, which in fact can be rewritten, with again
help of the einstein equations, as

with the surface gravity  dened by

a =



8a + rd2(cid:16) e

rd2(cid:17) ,

 

1

2h

ahhabbr .

(9)

(10)

at the apparent horizon, the last term in (9) drops out and, then, the dynamic entropy of the
gravity is identied with s = a
4 that is a quarter of the area of the apparent horizon measured
in the planck unit. this is direct (d + 1) dimensional generalization of the denition of dynamic
entropy introduced by hayward for the (3 + 1) case[8]. more precisely, the dynamic entropy
associated with the apparent horizon is

we now apply the denition to the frw universe dictated by

sah = vd
4d

rd1
ap .

k
a2 =
8

16

d(d  1)

 ,

h 2 +

a
a

= 

[(d  2) + dp] ,

d(d  1)
3

(11)

(12)

with the energy-momentum conservation

the projected (1 + 1)-dimensional energy-momentum tensor for the frw cosmology reads

d
dt

(ad) + p

d
dt

ad = 0 .

(13)

from (12), the misner-sharp energy can be evaluated, in terms of the matter density, as

tab = diag(cid:20) ,

p

1  kr2(cid:21) .

e =

d(d  1)vd

16

 h 2 +

k

a2! = vdrd ,

(14)

(15)

note that the at-volume is dierent from the spatial volume (i.e. vp = dvdadr r

which is the matter density multiplied by the at-volume in d spatial dimensions. one should
dr1kr2 ) of
radius r in case of the open or closed universe. this discrepancy appears due to the gravity
contribution to the energy in addition to the matter contribution.

0

having claried the issue of the cosmological entropy, we now state a version of the cosmic
holographic principle based on the cosmological apparent horizon: the particle entropy inside
the apparent horizon can never exceed the apparent-horizon gravitational entropy.

the main dierence from the fischler-susskind version of the cosmological holography lies
in the choice of the horizon; namely in the fischler-susskind proposal, the particle horizon
and a quarter of the associated area for the gravitational entropy is chosen for the holography.
in the cosmological context, there apeared two dierent kinds of horizon based on the light
paths[6]. the particle horizon that species the visible region for a comoving observer at time
t, is expressed as

0

dy1ky2

where g(x)  r x
and ti represents the initial moment of the universe. (in case the
universe has no beginning, ti = .) on the other hand, the cosmological event horizon that
species the boundary of the spatial region to be seen in the future by the comoving observer
reads

where tf is the nal moment of the universe. this is contrasted to the fact that the appar-
ent horizon in (3) does not refer to the initial or nal moment where our ability of physical
description often breaks down.

cosmic holography tested against frw unverse: the holographic principle may restrict
the matter contents of our universe because it involves the particle entropy of universe. since
matter contents are molding the geometry and evolution of the universe, the universe itself

4

rph = a(t)g1(cid:16)z t

ti

dt

a(t)(cid:17) ,

reh = a(t)g1(cid:16)z tf

t

dt

a(t)(cid:17) ,

(16)

(17)

conformed with the holography principle may well belong to a restricted class. the cosmic
holography condition leads to an inequality

volah(t) 

aah(t)

4

.

(18)

where volah(t) = dvdr rah(t)

1kr2 is the coordinate volume inside the apparent horizon.
the left side of (18) is the total particle entropy inside the apparent horizon, where the coor-
dinate entropy density is constant in time. in testing the condition to the frw cosmology, we
shall restrict ourselves to the cases of matters with simple equation of state p = .

dr rd1

0

in the at universe (k = 0), the condition is explicitly

4

dad1(t) a(t)  1.

(19)

2

d(1+)

for  6= 1 and a(t) = a0eh0t for  = 1, one concludes that the
since a(t) = a0t
holography condition is satiseld all the time followed by the planck time for ||  1 once it is
satised at the planck time, t  tp . the matters with || > 1 that are also inconsistent with
special relativity, is not compatible with the cosmic holography condition.

let us now turn to the case of open universe. for the discussion of open and closed universes,

it is convenient to introduce the conformal time ,

the holography condition now reads

 = z t dt

a(t)

.

d sinhd1 

4r ()
ad1() sinhd1(())  1.

0

(20)

(21)

where we dene () by sinh () = rah(). the solutions of the equation of motion (12) are
given by

a() = a0(cid:16)sinh |(k  1)|(cid:17)

1

k1 .

(22)

2

where k = d(1+)
,   (0, ) for k  1 > 0 and   (, 0) for k  1 < 0. here the initial
moment corresponds to  = 0 for k  1 > 0 and  for k  1 < 0. using the denition of
apparent horizon in (3), one nds () = |(k1)|. using the explicit solution, one may easily
show that, for   1, the holography condition is satised once satised at the initial moment
around the planck epoch. for  > 1, the maximum of the left hand side of (21) occurs at some
nite time after initial moment and the holography is respected if this this maximun satises
the bound. but if one assumes that the holography bound is saturated at the planck epoch,
the case of  > 1 is rejected by the holography condition. so far the restrictions on the matter
contents due to our holography condition are not quite dierent from those of fischler-susskind
holography. but we will see that there is some dierence in the case of the closed universe.

5

the holography condition for the closed universe (k = 1) is

d sind1 

4r ()
ad1() sind1(())  1.

0

(23)

where we dene () by sin () = rah(). the solutions of the equation of motion (12) are
given by

a() = a0(cid:16)sin|(k1)|(cid:17)

1

k1 .

(24)

1

|k1|(cid:17). for the universe with k  1 < 0 (i.e.  < 2

where   (cid:16)0,
d  1) begins with innite
scale factor a(), and we shall not discuss these cases since it is clear that our universe begins
with small scale factor from the observational ground. noting rah() = sin(|(k1)|), one
obtains that () = |k1|.

then one nds that the universe with  > 2

d  1 are not compatible with the cosmic holog-
raphy condition. namely, even if one may satisfy the bound at an initial moment, it is badly
d sind1  monotoni-
cally grow with time. the situation is worsened if one assumes that the bound saturates at the
planck time scale.

violated before reaching the big crunch. this is because the term r ()

0

4

in the fischler-susskind case, a careful analysis shows that the disfavored region by the
holography condition is only for   4
d  1. with d = 3, the universe with the matter of
d  1 = 1
3 corresponds to radiation-dominated universe, which is their marginal bound. on
the contrary, the cosmic holography condition seems to disfavor any closed universe, cleary an
over-restrictive condition.

we now consider inationary model of our d = 3 universe. as illustrated in ref. [3], the

particle entropy-area ratio (t)  4volah(t)

aah(t)

at the time of decoupling is2

where the decoupling time is td  1056 in planck units. since (t) is proportional to t 1
the radiation dominant era, the expresion of the ratio in the era reads

2 during

(td)  1028,

(25)

(t) = 1028(cid:20) td
t (cid:21)

1
2

.

(26)

this show that (t)  1 for all the time later planck time in case universe starts o as a
radiation-dominant universe after the planck time. however, if one assume the inationary
periods after the planck epoch and an exit to the radiation-dominant universe, the above
conclusion drastically changed. to illustrate this, let us note that in the de sitter phase,
the (t) scales like e(d+1)ht = e4ht with constant h. for example, the inationary factor

2the estimation used in the ref. [3] relies upon the particle-horizon based holography, but, in case of
standard cosmology, the particle horizon diers from apparent horizon by a constant factor of order one. thus
the estimation is still valid for our version of the holography.

6

p  ehte /ehtb  10100000 for the chaotic inationary senario, where te and tb denote respec-
tively the exit time and the beginning of the ination, is obtained from the theory of galaxy
formation[9]. this implies that the (tb) is bigger than (te) by a factor 10400000. the cosmic
holography condition is clearly incompatible with this result. furthermore, any models where
(t) scales tc with c <  1
2 after planck epoch, violates the holographic principle, so any typ-
ical post-big-bang inationary models that solve the the atness problem by an amplication
of the scale factor appear to be incompatible with the holography. does only the pre-big-bang
super-inationary senario[10] survive out of the restrictive holography condition or, otherwise,
should one resort to the regularity of the planck epoch to solve the atness and the horizon
problem?

one is thus led to conclude that the holography based on apparent horizon, despite its
aesthetically simple and appealing features such as compatibility with the rst-law of ther-
modynamics, are not totally satisfactory when applied to cosmology. nevertheless, we trust
that our proposal based on apparent horizon bears an important core of truth provided further
specication is supplied on the holographic surfaces and bounded regions therein. after the
present work has appeared, bousso has made an interesting proposal [11] concerning a covari-
ant entropy bound valid for all surfaces in all physical spacetimes. in particular, bousso has
established that bekenstein bound holds if the surface permits a complete, future-directed, in-
going null geodesic congruences. this singles out the apparent horizon as the largest admissible
holographic surface, thus conrming our proposal. boussos proposal has also remedied nicely
diculties we have posed in the present paper. most relevantly, it was shown that the hologra-
phy bound is satised only if the surface obeys the completeness condition and, when dealing
with closed universe, the entropy ought to be interpreted as that on null geodesic congruences
directed toward the smaller part of the universe.

before closing, we would like to make a brief comments on the string cosmology. if one
applies the new cosmic holographic principle to the string cosmology model considered in ref.[4],
it is straghtforward to show that it selects out open universe together with at universes with
||  1d
, while the closed universes are ruled out. here one must note that the apparent horizon
should be dened with the einstein frame metric instead of the string-frame metric because the
gravitational entropy is associated with the einstein frame metric although the relevant physics
should be independent of the choice of description. in view of boussos proposal [11], the above
results should be interpreted as the condition on completeness of the apparent horizon. the
above results are true both the pre-big-bang branch and the post-big-bang branch, so that
the time reversal symmetry is respected by the cosmic holography.
in the analysis[4] using
the fischler-susskind version, any at universes with matters are ruled out by the holography
condition. this dierence stems from the fact that the particle horizon in the pre-big-bang
cosmology is innite whereas the apparent horizon is nite in the pre-big-bang branch.

7

references

[1] g. t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, in salamfest pp. 284-296 (world

scientic co, singapore, 1993).

[2] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377.

[3] w. fischler and l. susskind, holography and cosmology, hep-th/9806039.

[4] d. bak and s. rey, class. quantum. grav. 17 (2000) l1 - l7.

[5] s. perlmutter et al., nature 391 (1998) 51; a.g. riess et al., astron. j. 116 (1998) 1009;

see also, j. glanz, science 278 (1997) 799 and references therein.

[6] w. rindler, mon.not.roy.ast.soc., 116 (1956) 663.

[7] c.w. misner and d.h. sharp, phys. rev. 136, (1964) b571.

[8] s.a. hayward and s. mukohyama, phys. lett. a256 (1999) 347.

[9] see for example a. linde, particle physics and inationary cosmology, (harwood, london,

1990) p. 53.

[10] g. veneziano, phys. lett. b265 (1991) 287.

[11] r. bousso, j. high-energy phys. 9907 (1999) 004; ibid, j. high-energy phys. 9906 (1999)

028.

8

