duke-cgtp-99-03

hep-th/9902116

9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
6
1

 

 
 

1
v
6
1
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

d-branes, derived categories,

and grothendieck groups

eric sharpe

department of physics

box 90305

duke university

durham, nc 27708

ersharpe@cgtp.duke.edu

in this paper we describe how grothendieck groups of coherent sheaves and locally free
sheaves can be used to describe type ii d-branes, in the case that all d-branes are wrapped
on complex varieties and all connections are holomorphic. our proposal is in the same
spirit as recent discussions of k-theory and d-branes; within the restricted class mentioned,
grothendieck groups encode a choice of connection on each d-brane worldvolume, in addition
to information about the c  bundles. we also point out that derived categories can also
be used to give insight into d-brane constructions, and analyze how a z2 subset of the t-
duality group acting on d-branes on tori can be understood in terms of a fourier-mukai
transformation.

february 1999

1

1 introduction

recently it was noted that topological k-theory can be usefully employed to describe d-
brane charges [1]. in this paper we shall introduce new technical tools which give a renement
of k-theory (more precisely, a holomorphic version of k theory), at the cost of less general
applicability. as an example of their application, we will apply these tools to a z2 subgroup of
t-duality (identied with a fourier-mukai transform) and show how these tools can be used
to understand fourier-mukai transforms beyond the subclass of sheaves usually considered
in the physics literature.

it has been observed elsewhere (for example, [2, 3]) that branes supported on complex
submanifolds of complex varieties are naturally described in terms of coherent sheaves. we
shall describe how grothendieck groups of coherent sheaves, the holomorphic version of k-
theory referred to above, can be used to describe d-branes, in the case that all d-branes are
wrapped on complex submanifolds. since we ultimately wish to study t-duality realized as
a fourier-mukai transform, and fourier-mukai transforms are dened, in general, on derived
categories, not individual sheaves, we shall also discuss derived categories. in particular, we
shall point out a physical interpretation of objects of a derived category, and give a physically-
motivated map from objects of a derived category to grothendieck group elements. we
conclude with a discussion of t-duality symmetries in terms of fourier-mukai transforms.
in particular, we shall examine how grothendieck groups can be used to extend the action
of fourier-mukai transforms beyond the class of w.i.t. sheaves considered previously in
the physics literature. for completeness, we have also included a short appendix on the
basics of topological k-theory. we suspect the application of these technical tools may have
much broader applicability (to the study of kontsevichs mirror conjecture, for example),
but unfortunately we shall have little to say on such extensions.

we shall only consider d-branes in type ii theories, which are described by the k-theory
of complex vector bundles [1]. we will not usually work with space-lling d-branes, and so
we shall not concern ourselves with tadpole-cancellation issues.

in [1] it was noted that branes can only consistently wrap a submanifold when the
normal bundle to the submanifold admits a spinc structure.
in this paper we will only
work in complex geometry, and as all u(n) bundles admit a canonical spinc structure [4,
appendix d], we shall never have to consider this subtlety in this paper. (for a more thorough
discussion of the spinc constraint in the context of type ii compactications with vanishing
cosmological constant, see [5].)

we shall assume throughout this paper that all varieties are smooth and projective. (for

example, all complex tori appearing will implicitly be assumed to be abelian varieties.)

since the publication of [1], several other papers have appeared on topological k theory
and d-branes [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. we should also mention that the work [1] built upon the earlier

2

works [11, 12, 13, 14, 15]. we have also been informed that another discussion of t-duality in
the context of k-theory will appear in [16]. also, as this paper was being nalized, another
paper on t-duality and k-theory appeared [17].

2 grothendieck groups

it has recently been argued by e. witten that d-brane charges should be understood in
terms of topological k-theory [1]. in this paper, we shall argue that in certain cases it is
more useful to work with grothendieck groups of coherent sheaves. in this particular section
we shall dene grothendieck groups, then in later sections we shall show their relation to
derived categories and describe how they can give insight into a z2 subgroup of t-duality
realized as a fourier-mukai transformation.

in this paper we shall only work on complex varieties, and will only wrap branes on
(complex) subvarieties. this constraint reduces us to a proper subset of all possible d-
brane congurations, but by making this restriction we will be able to use more powerful
tools. for example, in these circumstances we can make some strong statements concerning
supersymmetric vacuum congurations of a d-brane [2, section 4.2]. consider a set of n
branes on some kahler variety of dimension n. if f is the curvature of the connection on
the u(n) bundle, and j the kahler form, then in order to get a supersymmetric vacuum
some necessary conditions1 on f are [2, section 4.2]

f  1,1
f  j n1 = j n

(1)
(2)

for some constant .

given a c  bundle e (with a xed hermitian structure) on a complex manifold, there
is a one-to-one correspondence between connections da on e that satisfy equation (1) (in
other words, holomorphic connections) and holomorphic structures on e [18, section vii.1].
thus, specifying a bundle with a xed holomorphic structure is equivalent to specifying a c 
bundle with a choice of holomorphic connection. (if in addition the holomorphic connection
satises equation (2), then the corresponding holomorphic bundle will be mumford-takemoto
semistable.)

thus, within the context of the restriction to complex subvarieties and holomorphic bun-
dles, the specication of a holomorphic bundle on some subvariety is equivalent to specifying
a complex c  bundle together with a choice of holomorphic connection on the bundle 
data associated with a d-brane.

1the attentive reader will note that these are almost, but not quite, two necessary conditions for super-

symmetric heterotic vacua.

3

instead of working with topological k theory, which only encodes c  bundles, it can be
advantageous to work with a holomorphic version of k-theory, which implicitly encodes
not only choices of c  bundles, but also specic choices of (holomorphic) connections on
the bundles. such a holomorphic version of topological k-theory exists, and is known as a
grothendieck group (of locally free sheaves).

before we actually dene grothendieck groups, we need to make some general observa-
tions. the motivation given above for working with grothendieck groups is clearly rather
weak, but in later sections we shall give stronger arguments. we pointed out that the con-
ditions for a supersymmetric d-brane vacuum on a complex kahler manifold imply that
the connection on the c  bundle is holomorphic, and so the combined c  bundle plus
connection can be described equivalently in terms of a holomorphic bundle. however, when
we start working with congurations of both branes and antibranes, we should not expect
conditions for a supersymmetric vacuum to be of great relevance, and so it is not completely
clear from this description that grothendieck groups are necessarily useful objects. we shall
see later that working with grothendieck groups give us a natural arena in which to exam-
ine t-duality, for example, so by working with grothendieck groups we do get some useful
insights.

before dening grothendieck groups, another technical observation should be made. in
order to specify a supersymmetric vacuum for a d-brane, we must specify not just any
holomorphic connection, but one which is hermitian-einstein (equation (2)). thus, to spec-
ify a supersymmetric vacuum, not any holomorphic bundle will do, but only those which
are mumford-takemoto semistable. note this means that given a general element of the
grothendieck group, there is not one but two reasons why it will not describe a supersym-
metric vacuum  not only because of the simultaneous presence of branes and antibranes, but
also because the (holomorphic) bundles are not necessarily mumford-takemoto semistable.

strictly speaking there are two distinct grothendieck groups relevant here, which we
shall denote k 0(x) and k 
0(x) [19, 20]. we shall rst dene both, then point out that
in reasonably nice circumstances they are isomorphic. to distinguish grothendieck groups
from topological k-theory, we shall use k (x) to denote grothendieck groups and k(x) to
denote topological k-theory.

the grothendieck group k 

0(x) of coherent sheaves is dened to be the free abelian group
on coherent sheaves on x, modulo elements e  e   e , where e, e , and e  are coherent
sheaves related by short exact sequences of the form

0  e   e  e   0

the grothendieck group k 0(x) of locally free sheaves is dened to be the free abelian
group on locally free sheaves on x, modulo elements e  e   e , where e, e , and e  are

4

locally free sheaves related by short exact sequences of the form

0  e   e  e   0

more formally [19, prop. 4.4], k 0 is a contravariant functor from the category of noetherian
0 and k 0 are
schemes to the category of rings. note in passing that these denitions of k 
closely analogous to the denition of topological k 0.

for further information on grothendieck groups (and their relation to derived categories,

which shall appear shortly), see for example [19, 20].

it can be shown ([19],[22, exercise iii.6.9]) that on a smooth projective variety x, the
natural map k 0(x)  k 
0(x) is an isomorphism. in the rest of this paper we shall assume
that we are always working on a smooth projective variety, and so we shall use k 0 and k 
0
more or less interchangeably. we shall also often refer to the grothendieck group.

the reader may wonder how precisely grothendieck groups are related to topological k-
theory. in order to get some insight into the relation between these objects, let us consider
an example. suppose x is a smooth compact riemann surface.
it is straightforward to
compute2 that topological k 0(x) = z2. by contrast [22, exercise ii.6.11], the grothendieck
0(x) = pic x  z. although the topological k-theory groups and grothendieck
group k 
groups are not identical, they are still closely related. note for example that for x a smooth
riemann surface, pic x is an extension of z by jac x, so the grothendieck group k 
0(x) =
pic x  z includes the topological k-theory group k 0(x) = z  z as a subset. in other
words, in this example the grothendieck group contains more information than topological
k 0. this certainly agrees with the intuition we laid earlier  the grothendieck group should
contain information not only about the choice of c  bundle, but also about the precise
choice of connection on that bundle.

in general it is easy to see that the grothendieck group k 0 maps into topological k 0.
unfortunately in general this map will not be surjective. one can certainly map a locally
free sheaf to a smooth bundle, essentially just by forgetting the holomorphic structure. the
attentive reader might be concerned that this map is not well-dened  in the denition of
k 0, e is identied with e   e  if e is an extension of either e  or e  by the other, whereas
in topological k 0 we only identify split extensions. however, it is a standard fact that any
extension of continuous vector bundles splits [23, section 3.9] (whereas not every extension
of holomorphic bundles splits holomorphically), so in fact the obvious map k 0  k 0 is
well-dened. unfortunately in general this map will not be surjective. one way to see this
is to note that chern classes of a holomorphic bundle on a projective variety x live only in
a subset of h (x, z)  in particular, ci  h (i,i)(x)  h 2i(x, z)  whereas chern classes of
an arbitrary c  complex bundle are not so restricted.

in topological k-theory, one can dene k 1 in addition to k 0. there are also holomorphic

2using the atiyah-hirzebruch spectral sequence. see [21, section 2].

5

versions of k 1, though they are rather more obscure [24, chapter 13]. we shall not use these
holomorphic versions of k 1, though for completeness we list them here.

dene [24, chapter 13] k 

1(x) to be the free abelian group on pairs (e, ) where e is a
coherent sheaf on x and  : e  e is an isomorphism, modulo elements (e, )  (e , ) 
(e , ) where e, e , and e  are coherent sheaves related by short exact sequences of the
form

0  e   e  e   0

and also modulo (e,   )  (e, )  (e, ).

dene [24, chapter 13] k 1(x) analogously to k 

1(x), that is, to be the free abelian group
on pairs (e, ) where e is a locally free sheaf on x and  : e  e is an isomorphism, modulo
elements (e, )  (e , )  (e , ) where e, e , and e  are locally free sheaves related by
short exact sequences of the form

and also modulo (e,   )  (e, )  (e, ).

0  e   e  e   0

in passing, note that these denitions are closely analogous to a denition of topological

k 1 used recently in, for example, [6].

3 derived categories

ultimately in this paper we would like to study the action of t-duality (realized as a fourier-
mukai transform) on brane/antibrane congurations. however, fourier-mukai transforms
are dened on derived categories of coherent sheaves, not individual sheaves, in general. in
special cases3 one can make sense out of the action of a fourier-mukai transform on an
individual sheaf, however to discuss fourier-mukai transforms in generality, one must turn
to derived categories.

because of our interest in t-duality, we shall now discuss derived categories and their
physical relevance. in particular, we shall show how an element of a grothendieck group can
be obtained from an object in a derived category (in a physically meaningful manner). in the
next section, we shall put this map to use in studying t-duality in terms of fourier-mukai
transformations. as usual, we shall be implicitly working over complex varieties and with
holomorphic bundles, and so we shall also assume that all tachyons, viewed as bundle maps,
are also complex and holomorphic.

3indeed, previously in the physics literature authors have only considered these special cases when dis-

cussing fourier-mukai transforms.

6

recall from [1] that given a coincident brane, anti-brane pair, with bundles e and f
respectively, and a tachyon eld t : e  f , then the resulting brane charge one would
actually be left with in vacuum is (at least morally) the grothendieck group element given
by ker t coker t , or equivalently h 0 h 1, where the h i are the cohomology of the complex

0  e t f  0

(note that since we are working in complex geometry, ker t and coker t make sense as
sheaves4.)

one can also imagine working with more general complexes of bundles. these would be
described as a sandwich of alternating branes and anti-branes. for example, let f  denote
a complex of bundles

  

ti1 f i ti f i+1 ti+1 f i+2 ti+2   

(where, by denition of complex5, tj+1  tj = 0) such that the f 2i all live on (coincident)
branes and the f 2i+1 all live on (coincident) anti-branes. put another way, the total sheaf
on the brane is

and the total sheaf on the antibrane is

f 2n

mn

f 2n+1

mn

(3)

(4)

with the tachyon potential broken up into an interweaving series of maps between the brane
and antibrane. after cancelling as much as possible, one is left with an element of k 
0(x)
given by

"mn

h 2n# "mn

h 2n+1#

clearly such a complex encodes a lot of physically-irrelevant information. indeed, the

complex f  described above is physically identical to the complex

  

0 h j1

0 h j

0 h j+1

0   

and even the complex

h 2n

0  mn

h 2n+1  0

0 mn

the only physically relevant aspect of the complex is its image in the grothendieck group.

4a technical note: we shall implicitly restrict to complexes whose cohomology sheaves are coherent.
5 note that, for example, t2j+1  t2j is a map from the total sheaf on the brane (equation (3)) back into
itself, whereas tachyons should only map branes to antibranes and vice-versa. thus, in order to consistently
break up the tachyon between the total brane (3) and antibrane (4) into an interweaving series of maps, as
will be mentioned shortly, we must demand that tj+1  tj = 0, i.e., that the maps dene a complex.

7

although the only physically relevant aspect of a complex of branes and anti-branes is its
grothendieck-group image, we shall nevertheless nd it useful to work in terms of complexes
in the next section.

since we are working in algebraic geometry, the attentive reader may wonder why we
are restricting to locally free sheaves, rather than considering general coherent sheaves. for
example, we could identify a torsion sheaf with a lower-dimensional d-brane. the diculty
is that we wish to speak of maps between the worldvolumes described by tachyons, and
although open strings connecting branes and antibranes of the same dimension certainly
contain tachyon modes, open strings connecting branes and antibranes of distinct dimension
need not contain tachyon modes  whether a tachyon is actually present varies from case
to case. thus, we are restricting to locally free sheaves on worldvolumes all of the same
dimension.

there exists a useful mechanism for working with complexes of holomorphic bundles, and

more generally, holomorphic sheaves. this tool is known as a derived category.

a derived category of coherent sheaves on some variety x is a category whose objects
are complexes of sheaves on x, such that the cohomology sheaves of the complexes are
coherent. a derived category of (bounded complexes of) sheaves on x is denoted db(x). the
subcategory dened by complexes of sheaves with coherent cohomology is denoted db
c(x). in
general, not all derived categories are derived categories of sheaves; however, all the derived
categories we shall describe in this paper are derived categories of sheaves.

a proper explanation of derived categories is well beyond the scope of this paper  for
more information, see for example [25, 26]. however we shall mention one useful fact in pass-
ing. morphisms of chain complexes that preserve cohomology (so-called quasi-isomorphisms)
descend to isomorphisms in the derived category, so intuitively the reader might, very
loosely6, imagine that any two complexes in the derived category with isomorphic coho-
mology groups are themselves considered isomorphic.

it has been speculated previously in the physics literature that derived categories were
relevant for physics [27, 28, 29]. in the context of holomorphic bundles, we now have an
explicit correspondence.

note that derived categories, just like complexes, contain a great deal of physically irrel-
evant information. we do not need to know the full cohomology of a complex of sheaves,
but only the formal dierence

 mn

h 2n!  mn

h 2n+1!

in other words, the only physically relevant part of an object in a derived category is its

6technically this is incorrect; however, for those readers unwilling to delve into technicalities, this de-

scription does give some handle on matters.

8

image in the grothendieck group of coherent sheaves.

the attentive reader should be slightly bothered by our use of derived categories to
describe sandwiches of branes and antibranes. in these brane/antibrane sandwiches, we im-
plicitly assumed that all the branes and antibranes were of the same dimension (equivalently,
that we had a locally free sheaf on the worldvolume of each). by contrast, the objects of a
derived category are complexes of more or less arbitrary sheaves, whose cohomology groups
are coherent sheaves. naively, it would seem that our brane/antibrane sandwich construction
can only sense a small portion of the possible objects of a derived category.

however, this is not the case. any bounded complex of coherent sheaves on a smooth
variety is quasi-isomorphic to a bounded complex of locally free sheaves, that is, admits
a chain map to a complex of locally free sheaves such that the chain map preserves the
cohomology of the complex. (this is known formally as a cartan-eilenberg resolution of the
complex [25, section 5.7].) since quasi-isomorphisms descend to isomorphisms in the derived
category, we see that any complex of coherent sheaves is isomorphic (within the derived
category) to a complex of locally free sheaves.

there is one further technical problem that might bother the attentive reader. we have
just argued that any complex of coherent sheaves can be equivalently described by a complex
of locally free sheaves, and so in terms of a brane/antibrane sandwich. however, the objects
of a derived category are not precisely complexes of coherent sheaves, but rather complexes
of sheaves whose cohomology sheaves are coherent. in the special case of sheaves on smooth
projective varieties, we strongly suspect that the two categories are equivalent, but we do
not have a rigorous argument to support that claim.

4 t-duality

now that we have introduced relevant technical machinery, we shall discuss t-duality. it is
often said that a z2 subgroup of t-duality is realized via fourier-mukai transforms [3], and
in the present context we shall nd a natural setting for this ansatz. we shall begin by giving
a physical motivation for the identication of a z2 subgroup of t-duality with a fourier-
mukai transform, then go through a number of technical results on fourier-mukai transforms,
and nally conclude with a discussion of why precisely one needs grothendieck groups and
derived categories to discuss fourier-mukai transforms on general d-brane congurations.

4.1 physical motivation

before we begin discussing fourier-mukai transforms in technical detail, we shall discuss
in a pair of examples why precisely it is sometimes claimed [3] that a z2 subgroup of the

9

t-duality group acting on branes wrapped on complex algebraic tori is realized as a fourier-
mukai transform. note that for d-branes wrapped on t 2g, when we speak of t-duality we
mean, t-duality along each of 2g s1s in t 2g. since we have t-dualized an even number of
times, we will always take type iia back to type iia, and type iib back to type iib.

1) consider a rank n bundle on t 2, with c1 = 0  in other words, an su(n) bundle on t 2.
this precisely corresponds to n dp-branes wrapped on t 2, with no immersed d(p2)-brane
charge. one expects that t-duality should map this to a conguration of n d(p2)-branes,
with support only at points on t 2.

indeed, this is precisely what we nd. for reasonably nice7 su(n) bundles e on t 2, the

fourier-mukai transform is a skyscraper sheaf on t 2, supported at points.

2) consider a rank n bundle e on t 4  in other words, a u(n) bundle on t 4. this
precisely corresponds to n dp-branes wrapped on t 4, with immersed d(p  2)-brane charge
c1(e), and with d(p4)-brane charge given by ch2(e) = c2(e)(1/2)c1(e)2. under t-duality
we expect d(p  4)-brane charge8 on t 4 to become dp-branes wrapped t 4, and dp-branes
wrapping t 4 to become d(p  4)-brane charge on t 4. thus, we expect the t-dual to this
conguration to be another bundle e on the dual t 4, of rank ch2(e), and ch2( e) = rank e.

indeed, this is precisely what we nd. for reasonably nice9 bundles e on t 4, the dual is

a bundle e of10

rank e = ch2(e)

= c2(e)  (1/2)c1(e)2

c1( e) = ( c1(e) )
ch2( e) = rank e

where  : h 2(t 4, z)

= h 2( t 4, z) is an isomorphism.

thus, at least in these two examples, the usual claim [3] that t-duality of branes is

realized by fourier-mukai transform seems to check out.

in discussions of fourier-mukai transforms in the physics literature, a single sheaf is
mapped to a single sheaf. this is not the most general way that fourier-mukai transforms
act; it is also not the most natural. in general, fourier-mukai transforms act on derived

7in notation to be dened shortly, w.i.t.1.
8a small clarication is in order. given some dp-brane, there are two ways to get, say, d(p  4)-brane
charge: (i) add a d(p  4)-brane (add a torsion sheaf, in more algebraic language), and (ii) modify ch2 of
the bundle on the dp-brane worldvolume. more globally one expects the moduli space to be more or less
reducible, with these options corresponding to distinct components. for simplicity we only discuss option
(ii) in the example above.

9in notation to be dened shortly, w.i.t.1.
10the equations shown correct typographical errors in equation (3.2.16) of [30]. we would like to thank

kentaro hori for pointing out these errors to us.

10

categories of coherent sheaves, that is, they act on complexes of sheaves. one can act on a
single sheaf e by using the trivial complex

0  e  0

but in general the fourier-mukai transform will not be another trivial complex, but a much
more complicated complex. in the next section we shall give the general technical denition
of a fourier-mukai transform, then describe the special cases in which it has a well-dened
action on individual coherent sheaves.

4.2 technical denitions

let x and x be projective varieties (not necessarily tori, for the moment). a fourier-mukai
transform is a functor t between (in fact, an equivalence of) the derived categories db(x)
and db( x). more precisely, if 1 : x  x  x and 2 : x  x  x are the obvious
projections, then for any p  ob db(x  x), we can dene a fourier-mukai functor11 [31]

r2(cid:18)p

l

 

1(cid:19) : db(x)  db( x)

(5)

in the special case that p is a locally free sheaf on x  x  (the only case we shall consider),
the fourier-mukai functor simplies to become the right-derived functor12

r2(p  

1) : db(x)  db( x)

(6)

we shall denote this functor by t : db(x)  db( x), and we shall usually restrict to db
and db

c(x)

c( x).

in the remainder of this section, we shall specialize to the case that x and x are dual

projective complex tori, and that p is the poincare bundle on x  x.

although fourier-mukai transforms are dened on derived categories, that is, on com-
plexes of sheaves, there is a way to make sense out of their action on individual sheaves in
special cases, and this is the specialization usually invoked in the physics literature. first,
note that given any coherent sheaf e, we can dene the trivial complex

0  e  0

(7)

11in general, any equivalence of derived categories db(x) and db( x) for any smooth projective varieties

x and x can be written in the form of equation (5) for some p  ob db(x  x) [32].

12 as an aside, it is perhaps worth mentioning that conditions for a locally free sheaf p to dene an
equivalence of categories via equation (6) are known [33]. the locally free sheaf p denes an equivalence
of categories via equation (6) precisely when for all points x  x, px is simple, px = px   x (where
 x is the dualizing sheaf on x), and for any two distinct points x1, x2 of x and any integer i, one has
exti

x (px1 , px2) = 0 [33].

11

thus we can map individual coherent sheaves into the class of objects of a derived category.
we say a coherent sheaf e is w.i.t.n if [31]

ri2 (p  

1e) = 0

for all i except i = n. then, the fourier-mukai transform of a sheaf e, identied with an
object of the derived category via the trivial complex (7), is another sheaf (also dened
via (7)), given by

e = rn2 (p  

1e)

moreover, it can be shown that if e is w.i.t.n for some n, then e is also w.i.t.n for some
e = (1)e, where (1) multiplies all coordinates on the torus by 1 [31].
n, and moreover
clearly, those coherent sheaves that are w.i.t.n for some n have well-behaved dualization
properties, and so physicists speaking of fourier-mukai transformations usually assume the
sheaves in question are all w.i.t. for example, in the examples at the beginning of this
section, it was assumed that the coherent sheaves given were w.i.t.1. however, not all
coherent sheaves of interest are w.i.t., and for the more general case one needs the more
general methods outlined in this paper. we shall speak to the more general case, and the
precise relevance of the w.i.t. condition, in a later section.

4.3 action on grothendieck groups

although fourier-mukai transforms are dened on derived categories, they factor into an
action on grothendieck groups of coherent sheaves, in a manner that should be suggested
by the physical setup of section 3. let x : db
0 be dened as the map that takes
a complex of sheaves into the alternating sum of the cohomologies of the complex, i.e.,

c(x)  k 

x : f   hnh 2n(f )i hnh 2n+1(f )i

(the same map we introduced in more physical terms in section 3) and let t : db
c( x) denote fourier-mukai transform, then we have a commutative diagram [34]
db

c(x) 

c(x)

x k 

ob db
t 
ob db

0(x)
 tk
0( x)

c( x)

 x k 

where tk : k 

0(x)  k 

0( x) is dened by
tk() = xi

()iri2(p  

1)

in other words, the action of fourier-mukai transforms on derived categories factors into an
action on grothendieck groups of coherent sheaves.

12

4.4 a sign ambiguity

the attentive reader will notice there is a minor sign ambiguity in our presentation of fourier-
mukai transformations. one typically denes the inverse of a fourier-mukai transformation
with minor sign asymmetries relative to the original transformation [30, section 3.2], just
as inverses of fourier transformations are often dened with relative signs. by contrast,
we have presented fourier-mukai transformations in an implicitly symmetric fashion, which
means our results can only be interpreted physically up to a z2 ambiguity.

in order to describe this sign problem more precisely, let us reconsider the two examples

given at the beginning of the section, being somewhat more careful about signs.

1) consider a holomorphic rank n bundle e on t 2, with c1 = 0  in other words, an

su(n) bundle on t 2. as mentioned earlier, we assume e is w.i.t.1, so

r02(p  

1e) = 0

a close examination of our denition of fourier-mukai transform reveals that, as an ele-
0( t 2), the fourier-mukai transform of e is not precisely the torsion sheaf e =
ment of k 
r12 (p  

1e) but rather the virtual torsion sheaf  e  k 

0( t 2).

2) consider a holomorphic rank n bundle e on t 4  in other words, a u(n) bundle
on t 4. assume the complex structure on t 4 is such that the t 4 is projective. earlier we
mentioned that the fourier-mukai transform of e is a bundle e on t 4, in the case that e is
w.i.t.1, namely

r02(p  
r22(p  

1e) = 0
1e) = 0

a close examination of our denition of the fourier-mukai transform reveals that, as an
0( t 4), the fourier-mukai transform of e is not precisely the bundle e =
element of k 
1e) but rather the virtual bundle  e  k 
r12(p  

0( t 4).

as it has been presented so far, this sign problem could naively be cured by redening the
fourier-mukai transform. unfortunately, the diculty is much deeper. consider applying
if we are studying branes wrapped on t 2g, then this
a fourier-mukai transform twice.
means t-dualizing along each of the 2g s1s in t 2g twice, and so intuitively we should return
to where we started. according to [31], t 2 = (1)[g] as an action on db(t 2g). the
[g] formally shifts all complexes g places to the right, and the (1) multiplies all complex
coordinates on the torus by 1. this descends to an action on the grothendieck group that,
for g odd, switches signs (naively exchanging branes and antibranes), and for g even, leaves
the grothendieck group essentially invariant.

thus, if we apply fourier-mukai transform twice, then we do not get precisely the same
element of the grothendieck group we started with, but rather an element diering by a

13

sign. thus, we can clearly identify fourier-mukai transforms with t-duality only up to a z2.
as mentioned earlier, this is not a fundamental diculty, but merely reects the fact that
we have dened the fourier-mukai transform symmetrically with respect to a torus and its
dual, rather than with sign asymmetries that are often introduced.

4.5 non-w.i.t. sheaves

earlier we gave the denition of w.i.t. sheaves, and noted that for w.i.t. sheaves, fourier-
mukai transforms simplify greatly  their action becomes well dened on individual w.i.t.
sheaves, one does not need the full technology of derived categories and/or grothendieck
groups. in prior physics literature on fourier-mukai transforms, all sheaves were typically
assumed to be w.i.t., for precisely this reason. unfortunately, not all the coherent sheaves
that one would like to study are w.i.t.  not even all supersymmetric d-brane vacua are
w.i.t.  and for the more general case one needs the more sophisticated methods reviewed in
this paper. in this section we shall work through an example of a non-w.i.t. sheaf, and speak
to the relationship between the w.i.t. condition and mumford-takemoto semistability.

first, let us construct an easy explicit example of a non-w.i.t. sheaf. consider a sheaf
e t on t 2, where e is a w.i.t. rank n bundle of c1 = 0, and t is a torsion sheaf supported
at n  points on t 2. it is easy to check that this sheaf is not w.i.t. as described earlier, the
0( t 2), and the fourier-mukai
fourier-mukai transform of e is  e = r12 (p  
transform of t is a rank n  bundle t on t 2. thus, the fourier-mukai transform of the sheaf
e  t is the virtual sheaf t  e  k 
0( t 2). in other words, the fourier-mukai transform of a
non-w.i.t. sheaf is not an honest sheaf, but rather some general element of the grothendieck
group of coherent sheaves (or, depending on the readers preference, the derived category of
coherent sheaves) on the dual algebraic torus.

1e)  k 

what is the physics buried in the mathematical example above? the coherent sheaf e t
cannot be a supersymmetric vacuum conguration  it corresponds to non-dissolved d0-
branes inside d2-branes. the fourier-mukai transformation takes this non-supersymmetric
conguration, involving only branes, to another non-supersymmetric conguration, but (at
least naively) involving both branes and antibranes. at rst blush it seems very surprising
that t-duality could map a conguration of only branes to one involving both branes and
antibranes. however, on both sides of the duality we have a nonsupersymmetric congu-
ration, and perhaps more importantly, it is not clear how to distinguish a conguration of
d0-branes and d2-antibranes from a conguration of d0- and d2-branes. we shall return
to this issue after making a closer examination of the w.i.t. condition.

the reader might well ask, what is the precise relationship between mumford-takemoto
semistability and the w.i.t. condition? for example, the reader may be tempted to suspect
that supersymmetric brane vacua are w.i.t. and so have easy fourier-mukai transforma-
tions, in other words, that a locally-free sheaf that is mumford-takemoto semistable (and

14

therefore satises necessary conditions for a supersymmetric vacuum for a brane) must be
w.i.t. unfortunately this does not seem to be the case in general [35, 36, 37].

under what circumstances is a torsion-free, mumford-takemoto semistable sheaf e also
w.i.t.? first, let us specialize to the case that e is mumford-takemoto stable, not just
semistable, and that13 c1(e) = 0. in this case, e can have no (holomorphic) sections, as
such a section would make o a subsheaf of the same slope as e, whose existence would
contradict mumford-takemoto stability. similarly, if l is any at line bundle, then e  l
cannot have a section, as the section would dene l as a subsheaf, and we would have
the same contradiction as for o. thus, for any at line bundle l, h 0(e  l) = 0, and
so14 r02 (p  
1e) = 0. now, for any torsion-free sheaf e, e is mumford-takemoto stable
if and only if e  is also mumford-takemoto stable [39, lemma 4.5], consequently by serre
duality we have that on an n-(complex-)dimensional torus, h n(e  l) = 0 for any at line
bundle l by the same arguments as above, and so rn2 (p  

1e) = 0.

thus, a torsion-free, mumford-takemoto stable sheaf on t 4 of c1 = 0 is necessarily
w.i.t.1. unfortunately one does not get such statements in greater generality. for example,
on higher-dimensional tori, there is no good reason why a torsion-free, mumford-takemoto
stable sheaf of c1 = 0 should be w.i.t., and in general we expect that they will not be
w.i.t.

so far in our discussion of the relationship between the w.i.t. condition and mumford-
takemoto stability, we have only spoken about stable sheaves. how would one deal with
mumford-takemoto semistable sheaves that are not stable? after all, these can also satisfy
the conditions for a supersymmetric d-brane vacuum. as noted in [40], when using a properly
semistable sheaf, physics sees a split sheaf with stable factors. thus, questions regarding
fourier-mukai transforms and w.i.t. conditions for semistable sheaves can be reduced to
questions regarding direct sums of stable sheaves.

in general, therefore, there does not seem to be a simple relationship between mumford-
if we follow the usual wisdom that a z2
takemoto stability and the w.i.t. condition.
subgroup of t-duality is identied with fourier-mukai transformation, then one consequence
is that t-duals of some supersymmetric d-brane vacua naively involve both branes and
antibranes.

some care is required in interpreting grothendieck group elements, however. a standard
example from topological k-theory should make possible subtleties more clear. let e be a
c  vector bundle on a k-dimensional manifold m, then there exists a rank k c  bundle f
such that e = 1  f , where 1 denotes the trivial rank 2k bundle [23, exercise 3.3e, p. 39].

13it is interesting that w.i.t. and stability of a torsion-free sheaf e correlate somewhat more naturally
when det e is trivial; one is tempted to wonder if there is any connection to the fact that overall u (1)s
decouple from u (n ) in the ads/cft correspondence (see, for example, [38]).

14in this subsection we shall be slightly sloppy about computing right derived functors. for a more detailed

examination of their properties, see for example [22, section iii.12].

15

ordinarily, following [1], one would assume that 1  f was necessarily a non-supersymmetric
conguration of both branes and antibranes, but here we see that even without tachyon
condensation, sometimes a brane/antibrane conguration is equivalent to a conguration of
only branes15.

thus, even without tachyon condensation, sometimes naively nontrivial elements of topo-
logical k-theory, and also grothendieck groups, are equivalent to trivial elements. we sus-
pect (though we have not proven) that this is what is happening in fourier-mukai transfor-
mations of non-w.i.t. supersymmetric d-brane vacua  one gets a naively nontrivial element
of the grothendieck group of coherent sheaves, which is subtly equivalent to a conguration
involving only branes.

5 conclusions

in this paper we have argued that it can be useful to consider d-brane charges in terms
of grothendieck groups and, to a lesser extent, derived categories. we began by den-
ing grothendieck groups and listing some basic properties, then briey outlined derived
categories and displayed a physically natural map from objects of a derived category to a
grothendieck group of coherent sheaves. we concluded with a discussion of t-duality in
terms of fourier-mukai transforms, and argued that to understand the action of fourier-
mukai transforms even on general supersymmetric vacua, one needed the technology of
grothendieck groups and derived categories.

derived categories have previously entered the physics literature through kontsevichs
mirror conjecture [28, 29], in which mirror symmetry was conjectured to be realizable as an
equivalence of certain derived categories. it would be interesting to see if any insight could be
gained by working instead with grothendieck groups. perhaps grothendieck groups would
be more relevant for the open-string mirror symmetry proposed in [41].

derived categories might conceivably play a role in giving a solid justication to certain
proposed analogues of t-duality. for example, in [42], a t-duality symmetry was conjectured
that exchanged branes wrapped on general algebraic surfaces. this hypothesized t-duality-
analogue might conceivably be justied in terms of an equivalence of derived categories on
algebraic surfaces, or even an automorphism of derived categories on a single16 algebraic

15for a simpler example of a brane/antibrane conguration equivalent to a conguration of only branes
without tachyon condensation, consider the k-theory element (e  f)  f. this is clearly the same as the
branes-only conguration e, without tachyon condensation. the example discussed above is merely a more
sophisticated version of this case.

16in particular, it has been argued [44, 45] that a variety x can be more or less reconstructed from db

c(x)
if either its canonical sheaf or its anticanonical sheaf is ample, so for some algebraic surfaces, such as del
pezzo surfaces, the only possible t-duality-analogues of the form proposed above would necessarily map the
surface into itself.

16

surface, in which case one would presumably get not a z2 subgroup of some continuous
family of symmetries, but only a (discrete) z2 t-duality-analogue. (a more specialized form
of this conjecture, given essentially for algebraic k3s, was stated in [3].) one might even
speculate that the existence of equivalences of derived categories of coherent sheaves on
distinct calabi-yaus [43] might signal the existence of some mirror-symmetry-analogue for
branes, analogous to that proposed in [41].

the description of d-branes in terms of k theory given in [1] may also yield interest-
ing new insights via string-string duality. for example, consider the duality relating iia
compactied on k3 to a heterotic string on t 4. a d2-brane wrapped on a curve in k3,
for example, is interpreted as a particle on the heterotic side. what is the heterotic inter-
pretation of a wrapped d2 brane/antibrane pair? presumably the heterotic dual to such a
conguration is a massive heterotic string state [10]. thus, the interpretation of d-branes
in terms of k theory may give rise to a new geometric interpretation of massive heterotic
states, for example.

it is somewhat tempting to speculate that massive heterotic string states may have, at
least sometimes, an interpretation in terms of topological k theory or grothendieck groups
of the space that the heterotic string is compactied on. in such an event, it would seem
likely that isomorphisms of derived categories on distinct calabi-yaus [43] may correspond
immediately to some limit of (0,2) mirror symmetry, in which all b-elds are turned o and
 is small.

6 acknowledgements

we would like to thank p. aspinwall, t. gomez, k. hori, p. horja, a. knutson, d. morrison,
b. pardon, r. plesser, m. stern, and e. witten for useful conversations.

a notes on topological k-theory

for more information on topological k-theory, see for example [21, 23, 46, 47].

given a compact complex manifold x, the group k(x) is the free abelian group on
isomorphism classes of complex vector bundles on x, modulo elements of the form [e0 e1]
[e0]  [e1], where e0, e1 are complex vector bundles on x and [e] denotes the isomorphism
class of e. put another way, elements of k(x) are virtual bundles of the form e  f .
more generally, it is straightforward to see that k denes a contravariant functor from the
category of compact spaces to the category of abelian groups.

17

what is k(point) ? a vector bundle on a point is completely determined by its rank, so

it should be clear that k(point) = z.

the reduced k-ring of x, denoted k(x), is dened to be the kernel of the natural

projection k(x)  k(point).

let x be a topological space, y some subset of x. there exists a notion of relative
k-theory, denoted k(x, y ), which is dened as k(x, y ) = k(x/y ).
(if y is a closed
subset of x, then x/y is essentially a space obtained by collapsing y down to a single
point. for more information see for example [48, section 0.2].) as the reader may well guess,
k(x, ) = k(x).

dene the suspension of a topological space x, denoted sx, to be the quotient of x  i
(where i = [0, 1], the unit interval) obtained by collapsing x  {0} to one point and x  {1}
to another point. for example, ssn = sn+1.

for n positive, dene k n(x/y ) = k(sn(x/y )). in particular, k 1(point) = 0.

bott periodicity is simply the statement that for any compact hausdor space x, k n(x) =

k n+2(x). similarly, k n(x/y ) = k n+2(x/y ).

we dened k n above for n negative only; however, by bott periodicity we can now dene

k n for arbitary integer n:

k n(x) = k 0(x) for n even
k n(x) = k 1(x) for n odd

and similarly for k n(x, y ), and so forth.

k 1(x) has an alternative denition, described in [46, section ii.3]. consider the category
whose objects are pairs (e, ) where e is a bundle and  : e  e is an isomorphism, and
whose morphisms (e, )  (e , ) are given by maps h : e  e  such that the following
commutes:

e
h 
e 

 e
 h

 e 

dene the sum of two objects (e, ) and (e , ) to be (e  e ,   ). dene a pair (e, ) to
be elementary if  is homotopic to the identity within automorphisms of e. now we nally
have the denitions in hand to dene k 1(x). dene k 1(x) to be the free abelian group on
objects in the category, modulo the equivalence relation (e, )  (e , ) if and only if there
exist elementary pairs (f , ) and (f ,  ) such that (e, ) + (f , ) = (e , ) + (f ,  ).

for notational purposes, let [e, ] denote the equivalence class of the pair (e, ) in k 1(x).

then it can be shown that [e,   ] = [e, ] + [e, ].

18

it is possible to dene a product on elements of k theory; it has the properties

k 0(x)  k 0(x)  k 0(x)
k 0(x)  k 1(x)  k 1(x)
k 1(x)  k 1(x)  k 0(x)

by this point the reader has no doubt noticed the similarity between the groups k n(x)
and h n(x). in fact, k theory is an example of a generalized cohomology theory. more
precisely, cohomology theories can be dened axiomatically [49], and k theory satises all
the axioms for a cohomology theory except one (the dimension axiom).

references

[1] e. witten, d-branes and k theory, hep-th/9810188.

[2] j. harvey and g. moore, on the algebras of bps states, comm. math. phys. 197

(1998) 489-519, hep-th/9609017.

[3] k. hori and y. oz, f-theory, t-duality on k3 surfaces and n = 2 supersymmetric
gauge theories in four dimensions, nucl. phys. b501 (1997) 97-108, hep-th/9702173.

[4] h. b. lawson, jr. and m.-l. michelsohn, spin geometry, princeton university press,

princeton, 1989.

[5] r. l. bryant and e. sharpe, d-branes and spinc structures, hep-th/9812084.

[6] p. horava, type iia d-branes, k theory, and matrix theory, hep-th/9812135.

[7] h. garcia-compean, d-branes in orbifold singularities and equivariant k theory,

hep-th/9812226.

[8] s. gukov, k theory, reality, and orientifolds, hep-th/9901042.

[9] p. yi, membranes from ve-branes and fundamental strings from dp-branes,

hep-th/9901159.

[10] o. bergman and m. r. gaberdiel, nonbps states in heterotic type iia duality,

hep-th/9901014.

[11] a. sen,

stable non-bps states

in string theory, jhep 9806 (1998) 007,

hep-th/9803194.

[12] a. sen, stable non-bps bound states of bps d-branes, jhep 9808 (1998) 010,

hep-th/9805019.

19

[13] a. sen, tachyon condensation on the brane antibrane system, jhep 9808 (1998)

012, hep-th/9805170.

[14] a. sen, bps d-branes on nonsupersymmetric cycles, hep-th/9812031.

[15] r. minasian and g. moore, k-theory and ramond-ramond charges, jhep 9711

(1997) 002, hep-th/9710230.

[16] o. bergman, e. gimon, and p. horava, in preparation.

[17] k. hori, d-branes, t-duality, and index theory, hep-th/9902102.

[18] s. kobayashi, dierential geometry of complex vector bundles, princeton university

press, princeton, 1987.

[19] yu. i. manin, lectures on the k-functor in algebraic geometry, russ. math. surveys

24 (1969) 1-89.

[20] p. berthelot, a. grothendieck, and l. illusie, theorie des intersections et theor`eme
de riemann-roch, sga 6, lecture notes in math. 225, springer-verlag, berlin, 1971.

[21] m. f. atiyah and f. hirzebruch, vector bundles and homogeneous spaces, in dier-
ential geometry, proc. symp. pure math. 3, american mathematical society, provi-
dence, rhode island, 1961.

[22] r. hartshorne, algebraic geometry, springer-verlag, new york, 1977.

[23] d. husemoller, fibre bundles, third edition, springer-verlag, new york, 1994.

[24] r. g. swan, algebraic k-theory, lecture notes in math. 76, springer-verlag, berlin,

1968.

[25] c. weibel, an introduction to homological algebra, cambridge university press, cam-

bridge, 1994.

[26] r. hartshorne, residues and duality, lecture notes in mathematics 20, springer-

verlag, berlin, 1966.

[27] p. aspinwall and r. donagi, the heterotic string, the tangent bundle, and derived

categories, hep-th/9806094.

[28] a. polishchuk and e. zaslow, categorical mirror symmetry:

the elliptic curve,

math.ag/9801119.

[29] m. kontsevich, homological algebra of mirror symmetry, proceedings of the
1994 international congress of mathematicians, birkauser, zurich, 1995, p. 120,
alg-geom/9411018.

20

[30] s. k. donaldson and p. b. kronheimer, the geometry of four-manifolds, oxford

university press, oxford, 1990.

[31] s. mukai, duality between d(x) and d( x) with its application to picard sheaves,

nagoya math. j. 81 (1981) 153-175.

[32] d. orlov, equivalences of derived categories and k3 surfaces, j. math. sci. (new

york) 84 (1997) 1361-1381, alg-geom/9606006.

[33] t. bridgeland, equivalences of triangulated categories and fourier-mukai trans-

forms, bull. london math. soc. 31 (1999) 25-34, math.ag/9809114.

[34] a. beauville, quelques remarques sur la transformation de fourier dans lanneau de
chow dune variete abelienne, in algebraic geometry, ed. by a. dold and b. eckmann,
lecture notes in math. 1016, springer-verlag, berlin, 1983.

[35] d. huybrechts, private communication.

[36] a. maciocia, private communication.

[37] r. thomas, private communication.

[38] o. aharony and e. witten, anti-de-sitter space and the center of the gauge group,

jhep 9811 (1998) 018, hep-th/9807205.

[39] r. friedman, algebraic surfaces and holomorphic vector bundles, springer-verlag,

new york, 1998.

[40] e. sharpe, kahler cone substructure, hep-th/9810064.

[41] c. vafa, extending mirror conjecture to calabi-yau with bundles, hep-th/9804131.

[42] m. bershadsky, a. johansen, t. pantev, v. sadov, and c. vafa, f-theory, geometric
engineering and n=1 dualities, nucl. phys. b505 (1997) 153-164, hep-th/9612052.

[43] a. maciocia, generalized fourier-mukai transforms, j. riene angew. math. 480

(1996) 197-211, alg-geom/9705001.

[44] a. bondal and d. orlov, semiorthogonal decompositions for algebraic varieties,

alg-geom/9506012.

[45] a. bondal and d. orlov, reconstruction of a variety from the derived category and

groups of autoequivalences, alg-geom/9712029.

[46] m. karoubi, k-theory: an introduction, springer-verlag, berlin, 1978.

[47] m. atiyah, k-theory, w. a. benjamin, new york, 1967.

21

[48] a.

hatcher,

algebraic

topology

i,

available

on

the

web

at

http://math.cornell.edu/hatcher.

[49] s. eilenberg and n. steenrod, foundations of algebraic topology, princeton university

press, princeton, 1952.

22

