flavor conservation and hierarchy in tev-scale

supersymmetric standard model

hutp-98/a090, nub 3193

zurab kakushadze

lyman laboratory of physics, harvard university, cambridge, ma 02138

department of physics, northeastern university, boston, ma 02115

and

(february 11, 1999)

abstract

recently a tev-scale supersymmetric standard model (tssm) was proposed
in which the gauge coupling unication is as precise (at one loop) as in the
mssm, and occurs in the tev range. proton stability in the tssm is due
to an anomaly free z3  z3 discrete gauge symmetry, which is also essential
for successfully generating neutrino masses in the desirable range.
in this
paper we show that the tssm admits anomaly free non-abelian discrete
avor gauge symmetries (based on a left-right product tetrahedral group)
which together with a vector-like abelian (discrete) avor gauge symmetry
suppresses dangerous higher dimensional operators corresponding to avor
changing neutral currents (fcncs) to an acceptable level. discrete avor
gauge symmetries are more advantageous compared with continuous avor
gauge symmetries as the latter must be broken, which generically results in
unacceptably large gauge mediated avor violation. in contrast, in the case of
discrete avor gauge symmetries the only possibly dangerous sources of avor
violation either come from the corresponding bulk avon (that is, avor
symmetry breaking higgs) exchanges, or are induced by avon vevs. these
sources of avor violation, however, are adequately suppressed by the above
avor gauge symmetries for the string scale  10  100 tev.

9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
1
1

 

 
 

1
v
0
8
0
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

typeset using revtex

e-mail: zurab@string.harvard.edu

1

i. introduction

recently it has become clear that the discovery of d-branes [1] may have profound
phenomenological implications1.
in particular, the standard model gauge elds (as well
as the corresponding charged matter) may reside inside of p  9 spatial dimensional p-
branes (or a set of overlapping branes), while gravity lives in a larger (10 or 11) dimensional
bulk of space-time. this brane world scenario appears to be exible enough so that
satisfying various requirements such as gauge and gravitational coupling unication, dilaton
stabilization and weakness of the standard model gauge couplings seems to be possible
[11] within this framework (provided that the standard model elds live on branes with
3 < p < 9). this suggests that the brane world scenario might be a coherent picture for
describing our universe [11]2.

in string theory, which is the only known theory that consistently incorporates quantum
gravity, the gauge and gravitational couplings are expected to unify (up to an order one factor
due to various thresholds [14,15]) at the string scale ms = 1/. in the brane world scenario
the string scale is a priori undetermined, and can be anywhere between the electroweak scale
mew and the planck scale mp = 1/gn (where gn is the newtons constant). thus, if we
assume that the bulk is ten dimensional, then the four dimensional gauge and gravitational
couplings scale as3   gs/vp3m p3
s , where gs is the
string coupling, and vp3 and v9p are the compactication volumes inside and transverse
to the p-branes, respectively. for 3 < p < 9 there are two a priori independent volume
factors, and, for the xed gauge coupling  (at the unication, that is, string scale) and
four dimensional planck scale mp , the string scale is not determined. based on this fact,
in [2] it was proposed that the gauge and gravitational coupling unication problem4 can
be ameliorated in this context by lowering the string scale ms down to the gut scale
mgu t  2  1016 gev [18]5. in [3] it was noticed that ms can be lowered all the way down
to tev.
more recently it was proposed in [4] that ms as well as6 the fundamental (10 or 11
dimensional) planck scale can be around tev. the observed weakness of the four dimensional

respectively gn  g2

s

s /vp3v9pm 8

1for recent developments, see, e.g., [211].

2the brane world picture in the eective eld theory context was discussed in [12,13].

3for illustrative purposes here we are using the corresponding tree-level relations in type i (or
type i) theory.

4for a review of the gauge and gravitational coupling unication problem in the perturbative
heterotic string context, see, e.g., [16], and references therein. in the type i context the discussions
on this issue can be found in [17,11].

5by the gut scale here we mean the usual scale of gauge coupling unication in the mssm
obtained by extrapolating the lep data in the assumption of the standard desert scenario.

6note that the string scale ms cannot be too much lower than the fundamental planck scale or

2

gravitational coupling then requires the presence of at least two large ( 1/ms) compact
directions transverse to the p-branes on which the standard model elds are localized. a
general discussion of possible brane world embeddings of such a scenario was given in [7,8,11].
in [10] various non-trivial phenomenological issues were discussed in the context of the tev-
scale brane world scenario, and it was argued that this possibility does not appear to be
automatically ruled out7.

in such a scenario, however, as well as in any scenario with ms  mgu t , the gauge
coupling unication at ms would have to arise via a mechanism rather dierent from the
usual mssm unication which occurs with a remarkable precision [18]. in the brane world
picture there appears to exist such a mechanism [5] for lowering the unication scale. thus,
let the size r of the compact dimensions inside of the p-brane (where p > 3) be somewhat
large compared with 1/ms. then the evolution of the gauge couplings above the kaluza-
klein (kk) threshold 1/r is no longer logarithmic but power-like [30]. this observation was
used in [5] to argue that the gauge coupling unication might occur at a scale (which in the
brane world context would be identied with the string scale) much lower than mgu t . for
successfully implementing this mechanism, however, it is also necessary to nd a concrete
extension of the mssm such that the unication prediction is just as precise as in the mssm
(at least at one loop). in fact, one could also require that such an extension explain why
couplings unify in the mssm at all, that is, why the unication in the mssm is not just an
accident (assuming that the tev-scale brane world scenario has the pretense of replacing
the old framework).

in [22] a tev-scale supersymmetric standard model (tssm) was proposed in which
the gauge coupling unication indeed occurs via such a higher dimensional mechanism.
moreover, the unication in the tssm is as precise (at one loop) as in the mssm, and
occurs in the tev range8. in particular, the key ingredient of the tssm is the presence of
new (compared with the mssm) light states neutral under su(3)c  su(2)w but charged
under u(1)y whose mass scale is around that of the electroweak higgs doublets. it is the
heavy kaluza-klein tower corresponding to these new states which makes it possible to
satisfy the requirement that the unication in the tssm be as precise (at one loop) as in
the mssm. in fact, as was pointed out in [22], after a rather systematic search the tssm
was the only (simple) solution found for this constraint. the tssm also explains why the
unication in the mssm is not an accident - if the tssm is indeed (a part of) the correct
description of nature above the electroweak scale, then the gauge coupling unication in the

else the string coupling gs as well as all the gauge couplings would come out too small contradicting
the experimental data.

7for other recent works on tev-scale string/gravity scenarios, see, e.g., [5,1927]. for other
scenarios with lowered string scale and related works, see, e.g., [28]. tev-scale compactications
were studied in [29] in the context of supersymmetry breaking.

8by the tev range we do not necessarily mean that ms  1 tev.
in fact, as was argued in
[22], the gauge coupling unication constraints seem to imply that ms cannot really be lower than
10  100 tev.

3

mssm is explained by the present lack of experimental data which leads to the standard
desert assumption.

one of the most obvious worries with the tev-scale brane world scenario in general is the
proton stability problem - higher dimensional baryon and lepton number violating operators
are generically suppressed only by powers of 1/ms with ms in the tev range, which is
inadequate to ensure the observed proton longevity. in [24] it was shown that introduction
of the new states responsible for the gauge coupling unication in the tssm also allows
to gauge anomaly free discrete symmetries which suppress dangerous higher dimensional
operators and stabilize proton. in particular, in [24] an anomaly free z3  z3 discrete gauge
symmetry which makes proton completely stable was explicitly constructed. in [24] it was
also argued that this discrete gauge symmetry is essential for successfully generating neutrino
masses in the desirable range via a higher dimensional mechanism recently proposed in [21].
in particular, in [24] it was pointed out that certain dimension 5 lepton number violating
operators must be absent or else unacceptably large majorana neutrino masses would be
generated upon the electroweak symmetry breaking. more concretely, from this viewpoint
unsuppressed dimension 5 operators of the form llh+h+ would be disastrous, where l is
the su(2)w doublet containing a left-handed neutrino and the corresponding charged lepton
(we are suppressing the avor indices), and h+ is the electroweak higgs doublet with the
hypercharge +1. the z3  z3 discrete gauge symmetry mentioned above stabilizes proton
and forbids these dimension 5 operators in one shot.
the fact that the gauge coupling unication, proton stability and neutrino mass problems
can be solved within the tssm suggests that it is reasonable to take the tssm as a starting
point for addressing many other open questions that the tev-scale brane world scenario
faces9. in this paper we will focus on another obvious worry with the tev-scale brane world
scenario: avor changing neutral currents (fcncs). here we will take the approach where
we will try to nd possible solutions to this problem in ways consistent with other features
described above such as proton stability and neutrino masses. this appears to imply that the
number of viable possibilities is rather limited which allows to explore them in a systematic
fashion.

certain generic aspects of the fcnc problem in the context of the tev-scale brane world
scenario were discussed in [19,20]. thus, in [19] global avor symmetries were considered
in the context of generating the desired avor hierarchy.
it was pointed out in [19] that
hierarchical breaking of such avor symmetries on distant branes could account for the
observed fermion mass hierarchy in the standard model. breaking global avor symmetries
on distant branes would be compatible with the current experimental bounds on fcncs
as the only possibly dangerous sources of avor violation induced by such breaking come
from the corresponding bulk avon (that is, avor symmetry breaking higgs) exchanges.
the latter are adequately suppressed by the volume of the corresponding large dimensions
(required to be present in the tev-scale brane world scenario) transverse to the p-branes
on which the standard model elds are localized. however, global continuous symmetries
or non-gauge discrete symmetries may not be completely adequate in this context. first,

9supersymmetry breaking in the tssm was recently discussed in [26] in the context of the scherk-
schwarz mechanism [31].

4

generically quantum gravity eects (wormholes, etc.) are expected to violate such global
symmetries and induce eective avor violating higher dimensional operators which would
only be suppressed by the corresponding powers of 1/ms [32]. second, it is believed that
there are no global symmetries in string theory [33]10. this then implies that we should
consider either continuous or discrete avor gauge symmetries. discrete gauge symmetries
are believed to be stable under quantum gravity eects [34] (also see, e.g., [35]), and they do
arise in string theory. at rst it might appear that continuous avor gauge symmetries would
suppress fcncs much more eciently than discrete avor gauge symmetries. however,
it was pointed out in [20] that gauging continuous avor symmetries immediately runs into
the following problem. first, it was shown in [20] that abelian continuous avor gauge
symmetries cannot do the job of adequately suppressing all dangerous fcncs (for instance,
those relevant for the kaon system). this implies that we would have to consider non-abelian
continuous avor gauge symmetries. however, these gauge symmetries must be broken at
some scale (below ms) or else the corresponding massless gauge bosons would give rise
to experimentally excluded long range forces. also, the observed fermion hierarchy in the
standard model is incompatible with such unbroken avor symmetries. in [20] it was shown
that even if these avor symmetries are bulk gauge symmetries11, the gauge mediated
avor violation triggered by the avor symmetry breaking generically is not so small after
all, and can lead to unacceptably large fcncs. more precisely, it was shown in [20] that the
avor mediated fcncs are not at all suppressed in the case of 2 large dimensions transverse
to the p-branes, and an adequate suppression can only be achieved if the number of large
transverse dimensions is  4 (provided that ms is not lower than 10  100 tev). a priori
this fact may not look like a big deal, albeit it would rule out (provided that there are no
solutions to the problem other than gauging continuous avor symmetries in the bulk) the
cases with less than 4 large transverse dimensions. here it is reasonable to ask whether one
can nd a much more ecient way of solving the fcnc problem in the tev-scale brane
world context. this becomes especially desirable taking into account that, as was pointed
out in [24], in the brane world (that is, string theory) framework it might be necessary to
have 2 and only 2 large transverse directions (at least in the tssm context) if one would
like the higher dimensional mechanism of [21] for generating the correct neutrino masses to
work (and, at the same time, be compatible with n = 1 supersymmetry which seems to be
essential for the gauge coupling unication [22]). moreover, as was pointed out in [24], the
discussion of dilaton stabilization in [11], which takes into account various observations of
[36] as well as the explicit mechanisms of dilaton stabilization [37], suggests that to achieve

10these two observations may not be completely unrelated.

11note that such avor gauge symmetries would actually have to be bulk gauge symmetries.
thus, if the corresponding gauge bosons are localized on the same p-branes as the standard model
elds, the tree-level exchanges of the horizontal gauge boson(s) would ultimately reintroduce the
exact same types of fcncs (with unacceptable strengths) as those which the avor gauge symmetry
was supposed to suppress in the rst place.

5

the latter we do not seem to be allowed to have more12 than 2 large transverse dimensions
in the tev-scale brane world context. the recent discussion in [23] also suggests that radius
stabilization at large values in the brane world framework seems to favor having 2 large
transverse directions. these considerations all indicate that the case of 2 large transverse
directions could be the most interesting one, so letting it be ruled out so easily may not be
desirable.

motivated by the above considerations, in this paper we consider anomaly free non-
abelian discrete avor gauge symmetries for suppressing fcncs in the tssm. the ad-
vantage of gauging discrete rather than continuous avor symmetries is that, unlike in the
latter case, upon breaking the former no gauge mediated avor violation occurs whatsoever -
there are no horizontal gauge bosons to start with. thus, just as in the case of global avor
symmetries, the only possibly dangerous sources of avor violation come from the corre-
sponding bulk avon exchanges which are adequately suppressed. on the other hand,
as we have already pointed out, considering gauge rather than global symmetries appears
to be necessary in this context since we are dealing with a theory where quantum gravity
becomes strongly coupled at energies around ms which sets the cut-o for the induced
eective avor violating higher dimensional operators. gauging non-abelian discrete sym-
metries in the tssm is not completely trivial - we must ensure that these gauge symmetries
are anomaly free. this puts tight constraints on possible avor symmetries we can gauge,
especially that they must be compatible with other anomaly free gauge symmetries (such
as the z3  z3 discrete gauge symmetry responsible for proton longevity in the tssm). in
fact, the number of possibilities we nd is rather limited, and the conclusive solution to the
fcnc problem we present in this paper is based on a left-right product (non-abelian) tetra-
hedral group tl  tr (which can be viewed as a discrete subgroup of the su(2)l  su(2)r
avor symmetry group) accompanied by a vector-like u(1)v avor gauge symmetry (or
its appropriate discrete subgroup). the non-abelian part of the avor group together with
the u(1)v subgroup adequately suppresses fcncs (for any number  2 of large transverse
dimensions, and the string scale ms  10  100 tev) provided that the avor symmetry
breaking higgses (avons) are bulk elds.
the rest of this paper is organized as follows. in section ii we briey review the tssm
proposed in [22]. we mainly focus on the light spectrum as the heavy kk modes are not
going to be relevant for the subsequent discussions. we also briey review the discrete
gauge symmetries proposed in [24] which ensure proton stability and successful generation
of small neutrino masses. these discrete gauge symmetries are relevant in the following
as the avor symmetries we are going to gauge must be anomaly free without spoiling the
anomaly freedom condition for the former discrete gauge symmetries. in section iii we briey
review the discussion in [20], which we tailor to our purposes in this paper. in section iv
we explicitly construct an anomaly free discrete avor gauge symmetry which, as we show,
adequately suppresses fcncs in the tssm. there we also discuss various phenomenological
implications (including possible collider signatures) of these symmetries together with other
symmetries in the tssm. in section v we briey summarize our results.

12note that having only one large transverse dimension is experimentally excluded [4] for otherwise
there would be deviations from the newtonian gravity over solar system distances.

6

we have been recently informed that some issues related to avor violation in the tev-

scale brane world context are also going to be discussed in [38,39].

ii. the tssm

in this section we briey review the tssm proposed in [22]. the gauge group of this
model is the same as in the mssm, that is, su(3)csu(2)wu(1)y . the light spectrum13 of
the model is n = 1 supersymmetric, and along with the vector superelds v transforming
in the adjoint of su(3)c  su(2)w  u(1)y we also have the following chiral superelds
(corresponding to the matter and higgs particles):

qi = 3  (3, 2)(+1/3) , di = 3  (3, 1)(+2/3) , ui = 3  (3, 1)(4/3) ,
li = 3  (1, 2)(1) , ei = 3  (1, 1)(+2) , ni = 3  (1, 1)(0) ,
h+ = (1, 2)(+1) , h = (1, 2)(1) ,
f+ = (1, 1)(+2) , f = (1, 1)(2) .

here the su(3)c  su(2)w quantum numbers are given in bold font, whereas the u(1)y
hypercharge is given in parentheses. the three generations (i = 1, 2, 3) of quarks and
leptons are given by qi, di, ui respectively li, ei, ni (the chiral superelds ni correspond
to the right-handed neutrinos), whereas h correspond to the electroweak higgs doublets.
note that the chiral superelds f are new: they were not present in the mssm.

the massive spectrum of the tssm contains kaluza-klein (kk) states. these states
correspond to compact p  3 dimensions inside of the p-branes (p = 4 or 5) on which the
gauge elds are localized. the heavy kk levels are populated by n = 2 supermultiplets
with the quantum numbers given by (ev , fh+, fh, ef+, ef), where ev stands for the n = 2
vector supereld transforming in the adjoint of su(3)c  su(2)w  u(1)y , whereas fh, ef
are the n = 2 hypermultiplets with the gauge quantum numbers of h, f. (the exact
massive kk spectrum, which is not going to be important in the subsequent discussions, can
be found in [22,24].) here we would like to point out some of the features of the model which
are going to be relevant for discussions in this section as well as sections iii and iv. note that
the massless superelds v, h, f have heavy kk counterparts. we can think about these
states together with the corresponding heavy kk modes as arising upon compactication
of a p + 1 dimensional theory on a p  3 dimensional compact space with the volume vp3.
on the other hand, the massless superelds qi, di, ui, li, ei, ni do not possess heavy kk
counterparts corresponding to these p 3 dimensions. (a concrete mechanism for localizing
these elds in the brane world context was discussed in detail in [22,24].)
the gauge coupling unication in the tssm is just as precise (at one loop) as in the
mssm [22], and the unication scale ms is in the tev range (provided that the mass scale
of the superelds f is around that of the electroweak higgs doublets). the lowering of
the unication scale here occurs along the lines of [5] due to the power-like running of the

13by the light spectrum we mean the states which are massless before the supersymme-
try/electroweak symmetry breaking.

7

gauge couplings above the kk threshold scale [30]. on the other hand, the fact that the
one-loop unication in the tssm is as precise as in the mssm crucially depends on the kk
tower of the new states f. (the actual value of ms [22,24] depends on the volume vp3
which is assumed to be (relatively) large, that is, vp3/(2)p3  1/m p3
.) the unied
gauge coupling  in the tssm is small14. thus, for instance, for ms  10 tev we have
  1/37.5.

s

a. proton stability and neutrino masses

to stabilize proton, in [24] a z3 z3 discrete gauge symmetry was introduced. following
[24] we will refer to this discrete gauge symmetry as el3  fr3. the corresponding discrete

charges (which are conserved modulo 3) are given by:

q : (0, 0) , d : (0, +1) , u : (0,1) ,
l : (+1, 0) , e : (1, +1) , n : (1,1) ,
h+ : (0, +1) , h : (0,1) ,
f+ : (0,1) , f : (0, +1) .

in [24] it was shown that this discrete gauge symmetry is anomaly free. in particular, it
satises the anomaly freedom conditions discussed in [41].
in fact, this gauge symmetry
satises even stronger conditions as it can be embedded into an anomaly free continuous
gauge symmetry which we refer to u(1)l  u(1)r [24]. this fact will be useful in section
iv.
in [24] it was shown that the el3  fr3 discrete gauge symmetry stabilizes proton. thus,

it forbids all dangerous baryon and lepton number violating operators potentially leading
to proton decay.
in particular, dimension 4 [42], dimension 5 (such as qqql) as well
as all other higher dimensional operators of this type are forbidden by this discrete gauge
symmetry.

the el3fr3 discrete gauge symmetry also forbids the dangerous lepton number violating
dimension 5 operator llh+h+ which would be disastrous15 for neutrino masses [24] - this
operator is suppressed only by 1/ms (with ms in the tev range), and would result in un-
acceptably large majorana neutrino masses m  m 2
ew/ms upon the electroweak symmetry
breaking. the desirable dirac neutrino masses in the tssm can then be generated via the
higher dimensional mechanism of [21].

14note, however, that the true loop expansion parameter is of order one [22] for it is enhanced
by a factor proportional to the number of the heavy kk states which is large. (this enhancement
is analogous to that in large n gauge theories [40].) nonetheless, as explained in [22], one-loop
corrections to the gauge couplings are still dominant due to supersymmetry.

15note that this operator is precisely the one responsible for generating the correct neutrino masses
in the old see-saw mechanism [43] in scenarios with high ms  mgu t .

8

iii. flavor violation in the tev-scale brane world scenario

in this section we would like to review some of the discussions of [20] on avor violation
in the tev-scale brane world scenario. in particular, one of the important points in [20]
is the estimate for the expected avor violation coming from the bulk avon as well as
horizontal gauge boson (in the cases with continuous avor gauge symmetries) exchanges.
the latter are dominant, and lead to unacceptably large avor violation unless the number
of large transverse dimensions is  4.

a. why do we need flavor symmetries?

there are tight experimental bounds on the avor changing neutral currents [44], the
most constraining being the kaon system. thus, let us consider the constraints from the
mass splitting between k 0
l. the lowest dimensional operators relevant in this context
are the dimension 6 four-fermion operators of the form (for simplicity our notations here are
symbolic, and we suppress the corresponding color and lorentz indices as well as the chiral
projection operators for the left- and right-handed elds):

s and k 0

(sd)2 .

(1)

the experimental bounds on the dimensionful coupling  imply that we must have

re() < 108  107 tev2 [45]16. without any avor symmetries, we generically expect
the above operator to be suppressed at most by 1/m 2
s . this would imply the following lower
bound: ms > 103  104 tev. to lower this bound on ms we would need to impose some

symmetry which acts on s and d states dierently, that is, we would have to impose a avor
symmetry [20]. on the other hand, to be compatible with, say, the observed fermion hierar-
chy in the standard model, this avor symmetry would have to be broken. so suppressing
fcncs is a non-trivial task: the suppression should arise in a subtle way due to a broken
avor symmetry.

next, we can ask what kind of avor symmetries should be imposed to possibly sup-
press the above operator. first, we should consider (continuous or discrete) gauge avor
symmetries (see introduction). second, this gauge symmetry must be anomaly free. before
we plunge into more technical issues such as anomaly freedom, we can ask a more basic
question: would abelian avor symmetries suce, or should we impose non-abelian avor
symmetries? as pointed out in [20], abelian symmetries alone cannot do the job. here we
would like to briey review the arguments of [20].

16a rough estimate for the k 0
s mass splitting due to (1) is given by mk/mk  re()m2
k ,
where mk is the kaon mass. note that im() is constrained by the cp violation parameters, and
this constraint is about 100 times stronger than that for re(). we will discuss this issue in section
iv.

l  k 0

9

b. possible flavor symmetries

to understand why abelian avor symmetries are inadequate for suppressing fcncs in
the present context, let us consider dimension 6 four-fermion operators containing the elds
i
qi and q
, where the latter elds are just the conjugates of the former, and we are using
superscript for the corresponding avor indices as q
transform in the representation of the
avor group which is complex conjugate of the representation in which qi transform. here
the indices i, j, . . . refer to avor indices in the avor basis, that is, the basis in which the
charged electroweak currents are diagonal. ultimately we will be interested in understanding
fcncs in the physical basis in which the up and down quark mass matrices are diagonal.
these two bases are related by the usual unitary rotations (see below).

i

thus, let us consider the most general four fermion operators of the form:

c ij

i
kl(q

j
qk)(q

ql) .

(2)

note that no abelian (continuous or discrete) symmetry can forbid the terms with i = k
and j = l. moreover, the corresponding coecients a priori are completely unconstrained.
these terms do not contain the dangerous operator (sd)2 in the avor basis. however, in
the physical basis this term will be generated unless the avor and physical quark states
are identical, at least for the rst two generations. this could a priori be the case in,
say, the down quark sector. however, this cannot be the case in both up and down quark
sectors: indeed, if both up and down quark mass matrices were diagonal in both bases (or,
more precisely, if this was the case for the corresponding 1  2 blocks, 1, 2, 3 referring to
the three generations), there would be no cabibbo mixing between the rst and the second
generations, which would contradict the experimental data. this implies that either (sd)2
or (uc)2 (or both at the same time) operators would be present in the physical basis with the
coupling   sin2(c)/m 2
s (c is the cabibbo angle) if the avor symmetry is abelian. this is
unacceptable as the corresponding strengths of avor violation in the k 0k 0 and/or d0d0
transitions would be above the present experimental bounds (note that sin c  0.22). the
only way around this problem is to impose a non-abelian avor symmetry which is more
constraining and can a priori result in a non-trivial conspiracy between the coecients
c ij
kl such that the disastrous avor violating operators are not induced in the physical basis
[20].

we are therefore led to the conclusion that some type of non-abelian avor symmetry
must be invoked17. if all the yukawa couplings in the standard model are set to zero, then
we have the following avor symmetry group: gf = na u(3)a, where a = q, d, u, l, e, n.

this is the largest avor group we can attempt to introduce. however, it is clear that at
least in the quark sector the u(3)q and u(3)u must be broken at the string scale to have
large top mass. in fact, this is also the case for u(3)d as the top-bottom splitting is generally
considered to be due to a vertical hierarchy: we can either have large tan , or the qdh
coupling could arise as an eective yukawa coupling descending from a higher dimensional

17some early works on non-abelian avor symmetries include [46]. some of the more recent works
can be found in [47].

10

operator sqdh upon the additional singlet eld s acquiring a vev hsi/ms  mb/mt
(here mb and mt are the bottom and top quark masses, respectively, and tan  is assumed
to be  1). as was pointed out in [24], the latter possibility can naturally arise in the
tssm. the same is also expected to be the case in the lepton sector. thus, we should really
consider the u(2)a subgroup of the u(3)a avor group as our starting point.

thus, let us consider gauging as large a non-abelian avor group as possible. in the
next section we will argue that the anomaly cancellation conditions in the tssm require
that we identify su(2)q with su(2)l - we will refer to this avor subgroup as the left-
handed avor group su(2)l. similarly, we must identify the other four subgroups su(2)d,
su(2)u , su(2)e and su(2)n with each other - we will refer to this avor subgroup as the
right-handed avor group su(2)r. we can also gauge additional avor u(1)s (albeit the
number of relevant anomaly free possibilities is rather limited). we will consider such an
abelian avor group (as well as its discrete subgroups) in the next section in more detail.
here, however, we would like to concentrate on the non-abelian part of the avor group,
the largest possibility being su(2)l  su(2)r.
let us see if the su(2)l  su(2)r avor symmetry can suppress fcncs adequately.
let us concentrate on the rst and the second generations for the moment. in particular, in
the expressions we are about to write down the avor indices i, j, . . . take values 1, 2. thus,
consider four-fermion operators in the presence of the su(2)l  su(2)r avor symmetry.
the su(2)l  su(2)r invariant operators involving only the elds qi and q
are given by

i

i
c(q

j
qi)(q

i
qj) + c ijkl(q

qk)(q

j

ql) .

(3)

i we really mean two a priori independent matrices (qu )i

these operators do not contain the dangerous four-fermion interactions in the avor basis.
however, we really need to go to the physical basis. this is accomplished by means of the
iqi, which is unitary if we consider all three generations. here qi contains
rotation qi = qi
the left-handed up and down quarks (qu )i respectively (qd)i in the physical basis, and by
i acting on (qu )i
qi
respectively (qd)i. the condition that ensures that the dangerous operator (sd)2 does not
i
appear in the physical basis is then given by the requirement that the 2  2 matrix (qd)i
be almost unitary. a similar constraint arises if we consider the four-fermion operators
involving qs and/or ds (as well as their conjugates): the 2 2 matrix d i
i must be almost
unitary. here we are using the bar notation to distinguish the su(2)r avor indices i, i, . . .
from the su(2)l avor indices i, i, . . ., and the left-handed down anti-quarks in the physical
basis are given by d i, where di = d id i
i, which relates
the left-handed up anti-quarks in the avor and physical bases via ui = u iu i
i, must also
i and d i
be almost unitary. (note that (qd)i
i together diagonalize the down quark mass
matrix (md)ii via di(md)ii(qd)i = d i(md) ii(qd)i, where the diagonal mass matrix
(md) ii  d i
i(md)ii(qd)i
i. similarly, (qu )i
i together diagonalize the up quark
mass matrix (mu )ii via ui(mu )ii(qu )i = u i(mu ) ii(qu )i, where the diagonal mass matrix
(mu ) ii  u i
i(mu )ii(qu )i
i. here we are considering all three generations so that all
matrices are 3  3 matrices.)
the above unitarity constraints imply that the 1  3 and 2  3 mixing in the down
as well as the up quark sectors cannot be large. this requirement, however, is not so
constraining. thus, if we take the 1  3 and 2  3 mixings in the up and down quark
sectors to be of order of the corresponding mixings in the cabibbo-kobayashi-maskawa

i. finally, the 2  2 matrix u i

i and (qd)i

i and u i

11

(ckm) matrix vckm  q
uqd, then the fcncs induced by the non-unitarity of the
1  2 diagonalizations in the up and down quark sectors will be adequately suppressed
for ms  10  100 tev.
in particular, the 1  3 and 2  3 ckm mixings are given by
|vub|  3  103 and |vcb|  3  102. this implies that the corresponding avor violating
couplings are going to be given by:

(sd)2  (uc)2  |vubvcb|2/m 2
s  108/m 2
s ,
s  105/m 2
(bd)2  |vub|2/m 2
s ,
s  103/m 2
(bs)2  |vcb|2/m 2
s .

these couplings are within the experimental bounds for ms  10  100 tev.

c. gauge and flavon mediated flavor violation

imposing a avor symmetry is not the end of the story, however, as it has to be broken.
as pointed out in [20], it cannot be broken on the p-branes as this would be in contradiction
with various cosmological as well as other constraints [48]. this implies that it has to be
broken in the bulk, and if we gauge a continuous avor symmetry, it must be a bulk gauge
symmetry. note that the avor symmetry breaking source could be on a distant brane
[19], but it would have to be transmitted to the p-branes via some bulk elds anyways,
so for our purposes here we can treat the avor symmetry breaking as arising due to the
corresponding bulk avons acquiring non-zero vevs.

the avor symmetry breaking due to the bulk avons is felt by the p-brane elds via
the couplings of the latter to the former. the non-trivial avor hierarchy in the standard
model then would have to be due to the bulk avons. it is then clear that once the bulk
avons acquire non-zero vevs, there are going to be induced eective avor violating four-
fermion operators. we will discuss the avon vev-induced avor violation in detail in
section iv. here, however, we we will focus on the other two sources of avor violation
which we must take into account.

first, we must take into account the avon mediated avor violation due to the avon
exchanges. let n be the number of large transverse dimensions in which the avons can
propagate. then it is straightforward to estimate the corresponding avor non-universal

contributions due to the light ( < mm ) and heavy ( > mm ) kk avon modes in these

directions (mm is the corresponding meson mass, m = k, d, b) [20]:

light  (ms)2(mm /ms)n ,
heavy  n4(mm /ms)2 .

here   mc/mt  102 (mc is the charm quark mass) is a measure of the avor symmetry
breaking. thus, in the worst case where n = 2 we have avor violation which is in the
acceptable range for ms > 30 tev or so.

suppose, however, we have a continuous non-abelian avor gauge symmetry in the bulk.
then we must also consider gauge mediated avor violation due to the exchanges of hori-
zontal gauge bosons and their kk counterparts all of which have avor non-universal con-
tributions ( (ms)2) to their squared masses. the induced avor violation is given by
[20]:

12

gauge  n2m 2
gauge  2m 2

s

, n < 4 ,

s

, n  4 .

note that for n < 4 the gauge mediated avor violation is unacceptably large. in fact, for
n = 2 there is no suppression at all (which is due to the fact that in this case the avor
non-universal contribution to the gauge boson mass squared scales the same way with  as
the number of the light kk modes for which this contribution is dominant18). we are
therefore led to the conclusion that the fcnc constraints rule out gauging continuous avor
symmetries in the bulk for n < 4.
in the next section we will circumvent this diculty
by explicitly constructing a discrete avor gauge symmetry that suppresses the fcncs
adequately, yet has the advantage of not reintroducing gauge mediated avor violation as
there are no gauge bosons in this case to begin with.

iv. discrete flavor gauge symmetries and fcnc suppression

in this section we will explicitly construct an anomaly free non-abelian discrete avor
gauge symmetry which suppresses fcncs just as well as the su(2)l  su(2)r continuous
avor gauge symmetry. in fact, the discrete avor group we are going to discuss is a subgroup
of su(2)l  su(2)r. since we are going to gauge it, we must make sure that all anomalies
cancel. the discrete anomaly cancellation conditions are similar to those for continuous
gauge symmetries [41]. to illustrate some of the non-trivial issues arising when discussing
discrete anomaly cancellation conditions, let us rst consider these conditions in the case of
an abelian zn discrete gauge symmetry.

a zn discrete gauge symmetry can be thought of as follows. consider a theory with
some matter charged under an anomaly free u(1) gauge symmetry. let all the u(1) charge
assignments be integer. consider now adding a pair of chiral superelds which are neutral
under all the other gauge subgroups but carry +n and n charges under the above u(1).
suppose there is a at direction along which these chiral superelds acquire non-zero vevs.
then the u(1) gauge symmetry is broken down to its zn subgroup. this zn is then
an anomaly free discrete gauge symmetry.
in the above approach the anomalies for the
zn gauge symmetry mimic those for the original u(1) gauge symmetry (except that the
former anomalies are only dened modulo n). thus, we have the tr(z3
n ) anomaly as
well as the mixed tr(zn ) gravitational anomaly. if there are non-abelian gauge subgroups
ni gi in the theory, one also needs to consider the mixed tr(g2
i zn ) non-abelian gauge
anomalies. finally, if there are additional abelian subgroups na u(1)a, then we must also
consider the mixed tr(u(1)au(1)bzn ) and tr(u(1)az2
n ) gauge anomalies. the last two
anomalies are somewhat tricky compared with the rest of the anomalies. the reason is
that to compute them one is required to know the massive spectrum of the theory. more
concretely, these anomalies depend on details of the parent u(1) breaking [41]. since we
are going to attempt to gauge discrete symmetries in the tssm which contains an abelian

18by such light kk modes we mean those for which the avor universal mass squared contri-
butions due to the non-zero kk momenta are < (ms)2.

13

gauge subgroup (namely, u(1)y ), we cannot ignore these anomalies. there is however, a
way out of this diculty. we can explicitly gauge a continuous (that is, u(1)) symmetry
and make sure that all the anomalies cancel before we break it to the corresponding discrete
subgroup. this way we are guaranteed to have an anomaly free discrete gauge symmetry at
the end of the day.

similar considerations apply to any discrete avor gauge symmetry f . to make sure
that it is anomaly free, we can rst consistently gauge a continuous avor symmetry gf
which contains f as a subgroup (note that gf as well as f can contain abelian as well
as non-abelian factors). then the discrete avor symmetry f is guaranteed to be anomaly
free. this is precisely the strategy we will follow in this section.

a. the su (2)l  su (2)r flavor gauge symmetry

as our starting point, we would like to consistently gauge the su(2)l  su(2)r avor
symmetry. a priori we could start from the full avor group gf = na u(3)a, where
a = q, d, u, l, e, n, where the 3 generations transform in the corresponding fundamental
representations of the subgroups u(3)a. however, as we already mentioned in the previous
section, we need not bother trying to gauge the full u(3)a subgroups as they would have
to be broken at the string scale ms to account for the large quark and lepton masses in the

third generation. we can therefore restrict our attention to the avor group gf = na u(2)a.
here we must address the issue of the mixed tr(g2
f  u(1)y ) gauge anomalies. these could
a priori be canceled by introducing additional states charged under gf u(1)y (but neutral
under su(3)c  su(2)w). the generic problem with this is that we would have to add many
such states, and they would have to be chiral (to be able to cancel anomalies). they then
are generically massless unless u(1)y is broken, which only happens upon the electroweak
symmetry breaking19. this then implies that there would be many additional light states
on top of those we already have in the tssm. note that the situation is even worse once
f  ( el3  fr3)) gauge anomalies, where el3  fr3 is the abelian
we consider the mixed tr(g2
discrete gauge symmetry discussed in section ii which is responsible for proton stabilization.
the above diculties can be ameliorated by considering the avor group gf = su(2)l
su(2)r, where we identify su(2)a, a = q, l, with the left-handed avor group su(2)l, and
su(2)a, a = d, u, e, n, with the right-handed avor group su(2)r. a priori we could also
consider additional u(1) factors, but the anomaly cancellation conditions are very tight, so
the number of consistent possibilities is actually very limited. we will consider adding such
a u(1) factor in a moment. first, however, let us discuss gauging gf = su(2)l  su(2)r.
next, we give the quantum numbers of the tssm elds under [su(2)l  su(2)r] 
[u(1)l  u(1)r] (here u(1)l and u(1)r are the parent u(1) symmetries20 for the discrete
subgroups el3 respectively fr3):

19in fact, some of these additional states would actually have to be su (2)w doublets to have ap-
propriate couplings with the electroweak higgs doublets h, which makes the anomaly cancellation
(as well as other issues) even more problematic.

20here we choose to work with these parent gauge symmetries as the mixed anomalies are more

14

qi : (2, 1)(0, 0) , q3 : (1, 1)(0, 0) ,
di : (1, 2)(0, +1) , d3 : (1, 1)(0, +1) ,
ui : (1, 2)(0,1) , u3 : (1, 1)(0,1) ,
li : (2, 1)(+1, 0) , l3 : (1, 1)(+1, 0) ,
ei : (1, 2)(1, +1) , e3 : (1, 1)(1, +1) ,
ni : (1, 2)(1,1) , n3 : (1, 1)(1,1) ,
i : (2, 1)(1, 0) , 

i : (1, 2)(+1, 0) .

here the su(2)l  su(2)r quantum numbers are given in bold font, whereas the u(1)l 
u(1)r charges are given in parentheses. the tssm states h and f are neutral under
su(2)l  su(2)r, and are not shown. the avor indices i and i take values 1, 2 and
1, 2, respectively. the new states  and 
 (,  = 1, 2 are new indices not related
to the avor indices for the quarks and leptons) are neutral under the standard model
gauge group su(3)c  su(2)w  u(1)y , and they are required by the tr(su(2)2
lu(1)l)
and tr(su(2)2
ru(1)l) mixed gauge anomaly cancellation, respectively. note that these new
states carry non-zero u(1)l charges. this could be dangerous for proton stability which is

based on a non-trivial selection rule (due to the el3fr3 discrete gauge symmetry) discussed
in detail in [24]. to avoid jeopardizing proton stability, we can simply require that the new
states , 
 be heavier than proton (and their vevs are zero). this can be achieved by
introducing n additional avon elds (which are neutral under su(3)csu(2)wu(1)y )
(4)

a = 1, . . . , n ,

a (2, 2)(0, 0) ,

ii

with the following yukawa couplings to , 

:

yaii

a i

i .

(5)

upon the elds a (which we assume to be bulk avon elds) acquiring vevs (which break
the su(2)l  su(2)r avor symmetry), the elds , 
 pick up large masses (of order of
the avor symmetry breaking scale which is  ms  100 gev1 tev, where   102 was
introduced in the previous section), so that proton decay via channels involving  and/or

 in the nal state is forbidden due to the kinematics. note that such heavy elds could a
priori be dangerous - they could potentially mediate unacceptably large fcncs through a

tree-level exchange. however, precisely due to their non-zero u(1)l (or, more precisely, el3)
charges, the , 
 states do not have the required couplings (such as, say, qdh) to the
quarks (or leptons) to mediate avor violation in this way, and are therefore safe.

the above spectrum (together with the states h, f) is completely anomaly free. this
implies that if we considered the same spectrum21 with the discrete avor gauge symmetry
l  r (instead of the continuous avor gauge symmetry su(2)l  su(2)r), where  

transparent in this language.

21at the end of the day we are going to consider the discrete subgroup el3 er3 of the u (1)lu (1)r

gauge group as in [24].

15

su(2), the resulting spectrum would also be completely anomaly free. in the next subsection
we will make a particular choice of  such that in the unbroken avor symmetry limit the
fcncs are suppressed just as well as in the case of the full su(2)l  su(2)r avor gauge
symmetry.

b. a conclusive solution: the tl  tr discrete flavor gauge symmetry

next, we need to identify a discrete subgroup  of su(2) such that the l  r discrete
avor gauge symmetry suppresses fcncs just as well as the su(2)l  su(2)r avor gauge
symmetry itself. it is not dicult to identify such a subgroup - the discrete subgroups of
su(2) are classied in terms of the a-d-e series. the innite an series corresponds to
the abelian zn subgroups of su(2). the second innite dn series contains non-abelian
dihedral groups (with d3 isomorphic to (the double cover of) the permutation group s3).
finally, the nite e-series contains three exceptional non-abelian subgroups (analogous
to e6, e7, e8): the tetrahedral group t , the octahedral group o, and the icosahedral group
i. here we are interested in the non-abelian groups only. it is not dicult to show that
the dihedral groups dn cannot do the job. the tetrahedral group t , however, is perfectly
adequate for our purposes. thus, it only allows the su(2) invariant four-fermion operators.
for instance, the only operators containing qs and qs are those given in (3). this follows
from the action of the generators of the tetrahedral group t on the elds qi, q3 (i = 1, 2).
let these generators be , r, r. then their action on q3 is trivial. the elds qi, however,
transform in one, namely, 20, of the three non-trivial two dimensional representations 2k,
k = 0, 1, 2, of t . these two dimensional representations are given by

 =

k
2

(1  i1 + i2  i3) ,

r = i1, r = i3 ,

where 1 stands for the 2  2 identity matrix, and 1, 2, 3 are the pauli matrices. also,
  exp(2i/3). note that 3 = r2 = r2 = 1, and r = rr, r = r, rr = r,
and rrr = r. (these are the dening commutation relations for the tetrahedral group.)
note that we have just described the action of tl (on qs and ls). the action of tr (on
ds, us, es and ns) is similar.

thus, the tl  tr discrete avor gauge symmetry is just as ecient in constraining
four-fermion operators as the continuous su(2)l  su(2)r avor gauge symmetry whose
subgroup tltr is. this discrete symmetry, however, does not guarantee that all dangerous
avor violating operators are suppressed after the avor symmetry breaking (neither does
su(2)l  su(2)r). in the following we will consider an additional abelian avor symmetry
which is required to ensure that the avon vev-induced avor violation is also adequately
suppressed.

c. suppressing flavon vev-induced fcncs: the u (1)v flavor gauge symmetry

the su(2)lsu(2)r avor gauge symmetry (or its discrete subgroup tltr) suppresses
dangerous avor violating four-fermion operators before the avor symmetry breaking takes

16

place. once the avor symmetry is broken, there are going to be induced such four-fermion
operators, but the corresponding couplings will be suppressed by the avon vevs. nonethe-
less, we must make sure that this suppression is adequate, that is, that these couplings are
within the experimental bounds. in this respect it does not make any dierence whether we
are breaking the su(2)l  su(2)r avor gauge symmetry or its discrete subgroup tl  tr,
so we will use the language of the full su(2)l  su(2)r avor gauge symmetry in this
subsection.
let us rst consider the operators involving only the rst two generation quarks and
anti-quarks in the avor basis. the possible vev-induced operators of this type are always
suppressed by two powers of   mc/mt. to see this, note that, say, in the operator
j
) we must contract two pairs of the su(2) indices22. let us rst consider
(diqi)(q
the avon vev-induced operators of this type involving only avons in the bifundamental
representation of su(2)l  su(2)r, say, the elds ii
a introduced above. the corresponding
four-fermion operators then read:

d

j

j
(diqi)(q

d

j

)jkjk (cid:16)ca1a2ii

a1kk

a2 + c 

a1a2ik

a1ki

a2(cid:17) ,

(6)

s . here we are taking into account that the ii

a1a2 are some dimensionful couplings of order  1/m 4

where ca1a2 and c 
s . the strength of
the induced fcnc operator of the type (sd)2 is then going to be suppressed at least as
(sd)2  2/m 2
a vevs are expected to be such
that 22
a  ms to explain the avor hierarchy between the charm mass mc and the top mass
mt. the above coupling then follows if we assume the maximal mixing between the rst and
the second generations. however, in the case of bifundamental avons there is going to be
an additional suppression factor as the rst and the second generation mixing is expected
to be somewhat smaller, and it is reasonable to assume that it is (roughly) given by the
cabibbo angle c. then the corresponding coupling is going to be even more suppressed:
(sd)2  2 sin2(c)/m 2
s . in fact, to avoid ne-tuning in the determinants of the 1 2 blocks
in the up and/or down quark mass matrices, we can assume that 12
a   sin(c)ms,
which would lead to the same conclusion for the coupling (sd)2. (we will discuss the up and
down quark mass matrices in more detail in the next subsection.) the above suppression
is completely adequate for ms  10  100 tev. a similar conclusion also holds for avons
transforming in the fundamental representations.
there are, however, other operators we must worry about which generically are not as
suppressed. these are the operators involving the third generation quarks or anti-quarks.
thus, consider the following operator:

a , 21

ca(q3qi)(d3d

j

)ii

a ij ,

(7)

where the dimensionful coupling ca  1/m 3
s . it is then not dicult to see that the vev-
induced four-fermion operators of the type (bd)2 (and (bs)2) will be suppressed only by the

22note that operators of, say, the form (diqi)(dj qj) are further suppressed by a factor
 (hhi/ms)2  (mew/ms)2 as they carry two units of the weak isospin.
in the following we
will therefore not discuss such operators, but rather focus on self-conjugate operators of the type
mentioned above.

17

couplings of order    sin(c)/m 2
s . however, the above operator can be further suppressed
by imposing an additional vector-like avor symmetry that acts non-trivially, say, on the
third generation quarks and anti-quarks only.
in fact, even an abelian symmetry would
suce for this purpose. we can therefore augment the su(2)l  su(2)r avor gauge
symmetry by such a u(1)v avor gauge symmetry. thus, let the u(1)v charge assignments
be the following: +1 for q3, and 1 for d3 and u3. then it is clear that the above coupling
is going to be suppressed. (note that the avon ii
a must be neutral under u(1)v to have the
required couplings with the rst and the second generations.) in fact, all the other avon
vev-induced fcncs can be suppressed this way. thus, for instance, the operators of the
type

(q3qi)(q3qj) ,

(8)

where the su(2)l indices must be contracted with avons transforming in the fundamental
representation, are also suppressed provided that we can nd an appropriate u(1)v charge
assignment for the avons23.

it is, however, non-trivial to construct an anomaly free u(1)v avor gauge symmetry.
the anomaly cancellation constraints are very tight as we have to consider mixed anomalies
involving su(2)lsu(2)r, su(3)csu(2)wu(1)y , and u(1)lu(1)r (or, more precisely,
the discrete el3  fr3 subgroup of the latter). fortunately, there exists a simple u(1)v avor
gauge symmetry which is anomaly free. here we will rst write down the u(1)v charge
assignments for the quarks and leptons, and then explain why this choice turns out to be
anomaly free.

thus, consider the following u(1)v charge assignments (the su(2)l  su(2)r quantum

numbers are given in bold font, whereas the u(1)v charges are given in parenthesis):

qi : (2, 1)(0) , q3 : (1, 1)(+1) ,
di : (1, 2)(0) , d3 : (1, 1)(1) ,
ui : (1, 2)(0) , u3 : (1, 1)(1) ,
li : (2, 1)(0) , l3 : (1, 1)(3) ,
ei : (1, 2)(0) , e3 : (1, 1)(+3) ,
ni : (1, 2)(0) , n3 : (1, 1)(+3) ,
i : (2, 1)(0) , 
i : (1, 2)(0) ,
ii

a : (2, 2)(0) ,

23here we should point out that the avon vev-induced fcncs due to the avons transforming
in the fundamental representations can be suppressed even more if we utilize the vertical (that is,
up-down) hierarchy. thus, consider a scenario where the 1  3 and 2  3 mixing arises only in the
down quark sector, and the avons transforming in the fundamental representations responsible
for this mixing carry non-zero (namely, +3) u (1)l charges (the corresponding electroweak higgs
doublet h has u (1)l charge 3 - see [24] for details). this implies that the corresponding avon
vev-induced fcncs are suppressed by extra factors of (mb/mt)2 (note that /ms  mb/mt,
where  is the u (1)l  el3 breaking scale [24]).

18

i
 : (2, 1)(+1) ,
i : (2, 1)(3) ,

 )i : (1, 2)(1) ,
(
()i : (1, 2)(+3) .

all the other elds (such as h, f) are neutral under the u(1)v avor gauge symmetry.
 , ,  (as well as a) are all neutral
on the other hand, the elds (,  = 1, 2, 3) , 
under su(3)c  su(2)w  u(1)y  el3  fr3. the above spectrum is completely anomaly
free. this can be seen as follows. thus, the u(1)v symmetry acts as 3 times b  l (baryon
minus lepton number) for the third generation only (in the avor basis). this is precisely the
reason why it is anomaly free and compatible with all the other gauge symmetries we have
introduced so far in the tssm. thus, as was explained at length in [24], we can consistently
gauge any linear combination of the three u(1)s, namely, u(1)y , u(1)l, u(1)r.
in fact,
any linear combination of u(1)y and u(1)r can be gauged generation-by-generation. the
linear combination v  3y  3r is precisely the generator corresponding to 3 times b  l,
which we choose to act on the third generation only. in particular, the anomaly cancellation
requires that the u(1)v charge assignments be dierent in the quark and lepton sectors. note
that the elds , 

 , ,  are chosen so that the corresponding u(1)v anomalies cancel.

it is not dicult to check that with the above u(1)v charge assignments all the avon
vev-induced fcncs are adequately suppressed. in fact, the corresponding couplings are at
least as suppressed as those due to the non-unitarity of the 1 2 diagonalization discussed
in subsection b of section iii. here we would like to point out that suppressing avon vev-
induced fcncs in the up and down quark sectors does not require the full u(1)v symmetry.
more concretely, any discrete zn subgroup of u(1)v with n 6= 2, 4 would do the job. the
n = 4 case is also acceptable if the u(1)v  z4 breaking scale is 102ms or lower24.
next, we would like to briey discuss the avor hierarchy in the above model. note that
the couplings q3u3h+ and q3d3h are allowed by the gf = su(2)l  su(2)r  u(1)v
symmetry. (this, in particular, is one of the reasons why we have chosen the u(1)v symmetry
to be vector-like.) this implies that we have large top and bottom quark masses with the
vertical hierarchy generated as in [24]. on the other hand, the rst two generations can
only couple via

zbh+qiuiii
a ,
ezahqidiii
a ,

where the dimensionful couplings za  1/ms and eza  (mb/mt)za (here we are taking into
account the vertical hierarchy mentioned above). upon the elds a acquiring non-zero
vevs, we can generate non-zero masses for the second and rst generations25. in particular,

24one of the interesting phenomenological implications of the u (1)v breaking would be the exis-
tence of new sub-millimeter forces which would compete with gravity [10], and could be accessible
at the upcoming sub-millimeter experiments [49]. thus, u (1)v must be a bulk gauge symmetry
since bulk avons are charged under it. this implies that upon breaking u (1)v on a brane, the
corresponding gauge u (1)v boson acquires the mass around several inverse millimeters or so [10].

25here we are not going to consider the detailed mechanism of how the vevs for a are generated

19

we can consider scenarios where the 1  2 mixing occurs in both the up and down quark
sectors, or mostly in, say, the down quark sector.
the 1  3 and 2  3 mixing arises due to the corresponding couplings to the avons i



and (

 )i:

vh+qiu3i
v h+uiq3(

 , whqid3i
 )i , w hdiq3(

 ,

 )i ,

where v, v   1/ms, and w, w   (mb/mt)/ms. as we discussed in section iii, we will
assume that the , 
  vevs give rise to the 1 3 and 2 3 mixings comparable with those
in the ckm matrix. this is compatible with the observed avor hierarchy and the ckm
matrix (for a recent discussion, see,e.g., [50], and references therein).

before we end this subsection, we would like to comment on cp violation. up until now
we have been implicitly discussing the real parts of the dimensionful couplings  correspond-
ing to avor violating four-fermion operators. the experimental bounds on the imaginary
part of, say, (sd)2 are about 100 times stronger than those on the real part. here we would
like to address the issue of whether these imaginary avor violating couplings are adequately
suppressed as well.

let us rst discuss the (sd)2 and (uc)2 couplings. note that in the absence of the 1  3
and 2  3 mixing the up and down quark mass matrices are block-diagonal, and the cp
violation is absent. thus, in this limit we expect the imaginary parts of the corresponding
avor violating couplings to be vanishing. this implies that the cp violating imaginary
couplings are suppressed by the 1  3 and 2  3 mixing angles. in fact, for these particular
couplings this suppression can be seen to be adequate for ms  10  100 tev.
another coupling we must consider is im((bd)2). a priori this coupling is not suppressed
any more than the corresponding real part. however, suppose that the cp violating phases
in the up and down quark mass matrices are exactly equal (or very close to) /2 (that is,
we have the maximal cp violation). when translated into the corresponding four-fermion
couplings, these phases are squared, so that the imaginary parts of these couplings are
vanishing. thus, the maximal cp violation may provide a framework for suppressing the
corresponding avor violating couplings.

d. the lepton sector

so far we have discussed the quark sector of the model. the lepton sector deserves a
separate consideration as the u(1)v charge assignments here are dierent from those in the

to give a desirable avor hierarchy. this is a very model dependent question, which needs to be
addressed in any extension of the standard model. let us, however, mention that there are more
than one possibilities for generating such a hierarchy. thus, for instance, the avor symmetry could
be broken via some dynamical mechanism on distant branes [19]. then the avor hierarchy in
the observable sector is determined by a model dependent avor symmetry breaking dynamics
on these branes as well as their locations relative to the p-branes on which the quarks and leptons
are localized.

20

in particular, relatively large mixing angles between the rst two and the
quark sector.
third lepton generations might be desirable in the light of [51] (for a recent discussion, see,
e.g, [52], and references therein). in principle there appears to be no diculty in obtaining
such large mixing angles as the corresponding avons ,  can acquire vevs independent
from those in the quark sector.

next, we would like discuss the following possibility. as was pointed out in [24], the el3
fr3 discrete gauge symmetry is too strong for just proton stabilization purposes. thus, its
subgroup ey3 is just as ecient. this subgroup can be viewed as the z3 subgroup of the u(1)y
gauge symmetry, where the generator y is given by y = l  r. the advantage of having
the full el3  fr3 discrete symmetry is that it automatically forbids the dangerous dimension
5 operator llh+h+ which generically would result in too large majorana neutrino masses
(see section ii for details). a priori there is a possibility, however, that this operator is
suppressed due to the non-abelian avor gauge symmetries we have been considering in this
paper. this possibility was originally pointed out in [21], and also briey discussed in [24].
now we are in the position to see whether this operator is indeed suciently suppressed in
the context of a particular model we are considering in this paper.

it is convenient to discuss this issue using the language of the su(2)l  su(2)r  u(1)v
avor gauge symmetry (as the conclusions are the same for the tl  tr discrete avor
gauge symmetry). let us rst consider the unbroken avor symmetry limit. note that the
su(2)l  su(2)r invariant operator ijliljh+h+ vanishes due to antisymmetry. on the
other hand, the l3l3h+h+ operator is forbidden by the u(1)v avor symmetry. in fact,
even if we conne our attention to its zn subgroup with n  3, this latter operator is still
absent.
let us now consider the su(2)l  su(2)r breaking by the avon vevs. then a priori
we are going to have vev-induced operators of the form c ijliljh+h+. thus, for instance,
we can have such operators with c ij = ikkj. (here we could also consider the  avons
instead of the  avons.) to suppress such operators we can introduce a u(1)v  avor
gauge symmetry (or its appropriate discrete zn subgroup), where the vector-like u(1)v 
symmetry acts as 3 times b  l on the rst two generations only. however, then we have a
generation-blind subgroup u(1)z of u(1)v u(1)v  that acts as 3 times bl on all three
generations. as was explained in detail in [24], gauging u(1)y together with such a u(1)z
gauge symmetry is equivalent (for our purposes here) to gauging the full u(1)l  u(1)r
symmetry. in particular, note that z = 3y  3r, where z acts on all three generations.
(here the generalization to the corresponding discrete subgroups should be evident.) in fact,
it appears to be the case that we need two generation-blind discrete gauge symmetries to
both ensure proton longevity and suppress the llh+h+ operator.

the above discussion might have interesting phenomenological implications. note that

the ey3 discrete gauge symmetry allows all lepton number violating dimension 3 and 4 cou-
plings in the tssm [24], whereas the full el3  fr3 discrete gauge symmetry forbids all such

couplings. on the other hand, in the mssm with high ms (of order mgu t ) the only abelian
generation-blind discrete gauge symmetry that forbids the dimension 5 operator qqql
(which would otherwise be disastrous for proton stability even in the case ms  mgu t ) and
at the same time allows the llh+h+ operator (which in this case is needed to generate
the correct neutrino masses via the old see-saw mechanism [43]) is the ey3 discrete gauge

symmetry [53,24]. this would lead to an interesting experimental prediction that if ms

21

is high (that is,  mgu t or so), the upcoming collider experiments should detect lepton
number violating dimension 4 operators via channels involving sleptons. on the other hand,
if ms is low (that is, in the tev range), such operators should be absent. this implies that
it might indeed be possible to indirectly deduce whether ms is high or low by examining the
corresponding processes at the upcoming collider experiments without directly producing the
heavy kaluza-klein or string states. this might be important as the nearest future collider
experiments may not be able to directly probe such states if they are heavier than a few
tev.

v. summary and open questions

let us briey summarize the discussions in the previous sections. we have considered
the issue of fcnc suppression in the tssm. we have shown that the tl  tr non-abelian
discrete avor gauge symmetry is just as ecient in suppressing the corresponding four-
fermion operators as su(2)l  su(2)r (whose subgroup the former is). on the other
hand, the avon vev-induced operators can be adequately suppressed by introducing an
additional u(1)v avor gauge symmetry (or its appropriate discrete subgroup). thus, avor
violation in the tssm appears to be in the acceptable range for ms  10  100 tev.
one of the many remaining open questions is how to explicitly embed the tssm (or
its variations) in the brane world framework. that is, it would be nice to have an explicit
string construction of such a model. one of the promising directions in this regard appears
to be a possible embedding into the type i (type i) framework. the recent progress in
understanding four dimensional type i compactications [54,6,9] raises hope that this might
not be out of reach. however, as was pointed out in [22,24], if there exists an embedding
of the tssm in the type i framework, it appears to be within non-perturbative type i
compactications. a better understanding of such type i (as well as four dimensional
f-theory [55]) compactications is therefore more than desirable.

acknowledgments

i would like to thank nima arkani-hamed, tom banks and especially gia dvali for
useful discussions. this work was supported in part by the grant nsf phy-96-02074, and
the doe 1994 oji award. i would also like to thank albert and ribena yu for nancial
support.

22

references

[1] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724.
[2] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 135.
[3] j. lykken, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 3693.
[4] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263.
[5] k.r. dienes, e. dudas and t. gherghetta, phys. lett. b436 (1998) 55; hep-

ph/9806292; hep-ph/9807522.

[6] z. kakushadze, phys. lett. b434 (1998) 269; nucl. phys. b535 (1998) 311; phys. rev.

d58 (1998) 101901.

[7] i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b436 (1998)

257.

[8] g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 106007.
[9] z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 126001.
[10] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, hep-ph/9807344.
[11] z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, hep-th/9809147.
[12] v. rubakov and m. shaposhnikov, phys. lett. b125 (1983) 136;
a. barnaveli and o. kancheli, sov. j. nucl. phys. 52 (1990) 576.

[13] g. dvali and m. shifman, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 127; phys. lett. b396 (1997) 64;

erratum, ibid b407 (1997) 452.

[14] v. kaplunovsky, nucl. phys. b307 (1988) 145; (e) nucl. phys. b382 (1992) 436.
[15] c. bachas and c. fabre, nucl. phys. b476 (1996) 418;

i. antoniadis, h. partouche and t.r. taylor, nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 29.

[16] k.r. dienes, phys. rept. 287 (1997) 447.
[17] e. caceres, v.s. kaplunovsky and i.m. mandelberg, nucl. phys. b493 (1997) 73.
[18] s. dimopoulos and h. georgi, nucl. phys. b150 (1981) 193;

w.j. marciano and g. senjanovic, phys. rev. d25 (1982) 3092;
c. giunti, c.w. kim and u.w. lee, mod. phys. lett. a6 (1991) 1745;
j. ellis, s. kelley and d.v. nanopoulos, phys lett. b249 (1990) 441;
u. amaldi, w. de boer and h. furstenau, phys. lett. b260 (1991) 447;
p. langacker and m. luo, phys. rev. d44 (1991) 817.
[19] n. arkani-hamed and s. dimopoulos, hep-ph/9811353.
[20] z. berezhiani and g. dvali, hep-ph/9811378.
[21] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, g. dvali and j. march-russell, talk presented by s.

dimopoulos at susy98, hep-ph/9811448.

[22] z. kakushadze, hep-th/9811193.
[23] i. antoniadis and c. bachas, hep-th/9812093.
[24] z. kakushadze, hep-th/9812163.
[25] g. dvali and s.-h.h. tye, hep-ph/9812483.
[26] a. delgado, a. pomarol and m. quiros, hep-th/9812489.
[27] a. pomarol and m. quiros, phys. lett. b438 (1998) 255;

c.p. bachas, hep-ph/9807415;
p.c. argyres, s. dimopoulos and j. march-russell, hep-th/9808138;
n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and j. march-russell, hep-th/9809124;
d. ghilencea and g.g. ross, hep-ph/9809217;
k.r. dienes, e. dudas, t. gherghetta and a. riotto, hep-ph/9809406;

23

s. abel and s. king, hep-ph/9809467;
d. lyth, hep-ph/9810320;
i. antoniadis, s. dimopoulos, a. pomarol and m. quiros, hep-ph/9810410;
g.f. giudice, r. rattazzi and j.d. wells, hep-ph/9811291;
s. nussinov and r. shrock, hep-ph/9811323;
e.a. mirabelli, m. perelstein and m.e. peskin, hep-ph/9811337;
t. han, j.d. lykken and r.-j. zhang, hep-ph/9811350;
n. kaloper and a. linde, hep-th/9811141;
j.l. hewett, hep-ph/9811356;
k.r. dienes, e. dudas and t. gherghetta, hep-ph/9811428;
p. mathews, s. raychaudhuri and k. sridhar, hep-ph/9811501; hep-ph/9812486;
t. kobayashi, j. kubo, m. mondragon and g. zoupanos, hep-ph/9812221;
b.a. dobrescu, hep-ph/9812349;
t.g. rizzo, hep-ph/9901209; hep-ph/9902273;
a.e. faraggi and m. pospelov, hep-ph/9901299;
k. agashe and n.g. deshpande, hep-ph/9902263;
m.l. graesser, hep-ph/9902310.

[28] h. hatanaka, t. inami and c.s. lim, mod. phys. lett. a13 (1998) 2601;

r. sundrum, hep-ph/9805471; hep-ph/9807348;
k. benakli, hep-ph/9809582;
l. randall and r. sundrum, hep-th/9810155;
k. benakli and s. davidson, hep-ph/9810280;
g.f. de teramond, hep-ph/9810436;
c.p. burgess, l.e. ibanez and f. quevedo, hep-ph/9810535;
m. maggiore and a. riotto, hep-th/9811089;
m. drees, o.j.p. eboli and j.k. mizukoshi, hep-ph/9811343;
m. gogberashvili, hep-ph/9812296;
l.e. ibanez, c. munoz and s. rigolin, hep-ph/9812397;
a. donini and s. rigolin, hep-ph/9901443;
i. antoniadis and b. pioline, hep-th/9902055;
m. sakamoto, m. tachibana and k. takenaga, hep-th/9902070.

[29] i. antoniadis, phys. lett. b246 (1990) 377;

i. antoniadis, c. munoz and m. quiros, nucl. phys. b397 (1993) 515;
i. antoniadis, k. benakli and m. quiros, phys. lett. b331 (1994) 313;
i. antoniadis, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, nucl. phys. b516 (1998) 70.

[30] t.r. taylor and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b212 (1988) 147.
[31] j. scherk and j.h. schwarz, nucl. phys. b153 (1979) 61; phys. lett. b82 (1979) 60;

e. cremmer, j. scherk and j.h. schwarz, phys. lett. b84 (1979) 83;
p. fayet, phys. lett. b159 (1985) 121; nucl. phys. b263 (1986) 649.

[32] see, e.g.,

s. giddings and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b307 (1988) 854;
s. coleman, nucl. phys. b310 (1988) 643;
g. gilbert, nucl. phys. b328 (1989) 159.

[33] m. dine and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b306 (1988) 137;

t. banks and l. dixon, nucl. phys. b307 (1988) 93.

24

[34] l. krauss and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 62 (1989) 1221.
[35] t. banks, nucl. phys. b323 (1990) 90;

l. krauss, gen. rel. grav. 22 (1990) 50;
m. alford, j. march-russell and f. wilczek, nucl. phys. 337 (1990) 695;
j. preskill and l. krauss, nucl. phys. b341 (1990) 50;
m. alford, s. coleman and j. march-russell, nucl. phys. b351 (1991) 735.

[36] m. dine and n. seiberg, phys. rev. lett. 55 (1985) 366; phys. lett. b162 (1985) 299;

v.s. kaplunovsky, phys. rev. lett. 55 (1985) 1036;
t. banks and m. dine, phys. rev. d50 (1994) 7454.

[37] see, e.g.,

n.v. krasnikov, phys. lett. b193 (1987) 37;
l. dixon, v. kaplunovsky, j. louis and m. peskin, slac-pub-5229 (1990);
j.a. casas, z. lalak, c. munoz and g.g. ross, nucl. phys. b347 (1990) 243;
t.r. taylor, phys. lett. b252 (1990) 59;
v.s. kaplunovsky and j. louis, phys. lett. b417 (1998) 45;
g. dvali and z. kakushadze, phys. lett. b417 (1998) 50;
m. klein and j. louis, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 163;
c.p. burgess, a. de la macorra, i. maksymyk and f. quevedo, j. high energy phys.
9809 (1998) 007;
k.-i. izawa and t. yanagida, hep-ph/9809366.
[38] n. arkani-hamed and m. schmaltz, to appear.
[39] t. banks, m. dine and a. nelson, to appear.
[40] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b72 (1974) 461.
[41] l.e. ibanez and g.g. ross, phys. lett. b260 (1991) 291; nucl. phys. b368 (1992) 3;

j. preskill, s.p. trivedi, f. wilczek and m.b. wise, nucl. phys. 363 (1991) 207;
t. banks and m. dine, phys. rev. d45 (1992) 1424.

[42] s. weinberg, phys. rev. d26 (1982) 287;

n. sakai and t. yanagida, nucl. phys. b197 (1982) 533.

[43] m. gell-mann, p. ramond and r. slansky, in: supergravity, eds. p. van nieuwen-

huizen and d. freedman (amsterdam, north-holland, 1979) p. 315;
t. yanagida, in: workshop on unied theory and baryon number in the universe,
eds. o. sawada and a. sugamoto (kek, tsukuba, 1979) p. 95;
r.n. mohapatra and g. senjanovic, phys. rev. lett. 44 (1980) 912.

[44] c. caso et al., review of particle physics, eur. phys. j. c3 (1998) 1.
[45] see, e.g.,

n. arkani-hamed, c.d. carone, l.j. hall and h. murayama, phys. rev. d54 (1996)
7032, and references therein.

[46] for some early works, see, e.g.,

f. wilczek and a. zee, phys. rev. lett. 42 (1979) 421;
j. chkareuli, jetp lett. 32 (1980) 671;
z. berezhiani and j. chkareuli, sov. j. nucl. phys. 37 (1983) 618.

[47] see, e.g.,

m. dine, r. leigh and a. kagan, phys. rev. d48 (1993) 4269;
y. nir and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b309 (1993) 337;
p. pouliot and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b318 (1993) 169;

25

d. kaplan and m. schmaltz, phys. rev. d48 (1993) 4269;
r. barbieri, g. dvali and a. strumia, nucl. phys. b435 (1995) 102;
a. pomarol and d. tommasini, nucl. phys. b466 (1996) 3;
l.j. hall and h. murayama, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 3985;
p.h. frampton and o.c.w. kong, phys. rev. d53 (1995) 2293; phys. rev. lett. 77
(1996) 1699;
p.h. frampton and t.w. kephart, phys. rev. d51 (1995) 1;
r. barbieri, g. dvali and l.j. hall, phys. lett. b337 (1996) 76;
n. arkani-hamed, h.c. cheng and l.j. hall, nucl. phys. b472 (1996) 95; phys. rev.
d54 (1996) 2242;
k.s. babu and s.m. barr, phys. lett. b387 (1996) 87;
r. barbieri and l.j. hall, nuovo cim. 110a (1997) 1;
z. berezhiani, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 52a (1997) 153; hep-ph/9609342;
a. rasin, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 3977;
c.d. carone, l.j. hall and t. moroi, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 7183;
g. dvali and z. kakushadze, phys. lett. b426 (1998) 78.

[48] see, e.g.,

f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 49 (1982) 1549;
d. reiss, phys. lett. b115 (1982) 217;
g. gelmini, s. nussinov and t. yanagida, nucl. phys. b219 (1983) 311;
a. anselm and n. uraltsev, sov. phys. jetp 57 (1983) 1142;
a. anselm and z. berezhiani, phys. lett. b162 (1985) 349;
a. anselm, n. uraltsev and m. khlopov, sov. j. nucl. phys. 41 (1985) 1056;
j.e. kim, phys. rept. 150 (1987) 1;
m. khlopov and r. homeriki, sov. j. nucl. phys. 51 (1990) 935;
j.l. feng, t. moroi, h. murayama and e. schnapka, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 5875.

[49] j.c. price, in: proceedings of the international symposium on experimental gravita-

tional physics, ed. p.f. michelson (world scientic, singapore, 1988) 436-439;
j.c. price et al., nsf proposal (1996);
a. kapitulnik and t. kenny, nsf proposal (1997);
j.c. long, h.w. chan and j.c. price, hep-ph/9805217.

[50] j.l. chkareuli and c.d. froggatt, hep-ph/9812499.
[51] super-kamiokande collaboration, y. fukuda et al., phys. lett. b433 (1998) 9; ibid.

b436 (1998) 33;
kamiokande collaboration, s. hatakeyama et al., phys. rev. lett. 81 (1998) 2016.

[52] r. barbieri, l.j. hall, g.l. kane and g.g. ross, hep-ph/9901228.
[53] l.e. ibanez and g.g. ross, nucl. phys. b368 (1992) 3.
[54] m. berkooz and r.g. leigh, nucl. phys. b483 (1997) 187;

c. angelantonj, m. bianchi, g. pradisi, a. sagnotti and ya.s. stanev, phys. lett. b385
(1996) 96;
z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b512 (1998) 221;
z. kakushadze and g. shiu, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3686; nucl. phys. b520 (1998) 75;
g. aldazabal, a. font, l.e. ibanez, a.m. uranga and g. violero, nucl. phys. b519
(1998) 239;
g. zwart, nucl. phys. b526 (1998) 378;

26

g. aldazabal, a. font, l.e. ibanez and g. violero, nucl. phys. b536 (1999) 29;
z. kakushadze, g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 25;
r. blumenhagen and a. wisskirchen, phys. lett. b438 (1998) 52;
j.d. lykken, e. poppitz and s. trivedi, hep-th/9806080;
l.e. ibanez, r. rabadan and a.m. uranga, hep-th/9808139;
c. angelantonj, hep-th/9810214;
i. antoniadis, g. dappollonio, e. dudas and a. sagnotti, hep-th/9812118.

[55] c. vafa, nucl. phys. b469 (1996) 403.

27

