dsf/9-99
hep-th/9902187
february 1999

9
9
9
1

 

b
e
f
5
2

 

 
 

1
v
7
8
1
2
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

strings, noncommutative geometry

and

the size of the target space

fedele lizzi

dipartimento di scienze fisiche, universit`a di napoli federico ii,

and infn, sezione di napoli

mostra d oltremare pad. 20, i-80125, napoli, italy.

abstract

we describe how the presence of the antisymmetric tensor (tor-
sion) on the world sheet action of string theory renders the size of
the target space a gauge non invariant quantity. this generalizes the
r  1/r symmetry in which momenta and windings are exchanged,
to the whole o(d, d, z). the crucial point is that, with a transfor-
mation, it is possible always to have all of the lowest eigenvalues of

fedele.lizzi@na.infn.it

the hamiltonian to be momentum modes. we interpret this in the
framework of noncommutative geometry, in which algebras take the
place of point spaces, and of the spectral action principle for which the
eigenvalues of the dirac operator are the fundamental objects, out of
which the theory is constructed. a quantum observer, in the presence
of many low energy eigenvalues of the dirac operator (and hence of
the hamiltonian) will always interpreted the target space of the string
theory as eectively uncompactied.

1

1 introduction

it has been known for some time in string theory that the size of the target
space is not an invariant concept. a symmetry, called t-duality, exchanges
the theory of closed strings compactied in a tiny box, of the size a small
fraction of planck length, with the theory of strings living in large universe, of
size the inverse of the tiny box (times the square of the planck length). this
is a consequence [1] of a symmetry of the spectrum of the hamiltonian of the
theory, which remains invariant under an exchange between the lattice, which
denes a toroidal compactication, with its dual lattice. this is equivalent
to an exchange between the momenta of theory (quantized in units of the
inverse of the radius), with the winding modes, closed strings which stretch
across the torus. as the latter are also quantized, but in units of the size of
the torus, target spaces with vastly dierent sizes are identied. while at rst
sight this may seem a very curious result, the interpretation [2] only refers to
elementary concept of quantum mechanics. the argument of brandenberger
and vafa is that position is just a derived concept, as the fourier transform
of momentum spaces, and in string theory a dierent choice is also possible,
namely considering eigenstates of the winding. if the compactication radius
is of the order of planck length, the two choices are equivalent, but for a very
large radius the eigenvalues of momentum are nearly continuous, while the
ones of winding are far apart, the rst one appearing at a very large energy,
it is therefore dicult to make localized wave packets with the fourier
transform of winding. conversely, with a small radius of compactication, it
is the winding which gives the possibility to create localized wave packets.

the exchange between the compactication lattice and its dual is however
just a part of a larger group of symmetries, namely o(d, d, z), and some
of these transformation mix momentum and winding in a non trivial way.
the purpose of this paper to argue that a quantum observer will always
see an uncompactied space, provided the hamiltonian has a spectrum
containing many small eigenvalues (we will make this more precise later).
we will accomplish this using the tools of noncommutative geometry, that
is we will consider string theory as a noncommutative geometry. we take
the example of the (at) toroidal compactication. our aim is to just show
a mechanism, and this must be understood as an example, the principles
behind this mechanism are much more general. the large scale topology of
the universe is of course unknown. we will be only concerned with physical
interpretation, and the mathematics used will only have an ancillary purpose.
the non mathematically inclined reader should bear with the mathematical
parts, the main concepts should understandable even without the formal
apparatus. the mathematically inclined reader should be tolerant of the
(mis)use of mathematics in this paper.

the crucial observation [3, 4] is that, in the noncommutative geometry of
strings, the group o(d, d, z) is a part of the group of gauge transformations.
also important is the fact that, with a proper transformation, it is possible
to have all of the lower eigenvalues to be in the momentum sector. we will

2

use these observations in the context of noncommutative geometry, for which
the important feature is the spectrum of the (generalized) dirac operator.
the action in noncommutative geometry is a spectral action, it depends es-
sentially from the lower (smaller than a cuto parameter) eigenvalues of the
dirac operator. the noncommutative geometry of strings is given by the
vertex algebra of the vertex operators of the theory. the dirac operator can
be used to identify the low energy (tachyonic sector) of the theory. using
these ingredients, and the fact that the topology and metric of a space in
noncommutative geometry are described solely in terms of operators on an
hilbert space, we will argue that a quantum observer will see the space as
eectively uncompactied.

the plan of the remainder of the paper is as follows. in section 2 we in-
troduce the string theory of interest, and the o(d, d, z) symmetry of interest.
in section 3 we will describe the conguration space experienced by a quan-
tum observer in the framework of noncommutative geometry. the relevant
concept of noncommutative geometry are briey introduced. in section 4 we
introduce the noncommutative geometry of the string theory of interest, and
in particular the dirac operator, showing also how duality symmetries are
gauge transformation leaving the spectrum of the dirac operator invariant.
in section 5 we introduce briey the spectral action principle and argue how
a low energy quantum observer will necessarily see an uncompactied space.
section 6 contains conclusions and open problems.

2 target space symmetry of a string theory

consider the bosonic (sector of the) string, with the target space compactied
on a d dimensional torus. that is, consider a linear  model compactied
on rd quotiented by an abelian innite group (a lattice)  generated by d
generators ei. then the space td  rd/ is a d dimensional torus. on 
we dene an inner product of the generators, which provides a metric (of
euclidean signature) on td:

hei, eji  gij

.

(2.1)

the lengths of the vectors ei (here and in the following we work with units
such that plancks length equals unity) give the classical size of the target
space, which is compact and periodic in all dimensions. we will see that the
presence of torsion and quantum mechanical considerations will considerably
alter this classical picture.

the dual lattice  is spanned by the basis ei with (we implicitly complex-

ify  and extend the product):

the inner products of the eis dene a metric which is the inverse of gij, that
is

hei, eji = i

j

.

(2.2)

hei, eji  gij

.

3

(2.3)

notice that, if all of the ei are quantities of order r, with det g of order rd,
then the size of the dual lattice is (very roughly speaking) of order 1/r. in
this sense, if to a given lattice corresponds a large universe, to its dual it will
correspond a small one, the dual torus td. this conclusion is valid however,
even in this rough form, only in the absence of torsion in the action [5].

classically the string is described by a two dimensional nonlinear  model,
whose fundamental objects are the fubiniveneziano elds, which, for the
case of a closed string, are

x i(, ) = xi + gijpi + gijwi +xk6=0

1
ik

()

k

eik()

,

(2.4)

where x represents the centre of mass of the string, p its momentum and w
is the winding number, that is the number of times the string wraps around
the direction dened by the ei. notice that because the space is compact,
the momentum is quantized, and in fact it must be p  , while the winding
if the size of the target
number must belong to the dual lattice w  .
space is extremely large, then the momentum will have a spectrum with very
close eigenvalues, a nearly continuous spectrum, while the windings will have
values far apart. but apart from these scale considerations, the role of p
and w in (2.4) is symmetric.
in the following we will concentrate on the
zero modes of the string, mostly ignoring the oscillator modes. these are
internal excitations of the other string, and are not sensible to the target
space in which the strings live, and will therefore in general play no role in
this paper. moreover, the oscillators describe excitations which are starting
at the planck mass, while most of our considerations relate to the low energy
sector of the theory.

the action of the model is that of a two dimensional nonlinear  model:

s =

1

4 z dd (cid:0)x igijxj + bijx ix j(cid:1) ,

(2.5)

where  is the world sheet two dimensional metric, g is the matric dened
in (2.1), and b is an antisymmetric tensor which represent the torsion of the
string.

we can perform a chiral decompositions of the xs dening:

x i


(  ) = xi


+ gijpj (  ) +xk6=0

1
ik

()i

k

eik()

.

(2.6)

the zero modes xi
(the centre of mass coordinates of the string) and the

(centre of mass) momenta pi = 2pi(gb)ijwj are canonically conjugate
variables,
(2.7)

,

[xi


, pi ] = ij

i

in this paper we will consider only the simplest case of closed strings. the presence
of open strings, d-branes etc. will make this structure probably much richer, but will not
be considered in this paper.

other terms, such as a dilatons term, are possible, but we will not consider them here.

4

with all other commutators vanishing. the left-right momenta are

pi = 12

(pi  hei, wi)

the ps belong to the lattice:

 =   

(2.8)

(2.9)

we can therefore dene the elds x = x+ + x, and we may equally well
dene x  x+  x, whose zero mode we will indicate as x.

the hamiltonian of the theory (limiting ourselves to the zero mode part)

is very symmetric in this chiral decomposition:

h =

=

(p2

+ + p2
)

1

1
2

2 (cid:0)(2)2pigijpj + wi(g  bg1b)ijwj + 4wibikgkjpj(cid:1)

(2.10)

(2.11)

since the momenta and the windings belong to a lattice, the spectrum is
discrete.

the symmetry which exchanges the lattice with its dual is called t-duality
[1, 6]. it corresponds to an exchange of the momentum quantum number with
the winding. the zero mode corresponding to x, the position of the centre
of mass of the string, is exchanged with its dual x. as heuristically discussed
in the introduction (and as we will again argue below), two target spaces
related by a t-dual transformation are indistinguishable at low energies. in
the torsionless case b = 0 this corresponds to an exchange of g with its
inverse g1, and the change of size of the target space in which the radius
r  1/r. in the presence of torsion the exchange is g1  g  bg1b and
bg1  g1b, and it depends crucially on the values of the bij.
in the
toroidal case it is possible to exchange only some of the generators of the
lattice with their duals, giving rise to a group of factorized t-dualities.

even factorized t-duality is a subgroup of a larger group of symmetries
which leaves the spectrum invariant, the full group is in fact o(d, d, z) [7, 6].
it is generated from three kinds of transformations:

- the factorized dualities we have already discussed.

- the changes of base of the lattices, made via a matrix which belongs

to g(d, z), the group of integer valued matrices of unit determinant.

- the transformation bij  bij + cij with c an antisymmetric tensor with
integer entries.

there is a further z2 symmetry obtained exchanging  and  on the world
sheet, but this last symmetry does not aect the target space.

let us analyse in some details the third transformation. it changes the
components of the antisymmetric second rank tensor bij by the addition of an

5

arbitrary integer constant. this transformation does not change the lattice
, as it operates only on the antisymmetric tensor b. it does however change
the momenta conjugated to the zero modes of x and x. in particular, in
the spectrum (2.10), the relative contribution of the momenta conjugated
to x (represented by the rst term,) with respect to the windings, conju-
gated to x, and the mixed term will change. since this is a symmetry of
the spectrum, the set of numbers which are the eigenvalues is of course un-
changed, but the distribution in the three terms changes. by choosing the
integers which compose the antisymmetric tensor b arbitrarily large, we can
make the contribution of the second and third term arbitrarily large.
in
other words we concentrate the lowest eigenvalues of the hamiltonian in the
momentum part. in other words the low energy spectrum is made only of
the momentum eigenvalues. the lattice is still the same, but the strings are
extremely twisted, and we have transferred the lowest eigenvalues of the en-
ergy from winding to momentum. this relatively simple observation is the
key of our construction. in the following sections we will argue that in this
case a quantum observer will observe a spacetime in which the actual radii
of compactication will eectively be unobservable. roughly speaking, a low
energy strings for which in the original (small radius) lattice had a combina-
tion of momentum and winding, will now be twisted in such a way that it
will appear to have just momentum, it is like the lattice repeats itself over
and over.

again, as in the case of the of the r  1/r symmetry, we have to ask
ourselves what is position ? how do i measure it ? and using the same
heuristic arguments of [2], we can think of making wave packets using super-
positions of the eigenvalues of the momentum, in the case of large torsion the
eigenvalues of momentum are continuous for all practical purposes, therefore
the superposition will have the character of a uncompactied space, rather
than a string moving on a lattice. and this will be the situation until ener-
gies in which the new eigenvalues (coming from windings or the oscillatory
modes) start to play a role. in the following section we will argue this from
a quantum mechanical point of view, using the tools of noncommutative
geometry.

3 conguration space in quantum mechan-

ics.

in this section we will discuss the role of the classical conguration space in
quantum mechanics. this is an extremely complicated subject, which would
require a full understanding of the foundations of quantum mechanics, and
its classical limit. since this full understanding is lacking, we only point out
some facts which we feel relevant. we will use the language and formalism
of noncommutative geometry, but will keep the formalism to a minimum,
hoping to make the relevant physical principles emerge as clearly as possible.
a discussion along these line appeared in [8], a rigorous treatment of quantum

6

mechanics based on an algebraic approach can be found, for example, in
haags book [9], while the main reference for noncommutative geometry is
the book by connes [10], other useful reviews are [11, 12, 13].

consider, in the following, a purely quantum observer, that is somebody
making experiments with a set of operators which form an algebra. for
example bounded operators constructed from p and x. despite its historical
name not necessarily all self adjoint operators on an hilbert space can be
considered to be related to an experimental procedure. in fact the programme
of rigged hilbert space, (for reviews see [14]) is based on a particular choice
of a subspace of the hilbert space, on which some operators act in such a
way to have only states with a nite energy. here we will take a related but
dierent point of view, based more on the algebra of operators.

the usual way to construct quantum mechanics for the motion on a man-
ifold m, is to consider the hilbert space l2(m), and an algebra of (bounded)
operators acting on it. of course the hilbert space does not carry any in-
formation on m (all separable hilbert spaces are isomorphic), but the infor-
mation on the topology of m can be recovered by considering the algebra of
position operator, that is, the algebra of continuous, complex valued, func-
tions on m, seen as operators on l2(m), with a norm given by the maximum
of the modulus of the function.

the set of continuous complex valued functions on a topological space
form in fact an abelian c-algebra , and according to a series of theorems
due to gelfand and naimark (for a review see [15]), it is possible to recover
the original space in an unique way from the knowledge of just the abstract
algebra. the points of the topological space in this case are the set of ir-
reducible representations of the algebra, and the topology of the space can
be recovered as well. alternatively, the space can be reconstructed as the
set of maximal ideals. ideals are subalgebras such that the product of one
of their elements by any element (of the whole algebra) still belongs to the
ideal. maximal ideals are ideals which are not contained in any other ideal
(except the trivial ideal of the whole algebra). the relevant example is the
set of functions vanishing at a point.

there is a third way to identify the topological space corresponding to a
given c-algebra algebra, it is via the pure states of the algebra. a state is
a map from the algebra into complex numbers with the properties of being
positive denite, of unit norm and such that:

 : a  c ; (aa)  0 ,a  a,

|||| = 1 .

(3.12)

it is another result of gelfand that all c-algebra can be represented as
bounded operator on an hilbert space h, then vectors |i  h dene states
via the expectation values. states are however much more general. we
denote the space of states by s(a). since

(3.13)

 + (1  )  s(a) ,

,   s(a),   [0, 1]

in the following we will consider m compact, therefore continuous functions are

bounded as well.

7

the set of all states of an algebra a is a convex space. being a convex
space s(a) has a boundary whose elements are called pure states. the
delta-functions, seen as maps from the algebra of continuous function into
complex numbers:

x(f )  f (x)

,

f  a

(3.14)

are examples of pure states. namely, a state is called pure if it cannot be
written as the convex combination of (two) other states. we can therefore
reconstruct the space as the space of pure states, which coincides with the set
of irreducible representations, and hence the space of characters. moreover,
in the commutative case, it coincides with the space of maximal ideals of a.
the reconstruction of the underlying topological space from pure states is
actually quite close in spirit to quantum physics.

although the hilbert space h has been introduced to represent our alge-
bras, we will give it a physical meaning and see it as the space of wave func-
tions required by quantum mechanics. to reconstruct a topological space, all
we need is then an abelian subalgebra of the algebra of observables. at this,
purely topological level, there are however many ambiguities (to some ex-
tent similar to the polarization choices in geometric quantization), one could
choose the algebra of momentum operators, or combinations of position and
momentum etc.

we will consider the conguration space of a quantum mechanical space
therefore not as a set of points (and relations such as topology or a dierential
structure), but rather as an abelian c-algebra. this is our starting point.
the hilbert space could also be easily constructed a posteriori by giving a
sesquilinear form (a scalar product) on the algebra, and completing it under
the norm given by this product. other choice for the hilbert space are pos-
sible, a relevant one for instance is the space of spinors. a quantum observer
will have at his disposal, among the bounded operators on the hilbert space,
an abelian subalgebra that he will identify with the continuous function on
his space.

the size of this conguration space is given by a (generalized) dirac
operator d, a self adjoint, densely dened, compact resolvent operator on
the hilbert space. the distance between two points x and y is given, in
terms of d, by connes formula [10]:

d(x, y) = sup

||[d,a]||1|a(x)  a(y)|

.

(3.15)

since we are interested in doing physics with noncommutative geometric
tools, we should be able to introduce also potential and covariant derivatives
as operators on h. also in this respect the dirac operator plays a crucial
role. with it is in fact possible to represent dierential forms as bounded
operators [10].

we are assuming at this point that the hilbert space is a space of spinors.

8

given an abstract algebra of p-forms:

 = xi
d = xi

a0ida1i . . . dapi

da0ida1i . . . dapi

(3.16)

we dene a linear representation of  and d as bounded operators:

() = xi
(d) = xi

a0i[d, a1i] . . . [d, api]

[d, a0i][d, a1i] . . . [d, api]

.

(3.17)

since it may occur that pi a0ida1i . . . dapi = 0 while pi da0ida1i . . . dapi 6= 0,

care has to taken in quotienting out these forms (the so called junk forms),
for details see for example [10, 11]. for instance, in the usual commutative
case, in which the algebra is the one of complex valued functions on an
a manifold, the hilbert space is the one of spinors on spacetime and the
dirac operator is the usual one d = , the forms dx are represented
by (dx) = . in going to higher forms one has to retain only the anti-
symmetric part of the product of gamma matrices. in the following we will
omit to explicitly indicate the symbol  when we talk of forms, which we will
assume always represented on h. once we have dened forms we can then
dene connections (generic hermitean one forms):

a = xi

ai[d, bi]

and a covariant dirac operator

the curvature also can be dened.

da = d + a

fa = [d, a] + a2

(3.18)

(3.19)

(3.20)

connections and curvature transforms properly under a gauge group. in fact
in noncommutative geometry gauge transformation have a nice characteri-
zation as the unitary transformation of the algebra into itself (or the inner
automorphisms). if in fact we conjugate all of the element of the algebra by
an unitary element a  u1au, the physics must remain unchanged. this
means that the dierential forms dened in (3.17) have to transform prop-
erly. in fact for a matrix algebras this invariance is exactly the invariance for
a unitary gauge group.

a nal ingredient is the integral, since we are constructing a formalism
based on algebra of operators, without the geometrical concepts of points
etc, the best characterization of integration is as a trace.
in general for
commutative algebras is possible to show that the integral of a function is

9

the (properly regularized) trace of this function (represented as an operator
in the hilbert space) times |d|d. we dene the dixmier trace tr l of an
operator l, with eigenvalues n, with n+1  n, to be:

tr l = lim
n

1

log n

n

xn=1

n

(3.21)

for the algebra of continuous functions on a d-dimensional compact manifold
m, this denition yields [10]

zm

f (x) dpx = tr f|d|d .

(3.22)

we have therefore equipped our quantum observer with a series of tools
suited to him: algebras of operators, traces etc. in the commutative case
these tools reconstruct the usual dierential geometry, but we have dened
them in such a way that hey can be used without any reference to an underly-
ing commutative geometry. if we are in a commutative case, the quantum
observer has therefore at his disposal an algebra of observables, in this al-
gebra he recognizes an abelian subalgebra, that he calls the space on which
he lives, and with formula (3.15) he calculates distances, metric etc. the set
of an hilbert space h, a c-algebra realized as operators on h and a dirac
operator is called the spectral triple.

there is the possibility that the quantum observer nds himself on a non-
commutative space. that is, among his set of quantum observable he does
not identify an abelian algebra giving him the conguration space, he can
however dene (in an approximate sense perhaps) some sort of noncommu-
tative space, the algebra corresponding to it is however non abelian, usually
a deformation, governed by a small parameter, of an abelian algebra. this is,
for example, the situation envisaged in [16], in which the algebra of position
operators is noncommutative.

there is also an intermediate possibility, suppose for example that the
hilbert space the observer has at his disposal is that of spinors with an in-
dex, which transform under the fundamental representation of su(n). in this
case the algebra of position operators is actually made of functions from
the manifold to n n matrices. this is obviously a noncommutative algebra,
so the gelfandnaimark theorem (at least in the commutative form we have
enunciated) does not apply, it is nevertheless obvious that the conguration
space is the manifold m all the same. the choice of abelian subalgebras
(diagonal matrices) would create various identical copies of the manifold.
the question is easily resolved noticing that the algebra of n  n matrices
has only one nontrivial irreducible representation, or rather, all representa-
tions are unitarily equivalent. therefore the set of irreducible representations
(up to unitary transformations) of the algebra is still in a one to one corre-
spondence with the underlying manifold m. the noncommutativity of the
algebra however makes it impossible the identication of points with pure
states, there is in fact a n dimensional sphere of pure states at each point

10

of space (corresponding to the various unitarily equivalent representations)
and they can be seen as an internal space, points connected by a gauge
transformation.

we see therefore that there are noncommutative algebras which give (at
least at the topological level) the same geometry, this concept is captured by
the concept of morita equivalence [17]. two morita equivalent c-algebras
have equivalent representation theories, therefore at the topological level they
will describe the same set of points, with the same topology. the physics
they would describe (if we interpret them as the algebra on space) dier
therefore only in the internal space. quantum observers using morita
equivalent algebras of operators will therefore conclude they are describing
dierent theories on the same manifold. in the fth section we give a criterion
based on the spectrum of the dirac operator, with which he can identify an
algebra which will give the quantum observer his space, commutative or
noncommutative.

4 the noncommutative geometry of strings

in this section we will describe the noncommutative geometry corresponding
to the string theory of section 2. as we have seen in the preceding section
we need three ingredients for this purpose, let us construct them in turn. we
will be necessarily brief and details (and further references) can be found in
[18, 19, 3, 4, 20, 21]. we start the construction from the hilbert space h on
which the x act as quantum operators:

h = l2(cid:16)td  td , qd

i=1

dxi dxi

(2)2 (cid:17)  f +  f

(4.23)

the f are fock spaces on which the creation and annihilation oscillatory
modes act (and therefore will not be relevant at low energies), while the l2
space of spinors in (4.23) is generated by the canonical pairs of position and
momenta zero modes (2.7), and can be expressed in several isomorphic ways:

l2(cid:16)td  td , qd

i=1

dxi dxi

(2)2 (cid:17) = l2(cid:16)td , qd

i=1

dxi

2 (cid:17) c l2(cid:16)t d , qd

i=1

i=1

= mwl
= mpl

l2(cid:16)td , qd
l2(cid:16) td , qd

dxi

2 (cid:17)
2 (cid:17)

dxi

i=1

dxi

2 (cid:17)

(4.24)

that is, we can consider the zero modes part of h as copies of the spinors of
the torus (a copy for each winding), or as copies of spinors on the dual torus,
or as tensor product of two spinor spaces, reecting the various choices of
the spectrum.

we wish to describe interacting strings, and therefore we must use oper-
ators which describe strings splitting, joining etc. such operators are called
vertex operators, they form an algebra and have a distinguished position in

11

mathematics as well as in physics (for reviews see for example [22]), although
we will need very little of the beautiful mathematical formalism of these al-
gebras. the most important feature is the operator state correspondence.
this means that, to each state on the string hilbert space, it is possible to
associate an operator acting on the vacuum:

v|0i = |i

(4.25)

the fundamental vertex operator is the so called tachyonic vertex operator
(this can actually be a misnomer since, according to the string theory one is
considering, tachyons can be absent):

vq+q(z+, z)  v (eiq+
= (1)qw

 x

 x

+iq
: eiq+

  i; z+, z)
 x 
 x 
+(z+)iq

(z)

:

(4.26)

where (q+, q), (r+, r)  , z =i(), and :  : denotes normal ordering.
thus we take as second ingredient the vertex operator algebra. a word
of caution, in general a vertex operator algebra is not a c-algebra . in fact,
operators dened as in (4.26) are not bounded. to overcome this one can
smear them [18], however also smeared operators are not necessarily bounded
[19, 23]. alternatively one can consider a cuto on the oscillators (eectively
an ultraviolet cuto on the world sheet) [21]. the algebra, seen as bounded
operators on h, will then have to be completed to give a c-algebra .

the last ingredient we need is a dirac operator. in this case we can in

fact naturally dene two of them:

d(  ) =



xk=

dk eik()

(4.27)

where

dk = 2   

k

(4.28)
with 0 = p and the  are the appropriate gamma matrices in the 
sectors. in analogy with the denition of momentum and winding from the
p we can dene two operators:

d = d+ + d
d = d+  d

(4.29)
(4.30)

the algebra of vertex operators a, the hilbert space (4.23) and d are the
three elements which form the frohlich-gawedzki spectral triple, which de-
scribes the noncommutative geometry of interacting strings. the algebra of
vertex operators is of course non abelian and very complicated, and therefore
the geometry of the stringy spacetime is highly nontrivial. this is not sur-
prising, we know the extreme richness and beauty which lies behind string
theory, and the intricacies (and beauty) of vertex operator algebras are its
algebraic counterpart.

12

we note that, if we construct vertex operators only with x, we have
multiplicative operators of the kind eikx, which are the fourier basis of the
algebra of position operators, which can be therefore seen as a subalgebra
of the vertex operator algebrak. the spaces of the zero modes x or x can
be recovered using the dirac operators as follows [4]. we rst dene the
hilbert space obtained from the hilbert space (4.23) simply eliminating the
oscillators fock spaces:

(4.31)
we then dene the subalgebra a0 to be the commutant of the dirac operator
d, restricted to the hilbert space h0,

h0 = ph

a0 = p0 (comm d) p0  {v  a | [d, v ]p0 = 0}

(4.32)

it is the largest subalgebra of a with the property

a0h0 = h0

(4.33)

the essence of t-duality form the noncommutative geometry point of
view is that we could have substituted the role of d in (4.32) with d as
rst suggested in [18]. in fact , together with {a,h, d}, there is a totally
equivalent dual spectral triple {a,h, d}. that is, one can dene an algebra
a dual of a, which commutes with d. this explain the symmetry. another
crucial aspect [3] is that this transformation is a gauge transformation of the
theory.

as we said the gauge group of a spectral triple is given by the unitary
elements of the algebra. the unitary element of a vertex operator algebra
form a very complicated group, which is the gauge group of the string. under
a the gauge transformation the dirac operator transforms as d  u1du.
the point is that there are several unitary elements of the algebra [4] such
that

d = d  u1du

(4.34)
this shows that d and d have the same spectrum. the gauge transforma-
tion (4.34) only relabels the eigenvalues of the operators, calling momentum
eigenvalues the ones which were winding eigenvalues and viceversa for exam-
ple.

to conclude we note that, although the construction described here refers
to the bosonic string, generalizations to other strings based on the toroidal
compactication, such as the heterotic string, are possible [24].

5 spectral action and low energy theories

we want to discuss some low energy limit in string theory, and therefore we
have to specify better what we mean. in this section we will briey introduce

kwe stress again that here by vertex operator algebra we need the algebra opportunely

regularized and completed.

13

the chamseddineconnes spectral action principle [25], and will argue that
low energy means considering a theory in which only the low part of the
spectrum of d is considered. this is possible because in the framework of
noncommutative geometry one constructs a spectral geometry, in which the
information is stored in the spectrum of d. and low energy refers to an
action in which only the lower part of the spectrum is excited.

the spectral action principle is based on the covariant dirac operator,
and on the variation of its eigenvalues. the action must be read in a wilson
renormalization scheme sense, and it depends on an ultraviolet cuto m0:

sm0 = tr (cid:18)d2
0(cid:19)

a
m2

(5.35)

where da is the covariant derivative dened in (3.19) and (x) is a func-
tion which is 1 for x  1 and then goes rapidly to zero (some smoothened
characteristic function). the action (5.35) eectively counts the eigenvalues
of the covariant dirac operator up to the cuto. considering, in fact, the
eigenvalues of da as sequences of numbers, and these sequences as dynamical
variables of euclidean gravity, the spectral action is then the action of gen-
eral relativity in this space [26]. the trace in the action can be calculated
using known heath kernel techniques [25, 27], and the resulting theory con-
tains a cosmological constant, the einsteinhilbert and yangmills actions,
plus some terms quadratic in the riemann tensor. chamseddine [28] has
used the dirac operators (4.29) in the spectral action principle and shown
that they lead to the low energy eective string action.

here we are not to be concerned with the details of (5.35), nor with
its results for the description of gravity and the standard model. what we
wish to stress is that such an action comes from a spectral principle, that
is, the starting point is the spectrum of an operator, and its variations as
the backgrounds elds (the oneform a in this case) change. one can ask,
in fact, what is the role of the algebra in the spectral action, as the latter
depends just on the trace of the dirac operator. of course the role of the
algebra is in the fact that in (5.35) appears the covariant dirac operator.

apply these considerations to the frohlich-gawedzki spectral triple.

and the form a = p ai[d, bi] depends on the algebra chosen. let us now
the spectrum of d and d, or of any operator obtained from them with an
o(d, d, z) unitary transformations are the same. let us call d for convenience
the one for which the lower eigenvalues are the one relative to momentum.
here by lower we mean the ones which are lower than the energy of the
oscillatory modes (of the order of the planck mass mp). if the cuto m0 is
lower than mp, the cuto function  causes the projection of the operator
on the hilbert space h dened in (4.31). elements of the algebra which
commutes with d (such as the elements of a) will not contribute to the
variations of the action, and will therefore be unobservable. this algebra
can be constructed as the commutant of the t-dual operator d. this means
that the winding modes degrees of freedom are unobservable. since the dirac
operator has a near continuous spectrum, the tachyonic, low energy, algebra

14

is spanned by operators of the kind

vp = eipq

,

(5.36)

can be considered the fourier modes describing an uncompactied space.

in fact, in the spirit of section 3 of this paper, a quantum observer with
a spectral action, will have, as potentials at his disposal, only the elements
of the algebra which give low energy perturbations of the lowest eigenvalues
of d, always with the assumption of the cuto m0 < mp so that oscillatory
modes do not play a role. this is the abelian algebra of functions on some
space time. if, as we have seen, there are many low eigenvalues, the observer
will experience an eectively decompactied space time. the algebra which
he will measure will be composed of the operators which will create low energy
perturbation to d. at this point we have to make the sole assumption that
d has a spectrum with several small eigenvalues. in this way the quantum
observer will experience a (nearly) continuous spectrum of the momentum,
the sign of an uncompactied space.

the strings could still be seen as compactied on a small lattice, but the
presence of a very large torsion term b has drastically changed the operator
content of the theory, and this has rendered space eectively uncompactied.

6 conclusions

the usual geometric notions of points, distances etc. are basically classical.
they will need to be redened a quantum observer, dealing with states on
an operator algebra. the claim of this paper is that the torsion term makes
the observable radius of the target space a non invariant concept, since, with
a gauge transformation, it is possible to render it arbitrarily large (under
the fairly mild assumption that there are many low energy eigenvalues of
the hamiltonian). a quantum observer will measure in fact the fourier
transform of a near continuous spectrum, that is a uncompactied space. we
have argued this with the simplest possible example of bosonic theory. the
framework in which we investigated this has been noncommutative geometry,
and in particular the spectral action principle.

the presence of open strings, and in particular of d-branes will probably
in fact a theory of d-branes has a matrix
enrich this picture even more.
action in the large mass limit, and in turn this theory can be compactied on
a noncommutative torus [29], a genuine noncommutative space [30] generated
by d unitary generators with the relation

uiuj = eiij ujui

.

(6.37)

the noncommutative torus is also instrumental in the construction of the
t-dual action in [21]. dierent theories of branes related by o(d, d, z) trans-
formation give rise to morita equivalent noncommutative tori [31, 32].

15

needless to say, there are several unanswered questions. for example, in
the formalism, there is no reason at present for which there are four uncom-
pactied dimensions. or rather, in the spirit of this paper, why the eigenval-
ues of the dirac operator are such that only for four dimension the spectrum
is nearly continuous. the formalism we have used is euclidean, therefore
question such has the expansion of the universe cannot even asked. more-
over we passed dangerously close to several fundamental aspects of quantum
mechanics. we attempted on purpose to stay away from issues such as the
semiclassical limit and the quantum theory of measurement. those issues
are of course of paramount importance, but we decided not to concentrate
on them, giving priority to more concrete aspects of string theory. it is our
strong feeling that the tools noncommutative geometry are the right ones to
enable the description of a stringy geometry. in this paper we have seen just
an example, others still wait to be investigated.

acknowledgements.
the material leading to section 3 is the result of various discussions with
a.p. balachandran, g. landi, g. marmo, a. simoni, p. teotonio-sobrinho,
and various other colleagues. i would also like to thank r.j. szabo for many
discussions on the noncommutative geometry of strings and g. landi for
suggestions on a preliminary version of the manuscript.

references

[1] k. kikkawa and m. yamasaki, casimir eects in superstring theories,

phys. lett. 149b (1997) ;
n. sakai and i. senda, vacuum energies of string compactied on
torus , progr. theor. phys. 75 (1986) 692;
v.p. nair, a. shapere, a. strominger and f. wilczek, compactication
of the twisted heterotic string, nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 414.

[2] r. brandenberger and c. vafa, superstrings in the early universe, nucl.

phys. b316 (1989) 391.

[3] f. lizzi and r.j. szabo, target space duality in noncommutative geo-

metry, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 3581. (hep-th/9706107).

[4] f. lizzi and r.j. szabo, duality symmetries and noncommutative geo-
metry of string spacetimes, comm. math. phys. 197 (1998) 667-712,
(hep-th/9707202)

[5] m. douglas and c. hull, d-branes and the noncommutative torus,

jhep 02 (1998) 008.

[6] a. giveon, m. porrati and e. rabinovici, target space duality in string

theory, phys. rep. 244 (1994) 77 (hep-th/9401139).

16

[7] k.s. narain, new heterotic string theories in uncompactied dimen-

sions < 10, phys. lett. 169b (1986) 41;
k.s. narain, m.h. sarmadi and e. witten, a note on toroidal com-
pactication of heterotic string theory, nucl. phys. b279 (1987) 369.

[8] a.p. balachandran, bringing up a quantum baby, (quant-ph/9702055).

[9] r. haag, local quantum physics, springer 1996.

[10] a. connes, noncommutative geometry (academic press, 1994).

[11] g. landi, an introduction to noncommutative spaces and their ge-
ometries, springer lecture notes in physics 51, springer verlag (berlin
heidelberg) 1997.

[12] j. madore, an introduction to noncommutative geometry and its phys-

ical applications, lms lecture notes 206 (1995).

[13] j.c. varilly an introduction to noncommutative geometry, lectures

delivered at the lisbon summer school, 1997, (physics/9709045);
h. figueroa, j.m. gracia-bonda and j.c. varilly, elements of noncom-
mutative geometry, birkhauser, boston, to appear in late 1999.

[14] a. bohm and m. gadella, dirac kets, gamow vectros and gelfand

triplets, lecture notes in physics 348, springer verlag, 1989.
a. bohm, h-d. doebner and p. kielanowski (eds.) irreversibility
and causality, smigroups and rigged hilbert spaces. lecture notes in
physics 504. springer verlag, 1998.

[15] j.m.g. fell and r.s. doran, representations of -algebras, locally
compact groups and banach -algebraic bundles (academic press,
1988).

[16] s. doplicher, k. fredenhagen and j.e. roberts, spacetime quantization
induced by classical gravity, phys. lett. b331b (1994) 39; the quan-
tum structure of spacetime at the planck scale and quantum fields,
commun. math. phys. 172 (1995) 187;
a. kempf and g. mangano, minimal length uncertainty relation
and ultraviolet regularization, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 7909(hep-
th/9612084);
g. mangano, path integral approach to noncommutative spacetimes, j.
math. phys. 39 (1998) 2584 (gr-qc/9705040).

[17] m.a. rieel, induced representations of c-algebras, bull. amer. math.
soc. 78 (1972) 606609; adv. math. 13 (1974) 176257; morita equiv-
alence for operator algebras, in: operator algebras and applications,
proc. symp. pure math. 38, r.v. kadison ed. (american mathematical
society, 1982) 285298.

[18] j. frohlich and k. gawedzki, conformal field theory and geometry of

strings, crm proc. lecture notes 7 (1994) 57, (hep-th/9310187).

17

[19] j. frohlich, o. grandjean and a. recknagel, supersymmetric quan-
tum theory, noncommutative geometry and gravitation, in: quantum
symmetries, proc. lxiv les houches session, eds. a. connes and k.
gawedzki, to appear, (hep-th/9706132).

[20] f. lizzi and r.j. szabo, noncommutative geometry and spacetime
gauge symmetries of string theory, hep-th/9712206, to appear in
chaos, solitons and fractals.

[21] g. landi, f. lizzi and r.j. szabo, string geometry and the noncom-

mutative torus, (hep-th/9806099).

[22] i.b. frenkel, j. lepowsky and a. meurman, vertex operator algebras
and the monster, pure appl. math. 134 (academic press, new york,
1988);
r.w. gebert, introduction to vertex algebras, borcherds algebras and
the monster lie algebra, int. j. mod. phys. a8 (1993) 5441;
v. kac vertex algebras for beginners, ams university lecture series,
vol. 10 (1997).

[23] f. constantinescu and g. scharf, smeared and unsmeared chiral vertex

operators, hep-th/9712174.

[24] d. song and r.j. szabo, spectral geometry of heterotic compactica-

tion, (hep-th/9812235).

[25] a.h. chamseddine and a. connes, universal formula for noncommuta-
tive geometry actions: unication of gravity and the standard model,
phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 4868; the spectral action principle, com-
mun. math. phys. 186 (1997) 731, (hep-th/9606001).

[26] g. landi and c. rovelli, gravity from dirac eigenvalues, mod. phys.
lett. a13 (1998) 479 (gr-qc/9708041); general relativity in terms of
dirac eigenvalues, phys. rev. lett. 78 (1997) 3051, (gr-qc/9612034).

[27] b. iochum, d. kastler and t. schucker, on the universal chamseddine-
connes action i. details of the action computation, j. math. phys. 38
(1997) 4929, (hep-th/9607015).

[28] a.h. chamseddine, the spectral action principle in noncommuta-
tive geometry and the superstring, phys. lett. 400b (1997) 87 (hep-
th/9701096); an eective superstring spectral action, phys. rev. d56
(1997) 3555, (hep-th/9705153).

[29] a. connes, m.r. douglas and a. schwarz, noncommutative geometry

and matrix theory: compactication on tori, jhep 02 (1998) 003.

[30] m.a. rieel, c-algebras associated with irrational rotations, pac. j.

math. 93 (1981) 415.

18

[31] m.a. rieel and a. schwarz, morita equivalence of multidimensional
noncommutative tori, math.qa/9803057, to appear in int. j. of math.

[32] a. schwarz, morita equivalence and duality, nucl. phys. b534 (1998)

720, (hep-th/9805034).

19

