9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
0
3

 
 

1
v
5
5
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

effects of diracs negative energy

sea on quantum numbers

r. jackiw

center for theoretical physics
laboratory for nuclear science

and department of physics

massachusetts institute of technology

cambridge, massachusetts 02139 u.s.a.

dirac prize lecture

trieste, italy  march 1999

the dirac prize committee cited my work on fractional charges and on chiral
anomalies; therefore, i shall discuss these two topics. as with all true and deep
physical eects, there are many ways of arriving at the results. it is particularly ap-
propriate here today that one route towards understanding both fractional charges
and chiral anomalies delves into diracs negative energy sea. this is especially
provocative, because usually we think of diracs negative energy sea as an unphys-
ical construct, invented to render quantum eld theory physically acceptable by
hiding  that is, by renormalizing  negative energy solutions. but i am suggesting
that in fact physical consequences can be drawn from diracs construction.

first let me set the stage for the discussion.
quantum physics has taught us that a physical observable need not be a quan-
tity with arbitrary magnitude. because it is the eigenvalue of a linear hermitian
operator, it will in general be quantized. this is not the case in classical physics
where most observables, like angular momentum and energy, are continuously vary-
ing and can take on any value. on the other hand, even in classical physics, there
are concepts that are intrinsically integral  for example particle number of con-
served particles  and one expects that the integrality will be preserved in the
quantum theory, that is, eigenvalues of the relevant operator  the number oper-
ator in our example  are expected to be integers. quantization of eigenvalues is
most easily attained when the operator is a generator of a compact, non-abelian
group, like angular momentum generating so(3) rotations. however, the number
operator frequently generates only abelian transformations with no group-theoretic
quantization.

closer examination of the number operator in a theory with second quantized
fermions raises doubts that it will in fact possess only integer eigenvalues. the
problem derives from diracs negative energy sea, which must be lled to dene
the vacuum. this involves an innite number of particles. since the number
of any further particles must be measured relative to this innity, there may very
well emerge a non-integral answer. nevertheless, it had been believed that various
renormalization procedures, like normal ordering, can unambiguously ensure inte-
grality of the eigenvalue. therefore, it was a suprise when rebbi and i established
about twenty years ago that fermions moving in the eld of a topologically non-
trivial soliton (kink in one spatial dimension, vortex in two, monopole in three)
possess non-integer eigenvalues for their number operator.1 it is perhaps even more
surprising that this peculiar eect has a physical realization in properties of actual
condensed matter systems  polyacetylene being the standard example.2 here, i
shall describe this to you, rst in a general, formal way, and then in a physically
intuitive language appropriate to polyacetylene.

we wish to second quantize fermions moving in a static background that gener-
ically is described by . fermion dynamics is governed by a dirac hamiltonian
h(). two dierent backgrounds are envisioned: one is appropriate for the vac-

1

eects of diracs negative energy sea on quantum numbers

uum sector of the theory v, the other for the soliton s. for example,  may
be a condensate eld that takes a homogenous value in the vacuum sector and a
topologically nontrivial prole in the soliton sector.

second quantization proceeds by computing the energy eigenvalues and eigen-
functions of h(), which possesses both positive and negative energy eigenstates,
and lling the negative energy sea. the number density of the soliton ground
state is given by

(x) = pz 0



de (cid:0)|e(x)|2  |e(x)|2(cid:1)

(1)

where the integration, which also includes summutation over discrete levels, extends
over all negative energy states, since they are lled in the vacuum. here e is the
energy eigenfunction in the presence of the soliton and e is the eigenfunction in
the vacuum sector:

h(s)e = ee, h(v)e = ee .

(2)

in (1) the contribution from the vacuum sector is subtracted; the soliton charge
density is renormalized, so that it is measured relative to the vacuum. the fermion
number of the soliton ground state is the spatial integral of 

nf = z dx (x) .

(3)

a very beautiful aspect of the theory is that one can evaluate (1) and (3) by gen-
eral methods, which bypass solving the eigenvalue problem (2) explicitly. rather,
one uses spectral sum rules whose form is dictated by general features of the hamil-
tonian, in particular by the topological properties of the background  and of the
space {x}. while these methods are powerful, they are also technical, requiring
much mathematical knowledge, so i shall not present them here. however, when
the hamiltonian posseses one further property, which i shall now describe, the sum
rules become trivial, and the result for nf is immediate.

we assume further that h() possesses a conjugation symmetry, taking posi-
tive energy states into negative energy states and vice versa; that is, we assume
there exists an operator c that anticommutes with h(): c1hc = h. one
consequence of this is that the number density at e is an even function of e:
|e|2 = |e|2,
|e|2 = |e|2. a less obvious consequence is that in the soli-
ton sector, there are always normalizable, discrete zero-energy modes

h(s)u0 = 0,

z dx |u0(x)|2 = 1 .

(4)

this fact may be seen by explicit solution of the eigenvalue problem, but it also
follows from a general mathematical argument, called index theory, which ensures
that the dirac operator has normalizable zero-energy modes in the presence of a
topologically nontrivial background.

2

eects of diracs negative energy sea on quantum numbers

we are now in a position to evaluate (1) and (3). first, we use completeness of

the eigenfunctions in the soliton and vacuum sectors

pz 0

de |e(x)|2 +pz 



de |e(x)|2 + |u0(x)|2 pz 

0+



de |e(x)|2 = 0 .

(5)

the zero-energy mode in the soliton sector has been explicitly separated; we assume
there is just one. (in the vacuum sector there are none.) then, use of the conju-
gation symmetry allows equating the positive energy integrals with the negative
energy ones, and converts (5) into an evaluation of (1)

pz 0



de (cid:0)|e(x)|2  |e(x)|2(cid:1) =  1

2 |u0(x)|2 .

(6)

the spatial integration that determines nf is trivial since the zero mode is normal-
ized:

nf =  1

2 .

(7)

the conclusion is that the soliton vacuum, dened with the zero mode empty, carries
fermion number  1
2 ; of course, when the zero mode is lled, this fermion number is
+ 1
2 for two states degenerate in energy is
the only possible one consistent with a conjugation-odd fermion number operator.
two comments should be made in connection with this very elementary deriva-

2 ! the fermion number assignment of  1

tion of our surprising result.

(i) the above evaluation concerns the expected value of the second-quantized, eld
theoretic number operator, nf . however, one can show, by expanding the
second quantized eld in terms of creation and annihilation operators in the
presence of the soliton, that in fact the eigenvalues are  1
2 .

(ii) we have viewed the soliton as an external eld.

in a complete description,
one must take the solitons quantum dynamics into account. necessarily there
will occur spontaneous symmetry breaking in the vacuum sector. calculations
in the full theory can be carried out by monte-carlo methods, or by analytic
techniques of the born-oppenheimer variety.

the three ingredients necessary for fermion number fractionization  sponta-
neous symmetry breaking, solitons and fermions  come together in a description of
a physical system, polyacetylene. this is a one-dimensional array of carbon atoms
that can form one of two degenerate ground states. the degeneracy arises from a
spontaneous breaking of the right-left symmetry (peierls instability) and manifests
itself in an alteration of the bonding pattern, as illustrated in fig. 1.

a microscopic hamiltonian for the system has been proposed by su, schrieer
and heeger (ssh).2 in the continuum and innite volume limit, electron transport
is governed by a dirac-type hamiltonian in one spatial dimension:

h() = 3 p + 1(x),

p =

1
i

3 = (cid:16) 1

0 1(cid:17),

0

1 = (cid:16) 0

1

d
dx
1

0(cid:17) .

(8)

3

eects of diracs negative energy sea on quantum numbers

fig. 1: polyacetylene consists of a linear chain of carbon atoms (dots). the
equally spaced conguration (o) possesses a left-right symmetry, which how-
ever is energetically unstable. rather in the ground states the carbon atoms
shift a distance  to the left or right, breaking the symmetry and producing
two degenerate ground states (a,b). (the drawing is not to scale; the shift
is only a few percent of the total bond length.) a soliton (s) is a defect in
the alteration patters; it provides a domain wall between congurations (a)
and (b).

here, (x) is the phonon eld; it measures the displacement of the carbon atom from
its equalibrium position. the matrix structure of the above hamiltonian does not
arise from spin. in the ssh description, electron-electron interactions are ignored
and spin is a passive label; the hamiltonian in (8) describes separately spin up and
spin down electrons. rather, the dirac-like matrix form for h arises through a lin-
earized approximation and the two-component wavefunctions that are eigenmodes
of h refer to the right-moving and left-moving electrons with momentum |p|. the
lled negative energy states are the valence electrons, while the conduction electrons
populate the positive energy states.

in the ssh model, (x) is determined self-consistently by the phonons dy-
namics, and in the lowest (vacuum) states (x) takes the uniform values , as
illustrated in fig. 1. the corresponding spectrum of (8) exhibits a gap.

in addition to the two ground states, where the phonon eld takes a constant
value, there exist stable excited states where (x) assumes a kink shape, which
interpolates as x passes from  to +, between the vacuum congurations 
and +. this is the soliton, and it describes a defect in the alteration pattern, as
is also exhibited in fig. 1.

the hamiltonian in (8) admits a conjugation symmetry: c = 2 = (cid:0) 0

anticommutes with h  this is ordinary charge conjugation invariance in the absence
of coulomb interactions. the zero eigenvalue problem is easily solved with a kink
background: there is one normalizable zero-energy solution. thus, our general
analysis predicts that fermion number, here coinciding with charge, fractionizes to
 1

2 in the one-soliton state.

i

i

0 (cid:1)

4

eects of diracs negative energy sea on quantum numbers

this result may also be seen pictorially. when two solitons are inserted into the
ground state (b), the bonding pattern is depicted in fig. 2. note that the number
of bonds in the two-soliton state is one fewer than in the ground state. if the two
solitons are now separated far apart, so that they act independently, the quantum
numbers of the missing bond must be shared between the two states, and that is
how the fraction 1

2 arises.

fig. 2: with two solitons (ss) inserted in vacuum (b), the number of bonds
 electrons between the sites of the defects decreases from ve to four.

of course, for actual physical samples, where both the volume and the separation
between defects are nite, the non-integer fermion number is only an expectation
value for the operator nf , and there are corrections that vanish in the innite
limit. the important point is that the variance h n 2
f i  h nf i2 also vanishes in the
limit. this is to be contrasted to the uninteresting situation of, say, an electron
circulating about two nuclei. when the nuclei are far apart, the expected value
for electron number near each nucleus is 1
2 , plus small corrections. however, the
variance remains 1
4 for innite separation, which shows that this fraction never
becomes an eigenvalue.

the concept of fractional quantum numbers has now extended beyond soliton
systems  for example the theory of the quantum hall eect makes use of the idea,
even though dynamical details are quite dierent from the above example.

while fractional quantum numbers were rst seen in relativistic eld theory,
thus far they have not played any experimentally veried role in particle physics.
nevertheless, it is curious that an eect which in principle is physical, and has been
observed in condensed matter systems, should arise from distortions in the negative
energy sea, which for particle physicists is an unphysical construct, in contrast to the
condensed matter application, where negative energy states correspond to physical
quantities  the valence electrons.

in particle physics there is another, physically realized circumstance where the
dirac negative energy sea modies symmetry behavior of fermions. this is the
chiral anomaly phenomenon whereby the axial vector currect i   5, which is
conserved for free massless dirac fermions, ceases to be conserved when the mass-
less fermions are quantized and made to interact with a gauge eld, even though the
interaction appears to be chirally invariant.3 indeed, for unquantized dirac elds

5

eects of diracs negative energy sea on quantum numbers

the chiral invariance ensures conservation of the unquantized axial vector current.
this disappearance after quantization of chiral symmetry is usually associated with
innities that plague relativistic quantum eld theory: the innities must be reg-
ulated and renormalized, but there is no chirally invariant regulator procedure.
however, a more directly physical discussion of the anomaly phenomenom may be
given, which shows that in fact it is the lling of the negative energy sea that breaks
the chiral symmetry.

let me rst state the essential puzzle of the chiral anomaly. in spite of profound
dierences between the classical and quantal description of physical phenomena, it
was generally believed that symmetry properties and conserved constants of mo-
tion transcend the classical/quantal dichotomy: when a classical model possesses
symmetries and supports constants of motion, one expects that quantization pre-
serves the symmetries, so that conserved quantities  now propmoted to quantum
operators  remain time-independent, that is, they commute with the hamiltonian
operator. but as observed thirty years ago by bell and me,3 and also independently
by adler,3 this need not be so.

a simple instance of quantum mechanical violation of symmetry is encountered
by considering a massless dirac fermion moving in a background gauge eld a.
the dynamics is governed by a lagrangian, which splits into separate right and left
parts  this separation is a manifestation of chiral symmetry:

l = (i 6   e 6a)

= +(i 6   e 6a)+ + (i 6   e 6a)

 = + + ,  = 1

2 (1  i5) .

(10)

 are time-independent.

in the rst-quantized theory, where  is a wavefunction and   is a probabil-
ity current, the separate right and left currents are conserved, and the separate
probabilities r dx 
in the second quantized theory,
where  becomes an operator, the anomaly phenomenon renders the separate right
and left currents no longer conserved, and the right and left charges are not time-
independent. nevertheless, the sum of right and left currents  the vector current
 is conserved, while the divergence of the dierence between the right and left
currents  the axial vector current  is nonzero owing to the anomaly. our task
then is to understand what causes the separate nonconservation of left and right
currents even though there is no coupling between the two apparent in (10).

evidently, the problem derives from the second quantization procedure, hence
we implement it. we set a0 to zero, nd the eigenmodes of the hamiltonian in
the background eld a, and dene the second quantized vacuum by lling the
negative energy modes, leaving the positive energy modes empty. the background
a is chosen in a specic functional form so that the anomaly is nonvanishing. this
requires a be time-dependent, but we chose a potential constant in time and space
and model the time variation by an adiabatic change a  a + a.

the simplest model to study is two-dimensional and abelian  two-dimensional
massles quantum electrodynamics.4 the dirac matrices are 2  2 and  is a two-

6

eects of diracs negative energy sea on quantum numbers

component spinor.

 0 = 1,

 1 = i2,

5 = i 0 1 = i3

+ = (cid:16) 1 0

0 0(cid:17),  = (cid:16) 0 0

0 1(cid:17) .

(11)

the axial current possess an anomalous divergence proportional to  f  ta
(since a0 = 0 and a has the single spatial component a1  a),5 which we wish
to understand. the eigenmodes to be second quantized satisfy a one-dimensional
dirac equation,

he = (p  ea)e = ee,  = 3

where a is constant. they are given by

+ = (cid:16) eipx
 = (cid:16) 0

0 (cid:17) with e = p + ea
eipx (cid:17) with e = p  ea

.

(12)

(13)

second quantization is performed by lling the negative energy sea. for a = 0,
the energy-momentum dispersion is depicted in fig. 3, where the right-hand branch
corresponds to fermions of one chirality, and the left-hand branch to those of the
other chirality. the negative energy states are lled, as indicated by the lled
circles; the positive energy states are empty, as indicated by the empty circles. as
a increases from 0 to a, empty states in the right-hand branch acquire negative
energy, while lled states of the left-hand branch become positive energy states; that
is, there is a net production of right-handed antiparticles and left-handed particles;
see fig. 4. so the separate right and left charges are not conserved, but their sum
is. put in another way, the separation between positive and negative energy states
of denite chirality cannot be achieved gauge-invariantly, since changing a from 0
to a constant a is a gauge transformation, yet particles are produced.

fig. 3: energy-momentum disper-
sion at a = 0. empty circles are
empty states; lled circles are lled
states.

fig. 4: energy-momentum dispersion
at a = a > 0. the energy shift
produces negative energy empty states
and positive energy lled states.

7

eects of diracs negative energy sea on quantum numbers

we thus see that the negative energy sea is responsible for nonconservation of
chirality even though the dynamics is chirally invariant. this eect was called
anomalous because its discovery was a surprise.3 however, a better name might be
quantum mechanical symmetry breaking  a symmetry-breaking mechanism, which
like heisenbergs spontaneous symmetry breaking attributes physical asymmetry to
the vacuum state and not to the dynamics. here, however, unlike in heisenbergs
case, it is not vacuum degeneracy but the very denition of the vacuum that is
responsible. once again we must assign physical reality to diracs negative energy
sea, because it produces the chiral anomaly, whose eects are experimentally ob-
served, principally in the decay of the neutral pion to two photons, but there are
other physical consequences as well.6

the two phenomena that i have described show that nature seems to know and
make use of what at rst appears to be a defect of a quantum eld theory, and
which is usually renormalized away. remarkably, the innities in the formalism
give rise to nite and physical eects. one may quite appropriately call this an
example of the unreasonable eectiveness of quantum field theory in physics.
in my presentation of fractional charge and of the chiral anomaly i have used
concepts that are primitively physical, employing little analysis beyond drawing
pictures and counting. but to the same end a most sophisticated mathematical
discussion can also be given, wherein zero modes are controlled by various index
theorems (atiyah-singer, callias), fractional charges are related to atiyah, patodi,
singer spectral ows, and chiral anomalies are identied with chern-pontryagin
densities. this conuence between physics and mathematics, which was brought
about by physicists research on the topics that i described, seeded an interaction
between these two disciplines, which still ourishes and today fuels the current
string/m-theory program.

but in sharp contrast with the above, contemporary mathematical discussions
within physics do not as yet have experimentally observed correlatives. these days
research follows very closely diracs dictum:

the most powerful method of advance [in physics] . . . is to employ all the
resources of pure mathematics in attempts to perfect and generalize the
mathematical formalism that forms the existing basis of theoretical physics,
and . . . to try to interpret the new mathematical features in terms of physical
entities.
 p.a.m. dirac

early in my career i heard him say this at a seminar devoted to his research history,
and i was very inspired. however, my subsequent work with physics and mathe-
matics makes me feel that diracs suggestion is too radical, while a quote by yang
more accurately describes my own experience of mathematical physics:

physics is not mathematics, just as mathematics is not physics. somehow
nature chooses only a subset of the very beautiful and complex and intricate
mathematics that mathematicians develop, and that precise subset is what
 c.n. yang
the theoretical physicist is trying to look for.

8

eects of diracs negative energy sea on quantum numbers

references

1. r. jackiw and c. rebbi, phys. rev. d 13, 3398 (1976); for a review, see

a. niemi and g. semeno, phys. reports 135, 99 (1986).

2. w.-p. su, j.r. schrieer and a. heeger, phys. rev. lett. 42, 1698 (1979)

and phys. rev. b 22, 2099 (1980).

3. j.s. bell and r. jackiw, nuovo cim. 60, 47 (1969); s. adler, phys. rev.

177, 2426 (1969).

4. j. schwinger, phys. rev. 128, 2425 (1962).

5. k. johnson, phys. lett. 5, 253 (1963).

6. for extensive discussion of the anomaly phenomena see s. treiman,
r. jackiw, b. zumino and e. witten, current algebra and anomalies,
(princeton university press/world scientic, princeton, nj/singapore,
1985) or s. adler in lectures on elementary particles and quantum field
theory, s. deser, m. grisaru, and h. pendleton, eds. (mit press, cam-
bridge, ma, 1970).

9

