bonn-th-99-06

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
8
1

 
 

1
v
0
6
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

string dualities in the presence of

anomalous u (1) symmetries

zygmunt lalak 1, stephane lavignac 2 and hans peter nilles

physikalisches institut, universitat bonn

nussallee 12

d-53115 bonn, germany

abstract

anomalous u(1) gauge symmetries in type ii orientifold theories show some
unexpected properties. in contrast to the heterotic case, the masses of the gauge
bosons are in general of order of the string scale even in the absence of large
fayet-iliopoulos terms. despite this fact, the notion of heterotic-type ii orien-
tifold duality remains a useful concept, although this symmetry does not seem
to hold in all cases considered. we analyse the status of this duality symmetry,
clarify the properties of anomalous u(1) gauge symmetry in the orientifold pic-
ture and comment on the consequences for phenomenological applications of such
anomalous gauge symmetries.

1permanent address: institute of theoretical physics, warsaw university, poland.
2permanent address: service de physique theorique, cea-saclay, f-91191 gif-sur-yvette

cedex, france.

1 introduction

since its appearance in 4-dimensional (d = 4) heterotic string theories, anomalous
u(1) gauge symmetries have recieved considerable attention and have been exten-
sively used in model building. one of the intriguing consequences of the presence
of an anomalous u(1) in the heterotic theory is the dynamical appearance of a
fayet-iliopoulos term  in one-loop perturbation theory. this induces nontrivial
vacuum expectations values of charged scalar elds that break the u(1) and (po-
tentially) other gauge symmetries spontaneously. this breakdown in connection
with the green-schwarz mechanism [1] renders the gauge boson massive. in gen-
eral the size of this mass and of  is set by the string scale, possibly suppressed
by a constant factor   102  101 that might have interesting consequences
for model building. all in all the consequences of an anomalous u(1) symmetry
in the framework of the perturbative heterotic string are well understood.

the purpose of the present paper is to achieve a similar understanding of
that situation in the framework of open string theories: the properties of anoma-
lous u(1) symmetries in type i and type ii orientifolds. here, in contrast to
the situation in the perturbative heterotic theory, we might have to deal with
several anomalous u(1) gauge symmetries [2] and a generalized green-schwarz
mechanism [3, 4]. originally it was assumed that each of these symmetries comes
with a one-loop fayet-iliopoulos term i and that the green-schwarz mecha-
nism involves all the axions from the d = 10 antisymmetric tensor multiplets,
including the model independent axion from the dilaton supermultiplet. with
this multitude of anomalous u(1)s one expected gauge boson masses and fayet-
iliopoulos terms i of various sizes, including the possibility of anomalous gauge
boson masses that are small compared to the string scale and might even tend to
zero. in this paper we want to show that these expectations are not justied and
try to clarify the situation. to do that, we rely on two new results concerning
the mechanism of anomaly cancellation [5] and the generation of fayet-iliopoulos
terms [6].

we shall argue that in the orientifold picture, the values of the is are moduli
that can take arbitrary values, but that the mass of the anomalous gauge bosons
nonetheless is large and independent of the is. thus the gauge boson masses are
of the size of the string scale even if some or all of the is vanish. in that sense
the role of the s here is similar to those in a nonanomalous gauge symmetry
where it can usually be adjusted to any desired value. this is in contrast to
the heterotic theory, where we know that a nonvanishing value of  is induced.
of course, one should be aware of the fact, that there might be nonperturbative
contributions to the s in the orientifold picture. we shall come back to this
question later in the paper.

although the situation is so dierent in the heterotic and open string theories,
there is the notion of heterotic-type i duality [7], that was assumed to hold in the
orientifold picture as well [8, 9]. in the present paper we investigate this duality
in view of the results [5, 6] mentioned earlier. at the moment we are not able
to give a general answer, but we have to examine the situation on a model by

1

model basis. in some of the cases this duality seems to hold exactly, although the
role played by the dilaton is dierent in heterotic and type i theories. duality,
where it holds, leads to interesting results: a blown up orbifold on the heterotic
side can be dual to a type ii model in the exact orientifold limit (not blown up).
we also conrm the fact that anomalous gauge boson masses appear through
the green-schwarz mechanism even in the presence of vanishing s, which are
connected to the blowing up modes in the orientifold case.

but this duality symmetry should be taken with a grain of salt.

in some
of the cases (e.g. z7 and z3  z3 orientifold) problems appear at the level of
maximally unbroken gauge group or massless spectrum3. at the moment we do
not know how to interpret these discrepancies. it could be used as an argument
against the validity of duality, but it could as well be that we are missing some
nonperturbative mechanism that would restore it. such a mechanism could be
a nonperturbative induction of fayet-iliopoulos terms in type i theories. this
could lead to a further breakdown of gauge groups and a picture consistent with
duality, but at the moment this remains an open question.

the paper will be structured as follows. in the next chapter we shall explain
in detail properties of models with anomalous u(1) gauge theories. chapter
3 will then give a discussion of the masses of anomalous gauge bosons. the
question of heterotic-type i duality will be analyzed in four examples in chapter
4. the consequences for phenomenological application of anomalous u(1) gauge
symmetries will then be summarized in chapter 5.

2 the use of anomalous u (1)s

in eld theoretic models we were taught to discard anomalous gauge symmetries
in order to avoid inconsistencies. this was even true for the condition on the trace

of the chargespi qi = 0 of a u(1) gauge symmetry because of mixed gauge and

gravitational anomalies [10]. moreover a nonvanishing trace of the u(1) charges
would reintroduce quadratic divergencies in supersymmetric theories through a
one-loop fayet-iliopoulos term [11]. in string theory we then learned that one can
tolerate anomalous u(1) gauge symmetries due to the appearance of the green-
schwarz mechanism [1] that provides a mass for the anomalous gauge boson. in
fact, anomalous u(1) gauge symmetries are common in string theories and could
be useful for various reasons. before we discuss these applications in detail, let
us rst discuss the appearance of the anomalous symmetries in various string
models.

3 if we assume of sucient breakdown of gauge groups, as was done in previous investigations
of duality [9, 22, 23], these problems disappear, in the sense that states that are inconsistent
with duality are rendered heavy by the breakdown of gauge symmetries.

2

2.1 u (1)a in heterotic string theory

in this case one obtains models with at most one anomalous u(1), and the
green-schwarz mechanism involves the so-called model independent axion (the
pseudoscalar of the dilaton supereld s). the number of potentially anomalous
gauge bosons is in general limited by the number of antisymmetric tensor elds in
the ten-dimensional (d = 10) string theory. this explains the appearance of only
one such gauge boson in the perturbative heterotic string theory and leads to
specic correlations between the various (mixed) anomalies [12]. this universal
anomaly structure is tied to the coupling of the dilaton multiplet to the various
gauge bosons.

the appearance of a nonvanishing trace of the u(1) charges leads to the gen-
eration of a fayet-ilopoulos term 2 at one loop. in the low energy eective eld
theory this would be quadratically divergent, but in string theory this divergence
is cut o through the inherent regularization due to modular invariance. one
obtains [13, 14]

2 

1

(s + s)

m 2

planck  m 2

string

(1)

where (s + s)  1/g2 with the string coupling constant g. the fayet-iliopoulos
term of order of the string scale mstring is thus generated in perturbation theory.
this could in principle lead to a breakdown of supersymmetry, but in all known
cases there exists a supersymmetric minimum in which charged scalar elds re-
ceive nonvanishing vacuum expectation values (vevs), that break u(1)a (and even
other gauge groups) spontaneously. this then leads to a mixing of the goldstone
boson (as a member of a matter supermultiplet) of this spontaneous breakdown
and the model-independent axion (as a member of the dilaton multiplet) of the
green-schwarz mechnism. one of the linear combinations will provide a mass
to the anomalous gauge boson. the other combination will obtain a mass via
nonperturbative eects that might even be related to an axion-solution of the
strong cp-problem [15].

as we can see from (1), both the mass of the u(1)a gauge boson and the value
of the fayet-iliopoulos term  are of the order of the string scale. nonetheless,
models with an anomalous u(1) have been considered under various circum-
stances and lead to a number of desirable consequences. among those are

(i) the breakdown of some additional nonanomalous gauge groups [16],

(ii) a mechanism to parametrize the fermion mass spectrum in an economical

way [17],

(iii) the possibility to induce a breakdown of supersymmetry [18],

(iv) a satisfactory incorporation of d-term ination [19],

(v) the possibility for an axion solution of the strong cp-problem [15].

3

the nice property of the perturbative heterotic string theory in the presence
of an anomalous u(1) is the fact that both  and the mass of the anomalous
gauge boson are induced dynamically and not just put in by hand. both of them,
though, are of order of the string scale mstring, which might be too high for some
of the applications, notably (iv) and (v). we will now compare this for the case
of

2.2 u (1)a in type i and type ii orientifolds.

these are in general d = 4 string models of both open and closed strings that
are derived from either type i or type ii string theories in d = 10 by appropriate
orbifold or orientifold projections [20]. as a rst surprise it was noticed, that in
these cases more than a single anomalous u(1) symmetry could be obtained [2].
this led to the belief that here we can deal with a new playground of various
sizes of s and gauge boson masses in the phenomenological applications.

the appearance of several anomalous u(1)s is a consequence of the fact that
these models contain various antisymmetric tensor elds in the higher dimen-
sional theory and the presence of a generalized green-schwarz mechanism [3, 4]
involving axion elds in new supermultiplets m. in the type ii orientifolds under
consideration these new axion elds correspond to twisted elds in the ramond-
ramond sector of the theory.

from experience with the heterotic case it was then assumed [9] that for each
anomalous u(1) a fayet-iliopoulos term was induced dynamically. with a mixing
of the superelds m and the dilaton supereld s one hoped for u(1)a gauge boson
masses of various sizes in connection with various sizes of the s.

the picture of duality between heterotic orbifolds and type ii orientifolds as
postulated in [8] seemed to work even in the presence of several anomalous u(1)
gauge bosons assuming the presence of fayet-iliopoulos terms in perturbation
theory and the presence of the generalized green-schwarz mechanism.

meanwhile we became aware of two decisive new results that initiated our
renewed interest in these questions and forces us to reanalyse this situation. the
rst one concerns the inspection of the anomaly cancellation mechanism in var-
ious type ii orientifolds. as was observed by ibanez et al.
[5], in this class of
models there is no mixing between the dilaton multiplet and the m-elds. it is
solely the latter that contribute to the anomaly cancellation. thus the dilaton
that is at the origin of the green-schwarz mechanism in the heterotic theory
does not participate in that mechanism in the dual orientifold picture. the sec-
ond new result concerns the appearance of the fayet-iliopoulos terms. as was
shown by poppitz [6] in a specic model, there were no s generated in one-loop
perturbation theory. the one loop contribution vanishes because of tadpole can-
cellation in the given theory. this result seems to be of more general validity
and could have been anticipated from more general arguments, since in type i
theory a (one-loop) contribution to a fayet-iliopoulos term either vanishes or is
quadratically divergent, and the latter divergence is avoided by the requirement
of tadpole cancellation. of course, there is a possibility to have tree level contri-

4

butions to the s, but they are undetermined, in contrast to the heterotic case
where  is necessarily nonzero because of the one loop contribution. in type ii
theory such a contribution would have to be of nonperturbative origin.

in the heterotic theory the mass of the anomalous gauge boson was propor-
tional to the value of . if a similar result would hold in the orientifold picture,
this would mean that some of the u(1) gauge bosons could become arbitrary
light or even massless, a situation somewhat unexpected from our experience in
quantum eld theory. in any case a careful reevaluation of several questions is
necessary in the light of this new situation. among those are:

 the size of the s,
 the size of the masses of anomalous u(1) gauge bosons
 relation of  and gauge boson mass,
 the fate of heterotic - type iib orientifold duality,

which we will discuss in the remainder of this paper.

3 anomalous gauge boson masses

3.1 d = 4, n = 1 heterotic compactications

let us rst recall some facts about anomalous u(1)s in d = 4, n = 1 compact-
ications of the heterotic string. the gauge group of such vacua often possesses
several abelian factors, one of which may be anomalous. its anomalies are harm-
less, however, since they are compensated for by a four-dimensional version of
the green-schwarz mechanism [1] which ensures the consistency of the underly-
ing d = 10 string theory. a fayet-iliopoulos term 2 is generated in the d = 4
vacuum at the one string loop level, as well as a gauge boson mass at two loops.
a string computation gives [14]

2 =

tr x
1922 m 2

str

(2)

where tr x denotes the trace of the anomalous charge, called x in the following,
over all massless states of the theory.

as shown by dine, seiberg and witten [13], much information about the
anomalous u(1) can be obtained from a four-dimensional supersymmetric for-
mulation of the green-schwarz mechanism. before going through this formula-
tion, let us recall how the green-schwarz mechanism works in ten dimensions.
d = 10, n = 1 supergravity coupled to supersymmetric yang-mills theory has
in general gauge and gravitational anomalies which are generated by hexagon
diagrams with six external gauge bosons and/or gravitons. when the gauge
group is so(32) or e8  e8 , all anomalies can be cancelled by the addition of
counterterms such as b tr f 4 , where b and f are the two-forms corresponding

5

to the antisymmetric tensor bm n from the supergravity multiplet and to the
yang-mills eld strength fm n , respectively (m, n = 0 . . . 9). this term, to-
gether with the coupling m bn p y m
m n p present in the supergravity action (where
y m = tr (af  1
3a3) is the yang-mills chern-simons three-form), generates an
anomalous tree diagram with a b propagator and six external gauge elds. such
diagrams compensate for the hexagon diagrams. it has been shown that the type
i and heterotic string theories automatically contain the counterterms required
for anomaly cancellation.

in d = 4, n = 1 heterotic vacua, abelian anomalies are compensated for by
a remnant of this mechanism. the role of the ten-dimensional bm n is played by
the four-dimensional antisymmetric tensor b coming from the components of
bm n that are tangent to the non-compact dimensions. this eld couples to the
four-dimensional chern-simons form:

b ym


and to the eld strength of the anomalous u(1)x:

 bf 

x .

(3)

(4)

this last coupling is nothing but the four-dimentional remnant of the ten-dimensio-
nal green-schwarz counterterms (it can be obtained, for example, by giving back-
ground expectation values to the eld strengths with compact indices in the term
b tr f 4).

let us now recall the standard supersymmetric formulation of this mechanism
[13]. in four dimensions, an antisymmetric tensor b describes only one degree of
freedom and is related through a duality transformation to a pseudo-scalar eld:
b   a . after a duality transformation, the coupling (3) may be
kinetic function of heterotic compactications is simply the dilaton supermultiplet
(in the weakly coupled regime), this tells us that the axion a has to lie in this
multiplet. indeed, writing s |= =0 = s + i a and developping the gauge kinetic
terms in components, we obtain, omitting the fermionic terms:

rewritten (using the identity dy m = tr f 2) a f ef. since the tree-level gauge

1

lgk =

4 xa z d2 s w aw a + h.c.
a f aef a

s f af a

 +

1
4

= 

1
4

 +

1
2

s dada

(5)

where the index a = (a, i) runs over the factors of the four-dimensional gauge
group, g = a ga i u(1)i (the ga are simple groups, and i = x corresponds to
the anomalous u(1)), and we have omitted the kac-moody levels for simplicity.
in these notations, the string coupling constant is given by hsi = 1
g2 .
becomes a a
kinetic term of the dilaton, k(s, s) =  ln (s + s) , to

the green-schwarz counterterm (4), which after a duality transformation
x , is described in a supersymmetric manner by modifying the

(6)

lk = z d4 ln(cid:0)s + s   vx(cid:1)

6

where the green-schwarz parameter  characterizes the coupling of the anomalous
gauge boson to the axion. gauge invariance then requires that, under a u(1)x
transformation with parameter x :

s  s +

i
2

x

(7)

this results in a shift of the axion eld a  a + 
which through the variation of (5) compensates for the anomaly4

2 x (where x = re x |= =0),

l |1-loop = 

x

322 xa

ca f aef a

(8)

for this mechanism to work, the anomalies of the charge x must satisfy the
relations:

ca = 42

(9)

in heterotic compactications, this is automatically the case. thus all anomalies
(including the mixed gravitational anomaly cg = tr x , which is also compen-
sated for by the axion shift) are proportional to the green-schwarz parameter
 . this property, which ensures that heterotic string vacua contain at most one
anomalous u(1), is a consequence of the universal coupling of the dilaton super-
eld to the gauge elds. we shall for this reason refer to the above anomaly
compensation mechanism as the universal green-schwarz mechanism.

let us now develop the kahler potential (6) in component elds (again omit-

ting fermionic terms):


4 s2 a a

x 

1
4 s2 (s s + a a) +


where, since we are working in the einstein frame, mp l = 1 (here mp l refers to
the reduced planck mass, mp l = 2.41018gev ). the supersymmetrization of the
green-schwarz counterterm has introduced a mass term for the anomalous gauge
boson and a fayet-iliopoulos term. these arise in string perturbation theory at
the level of two loops and one loop, respectively. their expressions are given by:

2
16 s2 a

xax +

dx (10)


4 s

m 2

x =

1
8

g42m 2

str

2 =


4

m 2

str

(11)

where we have restored the string scale mstr = g mp l , and rescaled the vector
multiplet vx  g vx in order to have canonical kinetic terms for ax
 . the
green-schwarz parameter  is determined by the string computation of 2 (2):

 =

trx
482

(12)

4in (8), the anomaly coecient ca is dened by ca =pra 2 t (ra)xra for a non-abelian

group ga (where t (ra) and xra are respectively the index and the x-charge (14) of the
representation ra), and by ci = 2 tr (y 2
i x) for an abelian group u (1)yi (there is an additional
symmetry factor for the cubic anomaly of u (1)x , cx = 2

3 tr (x 3)).

7

this xes the proportionality coecient between the mixed gravitational anomaly
and the gauge anomalies in (9).

in the original vacuum, supersymmetry is broken by the fayet-iliopoulos term,
and the axion becomes the longitudinal component of the anomalous gauge boson.
in many compactications, however, there exist shifted vacua in which supersym-
metry is preserved upon some scalar elds charged under u(1)x acquiring a vev:

hdxi =p x|hi|2 + 2 = 0 . for this to happen, some of the x must have

the opposite sign to 2. a combination of the s and the  chiral superelds is
then absorbed by the anomalous vector multiplet and disappears from the mass-
less spectrum, while the orthogonal combination yields a low-energy axion. the
mass of the anomalous gauge boson is now (assuming that 2 is compensated for
by a single vev with charge x) m 2
str . note that, since the
 often carry other charges, it is likely that other gauge groups, either abelian
or non-abelian, are broken together with the anomalous u(1) [16].

x = 1

8 g2 (g24 x) m 2

the universal green-schwarz mechanism then leads to the following picture:
once the dilaton assumes its vacuum expectation value, the anomalous u(1)x is
broken and a fayet-iliopoulos term is generated. comparing the two scales

m 2

x =

1
2

g2 (g2  4 x) 2

(13)

we see that while 2 is tied to the string scale, one could in principle make
mx light with respect to mstr by lowering the string coupling constant. this
possibility would conict, however, with the successful gauge coupling unication
of the mssm.

3.2 d = 4, n = 1 type iib orientifolds

as stressed in the introduction, d = 4, n = 1 type iib orientifolds show a very
dierent pattern of anomaly cancellation. the gauge group of such vacua may
contain more than one anomalous u(1) . their anomalies are not universal in
the sense of eq. (9), and they are compensated by a generalized version of the
green-schwarz mechanism, which involves several antisymmetric tensors. also,
a string computation [6] has shown that no fayet-iliopoulos term is generated at
the one-loop level. while this result has been obtained in a specic vacuum (the
z3 orientifold of ref. [8]), it is believed to hold in a larger class of models, since
it is related to tadpole cancellation.

[5]. let us summarize here their results.

the cancellation of u(1) anomalies in toroidal zn type iib orientifolds has
in addition to
been studied in ref.
the antisymmetric tensor b from the untwisted sector, which is also present in
heterotic compactications, there are several rr antisymmetric tensors bk, k =
1 . . . m from the twisted sector, which are associated to the xed points of the
underlying orbifold. similarly to the heterotic b, those twisted antisymmetric
tensors couple to the yang-mills chern-simons forms:

b

k a ym



8

(14)

and to the eld strength of the n abelian factors u(1)i present in the gauge
group:

 b

k f 

i

(15)

but, contrary to the green-schwarz counterterm of heterotic compactications,
the couplings (15) are present at tree-level. another striking dierence with the
heterotic case is that there is no such coupling for b - implying that the dilaton
supereld does not play any role in anomaly cancellation.

the pseudoscalar duals ak of the twisted antisymmetric tensors lie in the
same chiral multiplets as the ns-ns twisted moduli mk corresponding to the
blowing-up modes associated with the singularities of the orbifold:

mk |= =0 = mk + i ak

(16)

performing a duality transformation on the couplings (14), we obtain the following
expression for the gauge kinetic function:

fa = fp + xk

ck
a mk

(17)

where fp is a function of the untwisted moduli5 and the ck
coecients. similarly, the couplings (15) can be rewritten:

a are model-dependent

i aka
k

i

xi, k

(18)

where the green-schwarz parameters k
i are model-dependent coecients as well6.
as stressed before, however, the i corresponding to the model-independent axion
always vanishes. thus only the twisted moduli, and not the dilaton, participate in
the generalized green-schwarz mechanism. this tells us that the kahler potential
for the mk elds takes the generic form7:

k = k  { mk + mk  2

i vi }k=1...m!

k

nxi=1

(19)

and that, under a u(1)i transformation with gauge parameter i , the mk undergo
a shift:

mk  mk + i k

i i

(20)

5in type iib orientifolds, the dependence on the untwisted moduli of the gauge kinetic
function associated with a gauge group depends on the d-brane sector this gauge group comes
from. for example, gauge groups coming from 9-branes have fp = s [2].

6more precisely, the ck

i = tr (ki)
respectively, where k represents the action of the kth orbifold twist on the chan-paton factors,
and i (a) is the chan-paton matrix associated with the gauge group u (1)i (ga) [5].

a) (a = a, i) and k

i are given by ck

a = tr (1

k 2

a and k

7for the sake of simplicity, we are working in the basis where the kinetic terms for the

twisted moduli are canonical in the orbifold limit, namely

9

 2k

mk ml |m

k =0 = 1

2 kl.

while the dilaton, as well as the other untwisted moduli, remains unshifted.
anomaly cancellation then requires the non-universal relations:

c i

a = 8 2xk

ck
a k
i

(21)

as mentioned above, a string computation [6] has shown that no fayet-
iliopoulos term is generated at one-loop level in such orientifolds. however, a
tree-level 2 can appear upon the mk assuming a vacuum expectation value. as
stressed in [5], this statement does not rely on any particular assumption regard-
ing the kahler potential.
in the presence of the green-schwarz counterterms
aka

i , supersymmetry requires couplings

xi, k

k
i mkdi

(22)

i = pk k

i hmki (for generic kahler potentials, the 2

which, if the orbifold singularities are blown up, generate fayet-iliopoulos terms
2
i receive other contri-
butions than (22), which also depend on the hmki). it should be stressed that,
since the mk are moduli, the 2
i are arbitrary. this is to be contrasted with
the heterotic case, in which 2 is tied to the string scale by a model-dependent
coecient: in the orientifold case, the fayet-iliopoulos terms are just moduli.

since the values of the fayet-iliopoulos terms are arbitrary, one may wonder
whether this is also the case for the anomalous gauge boson masses - recall that
in the heterotic case, m 2
x is proportional to 2. in [6], it was noticed that m 2
x
has a string-scale value if the kahler potential for the twisted moduli (19) is a
square. our goal here is to show that this statement is of general validity and
does not depend strongly on the particular choice of the kahler potential. we
shall rst consider the orbifold limit hmki = 0 , in which the couplings (22) are
computed. in this case, one can identify the scalar components of the massive
vector multiplets as combinations of the mk elds and compute their masses
(which by supersymmetry are the same as the gauge boson masses) without
knowing the kahler potential explicitly.
indeed, the couplings (22) induce a
mass matrix for the mk elds

2

kl = xi

i k
g2

i l
i

(23)

(we have performed the canonical rescaling on the abelian vector multiplets: vi 
givi , where gi = hre fii1/2). this matrix is diagonalized by some rotation r:

2

p pq = xi

g2
i

p
i

q
i

p

i = xk

rpk k
i

(24)

one can always choose r such that the rst r eigenvalues are nonzero. this
denes in an unambigous way r massive combinations of the mk:

m

p = xk

rpk mk

p = 1 . . . r

(25)

10

the mr remaining combinations, which can always be redened, being massless.
performing the same rotation r on the ns-ns partners of the scalars mk , one
nds that only the a

p , p = 1 . . . r couple to the abelian gauge bosons:

p a

pa 
p

rxp=1

(26)

where we have redened the a

i to

a 

p = xi

gip
i
p

a
i

p = 1 . . . r

(27)

and orthogonal combinations for the remaining n  r gauge bosons a
p , p =
r + 1 . . . n . equations (24) and (26) tell us that the chiral superelds m 
p =
p
i vi /p
to form r massive vector multiplets. then supersymmetry allows us to conclude
that the abelian gauge bosons a

pk rpkmk , p = 1 . . . r are absorbed by the r vector superelds v 

p have the same mass as the scalars m

p =pi gi

p .

kl l

n =0

i = hrefii = hrefpi +pk ck

n ! kkln1...nn (0)hmn1i . . .hmnni = 1

we can ask the question how the above formulae are modied when one
blows up the orientifold. for a generic kahler potential, both the normalization
of the kinetic terms of the twisted moduli and their couplings to the abelian
gauge bosons are corrected by the non-vanishing of the blowing-up modes. these
corrections can be taken into account by moving to the basis where the kinetic
kl ml (where kkl =
2k/mkml is the kahler metric), before applying the procedure of the previous
paragraph. all formulae then remain valid, with the k
i replaced by moduli-
i . therefore, in a blown-up orientifold,
the gauge boson masses p depend on the values of the blowing-up modes both
through the gauge couplings gi , with g2
i hmki , and
2n
2 kl +

terms of the twisted moduli are canonical, fmk = 2pl k 1/2
i = 2pl k 1/2
dependent coecientsek
through the kahler metric kkl =p
2pn kkln(0)hmni + . . . .

it is not dicult to identify the combinations of the u(1)s that are anomaly-
free. eq.
p and the
n  r massless gauge bosons, so the corresponding u(1)s must be anomaly-
free. this can be checked explicitely by redening the charges accordingly to
the gauge bosons, y 
i /p for p = 1 . . . r ,
and by computing the anomalies in the new basis. one nds that the charges
y 
p=r+1...n associated with the massless gauge bosons have no anomalies, except
mixed anomalies with the anomalous charges y 
p=1...r which are compensated for
by the generalized green-schwarz mechanism. after integrating out the massive
vector multiplets, we end up with n  r anomaly-free u(1)s and m  r twisted
moduli m 
p=r+1...m . note that contrary to the heterotic case, a vacuum shift is
not required to maintain supersymmetry, unless the orientifold is blown up and
fayet-iliopoulos terms are generated. eq. (26) implies that this can happen only
for an anomalous vector multiplet v 
p, and only if the scalar partner of the massive

(26) tells us that there are no couplings between the a

p =pi rv

pi giyi/pi g2

i , where rv

pi = gip

11

gauge boson m

p has a nonzero vev. indeed, the anomalous d-terms read:

d

p = pi g2

i  x

y  
p

||2 

ppi g2

i

p!

m

p = 1 . . . r

(28)

at the level of unbroken supersymmetry, and in the absence of any nonperturba-
tive mechanism that would stabilize them, the vevs of the m
p are only restricted
by the vanishing of the anomalous d-terms (together with the vevs of the matter
elds  , which are constrained by the other d-terms as well). thus nothing
forces them to be nonzero, and the fayet-iliopoulos terms in type iib orien-
in particular, there is an obvious vacuum hi = 0 ,
tifolds are just moduli.
hmki = 0 , corresponding to the orbifold limit, in which all 2
p vanish. in this vac-
uum, only the anomalous u(1)s are broken, and their associated gauge bosons
become heavy and decouple, leaving r residual global symmetries. on the other
hand, any nonzero hm
pi , p = 1 . . . r would force some of the matter elds  to
acquire a vev, possibly leading to further breakdown of the gauge group.
to summarize, in d = 4, n = 1 type iib orientifolds, the vector supermul-
tiplets v 
p associated with the anomalous u(1)s become massive by absorbing a
twisted modulus chiral supermultiplet m 
p. the masses of the massive multiplets
can be computed from the diagonalization of the twisted moduli mass matrix
(23):

2

p = xi

g2
i

p
i

p
i m 2
p l

p = 1 . . . r

(29)

(where we have restored the planck mass). to each of these massive multiplets
is associated a moduli-dependent fayet-iliopoulos term

2
p = 

i hm

pi mp l

pp i g2

p = 1 . . . r

(30)

which is proportional to the vev of the scalar partner of the gauge boson. from
the relation (30) we conclude that the anomalous gauge boson masses and their
fayet-iliopoulos terms are essentially decoupled. indeed, the latter can be made
arbitrarily small by tuning the hmki , while the former have a planck-scale value
in the orientifold limit, from which they can possibly depart only for large values
of the blowing-up modes. this is to be contrasted with the heterotic case, in
which the relation between the fayet-iliopoulos term and the anomalous gauge
boson mass is controlled by the gauge coupling.

one may still ask whether it is possible to make the anomalous gauge bosons
light for large values of the blowing-up modes. let us consider for simplicity the
case where the gauge group contains a single abelian factor u(1)x (this is the
case in the z3 orbifold [8]), with gauge coupling gx . the gauge boson mass and
the fayet-iliopoulos term are, respectively:

m 2

x = 2 g2

xxk,l

kkl k

xl

x m 2
p l

2 =  2xk,l

12

kkl k

xhmli m 2

p l

(31)

xhmki, one could try to make m 2

x = hrefxi = hrefpi +pk ck
2 kl + 2pn kkln(0)hmni + . . . , making it less natural to envisage a light

since g2
x small by
giving very large values to the blowing-up modes. however, if the kahler potential
diers from a square, the large values of hmki also contribute to the kahler metric,
kkl = 1
anomalous gauge boson. even if the kahler potential were quadratic, a nonzero
value of the mk would induce a vev of some eld with anomalous charge x,
resulting in:

m 2

x = pk k

xk

x + 2xpk k
hrefpi +pk ck

xhmki

xhmki

m 2
p l

(32)

thus it would be very dicult, even in this case, to obtain light gauge bosons.
to conclude, one does not expect the blowing-up of the orientifold to lower the
masses of the anomalous gauge bosons. the safest possibility to make them light
would be to tune the values of the untwisted moduli so as to make the gauge
coupling small, much like in the heterotic case.

4 heterotic-type i duality

the class of models containing anomalous u(1) factors oers a playground for
studying details of type i - heterotic duality in four dimensions. as pointed
out in [8] this duality, which is of the weak coupling - strong coupling type in
ten dimensions, upon compactication to lower dimensions gives rise to weak
coupling - weak coupling dualities in certain portions of the moduli space.
in
four dimensions the relation between the heterotic and type i dilatons is

h =

1
2

i 

1
8

log(gi)

(33)

where gi is the determinant of the metric of the compact 6d space, which depends
on some of the moduli elds. as the string coupling is ei,h , and the volume of
the compact space is at least unity in string units for phenomenologically relevant
models, then it is obvious that dual models on both sides can be simultaneously
weakly coupled. one may question whether this requirement of weak string cou-
pling on both sides constrains in any way the values of the moduli which we
need to solve d-and f-atness conditions as well as to give masses to unwanted
particle states. the answer is no and does not depend on the model. the basic
observation is that the generalized green-schwarz terms which we nd on type i
side do not depend on the dilaton (i.e. on the 4d universal s modulus), and the
compact space volume does not depend on the twisted moduli m which enter the
generalized green-schwarz terms and, consequently, four dimensional anomalous
d-terms. the independence of the anomalous u(1) d-terms of the dilaton does
not hold on the heterotic side, where the fayet-iliopoulos term h depends on the
dilaton only, and not on any other modulus. but we know already from earlier
sections, and shall see in more detail here, that thanks to the existence of certain
states charged under anomalous u(1), these models also fulll all the consistency

13

checks, like the requirement of the unication of gauge couplings at the proper
scale and value.

before we procede to analyze specic examples, let us specify the criteria for
two models to be called dual to each other. first of all, we remind the reader that
already in the heterotic models the anomalous u(1) appears in the low energy
lagrangian only to cause a shift of the vacuum which restores supersymmetry,
and to be immediately decoupled in a supersymmetric manner. what is left
behind, is the supersymmetric model with a global u(1) symmetry realized on
the matter supermultiplets in a linear way (the moduli which remain massless
do not transform under the global u(1)). thus, already there, the perturbative
couplings between would-be light states play an important role in nding the
correct supersymmetric vacuum. the same phenomenon is found in the present
case on both sides, and, moreover, to establish the duality equivalence of two
models, we shall need perturbative superpotential couplings between light elds
on the heterotic side. hence, we shall be working at the level of the eective
lagrangian valid just below the respective string scale on each side, heterotic
and type i 8. for the duality to hold between two models we require that they
have supersymmetric families of vacua, and that the spectrum of the massless
excitations around these vacua is equivalent. this means, in particular, that the
unbroken gauge groups and their massless representations should be the same.
in the sector of gauge singlet elds, we require that the number of truly massless
states be the same on both, heterotic and type i, sides. in addition, we require
that the masses of the states which become massive upon the choice of the vacua
of the eld theoretical lagrangians we are analyzing be of the same order of
magnitude. this requirement means in particular that we expect the masses of
the gauge bosons of the anomalous u(1)s to be very close to each other among
the dual pairs of models. in practice, we solve the d-atness conditions for all
anomalous and nonanomalous u(1) groups on both sides and then for the f-
atness conditions on the heterotic side.
it is legitimate in the string context
to assume that our unbroken supersymmetry minimum corresponds to at space
and, hence, that the use of the globally supersymmetric lagrangian instead of the
locally supersymmetric one is justied.

the pairs of models which we study are type iib orientifolds models in 4d
and their candidate heterotic duals which can be found in the existing literature
[8, 9, 22, 23, 24, 2, 25, 26].

4.1 z3 models without wilson lines

the rst two examples are z3 orientifolds/orbifolds without and with wilson
lines. the model without wilson lines is actually the original example proposed
for the conjectured type i - heterotic duality in four dimensions in [8]. the type
iib orientifold model has the gauge group g = su(12)  so(8)  u(1)a where
the u(1)a factor is anomalous. the anomalies are non-universal and get cancelled

8the scales and couplings in orientifold models were recently discussed in [21].

14

by means of the generalized gs mechanism. this mechanism involves twenty-
seven twisted singlets m, a particular combination of which combines with the
anomalous vector supereld to form a massive multiplet. after the decoupling of
this heavy vector multiplet we obtain the nonanomalous model with the gauge
goup g = su(12)  so(8).
on the heterotic side, which is the heterotic so(32) superstring compactied
on t 6/z3, the gauge group is g = su(12)so(8)u(1)a and the u(1)a is again
anomalous. its anomalies, however, are universal in this case, and the universal,
only dilaton-dependent, fayet-iliopoulos parameter is generated.
in this case
there are also elds which are charged only under the anomalous u(1) and that
can compensate for the fayet-iliopoulos term by assuming an expectation value,
whithout breaking the gauge group any further; a combination of these elds
and of the dilaton supermultiplet is absorbed by the anomalous vector multiplet.
these nonabelian singlets are the counterparts of the m moduli of the orien-
tifold model. however, on the heterotic side we have additional states charged
under u(1)a (and also under so(8)) the counterparts of which are not present in
the orientifold model. these unwanted states become heavy in a supersymmetric
manner through the superpotential couplings [9]

wh =       t r(mv  v  ) .

(34)

upon giving expectation values to the ms, the supermultiplets v obtain super-
symmetric mass terms of the order of . below the scale of the heavy gauge boson
mass we have a pair of models which exactly fulllls our duality criteria.

one should note that on the heterotic side we have a blown-up orbifold, since
the scalars that assume a vacuum expectation value correspond to the blowing-up
modes. thus, in this case, a type iib orientifold is found to be dual to a blown-
up heterotic orbifold9. the next point to be stressed is that the duality works
even though no fayet-iliopoulos term is present on the orientifold side. in ref. [9]
where, according to the general belief, the generation of a 1-loop fayet-iliopoulos
term in the orientifold model had been assumed, duality held only in a region of
the moduli space where the nonabelian gauge groups are broken. if such a term
were generated on the type iib side, perhaps by a nonperturbative mechanism,
the duality would still hold, but one would have to blow up the orientifold to
achieve d-atness on the type iib side.

4.2 z3 models with a discrete wilson line

one can add a discrete wilson line to the z3 orientifold construction [24]. in this
case the gauge group of the orientifold model is g = su(4)4u(1)4 where three of
the four u(1)s are anomalous and decouple, as they become massive upon mixing
with three combinations of the orientifold blowing-up modes. the combination of
the four u(1) generators which is orthogonal to the three anomalous generators
denes a nonanomalous u(1) under which all elds in the massless spectrum

9the blowing-up of the z3 orientifold has been recently discussed in ref. [27].

15

3 ,4,0  9 (1, 1, 1, 1) 4

3 , 4

3 , 4

3 ,0,0  9 (1, 1, 1, 1) 4
3 , 8

are neutral. hence, this last abelian factor cannot be spontaneously broken,
and the associated abelian vector boson remains in the massless spectrum of the
orientifold model. on the heterotic side there is, as always, only one anomalous
u(1)a which gets massive through the universal gs mechanism. the elds which
participate in forming the massive vector multiplet are the dilaton and 27 elds
which are neutral under the nonabelian factors but have nonzero abelian charges:
3 ,4,0 , where the subscript
9 (1, 1, 1, 1) 4
numbers are the abelian charges (the anomalous charge is the rst one). giving
vevs to three combination of these elds allows to make all abelian d-terms vanish,
while breaking spontaneously the rst two nonanomalous u(1) factors together
with the anomalous u(1). the last u(1) is not broken, as all the elds given
above are neutral with respect to it. below the scale of breaking of the three
u(1)s, which lies slightly below the string scale, the corresponding gauge bosons
decouple, and both models have the same gauge groups g = su(4)4  u(1)
and the same massless spectra at the end. it should be noted that this example
contains on the type iib side three independent anomalous u(1) factors, which
is a real novelty when compared to the heterotic models where one gets always a
single anomalous u(1).

4.3 z7 models

there exist, however, examples where exact duality (in the sense specied at
the beginning of this section) cannot be achieved. the rst of the examples we
present here is the z7 orientifold/orbifold model given in [22]. the orientifold
model has the gauge group g = su(4)3  so(8)  u(1)3. all three u(1) fac-
tors are anomalous and their gauge bosons decouple upon getting masses by the
nonuniversal gs mechanism. these gauge bosons mix with combinations of the
chiral superelds m a
 which transform nonlinearly under the u(1)s. in this case
the unbroken gauge group is large, g = su(4)3  so(8), since the inspection of
the d- and f-atness conditions shows that the charged elds are not forced to
assume vevs breaking the nonabelian subgroups. the situation is very dierent
on the heterotic orbifold side. here we have a unique anomalous u(1) and a
fayet-iliopoulos term 2  t rq > 0. the only elds at hand which can cancel
the anomalous d-term and participate in giving a mass to the gauge boson are
the qs from the table given below (where the indices give u(1) charges and the
rst abelian factor is anomalous).

16

q1
untwisted q2
(partial) q3
m 1

twisted m 2

 = 1 . . . 7 m 3

v 1

v 2

 = 1 . . . 7 v 3


twisted

7 , 6

7

(1, 4, 4, 1)2,1,1
(4, 1, 4, 1)2,1,1
(4, 4, 1, 1)3,3,0
7 (1, 1, 1, 1)0, 36
7 (1, 1, 1, 1)0, 12
7 (1, 1, 1, 1)0, 24
7 (1, 1, 6, 1)2, 8
7 (1, 6, 1, 1)2, 2
7 , 6
7 (6, 1, 1, 1)0, 10

7 , 4

7

7

7 , 2

7

7 , 20

7

7 , 16

7

since those elds are charged under the su(4)3 nonabelian factor, this group is
spontaneously broken together with the nonanomalous u(1) at the string scale,
and the low-energy gauge group is dierent from that on the type iib side. the
second problematic aspect is that the elds m a
 of the heterotic model must ac-
quire vevs in order to make massive in a supersymmetric way the unwanted states
v a
 , which are not present in the orientifold model. however, on the orientifold
side the corresponding m a
 states are gauge singlets, and nothing forces them to
assume nonzero vacuum expectation values.

thus, in the z7 example neither the low energy gauge groups nor the massless
spectra match in the supposedly dual pair, at least at the level of the perturbative
eective lagrangian we rely on here. the question is whether a nonperturbative
contribution to the superpotential or, perhaps a nontrivial kahler potential de-
pendence on the elds m a
 would change the picture. the second type of cor-
rections, although somewhat exotic in details, could achieve duality. this comes
from the fact that certain additional contributions to the kahler potential would
enforce nonzero vevs for the m a
 states on the type iib side (through the d-
atness conditions) and then the two models could appear as a dual pair. the
same eect would be achieved if nonzero fayet-iliopoulos terms were generated,
perhaps by nonperturbative eects.

4.4 z3  z3 models

a second example which sheds doubts on the exact weak-weak coupling 4d duality
conjecture is the z3  z3 orbifold/orientifold constructions of ref. [23]. in this
case after giving masses to the anomalous gauge bosons (there is just one on
each side) the gauge group is the same in both models in the pair, namely g =
su(4)3  so(8) u(1)1  u(1)2, but the spectra cannot be matched. there are
massless states in the heterotic model which are charged under the nonanomalous
u(1)1  u(1)2, which is not the case on the orientifold side - the corresponding
massless states are neutral under the u(1)1  u(1)2 factor.
the direct inspection shows that in this particular case no obvious modica-
tion of the kahler potential, or nonperturbative superpotential, can help restoring
duality.

17

4.5 global anomalous u (1) symmetries

as pointed out long ago by witten [28], when the anomalous gauge boson de-
couples, there remain many chiral superelds in the massless spectrum which
were charged under that u(1), and their interactions, in particular the pertur-
bative superpotential, still respect the global version of that symmetry. under
this global u(1) chiral elds transform linearly with inherited charges, hence this
global symmetry is anomalous. the low energy dilaton, s, does not transform
under this symmetry. the reason is that in terms of the original string variables
the chiral multiplet which is absorbed by the gauge boson to form the massive
vector multiplet is a linear combination of the original dilaton, s, and the charged
chiral multiplets which obtain the vacuum expectation values. the composition
of the combination which is eaten depends on the vacuum conguration, but it
always contains an admixture of s. the orthogonal combinations are massless,
and one of them, s, enters the gauge elds kinetic functions the way the origi-
nal dilaton did: (s w w)f + h.c. . this combination does not have any other
couplings, hence it supports another anomalous global u(1) symmetry under
which s  s + i  and other elds are inert10. there is a unique combination
of the u(1) and u(1) which is anomaly free, and the orthogonal combination
which is anomalous. this, somewhat simplied but physically accurate, reason-
ing convinces us that there is a global anomalous u(1) symmetry left behind the
original anomalous local u(1). this is the statement in the context of the het-
erotic string compactications, where there is always only one local anomalous
u(1). hence, on the heterotic side we expect naturally one anomalous global
u(1) symmetry. then, the question is what happens in the type iib orientifold
models, where one has more anomalous u(1) factors, like for example in the z3
with wilson lines, or in z7 models discussed earlier. the answer is that the phe-
nomenon described above occurs seperately for each anomalous factor in exactly
the same way as described above. the role of the dilaton is played this time
by the nonuniversal elds m which are numerous in these models and whose
combinations help to form massive vector supermultiplets on the type iib side.
among the orthogonal combinations are the superelds m  which are completely
analogous to the eld s. at this point we can illustrate this mechanism in the
type ii case with a simple example. let us take for simplicity a single modulus
m and a single charged chiral eld y . the kahler potential with the two elds
2 (m + m  2v )2 + y y , and the relevant kinetic function f = s + m,
is k = 1
where g2 = re(f )1. the lagrangian is

l = m m + y  y 

1
2

g2(m + m  y y )2

(35)

let us take the vacuum expectation values along the real directions of the elds:
m = re(m), y = re(y ) . then one can nd the eigenvalues of the mass
matrix of uctuations around the vacuum given by hmi, hyi, and corresponding
10this acts like the global shift of the model independent axion in original string variables.

18

0 =

(hyim + y)

and the orthogonal mode with the mass m2 = 4g2(1 + hyi2) is

m =

(hyiy  m)

(36)

(37)

eigenmodes. the zero eigenmode is

1

p1 + hyi2
p1 + hyi2

1

one can express the gauge kinetic function in terms of the eigenmodes which we
have found

1

p1 + hyi2

re(f ) = re(s) + hmi +

(hyi0  m)

(38)

the heavy mode m becomes part of the heavy gauge boson multiplet and decou-
ples from the massless elds. the eld which is a at direction of the potential
and enters the gauge kinetic function is 0. to make the expression for the eec-
tive gauge kinetic function more transparent, it is convenient to dene the eld
11+hyi2hyi0. then the gauge kinetic funtion is
m  through re(m ) = hmi +
simply fef f = s + m . we have assumed that the heavy mode m, together with
its whole supermultiplet decouples completely from the massless elds (which is
precisely the case for the models discussed here). then the anomalous global
symmetry acting on massless elds is unbroken at the renormalizable level. how-
ever, one should bear in mind that when we consider the full set of elds, light
and heavy, then the anomalous global u(1) is spontaneously broken. this means,
strictly speaking, that even in the sector of massless elds this symmetry shall
be broken through suppressed interactions with the heavy elds. we are working
here with the renormalizable interactions only, hence we can justiably treat the
global symmetries as exact ones.

the same mechanism works for each anomalous u(1) factor. this, however,
leads to the conclusion that in type iib models we have several global anoma-
lous u(1) symmetries. this conclusion is correct, as can easily be veried for
example in the z3 model with wilson lines described here. however, the dual
heterotic model has exactly the same superpotential, and the same light elds,
hence there are three, not just one, anomalous global u(1) symmetries also on
the heterotic side. how could they appear here? the answer is straigthforward,
although somewhat unexpected. recall, that on the heterotic side we have also
additional local but nonanomalous u(1)s. these additional factors are sponta-
neously broken and their gauge bosons also decouple. however, as discussed in
specic examples, to match the spectra we have to make certain chiral multi-
plets heavy on the heterotic side, through superpotential couplings. it turns out
that this process knocks-out from the massless spectrum some states charged
under nonanomalous local u(1)s in such a way, that what is left are anomalous
global u(1)s whose anomalies and charges are exactly the ones needed to match
anomalous global factors borne in the dual type iib model. this is a somewhat

19

unexpected observation, which might lead to interesting phenomenological con-
sequences. from the point of view of the present discussion this gives further
consistency check for heterotic - type i duality in four dimensions.

5 conclusion

in this paper, we have studied the properties of anomalous u(1)s in a large
class of d = 4, n = 1 type iib orientifolds, and reconsidered some candidate
evidence for heterotic-type i duality in 4 dimensions, in the light of the recent
results of ref.
[5] and [6]. we have shown that the masses of the anomalous
gauge bosons are proportional to the planck scale, and can be made light only at
the expense of small gauge couplings, very much like in the heterotic case. they
appear to be decoupled from the fayet-iliopoulos terms, whose scales are set by
the values of the blowing-up modes of the underlying orbifold, and are therefore
undetermined at the perturbative level. this is a noticeable dierence with the
heterotic anomalous u(1), whose fayet-iliopoulos term has a nonzero value, of
the order of the string scale.

the absence of such fayet-iliopoulos terms in type iib orientifolds seems at
rst sight to contradict the generally admitted duality between type iib orien-
tifolds and heterotic orbifolds, which has been considered as a d = 4, n = 1
manifestation of the postulated heterotic-type i duality in ten dimensions. how-
ever, this conclusion is too crude, since one should compare the supersymmetric
low-energy theories rather than the original vacua. from this point of view, the
vacuum shift induced by the heterotic fayet-iliopoulos term appears to be a neces-
sary, but not always sucient ingredient to match the gauge groups and massless
spectra of both low-energy theories.
if duality holds, one expects indeed the
heterotic counterparts of the twisted moduli that participate in the generalized
green-schwarz mechanism on the orientifold side to assume a vacuum expecta-
tion value in order to cancel the heterotic fayet-iliopoulos term, resulting in the
breaking and decoupling at a high scale of the same number of u(1)s on both
sides. at the same time, those vevs give large supersymmetric masses to states
that have no perturbative orientifold counterpart [9], making it possible for both
massless spectra to match.

this duality picture works perfectly well for the z3 models of ref. [8] and [24].
however, it fails in at least two known candidate dual examples. in the z7 model
[22] the heterotic vacuum shift triggers the breaking of nonabelian gauge factors,
which is not required on the orientifold side. in the z3  z3 model [23] some of
the remaining charged states of the heterotic model have singlet counterparts in
the orientifold model. while duality could be restored in the z7 case if fayet-
iliopoulos terms were generated in the orientifold model, presumably by some
nonperturbative mechanism, this would not be sucient in the z3  z3 case if
one insists on the requirement that the matching be enforced by the vacuum
shifts. it could be that type iib orientifolds do not always have a heterotic dual
model. this would not necessarily contradict the conventional heterotic-type i

20

duality [7], since type iib orientifolds represent a generalization of genuine type
i compactications. still, it would be interesting to see how nonperturbative
eects could possibly inuence the notion of heterotic-type ii orientifold duality.
we reserve this question for future investigation.

finally, let us say a few words about the possible consequences of the orien-
tifold anomalous u(1)s.
in heterotic string compactications, the presence of
an anomalous u(1) has been shown to have numerous implications of great rele-
vance for phenomenology. among them is the possibility of explaining the origin
and hierarchies of the small dimensionless parameters present in the low-energy

lagrangian, such as the yukawa couplings [17], in terms of the ratiop|2|/mp l .

particularly encouraging is the fact that, in explicit string models, 2 is found to
be of the order of magnitude necessary to account for the value of the cabibbo
angle. furthermore, the universality of the mixed gauge anomalies implies a
successful relation between the value of the weinberg angle at unication and
the observed fermion mass hierarchies [29]. the anomalous u(1) also plays an
important role in supersymmetry breaking: not only it takes part in its media-
tion from the hidden sector to the observable sector (as implied by the universal
green-schwarz relation among mixed gauge anomalies), but also it can trigger
the breaking of supersymmetry itself, due to an interplay between the anoma-
lous d-term and gaugino condensation [18]. also, the heterotic anomalous u(1)
is likely to have outstanding implications in cosmology, in particular its fayet-
iliopoulos term can dominate the vacuum energy of the early universe, leading
to ination [19]. finally, it may provide a solution of the strong cp problem [15].
one may now ask whether the anomalous u(1)s present in type iib orien-
tifolds are likely to have similar consequences - or even have the potential to solve
some of the problems encountered in the heterotic case. in order to answer this
question, it is important to note that all the phenomenological implications of the
heterotic u(1)x rely on the appearance of a fayet-iliopoulos term whose value,
a few orders of magnitude below the planck mass, is xed by the anomaly. the
situation is very dierent in orientifolds, where the fayet-iliopoulos terms are
moduli-dependent: the freedom that is gained (and allows for example to cure
the problems of d-term ination in heterotic models [30]) is payed for by a loss
of predictivity. in that respect, one may conclude that the orientifold anomalous
u(1)s are not very dierent from anomaly-free u(1)s, whose fayet-iliopoulos
terms are unconstrained and can be chosen at will.

acknowledgements

we wish to thank jan conrad, ignatios antoniadis and luis ibanez for in-
teresting discussions and comments. this work was partially supported by the
european commission programs erbfmrx-ct96-0045 and ct96-0090. z.l.
acknowledges additional nancial support from polish committee for scientic
research grant 2 p03b 037 15/99.

21

references

[1] m. green and j. schwarz, phys. lett. b149 (1984) 117.

[2] g. aldazabal, a. font, l.e. ibanez, and g. violero, nucl. phys. b536

(1998) 29.

[3] a. sagnotti, phys. lett. b294 (1992) 196.

[4] m. berkooz, r.g. leigh, j. polchinski, j.h. schwarz, n. seiberg and e.

witten, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 115.

[5] l.e. ibanez, r. rabadan and a.m. uranga, preprint ftuam-98-16, hep-

th/9808139.

[6] e poppitz, preprint ucsd-pth-98-34, hep-th/9810010.

[7] j. polchinski and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 525.

[8] c. angelantonj, m. bianchi, g. pradisi, a. sagnotti, and ya.s. stanev,

phys. lett. b385 (1996) 96.

[9] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b512 (1998) 221.

[10] l. alvarez-gaume and e. witten, nucl. phys. b234 (1984) 269.

[11] w. fischler, h.p. nilles, j. polchinski, s. raby and l. susskind, phys. rev.

lett. 47 (1981) 757.

[12] t. kobayashi and h. nakano, nucl. phys. b496 (1997) 103.

[13] m. dine, n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 317.

[14] j. atick, l. dixon and a. sen, nucl. phys. b292 (1987) 109; m. dine, i.

ichinose and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b293 (1987) 253.

[15] j.e. kim, phys. lett. b207 (1988) 434; e.j. chun, j.e. kim and h.p.

nilles, nucl. phys. b370 (1992) 105.

[16] a. font, l.e. ibanez, h.p. nilles and f. quevedo, nucl. phys. b307 (1988)

109; ibid., b310 (1988) 764.

[17] l. ibanez and g. g. ross, phys. lett. b332 (1994) 100; p. binetruy and p.
ramond, phys. lett. b350 (1995) 49; v. jain and r. shrock, phys. lett.
b352 (1995) 83; e. dudas, s. pokorski and c.a. savoy, phys. lett. b356
(1995) 45; p. binetruy, s. lavignac, and p. ramond, nucl. phys. b477
(1996) 353;

22

[18] p. binetruy and e. dudas, phys. lett. b389 (1996) 503; g. dvali and
a. pomarol, phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 3728; z. lalak, nucl. phys. b521
(1998) 37; n. arkani-hamed, m. dine, s. p. martin, phys. lett. b431
(1998) 329; t. barreiro, b. de carlos, j.a. casas, j.m. moreno, phys.
lett. b445 (1998) 82.

[19] j.a. casas and c. munoz, phys. lett. b216 (1989) 37; j.a. casas, j.m.
moreno, c. munoz and m. quiros, nucl. phys. b328 (1989) 272; p. binetruy
and g. dvali, phys. lett. b388 (1996) 241; e. halyo, phys. lett. b387
(1996) 43.

[20] a. sagnotti, in cargese 87, non-perturbative quantum field theory,
eds. g. mack et al. (pergamon press, oxford, 1988), p. 251; p. horava,
nucl. phys. b327 (1989) 461, phys. lett. b231 (1989) 251.

[21] l.e. ibanez, c. munoz and s. rigolin, preprint ftuam-98-28, hep-

ph/9812397.

[22] z. kakushadze and g. shiu, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3686.

[23] z. kakushadze and g. shiu, nucl. phys. b520 (1998) 75.

[24] l.e. ibanez, jhep 9807 (1998) 002.

[25] z. kakushadze, g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 25.

[26] j. lykken, e. poppitz and s.p. trivedi, preprint ucsd-pth-98-16, hep-

th/9806080.

[27] m. cvetic, l. everett, p. langacker and j. wang, preprint upr-0831t,

hep-th/9903051.

[28] e. witten, phys. lett. b149 (1984) 351.

[29] l. ibanez, phys. lett. b303 (1993) 55; p. binetruy and p. ramond, phys.

lett. b350 (1995) 49.

[30] e. halyo, preprint su-itp-99-2, hep-ph/9901302.

23

