9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
7
1

 
 

1
v
5
5
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

non-renormalization of induced charges and

constraints on strongly coupled theories.

s. l. dubovsky, d. s. gorbunov, m. v. libanov, and v. a. rubakov

institute for nuclear research of the russian academy of sciences,

60th october anniversary prospect, 7a, 117312 moscow, russia

abstract

it is shown that global fermionic charges induced in vacuum by slowly varying,

topologically non-trivial background scalar elds are not renormalized provided that

expansion in momenta of background elds is valid. this suggests that strongly cou-

pled theories obey induced charge matching conditions which are analogous, but gener-

ally not equivalent, to t hooft anomaly matching conditions. we give a few examples

of induced charge matching. in particular, the corresponding constraints in softly bro-

ken supersymmetric qcd suggest non-trivial low energy mass pattern, in full accord

with the results of direct analyses.

1 introduction

four dimensional gauge theories strongly coupled at low energies often exhibit interesting

content of composite massless fermions. this property is potentially important for con-

structing composite models of quarks and leptons, which is long being considered as a

possible major step on our way into the nature of matter [1]. powerful constraints on

the low energy spectrum are provided by t hooft anomaly matching conditions [2]. these

are heavily used, in particular, in establishing duality properties of supersymmetric gauge

theories (see, e.g., refs. [3, 4] and references therein).

the basis for anomaly matching is provided by the adlerbardeen non-renormalization

theorem [5]. in non-abelian theories, the absence of radiative corrections to anomalies is

1

intimately connected to topology: if one introduces background gauge elds corresponding

to the avor symmetry group, the anomalies in global currents are proportional to the topo-

logical charge densities of these background elds. integer-valuedness of global fermionic

charges, on the one hand, and integer-valuedness of topological charges of background gauge

elds, on the other, imply that anomaly equations should not get renormalized.

gauge eld backgrounds are not the only ones that may have topological properties.

topology is inherent also in scalar background elds of skyrmion type. indeed, one loop

calculations [6] show that slowly varying in space, static scalar elds induce, in vacuum,

fermionic global charges which are proportional to the topological charges of the background.

by analogy to triangle anomalies, this suggests that induced charges do not receive radiative

corrections, and hence may serve as constraints on low energy spectrum of strongly coupled

theories [7]. unlike triangle anomalies, however, the one-loop expressions for the induced

charges are promoted to full quantum theory only if the expansion in momenta of the

background elds is valid in the full theory. the latter property can often be established to

all orders of perturbation theory (exceptions are easy to understand); in some models the

validity of the expansion in momenta can be also shown non-perturbatively.

we will see that induced charge matching conditions emerging in this way have a certain

relation to anomaly matching. however, in some cases the two sets of matching conditions

are inequivalent, so the induced charges give additional information on the properties of the

low energy theory. this information is particularly interesting in softly broken supersym-

metric gauge theories.

fermionic charges in vacuum are induced due to yukawa interactions of fermions with

background scalar elds. these interactions introduce masses to some of the fermions in

the fundamental theory and hence explicitly break a subgroup of the avor group. as a

consequence, some of the fermions of the low energy eective theory acquire masses. induced

charge matching conditions constrain the resulting mass pattern of the eective theory. we

will see that these conditions are satised automatically (provided the triangle anomalies

2

match) if all composite fermions charged under explicitly broken avor subgroup become

massive. the latter situation is very appealing intuitively; however, we are not aware of any

argument implying that it should be generic.

this paper is organized as follows. in section 2 we show that global charges induced in

vacuum by slowly varying background scalar elds do not get renormalized provided that the

derivative expansion is valid. in section 3 we discuss exceptional situations by presenting a

model where the derivative expansion fails already at the one loop level. in section 4 we give

several examples of induced charge matching (ordinary qcd, supersymmetric n = 1 qcd

exhibiting the seiberg duality [8], sqcd with softly broken supersymmetry). we conclude

in section 5 by discussing the relation between induced charges and triangle anomalies.

2 non-renormalization of induced charges

to be specic, let us consider qcd with nc colors and nf massless fermion avors. let a
and a, a, a = 1, . . . , nf , denote left-handed quarks and anti-quarks, respectively. to probe

this theory, we introduce background scalar elds ma

b (x) of the following form,

ma

b (x) = m0u a

b (x) ,

where m0 is a constant and u is an su(nf ) matrix at each point x. let these elds interact

with quarks and anti-quarks,

lint = ama

b b + h.c.

(1)

besides the global su(nf )l  su(nf )r symmetry, the theory exhibits non-anomalous
baryon symmetry,   ei,   ei , m  m. the baryonic current is conserved
and obtains non-vanishing vacuum expectation value in the presence of the background

scalar elds.

to the leading order in momenta, the one-loop expression for this induced current is [6]

hj
bi =

nc

242 tr(cid:16)u u uu uu (cid:17) .

(2)

3

j
b







figure 1: leading order contribution to the induced baryonic current.

this expression can be obtained by considering a conguration which in the vicinity of a

given point x has the following form,

u(x) = 1 + (x) ,

(3)

where (x) is a small and slowly varying anti-hermitean background eld. to the leading

order in momenta, one-loop induced baryonic current is then given by the diagram of fig. 1

with fermions of mass m0 running in the loop. the complete expression (2) is reconstructed
by making use of su(nf )l  su(nf )r global symmetry.

a remarkable property of eq. (2) is that the baryonic charge induced in vacuum by

slowly varying, time-independent background eld u(x) with

u(x)  1 as |x|  

is proportional to the topological number of the background,

where

hbi = ncn[u] ,

(4)

242 z d3x ijktr(cid:16)uiu uju uku (cid:17) ,
the higher derivative terms omitted in eq. (2) do not contribute to hbi.

n[u] =

1

4

let us see that eq. (4) does not get renormalized in the full quantum theory provided the

expansion in momenta of the background eld works. let us consider the same theory with

the gauge coupling  depending on coordinates x. the induced current is now a functional

of (y) and u(y),

hj
b(x)i = j[x; (y); u(y)] .

at slowly varying (y) we expand hj

b(x)i in derivatives of  at the point x,

b(x)i = j  [x; (x); u(y)] + b[x; (x); u(y)](x) + oh()2i ,
hj

(5)

where the coecients on the right hand side are now functions, rather than functionals, of

(x) (but still functionals of u(y)). the structure analogous to the right hand side of eq. (2)

appears in the derivative expansion of the rst term on the right hand side of eq. (5),

j  =

f ()

242 tr(cid:16)u u uu uu (cid:17) + . . .

our purpose is to show that f () is independent of , and hence f () = nc.

let us make use of the conservation of hj

b(x)i,

hj

b(x)i = 0 .

(6)

if f were a non-trivial function of , the divergence of j  would contain the term

1

242 tr(cid:16)u u uu uu (cid:17) f



 .

the only possible source of cancellation of this term in eq. (6) is the second term on the

right hand side of eq. (5). the cancellation would occur i b contained the term of the

following structure

with

[u]

f


[u] = 

1

242 tr(cid:16)uu uu uu (cid:17) .

(7)

5

however, the right hand side of eq. (7) is not a complete divergence of any tensor that is

invariant under the avor group (recall that the right hand side of eq. (7) is a topological

current). hence, the conservation of the baryonic current requires that f / = 0.

this argument is straightforward to generalize to other conserved currents and to the-

ories other than qcd. as discussed in section 1, it implies that induced charges should

match in fundamental and low energy theories. examples of such a matching are given in

section 4.

3 failure of derivative expansion: an example

an important ingredient in the above argument is the derivative expansion. while in qcd

and many other models the derivative expansion works, at least to all orders of perturbation

theory, one can design models where the derivative expansion fails, and the induced charges

cannot be reliably calculated even within perturbation theory. as an example, let us consider
a model of free left-handed fermions a, a and a, a, a = 1, . . . , nf , with the mass term

l0 = 0 aa + h.c.

(8)

the model is invariant under the global su(nf )l  su(nf )r symmetry under which ,
, and  transform as (nf , 1), (1, nf ), and (1, nf ), respectively. the baryon numbers of
fermions ,  and  are +1, 1 and +1, respectively. let us introduce background elds
b (x) and their interaction with fermions  and  in the same way as in eq. (1).
ma

to see that the derivative expansion is not reliable in this model, let us again consider
the background eld of the form (3). at  = 0, fermions  and  = const  (0 + m0)
form massive dirac eld, while  = const  (m0  0) remains massless weyl eld. both
types of fermions interact with the background eld (x). in an attempt to calculate the

induced baryonic current, one faces diagrams with massless internal fermion lines like one

shown in fig. 2. it is straightforward to see that the derivative expansion of these diagrams

6

j
b







figure 2: dangerous diagram in the model of section 3. heavy and light lines correspond

to massless and massive fermions, respectively.

is singular.

the fact that the derivative expansion fails in this model manifests itself in dierent
values of induced charges in various limits. namely, at 0  m0 one can ignore the back-
ground elds, and hbi = 0. on the other hand, at 0  m0, the mass term (8) becomes
irrelevant, so hbi = n[u]. as outlined above, this phenomenon is due to the fact that
not all fermions charged under su(nf )l  su(nf )r obtain masses upon introducing the
background elds m(x).

this example shows that the validity of the derivative expansion requires that the back-

ground scalar elds provide masses to all relevant fermions. this will be the case in all

examples presented in the next section.

4 examples of induced charge matching

7

4.1 qcd

we again consider conventional su(nc) qcd with nf massless avors. let us generalize

slightly the discussion of section 2 by introducing background elds

m p

q(x) = m0u p

q (x)

(9)

q(x)  pq + h.c.. the
which give x-dependent masses to n0 quark avors only, lint = m p
elds m(x) are n0  n0 matrices; hereafter the indices p, q, r; p, q, r run from 1 to n0 with
n0 < nf . (nf  n0) avors remain massless. in all examples of this section we consider
background elds that are constant at spatial innity; by a global su(nf )l rotation we
|x|   . besides the baryon number symmetry u(1)b, we will be
set u(x)  1 as
interested in a vector subgroup u(1)f
8 of the original su(nf )l  su(nf )r avor group,

whose (unnormalized) generator is

t f

8 = diag 1, . . . , 1,

n0

nf  n0

, . . . ,

n0

nf  n0! .

the background elds are charged under neither u(1)b nor u(1)f
8 .

as all fundamental fermions that interact with the background scalar elds acquire

masses due to this interaction, the derivative expansion is justied, at least order by order

in perturbation theory. hence, for slowly varying m(x) one has

hbi = ncn[u] ,
ht f

8 i = ncn[u] .

(10)

(11)

let us see that the low energy eective theory of qcd  the non-linear sigma-model 

indeed reproduces eqs. (10) and (11). in the absence of the background elds, the non-linear

sigma-model action contains only derivative terms for the su(nf ) matrix valued dynamical

sigma-model eld v (x), including the usual kinetic term and the wesszumino term. the

background eld m(x) introduces a potential term into the low energy eective lagrangian,

le = tr(cid:16)mv + v m(cid:17) .

8

for slowly varying m, the eective potential is minimized at

v (x) = 


u(x) 0

0

1




.

(12)

hence, the induced baryonic charge appears at the classical level [9]; as the baryonic charge

of v (x) is equal to its topological number n[v ] times nc, the induced baryonic charge is

indeed given by eq.(10). likewise, it follows from the structure of the wesszumino term

that the t f

8 current of the conguration of the form (12) is (cf. ref. [10])

jf
8, =

nc

242 tr(cid:16)uu uu uu (cid:17) ,

so the t f

8 charge of the conguration (12) is given by eq.(11).

we see that the induced charges in qcd and its low energy eective theory match

rather trivially. the way the induced charges match becomes more interesting when low

energy theories (in the absence of background scalar elds) contain massless fermions.

4.2 supersymmetric qcd

let us now consider supersymmetric qcd with nc colors and nf avors. to be specic,

we discuss the case 3nc > nf > nc + 3. this theory exhibits the seiberg duality [8]:
the fundamental theory contains the superelds of quarks qi and anti-quarks qj, while its
eective low energy counterpart at the origin of moduli space is an su(nf  nc) magnetic
gauge theory with magnetic quarks qi, magnetic anti-quarks qj and mesons m i
j with the

superpotential qm q.

let us probe this theory by adding the scalar background elds mq

p(x) with the same

properties as above, i.e., by introducing the term

mq

p(x) qqqp

(13)

into the superpotential of the fundamental theory. let us take for deniteness
2  n0 < nf  nc  1. the calculation of the induced baryon and t f
fundamental theory proceeds as above, and we again obtain eqs.(10) and (11).

8 charges in the

9

we now turn to the eective low energy theory. for slowly varying m(x), the term (13)

translates into tr(mm), so the total superpotential of the magnetic theory is

qm q + 0tr(mm) ,

(14)

where 0 is the dimensionfull parameter inherent in the magnetic theory. the ground state

near the origin of the moduli space has the following non-vanishing x-dependent expectation

values1 of the magnetic quarks and anti-quarks,

hqp
qi = p

q , p = 1, . . . , n0, q = 1, . . . , n0

(here the upper and lower indices refer to magnetic color and avor, respectively)

hq q
pi =  q

p , p = 1, . . . , n0, q = 1, . . . , n0

(here the lower index refers to magnetic color). the expectation values obey

(15)

(16)

r
p(x)p

q(x) = 0mr

q(x) .

they also satisfy the d-atness condition at each point in space, q

p r

q =  q

p r

q . with our

choice of background elds, eq.(9), one has

 = 0m0 w (x) ,  = 0m0 w (x) ,

where w and w are n0  n0 unitary matrices obeying
( w w )(x) = u(x) .

(17)

indeed, at m = m0  1, the matrices  and  are proportional to n0  n0 unit matrix, up
to magnetic color rotation. at m = m0u(x) one has  = 0m0 ucu,  = 0m0 u 

c

where uc(x) is a slowly varying matrix belonging to su(n0) subgroup of the magnetic color

group. the explicit form of uc(x) is to be found from the minimization of the gradient

energy, and it is not important for our purposes.

1hereafter we use the same notations for superelds and their scalar components.

10

since the gradient energy has to vanish at spatial innity, w (x) and w (x) are constant
at |x|  , so they can be characterized by their winding numbers n[w ] and n[ w ].
because of eq. (17) one has

n[w ] + n[ w ] = n[u] .

in this ground state, the magnetic color is broken down to su(nf  nc  n0). at small
m0, the ground state (15), (16) is close to the origin of the moduli space, so the magnetic

description is reliable.

both the baryon number and t f

8 are broken in this vacuum. however, there exist

combinations of these generators and magnetic color generators that remain unbroken. re-
calling [8] that the baryon number of magnetic quarks equals nc/(nf  nc) and that the
magnetic quarks and anti-quarks transform as ( nf , 1) and (1, nf ), respectively, under the
global su(nf )l  su(nf )r group, the unbroken generators are

b = b 

nc

nf  nc
8 + t mc

8

t mc

8

,

,

(18)

(19)

8 = t f
t 

where t mc

8

is the following generator of the magnetic color group,

t mc

8 = diag 1, . . . , 1,

n0

nf  nc  n0

, . . . 

n0

nf  nc  n0! .

as the fundamental quarks and gluons are singlets under magnetic color, the induced charges
hbi and ht 
8i calculated in the magnetic theory should match eqs. (10) and (11). let us
check that this is indeed the case.

the induced charges appear in the magnetic theory through x-dependent mass terms of

fermions. these are generated by the expectation values (15), (16). the mass terms coming

from the superpotential (14) are

 p
q(x)i

pq

i + p

j
q(x) 
pq
j ,

(20)

11

where ,  and  are fermionic components of mesons, magnetic quarks and magnetic

anti-quarks, respectively. the gauge interactions give rise to other mass terms,

p
q (x)a

pq

a  p

q (x)a

p

 q
a ,

(21)

where b

a is the gluino eld, a, b = 1, . . . , (nf  nc) are magnetic color indices.

to calculate the induced baryon number hbi we observe that the only fermions carrying

non-zero b are magnetic quarks 
 = (nf  nc  n0 + 1), . . . , (nf  nc), magnetic anti-quarks j
b-charges are

i with i = 1, . . . , nf ,

 and gluinos 

p , p

. their


i

:

nc

nf  nc 

nc

nf  nc  

nc

nf  nc  n0

,

n0

nf  nc  n0! =
nf  nc  n0
nc

nc

,

nf  nc  n0

.


p :

j

 , p

 : 

hence, the induced b is due to the x-dependent mass term (21) and is equal to

nc

hbi = 

nf  nc  n0  (nf  nc  n0)(cid:16)n[w ] + n[ w ](cid:17) .

it follows from eq. (17) that hbi indeed coincides with ncn[u], the induced baryon number
calculated in the fundamental theory.

the induced charge ht 

8i is calculated in a similar way. the relevant t 

8 charges of

magnetic quarks are

u

p :


p : 
nf

nf  nc

,

nf  nc  n0
, u = (n0 + 1), . . . , nf ,

nf  n0

and similarly for magnetic anti-quarks, gluinos and mesons. we nd that both x-dependent
mass terms, (20) and (21), contribute to ht 

8i, and obtain

ht 

8i =

+

nf

nf  n0  (nf  n0)(cid:16)n[w ] + n[ w ](cid:17)
nf  nc
nf  nc  n0  (nf  nc  n0)(cid:16)n[w ] + n[ w ](cid:17) .

12

this is equal to ncn[u], so the induced t 

8 charges also match in the fundamental and low

energy theories.

4.3 softly broken sqcd

as our last example, let us consider supersymmetric qcd with small soft masses of scalar

quarks, m2

q, that explicitly break supersymmetry [11]. we again probe this theory by

introducing the term (13) into the superpotential. the restrictions on nf , nc and n0 are

the same as in the previous example.

the induced charges, as calculated in the fundamental theory, are still given by eqs.

(10) and (11). the low energy theory near the origin is still the magnetic theory, but now

with soft mass terms of scalar mesons and scalar magnetic quarks [11]. the scalar potential

of the magnetic theory near the origin at small m2

q is determined both by the superpotential

(14) and these soft terms,

v (m, q, q) = |qq + 0m|2 + |qm|2 + |m q|2 + m2

m m m + m2

q(qq + q q) + d-terms ,

(22)

where m2

m and m2

q are proportional to m2

q. were the soft terms in eq. (22) positive, the
ground state of this theory at m2
q > 0m0 would be at the origin, hqi = hqi = hmi = 0. the
masses of fermions in the magnetic theory would vanish, the induced charges hbi and ht f
8 i
would be zero, so the induced charge matching would not occur. hence, the induced charge

matching requires that either m2

q and/or m2
m0 = 0 is far away from the origin, or m2

m are negative, so that the ground state even at
q = 0, m2
m  0 with the ground state being the
same as in the previous example. this is in accord with explicit calculations. indeed, it has

been found in ref. [12] (see also ref. [13]) that m2
q < 0 at nc +1 < nf < 3nc/2, i.e., when the
magnetic theory is weakly coupled. as regards the conformal window 3nc/2  nf < 3nc,
the complete analysis of the infrared soft masses is still lacking. however, the existing results

[14] (see also ref.

[12]) suggest that either the origin q = q = m = 0 is again unstable,

or m2

q = m2

m = 0. we conclude that the induced charge matching provides qualitative

13

understanding of the behavior of soft masses in low energy description of softly broken

sqcd.

one can show that the same phenomenon occurs in softly broken supersymmetric the-

ories with so(nc) and sp(2k) gauge groups and fundamental quarks at nf , nc and k such

that the seiberg duality holds.

in particular, in theories with weakly coupled magnetic

description, the soft masses of magnetic squarks are negative. this is again in full accord

with induced charge matching conditions.

it is worth noting that there exists an example [12] where soft masses of fundamental

scalar quarks single out the vacuum at the origin of the moduli space (in the absence of the

background elds m(x)). this is the theory with sp(2k) gauge group and 2k + 4 = 2nf

quarks qi, i = 1, . . . , 2nf , in the fundamental representation. the low energy eective

theory [15] contains antisymmetric mesons mij and has superpotential pf m. one can

probe this theory by adding x-dependent mass terms mp q(x)qqqp where p = 1, . . . , nf ,

q = (nf + 1), . . . , 2nf . in the theory without soft supersymmetry breaking, the induced

charges match in a similar way as in the previous example: scalar mesons obtain the ex-
pectation values hmqp(x)i  m
after the soft scalar quark masses are introduced, the scalar potential of the low energy

qp(x) which give x-dependent masses to fermionic mesons.

theory contains soft meson masses, m2

m m m where m2

m > 0 at k > 1 [12]. at rst sight,

this ruins the induced charge matching at small m0, as the ground state appears to be at

m = 0 and no x-dependent masses of fermionic mesons seem to be generated. however,

potential, m2

the symmetries of the theory allow for a linear supersymmetry breaking term in the scalar
q, m0)mm, which shifts the ground state to hmi  m and in this way
restores induced charge matching. hence, we argue that this linear term is indeed generated

qf (m2

in the low energy theory.

14

5 discussion

let us discuss the relation between induced charges and triangle anomalies; we consider

induced baryon number in qcd as an example. we use the notations of section 4.1. the

x-dependence of the background eld m(x) can be removed at the expence of modication

of the gradient term in the quark lagrangian. namely, after the su(n0)l rotation of the
left-handed quark elds, (x)  u 1(x)(x), (x)  (x), rst n0 quarks and anti-
quarks have x-independent masses m0, and the gradient term of these quarks becomes

 i (cid:16)d + 1 5

2 al(cid:17)  where al

0 = 0, al

i = uiu 1, the covariant derivative d contains

dynamical gluon elds, and we switched to four-component notations. the addition to the

gradient term may be viewed as the interaction of massive quarks with the background

pure gauge vector elds corresponding to su(n0)l subgroup of the avor group; these

background elds are small, time-independent, and slowly varying in space.

now, consider an adiabatic process (either in minkowskian or in euclidean space-time)

in which the background vector elds al(x) (in the gauge al

0 = 0) change in time from

al

i = 0 to al

i = uiu 1, always varying slowly in space and vanishing at spatial innity

(an example of such a process is an instanton of large size). suppose that this process begins

with the system in the ground state which has zero induced charges because of the triviality

of the background. as the background vector elds interact with massive degrees of freedom

only, the system remains in its ground state in the entire process, at least order by order in

perturbation theory. the induced baryon number in the nal state  the quantity we are

interested in  is equal to hbi = r d4x j

in the gauge-invariant baryonic current j

b. hence, we recover eq. (10):

b which in turn is determined by the anomaly

hbi = 

nc

162 z d4x trf l



f l

 = ncn[u] .

(23)

this observation relates induced charges and anomalies.

let us note in passing that the phenomenon discussed in section 3 may be understood

in this language as follows. after the background eld m(x) is introduced, and its phase

15

u(x) is rotated away, there remain massless fermions interacting with the background eld

al(x). in this situation the adiabatic process does not necessarily end up in the ground

state, because some energy levels of massless fermions may cross zero.

in that case the

baryon number induced in the ground state by the background eld al

i (x) = uiu 1(x)

would be dierent from eq. (23), as the anomaly determines the total change in the baryon

number. this is the reason for the dependence of the induced charges on the parameters of

the theory (m0/0 in the example of section 3).

one may wonder whether similar phenomenon (fermion level crossing) might occur even

if all relevant fundamental fermions obtain masses upon introducing the background scalar

elds, i.e., whether the nal state might actually contain excitations carrying non-zero net

baryon number. to argue that this does not happen, let us consider qcd again. the

appearance, in the nal state, of excitations with non-zero net baryon number would show
up as a non-vanishing index of the four-dimensional euclidean dirac operator d[al] =  
(cid:16)d + 1 5
2 al(x)(cid:17)+m0, so that the vacuum-to-vacuum amplitude would vanish while matrix

elements of baryon number violating operators between the initial and nal vacua would not.
however, for arbitrary gluon elds, the eigenvalues  of the operator d[al = 0] = d +m0
obey || > m0 (the euclidean operator   d is anti-hermitean) so the operator d[al] has
no zero modes when the background elds al(x) are small (al(x)  m0 at all x) and
slowly vary in space-time. this argument implies that eq. (23) is valid in full quantum

theory even at m0 < qcd. although the situation in theories with fundamental scalars is

more complicated, it is likely that analogous arguments may be designed in those theories

as well.

finally, the same adiabatic process may be considered within the low energy eective

theory. the induced baryon number is now related to the anomaly in the eective theory,

provided all low energy degrees of freedom interacting with su(n0)l gauge elds become
massive upon introducing the mass m0 to n0 avors of fundamental quarks. as the u(1)b 
su(n0)l  su(n0)r anomalies are the same in the fundamental and low energy theories,

16

the induced baryon numbers match automatically in that case. this observation has an

obvious generalization: a sucient condition for induced charge matching is that no low

energy degrees of freedom transforming non-trivially under a subgroup of the avor group

remain massless when this subgroup is explicitly broken by masses of some fermions of

the fundamental theory. this property is certainly valid in supersymmetric theories where

no phase transition is expected to occur as the masses of some of the avors ow from

small to large values, i.e., where massive avors smoothly decouple. on the other hand,

this property does not seem to be guaranteed in non-supersymmetric models, though it is

intuitively appealing and may well be quite generic.

the authors are indebted to e. akhmedov, d. amati, g. dvali, yu. kubyshin, a. ku-

znetsov, v. kuzmin, a. penin, k. selivanov, a. smirnov, p. tinyakov and s. troitsky for

numerous helpful discussions. this research was supported in part by russian foundation

for basic research under grant 99-02-18410. the work of s.d. and d.g. is supported in part

by intas under grant 96-0457 within the research program of the international center for

fundamental physics in moscow and by issep fellowships. the work of s.d., d.g., and

m.l was supported in part by the russian academy of sciences, jrp grant 37. v.r. would

like to thank professor miguel virasoro for hopsitality at the abdus salam international

center for theoretical physics, where part of this work was carried out.

references

[1] l.b. okun, particle physics prospects: august 81, closing talk given at 10th int.

symp. on lepton and photon interactions at high energy, bonn, west germany, aug

24-28, 1981.

[2] g. t hooft, in recent developments in gauge theories, eds. g. t hooft et. al.

(plenum press, n.y., 1980), p.135.

17

[3] k. intriligator and n. seiberg, lectures on supersymmetric gauge theories and electric

- magnetic duality, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 45bc, 1 (1996) hep-th/9509066.

[4] e. poppitz and s.p. trivedi, dynamical supersymmetry breaking, hep-th/9803107.

[5] s.l. adler, w.a. bardeen, phys. rev. 192 (1969) 1517.

[6] j. goldstone and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 47 (1981) 986.

[7] v.a. rubakov, induced charges as probes of low-energy eective theories, hep-

th/9812128.

[8] n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b435 (1995) 129.

[9] a.p. polychronakos, phys. rev. d35 (1987) 1417.

[10] e. dhoker and e. farhi, nucl. phys. b248 (1984) 59.

[11] o. aharony, j. sonnenschein, m.e. peskin and s. yankielowicz, phys. rev. d52 (1995)

6157.

[12] n. arkani-hamed and r. rattazzi, exact results for nonholomorphic masses in softly

broken supersymmetric gauge theories, hep-th/9804068.

[13] h.-c. cheng and y. shadmi, nucl. phys. b531 (1998) 125.

[14] a. karch, t. kobayashi, j. kubo and g. zoupanos, phys. lett. b441 (1998) 235,

hep-th/9808178.

[15] k. intriligator and p. pouliot, phys. lett. 353b (1995) 471.

18

