9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
2
2

 
 

1
v
0
9
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

hutp-99/a016, efi-99-9
nsfitp-99-18, hep-th/9903190

spacetime and the

holographic renormalization group

vijay balasubramanian1,2  and per kraus3,

1lyman laboratory of physics, harvard university,

cambridge, ma 02138, usa

2 institute for theoretical physics,

university of california,

santa barbara, ca 93106, usa

3 enrico fermi institute,
university of chicago,
chicago, il 60637, usa

abstract

anti-de sitter (ads) space can be foliated by a family of nested surfaces
homeomorphic to the boundary of the space. we propose a holographic corre-
spondence between theories living on each surface in the foliation and quantum
gravity in the enclosed volume. the ow of observables between our interior
theories is described by a renormalization group equation. the dependence of
these ows on the foliation of space encodes bulk geometry.

1 introduction

the holographic principle [1] states that quantum gravity on a manifold can be de-
scribed by a theory dened on the boundary of that manifold. the simplest realization
of this principle has been in ads space, which, in certain cases, can be described by
a local conformal eld theory (cft) dened on the ads boundary [2]. the correla-
tion functions of the cft describe the experiments of an observer who prepares eld
congurations at innity and measures their amplitudes.

a strong version of the holographic principle would assert that quantum gravity on
any volume contained within a manifold can be described by a theory dened on the

vijayb@pauli.harvard.edu
pkraus@theory.uchicago.edu

1

boundary of that volume. the holographic dual would then describe experiments of
an observer who prepares eld congurations on the interior boundary and measures
their amplitudes.

however, such an interior holographic dual within ads cannot be a local theory.
to see this, assume that the boundary theory is local, and that bulk objects near the
boundary correspond to local excitations in the dual. then, imagine sending a light
ray radially through adsd+1, which has a metric:

ds2 = (1 + r2/2) dt2 + (1 + r2/2)1 dr2 + r2 d2

d1.

(1)

the time taken for a light ray to propagate from a point on the sphere at xed r to
the antipodal point is:

tbulk = 2z r

0

tbndy =

q1 + r2/2

dr

1 + r2/2 = 2 tan1 (r/) =  
r

=  

3
2r2 + o(r3).

22
r

+ o(r2)

(2)

(3)

2 tbulk.

as noted in [5], in the large r limit the bulk and boundary propagation times are
equal, indicating the potential consistency of a local holographic description. but
when r is nite, tbndy > tbulk, so that nonlocal boundary dynamics will be necessary
to yield the same arrival times. this also tells us that a holographic description of
at space should be nonlocal since taking    at xed r yields tbndy = 

in this note, we address the issue of interior holographic duals for ads by adopting
a wilsonian renormalization group (rg) perspective. to describe a subset of a system
we integrate out the excluded degrees of freedom. in general this will induce an
innite set of interactions in the remaining theory, making it nonlocal. in the ads
context, we foliate spacetime by surfaces m of constant radial coordinate , with
enclosed volume m. we x the values of the elds  on m and perform the bulk
path integral over the excluded volume. the result is a nonlocal functional of  which
we treat as a boundary contribution to the bulk action describing m. responses of
the resulting interior path integral to variations of  describe experiments carried
out by observers placed on m. we identify these responses with the correlation
functions of a holographic dual dened on the interior boundary. related work has
appeared recently in [6]. for some other discussions of rg equations in the ads/cft
context, see [7].

the observer at m naturally probes the interior volume with pointlike varia-
tions of the elds . in the semiclassical limit, the bulk equations of motion tell us
that these variations turn into extended variations of the elds at innity (see, e.g.,
[8] and references therein). this spreading of the elds increases as m is moved
into the interior. in the cft dual, these boundary values of bulk elds map onto
sources smeared over a characteristic scale specied by the the position of the inner

2

boundary. it is then appropriate to integrate out cft degrees of freedom at lengths
shorter than this scale. this suggests that the interior holographic theories described
above are related to the cft duals of ads spaces by coarsening transformations. we
will demonstrate that this is the case and show that, for any nested family of foliating
surfaces for ads, there is an rg equation describing the ow of observables in the
corresponding series of interior holographic duals. spacetime dieomorphisms relate
foliating families and are realized as relations between dierent ows.

2 dening the inner correspondence

we will consider euclidean ads, which is topologically a ball. foliate ads by a
family of topologically spherical surfaces indexed by a parameter  approaching 0 at
the boundary and  at the center. let m be any element of this foliating family,
with m being the enclosed volume. the ads/cft correspondence for the boundary
at  = 0 is written as [3, 4]:

ez0[0] = zm0 d es0[] = he

rm0

0 o

i = escft(0)

(4)

the two terms on the left represent the string theory path integral on ads evaluated
as a functional of the boundary data 0. on the right hand side is the eective
action for the dual conformal eld theory dened on the boundary manifold m0 in
the presence of sources 0. the spacetime action s0 contains both bulk and boundary
contributions:

s0[] = zm0 l[] +zm0

b0[0].

(5)

where the boundary terms are chosen to cancel divergences arising from the bulk
integral (see, e.g., [9]). upon performing the bulk path integral, z0[0] becomes a
functional of 0 dened on m0. since the conformal factor on the boundary of ads
actually diverges, it is convenient to cut o the space at some small  = , which can
be understood as a kind of ultraviolet regulator for the cft [10]. (we will always
take   0 in the end). we write:
xn=1zm
yj=1


dbjq(bj) (bj)

 cn(; b1    bn)

here b are boundary coordinates and  is the determinant of the induced metric on
m. the boundary term b0 in (5), when restricted to the surface m, eliminates
various contact terms that would otherwise make the expansion singular as   0 [9].
the correlation functions of the dual cft are precisely the coecients cn in the   0
limit.



n

z[] =

(6)

we are interested in dening a suitable inner correspondence between quantum
gravity on m and some theory dened on the boundary m. in the eld theory

3

limit we would like an equation analogous to (4):

ez[] = zm d es[] = escft().

(7)

consider an observer stationed on m. such an observer can probe physics in the
region m by measuring the amplitudes for various eld congurations  to occur.
the amplitudes are given by the path integral in the full ads spacetime subject to
the boundary condition that  =  on m. it is convenient to perform the path
integral in two steps. first, integrate over elds in the excluded volume m0 m to
get a nonlocal functional of :

ez[] = zm d zm0m d es0[] = zm d es[]

where

s[] = zm l[] +zm

b[].

(8)

(9)

s[] encapsulates the physics in m.

the virtue of rst integrating over the bulk elds in the excluded volume is that we
can envision doing the analogous procedure in the gauge theory. roughly speaking,
elds  correspond to smeared elds 0 at the outer boundary, and hence to smeared
sources in the gauge theory. in the cft it is then natural to form an eective action
by integrating over eld modes with wavelengths shorter than the smearing length.
matters will be made more concrete shortly when we consider the semiclassical limit.
to compute bulk correlation functions on m we perform the remaining path

integral over m to obtain a functional of ,

z[] =



xn=1zm 
yj=1


n

dbjq(bj) (bj)

 cn(; b1    bn).

(10)

we have obtained a one parameter set of correlation functions cn(; b1    bn) indexed
by  which, by construction, reduce to those in (6) as   . the dependence on
 is naturally interpreted as the renormalization group evolution of the correlation
functions.

2.1 semiclassical correspondence

in the semiclassical, small curvature, limit the bulk path integral for the outer cor-
respondence (4) is dominated by its saddlepoints. so, in the corresponding limit of
the dual cft, (4) becomes

escl(0) = escft(0).

(11)

the left hand side is now simply the ads classical action (5) evaluated as a functional
of boundary data. we might have expected multiple saddlepoints to contribute, but,

4

in euclidean signature, and at least in the nearly free limit, demanding regularity for
supergravity elds uniquely species classical solutions given the boundary data. this
even applies to the metric when the boundary data species a conformal structure
suciently close to the round one (see discussion and references in [4]). if we admit
black hole spacetimes the topology at innity is no longer a sphere  there is also
a circle whose periodicity must be chosen to achieve regularity of the solution at the
origin. again, the boundary conditions uniquely select the classical solution. multiple
solutions can exist for xed boundary conditions if we admit dierent bulk topologies.
for the present we will neglect the matter of summing over these solutions since they
do not arise in the analysis of pure ads.

to dene the inner correspondence in the eld theory limit we simply integrated
in the semiclassical limit this
over the elds in the excluded volume m0  m.
amounts to evaluating the action for a classical solution in the excluded volume with
elds taking values  at the inner boundary. again, there is a unique solution in
the bulk with the prescribed boundary conditions.

we can compute the full bulk action associated with classical solutions and express

it in terms of either the elds  or :

(12)

scl =

=



xn=1zm
yj=1

xn=1zm 
yj=1




n

n

dbjq(bj) (bj)
dbjq(bj) (bj)

 cn(; b1    bn)
 cn(; b1    bn).

to derive an rg equation we must relate the correlation functions at  to those at .
such a relation is found by noting, as above, that the classical elds  are uniquely
specied by . we display this relation in terms of a propagator:

(b) = zm q(b) g(b, b) (b).

(13)

2.2 the meaning of our construction

the meaning of our construction is most easily grasped by considering two point
functions in the inner and outer theories. in the semiclassical limit, the outer cft
two point function for widely separated operators is computed from a classical bulk
geodesic between two boundary points. our procedure for computing inner two point
functions amounts to extending the geodesic between two interior points until they
reach the outer boundary, and adding in the action for the excluded part of the
trajectory. since the geodesics spread on the way from the interior boundary to the
exterior, interior correlators at one separation are given by exterior correlators at a
larger separation. more concretely, consider ads in poincare coordinates:

ds2 =

2
2 (d2 + db2)

5

(14)

consider a scalar eld in ads in a representation of the conformal group with weight
. disturbances of this eld on the ads boundary ( = 0) propagate to the surface
at xed  via the kernel



(15)

gbb 

(2 + |b  b|2)

so a point disturbance at m0 grows to a coordinate size  at m. conversely, a
given point on m is aected by elds within a patch of coordinate size  on the
outer boundary. now imagine a observer on m who probes the system with local
sources. in terms of the original cft, such an observer only has access to sources
which are smeared over coordinate size . so her experiments can be reproduced by an
eective action in which degrees of freedom smaller than  have been integrated out 
short distance information has been lost1. integrating out degrees of freedom induces
an innite series of higher derivative terms, multiplied by powers of the dimensionful
scale . if one tries to pass to the at space limit by sending   , the coecients
of the higher derivative terms diverge, signalling an increasingly nonlocal description.
our procedure realizes the argument of susskind and witten [10] that the degrees
of freedom in an interior holographic dual should scale like the boundary area. con-
sider the surfaces m and m in poincare coordinates. we have just argued that
they are related to coarsenings of the cft at innity at scales  and . let us as-
sume, following [10], that there is a xed number of degrees of freedom per coarsened
cell in the cft at innity. then the ratio of degrees of freedom in the theories on
m and m is the ratio of areas, as desired.

an alternative procedure for dening the holographic dual of an interior volume is
to simply cut o the interior path integral at some nite boundary. this is unappeal-
ing because there are physical processes in which particles emerge from the interior
region, propagate in the exterior, and then reenter the interior. these processes are
analogous to the virtual eect of massive degrees of freedom in a wilsonian eective
action. in both cases, simply cutting o the theory throws out relevant physics. in
our approach, the eect of virtual processes is encoded in the nonlocal boundary
terms.

3 rg flow of observables

we will now show that the ow of observables between our inner theories is de-
scribed by a renormalization group equation. as before, foliate euclidean ads by a
family of surfaces homeomorphic to the boundary, and let n be the outward pointing
1if the observer can place sources on m with arbitrary precision, all cft degrees of freedom
must be retained. this is because the eect of the smearing can be undone by making experiments
at innitesimal separations on m. but of course such innite precision experiments are beyond
the validity of our supergravity analysis.

6

normal to this family of surfaces. then, if the spacetime metric is g, the induced
metric on a given foliating surface is  = g  n n. in an adapted coordinate
system, with  being the radial direction, the metric admits an adm-like decompo-
sition:

g = g d2 + ij (dbi + v i d)(dbj + v j d)
n = /g

then, from (12) and (13) we nd that

cn(; b1    bn) = zm
yj=1


n

db

jq(b

j) g(b

j, bj)

1    b
n)

 cn(; b

(16)

(17)

we have just learned that the observables of the inner theory are precisely the
outer cft correlators convolved against the kernel g. to make progress, consider
situations where we can undo the convolution by an integral transform. for example,
if the metric on m is proportional to the identity, the fourier transform converts
the convolution into a product. we will therefore refer to cn in the deconvolved basis
as the momentum space correlator cn,

cn(; b1    bn) = g(b1, k1)    g(bn, kn) cn(; k1    kn)

(18)

here the variables k parametrize the deconvolution basis. the correlator cn(;  ) is
independent of the index  of the interior surface. so the  dependence of the inner
observables is summarized by:

n cn(; b1    bn) +
xj

n ln g(bj, kj)

 cn(; b1    bn) = 0

(19)

where n is the normal vector to m. (19) is an rg equation describing wilsonian
ow of correlators in the gauge theory, in correspondence with the observations of
spacetime observers stationed on the xed surfaces m. the gradient operator
acts on the coordinates b as well as on . this equation looks unfamiliar because it
has been written for a general foliation of ads. we will see below that in poincare
coordinates it displays all the expected features of wilsonian renormalization group
ow.

3.1 example: poincare coordinates

in poincare coordinates the metric of ads is:

ds2 =

2
2 (d2 + db2)

7

(20)

and we are interested in surfaces of xed . we will work out the relation between
inner and outer observables for massive scalars. in adsd+1 the operator dual to such
a scalar has dimension :

 =

d
2

+ ,

d2 + 4m2.

 =

1
2

(21)

to fourier transform both sides of (17) it is convenient to dene the inner and outer
correlators in momentum space:

cn(; k1    kn) = zm 
yj=1


n

dbjq(bj)eikj bj

 cn(; b1    bn)

(22)

next, since the propagator g approaches (b  b)/q(b) as   , the fourier
transform with respect to b gives g(b, k) = eikb. it is easy to construct a massive
scalar mode solution that approaches such a plane wave on m from the complete
bases provided in, e.g., [11]. the propagator is then a bessel function:

g(b, k) =   

!d/2   k(q)

k(q)! eikb

with q2 = k  k. this gives:

cn(; k1    kn) = (cid:18)

(cid:19)nd/2 
yj

k(qj)

k(qj)

 cn(; k1    kn)

(23)

(24)

to gain further insight we need the power series expansion of the bessel function:2

k(z)  z[1 + f (z2)]
f (z2) =



e(n) z2n  z2

xn=1

(25)

e(n) z2n



xn=0

(for purposes of argument we have have taken  to be generic  when  is integral
the expansion also involves logarithmic terms.) using this in (24) we nd:

cn(; k1    kn) = (cid:18)

(cid:19)n(d) 
yj

1 + f (q2
1 + f (q2

j 2)

j 2)

 cn(; k1    kn)

(26)

we implicitly understood all along that   0. since the theory is conformally
invariant, this limit yields the scaling behaviour

2the precise coecients e

 are not important for us.

cn(; k1    kn) = n(d) cn(k1    kn)

(27)

8

where cn is nite. rearranging terms, the inner correlator becomes

n(d) 
yj

(1 + f (q2

j 2)

 cn(; k1    kn) = cn(k1    kn)

(28)

first consider (qj)  1 for all j. then the interior correlators at  and  are related
by a rescaling (/)n(d). this is exactly the behaviour expected for low energy
correlation functions in a wilsonian eective treatment. we argued in sec. 2 that the
observables on the surface m in poincare coordinates were smeared at a scale .
a wilsonian treatment requires a rescaling of coordinates to keep the numerical size
of the cuto xed. precisely this eect is achieved by the weyl factor in the metric
on m which keeps the proper size of the smearing xed. this in turn results in
scaling of the correlators as we ow inwards (to the infrared).

more generally, since c on the right hand side of (28) is independent of , we have

an rg equation:

"



  n(  d)# cn(; k1    kn) +
xj






ln[1 + f (q2

j 2)]

 cn(; k1    kn) = 0

(29)
when all the momenta q are small, the second term vanishes and, as expected, we
have the rg equation for pure scaling of infrared wilsonian correlators. violations of
scaling appear in the second term and are suppressed at low momenta. transforming
back into position space gives:

"



  n(  d)# cn +
xj






i )]
ln[1 + f (22
 cn = 0

(30)

3.2 bulk field equations from cft?

in the semiclassical limit, the interior eective theories that we have constructed are
related to the exterior cft by a renormalization group transformation, suggesting a
direct relation between the bulk eld equations and the rg equations in the cft.
this is at rst surprising since the bulk eld equations are second order while the
rg equations are rst order. however, there is no real conict because demanding
regularity of the bulk solutions in euclidean space eliminates one solution, making
the equations eectively rst order. related observations have been made in [6].

the connection can be made more explicit by recalling the correspondence between
boundary behavior of the bulk elds in adsd+1 and sources and operators in the gauge
theory [3, 4, 11, 12, 13]. up to a  dependent scaling, sources correspond to the
boundary values of bulk elds while operators correspond to their radial derivatives.
schematically:

j  ,

o   .

(31)

9

in the cft, j appears as a coupling to the gauge invariant operator o of the form
r j(b)o(b). in (31), o is understood as the expectation value of the operator. now

consider the structure of the bulk equation for a free scalar eld of mass m:

(2  m2) () ei~k~x = 0  [22

 + (1  d)   ~k2 2  m2]() = 0.

(32)

if we use the relations (31), the eld equation takes the form

"




+ d0#o  hd1 + d2

~k2 2i j = 0.

(33)

again, we are being schematic  d0, d1 and d2 are constants. the source j is not an
independent variable since it determines the expectation value for o. in momentum
space, j can be expressed as o times a function of ~k2. using this, we nd that (33)
has the same form as (29) with n = 1.
to make this connection precise, various issues such as the scheme dependence of
the rg equations must be confronted. nevertheless, there is reason to hope that the
eld equations of supergravity can be derived from the cft via the renormalization
group. work in this direction is in progress.

4 discussion: geometry and rg flows

we have argued that there is a natural way to dene an interior holographic corre-
spondence between physics inside nite volumes m and a theory on the boundary
m. the correlation functions of the interior theory are related to the exterior
observables by a coarsening transformation. a given family of foliating surfaces then
leads to a particular ow of smeared observables summarized by a renormalization
group equation. changing the foliation leads to a dierent ow.
in fact, we are
learning that spacetime geometry arises in a holographic context as the geometry of
the space of rg ows.

consider a cft dened on a plane and a family of theories derived from it by
coarsening transformations. concretely, let (b) be a eld in the cft, and dene
coarsened elds (; b) by convolving  against a kernel k which has a characteristic
scale . as  increases from 0 to , we arrive at a family of smeared theories. in
some natural sense there should be a geometry on this stack of theories. first of
all, a coarsening transformation should be accompanied by a rescaling of lengths, and
that is implemented by rescaling the metric of the smeared theories.
in addition,
we would like a notion of distance or separation between the original cft and its
cousins that depends on the coarsening parameter . for the class of kernels inspired
by ads/cft, we have learned that there is a natural distance, and it is given by
the the geodesic length between the xed  poincare surfaces. in this sense, anti-de
sitter spaces induce a geometry on a certain class of rg ows of the dual cfts.

10

in general there is no requirement that a eld should be coarsened uniformly. in-
deed, it is often convenient in lattice eld theory to use meshes of dierent sizes in
dierent regions. within the ads/cft correspondence this freedom is realized in our
ability to pick a general family of foliating surfaces for ads space. dieomorphisms,
or transformations between dierent families of foliating surfaces, are then manifestly
realized as transformations between dierent rg ows. the explicit action of dieo-
morphisms on our ows is easy to derive by acting with the generators on the kernel
g.

several questions arise. first, why is the class of smearing kernels selected by
the ads/cft correspondence distinguished? after all, there are many more ways
to smear eld variables than implied by solutions to ads wave equations. second, is
there a natural geometry on the space of rg ows that can be derived intrinsically
from gauge theory considerations? given two theories with the same set of elds,
we can detect the dierence between them by computing and comparing correlation
functions. it is possible that there is a natural measure of distance between theo-
ries that can be derived in this way. the answers to these questions are likely to
be intimately related. we are looking for a statement that some classes of coarsen-
ing transformations lead to rg ows on which there is a natural geometry. that
geometry, in a holographic context, is spacetime.

acknowledgments:
we thank steve giddings, david gross, gary horowitz, finn larsen, miao li,
emil martinec, george minic, nikita nekrasov, joe polchinski, and ruud siebelink
for helpful discussions. v.b. is supported by the harvard society of fellows and nsf
grants nsf-phy-9802709 and nsf-phy-9407194. p.k. is supported by nsf grant
phy-9600697.

references

[1] g.

t hooft,

1993:0284-296, gr-qc/9310026;
j.math.phys.36:6377-6396,1995, hep-th/9409089.

dimensional reduction in quantum gravity,

salamfest
l. susskind, the world as a hologram,

[2] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and super-

gravity, adv. theor. math. phys.2:231-252 (1998), hep-th/9711200.

[3] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from

noncritical string theory, phys. lett. b428:105 (1998), hep-th/9802109.

[4] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys.2:253

(1998), hep-th/9802150.

11

[5] g. horowitz, n. itzhaki,

black holes, shock waves, and causality in the

ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9901012;
l. susskind, holography in the at space limit, hep-th/9901079;
d. kabat and g. lifschytz, gauge theory origins of supergravity causal struc-
ture, hep-th/9902073;
d. bak and s.j. rey, holographic view of causality and locality via branes in
ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9902101.

[6] m. porrati and a. starinets, rg xed points in supergravity duals of 4-d eld

theory and asymptotically ads spaces, hep-th/9903085

[7] e. alvarez and c. gomez, geometric holography, the renormalization group

and the c theorem, nucl. phys. b541 (1999) 441, hep-th/9807226;
e.t. akhmedov, a remark on the ads/cft correspondence and the renor-
malization group ow, phys. lett. b442 (1998) 152, hep-th/9806217.

[8] a. peet and j. polchinski, uv/ir relations in ads dynamics, phys. rev. d18

(1978) 3565, hep-th/9809022

[9] g. chalmers and k. schalm, holographic normal ordering and multiparticle

states in the ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9901144;
v. balasubramanian and p. kraus, a stress tensor for anti-de sitter gravity,
hep-th/9902121.

[10] l. susskind and e. witten, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter space,

hep-th/9805114.

[11] v. balasubramanian, p. kraus and a. lawrence, bulk vs. boundary dynamics
in anti-de sitter spacetime, phys. rev. d59, (1999), 046003, hep-th/9805171.

[12] t. banks, m. douglas, g. horowitz, and e. martinec, ads dynamics from

conformal eld theory, hep-th/9808016

[13] v. balasubramanian, p. kraus, a. lawrence and s.p. trivedi, holographic
probes of anti-de sitter spacetimes, hep-th/9808017, to appear in phys. rev.
d.

12

