kuns-1566
hep-th/9903146

an uncertainty relation of space-time

naoki sasakura

department of physics, kyoto university, kyoto 606-8502, japan

march, 1999

abstract

we propose an uncertainty relation of space-time. it is characterized by gt .
v , where t and v denote a characteristic time scale and a spatial volume, re-
spectively. using this uncertainty relation, we give qualitative estimations for the
entropies of a black hole and our universe. we obtain qualitative agreements with
the known results. the holographic principle of t hooft and susskind is repro-
duced. we also discuss the cosmology and show a relation to the cosmic holo-
graphic principle of fischler and susskind. however, as for the maximal entropy

of a system with an energy e, we obtain a formula pev /g2 with v denoting

the volume of the system, which is distinct from the bekenstein entropy formula
er/ with r denoting the length scale of the system.

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
3
2

 
 

2
v
6
4
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

sasakura@gauge.scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp

1 introduction

despite the various excellent attempts so far, the cosmological constant problem is remaining

as one of the major mysteries in physics [1].
if we believe the locality of our world, the
fundamental degrees of freedom of a system should be the degrees of freedom at a suciently
small scale, because, then, we can make a prediction at any scale larger than the small scale.

the natural small scale associated to gravity is the planck length. the fundamental degrees
of freedom of gravity is believed to be anyhow associated to this planck length. then our

general knowledge of quantum eld theory tells that the vacuum quantum uctuations of these
degrees of freedom induce a cosmological constant in the huge order of (planck length)4,
since a cosmological constant can exist in the general relativity, which is well established as
the theory of gravity for macroscopic phenomena.

on the other hand, turning to the matter sector, qcd is well established as a quantum

eld theory of an su(3) non-abelian gauge eld (and quark elds). qcd is an asymptotically
free eld theory, and the non-abelian gauge eld is weakly interacting at a suciently small

scale. in such a small scale, the non-abelian gauge eld behaves like a classical eld, and we
may safely insist that the fundamental degrees of freedom of qcd are the (classical) non-

abelian gauge eld. however, in quantum gravity, we have a conict between the locality and
the weakness of the interactions. although the metric tensor eld describes the macroscopic
phenomena quite well, the interaction becomes stronger in a smaller scale. if we impose the

locality of our world, the fundamental degrees of freedom of gravity should have quantum
mechanical properties as their basic properties. the quantum mechanical properties may be

incorporated by an uncertainty relation of space-time.

in this paper, we propose a space-time uncertainty relation, and question whether the
fundamental scale associated to gravity is really the planck length. our proposal looks quite

unusual at rst sight, but turns out to be consistent with the known results. in section 2, we
explain the motivation for our proposal. based on the space-time uncertainty relation, we nd

that the density of the degrees of freedom vanishes in an innitely stretching space-time, which
might be a nice property to solve the cosmological constant problem. in section 3, we evaluate

the entropy in a spatial region as a function of the volume and the energy of the region, and
compare it with the previously known results. in section 4, we perform a thermodynamics.
in section 5, we evaluate the entropy and the energy density originating from the space-time

itself in our universe. in section 6, we summarize our results and give some discussions. in
appendix, we show the derivation of the entropy formula used in section 3. throughout this

paper, we use a unit system with c = 1.

1

2 a space-time uncertainty relation

the fundamental degrees of freedom of the general relativity is the metric tensor eld, which

is associated to each point in the (3+1)-dimensional space-time. it is implicitly assumed that
we can construct a coordinate system and measure the values of the metric tensor eld. this
process seems to have no diculties in the classical mechanics. we could arrange clocks in

an appropriate way and measure the metric eld by interchanging the light or some particles
among them. as one arranges more clocks in a spatial region, the measurement would

become ner. one might worry about the inuence from the masses of the clocks themselves,
when the density of the clocks becomes larger. but it would not contradict the principles

of the classical mechanics to make a clock with an arbitrarily small mass, though it would
become an arbitrarily hard problem in engineering.

however, in the quantum mechanics, one notices a serious diculty in the above process.

as the mass of each clock is smaller, the coordinate system decays in a shorter time. to see
this, let us consider the construction of a coordinate system for a time interval t and with a

spatial neness x in a minkowski space-time. since a clock must be localized in a region
with the scale x, the clock has inevitably a momentum of the order p  /x, obtained
from the uncertainty relation of the quantum mechanics. thus the clocks are moving with
a nite velocity of order v  /mx, where m denotes the masses of the clocks. this
means that the coordinate system will be destroyed by the quantum eect in a nite period
x/v  m(x)2/. this period must be larger than the time interval t of the coordinate.
hence we obtain

t . m(x)2/.

(1)

this gives a lower bound for the clock mass m for given t and x.

from (1), we need clocks with a larger mass to construct a ner coordinate system.

however we also have a maximum value of a clock mass, because each clock should not
become a black hole. to measure the gravitational eld, it should be possible to interchange

the light or particles among clocks. thus the schwarzschild radius should not exceed the
uncertainty x of each clock:

gm . x.

(2)

the clock mass can be chosen arbitrary if it satises (1) and (2). thus the condition for
the existence of such a clock mass is

gt . (x)3.

(3)

2

since we cannot construct an appropriate coordinate system unless the inequality (3) is
satised, it would be natural to propose that the inequality (3) is the property of a space-

time itself with t and x denoting the time scale and the spatial uncertainty of a space-time,
respectively. regarding (x)3 as the volume associated to each clock, (3) would be rewritten
in the form

gt . v,

(4)

where v denotes a volume uncertainty.

a aw in the above derivation is that we neglected the dynamical eect caused by the
gravitational eld generated by the clocks. one easily nds from (1) that a coordinate
system is destroyed in a much shorter time by the gravitational eects among the clocks
themselves than the quantum eects. to justify the neglection, we should consider the case

the distances among clocks are much larger than the neness x. in this case, the neness
x represents the uncertainty of the coordinate associated to each clock.

an unusual point of the inequality (3) is that the minimal spatial length x has a positive
correlation with the time interval t . although the left-hand side of (3) seems to be made

arbitrarily small, we cannot detect an arbitrarily small spatial length scale. to show this, let
us suppose a test particle is injected into a system to detect a structure with a length scale
x of the system by a collision experiment. since the speed of the particle is smaller than the
speed of light, the collision experiment needs time longer than x. thus, from (3), we have

gx < gt . (x)3,

(5)

which tells that the minimal length detectable is indeed the planck length g.

when we take the time scale t very large, the inequality (3) tells quite an unusual thing
for a space-time. if the time scale t diverges, the neness x also diverges. this means that

a space-time with an innite characteristic time scale has a vanishing density of degrees of
freedom. we will use this property in the discussions on the cosmological constant problem
in section 5.

from (4), it would be natural to propose that a fundamental degree of freedom of quantum

gravity is associated to a nite spatial volume determined by

v = cbtgt,

(6)

where cbt is a numerical constant. we will discuss its numerical value in section 5, but we just
neglect it for a meanwhile. we call each such fundamental space-time region a space-time bit

in this paper.

3

3 the number of bits in a region with an energy

in this section, we discuss the maximal number of the space-time bits in a spatial region with

a total volume v and a total energy e, and give a formula for the entropy associated to the
region.

suppose a spatial region is composed of bits labeled by an integer i = 1,    , n. we assume

the total spatial volume v be partitioned by the bits

v =

vi.

n

xi=1

(7)

we now use the uncertainty inequality for energy: e  /t . we assume also that the total
energy is partitioned by the bits. then

e =

n

xi=1

ei &



ti 

n

xi=1

g2
vi

.

n

xi=1

(8)

in the last equality, we have used (6). under the constraint (7), the most right-hand side of
(8) takes its minimum value when each volume of the bits, vi, takes the same value v /n.
thus we obtain an inequality

or

e &

g2n 2

v

,

n .r ev
g2 .

(9)

(10)

there is no reason to believe that the maximum value of the number of the bits in a region
agrees with the entropy associated to it. however, in the appendix, we give a discussion

which illustrates that the right-hand side of (10) is in fact approximately proportional to the
entropy1:

where c0 is a proportional factor that is a constant in the leading approximation.

s(e, v )  c0r ev
g2 ,

(11)

the right-hand side of (10) becomesper3/g2 for a system with a characteristic scale r.
thus the equation (10) has an extra factor pr/eg, compared with the so-called bekenstein

entropy bound er/ [2, 3]. in the case the schwarzschild bound ge < r is satised, the
bound (10) is larger than the bekenstein entropy bound. thus (10) is distinct from the

bekenstein entropy bound but does not contradict it.

in the case ge > r, the entropy

1the entropy in this paper is dimensionless.

4

formula (11) gives a value smaller than the bekenstein bound. this plays an important role

in explaining the entropy of our universe in section 5.

substituting (10) with the schwarzschild bound ge < r, we obtain

n .

r2
g

.

(12)

this is the basic inequality of the holographic principle of t hooft and susskind [4] that the

world can be described by the degrees of freedom on a two-dimensional surface. in the case
of a black hole, the schwarzschild bound is saturated. regarding r2 as the area of the black
hole, we obtain a qualitative agreement with the bekenstein-hawking entropy formula [5, 3].

4 thermodynamics

in this section we discuss thermodynamics based on the entropy formula (11).

using the rst law of the thermodynamics de = t ds  p dv , we nd

and

t =(cid:18) s

=

e(cid:19)1
p = t (cid:18) s

2

c0rg2e

v

,

v (cid:19) =

e
v

.

if we assume the energy distribution is uniform, we obtain from (14)

p = ,

(13)

(14)

(15)

where  denotes the energy density. if we regard r as v 1/3, we instead obtain p = e/3v = /3
from the bekenstein entropy formula s  er. this is the same relation between the energy
density and the pressure as radiation, while we obtain a distinct relation (15). the relation
(15) describes the most incompressible uid that is consistent with the special relativity.
the sound propagates at the velocity of light. this is an expected result because the

entropy formula (11) is manifestly lorentz invariant. this light-speed propagation might be
understood as that of graviton. eq. (15) is distinct from p =  = , either, which we
would have if the cosmological constant term was interpreted as an energy-momentum tensor.

the pressure (15) would also play important roles in the black hole physics and cosmology.

5

5 cosmological implications

in this section, we discuss the entropy of our universe and then discuss the cosmological

constant problem.

the total entropy of our universe would be well estimated by the entropy produced at the
planckian time tp = lp = g from the big bang. substituting t = tp into (6), the volume
vp of a bit at the planckian time is

thus the total number of the bits in the universe at the planckian time is estimated as

vp  gtp = (lp )3.

np 

r3
p

lp (cid:19)3
vp (cid:18)rp

,

(16)

(17)

where rp denotes the size of the observable part of our universe at the planckian time. thus,
using (11) and e  np /tp , we obtain the entropy of our universe as

su s np v

lp (cid:19)3
tpg  np (cid:18)rp

 1090.

(18)

here we used rp  1030lp obtained from the friedman-robertson-walker (frw) cosmological
model with the epoch of matter-radiation density equality teq  1011 sec. the value (18) is
very near to the entropy obtained from the 2.7 k cosmic microwave background.

this value (18) of the entropy of our universe has been recently discussed from the point
of view of the cosmic holographic principle [6, 7, 8]. fischler and susskind [6] have shown that

the cosmic holographic principle gives a bound on the expansion rate and it is translated to
a bound on the equation of state. the bound is saturated by the most incompressible perfect
uid which appeared in section 4. we can obtain the same bound by imposing the second law

of thermodynamics, namely the entropy of our universe should not decrease with time. to
show this, let us assume a(t)  tp, where a(t) is the scale factor of the frw metric. then,
v (t)  t from (6) and v (t)  t3p. thus, by a similar argument as in deriving (18), we obtain
the behavior of entropy

thus, for the second law to be satised, we must have

s(t)  n(t)  t3p1.

1
3

,

p 

6

(19)

(20)

which can be translated to the bound   1 for the equation of state p = . relations
between the generalized second law and the cosmic holographic principle are discussed in [8].

as we discussed in sec. 2, the notion of a space-time bit seems to seriously contradict the
classical notion of the (3+1)-dimensional space-time, if the range of time is innite. this

suggests that the space-time volume operator r d4xg does not exist in quantum grav-

ity. since the cosmological constant is the coupling constant associated to this operator,
the suggestion indicates that we cannot introduce the cosmological constant into quantum
gravity. however, our universe does not have an innite range of time, so we expect there
be an analogous term as a cosmological constant. we can estimate this as follows. we choose
the age of the universe tu as the characteristic time scale. then, from (6), the volume of a
space-time bit of our universe is

each bit will have an energy /tu coming from the uncertainty relation. thus the energy
density of our universe originating from the space-time itself is obtained as

vu  cbtgtu .

(21)

st 



tu vu 

1

cbtgt 2
u

.

(22)

this is in the same order as the critical density c = 3h 2/8g, where h is the hubbles
constant, and so might be large enough to change relevantly the evolution scenario of our
universe.

we now give an argument to estimate the numerical constant cbt in (6). let us consider
a frw cosmological model with a vanishing spatial curvature, and, as a matter, consider a
perfect uid with the thermodynamic property given in section 4. the conservation law of

the stress-energy tensor,  + 3( + p ) a/a = 0, determines the density as

where c is a numerical constant. substituting (23) into the evolution equation 3 a2/a2 = 8g,
we obtain a3 = 24gct, and hence

 =

c
a6 ,

(23)

 =

1

24gt2 .

(24)

since the general relativity is a perfect description at least for a macroscopic object, it would
be natural to demand that the result (24) should agree with (22) for tu = t. moreover, since
a(t)  t1/3, this evolution is an adiabatic process as can be seen from (19), and is consistent
with the conservation of the stress-energy tensor used in the derivation of (23). thus we obtain

cbt  24.

7

(25)

an important comment is that the perfect uid with the thermodynamic properties in

section 4 does not fully represent the properties of space-time bits. as an example in the
frw model of a at spatial curvature, let us consider the case there exist dust. since the
energy density of dust behaves as 1/a3 and decreases more slowly than (23), the evolution
of the universe is dominated by dust after a suciently long time. then the scale factor
behaves as a  t2/3 in this regime, and, substituting it into (23), we obtain   1/t4. this
contradicts (22), which was derived simply from the uncertainty relation of energy and time.

we propose that the thermodynamic properties change somehow in the regime and (22) is the
correct answer. substituting (25) into (22), the ratio of the energy density originating from
the space-time itself to the critical density becomes

st =

st
c 

1

9(htu )2 .

(26)

comparing with the observational data, since htu  1, a good portion of the total energy
density of our universe originates from the space-time itself.

since the time scale of our universe is very large, it would be interesting to estimate the

length scale of the space-time bit. we obtain

(cbtgtu )1/3  1014 m  (10 mev)1,

(27)

where we have taken tu = 1010 year. although this energy scale is much lower than the planck
energy and is within the range of the high energy experiment, it is not clear whether or how
this length scale can be seen by a high energy experiment or an astrophysical observation.

6 summary and discussions

in this paper, we have proposed an uncertainty relation of space-time, and have estimated some

quantities in quantum gravity. an interesting point is that, although the proposed uncertainty
relation is very much dierent from the usually expected relations such as tx & l2
p or x & lp ,
we have obtained the results qualitatively consistent with the known results, but have not

found any serious deviations from them. the purpose of this paper is merely to show the
surprise of the consistencies, but not to give a concrete way to calculate the quantities in
quantum gravity.

of course we hope that the uncertainty relation we have proposed turns out to be an
intermediate notion which catches an essential property of quantum gravity. the most peculiar

is that our space-time uncertainty relation is not consistent with the cosmological constant

8

term. nowadays the most promising direction towards quantum gravity is the string theory.

the microscopic derivation of the entropy formula for a bps black hole from d-brane dynamics
is marvelous [9]. the uncertainty relations in the string theory are the kinds of tx & l2
s or
x & lmin [10], which work evidently as an ultraviolet cuto. the reduction of the degrees of
freedom in the infrared is realized through a duality which interchanges a small scale and a
large scale dynamics [11, 10]. thus there would be a chance for an uncertainty relation similar

to ours to be derived from the string theory. we hope this as well as that our space-time
uncertainty relation will become a hint to construct a new theory describing quantum gravity.

finally, in the lattice approaches to quantum gravity, an uncertainty relation of the kind
x, t & lmin seems to be assumed implicitly [12]. our uncertainty relation may provide a new
direction for such approaches.

note added

thought experiments similar to that in section 2 were considered in [13] to derive the un-

certainty in the measurement of a space-time distance. we would like the thank y.j. ng for
this information. we would also like to thank t. yoneya for explaining in detail the stringy

uncertainty relation and informing us some references.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank h. hata for reading carefully the manuscript. this work was sup-
ported in part by grant-in-aid for scientic research from ministry of education, science and

culture (#09640346) and priority area: supersymmetry and unied theory of elementary
particles (#707).

appendix

in this appendix, we evaluate a quantity which is similar to an entropy in the statistical
mechanics to illustrate that the right hand side of (10) can be regarded as a quantity propor-

tional to the entropy of space-time. what we shall do here is just an example, but is not a
proof because we do not have any reliable microscopic theory of quantum gravity.

let us consider a space-time with the total number of bits n, the total volume v and the
total energy e. the quantity we evaluate is a phase volume of energies and volumes with the

9

constraint (4):

(n, v, e) =

n

yi=1(cid:18)z 

0 z 

0

dvidei

g2 (cid:0)viei  g2(cid:1)(cid:19)   n
xi=1

vi  v!   n
xi=1

ei  e! ,

(28)

where (y) denotes the step function (y) = 1 for y  0 and otherwise vanishing. the laplace
transform of (28) is evaluated as

dv de
g2 ev e(n, v, e)

0

0

n

=

(n, , ) = z 
0 z 
yi=1z 
0 z 
= (cid:20)z 
= "
= (cid:20)

g2

dv

2

0

dvidei

g2 eviei(cid:0)viei  g2(cid:1)
eg2/v v(cid:21)n
k1(2pg2)#n

pg2

(g2)3/4 exp(cid:16)2pg2(cid:17) h(cid:16)2pg2(cid:17)(cid:21)n

,

(29)

where k1(z) is a bessel function of imaginary argument, and h(z) is a function with the
following asymptotic series for large z:

h(z) =



xn=0

(3/2 + n)

n!(3/2  n)(2z)n .

(30)

the h(z) can be well approximated by 1 if z is suciently large. in the calculation below, we
shall neglect h(z), and the consistency of this neglection will be checked later.

the (n, v, e) is obtained by the inverse laplace transform of (29):

(n, v, e) =z i

iz i

i

dd (n, , ) exp (v + e) .

(31)

the integration would be approximated by the saddle point method. the saddle point is

determined by

s(n, , )  n(cid:18)1

2

ln() 
s(n, , )

s(n, , )

3
4

ln(g2)  2pg2(cid:19) + v + e,

=



= 0.



(32)

10

the solution is

0 =

0 =

substituting this back, we obtain

3n

,

.

3n

4v (1 pg2n 2/v e)
4e(1 pg2n 2/v e)
n0(cid:19) ,
2(cid:19) z 

ln(cid:18)3

3

ln((n, v, e))  s(n, 0, 0) = n0f(cid:18) n
4(cid:19) +

ln() 

3
2

2

f (z) = (cid:18) 1
n0 = r ev
g2 .

(33)

(34)

(35)

3
2

z ln(cid:18) z

1  z(cid:19) ,

for given e and v , the maximum value of (34) with respect to n will give its total entropy.
the function f (z) takes its maximum value f (z0)  1.3 at z0  0.5. the error by neglecting
h(z) is just z0 ln(h(z0))  0.1, and hence would be in the next order. thus we obtain

s(v, e)  1.4r ev
g2 .

(36)

references

[1] for reviews, see, s. weinberg, astro-ph/9610044; rev. mod. phys. 61 (1989) 1.

[2] j.d. bekenstein, phys. rev. d23 (1981) 287.

[3] for a review, see, j.d. bekenstein, gr-qc/9409015.

[4] g. t hooft, gr-qc/9310026.

l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377.

[5] j. bekenstein, phys. rev. d7 (1973) 2333; phys. rev. d9 (1974) 3292.

s.w. hawking, phys. rev. d13 (1976) 191.

[6] w. fischler and l. susskind, hep-th/9806039.

[7] d. bak and s.-j. rey, hep-th/9811008; hep-th/9902173.

a.k. biswas, j. maharana and r.k. pradhan, hep-th/9811051.
s.k. rama and t. sarkar, hep-th/9812043.

g. veneziano, hep-th/9902126.

11

[8] r. easther and d.a. lowe, hep-th/9902088.

[9] a. strominger and c. vafa, phys. lett. b379 (1996) 99.

for reviews, see, j. maldacena, hep-th/9607235; a.w. peet, class. quant. grav. 15

(1998) 3291.

[10] for a review, see, m. li and t. yoneya, hep-th/9806240.

[11] l. susskind and e. witten, hep-th/9805114.

l. susskind, hep-th/9901079.
t. yoneya, hep-th/9902200.

[12] t. regge, nuovo cim. 19 (1961) 558.

h. hamber, in critical phenomena, random systems, gauge theories, proceedings of

the les houches summer school, session xliii, ed. k. osterwalder and r. stora (north
holland, amsterdam, 1986).

the dynamical triangulation approach is reviewed in
j. ambjorn, hep-th/9411179, lectures presented at the 1994 les houches summer school
fluctuating geometries in statistical mechanics and field theory.

[13] h. salecker and e.p. wigner, phys. rev. 109 (1958) 571.

f. karolyhazy, nuovo cim. a42 (1966) 390.

y.j. ng and h. van dam, mod. phys. lett. a9 (1994) 335; a10 (1995) 2801.
g. amelino-camelia, mod. phys. lett. a9 (1994) 3415.

12

