iassns-hep-99-27

hep-th/9903224

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
8
1

 

 
 

2
v
4
2
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the d1/d5 system and singular cft

nathan seiberg and edward witten

school of natural sciences

institute for advanced study

olden lane, princeton, nj 08540

we study the conformal eld theory of the d1/d5 system compactied on x (x is t4 or

k3). it is described by a sigma model whose target space is the moduli space of instantons

on x. for values of the parameters where the branes can separate, the spectrum of

dimensions in the conformal eld theory exhibits a continuum above a gap. this continuum

leads to a pathology of the conformal eld theory, which explains a variety of problems

in various systems. in particular, we explain the apparent discrepancy between dierent

methods of nding the spectrum of chiral elds at certain points in the moduli space of

the system.

2/99

1. introduction

the d1/d5 system, which has been much studied of late, is constructed from branes
in r6  x, where x is t4 or k3. one considers q5 d5-branes wrapped on x, making
strings in r6; and one adds q1 d1-branes that are localized on x and parallel to the
strings made from the vebranes. if q1 and q5 are large, this system has a supergravity
description as a black string, whose near horizon geometry [1] looks like ads3  s3  x.
in this limit, the d1/d5 system is believed [2] to be described by a conformal eld theory
on the boundary of ads3  s3. (the boundary in question is a conformal boundary in
the sense of penrose [3].)

one can generalize the d1/d5 system by turning on various other elds or charges,

such as theta angles, rr elds, or d3-branes wrapped on two-cycles in x. however, the

simplest d1/d5 system with no such extra elds has the basic property that the branes

can separate at no cost in energy. in fact, any collection of d5 branes (wrapped on x)
and d1 branes (localized on x), with all branes parallel in r6, is bps-saturated (if the

theta angles and rr elds are zero). hence, the d1/d5 system can break into pieces at

no cost in energy. the goal of the present paper is to study the implications of this for the

boundary conformal eld theory.

one description of the low energy physics of this system is provided by the u (q5)

gauge theory on the d5-branes. the d1-branes can be interpreted as q1 instantons in
this gauge theory, and the d3-branes correspond to magnetic uxes, representing a non-
zero rst chern class. we denote by m the moduli space of u (q5) instantons on x with
onebrane charge1 q1 and with c1 determined by the number of threebranes. the dynamics
of our system is described by a (4, 4) sigma model whose target space is m.

to reproduce the pure d1/d5 system, we set c1 = 0. then we expect to see in
the gauge theory that the branes can separate. in fact, an instanton can become small,

and separate from the d1/d5 system as a d1-brane. or the structure group of a u (q5)
instanton might reduce to u (q
1 in the two
factors (and q
1 = q1). then the two groups of branes, with respective
5 ), can separate in r6. a special case of this, with
quantum numbers (q
1 , q
(q
5) = (0, 1), is the emission of a vebrane, a process that is t -dual to shrinking of

5)  u (q
1 +q
5) and (q

5 ) with instanton numbers q

1 and q

5 +q

5 = q5, q

1, q

1, q

an instanton and its emission as a d1-brane.

1 for x = t4, the onebrane charge q1 equals the instanton number q

1, while for x = k3,

q1 = q

1  q5. we will loosely refer to q1 as the instanton number.

1

in any of these cases, the separation of the branes is described in terms of gauge

theory by a passage from a higgs to a coulomb branch. to see this, one uses an eective

description as a two-dimensional gauge theory on the string. for example, the emission of

a small instanton is described by an eective u (1) gauge theory in 1 + 1 dimensions with

q5 hypermultiplets of charge 1. this theory has a higgs branch, describing a non-small

instanton, and a coulomb branch, describing a d1-brane that has been ejected from the

d1/d5 system. the two branches meet at the small instanton singularity. similarly, the
1 , q
1, q
splitting of the (q1, q5) system to (q
5 ) means that the structure group of
the instanton reduces from u (q5) to u (q
5 ), leaving unbroken an extra u (1). this
u (1) is coupled to several charged hypermultiplets (which represent the instanton moduli
that must be set to zero to reduce the structure group of the instanton to u (q

5) u (q
5 )).
the low energy theory describing the splitting is u (1) coupled to these hypermultiplets.

5) plus (q
5)u (q

in supersymmetric gauge theories above two dimensions, the higgs and coulomb

branches parametrize families of supersymmetric vacua. in two dimensions, this is not so;

the usual infrared divergences of massless bosons cause the quantum wave functions to

spread out over the higgs or coulomb branches. nevertheless, even in two dimensions, the

higgs and coulomb branches are described by dierent conformal eld theories [4]. the

dierent branches have dierent r-symmetries and usually have dierent central charges.

so even though the two branches meet classically, they are disconnected in conformal

eld theory. how can this happen? one idea is that as one ows to the infrared, the

metric on the two branches might be renormalized [5] so that the classical meeting place

of the two branches would be innitely far away as seen on either branch. something

like this happens to the coulomb branch at the one-loop level for any values of q1 and

q5 for which both a coulomb and higgs branch exist [6]. for a single vector multiplet,
the classical coulomb branch is a copy of r4; we regard the point of intersection with
the classical higgs branch as the origin of r4 and let u denote a radial variable on r4
that vanishes at the origin. the classical metric du2 + u2d2 of the coulomb branch is

renormalized at the one-loop level so that near u = 0 it looks like

1

u2(cid:0)du2 + u2d2(cid:1) .

(1.1)

thus u = 0 is at innite distance. moreover, there is a liouville coupling r ln u (with

r the worldsheet scalar curvature) such that the string coupling constant diverges as one

approaches u = 0. the metric (1.1) describes an innitely long tube near u = 0, which is

2

why we speak of tubelike behavior, and the string coupling diverges as one goes down

the tube.

one might hope for something similar on the higgs branch. but the fate of the higgs

branch must be more subtle. one cannot simply nd a quantum correction generating a

tubelike metric, since gauge loops do not renormalize the hyper-kahler metric on the higgs

branch [7]. however, the description of the higgs branch via a sigma model with target
space the classical higgs branch m is not good near the singularities of m. one might
hope that in terms of some new variables that do give an eective description near the

singularity one would nd a tubelike behavior. this is known in certain special cases via

duality between type iia at an an1 singularity and type iib with n parallel d5-branes
[8,9]. in more generality, such a description can be obtained using duality between the

higgs and coulomb branches of (4, 4) supersymmetric gauge theories in two dimensions

[10,11].

the purpose of the present paper is to exhibit tubelike behavior near the singularities

of the d1/d5 system, and therefore various other systems to which it is dual. we do this

by elaborating upon a construction introduced by maldacena, michelson, and strominger

[12]. we will give a description of the physics of the higgs branch near its singularity in

terms of an eective two-dimensional eld .  will be a liouville eld with kinetic energy
|d|2 and a liouville coupling r. the classical singularity of the higgs branch, or in other
words its meeting with the classical coulomb branch, corresponds to  = . because of
the liouville term, the string coupling blows up as one goes to  = .

thus, whether one begins on the coulomb branch or the higgs branch, the meeting

place of these two branches is at innite distance in terms of the right variables. hence,

starting from either branch, one can never reach the other. starting from either branch

and trying to approach the second, one must go down the tube and the string coupling

constant blows up. the blowup of the string coupling constant is extremely important

in some applications of the systems that have this behavior (like type iia at an an1
singularity) because it makes it possible to have nonperturbative eects (in that case,

enhanced gauge symmetry) that cannot be turned o by going to weak coupling.

since the usual d1/d5 system is the quantum mechanics of a higgs branch, the

tubelike nature of the singularity of the higgs branch has specic consequences for the

boundary conformal eld theory that governs this system. liouville theory has a continuous

spectrum of dimensions above a certain threshold. so the boundary conformal eld theory

will have this property. also, in liouville theory with a strong coupling end that is not

3

cut o or protected in any way, correlation functions generally diverge from integration

over the liouville eld. so correlation functions of the d1/d5 conformal eld theory can

be expected to receive divergent contributions near the singularity.

using s duality, we can transform the problem to q5 ns5-branes and q1 fundamental

strings [13]. in this case, one can study the system by using conformal eld theory of the

fundamental strings, and one can also hope to compare this to the boundary conformal eld

theory at innity. however, such a comparison will be aected by the continuous spectrum

of dimensions mentioned in the last paragraph. for example, above the threshold, chiral

primary states lie in the continuum, and one should expect diculty in counting them.

in this discussion, we have emphasized the ads3 examples. but part of our discussion

is also relevant to adsn for n > 3.

the discussion in the present paper is reminiscent of the membrane at the end of the

universe [14] and the liouville theory of ads3 [15], though the interpretation seems to

be somewhat dierent.

this paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we review the moduli space of the

d1/d5 system, explaining more precisely what conditions on the moduli are needed to get

the singularity that we will be studying.

in section 3, we show how the study of large strings or branes introduced in [12] gives

an eective description of the singularity of the higgs branch. we also show how, for

adsn models with n > 3, one reproduces in this way expected properties of the boundary

conformal eld theories. among other things, we show that the boundary must have

positive scalar curvature for stability, in agreement with the known behavior of n = 4

super yang-mills theory in four dimensions.

in section 4, we analize more quantitatively the eective theory of the long string in

ads3, and we determine the exact value of the threshold above which the conformal eld

theory has a continuous spectrum.

in section 5, we discuss the fate of the chiral states, and some additional applications.

2. near horizon moduli space and singularities

in this section, we will review the moduli space of ads3 compactications, following

[16], and then describe precisely where a singularity is expected.

4

2.1. classication of models

consider string compactication on x = t4 or k3. the duality group is k =

so(5, n; z), where n = 5 for t4 and n = 21 for k3. the moduli space of vacua is

w = so(5, n; z)\so(5, n; r)/so(5) so(n).

(2.1)

we now want to consider a system consisting of parallel strings in r6  x. the
d1/d5 system is the special case in which the strings are either d1-branes or else d5-

branes wrapped on x. in general, the charge of a string is measured by a charge vector
v that takes values in an even, unimodular lattice 5,n on which k acts. the quadratic
form on 5,n has ve positive and n negative eigenvalues. 5,n can be embedded in a
vector space v which has metric of signature (5, n). a point in w gives a decomposition
v = v+  v, where the quadratic form is positive on v+ and negative on v. 5,n
is analogous to a narain lattice in string theory, and v are analogous to the spaces of

right-moving and left-moving momenta.

for a string with charge vector v to be a bps conguration, it is necessary to have

v2  0. since the lattice is even, we have

v2 = 2n, with n  0.

(2.2)

given any vector v and any point in moduli space, we write v = v++v, with v  v.
the tension of a string with charge v is then (up to a multiplicative constant independent

of v and the moduli)

t (v) = |v+|.

(2.3)

we are mainly interested in the case that the charge vector v is primitive, in other
words is not of the form v = kv with v a lattice vector and k an integer greater than 1.

the reason for this restriction is that otherwise the model is singular  capable of breaking

into subsystems at no cost in energy  for all values of the moduli.

now, any two primitive lattice vectors v and w with v2 = w2 = 2n are equivalent
up to a transformation by an element of k, as explained in [16]. so up to a duality
transformation, there is only one model for every positive integer n . n = 0 is the case of

a single elementary string, so we are really interested in n > 0.

for example, the d1/d5 system is the case that there is a decomposition

5,n = 1,1  4,n1,

5

(2.4)

where 1,1 is a two-dimensional sublattice whose quadratic form in a suitable basis looks
like

(2.5)

(cid:18) 0

1

1

0(cid:19) ,

and the moduli are such that the decomposition (2.4) commutes with the projection to v+
and v. if the theta angles and rr elds vanish, then (as one can see in more detail from

formulas given in [16]) there is such a decomposition with the d1 string and the string
built from a wrapped d5 brane represented by null vectors (1, 0) and (0, 1) in 1,1. the
d1/d5 system can then be described by charges (q1, q5)  1,1, and hence

n = q1q5.

(2.6)

in this construction, v being primitive means that q1 and q5 are relatively prime.

as we have discussed in the introduction, the d1/d5 system is expected to have,

for each value of q1 and q5, a singularity associated with a small u (q5) instanton. to
achieve such a singularity, one must adjust 4(q5  1) parameters in the instanton solution.
the number of parameters that must be adjusted depends on q5, so the small instanton
singularity of the d1/d5 system depends on the value of q5, and not on the product
n = q1q5. thus, a single system, characterized by the choice of one integer n , has
dierent singularities corresponding to the dierent factorizations n = q1q5 with q1 and
q5 relatively prime. to clarify this further, we will in section 2.2 analyze precisely where
there are singularities of the near horizon theory.

near horizon moduli space

given a choice of charge vector v, one can construct a supergravity solution that

describes a string of that charge. here one nds [17] an interesting phenomenon:

in the

eld of this string, the moduli are not constant, and vary in such a way that at the horizon,

the vector v is purely right-moving, that is, it lies in v+. the moduli that would rotate
v+ and v so that v no longer lies in v+ are xed scalars; in the near horizon geometry
of the string, they are massive.

the near horizon geometry therefore has a reduced moduli space. roughly it is a

narain moduli space of signature (4, n), since v is now constrained to lie in v+ and only
the four-dimensional orthocomplement of v in v+ is free to vary. the near horizon geometry
also has a reduced duality group, namely the subgroup h of k consisting of transformations
that leave xed the vector v. the moduli space of the near horizon geometry is

n = h\so(4, n; r)/so(4)  so(n).

(2.7)

6

2.2. location of singularities

now we come to the question of under what condition the conformal eld theory that

describes the near horizon physics becomes singular. as we explained in the introduction,
this should occur when the charge vector v can be written as v = v + v, where v, v, and
v are all mutually bps. in view of (2.3), the condition for this is that |v+| = |v
+| + |v
+|.
since v = v+ in the near horizon geometry, this is |v| = |v
+|. in view of the triangle
inequality, this is equivalent to saying that the projection of v (or of v) to v+ is a multiple
of v. in other words, the lattice  generated by v and v has a projection to v+ that lies
in a one-dimensional subspace, the space of multiples of v.

+| +|v

assuming that this is so, the projection of  to v+ is one-dimensional, being generated
by v, so  has signature (1, 1). given any primitive v   and not a multiple of v, the
requirement that the projection of v to v+ is a multiple of v puts four conditions on the
near horizon moduli. (v+ is ve dimensional, so asking that a vector in v+ be a multiple
of v imposes four conditions.) if these conditions are imposed, then (as v and v generate
) the projection of  to v+ consists of multiples of v. when this happens, every way
of writing v = v + v with v, v   and (v)2, (v)2  0 will be a way of breaking our
system into two bps subsystems at no cost in energy. the ability to do this should give

a singularity in the boundary conformal eld theory.

thus the loci in moduli space on which the cft is expected to be singular are classied
by signature (1, 1) sublattices    that contain v.2 for each such , a singularity is
found by adjusting one hypermultiplet so that all projections of vectors in  to v+ become
proportional. on this locus, the string can break up according to any decomposition
v = v + v with v, v   and (v)2, (v)2  0. (for some , there may exist no such
v, v, and then there is no singularity associated with .)

for example, let us classify all cases in which  is unimodular, in other words in some

basis its quadratic form is

(cid:18) 0

1

1

0(cid:19) .

(2.8)

to put it dierently,  is isomorphic to the unique even unimodular lattice 1,1 of signature
(1, 1). such a  has up to a duality transformation a unique embedding in 5,n (this is

2 of course, we are only interested in the choice of  up to the action of the duality group h
that keeps v xed. equivalently, we want to choose the pair  and v up to the action of the full

duality group k.

7

proved by noting that the orthocomplement of  is even and unimodular and hence unique
up to isomorphism). the transformation that puts  in this standard form may rotate
v into an arbitrary form, modulo the symmetries of  plus the fact that v is primitive
and v2 = 2n . so in general we have v = (q1, q5) for some relatively prime integers q1
and q5 with q1q5 = n . by a symmetry of  (namely (q1, q5)  (q1, q5)), we
can assume that q1 and q5 are both nonnegative. the only remaining symmetry of 
is (q1, q5)  (q5, q1). (for example, for x = t4, this is a t -duality transformation on
x.) so, for given n , choices of a unimodular (1, 1) lattice  containing v are classied by

the unordered relatively prime pairs q1, q5 with n = q1q5.

in other words, the singularities with unimodular  are the small instanton and partial

un-higgsing singularities of u (q5) gauge theory described in the introduction, for various
values of q5. there are also singularities for which  is not unimodular. (for example, if
v describes the d1/d5 system while v has threebrane charge as well as d1 and d5 charge,
then v and v can generate a lattice that is not unimodular.) in the present paper, our

general analysis of the tube behavior via long strings in section 3 is valid for all of the

singularities. but our more quantitative study in section 4 uses specically the ns1/ns5
system (which is dual to d1/d5) and so is special to the case of unimodular .

we pause here to point out a subtlety that we have hidden in our exposition. let
 be the sublattice of 5,n consisting of vectors perpendicular to v, and let h be the
automorphism group of . h is a subgroup of h (since any symmetry of 5,n that leaves
v xed must map  to itself), and is actually a proper subgroup (any element of h is a
symmetry of the sublattice vz   of 5,n, but may not extend to a symmetry of 5,n
itself). to describe the singularities associated with unimodular , we have in the text
classied, up to the action of h, the embeddings of 1,1 in 5,n that contain v. it would be
tempting to reason as follows: every such 1,1 embedding contains a (unique up to sign)
primitive vector w  , with w2 = 2n . the choice of w determines the lattice 1,1. so
why not classify the 1,1s by classifying w up to the action of h? this reasoning actually
gives the wrong result (w is unique up to the h action, so one would conclude that the
singularity depends only on n and not on q5), which is possible since h, not h, is the
symmetry group of the problem.

examples

we conclude this section by briey stating some examples. the properties we assert

can all be veried in detail using formulas in [16].

8

for the d1/d5 system, the xed scalars, which are entirely absent in the near horizon

physics, are the volume of x, the anti-self-dual part of the ns b-elds, and a linear

combination of the rr zero-form and four-form. for example, in terms of the description

of the d1/d5 system by a sigma model with instanton moduli space as the target, it is

natural that the volume of x should drop out as the instanton equation on x is conformally

invariant.

in order to see a singularity from separating the d1/d5 system into d1/d5 subsys-

tems, four more parameters must be set to zero. they are the self-dual part of the ns

b-elds and a linear combination of the rr zero-form and four-form. for example, it

has been argued [18] that turning on the self-dual part of the b-eld deforms the instan-

ton equations to the equations for instantons in noncommutative yang-mills theory. this

operation eliminates the small instanton singularity; it blows up the small instanton

locus by, in one description, adding a constant to the adhm equations. so this operation

removes the singularity from breaking up the d1/d5 system into subsystems.

by an s-duality transformation, one can identify the corresponding statements for the

ns1/ns5 system. the xed scalars are the string coupling constant, the anti-self-dual part

of the rr b-elds, and a linear combination of the rr zero-form and four-form. there is

a singularity from breaking the ns1/ns5 system into similar subsystems if the remaining

rr elds  the self-dual part of the two-form, and a linear combination of the zero-form

and four-form  vanish.

in particular, in the study of the ns1/ns5 system by conventional conformal eld

theory methods [19-21], the rr elds are all assumed to vanish. hence one is necessarily

sitting on the singularity. as we explain in section 5, we believe that this is responsible

for some apparent discrepancies between computations performed in the worldsheet and

spacetime conformal eld theories.

comparison to symmetric product

we conclude this section with a brief discussion of the much-discussed relation of the

spacetime conformal eld theory of the near horizon system with a given value of n to a

sigma model with target space the symmetric product of n copies of x, which we denote
as sn x.

for reasons explained in [19,16], the sigma model with sn x as target very likely has a

moduli space that agrees with (2.7). this alone suggests that the sigma model with target

9

sn x is the right model. moreover, rigorous mathematical theorems3 show that (for all
n and certain charge vectors v with v2 = 2n ; the theorem has not been proved for all

such vectors) the moduli space of instantons with suitably specied chern classes is indeed

birational to a symmetric product of n copies of x. further, it has been proved recently

that any two birational compact hyper-kahler manifolds are deformation equivalent. we

believe that these facts mean that the d1/d5 system, for any n , is on the moduli space

of the symmetric product.

nevertheless, the relation between them is extremely subtle. the hyper-kahler mani-
fold sn x has singularities where two points meet. resolving the singularities and turning

on the associated theta angle put us into a moduli space that parametrizes unknown objects

that may have a rather complicated behavior. if it is true that this family of conformal

eld theories is the one we want, then these conformal eld theories exhibit quite an as-

sortment of singularities on many dierent loci in moduli space. we cannot rule out this

hypothesis, and it seems plausible that it is true.

for the usual questions involving black holes in a macroscopic ads model, one wants

large q1 and q5, leading to very special small instanton singularities characteristic of the

chosen charges. this may be described by a conformal eld theory that can be connected

to the symmetric product, but it cannot be described by the symmetric product itself 

which indeed depends only on n and not on the separate choice of q1 and q5, and so

cannot possibly yield the right singularities. we do not know where on the moduli space,

if anywhere, the symmetric product point might be.

it is tempting to think that the symmetric product point might be q1 = n , q5 = 1,

with vanishing theta angles and rr elds. but as in general the d1/d5 system has
singularities in codimension 4(q5  1), for q5 = 1 the system is generically singular
whatever that means. this does not sound like the hallmark of the symmetric product

point. we make a few more remarks on q5 = 1 in section 4.

3. mechanism for the singularity

in this section, by enlarging upon comments by maldacena, michelson, and strominger

[12], we will give a microscopic mechanism for exhibiting the singularity of the higgs

3 for an expository survey of mathematical results cited in this paragraph with references, see

[22].

10

branch. while the rest of the paper focusses only on the ads3 examples, in the present
section we consider also adsd+1 for all d  2. (d = 1 has special properties explored in
[12].)

as we explained in the introduction, the potential singularity of the higgs branch

arises when a brane is emitted from the system. emission of the brane will lower the
charges of the remaining system. for example, suppose that we are studying n = 4 super
yang-mills in four dimensions, with gauge group su (n ) (or u (n ) if one takes into account
a singleton degree of freedom at innity), via type iib on ads5  s5 with n units of
ve-form ux on s5. if the boundary of ads5 were at, it would be possible to move
on the coulomb branch, higgsing the su (n ) down to su (n  1)  u (1) by giving an
expectation value to a scalar eld . in such a vacuum, at very short distances  1/||,
one sees a gauge group su (n ), but at longer distances this is reduced to su (n 1)u (1).
let us try to translate this mechanism into ads using the familiar ir-uv connection.

the fact that the gauge group in the conformal eld theory is su (n ) at very short distances
means that very near the boundary of ads5, there are n units of ve-form ux on s5.
but at longer distances in the conformal eld theory, or in other words farther from the
boundary of ads5, there is only su (n  1), corresponding to n  1 units of ve-form
ux. but the ux in ads5 can only change in crossing a threebrane. so we assume that
there is a very large region w  ads5, with a threebrane wrapped on w , the boundary
of w . then the ve-form ux is n  1 in w and n outside. if w is very large, then
w is roughly speaking close to the boundary of ads5. we will call a brane whose

worldvolume is such a w a large brane, or, when it is a one-brane, a long string. the
su (n  1)  u (1) low energy gauge symmetry of the higgsed theory is in this situation
interpreted as a u (1) carried by the large threebrane plus the su (n  1) described by
supergravity on w  s5 with a ux of n  1.

in this particular example, because the boundary of ads5 has positive scalar curva-
ture r, one expects the coulomb branch to be suppressed because of an r2 interaction.

we will see this behavior below as a divergence in the action or energy when the large

threebrane approaches the boundary. we will also generalize the discussion to consider

instead of ads5 a more general negatively curved einstein ve-manifold, whose boundary
may have negative r. in that case, the threebrane action or energy will go to  when
the threebrane approaches the boundary, reproducing the expected unstable behavior of

the conformal eld theory on a manifold of negative r.

11

though we have framed this discussion for ads5, we can similarly probe the approach
to the coulomb branch in any of the adsd+1 examples by considering the behavior of a
large d  1-brane. many of the properties are independent of d for d > 2, but special
things happen for d = 2, where the d  1-brane is a string. as we will see, the eective
theory of the large string is a liouville theory. by studying it, we will be able to understand
the singularity of the higgs branch for the ads3 examples.

3.1. analysis of the large brane

with the motivation that we have just explained, and following maldacena, michelson
and strominger [12], we study the dynamics of a large d  1 brane in adsd+1. we
consider a large brane carrying charge q under the background antisymmetric tensor eld.
the brane is really moving on adsd+1  y for some y, but for the moment we can ignore
the motion on y.

we let a denote the volume of w , and we let v denote the volume of w . the

brane action has two terms, one a positive multiple of a coming from the brane tension,

and the other a negative multiple of v coming from the wess-zumino coupling of the

brane to the background antisymmetric tensor eld. in at spacetime, for a suciently
large brane one has v  a, so the action of a suciently large brane in the presence of a
constant antisymmetric tensor eld strength is negative. hence a suciently large brane

grows indenitely. a constant antisymmetric tensor eld in at spacetime would relax to

zero by nucleation of branes; for example, this mechanism leads to the periodicity of the 

angle in two dimensional qed. in ads space, this energetics is more delicate because v is

proportional to a. the bps case is precisely the case that the leading volume and surface

terms cancel. much physics is contained in the subleading terms that do not cancel.

we start by writing down the metric of ads space in the following form:

ds2 = r2

0(dr2 + sinh2rd2).

(3.1)

here d2 is the round metric on sd. the topology of the d dimensional worldvolume of
the brane is sd and it is located at r().

as a preliminary for nding the eective action of the brane we calculate v and a.

we easily nd that the volume enclosed by the brane is

0

rd+1
0

z ddz r
2d r dd(cid:16) 1
4 r d2(cid:0) 1

r3
0

v =rd+1

0

=

drsinhdr =

d edr  d
2 e2r  2r + o(e2r)(cid:1)

rd+1
0

2d z ddz r
 de(d2)r
d2 e(d2)r + o(e(d4)r)(cid:17) for d > 2;

dr(cid:16)edr

0

for d = 2.

+ o(e(d4)r

)(cid:17)

(3.2)

12

here dd is the volume element of a unit sphere.

similarly, the surface volume of the brane is

a =rd

1

gqdet(cid:0)sinh2rg + rr(cid:1)

0 z dd
2dz dd(cid:16)edr  de(d2)r + 2e(d2)r(r)2 + o(e(d4)r)(cid:17)

rd
0

=

(3.3)

where g is the round metric on the unit sphere.

in the above formulas, we can think of r as an eective eld on the large brane.

before combining these formulas to compute the action of a large brane as a function of this

eld, we will put them in a more covariant form. this will make it clear how r transforms

under weyl transformations in the boundary theory, and why.

the boundary of adsd+1 has a natural conformal structure but not a natural metric.
let ds2 = gijdxidxj be an arbitrary metric on the boundary in its conformal class. here
the xi, i = 1, . . . , d are an arbitrary set of local coordinates on the boundary. there is
then (see lemma 5.2 in [24]) a unique way to extend the xi to coordinates on adsd+1
near the boundary, adding an additional coordinate t that vanishes on the boundary, such

that the metric in a neighborhood of the boundary is

ds2 =

with

r2
0

t2 (cid:0)dt2 +bgij(x, t)dxidxj(cid:1)
bgij(x, 0) = gij(x).

moreover, one can use the einstein equations to determine the behavior ofbgij near t = 0.

one has

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

bgij(x, t) = gij(x)  t2pij + higher orders in t,

pij =

2(d  1)rij  gijr
2(d  1)(d  2)

where for d > 2

which implies

,

(3.7)

(3.8)

gijpij =

r

2(d  1)

.

this last formula is the only property of p that we will need. for d = 2, (3.7) is no longer

valid, but (3.8) is. (for d = 2, the einstein equations do not determine the trace-free part

of p in terms of local data near the boundary.)

13

in this formulation, we can see how t transforms under weyl rescalings of the boundary
metric. if we take gij  e2gij, then t must be transformed to maintain the properties
(3.4), (3.5). clearly, this requires

t  et + . . . ,

(3.9)

where the ellipses are terms of higher order near t = 0. this means that t (if corrected
by adding higher order terms to remove the ellipses) is a eld of conformal dimension 1.
the canonical dimension of a scalar eld is (d  2)/2 for d > 2, so we should expect
that a scalar eld  of canonical dimension will be   t(d2)/2 for d > 2. instead,
in classical eld theory in d = 2, an ordinary scalar eld is dimensionless. to make a
eld t of dimension 1 as a function of a two-dimensional real scalar eld ,  must be a
liouville eld (with a coupling r to the worldsheet curvature r) and t must be written

as a real exponential of .

before computing v and a in the covariant approach, we set t = 2er, so that the

metric becomes

ds2 = r2

0(cid:18)dr2 +

e2r
4

gijdxidxj  pijdxidxj + o(e2r)(cid:19) .

(3.10)

this will make the comparison with the formulas (3.2) and (3.3) more transparent. also,

as suggested in the last paragraph, we can write r in terms of a canonical scalar eld  for

d > 2, or a liouville eld  for d = 2, by

r =( 2

d2 log  +
 + e2r

(d1)(d2)  4

1

d2 r for d > 2
for d = 2.

(3.11)

the leading terms in this formula, which correspond to t = const 2/(d2) for d > 2,

and t = const e for d = 2, were explained in the last paragraph. the correction terms

in (3.11) can presumably be calculated by computing the higher order terms in (3.9) and

then seeing how t can be expressed in terms of a canonical scalar eld for d > 2, or a

liouville eld for d = 2. we will not be as systematic as this because the correction terms

are unimportant for bps branes, which are our main interest. we have merely determined

the coecients of the correction terms to make the formulas below conformally invariant

even for the non-bps case.

14

d2 )(cid:17) for d > 2;

for d = 2.

(3.13)

(3.14)

4(d1) 2r] + o(

2(d8)

d2 )(cid:17) for d > 2;

for d = 2.

(3.15)

using (3.10), we can compute that the volume enclosed by the brane, computed with

an arbitrary metric on the boundary in its conformal class and using the associated r-

function, is

1

(d1)(d2) e(d2)rr + o(e(d4)r)(cid:17) for d > 2;

for d = 2

(3.12)

this reduces to (3.2) when the boundary is a unit sphere with a round metric, for which
r = d(d  1). in terms of the canonical scalar or liouville eld , we have

v =

a =

a =

2d

r3
0

r3
0

2(d4)

rd+1
0

rd+1
0

d2 + o(

2d r ddxg(cid:16) 1
d erd 
2 e2r  rr + o(e2r)(cid:1)
4 r ddxg(cid:0) 1
v =
d2d r ddxg(cid:16)
8 r ddxg(cid:0)e2 + o(e2)(cid:1)
2dz ddxg(cid:18)edr 
2dr ddxg(cid:16)
4 r ddxg(cid:0)e2 + 2[()2 + r]  r + o(e2)(cid:1)

(d2)2 [()2 + d2

d2 + 8

d  1

rd
0

rd
0

r2
0

1

2d

in terms of , this is

likewise, in the same generality, the surface volume of the boundary is

e(d2)rr + 2e(d2)r(r)2 + o(e(d4)r)(cid:19) .

one of the advantages of the covariant derivation that we have given is that these

formulas are not restricted to branes near the boundary of adsd+1. one can replace
adsd+1 with an arbitrary einstein manifold w of negative curvature and conformal
boundary m . the same formulas hold, with the same derivation, for the area and wess-

zumino coupling of a large brane that is near m , or, if m is not connected, near any

component of m .

now, let us combine these formulas and study the behavior of branes. the action of a

brane that couples to the background antisymmetric tensor eld with charge q receives two

contributions. one term, arising from the tension of the brane t , is t a. the interaction

of its charge with the background gauge elds leads to a term proportional to v . the

whole action is

s =t (a 

qd
r0

v ) =

=

t rd
0

2d

d2 + 8

2d r g(cid:16)(1  q)
4 r g(cid:0)(1  q)e2 + 2[()2 + r]  r + o(e2)(cid:1)

(d2)2 [()2 + d2

t r2
0

4(d1) 2r] + o(

2(d4)

d2 )(cid:17) for d > 2;

for d = 2 .
(3.16)

15

the brane approaches the boundary in the limit   . for large , the dominant
term is the rst one, (1  q)2d/(d2) for d > 2 or (1  q)e2 for d = 2. for q > 1, the
action goes to  for    and the system is unstable against the emission of branes.
however, in a supersymmetric ads vacuum, there will never be a brane with q > 1 as

this violates a bps bound. in a supersymmetric theory, we will have either bps branes of

q = 1 or non-bps branes of q < 1.

if q < 1, the leading order term in (3.16) is a potential which tries to contract the

brane. in this case, the eect of the tension of the brane is larger than the force due to

the charge. the brane tends to contract and, if we are in adsd+1, eventually annihilates.

if adsd+1 is replaced by a more general einstein manifold x, the non-bps brane might

conceivably contract to a stable minimum of the action.

for bps branes, q = 1 and the eective action becomes

2(d4)

d2 )(cid:17) for d > 2;

for d = 2.

(3.17)

s =

t r2
0

t rd
0

2d3(d2)2r g(cid:16)()2 + d2
2 r g(cid:0)()2 + r  1

4(d1) 2r + o(
2 r + o(e2)(cid:1)

the bps term has caused the potential energy term to cancel out, leaving an action

that is for d > 2 the minimal conformally invariant kinetic energy of a scalar eld, and

for d = 2 is the minimal conformally invariant kinetic energy of a liouville eld.

do bps d-branes exist? for the usual ads models with d > 2, they generally do.
for example, there are bps three-branes in the case of ads5  s5. the reason is that the
usual d > 2 models are constructed from the near horizon geometry of a system of parallel

branes of just one type. in such a model, a probe brane of the type used in building the

vacuum is bps. on the other hand, the ads3 or d = 2 examples are constructed from

more than one type of brane, and then, as we have described in section 2, for generic values

of the moduli there are no bps probe branes.

now, let us focus on what happens when bps branes do exist. in string theory or
m -theory on adsd+1 (or more exactly adsd+1  y for some y ) the boundary is sd,
and its conformal structure is that of the round metric on a unit sphere. if s is evaluated

with the round metric, which has r > 0, it is manifestly positive denite and divergent for
  . since s is conformally invariant, this is true for any metric in the same conformal
class. thus, on adsd+1, there is no instability from emission of a large brane. this is in

accord with [12], where it was shown that there is no such instability except for d = 1 (a

case that we are not treating in the present paper).

16

on the other hand, suppose that we replace adsd+1  y by w  y , where w is
a more general einstein manifold w of conformal boundary m . the conformal class of

metrics on m may admit a representative with negative r. if so, s is not positive denite
and the string theory on w  y is unstable against emission of a large d-brane that
approaches the boundary.

these results agree with eld theory expectations in the important case that d = 4
and y is, for example, s5. then the boundary theory is su (n ) super yang-mills theory

(or u (n ) if we include the singleton eld on the boundary). if we formulate this theory

on a four-manifold m in a conformally invariant fashion, and try to higgs the su (n )
gauge group to su (n  1)  u (1) by giving an expectation value to a component 
of the scalar elds of the theory, then the conformally invariant kinetic energy for  is

precisely the functional s obtained above. hence, at the eld theory level, we expect an

instability when m has negative scalar curvature (and more generally when the conformally

invariant functional s is not positive semi-denite). in this way, string theory reproduces

the instability that is evident in the eld theory.

at this level, the results do not yet seem to distinguish d = 2 from d > 2. the

conformal eld theory of one of the d = 2 examples, just like those with d > 2, is stable

if formulated on a boundary with r > 0, but not if r < 0. however, d = 2 is clearly a

delicate case, since the growth of the action as a bps brane approaches the boundary is

much slower  linear in r for d = 2 and exponential for d > 2. this suggests that we

should look at d = 2 more closely.

to understand what is special about d = 2, it helps to consider a hamiltonian

formalism and to consider the energy of a large brane rather than its action, as considered

up to this point. thus, we are now considering the large brane as a physical object, whereas

so far, our branes (as euclidean space objects) were really instantons. for this, we go to
the lorentz signature version of adsd+1, so that the boundary is now r sd1 (with r
parametrizing the time direction) rather than sd. the formula for the large brane action

s is still valid, and from it we can read o an eective hamiltonian for the large brane. in
particular, the energy has an r2 or r term for d > 2 or d = 2. the main point is that
for d > 2, r  sd1 has r > 0, and hence in the hamiltonian formulation, the energy
diverges as a brane approaches the boundary. but for d = 2, the boundary is r  s1 and
has zero scalar curvature. hence, the energy of the brane does not grow as the brane is

stretched.

17

we can make a more precise statement using the fact that given the form of s, the

eective theory on the brane is a liouville theory (for a review see [25]). the normalizable

states of liouville the theory form a continuum above a certain positive threshold. in order

to nd the properties of the liouville theory of the long string (3.17), it is convenient to

rescale  such that its kinetic term is canonical. then, the coupling to the two dimensional

curvature r leads to an improvement term in the stress tensor with coecient

leading to a threshold at

q =q4t r2

0

e0 =

q2
4

= t r2
0.

(3.18)

(3.19)

we conclude that a bps brane in ads3 can be stretched to innity with a nite cost in
energy [12].

this nite non-zero energy is in accord with the fact that in the euclidean version,
a large brane approaching the boundary of ads3 has an action that diverges for r  ,
albeit slowly. such a large brane is an instanton. a nite action instanton describes a

tunneling process to a state of degenerate energy. since we are trying to get to a state of

nite energy  with a large brane in real time  there cannot be a nite action instanton.

as promised in the introduction, we have found a dangerous region in the spacetime

conformal eld theory of the d1/d5 system where it is described by an eective liouville

theory. we claim that, if the long string is a d1 brane, then the behavior for large 

corresponds to the small instanton singularity. the evidence for this claim is rst that,

as we explained at the outset, intuitively emission of a long string is a way to reduce

the charges of the system. second, the dangerous large  region occurs precisely when

the small instanton is bps; when  angles are turned on, as reviewed in section 2.2, to

suppress the small instanton singularity, then the long string has q < 1 and the large 

region is suppressed by an exponential potential. finally, we note the following important

check of the identication of the small instanton singularity with the large  region. the

small instanton singularity of the d1/d5 system depends only on q5 and not q1 (since
the singularity when an instanton is small is entirely independent of how many non-small

instantons there are). this is entirely in accord with the fact that, if the long string is a

d1 string, then the liouville action s() depends on q5 and not q1.

to be more precise about this, to describe the small instanton singularity of the

d1/d5 system of charges (q1, q5), we use a long d-string plus a d1/d5 system of charges

18

(q1  1, q5). the action s actually describes the motion of the long d-string on ads3,
and must be supplemented by additional terms describing its motion in other dimensions
of ads3  s3  x. in particular, the position of the long string on x corresponds, in the
other description, to the position of the small instanton on x.

like the d1/d5 system, the other singularities described in the instroduction have

an analogous tubelike description using other long bps strings. whenever there is a

bps string, the d1/d5 system (and its u -dual cousins) has a continuous spectrum at

energies above (3.19), though the spectrum is discrete at energies smaller than this. the

states in the continuum are states that contain a long string. states below threshold have

wavefunctions that vanish exponentially in the part of phase space where there is a long

string.

likewise, the operators in the boundary conformal eld theory have a discrete spec-

trum of conformal dimensions up to

0 =

e0
2

=

1
2

t r2
0.

(3.20)

the operators creating the long string and the uctuations on it have continuous dimen-

sions starting at 0.

conformal eld theories with a continuous spectrum of dimensions are most familiar

in cases when the target space is non-compact. the example of a single non-compact boson

is well known. in this case the continuum is associated with the arbitrary momentum of

the boson. momentum conservation guarantees that in the operator product expansion of

two operators there is only one value of the momentum, and therefore there is a discrete

sum over the operators which appear there. when the target space is non-compact and

is not translationally invariant, there is a continuum of operators in the operator product

expansion. we now see that the d1/d5 system, which appears to have a compact target
space m (the moduli space of u (q5) instantons with instanton number q1), also has a
continuous spectrum, albeit above a gap. this is possible because m has singularities.
the description of the conformal eld theory as a sigma model is not very useful near
singularities of m. the good description of the behavior near the singularities is in terms
of a long string plus a residual system of lower charges.

for the d1/d5 system, the long string is a d-object; it can be any collection of d1,

d3 and d5 branes which forms a bps string. therefore, from the point of view of a

conformal eld theory description of the d1/d5 system (such as the one in [26]), the long

19

string eect is non-perturbative. the same system, in a dierent region of its parameter

space, has a more natural description as an ns1/ns5 system, built from ns5 branes and

weakly coupled fundamental strings. in this region, the lightest string which can escape to

innity is a fundamental string. hence our instanton is in this case a genus zero worldsheet

instanton. it contributes at string tree level, but its contribution is non-perturbative in
 = 1

2t .

the string coupling constant

the boundary conformal eld theory is a conformal eld theory in which the string
coupling constant ef f () blows up as   , that is, as the long string goes to innity.
this is because of the r coupling. the divergence of  is actually the reason that the

exp(p4t r2

action for the instantonic long string  wrapped around the boundary of euclidean ads3
 diverges as  goes to innity. (the instanton amplitude is proportional to exp(s) 
ef f ().) the divergence of ef f () also
causes the partition function of the boundary conformal eld theory to be divergent for
   if formulated on a riemann surface of genus > 1. we have already noted above
this consequence of the r coupling for the case that r < 0.

0), which we can interpret as 1/2

if we formulate the boundary cft in genus zero (for instance on the boundary of

ads3), then because r > 0, the partition function converges. however, one would suspect
that the natural operators of the boundary cft will have an exponential dependence on

, and that some correlation functions will diverge in integrating over . thus, some

correlation functions of the boundary cft of the d1/d5 system are likely to receive

divergent contributions from the small instanton singularity, as well as singularities from

partial un-higgsing. of course, as reviewed in section 2, these divergent contributions can

be avoided if one turns on suitable theta angles and rr elds so that there are no bps-

saturated strings. in any event, determining the  dependence of operators and showing

that there really are divergent contributions to genus zero correlation functions is beyond

the scope of the present paper.

for some applications of conformal eld theories of this kind, the divergence of the
eective string coupling for    is very important. for example, if we set q5 = 2, then
the small instanton singularity is in codimension four and looks like r4/z2. specializing
to this case, the analysis shows that in terms of the right variable (which is the long string
position) the eective string coupling in r4/z2 conformal eld theory (with zero theta
angle) goes to innity as one approaches the singularity. this makes it possible for type

20

iia string theory on r4/z2 to have nonperturbative behavior (enhanced gauge symmetry)
no matter how small the bare string coupling constant may be.

change in central charge

because of the r term in the action (3.16), the liouville theory of the long string

has central charge

c = 3q2 = 12t r2
0.

(3.21)

we can interpret the long string as carrying away that amount of c out of the full conformal

eld theory of the d1/d5 system.

for the d1/d5 system, using t r2

0 = q5

2 , the threshold (3.20) and the central charge

(3.21) become

0 =

q5
4

c = 6q5.

(3.22)

the boundary conformal eld theory of the full system is known to have cf ull = 6q1q5.
when a string is emitted, the remaining system has charges (q1  1, q5), so its central
charge is reduced by 6q5. this coincides with the central charge of the long string itself,

so we see that the string whose emission reduces q1 by one carries with it the remaining

value of c. this is compatible with the claim that in a certain region of its phase space,
the (q1, q5) system behaves like a long string plus a (q1  1, q5) system.

the formulas in (3.22) are, however, only semiclassical approximations. a more precise

derivation will be presented in section 4.

4. exact analysis of the long string

the preceding analysis of the central charge and the gap is valid only for q1, q5  1,
where the the long string does not aect the background geometry signicantly. we now

present a more complete analysis, for the weakly coupled ns5/ns1 system. it is valid for
q1  1 but without assuming that q5 is large.

we will explain several approaches. to start with, we use the rns formalism as in

[19-21]. the system has short strings (ordinary perturbative excitations) and the long

strings that we have been considering. using a coordinate system with the metric

ds2 = dx2 + e2xdd,

(4.1)

21

the worldsheet lagrangian is

z (cid:0)x x + e2x (cid:1) d2z.

by introducing auxiliary elds , , one can write an equivalent lagrangian

(4.2)

(4.3)

z (cid:0)x x +   +   e2x (cid:1) d2z.

a long string can be described by the solution of the worldsheet equations of motion

x = x0  1
(z, z) = z

(z, z) = z.

(4.4)

since we take x0  1, we can treat the e2x  term in (4.3) as a small perturbation, and
use the free eld representation of sl(2) conformal eld theory as in [19]. furthermore,

the calculation of the central charge of the space-time virasoro algebra in [19] applies

directly to the long string rather than to the whole system. in particular, the value of the

central charge found there, namely

c = 6q5i dz




= 6q5,

(4.5)

coincides with our semiclassical result (3.22). more generally, if  in (4.4) is replaced by
 = zm, which corresponds to m coincident long strings, (4.5) becomes [19]

c = 6q5m.

(4.6)

in the rest of this paper we will be mostly concerned with a single long string; i.e. m = 1.

this calculation is to be contrasted with the calculation of the central charge of the full

theory including the short strings [20,21], which receives contributions from disconnected

diagrams. for more details about these two calculations and the relation between them

see [21].

we do not, however, know how to compute the value of the threshold from this point

of view. we will therefore present two additional calculations which determine both the

central charge of the long string and the threshold. the rst computation is based on the

covariant rns description with ghosts, and the second on a physical gauge. (the rst of

22

the two calculations is somewhat intuitive and needs to be put on a rmer footing than

we will achieve.)

we start by considering the bosonic string on ads3  m (m might be, for instance

s3  t20). in the covariant formalism the worldsheet stress tensor is

tworldsheet = tsl(2) + tm + tghosts

(4.7)

where tsl(2) is constructed out of a bosonic sl(2)k wzw theory. tm is the stress tensor
of the conformal eld theory on m and tghosts is constructed out of the b, c ghosts. the
central charges of these stress tensors are

csl(2) =

3k
k  2
3k
k  2

cm = 26 
cghosts = 26.

(4.8)

note that the total central charge cworldsheet = csl(2) + cm + cghosts vanishes.

in the wakimoto representation, using the elds in (4.3), the three sl(2) currents of

the bosonic level k wzw theory are

1

2p2(k  2)x

j + = 2 +p2(k  2)x + k.

evaluating them on the classical solution of the long string we nd

j  = 

j 3 =  +

j  = 0

j 3 = 0

j + = k.

(4.9)

(4.10)

therefore, it is natural to impose a lightcone-like gauge4 j + = k. more precisely, we

study the brst cohomology of our string after expanding the elds around this classical

conguration. to compute this cohomology, we imitate the proof of the no ghost theorem

for the bosonic string in at space, as presented in [28]. because  only appears in the
lagrangian via a term proportional to , there is a symmetry    + z. we dene an

4 related ideas were explored in [27].

23

modes of , , and , except the mode   z on which it acts trivially. because of that
one mode, the operator n does not commute with qbrst . the term in qbrst with the
brst = 0 reduces, for the
brst = 0. the same argument as in the usual proof
of the no ghost theorem in at space shows that the cohomology of qbrst is the same as

operator n (analogous to n lc, introduced in [28], eqn. (4.4.8)) that acts as h j 3 on all
most negative n charge is eqbrst = h cj . the equation q2
term of most negative n charge, to eq2
that of eqbrst . also, as in at space, taking the eqbrst cohomology eectively removes

from the hilbert space the elds  and  along with the conformal ghosts b and c. the
cohomology consists of all states built by acting on the ground state with the other elds.5

the procedure just sketched is similar to that of the hamiltonian reduction of sl(2)

as in [31], but the problem we are studying and therefore also the details of the construction

are somewhat dierent. we are computing the physical state spectrum for a bosonic string
on ads3  m, so in particular we have the bosonic string b, c ghosts of spins 2 and 1
together with additional variables, while in hamiltonian reduction a dierent problem

is solved, so the m degrees of freedom are absent, and dierent ghosts are used. our

gauge xing condition is therefore also somewhat dierent, though the computation of the

cohomology ends up being similar.

now we want to nd the spacetime stress tensor. it acts on the brst cohomology,

which we have identied as the cohomology of the operatorh cj . in this representation,
the spacetime stress tensor must be an operator that commutes withh cj . for this to be

so, j  must have conformal dimension 2 relative to the spacetime stress tensor (though its
dimension with respect to the worldsheet stress tensor is 1). also, the current j +, which

is expanded around a constant, should have conformal dimension zero. these dimensions

are obtained by twisting the stress tensor (4.7) to

ttotal = tworldsheet + j 3.

(4.11)

we interpret ttotal as the space-time stress tensor of the theory on the long string. com-
puting the central charge of (4.11) using j 3(z)j 3(w)   k/2

(zw)2 we nd

ctotal = 6k.

(4.12)

5 a very similar no ghost argument for the sl(2, r) wzw model, using a free eld represen-
tation, can be found in [29]. for another approach to this model and its no ghost theorem, see

[30].

24

the physical degrees of freedom living on the long string include the modes of the

sigma model on m describing the location of the string in m, and the x boson which we

now identify as the  eld of section 3. the central charge (4.12) is obtained because

the boson  becomes a liouville eld with an improvement term q. in order to nd the

improvement term we equate the two expressions for the central charge

26 

3k
k  2

+ 1 + 3q2 = 6k,

and nd

k  2
because of this improvement term the system has a gap

q = (k  3)r 2

.

0 =

q2
8

=

(k  3)2
4(k  2)

.

(4.13)

(4.14)

(4.15)

the two computations we have so far described give the same formula for the central

charge in the spacetime conformal eld theory, but give seemingly very dierent formulas

for the spacetime stress tensor. how are they related? this question can be partly answered

as follows.

in the classical approximation of large k we ignore the ghosts and set the

worldsheet stress tensor (4.7) to zero

0 = (j 3)2 + j +j 

k

+ tm

(we neglect the shift of k by 2). we substitute j + = k and solve for j 

j  =

(j 3)2

k  tm.

(4.16)

(4.17)

equation (2.37) in [19] gives the spacetime virasoro generators

ln =i dz(cid:2)nj n+1  (n + 1)j 3n(cid:3) =i dz(cid:20)j n+1 

1
2

(n + 1)2kxn(cid:21) ,

(4.18)

where we used the large k limit of (4.9). substituting (4.17) in (4.18) and ignoring terms

which vanish for large k we nd

ln =i dz(cid:20)(cid:18)tm 

1
2

(x)2(cid:19) n+1 

1
2

(n + 1)2kxn(cid:21) .

(4.19)

25

using our gauge choice  = z

ln =i dz(cid:20)tm 

1
2

(x)2 +

1
2

therefore, the spacetime stress tensor is

tspacetime = tm 

1
2

(x)2 +

2k2x(cid:21) zn+1.
2k2x,

1
2

(4.20)

(4.21)

whose central charge for large k is c = 6k in agreement with the exact answers. note also

that the boson x acquires an improvement term as above.

we now extend this analysis to superstrings on ads3  s3 x in the rns formalism.

the worldsheet stress tensor is

tworldsheet = tsl(2) + tsu(2) + tx + tghosts.

(4.22)

tsl(2) is constructed out of a bosonic sl(2)q5+2 wzw theory and three free fermions 
and 3. tsu(2) is constructed out of a bosonic su (2)q52 wzw and three free fermions,
a. tx is the stress tensor of the superconformal eld theory on x. tghosts is constructed

out of the b, c andeb,ec ghosts. the central charges of these stress tensors are

3(q5 + 2)

csl(2) =

3
2
3
2

+

q5

3(q5  2)

q5

+

csu(2) =

cx = 6

cghosts = 15.

(4.23)

as in the bosonic problem the total central charge cworldsheet = csl(2)+csu(2)+cx+cghosts
vanishes.

we can now x a lightcone gauge j + = q5 + 2. the brst charge then has a term

proportional to eqbrst = h c(j  + 3) +ec, and higher order terms. again, the
brst cohomology of the full brst charge is the same as that of eqbrst . as above, the

spacetime stress tensor is obtained by twisting the stress tensor (4.22)

ttotal = tworldsheet + (j 3 + +)

(4.24)

such that j +, j , + and  have conformal dimensions 0, 2,  1
2 respectively. as
in the bosonic problem, the twisting changes the central charge of the stress tensor (4.24)

2 , and 3

to

ctotal = 6q5

26

(4.25)

in agreement with the exact result above.

the physical degrees of

freedom living on the long string include the bosonic
su (2)q52, the three free fermions a, the modes of the sigma model on x, the  boson
and its superpartner which we denote by . the other modes on ads and the ghosts are

eectively removed by considering the cohomology. the central charge (4.25) is obtained

because the boson  becomes a liouville eld with an improvement term q = (q51)q 2

because of this improvement term the system has a gap

.

q5

0 =

q2
8

=

(q5  1)2

4q5

.

(4.26)

this result is consistent with the semiclassical answer q5

4 we found above.

our identication of the degrees of freedom on the long string and the fact that this

theory is essentially a free cft depend on having a single long string; i.e. m = 1 in (4.6).

for m > 1 coincident long strings, the collective coordinate  describes their center of

mass, but there are also other degrees of freedom corresponding to the separation between

them. these degrees of freedom lead to c = 6q5m rather than c = 6q5. as is common in
d-branes, the center of mass theory can be free but the remaining degrees of freedom are

interacting.

spacetime supersymmetry

finally, we will present a description of the long string that is more precise than the

above and exhibits spacetime supersymmetry. for this, we will use a sort of unitary gauge

description in terms of physical degrees of freedom only, an approach we followed already

in section 3. the reason for using unitary gauge is that to see spacetime supersymmetry,

one would like to use a green-schwarz type description, but the green-schwarz string is
dicult to quantize covariantly6.

for simplicity, consider the case x = t4 (the extension to k3 is straightforward). we

start with an rns description and then pass to green-schwarz variables by introducing
spin elds. the sigma model on x is described by four free bosons xi and four free fermions
i. motion on s3 is described by an su (2) current algebra. in a gauge  = z, the long

string motion on ads3 is described by a liouville eld  introduced in section 3. in the
rns description, two worldsheet fermions that are superpartners of ,  can be set to zero

6 for a recent attempt to derive a somewhat similar description of ads3 models from the

green-schwarz string, see [32].

27

by a gauge choice. in this unitary gauge, all ghosts decouple. so the description is by xi,

, and the su (2) current algebra, plus eight fermion partners.

to go to a green-schwarz description with manifest spacetime supersymmetry, one

replaces the eight rns fermions by their eight spin elds, which have dimension 1/2 and

are free fermions. in terms of these eight fermion elds along with xi, , and the su (2)

currents ja, we want to construct an n = 4 superconformal algebra which we will interpret
as the spacetime superconformal algebra.

the xi together with four free fermions make an n = 4 hypermultiplet, with c = 6.
so the essential point is to construct from , the su (2) currents ja at level q5  2, and
four free fermions s, an n = 4 algebra that, roughly, describes the long string motion on
ads3  s3. the nontrivial operator product expansions are

s(z)s (w)  
(z)(w)  


z  w
1
(z  w)2
ab(q5  2)/2

(z  w)2

ja(z)jb(w)  

we use the thooft  symbol

+

abcjc
(z  w)

.

a
 =

1
2

(a0  a 0 + a )

to express the n = 4 generators

ss 

jaja
q5 

1
2

 +

2(q5  1)
2q5

2

1
2

t = 
j a = ja +
2
2

g =

a
 ss

1
2
s 

2
q5

a
 jas +

1

6q5

sss 

q5  1
q5

s.

28

(4.27)

(4.28)

(4.29)

a straightforward calculation shows that they satisfy the n = 4 algebra with c = 6(q51)

t
z  w

(4.30)

j a(z)j b(w)  
t (z)j a(w) 

t (z)t (w) 

t (z)g(w) 
j a(z)g(w) 
g(z)g (w) 

abcj c
(z  w)

+

ab(q5  1)/2
j a
j a
(z  w)
2t
(z  w)2 +
g
(z  w)

(z  w)2
(z  w)2 +
3(q5  1)
(z  w)4 +
2 g
(z  w)2 +
a

z  w
 2(q5  1)
(z  w)3 

g

4

3

(z  w)2 a

 j a +

1

z  w(cid:0) t  2a

 j a(cid:1) .

together with the n = 4 algebra of the t4, which has c = 6, we have the expected result
of n = 4 with c = 6q5.

if we remove the improvement terms (last terms) in t and g and add the free
 ss, we nd a
realization of the large n = 4 algebra [33-36]. this algebra has two dierent ordinary

fermions s, the u (1) current  and the su (2)1 currents ej a = 1
n = 4 subalgebras: the one above with c = 6(q5  1), and another one including ej a
but without j a with c = 6. the other n = 4 algebra appeared in the study of string
propagation on solitons [37].

2 a

these two constructions are also important in the closely related gauge theory on the

onebranes. the algebra with c = 6 appears in the tube of the coulomb branch [6]. the
algebra (4.29) with c = 6(q5  1) appears along the higgs branch of the same system.
note that as in [4], they have dierent r symmetries and dierent central charges.

the chiral operators of the n = 4 algebra of the long string theory (4.30) are easily

found to be

oj = ejp 2

q5

vj

j = 0,

1
2

, ...,

q5  2

2

,

(4.31)

where vj are the spin j operators in the bosonic su (2)q52 wzw theory. the exponent
in the rst factor is determined by imposing

(oj) = j,

(4.32)

or by demanding that there is no isospin j + 1
product expansion of goj.

2 operator in the simple pole in the operator

29

the chiral operators o 1

2

lead to the following four desendants of conformal dimension

(1, 1) (the other descendants at this level are null since o 1

2

is chiral):

l = { g, [g, o 1

2

]}.

(4.33)

they are invariant under the left moving and right moving su (2)q51 current algebras in
the (4, 4) symmetry. as is standard in n = 4 superconformal eld theories, such operators
are truly marginal and preserve the (4, 4) superconformal symmetry. with these operators
added to the lagrangian we nd n = 4 liouville.

as we explained in section 3, if one perturbs the system so that the long string is

not bps, such a liouville potential is generated. let us check that the operators (4.33)

have the expected quantum numbers. the operators (4.33) transform as (2, 2) under
the su (2)  su (2) outer automorphism of the (4, 4) superconformal algebra.
in the
theory of the higgs branch  understood in terms of a small instanton on r4  the outer
automorphism group acts by rotations of r4. since the noncompact bosons describing
motion on r4 cannot be decomposed as sums of left and right-movers, only a diagonal

subgroup su (2)d of the outer automorphism group is a symmetry. (if one embeds the
small instanton in x = t4 or k3, this explicitly breaks su (2)d. but for a suciently
small instanton, the su (2)d symmetry is a good approximation, as the small instanton
singularity does not see the compactication of r4 to x.) under su (2)d, the four
operators (4.33) transform as 1  3.

now we compare this to the d1/d5 system. as reviewed in section 2.2, this system

can be deformed away from a singular point by turning on a  angle or fi terms. these
transform as 1  3 of su (2)d, just the quantum numbers of the (1, 1) operators (4.33).
liouville theory with improvement term proportional to q has operators e with

dimensions  =  1

2 (  q). the values of  are constrained by [25]

q
 
2
  

q
2

for q > 0

for q < 0.

the string coupling depends on  according to

g() = eq/2,

30

(4.34)

(4.35)

and therefore the coupling is strong as   + (  ) for q positive (negative). the
wave function associated with the operator e is

() =

1

g()

e = e( q

2 ).

(4.36)

the condition (4.34) can be interpreted as the condition that the wave function diverges

at the weak coupling end [25].

in our problem we have two liouville systems. the rst is the worldsheet theory

in the ads3 background. for large , it becomes a free theory with an improvement
. this value is obtained by looking at the shift term of the

term with qc = q 2

q5

free wakimoto description of our system [19]. alternatively, it can also be obtained by

analyzing the theory on the coulomb branch and its tube (hence the subscript c) [37].

this system describes the short strings. the second liouville system is on the long string

and corresponds to the tube of the higgs branch. from that point of view we have seen

that large  corresponds to strong coupling. the liouville system of the long strings has

qh = (q5  1)q 2

q5

. qc and qh dier in sign and in the absolute value. these two facts

follow from the two n = 4 superconformal subalgebras of the large n = 4 [34].

it is natural to identify  of the two tubes. the string coupling for the short strings

is large at one end and the string coupling for the long strings is large at the other end:

gc() = eqc/2 = exp(
gh() = eqh /2 = exp(

1

2q5
q5  1
2q5

)

).

(4.37)

the vertex operators e can act either on short strings or on long strings. therefore,

they should make sense in the two liouville systems and hence7

1

2q5   



q5  1
2q5

.

(4.38)

this guarantees that their wave functions diverge at the weak coupling end both for short

strings and for long strings.

the fact that the wave function () of a local vertex operator o diverges at large
 for a small string state but vanishes exponentially at large  for a long string seems

7 strictly, the bound on  in sl(2) could be weaker. here, we will use the bound in liouville

theory, which is obtained by studying the tube of the coulomb branch.

31

strange at rst, but is not so hard to understand intuitively. it means roughly that o is
likely to create a small string near the boundary of ads3, but is very unlikely to create a
long string wrapped around the boundary.

it is reassuring to see that the chiral operators (4.31) satisfy (4.38). we will have

more remarks about this bound in section 5.

the chiral operators (4.31) can be compared with their counterparts in the rst quan-

tized description of [19] (equation (4.11)):

z d2ze (3

1
2



1
2

 1+)( 3

1
2

 

1
2

 1 +)ejp 2

q5

j+mj+ mvj, (4.39)

where  and  are the bosonized ghosts. this expression is in the minus one ghost

picture. in the zero picture the exponential of the ghosts disappears and the factors with

the fermions are replaced by the sl(2) currents and some higher order terms. we follow
the light-cone like gauge xing (4.10) and keep only the term proportional to j +, which is

a constant in our gauge. using  = z we recognize (4.39) as the (m, m) mode of the local

operator ejp 2

q5

vj . this is the chiral operator (4.31).

remarks on q5 = 1

the near horizon ns5/ns1 system does not seem to make sense for q5 = 1, since it
uses an su (2) current algebra at level q5  2 [6]. hence in particular the above discussion
does not make sense for q5 = 1. however, there is a sense in which one can approach
q5 = 1: as reviewed in section 2, we can dene a model that depends on an arbitrary
positive integer n and move around in its moduli space until we reach the locus where

the small instanton singularity of q5 = 1 should appear. in this sense, something must
happen as one approaches q5 = 1.

though our derivation of (4.26) does not make sense for q5 = 1 (since the conformal
eld theory we used is not dened there), it is tempting to believe that the formula is still

valid for that value of q5. if so, the gap vanishes at q5 = 1. we take this to mean that
the ground state of the spacetime cft becomes unnormalizable when one moves around

in the parameter space (2.1) and approaches the locus of the q5 = 1 singularity. this
is compatible intuitively with the argument at the end of section 2 indicating that the

singularity is worse for q5 = 1, but we have no detailed interpretation to oer.

one might guess that the q5 = 1 system simply describes the scattering of low energy
particles in spacetime from a single ns vebrane in the weak coupling limit. if so, the

essential dierence between q5 = 1 and q5 > 1 is that (as there is [6] no tube for q5 = 1)

32

the conformal eld theory of a single vebrane (unlike that of q5 > 1 coincident vebranes)

is nonsingular, and hence string perturbation theory is well behaved as the string coupling

goes to zero. the weak coupling limit describes particles in spacetime that scatter from a

potential (the vebrane) but not from each other. perhaps as one approaches the q5 = 1

singularity, the near horizon cft somehow describes this physics. hence, one may wonder
whether the q5 = 1 system is related to the symmetric product (r4  x)q1/sq1 . clearly,
this issue deserves better understanding.

5. missing chiral states, and further applications

5.1. the fate of chiral primaries

the analysis of the worldsheet conformal eld theory of the ns1/ns5 theory in [19] has

found chiral operators in the boundary conformal eld theory with   q52
general considerations from a spacetime point of view [38] suggest that the system has
chiral operators with   q1q5
valid for generic values of the parameters, where the cft is not singular. on the other

. where are the missing operators? the analysis of [38] is

. however,

2

2

hand, the analysis of [19] is valid on a sixteen-dimensional subspace of the system, where

all the rr moduli of the ns1/ns5 system vanish. precisely on this subspace, the system
has, as we have seen, a continuum starting at 0 = (q51)2
that the disappearance of some states when the rr moduli vanish are somehow associated

it is natural to suspect

4q5

.

with the appearance of this continuum or (shifting to a d1/d5 language) with the small

instanton singularity.

comparison to classical instanton moduli space

to get some insight about this, let us look at the small instanton singularity classically.
according to the adhm construction, the moduli space of instantons on r4 is the higgs

branch of the following theory with eight supercharges: a u (1) gauge theory with q5
hypermultiplets ai, i = 1, . . . , q5 of charge 1. from the point of view of a theory with
only four supercharges, each ai splits as a pair of chiral multiplets ai, bi. the equations
determining a vacuum are f -atness

aibi = 0

q5xi=1

33

(5.1)

and d-atness

q5xi=1

|ai|2 

q5xj=1

|bj|2 = r.

(5.2)

here we have included an fi interaction with coecient r. for r 6= 0, the small instanton
singularity is blown up; the singularity is recovered for r = 0. up to an r-symmetry

transformation (rotating the choice of four supercharges out of the eight), there is no loss

of generality in assuming that the fi term appears only in (5.2) and that r > 0.

the small instanton moduli space t is the space of solutions of the above equations,
modulo the u (1) action a  eiwa, b  eiwb. setting b = 0, we see that t contains a
copy of u = cpq51, of radius r. t itself is the cotangent bundle t u = t cpq51
of u , as long as r > 0. for r = 0, the copy of cpq51 at the center of t is blown down
to a point, and t has a conical singularity.

now for topological reasons, for r > 0, there is an l2 harmonic form of the middle
dimension on t . indeed, a delta function that is poincare dual to u is of compact support
and also (since the bration t u  u has nonzero euler class) represents a nontrivial
cohomology class. it can therefore be projected to a unique nonzero l2 form  on t . for
r > 0,  generates the image of the compactly supported cohomology of t in the ordinary
cohomology of this space, and hence generates the l2 cohomology of t .

being poincare dual to a complex submanifold of complex codimension q5  1,  is a
form of degree (q5  1, q5  1) on t . it hence corresponds, for r 6= 0, to a chiral primary
eld of dimension ((q5  1)/2, (q5  1)/2)  exactly the quantum numbers of the rst
chiral primary that is missing in the conformal eld theory analysis of the ns1/ns5

system without rr elds [19].

the l2 form  has its support for a, b of order r, since this is the radius of u . if,
therefore, we approach the locus on which some chiral primaries are missing by taking
r  0, then  has delta function support at the singularity of the moduli space. (we use
the phrase delta function support somewhat loosely to mean simply that as r  0, 
vanishes away from the conical singularity.) a more evocative way to say this is that as
r  0,  becomes concentrated at the singularity and disappears from the smooth part of
t .

let us now try to interpret this in the conformal eld theory. the elds a, b do not

give a good description of the small instanton conformal eld theory near the singularity.

for this we should use instead the liouville eld  of the long strings together with other

degrees of freedom described in section 4. the small instanton region corresponds in that

34

description to   . for r very small and positive, an exponential coupling e suppresses
the region of large . the fact that the classical form  has its support at a, b  r

suggests that the chiral primary corresponding to  in the (better) long string description
has its support at, roughly, e  1/r for some  > 0. for r  0, this chiral primary state
then disappears to  = .

to prove that a chiral primary state corresponding to  moves to  =  as r  0,
we would need a fuller understanding of the n = 4 liouville theory. but this behavior is
certainly suggested by the classical facts that we have explained, and is entirely consistent

with the fact that for r = 0, that is in the absence of rr elds, a chiral primary with the

same quantum numbers as  is missing in the ns1/ns5 conformal eld theory.

the discussion so far makes it sound as if only one state should be missing, but that

is because we have focussed on just a single small instanton. let us see what happens when
we incorporate the other degrees of freedom. we let mq1,q5 be the moduli space of u (q5)
instantons of instanton number q1. the locus of mq1,q5 parametrizing congurations
with a very small instanton looks like a product (more precisely, a ber bundle) t  x 
mq11,q5 , where mq11,q5 parametrizes the q11 non-small instantons, x parametrizes
the position of the small instanton, and t is the one-instanton moduli space discussed
above. let  be any harmonic form on x  mq11,q5. then, when t is blown down by
turning o the rr elds,    has its support at the small instanton singularity in t
(since  does), so every cohomology class of this form disappears from the smooth part of

the moduli space in this limit.

harmonic forms on mq1,q5 of degree (p, q) with p (or q) less than q51 are supported,
for r  0, on the smooth part of the moduli space (since the singular part does not support
any l2 harmonic form of such degree). hence, the chiral primaries with j < (q5  1)/2
should decay as one approaches the long string or small instanton region, as we found in

section 4.

5.2. further applications

we conclude by briey remarking on some further applications.

in the ns1/ns5 case, the essence of our result concerns the behavior of long strings

in the wzw model of sl(2, r). this model has been studied over the years from many

point of view, for instance as an example of a non-unitary cft (see, e.g.

[39,40]), an

example of string propagation in nontrivial and time-dependent backgrounds (see, e.g.

[30,41,42] and references therein), as an ingredient in studying two-dimensional quantum

35

gravity [43], and black holes [44], and in the context of the ads/cft correspondence [19-

21]. this much-studied two-dimensional cft has the strange behavior we have described:

a continuum (above a certain threshold) coming from long strings, above and beyond

the continuum coming from the noncompactness of the group manifold. this raises the

interesting question, which we will not try to address, of what sort of singularities in

correlation functions are generated by the long strings.

breakdown of string perturbation theory

in certain applications of conformal eld theories of the sort we have been studying,

the behavior we have found has dramatic consequences. the type iia string on k3 is
dual to the heterotic string on t4 [45,46]; using this duality one can show that when type

iia string theory is compactied on a space m with an an singularity, an enhanced an
gauge symmetry occurs in the six dimensions orthogonal to m . this is a nonperturbative

phenomenon that cannot be avoided by making the string coupling constant smaller. it

thus represents a breakdown of string perturbation theory, possible only because of a

singular behavior of the conformal eld theory. this breakdown of perturbation theory is

associated with an important role played by wrapped membranes. one might suspect that

the breakdown of perturbation theory is associated with the appearance of a tube with

a linearly growing coupling. however, the target space of the cft does not exhibit such a

singularity; indeed, the hyper-kahler metric of the target space is subject to no quantum

corrections. in fact, in some cases the target space has only an orbifold singularity and

the theory diers from the non-singular orbifold only in the value of the  angle [47].

despite this, for string theory at the an1 singularity, a tubelike description arises
in suitable variables via t -duality [8,9]. these examples are similar to the ones we have

been studying since, for example, the a1 singularity is the small instanton singularity for
q5 = 2. for the d1/d5 cases that we have studied in the present paper, we have seen
a mechanism by which the cft develops the expected tube in eld space (but not in

the original variables of the sigma model), and therefore the cft is singular. thus, our

result can be seen as an analog or generalization of the tubelike description of the an1
singularities that comes from t -duality.

the d0/d4 system compactied on x is closely related to the d1/d5 system. its

low energy behavior is described by quantum mechanics whose target space is the moduli

space of instantons on x. for certain values of the parameters (one must set the three fi

couplings to zero), this target space has singularities. they are associated either with small

36

instantons or reduced structure group. the pathology discussed in this paper is a feature

of 1+1-dimensional conformal eld theory and does not aect d0/d4 quantum mechanics,

which remains well behaved even with the target space develops singularities. however,

some low energy states in the quantum mechanics are supported near the singularities, for

reasons explained in section 5.1. in making this assertion, we are assuming that, when one

turns o the fi couplings, the states in question do not spread on the coulomb branch.

assuming this, these states are a generalization, to higher q5, of the d0/d4 bound state
at threshold whose existence was proved in [48].

acknowledgements

we would like to thank o. aharony, t. banks, r. dijkgraaf, r. friedman, d. kutasov,

j. maldacena, g. moore, a. strominger, and s.-t. yau for useful discussions. n.s. thanks

the organizers of the string workshop at the institute for advanced studies at the hebrew

university for hospitality and for creating a stimulating environment during the completion

of this work. this work was supported in part by grant #de-fg02-90er40542 and grant

#nsf-phy-9512835.

37

references

[1] g. gibbons and p. townsend, vacuum interpolation in supergravity via super p-
branes, phys. rev. lett. 71 (1993) 5223; g. w. gibbons and p. townsend, higher
dimensional resolution of dilatonic black hole singularities, class. quant. grav.
12 (1995) 297.

[2] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and super-

gravity, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1997) 231, hep-th/9711200.

[3] r. penrose and w. rindler, spinors and spacetime, vol. 2 (cambridge university

press, 1986), chapter 9.

[4] e. witten, some comments on string dynamics, hep-th/9507121, in strings 95,

future perspectives in string theory, ed. i. bars et. al.

[5] m. douglas, j. polchinski, and a. strominger, probing five-dimensional black holes

with d-branes, hep-th/9703031, jhep 9712 (1997) 3.

[6] e. diaconescu and n. seiberg, the coulomb branch of (4, 4) supersymmetric field

theories in two dimensions, hep-th/9707158, jhep 9707 (1997) 1.

[7] p.c. argyres, m. ronen plesser and n. seiberg, the moduli space of vacua of n=2
susy qcd and duality in n=1 susy qcd, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 159, hep-
th/9603042.

[8] h. ooguri and c. vafa, two-dimensional black hole and singularities of cy man-

ifolds, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 55.

[9] r. gregory, j. a. harvey, and g. moore, unwinding strings and t -duality of

kaluza-klein and h-monopoles, adv. theor. math. phys. 1 (1998) 283.

[10] j. brodie, two-dimensional mirror symmmetry from m -theory, hep-th/9709228.
[11] s. sethi, the matrix formulation of type iib five-branes, nucl. phys. b523 (1998)

158, hep-th/9710005.

[12] j. maldacena, j. michelson, and a. strominger, anti-de sitter fragmentation, hep-

th/9812073.

[13] j. maldacena and a. strominger, ads(3) black holes and a stringy exclusion princi-

ple, jhep 12 (1998) 005, hep-th/9804085.

[14] m. du and c. sutton, the membrane at the end of the universe, new. sci.

118 (1988) 67.

[15] o. coussaert, m. henneaux and p. van driel, the asymptotic dynamics of three-
dimensional einstein gravity with a negative cosmological constant, class. quant.
grav. 12 (1995) 2961.

[16] r. dijkgraaf, instanton strings and hyperkahler geometry, hep-th/9810210.
[17] s. ferrara, r. kallosh, and a. strominger, n = 2 extremal black holes, phys.
rev. d52 (1995) 5412, hep-th/9508072; s. ferrara, g. w. gibbons, and r. kallosh,

38

black holes and critical points in moduli space, nucl. phys. 500 (1997) 75, hep-
th/9702103.

[18] n. nekrasov and a. s. schwarz, instantons on noncommutative r4 and (2, 0) su-
perconformal six-dimensional theory, hep-th/9802068, commun. math. phys. 198
(1998) 689.

[19] a. giveon, d. kutasov and n. seiberg, comments on string theory on ads3, adv.

theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 733, hep-th/9806194.

[20] j. de boer, h. ooguri, h. robins and j. tannenhauser, string theory on ads(3),

hep-th/9812046.

[21] d. kutasov and n. seiberg, more comments on string theory on ads3, efi-99-8,

iassns-hep-99-30, to appear.

[22] a. beauville, riemannian holonomy and algebraic geometry, math.ag/9902110.
[23] e. witten, anti de sitter space and holography, hep-th/9802150, adv. theor.

math. phys. 2 (1998) 253.

[24] c. r. graham and r. lee, einstein metrics with prescribed conformal innity on

the ball, adv. math. 87 (1991) 186.

[25] n. seiberg, notes on quantum liouville theory and quantum gravity, prog.

theor. phys. suppl. 102 (1990) 319.

[26] n. berkovits, c. vafa, and e. witten, conformal field theory of ads background

with ramond-ramond flux, hep-th/9902098.

[27] e. verlinde, h. verlinde and h. ooguri, unpublished; j. maldacena, unpublished.
[28] j. polchinski, string theory (cambridge university press, 1998), vol. 1, section 4.4.
i. bars, ghost-free spectrum of a quantum string in sl(2, r) curved space-
[29]
time, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 3308, hep-th/9503205; solution of the sl(2, r)
string in curved spacetime, in future perspectives in string theory (los angeles,
1995), hep-th/9511187.

[30] j. balog, l. oraifeartaigh, p. forgacs, and a. wipf, consistency of string prop-
agation on curved space-times: an su (1, 1) based counterexample, nucl. phys.
b325 (1989) 225; p. m. s. petropoulos, comments on su (1, 1) string theory,
phys. lett. b236 (1990) 151; s. hwang, no-ghost theorem for su (1, 1) string
theories, nucl. phys. b354 (1991) 100; j. m. evans, m. r. gaberdiel, and m. j.
perry, the no-ghost theorem and strings on ads3, hep-th/9812252.

[31] m. bershadsky and h. ooguri, hidden sl(n ) symmetry in conformal field theo-

[32]

ries, commun. math. phys. 126 (1989) 49.
i. pesando, on the quantization of the gs type iib superstring action on
ads3  s3 with ns-ns flux, hep-th/9903086.

[33] k. schoutens, o(n) extended superconformal field theory in superspace, nucl.

phys. b295 (1988) 634.

39

[34] a. sevrin, w. troost and a. van proeyen, superconformal algebras in two-

dimensions with n=4, phys. lett. 208b (1988) 447.

[35] e.a. ivanov, s.o. krivonos and v.m. leviant, a new class of superconformal sigma
models with the wess-zumino action, nucl. phys. b304 (1988) 601; quantum
n=3, n=4 superconformal wzw sigma models, phys. lett. b215 (1988) 689.

[36] c. kounnas, m. porrati and b. rostand, on n=4 extended super-liouville theory,

phys. lett. b258 (1991) 61.

[37] c.g. callan, j.a. harvey and a. strominger, world sheet approach to heterotic
instantons and solitons, nucl. phys. b359 (1991) 611; worldbrane actions for
string solitons, nucl. phys. b367 (1991) 60; supersymmetric string solitons,
hep-th/9112030.

[38] a. strominger and c. vafa, microscopic origin of the bekenstein-hawking en-

tropy, hep-th/9601029, phys. lett. b379 (1996) 99.

[39] a.b. zamolodchikov and v.a. fateev, operator algebra and correlation func-
tions in the two-dimensional wess-zumino su (2)  su (2) chiral model, sov.
j. nucl. phys. 43 (1986) 657.

[40] j. teschner, the minisuperspace limit of the sl(2, c)/su (2) wzw model, hep-

th/9712258.

[41] l.j. dixon, m.e. peskin and j. lykken, n=2 superconformal symmetry and so(2,1)

[42]

current algebra, nucl. phys. b325 (1989) 329.
i. bars and d. nemeschansky, string propagation in backgrounds with curved
space-time, nucl. phys. b348 (1991) 89.

[43] v.g. knizhnik, a.m. polyakov and a.b. zamolodchikov, fractal structure of 2-d

quantum gravity, mod. phys. lett. a3 (1988) 819.

[44] e. witten, on string theory and black holes, phys. rev. d44 (1991) 314.
[45] c.m. hull and p.k. townsend, unity of superstring dualities, nucl. phys. b438

(1995) 109, hep-th/9410167.

[46] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b443

(1995) 85,hep-th/9503124.

[47] p.s. aspinwall, enhanced gauge symmetries and k3 surfaces, phys. lett. b357

(1995) 329, hep-th/9507012.

[48] s. sethi and m. stern, a comment on the spectrum of h-monopoles, hep-

th/9607145.

40

