su-itp-99-28
nsf-itp-99-049

negative energy, superluminosity and holography

joseph polchinski

institute for theoretical physics, university of california

santa barbara, ca 93106-4030

leonard susskind and nicolaos toumbas

department of physics, stanford university

stanford, ca 94305-4060

abstract

the holographic connection between large n super yang mills the-
ory and gravity in anti desitter space requires unfamiliar behavior of
the sym theory in the limit that the curvature of the ads geometry
becomes small. the paradoxical behavior includes superluminal oscil-
lations and negative energy density. these eects typically occur in
the sym description of events which take place far from the boundary
of ads when the signal from the event arrives at the boundary. the
paradoxes can be resolved by assuming a very rich collection of hid-
den degrees of freedom of the sym theory which store information but
give rise to no local energy density. these degrees of freedom, called
precursors, are needed to make possible sudden apparently acausal en-
ergy momentum ows. such behavior would be impossible in classical
eld theory as a consequence of the positivity of the energy density.
however we show that these eects are not only allowed in quantum
eld theory but that we can model them in free quantum eld theory.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

8
1

 
 

4
v
8
2
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

march 1998

1 introduction and review

that there is some sort of holographic [1, 2] correspondence between maxi-
mally supersymmetric su(n) yang mills theory and supergravity or string
theory on ads5  s5 [3, 4, 5] has been established beyond reasonable doubt.
in this paper we will assume the correspondence in the strongest sense,
namely, that sym theory and iib string theory are equivalent for all val-
ues of n and gauge coupling constant.

equivalence between theories in dierent dimensions immediately raises
questions about how detailed bulk information in one theory can be com-
pletely coded in lower dimensional degrees of freedom. despite the large
amount of evidence that we have for the ads/cft correspondence, there is
not yet any direct translation of the congurations of one theory to the other.
we will see that the existence of such a dictionary requires behavior for the
large n limit of sym theory which seems very unusual and even unphysical,
but we will argue that it is neither.

the parameters of the sym theory are the gauge coupling constant g and
the number of colors n. these are related to the radius of curvature r of
the ads5  s5, the string length scale ls and the string coupling gs by

gs = g2
r = ls(ng2)1/4 .

the 5 and 10 dimensional newton constants are given by

g5 = g10/r5
g10 = g2

s l8
s.

(1.1)

(1.2)

throughout we will neglect constants of order one.

the features of the correspondence that are most relevant to our discus-

sion are the following:

1. certain local gauge invariant sym operators correspond to bulk su-
pergravity elds evaluated at the boundary of the ads space. that is, the
expectation value of the sym operator is determined from the boundary
value of the eld, as explained more fully in section 3. for example the
energy momentum tensor t of the sym theory corresponds to the metric
perturbation . similarly ff  corresponds to the dilaton eld .

2. the ultraviolet-infrared connection [6] relates the short wave length
ultraviolet modes of sym theory to the supergravity modes near the bound-
ary of ads space. to be more precise let us introduce cavity coordinates
in which the ads metric ds2 is written in terms of a dimensionless metric

2

ds2 and the radius of curvature r

ds2 = r2ds2

ds2 = (cid:18) 1 + r2
1  r2(cid:19)2

dt2 (cid:18) 2

1  r2(cid:19)2

(dr2 + r2d2) .

(1.3)

the coordinates t, r are dimensionless. the center of ads means the point
r = 0. near a point of the boundary at r = 1 the metric has the form

ds2 = r2(cid:20) 1

z2 (dt2  dz2  dxidxi)(cid:21)

(1.4)

where z = 1  r and x1, x2, x3 replace the coordinates of the 3-sphere. for
our purposes the metric (1.4) is to be regarded as a local approximation to
the cavity metric. it is true, but irrelevant to our purposes, that the same
metric also gives an exact description of a patch of ads space. in any case
we will call these the halfplane coordinates.

the sym theory will be thought of as living on the dimensionless unit
sphere  times the dimensionless time t. all quantities such as energy, dis-
tance and time in the sym theory are regarded as dimensionless. to relate
them to corresponding bulk quantities the conversion factor is r. thus for
example, a time interval t corresponds to a proper interval rt in the bulk
theory. similarly an energy esym in the sym theory is related to the bulk
energy by esym = ebulkr.

the uvir connection states that supergravity degrees of freedom at
1  r =  correspond to sym degrees of freedom with wavelength  . the
uvir connection is at the heart of the holographic requirement that the
number of degrees of freedom should be of order the area of the boundary
measured in planck units. it also suggests that physical systems near the
center of the ads space should be described by modes of the sym theory of
the longest wavelength, that is the homogeneous modes on .

3. the existence of a at space limit [7, 8]. this limit involves n  
but is not the t hooft limit in which g2n and the energy are kept xed. the
at space limit is given by

g2  xed
n   .

(1.5)

in addition, all energy scales are kept xed in string units. this means that
the dimensionless sym energy scales like r, or using eq. (1.1)

esym  n 1/4 .

(1.6)

as argued in [7, 8] an s-matrix can be dened in this limit in terms of sym
correlation functions (see refs. [9] for related developments). we will outline
the construction but the reader is referred to the references for details.

3

a bulk massless particle of energy k is described by a sym excitation of

energy  given by

 = rk = (ng2)1/4lsk .

(1.7)

in order to obtain denite kinematics in the at space limit, the scattering
must occur in a known position due to the position-dependence of the metric.
therefore, we require the particles to collide within a space-time region called
the lab. the lab is centered at t = r = 0 and has a large but xed size l
in string units. at the end we may take l/ls as big as we like.1 in terms of
dimensionless coordinates the lab dimensions are

since l is xed in string units

t  r  l/r .

t  r  (ng2)1/4 .

(1.8)

(1.9)

creation and annihilation operators for emitting and absorbing particles
at the ads boundary can be dened. in order that the particles pass through
the lab they must be emitted at time tin  /2. the collision process lasts
for a xed time in string units which means a dimensionless time of order
n 1/4. thus in the dimensionless time of the sym theory the duration of
the collision becomes negligible as n  . the outgoing particles will
arrive at the boundary at time tout  /2. the graviton creation operators
corresponding to this situation are given by

ain = z dt d3x t(x, t)eitg(x  x0, t + /2)

(1.10)

where the integration is over the boundary and x0 is the point from which
the graviton is emitted. annihilation operators aout at t = /2 are dened
in a similar manner. in order to make sure that the particles pass through
the origin the functions g in eq. (1.8) must not be too sharply peaked at x0.
we refer the reader to [7, 8] for a discussion of this point.

let us consider a state involving a packet of gravitons emitted at t = /2
from the boundary at point x0, in a uniform state on the s5. the packet
is very well concentrated in the dimensionless coordinates t, r, . in order
to translate this into the sym theory we need to compute the gravitational
eld of such a source. fortunately this has been done in [10]. the result
is an ads generalization of the aichelburg sexl metric and like that metric,
it is described by a shock wave that propagates in the bulk with the parti-
cle. the thickness of the shock in dimensionless coordinates tends to zero

1for generic wavepackets the analysis in refs. [7, 8] shows that they grow as n 1/8 due to
geometric optics eects, but for simplicity we imagine special packets chosen to intersect
in a volume of order n 0. the size and duration of any collision process is determined by
the external energies and so is of order n 0.

4

with the spread of the packet. the intersection of the shock wave with the
boundary forms a 2-sphere or shell which expands away from the point x0
with the speed of light. both in front of the shell and behind it hti van-
ishes. the shell expands to its maximum size at t = 0 and then contracts
to the antipodal point at t = +/2. thus the expectation value of the sym
energy momentum tensor has its support on such a moving shell and is zero
everywhere else.

the description given above is somewhat surprising in view of the uvir
connection. we might have expected that in the sym description the energy
would be transferred from the short wave length modes of the eld theory
to long wave lengths as the graviton moves toward r = 0. in this event the
sharp features of the shell should have dissipated. however the energy stays
concentrated in a thin shell whose thickness tends to zero with n. this in
itself is somewhat puzzling.

2 history of a collision

paradoxes become apparent when we consider the collision of two packets.
the packets are emitted from points x1, x2 at time t = /2. the rst
thing to notice is that from the viewpoint of the boundary sym theory the
behavior of the system after t = 0 becomes innitely sensitive to the details
of the emission process. as an example suppose x1 and x2 are separated by
an angle of 90 degrees on the 3-sphere . if the two particles are emitted at
the same time they will reach r = 0 simultaneously and collide. but suppose
the emission processes are separated by time   1. in this case the arrivals
will be separated by a time in string units of order (ng2)1/4. this means
that if  > (ng2)1/4 the particles will miss each other and pass essentially
unscattered. on the other hand if  < (ng2)1/4 a collision will take place
leading to a very dierent nal state. in other words shifting the parameters
of the emission process by tiny amounts will lead to large dierences in the
outcome.

consider a process in which two packets of xed energy in string units
are emitted from diametrically opposing points in such a way that they pass
through the lab.
in the sym theory the process starts out as a pair of
expanding thin shells of energy. at time t = 0 the shells meet. now from
what was said above, one might expect the evolution just after t = 0 to be
supersensitive to to the initial conditions. however this is not true. in fact the
two shells just pass through one another without any apparent interaction.
the reason is that as r  , points near the boundary are so far (again in
string units ) from the sources that the gravitational eld equations linearize.
the energy-momentum continues to be concentrated on the thin shells which
are now contracting toward the points antipodal from where they originated.

5

not only is hti zero everywhere o the shells but so are all other sym
elds that correspond to classical supergravity elds.
we now come to a critical question. the vanishing of hti in classical
eld theory would indicate that the local state of the system is vacuum-like.
in other words all elds or functionals of elds supported o the shells should
have their vacuum values. as we shall see, this can not be true in the quantum
theory. we will nd that after the shells pass through each other the region
between them must be excited away from the local vacuum conguration
despite the fact that the expectation value of the energy density (as well as
the value of every sym eld which corresponds to classical supergravity)
vanishes.

a simple illustrative example is the case where the two packets are pre-
pared so as to collide head-on at t = r = 0. assume the particles have a xed
energy which is much larger than the 10-dimensional planck mass. in this
case they will form a 10-dimensional schwarzschild black hole. not all the
energy will go into the black hole but much of it will continue to propagate
as gravitational bremsstrahlung. according to the assumption of a at space
limit [7, 8] the percentage of energy trapped in the black hole can be calcu-
lated in the at space limit [11]. the black hole quickly becomes spherically
symmetric and then decays by hawking evaporation. the entire history of
the black hole lasts a xed time in string units and therefore a dimensionless
time which tends to zero like n 1/4.

how does the creation and evaporation of the black hole aect the metric
and other supergravity elds at the ads boundary? the answer is that
it doesnt, at least at rst. in fact the supergravity elds do not respond
until light has had a chance to propagate from r = 0 to the boundary.
the evaporating black hole sends out a spherically symmetric signal which
arrives at the boundary at t = /2. the arrival of the signal is very sudden,
occupying a time t  (ng2)1/4. at this time the entire boundary suddenly
lights up with a spherically symmetric distribution of energy which in total
equals the mass of the black hole. in other words a fraction of the energy
originally stored in the collapsing shells very quickly ows and is redistributed
into a homogeneous component. we will call this phenomenon light-up.

this behavior seems extremely bizarre. the instantaneous rearrangement
of energy appears to violate causality. however this may not be so. to better
understand it we will describe an analogous example involving a sudden
ow of electric charge. consider an example in which initially there is a
concentration of charge in some region r1. at time t = 0 the charge is found
to disappear from r1 and reappear at r2 which is outside the forward light
cone of r1. to see how this can happen, imagine a wire connecting r1 and r2.
the wire is full of electrons and positive ions so that it is electrically neutral.
now we prearrange observers at each point of the wire so that at t = 0 they
move each electron slightly toward r2. the result is a sudden appearance of

6

charge at the ends with no charge density ever occurring anywhere else. if
there was already a charge at r1 it would be cancelled by the new charge at
that point. the net result would be a sudden redistribution of charge.

two ingredients are necessary for such behavior. the rst is that the
current vector j be spacelike. since the charge density on the wire is always
zero it is clear that the current is purely in the spacelike direction. this also
means that in some frame the charge density was negative. this of course is
not a diculty since charge density can be either positive or negative.

the other ingredient is prearrangement. the physical conditions along
the wire must include agents with synchronized clocks that are instructed in
advance to act simultaneously.

the sudden ow of energy requires the same two ingredients. in order
that the energy is rearranged so suddenly the ux of energy ht 0ii must be
much larger than the energy density itself. this means that the energy
density can be made negative by a lorentz boost. however, unlike electric
charge, energy is not allowed to be negative in sym theory. since in classical
sym theory the energy density is positive this kind of ow of energy is
absolutely forbidden in the classical theory. however quantum theory allows
local negative energy densities as long as they are (over)compensated by
nearby positive energy density [12]. in the next section we will analyze this
in more detail and show that the bounds as in ref. [12] are consistent with
the behavior required of the sym theory.

a second puzzle concerns locality. let us suppose that before light-up
the region between the separating shells is physically indistinguishable from
the vacuum of the sym theory. by this we mean that all expectation values
of functionals of elds in this region are identical to their vacuum values.
then the light-up is impossible. to see this we consider a point (x, t) on
the boundary just after light-up. the point is not near the points where the
shells are localized. the sym heisenberg equations of motion can be used
to express the energy density at this point in terms of local elds at a time
just before light-up. furthermore, causality requires that the only elds that
can be involved are in the region between the shells where we have assumed
vacuum conditions. it follows that the energy density at (x, t) must be the
same as for the vacuum, that is, zero.

the resolution of these paradoxes, assuming the correspondence is really
as strong as we believe, must be that the region between the shells at time
0 < t < /2 must not be vacuum-like even though the expectation value
of the energy-momentum tensor vanishes. thus we are forced to postulate
that in a region in which hti = hf fi = . . . = 0, the vacuum is excited
to a non-vacuum-like local state which provides the precursor for the later
event that we called light-up. the precursor elds must play the role of
the prearranged agents which simultaneously move charges in the electric
example. furthermore there must be a very rich manifold of such precursor

7

congurations. to see this suppose we change the initial emission parameters
by a small amount of order n 1/4. as we have seen this can lead to a
very large change in the results of the collision. for example such a change
can cause an increase of the impact parameter so that a peripheral grazing
collision results. in this case the particles may get deected through a small
angle. again, the news of the collision does not arrive at the boundary until
t = /2. as before the energy must suddenly rearrange but this time the
result is not a spherically symmetric component but a new pair of localized
small shells at shifted positions. also as before, the information must be
locally stored in a conguration with vanishing expectation value for the
energy momentum tensor. evidently all the local physical processes that can
take place in the lab are coded in precursor congurations.

3 gravitational wave

the principal.

in this section we will consider a simplied example in which a gravita-
tional wave propagates radially outward from r  0. we begin with the wave
in the linearized theory in which the eld equations are treated to lowest or-
der in the deviations from ads space. assume that the wave is in one of
the lowest spherical harmonics on the 3-sphere. in halfplane coordinates the
plane fronted wave has the form

(z, x, t) = r2z2f (z, t)

where (z, x, t) is dened by

ds2 = r2(cid:20) 1

z2 (dt2  dz2  dxidxi)(cid:21) + (z, x, t)dxdx

(3.1)

(3.2)

and  is a transverse traceless polarization tensor with nonvanishing com-
ponents in the x directions. the polarization tensor is assumed normalized
to unity.

according to the ads/cft correspondence, the wave makes a contribu-

tion to the sym energy momentum tensor given by [13][14][15]

< tij > 

r
g5

z2ij|z=0 = ij

r3
g5

f (0, t).

(3.3)

we assume that at some initial time t0 in the past, the function f (z, t) de-
scribes a wave propagating toward z = 0 and that it vanishes for z < t0 .
thus at the initial time the contribution to < t > from the wave vanishes.
furthermore causality of the bulk theory insures that f (0, t) will remain ex-
actly zero until t = 0. at that time f (0, t) and the sym stress tensor begin

8

to oscillate. after a time the wave will be reected and the value at z = 0
will return to zero exponentially. thus far we have considered the gravita-
tional wave in the linearized approximation. by analogy with terminology
introduced in [12] the contribution to < t > in this approximation is called
the principal.

the interest.

the nonlinear corrections to the gravitational eld equations give rise to
a correction to the metric which in turn corrects the sym energy density.
again by analogy with [12] this term is called the interest.
it is smaller
than the principal by a factor g5. to compute the interest let us return to
cavity coordinates. consider any spherical2 distribution of energy which is
non vanishing only for r < r0. then, as in at space, the gravitational eld
at r > r0 is completely determined to be that of a neutral nonrotating black
hole with the same total energy. the metric of a black hole in ads is given
in schwarzschild-like coordinates by

ds2 = r2(cid:20)(1 + b2 

2mg5
r2b2 )dt2  (1 + b2 

2mg5

r2b2 )1db2  b2d2(cid:21)

(3.4)

where b is the radial coordinate. the coordinates b and r are related by

1 + b2 =

(1 + r2)2

(1  r2)2 .

near the boundary this becomes

b =

1
1  r

.

(3.5)

(3.6)

thus near the boundary the timetime component of the metric has the form

g00 = gads

00  2mg5(1  r)2.

this gives a contribution to 00 given by

00 = 2mg5(1  r)2 = 2mg5z2.

using the timetime component of eq(3.3) we nd the interest

< t int

00 > mr.

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

thus to compute the interest we need to compute the energy m stored
in the gravitational wave. our goal will be to compute the energy in terms

2near the boundary, the gravitational wave looks like a plane sheet with uniform energy
density. the correction to the metric at a given point should be the same with that of a
large spherical distribution of the same energy density.

9

of data on the boundary. this will facilitate comparison with the boundary
cft. for our purposes, it is convenient to set

 =

h

z2 = r2 (z, t)

z2

.

(3.10)

we work in the gauge hz = 0. in the case when  is traceless with no
timelike components, the constraints from the z components of the einstein
equations are automatically satised. the linearized equations for hij reduce
to the following dierential equation for (z, t)

2
z  

3
z

z  2

t  = 0.

(3.11)

the corresponding 1 + 1 dimensional lagrangian density is obtained to be

l =

r2

2g5z3 h(t)2  (z)2i .

(3.12)

this is just the lagrangian density of a minimally coupled massless scalar
eld in ads. using the equation of motion, we can write the energy stored
in the gravitational wave as

m =

r2

2g5 z dz

z3 h(t)2  2

t i.

(3.13)

we now look for solutions that fall like z4 near the boundary so that 

falls like z2. if we set

 = z2(z)eit,

then  satises a standard bessel dierential equation
z  + zz  (4  z22) = 0

z22

(3.14)

(3.15)

with solution j2(z). thus, the most general solution can be written as
follows

(z, t) =

z2

2 z d()j2(z)eit + cc.

(3.16)

(3.17)

near the boundary, j2(z)  (z)2, and so
f () = 2()

is the fourier transform of the boundary data.

it is a simple exercise to compute the energy, and, therefore, the interest
in terms of the boundary data. using (3.13), (3.16) and the orthogonality
relations for bessel functions gives

00 e 
dt int

r3

g5 z d|f ()|2

3

10

.

(3.18)

there are two things to note about the interest. first is that it is com-
pletely featureless having neither space nor time dependence. the second is
that in a certain sense it can be made arbitrarily small. to see this let us
compare the interest with the principal obtained in eq(3.3)

< tij > ij

r3
g5

f (0, t) = ij

r3

2g5 z df ()eit + cc.

dening

p = < tij >
i = t int
00

we note that the ratio i/p 2 is given by

i
p 2  g5/r3.

(3.19)

(3.20)

(3.21)

now using eqs(1.1) and (1.2) we can rewrite this in terms of sym quantities

i
p 2  1/n 2.

(3.22)

the point is that if we hold xed the principal then the interest goes to zero
like 1/n 2. therefore in the large n limit the interest becomes negligible.

to summarize, the ads/cft correspondence requires the following be-
havior for the sym energy momentum tensor. for t < 0 the energy density
and pressure are constant with respect to spatial and temporal position. for
large n they are vanishingly small  n 2. at t = 0 the stress tensor be-
gins to oscillate simultaneously over all space with magnitude of order unity.
after a time the wave is reected and the oscillations cease.

4 squeezed states in field theory

the superluminal behavior and nonpositivity of the energy-momentum ten-
sor are incompatible with classical eld theory. however as we will see in
this section, they are not only compatible with quantum eld theory but can
even be found in the theory of free elds. for notational simplicity we will
use the theory of n 2 free scalar elds nm. thus, we will be able to obtain
a eld theoretic model for the gravitational wave we have just described.

conformal invariance requires that we use the improved form of the

energy-momentum tensor, which in four dimensions is given by

t = t r(

2
3

 

1
6

()2 

1
3

 +

1
12

2).

(4.23)

11

in this form, the energy-momentum tensor is traceless and satises the usual
conservation law.
in what follows we normal-order the energy-momentum
tensor so that all creation operators appear to the left of all annihilation
operators. this is equivalent to setting the vacuum energy to zero.

consider the squeezed state 3

|i = exp(cid:20)1

2 z d3~kd3~k f (~k, ~k) a

mn(~k)a

nm(~k)(cid:21) |0i

for the particular choice

f (~k, ~k) = f (~k)3(~k + ~k)

(4.24)

(4.25)

such that f (~k) = f (~k). we consider the case when f is small; then,

h| t |i = t (1)

 + t (2)


(4.26)

with the rst piece being linear in f and the second piece being quadratic
in f .

the eect linear in f is obtained from contracting two annihilation oper-
ators in t with two creation operators in |i, or vice versa with h|. the
gauge indices in each pair are contracted among themselves, and so t (1) is
of order n 2. all timelike components, t (1)
0 , are zero as one can easily verify.
the non zero diagonal components are given by

t (1)
ii =

n 2

2 z d3~p

~p

(p2

i 

1
3

~p

2)f (~p)e2i~pt + cc,

(4.27)

and the o-diagonal components

t (1)
ij =

n 2

2 z d3~p

~p

pipjf (~p)e2i~pt + cc.

(4.28)

as expected t (1) is homogeneous, traceless and oscillatory in time. in all,
ve independent components are non-zero as in the case of the gravitational
wave studied above. therefore, we identify this piece with the principal.

the only non-vanishing piece which is quadratic in f has the form hf| t |fi.
it receives contributions from terms in t with one creation and one annihi-
lation operator only. it is also of order n 2 and homogeneous. in particular,

00 = n 2(2)3z d3~p~p |f (~p)|2
t (2)

(4.29)

is positive and time-independent. we identify this piece with the interest.

3the terminology squeezed state originated in the quantum optics literature. the

squeezing refers to the shape of the oscillator phase space probability distributions.

12

we are now ready to compare with the results found in the previous

section. first, we note that the ratio

t2
(t1)2 

1
n 2

(4.30)

has the same scaling with n as before. moreover, we can obtain a consistent
relation between the fourier transform of the boundary data, f (), and the
angle average of f (~p). if we compare t (1) with the principal, we nd

f  f 3.

(4.31)

now, if we substitute f /3 for f in eq(4.29), we obtain the same connection
between interest and principal as given in eq(3.18).

we proceed now to study the time dependence of the principal. we
wish to show that it can be oscillatory for a certain period of time and then
vanishingly small. take

f (~p) = 

p2
3

p3(cid:16)p2(cid:17)n/2

ep2

(4.32)

as an example. here,  has units of mass and  has units of inverse mass
squared. we consider the case for which the number n is even. we focus on
a particular non-zero component. for example,

t (1)
33 =

4 3
2 n 2
45

z +



dxx(2+n)ex2

e2ix t

 .

(4.33)

this in turn is equal to

t (1)
33 =

=

8 3
2 n 2
45
8 3
2 n 2
45

 
2i !
 
2i !

(2+n)

(2+n)

(2+n)
t

(2+n)
t

dxex2



z +
(cid:18)e t

2

 (cid:19) .

2ixt


e

(4.34)

the nal result is a polynomial in t times a gaussian. this means that the
principal is oscillatory for some period of time near t = 0 (depending on )
and, then, it vanishes exponentially as t  .
it is interesting to consider gravitational waves which propagate along
a direction which is not perpendicular to the boundary. suppose the wave
vector has components in the (x1, z) plane. in this case the wave fronts do
not simultaneously arrive at the boundary. in fact the boundary data itself
becomes a wave propagating in the x1 direction. furthermore the wave has
both group and phase velocity greater than 1. it is superluminal! to see
how this happens in the cft we can compute the principal with the delta

13

function in eq(4.25) replaced by (~k + ~k  ~q) where ~q lies along the x1 direc-
tion. the resulting principal is easily computed and forms a superluminal
wave. actually it is not necessary to do any further calculation to see the
bulkboundary agreement in this case. the gravitational wave propagating
in the z, x1 direction can be obtained by an ads-lorentz transformation from
the original wave propagating along z. this maps into a conformal transfor-
mation of the boundary. since the eld theory we are using is conformally
invariant the agreement for the transformed wave follows from the agreement
in the original case.

in addition to being superluminal, the wave in the x1 direction also has
nonvanishing oscillating timetime component so that the energy density
oscillates from positive to negative [12].

5 precursors

the prole of the gravitational wave obviously carries information. we would
like to understand what precursor degrees of freedom carry that information,
particularly during the time t < 0 before the wave arrives at the boundary.
the interest t int
 is completely featureless in both space and time and cannot
be relevant here. furthermore all bulk elds vanish within a neighborhood
of the boundary. this means that the local sym elds that can be identied
with boundary values of bulk elds also vanish.

evidently the precursors are nonlocal. in the free eld example a conve-

nient example is given by

2
3



 

1
6

1
3




(x, x) = (

 

) < (~x, t)mn(~x, t)nm > |t=t (5.1)
where the expectation value is taken in the squeezed state. this quantity
obeys a wave equation with respect to t and (~x  ~x)/2. furthermore at
~x  ~x = 0 it is given by < t >. at early times when < t > vanishes
(x, x) is nonzero for |~x  ~x|  2|t|. in other words the precursor becomes
increasingly nonlocal the further the wave is from the boundary. this is of
course a manifestation of the ir/uv connection [6]. furthermore at any
time (x, x) has the same information as the function f that characterizes
the squeezed state.

6 conclusion

the main purpose of the free eld model is to demonstrate that some of the
odd superluminal and negative behavior of t predicted by the ads/cft
correspondence is consistent with the principles of quantum eld theory. it
is somewhat surprising that the free eld model works so well and captures

14

the detailed relation between principal and interest. we dont really know
why this is so but it seems to be part of a pattern. for example, free eld
theory describes the thermodynamics of ads black holes correctly apart from
a well known factor of 3/4 in the eective number of degrees of freedom.
more exactly, free eld theory agrees with ads/cft predictions for the two
and three point functions of chiral primaries. we suspect that if the model
scalar eld theory is replaced by free sym theory the numerical relation
between interest and principal may be exact as a consequence of the non-
renormalization theorems of the two and three point functions.

perhaps the most interesting result of this paper is the identication of

nonlocal precursor elds such as

mn(x)nm(x).

(6.1)

these elds would have to be modied in the interacting sym since they are
not gauge invariant as they stand. a candidate would be

mn(x)rs(x)wmrw 
sn

(6.2)

where w and w  are wilson lines along two paths connecting the points x, x.
in fact the entire object (6.2) can be thought of as a single wilson loop. this
suggests that the nonlocal precursors which code local bulk information are
expectation values of wilson loops of size dictated by the uv/ir connection.

7 acknowledgements

we would like to thank v. balasubramanian, g. horowitz, n. itzhaki, a.
peet, m. peskin, s. ross and s. shenker for helpful conversations. this
work was supported in part by nsf grants phy98-70115, phy94-07194 and
phy97-22022.

references

[1] g.

t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, gr-

qc/9310026.

[2] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, hep-th/9409089.

[3] juan m. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field the-

ories and supergravity, hep-th/9711200.

[4] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov, a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators

from non-critical string theory, hep-th/9802109

15

[5] edward witten, anti de sitter space and holography, hep-

th/9802150.

[6] l. susskind, edward witten, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter

space, hep-th/9805114.

[7] joseph polchinski, s-matrices from ads spacetime, hep-th/9901076.

[8] leonard susskind, holography in the flat space limit, hep-

th/9901079.

[9] v. balasubramanian, s. b. giddings and a. lawrence, what do cfts
tell us about anti-de sitter spacetimes? hep-th/9902052; s. b. gid-
dings, the boundary s-matrix and the ads to cft dictionary, in
preparation.

[10] gary t. horowitz, n. itzhaki, black holes, shock waves, and causality

in the ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9901012.

[11] p. death and p. payne, gravitational radiation in black-hole collisions

at the speed of light, phys. rev. d46(1992) 658.

[12] l.h. ford, thomas a. roman, the quantum interest conjecture,

gr-qc/9901074.

[13] v. balasubramanian and p. kraus, a stress tensor for anti-de sitter

gravity, hep-th/9902121.

[14] v. balasubramanian, p. kraus, and a. lawrence, bulk vs. boundary

dynamics in anti-de sitter spacetime, hep-th/9805171.

[15] t. banks, m. r. douglas, g. t. horowitz, and e. martinec, ads dy-

namics from conformal field theory, hep-th/9808016.

16

