9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
1
1

 
 

1
v
0
0
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

family unication from universality

p.p. divakaran

chennai mathematical institute

92 g.n. chetty road, t. nagar

chennai-600 017, india.

e-mail: ppd@smi.ernet.in

abstract

a direct consequence of the occurrence of fermion families in the standard

model is the invariance of fermion currents under certain groups of (universal-

ity) transformations. in this paper we show how these universality properties

can themselves be used as a method of nding and studying grand family

unication models. in the exact standard model limit two independent uni-

versality groups swk and sst of weak and strong gauge interactions are rst

identied. the subgroup of any family unication group g whose currents
are invariant under swk(sst) is then the centraliser gwk(gst) of swk(sst) in

1

g. choosing g = su(8n), we nd gwk = su(2) and gst = u(1)  su(3);
the standard model group g = gwk  gst is the group which respects either
weak or strong universality. the fundamental representation 8n of su(8n)

decomposes under su(2)  su(3) as n copies of (2, 1)  (2, 3); their u(1)
charges are the usual hypercharges. a higgs eld transforming as 8n ac-

complishes the secondary symmetry reduction (from g to u(1)em  su(3))
satisfactorily. the requirement that charged currents be v  a forces all
fermions to be left-handed in the unbroken g limit, making the model chi-

rally invariant in a strong sense  fermions have no right-handed components

to make masses with. the remedy proposed is that r-fermions are com-

posites of l-fermions and higgs. if their binding is in one specic channel,

r-fermions are shown to come in the right numbers and with the right cou-

plings to ensure pure v u(1)em and su(3) currents while leaving the su(2)

currents unchanged. it is nally argued that universality is most naturally

understood in terms of a simple preonic structure for fermions (but not for

gauge bosons), obviating the need for a primary g  g higgs mechanism.
su(8n) is then best interpreted as the global metaavour group of l-

chiral fermions. in this picture, g/g is not gauged; there are no ultraheavy
gauge bosons and hence no anomaly or hierarchy problem.

2

1 introduction

the problem of accommodating the existence of several replicas of a fam-

ily of leptons and quarks in unied theories of all their interactions (except,

of course, gravitational) has preoccupied model makers for more than two

decades now. beginning with ad hoc impositions of invariance under (-

nite [1] or lie [2]) groups of so called horizontal symmetries, this endeavour

soon moved on to the recognition that certain orthogonal groups g have
subgroups g and representations  such that the restriction of  to g is

a direct sum of copies of a unique irreducible representation of g, making

such groups plausible candidates for family unication [3]. such models,

however, have certain fundamental diculties (primarily to do with unac-

ceptably large right chiral interactions) which have resisted a satisfactory

natural resolution. subsequently, attention turned increasingly to supersym-

metric models; in particular, very detailed work on superstring - inspired

family unication models are going on apace now [4]. at the same time it

has recently been shown that conventional nonsupersymmetric unication

models, when combined with the topological properties of the higgs phase

of nonabelian gauge theories  i.e., going beyond the perturbative regime 

have the richness to accommodate the family structure [5,6].

the approach of the present paper to dealing with families is, by and

3

large, orthodox, at least in its fundamentals; supersymmetry is not invoked

and topological aspects of the reduction of a unifying gauge group g to an
observed or eective gauge group g are ignored in the lie algebraic consider-

ations below. it is also a pragmatic and phenomenological approach. instead

of looking for the source of the family structure, we shall focus primarily on

its most characteristic empirical signature, namely the observed universality

properties of the gauge interactions of all leptons and quarks, 8n in number

where n is the number of families. we shall seek to determine a simple group

g such that the subgroup of g whose currents respect the demand of univer-
sality is the (unbroken) standard model group g = su(2)  u(1)  su(3).
in the actual implementation, as described in the next section, we proceed as

follows. ignoring fermion masses and mixings, i.e., before g is further bro-

ken to u(1)em  su(3), the g-gauge interactions of fermions are separately
invariant under two types of  weak and strong  universality transforma-

tions forming two distinct subgroups swk and sst of g. the g-gauge currents
which are invariant under swk (respectively sst) are easily shown to couple

to the gauge bosons of a subgroup gwk(gst) of g which is the centraliser of
swk(sst), namely the group of elements of g which commute with all ele-
ments of swk(sst). moreover, the gauge group whose currents are invariant

under either swk or sst is gwk  gst. after identifying swk and sst (taking
account in particular of the fact that leptons have no strong interactions),

4

it is established that if g is chosen to be su(8n), then gwk = su(2) and
gst = u(1)  su(3). conversely if we want to have g = gwk  gst to
be su(2)  u(1)  su(3), then g can only be su(8n). the fundamental
representation 8n decomposes under su(2) su(3) as n copies of the rep-
resentation (2, 1)  (2, 3) i.e, n families of leptons and quarks. thus, by
embedding su(2) u(1) su(3) in su(8n) via the imposition of weak and
strong universalities, su(8n) is made to play the role of a grand family

unication group (no other simple group can serve this purpose) [7]. in par-

ticular, independently of the mechanism for the reduction of the gauge group

from g to g (more fundamentally, even in ignorance of the true source of
universality), the relative coupling constants of su(2), su(3) and u(1) get

xed.

it is noteworthy that the (weak) hypercharge u(1) reects the absence

of strong interactions for the leptons (as it perhaps should since, empirically,

it does distinguish between leptons and quarks). other indications that

the model is somewhat o the beaten track also become apparent at this

point. for instance, the su(2) coupling is smaller, in relation to su(3)
and u(1), by a factor 2 than in most conventional unication models,

resulting in a (unication) value of sin2  of 3/4. moreover, since su(2)

currents must be left-chiral, all fermions are forced to be left-handed (on

the scale of the g gauge theory), making the u(1) and su(3) currents also

5

left-chiral. thus, in the g-gauge invariant limit, all fermions are massless

and chiral symmetry is exact in the strongest possible form: there are no

right-handed (r-) fermions to couple to l-fermions so as to generate masses.

this circumstance suggests strongly that the mechanisms responsible for the

restoration of parity invariance of electromagnetic and colour interactions

and for the appearance of fermion masses are one and the same, namely a

suitable dynamical breaking of chiral symmetry, and that this mechanism

is closely linked to the spontaneous breaking of su(2)  u(1)  su(3) to
u(1)em  su(3).

as a rst step towards justifying such a linkage, we fall back on the stan-

dard higgs mechanism for breaking su(2) u(1) to u(1)em. accordingly, in
the g theory, we take the higgs to constitute one 8n representation, decom-
posing as n families of leptonic higgs ( (2, 1) under su(2)su(3)) and n
of coloured higgs ( (2, 3)). on assigning vacuum values to all n leptonic
higgs in, say, the up avour, the model becomes indistinguishable from the

standard model except, of course, for the exact (l-) chiral invariance. but

once elementary scalars are admitted, we have the possibility of generating

r-fermions as composites of l-fermions and higgs [8] and, thence, of produc-

ing masses by yukawa couplings. details of the dynamics of the proposal are

beyond the essentially group-theoretic scope of this paper. it is quite easy to

show however that there is a channel in the l-fermion higgs system which,

6

if assumed attractive, can produce just the right number of r-fermions with

the right transformation properties under su(2) and su(3): there are 8n

r-fermions, all of them transforming trivially under su(2), breaking up as

2n multiplets each transforming as 1  3 under su(3). consequently, no
r-fermion couples to su(2), the r-leptons do not couple to su(3) while

the r-quarks do, with strength equal to that of l-quarks. in other words,

su(2) currents are v  a and the su(3) (quark) currents pure v . finally,
the u(1)em coupling strengths of r-fermions are also easily computed; they

match precisely those of the corresponding l-fermions, making the electro-

magnetic current also pure v .

in the last section, we turn to the problem of the physics underlying the

reduction of the primitive group g to the standard model group g. after
exhibiting a simple higgs representation that will achieve this, a more directly

physical explanation for the manifestation of universality is sought in the

very natural idea that the (l-) fermions are themselves composites of a set

of preons or metafermions. the simplest explicit preonic model with built-in

universality then requires 6 + n preons (2 for avour, 4 for colour including

leptonic colour and n for family) [9]. all of them have meta-interactions

binding them into massless, l-chiral, leptons and quarks, but 6 of them have,

additionally, su(2) u(1) su(3) gauge interactions  the photon, gluons,
in this perspective, our unifying su(8n)
w and z are thus elementary.

7

is just t hoofts metaavour group [10] unbroken as long as fermions are

massless, but broken softly by the spontaneous generation of r-fermions and

the concomitant masses  the gauging of only a subgroup of the metaavour

group is no more than a reection of the fact that some of the preons already

have such gauge interactions.

obviously, these speculative ideas, touched upon only briey in the con-

cluding section, need to be worked out in detail. another area for further

work is the dynamics of chiral symmetry breaking. particularly worthy of

attention is the possibility that the higgs elds themselves have a dynam-

ical origin, i.e., that the spontaneous g-symmetry breaking and the chiral

symmetry breaking both arise from some sort of nambu-jona-lasinio mecha-

nism involving the l-fermions. it is nevertheless encouraging that the purely

group-theoretic and kinematic foundation of such an enterprise, as described

in this paper, has proved to have no serious drawbacks.

2 universality properties of fermions

2a. implementing universality

considering all leptons and quarks together, a fermion is labelled by a

family index i = 1, . . . , n, n assumed arbitrary, a avour index f = 1, 2 ( 1

is up and 2 is down, say) and a generalised colour index  = 0, 1, 2, 3,

8

 = 0 referring to leptons and  = 1, 2, 3 (collectively denoted by c where

necessary) to conventional quark colour. the 8n dimensional complex vector

space v spanned by the orthonormal basis {|i, f, i} is the space of 1-fermion
states (ignoring momenta and helicities). in any gauge model for the inter-

actions of all the fermions, v will carry a unitary, not necessarily irreducible,

representation of the global gauge group. the chirality assigned to the vec-

tors of v (e.g., whether dirac or weyl spinors) will determine the parity

properties of the various currents and is left open for the moment. it will

turn out that the only viable choice is in favour of left-handed weyl spinors;

in fact it is a unique and nontrivial feature of the model that right-handed

fermions cannot exist in the gauge - invariant limit of the model; they will

be generated spontaneously (along with masses) in a very natural way.

the basic strategy pursued in this paper is to postulate rst that underly-

ing the standard g = su(2)u(1)su(3)) gauge model there is a unifying
or embedding gauge theory with group g, treating all fermions on an equal
footing and, then, to determine g as the group having the property that its
subgroup respecting all observed universality properties is g. in the actual

execution, it is simpler to proceed by choosing g as the smallest simple group
that will suce, namely g = su(8n), and then to verify that its subgroup
satisfying weak and strong universality is indeed g. the universality prop-

erties referred to are those valid at the level of su(2) u(1) su(3), before

9

it is spontaneously broken to the su(3) u(1) model incorporating fermion
mass dierences and family mixings.

we denote a basis for the lie algebra of g = su(8n) by {ta, a =
1, . . . , 64n 21} and write the fermion current coupling to the g-gauge boson
xa as

ja = ta

where   v and the space-time structure has been suppressed. let us choose
the index a to be compatible with the family, avour and colour labels as

they occur in the g gauge theory: a is then a pair of sets of indices (i, f, )

and (i, f , ). a typical universality property is most simply formulated as

the statement that the current j which couples to a particular gauge boson

x of the g gauge theory is unchanged by a particular set of permutations of

the labels (i, f, ) of a fermion. weak universality of leptonic currents, for

instance, is the generalisation of the old e   universality to the statement
that the charged weak currents are invariant under a permutation of e,  and

 and the same permutation, simultaneously, of e,  and  . postponing a

more precise formulation of universality to the next two subsections, we note

rst that a universality transformation is a unitary matrix on v and that

the set of universality transformations leaving invariant a given subset of the

currents is a group.

10

given a group s of unitary operators on v , a g-gauge fermion current
j = t, where t is a real linear combination of {ta}, is invariant under s
(universal with respect to s) if

sts  s1ts = t

for all s  s. the set of t which commute with every s  s forms a lie
subalgebra of the lie algebra of g and the corresponding lie group is a
subgroup of g, the centraliser of s in g, denoted c(s). the gauge bosons
of the c(s) gauge theory couple to all currents universal with respect to s

and only to them, and we obtain in this way an embedding of the universal

gauge theory in the g gauge theory. the ratios of the gauge couplings of
each simple factor group of c(s), as well as the couplings of various fermion

currents to any abelian factor group of c(s), are thereby xed. thus one of

the prime motivations for unication is fullled by appealing to the observed

pattern of families rather than by invoking complicated higgs multiplets.

indeed, though the higgs mechanism for reducing g to g certainly remains a
viable option, we are now free to explore other, physically more compelling,

reasons for the manifestation of universality and family structure. one such

speculative possibility will be suggested at the end.

2b. weak universality

as already stated above, we follow conventional wisdom and begin by

11

supposing that the weak interactions of leptons in the unbroken standard

g gauge theory are unchanged by an arbitrary permutation  of the family

index of the up leptons and the same permutation of the down family index.

|i, u,  = 0i  |(i), u,  = 0i, |i, d,  = 0i  |(i), d,  = 0i.

the physical leptons may violate strict universality through mass dierences

and possible family mixings; both of these are generally taken to be mani-

festations of the breaking of g further to the nal, low energy, exact gauge

group u(1)em  su(3). under the same assumption, the weak interactions
of quarks in the g-gauge theory are also invariant under similar simulta-

neous permutations of the up and down family indices (despite the family

mixings present in low energy currents). hence the conventional universality

assumption can be stated as the invariance of all weak interactions under

|i, u, i  |(i), u, i,

|i, d, i  |(i), d, i

(1)

simultaneously for each xed  = 0, 1, 2, 3.

however, this formulation of weak universality is incomplete. firstly,

if we ignore, once again, family mixings (i.e., at the g-invariant stage), the

observed weak currents of a denite colour are of the general forms pi uidi
(and its conjugate), p uiui and p didi where  are (dierent) matrices

which do not operate on i. so a unitary transformation of the family index

i will commute with ; the currents are invariant not just under the discrete

12

permutations  but the more general

|i, u, i  uij|j, u, i,

|i, d, i  uij|j, d, i

(2)

where u in both transformations is the same unitary matrix [11]. next, as

far as the weak currents are concerned, quark colour is no dierent from the

family label; the coupling strengths of the currents do not depend on the

quark colour and the matrices  do not operate on them. we may therefore

immediately extend weak universality to encompass unitary transformations

on the pair of indices (i, c = 1, 2, 3). moreover the only empirical reason

for not extending it to include leptons also would appear to be the lack of

equality of the coupling strengths of leptons and quarks to the photon and

the z boson. the couplings of the physical  and z to fermions are however

xed only after su(2)  u(1)  g invariance is broken down to u(1)em
invariance and the neutral bosons mixed and hence this apparent reason is

not so compelling. this leaves the theoretical objection that the so called

weak hypercharges in the standard su(2)  u(1) model does distinguish
between quarks and leptons. the remarkable fact is, as will become clear in

the next subsection, that in our unication scheme the hypercharge is not an

attribute of weak but of strong universality and is a measure of the absence

of strong interactions for the leptons.

in the light of the above considerations, we take the maximal weak uni-

13

versality group swk as the group consisting of unitary transformations with

matrix elements ui,j, i, j = 1, . . . , n, ,  = 0, 1, 2, 3, applied to the fermion

basis |i, f, i leaving the avour f unchanged:

|i, u, i  ui,j|j, u, i,
|i, d, i  ui,j|j, d, i.

(3)

abstractly, swk is the group u(4n).

if we write v as a tensor product

of spaces spanned by family, avour and colour basis vectors, v = vf am 
vf l  vcol, swk is the unitary group of vf am  vcol. in this abstract sense,
weak universality is just the statement that, as far as weak interactions are

concerned, family and colour directions in v can be chosen as an arbitrary

orthonormal basis for vf am  vcol.

in accordance with the general considerations of section 2a, the subgroup

of g = su(8n) whose currents respect weak universality is the centraliser
c(swk). as a (8n 8n) matrix group on v , swk consists of pairs of identical
u(4n) matrices swk acting on vf am  vcol:

swk = 


xwk

0

0

xwk


 ;

(4)

i.e., swk is the diagonal subgroup {(xwk, xwk)} of the direct product u(4n)
u(4n). we write this as

swk = d2u(4n),

(5)

14

so that

gwk = c(d2u(4n)).

(6)

it is very easy to determine the group gwk. in the basis used in eq. (4)

(i.e., a xed avour labelling the rst 4n rows and columns), write a general

element g  su(8n) as the matrix
g = 


guu

gud

gdu

gdd


 ,

with each gf f  a 4n4n matrix. for g to commute with swk, each submatrix
gf f  must commute with xwk and since xwk is an arbitrary matrix, each gf f 

is trivial:

gf f  = af f 14n ,

where af f  are complex numbers (the subscript on 1 indicating dimension

will prove its usefulness soon). hence a general element of gwk is of the form

gwk = 


auu14n aud14n

adu14n

add14n


 ,

(7)

af f  being arbitrary complex numbers such that gwk is unitary and has deter-

minant 1. a reordering of the basis vectors of v (interchange the (n + 1)th

row (column) with the (4n + n)th row (column) of the matrix) allows us to

write a typical element of gwk as the 8n  8n matrix having the unitary
matrix

a = 


auu aud

adu

add




15

repeated 4n times along the principal diagonal. thus gwk is the unit deter-

minant diagonal subgroup of u(2)4n :

gwk = sd4n u(2).

(8)

the condition det gwk = (det a)4n = 1 allows us to rewrite this as the

diagonal group d4n u(2)4n , isomorphic to u(2)4n , the group of unitary ma-

trices having determinant equal to any 4nth root of unity. this is obviously

not a connected lie group; its connected component is su(2).

since the currents in a gauge theory are completely specied in terms

of the lie algebra of the gauge group, possible lack of connectedness (and

simple-connectedness) of the group is immaterial in the (perturbative) calcu-

lation of any process. nonperturbative results may depend on the topology

of the group, but such considerations are not pursued in this paper. with

this qualication, we have thus shown that

gwk = su(2).

(9)

it is immediately evident that the 8n basis vectors {|i, f, i} of the funda-
mental fermion representation of su(8n) form 4n copies of the fundamental

representation of su(2), the su(2) acting on avour and the copies labelled

by family and colour. the relationship between weak universality and family

structure has thus been made precise and concrete by the use of su(8n) as

an embedding or unifying group.

16

2c. strong universality

the formulation of a strong universality principle for quarks proceeds in

a manner very similar to that of weak universality: the colour currents of

quarks responsible for strong interactions are universal in the sense that they

are sums over family and avour, with a common coupling constant. this

feature is usually recognised as being the reason for the phenomenon loosely

called avour invariance (approximate because of quark masses). exactly as

above, the strong universality group is then d3u(2n). ignoring the existence

of leptons for a moment and taking the primitive gauge group to be su(6n),

the resulting strong gauge group would then be s(d2n u(3)).

but leptons do exist and the fact that they have no strong interaction

 i.e., no (low energy) current changes leptonic colour to any other colour

 introduces a fundamental new feature. in the context of universality this

means that the strong interactions are impervious to any arbitrary choice of

basis of the 2n dimensional leptonic subspace of v spanned by {|i, f,  =
0i}, completely independent of the universality transformations of the quark
subspace. the most general strong universality transformation, as a matrix

17

on v , is therefore of the form

x
st

xst

sst =





,





xst

xst

(10)

with x

st  u(2n) and xst  u(2n), all blank entries being zero. (the basis
used here is, of course, one in which the rst 2n rows and columns correspond

to leptons of all family and avour). the strong universality group is thus

sst = u(2n)  d3u(2n).

(11)

as before, the strong gauge group gst is the centraliser of sst in su(8n).

to compute it, write g  su(8n) as the matrix (in the basis used in eg.
(10)):

g =

g00
...

g30





  

g33

  

g03





 (g)

each g being a matrix on vf am  vf l. for g to commute with sst, we must
have

g00x

st = x

stg00, gccxst = xstgcc,

gc0x

st = xstgc0, gocxst = x

stgoc,

gccxst = xstgcc

for c 6= c

for all xst, x

st  u(2n) and c, c = 1, 2, 3. these conditions are solved by

g00 = b0012n , gc0 = g0c = 0, gcc = bcc12n for all c, c,

18

for arbitrary complex numbers b00 and {bcc}. reordering rows and columns,
a typical element of gst can therefore be written as the 8n  8n unitary
matrix having the 4  4 matrix

b = 


b(l)

0

0

b(q)


 ,

where b(l) is an arbitrary complex number with |b(l)| = 1 and b(q) is a unitary
33 matrix, repeated 2n times along the diagonal. the matrix b operates on
vcol whose leptonic and quark subspaces are distinguished by the subscripts.

thus, as a (8n  8n) matrix group, the strong gauge group is

gst = sd2n (u(1)  u(3)).

(12)

the unit determinant condition says that b2n

(l) (det b(q))2n = 1; this puts no

restriction on det b(q) but merely says that its value is xed in terms of the

arbitrary phase b(l). hence gst is connected and is isomorphic to u(3). re-

stricting ourselves to the lie algebra and ignoring topological niceties once

again, we therefore write

gst = u(1)  su(3).

(13)

it is clear that the su(3) group operates trivially on the subspace  = 0

(leptons) and as the fundamental 3 representation on the quark subspace of

each family and avour; the total fermion space v breaks up as 2n copies

of the colour triplet and 2n copies of the singlet representation. the u(1)

19

subgroup is not just a group acting on leptons, as it arises from solving the

unit determinant condition. its physical interpretation will become clear in

the next section.

3 the standard model

3a. combining gwk and gst

physically, the picture we would like to have is this: the eective gauge

theory arrived at by appealing to universality should accommodate all cur-

rents satisfying either weak universality or strong universality and no others.

this will be ensured if we can conclude that the eective gauge group g is

just the direct product of gwk and gst and that, in turn, requires that gwk

and gst are disjoint as subgroups of g and that they are mutually commu-
tative. these two properties are immediately obvious for the lie algebras of

gwk and gst (e.g., colour generators and avour generators commute) and

hence for the groups themselves if they are connected and simply connected.

since we have already chosen to conne attention to the lie algebra we may

assert that the subgroup of g = su(8n) describing the eective gauge theory
which respects either weak or strong universality is indeed

g = gwk  gst = su(2)  u(1)  su(3).

(14)

20

under the su(2)  su(3) subgroup of g, leptons of each family transform
as the representation (2, 1) and quarks of each family as the representation

(2, 3). (m and n in the notation (m, n) are the dimensions of su(2) and

su(3) representations). the u(1) transformation properties of (i.e., the

u(1) coupling constants to) the various fermions will be determined in the

next subsection  it will turn out that u(1) is in fact the group of what is

conventionally called the weak hypercharge.

at one level one may think of the results of this section as just a sys-

tematisation of the relationship between observed universality and family

structure. some striking insights have nevertheless emerged in the process:

1. if, as we have hypothesised, the family structure (the n-fold replication

of an irreducible representation) of fermions in the standard model

is the result of imposing universality restrictions on the currents of a

unifying gauge group g, the standard gauge group g = su(2)u(1)
su(3) xes g uniquely to be su(8n). the number of families plays
no role in the reduction of g to g (except in so far as the topological
properties of g are concerned).

2. the hypercharge u(1) actually arises from strong universality and re-

ects the absence of strong interactions among the leptons.

3. the fact that weak su(2) currents are left-chiral forces all fermions to

21

be left-handed weyl spinors in the primitive g gauge theory. obtaining
a g gauge theory in which the su(2) currents are v a while the su(3)
currents are pure v then poses a problem.

the usual ways of introducing r-fermions in a grand unied model

broadly fall into two distinct strategies:

i) they belong to a dierent rep-

resentation of a simple unifying group g chosen carefully so that when g is
broken to g, the parity properties of currents come out right. the prototype

of this method is of course the su(5) model [12] in which this is done for each

family separately. ii) they transform trivially under g but nontrivially under
another subgroup g  of a full unifying (nonsimple) group g  g   gl  gr.
the gauge bosons of the standard model then result from a mixing of the

bosons of g and g , induced by spontaneous symmetry breaking. the pro-
totypes here are left-right symmetric models [13]. such strategies are not

natural for us. for the rst option to work, the representation of su(8n)

to which r-fermions are to be assigned must evidently have dimension less

than 8n and there are no such. the second option is excluded by universality

itself. observed universality does not discriminate between v  a (charged
weak) and v (electromagnetic and colour) currents: if we apply universality

to, say, gl  gr as the unifying group, we shall end up with gl  gr as the
eective group, requiring further (higgs?) gymnastics to end up with the

correct v  a and v currents.

22

thus, accepting universality as the sole guide in the choice of the unifying

group forces us to look for novel ways of understanding the parity properties

of currents. a possible solution of this problem is described in section 4b.

3b. coupling constants

the ratios of the squares of the coupling constants of su(2) and su(3)

currents and of each individual fermion u(1) current are determined by the

way g is embedded in g. (it is useful to remember that the physical mech-
anism of symmetry reduction is immaterial for this purpose). fix a normal-

isation

tr t2

a = 

(15)

for the generators of su(8n). the generators of the su(2) subgroup can

then be written, as su(8n) generators, as the matrices

ta =

1
2

g diag (a, a, . . . , a), a = 1, 2, 3,

in the avour basis, where a are the pauli matrices (tr  2

a = 2), i.e., as the

matrix having a repeated 4n times along the diagonal and all other entries

zero. the normalisation (15) xes the value of g2:

 = tr t 2

a =

1
4

g24ntr  2

a = 2ng2,

i.e.,

g2 =


2n

.

23

(16)

similarly we write the generators of the su(3) subgroup as

ln =

1
2

f diag (0, n, 0, n, . . . , 0, n), n = 1, . . . , 8,

in the colour basis, where n are the gell-mann matrices (tr 2

n = 2), with

(0, n) repeated 2n times along the diagonal. so

f 2 =


n

= 2g2.

(17)

the u(1) group commutes with su(2) and su(3) and hence the hypercharge

y  as a generator of su(8n) commutes with {ta} and {ln}. therefore

y  =

1
2

diag (g 12n , g 16n )

(for real numbers g  and g ) in the avour basis. equivalently, in the colour

basis,

y  =

1
2

diag (g , g 13, . . . , g , g 13)

with 2n repetitions. since y  is traceless,

g  = 

1
3

g 

(18)

and we write, to conform to usual practice,

y  =

1
2

g y, y = diag (cid:18)12n ,

1
3

16n(cid:19)

in the avour basis. the correct ratio of the lepton and quark hypercharges

follows strictly from the simplicity of su(8n) and the fact that there are

24

three colours of quarks and one of leptons (it is not directly related to baryon

and lepton numbers). the common coupling constant g  is xed by the

normalisation  = tr y 2 to be

g 2 =

3
2n

= 3g2.

(19)

the ratios of the coupling constants are dierent from the almost canonical

values expected [14] in a sequential embedding of the standard model in any

simple unifying group with fermions in the (2, 1)  (2, 3) representation of
su(2) su(3) because there are no r-fermions in our model. (indeed, since
these ratios are xed by the way g sits inside su(8n), this is yet another

indication of the impossibility of incorporating r-fermions in any representa-

tion of su(8n) without destroying the standard model). consequently, the

values of the mixing angle and the strong coupling constant are both twice

their canonical values:

sin2  =

3
4

,

s
w

=

f 2
g2 = 2.

(20)

the rst of these numbers, in particular, shows that the unication regime

of the model has to be at substantially higher energy then we have been used

to (see later).

25

4 breaking g invariance

4a. the choice of higgs fields

so far we have avoided specifying the mechanism that is responsible for

reducing the gauge symmetry from the primitive (would-be) gauge group g
to the eective one of the standard model. in our model this mechanism is no

dierent from that responsible for the universality properties of the g-gauge

theory; hence, it is possible to think that looking for the underlying physical

causes of universality might oer options other than the search for an astute

higgs representation of g. we postpone this question to the concluding
section.

in contrast, the breaking of g to su(3)  u(1)em is attributed in this
paper to a conventional higgs mechanism. the main reason is that our real

concern is how to understand the (pre-higgs) standard model and its ob-

served systematics in terms of a unied model, rather than in the details of

how it is further broken. in any case, the standard higgs mechanism is ex-

traordinarily successful compared to the many eorts to supplant it or to nd

a more fundamental explanation for it. at the same time, it is very simple

 compare the complicated higgs multiplets required in most (one-family)

grand unied models. an additional reason is the central role the higgs

elds play in our approach to chiral symmetry breaking and in generating

26

r-fermions. (see, however, the remark at the end of the introduction).

accordingly, we assume that the g gauge theory has one higgs eld 
transforming as the dening (fundamental) representation of su(8n). with

respect to g  g,  decomposes exactly as the fermion representation: there
are n families i, each i transforming under su(2)su(3) as (2, 1)(2, 3)
with y = 1 and 1
3 respectively (lepton-like and quark-like higgs). we
assume further that only the up avours of lepton-like higgs of all families

condense in the vacuum, with vacuum expectation values i. except for

family replication, this is the standard higgs picture as far as su(2)  u(1)
is concerned. but the tree level algebraic properties of the standard model

 the relations involving various observables like the values of the photon

and z coupling constants and the mixing angle , the masses of w and

z, etc.  are insensitive to the number of higgs doublets (having vacuum

expectation values all in the same avour). thus the fully broken su(2) 
u(1) theory is indistinguishable from the standard model except in higher

orders involving higgs propagators (and also of course when external higgs

particles are involved). we note in particular that the electric charges of all

the fermions (so far, only left-handed) have the conventional values.

in addition, we have the colour triplets of quark-like higgs (which may or

may not be massive). they are presumably conned and cannot have su(3)

invariant couplings to quarks  indeed,  has no su(8n) invariant coupling

27

to the fermion 8n. they can interact with gluons however and so will form

part of the sea in hadrons.

4b. right-handed fermions

we have already noted (sec. 3a) the diculty of introducing r-fermions

in the g gauge model in such a way as to insure, in the eective g gauge
theory, that su(2) currents are v  a while the su(3) currents are v . as
a way out of this diculty, the proposal put forward here is that, while r-

fermions are absent in the g gauge model, they are generated dynamically,
simultaneously with the spontaneous breaking of g to su(3)  u(1)em. in
support of the general idea that r-fermions might really be the result of the

nal stage of symmetry breaking (of g), we point to two very suggestive

circumstances:

i) they are essential in restoring the parity invariance of

strong and electromagnetic interactions, precisely those interactions whose

gauge invariance survives all symmetry breaking; in other words, those and

only those currents which couple to massless gauge bosons are pure v .

ii)

they are necessary to generate fermion masses which are also a manifestation

of symmetry breaking. the only phenomena which require r-fermions are

thus closely linked to g-symmetry breaking.

explicitly, our proposal is that r-fermions are composites of l-fermions

and higgs bosons in certain specic channels. first, the binding must be

28

orbitally excited (to obtain the chirality ip) and must be, in a rst ap-

proximation [15], within the same family (to preserve the universality prop-

erties of realistic dirac fermions). dropping the family index and writ-

ing l for left handed weyl spinor elds of a given su(2)  su(3) mul-
tiplet, the composite eld l transforms under the lorentz group as
2, 0)  ( 1
2 )  (0, 1
( 1
can be projected out by taking

2) of which the right-handed (0, 1

2) component

2 , 1

2) = (1, 1

r  l

(21)

where 0 = 1 and i are the usual spin matrices. evidently this equation

can have, at this stage, only a schematic meaning, as a means of keeping

track of quantum members. at the very least, we have ignored the need for

proper regularisations of quantum composite elds. the dynamical problems

which will have to be solved in implementing this idea cannot obviously

be broached here. nevertheless, eq. (21) can already be seen to have an

intriguing consequence. on writing

r  (l)  (l),

it is clear that if both l and l are (l-projections of) massless dirac

elds, r vanishes; right handed components can be generated dynamically

in this way only if mass is also simultaneously generated. in the rest of this

section, we shall disregard all dynamical problems concentrating only on the

29

quantum number aspects.

in general l composites can transform under su(2) su(3) as any of
the irreducible representations occurring in the decomposition of (2, 3 1)
(2, 3 1). to delimit the number of possible irreducible elds, let us assume
that l binding takes place for exactly the same irreducible representation

(with respect to g) of  which also condenses in the vacuum, namely the

lepton-like (colourless) representation   (2, 1), and, furthermore, in the
antisymmetric tensor product  of su(2) representations. then

l  (2  2, (3  1)  1)

= (1, 3)  (1, 1).

we now identify the two irreducible representations on the right as the

down components of r-quarks and r-leptons respectively. explicitly, in a

general gauge,

and

rd(3)  l(u, 3)(d, 1)  l(d, 3)(u, 1)

rd(1)  l(u, 1)(d, 1)  l(d, 1)(u, 1)

(22)

(23)

the up r-fermions are correspondingly obtained by replacing  by its con-

jugate, c:

ru(3)  l(u, 3)c(d, 1)  l(d, 3)c(u, 1),

(24)

30

ru(1)  l(u, 1)c(d, 1)  l(d, 1)c(u, 1).

(25)

the subscripts u and d on r-fermions (as distinct from l-fermions for which

they are written as arguments) are meant only to indicate in advance which

composite will turn out to be the r-partner of which l-fermion in the currents

coupling to u(1)  su(3)  they are all invariant under su(2). the totality
of r-fermions falls into two sets of quarks ru(3) and rd(3) and two sets

of leptons ru(1) and rd(1) in each family. this is exactly the pattern

required by the standard model.

finally, to x the parity properties of the total fermionic currents of

u(1) and su(3), we need to know the corresponding coupling constants of

the r-fermions. the transformation properties of r under su(2)  su(3)
immediately imply that no r-currents couple to su(2) and no leptonic r

currents couple to su(3). the r-quark coupling to su(3) is determined,

just by su(3) gauge invariance, to be the same as the l-quark coupling (=

the intrinsic gauge coupling constant of su(3)). hence all su(3) currents

are pure v . the fermion couplings to abelian groups such as the hypercharge

u(1) or (equivalently) the electromagnetic u(1) are not xed in this way as

there is no intrinsic gauge coupling dened by the gauge eld; they have to

be determined for each fermion individually. but being abelian charges, they

are additive in each composite and we may compute them directly and easily.

31

for the electric charge, we get

q(rd(3)) =

and, similarly,




q(l(u, 3)) + q((d, 1)) =

q(l(d, 3)) + q((u, 1)) = 

2
3  1
1
+ 0
3

1
3

= 




q(rd(1)) = 1,
q(ru(3)) =

2
3
q(ru(1)) = 0.

hence the electromagnetic current is also pure v . it is pertinent to stress

that the electric charges of l and  are themselves xed completely by the

embedding of the hypercharge in su(8n) and by the higgs structure of the

model; they are not assigned a priori.

thus the assumption that there exists an attractive force between l-

fermions and higgs in a specic channel corresponding to unique angular

momentum, colour and avour selection rules, strong enough to bind, leads

to exactly the right global quantum numbers for the r-fermions. to make

the picture complete, this is of course not enough. one needs to be able to

construct local eld operators for r such that they transform correctly also

under local gauge transformations, in other words, deal with the dynamical

problems alluded to earlier. in conventional (unconstrained) quantum eld

theories, the way to construct local eld operators for composites has been

known since long [16], but its generalisation to gauge theories remains an

32

open problem.

5 open questions

of the questions we have so far left unaddressed, the most pressing is that

of the physical mechanism which reduces the primitive gauge group su(8n)

to su(2)  u(1)  su(3) and, conversely, the signicance and regime of
validity of full su(8n) gauge invariance. it may be reassuring to note at

the outset that it is possible to nd a higgs representation which will serve

the propose.

it is shown in the appendix that when a gauge group g is
spontaneously broken to a subgroup g which is the centraliser of a group

s  g, we can always nd a set of higgs elds belonging to the adjoint
representation of s and a set of non-zero vacuum values for them such that

their little group (stabiliser) is precisely g; it is also shown there that two

copies of the adjoint representation of the family su(n) group, suitably

embedded in the adjoint representation of su(8n), are sucient to break

su(8n) down to su(2)  u(1)  su(3).

if the higgs option is chosen, then conventional wisdom dictates that

the vacuum values of the adjoint higgs will determine the energy scale at

which unication will hold and all 64n 2  1 currents of su(8n) will be
operative. the relatively large values of sin2  and of f 2/g2 that we have

33

found in section 3b indicate that this unication energy (and hence the

masses of the exotic (non-universal) gauge bosons of su(8n)) will be many

orders of magnitude larger than the 1015gev or so that we are so used to

and, even, the planck mass. conceptually, this is unknown teritory; in any

case no reasonable physical sense can be attached to a procedure of evolving

low energy parameters beyond the planck mass while ignoring gravitational

eects in the renormalisation group equations.

the other question touching on the magnitude of the unication energy

scale is that of anomalies. though the su(8n) gauge theory is not anomaly-

free, our low energy universal model, being indistinguishable from the stan-

dard model, is: the dynamically generated r-fermions cancel precisely the

triangle anomalies arising from the l-fermions as long as no non-standard

gauge boson internal lines occur in loops. such loops will technically be

non-renormalisable; however, their contribution will be negligibly small in

any regularised computation, as long as the cut-o is much smaller than the

unication scale. this is just a loose paraphrase of the set of results collec-

tively known as decoupling theorems. since gravitational eects eectively

preclude a cut-o above the planck mass, we need not take the demand of

technical renormalisability too seriously at this stage.

in any case, these

points are only of academic interest if, as we suggest below, the reduction

g  g is caused by a mechanism other than that of higgs elds.

34

the option that we favour is to take leptons and quarks to be composites

of a set of preons (or metaparticles) and to attribute the distinct gauge

interactions of each fermion to the preons which themselves have the same

gauge interactions. the model we are thus led to is one of the earliest (and

conceptually simplest) preonic models proposed [9]: a fermion is assumed to

be a composite of three types of spin 1

2 preons, |i, f, i = |ii  |fi  |i.
all of them are subject to a meta-interaction which is responsible for the

binding (and about which it is futile to speculate at this stage). in addition,

the avour preons |fi have an su(2) gauge interaction and the quark-like
colour preons | = ci, c = 1, 2, 3 have an su(3) gauge interaction. if the
preons are all l-chiral and the binding is assumed to be without orbital

excitation, the composites necessarily belong to one of the irreducibles in

the representation

(cid:18)1

2

, 0(cid:19)  (cid:18)1

2

, 0(cid:19)  (cid:18)1

2

, 0(cid:19) = (cid:18) 3

2

, 0(cid:19)  (cid:18)1

2

, 0(cid:19)  (cid:18)1

2

, 0(cid:19)

of the lorentz group. since there are good reasons why massless particles of

spin 3

2 are unlikely to exist [17], we end up with the right number of l-chiral

spin 1

2 fermions if we assume that only one of the two ( 1

2 , 0) representations

binds.

in any case, chiral symmetry is valid strongly and the composite

fermions are strictly massless. we have then a metaavour group u(8n)

which, when the eects of instantons are taken into account, leaves su(8n)

as the group of exact symmetries of all interactions of the composite fermions

35

[10]. thus a preonic picture provides a natural reason why the unifying group

g is indeed su(8n).

it is nevertheless important to highlight the one signicant dierence

between the picture that emerges here and the one visualised by t hooft

[10]. once it is accepted that the universality properties of g gauge theory

reect the existence of avour and colour preons |fi and |i we are obliged
to ascribe the (low energy) g-gauge interactions to the preons themselves.

they are not some residual interactions left over from the meta-interactions

binding them, even less the manifestation of spectator gauge bosons. (an

instructive down-to-earth parallel is provided by a set of nuclei having the

same mass number but diering atomic numbers  their electromagnetic

interactions at energies low enough for nuclear structure eects to be ignored

arise from and are fully determined by the electromagnetic interactions of the

proton and the neutron). in particular, the gauge bosons of g are themselves

elementary.

we conclude by noting that there is no conceptual problem in having a

grand unifying group g of which only a subgroup g is actually a gauge
group with gauge bosons associated to its generators. the determination of

the gauge coupling constants of g by embedding it in g is independent of
whether all of g is gauged. the matrix elements of universality-violating cur-
rents are suppressed, not because they couple to superheavy gauge bosons,

36

but because the states between which the matrix elements are taken respect

universality. some of the problems occurring in traditional grand unica-

tion models like the naturalness and hierarchy problems are then no longer

relevant. also, we need no longer worry about anomalies connected with g
as along as the g theory is anomaly-free, which it is.

acknowledgements. this paper has beneted from the discussions i have

had with g. rajasekaran. i thank the institute of mathematical sciences,

chennai, for the use of its facilities and the universities of hawaii and oregon

for hospitality at times in the past during which the ideas of this paper were

being worked upon.

appendix

we describe here some elementary group theory used in the paper. let g be
a group, s a subset of g, not necessarily a subgroup. then the centraliser of
s in g is

c(s) = {g  g | gs = sg,  s  s}.

c(s) is a subgroup of g containing the centre of g. if s1 and s2 are subsets
of g and s1  s2, then obviously, c(s2)  c(s1). consider the centraliser
of c(s):

c(c(s)) = {g  g | gx = xg,  x  c(s)}.

37

c(c(s)) has s as a subset. moreover, since every x  c(s) commutes with
every g  c(c(s)), c(s) centralises c(c(s)) and c(c(s)) is the maximal
subgroup of g containing s and centralised by c(s). this observation is
useful if we wish to nd a subgroup s such that c(s) is a given subgroup, in

our case gwkgst = c(swk)c(sst). we have c(c(s)) = {g  g | gx = xg,
 x  gwk and gy = yg,  y  gst} = c(gwk)  c(gst) = c(c(swk)) 
c(c(sst)). it follows that s = swk  sst is the maximal subgroup centralised
by gwk  gst.

writing the dening representation space of su(8n) as

v = vf am  vf l  (vl  vq)

we may characterise swk and sst as

swk = d2

f lu(vf am  (vl  vq)),

sst = u(vf am  vf l)  d3

q (vf am  vf l).

as the notation makes clear, swk is the diagonal product with respect to

avour of the unitary group of vf amvcal and similarly for sst. the advantage
of this explicit notation is that we can read o the intersection of swk and

sst as the group

s = swk  sst = d6u(vf am)  d2u(vf am),

38

where, in the two factors on the right, the diagonal products are over vf lvq
and vf l  vl respectively. therefore s is isomorphic to u(n)  u(n).

in the argument given in section 2 for nding g given swk and sst, these

general considerations were unnecessary and were dispensed with. they be-

come very useful however in nding a minimal higgs scheme for reducing g
to g. for this purpose, we begin by noting the standard identication of the

lie algebra of g with the vector space of the adjoint representation ad of g.
if {ta} is a basis of matrices for lie g and   vad is a vector in the adjoint
representation, with components {a}, this identication is

  xa

ata = x.

on the matrix x, the adjoint action of g corresponds to the usual one of
conjugation by g  g:

ad(g)  g x g1.

under this identication, therefore, the centraliser of exp(ix)  g corre-
sponds to the set {g  g | ad(g) = }, in other words, the little group of
.

on the other hand, we have the general characterisation of the non-zero

vacuum values of the higgs elds as a numerical vector  of the representation

(in general reducible) of g to which the higgs belongs, such that the little
group of  in g is the unbroken subgroup g. hence when g is given as the

39

centraliser of some subgroup s, we may conclude that i) the higgs elds can

be assigned to (sums of copies of) the adjoint representation of g, and ii) their
nonvanishing vacuum values can be chosen to be a set of matrices spanning

the lie algebra of s. it follows that the higgs vacuum values which will break

g = su(8n) to g = su(2)  u(1)  su(3) form two sets of matrices each
spanning the lie algebra of su(n) [the centraliser of su(n) automatically

centralises u(n)]; each set consists of n 2  1 linearly independent hermitian
n  n matrices.

references

[1] h. georgi and a. pais, phys. rev. d 10, 539 (1974); f. wilczek and

z. zee, phys. lett. 70b, 418 (1977); a. de rujula, h. georgi and

s. glashow, ann. phys. (n.y) 109, 258 (1977); s. pakvasa and h.

sugawara, phys. lett. 73b, 61 (1978); phys. lett. 82b, 105 (1979),

and many subsequent papers by various authors. of these, the rst paper

cited is interesting in that it was seeking a natural explanation of e-

universality.

[2] t. maehara and t. yanagida, lett. nuovo cim., 19, 424 (1977); m.a.b.

beg and a. sirlin, phys. rev. lett., 38, 1113 (1977), c.l. ong, phys.

rev. d 19, 2738 (1979); f. wilczek and a. zee, phys. res. lett. 42, 421

40

(1979); a. davidson, m. koca and k.c. wali, phys. rev. lett. 43, 92

(1979); phys. res. d 20, 1195 (1979); a. davidson, k.c. wali and p.d.

mannheim, phys. rev. lett. 45, 1135 (1980); and subsequent papers on

special aspects by various authors.

[3] m. gell-mann, p. ramond and r. slansky, in supergravity edited by

p. van nieuwenhuizen and d.z. freedman (north-holland, amsterdam,

1979); for later work, see for example, k. enqvist and j. maalampi,

nucl. phys. b191, 189 (1981); j. bagger and s. dimopoulos, nucl.

phys. b244, 247 (1984); p. arnold, phys. lett. 149b, 473 (1984).

[4] for a detailed classication of such models and for references to earlier

work, see z. kakushadze and s-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d55, 7878 and

7896 (1997).

[5] n.a. batakis and a.a. kehagias, mod. phys. lett. a7, 1699 (1992).

[6] h. liu, g.d. starkman and t. vachaspati, phys. rev. lett. 78, 1223

(1997).

[7] the basic idea of unifying families by starting with a big group gauging

all fermions and then determining its subgroup commuting with uni-

versality transformations goes back to an earlier paper, p.p. divakaran,

phys. rev. lett. 48, 450 (1982), in which it was applied to weak uni-

41

versality. the formulation of (even weak) universality in that paper was

not general enough and led to a model with exotic particles. by a more

general formulation of both weak and strong universality, the present

work will be seen to have overcome those diculties.

[8] models of leptons and quarks (both l and r) as composites of conned

fermions and higgs were constructed in the past within the ambit of a

conjectured coexistence of conned and higgs phases of gauge models,

e.g., s. dimopoulos, s. raby and l. susskind, nucl. phys. b173, 208

(1980); l.f. abbott and e. farhi, nucl. phys. b189, 547 (1981). the

physical basis of the present proposal is very dierent from such models.

[9] j.c. pati, a. salam and j. strathdee, phys. lett. 59b, 265 (1975); h.

terazawa, y. chikashige and k. akama, phys. rev d 15, 480 (1977).

[10] g.t hooft, in recent developments in gauge theories, edited by g. t

hooft et al. (plenum press, new york, (1980)).

[11] for an early suggestion that weak universality has to be understood as

invariance under a diagonal product of unitary groups, see s. pakvasa,

in grand unied theories and related topics, edited by m. konuma

and t. maskawa (world scientic, singapore, 1981).

[12] h. georgi and s.l. glashow, phys. res. lett. 32, 438 (1974).

42

[13] j.c. pati and a. salam, phys. rev. d 10, 275 (1974).

[14] j.k. bajaj and g. rajasekaran, pramana 14, 395 (1980); see also h.

fritzsch and p. minkowski, ann. phys. (n.y) 93, 193 (1975).

[15] this is an exact statement if family mixings are ignored. mixings can

arise both in the binding of r-fermions across families and in the sub-

sequent yakawa interactions generating masses.

[16] k. nishijima, prog. theor. phys. 111, 995 (1958); w. zimmermann,

nnovo cim. 10, 129 (1958).

[17] s. weinberg and e. witten, phys. lett. 96b, 59 (1980).

43

