9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
1
3

 
 

1
v
2
6
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

chiral observables and modular

invariants

k.-h. rehren

institut fur theoretische physik, universitat gottingen (germany)

abstract: various denitions of chiral observables in a given mobius covariant two-
dimensional (2d) theory are shown to be equivalent. their representation theory in the
vacuum hilbert space of the 2d theory is studied. it shares the general characteristics of
modular invariant partition functions, although sl(2, z) transformation properties are not
assumed. first steps towards classication are made.

1 introduction

the program of classication of modular invariant partition functions in 2d con-
formal quantum eld theory (see below for more details) has seen steady progress
since the original a-d-e classication for su(2) theories [3]. apart from explicit
classications for new models [8], classication theorems have been established for
the general case [22, 1]. yet, the feeling persists that the full depth of the problem
has not yet been sounded.

it is the intention of the present note to show that general classication theorems
of a very similar nature can be derived in a setting which does not refer to modular
transformations of gibbs states at all. our statements are on the decomposition
(described by a coupling matrix) of the vacuum representation of a conformal
2d quantum eld theory upon restriction to its chiral observables. they can be
considered with a dierent perspective as statements on the possible 2d extensions
of given left and right chiral algebras. our mathematical tool is the structure theory
of subfactors applied to the inclusion of local algebras of chiral observables into local
algebras of 2d observables.

note that a modular invariant partition function is also described by a coupling
matrix which is usually also interpreted as a chiral decomposition of a 2d vacuum
representation. but the classication method based on arithmetic properties of the
representation matrices s and t of the sl(2, z) generators is entirely dierent and
does not rely on this interpretation. in fact, there seem to be exotic (accidental?)
modular invariants which do not derive from a 2d theory [1, iii].

in contrast to the modular invariants program, we make only rather general struc-
tural assumptions on the theory under consideration. we put the emphasis on the

1

1

introduction

2

local structure [12], rather than the accidental lie algebra structure of chiral observ-
ables. thus we avoid the, somewhat articial, restriction to chiral algebras which
are related to ane lie algebras because these are the only ones for which gibbs
functionals tr el0 (characters) are known [13]. likewise, the problem that for
most w -algebras it is not clear on which suitable set of zero mode quantum num-
bers for chiral gibbs functionals the modular group should act, does not pose itself
in our approach.

furthermore, we do not assume that the left and right chiral observables are isomor-
phic, nor that they have isomorphic fusion of their superselection sectors. instead,
we shall derive that the maximal (see below) chiral observables automatically possess
sectors with identical fusion rules.

to be sure, it is not our intention to depreciate the modular point of view at all.
on the contrary, the sl(2, z) symmetry between high and low temperature gibbs
states is one of the most fascinating features of chiral models which calls for a sound
physical understanding.
indeed, there are general arguments, with reasonable as-
sumptions, in favour of a modular transformation law which generalizes the one for
ane lie algebras [13] as conjectured in [32]. e.g., cardy [4] argues with transfer
matrix methods and invariance under global resummations in lattice models before
the continuum limit is taken, and nahm [23] exploits the operator product algebra
of the schwinger functions to show that gibbs states transform into gibbs states.
none of these, however, provides a completely satisfactory explanation in terms of
the real time local quantum eld theory.

on the other hand, the modular group sl(2, z) plays a fundamental role even with-
out any gibbs functionals to act on by a modular transformation of the temperature.
namely, the general theory of superselection sectors collects monodromy data of braid
group statistics in numerical matrices sstat and t stat, and as a maximality feature
of braid group statistics, these matrices represent the modular group [27, 6, 21]. in
models where both concepts are dened, one has s = sstat and t = t stat. e.g., the
kac-peterson modular matrices [13] for ane lie algebras can be computed from
the statistics of the representations with positive energy of associated local current
algebras.
furthermore, the matrix entries of sstat were found [5, ii] to describe the spectrum
of the central observables naturally associated with the nontrivial topology of the
space s1. these discoveries are general structure theorems from local quantum eld
theory and never refer to gibbs functionals (and hardly to conformal invariance).
they show also, however, that a degeneracy (sstat being not invertible) can  and
in higher dimensions must  occur which obstructs the existence of an sl(2, z)
representation. (algebraic conditions for non-degeneracy are given in [15].)

thus, even if sl(2, z) does not act on chiral characters, it is likely to be around,
with various caveats as in the discussion above, as a consequence of fundamentals
of local quantum eld theory, and an interpretation in terms of gibbs functionals
would be highly desirable. this issue will not be addressed here.

1

introduction

3

in the classication program for modular invariant 2d partition functions, it is as-
sumed that certain chiral observables al  ar are a priori given along with a
collection of representations (sectors) described by their chiral characters (gibbs
functionals for the conformal hamiltonian l0 and suitable other quantum numbers
such as cartan charges for current algebras). these characters transform linearly
under the group sl(2, z) which is essentially generated by the imaginary unit shift
(t ) and the inversion (s) of the inverse temperature parameter /2. one then
looks for bilinear combinations of chiral characters with positive integer coecients
zl,r (the coupling matrix) which are invariant under the simultaneous sl(2, z) trans-
formations for both chiral factors (that is, z commutes with s and t ). the resulting
modular invariant partition functions are considered as gibbs functionals for two-
dimensional energy and momentum operators in a representation of a 2d conformally
invariant quantum eld theory. the latter contains the chiral observables along with
additional local 2d elds which are nonlocal in each light-cone coordinate separately.
in this interpretation, the entries of the coupling matrix z clearly are the multiplic-
ities of the sectors of the chiral algebras within the representation space of the 2d
theory. e.g., one usually imposes the constraint z0,0 = 1 on the coupling matrix
which ensures this representation to contain a unique vacuum vector.

one of the most important general classication statements [22] asserts that every so-
lution can be turned into a permutation matrix induced by an automorphism of the
fusion rules with respect to some suitably extended algebra of chiral observables
aext
r . furthermore, it was found [1] that the non-vanishing diagonal entries of
the coupling matrix z (with respect to the initially given chiral observables) can be
characterized in terms of structure data which refer to the chiral extension a  aext
only. in the case of su(2), these two statements yield the a-d-e classication of [3].

l  aext

and amax

l

in this article, we endeavour a somewhat opposite program. we assume a local
2d conformally invariant quantum eld theory, denoted by b, to be given in its
vacuum representation 0 on a hilbert space h. within this theory we identify
chiral observables, denoted by amax
r , and show that these are the respective
relative commutants of any initially given chiral observables ar and al within the
same 2d theory (corollary 2.7). we then study the superselection sectors of the
maximal chiral observables which are contained in h, that is, the branching of the
irreducible representation 0 upon restriction to the subalgebra amax
r . we
show that the coupling matrix for the chiral observables amax is described by an
isomorphism between the left and right chiral fusion rules (corollary 3.5), which
as a side result implies that amax coincide with aext in the modular classication
statement (lemma 3.4).

l  amax

we just use the laws controlling local extensions of local algebras, as established in
[17]. the crucial point is the fact that the same coupling matrix which describes
the vacuum branching (or the 2d partition function), at the same time describes a
distinguished dhr representation of the chiral observables, and an endomorphism of
a von neumann algebra of the form al  ar canonically associated with a subfactor
al  ar  b. the constraints on the coupling matrix arise by the latter endo-

2 chiral observables

4

morphism both being canonical and respecting the tensor product (these notions are
explained in sect. 3).

unlike locality of the chiral observables, locality of the 2d net is only implicitly
exploited and does not yet enter our (outline of the) classication itself. it is well
known that left and right chiral sectors (charged elds) cannot be freely composed
to yield local 2d elds [28, 25, 22], and a general algebraic condition in terms of a
statistics operator was given in [17]. the incorporation of this condition into our
present scheme is still awaiting.

as far as these constraints are concerned, very similar arguments also apply to coset
models in which a tensor product of two commuting subtheories is embedded within
a given chiral theory. therefore, the same constraints on the coupling matrix also
arise for the branching of the vacuum sector of the ambient theory upon restriction
to the pair of subtheories.

the paper is organized as follows. section 2 sets the physical stage with emphasis on
the equivalence of various possible denitions of the chiral observables. in section
3 the decomposition of the 2d vacuum representation upon restriction to the chiral
observables is analyzed in the light of the general theory described in [17]. the
central result is a generalization of the automorphism of the fusion rules theorem
[22]. section 4 discusses the (rst) implications for the classication problem.

the central argument in section 3 is in fact a theorem on the sector decomposition
of the canonical endomorphism of a von neumann subfactor. this theorem, and the
associated notion of a normal canonical tensor product subfactor, is of its own math-
ematical interest [26] and constitutes the common link between various problems in
quantum eld theory, such as chiral observables in 2d, and coset models [35] and
jones-wassermann subfactors [34, 15] in chiral conformal quantum eld theory. its
mathematical essence seems to be most appropriately formulated in terms of c* ten-
sor categories. it furthermore reveals a connection to asymptotic subfactors [24] and
quantum doubles [15]. this observation may support the expected role of quantum
double symmetry in 2d conformal quantum eld theory and coset models.

2 chiral observables

we start with the discussion of various alternatives to dene chiral observables within
a conformally invariant 2d theory. the reader mainly interested in modular invari-
ants is invited to skip this section, and take its results referred to in sect. 3 for
granted.

we adopt the algebraic approach to quantum eld theory in which the local algebras
are considered rather than the local (wightman) elds which possibly generate them.
the underlying picture [11] is that the net of algebras, i.e., the complete collection
of inclusion and intersection relations between algebras associated with smaller and
larger space-time regions, is sucient in principle to reconstruct the full physical

2 chiral observables

5

content of the theory. specications of the model, therefore, have to be formulated
as properties of the net of local algebras.

a two-dimensional local conformal quantum eld theory is dened on a covering

manifold em of minkowski space-time m = r(1,1). this manifold is obtained as follows

[19, 2]. one rst considers minkowski space-time as the cartesian product r  r of
its two chiral light-cone directions. on each light-cone, the mobius group psl(2, r)
acts by the rational transformations x 7 ax+b
cx+d , thus enforcing the compactication
of r to s1 by addition of the point  = . in the quantum eld theory, the chiral
mobius groups are only projectively represented, leading to a covering of s1 (in which

is the cartesian product of the coverings of the two chiral s1, quotiented by the
identication (xl, xr) = (xl + 2, xr  2). each subset (a, a + 2)  (b, b + 2)

r will be henceforth identied with the interval (0, 2)). the covering manifold em
represents one copy of minkowski space-time m within em.
the covering manifold em possesses a global causal structure such that the causal

complement of a double cone o = (a, b)  (c, d)1 is the double cone o = (b, a + 2) 
(d  2, c)  (b  2, a)  (d, c + 2), and (o) = o.

we may assume that the 2d theory b is given by the isotonous net of local von
neumann algebras b(o) associated with double cones in minkowski space-time
o = i  j  m where i  r and j  r are open intervals on the respective
chiral light-cones. we assume that b is irreducibly represented on a vacuum hilbert
space h, and transforms covariantly under a strongly continuous positive-energy
representation u of the 2d conformal group. the latter is the cartesian product of

left and right chiral covering groups egl, egr (with covering projection p : g 7 g)

where g = psl(2, r) is the mobius group. both chiral mobius groups g contain
a subgroup u(1) with positive generators l0, the chiral conformal hamiltonians.
the corresponding chiral rotations by 2 will be denoted for simplicity by ul(2)
and ur(2). in a local theory, ul(2) = ur(2), that is, the diagonal of the kernel
of the covering projection p is represented trivially [19].

conformal covariance means

b(gli  grj) = adu (gl,gr) b(i  j)

whenever the elements g  eg are represented by paths gt  g connecting g with

if,
the identity which map the respective chiral intervals pointwise into intervals.
on the other hand, the image of an interval under gt contains , then the above
transformation law is considered as the denition of the algebra on the left hand
side, where now gli and grj are intervals on the covering of the compactied light-
cones s1 = r  {}. if we denote by i + 2 and j + 2 the images under chiral
rotations by 2, then it follows that

b((i + 2)  (j  2)) = b(i  j),

1it is always understood that 0 < b  a < 2 and 0 < d  c < 2.

2 chiral observables

6

that is, the theory b is indeed dened over the conformal covering space em.

locality of b on minkowski space implies that the local algebras also commute when-
ever the associated double cones in the covering manifold are spacelike separated,
i.e., b(o)  b(o). in theories generated by wightman elds, one even has

essential duality (duality on the covering space em):

b(o) = b(o).

the same also holds in parity invariant conformal nets [2]. we shall assume essential
duality throughout.

note that any pair o and o are a left and a right wedge, or likewise the other way

round, in a suitable copy of minkowski space-time in em, or can be mapped by mobius

transformations into these wedges in any reference copy of minkowski space-time.
hence, essential duality is equivalent to wedge duality in minkowski space.

we reserve the term haag duality, according to its original usage [11], for the stronger
property of duality on minkowski space m (see below) which is not an automatic
feature. it will not be assumed in this paper.

we proceed to dene chiral observables.

2.1. denition: the (maximal) left chiral observables are

the (maximal) right chiral observables amax

r (j) are dened analogously.

amax

l (i) := b(i  j)  u(egr).

first we note that this denition does not depend on the interval j since any two open

intervals are connected by a mobius transformation in {e}  eg which act trivially on

amax
l (i) by denition. second, the left chiral observables commute with ul(2) =
ur(2). consequently, the chiral observables are dened over the compactied light-
cone s1 without covering, and are covariant under the proper mobius group g =
psl(2, r). the operators ul(2) = ur(2) are multiples of unity in every irreducible
subrepresentation of the chiral observables, contained in h. the chiral net of von
neumann algebras i 7 amax
l (i) satises chiral locality (commutativity for disjoint
intervals) since for given disjoint i1 and i2 it is always possible to nd intervals j1
and j2 such that oi = ii  ji are space-like to each other, and 2d space-like locality
of the net b applies.

left chiral observables and right chiral observables commute with each other irre-
spective of their localization since for any i and j there are j and i such that i  j
and i  j are space-like, and again space-like commutativity of b applies.
clearly, the net amax
the reeh-schlieder theorem, the projections el onto the subspaces al(i) for any
covariant net al do not depend on the interval i. by standard arguments, involving
the tomita-takesaki modular theory [31] and exploiting the geometric action of the
modular group associated with conformal double cone algebras [2], one has

is mobius covariant under the representation ul  u|egl. by

l

2 chiral observables

7

2.2. lemma: the projection el implements a faithful normal conditional ex-
pectation l : b(i  j)  al(i), that is, for b  b(i  j) there is a unique
a =: l(b)  a(i) such that

elbel = ael.

the expectation l preserves the vacuum state, and the vacuum representation of
the net al is given by

l
0 (al(i)) = elb(i  j)el.

the corresponding statements hold for ar.

furthermore, for any mobius covariant chiral net, the local algebras, unless trivial,
are known to be type iii von neumann factors, and one has [7, 2]
essential duality (duality on s1):

0(a(i)) = 0(a(i ))

valid in the vacuum representation 0 of a.

hence the chiral observables automatically satisfy essential duality.

2.3. lemma: the subspace amax
vectors in h, that is

l (i) coincides with the subspace of ur-invariant

e 

l = emax

l

where e 
statement holds for ar.

l denotes the projection onto the ur-invariant subspace. the corresponding

proof: i owe the following argument to d. buchholz. we only have to show that
every ur-invariant vector can be approximated in amax
l (i). since b(o) is dense
in h, e 
lb with b  b(o).
then  = ur(g) = e 

lh. consider any vector  = e 

lb(o) is dense in e 

lbt  where

lg(b) for all g  egr, and  = e 

bt =

dt gt(b)

1

2t z t

t

is an average over the one-parameter group of right chiral dilatations gt which leave
the interval j xed. since kbt k  kbk, the family bt has a weak limit point a in the
von neumann algebra b(o) as t  . we are going to show that a is invariant
l (i). it follows that

 = e 

lbt  = e 

la = a is in amax

under egr, hence commutes with ur and thus belongs to amax
in order to show the egr-invariance of a, we rst note that
(cid:21) dt gt(b)k 

+z t +s

k(cid:20)z t

kgs(bt )  bt k =

1
2t

t +s

t

l (i), and the latter space is dense in e 

lh.

|s|
t

kbk

which vanishes as t  . hence a is dilatation invariant, and

kg(a)  ak = kggt(a)  gt(a)k = kgtggt(a)  ak

2 chiral observables

8

for all g  egr and all t. for g a translation resp. a special conformal transformation

(relative to the dilatations gt), gtggt tends to the identity as t   resp. t  +.
for a suciently regular to have norm-continuity of g (which is the case if b above
was regular; such operators still generate a dense subspace of h) it follows that
kg(a)  ak = 0, as asserted.
(cid:3)

we want to study the equivalence of the denition 2.1 with several alternative rea-
sonable denitions. for this purpose, we rst compile some useful notions for 2d
and for chiral nets.

generating property: the net b is said to have the generating property if

u(egl)  b(i  j)  b(i   j)
b(i  j)  b(i   j)  u(egl)

for any j, and equivalently (taking commutants and using essential duality of b) if

for any j. (here i  is either of the two intervals i + = (b, a + 2) or i  = (b  2, a)
if i = (a, b). by the very second formula, the algebra on its left hand side does not
depend on this choice, since a suitable left mobius transformation which maps i onto
i + and i  onto i, leaves the intersection of the two algebras invariant.)

haag duality (duality on minkowski space m): the net b fulls haag duality
if

b(o) = b(oc)  b(o)  b(o+)

where oc is the disconnected causal complement of o in minkowski space with
connected components o, o+.

strong additivity: the net b fulls strong additivity if

b(o1)  b(o2) = b(o)

for o1 and o2 the two connected components of the causal complement of an interior
point in a double cone o.

chiral additivity: the net b fulls chiral additivity if

b(i1  j)  b(i2  j) = b(i  j)

if i1, i2 arise from i by removal of an interior point; and likewise for the two light-cone
directions interchanged.
generating property: a left chiral net al of subalgebras of amax
generating property if

l (i) has the

the analogous denition holds for right chiral nets ar of subalgebras of amax

r (j).

u(egl)  al(i)  al(i );

2 chiral observables

9

haag duality (duality on r): a chiral net a fulls haag duality if

0(a(i)) = 0(a(i c))

holds in the vacuum representation. here i c denotes the (disconnected) open com-
plement of an interval i in r.

strong additivity: a chiral net a fulls strong additivity if

a(i1)  a(i2) = a(i)

if i is an interval in s1 divided into two subintervals i1, i2 by removal of an interior
point.
it is obvious, that if any net al of subalgebras of amax
then amax

has the generating property and b also has the generating property.

l

has the generating property,

l

in fact, in view of the previous denition of chiral observables, the generating prop-
erty for amax is actually a feature of the 2d net b. in the cyclic subspace of the chiral
observables (their vacuum representation), the assumption is always true by essential
duality and factoriality. but the generating property for a is required to hold on the
full vacuum hilbert space h of b. it certainly holds if b possesses a conserved stress-
energy tensor whose chiral components then are among the chiral observables. it also
holds, e.g., in the theory generated by the derivatives of a massless conserved vector
current which has nontrivial chiral observables (the derivatives of a u(1) current)
but no stress-energy tensor. namely, in this model, b(i  j) = amax
r (j),
and h = hl  hr. thus h contains only the vacuum representation of the chiral
observables. therefore, we believe that the assumption of the generating property
for chiral observables does not exclude any models of serious interest.

l (i)  amax

the following assertions hardly need to be proven.

2.4. lemma: (i) haag duality is equivalent to strong additivity, both for 2d and
chiral conformal nets.

(ii) strong additivity of a 2d net implies chiral additivity.

proof: (i) by essential duality, haag duality is equivalent to b(oc) = b(o) (in

the 2d case). this in turn is strong additivity since, in the covering space em, the

two connected components of oc touch each other in a point (space-like innity),
and thus constitute the causal complement of that point in o. the same argument
applies in the chiral case, as the two connected components of i c touch each other
in s1 at innity.
(ii) let j1 and j2 arise by removal of an arbitrary interior point from j, such that
o1 = i1  j2 and o2 = i2  j1 are the components of the causal complement of an
interior point in the double cone o = i  j. then b(o1)  b(o2)  b(i1  j) 
b(i2  j)  b(o), and strong additivity implies equality.
(cid:3)

in order to compare alternative denitions of chiral observables, we consider the
following two chains of inclusions, which hold just by isotony and essential duality:

2 chiral observables

10

2.5. lemma: with notations as explained below, one has

amax

l (i2)  \j



b(i2  j)  b2,1  b2,2  b2,1  b2,2 

 b2+3,1  b2,2  b

1,2  b2,2  ar(j2)  b2,2 .

 b2+3,1  b1+2,2  b

1,2  b1+2,2  b2+3,1  b

3,1 .

here we have picked three left chiral intervals i1 = (0, a), i2 = (a, b), i3 = (b, 2)
and two right chiral intervals j1 = (0, c), j2 = (c, 2) as indicated by the gure, and
employ short hand notations bi,j = b(ii  jj), bi,j = b(ii  jj) with jj  jj. the
labels 1 + 2 resp. 2 + 3 stand for the intervals (0, b) resp. (a, 2).

(0, 2)  (0, 2) = m

 

@

 

 
@

 

3,2

 

@
 

@

@
 

 
@

2,2

 

@
 

 
@

2,1

 

p

 
@
a
@
@
@
i1

1,1

 
 

 
@
0

p

 
@
c
 
 
 
j1

 
2
@
@i
@
i3

 

3,1

 

p

 
@
b
@
@
@
i2

@
 

@

1,2

@
2
 
 
 
j2

 
 

figure 1: space-time regions in lemma 2.5

of course, the choice of the values 0 < a < b < 2 and 0 < c < 2 is completely
immaterial since the ensuing partition of one copy of minkowski space m within the

covering space em can be transferred to any other partition of any other copy by left

and right mobius transformations.
ar in the second line in lemma 2.5 is any covariant net of subalgebras of amax
r (j).
the consideration of subalgebras of the maximal chiral observables is motivated by
our intention to compare with the context of modular invariant partition functions.
there one usually starts with some a priori given chiral observables ar and al such
as current algebras while the maximal ones might turn out as some w -algebra
extension thereof. indeed, we shall later nd a condition (corollary 3.5) when the
given chiral observables and the maximal ones coincide.

of particular interest are the expressions tj b(i2  j), b

1,2  b1+2,2, and ar(j2) 
b2,2 guring in lemma 2.5. the rst one is possibly nontrivial even in massive 2d
theories [30], where it provides a holographic sattelite theory (with a conformal
symmetry emerging automatically [33]); it has been used as a denition of observables
on a horizon in curved space-time [10] in the absence of space-time symmetries.
the second one is, up to a mobius transformation, the relative commutant of a
wedge algebra b(w + a) within another wedge algebra b(w ) where a is a shift in
a light-like direction. the third one is the relative commutant of the opposite chiral
observables within a double cone. each of these would be a sensible denition of
chiral observables.

2 chiral observables

11

in fact, under suitable conditions, the inclusions above turn into equalities and the
various denitions coalesce. (note that any nontrivial inclusion in the rst and second

line would require the respective larger algebra not to commute with u(egr).)

2.6. proposition (referring to the chains of inclusions as in lemma 2.5):

(i) if b has the generating property, then all inclusions in the rst line are equalities.
(ii) if ar has the generating property, then all inclusions in the rst and second lines
are equalities.
(iii) if all inclusions in the rst and second line are equalities, then b has the gener-
ating property.
1,2b1+2,2 where j1 = (c, c), j2 =
(iv) if b satises haag duality, then b2,1 b2,2 = b
(c, c), 0 < c < c < c < 2; in particular, if in addition the inclusions in the rst
line are equalities, then all inclusions in the rst and third lines are equalities.
(v) if all inclusions in the rst line are equalities and b satises chiral additivity,
then amax

satises haag duality. the corresponding statement holds for amax
r .

l

versions of assertions (iv) and (v) are also contained in [10].

proof: (i) the generating property of b implies that b(i  j)  b(i  j ) commutes

l (i).

amax

l (i2).

(ii) b2,2 commutes with ar(j1), and hence ar(j2)  b2,2 is contained in [ar(j2) 

with u(egr) and thus is contained in amax
ar(j1)]b2,2 which by the generating property of ar is contained in u(egr)b2,2 =
(iii) we have u(egr)  amax

l (i2) = b1,2  b3,1 by denition and by assumption. the
claim follows by isotony with i1  j2  (b  2, a)  j2 and i3  j1 = (i3  2) 
(j1 + 2)  (b  2, a)  j2.
(iv) we have b
1,2  b
3,1
which equals b2,1 by haag duality, where j1 = (0, c). the same algebra is similarly
3,1 = b2,2 where j2 = (c, 2). this gives both assertions, by
contained in b
inspection of the chain of inclusions, lemma 2.5.
(v) chiral additivity for b is, by passing to the commutants, equivalent to

3,1. by isotony, this is contained in b

1,2  b1+2,2 = b

1,2  b

1,2  b

b((a, b)  j) = b((0, b)  j)  b((a, 2)  j)

for 0 < a < b < 2 and any interval j. taking suitable intersections over j to obtain
amax

l (i) by using equality in the rst line of the chain of inclusions, yields

amax

l ((a, b)) = amax

l ((0, b))  amax

l ((a, 2)).

since the vacuum representation is faithful on r = (0, 2), the same holds in the
vacuum representation 0 (i.e., after multiplication with emax
l ). passing to the com-
mutants in the vacuum representation, and using essential duality for amax
l , one gets
strong additivity in the vacuum and hence in any representation.
(cid:3)

we must admit a little lapse in the proof of (v). namely, the vacuum representation
of a chiral net a is known to be faithful on the quasilocal c* algebra on r =

2 chiral observables

12

(0, 2) which does not contain the von neumann algebras a((0, b)) and a((a, 2)).
yet, we are condent that the above conclusion from faithfulness is correct for the
intersections. we have tested its validity in the (prototypical) model with a chiral

u(1) current j and associated charge q = r j(x)dx. the operator exp itq which is

trivially represented in the vacuum representation can be weakly approximated by
weyl operators exp itj(fr) as r   where fr(x) = f (x/r) and f is a testfunction
with f (x) = 1 for |x| < 1 and f (x) = 0 for |x| > 2, say. splitting fr into two pieces
f 
r with supports in (2r, a) and in (a, 2r) respectively, yields two weyl operators
exp itj(f 
r ) localized in overlapping left and right halfspaces whose
weak limits as r   should coincide in the vacuum representation, and dier in a
charged representation by a factor exp itq. nontriviality of these weak limits would
invalidate our conclusion in the proof of (v). a calculation, however, shows that, due
to scale invariance, the cuto within the xed interval (a, a) in comparison to the
increase in r behaves like a cuto in a scaled interval (a/r, a/r), and produces
an ultraviolet singularity which causes the weak limits of interest to be zero. since
this ultraviolet behaviour is a universal eect of scale invariance, we believe that
the same mechanism protects the validity of our conclusion also in general models.
in any case, (v) will not be needed for the purposes of this paper.

r ) and exp itj(f +

since we consider the assumption of the generating property for the chiral observables
as no serious restriction, we reformulate the statements with this assumption as a
default.

2.7. corollary: (i) assume the generating property for some nets al(i) and ar(j)
of subalgebras of b(i  j) which are invariant under the respective opposite mobius
group. then

amax

l (i) =\j

b(i  j) = ar(j)  b(i  j),

r . in particular, the left and right maximal chiral observables

and similarly for amax
are each others mutual relative commutants in b.
and amax
(ii) if the net b is haag dual, then amax

l

r

are haag dual, and

amax

l (i1) = b(i2  j)  b(i  j)

where i1, i2 arise from the interval i by removal of an interior point, and j is an
arbitrary interval. the corresponding statement holds for amax
r .

(again, the assertion of haag duality for the chiral observables has to be taken with
a little caution.)

we conclude this section with a study of the joint position of the subalgebras of left
and right chiral observables within b(o). we have

2.8. proposition:
observables are in a tensor product position, i.e.,

in the vacuum representation of b, the left and right chiral

amax

l (i)  amax

r (j)  amax

l (i)  amax

r (j).

3 representation theory

13

proof: the statement follows, by tomita-takesaki modular theory [31], from the
existence of the conditional expectations l and r, cf. lemma 2.2. we want to give
a less abstract argument.

since left and right chiral observables mutually commute, it is sucient to consider
products alar where al  amax
r (j). since the vacuum state  is
conformally invariant, and since the chiral observables transform under the respective
chiral mobius groups only, we have

l (i) and ar  amax

(alar) = (glgr(alar)) = (gl(al)gr(ar)).

for suitable elements gl and gr, the localization of the transformed observables
tends to space-like innite separation, hence the cluster property of the vacuum
state applies and entails

(alar) = (al)(ar).

the factorization of the (normal) vacuum state implies the tensor product factoriza-
tion of the corresponding algebras.
(cid:3)

3 representation theory

a subtheory a of a given theory b is described by a net of subalgebras (subfactors)
a(o)  b(o). conversely, b may be considered as a (local) extension of a given
in the present paper, a is a net of left and right chiral observables2
theory a.
o 7 a(o) = al(i)  ar(j), contained in a two-dimensional net o 7 b(o).

a general analysis of the representation theory in this situation was initiated in [17].
as a prerequisite it was required that, in generalization of an unbroken global gauge
symmetry, there is a consistent family of (normal, faithful) conditional expectations
o : b(o)  a(o) which commute with space-time symmetries and preserve the
vacuum state.

in our situation at hand, these expectations are provided by takesakis theorem [31],
thanks to the fact that tomitas modular group for conformal double cone algebras is

a subgroup of eglegr and consequently preserves any mobius covariant subtheory of

the form al  ar. as in sect. 2, they are coherently implemented by the projection
elr onto the closure of the subspace al(i)ar(j) (not depending on i  j), which
commutes with mobius transformations and preserves the vacuum state.

actually, for the analysis in [17] nets have to be directed. we must therefore pass
to the 2d and chiral theories on minkowski space m and the light-cone axes r,
respectively. as is common practice, we denote the quasilocal c* algebra generated
by a directed net of von neumann algebras (say a(o)) by the same symbol (say a)
as the net itself. we also denote the vacuum representations of a and of b by 0
and 0, respectively.

2henceforth, the notation o = i  j will be understood.

3 representation theory

14

in the algebraic approach to quantum eld theory, positive energy representations
are conveniently described in terms of dhr endomorphisms [11], provided haag
duality holds. but the restriction of 0 to the subtheory a is always given by a dhr
endomorphism  of a

0|a  0

even without assuming haag duality [17]. moreover,  is of the canonical form
 = . here  : a  b is the embedding homomorphism and  : b  a is a
conjugate homomorphism to  in the sense [18] that there exist isometric intertwiners
w  a, w : ida     and v  b, v : idb     with wv = w(v) = 1  1l.
the number   1 is the (statistical) dimension of  and coincides with the index
of the local subfactor a(o)  b(o) which is independent of o. (we assume this
index, and hence the dimensions of  and all its subsectors, to be nite throughout.)

the construction given in [17] starts o from a canonical endomorphism [16] o of
the local von neumann algebra b(o) for any xed double cone o into its subfactor
a(o). o extends to a canonical endomorphism  of the quasilocal algebra b into a
in such a way that on any b( o), o  o, it yields a canonical endomorphism of b( o)
into a( o), and consequently the restriction of  = |a to a( o) is the corresponding
dual canonical endomorphism. it was shown that  is a dhr endomorphism localized
in the xed double cone o, and that w  a(o) and v  b(o) are local operators.

in the present case, a being a tensor product al ar of c* algebras, any irreducible
representation is also a c* tensor product. as pointed out by r. longo, there is a
theoretical possibility (in case the chiral representations are not type i, cf. [15]),
that the c* tensor products are not spatial. in a large class of models, including
current algebras, this possibility can be ruled out [15, lemma 12], however, and it
can presumably never arise when the statistical dimension is nite. thus we may
assume that the corresponding subspaces of h are also tensor products.

let therefore the irreducible decomposition of the restricted vacuum representation
into chiral sectors be given by

0|alar ml,r

zl,r l

l  r

r

with a (possibly rectangular) matrix of nonnegative integers zl,r where l, r run over
the irreducible superselection sectors of the left and right chiral observables contained
in h. equivalently, the corresponding dhr endomorphism  decomposes as

 ml,r

zl,r l

l  r

r

with irreducible chiral dhr endomorphisms l
r , and with the same matrix
z. we call z the coupling matrix, and we reserve the labels l = 0 and r = 0 for
the respective vacuum sectors, l

0  idal  idl and r

0  idar  idr.

l and r

3 representation theory

15

making contact with modular invariants, it should be clear that the coupling matrix
also enters the decomposition of the vacuum partition function of a 2d local theory

tr0 e(ll

0 +lr

0 ) =xl,r

zl,r trl

l

ell

0 trr

r elr

0

into chiral characters  = tr el0 of the representations of the chiral observables.

a similar algebraic situation with a tensor product of two nets of observables embed-
ded into another net also arises in coset models [35] in chiral quantum eld theory.
these models are given by a net of chiral observables b(i) and a proper subnet a(i)
(e.g., the current algebras associated with a compact lie group g and a subgroup h).
the coset theory is dened as the net of relative commutants c(i) := a(i)  b(i).
unless the pair of groups gives rise to a conformal inclusion (in which case c(i) is
trivial), the net c possesses a stress-energy tensor of its own which commutes with
the stress-energy tensor of a. an argument similar as in proposition 2.8, making
use of the two commuting mobius groups for a and c, yields the tensor product
position of a and c within b. again, the branching of the vacuum sector of b is
described by a coupling matrix, and our results below can be easily adapted to coset
models.
we are going to study the branching of the vacuum representation 0|a in terms of
the endomorphism .
it turns out convenient to do this in a framework of endo-
morphisms of von neumann algebras. for this purpose we use the fact that  as a
dhr endomorphism of the quasilocal algebra a has the same decomposition into
irreducibles as its restriction o = |a(o) as a (dual canonical) endomorphism of a
local von neumann algebra. this statement is standard if one assumes haag duality
and strong additivity. but it has also been established without these assumptions in
the chiral case, making use of conformal symmetry and essential duality instead, pro-
vided the statistical dimension is nite [9]. the latter argument carries over without
diculty to the 2d case. we just state this result without repeating its proof.

3.1. lemma: let a be a local net on m or r. assume either that a is the

restriction of a conformal net on em resp. s1, or that a satises haag duality and

strong additivity. let ,  be two dhr endomorphisms (in the conformal case: with
nite statistical dimension), localized in some double cone or interval o, and o, o
their restrictions to a(o). then the intertwiner spaces (,  ) and (o, o) coincide.
in particular,  and o have the same decomposition into irreducibles.

since our nets b and al, ar are conformal, the lemma applies to all dhr endo-
morphisms with nite dimension. it follows that the decomposition

o ml,r

zl,r l

l  r

r

of the dual canonical endomorphism for the local subfactor al(i)  ar(j)  b(o)
is again described by the same coupling matrix z, where now l
r are local
restrictions of chiral dhr endomorphisms.

l and r

3 representation theory

16

the crucial additional information here is that  and hence the dual canonical en-
domorphism o respects the tensor product structure a(o) = al(i)  ar(j) in
the sense that its irreducible components are equivalent to tensor products of irre-
ducible endomorphisms of the factor algebras. we call a von neumann subfactor
a  c  b with this property a canonical tensor product subfactor (ctps)3
with associated coupling matrix z.

the subfactors al(i)  ar(j)  b(o), or a(i)  c(i)  b(i) for coset models, are
examples of ctpss. other examples in conformal quantum eld theory are jones-
wassermann subfactors arising from partitions of s1 into four intervals [34, 15].

since we assume the index to be nite, only nitely many sectors can contribute
which all must have nite dimension, hence the coupling matrix is a nite matrix.
since we have assumed the dening representation of b to contain a unique vacuum
vector, it follows that its restriction to the chiral observables contains the joint vac-
uum representation exactly once, hence z0,0 = 1. this implies that the multiplicity
of idl  idr in  is one, hence the embedding al  ar  b is irreducible (both for
the local von neumann algebras and for the quasilocal c* algebras).

we summarize the discussion so far:

3.2. proposition: the local subfactors al(i)  ar(j)  b(o) are irreducible
canonical tensor product subfactors. the irreducible sector decomposition of their
dual canonical endomorphisms is described by the same nite coupling matrix z as
the decomposition of the restricted vacuum representation 0|alar of b.
we are going to study the constraints on z being the coupling matrix of a canoni-
cal tps. these constraints are then read back as constraints on the representation
0|alar or on the 2d partition function.
in the sequel when we write al  ar  b, we have in mind the local subfactor
al(i)  ar(j)  b(o), or with suitable modications a(i)  c(i)  b(i) in
coset models. but we are actually going to establish general statements on coupling
matrices of ctpss without reference to quantum eld theory.

we shall several times need frobenius reciprocity, cf. [18], which we recall in

3.3. lemma: let a, b, c be unital c* or von neumann algebras and  : a  b,
 : b  c,  : a  c unital homomorphisms. denote by h, i the dimension of
the linear space of intertwiners t  c, t :   . then

h , i = h, i = h , i

provided the conjugate homomorphisms  : b  a or  : c  b exist.
here, as before, conjugates are dened in terms of a pair of intertwiners [18], say
w : ida  , v : idb   which satisfy the relations (w)v = 1lb, (v)w = 1la.
3an elementary example of a subfactor a  c  b which is not canonical in this sense was
suggested to me by h.j. borchers: take c = a, and b the crossed product of a  a by the ip
automorphism. then the dual canonical endomorphism is the direct sum of the identity and the
ip. the latter does not respect the tensor product.

3 representation theory

17

for x  b the relative commutant x   b is commonly denoted by x c. we have

3.4. lemma: let al  ar  b be a ctps with nite index, and zl,r its coupling
matrix. then, z0,r 6= 0 implies r = 0 if and only if 1l  ar = (al  1l)c. the
corresponding statement holds exchanging al and ar.
proof: we have to show that z0,r 6= 0 for some r 6= 0 (that is, r
r 6 idr) if and only
if the inclusion 1l  ar  (al  1l)c is proper. note that equality holds if and only
if x := (al  1l)  (al  1l)c equals al  ar (since al is a factor).

consider now the intermediate subfactor al  ar  x  b.
inclusion maps 1 : al  ar  x and 2 : x  b, we have

in terms of the

1  11  1221 =   .

if al  ar  x is proper, then 1 is nontrivial and 1 contains a nontrivial subsector
idl  r
r which is also a subsector of  giving rise to a nonvanishing matrix entry
z0,r. conversely, if z0,r 6= 0, then idl  r
r  . by frobenius reciprocity (lemma
3.3),   (idl  r
r ), hence there is a nonvanishing intertwiner   b which satises

(al  ar) = (al  r

r (ar)).

putting ar = 1l, this implies that   (al  1l)c, thus   x, and hence 1 
1(idlr
r  1. thus alar  x
is proper.
(cid:3)

r ). again invoking frobenius reciprocity, idlr

the lemma allows us to characterize the maximal chiral observables by a normality
property of the local subfactors, see corollary 3.5 below. we recall that an inclusion
a  b is called normal if (ac)c = a. in general, acc  a. it follows that (acc)c  ac
and (ac)cc  ac, hence accc = ac which is obviously equivalent to the statement
that a relative commutant is always normal.

we call (with a slight abuse of terminology) a tensor product subfactor a  c  b
normal if a  1l and 1l  c are each others relative commutants in b.

l (i)  amax

hence, the local subfactors of chiral observables within 2d conformal quantum eld
theories, amax
r (j)  b(o) are examples of normal and canonical tpss.
also coset models give rise to local subfactors which are normal ctpss. namely,
one obtains normality by extending (if necessary) a(i) by the relative commutant
of c(i).

normality of the local subfactors is characteristic for the maximal chiral observables,
and a criterium in terms of the coupling matrix is given in

l

and ar = amax
r .

3.5. corollary: the following are equivalent.
(i) al = amax
(ii) the local subfactors al(i)  ar(j)  b(o) are normal ctpss.
(iii) the coupling matrix satises z0,r = 0,r and zl,0 = l,0.
(iv) the coupling matrix describes an isomorphism of the left and right chiral fusion
rules (in the sense of theorem 3.6 below).

3 representation theory

18

proof: (i) and (ii) are equivalent by corollary 2.7. (ii) and (iii) are equivalent by
lemma 3.4. (iii) and (iv) are equivalent by the following theorem.
(cid:3)

(the equivalence (i)  (iii) could have been argued already from lemma 2.3.)

3.6. theorem: let al  ar  b be a ctps with nite index, and zl,r its coupling
matrix, that is

 =  ml,r

zl,r l

l  r

r

where  : al  ar  b denote the inclusion map and  its conjugate. if the coupling
matrix satises

z0,r = 0,r

and zl,0 = l,0

(that is, the ctps is normal and irreducible), then
(1) z is a permutation matrix. it induces a bijection  with inverse  between the
systems of sectors {l
r } contributing to the decomposition of  such that

l } and {r

zl,r = l,r = l,r.

(2) both systems of sectors {l
decomposition of products (fusion). they satisfy the same fusion rules

r } are closed under conjugation and under

l } and {r

l
l l

k mm

n m

lk l

m

and

r
r r

s mt

n t

rs r

t

lk = n m
lk

with n m
sions of the corresponding sectors coincide:

. in particular, the bijection  respects conjugation, and the dimen-

d(r

l ) = d(l
l ).

(3) the homomorphisms l
l
mutually inequivalent. the same holds for r

:= (l

l  idr) : al  ar  b are irreducible and
r . moreover,

r := (idlr

r ), and r

r  l

(l

l  r

r ) mk

n k

rl l

k ms

n s
lr

r
s .

proof: the proof adopts and extends methods taken from [20].

let the index sets {l} and {r} label the irreducible sectors l
r of
ar, respectively, obtained by closure under reduction of products of those sectors
which contribute to .
if among these there are any new sectors not already
contributing to , we extend the coupling matrix z by zero columns and rows, but
we are eventually going to show that there are no such new sectors.

l of al and r

only nitely many columns and rows of z are non-zero. since  =  is self-
conjugate, along with l
r also its conjugate must contribute with the same
multiplicity, and hence zl,r = zl,r. in particular, both systems {l
r } are
closed under conjugation.

l } and {r

l  r

3 representation theory

19

let the homomorphisms l
l

: al  ar  b be as in (3). we compute

hl

l , l

l i = h(l

l  idr), (l

l  idr)i = hl

zk,shl

l  idr, l

k l

l  r

=xk,s

l  idr,(l
zk,shl

s i =xk,s

l  idr)i =
l , l

k l

l ihidr, r

s i.

to this sum contributes only s = 0 since hidr, r
properties of z also k = 0 is the only contribution. hence

s i = s,0, and by the assumed

hl

l , l

l i = hl

l , l

l i = l,l.

thus the homomorphisms l
metric argument applies to r

l are irreducible and mutually inequivalent. the sym-
r . next we compute

hl

l , r

r i = hl

l  idr,(idl  r

r )i =xk,s

zk,shl

l , l

k ihidr, r

s r

r i = zl,r .

as we have seen that both sets of homomorphisms {l
r } consist of mutually
inequivalent irreducibles, each l
r . hence for
xed index l, at most one entry zl,r can be dierent from zero and must be one. it
follows also that no l
l can be equivalent to any
of the r

l can be equivalent to at most one r

l associated with a new sector l

r , old or new, and vice versa.

l } and {r

for the old sectors, we write

r = l

and l = r

i zl,r = 1,

that is, i l

l  r
r .

that this assignment between old sectors is bijective follows from transitivity of
equivalence of sectors. since we have already seen that z is conjugation invariant,
this assignment respects conjugation, that is

l = r
r
l

= r
l

etc.

next, we consider homomorphisms l,r := (l

l  r

r ) : al  ar  b and compute

l,r = r

r (l

l  idr)  l

r (l

l  idr) = (l

r l

l  idr) mk

n k

rl l
k .

the symmetric argument produces also the decomposition

l,r = l

l (idl  r

r )  (idl  r

l r

r ) ms

n s
lr

r
s .

in the rst of these two decomposition formulae of the same object, no new label k
can appear, since we have seen that such a term l
s in
the second decomposition formula, and vice versa. this shows that the sets of sectors
contributing to the coupling matrix are already closed under reduction of products.

k is not equivalent to any term r

4 towards classification

20

furthermore, comparison of the two decomposition formulae shows equality of the
if s = k. hence the bijection  between the sectors
multiplicities n k
induces an isomorphism of the fusion rules.

rl and n s
lr

 n s
rl

since nally the fusion rules of a nite system determine the dimensions uniquely,
also the equality of the dimensions follows.
(cid:3)

we have thus reproduced a result found previously in the classication program for
modular invariant partition functions with heavy use of sl(2, z) machinery [22],
reducing every modular invariant to an automorphism of the fusion rules for suit-
ably extended chiral observables. our analysis is, however, much stronger since its
assumptions are much weaker. furthermore, it implies that the suitably extended
chiral observables are indeed the maximal chiral observables dened in 2.1, and coin-
cide with the relative commutants of the initially given chiral observables (corollary
2.7(i)).

second, if possibly the maximal left and right chiral observables are not isomorphic,
then the result still implies an isomorphism of the respective fusion rules. the
corresponding statement is even more interesting in the case of coset models where
typically a  b is a theory with well-known fusion rules, while the coset theory
c = ac is in general a w -algebra whose superselection structure is a priori unknown.
the theorem establishes that the fusion rules of this w -algebra are isomorphic to
those of a local extension of the given theory a, namely the relative commutant
acc of c, which is in turn controllable in terms of the representations of a itself.
for coset models based on current algebras, our result seems to be the algebraic
backbone of the modular reasoning as in [29].

finally, we emphasize that the sectors in theorem 3.6 were never referred to as being
restrictions of dhr sectors. neither was it required that their fusion be abelian.
the theorem is thus of a quite more general nature than its specic application to
conformal quantum eld theory as treated in this paper.

4 towards classication

modular invariant partition functions associated with ane lie algebras (al  a 
ar), as far as they have been classied, exhibit a classication scheme which refers
to certain graphs and their exponents (eigenvalues of the square of the adjacency
matrix) [3, 8]. an essential statement is on the non-vanishing diagonal entries of the
coupling matrix z.
a rather general formulation can be found in [1, ii]. it entails that z, 6= 04 if and
only if the dhr sector  of a belongs to a set of exponents associated with the
chiral extensions a  aext. the set of exponents is a subset of the sectors of a.

4in ane models the dhr sectors of the initially given chiral observables are given in terms
of weights  of semisimple lie algebras. throughout this section, we adopt the labels  for dhr
sectors in order to make the present generalizations more transparent.

4 towards classification

21

by modular invariance, the sectors of a label at the same time also the irreducible
representations of their own fusion algebra, the modular matrix s playing the role of a
generalized fourier transformation between the fusion algebra itself and its dual.
on the other hand, modular invariance of the partition function implies that the
coupling matrix coincides with its fourier transform (up to a conjugation). hence,
the above statement on the sector  being an exponent can as well be interpreted
as a statement on the irreducible representation  of the fusion algebra and on non-
vanishing entries of the fourier transformed coupling matrix. in the following, we
set out to formulate a generalization of this version of the statement to the more
general situation we discussed in this paper (without parity symmetry between left
and right chiral algebras, and without assumption of modular invariance).
let al  ar  amax
r  b denote some initially given chiral observables em-
bedded into a two-dimensional local theory b (satisfying the assumptions of section
2) along with their maximal chiral extensions obtained by passing to the relative
commutants in b.

l  amax

let wl and wr denote the fusion algebras of all irreducible dhr sectors l, r
of the initially given chiral observables (or fusion subalgebras containing all sectors
which contribute to the coupling matrix z). let w max
denote the fu-
sion algebras of the irreducible sectors l, r of the extended (= maximal) chiral
observables which contribute to the coupling matrix (i.e., which are contained in
the vacuum representation of b). according to theorem 3.6 and corollary 3.5, the
fusion algebras w max
are isomorphic under the bijection  . we use this
bijection to identify w max
r , so the coupling matrix with respect to amax
becomes the unit matrix 1l.

and w max
l with w max

and w max

r

l

l

r

to be on safe grounds, we assume that wl and wr contain only nitely many sectors,
and that these have nite dimensions. this implies the same for w max, and ensures
that all extensions have nite index.

restriction and extension prescriptions between dhr sectors of a theory b and a
subtheory a were given in [17], and further analyzed in [1]. we are going to apply
this theory to the chiral extensions amax

of al, and amax

of ar.

r

l

the restriction is just the restriction of representations and coincides with the canon-
ical prescription in terms of the inclusion homomorphism  and its conjugate, given
by  7  =  .
in the present situation,
-restriction maps w max into w .5

it was named -restriction in [1].

in contrast, the extension prescription  7  [17] diers from the canonical in-
duction  7 ; it was named -induction in [1] for distinction. in particular,
unlike canonical induction, -induction respects sector composition, and the trivial
sector of the subtheory extends to the trivial sector of the extended theory. further-
more, -extensions of dhr sectors of the subtheory in general are not dhr but only

5here and in the sequel, we often suppress the subscripts l and r when both chiralities are

understood.

4 towards classification

22

half-space localized (solitonic) sectors, due to a monodromy obstruction [17]. let vl
and vr denote the, possibly non-abelian, fusion algebras of all sectors (labelled )
generated by reduction of products of -extended dhr sectors from wl and wr.

in [1], a reciprocity formula for -induction and -restriction was found:

h,  i = h,  i

provided  and  are dhr sectors of the respective theories. it entails that  and
, while otherwise dierent, contain the same dhr subsectors.
it also entails
that, in the present setting, the fusion algebras v contain the abelian subalgebras
w max.

let bl and br denote the rectangular branching matrices, describing chiral -
restriction, with non-negative integer entries h,  i which connect the irreducible
dhr sectors   w max with   w . then the (in general rectangular, dim wl 
dim wr) coupling matrix with respect to the initially given chiral observables is

z = blbt
r,

that is, zl,r 6= 0 if and only if the sectors l and r arise by restriction from a
pair of sectors of the maximal chiral observables which are identied by the bijection
 of theorem 3.6. this is just the block form of the coupling matrix expected by
restricting rst 0
b to the maximal chiral observables, and subsequently restricting
the sectors so obtained to the initially given chiral observables.

each fusion algebra has a regular representation dened by representing a sector
by its matrix of fusion multiplicities with the other sectors. w and w max being
abelian, all their irreducible representations are one-dimensional and contribute with
multiplicity one to the regular representations. the values of the generators of the
fusion algebra in the irreducible representations provide character tables which are
non-degenerate square matrices. we denote the one-dimensional representations of

w by  cw , and their character tables by x.

the character table denes a generalized fourier transform between any abelian
fusion algebra and its representations. the fourier transformed coupling matrix is
thus dened as

bz = (xlbl)(xrbr)t.

its matrix entries are the values of the restriction of the vacuum sector of the 2d
theory b, as a dhr sector of al  ar, in the irreducible representations l  r of
the tensor product wl  wr of the chiral dhr fusion algebras. a priori, the entries
need not to be integers.

algebra is given by sector conjugation, we have () = () = (). this means

let  cw denote the conjugate representation of . since the adjoint in the fusion
bcx = xc = x where c and bc are the conjugation matrices for the dhr sectors

of the initially given chiral observables a and for the representations of their fusion

4 towards classification

23

algebras w , respectively. furthermore, restriction respects sector conjugation, hence
bc max = cb where c max is the conjugation matrix for the sectors   w max of the
maximal chiral observables amax.

thus, since the branching matrices are real, we arrive at

bzbc = (xlbl)(xrbr)+

or equivalently

bz = (xlbl)c(xrbr)+.

complex row vectors of xlbl and xrbr are not orthogonal, and a fortiori non-zero.
if both the chiral branching and the chiral fusion algebras are isomorphic, e.g., if the

it follows that a matrix entry of bzbc to be non-zero requires that the corresponding
theory b is parity symmetric, then a diagonal matrix entry of bzbc vanishes if and

only if the corresponding row vector of xb vanishes.

a modular (transformation) matrix s, if it exists, establishes a natural identication
between the generators of a fusion algebra and its representations, and x = s.

since s2 = c = bc, modular s-invariance is the statement that the coupling matrix
z = szs  = bzbc equals its own fourier transform up to a conjugation.

this remark implies that the proposition 4.1 below reduces to the above-mentioned
statement on exponents in [1] in the case with modular invariance.

we have rst to adapt denitions made in [1, ii] to our more general setting. we

introduce certain subsets of cw which reect the structure of the chiral extensions.

for a given irreducible dhr sector   w max, we dene the -supports suppl( )
and suppr( ) as the subsets of those irreducible representations of wl and wr which
do not vanish on the respective restrictions  of  to the initially given left and right
chiral observables, that is, those rows of xb which have non-zero entry in column
 . the notion support is motivated by considering the abelian fusion algebra w

as an algebra of functions on the set cw of its one-dimensional representations. thus
supp( )  cw is indeed the support of the function   w . (the -supports were

called eig( ) in [1].)

as shown in [1], -induction of sectors induces a homomorphism of fusion algebras
w  v . composing this homomorphism with the regular representation of v yields
another representation, , of w . we dene the -spectra specl and specr as the
subsets of those irreducible representations of wl and wr which are contained in
the -induced representations l
 . (the -spectra were called exp in [1] and
are the exponents mentioned above.)

 and r

now, by virtue of --reciprocity [1], we are going to derive

4.1. proposition: (i) a matrix entry of bzbc vanishes unless for some sector  

w max, both matrix indices belong to the respective left and right -supports supp( ).
it also vanishes unless both matrix indices belong to the left and right -spectra spec.

(ii) if (fusion and branching of) the left and right chiral theories are isomorphic,

then a diagonal matrix entry of bzbc is non-zero if and only if the corresponding
representation of w belongs to the union s supp( ).

4 towards classification

24

in fact, there are many interesting cases when s supp( ) = spec (some of them

being given below), so the last statement can be phrased in terms of the -spectrum
spec.

the proposition is the desired generalization of the classication statement [3, 8, 1]
for modular invariant partition functions. (the second statement seems not to be
sensible with diering left and right chiral fusion and branching matrices, since the
product of two dierent row vectors can clearly vanish without these vectors being
zero.)

the proposition makes assertions about the coupling matrix for the initially given
chiral observables al  ar embedded into the 2d theory b, in terms of the chiral
extensions a  amax to which -induction and -restriction pertain. thus the 2d
problem is reduced to a chiral problem. an open issue remains, however, a model-
independent classication of possible -spectra, and hence of 2d chiral extensions.
the available classications for ane lie and virasoro algebras (diagonal or auto-
morphism, orbifold, exceptional [3, 8, 1]) refer to the chiral extensions being in turn
trivial, xpoints under an abelian group, or conformal embeddings, and are expected
to be too coarse in the general case.

proof of the proposition: (i) the rst statement is obvious since by the representa-

tion bzbc = (xlbl)(xrbr)+, every matrix entry is the inner product of row vectors

whose components are the values of the functions  ,   w max, evaluated on the re-
spective left and right one-dimensional representations. the inner product vanishes
whenever these representations do not belong to the respective -supports. the sec-
ond statement is a consequence of the rst in view of the lemma 4.2 below.
(ii) for isomorphic left and right chiral fusion and branching, xlbl = xrbr, diag-

onal matrix entries of bzbc are norm squares of row vectors of xb which vanish if and

only if all their entries vanish, hence if and only if the corresponding representation
of w does not belong to any of the -supports supp( ),   w max.
(cid:3)

we have used

4.2. lemma: s supp( )  spec.

proof: the one-dimensional representations  of an abelian fusion algebra with
generators , considered as vectors with entries (), are pairwise orthogonal [14].
this property enables us to decide whether a representation  is contained in the
-induced representation () with matrix entries h1, 2i, by contracting the
matrix-valued vector (()) with the vector (()). thus  belongs to the -
spectrum spec if and only if the resulting matrix

(  )12 x

()()12 =x

()h1, 2i

is non-zero. but for 1 = idamax, and 2 =  an irreducible sector from w max  v ,
the matrix entry of the -induced representation equals h,  i by --reciprocity,
and the contracted matrix entry equals ( ). hence, if  belongs to any of the
-supports supp( ), then  belongs to the -spectrum spec.
(cid:3)

4 towards classification

25

we list here two extremal, but by no means exhaustive, conditions to ensure

4.3. lemma: if -induction is surjective (considered as a linear map from w into

if -restriction is surjective (considered as a linear map from w max into w ), then

equality in lemma 4.2, that is, s supp( ) = spec:
v ), then supp(idamax) =s supp( ) = spec.
s supp( ) = spec =cw exhaust all representations of w .
are many other cases when s supp( ) = spec, but we have no satisfactory charac-

the case of surjective induction was also paid special attention in [1]. indeed, there

terization yet.

proof: we want to compute the -support supp(idamax). for this purpose, we mul-
tiply (idamax ) with (),   w . using in turn --reciprocity, the representation
condition for , frobenius reciprocity, the homomorphism property of -induction,
and associativity of fusion, we arrive at

(idamax )() =x
=x

()()h, idamaxi =x
()h , idamaxi =x,

n 

()h, idamaxi =

()h , ih, idamaxi.

here the sum over  extends over all sectors of v . the last sum must vanish for
every , since the left hand side does, if (idamax ) = 0, i.e., if  6 supp(idamax).
now, if -induction is surjective, then every sector  arises as a linear combination
of sectors , and consequently

x

()h, idamaxi =x

()h, i

must vanish for all . these are suciently many matrix entries to ensure the

vanishing of the full matrix (since h1, 2i = ph, ih1, 2i), and hence the

absence of  from the -spectrum spec. hence spec  supp(idamax), implying the
rst claim.
on the other hand, if -restriction is surjective, then ( ) = 0 for all   w max
implies () = 0 for all   w , hence  = 0. thus the union of the -supports
exhausts all representations of w , implying the second claim.
(cid:3)

we have thus established some rst constraints on the coupling matrix in terms of
representations of fusion algebras.

further constraints are expected to derive from locality which was only partially
exploited in the form of --reciprocity in proposition 4.1, and in the commutativity
of left and right chiral observables in theorem 3.6. notably the condition for locality
of the 2d theory in terms of the local subfactor data and the statistics which was
given in [17] remains to be transcribed into a condition on the coupling matrix.

5 conclusions

26

l z = zsstat

as mentioned in the introduction, chiral locality produces matrices sstat and t stat
which represent sl(2, z) [27, 6], except for a possible degeneracy of the braiding. a
rst implication of the locality condition for the 2d theory is that t stat
l z = zt stat
r ,
in accordance with local 2d conformal elds having integer spin hl  hr. the
companion relation sstat
r , that is, modular invariance of the coupling
matrix with respect to the representation of sl(2, z) given by the statistics, cannot
be established for general 2d nets b, however. the surprise is that, as shown here,
one can go much of the way towards classication without knowing these formulae,
and that one can do so whether the involved sectors have a degenerate braiding or
not. (mugers proof [21] that the degeneracy can always be removed by an algebraic
extension of the chiral observables does not help here, since this extension is in
general not possible within the given 2d observables.)

5 conclusions

we have shown that in a 2d conformally invariant quantum eld theory with suf-
ciently many chiral observables to generate the chiral mobius groups, there are
maximal algebras of chiral observables which are, locally, the relative commutants of
each other, as well as of any a priori given chiral observables sharing the generating
property (cf. sect. 2).

the representation theory of the chiral observables is governed by a canonical tensor
product subfactor (ctps) al  ar  b given by the respective chiral and 2d
local algebras. we have therefore investigated the general structure of ctpss and
have found a characterization of the two tensor factors being each others relative
commutants (normality) in terms of a coupling matrix. the coupling matrix in
this case provides an isomorphism between the respective fusion rules for the involved
sectors of the two tensor factors.

this abstract result, applied to the quantum eld theoretical situation at hand,
generalizes a statement on certain extended chiral observables in the classication
program for 2d modular invariant partition functions, and shows that the latter
coincide with the maximal chiral observables.

exploiting general properties of -induction and -restriction between the superse-
lection sectors of the maximal and the a priori given non-maximal chiral observables,
constraints on the coupling matrix (with respect to the non-maximal chiral observ-
ables) are derived which are the direct counterparts of similar constraints in the
modular classication program.

yet, modular invariance has not been assumed throughout the analysis. this sup-
ports our conviction that modular invariants are just one aspect of a deeper and
more general mathematical structure (presumably related to asymptotic subfac-
tors and quantum doubles). a classication in terms of graphs still remains to

references

27

be established in the general situation. possibly, additional constraints originating
from locality will play a role here.

acknowledgements: i am indebted to j. bockenhauer for many helpful and critical
comments on an earlier version of this paper, as well as to a. recknagel for discussions
on modular invariance. i also thank d. buchholz, b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock
for useful suggestions concerning sect. 2, and r. longo for pointing out a diculty
in sect. 3.

references

[1] j. bockenhauer, d.e. evans: modular invariants, graphs and -induction for nets of
subfactors, i: commun. math. phys. 197 (1998) 361-386, ii: ibid. 200 (1999) 57-103,
and iii: preprint hep-th/9812110 (1998).

[2] r. brunetti, d. guido, r. longo: modular structure and duality in conformal quantum

eld theory, commun. math. phys. 156 (1993) 201-219.

[3] a. cappelli, c. itzykson, j.-b. zuber: the a-d-e classication of minimal and a(1)
1

conformal invariant theories, commun. math. phys. 113 (1987) 1-26.

[4] j.l. cardy: operator content of two-dimensional conformally invariant theories, nucl.

phys. b270 (1986) 186-204.

[5] k. fredenhagen, k.-h. rehren, b. schroer: superselection sectors with permutation
group statistics and exchange algebras, i: commun. math. phys. 125 (1989) 201-226,
and ii: rev. math. phys. special issue (1992) 113-157.

[6] j. frohlich, f. gabbiani: braid statistics in local quantum theory, rev. math. phys.

2 (1991) 251-353.

[7] j. frohlich, f. gabbiani: operator algebras and conformal eld theory, commun.

math. phys. 155 (1993) 569-640.

[8] t. gannon: the classication of ane su(3) modular invariants, commun. math.

phys. 161 (1994) 233-264.

[9] d. guido, r. longo: the conformal spin and statistics theorem, commun. math.

phys. 181 (1996) 11-36.

[10] d. guido, r. longo, j.e. roberts, r. verch: a general framework for charged sectors

in quantum eld theory on curved spacetimes, preprint in preparation.

[11] r. haag: local quantum physics, springer (1992).

[12] v.g. kac: the idea of locality,

in: group 21, proceedings goslar 1996, h.-d.

doebner et al eds. (world scientic 1997), pp. 16-32.

[13] v.g. kac, d.h. peterson: innite-dimensional lie algebras, theta functions and mod-

ular forms, adv. math. 53 (1984) 125-264.

references

28

[14] t. kawai: on the structure of fusion algebras, phys. lett. b 217 (1989) 247-251.

[15] y. kawahigashi, r. longo, m. muger: multi-interval subfactors and modularity of

representations in conformal eld theory, preprint math.oa/9903104 (1999).

[16] r. longo: index of subfactors and statistics of quantum elds, ii: commun. math.

phys. 130 (1990) 285-309.

[17] r. longo, k.-h. rehren: nets of subfactors, rev. math. phys. 7 (1995) 567-597.

[18] r. longo, j.e. roberts: a theory of dimension, k-theory 11 (1997) 103-159.

[19] m. luscher, g. mack: global conformal invariance in quantum eld theory, commun.

math. phys. 41 (1975) 203-234.

[20] t. masuda: an analogue of longos canonical endomorphism for bimodule theory and

its application to asymptotic inclusions, int. j. math. 8 (1997) 249-265.

[21] m. muger: on charged elds with group symmetry and degeneracies of verlindes

matrix s, hep-th/9705018, to appear in ann. inst. h. poincare.

[22] g. moore, n. seiberg: naturality in conformal eld theory, nucl. phys. b313 (1989)

16-40.

[23] w. nahm: a proof of modular invariance, int. j. mod. phys. a6 (1991) 2837-2845.

[24] a. ocneanu: quantum symmetry, dierential geometry, and classication of subfac-

tors, univ. tokyo seminary notes 45 (1991) (notes taken by y. kawahigashi).

[25] k.-h. rehren: space-time elds and exchange elds, commun. math. phys. 132

(1990) 461-483.

[26] k.-h rehren: in preparation.

[27] k.-h. rehren: braid group statistics and their superselection rules, in: the algebraic
theory of superselection sectors, proceedings palermo 1989, d. kastler ed. (world
scientic 1990) pp. 333-355.

[28] k.-h. rehren, b. schroer: einstein causality and artin braids, nucl. phys. b312

(1989) 715-750.

[29] a.n. schellekens, s. yankielowicz: simple currents, modular invariants, and xed

points, int. j. mod. phys. a 5 (1990) 2903-2952.

[30] b. schroer, h.-w. wiesbrock: looking behind the thermal horizon: hidden symmetries

in chiral models, preprint hep-th/9901031 (1999).)

[31] m. takesaki: conditional expectations in von neumann algebras, j. funct. anal. 9

(1972) 306-321.

[32] e. verlinde: fusion rules and modular transformations in 2d conformal eld theories,

nucl. phys. b300 (1988) 360-376.

[33] h.-w. wiesbrock: conformal quantum eld theory and half-sided modular inclusions

of von neumann algebras, commun. math. phys. 158 (1993) 537-544.

[34] f. xu:

jones-wassermann subfactors for disconnected intervals, preprint q-

alg/9704003 (1997).

[35] f. xu: algebraic coset conformal eld theories, preprint math.oa/9810035 (1998).

