su-gp-99/3-2
nsf-itp-99-14
hep-th/9903213

brane baldness vs. superselection sectors

institute for theoretical physics, university of california, santa barbara, ca 93106

physics department, syracuse university, syracuse, ny 13244

donald marolf

institute for theoretical physics, university of california, santa barbara, ca 93106

amanda peet

abstract

the search for intersecting brane solutions in supergravity is a large and
protable industry. recently, attention has focused on nding localized forms
of known delocalized solutions. however, in some cases, a localized version
of the delocalized solution simply does not exist. instead, localized separated
branes necessarily delocalize as the separation is removed. this phenomenon
is related to black hole no-hair theorems, i.e.
baldness. we continue the
discussion of this eect and describe how it can be understood, in the case
of dirichlet branes, in terms of the corresponding intersection eld theory.
when it occurs, it is associated with the quantum mixing of phases and lack
of superselection sectors in low dimensional eld theories. we nd surprisingly
wide agreement between the eld theory and supergravity both with respect
to which examples delocalize and with respect to the rate at which this occurs.

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
5
2

 
 

2
v
3
1
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

march, 1999

1

i. introduction

it is a well-known fact that, while string perturbation theory in intersecting d-brane
backgrounds is discussed in terms of localized branes [1], classical supergravity solutions
representing such localized branes are typically dicult to construct. one often works with
supergravity solutions where the branes are less well localized than one might like, and
in fact have extra translational symmetries [2] - [21]; see [22] for a thorough review. one
says that the branes have been smeared over some of the directions that were, a priori,
transverse to their world volume. in some cases, with a bit more work, one can construct
explicit fully localized solutions, at least in the near-core limit [23,24].

however, there are some situations where fully localized supergravity solutions of the
desired type simply do not exist. this happens when the world volume of one type of brane
(b) is contained inside that of another (a), or inside the volume through which brane a has
been smeared, and when the branes intersect on a manifold of suciently low dimension; the
details will be explained below. if the branes are separated in a direction transverse to both
types (a and b), then localized solutions exist. nonetheless, as the transverse separation
between the branes is removed, the type b brane delocalizes. this phenomenon does not
occur when the dimension of the intersection manifold is suciently high.

this delocalization was studied in [25] for one-branes parallel to ve-branes. as discussed
there, this eect is related to a black hole no-hair theorem. black hole no-hair results tell
us that, in certain cases, black hole horizons must be uniform. a pertinent example occurs
in einstein-maxwell theory: when an electric charge q is brought near a black hole, the
charge q appears to be delocalized over the black hole horizon [26]. the situation discussed
below is similar as, when delocalization occurs, the charge of the type b brane appears to be
delocalized over the entire horizon of the type a brane. for such cases, the type a branes
are bald and unable to support such hair.

now, recall that there are certain dualities between supergravity and brane gauge the-
ories, as in the ads/cft correspondence [27] and its p-brane generalizations [28]. the
general picture of a duality is that there is a single quantum theory which has several dis-
tinct classical limits. in our case, one of these limits would give classical supergravity while
the other would give classical brane gauge theory. this means that aspects of the dynamics
which are classical from the point of view of one theory correspond to strongly quantum
mechanical eects in terms of the other. we will further generalize the ads/cft limit
to describe interacting a and b branes, and we will see that the delocalization of classical
supergravity corresponds to large uctuations of a modulus eld on the gauge theory side.
in particular, its occurrence is related to the quantum mixing between phases and the lack
of superselection sectors associated with the asymptotic values of massless elds in low di-
mensional quantum eld theories; i.e., on the gauge theory side, delocalization is controlled
by the coleman-mermin-wagner theorem [29,30]. the relevant quantum mixing is between
the gauge theory phase which describes type a branes separated from type b branes in
an overall transverse direction, which we will refer to generally as the separated branch,
and the phase that describes such branes with no transverse separation, which we call the

2

coincident branch1 that some correspondence of this sort should occur was suggested in
[33]. the consistency of this picture will be explained in section iii. we will see that, not
only will this interpretation successfully predict the cases for which the type b branes delo-
calize, it will also give the correct rate at which the delocalization occurs as the transverse
separation is removed.

before progressing to the main paper, it is perhaps worthwhile to display an explicit and
tractable example of the supergravity delocalization phenomenon. it turns out that this is
much easier to see for a d-instanton located near a d3-brane than for the systems studied
in [25]. the point is that the classical supergravity solution for a localized bps d-instanton
in ads5s5 is known in terms of elementary functions [3436] while, for the other examples,
the supergravity solution is known only as a (convergent) innite series.
the near d3-brane geometry is just ads5s5. for simplicity, we take the case [34] where
the d-instanton is smeared over the s5, but the solution localized on the s5 is also known
explicitly [35]. by writing the ads5s5 metric in poincare coordinates,

ds2 = r2(u 2du 2 + u 2ijdyidyj + d2

5),

(1.1)

we may interpret the solution of [34] as the near-core part of an asymptotically at (eu-
clidean) spacetime with a spherical (s5) shell of d-instantons located near the three-branes.
in (1.1), r is the radius of the ads5 and of the s5. in the presence of the d-instantons, the
(einstein) metric is unchanged, and the dilaton is given by

where

e = c0 + c1

(d2 + 2)(d4 + 4d2  2)

d3(d2 + 4)3/2

,

d2 = u0u "(u 1  u 1

0 )2 +

(yi  yi

0)2# ,

3

xi=0

(1.2)

(1.3)

with (u0, yi
0) the location of the d-instantons. this setup allows a separation between the
d-instantons and the origin of ads5. note that far from the d-instantons e tends to a
nite and nonzero constant, c0 + c1. the constant c0 is arbitrary while the constant c1 is
proportional to the instanton charge. consider now the limit in which the instantons are
moved onto the three-brane; that is, the limit in which u0  0 with xed c0, c1, yi
0. note
that u, yi should also remain xed as we wish to examine the solution at a given location
relative to the three-brane. in this limit, (1.3) diverges so that we have

(cid:16)e(cid:17)lim

= c0 + c1.

(1.4)

therefore the dilaton is now constant (and it is in fact the same constant as the asymptotic
value of e at generic d-instanton position). in particular, the solution no longer has any
dependence on the coordinates yi along the three-brane. we see that the d-instantons have

1this result is not, in fact, in conict with [31,32], as we will discuss.

3

delocalized as they were moved toward the three-brane. note that this does not happen
suddenly at u0 = 0, but rather gradually. as viewed from a xed point relative to the three-
brane, the eld created by the instantons smoothly blurs out as we decrease u0 to zero. in
this context, we see that our delocalization is related to the well-known scale/radius duality
of this system [3436]. the behavior of the d-instanton solution [35] that is localized on the
s5 as well as in the ads5 is similar. much the same behavior was seen in [25] for a localized
one-brane as it is moved onto a localized ve-brane and, as we will see below, it occurs in
many other cases as well.

the outline of this paper is as follows. in section ii, we extend the analysis of [25] to
consider the full range of two charge intersecting brane solutions whose mathematical form
is similar to that of the localized d1-branes parallel to d5-branes (d1kd5). for example,
the analysis includes the localized d0kd4 system, and the d2kd6 system studied in [23].
we will see that the d0kd4 system delocalizes as does the d1kd5 system, but that the same
methods nd the d2kd6 system to remain localized. this is a useful check of the method
and resolves the apparent conict2 between the results of [25] for the d1kd5 system and the
explicit construction of the localized d2kd6 solutions in [23]. the d2kd6 system is simply
dierent from the d1kd5 system, in a way that will be discussed below. other solutions
considered below are similar to a d1-brane orthogonally intersecting a d3-brane, where (say)
the d1-brane is smeared along the d3-brane world volume. in this case, we will see that
when the transverse separation between a (localized) d3 brane and the smeared d1 branes
is removed, the d3 brane delocalizes along the d1-brane world volume. to be quite general,
we will allow arbitrary transverse separation between the two types of branes, although
we will still refer to these solutions as intersecting brane spacetimes. for many of these
systems, certain near-core solutions were constructed in [37]; we argue in appendix a that,
while these are certainly valid solutions to the supergravity equations, due to the subtleties
of boundary conditions they are not the appropriate ones to consider in our context.

after studying the supergravity solutions, we turn in section iii to a discussion of the
corresponding intersection eld theories and the appropriate ads/cft limit [28]. we will
see that our delocalization phenomenon (when it occurs!) corresponds to a quantum mixing
between phases of the yang-mills theory and to the fact that 0+1 and 1+1 eld theories are
not superselected by the asymptotic values of the massless elds. finally, we discuss a few
remaining issues in section iv.

ii. delocalization in supergravity

here, we consider bps solutions with two types of branes, a and b, each localized at
xed, but dierent, values of isotropic coordinates x which label the space transverse to
both branes3. that is, we consider bps solutions with the branes separated in the transverse

2in [25], it was stated that there was a normalization problem with the solutions of [23]. this is
not, in fact, correct. for completeness, the normalizations are discussed in appendix a.

3 we describe locations in the spacetime in terms of isotropic coordinates. in all cases below, this
may be translated into a coordinate invariant statement by referring, for example, to the surface

4

direction. the branes may carry ramond-ramond or neveu-schwarzneveu-schwarz charge
in type iia/b string theory or be m-branes, and the a- and b-branes need not be of the
same sort. for example, the type a brane may be r-r while the type b branes are ns-
ns. thus, we include the case of a fundamental string intersecting (but not ending on) a
d-brane. the equations of motion for all of these cases have a similar structure as they are
related by t- and s- duality. a similar analysis also applies to kaluza-klein monopoles and
various sorts of waves. in this section, we refer to all such cases as branes.

the world-volumes of the type a and b branes will in general have certain directions
in common. we label the directions common to both by coordinates t, zi. here, the i is
a label denoting the intersection directions. similarly, we denote by za the worldvolume
directions of brane a not in i, and we denote by zb the worldvolume directions of brane b
not in i. we take brane a to be smeared in the zb directions, as well as in any directions in
which brane b has been smeared. we will have no need to refer explicitly to directions in
which both branes have been smeared, as these can be removed by a t-duality symmetry
transformation, but we label directions in which brane a (but not b)4 has been smeared by
w. finally, x labels directions orthogonal to both branes along which neither brane has
been smeared. our conventions are conveniently summarized by the following table, where
() denotes a direction along a brane, () denotes a direction in which a brane has been
smeared, and an empty space denotes a direction orthogonal to the brane in which it has
not been smeared.

t
a 
b 

zi



zb w x

za
  



we assume that the za, zb, and w directions are compactied to form tori of volumes va,
vb, and vw respectively (the noncompact case just corresponds to the v   limit). the
zi directions are taken to be uncompactied, or compactied on a manifold of very large
volume. we will also use the symbols a, b, w to denote the number of za, zb, w coordinates.
our discussion also applies to bps branes at angles, though we will not consider this case
explicitly.

familiar examples of this class are d(p  4)-branes (b) oriented parallel to dp-branes
(a) as well as various intersecting brane solutions [9,10,19,22] with one brane (a) smeared
along the world-volume directions of the other brane (b). additional cases are generated by
further smearing. thus, we may refer to brane a as the bigger brane, in the sense that the
smeared type a branes ll out a higher dimensional volume.

for bps congurations we make the ansatz

ds2 =

1

hahb

(dt2 + dz2

i ) +s ha

hb

(dzb)2 +s hb

ha

(dza)2 +qhahb(dx2

) ,

(2.1)

in spacetime on which the various gauge eld strengths take a given value. however, it is simpler
to discuss the solutions directly in terms of isotropic coordinates.

4we could alternatively smear brane b, but this will not aect the delocalization behavior.

5

and

e = gsh (3a)/4

a

h (3b)/4

b

.

(2.2)

we have not written the gauge elds explicitly, but they have the standard form. construct-
ing the supergravity solutions then reduces (see, e.g., [10,13,17,38]) to solving the following
equations of motion:

2
xha(x) =

qa
vbvw

(x),

(2.3)

(2

zahb(x, w, za) = qb(x, x0)(w, w0)(za, za0), (2.4)

x + 2

w)hb(x, w, za) + ha(x)2

x represents the at space laplacian in the x directions, and similarly for 2

where 2
w and
2
za. note that, by construction, the solution has no dependence on t, zi or zb. the delta-
function sources, each of the appropriate dimension, ensure that the solution carries gauge
eld uxes corresponding to charges qa, qb at the locations specied. note that we have
taken brane a to lie at the origin of the transverse coordinates x, while we have placed
brane b at the location (x0, w0, za0). we have chosen to let qa, qb denote the total charge
of the type a and b branes, although only the charge density of the type a branes appears
in the above equations of motion (2.3).

the rst equation of motion (2.3) is just laplaces equation. solutions appropriate
to asymptotically at boundary conditions may be found if the x coordinates label a d
dimensional space with d  3, and we conne ourselves to this case. the type a branes are
associated with a charge radius ra proportional to q1/(d+b+w2)
, but the behavior of the
supergravity solution is controlled by the length scale

a

ra = (

rd+b+w2
a
vbvw

)1/(d2) .

the appropriate solution may thus be written

ha(x) = 1 +

rd2
a
rd2



,

(2.5)

(2.6)

where r = |x|.
the method of [25] then uses the symmetries and the linearity of equation (2.4) to solve
for hb as an innite sum (in the case where the w, za directions are compact) over modes.
this series turns out to be absolutely convergent, and so is a useful representation of the
full solution.

we proceed here in the same way. as stated above, we suppose that the coordinates
za, w label compact tori of volume va, vw. if these directions are not in fact compact, then
a similar argument follows simply by replacing the mode sums with integrals. we fourier
transform over the za, w directions and decompose the solution into harmonics on the d  1
sphere associated with the d transverse coordinates x.
in fact, it is only necessary to consider modes which are constant over the sd1 sphere.
the higher spherical harmonics would tell us about localization of the type b branes in the

6

angular directions, but we already expect that, when we move the type b branes to r = 0,
the limiting solution becomes symmetric over the sd1 sphere. including a discussion of the
higher spherical harmonics, as was done in [25], veries this conclusion, but does not impact
the question of localization in the za and w directions. thus, we consider here only modes
which are uniform over the sd1 sphere. this is equivalent to replacing the point source in
b with an sd1 shell of source: qbr(d1)

(r, r0)(w, w0)(za, za0), where r0 = |x0|.

we express the function hb(r, w, za) as a sum over fourier modes in w and za multiplied
by radial modes hb,pw,pa(r), where pw and pa denote the relevant (discrete) momenta in
the w, za directions. these radial modes satisfy the following second order ode:



r(d1)



r (cid:16)r(d1)



rhb,pw,pa(r)(cid:17)  p2
ha(r)p2

whb,pw,pa(r)
ahb,pw,pa(r) =

qb

vavw

r(d1)



(r, r0).

(2.7)

let us, for the moment, x our attention on one choice of pw, pa, so that we need not
indicate these labels explicitly. the pw = 0, pa = 0 mode has special boundary conditions
which we will discuss later. for the other modes, imposing boundedness at large r will
determine the solution at r > r0 to be a constant + times some particular solution +,
while continuity at the origin will determine the solution for r < r0 to be a constant 
times some particular solution . the constants  are then determined by the matching
conditions dictated by the delta-function in (2.7). namely, as the source in (2.7) has no
derivatives of delta functions, we must have ++(r0) = (r0), while the discontinuity
 to denote
in the rst derivatives must reproduce the delta function source. using  and 
the values of the solutions and their r derivatives evaluated at r = r0, we have as usual

qbr(d1)



+ =

0
vavw(+

  +

)

,  =

qbr(d1)

+

0
vavw(+

  +

)

.

(2.8)

our main task is to study the behavior of + as r0  0. if the coecient + vanishes in
this limit, then the corresponding mode will not appear in the limiting solution for hb.
the denominator of (2.8) is just the wronskian (w ) of (2.7) evaluated at r = r0 and
may be computed by standard techniques. up to a constant (which does not depend on
r0), it is given by w (r) = r(d1)

. thus, up to an irrelevant constant we have



+ =

qb(r0)

vavw

,  =

qb+(r0)

vavw

.

(2.9)

all that remains is to determine the behavior of  for small r0.

let us suppose that pa is nonzero, so that the behavior near r = 0 is controlled by
the term proportional to ha(r)p2
a in the radial equation (2.7). recall that ha describes
some power law potential in r that diverges at r = 0. for the r2
 potential (d = 4),
the radial equation may be solved exactly in terms of bessel functions as was done in [25].
given the explicit solution in [25], one can see that the sum over pa converges absolutely at
any r 6= r0 so that the series gives an accurate description of the physics. solutions to the
near r = 0, so that continuity at the origin
source-free equation behave like r
forces  to vanish there. thus, only modes with pa = 0 contribute in the r0  0 limit

11+p2

ar2



a

7

and the type b branes delocalize in the za directions. this case corresponds to, for example,
d1 branes parallel to d5 branes.

still considering the case d = 4 (e.g., d1-branes and d5-branes), it is interesting to ask
about the rate at which the type b branes delocalize. since we are interested in the limiting
behavior as r  0, we consider the delocalization as it reaches the largest length scales (small
pa). note that, as measured by the asymptotic elds, the solution has delocalized on a length
scale x when the coecient + corresponding to the momentum pa  1/x becomes small
relative to its value at large r0. for convenience, we will measure  relative to its value
(qb(ra)/vavw) at r0 = ra. a comparison with [25] or an approximate solution for small
r shows that + vanishes like

vavw+

qb(ra)  (cid:18)r0

ra (cid:19)1+1+p2

ar2

a

(2.10)

for r  ra. specically, for small pa, + vanishes like (r0/ra)
type b brane appears to be delocalized on a length scale x  raqln ra

a. thus, for d = 4, the
as viewed from
innity. note that, for large ra, the b-branes are quite well delocalized before they reach
any strong curvature region.

r0

1

2 p2

a r2

let us now consider the case d > 4, e.g. d0-branes approaching d4-branes. since
 vanishes at the origin for the r2 potential, one may expect the same behavior for
the stronger potentials r(d2). this may be veried by looking for a solution of the form
 = r(d1)/2
e(r), using the wkb approximation, and again imposing continuity at r = 0.
note that the wkb approximation is self-consistent for such strong potentials. thus, the su-
pergravity solutions delocalize in the za directions for these cases as well. the delocalization
is even faster than for d = 4 as + now vanishes like



+  exp

pa  d  2

2  1!1

d2

2

r0!
ra  ra

1
 ,

(2.11)

2

2

d2

d2

as opposed to the power law behavior for the r2
 potential. when the type b branes are
1 and the type b brane has
at r0, the coecients + are small for rapa > (r0/ra)
1. again, at least within the domain of the
delocalized to a size scale x  ra(ra/r0)
wkb approximation, the sum over momenta converges absolutely. the case d > 4 includes
d0 branes approaching d4 branes, as well as intersecting brane solutions (either r-r, ns-
ns, or m) with 5 or more directions transverse to both branes. for example, it addresses the
case of a d3-brane (b) and an orthogonal d1-brane (a) smeared in the three zb directions
along the d3-brane. as the transverse separation is removed, the d3 brane delocalizes along
the d1-brane. the case d > 4 also includes the case of d-instantons in a d3 brane, which
was explicitly seen to delocalize in section i. as before, for large ra, the type b branes are
well delocalized before they reach any strong curvature region.

the remaining case is when the bigger brane has only three transverse directions (d = 3),
which is exactly the situation that arises in the solutions of [23]. in this case, the wkb
approximation is not self-consistent, but we may study the radial equation by a related
technique. writing (r) = r1e(r), the sourceless radial equation (2.7) becomes

2
r + (r)2  p2

w  p2

a

ra
r

= 0.

(2.12)

8

r is much larger than (r)2, which turns out
this may be analyzed by assuming that 2
to be self-consistent for r  ra. within this approximation, the general solution behaves
near the origin like

 = c1(cid:18)r

ra(cid:19)[p2

arar1]

arar]

+ c2(cid:18)r

ra(cid:19)[p2

.

(2.13)

thus, if  is to be continuous at the origin we must have c1 = 0. as a result,  behaves
like (r/ra)[p2
arar], which is nite and nonzero at r = 0. this time we nd that +
does not vanish as r0  0. the result is that the type b brane remains localized in the za
directions in agreement with [23]. again, within the domain of validity of this approximation
(ra  r0, r), one nds that the sum over modes converges absolutely. the innite series
discussed here should sum to the solution of [23] in the near-core region.
we have not yet addressed localization in the w directions for any value of d. let us
therefore consider a mode with pa = 0, pw 6= 0. the radial equations in this case are just
those for the coulomb potential of a massive eld and are easily studied. one nds that 
does not vanish at r = 0, and the sum over modes once again converges absolutely5. thus,
localization is always possible in any directions transverse to brane b along which brane a
has been smeared.

the last mode to consider is the case pa = 0, pw = 0; i.e., the spatially homogeneous
mode. this mode does not tell us about delocalization of the branes; instead, it is the
entire eld remaining once complete delocalization has occurred. this mode is special as
its boundary condition at innity diers from that of any other mode. the point is that,
for qb = 0, the appropriate solution is hb = 1 and not hb = 0. thus, the correct
solution for the homogeneous mode is a constant plus a function that vanishes for large
r. we now consider the case where the type b brane delocalizes completely and make
several observations. recall that complete delocalization occurs when d  4 and there
are no w directions. first, note that the complete solution for r0 = 0 is of the form
hb = 1 + (rd2+a
 ), since only the spatially homogeneous mode survives. second,
since all modes with pa 6= 0 vanish at r = 0 for any location r0 of the type b branes, we
may evaluate hb exactly at the origin:

/vard2

b

hb(r = 0) = 1 +  rd2+a
0 ! .

b
vard2

(2.14)

note that this result also holds in the innite volume limit (va  ) in which rd2+a
/va =
0. thus, if the za directions are not compactied, we have simply hb = 1 at r = 0,
independent of r0. these observations will prove useful in the following sections.

b

we now make a few nal remarks about variations on the above theme. consider, for
example, solutions representing not branes in asymptotically at space, but branes in the
near horizon geometry associated with the type a branes; i.e., the solutions obtained by
taking a limit ra  r, r0. this is really the only part of the asymptotically at geometry

5of course, the full sum over modes includes a sum over pw even for pa 6= 0. for p
y  p
the analysis is identical to the pa = 0 case and shows convergence of the sum over pw.

2

2

r(cid:17)d2
a(cid:16) ra

,

9

of which we have made signicant use, so the discussion is not changed. note that taking this
limit is equivalent to setting ha = ( ra
)d2 and xing the boundary conditions by imposing
r
boundedness at innity and specifying the value of hb at r = 0 to be given by (2.14)
above. the point we wish to emphasize is that the pa = 0, pw = 0 mode still approaches a
nonzero constant far from the type b branes and we have hb  1 as r  . one can see
this explicitly in the d-instanton example from the introduction, which already resides in
the near-horizon geometry of the three-brane.

in addition, one might ask how the analysis would change if a given set of (type iia)
branes were lifted to eleven dimensional supergravity. such a lift has a translational sym-
metry in x11, so that x11 does not become a transverse direction. as the behavior of the
classical solution is determined by the number of dimensions transverse to the type a brane,
it is not aected by this process. one might also ask about related solutions where the
m-brane is localized in x11. an example where this is possible is lifting a solution with
d2-branes (with one brane smeared over the other) intersecting in points to a solution with
m2-branes intersecting in points (with one brane still smeared over the other but otherwise
fully localized). in such cases, the m-theoretic solution will generally delocalize faster than
the type iia supergravity solution due to the increased number of transverse dimensions.
note that a qualitative change from delocalization to localization could only happen if the
number of transverse directions crosses the threshold at d = 4, i.e., the lifting of a d6 brane
to m-theory. but this lift is a kaluza-klein monopole and, while there are only 6 directions
along the corresponding m-theoretic brane, the kaluza-klein monopole has a nontrivial
structure in the remaining 4 spatial directions. due to the structure of these dimensions,
the corresponding potential ha behaves only as r1 even for the m-theoretic solution, and
therefore has the same properties with regard to delocalization as the iia d6-brane. one
can, of course, consider a kaluza-klein monopole in any dimension and, as it always has
an r1 potential, the type b branes always remain localized. this is of course to be ex-
pected from the method of [23,24], which realizes the near-core kaluza-klein monopole as
an orbifold of at space and inserts the type b branes before taking the orbifold quotient.
finally, within supergravity, it is clear that the above analysis can be extended to branes
that are not asymptotically at. they correspond to potentials that are softer than r1 and
therefore allow localization of the directions parallel to the a brane. however, this case is
not our primary concern and we will not discuss it in detail.

iii. the supergravity / field theory correspondence.

in the last section we studied the delocalization behavior of a class of asymptotically
at supergravity brane solutions of type iia/b string theory. we would now like to under-
stand this behavior from a eld theory perspective by using a generalization of the p-brane
ads/cft correspondence, which is obtained by taking a certain low-energy limit of a sys-
tem of np r-r charged p-branes. we rst study the supergravity solutions and dene
the ads/cft limit, and then move on to a eld theory explanation of the supergravity
(de)localization phenomena.

let us rst orient ourselves with a lightning review of the salient features of the ads/cft
correspondence of [28] for da-branes. here, a denotes the number of spatial dimensions of
what in section ii was a type a (dirichlet) brane. we will ignore numerical factors in this

10

entire section; the relevant precise normalizations may be found in [28] or in the previous
section. the ads/cft correspondence for na da-branes is obtained by starting in string
theory with the coupled bulk-brane dynamics, and taking the low-energy limit

(es)  0 .

(3.1)

this energy e is measured in the gauge theory. the gauge theory coordinates are the
isotropic supergravity coordinates in directions parallel to the brane. to see this, one can
compute the associated moduli space metric for motion of a probe da-brane in the back-
ground of the others; it is trivial. the next step is to keep the dimensionless expansion
parameter in the u(na) gauge theory xed; since we are interested in large numbers of
branes for comparison to the supergravity, this expansion parameter is

2
a(e) = g2

y m,anaea3 = gsna(se)a3 .

(3.2)

the eld theory is perturbative when this parameter is small. one also keeps xed the
mass of strings stretched perpendicular to the branes, e = |x|/2
s  u, where x is the
displacement between the branes.
in the ads/cft low-energy limit the physics on the brane decouples from the physics
in the bulk, provided that a < 6. this decoupling happens essentially because supergravity
is a weak interaction at low energy compared to the gauge interaction.

the supergravity metric is

ds2 =

1

ha (cid:16)dt2 + dz2

a(cid:17) +qhadx2

 ,

where ha = 1 +  ra

|x|!7a

.

(3.3)

here, we have taken all of the da-branes to be clumped together at the origin r = 0 and
have not allowed any smearing of the branes. the symbol ra denotes the charge radius of
the brane, i.e. the radius where the 1 in the harmonic function is comparable to the other
term:

ra = s(gsna)1/(7a) .

(3.4)

converting x to u and the other factors using (3.2) the harmonic function may be written
ha = 1 + 2
a(u)/(su)4. assuming that the supergravity u, which is an energy, scales the
same as the gauge theory energy e, we see that the 1 in ha is lost in the low-energy limit.
this means that we have lost the asymptotically at part of the supergravity geometry. in
considering the physical validity of this near-horizon supergravity solution, there are two
types of corrections to worry about,  and gs. a measure of the rst type of correction
is the ricci scalar measured in string units, which is found to be 2
sr = 1/a(u) and so
the supergravity is weakly coupled for a(u)  1. in comparing this to the gauge theory
regime a(e)  1, as pointed out in [39], we must be careful in specifying the type of
probe we are using, which in turn gives a relationship between the gauge theory energy e
and the supergravity radius u. the simplest type of probe to consider is the one originally
studied in [28], the stretched fundamental string, which is a bps state in the gauge theory
and has e = u as above. one then sees that the supergravity and gauge theory breakdowns
happen in a consistent fashion. here it was important that this result for the stretched

11

string mass is not corrected gravitationally. the gravitational warpage for a fundamental
string is computed from the da-brane metric in the string frame (3.3), and since the (bps)
stretched string points in a direction perpendicular () to the branes the warpage is unity:

 warpage = z g  g = z qh 1/2

a h +1/2

a = 1 .

(3.5)

at still higher values of , other descriptions of the physics are appropriate [28], such as
s-dual supergravity geometries. overall one nds dierent descriptions of the physics to be
valid at dierent 2s, and they are dual to one another. we will be concentrating on the
super yang-mills and ten-dimensional supergravity phases.

lastly, let us make a brief remark contrasting the near-horizon spacetime with the asymp-
totically at solution. if we compute the curvature in string units of the asymptotically at
a < 3 solutions, we nd that it starts from zero at x = 0, peaks at around the charge radius
at a value of order (gsna)2/(7p) which is small for large gsna, and falls o to zero again
at r  . for a > 3, a similar behavior occurs for the dilaton. this is to be contrasted
with the near-horizon spacetime for which the curvature and dilaton are monotonic [28]. for
a < 3, the curvature diverges near the branes while for a > 3 the dilaton diverges there.

a. the supergravity side

we now wish to dene a generalized ads/cft correspondence for intersecting d-branes
appropriate to the r-r supergravity solutions that we constructed in the last section. our
conventions dier from the last section only in that, for the moment, we take there to be
no w directions. one special case in which we will need to reintroduce w directions will be
discussed near the end of subsection b. so, our setup is

t
da 
db 

zi



zb x

za
 


there are d = (9 + i  a  b) of the x, a = (a  i) of the za, and b = (b  i) of the
zb. without loss of generality, we have chosen the da-branes to be smeared over the zb.
we work in the large-volume limit, va,b  , but we keep a nite charge density of the
a-branes, na/(vb/b
s)  0. now, if there are
no zb, then the intersection is parallel, otherwise it is orthogonal. in addition, we take any
smeared conguration to be irreducibly smeared in the sense that it cannot be reduced via
a t-duality symmetry transformation to an unsmeared conguration.

s). in contrast, the charge density nb/(va/a

let us now study our intersecting brane supergravity solutions from section ii in a
generalization of the low-energy limit of [28]. our concern is to nd the relevant region
of the supergravity geometry.
if the da-branes and db-branes are very far from each
other, then each has its own near-horizon region as if the other collection of branes did not
exist. the more interesting, and new, situation arises when the branes inuence each other
strongly, i.e. when the separation x0 is near-horizon in a sense which we now explain. in
this section, we keep the localization in the (d  1)-sphere explicit, and do not use spherical
shells.

12

an important subtlety in determining the low-energy limit for intersecting d-branes
concerns the kind of probe we will use to connect a gauge theory energy e with a super-
gravity radius u. as before, the most straightforward probes to consider are the stretched
strings.
in the intersecting brane geometry, with metric (2.1), and harmonic functions
ha(x), hb(x, za), the only bps stretched strings are the ones running in the transverse
(x) directions. strings stretched in directions other than x, for example tethering two
clumps of b branes separated in a za (k) direction, are not bps; a symptom of this is that
they experience large warpage

k warpage = z g  g = z d dq1/ha .

(3.6)

a(u) xed; if a < b we hold 2

if a  b we hold the a-brane coupling 2

because of this warpage, the non-transverse strings are attracted to the a branes. so we
will concentrate only on the transverse bps stretched strings in the following; the dynamics
for other types of probes is much more complicated and we will not discuss it. as a con-
sequence, when we take the low-energy limit, we perform the scaling of coordinates only in
the transverse directions: us = x/s  0.
b(u) xed.
eectively, this means we are taking the ads/cft limit just as for the larger brane. in
a sense, including the physics of the smaller brane is like a perturbation on this larger-
brane ads/cft correspondence, although we are not in any way treating the smaller brane
physics perturbatively. a simple example of this is the case of the d-instanton in the
d3-brane near-horizon geometry which we discussed in the introduction; however, for the
examples with larger branes such as d1kd5, the theory on the smaller branes is in fact
dynamical. in addition, the intersecting brane gauge theories will decouple from the bulk
as long as the branes are small enough; here this means that there are more than three
directions transverse to both branes. for the cases where there are only three, even though
the metric does not have the same form as for a d6-brane, we can compute the curvature
and hawking temperature and they turn out to behave as for sixbranes. therefore we
suspect that holography is breaking down, i.e. that making predictions about the classical
supergravity from the quantum brane eld theory may be problematic. we will remark on
these cases explicitly when we encounter them.

now, doing the ads/cft scaling in x and holding 2 of the larger brane xed gives the
the near-horizon geometry of the da-branes. that this is true no matter whether a  b
or a < b can be seen as follows. from

ha = 1 +

r7a
a
vb

1

|x|7ab

we nd

ha  hgsna(su)a3i
s)(su)4b =

(vb/b

na
(vb/b

s)nb

hgsnb(su)b3i

(su)4a

.

(3.7)

(3.8)

recall that there are several constraints of our setup, such as asymptotic atness of the
intersecting brane solution, the smearing of the da-branes over zb, and the fact that both
intersecting d-branes live in either type iia or iib string theory. as a result, it is always
true that b < 4 if a  b where we hold 2
b(u)

a(u) xed, or a < 4 if a < b where we hold 2

13

xed. thus we see that, as previously advertised, in either case only the near-horizon part
of ha remains. that this happens even for a < b is due to the smearing of the a-branes
over zb.

we now need to check whether the supergravity curvature and dilaton develop any
additional strong coupling regions due to the presence of the b branes. first of all, we
should not be tempted to just throw away the 1 in hb by analogy with what happened
to ha. recall that in the innite volume limit, we have hb = 1 at the location of the
da-branes for any value of x0, and that this provides a boundary condition which forces
hb  1 far from the db-branes as well. (we also discussed this phenomenon explicitly for
the a = 3, b = 1 example in the introduction.) we conclude that, far from the db-branes,
the geometry and dilaton are just as they were for the near-horizon da-branes in isolation.
thus, one expects that new strong coupling regions could arise only near the db-branes.
we examine this possibility now, though we need to treat the x0 = 0 and |x0| > 0 cases
separately. let us study x0 = 0 rst.
for x0 = 0 we go directly to the exact solution of the previous section. for all cases with
potentials stronger than 1/r, where we expect holography to hold, delocalization occurs, and
the solution depends only on the d overall transverse coordinates. for x0 = 0 the solution
is

hb = 1 +

r7b
b
va

1

r7ba = 1 +

gsnb
va/a

|x|!7ab
s   s

.

(3.9)

where va is the volume of the za directions, and we have used the identity a + b = a + b.
since we do not have a (va) volume innity of db-branes, we have just hb = 1, everywhere.
as a result, the curvature and dilaton behave exactly as they would for the isolated da-
branes. we can therefore simply use our da-brane intuition to tell us where the x0 = 0
intersecting brane supergravity solution is valid.

at generic separations x0, the supergravity solution is complicated, and is not known
in terms of elementary functions. we will instead use an approximation scheme to study the
curvature. as usual, we consider da-branes with worldvolume {t, zi, za} and db-branes
with {t, zi, zb}. the supergravity equation of motion for ha is

xi ha =
h2

qa
vb

(x)

i.e. the a-branes are all at x = 0. the near-horizon solution is

ha =

r7a
a

vb|x|7ab ,

(3.10)

(3.11)

(3.12)

where the b appears because of the smearing of the da-branes along the db-branes. (recall
that, in our low-energy limit, the 1 in ha has dropped out.)

we chose the origin of coordinates such that the db-branes are located at za = 0 and

at x = x0. the equation satised by hb is

h2
x + ha2

zai hb = qb(x, x0)(za) .

we will solve this equation in the region near the db-branes, in particular for x satisfying
|x  x0|  |x0|. over such a region, the function ha does not vary much, and we can
approximate it by a constant in the equation for hb. after a change of coordinates,

14

y = x  x0 ,

ya =

zaha

,

we see that an approximate solution to the hb equation of motion is given by

hb = f0 +

r7b
b

[(ya)2 + (y)2](7b)/2 ,

(3.13)

(3.14)

where f0 is a solution of the qb = 0 version of (3.12). in particular, f0 is smooth at the
location of the db-branes, so that the singular term will dominate in this region. for
convenience, we pretend that f0 = 1 in order to borrow results from the familiar db-brane
metric, but our conclusions will not depend on this choice.

now notice that the elds of the intersecting brane system do not depend on any of
{t, zi, zb}. we may therefore rescale these coordinates without aecting the supergravity
physics. dening

(t, yi, yb) =

(t, zi, zb)
ha

,

the metric becomes

ds2 = qha


1

qhb(ya, y) (cid:16)dt 2 + dy2

i + dy2

b(cid:17) +qhb(ya, y)(cid:16)dy2

a + dy2

(cid:17)
 .

(3.15)

(3.16)

with the metric near the db-branes in the above form, the scalar curvature r of the
intersecting brane solution is easy to compute. we have

2
sr 

1
ha

2
srb

(3.17)

where rb is the curvature of the db-brane metric by itself. at large gsnb, this curvature
is small everywhere, as we saw at the beginning of this section. the factor of 1/ha only
makes this conclusion stronger, by a factor q(gsna)/(x0/s)7ab  .

we also consider the dilaton. for the intersecting solution it is

e = gsh (3a)/4

a

h (3b)/4

b

.

(3.18)

for small b, this will become large near the db-branes. for a > 3, it will be damped
by a power of ha. however, due to the change of coordinates above from za to ya, hb
is large over a range of za that is larger than for the b-branes in isolation. for small b,
the supergravity solution also breaks down near the db-branes, over a range of za that is
signicantly stretched relative to what occurs for the b-branes by themselves. if we were
interested in the region where the dilaton were too large, we would switch to an s-dual
description.

however, the most important point for us follows from the observation of the previous
section that we have hb  1 far from the db-branes. in fact, when the separation |x0|
is small and if we do not have a volume (va) innity of db-branes, hb approaches 1
quite rapidly. now let us pick a point signicantly further out than the db-branes but

15

close enough that it would lie inside the region of validity of the near-horizon supergravity
solution for the da-branes alone. then in the combined system, hb is close to 1 at this
point, and the db-branes do not aect the validity of the supergravity solution. the
previous section then tells us that the delocalization is visible in this region, and also that,
by adjusting parameters, we can make the delocalization arbitrarily large without placing
the db-branes in the strong-curvature region of the near-a-brane geometry. we conclude
that delocalization is a reliable prediction in this intersecting brane spacetime, and so it
should have a dual description in terms of the gauge eld theory on the branes.

b. the eld theory side

on the eld theory side of our generalized correspondence we have the coupled eld
theory of the da- and db-branes. there are three sectors of open strings, the aa strings,
the bb strings, and the ab strings. the action for this system in the low-energy limit
at weak gauge couplings is well known; it is t-dual to that for the d0kd4 system and has
eight real supercharges.
since the dimensions of the low-energy eld theories for the aa, bb, and ab strings
are all dierent, we need to know how the couplings scale relatively in the low-energy limit
(es)  0. the gauge couplings on the a- and b-clumps are built out of the same string
theory parameters. let us study the expansion parameters 2 closely. for the a-clump we
have

and for the b-clump

a(e) = gsna(se)a3 ,
2

b(e) = gsnb(se)b3 .
2

(3.19)

(3.20)

now let us take the low-energy limit of a system of two clumps of branes, the da-
branes and the db-branes, as we did in the previous subsection. in general the expansion
parameters will develop a hierarchy for energies e of similar order:

2
a(e)
b(e) 
2

na
nb

(se)ab .

(3.21)

we see that a large hierarchy arises because we are taking the low-energy limit (se)  0.
now recall the condition that we keep 2(e) xed for the bigger brane; this would be 2
a(u)
for a  b or 2
b(u) for a < b. therefore we see that the coupling of the smaller brane
becomes much stronger than that of the larger one,

2
small(e)  2

big(e) .

(3.22)

this means that the physics on the bigger brane does not signicantly inuence the physics
on the smaller brane. this is similar in spirit to the ads/cft decoupling of the bulk
theory from the brane theory. so whenever we consider two intersecting branes, orthogonal
or parallel, we need only study the gauge theory on the smaller brane and on the intersection,
and we can ignore the physics on the bigger brane as it is essentially frozen out. the one

16

exception occurs, of course, when a = b, in which case the dynamics on both clumps of
branes is equally relevant.

now, for dp-branes with p < 3, we have from the formula for 2

p(e) that the perturbative
sym regime is the high-energy or ultraviolet regime [28]. so in a wilsonian sense the sym
description is the fundamental one. now, note that the dimension of the theory on the
intersection for our intersecting d-brane congurations has an upper bound of d = 2 + 1.
this happens because there are not enough dimensions of spacetime to have intersecting
branes (parallel or orthogonal) which are asymptotically at and which have an intersection
theory with d > 2 + 1. therefore, even at strong coupling, we may rely on conclusions that
follow from general properties of the eld theory on the smaller branes (with p  3) and on
the intersection, such as locality and dimensionality. on the other hand, the sym physics
on the d = p + 1 worldvolume of p > 3 branes is at best a low-energy eective eld theory,
and gets replaced in the uv by a more complicated theory which may not even be a local
quantum eld theory [28]. taking into account our previous nding that the gauge physics
is relevant only on the intersection or the smaller brane, or at worst on both clumps for the
a = b case, the only case where the fact that symp+1 is not the uv theory might bother
us is d4d4(2). in fact, since in this case we do not know the fully localized supergravity
solution but only an irreducibly smeared one, we are in eect dealing with 1/r potentials.
therefore, we suspect that holography may be breaking down for this particular case.

we see that the strongly quantum mechanical coupled da,db eld theory describes the
supergravity solution in the near-a-horizon regime. this concludes our discussion of the
regime of validity of the gauge theory and its relation to the supergravity regime of validity.
now we turn to the gauge theory considerations, with which we want to explain our previous
supergravity results on (de)localization.

in the supergravity section we saw (de)localization occur as we brought the b-branes in
to the a-branes from nite transverse separation to zero separation. we now want to see how
this happens from the eld theory perspective. since the type a and b branes are initially
separated, we are a priori on the separated branch of moduli space. for the d5kd1 (and t-
dual d4kd0) case this is usually called the coulomb branch, and the coincident branch the
higgs branch. now, if we were to integrate out the 1-5 strings to study the coulomb branch,
we would nd [31,32] that the coulomb and higgs branches of moduli space are separated
by an innite distance and decouple. however, these 1-5 strings become light in the limit
in which the separation between the a and b branes is removed, which is our situation of
interest. in particular, in our setup we have kept the mass of such strings xed relative to
our gauge theory energy scale. thus, the moduli space is simply not sucient to describe
physics in the region of interest. an analogy to our ramond-ramond case is the s-dual
situation of fundamental strings approaching n-s vebranes. there, the innite distance in
moduli space corresponds to the innite throat of the vebrane. however, we know that this
is no obstacle to a fundamental string reaching and crossing the vebrane horizon. again,
what one nds is that the moduli space approximation is simply not sucient to describe
this part of the dynamics. in the same way, there is no conict between our picture and the
results of [31,32]; a mixing between the coulomb and higgs branches is allowed in our setup

17

of the ads/cft limit for the intersecting branes when the separation is small6.

let us consider in more detail the case of d1-branes (b) and d5-branes (a), where
on the higgs branch the relevant moduli are the scale sizes and orientations of the gauge
instantons which represent the d1-branes in the d5-brane gauge theory. (there are also
position moduli but they will not be important in the following.) as we argued above, we
expect a mixing between the coulomb and higgs branches as the separation goes to zero.
we will use physics of the higgs branch to study delocalization, in an approximate sense,
keeping in mind that the small mass of the 1-5 strings modies the dynamics of the system
at large length scales and thus provides an ir cuto. now let us extract a length scale
for instanton size uctuations. the scale size and orientation for a single instanton form a
1+1 quantum eld theory with a moduli space metric which is at for n1 = 1, and with
a coecient 1/(l2
s is associated with the fact that 
has dimensions of a length. that the metric is not renormalized at strong coupling is a
consequence of the high degree of supersymmetry in this system (it is hyperkahler). for
large n5, there are roughly n5 possible orientations for the instanton in gauge space, so we
have

sgs) in front of the lagrangian. the l2

1 + . . . + 2

(3.23)

qh2i = qh2

n5i  lsqn5gsqlog (u v /ir),
where ir, u v are appropriate infrared and ultraviolet cutos. now, since we take all
energies low by comparison to the string scale as in (3.1), u v  l1
s .
in addition, as
above, the 1-5 strings have a mass u which provides an ir cuto. if there are nb separate
instantons, the moduli space metric, although uncorrected, is not at. what is important
for our estimate is the normalization, which is the same as in the nb = 1 case. in addition,
the instantons all uctuate independently, and so we may expect the above rough estimate
to carry over. to translate our estimate into the quantities used in the classical supergravity
discussion, recall that u = r0/l2
s and, since the a-brane is an unsmeared ve-brane, r5 =
lsn5gs. also, since we are holding 2
5(u) = gsn5(su)2 xed and r0 is small, up to
numbers of order one we may replace the ls coming from u v inside the logarithm with r5.
we then have

we see that this estimate matches the supergravity result.

qh2i  r5qln(r0/r5).

(3.24)

the story is similar for d0 branes approaching d4 branes.

in that case, we have a

0+1 quantum eld theory and the rms uctuations will be proportional to qu v /ir, but

r4 = (gsn4)1/3ls. we nd

qh2i  qgsn4lsqls/r0 = (gsn4)1/3lss (gsn4)1/3ls

r0

.

(3.25)

6our analysis also diers in that our b-branes are not probes; we take into account their eect
on the supergravity elds.
in addition, the eld theory description of our setup is neither the
conformal eld theory which appears in the extreme ir on the higgs branch nor the one on the
coulomb branch (these theories have dierent r-symmetries) [31].

18

again, this matches the classical supergravity delocalization rate. the case of d3-branes
and d-instantons is a bit degenerate, but one nds agreement with the classical supergravity

results by taking qh2i proportional to u v /ir.
we note that, for every case of intersecting ramond-ramond branes that falls within
our framework, we have a + b  4 and the potential ha diverges no faster than r3.
furthermore, an r3 potential is always associated with a 0+1 dimensional intersection
and an r2 potential is always associated with a 1+1 dimensional intersection. similarly,
cases where ha diverges only like r1 or weaker correspond to 2 + 1-dimensional or larger
intersections, and both the quantum size moduli uctuations in the brane gauge theory and
the classical supergravity delocalization are small. (if the zi were compactied on a very
large manifold, the above results hold in the innite-volume limit, and so by continuity
the (de)localization results are essentially unchanged at large but nite volume. we will,
however, avoid nite volumes so as to nesse additional phenomena that occur when the
sizes of the compactied manifolds get too small near the core in the supergravity geometry.)
therefore, we see agreement for both the parallel and orthogonal intersections.

in cases where b > 0 i.e. the type a branes are smeared, their eld theory is still a + 1
it is therefore reasonable to replace na in the
dimensional, not a + b + 1 dimensional.
argument above for the delocalization rate with the volume density nalb
s/vb, as one may
think of this case as having a large number, of order vb/lb
s, of separate intersections. thus,
an estimate of the instanton scale size uctuations can always be made that agrees with the
classical supergravity delocalization rate.

let us lastly consider the qualitatively dierent kinds of solutions we get by additionally
smearing the type a branes along the w direction. in the classical supergravity, we have
a localized solution if only three transverse dimensions are left unsmeared. this is hard to
explain from the eld theory perspective, as can be seen by considering a prototypical exam-
ple of the d0-clump with a d4-clump smeared along two of the ve transverse dimensions.
then the smeared d4-clump gives rise to a 1/r potential and the supergravity solution local-
izes, even though the intersection is 0 + 1 dimensional. now, recall that holography for the
d6-brane system is problematic. for the d4-brane smeared over two transverse directions,
we have a 1/r potential and so we suspect that holography is breaking down for this twice-
smeared d4-brane as well. in this sense, our success in getting the classical supergravity
answer for the d6kd2(2) and d4d4(2) systems from the quantum brane gauge theory is
surprising. on the other hand, it may simply be that smearing one brane and not the other
is not a straightforward operation from the eld theory perspective. note also that when
the d4-branes are smeared over only one transverse direction, instead of two, the quantum
theory on the branes and the classical supergravity agree that delocalization should occur,
but do not agree with regard to the rate at which this happens.

c. asymptotically flat orthogonal branes

we would like to add a few more comments on the cases involving orthogonal intersecting
branes, and how to use our earlier results to say something about asymptotically at, as
opposed to near-horizon, spacetimes. recall that the intersection eld theory description is
dual to the near-horizon supergravity description. as such, it does not directly say anything
about the asymptotically at solutions. however, the near-horizon and asymptotically at

19

supergravity solutions are controlled by the same equations of motion (2.3,2.4). the only
dierence is in the boundary conditions imposed on ha; the boundary conditions on hb are
identical for both cases. thus the two supergravity solutions must agree to high accuracy in
the region |x|  ra. thus, if the near-horizon geometry is delocalized, there must also be a
region (perhaps, only for |x|  ra) in which the asymptotically at geometry is delocalized
as well. we saw this explicitly for the solutions exhibited in section ii, in which the type a
branes were initially smeared over the zb directions. the same conclusion should hold in the
case without the initial smearing, for which the supergravity solutions are not yet known.
for initial progress toward constructing these solutions, see [20].

let us now consider as a prototype of orthogonal intersections the d2d2(0) system.
initially, for clarity, we refrain from smearing the a-branes over the b-brane world-volume.
in the quantum gauge eld theory, the instanton scale sizes become blowup modes of the
orthogonally intersecting d2-branes. to see this, write each pair of spatial worldvolume
coordinates as a complex coordinate z, then for the combined worldvolumes we get the
holomorphic curve zazb = . the smearing of  is innite because the eld theory on
the intersection is only 0 + 1 dimensional. this means that the corresponding near-horizon
geometry will also be smeared.

we now use the above argument about matching supergravity solutions and our knowl-
edge of the blowup modes in the near-horizon case to draw some conclusions about delocal-
ization in the asymptotically at case. this solution should be delocalized, but perhaps only
in some near-horizon region. a diagram giving our artistic impression of the asymptotically
at solution is included below. we can only conclude that delocalization must occur in the
interior of the shaded region, which is the region inside a blowup mode that has expanded
until it reaches the curve r = r2. this is consistent with our expectations that, far from
the intersection, the solution should reduce to the known physics of a lone d2-brane clump.
our delocalization has become a nite-sized neck of the supergravity solution.

a

b

r = r
2

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                

                


a

b

in the actual d2d2(0) case studied in the previous section, the d2d2(0) supergravity
solution has the a-branes initially smeared over zb. the eld theory on the intersection is
still 0 + 1 dimensional, and so we conclude that the b-branes delocalize over the full near-
a-horizon spacetime. in considering the implications for the asymptotically at solutions,
we recall that the near-a-horizon region has been enlarged by smearing over zb. the gure
below shows the result for three clumps of type a branes placed close enough to each other
that their charge radii (r2, indicated by dotted lines) overlap. the full near-horizon region

20

is the interior of the solid heavy line. thus, blowup modes near the center (thin solid line)
are now allowed to be much larger while remaining inside the near-horizon region. when
enough clumps are present to model a complete smearing of the type a branes, we may
expect the eld theory prediction to imply complete delocalization in the za directions of
the type b branes in the asymptotically at solution as well as the near-a-horizon solution.

we draw entirely analogous conclusions for the other orthogonally intersecting cases
which have d = 0 + 1 or d = 1 + 1 dimensional intersections, such as the d1d3(0). the
only case which can localize from the eld theory perspective has a d = 2 + 1 intersection,
and this is d4d4(2). but since this has only three totally transverse coordinates it exerts
a 1/r potential and its near-horizon supergravity solution is localized, so again we have
agreement of the near-horizon supergravity and eld theory. following our above argument,
there will be asymptotically at solutions in which both branes are localized, in addition to
the known solutions where the a branes are initially smeared over the zb directions.

iv. discussion

we have seen that many supergravity solutions containing two types of branes (a and
b) have the property that one of the branes (b) delocalizes when the transverse separation
between the branes is removed. this happens when the world volume directions of the type
b brane are contained in the world volume directions of the type a brane, or in directions
in which the type a brane has been smeared, and when the dimension of the intersection
manifold is suciently small.

in terms of the corresponding brane gauge theories, this phenomenon is associated with
the lack of a sharp transition between the separated and coincident branches in the limit
where the separation between the branes is very small. it is also associated with the fact
that the asymptotic values of massless elds do not label superselection sectors in 0+1 and
1+1 dimensions;
in particular,
the supergravity delocalization is related to large uctuations of some size moduli elds in
the coincident branch of the super yang-mills theory. as mentioned in [25], the classical
delocalization is closely related to the black hole no-hair theorems, recently reviewed in [40].

i.e., with the coleman-mermin-wagner theorem [29,30].

21

it is rather amusing to connect such a classic feature of black hole physics with quantum
uctuations in the super yang-mills theory. up to subtleties discussed in section iii, we
nd agreement both with respect to which cases should delocalize and with respect to the
rate at which this delocalization occurs as the transverse separation between the branes is
removed. it would be very interesting to understand in detail exactly why this rate agrees
so well.

we have also seen this delocalization to be in accord with expectations that there should
in fact exist orthogonal intersecting brane supergravity solutions with both branes (a and b)
localized in the directions along the other brane. in this case, our delocalization phenomenon
may become a nite neck of the supergravity solution of the sort that is seen [41] in the
born-infeld description of intersecting branes. thus, when the intersection manifold is 0+1
or 1+1 dimensional, we expect only solutions with necks of some minimum nite size while,
for higher dimensional cases we expect solutions with necks of all nite sizes (including zero).
there were, however, some cases that we were not able to analyze properly. in some of
these cases, the type a brane has been smeared so that it covers a 6+1 dimensional volume.
the corresponding spacetime then resembles, to a certain extent, that of a d6-brane and the
brane gauge theory may not properly decouple from the bulk. we were therefore unable to
rely on holography to draw conclusions about the classical supergravity from the quantum
gauge theory. nonetheless, we found agreement for the d2kd6 and d4d4(2) cases, and
we would like to understand why this happened.
as mentioned in [25], bps supergravity solutions for many three- (and higher)-charge
solutions can also be analyzed in this way. typically, when two of the charges are smeared,
we can discuss localization of the third just as was done for the type b branes above.
asymptotically at situations of this type that involve only ramond-ramond branes include
three sets of d2 branes, or three sets of d3 branes. in these cases, the branes are again
smeared over a 6+1-dimensional volume and we do not expect decoupling from the bulk.

other cases that could not be studied precisely include ns-ns objects. consider rst
the case of fundamental strings intersecting r-r branes. here, we are stymied by our lack
of understanding of fundamental strings in r-r backgrounds7. however, in the supergravity
regime, either the curvature in string units or the dilaton becomes large near the core
of the r-r branes. this suggests that the fundamental string will uctuate signicantly
near the supergravity r-r branes, and that this should give rise to delocalization of the
endpoint (necking) near the core of the r-r branes in analogy with our discussion of solutions
describing d-strings intersecting a d3-brane.

for the case of dp-branes intersecting ns5-branes, where the intersection has p 1 space
and one time dimension, we have little to say because we do not understand well enough
the theory on the ns5-branes or the related theory on the intersection manifold. it may
be described by some sector of the ns5 little string theory [45,46], but such a description
is likely to require much more than a eld theory. note that there are only 3 directions
transverse to both branes for any value of p, so that the supergravity solutions, with one
brane smeared over the other, will always be localized.

there remains however, the annoying case of d4kd0 with the d4-branes smeared over

7for recent progress in this direction, see [4244].

22

one w direction. here, our classical supergravity and quantum eld theory analyses predict
delocalization. but, despite the fact that the potential is r2 and we expect holography to
hold, the two descriptions disagree with regard to the rate at which this should happen. it
appears that smearing just the d4 branes is a more subtle operation in the quantum brane
gauge theory than the supergravity would have us believe.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank andr`es gombero, akikazu hashimoto, david kastor, andy
strominger, jennie traschen, and especially cliord johnson and nikita nekrassov, for
useful discussions.
in addition, we are extremely grateful to joe polchinski both for his
patience and his valuable insight, and for explanations of several matters integral to section
iiib. this work was supported in part by national science foundation grant no. phy94-
07194. d.m was supported in part by nsf grant no. phy97-22362 and funds from syracuse
university.

appendix a: a comparison with near-core solutions

one potential confusion concerns the near-core solutions of [37]. while they are valid
solutions to the supergravity equations, we now argue that, due to the subtleties of boundary
conditions, they are not the appropriate ones to consider in our context.

to discuss those solutions, it is necessary to recall some elements of their construction.
the dierential equations to be solved are just (2.3) and (2.4) in the regime ra  r, r0
under the assumption that no w directions (associated with smearing of the type a branes
in directions transverse to the type b branes) are present.
in [37], r0 was set to zero.
however, we will nd it useful to keep r0 nonzero and then study the limit in which it
vanishes. following [37], we take the za directions to be non-compact. we take the number
of za directions to be d. we would like to have spherical symmetry in both the x and za
directions so, as in section ii, we replace the fully localized type b brane with a spherical
(sd1  sd1) shell of source: qbr(d1)
(r, r0)(ra, ra0). thus, we have spherical
symmetry in both the za and x directions and the solution depends only on r and ra = |za|.
in the region ra  r, r0, [37] uses a trick rst introduced in [23] and nds that the
equation simplies under a change of coordinates (correcting a typographic error in [37]):

r(d1)
a



r  y =

a

2r(d2)/2
|4  d|

4d

r

2

 .

in terms of y , the equation to be solved (for ra  r, r0) may be written

y d/(4d)(cid:16)y (y d/(4d)y hb)(cid:17) + r1d

a

= y d/(4d)r1d

(cid:16)ra(rd1

a hb)(cid:17)
(y  y (r0))(ra, ra0).

a

(a1)

(a2)

this equation may be solved by realizing that it is the analytic continuation (to non-integer
dimensions) of laplaces equation on r( d
4d +
1)  so(d) symmetry is manifest. the closed form solutions of [37] may be obtained by

4d +1)  rd, in coordinates in which the so( d

23

d

a = r2

d4 +d sphere y 2 + r2

0 and taking the limit as
smearing out the source further over the s
r0  0. what is important to note is that, for d > 4, the coordinate transformation (a1)
means that r0  0 corresponds to taking r0 to innity. thus, the type b and a branes
are not in fact being placed at the same location in space. one may verify that, near the
type a branes, the solutions of [37] for d > 4 do not depend on the za coordinates, and so in
this sense are not localized solutions. the fact that, at a generic point in the spacetime, the
solutions of [37] do depend on za is a reection of the lack of an asymptotically at region in
the near-core spacetime: even though the type b branes have been taken to innity, part of
their eld can still be seen. for the case d = 4, the coordinate transformation (a1) breaks
down, but [37] constructs a logarithmic solution to which similar remarks apply.

we note that if one tries to use these methods to construct a localized solution (for d > 4)
by taking ra0, r0  0, one takes the source to innity in y where it will have little impact.
thus, this seems to reproduce the conclusion of section ii that the type b branes delocalize.
however, the analysis is complicated by the nontrivial mapping of surfaces in za, x space
into za, y space.

24

references

[1] j. polchinski, string theory, (cambridge, new york, 1998).
[2] r. khuri, phys. rev. d48 (1993) 2947.
[3] g. papadopoulos, p.k. townsend, phys. lett. b380 (1996) 273, hep-th/9603087.
[4] a.a. tseytlin, nucl.phys. b475 (1996) 149, hep-th/9604035.
[5] i.r. klebanov, a.a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 179, hep-th/9604166.
[6] k. behrndt, e. bergshoe, and b. janssen, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 3785, hep-

th/9604168.

[7] j. p. gauntlett, d. a. kastor, and j. traschen, nucl. phys. b478 (1996) 544, hep-

th/9604179.

[8] e. bergshoe, m. de roo, e. eyras, b. janssen, and j. p. van der schaar, nucl. phys.

b494 (1997) 119, hep-th/9612095.

[9] a.a. tseytlin, mod. phys. lett. a11 (1996) 689, hep-th/9601177.
[10] a.a. tseytlin, class. quant. grav. 14 (1997) 2085, hep-th/9702163.
[11] k. behrndt and m. cvetic, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 1188, hep-th/9702205.
[12] j.c. breckenridge, g. michaud, and r. c. myers, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 5172, hep-

th/9703041.

[13] e. bergshoe, m. de roo, e. eyras, b. janssen, j.p. van der schaar, class. quant.

grav. 14 (1997) 2757, hep-th/9704120.

[14] v. balasubramanian, f. larsen, and r. g. leigh, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 3509, hep-

th/9704143.

[15] g. michaud and r.c. myers, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3698, hep-th/9705079.
[16] j. d. edelstein, l. tataru, and r. tatar, jhep 9806 (1998) 003, hep-th/9801049.
[17] i. ya. arefeva, m. g. ivanov, o. a. rytchkov, and i. v. volovich, class. quant. grav.

15 (1998) 2923, hep-th/9802163.

[18] k.s. stelle, ictp lectures 1996&7, hep-th/9803116.
[19] h. yang, hep-th/9902128.
[20] a. fayyazuddin and d. j. smith, hep-th/9902210.
[21] a. loewy, hep-th/9903038.
[22] d. youm, hep-th/9710046, submitted to physics reports.
[23] n. itzhaki, a. tseytlin, and s. yankielowicz, phys. lett. b432 (1998) 298, hep-

th/9803103.

[24] a. hashimoto, hep-th/9812159.
[25] s. surya and d. marolf, phys. rev. d 58 (1998) 124013, hep-th/9805121.
[26] d.a. macdonald, r.h. price, w. suen and k.s. thorne, black holes: the membrane
paradigm, chapter 11, eds. k.s. thorne, r.h. price, and d. a. macdonald, (yale
university press, 1986).

[27] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.
[28] n. itzhaki, j. m. maldacena, j. sonnenschein, and s. yankielowicz, phys. rev. d58

(1998) 046004, hep-th/9802042.

[29] n.d. mermin and h. wagner, phys. rev. lett. 17 (1966) 1133.
[30] s. coleman, commun. math. phys. 31 (1973) 259.
[31] e. witten in strings 95, ed. by i. bars et al (world scientic, singapore, 1996), hep-

th/9507121; and jhep 9707 (1997) 003, hep-th/9707093.

25

[32] o. aharony, m. berkooz, s. kachru, n. seiberg, and e. silverstein, adv. theor. math.

phys. 1 (1998) 148, hep-th/9707079.

[33] o. pelc and r. siebelink, hep-th/9902045.
[34] c-s. chu, p-m. ho, and y-y wu, nucl.phys. b541 (1999) 179, hep-th/9806103.
[35] m. bianchi, m. green, s. kovacs, and g. rossi, jhep 9808 (1998) 013, hep-th/9807033.
[36] i. kogan and g. luzon, nucl. phys. b539 (1999) 121, hep-th/9806197.
[37] d. youm, hep-th/9902208.
[38] g.t. horowitz and d. marolf, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 3654, hep-th/9610171.
[39] a.w. peet and j. polchinski, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 065006, hep-th/9809022.
[40] j. bekenstein, 1996 sakharov conference talk, gr-qc/9605059.
[41] c. callan and j. maldacena, nucl.phys. b513 (1998) 198, hep-th/9708147; g. gibbons,

nucl.phys. b514 (1998) 603, hep-th/9709027.

[42] a. giveon, d.. kutasov, and n. seiberg, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 733, hep-

th/9806194.

[43] j. de boer, h. ooguri, h. robins, and j. tannenhauser, jhep 9812 (1998) 026, hep-

th/9812046.

[44] n. berkovits, c. vafa, and e. witten, hep-th/9902098.
[45] m. berkooz, m. rozali and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b408 (1997) 105, hep-th/9704089.
[46] n. seiberg, phys. lett. b408 (1997) 98, hep-th/9705221.

26

