9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
9
1

 
 

1
v
8
6
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

integrable theories in any dimension: a perspective1

orlando alvareza, l.a. ferreirab and j. sanchez guillenc

a department of physics

university of miami

p.o. box 248046

coral gables, fl 33124, usa

binstituto de fsica teorica - ift/unesp

rua pamplona 145

01405-900 sao paulo-sp, brazil

cdepartamento de fsica de partculas,

facultad de fsica

universidad de santiago

e-15706 santiago de compostela, spain

abstract

we review the developments of a recently proposed approach to study inte-
grable theories in any dimension. the basic idea consists in generalizing the zero
curvature representation for two-dimensional integrable models to space-times of
dimension d + 1 by the introduction of a d-form connection. the method has
been used to study several theories of physical interest, like self-dual yang-mills
theories, bogomolny equations, non-linear sigma models and skyrme-type mod-
els. the local version of the generalized zero curvature involves a lie algebra
and a representation of it, leading to a number of conservation laws equal to
the dimension of that representation. we discuss the conditions a given theory
has to satisfy in order for its associated zero curvature to admit an innite di-
mensional (reducible) representation. we also present the theory in the more
abstract setting of the space of loops, which gives a deeper understanding and a
more simple formulation of integrability in any dimension.

1invited talk at the meeting trends in theoretical physics ii at buenos aires, december 1998.

1 introduction

this paper addresses the long standing problem of the generalization of the zero cur-
vature in classical integrability, from two dimensions to theories dened on space-times
of any dimension. it consists of a review of the ideas proposed in [1] to implement that
generalization, and also of the subsequent developments.

integrability and, in a more general sense, construction of solutions and constants
of motion, are important issues, given the relevance of nonperturbative aspects of
eld theories in high energy physics , statistical mechanics, solid state physics and
gravity.

in 2d, an impressive understanding of integrable theories has been achieved, which
can be essentially encoded in the zero curvature formulation. in fact, the equations of
motion of such theories, including relativistic invariant ones, can be naturally expressed
in terms of a at connection as [  a,   a] = 0. the simplest (abelian) example
is that of a free scalar eld , with a = . the equations of motion of the
sine-gordon models and its generalizations, the so called ane toda systems, are also
expressed as zero curvature with a taking values in an ane algebra [2]. one of the
remarkable facts is that the algebraic structure involved in the zero curvature does
not describe, in general, any explicit symmetry of the original equations of motion.
in the case of theories presenting soliton solutions, a great unication is achieved in
the framework of ane algebras, where there exists algebraic equivalent methods, like
dressing of vacuum solutions or solitonic specialization giving the interesting solitonic
solutions in a systematic and simple way [3].

any power n of the t r(p exp(r l

the zero curvature formulation also provides a way of constructing conserved
charges. this is easily seen choosing a nite two dimensional space-time with periodic
boundary conditions on the time component of the connection. by stokes calculus,
l ax(x, t)dx))n is conserved in the time evolution (the
path ordering p is for the non-abelian general case). despite the great advances in
2d classical integrability, and also on some relations between integrability in parameter
space and solutions of supersymmetric gauge theories in 4d [4], very little was done
in generalizing this beautiful picture to any dimension in space time, and understand
directly those solutions in terms of generalized soliton dynamics, most interesting by
itself. but expressing relativistic invariant eld equations, known and possibly new
ones, in such geometrical way which yields their integrals of motion, cannot be simple
in higher dimensions. first of all, relativistic invariance requires higher rank tensors
and connections, in principle with complicated gauge transformations. besides, in 2d

1

the lorentz transformations are rather trivial x  1x and they can be imitated
by the grading operator in the algebra, just making the forward (backward) light-cone
to be positive (negative), incorporating also holomorphicity directly.

the main diculties in extending of the integrability concepts to higher dimen-
sions are associated to non-locality issues that rise when dealing with higher rank
connections. those problems can be circunvented by the introduction of auxiliary con-
nections that allow for parallel transport.
in addtion, once the invariant equations
have been formulated, to get their integrals of motion one needs a generalization of
stokes calculus, which is directly related to the rst problem of the transformation of
the generalized connections. in fact stokes formulae are problematic for the relevant
non-abelian case even in 2d [5]. therefore, the starting point of [1] was to obtain a
simple local expression for the non-abelian stokes theorem, as we review in section 2.

our approach to generalize the zero curvature is based on the observation that the
conservation laws can be expressed as the condition for the invariance of some quantity
under the deformation of hypersurfaces. we are in fact constructing higher dimensional
non-abelian gauss-type laws. the main dicult is related to the implementation of the
calculus of the variation of the hypersurfaces and the requirement that at the end one
wants local conservation laws. the key observation for implementing the calculus was
based on the formula satised by the wilson loop wc, calculated on a closed countour
c, i.e.

dwc
dt

= wct (f, 2, t)

(1.1)

where t parametrizes the variations of the countour that keep a given xed point x0
xed, and

t (f, 2, t)  z 2

0

dx
d

dx
dt

dw 1fw

,

and f is the curvature of the connection a dening the wilson line w , i.e.

(1.2)

(1.3)

dw
d

= a

dx
d

w

and the integral in t is along the curve parameter . eq.(1.1), which is easily obtained
from interaction picture method in [1], expresses loop independence when the connec-
tion is at and it is essentially non-local. this simple formulation gives the idea for
the zero curvature generalization to 3d: introduce a functional of the elds v dened
by its variation under deformations of the loops through the equation

where b is a general antisymmetric tensor functional and

dv
dt

= v t (b, 2, t)

t (b, 2, t)  z 2

0

dw 1bw

dx
d

dx
dt

,

2

(1.4)

(1.5)

one looks then for the conditions for v , now a surface integral, to be independent of
the surface scanned by the dierent loops. notice that the integrand in t (b, 2, t)
is a local function. the form of t will be essential to guarantee lorentz and gauge
invariant time evolution. generalizing directly the previous 2d interaction picture
computation varying now with respect to a new orthogonal parameter  , we obtain
a rather complicated expression, albeit with a transparent geometrical and physical
meaning. it is a generalized non-abelian gauss law and, as shown in detail in section
2.1, it corresponds to parallel transport in the space of loops. this geometrical theory
tell us how to proceed in any dimension and makes very natural the translation of
the surface independence to dierent local equations of motion and/or integrability
conditions, which are deduced directly in section 3. a natural condition is the atness
of the rst connection fa = 0, which guarantees independence of how the surface
is scanned by loops, and then a sucient condition for the vanishing of the non-local
curvature associated to v is the constant covariance of the tensor connection dab = 0.
this nesting of constant covariance and vanishing of the commutator of two d  f orms
and atness of the lower d  1, d  2... curvatures (or possibly some of them) is generic
and it is worked out in detail also for the 4d (see [1] for details).

the lorentz covariant and gauge invariant formalism is very general and one has
lots of algebraic and topological structures to explore which support those local for-
mulations and which will yield new formulations of known theories or new ones, with
a systematic method to get their integrals of motion and solutions. in 3d, the most
simple case is choosing b(0) on an abelian subalgebra. notice that b can then be
uniquely dened at any point x by parallel transport under a. the integrability con-
ditions in this case correspond to the bf theory, chern-simons and other topological
theories in 3d. that the construction works for these topological cases is reassuring and
one can dene now naturally new observables like invariants for link crossings or study
topological defects, but the importance of conserved quantities is, of course, with time
evolution. on the other hand very little is clearly understood about non-perturbative
solutions and classical integrability for the situation when there is full relativistic dy-
namics in dimension higher than 2. so we concentrated in [1] on the simplest genuine
2 + 1 theory, the o(3) nonlinear model, although most of the approach can be used
for a general sigma model as shown later in [6, 7]. in the four dimensional case, it was
shown in [1] how to express self-dual yang-mills and bps theory in such zero curvature
formulation of local integrability conditions for volume independence. we obtain also
a reduction of the equations which exhibit directly their conservation character.

one of the interesting aspects of [1] is that many theories presenting the local zero
curvature are not integrable in the sense of possessing an innite number of conservation

3

laws. however, some of those theories contain integrable submodels that do present an
innite number of conserved currents. we discuss in section 4 the conditions a given
theory has to satisfy to present an innity number of conserved local currents. the
main point is that its zero curvature representation has to involve innite dimensional
representations of a lie algebra, or equivalently as we explain, and innite dimensional
non-semisimple lie algebra of the poincare type.

2 geometrical approach to integrability

the zero curvature condition in two dimensional spacetime, know as the zakharov-
shabat equation [8] is given by

f  [ + a,  + a] = 0

 ,  = 0, 1

(2.1)

one of the consequences of it is that it leads to conservation laws. in order to see that,
consider a quantity w dened by paralell transport with a connection a,

dw
d

+ a

dx
d

w = 0

(2.2)

consider now a closed curve , and let  be a two dimensional surface having 
as its boundary. the nonabelian stokes theorem states that the quantity w can be
determined either by integrating (2.2) on  or on . more precisely one has

w () = p exp z

da

dx

d ! = p exp z

d dw 1fw

dx
d

dx

d !

(2.3)

where p and p mean path and surface ordering respectively (see [1] for details).

therefore, if the connection a is at, i.e. (2.1) holds true, then w is equal to
unity for closed loops. then, conserved quantities are constructed as follows. first we
consider the case where spacetime is a cylinder. at a xed time t0 consider a loop 0
beginning and ending at x0. at a later xed time t1 consider a loop 1 also beginning
and ending at x0. let 01 be a path connecting (t0, x0) with (t1, x0). the at connection
allows us to integrate the parallel transport equation (2.2) along two dierent paths
obtaining w (0) = w (01)1w (1)w (01). we rst observe that w (0) transforms
under a gauge transformation g(x) as w (0)  g(x0)w (0)g(x0)1. the conserved
quantity should be gauge invariant. if  is a character for the group g we have that
(w (0)) will be gauge invariant. also (w (0)) = (w (1)). thus we can construct
a conserved gauge invariant quantity

(w (0))

4

(2.4)

for every independent character of the group. these are the constants of motion in
the zero curvature construction. note that the data needed to compute (w (0)) is
all determined at time t0.

in the case where the spacetime is two dimensional minkowski space one has

to impose physically sensible boundary conditions at spatial innity. note that

p exp(cid:16)r 

 axdx(cid:17) is not gauge invariant if one allows nontrivial gauge transformations

at innity. in setting up the problem one has to choose the correct physical bound-
ary conditions which may for example require that a0 vanishes at innity. depending
on the details one can construct a conserved quantity by a slight modication of the
construction above.

the conserved quantities (2.4) are nonlocal because in general the connection a
lies in a nonabelian algebra. however, in cases like the ane toda models [2], it
is possible to get local conservation laws by gauge transforming a into an abelian
subalgebra.

the basic idea in [1] to bring such concepts to higher dimensions, is to introduce
quantities integrated over hypersurfaces and to nd the conditions for them to be
independent of deformations of the hypersurfaces which keep their boundaries xed.
such an approach will certainly lead to conservation laws in a manner very similar to the
two dimensional case. however, the main problem of that it is how to introduce non-
linear zero curvatures keeping things as local as possible. the way out is to introduce
auxiliary connections to allow for parallel transport. the number of possibilities of
implementing those ideas increase with the dimensionality of space-time. however, the
simplest scenario is that where, in a space-time of dimension d + 1, one introduces a
rank d antisymmetric tensor b12...d and a vector a. the idea can perhaps be best
stated using a formulation in loop space. on a d + 1 dimensional space-time m one
considers the space d1(m, x0) of d  1 dimensional closed hypersurfaces based at a
xed point x0  m. one then introduces on such higher loop space a 1-form a which
is basically the quantity w 1b12...dw integrated over the closed hypersurfaces (see
[1] for details). the quantity w is dened in terms of the vector a through (2.2).
however, for w to be independent of the way one integrates it from x0 to a given point
on the hypersurface, one has to assume that a is at, i.e.

f = [d, d] =  a   a + [a, a] = 0 ;

,  = 0, 1, 2 . . . d

(2.5)

with

d    +[a ,  ]

(2.6)

roughly speaking a d dimensional closed hypersurface in m, based at x0, corre-

5

sponds to a (one dimensional) loop in d1(m, x0). therefore, the condition to have
things independent of deformation of hypersurfaces translates in such higher loop
space to the zero curvature condition for a, namely

f = a + a  a = 0

(2.7)

the relation (2.7) (together with (2.5)) is the generalization of the zero curvature (2.1)
to higher dimensions proposed in [1].

the idea of constructing conserved quantities using (2.7) is the same as the two
dimensional case decribed above.
indeed, the condition (2.7) implies that the path
ordered exponential of a along a closed loop in the higher loop space d1(m, x0) is
independent of the loop. following arguments similar to those below (2.3), one sees
that the conserved quantities are path ordered exponentials of a along closed loop
at a given xed time. since loops in d1(m, x0) correspond to d-dimesnional closed
surfaces in the d + 1-dimensional spcaetime m, one gets that such quantities are indeed
integrated over the physical space. although the analogy with the two dimensional case
looks straitghforward, the implementation is quite involved due to the ordering of the
integration, the respect to gauge invariance and boundary conditions. we refer to [1]
for those very important explanations.

in order to make the formulas more explicit we give below the discussion of the

2 + 1 dimensional case.

2.1 the zero curvature in three dimensions

assume we have a principal bundle p  m with connection. for a xed point x0  m
let (m, x0) be the space of all loops based at x0:

(m, x0) = { : s1  m | (0) = x0} .

(2.8)

we now want to construct a principal g-bundle over (m, x0) with connection. note
that the structure group of the bundle is a nite dimensional group not a loop group.
it will be the trivial bundle p = (m, x0)  g. conceptually the bundle is constructed
as follows. over x0  m the bundle p  m has ber px0 which is isomorphic to g.
all loops in (m, x0) have x0  m as a starting point so we can consider them having
px0 in common. this is the common ber in the cartesian product (m, x0)  g.
mathematically we have a natural map  : (m, x0)  m given by () = x0. the
bundle p is just the pullback bundle p , see [9]. since p  (m, x0) is a trivial
bundle we can put the trivial connection on it. there is a more interesting connection

6

one can put on it which exploits the connection on the bundle p  m. consider a
lie algebra valued 2-form b on m such that under the transition function  we have
b  1b. let w () be the parallel transport operator from the point x(0) = x0 to
the point x() along the loop . we can assign the lie algebra valued 1-form

a[x()] = z 2

0

d w ()1b(x())w ()

dx
d

x()

(2.9)

the transformation laws of the above are determined by (x0) which is clearly associ-
ated with the common ber px0. thus we can dene a connection on p by

 = dgg1 + g z 2

0

d w ()1b(x())w ()

dx
d

x()! g1 .

thus we can treat a as the connection in a certain trivialization. the curvature is
given by f = a + a  a.

what do we mean when we say that we want to have parallel transport independent
of path in (m, x0)? look at the space (m, x0) and consider a curve  in (m, x0)
parametrized by  such that (0) is the constant curve x0. note that for xed  , ( )
is a curve x () for   [0, 2] in m. thus it is convenient to write  as x(,  ). the
statement that parallel transport be independent of the choice of curve   (m, x0)
with xed starting and ending points is the statement that the curvature vanish. if
one wants the parallel transport between points in (m, x0) to be independent of path
then parallel transport should be path independent in m. the reason for this is that a
loop in (m, x0) beginning at the trivial loop may be viewed as a map from the square
[0, 2]2 to m such that [0, 2]2 gets mapped to x0. to get the same result for two
dierent sets of constant  curves associated with the same closed 2-submanifold in
m, one needs ordinary parallel transport to be path independent, i.e. f = 0.

in order to perform the curvature computation we need the standard result:

w ()1w () = w ()1a(x())w ()x()

+ z 

0

d w ()1f(x())w ()

dx
d x() .

we also need denition (2.9). let  be the exterior derivative on the space (m, x0)
and thus 2 = 0 and

x()  x() = x ()  x() .

computing the curvature f = a + a  a is tedious and we refer to [1] for the

details. the result is

f = 

1

2 z 2

0

d w ()1 [db + db + db] (x())w ()

7



dx
d

x()  x()

 (x()), bw

0

0

 z 2
2 z 2

dz 
dz 2

d hf w
dhbw

+

1

0

0

(x()), bw

dx
d

d

(x())i dx
(x())i dx

d

x()  x()

dx
d

x()  x() .

the vanishing of f , i.e.
relation (2.7), is our generalization of the zero curvature
to higher dimensions. it implies hypersurface indepence and conservation laws as we
explained above.

3 local integrability conditions

the condition (2.7) that the loop space curvature should vanish is local in d1(m, x0),
but it is highly non-local in the spacetime m. we now discuss some sucient local
conditions for the vanishing of (2.10).

let g be a lie algebra and r be a representation of it. we introduce the non-

semisimple lie algebra gr as

[ta , tb] = f c

abtc

[ta , pi] = pjrji (ta)

[pi , pj] = 0

(3.1)

where ta constitute a basis of g and pi a basis for the abelian ideal p (representation
space). the fact that r is a matrix representation, i.e.

[r (ta) , r (tb)] = r ([ta , tb])

(3.2)

follows from the jacobi identities.

we take the connection a to be in g and the rank d antisymmetric tensor b12...d

to be in p , i.e.

a = aa

ta ,

b12...d = bi

12...dpi

(3.3)

then a set of sucient local conditions for the vanishing of the curvature f in (2.7)

is given by

where we have introduced the dual of b12...d as

d b = 0 ;

f = 0

b 

1
d!

12...d b12...d

8

(3.4)

(3.5)

indeed, in the 2 + 1 dimensional case the conditions (3.1) and (3.3) imply that

w 1bw  p

(3.6)

and therefore the commutator in the last term of (2.10) vanishes, since p is abelian.
the rst condition in (3.4) in the 2 + 1 dimensional case reads

db + db + db = 0

(3.7)

therefore, together with f = 0, it implies that the remaining terms of (2.10) vanish
too.

the relations (3.4) are the local integrability conditions which we introduce for
theories dened on a spacetime of any dimension, and which constitutes a generalization
of the zero curvature condition (2.1) in two dimensions. they lead to local conservation
laws. indeed, since the connection a is at it can be written as

and consequently (3.4) imply that the currents

a = w w 1

are conserved

j  w 1 b w

 j  = 0

(3.8)

(3.9)

(3.10)

the zero curvature conditions (3.4) are invariant under the gauge transformations

a  g a g1  g g1

b  g b g1

(3.11)

and

a  a

b  b + 1...dd12...d  b + d 

(3.12)

where we have introduced the dual   2...d2...d. in (3.11) g is an element of
the group obtained by exponentiating the lie algebra g. the transformations (3.12)
are symmetries of (3.4) as a consequence of the fact that the connection a is at, i.e.
[d , d] = 0. in addition, the parameters 1...d1 take values in the abelian ideal p .

the currents (3.9) are invariant under the transformations (3.11), but under (3.12)

they transform as

j  j + 1...d1 (cid:16)w 1 2...d w(cid:17) = j +  (cid:16)w 1  w(cid:17)

(3.13)

9

the transformations (3.11) and (3.12) do not commute and their algebra is iso-
morphic to the non-semisimple algebra gr introduced in (3.1). the nontrivial gauge
transformations allow in principle the dressing of vacuum solutions to obtain general
ones, as discussed in [1].

4 integrable submodels

the number of conserved currents one gets from (3.9) is equal to the dimension of
the representation of g, dened by the generators pi of gr. consequently, the notion
of integrability in such approach is related to innite dimensional representations, or
equivalently to innite dimensional non-semisimple lie algebras of the type (3.1). that
is similar to the two dimensional case where the appearence of innte number of charges
is also linked to innite dimensional lie algebras. however, those are in general of the
ane type, and it is now quite well understood the role they have in soliton theory
and exact methods of construction of solutions. in our approach, the role of algebraic
structures like (3.1) is not fully understood yet, but we believe it must have profound
consequences in the study of higher dimensional integrable theories.

one point that became clear recently is that of integrable submodels. it is known
that conditions like self-duality in yang-mills theories and the bogomolny equations in
gauge theories with symmetry spontaneously broken by a higgs in the adjoint repre-
sentation, play a crucial role in the construction of submodels which possess properties
of solvability not present in the full theory. those conditions lead to a saturation of a
bound on the euclidean action in the case of self-dual yang-mills and on the energy
in the case of bogomolny equations.

in our approach a similar thing happens, however involving quite dierent struc-
tures.
it does lead to conditions for integrable submodels, but apparently not to
saturation of bounds. in the examples studied so far what one gets is the following.
suppose that using the gauge symmetries (3.11) and (3.12) one can nd a gauge where
the connection a can be split as [6]

a = as

 + ak


where as/k



are the components of a in the decomposition

g = s + k

(4.1)

(4.2)

with k being a subalgebra of g, and s its complement in g. suppose in addition that

h as

 , bi = 0

10

(4.3)

then the rst zero curvature (3.4) becomes

 b +h ak , bi = (cid:16) b,i + a
kka, with ka being the generators of k, and r (ka)ij being the

k b,jr (ka)ij(cid:17) pi

(4.4)

a

where ak = a
a
matrix representation of k dened by the pis, i.e.

[ ka , pi ] = pjr (ka)ji

(4.5)

therefore, the zero curvature condition is only determined by the representation of
k dened by the subspace p . such a representation is in general reducible, and we
shall denote the branching as

l being irreducible representations of k. suppose now that a given represen-

with rk
tation r of g presents a branching rule

rk
l

r = xl

(4.6)

r = xl

rk

l + something

then we can introduce an operator

b

  b,i p 

i

(4.7)

(4.8)

where b,i are the same coecients as in the expansion of the original b in terms of
the basis pi of the representation r of g, i.e. b = b,i pi. in addition, p 
i are the
generators of gr associated to the representation r, corresponding to the subspace

l , and transforming exactly as the pis under the subalgebra k, i.e.

pl rk

(4.9)

(4.10)

h ka , p 

i i = p 

j r (ka)ji

therefore, one gets that

d b

 =  b

 +h a , b
i
k b,jr (ka)ij(cid:17) p 

a

i

= (cid:16) b,i + a
+ h as , b
i

notice that the rst term after the last equality in (4.10) corresponds to the zero
curvature for the theory under consideration, namely (4.4). consequently, if one im-
poses the constraint

h as , b

i = as

r

bi
h sr , p 

i i = 0

(4.11)

11

with sr being the generators of the subspace s, one gets a submodel with the conserved
currents given by (see (3.9))

  w 1 b
j 

 w

(4.12)

suppose now that there exists an innite number of representations, like r, sat-
isfying (4.7) such that the conditions (4.11) impose the same set of constraints on the
model. then the submodel dened by the equations (4.4) and the constraints (4.11)
possesses an innite number of local conserved currents. several examples fulllling
those requirements were constructed in [1, 7, 6, 10].

an important case where the above construction works is when the representation
of g dened by the pis, possesses at least one charge zero singlet of the subalgebra k,
i.e. there exists in the abelian subalgebra p a generator p, such that [6]

[ ka , p ] = 0

(4.13)

then one can easily construct representations satisfying (4.7) by considering tensor
products of the representation r, dened by the pis, with itself. the subsapces given
l . for instance,

by the tensor products of r with the singlet p, transform like pl rk

in the case of r  r one has that p  r (equivalently r  p) satises

[ 1  ka + ka  1 , p  pi ] = p  pj r (ka)ji

(4.14)

for the case of (r)n any representation of the form (p)l  r (p)nl1 is
equivalent to r (viewed as representations of the subalgebra k) . therefore, one
introduces the potentials

n1

(1)l  t (1)nl1

a(n)

b(n)

  a


xl=0
  b,i
xl=0

n1

cn,l (p)l  pi (p)nl1

(4.15)

where we have denoted a = a
 t, with t being the generators of g, and where cn,l
are constants. we introduce such constants because one can rescale the basis of each
irreducible component of the representations of k independently, without aecting
the equations (4.4). only the constraints, dening the submodel, are aected by the
constants cn,l.

notice that the curvature f (n)

vanishes as a
consquence of the fact that a is at. therefore, the rst condition in (3.4) leads in
this case, to the same equations as following equations as (4.4), i.e.

 associated to the connection a(n)


 b,i + a
a

k b,jr (ka)ij = 0

(4.16)

12

and the constraints

as,r


b

i "  n1
xm=0

(1)m  sr (1)nm1! ,  n1
xl=0

cn,l (p)l  pj (p)nl1!# = 0

(4.17)

therefore, since (4.16) are the same equations as (4.4) we have a submodel, and

the subclass of solutions is determined by the constraints (4.17).

the conserved currents obtained from the zero curvature are (see (3.9))

j (n)


 (cid:16)w 1(cid:17)n b(n)



(w )n

(4.18)

therefore, if we can choose the constants cn,l in such way that (4.17) imposes the
same set of constraints for any n, then one gets that the corresponding submodel
possesses an innity number of conserved currents.

5 applications and outlook

the rst applications of our zero curvature generalization have been to produce new
geometrical formulations of well known theories in higher dimensions. the most obvi-
ous way to have atness locally is by requiring each component of b to be covariantly
constant and to commute at the same point. this simplest possibility, which has not
been reviewd here, produces topological theories like chern-simons [11] . since these
theories are rather well understood in the quantum case, a possible application is to
compare to the classical solution. self dual yang-mills or bps are also easily incorpo-
rated and were also given in [1] as 4d examples.

the case which has been studied in more detail is when the local equation are based
on a non-semisimple lie algebra, which has produced many new results, specially ob-
taining reductions with innite number of conserved currents. first it was applied to
cp 1 in [1], and to the chiral (su(2)) model in [7], later generalized to grassmannian
models in [12] and then to homogeneous spaces in general in [6], including symmetric
spaces (compact and noncompact). in this last general formulation, new models and
many classes of the previous cases where treated with new results and insights.
in
particular, the reason behind the innity of conserved currents, discussed only heuris-
tically in [1], has been fully understood in [6] with the coset construction g/k in terms
of the branching of representations of g in those of k with some singlets states playing
a special and important role. this has been explained in detail here (see section 4)
directly in terms of the decomposition of the algebra of g in a subalgebra k and its
complement.

13

one of the most relevant aspects of our approach is the reduction to submodels
possessing innite number of conserved charges. although that may resemble the bps
condition, it apparently does not involve saturation of any bound. such methods
have also been applied to skyrme and skyrme-type models [10, 13]. the existence of
solutions for the constraints is highly non trivial, specially for the hedgehog for skyrme
[13]. indeed it is a non trivial fact that there are solutions to the constraints, like the
special one found in [10] with the rational map, and the meromorphic ones for adjusted
babyskyrme with an old trick due to smirnov and sobolev in [14].

although there is a possibility to implement dressing, as mentioned in [1], the
systematic method to construct solutions, which come naturally in 2d from the ane
algebraic structures, has still to be developed.

acknowledgments

jsg would like to thank the la plata colleagues for the perfect organization and all
the participants for the friendly and rewarding atmosphere. this work is partially sup-
ported by grants from from cnpq (brazil), nsf (phy-9507829), ec (tmrerbfm-
rxct960012) and dgicyt (pb 96-0960).

references

[1] orlando alvarez, luiz a. ferreira and j. sanchez guillen nucl. phys. b529 (1998)

689.

[2] d.i. olive, n. turok, nucl. phys. b220 (1983) 491, nucl. phys. b257 (1985) 277.

[3] l.a.ferreira, j.l.miramontes, j. sanchez guillen j. math. phys. 38 (1997) 882;

j.l.miramontes, hep-th/9809052.

[4] r.donagi, e.witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 97; j. edelstein and j.mas, these

proceedings, hep-th/9902161.

[5] ya. arefeva theor. mat. phys. 43 (1980) 353, n.e.bralic phys. rev. d22 (1980)

3090.

14

[6] l.a. ferreira and e. leite, integrable theories in any dimension and homogeneous

spaces, hep-th/9810067, to appear in nuclear physics b.

[7] d. gianzo, j.o. madsen and j. sanchez guillen, nucl. phys. b537 (1999) 586.

[8] v.e. zakharov and a.b. shabat, zh. exp. teor. fiz. 61 (1971) 118-134; english
transl. soviet phys. jetp 34 (1972) 62-69; p. lax, comm. pure appl. math. 21
(1968) 467-490.

[9] p.g.o. freund and r. nepomechie, nucl. phys. b199 (1982) 482.

[10] h.aratyn, l.a. ferreira and a. zimerman, toroidal solitons in 3 + 1 dimensional

integrable theories, hep-th/9902141.

[11] j.m.f. labastida, these proceedings.

[12] k. fuji, y. homma and t. suzuki,phys. lett. 438b (1998) 290

[13] j.o. madsen and j. sanchez guillen, in preparation.

[14] k. fuji, y. homma and t. suzuki, hep-th/9809149.

15

