hutp-99/a018

hep-th/9903226

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
5
2

 
 

1
v
6
2
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

conformal approach to particle phenomenology

paul h. frampton (1) and cumrun vafa (2)

(1) department of physics and astronomy

university of north carolina, chapel hill, nc 27599-3255

(2) jeerson laboratory of physics

harvard university, cambridge, ma 02138

we propose the existence of a non-supersymmetric conformal eld theory softly bro-

ken at the tev scale as a new mechanism for solving the hierarchy problem. we nd

the imposition of conformal invariance to be very restrictive with many predictive conse-

quences, including severe restrictions on the eld content, the number of families as well as

on the structure of inter-family yukawa couplings. a large class of potentially conformal

non-supersymmetric theories are considered and some general predictions are made about

the existence of a rich spectrum of color and weak multiplets in the tev range.

march 1999

1. introduction

one of the basic facts about particle physics is the existence of (at least) two very
dierent scales: the planck scale  1019gev and the weak scale  102gev . the existence

of these two very dierent scales and their stability under quantum correction is generally

called the hierarchy problem.

in fact there are two separate issues here: one is the

existence of two very dierent scales, and the other one is the stability of such dierent

scales under quantum corrections. as an example of the latter point generically the mass

of the scalars should be articially ne tuned to avoid getting the planck scale masses by

quantum corrections. one approach to solving both aspects of the hierarchy problem is

to postulate the existence of supersymmetry which remains unbroken all the way down

to near the weak scale. supersymmetry is responsible for cancellation of many quantum

corrections and this at least makes the hierarchy technically possible. the generation

of widely dierent scales can also be explained if one assumes non-perturbative eects

to be responsible. indirect evidence for supersymmetry is mounting. these include the

unication of the gauge coupling constants of electroweak and strong forces in the minimal

supersymmetric extension of the standard model (but their lack of unication with the

standard model particle content) and the successful prediction of the top quark mass.

more theoretic arguments for supersymmetry have also been advanced, for example by

appealing to its natural appearance in string theory.

despite all this, there are some puzzles even in the supersymmetric context including

the -problem (i.e. why the higgs mass is at the tev scale as opposed to the planck scale

in other words the rst aspect of hierarchy problem) and the issue of proton stability. more

fundamentally breaking supersymmetry would seem to lead to an unacceptably large value

for the cosmological constant. also the theoretic motivation for supersymmetry as being

fundamental for string theory is questionable. in fact one does have solutions of string

theories without any supersymmetry (see e.g.

[1] for non-supersymmetric solutions with

zero (or small) cosmological constant). even in the supersymmetric compactications

one will have to deal with strings in non-supersymmetric contexts (for example when one

considers thermal backgrounds). for these reasons, as well as because the issue is such a

fundamental one for physics, one should attempt alternative routes for solving the hierarchy

problem.

this paper is devoted to studying the possibility of replacing supersymmetry with

conformal invariance near the tev scale in an attempt to solve the hierarchy problem.

1

we will show that this idea is in principle possible and we present some toy models. we

will mainly address the issue of the stability of the existence of two scales, and do not

specically discuss the mechanisms of breaking conformal invariance which should give

rise to two very dierent scales.

we nd that the principle of conformal invariance is more rigid than supersymmetry

in that in many examples it predicts the number of generations as well as a rich structure

for yukawa couplings among the various families. this inter-family rigidity is a welcome

feature of the conformal approach to particle phenomenology. in fact it is challenging to

come up with a conformal model which satises all the known properties of the standard

model.

the organization of this paper is as follows: in the next section we motivate the basic

idea of considering conformal theories for particle phenomenology. in section 3 we review

a large class of non-supersymmetric quantum eld theories which are believed to lead to

conformal theories. in fact we present further arguments, using string dualities, supporting

the conjecture that the theories in question are conformal. in section 4 we consider some

aspects of model building using the quantum eld theories discussed in section 3. in section

5 we end with some concluding remarks.

2. conformal invariance as a solution to the hierarchy puzzle

the weak scale and the qcd scale, as well as the masses of observed quarks and

leptons are all so small compared to the planck scale, that it is reasonable to believe

that in some approximation they are exactly zero. if so, then the quantum eld theory

which would be describing the massless elds should be a conformal theory (as it has no

mass scales). this simple observation suggests that the gauge particles and the quarks and

leptons, together with some yet unseen degrees of freedom may combine to give a quantum

eld theory with non-trivial realization of conformal invariance. in such a scenario the fact

that there are no large mass corrections follows by the condition of conformal invariance.

in other words t hoofts naturalness condition is satised, namely in the absence of masses

there is an enhanced symmetry which is conformal invariance. we thus imagine the actual

theory to be given by an action

s = s0 + z d4x ioi

2

where s0 is the lagrangian for the conformal eld theory in question, and oi are certain
operators of dimension less than 4, breaking conformal invariance softly. the i represent

the mass parameters. their mass dimension is 4  i where i is the dimension of the

eld oi at the conformal point. note that the breaking should be soft, in order for the

idea of conformal invariance to be relevant for solving the hierarchy problem. this requires

that the operators oi have dimension less than 4.

let m denote the mass scale determined by the parameters i. this is the scale

at which the conformal invariance is broken. in other words, for energies e >> m the

couplings will not run while they start running for e < m . we will assume that m is

suciently near the tev scale in order to solve the hierarchy problem using conformal

invariance.

this is our basic setup. the main ingredient to ll is to supply examples for conformal

theories and see how close can we come to the standard model. in the next section we

review a large class of non-supersymmetric theories in 4 dimensions which have been argued

to be conformal at least to the leading order in the large n expansion. we extend these

arguments (making some plausible assumptions) to nite order in n . in section 4 we apply

them to model building.

3. examples of conformal theories in 4 dimensions

in this section we review the construction of a large class of quantum eld theories in

4 dimensions, one for each discrete subgroup of su (4) and each choice of integer n , moti-

vated from string theory considerations [2][3]. it has been proven that these theories have

vanishing beta function to leading order in n using t hoofts planar diagrams embedded

in string theory [4] or its translation to feynman diagrams [5]. below we argue for the

existence of at least one xed point even for nite n (under some technical assumptions).

the vanishing of the beta function at large n was also argued in [2] using ads/cft

correspondence.

we will now describe the prescription for constructing the above mentioned gauge

theories. we refer the reader to [2][3] for the motivation for the prescription. roughly

speaking what the prescription does is to start with an n = 4 gauge theory and get rid

of some elds in the theory and identify some of the other ones together in such a way

that the resulting theory is conformal. one ends up with theories with equal number

of bosons and fermions (if one includes the u (1) parts) but with bosons and fermions in

3

dierent representations of the gauge group. in particular one typically ends up with a non-

supersymmetric theory. the prescription is as follows: we start with   su (4) which

denotes a discrete subgroup of su (4) (the global symmetry for n = 4 supersymmetric

gauge theory). consider irreducible representations of . suppose there are k irreducible

representations ri, with dimensions di with i = 1, ..., k. the gauge theory we construct

has gauge symmetry

su (n d1)  su (n d2)  ...  su (n dk)

for an arbitrary choice of integer n . the fermions in the theory are given as follows.

consider the 4 dimensional representation of  induced from its embedding in su (4). it

may or may not be an irreducible representation of . we consider the tensor product of

4 with the representations ri:

4  ri = jnj

i rj

(3.1)

the chiral fermions are in bifundamental representations

(1, 1, .., ndi, 1, ..., ndj, 1, ..)

with multiplicity nj
obtain ni
view nj

i dened above. for i = j the above is understood in the sense that we
i neutral elds of su (n di). note that we can equivalently

i adjoint elds plus ni

i as the number of trivial representations in the tensor product

(4  ri  r

j )trivial = nj

i

(3.2)

the asymmetry between i and j is manifest in the above formula. thus in general we have

nj
i 6= ni

j

and so the theory in question is in general a chiral theory. however if  is a real subgroup

of su (4), i.e. if 4 = 4 as far as  representations are concerned, then we have by taking

the complex conjugate of (3.2):

nj
i = (4  ri  r

j )trivial = (4  ri  r

j )

trivial =

(4  r

i  rj)trivial = (4  r

i  rj)trivial = ni
j.

(3.3)

so the theory is chiral if and only if 4 is a complex representation of , i.e. if and only if
4 6= 4 as a representation of . if  were a real subgroup of su (4) then nj

i = ni
j.

4

if  is a complex subgroup, the theory is chiral, but it is free of gauge anomalies. to

see this note that the number of chiral fermions in the fundamnetal representation of each

group su (n di) plus n di times the number of chiral fermions in the adjoint representation

is given by

nj
i n dj = 4n di

xj

(3.4)

(where the number of adjoints is given by ni

i). similarly the number of anti-fundamentals

plus n di times the number of adjoints is given by

xj

jn dj = x n dj(4  rj  r
ni

i )trivial = x n dj(4  r

j  ri)trivial = 4n di

(3.5)

thus, comparing with (3.4) we see that the dierence of the number of chiral fermions

in the fundamental and the anti-fundamental representation is zero (note that the adjoint

representation is real and does not contribute to anomaly). thus each gauge group is

anomaly free.

in addition to fermions, we have bosons, also in the bi-fundamental represenations.

the number of bosons m j

i in the bi-fundamental representation of su (n di)  su (n dj) is

given by the number of rj representations in the tensor product of the representation 6 of

su (4) restricted to  with the ri representation. note that since 6 is a real representation

we have

m j

i = (6  ri  r

j )trivial = (6  r

i  rj)trivial = m i

j

in other words for each m j

i we have a complex scalar eld in the corresponding bi-

fundamental representation, where complex conjugation will take us from the elds labeled
by m j

i to m i
j .

the elds in the theory are natually summarized by a graph, called the quiver diagram

[6], where for each gauge group su (n di) there corresponds a node in the graph, for each
chiral fermion in the representation (n di, n dj), nj

i in total, corresponds a directed arrow

from the i-th node to the j-th node, and for each complex scalar in the bifundamental of
su (n di)  su (n dj), m j
i

in total, corresponds an undirected line between the i-th node

and the j-th node (see fig. 1).

5

3.1. interactions

the interactions of the gauge elds with the matter is xed by the gauge coupling

constants for each gauge group. the inverse coupling constant squared for the i-th group

combined with the theta angle for the i-th gauge group is

i = i +

i

4g2
i

=

di
||

where  =  + i

4g2 is an arbitrary complex parameter independent of the gauge group and

|| denotes the number of elements in .

there are two other kinds of interactions: yukawa interactions and quartic scalar

eld interactions. the yukawa interactions are in 1-1 correspondence with triangles in the

quiver diagram with two directed fermionic edges and one undirected scalar edge, with

compatible directions of the fermionic edges (see fig. 1):

sy ukawa =

1

4g2

xdirected triangles

dabctra

ij  b

jk c

ki

where a, b, c denote a degeneracy label of the corresponding elds. dabc are avor dependent

numbers determined by clebsch-gordan coecients as follows: a, b, c determine elements

u, v, w (the corresponding trivial representation) in 4rir

j , 6rj r

k and 4rk r
i .

then

dabc = u  v  w

where the product on the right-hand side corresponds to contracting the corresponding

representation indices for rms with r

ms as well as contracting the (4  6  4) according

to the unique su (4) trivial representation in this tensor product.

similarly the quartic scalar interactions are in 1-1 correspondence with the 4-sided

polygons in the quiver diagram, with each edge corresponding to an undirected line (see

fig. 1). we have

squartic =

1

4g2 x4gons

f abcda

ij b

jk c

kl d

li

where again the elds correspond to lines a, b, c, d which in turn determine an element
n. f abcd is obtained by contraction of
the correponding element as in the case for yukawa coupling and also using a [, ][, ]

in the tensor products of the form 6  rm  r

contraction in the 6  6  6  6 part of the product.

6

d

c

a

b

fig. 1

fig.1: a part of the quiver diagram. the edges with arrow represent fermionic

matter and the edges without arrows represent scalar matter. the yukawa coupling

in this diagram comes from the acb triangle and the quartic coupling comes from the

abcda square. the edges whose beginning and end are the same point correspond

to adjoint matter.

3.2. conformality

as mentioned before it has been shown that the above theories are confor-

mal to leading order in a 1/n expansion for arbitrary values of  . the question

is whether this can be pushed to go beyond the leading order in the 1/n expan-

sion. if  resides in an su (2) subgroup of su (4) then one obtains an n = 2

superconformal theory and the conformality is automatic for nite n as well,

by non-renormalization theorems of n = 2.

in fact it has been shown that

all the nite n = 2 theories with matter representations in the bi-fundamental

representation of the groups are captured by the above construction [7], and are

thus in 1-1 correspondence with discrete subgroups of su (2). in particular the

corresponding reduced quiver diagram corresponds, in this case, to the ane

a  d  e dynkin diagrams (for cyclic, dihedral and exceptional subgroups

of su (2) respectively) with each link of the dynkin diagram corresponding to

hypermultiplet matter, and the rank of each gauge group being proportional to

the corresponding dynkin numbers. in this case one can actually change the

coupling of each gauge group independently and still obtain a conformal the-

ory. if  resides in an su (3) subgroup, one obtains an n = 1 supersymmetric

theory. in this case one can use n = 1 non-renormalization theorems, along

the lines of [8] to prove for the existence of conformal theories to all orders. in

these cases there would be at least a one dimensional line of xed points.

7

if  resides in the full su (4) group, then we have a non-supersymmetric

theory, and it is natural to ask to what extent one can expect conformal theories

for nite values of n .

it has been conjectured in [3] that this continues to

be the case, at least for some choice of the coupling constants. here we will

give a plausibility argument for this conjecture. at the leading order in 1/n ,

as we have indicated above, all the coupling constants in the lagrangian are

determined by a single coupling constant  , and we thus eectively have only one

coupling constant. under the renormalization group ow it is not necessarily

true that all the couplings in the theory will still be determined by a single

coupling constant; however let us assume this continues to be correct. these

theories have an additional property that has not been mentioned so far, and
that is the   1/ strong-weak duality. this duality exchanges 4g2 
1/4g2 (at  = 0). this follows from their embedding in the type iib string

theory which enjoys the same symmetry. in fact this gauge theory denes a

particular type iib string theory background [2] and so this symmetry must be

true for the gauge theory as well. in the leading order in n the beta function

vanishes. let us assume at the next order there is a negative beta function,

i.e., that we have an asymptotically free theory. then the ow towards infrared

increases the value of the coupling constant. similarly, by the strong-weak

duality, the ow towards the infrared at large values of the coupling constant

must decrease the value of the coupling constant. therefore we conclude that

the beta function must have at least one zero for a nite value of g.

this argument is not rigorous for three reasons: one is that we ignored the

ow for the  angle. this can be remedied by using the fact that the moduli

space is the upper half-plane modulo sl(2, z) which gives rise to a sphere

topology and using the fact that any vector eld has a zero on the sphere (you

cannot comb your hair on a sphere). the second reason is that we assumed

asymptotic freedom at the rst non-vanishing order in the large n expansion.

this can in principle be checked by perturbative techniques and at least it is

not a far-fetched assumption. more serious, however, is the assumption that

there is eectively one coupling constant. it would be interesting to see if one

can relax or verify this assumption, which is valid at large n .

8

4. applications to particle phenomenology

in section 2 we have outlined the basic strategy of connecting conformal

theory to particle phenomenology and in section 3 we have given a large list

of quantum eld theories which are potentially conformal. in this section we

would like to indicate by general arguments and also through examples, how

particle phenomenology may arise from such a picture. even though there

presumably are many more conformal theories without supersymmetry, we will

mainly concentrate on the ones that we discussed in section 3. for an extension

of these models, see [9]. hopefully more examples will be known in the near

future, which one may apply to particle phenomenology.

as discussed in section 2 we assume that the lagrangian describing the

particles and their interaction is nearly conformal, i.e. it is a soft-breaking of a

conformal theory. in the examples provided in section 3 the soft breaking terms

would involve arbitrary additions to the lagrangain involving quadratic scalar

mass terms, fermionic mass terms and cubic scalar mass terms consistent with

gauge interactions. from the perspective of quiver diagrams this means con-

sidering 2-gons with two compatibly directed edges (corresponding to fermion

mass term) or 2-gons with two undirected edges, corresponding to scalar mass

terms, or triangles with three undirected edges, corresponding to cubic scalar

couplings:

s = s0 + z abtra

ij  b

ji + 2

cdtrc

ij d

ji + ef gtre

ij  f

jkg

ki + c.c.

(4.1)

depending on the sign of quadratic terms for the scalars in the above

action, the conformal breaking terms in (4.1) could induce gauge symmetry

breaking using the higgs mechanism. consider for example two gauge groups
su (n di)  su (n dj) and let us suppose that the above terms are such that
hij  i 6= 0. for the sake of example let us assume di = dj = d. then we can
represent the expectation value of ij  as a square matrix with diagonal entries.
depending on the eigenvalues of the matrix we get various patterns of gauge

symmetry breaking. for example if we have 2 equal non-vahnishing eigenvalues

and the rest zero we get the breaking pattern

su (n d)  su (n d)  su (2)diagonal  u (1)  su (n d  2)  su (n d  2).

if we have more scalars in the bifundamentals of the su (n d)  su (n d) we can

break the groups even further, by various alignments of the expectation values.

thus in general we can have a rich pattern of gauge symmetry breakings.

9

4.1. some general predictions

we would like to discuss how su (3)  su (2)  u (1) standard model can

be imbedded in the conformal theories under discussion.

in other words we

consider some embedding

su (3)  su (2)  u (1)  isu (n di)

in the set of conformal theories discussed in section 3. each gauge group of

the standard model may lie in a single su (n di) group or in some diagonal

subgroup of a number of su (n di) gauge groups in the conformal theory. the

rst fact to note, independently of the embeddings, is that the matter repre-

sentations we will get in this way are severly restricted. this is because in the

conformal theories we only have bi-fundamental elds (including adjoint elds),

and thus any embedding of the standard model in the conformal theories under

discussion will result in matter in bi-fundamentals (including adjoints), and no

other representation. for example we cannot have a matter eld tranforming

according to representation of the form (8, 2) of su (3)  su (2). that we can

have only fundamental elds or bi-fundamental elds is a strong restriction on

the matter content of the standard model which in fact is satised and we take

it as a check (or evidence!) for the conformal approach to phenomenology. the

rigidity of conformal theory in this regard can be compared to other approaches,

where typically we can have various kinds of representations.

another fact to note is that there are no u (1) factors in the conformal theo-

ries (having charged u (1) elds is in conict with conformality) and in particular

the existence of quantization of hypercharge is automatic in our setup, as the

u (1) has to be embedded in some product of su groups. this is the conformal

version of the analogous statement in the standard scenarios to unication, such

as su (5) gut.

the rigidity of conformal invariance goes much further. embedding the

standard model in the conformal theories predicts a rich spectrum of additional

unobserved particles charged under su (3) and su (2). these extra particles

should have mass in the tev range (the conformal breaking scale) in order for

conformal invariance to be relevant for the resolution of the hierarchy puzzle.

the lower bound on the number of extra particles arises if we assume each group

10

of the standard model is embedded in a single su (n di) group of the same size.

this is because the number of extra fermions transforming under fundamental

representation (plus n di times the number of adjoint elds) is given by 4n di

for each su (n di) and taking a diagonal subgroup of them will only give rise to

more matter elds. moreover the minimal extra matter will come by assuming

n di is equal to 3 and 2 for the su (3) and su (2) gauge groups respectively. to

obtain the lower bound on the number of extra color charged matter elds we

thus assume that one of the gauge groups in s0 is the su (3) color. then from
the constructions discussed in the previous section we see that the number of

the triplets n3 plus 3 times the number of adjoints n8 is bounded by

n3 + 3n8  4  3 = 12

subtracting the observed number of quarks n3 = 6 + n3 we see that

n3 + 3n8  6

in other words, if all the extra color charged fermions were in the fundamental

representations, we would be predicting at least 6 more quarks in the tev range.

of course the actual number of families will depend on the rest of the gauge

groups. for example if the breaking goes through an su (3)  su (3)  su (3)

gauge group, as in the trinication scenario [10] each family would contain 3

quarks (one of which must be much heavier than the other two to be phe-

nomenologically realistic) and in the case of the lower bound we would end up

with 4 families. similarly we predict the existence of extra colored scalars. if we

denote the number of complex triplet scalars by m3 and the number of adjoint
scalars by m8 we would predict

m3 + 3m8  6  3 = 18

going over the same exercise for the su (2) group we would predict the following

bound on the extra weak charged fermions and bosons in the tev range:

n2 + 4n3  4

m2 + 2m3  11

11

(where we subtracted 12 from n2 and 1 from m2 corresponding to the matter
content in the standard model). these bounds clearly demonstrate the rigidity

of the conformal approach to phenomenology.

as far as other rigidities that the conformal assumption introduces, we

should note that the structure of the yukawa and quartic couplings is untouched

by the soft-breaking terms and is determined completely in terms of the xed

point values at the conformal point given in s0. as we saw in the last section,
these yukawa terms have rich avor dependent structure which is dictated by

conformal invariance. this is in sharp contrast to standard phenomenology or

the mssm where the yukawa couplings are put in by hand. we thus see that

conformal symmetry is far more rigid than supersymmetry.

4.2. coupling unication

one of the successful ideas about guts is the prediction of the meeting

of the three gauge coupling constants of the standard model at a high energy
scale ( 1016gev ) which is a beautiful feature of the minimal supersymmet-
in the case at hand, however we are
ric extension of the standard model.

assuming the existence of a conformal theory in the tev scale. beyond the

conformal symmetry breaking scale the gauge group su (n di) is restored and
their couplings will not run. even though the gauge groups do not unify into

a single gauge group, recall from section 3 that the coupling constants of the

gauge groups are related to each other, which is also a feature of gut theories.

matching the coupling constant of the su (3)  su (2)  u (1) gauge theories

at the conformal breaking scale with the xed point values for the coupling

constants at the conformal point, we see that the coupling constants of the

su (3) and su (2) and u (1) will be strongly correlated, though not necessarily

equal. even if the gauge coupling constants of the su (n di) groups were all
equal (which is in general not true) we cannot deduce that the gauge couplings

of the su (3) su (2) u (1) gauge theories are equal at the conformal breaking

scale. in particular if su (3) embeds into a single su (n di) gauge group, and
su (2) in two such groups and u (1) in 6 such groups, we would have gotten

the ratios of the coupling constants 3/2/1  1/3/6 which would be close to
the observed ratios in the weak scale. we thus see that in the present scenario

the coupling constants are strongly correlated, yet they do not have to be equal

unlike the case in the standard guts.

12

4.3. some examples

in this section we will consider some illustrative examples.

in order to

specify an s0 in the class of lagrangian we considered in the previous section,
we need to start with a discrete subgroup   su (4). moreover if we wish

to have a chiral theory we should consider complex subgroups of su (4). the

simplest (though not necessarily the most interesting) subgroups are the cyclic

ones. let us look for a non-supersymmetric chiral model. the z2 subgroup,
consisting of 4(1) eigenvalues, is real and so is not a chiral theory. for the z3
subgroup we have two choices: one is three equal eigenvalues and one eigenvalue

1, which corresponds to an n = 1 supersymmetric chiral theory (for the rank

3 case we would get 3 families of the supersymmetric version of trinication

without any higgs multiplets). another choice of z3 consists of two pairs of
conjugate eigenvalues. this is a real representation and is not chiral. the next

case is z4 and the only complex representation without supersymmetry is the
embedding with four eigenvalues of i. this gives a gauge group su (n )4 for

some choice of n with fermion and bosons given by the quiver diagram below:

4

4

6

6

4

    fig. 2

4

fig.2: the quiver diagram for the z4 theory. fermions correspond to the edges

and the diagonals correspond to the scalars. the labels next to the lines denote the

degeneracy of each line.

the four gauge groups are identied with the vertices of the square. the

fermions are four copies of the edges of the square and the scalars are 6 complex

elds identied with the diagonals. the scalar content of this theory is too rigid

to give a breaking pattern which could lead to the standard model spectrum.

the simplest non-supersymmetric chiral model which contains the spectrum of

the standard model and can be broken to it is a z5 subgroup of su (4) where

13

we choose the four eigenvalues to be (, , , 2) where  = exp(2i/5). for
the gauge group we take su (3)5 and it is convenient to identify them with 5

points on the circle, labeled in order by 0 through 4 with the integers dened

mod 5. the theory at the conformal point has a z5 cyclic permutation of the

gauge groups (along with other symmetries which we will not consider here).

there are three chiral fermions in the bifundamental of (i, i + 1) gauge groups

and one bi-fundamental in the (i, i + 2) gauge groups where i runs over all the

gauge groups. there are in addition 3 complex scalars in the bifundamental of

the (i, i + 2) and 3 complex scalars in the bifundamental of (i, i + 3). see the

quiver diagarm below.

1

weak

3

1

3

3

0

color

hyper

2

3

weak

4

hyper

       fig. 3

fig.3: the quiver diagram for the z5 conformal theory.

in order to simplify the

diagram we have drawn only the edges emenating from the 0 node. the rest are

found by the cyclic symmetry of the theory under the cyclic permutation (01234).

the su (3) color is embeded in the gauge group at node 0, and the su (2) weak is

embedded in the diagonal subgroup of nodes 1 and 3, and the third gauge group in

the trinication (which we have rather loosely called hyper) comes from the diagonal

embedding in the gauge groups 2 and 4.

14

we identify the su (3) color group with the gauge group at node 0. we

assume that the conformal breaking deformation breaks the groups (1, 3) to

a diagonal su (3) (which contains the su (2) weak) and the groups (2, 4) to

a diagonal su (3). we end up with 3 families of fermions in the standard

trinication representation

(3, 3, 1) + (1, 3, 3) + (3, 1, 3)

and one family in the conjugate representation.

in addition we have one

fermionic elds in the adjoint of the second and third su (3)s as well as 3

copies of [(1, 3, 3) + c.c.] . in addition there are a number of scalars in various

bi-fundamental represenations. there are enough scalars to induce the breaking

of the trinication group to the standard su (3)  su (2)  u (1)), which require

only two bi-fundamental eld in the last two su (3)s which is available. the

point of this exercise was to show how the standard model may arise, and not

to overemphasize this particular model.

5. concluding remarks

it should be clear from the various examples presented how restrictive the

assumption of conformal invariance is for particle phenomenology. it is precisely

for this reason that it is potentially useful as an organizing principle for particle

physics.

here we have concentrated on a large class of conformal eld theories (which

have been conjectured to be the complete list [3] if one restricts attention to

theories with bi-fundamental matter). however there may well be other in-

teresting conformal theories for particle phenomenology and this issue should

be further investigated. even within the class of models considered, we would

need a complete classication of subgroups of su (4) and their representation

ringthis is mathematically within reach, but has not been done yet (for the

su (3) case this is already knownsee [11][12] ). some progress in this direction

has been made in [13].

a key issue to understand in connection with applying the ideas of the

present paper to particle physics is to identify natural mechanisms to softly

break conformal invariance. in particular one would like to get an explanation

15

of the generation of a small scale compared to the planck scale. it is tempting

to speculate that quantum gravity eects can play an interesting role here.

within the class of models introduced, we have found a lower bound on the

number of new charged elds in the tev scale. thus if conformal symmetry

is realized near the tev scale, we will be witnessing discovery of many new

particles in the accelerators in the near future.

we would also like to thank t. banks, h. georgi, s. glashow, z.

kakushadze and e. witten for valuable discussions.

the research of p.f. was supported in part by doe grant de-fg02-

97er41036. the research of c.v. was supported in part by nsf grant phy-

92-18167.

16

references

[1] s. kachru, j. kumar and e. silverstein, vacuum energy cancellation in

a non-supersymmetric string, hep-th/9810129.

[2] s. kachru and e. silverstein, phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 4855, hep-

th/9802183.

[3] a. lawrence, n. nekrasov and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 199,

hep-th/9803015.

[4] m. bershadsky, z. kakushadze and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b523 (1998) 59,

hep-th/9803076.

[5] m. bershadsky and a. johansen, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 141, hep-

th/9803249.

[6] m.r. douglas and g. moore, quivers and ale instantons, hep-th/9603167.
[7] s. katz, p. mayr and c. vafa, adv. theor. math. phys. 1 (1998) 53, hep-

th/9706110.

[8] r.g. leigh and m.j. strassler, nucl. phys. b447 (1995) 95, hep-th/9503121.
[9] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b544 (1999) 265, hep-th/9808048;

phys. rev. d59 (1999) 045007, hep-th/9806091.

[10] a.de rujula, h. georgi and s.l. glashow, trinication of all elementary
particle forces, presented by s.l. glashow at the fifth woskshop on grand
unication, brown university, 1984.

[11] w.m. fairbanks, t. fulton and w.h. klink, j. math. phys. 5 (1964) 1038.
[12] a. hanany and y.-h. he,non-abelian finite gauge theories, hep-

th/9811183.

[13] w. plesken and m. pohst, math. comp. 31 (1977) 552.

17

