hep-th/9903019
scipp-99/03; ru-98-53; uw/pt-99-05

constraints on theories with large extra

dimensions

tom banksa, michael dineb, and ann e. nelsonc

aphysics department, rutgers university, piscataway, nj 08855-0849

bsanta cruz institute for particle physics, santa cruz ca 95064

cphysics department, university of washington, seattle, wa 98195-1550

abstract

recently, a number of authors have challenged the conventional assumption that the
string scale, planck mass, and unication scale are roughly comparable. it has been sug-
gested that the string scale could be as low as a tev. in this note, we explore constraints on
these scenarios. we argue that the most plausible cases have a fundamental scale of at least
10 tev and ve dimensions of inverse size 10 mev. we show that a radial dilaton mass in
the range of proposed millimeter scale gravitational arises naturally in these scenarios. most
other scenarios require huge values of ux and may not be realizable in m theory. existing
precision experiments put a conservative lower bound of 6  10 tev on the fundamental
energy scale. we note that large dimensions with bulk supersymmetry might be a natural
framework for quintessence, and make some other tentative remarks about cosmology.

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

m
5

 

 
 

3
v
9
1
0
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

introduction

it has been traditional, in string theory, to assume that the compactication scale and the string

scale are both large, comparable to the planck scale. this stemmed from the belief that sensible

string phenomenology could only emerge from the heterotic string. in weakly coupled heterotic

string theory, the coincidence of these scales is inevitable, since the observed four dimensional

gauge couplings are inversely proportional to the volume of the compact space, vd. with the
recent discovery that all string theories are dierent limits of a larger theory, called m theory,

these assumptions have been called into question.

indeed, they do not even hold in weakly

coupled type i theory. witten argued that the phenomenon of coupling constant unication

suggests that the proper description of nature might be as a strongly coupled heterotic string,

in which the fundamental planck scale was of order the unication scale, with the eleventh

dimension about 40 times larger [1]. more generally, it has been realized that in m theory,

nonabelian gauge elds arise on lower dimensional submanifolds of the internal space, which

have been named branes. it is thus quite natural to have an internal manifold somewhat larger

than the fundamental scale, which would then give a large eective four dimensional planck

mass, without aecting the gauge couplings.

ref.

[2] pointed out a diculty with this sort of picture. in a theory where at least ve

dimensions are large, it is dicult to understand the stabilization of the radii. if the underlying

theory is supersymmetric, the bulk supersymmetry, which is at least that of a ve dimensional

theory, requires that the potential vanish for large radii. this means that the radii must be

stabilized at values of order the fundamental scale. this is similar to the argument that the

gauge coupling must be of order one.

in the case of the gauge coupling, the problem is to

explain why the coupling is 1/25 instead of one, and why a weak coupling expansion should

hold in the low energy theory. for the case of the scales of a supersymmetric theory, one must

understand why there are ratios of scales of order 40 rather than 1, and why a large radius

m -theory type picture is valid. a possible explanation why numbers normally of order one
might be 10 100 was described in [3] and [2]. note also, that in wittens picture there is only
one large dimension, whereas in general there might be as many as seven. this would further

reduce the size of the internal manifold necessary to the explanation of the discrepancy between

the unication and planck scales.

while explaining numbers of order 10100 may be troubling, the only enormous hierarchies
in these pictures which require explanation are the ratio of mw over mp, and the smallness of

2

the cosmological constant. the rst problem is traditionally explained through exponentially

small low energy eld theory eects, and the latter problem is a feature of any description of
the world in terms of low energy eective eld theory 1.

by contrast, the radii, in units of the fundamental planck scale or string tension, are at most

numbers of order a few (perhaps 70 in the witten proposal, and smaller in generalizations of it

with more dimensions a bit bigger than the gut scale), and the basic couplings are numbers

of order one. the coincidence of the radial size with the gut scale allows us to understand

the evidence for coupling unication and neutrino masses as probes of the fundamental scale

of the theory, while the planck scale arises from the product of a large number of numbers of
order one, and has no fundamental signicance2. the high fundamental scale also makes it

easier to suppress violations of baryon number, lepton number and avor, though in a theory

with standard model superpartners around the tev scale, one also needs discrete symmetries

to ensure that these approximate conservation laws are preserved with the requisite accuracy.

more recently, a number of authors have considered the possibility that the compactication

(energy) scale is far lower, with the fundamental scale of string theory being as low as a

tev[6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. they argue, rst, that this might be desirable. scalar masses would then

naturally be of order 1 tev or so, eliminating the conventional ne tuning problem associated

with the higgs boson. proton decay could be forbidden by discrete symmetries, much as in the

more conventional supersymmetric case, though more intricate symmetries may be required

(bulk gauge symmetries were suggested in [11]). flavor problems can be suppressed if one

supposes that there are suciently elaborate non-abelian avor symmetries. more serious issues

are posed by the production of the light kaluza-klein (kk) states. but these authors show

that provided the compactication radius is smaller than a millimeter, then production of these

particles is not a serious problem[12]. accelerator experiments set limits in the tev range[13],

while astrophysics in some cases sets stronger limits[12]. in particular, in the scenario with two

large dimensions, where kk states might be observable in sensitive gravitational experiments,

the bounds on the higher dimensional planck scale are pushed up to 30 tev.

the possibility that we might observe violations of newtons law of gravity in sensitive

tabletop experiments, or probe extra dimensions in accelerators is extremely exciting. the fact

that such a possibility is not a priori ridiculous is very interesting. but it is natural to ask: how

1as it is conventionally understood. see however [4, 5].
2we note also that the simplest way to understand the magnitude of density uctuations as measured by
cobe, invokes an inationary potential of the form m 4
gu t v(/mp ). this suggests again that mgu t is the
fundamental scale and that the inaton is a bulk modulus in a brane scenario with susy broken only on branes.

3

plausible is it that the extra dimensions be so large?

in this note, we will address this question from several points of view. we should stress

from the start that we will not be able to demonstrate that a low string scale and large compact

dimensions are impossible. we will concentrate on scenarios in which the fundamental scale

is within the reach of planned accelerator experiments. some of our remarks and techniques

may be applicable to the analysis of other parts of the wide spectrum of choices which have

been explored for the sizes of extra dimensions [14] but we will not discuss these more general

scenarios. our discussion of laboratory constraints is denitely not relevant to most of these

more general scenarios.

our discussion will focus on three issues:

 the problem of xing the moduli: this problem takes on dierent forms according to the
manner in which susy is broken. there are two ways to break susy consistent with

observation. it can be broken (at or near the fundamental tev scale) on the brane where

the standard model lives, but unbroken in the bulk. or it can be broken everywhere at the

fundamental scale. in the second case, there is an essentially unique way to stabilize the

radial dilaton, which is to balance the energy of a large ux against the bulk cosmological

constant, as proposed by arkani-hamed, dimopoulos and march-russell[15], following

earlier suggestions by sundrum[16]. (other discussions of stabilization appear in [17].)
we show that in this case, the requisite uxes are huge, always larger than 105. when

susy is (approximately) preserved in the bulk, the mechanisms of stabilization are more

intricate. in many cases the radial dilaton mass is extremely small, and it is likely to lead

to observational problems. however, there is a scenario with 5 relatively large dimensions

and a fundamental scale of order 10 tev, where the ux needed to stabilize the radius is
of order one.3 in this case the radial dilaton is within range of proposed improvements of

the cavendish experiment.

we emphasize however that in most of these models, the hierarchy problem is solved

in the low energy eective theory by introducing a large integer valued conserved ux

on a compact manifold. there is no guarantee that m theory allows such large uxes,

and there are no known supersymmetric vacua with at noncompact dimensions which

support such large values of the ux.

finally, we note that if we do not stabilize the radial dilaton in the susy case, we

3we must also invoke a plausible weak coupling factor and a scale of susy breaking of order 1 tev on the

brane.

4

might be led to an interesting model of quintessence[18, 19, 20, 21, 22] this possibility is

potentially exciting for several reasons. first, it might provide a natural understanding

of the large value of the radius. in addition, the scale of supersymmetry breaking and of

the vacuum energy are not so closely tied as in more conventional pictures. as we will

explain, quintessence based on bulk moduli elds in a brane world does not have a problem

with the time variation of the ne structure constant. unfortunately, bounds on the time

variation of newtons constant require that the radial dilaton did not change drastically

during post bbn cosmological history (so that a cosmological explanation for the large

size of the extra dimensions must involve cosmology before this time). in addition, the

radial dilaton is extremely light, and generically possesses brans-dicke couplings of order

one, which will cause problems for astronomy.

 problems of avor: here we include not just avor, but also the eects of higher dimension
avor-conserving operators. these suggest lower limits of order 6 tev on the scale of the

theory. as explained in ref.

[11, 23], one can hypothesize mechanisms for fermion mass

generation which lead to suitable textures, and these mechanisms can suppress many

dangerous avor-changing processes. there are two diculties, however, one theoretical

and one phenomenological. the avor proposals of [11, 23] require that avor symmetries

be broken on other, faraway branes from the one on which the standard model elds

live. but, as we will explain, given the lack of supersymmetry one expects that there

is a potential between the branes, and they are not likely to be widely separated. this

aw, as we will see, is hardly fatal, but it is still one more coincidence required for the

whole picture to make sense. second, these mechanisms do not account by themselves

for the smallness of cp violation. without supposing additional structure or very weak

couplings, one obtains a limit of at least 10 tev. these scales are already troubling from

the point of view of scalar masses. one needs to explain why the higgs mass-squared is

100 to 1000 times smaller than its expected value. this criticism is certainly not decisive,

and it also applies to many supersymmetric models.

 cosmology. here our statements will be quite tentative. we know little about the cos-
mology of such high dimension theories. still, there are several puzzles. most of these

are connected with the question of how the theory nds its way into the correct vac-

uum. essentially all of them lead back to an inationary era[24, 26, 25].

inationary

cosmology in a brane world scenario has not been suciently explored to warrant denite

conclusions. we will simply exhibit the formidable problems to be solved and make a

few remarks about attempts to solve them. in particular, in arguing that scenarios with

5

millimeter extra dimensions were compatible with big bang nucleosynthesis, the authors

of [12] assume initial conditions in which the brane is excited to about 1 mev, while bulk

modes of much lower energy are in their ground state. we suggest that it may be very

dicult to nd plausible conditions at higher energy which leave the system in this rather

bizarre state. in particular, although dvali and tye [27] have proposed an explicit model

in which a eld on the brane dominates the energy density at some point in time, the

reheat temperature they obtain is too high, and the bulk will become overexcited in this

model. we suspect that this is a quite general feature. in addition we point out that

models with only two large dimensions have much stronger couplings between brane and

bulk, since homogeneous excitations on the brane give rise to elds which do not fall o

in the bulk. our conclusion is that models with a kk threshold somewhat above an mev

are much more likely to be viable.

2 fixing the moduli

it is natural to divide this discussion into two parts, according to the manner in which susy

is broken. note that supersymmetry is almost certainly broken on the brane at a scale com-

parable to a tev. a much lower scale for susy breaking would bring us into conict with

direct searches. this however still leaves us the option of preserving susy in the bulk. the

stabilization problem has a rather dierent character in this case. we begin with the case where

susy is completely broken in the bulk as well as on the brane.

our treatment of the non-supersymmetric case diers from that of [15] in the way in which

we treat curvature and the cancellation of the eective cosmological constant. the latter is the

cosmological constant in the eective theory below the kk energy scale and is the parameter

actually measured by observation.

it is the sum of a bulk term, a boundary term and a

radiative correction term.

in [15] it was assumed that the bulk cosmological constant was

tuned to cancel the boundary cosmological constant. for large radius this implies that the
dimensionless coecient of the bulk term is extremely small, of order (rm )n, where n is the
number of large compact dimensions. the boundary cosmological constant is of order m 4, with
m  1 tev in the most ambitious models. in this case it is consistent to neglect the curvature
terms in the eective action because the curvatures obtained by solving the einstein equations

in the presence of the bulk cosmological constant are smaller than or equal to the cosmological

term itself. the resulting bulk geometry is approximately at and the kk modes have masses

of order 1/r. the compton wavelength of the radial dilaton is of order a mm. independent of

6

the number of spatial dimensions. this follows from the fact that the dilaton is a bulk modulus
and the overall scale of its potential is set by the boundary cosmological term.4

we believe that a more plausible mechanism for ne tuning the eective cosmological

constant is obtained by allowing the curvature terms in the eective action to have the order of

magnitude suggested by dimensional analysis. then one can ne tune the cosmological constant

by canceling the bulk cosmological term against the leading curvature term. the coecient of
the bulk term now only needs to be a factor of (rm )2 smaller than its naive expectation, in

any number of dimensions. of course, since we are talking about a single ne tuning in either

case, the reader may feel that our choice is purely a matter of taste. we do not have strong

arguments against this position, but will nonetheless present our results with the curvature

terms in place.

we argue that the only plausible mechanism for stabilizing a large radius is to balance a

large ux against the bulk cosmological constant, and curvature terms, as suggested in [15].

in this case the internal manifold will not be ricci at. thus we nd that the only case with

cavendish signals is that with two dimensions of millimeter scale. this scenario requires a

huge ux, which although technically natural, does not seem to be a likely vacuum state for m

theory. we also nd that the natural scale for the bulk vacuum energy, and thus for the ux

which stabilizes the radius, is much larger than that found in [15] in all dimensions above two.

our treatment of the supersymmetric case is quite dierent from that of [15]. in particular,

it is not correct that susy breaking in the brane induces a small bulk cosmological constant.

the potential always falls to zero at innite r in the susy case. we nd an acceptable value

for the dilaton mass only for rather large n. by raising the fundamental scale, and invoking

susy broken at the tev scale on the brane, we nd a scenario with only modest values of

the uxes, and a radial dilaton within reach of gravitational experiments. this model has ve

dimensions, whose inverse size is of order 10 mev.

2.1 non-supersymmetric bulk

we will concentrate on a particular modulus, called the radial dilaton, r, that parameterizes

the overall scale of the internal geometry.

in order to study the regime of very large radial

dilaton r we can use the techniques of low energy eective eld theory. the leading term in
the large r expansion of the eective potential for r is the bulk cosmological constant: n+4rn,

4this conclusion follows from equation (2.26) of [15] but was not emphasized in that paper.

7

where n is the number of large compact dimensions. from dimensional analysis, we expect that
n+4 = am n+4, with a a constant of order unity 5.

higher order terms in the expansion of the eective potential for large r can come from

three sources. as noted in [15], if the internal space has non-zero ricci curvature, one gets a
term behaving as m n+2rn2. higher orders in the curvature and its covariant derivatives can
also be important if n is large enough. the next to leading term is of order m nrn4, and

comes from terms quadratic in curvature. even if the curvature vanishes, as on a torus, there
is a casimir energy of the massless modes. it is of the form c/r4, with a coecient c which is

of order one and may be positive or negative. other terms, which scale as various powers of

r, can occur if the low energy eective eld theory contains antisymmetric tensor gauge elds.

from a ux q of a eld with rank p eld strength tensor, threading a p-cycle of the internal
manifold, we get an energy  e2q2m 4(m r)n2p. here e is a dimensionless coupling which
in principle could be large or small. in m theory it would be a modulus. thus, a truly large

or small value of this parameter would require an explanation. we would again argue that the

potential for this modulus would be unlikely to have a minimum at such extreme values.

if all dimensionless coecients are of order one, and there is a stable minimum for the
potential described above, then it occurs for r  m 1 and gives a four dimensional cosmological
constant of order m 4. however, we know that eective eld theory generally gives a large value

of the cosmological constant, so the simpleminded dimensional analysis argument may well be

incorrect.

a conservative, or at least conventional, way to deal with this problem is to assume that

the eective four dimensional cosmological constant vanishes (or takes on a tiny nonzero value

5the appearance of a bulk cosmological constant raises the specter of ination in the extra dimensions. the
authors of reference [15] dealt with this by insisting that the hubble radius corresponding to the cosmological
constant was always larger than the actual radius of the internal dimensions. this constraint can be understood
in another way. if we consider solutions of the eld equations involving time dependent moduli of the internal
dimensions, then the moduli appear as scalar elds in a lower dimensional theory. in other words, we can imagine
integrating out the massive kaluza-klein modes and obtaining an eective action for the moduli. if the potential
for these elds (including the cosmological constant term) has a stable minimum then we have a static solution,
with no ination or other evolution. if we wish to treat b as a small parameter, consistency requires that the
shifts in the massive modes, as we turn on b, be small. it is a simple exercise to show that if b < m n2/r2,
the contribution to the mass of the kaluza-klein states from the cosmological term is small, and the shifts are
small (br4 < r2). this question leads to precisely the constraint found by dimopoulos et al., b < m n+2/r2
o.
we do not see, however, that this constraint is truly necessary. once b > 1/r2, the cosmological term makes a
large contribution to the mass of the low-lying kaluza-klein states, but there are perfectly good static solutions
of the equations of motion. the naive idea that internal dimensions of scale r would lead to particles of mass
1/r is incorrect in this case, and the phenomenological consequences would be dierent. however, we will see
below that the requirement that the four dimensional eective cosmological constant comes out consistent with
observation, requires the bulk cosmological constant to be small enough that this issue never arises.

8

consistent with observation) by some mechanism unknown in eective eld theories, and pursue

the consequences of this constraint on the rest of the physical problems at hand.

this viewpoint places a strong upper bound on the bulk cosmological constant. the

eective four dimensional cosmological constant is

4 = 4+nrn + dm n+2rn2 + boundary + radiative corrections .

(1)

here, d is a numerical constant, and the boundary cosmological constant is a term boundarygind,
where g
ind is the metric induced on the wall by the metric in bulk. naive dimensional analysis
estimates it to be of order m 4, and we will assume that it is of this order in most of what

follows. the authors of [15] have proposed a brane crystallization mechanism for stabiliza-

tion in which it might be much larger. the idea is to have a large number of branes, each
with tension of order m 4. we do not fully understand this scenario (in particular, we do not

understand how gauss law can be satised in the presence of a vast number of branes with the

same charge) and will not explore it here. susy on the brane must be broken near the tev

scale, in a phenomenologically viable theory, so a small boundary cosmological constant would

denitely be an extra ne tuning.

with the conventional sign for the einstein action, a manifold with positive integrated ricci

curvature, will make a negative contribution to the energy. if the bulk cosmological constant is

positive, we can obtain a cancellation of the eective cosmological constant between these two

terms. in order for this to occur, the dimensionless coecient of the bulk cosmological constant

must be very small if r0m is very large (r0 is the value of the radial dilaton at the minimum
of the potential), 4+n  (rom )2m 4+n. of course, the full cancellation of the eective
cosmological constant requires us to take into account many terms in the eective potential.

this will involve further ne tuning of the coecient of the bulk cosmological constant but will

not change the order of magnitude estimate of its size.

we can obtain a similar cancellation with a negative integrated ricci curvature and a

negative cosmological constant. note however that if both the integrated curvature and the

bulk cosmological term contribute to the potential with the same sign,and if n > 2, then we

can obtain a cancellation at large r0m only when both of these terms are much smaller than
indicated by dimensional analysis. we consider such a double ne tuning unacceptable and will

not consider such scenarios further.

the careful reader may wonder why we have not considered a cancellation of the cosmo-

logical constant which involves a bulk term of natural order of magnitude, and some term lower

9

order in r with a very large coecient (we will encounter such a term in a moment). such

a cancellation is possible, but the resulting mass for the radial dilaton and kk modes is very

large and most of the phenomenology expected for large extra dimensions disappears in this

scenario.

one might have imagined that, having made the two largest terms in the eective action

of the same order of magnitude, that we could obtain a suitable minimum just from these two

terms. this is not the case. it is easily veried that the relevant variational equations are the

euclidean einstein equations with a cosmological constant and that the action (which is the

energy in the non-compact dimensions) is a negative number of order the cosmological constant.

thus, the cancellation of the eective cosmological constant is incompatible with solving the

equations with just these two terms.

thus, some other term must come into the solution of the variational equations, which

means that this term must have a coecient much larger than is expected on the basis of naive

dimensional analysis. there is a unique, technically natural way to obtain such a term. one

can have a large p form ux, q, wrapped around some p cycle of the internal manifold. the

corresponding eective potential is

v (r) = m 4[a(m r0)2(m r)n  b(m r)n2 +

e2q2

(m r)2pn ],

(2)

where a and b are positive constants of order one.

the equations for a minimum with zero cosmological constant (up to corrections sub-

leading in m r0) may be written as :

and

e2q2 = (m r0)2p2(b  a),

(2p  2)(b  a) = 2a.

(3)

(4)

thus we must have b > a > 0 and p > 1 in order to satisfy these equations. since p is an integer,
this means that e2q2 is always greater than (m r0)2. remembering that m r0  (mp /m )2/n
we nd that even for m  10 tev6 and seven large dimensions,the ux is of order 104. note
further that eleven dimensional sugra does not have a two form eld strength. thus, in

6we choose this scale both because it is of order the phenomenological bounds we derive in the next section,
and because it was claimed in [15] that one could obtain a minimum with 6 large dimensions and ux of order
one when the fundamental scale is 10 tev. their claims were based on the assumption of a very small bulk
cosmological constant.

10

m theory, we have p = 4 and the ux would be of order 1013 in seven large dimensions. we

can do somewhat better in string theoretic limits in six large dimensions. heterotic and type

i and iia strings have bulk two form eld strengths and yield suitable r0 with uxes of order
105.
in

in this case one might hope to do better if the dimensionless coupling e2 is small.

type iia theory the two form is a ramond-ramond eld and we do not expect such a factor,

but in the heterotic/type i theories we would get an enhancement for magnetic uxes at weak

coupling. note however that if we make this parameter very small we are introducing another

stabilization problem. the string coupling is a modulus and it is dicult to understand how it
is stabilized at a very small value. we believe that it is unreasonable to expect e2 to be smaller
than 102. to obtain values even this small from string dynamics , one has to invoke the ill

understood notion of kahler stabilization [3]. we also note that in these scenarios, independent

of the dimension, the radial dilaton mass is of order 1/r0.

a word should be said about the other moduli of the internal space, which we have been

presuming xed. in general, if p < n and the ux is very large, this assumption is probably

untenable. the potential for the other moduli will be overwhelmed by a huge ux which really

wants to blow up only one p cycle of the manifold. on a torus one can solve this problem by

putting ux on a complete set of cycles (e.g. put two form ux on both the 12 and 34 cycles of

a four torus). it is not clear that this is possible on a general curved manifold. thus, it may be

that the case p = n is the only one where the analysis we have made above really works. other

values of p might lead to ne tuning problems for the potentials of moduli other than the radial

dilaton. we will continue to ignore this problem, but we consider it a further indication of the

delicate balancing act which must be performed to nd a theory with large dimensions.

let us also discuss briey the scenario of [15] in which the dimensionless coecient in the

bulk cosmological term is taken so small that the term is of the same order as the boundary
cosmological constant. in this case, the overall scale of the potential is m 4, and for m of order

a tev, the radial dilaton compton wavelength is within reach of proposed improvements of the

cavendish experiment, for any number of large compact dimensions. the cosmological constant

is so small that it does not aect the masses of the kk modes.

actually, one should be somewhat careful in the two dimensional case. the brane tension

(boundary cosmological constant) is enhanced by a factor of ln (m r0) because long range elds
do not fall o at innity. this, via the ne tuning of the eective cosmological constant, in

turn enhances the bulk cosmological term. as a consequence, the masses of both radial dilaton

and kk modes are enhanced by a factor of  pln (m r0)  7 . thus, one cannot probe the

11

extra dimensions until one gets up to these higher energy scales. combined with the lower

bounds on the fundamental scale which we will derive in the next section, this result may be

discouraging for the prospects of testing the two dimensional scenario in experiments on gravity

at millimeter scales.

as we have emphasized, for n > 2 it seems likely that the curvature terms will be important.

in their presence, the cancellation of the eective cosmological constant implies a much larger

bulk energy density than in the almost at case we have just discussed. in these curved scenarios

we nd a radial dilaton mass of the same order as the kk mass, which is of order its naive at

space value 1/r0. thus the estimates of production cross sections and discovery criteria cited
in [13] will not be substantially changed by our reevaluation of the stability of large dimension

scenarios. one concludes then that eective eld theory analysis shows that the only way to

stabilize the system at large r0m is to have a large integer ux, as originally proposed by
[15]. our analysis diers from theirs (for n > 2) by including curvature terms for the internal

manifold, which dominate the eective potential. as a consequence, even a large number of
large dimensions, with a 10 tev fundamental scale still require integer uxes of order 105. the

hierarchy problem is to a large extent solved by hand.

in the low energy eective theory, large uxes appear to be technically natural because

they are quantized and conserved. at a more microscopic level one should investigate the

possibility that there are quantum processes which can screen the ux by popping branes out

of the vacuum. for m theorists, the plausibility of this scenario becomes a question of whether

vacuum states with large ux and at external dimensions exist. we know of no susy vacuum

states with this property. fluxes have a tendency to appear in chern simons like terms and

to be bounded by considerations of anomaly cancellation. however, the present subsection is

devoted to non-supersymmetric vacuum states and our understanding of those is practically

nil.

2.2 supersymmetric stabilization and quintessence

if we assume that the system becomes supersymmetric in the large radius limit, then the story

is quite dierent. in this case the bulk cosmological constant vanishes. many of the terms in

the potential which determine the value of the radius, are now a priori much smaller than the

constant which determines the four dimensional cosmological constant.

it is also natural to impose a ricci atness condition on the bulk geometry, since this is the

12

simplest way to preserve susy in the low energy theory. to be specic, we might imagine a iib

string or f theory compactication which preserves eight supercharges except on a threebrane

(which is point-like in the compact dimensions) where various gauge elds live. the remaining

four supercharges on the brane might be broken dynamically by gauge dynamics. the only

unnatural thing about this idea in the context of a very low fundamental scale is the fact that

we want the susy breaking scale to be close to the fundamental scale, so the treatment of the

susy breaking dynamics by low energy eective eld theory may be suspect. since we are

using this scenario merely to x ideas, we will not explore this issue.

the leading terms in the eective action that cannot be set to zero by making techni-

cally natural discrete choices, now come from curvature squared terms. they are of order
m 4(m r)(n4). the overall coecient of this term might be either positive or negative, but is

naturally of order one. as before, the only way to achieve a technically natural stabilization at

large radius is to introduce a term with large ux which is sub-leading in the large m r expan-

sion. this means that p > 2. we note that in the presence of ux, the manifold is no longer

ricci at, but the additional ricci tensor term scales just like the ux term which produced it.

thus it does not change the argument substantially.

the details of the stabilization depend crucially on whether n < 4.

if it is, then the

ne tuning of the 4d eective cosmological constant does not require any parameter in the

higher dimensional lagrangian to take on a particularly small value. stabilization is decoupled
from the problem of the cosmological constant. to achieve it, the sign of the (m r)(n4)

term coming from the various quadratic curvature invariants must be negative. furthermore,
e2q2  (r0m )(2p4)  (mp /m )2(2p4)/n. the smallest ux is obtained for p = 3 and n = 3 ,
and is 1010 when m  10 tev.

the mass of the radial dilaton is much smaller in these supersymmetric scenarios. for

n < 3 the formula is

m  m (m/mp )(4/n).

(5)

even for a scale of 10 tev and n = 3, this is of order 108 ev and the force coming from

exchange of this particle should have been seen in existing experiments. note that susy

will imply that to leading order in the 1/(r0m ) expansion, the couplings of this particle are
universal.

when n = 4 the terms quadratic in curvature are r independent and are not useful in

the stabilization program. the ne tuning of the observed cosmological constant again has no

13

eect on the relevant terms in the potential7, which are now cubic curvature terms (scaling like
(m r)2, and a large ux term with p > 3 (there are also terms with covariant derivatives of

curvature which have the same scaling as the cubic ones). the conditions for stabilization give
e2q2  (r0m )2p6  (mp /m )(p3). the smallest value is obtained for p = 4 and equals 1015.
the radial dilaton mass comes out of order m (m/mp )3/2. even for m of order 10 tev this
gives a compton wavelength of order a kilometer. thus, this scenario is ruled out by existing

gravitational experiments, since there is no way to tune the radial dilaton couplings to be much

smaller than that of gravity.

for 6  n > 4, the quadratic curvature terms in the eective action give rise to terms in
the potential which grow with r. if we allow this term to be of its natural order of magnitude,

then the whole extra dimension picture is modied. dimensions of size r no longer give rise

to kk states with masses of order 1/r because the large term in the action gives a large mass

to all of the modes. furthermore, the next largest term in the inverse rm expansion is the

r independent boundary cosmological term. thus, the coecient c in the eective potential
term cm 4(rm )(n4) should be of order (r0m )(4n) (where r0 is the value of r at which
the potential is minimized ) in order to obtain the right order of magnitude for the observed

cosmological constant. this is of course a ne tuning, but since it is the same ne tuning which

sets the cosmological constant, we should discount it. a technically natural minimum at large
r can be obtained by adding a large ux term , q2m 4(rm )(n2p) with p > 2 (p > 3 if n = 6),
to the action. stabilization can be achieved if q  (r0m )(2pn)/2  (mp /m )(2p/n1). for
p = 3 and n = 5 this is of order 103, the smallest value we have yet seen, when the fundamental

scale is of order 10 tev. indeed, if the coupling of the three form gauge eld strength is as weak

as a standard model coupling, the amelioration of the ux bound mentioned above is likely

to make the necessary integer of order 100, which is perhaps more palatable than the other

examples we have found. if the three form is a neveu-schwarz eld strength in weakly coupled

iib string theory, then a large weak coupling factor is natural. one would have to explain the

stabilization of the string dilaton in this regime, however.

for this range of n the magnitude of the eective potential is of order m 4 for all n, so the
radial dilaton mass is of order m 2/mp for all scenarios in this group. thus, if m is of order 1
tev we have a compton wavelength in the range of proposed improvements of short distance

tests of gravity. in particular, this is true for the attractive scenario with p = 3 and n = 5.

we can make things even better by invoking susy on the brane. suppose the fundamental

7this is because it can be viewed as the ne tuning of a much larger, but r independent, term in the potential.

14

scale m is 10 tev, while susy is broken on the brane at around msu sy  1 tev. then
the equation for q is replaced by q  (mp /m )(2p/n1)(msu sy /m )2, because the scale of the
potential will be lowered to m 4
su sy . if we take p = 3 and n = 5 as above, we get q  10. taking
into account the weak coupling factor mentioned above, this could be an integer ux of order

one. note further that the radial dilaton mass in this case would be in the range of cavendish

experiments. as far as we can see, this is the model with the fewest large dimensionless numbers

in it, which still gives exciting near term phenomenology.

for n = 7 both the quadratic and cubic curvature terms in the eective action give terms

in the potential which grow with r. in order to cancel the cosmological constant with only

one ne tuned parameter, we must take the dimensionless coecient of the quadratic term to
be of order (r0m )2. in order to nd a stable minimum, we must add a large ux term of
the form q2m 4(rm )72p with p  4. the only value of p expected from eleven dimensional
sugra is p = 4. this also gives the lowest value of ux, namely q2  (r0m )(2p6) or
q  (mp /m )(2p6)/7  (mp /m )2/7. for m  10 tev, this is larger than 104. note also
that there is no plausible weak coupling enhancement in this case, since 11d sugra has no
dimensionless expansion parameter. the radial dilaton mass comes out of order m (m/mp )(6/7)
and it cannot be seen in cavendish experiments.

we have seen that there are a variety of radial stabilization schemes whose plausibility

depends on whether the underlying dynamics has stable vacua with large ux, and a single

example where we can get a relatively low fundamental scale and a light radial dilaton with

uxes of order one. a much more exciting possibility in the case of bulk susy, is simply that

the radius is not stabilized at all. if the leading term in the potential is positive and vanishes

at large r then the system is driven to innity. thus, we might hope to explain a large current

value for r, simply as a result of the slow migration of r to innity during the expansion of the

three dimensional part of the universe. r would be a form of quintessence [18]. such a scenario

would be a realization of diracs old idea that newtons constant is small because the universe

is old. although we think that this is an attractive possibility, we will nd several problems
with it 8.

we will assume that susy is broken on our brane, at the scale m . there is then a
cosmological constant of order m 4 which must be canceled by ne tuning. we must also

require that the additional, time dependent (because r itself is time dependent), potential

energy of r is smaller than the conventional contributions to the energy density of the universe

8for an alternative model of quintessence in large radii models see ref. [22].

15

throughout most of cosmic history. today it can be a nite fraction of closure density.

in order to achieve this goal, it is obviously best to have a leading term in the potential
which is as high a power of r1 as possible. the 1/r4 term comes from the casimir energy,

and its coecient is expected to be of order one. the precise value of this coecient depends

on the nature of the coupling of the massless bulk elds to the susy breaking system on the

wall. for the quintessence scenario, we must demand that the coecient be positive.

1030m 1

the bound that the current casimir energy density not exceed the critical density is r0 >
p  103cm. thus, in the context of a theory with m  1 tev, and mp  (r0m )n/2m
only the scenario with two large dimensions is viable. however, it is also hard to see how to
avoid a term in the potential coming from quadratic curvature terms, which scales like (rm )2.

in the presence of such a term, even the two dimensional case would seem to be ruled out. let

us agree to ignore this and explore the other features of the radial quintessence scenario.

to determine whether the bound on the radial potential was satised in the early history

of the universe, we invoke another bound, the constraint on the time variation of newtons
< 1011/yr. this translates directly into a bound
constant. this is usually stated as
on the time variation of r, which implies that r/r < 1011/yr.. thus, during the time since
nucleosynthesis rm has changed by at most a factor of order one. on the one hand, this implies

gn
gn

that there is no problem with the energy density in r dominating the universe at previous eras.

on the other hand it means that our hope to explain the large value of r as a consequence of the

large age of the universe, cannot work. the initial value of r cannot be so very dierent than

its value today. this is certainly disappointing. a cosmological explanation for the large value
of rm would have to come from an inationary era preceding the time of nucleosynthesis.9

it is worth pointing out that, in contrast to many models of quintessence, the current

model is not seriously constrained by the cosmological variation of the ne structure constant.

in this model gauge elds live on the brane and do not couple directly to r. their coupling

comes only through radiative corrections in which kk excitations are exchanged between the

lines in a vacuum polarization diagram. the ne structure constant has the form

thus

1/ = 1/0 + o([rm ]q)


 

r
r

[rm ]q

(6)

(7)

9we note a recent paper, [28], in which an attempt is made to explain the large value of rm in terms of a

thermal eective potential in a pre bbn era.

16

since we have already established that rm > 1014 and

r
r < 1011/yr., from the bounds on the
cosmological constant and the time variation of gn , this is less than the strongest bound on
the time variation of  from the oklo natural nuclear reactor[29].

another appealing feature of this picture is that the scale of the potential is not necessarily

connected to the scale of supersymmetry breaking. this is in contrast to more conventional

pictures[30], where these relations are tightly (and unacceptably) constrained.

there probably is a ne tuning problem of order 102,3 coming from the eect of the r

eld on astronomy. in this respect it behaves like a classic brans-dicke eld.

none of these estimates touches on the question of whether the dynamics of the r eld

is really compatible with the bounds. that is, is the radial dilaton an acceptable dynamical

model of quintessence. we will not attempt to answer this or any other cosmological question

in the current paper.

however, it is clear that in the best of all possible scenarios, we can construct a viable model

of radial dilaton quintessence only for n = 2 and that even in that case the large current value

of the radius has to be put in as an initial condition sometime before the era of nucleosynthesis.

it remains to be seen whether early universe cosmology and ination can give us a natural

explanation of this number.

to summarize: models with susy in the bulk can have similar stabilization mechanisms

to non supersymmetric models. often the radial dilaton is very light in the susy case, and

the models are ruled out. there is however a susy model with ve large dimensions and a 10

tev fundamental scale, which requires no large or small parameters and has a radial dilaton

which might be found in sub-millimeter gravitational experiments. the susy case also allows

us to construct a model in which the radial dilaton is not stabilized and might act as a form of

quintessence. compared to most quintessence models, this scenario has less of a problem with

the time variation of the cosmological constant. however, the appealing idea of explaining the

large value of r via the cosmological time variation of this parameter runs into the observational

bounds on the variation of newtons constant. a viable model of r as quintessence might be

constructed in the case n = 2, but the explanation of its current value would have to come from

some very early inationary era.

17

3 flavor, cp and precision electroweak constraints

a traditional argument for a large fundamental scale has been the absence of certain avor

changing processes. the most dramatic of these is baryon number conservation. unless the
fundamental scale is higher than around 1015 gev, proton stability must be protected by sym-

metries. however in many models of physics beyond the standard model such as the mssm, it

is already necessary to impose additional symmetries in order to suppress dangerous renormal-

izable and dimension 5 baryon and lepton violating operators. more elaborate symmetries can

suppress baryon-number violating operators up to terms of very high dimension.

of course, there are many other sorts of avor violation which must be suppressed, and

refs. [11, 23] discussed some aspects of this problem, and made an interesting proposal. they

suggested that the underlying theory might possess some large avor symmetry, and, in addi-

tion, several additional branes, far from ours on the scale m , but close when compared to

the scale of compactication. the hierarchy of quark and lepton masses then arises because of

a hierarchical separation of the branes. explaining this hierarchy will raise many of the issues

discussed above, but it certainly provides a way of parameterizing the breaking of chiral sym-

metries. just as for the bulk moduli we have discussed above, xing these separation moduli

at extreme values is problematic. we have already argued that there cannot be any approxi-

mate supersymmetry in these pictures. in weakly coupled string theory, there is no potential

between branes at the classical level. however, there are states whose mass grows with the

separation of the branes. in supersymmetric theories, there is a cancellation between bosonic

and fermionic modes, and perturbatively (and non-perturbatively, if there is enough supersym-

metry) there is no potential. however, for non-supersymmetric theories, generically there is

already a force between branes already at the one loop level. in weakly coupled string theory,

at large distances, this force corresponds to the exchange of massless particles (gravitons, etc.)

between the branes. again, then, one expects stabilization only for brane separations of order

the fundamental scale, if at all.

in the rest of this section, however, we will adopt the viewpoint of refs. [11, 23], and suppose

that the solution of the avor problems lies in a large separation of at least some of the branes.

we will see that this still requires that the fundamental scale be of order 6 tev, and suppression

of cp violating eects requires either additional assumptions, a higher scale, or both.

in analyzing the eectiveness of this scheme in suppressing avor changing processes, we

will impose a strict notion of naturalness.

in particular, one expects in string theory that

18

operators permitted by symmetries are generated already at tree level. in addition, in accord

with the arguments of ref.
[31], one doesnt expect that the couplings should be weak. as
a result, operators allowed by symmetries should be present at o(1) (one might argue that
they should be larger). with this assumption, one should rst examine constraints from avor

conserving operators, which, due to recent progress in precision electroweak physics, can be

quite severe. these come from processes such as

 direct searches for 4-fermi couplings at lepii.
 atomic parity violation.
 limits from precision measurements of properties of the weak gauge bosons on dimension

6 operators.

for instance, data from the recently completed high luminosity lepii run place a 95% c.l.

limit on 4-lepton couplings such as

g2
m 2

ii jj ,

(8)

of m/g > 3 tev [32].

a comparable or slightly stronger limit on m/g can be found by considering the eects of

operators such as

g2
m 2

i5i qjqj .

on atomic parity violation [33].

other dimension 6 operators such as

g2
m 2 (h dh)(h dh)

(9)

(10)

can aect the  parameter. requiring / < .003 places a constraint m/g > 6 tev. similarly

strong constraints on m/g can be found by considering other precisely measured electroweak

observables such as the total width, total leptonic width, and total hadronic width of the z,

which can be aected by operators such as

and

g2
m 2 (dz ) fifi

g2
m 2 (h dh) fifi ,

19

(11)

(12)

where f is any fermion.

in addition, any possible avor symmetry involving the top quark and left handed bottom

quark must be maximally broken, and one can also nd constraints on m/g from processes

such as

 the partial width z  b + b, which is aected by operators such as q3lq3lh dh.
 bd  bd mixing, which, after the eects of ckm missing are considered, is aected by

q3lq3l q3lq3l.

these processes give a constraint on m/g of about 2 tev.

we turn now to avor violating processes in the rst two generations. clearly, without some

assumption of underlying avor symmetries, the scale m is constrained to be far larger than

a few tev. the authors of [11] made a set of assumptions which provide maximal suppression

of unwanted processes. in the standard model, ignoring yukawa couplings, there is a global
u (3)5 symmetry. the rst assumption is that a large discrete subgroup of this symmetry is

in fact a good symmetry of the underlying theory. (these chiral symmetries must be discrete,

in order to avoid light nambu-goldstone bosons on the branes. also, in m theory we do

not expect global symmetries.) this symmetry is assumed to be broken on branes which
are far from our own (in units of m 1). there are some bulk elds which transform under

these symmetries and which communicate this breaking to our wall. we will denote these

generically by . the simplest way to suppress avor changing neutral currents is to assume

that the  are in the representations necessary to give quark and lepton masses, i.e. there are
various u,d transforming as (3, 3, 1) and (3, 1, 3), respectively, under the discrete subgroups of
u (3)q  u (3)u  u (3)d, and  transforming as (3, 3) under u (3)  u (3)e. in this picture, some
masses are smaller than others because some of the branes are farther away than others, or some

of the  are heavier than others (since the  expectation values on our brane are exponentially

suppressed by the product of  mass and the distance to the source of  vev). for example,

one can imagine a nearby wall responsible for the mass of the b quark, another, farther away,

for the s quark, another for the electron mass, etc. the smallness of mixing angles could arise

from the particular alignment of the symmetry breaking on dierent walls, for example (given

the assumption of large discrete groups).

in such a picture, avor violation is clearly suppressed by the discrete subgroup of u (3)5.

the question is by how much. to analyze the amount of suppression of reasonably low dimension

20

operators, we assume the discrete avor symmetry is large enough so that we may proceed as
if we have the full u (3)5 symmetry. first, it should be noted that cp conserving s = 2

processes are reasonably safe, provided the lightest  elds are just those necessary to generate

quark and lepton masses. dangerous dimension six operators can arise from terms such as

g2
m 2 qlddr qlddr .

(13)

here q refers generically to the left handed quarks, d to the right handed down-type quarks, d

to either the avon eld or to derivatives of the eld with respect to coordinates transverse to

the brane. there is no reason to expect any additional suppression of such derivatives, since

the mass of  is presumably of order m . the quark masses also actually receive contributions

from an innite number of operators involving  and its derivatives. thus the operator (14)
need not be diagonal in the down quark mass basis since in general neither derivatives of d nor
the expectation value of (d)2 can be diagonalized simultaneously with the expectation value

of . it is however true that in models such as those suggested by refs. [11, 23], the various
entries of the matrices indicated by u,d, will have the same order of magnitude as those of the

corresponding yukawa matrices. with these assumptions, in the down quark mass basis, one

could nd a s = 2 operator of order

g2

m 2   m2

sv 2
cd

v2 ! dlsr dlsr.

(14)

the matrix element of the operator (14) is enhanced by a factor m2
s and by short distance
qcd renormalization group eects. however the real part of k k mixing is adequately sup-
pressed for m/g of 900 gev. similar operators, with d replaced by u, can contribute to d d
mixing. however a m/g of order 1 tev provides suppression consistent with current limits.

k/m2

other s = 2 operators arise from terms such as

g2
m 2 qlql qlql

(15)

with various contractions of the indices. but these are suppressed by four powers of mc or small
ckm angles, and are less dangerous. s = 1 operators also provide weaker limits.

consideration of cp violating operators provides, potentially, more stringent constraints.

to explain the smallness of cp violation, cp must be a good symmetry of the bulk, violated

spontaneously on a distant brane. otherwise, unless the scale m is very big, cp violating

operators such as

g2
m 2 fabcga



gb



 gc




21

(16)

will make huge contributions to the dipole moment of the neutron dn.

assuming the ckm mechanism of cp violation, it is necessary that cp be violated on

some of the branes responsible for quark masses. an order one ckm phase is not possible if

cp is only violated on the branes responsible for the rst generation masses. if cp is violated

generically on the the branes which provide the quark masses, then operators such as (14) and

also such as

g2
m 2 ef qlddrh

(17)

(where again  may refer to a derivative of itself, not necessarily real in the same basis as the

quark masses) may have complex coecients. the former potentially gives too large an k
unless m/g > 10 tev. the latter may give a too large dn unless m/g > 40 tev (assuming the
contribution of the down quark dipole moment to dn is given by naive dimensional analysis [34]).
the contributions of the latter must be substantially suppressed if the scale m is anywhere near

the electroweak scale. one way to suppress the contribution of the operator (17) is if the  eld

is rather light compared with m so that contributions of its derivatives are suppressed. it is also
quite possible that even if d is not light, its derivatives are real and diagonal in the same basis
as d. recall that we are assuming that the bulk physics preserves a large discrete subgroup of

the avor symmetries. thus the bulk physics provides a potential for the matrices u (l) and
u (r) which diagonalize d, which is minimized for discrete values. it is thus plausible that

these matrices are not spatially varying, since to do so might cost too much potential energy.

there would therefore be a basis, in which the down masses were real and diagonal, and cp and
strangeness were good symmetries until the eects of u (and its derivatives) are considered.
however it will still be expected that, e.g. huudi will be complex in the quark mass basis
and so operators such as

  g2
m 2! ef qluud drh

(18)

give a contribution to dn. the contribution from the down quark is not dangerous, and even
if the strange quark matrix elements are order 1 as given by naive dimensional analysis and

indicated by several experiments [35], then one would have to have m/g > 1 tev in order to

suppress the contribution to dn from the strange quark electric dipole moment.

note that suppression of the contribution of the operator (17) still does not completely
explain the small size of dn which still could arise from the strong cp parameter  10. more
[12], or a massless

10this strong cp problem might still be solved by an invisible axion in the bulk, see ref.

up quark.

22

restricted assumptions about cp violation can ameliorate this problem as well as the constraints

previously mentioned. one alternative is that there is no cp violation either in the bulk or on
the branes which serve as sources for u,d. then the quark mass matrix is nearly real and the
phase in the ckm matrix is very small11. this could have the advantage of solving the strong

cp problem. however, one then must hypothesize more complicated mechanisms to provide
cp violation in k  k mixing. for instance there could be another distant wall, on which cp
and, say, the avor symmetry acting on the left handed quarks is broken, but the other avor
symmetries are conserved. thus this wall cannot serve as a source for u,d. the expectation
value of a heavy q eld transforming as a 27 under the su (3) of the left handed quarks could

provide a s = 2 cp violating operator

sldlsldl .

(19)

quark electric dipole moments would now arise only from additionally suppressed operators

such as

g2
m 2 ef qlquud drh .

(20)

the strong cp parameter  and dangerous cp violating operators such as (16) could be su-
ciently small provided that any  elds which combine into a complex avor singlet have enough

suppression of the product of their expectation values. within a few years such a solution will

be denitely tested by the b factories, which might provide direct evidence for a nonzero ckm

phase.

lepton number and lepton avor violation also must be highly suppressed.

it is not

reasonable simply to assume that the individual lepton avors are conserved since there is good

evidence for violation of lepton avor in neutrino oscillations. one might assume that small

dirac neutrino masses arise from the mechanism of ref. [11, 37]. neutrino masses then imply

large violation of the u (3) symmetries of the left handed leptons, which we parameterize by
. lepton avor violation from higher dimension operators such as

g2
m 2

l l ll ,

(21)

could lead to visible nonstandard decays such as   3 or   3e unless m/g is very large.
however by choosing dierent properties for the right handed neutrinos or a dierent mech-

anism for neutrino masses one clearly has the option of assuming that lepton avor violating

11unlike in the standard model case[36], current data still allows a real ckm matrix if there are nonstandard

contributions to b b mixing.

23

 expectation values are very small and not dangerous12. because there are many possible

options for the neutrino masses, we do not consider lepton avor violating constraints further

in this paper.

however even with suppression of lepton avor violation, a constraint comes from a possible

contribution to the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon13, from

g2
m 2 ef lerh .

(22)

this is too large unless m/g > 1 tev.

we have seen that consideration of the eects of avor conserving higher dimension oper-

ators suggest that the fundamental scale should be at least 6 tev, and in many models of cp

violation the scale must be at least 10 tev. also a peculiar avor symmetry is required which

must be very judiciously broken. these scales are somewhat troubling from the perspective of

understanding the lightness of the higgs particle, which requires some mechanism to suppress
its mass squared term to of order (200 gev)2(800 gev)2. if this small term arises by accident,

a ne tuning is required which is greater than at least a part in 100 . of course, it is possible

that for some mysterious reason the natural size of the higgs mass is not m . there might be

some approximation in which the higgs is light, and receives its mass radiatively. also, there

might be very small couplings that enter in the higher dimension operators. however avoiding

substantial ne tuning of the weak scale clearly places additional nontrivial constraints on the

underlying theory.

4 cosmology

the cosmology of theories with several large dimensions could potentially be quite rich. at

very early times, the gravitational and gauge couplings could be far from their present values.

the conventional horizon and atness problems might take a quite dierent form, and might

be amenable to quite dierent solutions, than usually assumed.

even so, cosmology is likely to pose serious problems for theories with such light moduli.

lacking a detailed cosmological model, we will content ourselves with a few brief remarks in

this section.

12for another discussion of neutrino masses and large extra dimensions see ref. [38].
13a similar bound may also be placed by considering the explicit contributions from kk modes [39].

24

first, as noted in [12], it is necessary that the bulk moduli are in their ground states to a

high degree of accuracy at early times. indeed, these authors dene a normalcy temperature,

tn, above which thermal production on the branes will over-produce the bulk modes. this
in the case of two dimensions it is barely above nucleosynthesis
temperature is quite low.

temperatures. so it is necessary that ination only reheat to temperatures very slightly

above an mev. in all cases, the temperature is orders of magnitude below the fundamental

scale.

we nd this condition quite puzzling. for example, if the inaton is a bulk modulus, it will

contribute to the bulk cosmological constant and inevitably displace the radial dilaton far from

its true minimum. on the other hand, without ination in the bulk, it is hard to understand

how the bulk system got into its ground state. so one must have ination in the bulk with a

reheat temperature below an mev. furthermore, in order to account for the excitation of the

standard model during nucleosynthesis, the bulk ination (or some other mechanism) must, as

discussed in [12], leave over some excited eld on the brane which dumps its energy almost

entirely into standard model degrees of freedom. this seems particularly dicult in scenarios

with only two large extra dimensions. in this case, homogeneous excitations on the brane have

logarithmically growing couplings to bulk modes. finally, assuming that all of these other

criteria have been met, the reheat temperature on the brane must be lower than the normalcy

temperature of [12].

the potential diculty posed by this last constraint is illustrated by the otherwise attrac-

tive model of ination proposed in [27] (another model for brane ination appears in [25]).

these authors make the very interesting point that in the brane scenario there are natural can-

didate inatons. these are the elds which describe the separation of the branes. these elds

have potentials, arising from massless exchanges, which fall rapidly to zero when the branes are

separated. when the branes are nearby, they are expected to have potentials with curvature

of order m . thus if the ground state has some branes close together, and yet they start out

well separated at early times, the system can inate. however, there are at least two diculties

with such a picture. first, as pointed out by the authors, it is dicult to have suciently large

uctuations. second, the natural reheating temperature is of order m . smaller scales seem to

require ne tuning.

finally, particularly for the case n = 2, there are potentially ecient production mecha-

nisms for the bulk modes , which have not been carefully studied. suppose for example that the

universe undergoes a phase transition on a time scale small compared to r0. this would be the

25

case in the brane separation transition described above. recall that for n = 2 there is enormous

energy stored in the gravitational eld surrounding the brane, spread over a millimeter. if the

transition is too rapid, this energy cannot be dissipated adiabatically; it will be principally

radiated in bulk modes.

we are not sure that these problems are insurmountable, and existing models of ination

also have their diculties. still, absent a concrete model, one is entitled to be skeptical of the

possibility of arranging such a delicate sequence of events in the early universe. it is interesting
that models with dimensions of order a (10 mev)1 or smaller avoid most of the diculties

with big bang nucleosynthesis, because the kk modes are unexcited at nucleosynthesis tem-

peratures. this is another reason why we consider this the most plausible realization of the

large extra dimension scenario.

another issue that will have to be resolved in these theories is an analog of the cosmological

moduli problem. we have argued quite generally that the radial dilaton will be a eld with
gravitational couplings, mass of order 10(3 or 4) ev, and a potential energy density of order
a (tev)4 . thus, a mechanism for setting this eld at its minimum before or during ination

must be found in order to avoid a matter dominated universe at nucleosynthesis energies. in

scenarios with two large dimensions there will be similar problems with the kk modes.

these problems appear formidable to us, but the cosmology of brane worlds has many

potential sources of surprise. the interplay of ination on and o the brane and a rich spectrum

of energy scales seems quite complicated.

5 conclusions

the possibility that the fundamental scales of nature are comparable to the electroweak scale,

while the scales of compactication are large, is extremely exciting.

in this note we have

argued that while this possibility is not ruled out by any phenomenological considerations, it

is highly constrained, particularly within the framework of m theory. we argued that purely

phenomenological constraints, coming from precision electroweak measurements as well as avor
violating rare processes, push the lowest allowed value of the fundamental scale up to 610 tev.
we believe that we have been very conservative in deriving these bounds, and used ameliorating

assumptions proposed by other authors with a large degree of faith. in particular, although the

authors of [11] propose a resolution of the avor problem employing large discrete nonabelian

symmetries, broken on distant branes, no explicit models with all the required properties have

26

been constructed14. our analysis assumed that models incorporating these ideas will eventually

appear. if not, the avor constraints are probably stronger. we have made similar, maximally

mitigating, assumptions with respect to cp violation.

probably the most severe problems with models of large dimensions were associated with

the stabilization of the radius. in the non-supersymmetric case, it is necessary that there be
large, quantized uxes of magnitude at least 105. it is not clear whether m theory allows such

large uxes in spaces which are minkowski space times a compact manifold. when the bulk

theory obeys susy, we saw that if there are ve large dimensions, and one is willing to push

the fundamental scale up to at least 10 tev (which anyway one must do to satisfy constraints

from precision experiments), while keeping the boundary cosmological constant scale xed at

1 tev (e.g. by invoking susy on the brane), then one can stabilize the radius with moderate

values of the ux. the combination of experimental constraints and plausible stabilization

mechanisms suggest that this kind of model is the most likely realization of large dimension

scenarios. there are many other susy scenarios which require large values of ux and have

radial dilaton masses which contradict experiment.

an interesting possibility, which we had hoped would provide more motivation for the idea

of large dimensions, is that the radial dilaton might play the role of the quintessence eld.

in the case of two large dimensions, the scales at least are plausible: assuming a non-zero

casimir potential, the mass of the radial dilaton is naturally within a few orders of magnitude

of the present value of the hubble constant. however, one must ne tune the coecient of

a term in the eective action quadratic in curvatures (or nd a model with vanishing bulk

curvature) in order to have the casimir energy dominate the potential. the cancellation of the

cosmological constant between boundary and bulk eects is still mysterious, but at least the

value of the radius dependent terms is of the right order of magnitude. there are two problems

with this idea. the brans-dicke coupling of the radial dilaton is naturally of order one, whereas
observation restricts its value to 104 or so. and bounds on the time variation of newtons

constant imply that one cannot explain the current large value of the radius as a consequence

of the evolution of the universe during the long period of time since bbn. still, given that the

rest of the numerology is so suggestive, and also the high degree of ne tuning required by

existing quintessence models[20], it is probably worth exploring this intriguing idea further. to

do so, we would have to understand brane world models during inationary eras. the analysis

of such scenarios is only just beginning.

14for a slightly dierent and more explicit avor proposal see ref. [40].

27

there are in fact a large number of interesting questions about large dimension scenarios

that can only be understood in the context of inationary cosmology. in particular, for those

values of n for which the bulk kk spectrum is below 1 mev, the initial conditions one must

assume in order to make the model consistent with bbn are quite bizarre. the brane is excited

to a temperature above 1 mev while the bulk is in its ground state. this could only be accounted

for by some inationary mechanism which put both bulk and boundary into their ground states
apart from some stretched scalar eld on the brane15. this scalar must couple strongly to the

standard model in order to dump most of its energy on the brane. on the other hand, its

reheat temperature must be low (not more than a few gev) in order to avoid excitation of the

bulk through its well understood couplings to the standard model. furthermore, baryogenesis

and structure formation must all be squeezed into this rather abbreviated cosmic history. the

absence of coupling to the bulk is particularly hard to understand in models with two large

dimensions, where homogeneous excitations on the brane give rise to logarithmically growing

eects in the bulk.

the inationary cosmology of brane worlds is only beginning to be explored [27] and it

remains to be seen whether models which meet all the challenges can be constructed. here

we note (once again) only that many of these problems are ameliorated in scenarios with a

large number of dimensions with inverse size of order 10 mev. the kk modes are now above

nucleosynthesis temperatures. thus, from the cosmological point of view as well, models with a

large number of large dimensions and a 10 tev fundamental scale seem like the most plausible

realization of large dimension scenarios. these models could have exciting phenomenology both

in gravitational and accelerator experiments and we believe they deserve further study.

acknowledgements:

we thank sean carroll, s. dimopoulos and nima arkanani-hamed for discussions. this work

of m.d. was supported in part by the u.s. department of energy. the work of t.b. was

supported in part by the department of energy under grant number de-fg02-96er40559.

the work of a.n. was supported in part by the department of energy under grant no. de-

fg03-96er40956. a.n. would like to thank the ucsc and cern theory groups for hospitality.

references

15t.b. thanks nima arkani-hamed for explaining this scenario to us.

28

[1] e. witten, strong coupling expansion of calabi-yau compactication, nucl. phys.

b471 (1996) 135, hep-th/9602070.

[2] t. banks and m. dine, couplings and scales in strongly coupled heterotic string the-

ory, nucl. phys. b479 (1996) 173, hep-th/9605136.

[3] t. banks and m. dine, coping with strongly coupled string theory, phys. rev. d50

(1994) 7454, hep-th/9406132.

[4] a. cohen, d.b. kaplan and a. e. nelson, eective field theory, black holes, and the

cosmological constant, hep-th/9803132.

[5] p. horava, m theory as a holographic field theory, hep-th/9712130.

[6] i. antoniadis, phys. lett. b246 (1990) 377; j. lykken, weak scale superstrings, phys.

rev. d54 (1996) 3693, hep-th/9603133.

[7] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, the hierarchy problem and new dimen-
sions at a millimeter, phys. rev. lett. b429 (1998) 263, hep-ph/9803315; i. antoniadis,
n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, new dimensions at a millimeter to a
fermi and superstrings at a tev, phys. lett. b436, 257 (1998) hep-ph/9804398.

[8] z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, brane world, hep-th/9809147.

[9] some precursors of these ideas can be found in v.a. rubakov and m.e. shaposhnikov, do
we live inside a domain wall?, phys. lett. 125b, 136 (1983); g. dvali and m. shifman,
dynamical compactication as a mechanism of spontaneous supersymmetry breaking,
nucl. phys. b504, 127 (1996) hep-th/9611213; g. dvali and m. shifman, domain walls
in strongly coupled theories, phys. lett. b396, 64 (1997) hep-th/9612128;

[10] among the papers exploring the possibility of large dimensions are k.r. dienes, e. dudas
and t. gherghetta, extra space-time dimensions and unication, phys. lett. b436,
55 (1998) hep-ph/9803466; g. shiu and s.h. tye, tev scale superstring and extra di-
mensions, phys. rev. d58, 106007 (1998) hep-th/9805157; p.c. argyres, s. dimopoulos
and j. march-russell, black holes and submillimeter dimensions, phys. lett. b441, 96
(1998) hep-th/9808138; l.e. ibanez, c. munoz and s. rigolin, aspect of type i string
phenomenology, hep-ph/9812397; a. pomarol and m. quiros, the standard model from
extra dimensions, phys. lett. b438, 255 (1998); t.e. clark and s.t. love, the eective
kahler potential and extra space-time dimensions, hep-th/9901103.

[11] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, new origin for approximate symmetries from distant

breaking in extra dimensions, hep-ph/9811353.

[12] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phenomenology, astrophysics and cos-
mology of theories with submillimeter dimensions and tev scale quantum gravity,
hep-ph/9807344.

[13] g.f. giudice, r. rattazzi and j.d. wells, quantum gravity and extra dimensions at
high energy colliders, hep-ph/9811291; t. han, j.d. lykken and r. zhang, on kaluza-
klein states from large extra dimensions, hep-ph/9811350; j.l. hewett, indirect col-
lider signals for extra dimensions, hep-ph/9811356; e.a. mirabelli, m. perlstein and

29

m.e. peskin, collider signatures of new large space dimensions, hep-ph/9811337; p.
mathews, s. raychaudhuri and k. srihar, large extra dimensions and deep inelas-
tic scattering at hera, hep-ph/9812486, getting to the top with extra dimensions,
hep-ph/9811501; s. nussinov and r.e. shrock, hep-ph/9811323; t.g. rizzo, more and
more indirect signals for extra dimensions at more and more colliders, hep-ph/9901209;
k. agashe and n.g. deshpande, limits on low scale gravity from e+e  w +w , zz
and , hep-ph/9902263, m. masip and a. pomarol, eects of sm kaluza-klein exci-
tations on electroweak observables, hep-ph/9902467.

[14] l. randall and r. sundrum, out of this world supersymmetry breaking, hep-
th/9810155, c.p. burgess, l.e. ibanez and f. quevedo, strings at the intermediate scale,
or is the fermi scale dual to the planck scale?, hep-ph/9810535.

[15] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and j. march-russell, stabilization of submillimeter

dimensions, the new guise of the hierarchy problem, hep-th/9809124.

[16] r. sundrum, compactication for a three-brane universe, hep-ph/9807348.

[17] a. donini and s. rigolin, anisotropic type i string compactication, winding modes and
large extra dimensions, hep-ph/9901443. p. mathews, s. raychaudhuri and k. sridhar,
large extra dimensions and deep inelastic scattering at hera, hep-ph/9812486.

[18] b. ratra and p.j.e. peebles, phys. rev. d37 (1988) 3406, and astrophysics j. 325 (1988)
l17; k. coble, s. dodelson and j.a. frieman, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 1851; m.s. turner
and m. white, phys. rev. d56 (4439) 1997, astro-ph/9701138; r.r. caldwell, r. dave
and p.j. steinhardt, phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 1582, astro-ph/9708069; c.t. hill, d.n.
schramm, and j.n. fry, comments nucl. part. phys. 19 (1989) 25; j. frieman, c. hill,
and r. watkins, phys. rev. d46 (1992) 1226; j. frieman, c. hill, a. stebbins and i.
waga, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1077) 1995, astro-ph/9505060.

[19] for a recent review, see s. m. carroll, quintessence and the rest of the world, astro-

ph/9806099.

[20] c. kolda and d.h.lyth, quintessential diculties, hep-ph/9811375.

[21] j. frieman, j. lykken, m. pietroni and a. riotto have made similar observations concern-

ing quintessence in large radius scenarios. we thank them for discussions.

[22] k. benakli phenomenology of low quantum gravity scale models hep-ph/9809582.

[23] z. berezhiani and g. dvali, flavor violation in theories with tev scale quantum grav-

ity, hep-ph/9811378.

[24] k. benakli and s. davidson, baryogenesis in models with a low quantum gravity scale,
hep-ph/9810280; m. maggiore and a. riotto, d-branes and cosmology, hep-th/9811089

[25] a. lukas, b. ovrut and d. waldram, boundary ination, hep-th/9902071; cosmolog-

ical solutions of horava-witten theory, hep-th/9806022.

[26] n. kaloper and a. linde, ination and large internal dimensions, hep-th/9811141.

30

[27] g. dvali and s.-h. h. tye, brane ination, hep-ph/9812483.

[28] cosmological phase transitions and radius stabilization in higher dimensions ,

k.r.dienes, e.dudas, t.ghergetta, a.riotto, hep-ph/9809406.

[29] for a recent discussion see t. damour and f. dyson, the oklo bound on the time
variation of the fine structure constant revisited, nucl. phys. b480 (1996) 37, hep-
ph/9606486.

[30] m. dine and n. seiberg, microscopic knowledge from macroscopic physics in string

theory, nucl.phys. b301 (1988) 357.

[31] m. dine and n. seiberg, is the superstring weakly coupled?, phys. lett. 162b (1985)

299.

[32] r. clare, for the l3 collaboration l3 report to lepc., report to lep experiments

committee, nov 19, 1998.

[33] c. s. wood et al., science 275(1997) 1759; see a. deandrea, phys. lett. b409 (1997) 277,

e-print archive: hep-ph/9705435 for a recent review;

[34] a. manohar and h. georgi,chiral quarks and the nonrelativistic quark model, nucl.
phys. b234 (1984) 189; h. georgi and l. randall,flavor conserving cp violation in
invisible axion models, nucl. phys. b276 (1986) 241.

[35] j.f. donoghue and c. r. nappi. the quark content of the proton, phys. lett. 168b
(1986) 105; r.l. jae and c.l. korpa, the pattern of chiral symmetry breaking and
the strange quark content of the proton, comments nucl. part. phys. 17 (1987) 163;
d. b. kaplan and aneesh manohar, strange matrix elements in the proton from neural
current experiments, nucl. phys. b310 (1988) 527; s. j. brodsky, j. ellis and m. kar-
liner, chiral symmetry and the spin of the proton, phys. lett. 206b (1988) 309; d. b.
kaplan, strong evidence for a new strange matrix element, phys. lett. b275 (1992)
137.

[36] s. mele, experimental constraints on the cabibbo-kobayashi-maskawa matrix, hep-
ph/9808411, indirect measurement of the vertex and angles of the unitarity triangle,
hep-ph/9810333. p. checchia, e. piotto and f. simonetto, a real ckm matrix?, hep-
ph/9901418.

[37] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, g. dvali and j. march-russell report slac-pub-8014,
presented at susy 98 conference, oxford, england, 11-17 jul 1998, e-print archive:
hep-ph/9811448; k. r. dienes, e. dudas, and t. gherghetta, report cern- th-98-370,
e-print archive: hep-ph/9811428.

[38] a.e. faraggi and m. pospelov, phenomenological issues in tev scale gravity with light

neutrino masses, hep-ph/9901299.

[39] m.l. graesser, extra dimensions and the muon anomalous magnetic moment, hep-

ph/9902310.

31

[40] z. kakushadze,tev scale supersymmetric standard model and brane world, hep-
th/9812163, flavor conservation and hierarchy in tev scale supersymmetric standard
model, hep-th/9902080.

32

