9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
8

 

 
 

3
v
5
9
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

hep-th/9903195

iassns-hep-99/31

a comment on nonsupersymmetric fixed points and

duality at large n

micha berkooz1 and anton kapustin2

school of natural sciences

institute for advanced study

princeton, nj 08540, usa

we review some of the problems associated with deriving eld theoretic results from

nonsupersymmetric ads, focusing on how to control the behavior of the eld theory along

the at directions. we discuss an example in which the origin of the moduli space remains

a stable vacuum at nite n , and argue that it corresponds to an interacting cft in three

dimensions. associated to this xed point is a statement of nonsupersymmetric duality.

because 1/n corrections may change the global picture of the rg ow, the statement of

duality is much weaker than in the supersymmetric case.

1 berkooz@sns.ias.edu
2 kapustin@sns.ias.edu

1. introduction

the ads/cft correspondence [1],[2] is a powerful tool for studying the large n

limit of eld theories. by now a signicant number of matches has been made between

the dynamics of gauge theories and the dynamics of supergravity in the corresponding

backgrounds. for the most part this analysis has been carried out in a supersymmetric

setting.

an interesting question is whether one can use gravity to understand the dynamics

of nonsupersymmetric conformal eld theories at large n. to answer this question one is
led to study string theory/m-theory backgrounds of the form adsp  mq where mq is a
compact manifold which breaks supersymmetry (either via orbifolding a supersymmetric

manifold [3], or by other means [4]). another approach (related to the previous one [6])

uses type 0 string theory [5].

when discussing nonsupersymmetric theories one usually appeals to classical 11d

supergravity (i.e., the leading term in the momentum expansion) or to classical string
theory, both of which correspond to n = . in trying to extend the discussion to large
but nite n one generically runs into problems. in [4] the following two problems were

discussed:
1. if for n =  there are elds whose masses are at the breitenlohner-freedman unitar-
ity bound, then these masses might be pushed below the bound by 1/n corrections.
2. if there are massless elds (i.e. elds that correspond to marginal operators at n = )
which are invariant under all the symmetries, then 1/n corrections may shift their

vevs signicantly and there may not be a stable vacuum for nite n , or if such
vacuum exists, it may be qualitatively dierent from the n =  starting point.

it was shown in [4], however, that it is easy to construct models in which these problems

do not arise.

another problem which we will discuss in this paper is that of the fate of at directions
present at n = . many nonsupersymmetric gauge theories converge, in some formal
sense at least, to a theory with sixteen supercharges as n   [7], so in this limit the
scalar potential has at directions. these at directions are typically lifted by 1/n eects,

as a result of which the elds are either driven away from the origin or attracted to the

origin (or a combination of both in dierent directions). in the former case the vacuum

at the origin is destabilized (in fact, the theory may not have any stable vacuum at all),

while in the latter case the origin is at least perturbatively stable. in the latter case there

is generically a mass gap, explaining why it is so hard to construct nonsupersymmetric

cfts when scalars are present (there are however examples of nonsupersymmetric xed

points with fermions in the weak coupling regime [8]). in this paper we will discuss a 2+1

dimensional example in which the at directions are lifted in a way which drives the elds

to the origin, nevertheless the theory does not become massive and trivial there.

before proceeding it is worth mentioning some open problems. the main open problem
is that it is not clear whether the expansion around n =  is only formal, or whether it
can be used to really approximate the physics at nite n . in backgrounds that correspond

to weakly coupled string theory there is a genus expansion which is an expansion in 1/n .

if the contribution of each genus is nite then there is a valid 1/n expansion. however,

models in the perturbative stringy regime, for example those based on d3-branes, run

into problem 2 (the dilaton is always a dangerous massless eld). in the strong coupling

regime (m-theory or type iib string theory near its self-dual points) it is not clear whether

quantum corrections are small. more on this point will appear in [10].

another open problem is the issue of nonperturbative instabilities which describe

tunneling in the bulk. presumably these eects are exponentially small at large n . not

much is known about such instabilities (see however [9]), and we will not change this

situation here.

2. the example

the example that we will focus on is that of m-theory on1 ads4  s7/zz2 . this
background is obtained by probing dierent kinds of ir8/zz2 orbifolds of m-theory with
either m2-branes or anti-m2-branes.

the two kinds of ir8/zz2 orbifolds dier by the charge of the singularity. the rst
one, which we call the a-orbifold, has membrane charge 1/16, while the other one,
which we will call the b-orbifold, has charge 3/16 [12]. both orbifolds preserve sixteen

supercharges, the same supercharges as those preserved by an m2-brane parallel to the
orbifold plane. hence probing the orbifold singularities by m2-branes yields n = 8 eld
theories in three dimensions. supersymmetry implies that when the charge of the orbifold

singularity is positive (relative to that of the m2-brane) the long range gravitational eld

1 the spectrum is related to that of ads4  s 7. the spectrum of the latter is computed in [18]

and compared to eld theory expectations in [19].

of the singularity is as if it had a positive mass; contrary-wise, if the charge is negative,

then the mass is negative (this, for example, can be deduced from the cancelation of forces

between the m2-brane and the singularity).

for both singularities the near-horizon geometry in the limit of large number of probes
n is ads4  irp7. the only dierence between the two backgrounds is the torsion class
[11] in h 4(irp7, zz) = zz2 which species how a membrane propagating in this background
is to be quantized [11,12,13]. the a-singularity corresponds to a trivial torsion class, while

the b-singularity corresponds to a nontrivial one. in the large n limit the curvature is
small, and m-theory on ads4  irp7 reduces to supergravity on the same background.
since supergravity is insensitive to the torsion, the supergravity spectrum will be exactly

the same for the two backgrounds.

in this limit, the dierence in the torsion class be-

comes visible only if one considers solitonic objects (m2-branes and m5-branes) wrapping
nontrivial cycles of ads4  irp7.

similarly we can probe the a and b singularities with anti-m2-branes. this yields

models without any supersymmetry. the near horizon geometry in this case is the skew-
whied ads4  irp7 [14]. the usual logic of the ads/cft correspondence leads to the
conclusion that m-theory on a skew-whied ads4irp7 describes a nonsupersymmetric
cft on the boundary. the backgrounds obtained from the a and b singularities dier

only by a torsion class which does not aect the kaluza-klein spectrum.

both a and b singularities can be regarded as a strong-coupling limit of certain

+

plane (which is an o2 plane with a half-d2-brane stuck

orientifold backgrounds in iia string theory [12],[13]. an o2 plane lifts to an m-theory
background of the form (ir7  s1)/zz2 which has two orbifold singularities of type a. an
o2+ plane lifts to the same orbifold, except that one singularity is of type a, and the other
one is of type b. finally, an fo2
to it) lifts to a pair of b-singularities. these iia backgrounds can be probed with (anti-)d2
branes, which lift to (anti-)m2-branes of m-theory. thus the n = 8 cfts described by
m-theory on ads4  irp7 are related to n = 8 gauge theories on d2-branes, while the
n = 0 cfts described by m-theory on the skew-whied ads4  irp7 are related to the
gauge theories on anti-d2-branes. the precise nature of this relation will be discussed in
section 4. in this paper we will focus on the n = 0 case.

reference [4] discusses some aspects of supergravity on the skew-whied ads4 
irp7. it was shown there that the kaluza-klein spectrum has neither massless charged

scalars, nor modes saturating the breitenlohner-freedman bound. as explained in the
introduction, this implies that the skew-whied ads4  irp7 avoids some immediate

problems of nosupersymmetric compactications.

in the next section we will address

another potential problem associated with the presence of at directions at innite n . we

will argue that for the b-singularity the potential generated along the at directions at

large but nite n does not change the vacuum signicantly. the model corresponding to

the a-singularity is apparently destabilized by 1/n corrections.

3. lifting of the at direction

we are therefore interested in discussing anti-m2-branes probing an a or b ir8/zz2
singularity. equivalently one may consider m2-branes probing the charge-conjugated sin-

gularities which we will call a and b. in this section we will use the latter viewpoint.

at leading order in n there are at directions which correspond to moving the branes
away from the singularity and away from each other 2. this can be seen in several ways,
but in general one expects [7] that at n =  the structure of the at directions is the
same as in the corresponding n = 8 theory.

to obtain some information about the potential along the at directions one can do a

long distance m-theory computation: one can place the branes at a distance r >> lp from
the singularity and determine, based on the charge and mass of the singularity, whether

there is an attractive or repulsive force between the branes and the singularity. this

computation has little to do with eld theory, since the branes are in the asymptotically

at region. however, because this computation depends on the mass and charge of the

singularity in the same way as the correct near horizon computation, it distinguishes

correctly between attractive and repulsive potential.

using this approach one can also see that the potential is subleading in 1/n . the
leading term in the long distance computation (r >> lp) is nominally of order n 2 (coming
from all pairwise interactions between the branes), but because this is the same as in the
n = 8 theory it is n 2  0 = 0. on the other hand, the interaction between the singularity
and the branes is of order n , because there is only one singularity.

the computation that we would like to do is to check the stability of the ads to

fragmentation along the at directions in the near horizon geometry. the idea is to separate

the branes into several clusters and compute the potential as a function of separation. for

simplicity we will focus on the case of a single cluster away from the singularity (i.e., two

clusters which are the images of each other).

2 we are referring to the at directions of the xed point theory in the ir rather than to those

of the uv theory which ows to it.

3.1. the approximate solution along the at directions

we will start with the supergravity solution representing two clusters of m2-branes

in at space and then orbifold this solution. the metric for several parallel d3-branes

in at space was written in [1] and it is straightforward to generalize the ansatz [16] to

m2-branes:

ds2 = f 2/3dx2 + f 1/3(dr2 + r2d2)

(3.1)

gx0x1x2ri  rif 1(r),

where g is the 4-form eld strength and f is an harmonic function of the 8-vector r. to

obtain the situation with two clusters each containing n m2-branes we set

f (r) =

n l6
p

|r  a|6 +

n l6
p

|r + a|6 ,

where the 8-vector a is the position of the cluster. from the eld theory point of view it
is convenient to do a rescaling ui = ri/l

p [1].

3
2

next we want to orbifold this background. orbifolding introduces an ir8/zz2 singu-
larity at r = 0. to facilitate the analysis of this background it is convenient to further

rescale the coordinates so that the metric near the origin is the canonical at metric on
ir11:

yi =(cid:18) 2n l6
a6 (cid:19)

p

1
3

xi, zi =(cid:18) 2n l6
a6 (cid:19) 1

p

6

ri,

(3.2)

after which the metric and the 4-form are given by the same ansatz but with the following
harmonic function: f :

f =

1/2
z

(2n)1/6lp(cid:12)(cid:12)6 +

1/2
z

(2n)1/6lp(cid:12)(cid:12)6 ,

(cid:12)(cid:12)n +

(cid:12)(cid:12)n 

where n is a unit 8-vector in the direction of a.

since the metric near the origin is the canonical one, and for large n all curvatures

and eld strengths are small there, it is easy to insert the elds of the zz2 singularity at
z = 0. one can identify the following regions in the orbifolded background:

1. z2 < l2
p:

inside this region the curvature and the eld strength produced by the

singularity are large. our knowledge of this this region is not better or worse than that
of the ir8/zz2 singularity in at space. the elds due to the clusters of m2-branes (the
curvature and the 4-form) are of order 1/n

6 there.

1

2. the elds produced by the singularity and the elds produced by the branes are

comparable when

1
z7 

1

1
6

n

.

at this point both are weak and can be treated using perturbation theory around at space

(locally).

1

3. at z  n

6 n we approach the cluster of m2-branes around which the space looks
like ads4  s7. this describes an n = 8 ir xed point to which our theory ows along
this at direction.

in the region z > lp, the elds produced by the singularity are small, and so are the
elds of the original background. the gravity background is therefore under control, and

furthermore, the corrections to the background due to the introduction of the singularity

are small as well. in the following subsection we will extract the inuence of this small

correction on the potential along the at directions.

3.2. the potential along the at directions

we would like to know whether, upon the introduction of the singularity, there is

a potential which drives the center of the cluster to the origin or repels it. this poten-

tial is subleading in the 1/n expansion and can be easily computed if one neglects the

back-reaction of the singularity on the rest of the geometry. we saw above that this

approximation is valid for z > lp.

within this approximation the computation is straightforward. if we were allowed to

choose the mass (m) and charge (q) of the singularity arbitrarily (the charge is measured
relative to the charge of the m2-branes), then there would be a line in the q  m plane,
q = m in appropriate units, on which supersymmetry is preserved. a and b singularities

correspond to two points on this line (a has negative charge, while b has positive charge).

the points corresponding to the a and b singularities which break supersymmetry also
have charges of opposite sign and lie on on the line q = m. clearly the sign of the
potential will change when going from one side of the line q = m to the other. hence one

of the susy-breaking singularities will attract the two clusters of branes, and the other

will repel them.

in more detail, the computation goes as the follows. when we take into account the

singularity the action is

l = l0 + mzr=0

d3xgind + qzr=0

c(3)

(3.3)

where l0 is the usual action of 11d supergravity and gind is the determinant of the induced
metric on the plane r = 0. the elds in l0 are the same as in the supersymmetric case,
except for a two-fold identication due to orbifolding. the terms localized at r = 0 are

due to the mass and charge of the singularity. to compute the leading contribution to the

potential in the no-back-reaction approximation one has to insert the ansatz (3.1) for the

two symmetrically separated clusters into this action.

the terms that we are interested in are the kinetic terms for ai(x) (we allow a
to depend slowly on x) and the terms that encode the interaction of clusters with the

singularity. the latter are proportional to rr=0 dxc(3) (the gravitational term gives an

equal contribution as can be seen by comparison with the supersymmetric case). this

gives a term in the eective lagrangian for a of the form

1

n z d3x(u i)6,

where u is the eld theory quantity with dimension 1/2 (u i = ai/l3/2

p

).

the kinetic term is also easy to evaluate. the functional dependence is determined

by spontaneously broken scale invariance to be proportional to

z d3x(u i)2.

the coecient in front of this term is of order n . this can be seen by rescaling the

coordinates x so that the entire metric in the new coordinates is proportional to n
3 . in
this setup it is easy to obtain the n -scaling of l0 and therefore the n -scaling of the kinetic
term.

1

the result of this computation is that for a singularity with negative charge (b) there

is an attractive potential along the at directions, while for a the potential is repulsive.

furthermore, since the potential is suppressed by powers of n , it is small at large n , and

the no-back-reaction approximation is self-consistent.

4. nonsupersymmetric duality

4.1. weakness of nonsupersymmetric duality

the statement that we are after is that of ir duality, i.e., we would like to exhibit

two distinct (weakly coupled) theories in the uv which ow in the ir to the xed point

described above. however, the duality that we obtain here will be considerably weaker

than the one obtained in cases with higher supersymmetry.

field theory considerations

the reason that the duality is weaker is the following. let us rst consider the case
n = . in this case the theory is a projection of the n = 8 theory, in the sense that its
dynamics is the same as in the latter, except that we restrict our attention to a subset of
operators [7]. the dynamics of the n = 8 theory is well understood [17] and it is known
that at the origin of its moduli space it ows from a free uv xed point to an interacting

superconformal ir xed point.

consider now the 1/n corrections to the rg ow. they are present everywhere along

the rg trajectory. such corrections, even though they are small at each point in the eld

theory parameter space, can change the global picture of the rg ow. therefore they may

change the statement that the theory ows from the gaussian xed point in the uv to the

interacting ir.

nevertheless, even with 1/n corrections taken into account, there exists an rg tra-

jectory which ends at the ir xed point and passes at a distance of order 1/n from the

gaussian xed point. therefore, if one wishes to land at the ir xed point, one needs to
x a cuto and add, besides the relevant perturbation that already exists in the n = 
theory, other operators with ne-tuned coecients suppressed by powers of 1/n . in prin-

ciple, at each order in 1/n expansion one will have to tune the coecients of all operators

allowed by symmetries, including nonrenormalizable ones (of course, we do not need to

tune these innite number of coecients independently since there would be an entire sub-

manifold of trajectories which passes close to the gaussian uv and ends in the interacting

ir). note that at large n we are still close to the free xed point at the cuto scale, but

we do not start from it in the uv. duality is thus a weaker concept, since we do not know

precisely the lagrangian at the cuto.

an example (not necessarily the specic theory we have discussed in the paper so far)

of how small subleading 1/n eects may change the global structure of the ow, and the

need to ne tune at the uv, is shown in g. 1.

m-theory considerations

in the ads/cf t correspondence the statement that for n =  the rg ow is the
same as in n = 8 is mimicked by the fact that the orbifold of the entire n = 8 solution
[15] at all scales is still a solution of the classical equations of motion.

uv fixed point

b

a

ir fixed point

figure 1: global aspects of the ow. black arrows are the leading n contri-
bution. dashed/white arrows are the subleading n correction. line a is the
modied ow from the uv xed point. line b is the ne tuned trajectory
needed to hit the ir xed point (we have neglected the fact that the ir xed
point moves a bit once 1/n corrections are included.

consider now 1/n corrections. these corrections are present at each value of u

(where u is the additional coordinate in the ads, which contains information about the

rg ow). the zeroth order solution is no longer a solution and we need to correct it.
when correcting it we may either keep the boundary conditions at u =  xed or the
behavior at u = 0 xed. in the rst case we keep the uv of the theory xed but then the

corrections at u = 0 may be signicant and the solution there may longer by approaching

ads. instead we would like to keep the ads near u = 0 but we can do so at the price of
maybe changing the u =  behavior.

one may ask whether from the supergravity description one can argue that the eld

theory becomes a gaussian theory in the uv. it would seem that the answer is no. the

reason is that in the supergravity solution all that one sees near the boundary of the

space-time are large curvatures [15]. without independent means of computing at large

curvature, all one can say is that this is consistent with the eld theory becoming weakly

coupled in the uv. one may perhaps also deduce the number of degrees of freedom from

black hole entropy counting, or other dominant eects, but one can not argue that one

knows exactly the lagrangian of this weakly coupled theory at some given cuto.

4.2. an example of a nonsupersymmetric dual pair

we need to exhibit two distinct theories which ow in the ir to the theory of anti-m2
branes near the b-singularity. for example, we may consider (ir7  s1)/zz2 orbifolds of
m-theory of types ab and bb and probe them with anti-m2-branes. at weak coupling (i.e.
when the radius of s1 is small) the m-theory orbifold of type bb becomes an fo2
branes in this limit. naively, one expects the theories of anti-d2 branes probing the fo2
and o2+ planes to be ir dual. as explained above, this is only literally true for n = ,
and for nite n one may need to add renormalizable and nonrenormalizable operators with

plane in
iia, while the orbifold of type ab becomes an o2+ plane. anti-m2 branes become anti-d2
+

+

ne-tuned coecients in order to preserve duality. an analogous supersymmetric duality

was suggested in [12]. the dierence is that in the supersymmetric case the theories have

a moduli space of vacua, and to see the duality one needs to go to a specic place in the

moduli space. we have argued above that in the nonsupersymmetric case the moduli space

is lifted at subleading order in the 1/n expansion, so both theories have a unique vacuum

and no tuning of the moduli is necessary.

the theories on anti-d2 branes are of course gauge theories. they are closely related

to n = 8 theories on d2 branes probing the same backgrounds;
elds are identical. to obtain the spectrum of fermions recall that the eld theory on

in fact, the bosonic

n (anti-)d2 branes near an orientifold 2-plane is obtained by orientifolding the spectrum
of the n = 8 u (2n ) theory. in the supersymmetric case the projection is identical for
fermions and bosons, while in the nonsupersymmetric case the projection for the fermions

has an extra minus sign compared to that for the bosons. it follows that the spectrum
(resp. o2+) orientifold contains
gauge bosons and seven real scalars in the adjoint of so(2n + 1) (resp. sp(2n )) and

of the gauge theory of n anti-d2 branes near an fo2

+

eight majorana fermions in the symmetric tensor representation of so(2n + 1) (resp.

antisymmetric tensor representation of sp(2n )). we do not know the precise lagrangian,

for reasons explained above. at leading order in 1/n the lagrangian can be obtained by
taking the corresponding n = 8 lagrangian describing d2 branes and replacing fermions
in the adjoint by fermions in the appropriate tensor representation of the gauge group.

this lagrangian is superrenormalizable. we expect that all terms allowed by symmetries,

including nonrenormalizable ones, would have to be included at next-to-leading order if
one wants to ow to the cft described by the skew-whied ads4  irp7.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank o. aharony, s. kachru, e. silverstein, and m. strassler for

useful discussions. the work of mb is supported by nsf grant phy-9513835. the work

of ak is supported by doe grant de-fg02-90er40542.

references

[1] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and supergrav-

ity, hep-th/9711200, adv. theor. math. phys.2,231,1998

[2] e. witten, anti-de-sitter space and holography, hep-th/9802150, adv. theor.
math. phys.2,253,1998; s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, gauge
theory correlators from noncritical string theory, hep-th/9802109, phys. lett.b
428,105,1998

[3] s. kachru and e. silverstein, 4-d conformal theories and strings on orbifolds,

hep-th/9802183, phys. rev. lett. 80,4855,1998

[4] m. berkooz and s.-j. rey, nonsupersymmetric stable vacua of m-theory, hep-

[5]

th/9807200, jhep 9901:014,1999
i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, d-branes and dual gauge theories in type 0
string, hep-th/9811035; i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, asymptotic freedom and
infrared behavior in the type 0 string approach to gauge theory, hep-th/9812089;
i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, a nonsupersymmetric large n cft from type 0
string theory, hep-th/9901101; a.a. tseytlin and k. zarembo, eective potential
in non-supersymmetric su (n )  su (n ) gauge theory and interactions of type 0
d3-brane, hep-th/9902095

[6] n. nekrasov and s.l. shatashvili, on nonsupersymmetric cft in four dimensions,

hep-th/9902110

[7] m. bershadsky, z. kakushadze and c. vafa, string expansion as large n expan-
sion of gauge theory, hep-th/9803076, nucl. phys. b523,59, 1998; z. kakushadze,
gauge theories from orientifolds and large n limit hep-th/9803214, nucl. phys.
b529, 157,1998; m. bershadsky and a. johansen, large n limit of orbifold field
theories, hep-th/9803249, nucl. phys. b536,141, 1998

[8] t. banks and a. zaks, on the phase structure of vector-like gauge theories with

massless fermions, nucl. phys. b196,189,1982.

[9] j. maldacena, j. michelson and a. strominger, anti-de-sitter fragmentation, hep-

th/9812073

[10] m. berkooz and a. kapustin, work in progress
[11] e. witten, baryons and branes in ads, hep-th/9804001, jhep 9807:006,1998
[12] s. sethi, a relation between n=8 gauge theories in three dimensions, hep-

th/9809162, jhep 9811:003,1998

[13] m. berkooz and a. kapustin, new ir dualities in supersymmetric gauge theories,

hep-th/9810257, to be published in jhep.

[14] m.j. du, b.e.w. nilsson and c.n. pope, phys. rep. 130,1,1986 ; m.j. du, b.e.w.
nilsson and c.n. pope, spontaneous supersymmetry breaking by the squashed
seven-sphere, phys. rev. 50,2043,1983, erratum 51, 846,1983.

[15] n. itzhaki, j. maldacena, j. sonnenschein and s. yankielowicz, supergravity and the
large n limit of theories with sixteen supercharges, hep-th/9802042, phys. rev.
d58,46,1998

[16] a. fayyazuddin and m. spalinski, large n superconformal gauge theories and
supergravity orientifolds, hep-th/9805096, nucl. phys. b535,219,1998; o. aharony,
a. fayyazuddin and j. maldacena, the large n limit of n=2,1 field theories from
threebranes in f-theory, hep-th/9806159, jhep 9807:013,1998; a. kehagias, new
type iib vacua and their f-theory interpretation, hep-th/9805131, phys. lett.
b435,337,1998

[17] n. seiberg, notes on theories with sixteen supercharges, hep-th/9705117, nucl.

phys. proc. suppl.67:158-171,1998

[18] b. biran, a. casher, f. englert, m. rooman and p. spindel, the fluctuating seven
sphere in eleven dimensional supergravity, phys. lett. 134b,179,1984; l. castellani,
r. dauria, p. fre, k.pilch and p. van nieuwenhuizen, the bosonic mass formula
for freund-rubin solution of d=11 supergravity general coset manifolds, class.
quant. grav. 1,229,1984

[19] o. aharony, y. oz and z. yin, m-theory on ads(p )s(11p ) and superconformal

field theories, hep-th/9803051, phys.lett.b430,87,1998

