9
9
9
1

 
r
a

m
4

 

 
 

1
v
4
4
0
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

when radiative corrections are nite

but undetermined

r. jackiw

mit center for theoretical physics

cambridge, massachusetts

rajaramanfest, new delhi, march 1999

abstract

in quantum eld theory radiative corrections can be nite but undeter-
mined.

1 introduction

the following situation is familiar in quantum eld theory. one begins with
a eld-theoretic lagrange density that contains, in addition to its kinetic term,
various further contributions, which at tree level describe masses of excitations
and coupling strengths of interactions. one might suppose that these take on
denite classical values and attempt to compute corrections that arise when
the elds are quantized. while the hope is that such corrections are small  o()
 mostly one nds that they are innite. it is then said that these quantities
 masses and coupling strengths  are not calculable, and the classical plus
(innite) quantal contributions are dened to take on denite, experimentally
determined values. in this way, the program of renormalization, renormalization
group, running coupling constants, and so on, becomes an essential part of the
theory.

mit-ctp#2835 hep-th/9903044

this work is partially supported by the us dept. of

energy (doe) under cooperative research agreement de-fc02-94er40818.

2 schwinger model

2

but this is not the only scenario. there are also favorable situations where a
tree-level value can be assigned; the quantum correction is calculable and nite,
giving a denite (usually small) contribution. a physical example is the mag-
netic moment of leptons, where the tree-level value of 2 for the g-factor acquires
precisely determined quantal corrections, which these days are calculated and
measured to six signicant gures. a theoretical example is provided by the
schwinger model  two-dimensional qed with massless fermions. the massless
photon of the tree approximation acquires at one loop (which is exact in this
simple model) the mass e2/, where e is the coupling strength with dimension-
ality of (mass)1/2.
[a similar eect is believed to happen in three-dimensional
non-abelian gauge theories, with radiatively induced mass o(g), where g is the
coupling strength with dimensionality of mass.]

in this essay, presented to duggy rajaraman on the occasion of a signicant
birthday, i call attention to a third possibility.
it can happen that radiative
corrections are nite, but not determined by the theory; so, just as for innite
radiative corrections, their values are only xed by experiment. rajaraman and i
discussed an example of this 15 years ago [1], and more recently another instance
has been encountered [2].

2 schwinger model

although the schwinger model is simple, much studied, and well understood, a
close examination is useful for my further discussion. the quantity of interest is
the eective action, radiatively induced by fermions:

s(a) = i ln det(i6   e6a) .

(1)

possible mass generation is seen in the o(a2) contribution, which for this
model determines s(a) completely. to this end one computes the vacuum
polarization, given in momentum space by



s (p) = i trz d2k

(2)2  i
6 k



i

6 k + 6p

.

(2a)

the integral is logarithmically divergent, hence shifting integration variables does
not alter its value. after the divergent part is identied and separated, the

2 schwinger model

convergent part is evaluated, with the result



s (p) = tr 1

2

 + 1

(cid:16)g
2 

pp

p2 (cid:17)

where



  2iz d2k

(2)2

(k2g + 2kk)

(k2  2)2

3

(2b)

(2c)

 should be proportional to g.

to make progress i must assign a value to 

s (p) is not gauge invariant  it is not transverse to p.

and 2 is an arbitrary infrared cuto, whose value does not aect 
 . note
that in general 
in
fact the tensor is traceless in (, ), a feature already recognized in the integral
representation (2a) when it is remembered that in two dimensions, 6 k = 0.
 . but no unique value can be
given, because the integral is divergent, that is, undened. by lorentz invariance,

in two dimensions any lorentz-invariant
prescription for calculating the integral will give a vanishing value, 
 = 0,
consistent with its being proportional to g and traceless. gauge invariance
is regained by using, for instance, pauli-villars regularization: the pauli-villars
regulator elds give an additional contribution 
s (p)+
pv = 1
is transverse. alternatively, an evaluation of 
 by dimensional regularization
gives 
s (p). but
i shall not adopt these regularization procedures. the viewpoint that i prefer
will be used in the analysis of the models considered below, for which the above
regularization methods are problematical.

2 g, which also leads to a gauge-invariant result for 

2 g, so that 

 = 1

pv

since dierent evaluations of 

 produce dierent results, i propose that
 = ag, where a is dimensionless and as yet undetermined. this ansatz is

consistent with the fact that in s(a), terms cubic and higher in a are well de-
ned (actually they vanish), while the quadratic term can have an undetermined,
local contribution.

thus within my viewpoint, the feynman graphs of the schwinger model need
not be regulated, but they give a vacuum polarization with an undetermined local
part:



s (p) = 1

 (cid:18)g(cid:16) 1 + a

2 (cid:17) 

pp

p2 (cid:19) .

(3)

3 first example: chiral schwinger model

4

now i make use of the formal gauge invariance of the schwinger model and
enquire whether it is possible to x the ambiguity in (3) by insisting that this
symmetry is preserved: 
s (p) should be transverse. indeed this is possible; the
choice a = 1 yields the conventional result for the vacuum polarization in this
model



s (p) = 1

(cid:16)g 

and a photon mass

m2 =

e2


.

pp

p2 (cid:17)

(4)

(5)

note that by adopting the transverse expression for the vacuum polarization, in
order to agree with the constraint of gauge invariance, i have abandoned another
formal feature: tracelessness of 

s (p).

i have passed slowly and laboriously over familiar ground so that new ter-
ritories can be explored quickly. the key point is that regularization has been
avoided. while usual regularization methods, for example, pauli-villars or di-
mensional, can be successfully used in the schwinger model, i shall now examine
models for which these regularizations are unavailable or inappropriate. never-
theless, nite but undetermined radiative corrections can be calculated, and then
further properties of the theory are brought to bear on the question of whether
or not the arbitrariness can be removed.

3 first example: chiral schwinger model

my rst example is the one that rajaraman and i studied in 1985 [1]: the chiral
schwinger model, where the vector interaction of the schwinger model is replaced
by a chiral interaction e(1 + 5)6a, 5 =  0 1. the relevant induced action now
reads

cs(a) = i ln det(cid:0)i6   e(1 + 5)6a(cid:1) .

(6)

evaluation of the vacuum polarization proceeds as above in the schwinger model
to the end



cs(p) = 1

(cid:16)ga  (g + )

pp

p2 (g  )(cid:17) .

(7)

3 first example: chiral schwinger model

5

here a is once again a dimensionless parameter, not determined uniquely by
the dierent procedures for calculating the fermion determinant; it gives a local,
o(a2), contribution to cs(a). note further that since the usual schwinger
model is the sum of two chiral models with opposite chirality, combining (7)
with its chiral partner (  ) reproduces formula (3) for 
can a regulator method be implemented here, as it can be for the schwinger
model, to remove the ambiguity? pauli-villars regulators with massive fermions
are obviously inappropriate because the chiral interaction requires massless fer-
mions. dimensional regularization is problematic with a 5 matrix, which is
dimension specic. so there only remains the possibility of enforcing gauge
invariance  a formal property of the theory.

s (p).

however, unlike for the schwinger model, imposing transversality on 

cs(p)
does not determine a, because the longitudinal part does not vanish for any value
of a:

p

cs(p) = 1

(cid:0)p(a  1) + p(cid:1) .

(8)

this of course is another face of the two-dimensional chiral anomaly [3]  owing
to the anomalous nonconservation of the chiral current, the quantized chiral
schwinger model is not gauge invariant. nevertheless, it possesses a physical
spectrum for a > 1, with radiatively induced photon mass m:

m2 =

e2


a2
a  1

.

(9)

thus here radiative corrections are nite but undetermined, so that if a physical
setting for this model can be found (perhaps in a description of edge states in
the quantum hall eect), the value of a and m is xed only by experiment.

finally we note that for a 6= 0, a formal property of the chiral schwinger
model is abandoned: owing to the two-dimensional identity  5 = , the
gauge eld a enters (6) only on the combination (g + )a, which is con-
[in
sistent with the unique, absorptive part of (7), but not with the real part.
the present context, this corresponds to abandoning the tracelessness of 
s (p)
for the vector schwinger model.]

4 second example: triangle graphs

6

4 second example: triangle graphs

my second example of nite but undetermined radiative corrections is even older
 i recall the massless, fermionic triangle-loop graphs in four dimensions with
vector, vector, and axial vector vertices: (p, q). (the incoming vector mo-
menta are p and q, while the outgoing axial vector momentum is p +q [3, 4].)
because three fermion propagators determine the triangle, the feynman graphs
are (supercially) linearly divergent (even though an eventual evaluation, relying
on a lorentz-invariant calculation, yields a nite answer). however, owing to the
linear divergence, shifting the integration momentum in the closed loop changes
the value of the integral, so that there is an essential ambiguity in (p, q): an
evaluation of the integral produces some preferred form, plus an undetermined
contribution proportional to (p  q):

(p, q)  (p, q) + ia(p  q) .

(10)

here a is a dimensionless constant, controlling the magnitude of an arbitrary
local part. turning to symmetries/formal properties to x a, i try to make use
of the conservation of the vector current and (since fermions are massless) of the
axial vector current, thereby requiring transversality of (p, q) in each index.
but as is well known, for no value of a can this condition be satised, and this is
another face of the four-dimensional chiral anomaly. the situation is completely
analogous to the chiral schwinger model. so we must abandon some of the formal
properties, and settle for transversality in the vector indices or in the axial vector,
but not in all three. moreover, the calculation of the radiative correction cannot
decide which option to choose  this must come from elsewhere in the theory. in
other words, the correct answer for the triangle graph is not intrinsic to it, but
depends on the context in which it arises. thus, for example, when the vector
indices couple to photons and refer to gauge currents, while the axial vector refers
to a global chiral symmetry, the choice is made to preserve transversality of the
vector indices and to abandon axial-vector transversality. this is the situation
for 0  2 decay [5]. on the other hand, in the standard model of particle
physics, when axial vertices are part of the chiral coupling to gauge elds and
a vector index refers to a global fermion-number current, transversality of the
former rather than the latter is enforced. this is the situation with t hoofts
celebrated calculation of proton decay in the standard model [6].

5 third example: induced lorentz-ptc symmetry breaking

7

i must emphasize that both pauli-villars and a specic dimensional regular-
ization [7] preserve vector gauge invariance. nevertheless, as explained above,
this need not be the correct choice if chiral invariance should be enforced.

note that once a decision is made about which symmetry (transversality)
should be preserved, a unique value for (p, q) is established. an arbitrary
value persists only when no symmetry is enforced.

5 third example: induced lorentz-ptc

symmetry breaking

it is known that if one adds to conventional four-dimensional maxwell electro-
dynamics the lorentz- and ptc-violating chern-simons term

l = 1

2 cfa

(11)

where c selects a xed direction in spacetime, light from distant galaxies under-
goes a faraday-like rotation [8]. observation of distant galaxies puts a stringent
bound on this vacuum birefringence: c should eectively vanish [8, 9]. an
important feature of the chern-simons term is that its lagrange density is not
gauge invariant: l depends on a. however, the action, the spacetime inte-
gral of the density, is gauge invariant because under a gauge transformation l
changes by a total derivative. correspondingly, the euler-lagrange equations
remain gauge invariant, even in the presence of the gauge-noninvariant chern-
simons density [10].

a natural question is whether such a term could be induced through radiative
corrections when lorentz and ptc symmetries are violated in other parts of a
larger theory.

for deniteness, consider the fermionic lagrange density of conventional
qed, extended to include a lorentz- and ptc-violating axial vector term [11,
12, 13]

lextended = (cid:0)i6   e6a  m  6 b5(cid:1)

(12)

where 5 is hermitian with tr 5 = 4i and b is a constant, pre-
scribed 4-vector. one is then led to enquire whether the eective action

(a) = i ln det(cid:0)i6   e6a  m  6 b5(cid:1)

(13)

5 third example: induced lorentz-ptc symmetry breaking

8

contains the chern-simons term (11) with c determined by b. since (11) is
bilinear in a, i examine only the o(a2) portion of (a).

a plausible approach is to calculate the lowest order in b. but then it is clear
that one again encounters triangle graphs, with two vector vertices coupling to
the two as and the axial vertex contracted with b. moreover, the axial vector
carries zero momentum:
in the notation of the previous subjection p = q,
and the relevant amplitude is b(p, p) where now (p, q) is calculated
with massive fermions. the coecient of the induced chern-simons terms is
determined by b(p, p)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0.
ously, that (p, p) is undetermined as in (10):

it follows from the property of the triangle graphs, which i reviewed previ-

(p, p)  (p, p) + 2iap .

(14)
of course gauge invariance, that is, transversality of (p, p) to p and p,
must hold. but unlike the case when the axial vector carries nonvanishing mo-
mentum, (p, p) is transverse in its photon indices for all routings of the
integration momentum, as is also seen from the form of the ambiguity: p
is transverse to p and p. therefore, the requirement of gauge invariance does
not x a value for the graphs in the present context.

the conclusion is that the radiatively induced chern-simons term, to lowest
order in b, is as in (11), with c proportional to b, but the numerical propor-
tionality constant is undetermined when the theory is considered perturbatively
in b [2, 11].

what is the situation with regulators? pauli-villars regularization removes
the induced chern-simons term. this is true because the induced undetermined
coecient is a mass-independent pure number, and an equal amount is sub-
tracted by pauli-villars regulators. dimensional regularization is problematic
in the presence of a 5 matrix, and a variety of results can be obtained when a
variety of prescriptions is made for the dimensional generalization of 5. one can
arrange a dimensional extension [7] so that the induced chern-simons coecient
vanishes.

however, these regulators are inappropriate for the following subtle reason [2].
we are seeking an induced density, (11), which is not gauge invariant, while its
spacetime integral is gauge invariant. an alternative, equivalent momentum-
space statement is that we seek a term that is gauge invariant at zero momentum,

5 third example: induced lorentz-ptc symmetry breaking

9

but not at arbitrary momenta. pauli-villars regularization and gauge-invariant
dimensional regularization enforce gauge invariance at all momenta, and there-
fore exclude a priori the generation of a chern-simons term, which does not
have this property. these regulators are not suciently ne to enforce gauge
invariance at zero momentum only. thus an undetermined but nite answer
remains.

is there any other criterion that can be brought to bear on the problem?
coleman and glashow [12] have suggested that the axial vector current be reg-
ulated so it is gauge invariant at all momenta. this gives a unique result for
the induced chern-simons term  it vanishes. however, as stated above, such
a regularization requirement (which can be implemented by pauli-villars or di-
mensional procedures [7]) is ad hoc and unjustied since the axial vector enters
into the theory only at zero momentum (it couples to an external constant, b).
demanding gauge invariance for all momenta is equivalent to demanding gauge
invariance for the unintegrated densities, and this would exclude a priori the
chern-simons term, which is not a gauge-invariant density.

curiously, a unique answer does emerge when the interaction 6 b5 is treated
nonperturbatively. note that the b-exact, o(a2) contribution to the eective
action is determined by the vacuum polarization tensor constructed with b-exact
fermion propagators

(p) = i trz d4k

(2)4 

i

6 k  m  6 b5



i

6 k + 6p  m  6 b5

.

(15)

the b-exact propagator

may be decomposed as

g(p) =

i

6 k  m  6 b5

g(p) = s(p)  ig(p)6 b5s(p)  s(p) + gb(p)

where s(p) is the free propagator

s(p) =

i

6p  m

.

(16)

(17)

(18)

5 third example: induced lorentz-ptc symmetry breaking

with decomposition (p) splits into three terms

 = 

0 + 

b + 
bb .

10

(19)

0


is the usual, lowest-order vacuum polarization tensor of qed, which i shall
not discuss further. 
bb , containing gb twice, is at least quadratic in b; it is at
most logarithmically divergent and suers no ambiguities in routing the internal
momenta. the b-linear contribution to the induced chern-simons term arises
from 

b , which is explicitly given by



b (p) = i trz d4k

(2)4ns(k)gb(k + p) + gb(k)s(k + p)o .

(20)

there are several important features of this expression. each of the two integrals
is (supercially) linearly divergent. however, the divergences cancel when the
two terms are taken together and the traces are evaluated. as a consequence,
there is no momentum-routing ambiguity in the summed integrand. when the
integration momentum is shifted by the same amount on both integrands, the
value of the integral does not change, even though shifting separately by dif-
ferent amounts in each of the two integrands changes the value of the integral
by a surface term.
it follows that dierent momentum routings in the entire
integrand (20) leave the value of 
b unchanged, because they produce a si-
multaneous shift of integration variable by the same amount in each of the two
integrands. therefore, a unique value can be attached to 

b (p).

b (p) to lowest order in b, by replacing gb(k) with

next we evaluate 

is(k)6 b5s(k). this gives 
(p) = trz d4k

b (p)  b(p), where
(2)4ns(k)s(k + p)5s(k + p)
+ s(k) 5s(k)s(k + p)o .

(21)

when lorentz invariance is enforced, this integral may be evaluated unambigu-
ously. it leads to the nite result

(p) = ip(cid:16) 1
22(cid:16) 

= i p

82 +

sin  

2

2m

2 z 
4(cid:17)

1

d

m2

2  4m2

1

p2  2  i(cid:17)

(22)

5 third example: induced lorentz-ptc symmetry breaking

where  = 2 sin1pp2/2m, so that
(p)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)p2=0

=

3i
82 p

and the chern-simons coecient is unambiguously [2, 13]

c =

3
162 b .

11

(23a)

(23b)

what is the dierence between the present calculation and the perturbative
ones that leave c undetermined? eq. (21) does indeed exhibit the vector, vec-
tor, axial vector triangle graphs, with zero 4-momentum in the axial vertex,
as in the b-perturbative calculation. however, here the two triangle graphs
have their integration momenta routings correlated, since they descend from the
single, b-exact formula (15). in b-perturbation theory, no correlation is deter-
mined a priori between the momentum routings of the two graphs.
if in the
perturbative calculation the relative routings are as in (21), the resulting ex-
pression coincides with (22). otherwise a shift of integration variables in one
integrand relative to the other produces the conguration (21), but generates a
surface contribution. therefore, a b-perturbative calculation gives (22) with an
undetermined polynomial contribution

(p) = ip(cid:16) a
22(cid:16) 

= i p

22 +
sin   a(cid:17)

2

2 z 

2m

d

m2

2  4m2

1

p2  2 + i(cid:17)

leading to a chern-simons density with strength

c =

1
42 (1  a)b .

(24)

(25)

note that gauge invariance is preserved for all a, in the sense that p(p) = 0.
(in momentum space one does not see the gauge noninvariance of the position-
space chern-simons density.)

as in our other examples, the arbitrary term is a local contribution to the
eective action (13) and in a dispersive representation, as in (24), it contributes
a real subtraction, even though the unique absorptive part permits presenting
an unsubtracted integral

6 conclusion

12

an open question remains whether the unique result obtained by the non-

perturbative evaluation has any deeper signicance.

[the demand that triangle graphs be evaluated so that they are gauge in-
variant with arbitrary momentum in the axial vector vertex [12], can be met
by a particular routing of the integration momentum [2, 3] or by pauli-villars
regularization, or by a particular dimensional regularization [7]; one nds a = 1
and c = 0. but there is no a priori reason for placing this requirement on
the theory, and one may view its consequence (c = 0) as tautological, since a
chern-simons term does not enjoy such a strong form of gauge invariance.]

experiment eectively prohibits a chern-simons term in qed, and i conclude
that the conjectural noninvariant addition to fermion dynamics, 6 b5, is absent
altogether (if the nonperturbative approach is taken) or that the ambiguity is
xed so that c = 0 (if the undetermined perturbative calculation is taken).
when several dierent fermion species participate in the lorentz- and ptc-
violating interaction, another possibility emerges: contributions from dierent
fermions may sum to zero [11].

6 conclusion

the various radiative corrections that i surveyed (g  2, induced mass in the
schwinger and chiral schwinger models, triangle graphs of the chiral anomaly, in-
duced lorentz and ptc-violating chern-simons term) behave variously in their
calculability. can one formulate a criterion that will settle a priori whether the
radiative correction produces a denite or indenite result? the above exam-
ples suggest the following rule: if the form of the radiative correction is such
that inserting it into the bare lagrangian would interfere with symmetries of the
model or would spoil renormalizability, then the radiative result will be nite and
uniquely xed. alternatively, if modifying the bare lagrangian by the radiative
correction preserves renormalizability and retains the symmetries of the theory,
then the radiative calculation will not produce a denite result  it is as if the
term in question is already present in the bare lagrangian with an undetermined
strength, and the radiative correction adds a further undetermined contribution.
with this criterion, the radiatively induced g2 pauli term in qed and the pho-
ton mass in the schwinger model are unique, because in the former case a pauli

6 conclusion

13

term in the bare lagrangian would spoil renormalizability, and in the latter, a
photon mass term would spoil gauge invariance. correspondingly, in the quanti-
ed chiral schwinger model, the chiral anomaly spoils gauge invariance, so there
is no symmetry prohibiting inserting a photon mass in the bare lagrangian,
and indeed the radiatively induced mass is undetermined. similarly with the
symmetry-violating chern-simons term: ignoring experimental constraints and
allowing symmetry violation in the fermion sector permits insertion of a chern-
simons term in the lagrange density, so the radiatively induced chern-simons
term can have an arbitrary coecient. (the subtlety here is that one must al-
low for calculational schemes that permit gauge noninvariance on the level of a
position-space density.) finally, the triangle graphs of the axial vector anomaly
take on a unique value once it is decided which symmetries are preserved, vector
or chiral. in either case they induce a process that, if inserted as a vertex in the
bare lagrangian, would destroy renormalizability: the induced 0 decay vertex
is 0ff and the induced baryon decay amplitude involves high powers
of fermi elds. thus the radiatively induced values are unique.

when a radiative correction is innite, there must be a term in the bare
lagrangian of similar form to absorb the innity through renormalization. the
nite but undetermined radiative corrections, which i have discussed, are seen
to be similar to the innite ones, and their nite value does not enhance the
predictability of the theory.

references

[1] r. jackiw and r. rajaraman, vector meson mass generation through chiral
anomalies, phys rev lett 54:1219(1985); (e) 54:2060(1985); (c) 55:2224(1985).

[2] r. jackiw and v. kostelecky, radiatively induced lorentz and cpt violation

in electrodynamics (indiana, mit preprint; hep-ph/9901358).

[3] for a review see r. jackiw, field theoretic investigations in current algebra
and topological investigations of quantized gauge theories in s. treiman,
r. jackiw, b. zumino, and e. witten, current algebra and anomalies (princeton
university press/world scientic, princeton nj/singapore, 1985).

[4] for a review see s. adler, perturbation theory anomalies in lectures on
elemetary particles and quantum field theory, s. deser, m. grisaru, and
h. pendleton, eds. (mit press, cambridge ma, 1970).

6 conclusion

14

[5] j. bell and r. jackiw, a pcac puzzle: 

0   in the -model, nuovo cimento
60a:47(1969); s. adler, axial-vector vertex in spinor electrodynamics, phys rev
177:2426(1969).

[6] g. t hooft, symmetry breaking through bell-jackiw anomalies, phys rev lett

37:8(1976).

[7] m. peskin and d. schroeder, an introduction to quantum field theory (addison-

wesley, reading ma, 1995), p. 661.

[8] s. carroll, g. field, and r. jackiw, limits on a lorentz and parity violating

modication of electrodynamics, phys rev d 41:1231(1990).

[9] m. goldhaber and v. trimble, limits on the chirality of interstellar and inter-
galactic space, j astrophys astr 17:17(1996); s. carroll and g. field, is there
evidence for cosmic anisotrophy in the polarization of distand radio sources?,
phys rev lett 79:234(1997).

[10] s. deser, r. jackiw, and s. templeton, topologically massive gauge theories,

ann phys (ny) 140:372(1982); (e) 185:406(1988).

[11] d. colladay and v. kostelecky, lorentz violating extension of the standard

model, phys rev d 58:116002(1998).

[12] s. coleman and s. glashow, high-energy tests of lorentz invariance (harvard
university preprint, hep-ph/9812418v3); see also a. andrianov, r. soldati, and
l. sorbo, dynamical lorentz symmetry breaking from 3+1 axion-wess-zumino
model, phys rev d 59:025002(1999).

[13] j.-m. chung and p. oh, lorentz and cpt violating chern-simons term in the

derivative expansion of qed (mit preprint, hep-th/9812132v3).

