9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
2
2

 
 

1
v
0
8
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

a critique of the gauge technique

r. delbourgo

school of mathematics and physics, university of tasmania
gpo box 252-21, hobart, australia 7001

abstract
a summary of the successes of and obstacles to the gauge technique (a non-
perturbative method of solving dyson-schwinger equations in gauge theories) is
given, as well as an outline of how progress may be achieved in this eld.

1 the gauge technique

nature seems inordinately fond of gauge theories. chromodynamics, elec-
troweak theory and gravitation are all based on the gauge principle, featuring
the groups su(3), su(2)u(1) and sl(2,c), respectively. it is quite likely
that any unied gauge model of the fundamental forces will also be a gauge
eld theory and it is conceivable that a supersymmetric version, in some
higher dimension, will be founded on a local supergauge principle, although
nature seems reticent to display her supersymmetric hand in the low energy
spectrum of states.

whenever a eld theory is invariant under local group transformations,
the resulting green functions obey a series of gauge covariance relations
which specify how the functions change under a variation of gauge1. in qed
these relations were originally found by landau and khalatnikov (1956, lk

1 purely photonic processes and amplitudes involving on-shell fermions remain gauge-

invariant of course.

1

for short); later on, johnson and zumino (1959) and zumino (1960) rederived
them using functional methods. an immediate consequence of these ideas
is the famous divergence properties of green functions at each vector leg,
named ward-green-takahashi (wgt) identities after their early discoverers
(ward 1950; green 1953; takahashi, 1957).

heroic eorts have been expended in determining the behaviour of o-
shell green functions. this program has be carried out to high accuracy
in perturbation theory for the standard model of particle physics and the
results (at least for asymptotic momenta in qcd) are quite reliable because
the perturbation series converge to the order in which they have been cal-
culated so far and also because the model is renormalizable2. an alternative
approach is to solve the full set of dyson-schwinger (ds) equations connect-
ing the various green functions by some suitable truncation procedure. for
instance, one simple way is to sum the rainbow diagrams of the self-energy
or the ladder diagrams of the vertex, which amounts to simplifying the ds
equations for the two- and three-point functions in a particular way. by this
means one can already discern the phase structure of a model as the coupling
runs through certain critical values.

in gauge theories, thanks to the existence of wgt identities between
successive n-point green functions, a more sophisticated approach suggests
itself. the identities allow one to determine (longitudinal) pieces of the green
function in terms of the function with one less vector particle3. hence if one
discards transverse parts of the green function (orthogonal to the photon
momentum) or at least ties them in a particular fashion to the longitudinal
parts, then this amounts to a truncation which produces a closed set of
equations among the functionsto some level of approximation depending
on n. for want of better terminology, we will coin this procedure the gauge
technique after salam (salam 1963; salam and delbourgo 1964; strathdee
1964)even though it was originally tied to a specic way of solving the
gauge identities and began at level n = 2. anyway, armed with solutions of

2they will eventually go wrong because the series in e2 is believed to be only an

asymptotic one.

3there is even a curly version of such identities, obtained by takahashi; they are
rather more complicated than the ordinary divergence and we will have little to say about
them in this paper. however in 2-dimensions, it should be noted that they are equivalent
to the axial gauge identities (delbourgo and thompson 1982; thompson 1983; kondo
1997).

2

the ds equations, one may go on to calculate quantities of physical interest,
such as decay constants of hadrons (maris and roberts 1997; ivanov et al
1998). this approach (thompson and zhang 1987; roberts and williams
1994) can be carried out in any number of space-time dimensions d and for
any physical fermion mass m and it is quite interesting to see how the results
depend on d and m separately, in various background (cornwall 1986; maris
and roberts 1998) congurations (temperature, eld, etc.).

in this paper we shall focus primarily on the archetype gauge theory,
qed. this has the advantage of yielding simple abelian identities and of
bringing into relief the principal obstacles which the gauge technique must
circumvent before it can be considered a fully-edged method, with results
that are above reproach. the purpose of this paper is to highlight some of
these problems and to suggest possible ways in which some progress may be
achieved.

since we are dealing with gauge theories, the rst issue we face is the
gauge covariance of the technique, i.e. how well do the green functions solu-
tions obey the lk relations. the second question concerns the comparison
with perturbation theory (in the ne structure constant ), i.e. how closely
do the non-perturbative answers coincide with the perturbation series if we
try to expand them in . the third matter refers to the level of approxima-
tion, i.e. to what extent do the results change with the level of truncation n.
since the technique concentrates primarily on the charged particle functions,
the fourth issue is what happens to vector propagation, i.e. how will vac-
uum polarization pan out in such schemes: this is an serious matter because
photon renormalization, not electron renormalization, governs the momen-
tum dependence of the running charge. indeed vertex and charged particle
renormalizations are largely irrelevant: they are gauge-dependent and can-
cel out, leaving little physical trace. it means that going from quenched to
unquenched solutions represents a major step physically.

if these issues can be claried in qed, there are denite lessons (pa-
pavassiliou and cornwall 1986; alekseev 1998; cahill and gunner 1998) for
qcd and gravity.

3

2 gauge identities and sd equations

first we set up the framework for the ensuing discussion by summarising
quickly the identities and the coupled equations for green functions in qed.
if nothing else this will x our notation. let g1,2,.(p1, p2, .; k1, k2, .) stand
for a connected time-ordered green function, with electron momenta p and
photon momenta k, as labelled. it is usual to write g(p) = s(p) and g(k) =
d(k) for the two-point electron and photon propagators respectively. it is
convenient often to dene the one-particle irreducible green functions (p; k)
by dropping all the pole parts of g(p; k) and by multiplying out by the
inverse propagators of the external lines; for instance, the 3-vertex function
(p, p; k) with k = pp arises via g(p, p; k)  s(p)(p, p; k)s(p)d(k),
while the compton part (p, p; k, k) of electron photon scattering occurs
in

g(p, p; k, k)  d(k)s(p)[(p, p; k, k) 

(p, p + k; k)s(p + k)(p + k, p; k) 
(pk, p; k)s(pk)(p, pk; k)]s(p)d(k) (1)

etc. the x-space fourier transforms are obtained as convolutions; thus

g(x, y; z) = z d4xd4y d4zd(z  z)s(x  x)(x, y ; z)s(y   y),

and so on. the reason why we have mentioned the coordinate space version
is because the gauge covariance identities, to which we shall presently turn,
are best written in x-space.

the dyson-schwinger equations connect successive (renormalized) charged

green functions through the series4,

s(p)(6 p  m0) = z 1 + ie2z d4kg(p, p  k; k)

(2)

g(p, p; p  p)(6 p  m0) = s(p)  ie2z d4kg(p, p  k; p  p, k) (3)

etc. plus the uncharged cases starting with,

 = za d1(k)0

(4)
4below and later on, we adopt the notation, d4k  d4k/(2)4, 4(k) = (2)44(k), etc.

d(k)  ie2z trz d4pg(p + k, p).

4

the nonlinearity of electrodynamics becomes evident via the innite skeleton
expansion of the higher-point green functions, when one expresses the g in
terms of their 1pi counterpart functions . that is why one is obliged to
invoke some kind of truncation for solving the equations nonperturbatively,
instead of resorting to e2 expansionthe idea being that a nonperturbative
solution may reveal some dependence in 1/e2 (usually in an exponent) which
is not immediately apparent from the asymptotic e2 series.

all of the above applies, however one xes the photon gauge. now under
a change of photon gauge, d(x)  dm
(x) = d(x) m(x), the
renormalized green functions are modied in a well-dened manner from g
to gm . thus

sm (x) = exp[ie2m(x)]s(x),
gm
 (x, y; z) = exp[ie2m(xy)][g(x, y; z)+is(xy)z
{m(xz)m(yz)}],
and so on. let us call these the gauge covariance or lk relations.
it is
simple to check that they are consistent with the sd equations in any gauge.
a secondary consequence (though historically a primary one) is that the
green functions will satisfy the wgt identities,

(pp)g(p, p; p  p) = s(p)  s(p),

kg(p, p; k, k) = g(p, p + k; k)  g(p  k, p; k),

whose soft k-limit produces the ward versions, g(p, p; 0) = s(p)/p,
etc. the wgt identities also appear straightforward for the 1pi functions
, e.g.

(p  p)(p, p; p  p) = s 1(p)  s 1(p).

however the wgt identities are weaker than the lk relations, which can
themselves become quite complicated for the amputated , in contrast to
those for the full green functions g, especially when written in momentum
space. it is therefore a vexing business to verify that any , derived some-
how in some m-gauge, properly obeys the required covariance identity; by
comparison it is easier to investigate the matter for the non-amputated g.
in fact if one only amputates the photon legs, the gauge covariance relations
simplify a little further and make our task easier. for illustration, take the
vertex function ss; one nds, like sm (x  y) = exp[ie2m(x  y)]s(x  y),
that
(5)

(ss)m (x, y, ; z) = exp[ie2m(x  y)](ss)(x, y; z),

5

and z  (ss)m (x, y; z) = ism (x  y)[4(x  z)  4(y  z)].
that completes the quick tour of the basis for the gauge technique.

(6)

3 what gauge covariance implies

before tackling the spinor case, let us start with scalar electrodynamics,
where the algebra and arguments are simpler.
if  connotes the charged
scalar propagator and  the fully amputated 3-point vertex in some gauge
(specied by m = 0 say), focus on the three relations:

m (x, y) = exp[ie2m(x  y)](x, y),

()m (x, y; z) = exp[ie2m(x  y)]()(x, y; z),


z ()m (x, y; z) = im (x  y)[4(x  z)  4(y  z)],

(7)

associated with the lowest functions in a dierent gauge m. now in general,
the o-shell 3-point function can be expressed in terms of two invariants, one
associated with the longitudinal vertex and the other with a purely transverse
vertex (k = p  p):
(p, p; k) = (p+p)l(p2, p2, k2)+[k(p2p2)(p+p)k2]t (p2, p2, k2), (8)
where l and t are symmetric scalar function under p2  p2.
it follows
that, when p2 = p2, the transverse part can be eectively combined with
the longitudinal piece; this case applies in particular when one goes on the
meson mass shell.

it is the t part which largely governs5 the meson form factor because
the scalar wgt identity tells us unambiguously that the longitudinal part l
cannot depend on the invariant (p  p)2 in any gauge; for it is always true
that
(9)

lm (p2, p2) = (1 m (p)  1 m (p))/(p2  p2).

like l, the transverse contribution t must also change with gauge function
m, but in a subtler way than l and one where the (p  p)2 dependence
5it is worth noting that t has no singularities in the triangular variable k4 + p4 + p4 
2p2p2  2p2k2  2p2k2, but that if we set p2 6= p2 there do arise logarithmic divergences
(ball and chiu 1980) in perturbation theory as k2  0.

6

cannot be so easily forgotten. for suppose that in some gauge, we were to
ignore t and wrote at the very least:

()(p, p; k) = (p)(p + p)(p)l.

then in another gauge, according to (7), the result would get modied to

()(p, p; k) = z d4k(p  k)(p + p  2k)(p  k)lem (k),

where

em (k)  z d4x exp[ie2m(x) + ik  x].

(10)

a transverse amplitude t in the o-shell vertex would be ineluctably en-
trained via the momentum numerator of the integrand. for instance, start-
ing with rst order perturbation theory, a transverse lorentz-covariant lurks
within the expression

()m (p, p; k) = z d4k

(p + p  2k)em (k)

[(p  k)  m2][(p  k)2  m2]

.

(11)

only in the limit e2m = 0, when em (k) = 4(k), will such a transverse
term disappear. this argument teaches us two things about ensuring gauge
covariance for general m: (i) that it is perilous to neglect the transverse
parts of green functions in non-perturbative treatments, and (ii) that one
cannot always disregard the dependence of the amplitude on the momentum
of the vector leg, i.e. one cannot purely6 use functions of p2, p2.

the discussion increases in substance, richness and delicacy for fermions.
instead of one transverse and one longitudinal part, the vertex contains four
independent longitudinal pieces and eight transverse pieces o-shell.
in a
real tour de force, these pieces have been computed by ball and chiu (1980)
to rst order perturbation theory in the fermi-feynman gauge, and by kizil-
ersu, pennington and reenders (1995) in any gauge. being o-shell, the
answers are extremely involved and we shall content ourselves with making

6this applies with force to various improvements or corrections to the longitudinal
vertex, consistent with multiplicative renormalizability, that have been suggested (curtis
and pennington, 1993; haeri 1993). in this connection it is worth remembering that the
covariant gauge a = 3 produces a zero rst order in  correction to the scalar propagator
or to all orders, in the infrared limit.

7

three remarks: (i) there exist transverse covariants now which survive the on-
shell spinor limit, such as ik, that have important physical consequences;
(ii) no longer can one combine transverse vertices with longitudinal ones for
physical fermions7; (iii) there is a lot more freedom in solving the wgt
identity for the vertex, with distinct methods, all deemed free of unphysical
singularities and all independent of the square of the photon momentum,
yielding vertices diering by specic transverse terms t . (see the appendix
for details.) the various t arise automatically in the spinor version of (8)
for arbitrary m, so it is futile to discard them in a general gauge8 unless one
gives up on the idea of satisfying the lk relationsa big disappointment for
a gauge theory.

4 comparison with perturbation theory

if one does succeed in obtaining acceptable solutions (presumably with an
implicit dependence on e2) of the ds equations by the gauge technique, then
there is the obvious question of how well the answers stack up against pertur-
bation theory, when expanded in powers of e2. at the very least one would
hope that they would correct up to rst order in , as they are indubitably
correct to zeroth orderbut that hardly constitutes progress! it is not much
good having them agree with perturbation theory in one gauge (for some l
and t ) but being wrong in another gauge. however that is what will likely
happen from the transformation property of the g unless the various parts
carry precisely the correct dependence on m and, as stressed previously, one
countenances some k2 dependence in ss. and it is no good avouching that
the o-shell dependence of the propagator on the momentum looks reason-
able, with suitable behaviour in the infrared or ultraviolet limits, since one
can change the behaviour at will, just by choosing the gauge function m
however one likes.

to clarify these points, let us consider covariant gauges, parametrized by

7in fact because physical fermions satisfy free equations of motion, the transverse co-

variants are no longer independent but can be transmogried into one another.

8nevertheless one should recognize the privileged position of the covariant (landau)
gauge a = 0, because the rst order in  correction to the wave function renormalization
vanishes identically, as do all rainbow modications of the spinor propagator. see section
6.

8

a real number a:

da
(k) = /k2 + (1  a)kk/k4.

(the values a = 0, 1, 3 dene the landau, fermi-feynman and fried-yennie
gauges respectively.) upon introducing a regularization scale, like the elec-
tron mass m, the fourier transform of m(k)  a/k4 is obtained as im(x) =
a ln(m2x2)/162. therefore the coordinate space green functions g of
two charged elds separated by x will be multiplied by the gauge factor

exp[ie2m(x)] = (m2x2)a;

  e2/162 = /4,

with transform,

em (k) = z d4x exp(ip  x)(m2x2)a = 

162i(2  a)

k4(a)

(k2m2/4)a.

expanding in powers of e2, one can check that

em (k) = 4(k)  ie2a/k4 + o(e4),

with the second term on the right corresponding to the change of covariant
gauge parameter a to rst order perturbation theory.

the transverse term has a complicated analytic form which only simplies
in various asymptotic limits; the behaviour in the ultraviolet regime is one
such limit and king (1983) and haeri (1988) put it to good use in correcting
multiplicative renormalizability that is jeopardised in simple gauge technique
ansatze; however, their procedure fails in the soft photon limit and does not
do justice to the analytic behaviour in momentum transfer. to do better, it
is useful to look at the form of t in scalar electrodynamics say, to rst order
in  or m as above. an examination of the feynman graph integral, shows
that it can be expressed in the parametric form

(p2  p2)t =

e2

162 z ddd (1      ) 
m2(1  )  (p2 + p2)  (p  p)2

n(, , )

(12)

where the parametric numerator (for a = 1 say) is given by

n = 2(p2  p2) + (  )[p2(1  ) + p2(1  ) + m2(3  )]

9

3(  )[(p2  p2) + (p  p)2(  )].

the important thing is that the integral produces a result which vanishes for
p2 = p2.

it is interesting to see whether the answer can be rewritten as some kind of
dispersion relation. to that end, consider the self-energy rst. the standard
feynman parametric form leads to the scalar integral

i = z 1

0

d (p, )/(p2  m2).

by changing variable to w 2 = m2/, the expression above can be easily
converted into the more familiar form

i = z 

m2

(w 2)/(p2  w 2).

turning to the proper vertex part, if we make the change of variables in the
feynman parametric integral,  +  = ,    = u and  = m2/w 2, we
obtain an expression like

z 

m2

dw 2z 1

1

du n(p, p, u, w )/d(p, p, u, w ),

for the transverse part. the denominator d takes the form
p2(1 + u)/2 + p2(1  u)/2 + (p  p)2(1  u2)(1  m2/w 2)(1  u2)/4  w 2,
and we see that only near the fermion mass shell (w 2 = m2) and in the soft
photon limit can one disregard the dependence on the momentum transfer.
(in the ultraviolet limit where the spinor momentum is a long way from the
p2 = m2 one can make other sorts of approximations.)

what this exercise demonstrates is that under no stretch of the imagina-
tion can one invoke a transverse vertex which is purely a function of p2 and
p2. even an invokation like

(st

 s)(p, p) = z dw

1

6 p  w

i (p  p)

1

6 p  w

,

misses the point altogether, since it fails to include the correct analytic struc-
ture for a magnetic form factor. remember also that the covariance lk rela-
tion under change of gauge will inevitably create such structure, if none were

10

initially present. therefore we insist that any substantive improvements to
the gauge technique ought to include these kinds of eects and agree with
rst order perturbation theory at the very least. ansatze of the type,

t

 (p, p) = z 

m

dw z 1

1

du t (w )k t

 /d(p, p, u, w )

stand some chance of capturing the main feature of transverse corrections.

5 level of truncation

in an eort to improve upon the three-point green function it is good to
proceed to the next level of the ds equations. this will relate the three and
four-point green functions, via a bethe-salpeter like equationsee parker
(1984), delbourgo and zhang (1984). note that in order to make use of the
higher-point wgt identities, it is sensible to write this equation with one
of the spinor legs preferred rather than the photon leg as is normally done;
for with that choice one can use the four-point wgt identity to relate to
relate that amplitude to the three-point green function and thereby arrive at
a self-consistent equation for the three-point function. (this is in complete
analogy to the favourite way of handling the propagator and vertex function
together and we can think of it as the n = 3 level improvement of the gauge
technique, in contrast to the conventional n = 2 level).

what is more to the point is that, at this level, the longitudinal and trans-
verse vertices are treated on an equal footing while the two-point function
(propagator) is obtained secondarily through the divergence of the three-
point function. in practice, though, the equation for the vertex is very dif-
cult to solve, for one is not entirely sure of its full analytic representation,
except through the perturbation expansion. the best one can do in such cir-
cumstances is to use a double dispersion relation (in a feynman parametric
form say) and try to determine the spectral function self-consistently, but
even that is not straightforward. the only progress to date has been the de-
termination (delbourgo and zhang 1984) of the propagator spectral function
in a manner which coincides with perturbation theory to order 2. hopefully
this problem will receive due attention in future.

11

6 unquenching  vacuum polarization

in most of the self-consistent calculations of the charged eld propagator,
the photon is taken as bare: this represents the so-called quenched ap-
proximation. including the eect of vacuum polarization leads to a highly
nonlinear equation for the propagator even in the best method of solving
for the propagator, since vacuum polarization is determined by charged loop
eects; that is one of the main reasons why the problem is normally avoided.
the best that one can do in that situation is to make an inspired guess at
the behaviour of the dressed vector propagator d(k) and (i) either include
this in the computation of s(p), or (ii) introduce a running coupling in the
interaction between the vector and the charged eld. now in qed the pho-
ton receives small logarithmic corrections in the ultraviolet regime, but its
low energy properties are largely unaected; for that reason the quenched
approximation is not too drastic a procedure for electrodynamics, at least in
four dimensions9. but in qcd, the gluon exhibits asymptotic freedom in the
ultravioletagain a logarithmic correctionwhich hints at infrared slavery
(connement of colour?) at low energies and a propagator which is possibly
more singular that the undressed form (alekseev 1998; cahill and gunner
1998). thus a variety of models have been proposed and the corresponding
quark s(p) found; the results depend critically on the assumed form of d(k)
which is itself inuenced by the gluon self-interactions and the ghost eld
eects. there is still some dispute about what is the correct form of d(k)
and whether the quark propagator is an entire function of the momentum.
we do not wish to get involved in these arguments; suce it to say that the
method with the best chance of being correct is the one that handles the
gauge covariance properties correctly, in tandem with the gauge-invariant
eective coupling g = g0z 1

1 z2z 1/2

.

3

in this connection it is worth recalling (larin and vermaseren 1993) the
perturbative expansions of the beta functions for qed and qcd, which are
of course gauge independent. let   g2/162  /4 for qed. then

() = [3() + 22()  21()] 

nn+1



xn=1

9 in three dimensions charged loops alter substantially the low energy behaviour from

d(k) = 1/k2 to d(k)  1k2, while in two dimensions the vector becomes massive

through the schwinger mechanism.

12

(in qed the anomalous dimensions are equal, 2 = 1, so  = 3 is deter-
mined purely by the anomalous dimension of the photon eld.) up to three
loops,

qed =

4
3

qcd = 2"(

2(cid:20)1 + 3  (
2n
3  11)+(

11n

3
)2 + . . .(cid:21)
2
38n
3  102)(

+

3

(13)

5033n

18

+

2857

2

)2+. . .# ,

325n 2

54 

where n stands for the number of charged fermions or avours. the de-
pendence on the gauge parameter a in qed arises through the anomalous
scaling function for the spinor10,

2() = (cid:20)a 

3
2

 +

3
2

2 + . . .(cid:21) .

notice that the gauge dependence arises only at one-loop level and that it
vanishes in the landau gauge a = 0. more signicantly there are higher
order in  contributions which cannot be ignored; it is therefore fatuous to
suppose that one can simply set the coecient of 6 p in the spinor propagator
equal to one in the landau gaugethis is simply incorrect in higher orders.
anyhow it is reasonable to enquire what repercussions, if any, does the
gauge technique have on vacuum polarization. there are two important
points to check in this connection: whether the polarization tensor (k) is
transverse and whether it is gauge-independent. since

(k) = ie2 trz d4p(ss)(p + k, p),

it is fairly clear that a non-perturbative calculation of  which dresses the
fermions (s) but leaves the full vertex as bare (  ), will not produce a
transverse tensor; therefore this strategy is unacceptable. it is also easy to
concoct a longitudinal approximation to the three-point green function that
does lead to transverse polarization, e.g. a mass-weighted spectral represen-
tation, as described in the appendix. carrying out the computations in the
landau gauge say, where

s(x  y) = z dw 0(w )sf (x  y|w ),

10see larin and vermaseren (1993) for a complete determination of the anomalous
scaling functions in qcd, which are too long to reproduce for the purposes of this paper.

13

(sls)(x, y; z) = z dw 0(w )sf (x  z|w )sf (z  y|w ),

(14)

with sf (x|w )  (i   + w )f (x|w ), we will obey gauge covariance by
stipulating that, in any other gauge m, the expressions above are to be
multiplied by exp[ie2m(x  y)]. this then leads to the gratifying result that
the resulting vacuum polarization is transverse and gauge-independent, since

tr(ss)(x, y; z)

(z)  lim
= lim
x,y0

x,y0

trz dw 0(w )sf (x  z|w )sf (z  y|w )eie2m (xy)

= trz dw 0(w )sf (x  z|w )sf (z  y|w ),

(15)

if we approach the equal location limit x = y along a certain direction. this
would imply that vacuum polarization is gauge independent and is given

by the landau gauge result, (z) = r dw 0(w )(z|w ), corresponding

to a weighted mass integral. actually this result is still not correct: the
green function (14) is insucient to account for all higher order quantum
corrections, because we must supplement it by a transverse (landau gauge)
contribution, which certainly does not spoil the transversality property. un-
less this is added, qed, will almost certainly be wrong.

thus, from all of this discussion, we see that the most pressing prob-
lem in patching up the gauge technique is to incorporate transverse green
functions which have correct analytic and gauge-covariance properties. until
this is done, any physical results that are claimed to be a consequence of the
technique are not to be fully trusted.

acknowledgements

this work was initiated during the qft98 workshop (feb. 1998, university
of adelaide) and i wish to thank the organizers, a schreiber, a thomas and
a williams, for their hospitality there.

14

appendix

in scalar electrodynamics, if (p2) = r dw 2(w 2)/(p2  w 2) stands for the

meson propagator, the longitudinal expressions for the vertex,

l

(p, p) = (p + p)

1(p2)  1(p2)

p2  p2

,

and

(l

)(p, p) = (p + p)

(p2)  (p2)

= z dw 2(w 2)"

p2  p2
1
p2  w 2 (p + p)

1

p2  w 2# ,

are entirely equivalent. although one may add any amount of transverse
amplitude without aecting the wgt identity, it would be perverse to in-
troduce such an additional piece unless there are good reasons to do so like
reaching agreement with perturbation theory, eliminating subdivergences or
trying to patch up the gauge covariance relation. this is precisely what
has motivated king (in qed) and haeri (in qcd) to incorporate particular
transverse terms in the ultraviolet regime (king 1983; haeri 1988). no such
corrections are needed in the infrared regime, since all green functions are
eectively governed by the nonperturbative behaviour of the charged particle
propagator (delbourgo and west 1977a, 1977b; delbourgo 1979; atkinson
and slim 1979).

in spinor electrodynamics the situation is much less clearcut because of
the plasticity of the gamma-matrix algebra. begin with the spinor propaga-
tor, written in the equivalent forms,

s(p) = z dw (w )/(6 p  w ) or s 1(p) 6 pa(p2) + b(p2).

for short, write a  a(p2), b  b(p2), a  a(p2), b   b(p2) and f 
p2a2  b2, etc. then there are at least three obvious ways of solving the
gauge identities, all of which are singularity free. from the proper vertex
identity, one may factor out the momentum transfer and arrive at the rst
version (ball and chiu 1980),

l

(p, p) =

1
2

(a + a) +

(p + p)

p2  p2 (cid:20)(b   b) +

1
2

(6 p+ 6 p)(a  a)(cid:21) .

15

a second way is to carry out the factorization for the full green function:

(sl

s)(p, p) =



2   a
f  +

a

f!+

(p + p)

p2  p2 "6 p+6 p

2   a
f  

a

f!   b 
f  

b

f !# .

a third way is to take advantage of the dispersive representation as a weighted
mass integral and thereby arrive at the form

(sl

s)(p, p) = z dw (w )

1

6 p  w



1

6 p  w

.

these three versions are not identical to one another, in contrast to the scalar
case. they dier from one another by particular transverse components
(which of course have no eect on the wgt identity) and no version is more
natural than any other at this level, unless other considerations intervene;
thus they all behave smoothly as p2  p2 and they agree with lowest order
perturbation theory. for instance, the dierence between the rst and second
versions of the proper vertices can be expressed as

a

(6 pa  b )

t(6 pa + b) + at + (6 pa + b )t

a

(6 pa  b)

+ ta

where 2t = (6 p 6 p)(p+p)/(p2p2) is a transverse lorentz-covariant.
similarly, the third version can be rewritten in a more revealing form:

(sl

s)(p, p) = z dw (w )

1

6 p  w

2t

1

6 p  w

+

(p + p)

p2  p2 [s(p)  s(p)] .

haeri and haeri (1992) have shown that this particular spectral form of the
longitudinal vertex can be converted into the equivalent but more elegant
form

(sl

s)(p, p) =

(6 p +  6 p)s(p)  s(p)(6 p +  6 p)

,

p2  p2
which corresponds to the proper vertex solution

(p, p) = 6 p 6 p(a  a) + (6 p +  6 p)(b   b) + (p2a  p2a)
l

p2  p2

,

featuring the inverse propagator functions a and b.

16

references

atkinson, d., and slim, h. (1979). nuovo cim. 50a, 555.
alekseev, a. i. (1998). proceedings of workshop on nonperturbative methods
in quantum field theory, p.104, ed. schreiber, williams and thomas, adelaide
(world scientic, 1998).
ball, j. s., and chiu, t-w. (1980). phys. rev. 22, 2542.
cahill, r. t., and gunner, s. m. (1998). proceedings of workshop on nonper-
turbative methods in quantum field theory, p.261, ed. schreiber, williams and
thomas, adelaide (world scientic, 1998).
cornwall, j. m. (1986). phys. rev. d34, 585.
curtis, d. c., and pennington, m. r. (1993). phys. rev. d48, 4933.
delbourgo, r. (1979). nuovo cim. 49a, 484.
delbourgo, r., and west, p. c. (1977a). j. phys. a10, 1049.
delbourgo, r., and west, p. c. (1977b). phys. lett. 72b, 86.
delbourgo, r., and thompson, g. (1982). j. phys. g8, l185.
delbourgo, r., and zhang, r. b. (1984). j. phys. 17a, 3593.
green, h. s. (1953). proc. phys. soc. (london) a66, 873.
haeri, b. j (1988). phys. rev. d38, 3799.
haeri, b. j. (1993). phys. rev. d48, 5930.
haeri, b. j., and haeri, m. b. (1992). phys. rev. d43, 3732.
ivanov, m. a., kalinovskii, yu. l., maris, p., and roberts, c. d. (1998). 11th
int. conf. of problems in qft, dubna (nucl-th/9810010).
johnson, k., and zumino, b. (1959). phys. rev. lett. 3, 351.
king, j. e. (1983). phys. rev. d27, 1821.
kizilersu, a., reenders, m., and pennington, m. r. (1995). phys. rev. 352, 1242.
kondo, k-i. (1997). int. j. mod. phys. a12, 5651.
landau, l. d., and khalatnikov, i. m. (1956). zh. eksp. teor. fiz. 29, 89 [sov.
phys. jetp 2, 2].
larin, s. f., and vermaseren, j. a. m. (1993). phys. lett. b303, 334.
maris, p., and roberts, c. d. (1997). phys. rev. 56c, 3369.
maris, p., and roberts, c. d. (1998). proceedings of workshop on nonpertur-
bative methods in quantum field theory, p.132, ed. schreiber, williams and
thomas, adelaide (world scientic, 1998).
papavassiliou, j., and cornwall, j. m. (1991). phys. rev. d44, 1285.
parker, c. n. (1984). j. phys. 17a, 2873.
roberts, c. d., and williams, a. g. (1994). prog. part. nucl. phys. 33, 477.
salam, a. (1963). phys. rev. 130, 1287.
salam, a., and delbourgo, r. (1964). phys. rev. 135, b1398.

17

strathdee, j. (1964). phys. rev. 135, b1428.
takahashi, y. (1957). nuovo cim. 6, 371.
thompson, g. (1983). phys. lett. 131b, 385.
thompson, g., and zhang, r. b. (1987). phys. rev. d35, 631.
ward, j. c. (1950). phys. rev. 78, 182.
zumino, b. (1960). j. math. phys. 1, 1.

18

