can the red shift be a consequence of the dilaton

field?

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
1

 

 
 

1
v
5
6
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

alejandro cabo and alexis amezaga

grupo de fisica teorica

instituto de cibernetica, matematica y fisica

calle e no 309, vedado,la habana, cuba

abstact

the possibility that the expansion rate of the universe, as reected by the

red shift, could be produced by the existence of the dilaton eld is explored.

the analysis starts from previously studied solutions of the einstein equations

for gravity interacting with a massive scalar eld. it is rstly underlined

that such solutions can produce the observed values of the hubble constant.

since the einstein-klein-gordon lagrangian could be expected to appear as an

eective one for the dilaton in some approximation, the mentioned solutions

are applied to study this eld. therefore, the vacuum expectation value

for the dilaton is selected to be of the order of the planck mass, as it is

frequently xed in string phenomenology. then, it follows that the value

of its eective mass should be as low as m=3.9 10(-29) cm(-1) in order

produce the observed expansion rate. the discussion can also predict a radius of the

universe of the order of 10(29) cm. finally, after adopting the view advanced ina previous

work, in which these mentioned solutions are associated to interior congurations of collapsed

scalar elds, a picture of our universe as a black hole interior is suggested.

1

i. introduction

the relevance for the physical world of the string theory is an central issue to be decided

for the future research activity in this basic area of modern theoretical physics [1,2,3]. at

present the experimental limitations make unclear the perspectives for the clarication of

this question [4,5]. therefore, it becomes of central interest the search for any signal in

nature from the string structure of matter.

as a preamble it could be remarked the construction of realistic models in four dimensions

from superstring theory, the breakdown of various symmetries in the low energy limit play a

very crucial role. at these low energies, it is commonly expected that a eld theoretical eect

should be dominant in order to generate the hierarchy of scales currently observed. in one of

the preferred views: the two steps scenario, string eects dominate to lift vacuum degeneracy

and eld theory eects are responsible for to break supersymmetry. in this approach, the

vacuum expectation values (vev) of the dilaton and other vacuum elds are xed at high

energies with values near to planck mass. a problem here resides in the implementation of

this scenario due to no yet complete understanding of nonperturbative string eects. the

search of a deeper knowledge about these eects is currently very active due to the ndings

of equivalence of the various string theories under duality [6].

in this note, our purpose is to explore the possibility for the existence of a macroscopic

signal form the string structure of matter. it would arise from the relevant scalar eld arising

in string theory: the dilaton, which reects the condensation of zero mass strings [1]. the

idea is the following: as it was recalled above, for the construction of string phenomenology,

the mean vev of the dilaton is xed at values of the order of the planck mass [4,5]. then

we may consider the properties of the dilaton as input parameters of a particular type of

solution of the einstein equations for massive scalar eld interacting with gravity [7,8]. such

solutions are regular at a centre of spherical symmetry and show a decreasing gravitational

potential away from the center. the decaying potential could be interpreted as reecting

the expansion rate of the universe. consider also the possibility that a small value of the

2

mass for the dilaton can be generated due to combined non-perturbative string corrections

and the breaking of supersymmetry. then, it seems a sensible issue to to determine the

value of such a mass which can predict the observed hubble constant when the dilaton vev

is taken of the order of the planck mass. the resulting mass values calculated here turn to

be extremely small. this outcome seems at least compatible with the massles of the dilaton

eld in the perturbative string theory[1]. such mass values, up to our knowledge, could not

be rejected under the basis of the current understanding of string phenomenology.

it should be recognized that the picture here examined would introduce radical changes

in the most accepted views at present about the dynamical evolution of the universe [9].

therefore, a further inspection of its implication is in need.

it should be also said that the above mentioned solutions corresponds to the internal part

of the extended solutions investigated in [7]. in that work the central aim was to obtain indi-

cations about tht possibility of interpreting such eld congurations as internal space times

of black holes.the external metric in the proposed solutions is the scwartzschild one with

a null scalar eld. an important circumstance in such an interpretation is that the proper

mass of the interior scalar eld is exactly coinciding with the proper mass of a scwartzschild

solution having the horizon at the precise radius in which the internal metric become singular

[7]. work is being directed to rigorously argument that these global eld congurations solve

the einstein-klein-gordon equation in some generalized mathematical sense. the complete

validation of these considerations then, would indicate the interpretation of our universe as

an internal space time of a black hole of collapsed dilaton matter.

ii. 1. the special solutions

the coupled set of klein-gordon and einstein equations in spherical coordinates which

was considered in ref. [7] has the explicit form

u()

 

1  u()

2

=  (8k/c4)(

u() ()2

2

+

(mc/h)2 ()2

2

)

(1)

3

u()
v()

v ()

 

1  u()

2

= + (8k/c4)(

u() ()2

2



(mc/h)2 ()2

2

)

m2()  u() () = ()  (u() + 1)



 (8k/c4)

(mc/h)2()2

2

!

(2)

(3)

where the invariant interval has been taken as dened by the spherical coordinates form

ds2 = v ()dxo2

 u()1d2

 2(sin2d2 + d2).

dxo = cdt

the scalar eld  is real and its mass m can be absorbed in the denition of a new radial

variable r = mc/h. moreover, the scalar eld also can been scaled as  = /q8k/c4 in

order to absorb the factor 8k/c4 multiplying the energy momentum tensor in it. after

these changes, the equations take the form

u(r)

r 

1  u(r)

r2

= 

u(r) (r)2

2

(r)2

2



v (r)

u(r)
v(r)

u(r) (r)2

(r)2

1  u(r)

= +

r2

r 
(r)  u(r) (r) = +(r)   (u(r) + 1)



2

r

2

r(r)2

2

!



(4)

(5)

(6)

it can be observed that equations (4) and (6) are closed because they do not depend on

v(r). in place of v(r), below it will be sometimes used the variable

(r) = log (v(r)).

the set of equations (4)-(6) have solutions showing a leading asymptotic behavior near

the origin r = 0 of the following form

2 r2
6
2 r2
6

+ ...

+ ...

0

0

u(r) = 1 
v(r) = 1 
(r) = 0  1 +

r2

6 ! + ...

(7)

(8)

(9)

the behavior of this solutions motivated the present note. as it can be noticed

from them, the gravitation potential decreases away from the origin of coordinates with

4

a quadratic dependence with the radial distance. near the origin, the metric is approxi-

mately lorentzian. then, some questions are directly suggested : could these solutions be

applied to construct a model of the expansion rate of the universe?, assuming that so is the

case: what is the nature of the scalar eld being considered?. similar questions have been

addressed in the literature in connection with the possible role of a cosmological constant in

robertson-walker (wr) cosmologies [9] . the existence of physical sources of such cosmo-

logical constants has been a limitation for the introduction of a cosmological term in such

models (it may be useful to say that the massive term for the scalar eld plays a similar role

in the dynamical equations, that a cosmological constant if the eld is space-time indepen-

dent in some region). however, at present there are new theoretical ideas related with string

theory phenomenology which assume the existence of a vacuum expectations of scalar elds.

these values could be suspected to be connected the parameter 0 in equations (7)-(9 ).

concretely, as it was mentioned before, in one of the adopted views about the construction

of string phenomenological theories, a high value of the vev for the dilaton eld of the order

of the planck mass is xed [4,5]. on another hand, the perturbative value of the dilaton mas

is null, a fact that can cast doubts on the present proposal. however, it can be taken into

account the possibility that a mass can be generated by string non perturbative corrections

and also by the various spontaneous symmetry breaking eects that are expected to occur

in order to reproduce the observable experience. therefore, it seems reasonable to assume

non vanishing values for the dilaton eective mass. as it will be seen, the magnitude of the

of the product of the dilaton mass and its vev is determined from the condition of xing the

observable value of the hubble constant.

let us consider the equation (8) which denes the gravitation potential in the vecinity

of the origin when written in the form

v() = 1 + 2()/c2,

(10)

where () is the gravitational potential.

then, for  it follows

5

() = (4/6)gn 2

0(m/h)22.

the hubble law is now expressed by the relation

ep ot(0) = 0 = ep ot() + ek in()

= m () + m

v 2
2

(11)

(12)

where the l.h.s. is the potential energy of a gallaxy of mass m at the origin of coordinates

and v() = d/dt is its velocity at the radial distance .

recalling the denition of the hubble constant h0 through (v /)2 = h 2

0 the following

relation between the mass and the vev of the scalar eld follows

m22

0 =

0

h2h 2
4k

(13)

after assuming the values for h0 = 75  105

cm/(smpc) and the gravitation constant

k = 6.67108
units: [m] = cm1, [] = cm1)

cm/gs2 the product of the mass and the vev takes the value (in rationalized

m0 = 24584 cm2.

(14)

the relationship (14) has been gotten starting from a solution for a massive scalar eld

in interaction with the gravity, within the context of general classical relativity. however, as

it was discussed in ref.[8] the einstein klein gordon equations can be expected to become

a reasonable eective action for the dilaton eld in a consistent context of gravity based in

superstring theory, if the dilaton eld aquires mass through any mechanism.

finally after setting the vev of the dilaton to 1 in the planck scale, i.e.

< 0 >= 0.63 1033cm1 using (14) it is obtained

m = 3.9 1029cm1..

(15)

therefore, if the nonperturbative corrections or symmetry breaking eects are able to

produce a tiny non vanishing dilaton mass, it would be sucient to generate the observed

expansion rate of the gallaxies.

6

let us consider now an additional implication of the possibility being discussed.

as it was mentioned in the introduction, the approximate solutions near r = 0 can be

numerically extended away from the origin by taking as the initial conditions the values at

small radial distance of u(r),v(r), (r) and (r). the value of the vev is taken as 0 = 4.5

in (7)-(9) which is determined for a xed magnitude of the dilaton vev of the order of the

planck mass. the initial values and the rst derivative of the scalar eld necessary for the

numerical algorithm were calculated also from (7)-(9) at the radial position r = 0.003.

the results of [7] show a decreasing behavior of the function u(r), which approaches zero

linearly at some radius r0 = 0.502416. the picture for the variation of v(r), while similarly

decreasing, tends to approach a constant value diering from zero when r approaches r0.

the scalar eld, on another hand, increases away from the origin and approaches a constant

value at r0, but with a fast growing slope diverging at r0.

the asymptotic behavior near r0 of the numerical solution was also determined in [7] to

be given by

u(r) = (r02
r0  2/r0)(r0  r) + ...
(r) = r0  2r0  r/r0 + ...

(16)

(17)

(18)

it was shown in [7] that the singular behavior near r0 of the numerical

solution is well reproduced by this asymptotic expressions. an important property

of the dependence with the radial distance of u(r) is the fact that this quantity tends

to vanish at r = r0. this fact allows to show that the proper mass of the scalar eld

in the interior region exactly coincides with the proper mass of a scwartzschild solution

having its horizon at the same radius r0. this circumstance strongly suggest the interest of

a global eld conguration dened by the here considered one at the internal region after

extedending it to coincide witht the scwartzschild solution at exterior by also taking null

values of the scalar eld (as suggestd by the non-hair theorems). such elds evidently solve

the dynamical equations everywhere except at of the shell r = r0. then, if some localized

7

sources axist at the boundary, they should not contribute to the total value of thee proper

mass. this remarks strongly indicate that such elds should correspond to solutions in all

the space in some generalized mathematical sense. work on the verication of this possibility

is under developement.

iii. conclusions

an alternative for the physical interpretation of the observed expansion rate of the uni-

verse is explored. it rests in the assumption that the dilaton eld in string theory gets a

small mass under non-perturbative corrections or the symmetry breakings needed for string

theory to become a realsitic theory. the validity of the picture would implicate the interpre-

tation of the universe as the interior region of a black hole formed in the collapse of dilaton

eld matter. it is clear that the formulation of the proposed model should undergone a closer

scrutiny in connection with its ability to explain the many observed cosmological data. the

inevestigation on these questions would be considered elsewhere.

the discussion has some resemblance with the analysis of robertson-walker models

under assuming a non-vanishing cosmological constant [9]. it could be imagined that what

is done here is to explore the possibility that the vev of the dilaton eld play a similar role

that a cosmological constant in determining the expansion rate [9].

8

references

[1] m. green, j. schwartz and e. witten, superstringtheory, 1 , 2 ,cambridge

university press(1987)

[2] m. kaku, string theory, springer verlag (1998).

[3] j. polshinski, les houches lectures, hep-th/9411028 (1994).

[4] f. quevedo, superstring phenomenoloy, an overview, hep-ph/9707434 (1997).

[5] a. font, l.e. ibanez, f. quevedo and a. sierra, the construction of

realistic four dimensional strings through orbifolds, cern-th-5326/89.

[6] r. diskgraaf, les houches lectures on fields, strings and duality,

hep-th/9703136 (1997).

[7] a. cabo and e. ayon, accepted in int. jour. mod. phys. a, gr-qc/9704073

(1997).

[8] m. fabbrichessi and r. iengo, phys.lett. b292 (1992)262, hep-th/9207087

(1992).

[9] r. schaefer,page 649, in: ictp series in theoretical physics, vol 9, 1992

summer workshop in high energy physics and cosmology, world

scientic,1992.

enddocument

9

