hep-th/9903104
iassns-hep-99-28

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
1
1

 
 

1
v
4
0
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

geometrical aspects of fivebranes in

heterotic/f-theory duality in four dimensions

duiliu-emanuel diaconescu and govindan rajesh

school of natural sciences,

institute for advanced study,

olden lane,

princeton, nj 08540

diacones, rajesh@ias.edu

abstract

we use the method of stable degenerations to study the local geometry of calabiyau four-

folds for f-theory compactications dual to heterotic compactications on a calabiyau

threefold with vebranes wrapping holomorphic curves in the threefold. when vebranes

wrap intersecting curves, or when many vebranes wrap the same curve, the dual fourfolds

degenerate in interesting ways. we nd that some of these can be usefully described in

terms of degenerations of the base of the elliptic brations of these fourfolds. we use

wittens criterion to determine which of the vebranes can lead to the generation of a

non-perturbative superpotential.

march, 1999

1. introduction

heterotic compactications on elliptic calabiyau threefolds provide us with phe-

nomenologically interesting vacua in four dimensions with n = 1 supersymmetry. more-

over, such vacua are conjectured to have a dual description in terms of f-theory com-

pactied on elliptically bered calabiyau fourfolds. the heterotic vacua are specied by

a choice of gauge bundle, constructed using the general techniques of friedman, morgan

and witten [1]. it was shown there that such vacua often include vebranes wrapping the

elliptic bers of the calabiyau threefold z, whose number is determined by an anomaly

cancelation condition.

more generally, we can have vebranes on the heterotic side wrapping holomorphic

curves in z. in this paper, we examine the geometry of fourfold duals of heterotic vacua

with vebranes. the cohomology classes of the curves being wrapped are xed by the

general heterotic anomaly cancelation condition

[w ] = c2(t z)  (v1)  (v2),

(1.1)

where [w ] is the class of the wrapped curves, c2(t z) is the second chern class of the
tangent bundle of the calabiyau threefold z, and (vi) are the second chern classes
of the vector bundles on z. note that this only xes the curves up to their cohomology

classes. given that z is elliptically bered with a section , we see that the class [w ] may

be written [w ] = c1 + c2, so that under the projection  : z  b2, c1 maps to a divisor
in b2, and c2 maps to h[p], where [p] is the class of a point in b2 and h = r c2 is an
integer. thus the class c2 actually describes the vebranes wrapping the elliptic ber of
z, while c1 describes the vebranes wrapping holomorphic curves in the base b2. in this
paper, we will refer to the rst kind (i.e., those in the class c2) as vertical vebranes, and
the second (i.e., those in the class c1) as horizontal ones. (it is of course possible for a
vebrane to wrap a curve which has both vertical (i.e., ber) components and horizontal

(i.e., base) components.)

under the duality, the vertical vebranes map to f-theory threebranes [2]. the num-

ber of the f-theory threebranes is related to the euler number of the fourfold by tadpole

anomaly cancelation [3]. this relation is actually modied in the presence of the four form

eld strength g. also, when the threebranes coincide with the sevenbranes wrapping divi-

sors in the base b3 of the fourfold over which the elliptic bration degenerates, they behave
as instantons, breaking the gauge group observed from the singularity to a smaller one.

1

for the purposes of this paper, we will ignore both these possibilities, since they play no

role in our analysis. our results will be valid even in the presence of these complications.

the horizontal vebranes, on the other hand, map to geometric data on the f-theory

side. specically, if a vebrane wraps a curve c in b2, then the f-theory base b3 is blown
up once over the corresponding curve [4] vebranes wrapping the same curve correspond

to an equal number of blow-ups on the f-theory side.

for the purposes of this paper, we choose to ignore the vector bundles on the heterotic

theory altogether, and concentrate instead on the local physics of the vebranes. thus, we

consider an extreme situation when the bundles v1,2 are without structure group. this is
analogous to the six dimensional vacuum with 24 small instantons, the anomaly cancelation

being entirely due to vebranes. the base of the f-theory threefold in this case acquires

several blowups [5], whose local description involves the method of stable degenerations

[6,7].

in the four dimensional situation, it is precisely the horizontal vebranes that corre-

spond to blowup modes in the fourfold base. in this paper, will use the method of stable

degenerations to describe this geometry. after a brief description of the general technique

in section 2, we explicitly work out the fourfold geometry in the stable degeneration limit

for a single horizontal vebrane in section 3. when two vebranes wrap intersecting curves,

or when several vebranes wrap the same curve, the dual fourfolds degenerate in interest-

ing ways. we nd that it is more useful to describe these degenerations by studying the

degenerations of the corresponding base b3, which is the subject of section 4. we nd,
for example, that when two horizontal vebranes intersect, the base b3 acquires a conifold
singularity, while k horizontal vebranes wrapping the same curve c in b2 lead to an ak1
singularity bered over the corresponding curve in b3.

in addition to aecting the geometry of the fourfolds, the vebranes can contribute

to the nonperturbative superpotential. section 5 is devoted to discussing the criteria for

determining which vebranes can contribute to the superpotential, based on the work of

[8,9].

2. heterotic models and stable degenerations

this section consists of a brief review of heterotic vacua and the stable degeneration

limit. consider a general d = 4, n = 1 heterotic vacuum specied by the compactication

data (z, v1, v2). here  : z  b2 is a nonsingular elliptic calabi-yau threefold with a

2

section  : b2  z. v1, v2 are two holomorphic bundles with structure group gc
2 where
g1,2  e8. throughout the paper, the base b2 will be taken to be a hirzebruch surface

1, gc

fe, with e = 0, 1, 2 in order to insure the smoothness of the total space z. moreover, the

present considerations are restricted to heterotic models which admit an f-theory dual.

therefore, z will be taken to be a smooth weierstrass model

zy2 = x3  axz2  bz3

(2.1)

in p(cid:0)ob  l2  l3(cid:1) with l  k 1
in order to satisfy the calabi-yau condition. a, b are
sections of l4, l6. the bundles v1,2 will be specied by spectral data (1,2, n1,2) [1,10,11].

b2

according to [5,1], the dual f-theory model can be constructed by taking the size

of the base b2 very large so that we can use adiabatic arguments. the elliptic bration

 : z  b2 is then replaced adiabatically by a k3 bration over b2 with total space a

calabi-yau fourfold x. it turns out that x can be represented as an elliptic weierstrass

model  : x  b3 where p : b3  b2 is a rationally ruled threefold over b2. the

moduli map between the heterotic and f-theory data has been discussed intensively in

[5,1,10,13,4,12].

a particularly convenient approach consists is given by the method of stable degen-

erations [1,7,14] which establishes a direct geometric correspondence between the two sets

of data. briey, this consists of taking a limit in which the size of the elliptic ber of z

is also very large. then, the f-theory fourfold x degenerates to a union of two fourfolds

x = x1 z x2 glued together along a three dimensional variety isomorphic to z. both

x1, x2 are elliptically bered over rationally ruled threefolds isomorphic to b3 with pro-
jections 

2|z. the composite maps p  

1,2 are brations of

1, 

2 such that  = 

1|z = 

x1,2 over b2, with generic ber a rational elliptic surface dp9.

as explained in [7], [14] this procedure is very useful for studying the f-theory local

geometry associated to heterotic small instantons. however, since the stable degeneration

is, strictly speaking, at innite distance in the moduli space metric, it may not be suitable

for describing particular physical processes. this will be the case with certain vebrane

interactions and nonperturbative instanton eects. these phenomena are better described

using a smooth resolution of the calabi-yau fourfold in a region of the moduli space where

the geometric map developed via stable degenerations is still valid.

3

3. a single horizontal fivebrane

here we consider the case of a single heterotic vebrane wrapping a nonsingular irre-
ducible curve c  b2. the goal of this section is to determine the corresponding f-theory
geometry in the stable degeneration limit. recall that the fourfold x  x1 can be repre-
sented as a weierstrass model over a base b3 which can be identied with the total space
of a projective bundle p (ob2  t ) over b. in the following, we will restrict to models
in which t  ob2 () for some eective divisor  on b2. to introduce some notation,
note that the bration p : b3  b2 has two disjoint holomorphic sections which will be
denoted by s0, s by analogy with hirzebruch surfaces. then

s = s0 + p

kb3 = 2s0 + p (kb2  ) .

the fourfold  : x  b3 is described as a weierstrass model

y2 = x3  f x  g

(3.1)

(3.2)

in p(cid:16)ob3  l2  l3(cid:17), with l = ob3 (s0)  pk 1
not a calabi-yau variety in this case. as in [7,6], the structure of the elliptic brations is

. note that the total space x is

b2

determined by the divisors

f = 4s0  4pkb2

g = 6s0  6pkb2

 = 12s0  12pkb2 .

(3.3)

the base b3 is glued to the base of the second fourfold of the stable degeneration along
the section s. therefore the gluing divisor is the restriction of the elliptic bration to
s which can be described as a weierstrass model with line bundle k 1
b2
denes a smooth calabi-yau space which is identied with z. also, note that the restric-
tion of the elliptic bration to the generic rational ber of p : b3  b2 has exactly 12 i1
bers, therefore it is a rational elliptic surface as claimed before.

. this generically

since we are interested in heterotic models without structure group, we rst enforce
a section of ii  singularities along the section s0 of b3 ensuring an unbroken e8 group.
this corresponds to splitting the divisors f, g,  into

f = 4s0 + f ,

f  = 4pkb2

g = 5s0 + g,

g = s0  6pkb2

 = 10s0 + ,

 = 2s0  12pkb2 .

4

(3.4)

the location of the small instantons will be determined by the collision of the component
 of the discriminant with the section s0. a more precise description requires the explicit
expression of the polynomials f, g,  function of the coordinates of the base. in fact, the

weierstrass model can be characterized in a neighborhood of s0  b2 as a hypersurface

y2 = x3  f x  g

(3.5)

in the bundle t  t 2  l2  t 3  l3 [1]. let s denote an ane coordinate along the bers
of b3 in the neighborhood of s0. hence s is a section of the normal bundle ns0/b3  t .
then we have the following power series expansions

f = s4f4  s4f 
g = s5 (g5 + sg6)  s5g
 = s10 h4s2f 3

4 + 27 (g5 + sg6)2i  s10

(3.6)

where f4 is a section of l4 and g5, g6 are sections of l6  t , l6.

the component  is dened by  = 0. this is a quadratic equation in s with

discriminant (up to a multiplicative factor)

4 g2
f 3
5.

therefore  is a double cover of b2 branched along the locus

f4 = g5 = 0.

(3.7)

(3.8)

for future reference, let a, c denote the loci f4 = 0 and g5 = 0 in s0  b2 respectively.
by a suitable choice of the line bundle t , these can be assumed nonsingular irreducible
curves. note that c actually represents the locus of intersection of  with s0, which is
precisely the location of the small instanton. the singularity of the total space x induced
by the i1 + ii  collision along c requires a blow-up of the base, as will be shortly detailed.
the points of the discriminant in the inverse image of a in  represent a locus of ii
elliptic bers of x. furthermore, note that  intersects the section s along the locus

l given by

which is a section of 12kb2 . the equation  = 0 is identically satised when

4f 3

4 + 27g2

6 = 0

4f 3

4 + 27g2

6 = 0,

g5 = 0

5

(3.9)

(3.10)

hold simultaneously. therefore, the discriminant  contains the 12kb2  c bers of

p : b3  b2 localized at the points of intersection c  l in b2.

as observed above, a smooth model of the fourfold x can be constructed by blowing-

up the base b3 along the curve c embedded in s0.

in order to describe the resulting

conguration, let (t, u) be local coordinates on s0 near a point p of c so that t is a normal

coordinate and u is a coordinate on c centered at p . the section g5 is assumed to have a

simple zero along c, therefore, it will have a local expansion of the form

g5 = tg
5,

(3.11)

where g

5 does not vanish at t = 0. the blow-up is described in ane coordinates by setting

s = s1t1, t = t1 which results in

g = s5

f = s4

1t4
1f4
1t6
1(g
1 h4s2
 = s10
1 t12

5 + s1g6)

1f 3

4 + 27 (g

5 + s1g6)2i .

(3.12)

the weierstrass model can be set in normal form by rescaling the coordinates x, y by

appropriate powers of t1 obtaining

f = s4

1f4

g = s5

 = s10

1(g5 + s1t1g6)
1 h4s2

1f 3

4 + 27 (g

5 + s1g6)2i .

(3.13)

globally, the exceptional divisor d is isomorphic to the projective bundle p(cid:0)nc/b3(cid:1) whose
p 1 ber is parameterized by the ane coordinate s1. the degree of the ruling is 6kb2 c.
the strict transform of the vertical divisor pc is isomorphic to another rationally ruled

surface d over c. let cd

0 , cd

, cd

0 , cd

 denote the disjoint sections of d, d respectively

and let s 

0 , and d and d intersect along a common section cd

0 denote the strict transform of the section c0. then s 
0  cd

0 and d intersect along
 . the blown-up base b3
cd
can be regarded as a bration p : b3  b2 with generic ber p 1. above c  b2, the ber
consists of two rational components intersecting transversely. see fig.1. for a schematic

representation.

6

d

d

c

s

8

s
0

fig. 1: the blow-up geometry corresponding to a single horizontal vebrane
wrapped around the curve c. d and d are the exceptional divisor and the proper
transform of pc respectively. the thick lines represent the intersection of the
discriminant with d, d.

 which does not meet s 

it follows from (3.13) that the proper transform of the discriminant  intersects d
along a divisor in the class 2cd
0 is an isolated
section of ii  bers of the resulting fourfold x. furthermore,  intersects the surface d
along 12kb2  c p 1 bers which carry i1 elliptic bers. an interesting exception arises
in the case b2  f2 and c = c0. in this case, the exceptional divisor d is simply p 1  p 1
since kb2  c0 = 0 and  intersects d along two disjoint sections. the strict transform
d does not intersect  and there are no vertical lines carrying i1 elliptic bers.
if everything else is generic, the elliptic bration is smooth away from s 

0. therefore s 

0 and it
has a locus of type ii bers which projects to the curve a in the base. from here, a
smooth model is easily obtained by blowing up x along the section s 
hirzebruch-jung tree bered over s 

0, obtaining an e8
0. these exceptional divisors play an important role

in the dynamics of d = 3 n = 2 pure gauge theories [15,16].

3.1. the spectral cover

the heterotic spectral cover corresponding to the above fourfold degeneration can be

determined by analogy with the six dimensional situation considered in [7,14].

in that

case, it is known [5], that the extra kahler moduli associated to a blow-up in the base

corresponds to an extra (1, 0) tensor multiplet. this allows an identication of the threefold

degeneration with a small e8 instanton, that is a heterotic vebrane.
situation, the low energy eective action corresponding to the fourfold degeneration can be
easily derived regarding the model as a iib compactication on the base b3 with a varying

in the present

7

dilaton. note that blowing-up b3 along the curve c has the eect of producing nontrivial
homology 3-cycles. more precisely, the intermediate jacobian j (cid:0) b3(cid:1) is isomorphic to the
jacobian j (c) [17,18]. therefore there is a 1  1 correspondence between h 1,2 (cid:0) b3(cid:1) and
h 0,1 (c) given by the cylinder (or equivalently, abel-jacobi) map of [17,18]. note that
h0,3 (cid:0) b3(cid:1) = h0,3(b3) = 0, therefore j (cid:0) b3(cid:1) is in this case a principally polarized abelian
variety.

the low energy eective action is then determined by reducing the sl(2, z) invari-
ant 4-form c(4) with self-dual eld strength g(5) along the elements of h 1,2 (cid:0) b3(cid:1). the
discussion is similar to the reduction of the m-theory vebrane along a compact riemann

surface found in [19]. we have an ansatz

g(5) = f   + f  

(3.14)

where f is a 2-form on r4 and  is a 3-form on b3. the equation of motion dg(5) = 0
yields the maxwell equations for f and requires  to be a harmonic 3-form. it follows
from hodge theorem that  denes a point in the intermediate jacobian j (cid:0) b3(cid:1). the
corresponding low-energy eective action consists of u (1)g massless gauge elds whose
couplings are determined by j (cid:0) b3(cid:1) (g is the genus of the wrapped riemann surface).
taking into account the identication j (cid:0) b3(cid:1)  j (c), we conclude that the eective
action derived this way is in fact identical with that of an m-theory vebrane wrapping

the compact riemann surface c [20,21]. this provides physical evidence for identifying

the fourfold degeneration with an e8 heterotic vebrane wrapping the curve c in the base
b2.

a more precise geometric picture can be achieved as follows. note that the strict
transform d discussed in the previous subsection intersects the section s along a curve
isomorphic to c. the restriction of the elliptic bration to d gives an elliptic threefold
q  d with i1 degenerations along 12kb2  c rational bers of d. moreover, the
heterotic calabi-yau threefold z is identied with the restriction of  : x  b3 to s.
therefore q and z meet along a surface s elliptically bered over c and with 12kb2  c
i1 bers. as in [14], this is an irreducible component of the spectral cover  =   s. note
that the reducible spectral cover describes a bundle without structure group which is in
proper language the ideal sheaf jc/z. similar degenerations have been also considered in
[22].

before further developing the subject by considering multiple small instantons, a cou-

ple of remarks are in order. some aspects of the present construction may be better

8

understood by comparison with the threefold degenerations studied in [14] (section 3.4).

note that in that case, the role of the elliptic threefold q is played by an elliptic surface
which is generically trivial i.e. q  p 1  t 2. the injective map h 1 (q, z)  h 3 (x, z)

induces nontrivial homology 3-cycles on x. the spectral cover is again reducible  =  s

where s is isomorphic to the constant elliptic ber of q. therefore, the jacobian of ,

which is isomorphic to that of s, is mapped injectively into the intermediate jacobian of x.

this is part of the heterotic/f-theory map which maps the position of the small instanton

along the elliptic ber to ramond-ramond moduli of x. in the present situation, s is an

elliptic surface which can be written as a weierstrass model over c   with line bundle
k 1
|c. this shows that the normal bundle nc/s  kb2|c is of negative degree, therefore
b2
c cannot be deformed in s. accordingly, there are no moduli parameterizing the position

of the small instanton along the elliptic ber. if the genus of c is g  1, the surface s

has a nontrivial jacobian isomorphic to that of c which injects in the jacobian of x as

explained before. this is again part of the heterotic/f-theory map having, however, a

dierent physical interpretation in terms of the eective couplings of the four-dimensional

low-energy action.

note that there is an exception to this generic behavior. namely, as also noted before,

if b  f2 and c = c0, it turns out that the threefold q and the surface  = q  z are
trivial elliptic brations, that is q  d  t 2 and   p 1  t 2. this behavior is very

similar to the six dimensional case since the jacobian of  is now isomorphic to that of the

trivial elliptic ber. in particular, the vebrane wrapped on c   can be moved along
the elliptic ber and its position on t 2 is parameterized by a point in the jacobian.

3.2. interaction with vertical fivebranes  a puzzle

we know from anomaly cancelation considerations that vertical vebranes should also

be present. since they are obviously mobile along the heterotic base, the vertical vebranes

can collide the horizontal brane by a suitable tuning of moduli. for simplicity, we consider

a single vertical vebrane approaching the horizontal one. the eective theory on the

non-compact directions of the vertical vebrane is a free u (1) gauge theory with three

neutral complex chiral multiplets. two chiral multiplets parameterize the motion of the

vebrane along the base. the scalar component of the third,  =  + ia, incorporates the
position  along the interval s1/z2 and the vebrane axion da = 4db.

in at eleven dimensional space, such a collision is expected to result in extra degrees

of freedom  tensionless strings  localized on the intersection and eventually in an

9

interacting superconformal xed point [23,24]. in our case, the vebranes wrap riemann

surfaces embedded in a curved space, therefore there could be extra eects and it is not

clear if the decoupling takes place.

a possible approach to this problem is via duality with f-theory. as noted above,

the horizontal vebranes map to background threebranes lling the non-compact 3 + 1

directions. the expectation value of the eld  is related to the position of the threebrane
on the p 1 ber of p : b3  b.
in particular if the vertical vebrane is localized at a
point p  c on the base b2,  corresponds to the threebrane position along the p 1
ber of the proper transform d. therefore, the collision takes place precisely when the

threebrane hits the exceptional divisor d. however, this apparently leads to a puzzle since

the total space of the threefold b3 is smooth hence, we have no reasons to expect an
interacting theory on the threebrane worldvolume when it collides with the intersection
d d. in particular, although the heterotic picture suggests a solitonic string of vanishing

tension localized on the intersection of the vebranes, no such object can be found in the

threebrane worldvolume theory. at the present stage, although we do not have a complete

solution of this puzzle, we suggest that it could be understood along the following lines.

the present picture is valid within the framework of adiabatic duality, i.e., the size of the

base b2 is much larger than the size of the elliptic ber. note that this is not the case
in the stable degeneration limit, therefore the analysis is performed using a smooth f-

theory model in a suitable region of the moduli space so that the local geometry described

by the stable degeneration is still valid. then, the intersecting vebranes can be locally
modeled as two intersecting vebranes in m-theory on r1,8  t 2. the vertical vebrane
corresponds to a vebrane whose relative transverse directions are wrapped on t 2, while

the horizontal vebrane is transverse to the torus. using standard duality arguments,

this conguration can be mapped to a d3-brane in type iib theory moving in a smooth

taub-nut background. therefore the theory of the brane has a smooth moduli space,

similarly to the situation considered in [25]. in particular, there are no singularities and

no extra light degrees of freedom at any point in the moduli space. this is in agreement

with the f-theory picture developed above.

another question is related to the possibility of deforming the intersecting vebranes,

obtaining a single brane wrapping a smooth irreducible curve in the calabi-yau threefold.

this is an interesting question also treated in [21]. for concreteness, let us consider a

vebrane wrapping an eective cycle in the homology class c + nf where f is the class

of the elliptic ber. as shown in a particular example in [21], the moduli space of this

10

vebrane has, in general, many disconnected components. more precisely, let  = c

and i :   z denote the inclusion. there could several homologically inequivalent

congurations of holomorphic curves on  mapping to the homology class c + nf  h2(z)
under the map i : h2()  h2(z). however, although these curves are homologically
equivalent when embedded in z, they may not be algebraically equivalent, in which case

the dierent types of vebranes cannot be deformed one to another in a supersymmetric

way. this gives rise to several distinct components of the vebrane moduli space.

for the class c + nf , one can show that there are no algebraic (i.e., holomorphic)
deformations that lie entirely within  = c. however, it may be possible to deform

this class in the ambient space z. such deformations, cannot, however, exist if c has no

deformations in b2 (e.g., if c  c < 0). this is because any deformation of c + nf into a
smooth irreducible curve c  in z must project down to a deformation of c in b2, but c
cannot move in b2, which implies that the deformation lies entirely in , and hence does
not exist. thus, if there is a curve c  in  which is dierent from c + nf in h2(), but
maps to the same element of h2(z) under i, then we cannot deform holomorphically from
c + nf to c , so that they sit in disconnected components of the vebrane moduli space.

however, it is not clear if such deformations exist if c moves in b2. deformations entirely
within  can exist when the multiplicity of the horizontal vebranes is greater than one,

i.e., the vebrane class is kc + nf , with k > 1. this phenomenon will be considered at a

later stage.

4. multiple fivebranes

4.1. intersecting horizontal fivebranes

the discussion in the previous section can be generalized in several dierent ways.

we consider here the situation when we have two horizontal vebranes wrapping two

irreducible smooth curves c1, c2  b2 intersecting in a nite number of points. these
curves may belong to the same, or dierent cohomology class in the base. in [4], the dual

f-theory picture was described in terms of intersecting del pezzo surfaces. here, we will

describe it in terms of the geometry of the fourfold base. this corresponds to viewing

f-theory as a nonperturbative type iib vacuum, which, as we will see shortly, is a more

useful picture.

for simplicity, we rst consider the case when both c1, c2 are rational and they
intersect in exactly one point (for example a ber and a section of a hirzebruch surface).

11

the base of the fourfold b3 is now given by the p 1 bundle p : b3  b blown-up twice
along the curves c1, c2 embedded in the section s0. since the curves are intersecting
the order of the blow-ups is important, as explained in the following. assume that c1
is blown-up rst. let d1, d2 denote the exceptional divisors, which are p 1 rulings over
c1, c2 and let e1, e2 denote the classes of the bers. also, let d
2 denote the strict
transforms of the vertical divisors pc1, pc2. near the intersection point p  s0, the
geometry looks as in fig.2.

1, d

d
2

d
1

s

8

e3

e

2

c
1

2d

c

2

e1

d1

s

0

fig. 2: the blow-up geometry corresponding to two intersecting horizontal ve-
branes. note that the ber acquires a third component e3 = d1  d
2 over the
intersection point.

note that when performing the second blow-up along c2, the exceptional divisor d1 un-
dergoes an embedded blow-up at the point p . this results in a reducible ber with three
components, the third component e3 being the dierence e1  e2. the strict transform
d
2 also acquires a reducible ber with a component identied with e3. therefore we have
d1  d
2 = e3. note that e3 is then a (1) curve in both surfaces, hence we can compute
its normal bundle

ne3/ b3  o(1)  o(1).

(4.1)

if the blow-ups are performed in dierent order, the roles of d1, d2 are interchanged, so
that that the extra component e3 lies now in d2, d
1. in this case, e3 = e2  e1. in
fact the two models are related by a op transition whose physical interpretation will be

investigated below.

at classical level, the map between heterotic and f-theory parameters is similar to

the six dimensional case. the sizes of e1, e2 give the positions 1, 2 of the vebranes

12

in the m-theory interval, and are therefore generically dierent. furthermore, the size

of e3 is related to the distance |1  2| between the two vebranes along the m-theory
interval. in particular, note that as long as e3 is of nite size, the two vebranes do not

really intersect each other. finally, as noted above, there are two choices for the curve

e3, namely e1  e2 or e2  e1. the process of going from one situation to the other can
be interpreted as moving the two vebranes past each other along the m-theory interval,

with the vebranes intersecting when e1 = e2, i.e., when e3 shrinks to zero size.

thus, we nd that intersecting vebranes on the heterotic side correspond to an

isolated singularity in the base of the f-theory fourfold.

if both curves are rational as

stated above, the singularity in b3 can be very simply identied as a conifold by looking

at the toric diagram of the fan of the fourfold base.

r7

r5

r3

r4

r8

r6

r1

r2

r7

r8

r3

r7

r6

r8

fig. 3: toric diagram of a conifold. the gure on the left gives the fan of (p 1)3
blown up along two p 1s in the base (p 1)2. the fan of the base (p 1)2 is described
by the rays r3, . . . , r6. the conifold singularity is described by the rays r3, r6, r7
and r8. the two small resolutions of the conifold correspond to dierent triangu-
lations of the fan, and are shown on the right.

r3

r6

the two resolutions of the singularity are then dierent triangulations of the fourfold,

related by a op, which is precisely the transition of e3 from e1  e2 to e2  e1. it is

worth emphasizing here that the conifold singularity is not in the calabiyau fourfold itself,
but in the base b3. alternatively, the normal bundle computation (4.1) shows that the

13

singularity resulting from shrinking e3 is a simple node. thus, separating the vebranes
on the m-theory interval, which gives e3 a non-zero volume, corresponds to resolving the
conifold singularity, and the two ways of moving them apart correspond to the two possible

small resolutions of the conifold.

the relation between intersecting vebranes and the conifold singularity has been well

studied recently [26,27,28,29]. it has been shown there that starting from a conguration

of two innite type iia ns-vebranes stretching along (012345) and (012389), and t-

dualizing along x6, we obtain type iib on a conifold. the separation of the ns-vebranes
along x6 maps to a component of the b eld under the t-duality. furthermore, if we
have fourbranes along (01236), these map to threebranes on the conifold singularity. in

our case, we have vebranes in the heterotic theory. thus we can heuristically relate

our situation with the iia case by rst going to m-theory by taking the strong coupling

limit of the iia conguration (in which case the fourbranes now become vebranes along
(01236&10)), and then compactifying x7 to an interval (s1/z2). we emphasize that this is
only heuristic, since the analysis of refs. [26,27,28] is valid only for innite branes, while

the vebranes here are compact (at least along the wrapped curves). however, since the

geometric description of the heterotic/f-theory vacua above is strictly valid only when

both the volumes of the section  (and hence the wrapped curves) and the elliptic ber

are both large, we have reason to trust our conclusions. in particular, we see that in the

f-theory case, we cannot turn on b elds (as they are not sl(2, z) invariant), so this is

analogous to having x6 = 0 in the iia case. moreover, we see that there is a very suggestive
relation between the vertical heterotic vebranes and the iia fourbranes, since in the m-

theory limit, the fourbranes become vebranes wrapping (6&10), which form a torus (since

both x6 and x10 are compactied on circles), and the vertical heterotic vebranes wrap
the elliptic bre, which is also a torus. furthermore, in both cases, they are related to

threebranes on the dual.

we can use the analogy developed above to describe the situation when the f-theory

threebranes coincide with the conifold singularity in the base. note that the threebranes
only move along b3, or rather, a section of the elliptic calabiyau fourfold x4. this follows
from viewing the f-theory vacuum as type iib compactied on b3, since the threebranes
and sevenbranes are, strictly speaking, type iib objects. when n threebranes sit on
the node of the conifold (recall that it is really the base b3 which develops the conifold
singularity), the heterotic dual consists of intersecting horizontal vebranes with n vertical

vebranes at the point of intersection. thus, we are again in a situation similar to the one

14

discussed in [26,27,28], where the m-theory dual of n threebranes on a conifold consists

of n vebranes along (01236&10) between two transverse vebranes along (012345) and

(012389), respectively. however, since we are really in f-theory, we must switch o the
the b and b elds. this corresponds in the m-theory picture to setting the x6 and x10
separations of the transverse vebranes to zero, so that there really is only one set of

vebranes between them, and not two. thus while the gauge theory in the more general

situation of [26,27,28] is an su (n)  su (n) theory, we see that in our case, we only get

an su (n) gauge theory at the singularity. note that unlike the situation in section 3.2,

the arguments of [24] showing the existence of an interacting theory on the vebrane

intersection are supported by the f-theory picture.

the relation between the present situation and the one discussed in [26,27,28] suggests

a useful interpretation of the resolution of the conifold singularity in terms of the vebranes.
we note that the size of e3, the resolving p 1, is related to the separation the vebranes
along the m-theory interval. we have argued before that this corresponds to the x7
direction in the picture of [26,27,28]. therefore, resolving the conifold should correspond

to separating the transverse vebranes along x7 in the brane picture. in fact, separating the
vebranes along x7 corresponds to turning on a fayet-iliopoulos d-term in the lagrangian
of the n = 1 u (1) gauge theory describing the conifold, whose coecient  is the x7
separation of the branes [26,30]. but, as shown in [26], setting  6= 0 gives a resolution of

the conifold singularity, and in fact there are two dierent resolutions depending on the

sign of . moving the vebranes past each other in the x7 direction thus corresponds to a
op transition in the dual theory, exactly as in the heterotic picture above.

the conifold has another interesting property: it can be deformed to a smooth mani-
fold. thus, we expect to be able to deform the base b3 away from the conifold. what is
the heterotic dual of this deformation?

it was shown in [31] that the conifold metric is deformed to a smooth metric when

threebranes sit on the node of the conifold. we will show in our case that even in the

absence of the threebranes, there are often deformations that smooth out the singularity.

consider the following example, rst discussed in [4]. we consider the heterotic theory

on the calabiyau threefold elliptically bered over the hirzebruch surface f1, with e8
bundles chosen so that the dual calabiyau fourfold is elliptically bered over f100 =
f1  p 1. now let us consider two horizontal vebranes, one wrapping the zero section c0
and the other wrapping the ber class f of f1. since c0  f = 1, these vebranes intersect
exactly once, therefore we are in the situation discussed above. setting the size of the

15

exceptional component e3 to zero corresponds to moving the vebranes on top of each

other in the m-theory interval so that they actually intersect, and we obtain a conifold
singularity in b3. however, we can now deform away from the conifold as follows. the
innity section c of f1 is in the same divisor class as c0 + f , but has one additional

deformation modulus (c0 has no moduli as it has negative self-intersection and so cannot

be moved, f has exactly one modulus, and c has two moduli). thus, we can deform the

intersecting vebranes into a single one wrapping c. on the f-theory dual, we obtain

a calabiyau fourfold with dierent hodge numbers (since the moduli are dierent) but

the same euler number (since the number of threebranes is the same).

on the other hand, if the heterotic base were the hirzebruch surface f2 instead, then

we cannot deform the two curves c0 and f into a single curve. thus the node at the point

of intersection of c0 and f cannot be deformed. we see therefore that there is a global

obstruction to the deformation of the conifold singularity obtained by the intersection of

the two curves. this global obstruction can be simply stated as follows. the number
of moduli of a curve c in the heterotic base b2 is given by h0(nc/b2 ) = h0(oc(c)),
the number of deformations of the normal bundle nc/b2 = oc(c) of c in b2. when
h1,0(b2) = h1(b2, o) = 0, the number of moduli is also the dimension of the linear system
of the divisor associated with the curve c, which is simply h0(b2, o(c))  1. clearly, if
we have two curves c1 and c2, then we can deform to a single curve only if c1 + c2 has

more moduli than c1 and c2, so that the deformation exists only when

h0(o(c1+c2)(c1 + c2)) > h0(oc1 (c1)) + h0(oc2 (c2)).

(4.2)

to summarize, we have found that intersecting horizontal vebranes are dual to iso-

lated conifold singularities in the f-theory base. at classical level, the theory exhibits

two branches corresponding to the small resolution and respectively to the deformation of

singularities. the passage from one branch to the other represents an extremal transition

in the fourfold geometry. although the situation seems similar to the conifold singularities

encountered in n = 2 string vacua [32,33], there are important dierences. first note that
the s3 cycle present in the local deformation of the conifold is in general homologically

trivial in the deformed f-theory base. if c1, c2 are rational curves, this follows easily by

noting that the third betti number of the deformed base is zero. therefore, the usual

restrictions on kahler resolutions imposed by the presence of three-cycles are absent in

this case. in particular, small kahler resolutions of single isolated conifold are allowed.

16

physically, this means that on the deformation branch, we cannot identify a state of
vanishing mass at the singularity. moreover, even if s3 were homologically nontrivial, a

wrapped threebrane would still not dene a stable bps state due to the reduced amount
of supersymmetry. at the same time, a threebrane wrapped around the s2 cycle of a

small kahler resolution will give rise to a stable bps string whose tension goes to zero

as we approach the singularity.

in the context of calabi-yau conifolds, this string has

been identied with a ux tube between charged sources in the conning phase of an

n = 2 gauge theory [34]. here, single conifold transitions are allowed, therefore such an

interpretation is no longer valid. instead, we can regard the stable tensionless string as

(weak) evidence for the existence of an interacting superconformal theory localized at the

singularity. this would be dual to the theory on intersecting heterotic vebranes.

thus far, we have only considered curves of genus zero, i.e., p 1s. let us now see

how this discussion needs to be modied when we have curves of higher genus. first,

according to section 2, the f-theory dual of a vebrane wrapping a curve of genus g is

once again a blowup of b3 over the same curve, the size of the blowup giving the position

of the vebrane in the m-theory interval. when two such curves intersect in n points,

the local geometry near each intersection point is identical to that represented in fig.2.
therefore we obtain n exceptional p 1 components of type e3 which are in the same
cohomology class, either e1  e2 or e2  e1. since the total space is kahler, they are also

of the same size giving the separation between the vebranes on the interval. when the
two vebranes coincide, all the exceptional p 1 components shrink simultaneously and we

obtain n isolated conifold singularities. this picture shows that the n isolated singularities

cannot be resolved independently. there are precisely two ways of resolving the singularity

(which are related by a op), corresponding to the two ways of separating the vebranes

on the interval. once again, deforming the two curves c1 and c2 into a single curve in

the class c1 + c2 is a deformation away from the singularity. the global obstruction to

this is again given by eqn.(4.2).

4.2. parallel fivebranes

now consider the situation when we have two horizontal vebranes wrapping the same
curve c. again, we rst consider the case when the curve in question is a p 1. on the
f-theory side, the base b3 now has two intersecting exceptional p 1s e1, e2 bered over
c (e3 is the proper transform of the original ber)

17

d3

d2

d1

c12

c

e 3

s8

e
2

e
1

s

0

fig. 4: the blow-up geometry corresponding to two vebranes wrapping the curve
c.

with the size of the e2 giving the mutual separation of the vebranes along the m-theory
interval. blowing down this p 1, therefore, corresponds to moving the vebranes on top
of each other. this gives an a1 singularity over c in b3. more generally, if we have k
coincident vebranes wrapping c, we would get an ak1 singularity over c in b3.
in
addition, if we have n coincident vertical vebranes, this corresponds on the f-theory side

to n threebranes on the ak1 singularity. as before, we see that this is very similar to
the situation discussed in refs. [27,28], except that the b elds are zero in our situation,

corresponding to zero separation of the branes along x6 and x10 in the brane description.
for clarity, we will restrict our attention to the case when we have only two parallel

vebranes for the rest of this section. the generalization to more branes is elementary.

apart from the obvious resolution of this singularity (blowing up the p 1 again, corre-

sponding to separating the vebranes), we can deform away from it as follows. first, if c is
movable (i.e., if h0(oc (c)) > 0), then we can deform away from the singularity by moving
one curve away from the other in b2. if c.c = 0, then the two curves no longer intersect,
and the corresponding b3 is smooth. however, if c  c > 0 (c  c < 0 is impossible here,
since we have assumed that c is movable), then the curves intersect in a set of points,
and b3 becomes a conifold, as in the previous section, with a set of isolated nodes. we
can then either resolve the conifold by blowing it up, i.e., separating the vebranes, or by

deforming it further. this deformation is only possible if 2c has a smooth section dierent
from c, i.e., if h0(o2c(2c)) > 2h0(oc (c)). in this case, the curves can be deformed into

18

a single curve, and we get a single vebrane wrapping a smooth curve in the class 2c. of

course, in this case, we could have directly deformed the two curves into a single curve

without passing through the conifold phase. if c is not movable, then we cannot deform
to a conifold. however, if h0(o2c(2c)) > 2h0(oc(c)), then we can still deform to a single
curve, because 2c is then movable. if, however, 2c is also not movable, then we cannot

deform away at all. the geometrical analysis can be easily generalized to curves of higher

genus.

note that in contrast with the previous cases, the low energy theory obtained here

is essentially associated to a curve of ak1 singularity in type iib theory. therefore we
will have an interacting theory which can be described as the compactication of the (2, 0)

eld theory on a riemann surface. if vertical vebranes are added to the picture, the dual

f-theory phenomenon consists of threebranes transverse to a curve of ak1 singularities in
iib theory. this is a familiar situation encountered many times in the literature, starting

with [35]. however, the resulting eective theory may present some complications due to

the nite size of the singular curve. this will be discussed in the next subsection.

finally, we can combine the situation here with that of the previous subsection, and

consider k1 horizontal vebranes wrapping c1, k2 horizontal vebranes wrapping c2, and
n vertical vebranes at a point of intersection of c1 and c2. first, ignoring the vertical
vebranes, the dual f-theory degeneration consists of two curves of ak11 and ak21 sin-
gularities intersecting transversely in b3. this results in a nonabelian conifold singularity
[36,37]. near each intersection point, this is again similar to a situation considered in ref.
[28], where the singularity was shown to be of the form xy = zk1 wk2 . note again that the

x6 separation of the branes is zero since we have to set the b elds to zero. it is an easy
exercise to describe geometrically the various deformations and resolutions of this situa-

tion. the specic example of k1 = 1, k2 = 2 was worked out in 4 of ref. [28]. bringing
the k vertical vebranes near an intersection point corresponds to placing n threebranes at

a nonabelian conifold singularity in f-theory. the description of the low energy eective

theory is quite dicult in this case, as will be detailed in the following.

4.3. merging horizontal and vertical fivebranes  a second puzzle

consider the situation discussed in the previous subsection, namely n vertical ve-

branes intersecting k > 1 horizontal vebranes wrapped around a curve c in b2. here
we encounter a qualitatively new phenomenon. the vebranes can merge together into
a single vebrane wrapping a smooth curve c  in the calabi-yau space z. an obvious

19

necessary condition for this is (kc + nf )  c > 0, i.e., n > kc  c. the resulting vebrane

is, in a sense, skew. the case k = 1 was discussed in section 3.2.

therefore, it follows that there is a new branch of the theory along which the low
energy eective action consists of g(c ) abelian gauge elds whose couplings are governed
by the jacobian of c . the main problem is to understand the f-theory origin of this

new branch. as a rst step, note that this phenomenon cannot admit a pure geometrical

interpretation. this is because horizontal and vertical vebranes map to very dierent

objects in f-theory. the horizontal vebranes are described in terms of blowup modes in

the base, which can be described purely in terms of the fourfold geometry, but the vertical

vebranes map to threebranes, which are not related in any way to the geometry - rather,

they constitute additional non-geometric data necessary for the complete description of

the f-theory vacuum. therefore, when these two kinds of vebranes merge into a single

vebrane, it is unlikely to nd a pure geometric description.

in the following, we suggest a possible resolution of this puzzle based on a careful

analysis of threebranes transverse to a curve of ak1 singularities. in principle, threebranes
transverse to an ak1 singularity are described by an ak1 quiver gauge theory [35]. the
space time parameters  blow-up modes and theta angles  are realized as fi terms in

the brane gauge theory. however, at the same, the spacetime moduli are coordinates

along the at directions of the ak1 (2,0) theory localized at the singularity. a similar
situation is encountered in the (1, 0) theories with tensor multiplets discussed in [38,39].

in the present situation, the spacetime (2, 0) is compactied on a riemann surface of

nite size, therefore it yields an interacting four dimensional theory with no lagrangian

description. moreover, the (2, 0) degrees of freedom must interact nontrivially with the

threebrane degrees of freedom, as a result of the previous interplay between space time

moduli and brane gauge theory. therefore, we conclude that the theory associated to

f-theory threebranes transverse to a curve of ak1 singularities must be a complicated
interacting xed point. the new vebrane branch found above can then be interpreted

as a low energy coulomb branch emerging from this xed point.

in particular, it is a

non-geometric branch.

when c  c = 2,  = c  p 1  t 2, and there is a brane construction for the

above situation. the above coulomb branch can then be interpreted in terms of fractional

branes [40]. it is not clear if this description holds in the more general cases.

another possibility [41], is to compactify on a further circle to m-theory.

in this

picture, the f-theory threebranes map to membranes. deforming kc + nf to a single

20

irreducible curve might correspond to absorbing n membranes and turning on a four-form

eld strength ux carrying n units of membrane charge. lifting back to f-theory, this
would map to turning on h, h uxes. we are currently investigating this possibility and

hope to report on it in the future.

finally, note that the situation is even more complicated when vertical vebranes sit

at a point of intersection of multiple horizontal vebranes.

5. discussion of the superpotential

in the previous sections, we have studied the n = 1 moduli space from an essentially

classical point of view. here we will discuss how the classical picture is modied by

nonperturbative instanton eects. from the heterotic perspective, there can be various

nonperturbative phenomena generated by spacetime or worldsheet instantons. all these

eects have a simple and unitary f-theory interpretation in terms of threebrane instantons

wrapping divisors in the threefold base. in the following we will give a systematic treatment

of these eects for the small instanton degenerations considered so far. note that in order

obtain correct results, the zero mode computations must be performed away from the zero

degeneration limit, that is for a smooth elliptic calabi-yau fourfold  : x  b3. this

can be seen, for example, by taking into account the m-theory origin of the instantons
explained in [19]. in order to obtain such a smooth model, the base b3 must be blown-up
a number of times along certain curves contained in the two ii  sections. as before, let
b3 denote the blown-up base. many of the results of this section have been obtained
independently by a. grassi [42]. we are grateful to her for sharing her results with us.

i) heterotic worldsheet instantons. generically, these correspond to threebranes wrap-
ping divisors w  b3 which are vertical with respect to the map p : b3  b2 [19]. here,
this is still valid if w is the pull back of a generic curve c in the base, other than the

support of the exceptional locus. in this case, we can apply directly the results of [9]. the

number of zero modes is given by

 (ow ) =

1
2

k b3 w 2.

since w = pc, w 3 = 0 and the adjunction formula

kw = (cid:0)k b3 + w(cid:1)  w

21

(5.1)

(5.2)

shows that

k b3 w 2 = kw  w = 2(c2)b2 .

(5.3)

therefore, only divisors supported on curves with (c2)b2 = 1 can contribute. as the
base b2  fn, 0  n  2, it follows that a superpotential can be generated only if n = 1.

the analysis of [19,9] shows that in this case, a superpotential is actually generated.

ii) noncritical string instantons. regarding the heterotic theory as m-theory on an

interval, there are two types of noncritical strings corresponding to membranes stretching

between two vebranes or membranes stretching between a vebrane and a nine dimen-

sional wall. some eects associated with these instantons have been discussed in [43,44].

these are bps strings whose tension is proportional to the separation between the branes.

therefore, taking into account the moduli map developed in the previous sections, they

can be naturally identied with euclidean threebranes wrapping the exceptional divisors

in f-theory. more precisely, let us consider a conguration of k vebranes wrapping a

curve c in b2 and separated along the interval. the corresponding f-theory geometry

consists of a sequence of divisors d1, d2 . . . dk, dk+1 with normal crossings as explained

in section 4.2. threebranes wrapped on the divisors d1, dk+1 correspond to membranes

stretching between the rst and the last vebrane and the nine dimensional walls respec-

tively. at the same time, threebranes wrapped on d1 . . . dk correspond to membranes

stretching between consecutive vebranes. the number of zero modes can be computed

again using formula (5.1). in fact a simple local computation shows that the bers e1, ek+1

of d1, dk+1 are negative extremal rays in the blown-up threefold base, therefore we can

apply the results of [9] (ex. 2.9.1 and prop. 3.4). this shows that

 (od1 ) = (cid:0)odk+1(cid:1) = 1  g(c)

(5.4)

where g(c) is the genus of the curve. moreover, it can be shown as in [9] that the hodge

numbers of these divisors are

h0,0 = 1,

h0,1 = g(c),

h0,2 = h0,3 = 0.

(5.5)

therefore the divisors d1, dk+1 contribute if and only if c is a rational curve.

this formula does not apply to the middle divisors d1 . . . dk since their bers are not

negative extremal rays. the number of zero modes can be computed recursively as follows.

22

for simplicity consider the case k = 2 represented in g. 4. let ni, i = 1, 2, 3 denote the
degrees of the rulings of the three divisors. note that by construction,

n1 = n2 + (c2)b2

(5.6)

and the divisors d1, d2 intersect along a common section c12 isomorphic to c. the
adjunction formula (5.2) shows that

k b3 d2

2 = (cid:0)kd2  d2

2(cid:1)  d2

where

kd2 = 2c12 + (2g(c)  2  n2)e2.

(5.7)

(5.8)

furthermore, a local computation shows that the restriction of the normal bundle nd2/ b3
to the p 1 ber e2 is of degree 2. therefore, we have

nd2/ b3 = 2c12 + ae2

(5.9)

where a is an integer number which can be determined as follows. the triple intersection
d1d2

2 can be computed in two equivalent ways

d1d2

2 = (c2

12)d1 = n1

using also (5.6), we nd

= c12  d2 = 2n2 + a.

a = (c2)b2  n2.

finally, (5.7), (5.8) and (5.9) imply that

(5.10)

(5.11)

 (od2 ) = (c2)b2 + 2g(c)  2 = c  kb2 .

(5.12)

it is clear that this recursive step can be applied for each of the divisors d2 . . . dk yielding
the same result. the hodge numbers can be computed using the general expressions in [9]

and the riemann-roch theorem on the di

h0,0 = 1,

h0,1 = g(c),

h0,2 = c  kb2 + g(c)  1,

h0,3 = 0.

(5.13)

note that again there is an exceptional case, namely b  f2, c = c0 when the above
general formulae do not hold. in that case, we obtain similarly

h0,0 = 1,

h0,1 = 1,

h0,2 = h0,3 = 0.

(5.14)

23

therefore, although c  kb2 = 1 is a necessary condition for the generation of a superpo-
tential, it may not be sucient [19]. a sucient condition also requires g(c) = 0, showing
that the contribution is certain for rational curves satisfying (cid:0)c2(cid:1)b2
= 1. if the base is
a hirzebruch surface of degree 0  n  2, this can be realized only when n = 1 and c is a

rational curve.

iii) exceptional instantons.

in addition to the eects discussed so far, there are
also contributions coming from the resolution of the sections of e8 singularities of the
elliptic bration. these have been shown in [15,16] to give the expected gauge theoretic

nonperturbative superpotentials and will not be discussed here.

5.1. toric description

it is interesting also to consider the computation of the zero modes in the light of

toric geometry, which provides a method of explicitly constructing calabiyau fourfolds

as hypersurfaces in toric varieties. such a calabiyau fourfold x is described by a dual pair
of ve dimensional reexive polyhedra (, ). in particular, the points in  correspond to

divisors in the calabiyau manifold. (see, for example, [45] for a useful review). for any
point p in , the arithmetic genus of the corresponding divisor in the calabiyau fourfold
is given by a formula of [46]. if p is interior to a face 
p in , and p is the dual face in
 (dened by p = {q  | < q, v >= 1, v  
p) = 4),
and l() is the number of lattice points interior to , the formula of [46] is

p}, note that dim(p) + dim(

(dp, o(dp)) = 1  (1)dim(p)l(p),

(5.15)

where dp is the divisor in x corresponding to the point p. (if dim(
p) = 4, the point p
corresponds to a divisor in the embedding variety that does not intersect the space x, and

hence does not give a divisor on x).

since we are studying f-theory compactications, x is an elliptic bration, i.e., there
is a projection  : x  b3 whose generic ber is an elliptic curve e, and the vertical
divisors (which project down to divisors in b3) are the only ones that contribute to the
superpotential. now, by theorems in [47,48], the polyhedron  contains a slice e through
the origin, where e is the polyhedron describing the elliptic ber (which is a torus, and

hence calabiyau) as a hypersurface in a toric variety. the theorem also assures us that
there exists a projection acting on , which projects e to a point, and whose image is
the fan b3 of b3. thus, points in  project down to points in b3 , and hence describe
divisors in b3. furthermore, in order that a heterotic dual exist, x must also admit a k3
bration that is consistent with the elliptic bration structure. this implies that b3 is
itself a p 1 bered over b2, the base of the heterotic threefold z.

24

(-1,0,0)

d1

d4

(0,-1,0)

(0,0,1)

d5

d2

(1,n,0)

d3

(0,1,0)

d6

(0,0,-1)

 (a)

(0,1,1)

d7

d8

d9

(0,1,-1)

(0,1,-2)

(b)

 p 1, the base of the fourfold dual to
fig. 5: in (a), we have the fan of fn,0,0 = fn
the heterotic compactication on the elliptic calabiyau threefold with base fn.
in (b), we have the fan of fn,0,0 blown up three times over the zero section c0 of
fn, corresponding to three vebranes wrapping c0 in the heterotic base fn.

when k vebranes wrap a curve c in b2 which corresponds to a toric divisor, the
corresponding base b3 acquires k blowup modes over the corresponding divisor (see g. 5).
thus, we get a line of points p1, p2, . . . , pk+1 all of which project down to the divisor c in
b2 under the projection p : b3  b2. the fact that all of these points lie in a straight
line indicates that they all lie in the same face of . in the simplest cases, p1 and pk+1 are
vertices in , while p2, . . . , pk lie in the edge joining p1 and pk+1. in general, p2, . . . , pk
are interior to a face  of , while p1 and pk+1 will usually lie on the boundary of ,
and hence in faces of lower dimension. now the expression (5.15) yields the same result
for all points interior to a given face  of . thus we see immediately that p2, . . . , pk
all have exactly the same arithmetic genus, and therefore, either they all contribute to the

superpotential or they all do not. moreover, it follows that the points p1 and pk+1 can
have a dierent arithmetic genus.

we can actually compute the arithmetic genus of the divisors in the fourfold that

correspond to heterotic worldsheet instantons and noncritical string instantons as follows.

the points of  for the fourfold x can be put in the form (x, y, z, u, v), such that the

slice (0, 0, 0, u, v) gives e , and the slice (0, 0, z, u, v) gives k3. the projection p3 :

25

(x, y, z, u, v)  (x, y, z) yields the fan b3 of b3, the base of the elliptic bration, while
p2 : (x, y, z, u, v)  (x, y) gives the fan b2 of the base b2 of the k3 bration. the points
q   satisfy < q, p >  1, p  . in terms of , the polyhedron k3 of the k3 ber is
seen as a projection k3 : {a, b, c, d, e}  {c, d, e}, while e of the elliptic ber is given by
e : {a, b, c, d, e}  {d, e}[47,48]. (we will use round brackets to denote points in , and

curly brackets to denote points in .) for example, the polyhedron given by the points

(1, 1, 0, 2, 3), (0, 1, 0, 2, 3), (0, 0, 1, 2, 3), (0, 0, 0, 2, 3), (0, 0, 0, 1, 2), (0, 0, 0, 1, 1), (0, 0, 0, 0, 1)

(0, 0, 0, 0, 0), (0, 0, 0, 0, 1), (0, 0, 0, 1, 0), (1, 0, 0, 2, 3), (0, 1, 0, 2, 3), (0, 0, 1, 2, 3)

describes a fourfold elliptically bered over f1  p 1, which can also be viewed as a k3
bration over f1.

consider rst the case of the worldsheet instanton. this corresponds to a point p  

that projects down to a point p  b2 under p2, which describes a divisor (curve) cp in
b2. now cp  cp  2, otherwise the elliptic bration will be singular over cp. in such a
case we do not have heterotic worldsheet instantons, but rather instantons associated with

the exceptional bers. for cp  cp > 2, the point p is a vertex, whereas for cp  cp = 2,
p is interior to an edge. now, the points q which are interior to a face  in  satisfy
< q, v >= 1, v   and < q, v >  0, v /  (v  ). but  contains the reexive

polyhedron k3 as a slice. the only point in k3 that has non-negative product with
all the points in k3 is the origin {0, 0, 0}, since, by reexivity, it is the unique interior
point of k3. since k3() = k3, it follows that the only points in  that have non-
negative product with all the points in k3   are of the form {a, b, 0, 0, 0}. now, all
the points interior to p must have non-negative product with any point in  not in 
p.
in particular, they have non-negative product with any point in k3  , and so must be
of the form {a, b, 0, 0, 0}. it is then a simple matter to count l(p), the number of points
interior to p.

for cp  cp > 2, we nd l() = 1 + cp  cp. since p is a vertex, dim(p) = 4, and

(5.15) gives

(dp, o(dp)) = cp  cp.

using the results of [46] we also nd

h0,0 = 1,

h1,0 = 0,

h2,0 = 0,

h3,0 = 1 + cp  cp,

so that a superpotential is generated if and only if cp  cp = 1.

26

when cp  cp = 2, we get l() = 1. but dim(p) = 3 (since p must lie in an edge,
otherwise the fourfold x will not admit a k3 bration consistent with the elliptic bration

structure), so (5.15) gives

(dp, o(dp)) = 2 = cp  cp.

in fact, we nd

h0,0 = 1,

h1,0 = 0,

h2,0 = 1,

h3,0 = 0.

now consider the case of the noncritical string instantons. we now have a line of

points p1, . . . , pk+1   all of which project down to the same point p  b2 . once again,
cp  cp  2, otherwise we have exceptional bers.

for cp  cp > 2 the points pj, 2  j  k lie in the edge 

1,k+1 joining p1 and pk+1.
once again, we see that all the points interior to 1,k+1 are of the form {a, b, 0, 0, 0}, and
l(1,k+1) = 1 + cp  cp. thus, for the points pj, 2  j  k, we get, using dim(1,k+1) = 3
and (5.15),

(dpj , o(dpj )) = 2 + cp  cp = kb2  cp.

we also nd

h0,0 = 1,

h1,0 = 0,

h2,0 = 1 + cp  cp = kb2  cp  1,

h3,0 = 0.

but 1,k+1 is the common face of 1 and k+1. we see that all the points of the form
{a, b, 0, 0, 0} in 1 lie in 1,k+1 and hence cannot be interior to 1. therefore, l(1) = 0,
and similarly, l(k+1) = 0. we thus get

(dp1 , o(dp1)) = (dpk+1 , o(dpk+1)) = 1,

and moreover,

h0,0 = 1,

h1,0 = 0,

h2,0 = 0,

h3,0 = 0.

for cp  cp = 2, the points pj , 2  j  k lie in a two dimensional face. using the

methods described above, we nd

(dpj , o(dpj )) = 0 = kb2  cp,

and

h0,0 = 1,

h1,0 = 1,

h2,0 = 0,

h3,0 = 0.

27

for the points p1 and pk+1, we get

(dp1 , o(dp1)) = (dpk+1 , o(dpk+1)) = 1,

and

h0,0 = 1,

h1,0 = 0,

h2,0 = 0,

h3,0 = 0.

we thus see that the toric method yields results which are in general agreement with

formulas (5.3), (5.4), and (5.12) with g(cp) = 0, since all the (toric) divisors cp in the
toric variety b2 are rational.

another way to compute the arithmetic genus of the horizontal divisors is to use
(d, o(d)) = 1/2kb3  d2 , which expresses the arithmetic genus of the vertical divisor
d in the fourfold in terms of its image d in the base b3, and compute the right hand
side from the fan of b3. as an illustrative example, we explicitly compute the arithmetic
genera of the divisors in the calabiyau fourfold bered over the base shown in g. 5(b).

now, each ray in the fan of the base corresponds to a divisor, and the canonical class
k = idi. furthermore, three (distinct) divisors intersect if and only if they form a
cone in the fan. thus, for instance, d1  d2  d5 = 1, but d5  d4  d6 = 0. in addition,
there are three linear relations among the divisors imposed by the structure of the lattice.

these relations are:

d2 = d4

d1 = nd2 + d7 + d3 + d8 + d9

(5.16)

d5 + d7 = d8 + 2d9 + d6

for the fan of g. 5(a), the corresponding relations are identical except for the absence

of the terms involving d7, d8, d9, since these divisors are absent. in this case, we recognize
d5, d6 as giving the fan of the p 1 ber, and d1, . . . , d4 as giving the fan of fn, with
d2 = d4 = f , d1 = c, and d3 = c0. (strictly speaking, d1 = p (c), and so on).
the fan of g. 5(b) then describes the variety obtained by blowing up fn  p 1 three times
over c0, the zero section of fn.

after a simple computation, we obtain the following results:

k  d2

k  d2

k  d2

k  d2

4 = 0 = 2f 2,

1 = 2n = 2c2
,
2 = k  d2
7 = k  d2
3 = k  d2

9 = 2,

8 = 4  2n = 2kfn  c0.

(5.17)

the above results again agree with equations (5.1), (5.4) and (5.12).

28

5.2. physical implications

the above results have interesting physical implications. note rst that the behavior

of the outer divisors in the chain is dierent from that of the inner divisors. in turn, all

inner divisors have the same number of zero modes. this is actually the expected behavior

since the outer and inner divisors correspond to two dierent types of open membranes as

explained above.

although we have derived a necessary and sucient formula for the generation of a

nonperturbative superpotential very little is known about its explicit dependence on the

complex structure moduli. a notable exception is the case treated in [49]. considering an
exceptional divisor di in the chain, the size of the p 1 ber i combines with a kaluza-klein
mode obtained by reducing the ten dimensional four-form c(4) on the harmonic form dual

to ei in b3, resulting in a chiral multiplet i. the general expression of the corresponding
superpotential term is of the form

v  ei f (. . .)

(5.18)

where f (. . .) is an unknown holomorphic function depending on the complex structure

moduli of x as well as the j and on the positions of the background threebranes [19,50].
furthermore, taking into account the possible extremal transitions discussed in the previ-

ous section the classical moduli space has a very complicated structure. in this case, there

could be contributions to the superpotential of perturbative nature as explained in the

simpler context of n = 2 d = 3 gauge theories in [51]. a discussion of these phenomena in

a particular geometric situation has appeared in [52]. therefore the analysis of this section

is a small step towards a complete understanding of this complicated moduli space.

another interesting aspect is related to the fact that when the number of zero modes

forbids the generation of a superpotential, there could be other associated nonperturbative

eects. this is well known in the context of n = 1 eld theories with nf = nc when such
an eect results in a quantum deformation of the classical moduli space [53]. as also

explained in [54] such a phenomenon can be produced by a divisor with  = 0. in the

present situation this is obviously the case when a horizontal heterotic vebrane wraps

an elliptic curve in c  b2, according to (5.4). this suggests that in this case the four
dimensional vebraneinstanton transition can be smoothed by nonperturbative eects.
however, extra care is needed since if g(c) = 1, we also have h0,1 = 1, hence a cancelation

could in principle take place.

29

acknowledgments

it is a pleasure to thank m. berkooz, p. candelas, g. curio, k. dasgupta, a. grassi,

j. gomis, k. intriligator, b. ovrut, n. seiberg, s. sethi, a. uranga, e. witten and z.

yin for useful discussions. the work of d-e. d. is supported in part by doe grant

de-fg02-90er40542. the work of g.r. is supported in part by nsf grant math/phys

dms-9627351.

30

references

[1] r. friedman, j. morgan, e. witten, vector bundles and f theory, commun. math.

phys. 187 (1997) 679, hep-th/9701162.

[2] b. andreas and g. curio, three-branes and five-branes in n=1 dual string pairs,

phys. lett. b417 (1998) 41, hep-th/9706093.

[3] s. sethi, c. vafa and e. witten, constraints on low-dimensional string compacti-

cations, nucl. phys. b480 (1996) 213, hep-th/9606122.

[4] g. rajesh, toric geometry and f-theory/heterotic duality in four dimensions,

jhep 12 (1998) 018, hep-th/9811240.

[5] d.r. morrison and c. vafa, compactications of f-theory on calabiyau threefolds
 i, nucl.phys. b473 (1996) 74, hep-th/9602114; compactications of f-theory on
calabiyau threefolds  ii, nucl.phys. b476 (1996) 437, hep-th/9603161.
[6] p.s. aspinwall, k3 surfaces in string duality, tasi(96), hep-th/9611137.
[7] p.s. aspinwall and d. r. morrison, point-like instantons on k3 orbifolds, nucl.

phys. b503 (1997) 533, hep-th/9705104.

[8] e. witten, non-perturbative superpotentials in string theory, nucl. phys. 474

(1996), hep-th/9604030.

[9] a. grassi, divisors on elliptic calabi-yau 4-folds and the superpotential in f-

theory, i, alg-geom/9704008.

[10] m. bershadsky, a. johansen, t. pantev, v. sadov, on four-dimensional compact-

ications of f-theory, nucl. phys. b505 (1997) 165, hep-th/9701165.

[11] r. friedman, j.w. morgan, e. witten, vector bundles over elliptic fibrations,

alg-geom/9709029.

[12] p. berglund and p. mayr, heterotic string/f-theory duality from mirror symmetry,

hep-th/9811217.

[13] g. curio and r.y. donagi, moduli in n=1 heterotic/f-theory duality, nucl. phys.

b518 (1998) 603, hep-th/9801057.

[14] p.s. aspinwall, aspects of the hypermultiplet moduli space in string duality, j.

high energy phys. 04 (1998) 019, hep-th/9802194.

[15] s. katz, c. vafa, geometric engineering of n=1 quantum field theories, nucl.

phys. b497 (1997) 196, hep-th/9611090.

[16] c. vafa, on n=1 yang-mills in four dimensions, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998)

497, hep-th/9801139.

[17] c.h. clemens and p.a. griths, the intermediate jacobian of the cubic three-

fold, ann. of math. (2) 95 (1972) 281.

[18] a.n. tyurin, five lectures on three-dimensional varieties, russian. math. sur-

veys. (5) 27 (1972) 1.

31

[19] e. witten, solutions of four-dimensional field theory via m theory, nucl. phys.

(1997) , hep-th/9703166.

[20] a. lukas, b.a. ovrut, d. waldram, non-standard embedding and ve-branes in

heterotic m-theory, hep-th/9808101.

[21] r. donagi, a. lukas, b.a. ovrut, d. waldram, non-perturbative vacua and particle

physics in m-theory, hep-th/9811168.

[22] e. sharpe, extremal transitions in heterotic string theory, nucl. phys. b513,

175, hep-th/9705210.

[23] a. hanany, i. r. klebanov, on tensionless strings in 3 + 1 dimensions, nucl. phys.

b482 (1996) 105, hep-th/9606136.

[24] s. kachru, y. oz and z. yin, matrix description of intersecting m5 branes, hep-

th/9803050.

[25] n. seiberg, ir dynamics on branes and space-time geometry, phys. lett. b384

[26]

(1996) 81, hep-th/9606017.
i. klebanov and e. witten,superconformal field theory on threebranes at a calabi-
yau singularity, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 199, hep-th/9807080.

[27] k. dasgupta and s. mukhi, brane constructions, conifolds and m-theory, hep-

th/9811139.

[28] a. uranga, brane congurations for branes at conifolds, hep-th/9811004.
[29] d. morrison, m.r. plesser, non-spherical horizons, i, hep-th/9810201.
[30] a. giveon and d. kutasov, brane dynamics and gauge theory, hep-th/9802067.
[31] s. gubser, i. klebanov, baryons and domain walls in an n = 1 superconformal

gauge theory, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 125025, hep-th/9808075.

[32] a. strominger, massless black holes and conifolds in string theory, nucl. phys.

b451 (1995) 96, hep-th/9504090.

[33] b. greene, d.r. morrison, a. strominger, black hole condensation and the uni-

cation of string vacua, nucl. phys. b451 (1995), 109, hep-th/9504145.

[34] b. greene, d.r. morrison, c. vafa, a geometric realization of connement, nucl.

phys. b481 (1996) 51, hep-th/9608039.

[35] m. douglas and g. moore, d-branes, quivers, and ale instantons, hep-th/9603167.
[36] m. bershadsky, v. sadov, c. vafa, d-strings on d-manifolds, nucl.phys. b463

(1996) 398, hep-th/9510225.

[37] k. hori, h. ooguri, c. vafa, non-abelian conifold transitions and n=4 dualities

in three dimensions, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 147, hep-th/9705220.

[38] k. intriligator, rg fixed points in six dimensions via branes at orbifold singular-

ities, nucl. phys. b496 (1997) 177, hep-th/9702038.

[39] j.d. blum, k. intriligator, new phases of string theory and 6d rg fixed points
via branes at orbifold singularities, nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 223, hep-th/9705044.

[40] a. m. uranga, private communication.

32

[41] e. witten, private communication.
[42] a. grassi, to appear.
[43] p. mayr, mirror symmetry, n=1 superpotentials and tensionless strings on calabi-

yau four-folds, nucl. phys. b494 (1997) 489, hep-th/9610162.

[44] s. kachru, e. silverstein, chirality changing phase transitions in 4d string vacua,

nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 272, hep-th/9704185.

[45] h. skarke, string dualities and toric geometry: an introduction, hep-th/9806059.
[46] a. klemm, b. lian, s-s. roan and s-t. yau, calabi-yau fourfolds for m- and f-

theory compactications, nucl. phys. b518 (1998) 515 hep-th/9609239.

[47] a. avram, m. kreuzer, m. mandelberg and h. skarke, searching for k3 brations,

nucl. phys. b494 (1997) 567, hep-th/9805190.

[48] m. kreuzer and h. skarke, calabiyau 4-folds and toric brations, j. geom. phys.

26 (1998) 272, hep-th/9701175.

[49] r. donagi, a. grassi and e. witten, a non-perturbative superpotential with e8

symmetry, mod. phys. lett. a11 (1996) 2199, hep-th/9607091.

[50] o. ganor, a note on zeroes of superpotentials in f-theory, nucl. phys. b499

(1997) 55, hep-th/9612077.

[51] o. aharony, aspects of n=2 supersymmetric gauge theories in three dimensions,

nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 67, hep-th/9703110.

[52] d.-e. diaconescu and s. gukov, three dimensional n=2 gauge theories and de-
generations of calabi-yau four-folds, nucl. phys. b535 (1998) 17, hep-th/9804059.
[53] n. seiberg, exact results on the space of vacua of four dimensional susy gauge

theories, phys.rev. d49 (1994) 6857, hep-th/9402044.

[54] m. bershadsky,  f-theory, geometric engineering and n=1 dualities, nucl. phys.

b505 (1997) 153, hep-th/9612052.

33

