hep-th/9903212
scipp-99/02

seeking the ground state of string theory1

michael dine

santa cruz institute for particle physics, santa cruz ca 95064

abstract

the greatest obstacle to developing a string phenomenology is our lack of understanding
of the ground state. we explain why the dynamics which determines this state is not likely
to be accessible to any systematic approximation. we note that the racetrack scheme, often
cited as a counterexample, suers from similar diculties. we stress that the weakness
of the gauge couplings, the gauge hierarchy, and coupling unication suggest that it may
be possible to extract some information in a systematic approximation. we review the
ideas of kahler stabilization, an attempt to reconcile these facts. we consider whether the
system is likely to sit at extremes of the moduli space, as in recent proposals for a low
string scale. finally we discuss the idea of maximally enhanced symmetry, a hypothesis
which is technically natural, compatible with basic facts about cosmology, and potentially
predictive.

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
5
2

 
 

1
v
2
1
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1invited talk at the yukawa-nishinomiya symposium, nishinomiya city, november 1998.

1

introduction

in thinking of yukawas great work, one cannot help but consider the importance of asking the

right questions. it is not merely that yukawa predicted the existence of a particular particle,

but that the questions which he asked, and the answer which he provided, remain fruitful to this

day. in thinking about the fundamental interactions, we would like to pose and answer similar,

qualitative questions. this has been the spirit of this conference. it would be presumptuous to

suppose that the questions which i will pose here will be of such importance, or the answers

so signicant.

it is likely, as we will see, that it is premature to ask these questions.

it is

also possible that the questions i pose here will someday seem inappropriate, in much the

way we no longer see the computation of the total cross section as an important problem in

strong interactions. still, i hope that the questions which i will phrase here will be helpful in

confronting some of the issues which we face in thinking about the formulation of string theory

and its connection with nature.

up until now, our approach to string theory has suered from a certain schizophrenia. at

weak coupling, we have a beautiful picture, containing gravity, gauge interactions, chirality,

generations, calculable interactions, and other features which we view as crucial to any fun-

damental theory. but there are also problems with this picture. first, there are many vacua.

these vacua carry both discrete and continuous labels. the discrete labels, especially the num-

ber of supersymmetries, are extremely useful in gaining control over the theory; they can be

used to severely constrain, for example, the eective lagrangian for the moduli, the elds whose

expectation values correspond to the continuous labels. the more supersymmetry, the stronger

the constraints and the more powerful the statements we can make. this power is the origin of

virtually all of the recent developments connected with duality. unfortunately, one of the easiest

statements to make about ground states with more than four supersymmetries (n > 1 in four

dimensional counting) is that they are ground states, perturbatively and non-perturbatively.

for the interesting cases with n  1 supersymmetry, there is no such simple argument,

in general. generically, perturbative ground states with four or less supersymmetries are un-

stable. assuming that string theory describes nature, duality is not likely to be of much help

in establishing the properties of the non-supersymmetric state which corresponds to the world

we observe. duality generally relates very strong coupling in one theory to weak coupling in

another theory. yet a simple argument shows that any stable ground state of the theory is

either degenerate with other ground states or lies at a point in the moduli space where no

2

weakly coupled description is possible[1]. while this argument was originally formulated with

the heterotic string in mind, it applies to any weak coupling description. the point is simply

that at weak coupling, any potential for the modulus which describes the coupling necessar-

ily goes to zero.recent developments in duality are thus not directly useful for addressing the

problem of vacuum stability[2]. if a very strong coupling region of one theory corresponds to

a weakly coupled description of another, than it suers from the same problem. this suggests

that in seeking the phenomenologically interesting ground state(s) of the theory, we need to
look for regions of the moduli space which admit no weak coupling description.1 david gross

has dubbed this the principal of minimal calculability (pmc).

still, nature exhibits weak coupling and seems to exhibit perturbative unication. surely,

these are important clues. one of the themes of this lecture will be an eort to reconcile these

seemingly contradictory facts. a related fact, which also gures heavily in this talk, is that

nature exhibits hierarchies. from the perspective of string theory, the issue is: how does a theory

with no parameters generate large (small) pure numbers. we will confront these issues quite

directly in this discussion. we will see that the traditional particle physics answers provide only

limited comfort. for example, we often say that hierarchies can be understood through the slow

running of couplings, or through the natural appearance in eld theories of expressions involving
e82/g2
. we say that it is natural that g should be of order 1, and therefore the exponential
can be extremely small. but, especially in light of duality, a more natural condition is that g2
4
should be 1. then the exponential should not be thought of as small at all. to my knowledge,

there are only three proposals in the literature to deal with this conundrum, and i will review

them here. the rst of these is known as the racetrack scheme[3]. the idea is that one has

several gaugino condensates (or similar sources of moduli superpotentials). it is assumed that

the superpotential is a sum of the superpotentials generated by gluino condensation in each

sector, i.e. it has the form

 8
bi g2
i .

w = x e

(1)

generically, any ground states one nds in such a picture will suer from the problem described
above, that e82/g2
has been argued, however, that for some choices of low energy gauge groups, large hierarchies

is not small, since the various terms in the sum must be comparable. it

can result if there are terms in the sum with large -functions. this proposal has been most

persuasively developed by kaplunovsky and louis[3]. we will see that while this is a logical

possibility, it cannot be studied in a systematic approximation, and it seems unlikely that

1the notion of a moduli space, in this context, is a bit fuzzy; we have in mind the classical moduli space;

later, we will introduce the notion of an approximate moduli space.

3

minima with the desired properties exist. the second proposal is known as kahler stabilization,

and will be briey reviewed here[4]. we will spend most of our time, however, on a third

proposal, that of maximally enhanced symmetry[5]. this proposal, as we will see, has

problems of its own, but if we hypothesize that it is correct, it makes denite predictions for

low energy physics, and also suggests an approach to developing a real string phenomenology.

2 fixing the moduli

2.1 generalities

string theory is a theory without free parameters, but the role of parameters is played by the

moduli. even without any detailed understanding of string dynamics, there are only a few

logical possibilities for the fate of the moduli:

 the moduli are not xed. perturbatively and non-perturbatively, their potential vanishes.

this is the case for n > 1 supersymmetry in four dimensions and for supersymmetry in

d > 4. in such cases, the supersymmetry prevents one from writing any potential for the

moduli in the low energy eective theory at all.

 the moduli are unstable to runaway to . consider, for example, the modulus which

describes the string coupling. one expects that any potential which is generated either

perturbatively or non-perturbatively will vanish as the coupling tends to zero. one can

imagine loopholes to this argument, but it is certainly true of all known cases. a similar

argument applies to moduli which describe, for example, compactication radii, at least

in cases with an approximate, low energy supersymmetry[6]. as the radii become large,

the theory becomes a theory in more that four dimensions with supersymmetry, and in

such theories the energy necessarily vanishes. again, one can conceive of loopholes to this

argument, but it holds for all known cases.

 the moduli are xed. necessarily this occurs for couplings of order one. this follows from

our discussion above: if any weak coupling approximation is valid, the potential cannot

have a minimum. a similar argument holds for the moduli which describe compactication

(at least, as discussed above, in cases with low energy supersymmetry). of course, we

can hope for accidents. ratios of scales might be small, couplings in eective lagrangians

might be small, simply by accident. but the underlying theory is still likely to be strongly

coupled. without some further assumptions, one has little hope of predicting anything

4

under theses circumstances. as we will discuss below, supersymmetry, holomorphy, and

other symmetries may allow one to make some predictions.

string duality is an exciting development, but it doesnt help directly with this problem.

indeed, these arguments imply that we expect realistic ground states of string theory to lie

where no weak coupling description is valid (this is the pmc alluded to above).

how, then, can we imagine developing any phenomenology? how can we reconcile these

remarks with the facts that the gauge couplings we observe in nature are small and seem to

unify? in this lecture, i will review what has been said about these questions, and oer some

speculations. i will focus on the third possibility in our list above, that the moduli are xed

and in some sense of order one. i will focus principally on the questions: why is   1, and
why is mw
mp

 1. i wont oer much insight into the questions: what is the origin of the fermion

mass hierarchy, and, most importantly, why is the cosmological constant so small. it will be

clear from the discussion that our lack of an answer to this last question is an extremely serious

limitation, and quite possibly an indication that all of this discussion is premature.

before turning to general theoretical issues, i would like to mention one more possible clue

and constraint. this is the cosmological moduli problem[7]. most proposals for supersymmetry

breaking in string theory postulate that the moduli develop a shallow potential, typically with

a minimum at some more or less random value. in that case, the early universe has no reason

to start out close to the ground state and the system generically stores too much energy. the

conventional solution to this problem is to suppose that when these moduli decay, they heat

the universe above nucleosynthesis temperatures, and produce the observed baryon asymmetry

at the same time. this requires that the moduli be quite heavy[7]. an alternative possibility

is that all of the moduli are charged under symmetries at the minimum, so that the values

of these elds in the early universe can naturally coincide with those at the present time[8].

prior to the recent developments in string duality, it was not possible to say much about this

possibility. now it is easy to construct examples of this phenomenon. this will be the focus of

the latter part of this talk.

it is worthwhile to rst review the conventional particle physics wisdom about small num-

bers. usually we say that the gauge couplings (gs, g, g) are numbers of order 1. thus it is
natural that gut  1
30 , for example. this also provides a way of understanding hierarchies,
g2 b . but

since non-perturbative eects in weakly coupled eld theories typically behave as e

 82

this begs the question: why is it g which is o(1), and not . in the case of electric-magnetic du-

5

ality, for example,  = 1 at the self-dual point. we will confront this issue shortly. about small

yukawa couplings, there are a few ideas. most assume that there are approximate symmetries,

broken by the expectation values of elds. in string theory, it has long been noted that some

yukawa couplings vanish exponentially with compactication radius, and this could be a source

of yukawa hierarchies[9]. a version of this idea suggested by brane physics has recently been

studied by [10, 11]. about the cosmological constant, there is no real conventional wisdom,

and i wont have anything to add today. recently, kachru and silverstein[12] have exhibited

non-supersymmetric models in which the cosmological constant vanishes, and harvey[13] has

noted that in some string theories the cosmological constant may be exponentially small. wit-

ten earlier made an interesting proposal motivated by string dualities[14]. but none of these

ideas is as yet complete.

it is also useful to recall the conventional approaches to string phenomenology. essentially

all string phenomenology ignores the problem of moduli and simply assumes that the moduli

are xed to some convenient values. the couplings are invariably assumed weak. the ratio-

nale is that, after all, weakly coupled strings look much like nature. prior to 1995, virtually

all string model building started with the assumption that only the heterotic string was phe-

nomenologically viable. in this theory, the unied coupling is related to the string coupling and

the compactication volume through

gut 

g2
s
v

(2)

here gs is the dimensionless string coupling and v is the compactication volume in units of the
string tension. requiring that gs  1, so that a weak coupling string description should be valid,
yields that v  1, while ms  mgut  mp[15, 16]. the requirement that gs < 1, however, was
always articial, a reection of our wishful thinking that the theory should be weakly coupled.

our post 1995 understanding of duality permits many new possibilities. perhaps the simplest of

these is the proposal by witten[17], following the realization of horava and witten[18] that the

strongly coupled heterotic string theory is in fact an eleven dimensional theory with two walls

in the eleventh dimension. taking the values of the gauge coupling and unication scale at face

value, this could be the appropriate description of the theory. it leads to a picture in which

the world is approximately ve dimensional; six dimensions are compactied, say, on a calabi-

yau space with radius of order one in eleven-dimensional planck units, while one dimension is

signicantly larger. more radical possibilities[20, 21, 22, 23] have been proposed recently, and

will be discussed further below. one intriguing possibility is that the standard model lives on

a brane. in this case, the gauge couplings are independent of the compactication volume, and

6

one can, again, consider the possibility that the compact space is large. in all of these pictures,

one must still ask why some dimensions are large.

finally, what is the conventional wisdom about xing the moduli? there are a number of

approaches:

 ignore the issue.

 assume that the moduli are stabilized at strong coupling, and that the smallness of the

observed couplings is an accident. this could be well be the answer, and is in line with

the pmc enunciated earlier. but it is very disappointing, and leaves us without an

explanation of why string theory gets even qualitative things right.

 racetrack models[3]: in theories with two or more gaugino condensates, it has been argued

that there is a superpotential for the moduli of the form

w = x ca(t )e 8

baa(t ) .

(3)

then one can have, for example, isolated supersymmetric minima with xed, large values

of the moduli, provided that some of the ba are large and nearly equal. supersymmetry
can then be broken at a lower scale.

 kahler stabilization[4]: in this picture, holomorphic quantities, such as e

82

g2

and the

holomorphic gauge couplings are small. however, non-holomorphic quantities, such as

the kahler potential, are assumed to receive large corrections, and to be responsible for

the stabilization of the moduli.

 large topological charges: the authors of [24] argue that large topological charges could

stabilize compactication radii at large values. one could imagine that similar eects

stabilize other moduli. the question would then be whether why these charges take such

values.

 maximally enhanced symmetry[5]: this is the natural postulate that the ground state

lies at a point where all of the moduli transform under unbroken symmetries. this

postulate makes some denite predictions. whether there really exist string vacua with

such symmetries, and simultaneously with small eective gauge couplings, is an open

question.

we dont have much to add to the rst two items. in the next section, we will explain

why the multiple gaugino condensate idea cannot be studied systematically. the following

7

section then explains the basic ideas of kahler stabilization. the nal section is devoted to the

hypothesis of maximally enhanced symmetries.

2.2 racetrack models

racetrack models have been oered to explain how string vacua might arise at perturbatively

weak couplings. the idea is that the superpotential of the theory is a sum of terms of the form

of [3]. in fact, as has been explained in [3], it is quite natural that eects associated with low

energy dynamics be larger than stringy non-perturbative dynamics. noting that low energy

gauge groups in string theory can be extremely large, the authors of [3] argue that if two groups

have very large -functions, some of the moduli can be xed, without breaking supersymmetry.

there are several diculties with this picture. all are related to the problem that that

there is no small parameter to justify the approximations; i.e. there is nothing like the n of

82 b

the large n expansion[25]. in this version of the mechanism, for example, x = e

g2

should

be of order one. but this means that the scale of the low energy groups is of the order of the

fundamental scale, so the low energy analysis is not really consistent. alternatively, higher

order operators complicate the the analysis. as a result, it is dicult to determine whether a

vacuum state even exists. other versions of the scheme suer from similar diculties. one can

obtain smaller x at the price of ne tuning, but it is still dicult to obtain a small cosmological

constant. in all of these versions, the kahler potential is not calculable; this is a particular

important issue in versions of the scheme in which supersymmetry is broken by the condensates.

it would seem that one should have simply hypothesized the desired result: the coupling is xed

in a way that the gauge coupling is small. one has no control over the nal answer. these

issues will be explored in a future publication.

2.3 kahler stabilization

quite generally, if the superpotential is responsible for stabilizing the moduli, it is unlikely that
the eective couplings can be weak, in the sense that e82/g2
from holomorphy. consider, for example, weakly coupled string theory. we expect that the

is small. this follows simply

superpotential is roughly of the form

w = es + be2s + . . .

(4)

8

if the kahler potential is not signicantly modied from its tree level form, then at any minimum
of the potential, es  e2s  1. thus the coupling is strong and there is no hierarchy.2

we can be more precise if we exploit holormorphy and the discrete axion shift symmetry.

these restrict the couplings of s to the gauge elds to

(

1

22s

+ es + . . .)w 2
,

while the superpotential has the form[4]

w = es + e2s + . . .

(5)

(6)

the kahler potential, on the other hand, is not restricted by holomorphy. it is known that

string perturbation theory is not as convergent as eld theory perturbation theory. assume,
then, that there are large corrections even for   1
30 . the full potential is given, in terms of

w and k by (for simplicity, considering only the eld s)

v = ek
|

w
s

+

k
s

w |2  2k

ss !1

 3|w |2
 .

(7)

kahler stabilization is the suggestion that this potential has its minimum when es is

small due to the structure of k. one can certainly postulate forms for k which yield a local

minimum of the potential for such values of s, with vanishing cosmological constant (if one
allows sucient ne tuning). this approach is predictive. because es is small, it predicts

coupling constant unication and that the superpotential is not signicantly altered from its

weak coupling form. it also predicts that there is approximate, low energy supersymmetry. on

the other hand, explaining, say, squark degeneracy requires additional inputs. while squark

masses, for example, are sometimes degenerate in the weak coupling limit, our basic assumption

is that the kahler potential is very dierent from its weak coupling form. so one needs to

postulate, say, approximate avor symmetries.

in this picture, other moduli are also xed by the form of k. just as one does not

expect the gauge couplings to be extremely small, one does not expect large hierarchies of

compactication radii. this follows from the fact that as the radii become large, the theory

is eectively a supersymmetric theory in a higher dimension, where one cannot write down a

2one might hope to get around this by supposing that, say, considering, as in the racetrack schemes, two
terms, aes + bes, and hoping to nd a minimum where e = b/a, and    is small, while b/a is also
small. this is similar to the failed racetrack schemes described above, but perhaps occurs in some other context.

9

potential for the moduli. in other words, the potentials for the moduli which describe the size

of the internal dimension necessarily vanish as the size tends to innity.

one doesnt expect, in such a picture, particularly large hierarchies of compactication

scales and mp. of course, one has provided no explanation of the cosmological constant puzzle.

3 new insights from duality

3.1 horava-witten: a large eleventh dimension

duality has opened up new ways to think about these problems. one puzzle in the early days

of superstring compactications was reconciling the observed values of the unied scale and

couplings with weakly coupled string theory.

in light of our understanding of duality, it is

reasonable, following horava and witten[18] and [17] to suppose that string theory is described

by the heterotic string theory in a strongly coupled regime. in this regime, the theory looks

eleven dimensional with two walls in the 11th dimension separated by a distance r11[17, 26].
calling m11 the eleven dimensional planck scale, and v the compactication volume of, say,
some six dimensional calabi-yau manifold, one nds

r3

11 =

3

gutv
5124g2
n

.

m11 = r1(2(4)2/3gu t )1/6.

(8)

(9)

in these equations, gn is the ordinary newton constant. plugging in the observed values for
the unication scale (r1) and the unied coupling constant, one nds

m11r11 = 72

m11r  2.

(10)

in this picture, then, the eleven dimensional planck scale is close to the unication scale,

while r11 is signicantly larger. this viewpoint has other interesting consequences. for exam-
ple, it ameliorates the cosmological axion problem of string theory[26, 27]. on the other hand,

it is still hard to understand the stabilization of the moduli. for large r11, the bulk theory
is approximately ve dimensional. supersymmetry in ve dimensions forbids a potential, so

the potential must tend to zero as r11  . this can be made precise, by using the ve
dimensional supersymmetry to restrict the form of k and w , and one nds that the potential

does tend rapidly to zero, consistent with this heuristic argument[26, 19]. thus one expects

10

that, if there is a stable minimum of the potential, it occurs when the various radii are of order

m11. the problem of explaining why this ratio is of order 70 seems similar to the problem of
understanding why the gauge coupling is of order 1/30. again, one needs something like kahler

stabilization of the moduli.

3.2 a more radical proposal: string theory at the t ev scale

all of the previous discussion has been based on the idea that, string theory being a theory

without parameters, all dimensionless couplings and ratios of scales should be numbers of order

one (with the exception of the supersymmetry breaking scale, which is understood as the

exponential of a number of order one). indeed, we have seen that in the supersymmetric case,

one can prove this. recently, various authors have proposed that perhaps the string scale lies

at another familiar scale in physics, the scale of weak interaction symmetry breaking[20, 21].

such ideas, in fact, had been considered in the past, but had not been taken too seriously

because such a possibility corresponds to enormous string coupling, in the case of the heterotic

string. newtons coupling is so small, or the planck scale so large, in such a picture, because the

internal space has a very large volume. for example, if one compacties the eleven dimensional

theory, one has

gn =

tev9
v (7) .

(11)

in particular, if all of the dimensions are of comparable size, than r, the radius of the compact
space, satises r  mev1, while if, for example, two dimensions are large, and the others

are of order the fundamental scale, r  mm. most of the proposals of this type assume

that the elds of the standard model live on a brane. gravity looks 4 + n dimensional on

scales small compared to r, where n is the number of large compact dimensions. exciting new

phenomenological possibilities exist: long range forces (in the mm case, and possibly in others,

as we will discuss below), production of large numbers of kaluza-klein states, and production

of stringy excitations.

at rst sight, this idea seems outrageous, but in fact it is quite dicult to denitively rule

out[28]. there are several obvious problems to worry about:

 proton decay: proton decay must be highly suppressed; if the relevant scale is of order a

t ev , then operators up to very high dimension must be forbidden. this can be arranged,

however, by assuming, for example, that there is a discrete symmetry which is a large

subgroup of baryon number.

11

 other types of avor violation: these can be suppressed if one assumes that the theory has

a large avor symmetry, broken, perhaps, on distant walls[10, 11]. still, these processes

constrain the scale to be greater than 5  10 tev[7].

 production of kaluza-klein modes: in this picture, typical kaluza-klein modes of the

graviton couple with gravitational strength. however, there are a huge number of such

modes, so one needs to worry about processes in which one produces these modes and

they carry o energy. the lower limits on the string scale arising from these types of

considerations are of order a few t ev .

 astrophysical constraints: here one needs to worry about production of these particles

in red giants. the problem is most severe in the case of two compact dimensions. here

one obtains limits in the 30 tev range if n = 2[28]; recently it has been argued that the

limit is 50 tev[29]. this means that it will be dicult to observe the associated change in

newtons law, and is certainly problematic from the perspective of the hierarchy problem.

 cosmology: even for general n this is more problematic. one has in these theories a

serious moduli problem, for example. the authors of [28] argue that, if the scale is not too

low, provided the universe was in the correct ground state shortly before nucleosynthesis,

production of kaluza-klein modes will not spoil this. as we will describe later, it is hard

to imagine how to establish such an initial condition. one can contemplate, for example,

several stages of ination, but one is still left with a severe moduli problem[30].

while some of these issues may make one uncomfortable with the idea of a low string

scale, it is clear that these considerations alone do not rule out the possibility. the laboratory

and astrophysical constraints at best place the lower limit on the scale at 10 tev, and the

cosmological constraints, while potentially more severe, require assumptions about aspects of

early universe physics about which we dont have direct evidence.

still, one can ask:

is there any physics which suggests a low string scale. the literature

on this problem refers to the hierarchy problem. indeed, if the scale is close to the weak scale,

then higgs scalars with mass of this order are natural. however, if the scale is 10 tev, then

this is less clear. we have argued that the true ground state of string theory should be strongly

coupled. but in this case, absent supersymmetry, one expects any fundamental scalars to have

masses of order the scale, i.e. of order 10 tev. so one has a ne tuning to at least one part

in several hundred, or perhaps even worse.

in weakly coupled string theory, this might be

acceptable. at string tree level, one often nds particles which are massless for no symmetry

12

reason. loop corrections to the mass might be in an acceptable range. however, as we have

argued, it is not likely that there is such a weak coupling parameter.

so there is already a potential hierarchy problem. a more severe problem arises when

we ask: how might we stabilize the radius at such a large value? after all, we have argued

that most dimensionless ratios in the theory should be of order 1. there would seem to be

two possible explanations for such large numbers. one is that some modulus (not associated

with the large dimensions) takes an extreme value, and some largrangian parameter relevant

to xing the size of the compact space is exponentially small in this modulus. it is not easy to

see how this would work in practice, and in any case xing this modulus would represent one

more mystery. an alternative possibility has been explored in [24],following earlier suggestions

of sundrum[31]; in this scenario, the large dimensions are connected with the large value of

some topological charge. the problem of large radii is then replaced by the question of why

this topological charge is so large.

the problem of stabilization has been discussed in [24] and further in [6].

in order to

discuss stabilization of the moduli, it is crucial to make some assumptions about the way in

which the cosmological constant is cancelled. one possibility is that, independent of the value

of the cosmological constant in the eective low energy eld theory, say at energy scales slightly
below the radius r1, the large distance cosmological constant vanishes, for some unknown

reason. in this case, the values of the bulk cosmological constant and the cosmological constant

of the brane theory are independent. we expect the brane cosmological constant to be of order
m 4. in any large radius scenario, on the other hand, the bulk cosmological constant must be
many orders of magnitude smaller than the value expected from dimensional analysis, m 4+n.

indeed, the bulk cosmological constant makes a contribution to the masses of the kaluza-klein
states of order b/m n+2. this mass is greater than 1/r unless b < 1/(r2m 2)m 4+n. this is an
additional ne tuning which must be explained. moreover, the actual small value of the number

requires that there be some modulus besides the radial dilaton which takes some extreme value.

the authors of [24] argue that such a value of b is at least plausible in the case that the bulk
theory is supersymmetric. but in that case, one can show that the bulk cosmological constant

vanishes; a dierent analysis, described in [6], is required.

i will return to this case below.

finally, as noted in [24], the required toplogical charges are very large.

an approach which yields a more plausible picture is to assume that the the cosmological
constant must already nearly vanish in the theory at scales below r1. more precisely, one

assumes that, on account of some unknown mechanism, the cosmological constant in the bulk

13

adjusts to cancel the contribution of the brane, of possible higher curvature terms, and of any

topological charges in the internal dimensions. the brane contribution is expected to be of
order m 4. if one assumes that the internal space is at, then the radial dilaton mass is of order
mm1, independent of the number of internal dimensions. this is interesting, but, as explained

in [6], a at internal space requires far more ne tuning than a curved one. various possibilities

arise in the case of curved manifolds. if the bulk is not supersymmetric, the required topological

charges are still rather large, and generically the radial dilaton has mass of order 1/r. if the

bulk theory is supersymmetric, the story is more complicated, and depends sensitively on the

values of n and the nature of the stabilizing charges. one turns out to require n > 4, and even

then, one typically nds that there are contributions to the masses of the kaluza-klein states

larger than 1/r. if one is willing to suppose that supersymmetry is hierarchically broken on the

branes, one can nd an example with rather small charges and a radial dilaton light enough to

aect cavendish experiments. this case comes closest to realizing a solution of the hierarchy

without very large parameters, and with no more mystery than the usual one of understanding

the smallness of the observed cosmological constant. the methods of [6] can also be applied to

the possibility that the radii are large due to some extreme values of other moduli. finally, in

the case n = 2 (and certain suitable generalizations) there may be additional possibilities. if

one has bulk supersymmetry, the potential for r is a function of ln(r). if this function has a

minimum for a value of ln(r)  40, this would give rise to a large radius. moreover, because
the elds in the bulk vary logarithmically, and some inevitably couple to f f , such a picture
might account for the smallness of the gauge couplings.3 this picture of stabilization has much

in common with the idea of kahler stabilization discussed earlier.

given a model for the stabilization of the radial dilaton, the question of early universe

cosmology is also brought into focus. perhaps the most serious issue is production of bulk

modes. as noted in [28], if the temperature on the brane is higher than some temperature, to,
then the bulk modes are overpopulated at nucleosynthesis. in the case n = 2, this temperature

is only a few mev. this already seems a ne tuning. moreover, in this case, there may be

other, very ecient, mechanisms for production of bulk modes, as will be described below. for

any dimension, there is also a potential, very severe, moduli problem. in particular, if there is

a period of ination, it would seem that the bulk cosmological constant, and hence the location

of the minimum, would be modied. the authors of [28] deal with this problem by supposing

that the inaton lives on a brane. a specic proposal along these lines was made in [33].

this model, however, illustrates several generic problems:

it is hard to obtain a reasonable

3i thanks nima arkani-hamed for discussions of this possibility. elaborations on these ideas will appear

elsewhere. the special role of n = 2 has been discussed in [32].

14

uctuation spectrum, and it is hard to understand why the reheating temperature is not of

order m [6]. other potential problems abound[34, 35, 6] cosmology in higher dimensions opens

many new and interesting possibilities, but the diculties look formidable.

all of this leads to the following conclusion: given the current state of our understanding,

the view that the compactication scales should be small is, at best, prejudice. there is no

decisive theoretical argument that the fundamental scale of string theory couldnt be a few

tev.

it is important to keep this possibility in mind, both in thinking about experiments

and in developing string phenomenology. on the other hand, the issues raised above, and the

absence of any compelling argument in favor of large dimensions, in my view, provide some

reinforcement for the earlier prejudice.

4 maximal symmetry

we now turn to another approach to the problem of moduli[5], inspired, in part, by recent

developments in duality, and in part by the cosmological moduli problem[7].

imagine the classical moduli space of some string compactication. if there are points in

this moduli space where all of the moduli are charged under unbroken symmetries, then:

 such points are automatically stationary points of the full eective action

 because of their high degree of symmetry, it is natural for the early universe to start out

at such a point.

from studies of duality, we know that there are many such points of maximal symme-

try. probably the simplest example of this phenomenon is provided by the iib theory in 10

dimensions. this has a well-known sl(2, z) symmetry, under which

transforms as

 =

i
g

+ a

  

1


   + 1.

(12)

(13)

with a = 0, the rst transformation has a self-dual point, a particular value of the coupling at

which the z2 symmetry is restored. at this point, the dilaton transforms.

15

upon compactication, one can construct many more examples of this phenomenon, with

varying amounts of supersymmetry. for example, one can consider toroidal compactication of

the iib theory, with special radii and angles for the torus; gepner compactications of the type

ii theory, and many others. one interesting example in four dimensions is provided by toroidal

compactication of the heterotic string.

if one takes the torus to be a product of circles,

each at the appropriate su (2) point, then all of the moduli are charged under the su (2)s

except the dilaton. but this theory also has an sl(2, z) symmetry; at the self dual point, s

transforms. presumably this phenomenon occurs also in theories with n = 1 supersymmetry;

this is currently under study.

as we stated, such points are automatically stationary points of the eective action and
thus candidate minima.4 moreover, it is natural for the early universe to favor states with high

degrees of symmetry, so this proposal solves the cosmological moduli problem. however, there

are some obvious objections to this possibility.

in particular, one expects that, generically,

 = o(1) at these points. this follows from our discussion in the previous section regarding

holomorphy. it also follows for some of our particular examples. in the case of electric-magnetic

duality (the heterotic example above), the dirac quantization condition shows that the gauge

coupling is indeed of order 1 at the self-dual point. in the case of four supersymmetries, the

situation might be better. first, as in the discussion of the previous section, kahler potential

eects might be relevant in the symmetry restoration phenomenon. a toy example of this

was provided in [5].

it would be of interest to survey examples of the enhanced symmetry

phenomenon to determine if the couplings are ever small.

in any case, for the rest of this section, we will adopt a set of hypotheses and explore their

consequences. in particular, we will assume that, at some high scale, m , one has

 maximally enhanced symmetry: all of the moduli transform under symmetries. an inter-

esting and perhaps appealing version of this hypothesis is that there are no moduli.

 approximate n = 1 supersymmetry.

 small, unied gauge couplings. in particular, es is an extremely small number.

before going further, we should note that gaugino condensation cannot play a role in

supersymmetry breaking at such points. this is because linear couplings of the moduli to the

4in theories with more than four supersymmetries, the moduli space is generally exact quantum mechanically,
i.e. there is no potential for the moduli. we have in mind with these remarks models with four or less (zero)
supersymmetries.

16

gauge elds, mw 2

, are forbidden by the symmetries. this means will mean that we require

supersymmetry breaking at relatively low energies.

4.1 the case of no moduli

consider the possibility that there are no moduli. this has two immediate consequences. first,

supersymmetry cannot be broken by high energy string eects, but must be broken by eects

which are visible in the low energy theory. to understand this, note that any supersymmetry

breaking eect must be describable in terms of a superpotential which is a function of the light

elds, w (). in order to obtain supersymmetry breaking, one needs a linear term for some
singlet eld. but it is not plausible that there are such light elds at strong coupling.5

this observation, in turn, has the consequence that whatever breaks supersymmetry must

be visible in the low energy dynamics. this is likely to mean that there is a supersymmetry
breaking hidden sector. what is the scale? if there are no singlets, couplings of the form w 2

cannot be the source of gaugino mass, as is usually assumed.6 this suggests that supersymmetry

breaking must be a low energy phenomenon, presumably mediated by gauge interactions. in

other words, this general framework predicts something like low energy gauge mediation.

4.2 maximal symmetry

now consider the case that there are moduli, and that the minimum of the potential lies at a

point of maximal symmetry. this turns out to be similar to the case of no moduli, in its low

energy consequences. supersymmetry breaking again must be a low energy phenomenon, since

the symmetries forbid terms linear in the elds. gaugino condensation and its generalizations
are also forbidden, since couplings such as w 2

 do not respect the symmetries. so, just as in
the case of no moduli, supersymmetry breaking must be a low energy phenomenon, presumably

mediated by gauge interactions.

one question which we can ask in this framework is: how are the moduli stabilized? there

are several rather natural possibilities. perhaps the most interesting is the following. suppose

5here, we are assuming that some sort of conventional notion of naturalness holds in strongly coupled string
theory, i.e. when one includes both perturbative and non-perturbative eects. note we are also ignoring the eects
of eld-independent constants in the superpotential. this follows from our basic assumption that supersymmetry
is not broken at the high energy scale. it can be enforced by an unbroken discrete r symmetry.

6several authors have noted recently that at one loop, eects associated with the kahler anomaly can lead to
gaugino masses. however, these eects tend to be quite small, and to require a large scale for supersymmetry
breaking[38, 37, 39].

17

that all of the moduli are charged under standard model gauge symmetries. this is not such

an outlandish suggestion. the mssm has approximate at directions in which all the gauge

symmetry is broken. for example, there is a direction parameterized by qqql, i.e.

v
0
0

q = 


0
v
0

0
0
v




l = (0, v)

(14)

where the q eld is written as a matrix in color and avor. this at direction has 12 parameters,

or 12 candidate moduli. note that this direction can be exactly at even without string miracles;

a discrete r symmetry under which q and l are neutral can insure this.

now suppose supersymmetry is broken in a hidden sector, with the breaking communicated

by gauge elds as in usual models of gauge mediation. then the elds q and l will receive

positive masses-squared from low energy loop eects. this means that the potential has a

minimum at the symmetric point.

5 the cosmological constant problem

within each of these hypotheses, the cosmological constant problem remains a signicant puzzle.

within the framework of kahler stabilization, we had to suppose a ne tuning of the kahler

potential to obtain vanishing .

in the case of kahler stabilization, we assumed that the

supersymmetry was broken at the intermediate scale, and transmitted to light elds by eects

suppressed by 1/mp. examining eqn. 7, we see that the potential possesses terms of opposite
signs. for intermediate scale supersymmetry breaking, these terms are of the same order of

magnitude.

if the kahler potential has just the right form (i.e.

if it is tuned in precisely

the right way), these terms can cancel. in the case of maximal symmetry, however, we have
argued that the breaking must be at a low scale. in this case, the contributions to the 3|w |2

term from the susy-breaking dynamics are suppressed by powers of the breaking scale over mp.
something more is needed if the cosmological constant is to vanish at the level of the eective

lagrangian. it is necessary that there be a large constant in the superpotential in order to cancel

the contribution to the vacuum energy coming from low energy supersymmetry breaking. this

constant could be generated by gluino condensation in a pure gauge theory. in the absence

of moduli, such condensation does generate a constant in w . this constant would have to be

just of the right size to cancel the cosmological term from the other sectors. this is arguably a

troubling feature of gauge mediation in general. of course, given our total lack of understanding

of the cosmological constant problem, perhaps this concern is misplaced.

18

6 conclusions

if string theory is ever to be directly tested, it is probably necessary to extract some general,

qualitative prediction. one such prediction might be that there should be low energy super-

symmetry, broken in some particular way. another might be that the string scale is very low,

so that there might be many new states at accessible energies. in this talk, we have explored

some possibilities, but we do not have rm answers. phenomenologically, a low string scale

is not ruled out, though it may be hard to understand a scale less than about 6  10 tev.

on theoretical grounds, however, this possibility seems unlikely. it requires that the minimum

of the potential lie in at a rather implausible extreme of the moduli space. it also requires a

rather elaborate structure, and some number of ne tunings. still, absent a real theory, these

arguments can at best be described as informed prejudice. the challenge for these ideas is to

provide some compelling argument that the scale should, indeed, be at some particular, low

value. alternatively, we might be lucky and make the extraordinary discovery that newtonian

gravity is modied at short distances, or that phase space is more than four dimensional at

tev energies.

it could be that the usual arguments based on hierarchies for low energy supersymmetry

are incorrect, and that there are good string ground states in which supersymmetry is badly

broken. after all, our failure to understand the cosmological constant problem suggests that

our ideas about naturalness and ne tuning are not entirely correct. so it is hard, given the

present state of our understanding, to argue persuasively that low energy supersymmetry is an

outcome of string theory. but we have seen that the hypothesis of low energy supersymmetry,

combined with maximally enhanced symmetry, makes some denite, qualitative predictions. we

have argued that with these suppositions, supersymmetry must be broken at very low energy

scales (perhaps a few orders of magnitude above the weak scale) with gauge interactions as

the messengers of the breaking. this suggests, in fact, an approach to phenomenology which

does not require complete control of strong dynamics. one might hope to study moduli spaces

of n = 1 theories, and to determine the symmetry structure at their enhanced symmetry

points. some features, such as spectra and perhaps gauge couplings and some terms in the

superpotential, might be restricted by symmetries and holomorphy.

it may well be that fundamental theory is entering an era where hypotheses will be tested

principally by their self consistency, and by considering various gadanken experiments. but it

would be disappointing if we did not have some picture of how string theory made contact with

19

nature, and if this picture did not make some predictions. it is quite possible that none of the

proposals for string dynamics described here are correct. the cosmological constant and the

question of the smallness of the gauge couplings are serious challenges to the maximal symmetry

hypothesis, in particular. but hopefully there is some approach which allows a qualitative -

and perhaps somewhat quantitative - picture.

acknowledgements:

i would like to thank t. banks, a. nelson, y. nir and y. shadmi for enjoyable collaborations

and many discussions of the issues reviewed here. i would also like to thank s. dimopoulos

and n. arkani-hamid for many patient explanations of the ideas surrounding large dimensions.

this work supported in part by the u.s. department of energy.

references

[1] m. dine and n. seiberg, phys. lett. 162b (1985) 299.

[2] m. dine and y. shirman, truly strong coupling and large radius in string theory,

phys. lett. b377 (1996) 36. hep-th/9601175.

[3] this idea has been presented most compellingly in v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, phe-

nomenological aspects of f theory, phys. lett. b417 (1998) 45, hep-th/9708049.

[4] t. banks and m. dine, coping with strongly coupled string theory, phys. rev. d50

(1994) 7454, hep-th/9406132.

[5] m. dine, y. nir and y. shadmi, enhanced symmetries and the ground state of string

theory, phys. lett. b438 (1998) 61, hep-th/9806124.

[6] t. banks, m. dine and a. nelson, to appear.

[7] t. banks, d. kaplan and a. nelson, cosmological implications of dynamical supersym-

metry breaking, phys. rev. d49 (1994) 779, hep-ph/9308292.

[8] m. dine, l. randall and s. thomas, supersymmetry breaking in the early universe,
phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 398, hep-ph/9503303; baryogenesis from flat directions of
the supersymmetric standard model, nucl. phys. b458 (1996) 291.

[9] e. witten, new issues in manifolds of su (3) holonomy, nucl. phys. b268 (1986) 79.

[10] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, new origin for approximate symmetries from distant

breaking in extra dimensions, hep-ph/9811353.

[11] z. berezhiani and g. dvali, flavor violation in theories with tev scale quantum grav-

ity, hep-ph/9811378.

20

[12] s. kachru and e. silverstein, 4d conformal field theories and strings on orbifolds,

phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 4855, hep-th/9802183.

[13] j. harvey, string duality and non-supersymmetric strings, phys. rev. d59 (1999)

026002, hep-th/9807213.

[14] e. witten, strong coupling and the cosmological constant, mod. phys. lett. a10

(1995) 2153, hep-th/9506101.

[15] v. s. kaplunovsky, mass scales of string unication, phys. rev. lett. 55 (1985) 1036.

[16] m. dine and n. seiberg, couplings and scales in superstring models, phys. rev. lett.

55 (366) 1985.

[17] e. witten, strong coupling expansion of calabi-yau compactication, nucl. phys.

b471 (1996) 135, hep-th/9602070.

[18] p. horava and e. witten, eleven-dimensional supergravity on a manifold with bound-

ary, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 94, hep-th/9603142.

[19] a. lukas, b. ovrut, k. stelle, s. waldram, the universe as a domain wall, hep-

th/9803235.

[20] i. antoniadis, phys. lett. b246 (1990) 377; j. lykken, weak scale superstrings, phys.

rev. d54 (1996) 3693, hep-th/9603133.

[21] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, the hierarchy problem and new dimen-

sions at a millimeter, phys. rev. lett. b429 (1998) 263, hep-ph/9803315.

[22] some precursors of these ideas can be found in v.a. rubakov and m.e. shaposhnikov, do
we live inside a domain wall?, phys. lett. 125b, 136 (1983); g. dvali and m. shifman,
dynamical compactication as a mechanism of spontaneous supersymmetry breaking,
nucl. phys. b504, 127 (1996) hep-th/9611213; g. dvali and m. shifman, domain walls
in strongly coupled theories, phys. lett. b396, 64 (1997) hep-th/9612128.

[23] among the papers exploring the possibility of large dimensions are k.r. dienes, e. dudas
and t. gherghetta, extra space-time dimensions and unication, phys. lett. b436,
55 (1998) hep-ph/9803466; g. shiu and s.h. tye, tev scale superstring and extra di-
mensions, phys. rev. d58, 106007 (1998) hep-th/9805157; p.c. argyres, s. dimopoulos
and j. march-russell, black holes and submillimeter dimensions, phys. lett. b441, 96
(1998) hep-th/9808138; l.e. ibanez, c. munoz and s. rigolin, aspect of type i string
phenomenology, hep-ph/9812397; a. pomarol and m. quiros, the standard model from
extra dimensions, phys. lett. b438, 255 (1998); t.e. clark and s.t. love, the eective
kahler potential and extra space-time dimensions, hep-th/9901103.

[24] n. arakani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and j. march-russell, stabilization of submillimeter

dimensions,, the new guise of the hierarchy problem, hep-th/9809124.

[25] n. seiberg, private communication.

21

[26] t. banks and m. dine, couplings and scales in strongly coupled heterotic string the-

ory, nucl. phys. b479 (1996) 173, hep-th/9605136.

[27] t. banks and m. dine, the cosmology of string theoretic axions, nucl. phys. b505

(1997) 445, hep-th/9608197.

[28] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phenomenology, astrophysics and cos-
mology of theories with submillimeter dimensions and tev scale quantum gravity,
hep-ph/9807344.

[29] s. cullen and m. perelstein, sn1987a constraints on large compact dimensions, hep-

ph/9903422.

[30] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, n. kaloper and j. march-russell, rapid asymmet-
ric ination and early cosmology in theories with sub-millimeter dimensions, hep-
ph/9903224.

[31] r. sundrum, compactication for a three-brane universe, hep-ph/9807348.

[32] i. antoniadis and c. bachas, branes and the gauge hierarchy, hep-th/9812093.

[33] g. dvali and s.-h. h. tye, brane ination, hep-ph/9812483.

[34] k. benakli and s. davidson, baryogenesis in models with a low quantum gravity scale,
hep-ph/9810280; m. maggiore and a. riotto, d-branes and cosmology, hep-th/9811089

[35] n. kaloper and a. linde, ination and large internal dimensions, hep-th/9811141.

[36] david h. lyth, ination with tev scale gravity needs supersymmetry, phys. lett.

b448 (1999) 191, hep-ph/9810320.

[37] l. randall and r. sundrum, out of this world supersymmetry breaking, hep-

th/9810155.

[38] g. giudice, m. luty and h. murayama, gaugino mass without singlets, hep-

ph/9810442.

[39] j. bagger, private communication.

22

