upr-0831-t
um-th/99-01
hep-th/9903051

blowing-up the four-dimensional z3 orientifold

mirjam cvetic, lisa everett, paul langacker, and jing wang

 department of physics and astronomy

university of pennsylvania, philadelphia pa 19104-6396, usa

department of physics

university of michigan, ann arbor, mi 48109 , usa

abstract

we study the blowing-up of the four-dimensional z3 orientifold of ange-
lantonj, bianchi, pradisi, sagnotti and stanev (abpss) by giving nonzero
vacuum expectation values (vevs) to the twisted sector moduli blowing-up
modes. the blowing-up procedure induces a fayet-iliopoulos (fi) term for
the anomalous u (1), whose magnitude depends linearly on the vevs of
the blowing-up modes. to preserve the n = 1 supersymmetry, non-abelian
matter elds are forced to acquire nonzero vevs, thus breaking (some of)
the non-abelian gauge structure and decoupling some of the matter elds.
we determine the form of the fi term, construct explicit examples of (non-
abelian) d and f at directions, and determine the surviving gauge groups
of the restabilized vacua. we also determine the mass spectra, for which the
restabilization reduces the number of families.

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

m
5

 

 
 

1
v
1
5
0
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

i. introduction

with the advent of the duality symmetries of m-theory [1] a new domain of string vacua
(previously considered as strongly coupled) have become accessible for study. such dual
four-dimensional string vacua with n = 1 supersymmetry should provide a fruitful domain
for studying novel phenomenological implications of string theory. in particular, the type i
string orientifolds [2,3] provide a promising set of new string vacua, where the techniques of
the open-string theory allow for a quantitative study of the gauge structure, mass spectrum
and (certain) couplings in the eective theory. the four-dimensional orientifolds [4,5] with
n = 1 supersymmetry are thus particularly well suited for phenomenological studies.

one of the interesting features of the n = 1 orientifolds is that in general they contain
a set of anomalous u(1)s and the breaking of these u(1)s is inherently related to the
blowing-up procedure. the massless chiral superelds, formed from the neveu-schwarz-
neveu-schwarz (ns-ns) and ramond-ramond (r-r) elds appearing in the twisted sector
of type iib orientifolds, are blowing-up moduli whose nonzero vacuum expectation values
(vevs) correspond to the geometric smoothing-out (blowing-up) of the orientifold singular-
ities. these elds play an instrumental role in the cancellation [6,7] of the triangular gauge
anomalies via the green-schwarz mechanism. in addition, their coupling to the gauge su-
perelds [8] contributes to the d term of the anomalous u(1), and its structure is xed by
the the anomaly cancellation constraints. thus, the fayet-iliopoulos (fi) term is induced
when the blowing-up modes acquire nonzero vevs. to maintain the anomalous u(1) d
atness of the blown-up orientifold, additional matter elds in the theory have to acquire
nonzero vevs subject to the constraint that the f atness and the d atness of the rest
of the gauge sector is maintained. the generic eect of the blowing-up procedure and sub-
sequent vacuum restabilization is then the spontaneous breaking of the gauge symmetry as
well as the decoupling of a number of matter elds in the eective theory. in particular, the
number of families in the eective theory may be reduced.

it is instructive to contrast the blowing-up and the accompanying vacuum restabiliza-
tion of type i orientifolds with the blowing-up of perturbative heterotic string orbifolds.
there, the blowing-up of the orbifold singularities [9] and the restabilization of vacuum
due to the anomalous u(1) [1013] are somewhat disconnected and the two procedures are
dierent from those on the type i side. for the (2, 2) orbifolds, i.e., those with the spin
and gauge connection identied (analogs of such constructions on the type i side are non-
existent), there is no anomalous u(1) and the blowing-up modes (twisted sector moduli)
are charged under the enhanced gauge symmetry that commutes with the discrete gauge
connection [14,15]. (this is in contrast to those of the type i orientifolds which are total
singlets.) their nonzero vevs fully break the enhanced gauge symmetry that at the orb-
ifold limit commutes with the discrete spin connection and decouple some matter states;
the procedure geometrically corresponds to blowing-up the orbifold singularities produc-
ing a smooth (2, 2) calabi-yau three-folds [9]. on the other hand (asymmetric) orbifold
and free fermionic constructions with only (0, 2) worldsheet symmetry in general possess
an anomalous u(1).
in contrast with the type i orientifolds such perturbative heterotic
string vacua have only one anomalous u(1), whose anomaly cancellation is ensured by an
universal green-schwarz mechanism, due to an eective chern-simons (cs) term, at the
genus-one level, of the untwisted sector two-form eld to the gauge eld strength [10]. the

2

dual of this antisymmetric eld-axion, along with the (untwisted sector) dilaton eld, form
a scalar component of the chiral supereld, which couples universally to the gauge sector
of the theory. by supersymmetry the cs term is accompanied by a fi term (also at the
genus-one level), which is proportional to the nonzero vev of the dilaton eld. since this
vev determines the strength of the gauge coupling and thus it is necessarily nonzero, these
vacua necessarily have nonzero fi terms [1013]. the structure of this fi term is universal;
it is completely xed by the vev of the dilaton and the trace of the anomalous u(1) charges.
therefore the existence of anomalous u(1) necessarily triggers the vacuum restabilization.
for recent work on the systematic classication of at directions for a set of perturbative
heterotic string vacua see, e.g., refs. [1618].

the crucial dierence in the case of the type i orientifolds is that the blowing-up pro-
cedure and the restabilization of vacuum are now inherently connected. since in general
there are more than one anomalous u(1) the anomaly associated with each is cancelled by
non-universal green-schwarz terms, which arise due to the cs coupling of the gauge eld
strengths to the twisted sector r-r two-form elds (which is dual to the twisted sector r-r
scalars -axions). thus each of the anomalous gauge group factors has a cancellation en-
sured by a specic combination of twisted sector r-r axions. the non-universality of the
green-schwarz mechanism via twisted r-r sector axions is generic in n = 1 orientifold con-
structions1. due to supersymmetry, these cs terms are accompanied by the corresponding
fi terms, which involve a specic combination of the twisted sector ns-ns elds-blowing-
up modes. consequently, when these twisted sector dilatons acquire nonzero vevs, the
orbifold singularity, associated with particular xed points where the d branes are located,
is blown-up. this procedure in turn induces non-universal fi terms, which for each anoma-
lous u(1) is proportional to a specic combination of the vevs of the blowing-up modes.
the appearance of fi term then triggers the vacuum restabilization.

the purpose of the present paper is to explore in a concrete way the eects of the blowing-
up procedure for four-dimensional n = 1 orientifolds. the explicit vacuum restabilization
triggered by the blowing-up has to be carried out, and the surviving gauge structure and light
mass spectrum determined before phenomenological implications of the blown-up orientifolds
can be addressed. the goal is to carry out this procedure explicitly for specic blown-up
orientifolds and to study its consequences. (unlike the four-dimensional n = 1 orientifolds,
the blowing-up procedure of six-dimensional n = 1 orientifolds is better understood and
related geometrically to blowing-up of the ade singularities of k3 surfaces [8].)

while by now a large class of n = 1 orientifolds have been constructed [3,4], only specic
models (usually with additional wilson lines included) contain matter elds which are non-
abelian singlets. these singlets could be candidates for the restabilization of the blown-up
orientifold vacua, since in such cases it should be possible to achieve a systematic classi-
cation of at directions, very much along the lines developed for vacuum restabilization of
the perturbative heterotic string vacua via non-abelian singlets [16,17].

on the other hand, a large class of (simpler) type i orientifold constructions have no

1it is conrmed that at the orientifold limit there is no genus-one correction to the fi term,
calculated for the abpss orientifold model in ref. [20].

3

non-abelian gauge singlets, and thus the vacuum restabilization of the blown-up orientifold
should necessarily proceed by giving vevs to non-abelian matter elds. in this case the
classication of d at directions is complicated by non-abelian d atness constraints, and
a systematic approach to the study of vacuum restabilization is lacking. nevertheless, the
powerful connection between the holomorphic gauge-invariant monomials and the d at
directions [21] (which generalizes in the non-abelian case to polynomials) facilitates the
construction of non-abelian d at directions. applications of this approach to the vacuum
restabilization of the blown-up type i orientifolds (without gauge singlets) will be the focal
point of this paper.

one of the immediate consequences of the vacuum restabilization with non-abelian elds
is the breaking of the large non-abelian gauge groups down to smaller ones. from the
phenomenological point of view, the vacuum restabilization of the blown-up orientifold is
one of a few ways to achieve smaller gauge groups with reduced massless particle content.
in that sense, it could be viewed as complementary to other stringy methods in orientifold
construction, which involve spliting the 32 nine- (or ve-) branes among dierent xed points
of the orbifold, turning on the background ns-ns antisymmetric b-eld, adding discrete
wilson lines (see e.g., [5]), etc.

the paper is organized in the following way. in section ii we describe the spectra and
the superpotential of the rst four-dimensional orientifold with n = 1 supersymmetry,
constructed by angelantonj, bianchi, pradisi, sagnotti and stanev (abpss orientifold) [4].
we discuss the general procedure of anomaly cancellation and the generation of fi terms
and explicitly write down the fi term for the anomalous u(1) of the abpss model.
in
section iii, we discuss the atness conditions of the model in the restabilized vacuum and
the method of classifying the d at directions. in section iv, we present classes of d at
directions that are also f at to all orders, and discuss the consequences of the restabilized
vacuum. in section v, we present the conclusions.

ii. abpss model and anomaly cancellation

a. massless spectrum and superpotential couplings of the abpss orientifold

we choose to analyze the abpss model. this is a z3 orientifold with the gauge structure:

and a matter content of three copies of

so(8)  su(12)  u(1)

 = (8, 12)1,  = (1, 66)+2  = 1, 2, 3,

which arise from the open-string sector, due to the strings stretching between the nine-branes
located at the orientifold singularities.

in the type iib orientifold (closed string) sector, in the ns-ns sector there is the grav-
ity supermultiplet and the 36 (chiral) supermultiplets corresponding to the 9 untwisted
(toroidal) and 27 twisted (blowing-up) sector moduli. the moduli are total gauge singlets
(unlike the twisted sector moduli of the perturbative heterotic orbifolds), whose real and

4

imaginary components arise from the ns-ns and r-r sector, respectively.
in particular,
the abpss orientifold has the untwisted sector dilaton s, moduli singlets ti (i = 1,   , 9)
and 27 twisted sector supermultiplets, out of which only one participates in the blowing-
up procedure, since all the nine-branes are sitting at the xed point of the z3 orbifold at
the origin. the twisted sectors (k = 1, 2) give the ns-ns elds k and the r-r two-form
elds c (2)
(which by duality are related to the twisted sector r-r axions k). they are
k
constrained by the reality condition 1 = 
in addition, the orientifold
2
projection removes [22] the real components of k and c (2)
k

1 = c (2)

2; c (2)

(k).

.

the renormalizable superpotential is of the form

w3 = ya

i b

i 

[a,b],

(1)

where y is a constant; , ,  are family indices; i is an so(8) index; and a, b are su(12)
indices.

in the following we shall address the nature of chern-simons (cs) terms in orientifold

models and derive the explicit expressions for the case of the abpss orientifold.

b. chern-simons terms, fayet-iliopoulos terms, and anomaly cancellation

the u(1) triangular gauge anomalies are cancelled via the green-schwarz mechanism
involving the exchange of twisted sector r-r elds k (twisted axions) due to the cs
couplings [7,8]. for the four-dimensional type i orientifold the coupling takes the form:

ics = xk

z d4x ck  ef = xk

z d4x c (2)

k  t r(k)f + ...,

(2)

where c (2)
is the r-r 2-form in the kth twisted sector; their duals are the scalar elds
k
k. f schematically represents the gauge eld strength of the anomalous u(1), associated
with the d brane located at the orientifold singularity. the matrix k describes the action
of the orbifold group on the chan-paton (cp) factors in the kth twisted sector. for the
zn orientifold, it takes the form k = ei2kvi hi
in the cartan-weyl basis, where v is
a 16-dimensional real vector and hi, (i = 1, .., 16) are the cartan generators of so(32)
represented by tensor products of 2 2 3 submatrices. for the sake of simplicity we conne
ourselves to the case of 32 branes of the same type located at a single xed point.
the supersymmetric completion of the rst term in eqn. (2) gives the fayet-iliopoulos

(fi) contribution to the action:

if i = xk

z d4x kt r(k)d,

(3)

where d is the auxiliary component of the vector multiplet which contains the gauge eld
a of the anomalous u(1). hence, the fi term is given by

f i = xk

t r(k)k,

5

(4)

where the sum is over twisted sectors,  is the chan-paton matrix associated with the gauge
boson of the anomalous u(1). in the cartan-weyl basis, it takes the form i = qi h, where
qi is a 16-dimensional real vector. for the zn orientifold, the spectrum of the kth-twisted
sector and the (n  k)th twisted sector satisfy reality conditions, e.g., k = 
(n k) and
c (p)
k = c (p)
n k. furthermore, the orientifold projection projects out the real components of
k and c (p)
(see e.g. [22]). in addition, the action of the orbifold group on the chan-paton
k
indices has the following property:

then the fi term takes the form:

t r(k) = [t r((n k))].

f i = 2

[ n 1
2 ]

xk=1

re(t r(k)k) = (2)

[ n 1
2 ]

xk=1

im[t r(k)]im(k).

(5)

(6)

note that due to the reality constraint, the sum is only over the rst half of the twisted
sectors.

a similar argument applies to the coupling between the twisted sector r-r scalar eld

k and the gauge eld a, thus yielding the cs coupling of the type:

(2)z d4x

[ n 1

2

]

xk=1

im[t r(k)]im(k)a.

(7)

thus the imaginary components of k and k can be combined into the physical moduli rk
of the zn , rk = im(k) + iim(k) in which k goes from 1 to [ n 1

2 ].

for z3 orientifold models, which have two twisted sectors, the reality condition on the

twisted sector ns-ns scalars reduces to 1 = 

2 and the fi term (6) then takes the form

f i = 2im[t r(1)]im(1).

(8)

the physical moduli r of the z3 of the single twisted sector is r = im(1) + iim(1).
a few comments are in order regarding the units appearing in front of the cs term. the
nine-brane cs term in 10 dimensions has dimension one; it is proportional to 10/g10 [23].
dimensionally reducing such a term to four dimensional eective theory, the prefactor gains
6 4/g4. with the convention of assigning vevs of re(r) in terms of
a volume factor v 1/4
dimensionless quantities (just as the convention for the dilaton eld s), the prefactor of the
fi term (14) is of dimension 2. however, since the cs-type couplings arise from the untwisted
sector, they are absent in the four-dimensional theory of the n = 1 orientifolds. nevertheless
we would like to argue that the dimensionful parameters of the cs term associated with the
twisted sector are of the same structure. such a term should be calculated in perturbative
open-string theory by evaluating the disk diagram for two matter elds at the boundary and
a twisted eld ck integrated over the bulk. while this calculation is technically involved due
to subtleties of the twisted sector elds2, the dimensionful parameter of the resulting term

2a related calculation was given for six-dimensional untwisted sector elds in the appendix of [8].

6

is expected to have the same structure as that obtained by a naive dimensional reduction.3
gauge coupling corrections. analogously, one would like to determine the correction of the
twisted sector blowing-up modes to the gauge function:

f = s + f (r) .

(9)

here s is the (untwisted sector) dilaton for the case of the nine-brane sector (it is the un-
twisted toroidal modulus t in the case of the ve-brane sector.) the coupling of imf (r)f f
could in principle appear as the second order expansion of the chern-simons term (2). in
the case of zn orientifold such a term takes the form:

z d4x t r(k2)kf f ,

xk

(10)

thus when summed over the twisted sectors only the real component of k survives. how-
ever, it is projected out by the orientifold projection. hence, the term imf (r)f f seems to
be absent4, indicating that f (r) = 0, i.e., for zn type i orientifolds, there seems to be no
gauge coupling correction due to the twisted sector moduli. note that in contrast to type i
orientifold, type ii zn orbifolds allow such terms since the real components of the twisted
sector r-r elds are not projected out.
anomaly cancellation. the symmetry factors in the string amplitudes for a disc that involves
three gauge elds as external legs can be determined by identifying the eective coupling of
the twisted-sector r-r elds to these gauge eld strengths as arising from the cs couplings
of the type (2) (such a string diagram can then be viewed as dominated by the exchange of
rr elds [7]). in principle, the prefactors of the amplitudes can be xed by requiring the
exact cancellation of the gauge anomalies. in particular, the amplitude of the scattering of
a u(1)i gauge boson and two non-abelian gj gauge bosons with tree level exchange of a
r-r scalar is [7]5

3in compactications from d = 10 to d = 4, the case in which the gauge groups arises from
the ve-brane world-volume theory, this relationship is modied by ratios of the compactied ve-
brane world-volume and the volume of the bulk. however in the case of the nine-branes (which ll
up the full nine-dimensional spatial part of the ten-dimensional theory), the result depends only
on the volume of the six-dimensional space.

4one resolution to this problem may have to do with modifying the prescription that the sum is
done only over the rst [(n  1)/2] twisted sectors of the zn orientifold. however, this would have
to be conrmed by explicit string calculations. we thank a. uranga for communication on that
point.

5if the eective couplings between the r-r elds and two non-abelian gauge bosons are deter-
mined from the expansion of the cs term of the type (2), and adding up the contributions from all
twisted sectors, the contributions from the kth and (nk)th twisted sector to such an eective term
add up to zero, since the orientifold projection keeps only imaginary components of the c (2)
forms.
k

7

aij =

i

|p| xk

ckt r(ki)t r((k)1(j)2),

(11)

where |p| is the order of the orientifold group and k runs over the twisted sectors. for a
particular of the zn orbifold, ck are given by [7]

ck = 3

a=12 sin kva,

(12)

where va is the compact space twist vector. aij cancels the usual eld theory triangular
anomalies of the model [7].

c. fayet-iliopoulos term and anomaly cancellation of the abpss model

in the abpss model, the cp matrix in the cartan-weyl basis for the anomalous u(1)
gauge eld is  = diag{i12,i12, 0  i8}, in which in is the n  n identity matrix. the 
matrices are given by

k = diag{eiki12, eiki12, i8},

(13)

where,  = 2
3 .

the fi term of the anomalous u(1), which arises from the supersymmetric completion of
the chern-simons couplings between the twisted sector r-r elds and the gauge elds [8],
is given by eqn.(4) with  and k of the abpss model:

f i = 2  12  2 sin(

2
3

) re(r) = 243 re(r),

where r is the twist sector moduli eld. f i modies the usual u(1) d term as

d  d + f i.

(14)

(15)

therefore, the fi term is proportional to the vev of the real component of the twisted
moduli r.

the coupling of imf (r)f f in the case of abpss orientifold could take the form:

z d4x t r(k2)kf f = 2  12  cos

2
3  2  re(1).

xk=1,2

(16)

however, the string amplitude that involves the diagram with three gauge bosons as external legs
involves exchanges of r-r elds k in each twisted sector separately. the total contributions to
such a string amplitude, summing over the twisted sectors, would then yield a nonzero eective
coupling that involves two non-abelian gauge bosons and the the anomalous u (1) gauge boson, as
quoted in [7].

8

since the real component of 1 is projected out by the orientifold projection, the term
imf (r)f f seems to be absent (as discussed on general grounds in the previous subsec-
tions).

in the abpss model, the u(1)3, u(1)  so(8)2, and u(1)  su(12)2 anomalies are

(432,  36, 18),

(17)

respectively.

since the compact space twist vector for z3 is v = 1

3(1, 1,2), one obtains c1 = c2 =
33. thus, the scattering amplitudes aij, with the  and  matrices presented previously,

are [7]

au (1), (u (1),so(8),su (12)) =

1
3

2(33)12

3
2

(24(

1
2

),1,

1
2

) = (432, 36,18),

(18)

which cancel the u(1) anomalies in eqn.(17).

iii. anomalous u (1) and vacuum restabilization

the appearance of the fi term for the anomalous u(1) due to the blowing-up procedure
requires the well known vacuum restablization procedure to preserve supersymmetry at the
string scale. certain elds that are charged under the anomalous u(1) are triggered to
acquire nonzero vacuum expectation values (vevs) that cancel the fi d term, subject to
the constraints that they are both d at with respect to the other gauge groups and f at,
leading to a consistent restabilized string vacuum. as a consequence, some elds become
massive (depending on the size of the fi term, which generally sets the scale of the vevs,
they will either decouple or remain in the low energy theory). in addition, the rank of the
gauge group is usually reduced as well as the number of families.

in previous work [16], techniques were developed to construct the moduli space of the at
directions for models with an anomalous u(1) systematically. the method utilizes the one
to one correspondence of d at directions (under both the non-anomalous abelian gauge
groups and the non-abelian gauge groups) with holomorphic gauge-invariant polynomials
built out of the chiral elds in the model. for simplicity, the at direction analysis in [16]
considered only the non-abelian singlet elds in the model, in which case the at directions
correspond to monomials (hims). in particular, the superbasis, which is the set of the one-
dimensional (i.e., that depend on one free vev) hims of the model, can be constructed.
every d at direction can be expressed as a product of the elements in the superbasis,
such that the positivity of the vev-squares of the elds can be satised automatically. for
nl
example, if the lth him for the at direction is pl = p
p
p , then the elds p have vevs

|hpi|2 = xl

nl
p|vl|2,

(19)

where vl is the vev corresponding to pl. the phase of the |hpi| can be chosen for conve-
nience.

9

the hims of the superbasis are then classied according to the sign of their contribution
to da, the d term of the anomalous u(1). since the fi term for the anomalous u(1) has to
be cancelled by the vevs of certain elds in the model, the sign of the fi term is crucial.
to ensure the da atness constraint, the required hims should necessarily contain one or
more elements that are opposite in sign to that of f i.

the constraints of f atness require that hw/pi = 0 and hwi = 0 for all of the
massless superelds p in the model. further consideration of these conditions demonstrates
that there are two types of dangerous terms which can lift a given d at direction. the rst
class of terms, which we denote as the wa terms, are formed solely of the elds that are
in the d at direction. gauge invariance dictates that if such a term can be constructed,
it can appear in the superpotential raised to any positive power. in this case, for the d
at direction to remain f at to all orders in the superpotential, string selection rules must
conspire to forbid the innite number of wa terms, which can be dicult to prove in general.
we choose to adopt a conservative strategy and do not consider d at directions for which
wa terms can appear (with the recognition that in doing so, we may be neglecting possible
at directions which are in fact f at to all orders).

the other type of dangerous terms, which we denote as the wb terms, are linear in an
additional massless supereld which is not in the at direction (i.e., which has zero vev),
such that hwi = 0 but hw/i may be nonzero. in this case, gauge invariance constrains
the number of wb terms to be nite, and an explicit string calculation can be performed
to determine if such terms are in fact present in the superpotential. thus, the at direction
can be proven to be f at to all orders if all such wb terms vanish. it is also possible that in
certain cases the contributions to the f term w/ from dierent wb terms linear in the
same eld  (which is not in the at direction) could be arranged to cancel for appropriate
magnitudes and signs of the vevs of the elds involved.

in the present model, the d at directions necessarily involve non-abelian elds due to
the matter content. in principle, the problem could be simplied signicantly if only one
component for each supereld which is charged under su(12) and/or so(8) is nonzero,
such that only diagonal generators would be involved in d terms for the non-abelian gauge
groups. in this case, the problem is similar to that of the abelian case (abelian-like), and
the techniques developed in [16] and described above can be directly applied.

the one to one correspondence between holomorphic gauge invariant polynomials (hips)
and non-anomalous d at directions [21] provides a powerful way of searching for a more
general class of d at directions with non-abelian elds. we rst construct a gauge in-
variant polynomial from the non-abelian elds, which is a sum of monomials involving the
components of the elds. then one monomial term denes a d at direction. each eld in
the monomial will have the same magnitude of the vev (or times np if the component
eld is raised to the np power). the d atness constraints for both diagonal and o-diagonal
generators of the non-abelian gauge group are automatically satised. other at directions
are gauge rotations of the direction corresponding to a single monomial. they are equiv-
alent to a product of monomials from the same hip. each monomial introduces the same
magnitude of the vev for each component present (or np), but the phases of the vevs
are dictated by the gauge rotation.

one can also consider higher dimensional d at directions (with more than one indepen-
dent vev), formed as products of other hips. the at directions correspond to products

10

of monomials from each of the hips, each with its own vev. such products often have a
reduced surviving gauge symmetry and massless particle content. they are sometimes f
at (due to cancellations) for specic ratios of the vevs and choices of phases, even though
the directions corresponding to a single hip are not. for overlapping polynomials, which
are products involving common multiplets, there is a at direction in which the common
multiplets have the same nonzero component (or involve components not connected by any
single gauge generator) for each of the monomial factors, which avoids nonzero d terms
for o-diagonal generators6. the vevs of the nonzero components in a product are given
by an expression analogous to (19). for products of non-overlapping hips (i.e., with no
multiplets in common), the corresponding monomials may have dierent orientations in the
internal symmetry space.

iv. flat directions

the f atness conditions of the abpss model are

a

i b

i = 0;

b

i 

[a,b] = 0.

the d atness condition for so(8) is

di = x,a xi,j

(a

i t i,ija

j ) = 0,

(20)

(21)

(22)

where t i are generators of the vector representation of so(8) and i = 1, .., 28. for su(12),

dj = x,i xa,b

a

i

t j
abb

i + x xa,b,c(cid:16)

[a,c](cid:17)

t j
ab

[b,c],

(23)

where t j ( t j  t jt ) are the generator matrices for the fundamental (anti-fundamental)
representation of su(12) and j = 1, .., 143. the d atness condition for the anomalous
u(1) is given by

da =  x,i,a

a
i a

i + 2 x,a<b


[a,b]

[a,b] + f i.

(24)

since there are no non-abelian singlet elds in the model, the d at directions are
necessarily formed of superelds which transform nontrivially under the non-abelian gauge
groups. due to the form of the superpotential and the number of families, we have not been
able to construct a d at direction involving only one component per multiplet, namely, the
abelian-like solution with only the diagonal generators of su(12) involved.

6gauge or family rotations of that at direction may have additional nonzero components of the
same multiplets. the d atness of the o-diagonal generators then occurs by cancellations.

11

we thus concentrate on the holomorphic gauge invariant polynomial method as a more
general and powerful tool. we construct gauge invariant (under so(8) su(12)) combina-
tions of elds a
[a,b]. any monomial from the hip involving particular components
of the elds  and/or  is a one-dimensional d at direction. other d at directions can
be constructed from products of these one-dimensional directions. we then check the f
atness constraints.

i and/or 

we have found classes of at directions involving  only, exploiting the fact that the
totally antisymmetric product 6 is an su(12) singlet. dierent combinations of the family
indices for the six  elds, or products of such polynomials, correspond to dierent residual
symmetries and spectra after vacuum restabilization. the  elds have u(1)a charge +2, so
that these directions have da = 0 for f i < 0, i.e., for positive re(r) in (14). the vevs
of the components of the elds are proportional to f i, so they interpolate smoothly to the
limit f i = 0.

the one-dimensional at directions take the form (up to a gauge rotation)

6 = 1

[1,2]2

[3,4]3

[5,6]4

[7,8]5

[9,10]6

[11,12],

(25)

where the family indices i take the values 1, 2, or 3. this monomial is a singlet under
so(8), with anomalous u(1) charge +12.

in addition to so(8), which obviously remains unbroken by this class of at directions,
the remaining unbroken gauge symmetries from su(12) clearly contain su(2)6, where each
su(2) corresponds to the indices of one of the  elds in the at direction. however, since
there are only three possible values of the six i, these are not all the unbroken generators
of the original su(12). there are additional o-diagonal generators which remain unbroken
such that the remaining gauge symmetry is sp(2l)  sp(2m)  sp(2n)7, where l, m, and n
are the number of occurrences of the direction 1, 2, and 3, respectively, and l + m + n = 6.
(of course, sp(2)  su(2) and the sp(2k) factor is absent for k = 0, where k is l, m or n.)
in appendix a, an example with two  elds is given to illustrate the survival of the sp(4)
gauge group.

[ai,bi]3

[ai,bi]2

there are also at directions which are arbitrary superpositions of directions with dif-
ferent family indices but the same su(12) indices. these are equivalent to each of the six
factors having an independent direction in family space; i.e., i is promoted to a vector in
the three-dimensional family space, with each component having an arbitrary phase. thus,
i
[ai,bi]  1
[ai,bi], where [ai, bi] = [1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6], [7, 8], [9, 10], or [11, 12], and the
vevs of three components in the family space satisfy |v1
[ai,bi]|2 = |v|2,
where v is the vev determined from f i. the generic residual symmetry is su(2)6, except
for the special directions for which k of the i are aligned, in which case su(2)k  sp(2k).
the space of the at directions of this class is a subspace of the 366 dimensional complex
space of 
[a,b]. at a generic point (the vectors i in the family space are dierent from each
other), other at directions can be constructed by family and phase transformations classied

[ai,bi]|2 + |v3

[ai,bi]|2 + |v2

7note that in the orientifold limit, appearance of sp(2k) groups is usually associated with exis-
tence of ve-branes. interestingly, the abpss orientifold has only nine-branes, yet the blowing-up
procedure introduces sp(2k) groups.

12

by u(3)/u(2) for each of the six factors i
[ai,bi]. of the ve generators of u(3)/u(2), one is
from su(12)  u(1)a and the other four correspond to moduli. hence, the generic points
with 6 arbitrary i form a 12-dimensional complex moduli space. the points in moduli
space that involve permutating the i and associated phases are equivalent by discrete
gauge transformations, such as the one which maps 1
[1,2]. the  spectrum
for a generic point includes 126 massive states associated with the spontaneous breakdown of
su(12) u(1)a to su(2)6 (the imaginary parts are the absorbed goldstone bosons and the
real parts are the massive scalar partners). in addition, there are 3 66 126 = 72 massless
complex  states, 12 of which are associated with the moduli. at the special points in the
moduli space where the vectors in the family space i are aligned, the gauge symmetries
are enhanced. there are correspondingly more massless states and fewer associated with
symmetry breaking.

[3,4] to 1

[1,2]2

[3,4]2

to determine the spectrum for the  elds, consider any of the six factors of 6. without
[a,b]i = v for a specic  =

loss of generality we can choose axes in family space such that h
1, 2, or 3, with the other vevs vanishing. from the superpotential

w3  2yv(a
, b
i

i

i b

i  a
, a
i

i b

i ),

(26)

i

(where  6=  6= ) one has that a
i become massive ( 2y|v|), while
a/b
remain massless. similarly, two of the three families become massive for each of the
12 values of the su(12) index. (so(8) remains unbroken.) in the special case of l = m = 0,
n = 6, for example, 3a
, (a = 1..12) remain massless in the restabilized vacuum. hence,
i
three apparent families are reduced to one. this suggests that it may be worthwhile to
consider models with more than three apparent families.

and b

the 6 at directions are f at to all orders, since so(8) u(1)a invariance requires at
least two factors of  for each term in the superpotential. the form of the eective super-
potential (after restabilization) for the massless states depends on the specic at direction.
u(1)a invariance implies that n = 2n for an allowed term in the original superpotential,
where n and n are respectively the number of factors of  and . eective cubic terms
must therefore result from surviving terms in the original superpotential w3 in (1). such
terms survive for points in the moduli space except for the maximal symmetry points like
(l, m, n) = (0, 0, 6). there could conceivably be four-dimensional eective couplings from
original non-renormalizable couplings of the type 4h2i. however, these would have to be
of dierent form than w 2
3 .
the generic 6 at directions that we have discussed so far are technically of the over-
lapping type; i.e., they involve products of monomials in which more than one component of
the same eld is allowed to have a vev, as occurs, for example, if 1 and 2, associated with
1
[1,2] and 2
[3,4] are not orthogonal. for this class of at direction this presents no diculty:
no su(12) generator connects 1
[3,4], for example, and no o-diagonal d terms
are induced. for this to work, it is necessary for the su(12) indices to be the same in each
monomial, i.e., each has the same su(12) orientation.

[1,2] with 1

there is another class of 6 at directions involving non-overlapping polynomials, such
as (1)6(2)6, or (1)6(2)6(3)6. since they are non-overlapping, there is no need for the
su(12) indices to be the same in each factor. these directions therefore allow even more
breaking of the su(12), although to maintain the non-overlapping character there is much

13

less freedom for rotations in the family indices8. there are many possibilities for the relative
su(12) orientations of the ()6 factors, with dierent implications for the physics of the
associated restabilized vacua. we will simply use two examples given in appendix b to
illustrate the complexity of the physics associated with this class of at directions.

there are other classes of directions which are d at with respect to so(8)  su(12),
of the generic form 12 or (12)    (12). such directions have negative u(1)a charges, and
would yield da = 0 for blown-up constructions with f i > 0. these would correspond
to re(r) < 0 in (14), and would not have a canonical geometric interpretation. for such
directions, each (12) factor is totally antisymmetric in the su(12) indices, while the so(8)
indices are contracted in pairs. the latter can be within the same (12) factor, in which case
they must have dierent family indices, or can connect dierent (12) factors. however, we
have not found any examples of this class which are also f at9.

similarly, we have not found any non-trivial solutions involving both the  and  elds
in the at direction. clearly a
[a,b] is not f at, and we have not found combinations
involving dierent families, etc., which are both f and d at10. (of course, the orientifold
point with re(r) = 0 has f i = 0, and the trivial solution with no nonzero vev is d and
f at.)

i b

i 

v. conclusions

the aim of this paper has been to address explicitly the blowing-up procedure of the
four-dimensional type i orientifolds with n = 1 supersymmetry. the specic analysis was
done for the type i z3 orientifold constructed by angelantonj, bianchi, pradisi, sagnotti
and stanev (abpss orientifold) [4]. we chose it in part due to its simplicity (it involves only
nine-branes), and in part due to its potential phenomenological implications since the model
contains three families. the goals were two-fold: (i) we identied the elds participating
in the blowing-up procedure, and determined the structure of the induced fayet-iliopoulos
(fi) term, and (ii) we provided a detailed analysis of the at directions, surviving gauge
symmetry, and light particle spectra after the subsequent vacuum restabilization of the
blown-up orientifold.

8there are also hybrid at directions, involving family rotations for some of the  factors and
su (12) rotations for others.

9we have also not found any f at examples for generalizations involving overlapping polynomials
in which the monomials have dierent combinations of su (12), so(8), and family indices. these
generically induce d terms for the o-diagonal generators, but these can often be cancelled by
appropriate choices of relative signs for the elds in a monomial.

10in [4], a form of directions involving both  and  which satised f atness was given. however,
no examples which were d at were presented, nor was their existence proved. the examples
presented in this paper are both d and f at, and are outside of their class.

14

(i) for the z3 abpss orientifold, only one twisted sector blowing-up mode r partici-
pates in the blowing-up procedure and triggers the subsequent vacuum restabilization. it is
associated with one out of the 27 xed points, chosen at the origin where the nine-branes
are located. we showed that the real part re(r) =  of this blowing-up mode (which arises
in the ns-ns twisted type iib sector) contributes to the fi term. the nonzero vacuum
expectation value (vev) of this eld which, based on the geometrical interpretation of the
blowing-up procedure should be taken to have positive sign, xes the magnitude and the
sign of the fi term. on the other hand, the chern-simons (cs) term, which plays an
instrumental role in the anomaly cancellation procedure and is related to the fi term by
supersymmetry, is proportional to the imaginary part im(r) =  of the blowing-up mode
(which arises from the r-r twisted sector). we also noted that the second order expansion
of this cs term [8], which contributes to the imaginary part of the gauge coupling correc-
tions, does not seem to be present (the part of the r-r sector two-form eld that would
contribute to this coupling is projected out by the orientifold projection.).

(ii) due to the absence of non-abelian singlet elds in the spectrum, the subsequent vac-
uum restabilization necessarily involves non-abelian elds, thus complicating the analysis.
we employed the powerful connection between holomorphic gauge invariant polynomials
and at directions [21], which enabled us to classify the d and f at directions of the
blown-up orientifold in detail. we found that the d and f at directions of this model
are associated with the general set of  6 monomials, in which  transforms as (1, 66)+2
under so(8)  su(12)  u(1). we were unable to nd d and f at directions for the
gauge invariant monomials of the type  12, in which  transforms as (8, 12)1 under
so(8)  su(12)  u(1). we were also unable to nd hybrid at directions with both the
 and  elds involved. incidentally, only the  6 d at directions of this model have
the correct sign of the u(1) charges to cancel the fi term with the positive value of the
blowing-up mode.

the generic point in the moduli space of d and f at directions associated with the  6
monomials is specied by 12 complex moduli (elds that can acquire free vevs), breaks
the gauge group down to su(2)6  so(8), and leaves only one family of the  multiplets
massless. at special points of moduli space, for example where k of the family indices  in
the monomials are aligned, the unbroken gauge group su(2)k is enhanced to sp(2k).

we conclude with a number of remarks that in view of the analysis presented in this paper
may be more general and could apply to a larger class of type i blown-up orientifolds. in
particular, a preliminary investigation of other orientifold models with non-abelian singlets,
indicates that the vacuum restabilization procedure still necessarily involves non-abelian
elds [19]. a large set of zn  zm orientifolds (e.g., [3]) have only the fundamental and
antisymmetric tensor representations of the gauge group in the light particle spectrum (i.e.,
those of the - and -type, respectively). it is conceivable that ingeneral the  type elds
play an instrumental role in the vacuum restabilization of this class of blown-up orientifolds.
our analysis demonstrates that the particular blown-up orientifold addressed in this pa-
per is unlikely to have interesting phenomenological implications, since neither the surviving
gauge group, generically su(2)6 so(8), nor the particle content, with generically only one
family remaining light, are phenomenologically viable. nevertheless, the approach sets the
stage for further systematic analysis of other blown-up orientifolds, which may uncover po-
tentially phenomenologically interesting type i string vacua.

15

acknowledgments

this work was supported in part by u.s. department of energy grant no. doe-ey-
76-02-3071. we would like to than m. douglas, g. moore, e. poppitz, and z. kakushadze
for useful correspondence and a. uranga for correspondence and discussions. we would also
like to thank m. plumacher for helpful discussions.

16

appendix a: enhanced symmetries.

as an example, take two  elds from the same family, and assume the components 3

[1,2]

and 3

[3,4] have nonzero and equal vevs. label the su(12) generators by t a

b , where

t a
b [c,d] = a

c [b,d] + a

d[c,b].

(a1)

2 , t 4

3 , t 3

3 t 4

1 t 2
4 , t 1

1 , t 1
3 , t 3

2 , t 1
1 t 2

2 ) and (t 4
4 + t 3

then, the unbroken generators in the su(4) subgroup are (t 2
3 
t 4
4 ), which correspond to su(2)2, as well as t 1
1 + t 2
2 . it is straight-
forward to show that the remaining gauge group is sp(4). generalizing to the case with k
factors of  elds aligned in their family indices, 3k generators remain unbroken from the
obvious su(2)k subgroup. in addition, there are 4 unbroken generators for each pair of 
elds. therefore, the total number of unbroken generators is 3k + 4k(k  1)/2 = k(2k + 1),
and the unbroken gauge group can be shown to be sp(2k). there are six broken diagonal
generators, which are the ve su(12) generators not in su(2)6 and that of the anomalous
u(1). the o-diagonal generators which connect factors from dierent families are also bro-
ken, as are the linear combinations of the o-diagonal generators that are orthogonal to the
generators in the extensions of su(2)k to sp(2k).

4 , t 3

appendix b: directions involving non-overlapping

polynomials.

we will simply illustrate with two examples involving an su(4) subgroup of su(12) and

two  elds.

[1,4]2

[1,2]1

[1,2]2

[1,2]1

[3,4]) (2

as we have seen in appendix a, the single monomial 1

[3,4] breaks su(4) to sp(4),
while 1
[3,4] leaves su(2)2 unbroken. as an example of a non-overlapping polynomial di-
rection, consider (1
[2,3]), where the rst (second) pair of elds have vevs v1
(v2). although this direction breaks each individual su(4) generator, there are six unbroken
linear combinations. these are t1  t 1
2  t 3
2 , and their hermitian conjugates,
as well as the hermitian generators h1  t 1
4 and h2  i(t 2
2 ). h1
and h2 commute with each other and the ti. the six surviving generators correspond to an
unbroken su(2)2, with the canonical su(2) generators given by linear combinations of the
ti and the hi. this class of directions involves 5 real moduli. there are 8 massless complex
 elds associated with the su(4) subgroup. two families of  states become massive and
one remains massless.

4 , t2  t 1
1 t 2
2 +t 3

4 + t 3
3 t 4

3 t 3

1 t 4

4 +t 1

[4,2]), with vevs vi, i = 1, 2, 3 for the three pairs.

an extension of this example utilizes all three families,
[1,3]3

[2,3])
(3
in this case, there are three
hermitian generators, h2, i(t1  t
2), of a surviving su(2). there are 7 real
moduli for these examples, and 5 massless complex  elds. all three families of s become
massive.

1), and i(t2  t

[1,2]1

[3,4]) (2

i.e., (1

[1,4]2

17

references

[1] c. hull and p. townsend, nucl. phys. b438 (1995) 109; e. witten, nucl. phys. b443

(1995) 85.

[2] e. gimon and j. polchinski, nucl. phys. b477 (191996) 715, hep-th/9601038.
[3] a. dabholkar and j. park, nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 207, hep-th/9602030; nucl. phys.
b477 (1996) 701, hep-th/9604178; phys. lett. b394 (1997) 302, hep-th/9607041; e.
gimon and c. johnson, nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 715, hep-th/9604129; j. blum and
a. zaaroni, phys. lett. b387 (1996) 71, hep-th/9607019; j. blum, nucl. phys. b486
(1997) 34, hep-th/9608053; z. kakushadze, g. shiu and s.-h. tye, phys. rev. d58
(1998) 086001, hep-th/9803141.

[4] c. angelantonj, m. bianchi, g. pradisi, a. sagnotti and ya.s. stanev, phys. lett. b385

(1996) 96, hep-th/9606169.

[5] m. berkooz and r.g. leigh, nucl. phys. b483 (1997) 187, hep-th/9605049; g. zwart,
nucl. phys. b526 (1998) 378, hep-th/9708040; z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b512 (1998)
221, hep-th/9704059; z. kakushadze and g. shiu, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3686, hep-
th/9705163; nucl. phys. b520 (1998) 75, hep-th/9706051; l.e. ibanez, hep-th/9802103;
d. odriscoll, hep-th/9801114.

[6] m. berkooz, r. g. leigh, j. polchinski, j.h. schwarz, n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl.

phys. b475 (1996) 115.

[7] l.e. ibanez, r. rabadan and a.m. uranga, hep-th/9808139.
[8] m.r. douglas and g. moore, hep-th/9603167.
[9] m. cvetic and l. dixon, unpublished, m. cvetic, in proceedings of superstrings, cos-
mology and composite structures, college park, maryland, march 1987, s.j. gates and
r. mohapatra, eds. (world scientic, singapore, 1987) and phys. rev. lett. 59 (1987)
2829.

[10] m. dine, n. sieberg, and e. witten, nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 585.
[11] j. atick, l. dixon and a. sen, nucl. phys. b292 (1987) 109; m. dine, i. ichinose, and
n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b293 (1987) 253; m. dine and c. lee, nucl. phys. b336 (1990)
317.

[12] l. dixon and v. kaplunovsky, unpublished.
[13] j. atick and a. sen, nucl. phys. b296 (1988) 157.
[14] l. dixon, j.a. harvey, c. vafa and e. witten, nucl. phys. b261 (1985) 678 and nucl.
phys. b274 (1986) 285; l. dixon, d. friedan, e. martinec and s. shenker, nucl. phys.
b282 (1987) 13.

[15] l. ibanez, j.e. kim, h.p. nilles and f. quevedo, phys. lett. b191 (1987) 282;
j.a. casas and c. munoz, phys. lett. b209 (1988) 214 and b214 (1988) 157;
j.a. casas, e. katehou and c. munoz, nucl. phys. b317 (1989) 171; a. font,
l. ibanez, h.p. nilles and f. quevedo, phys. lett. b210 (1988) 101; a. chamseddine
and m. quiros, phys. lett. b212 (1988) 343, nucl. phys. b316 (1989) 101; a. font,
l. ibanez, f. quevedo and a. sierra, nucl. phys. b331 (1990) 421.

[16] g. cleaver, m. cvetic, j. r. espinosa, l. everett, and p. langacker, nucl. phys. b525

(1998) 3.

[17] g. cleaver, m. cvetic, j.r. espinosa, l. everett, and p. langacker, hep-th/9805133,

to appear in nucl. phys. b.

18

[18] g. cleaver, m. cvetic, j.r. espinosa, l. everett, p. langacker, and j. wang, phys.
rev. d59 (1999) 055005, hep-ph/9807479; hep-ph/9811355, to appear in phys. rev. d.

[19] m. cvetic, l. everett, p. langacker, m. plumacher and j. wang, work in progress.
[20] e. poppitz, hep-th/9810010.
[21] f. buccella, j.-p. derendinger, c. savoy and s. ferrara, phys. lett. b115 (1982) 375; i.
aeck, m. dine and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b241 (1984) 493, nucl. phys. b256 (1985)
557; m.a. luty and w. taylor iv, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 3399 and references therein;
t. gherghetta, c. kolda and s. martin, nucl. phys. b468 (1996) 37; p. binetruy,
n. irges, s. lavignac and p. ramond, phys. lett. b403 (1997) 38.

[22] m.r. douglas, b.r. greene and d.r. morrison, nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 84, ,hep-

th/9704151.

[23] j. polchinski, string theory:, v. ii, (cambridge university press, cambridge, 1988.

19

