9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
6
1

 
 

1
v
9
3
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

report no. 12, 1998/1999
desy 99-013

hep-th/9903139

moduli spaces

of d-branes in cft-backgrounds

andreas recknagel1, volker schomerus2,3

1mpi fur gravitationsphysik, albert-einstein-institut

schlaatzweg 1, d-14473 potsdam, germany

2ii. inst. f. theor. physik, universitat hamburg

luruper chaussee 149, d-22670 hamburg, germany

3institut mittag-leer, auravagen 17

s-182 62 djursholm, sweden

march 3, 1999

abstract

d-branes in curved backgrounds can be treated with techniques of
boundary conformal eld theory. we discuss the inuence of scalar
condensates on such branes, i.e. perturbations of boundary conditions
by marginal boundary operators. a general criterion is presented that
guarantees a boundary perturbation to be truly marginal in all orders
of perturbation theory. our results on boundary deformations have
several interesting applications which are sketched at the end of this
note.

e-mail: vschomer@x4u.desy.de, anderl@mis.mpg.de

talk given by v. schomerus at the 32nd international symposium ahrenshoop
on the theory of elementary particles (buckow, germany, september 1998)

it was observed many years ago that low energy eective actions of (super-)
string theories possess solitonic solutions. they are known as solitonic p-
branes because of their localization along certain p + 1-dimensional surfaces
in the string-background. later, polchinski discovered a remarkable cor-
respondence between such solitonic p-branes and dp-branes, i.e. boundary
conditions for open strings (for a review see [1]). this makes it possible
to study branes through the microscopic techniques of boundary confor-
mal eld theory. the latter are particularly eective in dealing with curved
backgrounds and they have also been successfully applied to study non-bps
branes.

we consider conformal eld theories on the upper half of the complex plane.
any such theory contains two dierent kinds of elds, namely bulk elds
(z, z) (i.e. closed string vertex operators) which are dened for points in
the interior im z > 0 of the upper half-plane and boundary elds (x) (i.e.
open string vertex operators) that are inserted along the boundary im z = 0.
operator product expansions (opes) of the former specify the background
of our string theory. even if we do not allow for changes of these bulk
opes there remains some freedom to choose dierent boundary conditions.
roughly speaking, this corresponds to the freedom of placing d-branes in a
xed background. a somewhat axiomatic characterization of the admissible
boundary theories can be found e.g. in [2].

the problem of constructing boundary theories possesses some universal so-
lutions in terms of the modular s-matrix, which were found by cardy in
[3]. they provide at least a nite set of boundary conformal eld theories
(d-branes) for a large class of backgrounds. on the other hand the relation
with solitonic p-branes suggests the existence of continuous families of so-
lutions. we shall explain below how such families may be recovered from
a discrete set of boundary cfts. the idea is to generate continuous de-
formations through perturbations with marginal boundary elds. since the
boundary operator content depends on the boundary condition, the number
of possible deformations will depend on the boundary theory we start with.

suppose we are given a set of correlation functions of some boundary con-

1

formal eld theory. we want to perturb this initial theory by one of its
boundary elds (x) according to the formal prescription

h 1(z1, z1)    n (zn , zn ) i = z 1  h i 1(z1, z1)    n (zn , zn ) i

:= z 1xn

n

n! xsn

z   z

dx1
2

  

dxn
2

x(i) < x(i+1)

h (x(1))    (x(n)) 1    n i

where  is a real parameter.the symbol i in the rst line should be under-
stood as a path ordered exponential of the perturbing operator,

i = p exp{ s } := p exp{ z 



(x)

dx
2

} .

(1)

the normalization z is dened as the expectation value z  hii. these
expressions deal with deformations of bulk correlators only. if there are extra
boundary elds present in the correlation function, the formulas need to be
modied in an obvious fashion so that these boundary elds are included
in the path ordering. some particularly simple cases of this type will
be discussed shortly. the path ordering is essential since correlations of
boundary elds are only dened for an ordered set of insertion points along
the real line. their analytic continuation beyond this domain is not unique,
in general.

to make sense of the above expressions (beyond the formal level), it is nec-
essary to regularize the integrals (introducing uv- and ir-cutos) and to
renormalize couplings and elds (for an introduction into bulk perturbations
in 2d conformal eld theories see e.g.
ir divergences can be cured
by putting the system into a nite box. on the other hand, we have to
deal with uv divergences. so, let us introduce a uv cuto  such that the
integrations are restricted to the region |xi  xj| > . thereby, all integrals
become uv-nite before we perform the limit   0.

[4]).

in the following, we consider marginal boundary deformations where the
conformal dimension h of the perturbing operator (x) is h = 1 so that
there is a chance to stay at the conformal point for arbitrary values of . of
course, the dimension of the eld  may decrease upon perturbation to values
h < 1. in such cases, the perturbation with (x) is said to be marginally
relevant and the perturbed theories are no longer scale invariant. here we are
interested in a condition which guarantees that (x) is truly marginal, i.e.

2

that the dimension of (x) stays at its initial value h = 1. perturbations with
truly marginal elds then lead to a one-parameter family of scale invariant
theories.

it was shown in [2] that (x) is truly marginal provided that it is a self-local
eld of conformal dimension h = 1. the condition of self-locality requires 
to obey

(x) (y) = (y) (x)

for x < y .

here we assumed that the right hand side can be unambiguously dened by
analytic continuation.

let us briey sketch the main idea behind this result. because of its self-
locality, (x) behaves like a connection in an abelian gauge theory so that we
may employ the usual arguments to omit the path-ordering in our construc-
tion of the deformed correlators. consequently, all integrals can be performed
along the whole real axis. the cuto  together with the normalization by z
results in a small shift of the integration contour into the upper half-plane.
since these contour integrals do no longer depend on the cuto, the limit
  becomes trivial, i.e.

h 1(z1, z1)    n (zn , zn ) i = lim
0

h 1(z1, z1)    n (zn , zn ) i


(2)

= xn

n

n! z1

  zn

dx1
2

  

dxn
2

h (x1)    (xn) 1    n i

where p is the straight line parallel to the real axis with im p = i/p. the
expression on the right hand side is manifestly nite and is independent of
 as long as  < min(im zi) where zi denote the insertion points of bulk
elds. thus, the above formula allows us to construct the perturbed bulk
correlators to all orders in perturbation theory.

the extension of these ideas to the deformation of correlators which involve
boundary elds 1, . . . , n is straightforward if and only if the boundary
elds 1, . . . , m are local with respect to the perturbing eld , i.e. i

(x) i(y) = i(y) (x)

for x < y .

this usually places a strong constraint on boundary elds. but if it is sat-
ised, the (renormalized) correlation functions are again obtained through

3

contour integration formulas very similar to the eqs. (2) (see [2] for details).
the explicit expressions imply in particular that the conformal dimension of
a boundary eld (x) is not changed upon deformation provided that  is
local with respect to .

the preceding statement has a number of nice consequences. first of all it
certainly allows us to understand that non-locality is the only obstruction to
true marginality. indeed, with the choice  =  our result implies that the
dimension of the perturbing self-local eld  sticks to its initial value h = 1,
i.e. that  is truly marginal.

whenever we have several self-local boundary elds which are all local with
respect to each other, they generate a multi-parameter deformation of the
initial boundary theory. at rst sight, this may seem to result in very trivial
moduli spaces. however, it may happen that certain important properties of
the boundary conformal eld theory (e.g. the cluster property) break down
at some nite value of the perturbation parameter  [2]: admissible defor-
mations form a subspace   rq. the moduli space m we assign to our
initial boundary condition is obtained from  upon identication of equiva-
lent boundary theories, i.e. m = / . here, equivalence must be tested by
closed string exchange between dierent branes, as explained in [2].

moduli spaces of d0-branes are expected to probe the background geometry,
i.e. they provide a way of recovering the background from the purely algebraic
cft description. a number of explicit examples are discussed in [2]. the
resulting geometry, however, is not unique due to the freedom one has in
declaring a given boundary condition a d0-brane. such choices may be
understood as a consequence of t-duality (or mirror symmetry).

for boundary conditions in gepner models [6] (i.e. d-branes on certain com-
plete intersection calabi yau spaces), the moduli spaces m should come
equipped with additional kahler structures much as their cousins in algebraic
geometry (see e.g. [5]) but this and other predictions of algebraic geometry
remain to be investigated in more detail.

to state another corollary of our main result we consider n identical branes
placed on top of each other. within the cft framework this means that
we multiply all boundary elds with chan-paton matrices, as usual. thus,
instead of perturbing our theories with , we generate perturbations by 
where  is now some n  n matrix. a single self-local boundary eld  can

4

be combined with several dierent matrix parameters i. this gives rise to
a multi-parameter deformation provided that the matrices i commute,

[ i , j ] = 0 .

(3)

we conclude that any self-local boundary eld can generate an n-parameter
deformation. in the case of d-branes on rd, this fact was rst observed by
witten [7]. the n parameters are then interpreted as distances between the
n branes in a xed direction transverse to their world-volume. in the present
context, equation (3) makes a rather general statement about at directions
of the branes low enery eective action in curved backgrounds.

deformations can have rather drastic eects on the geometry  and in partic-
ular on the dimension  of branes [2]. for a compactied bosonic theory at
the self-dual radius there exist boundary deformations that continuously de-
form neumann- into dirichlet-type boundary conditions. this phenomenon
extends to other radii by means of radius-changing bulk deformations. circle
theories at rational radii possess additional tachyon condensates which are
even capable of transforming neumann-type branes into a superposition of
dirichlet-type branes and vice versa [2] (see also the recent work of sen [8]).

let us nally mention that our formula (2), and its appropriate generalization
in the presence of boundary elds, provide a powerful tool in computing the
deformed theory explicitly. they might be quite useful in studying certain
bound states of d-branes. related calculations by sen (see [8] and references
therein) were argued in [9] to support the idea of classifying d-branes through
an appropriate k-theory of the background.

references

[1] j. polchinski, tasi-lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9611050

[2] a. recknagel, v. schomerus, boundary deformations and d-brane mod-

uli, hep- th/9811237, nucl. phys. b , to appear

[3] j. cardy, boundary conditions, fusion rules and the verlinde formula,

nucl. phys. b 324 (1989) 581

[4] j. cardy, conformal invariance and statistical mechanics, lectures given

at the les houches summer school in theoretical physics, 1988

5

[5] a. strominger, s.-t. yau, e. zaslow, mirror symmetry is t-duality,

nucl. phys. b 479 (1996) 243, hep-th/9606040

[6] a. recknagel, v. schomerus, d-branes in gepner models, nucl. phys.

b 531 (1998) 185, hep-th/9712186

m. gutperle, y. satoh, d-branes in gepner models and supersymmetry,
hep-th/9808080; d0-branes in gepner models and n=2 black holes, hep-
th/9902120

[7] e. witten, bound states of strings and d-branes, nucl. phys. b 460

(1996) 335

[8] a. sen, so(32) spinors of type i and other solitons on brane - anti-brane
pair, jhep 09 (1998) 023, hep-th/9808141; descent relations among
bosonic d-branes, hep-th/9902105

[9] e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, hep-th/9810188

6

