9
9
9
1

 
r
a

m
5

 

 
 

1
v
6
5
0
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

mit-ctp-2837
hep-th/9903056

of mckay correspondence,

non-linear sigma-model

and conformal field theory

yang-hui he

and

jun s. song

center for theoretical physics

massachusetts institute of technology

cambridge, massachusetts 02139

abstract

the ubiquitous a-d-e classication has induced many proposals of often
mysterious correspondences both in mathematics and physics. the mathemat-
ics side includes quiver theory and the mckay correspondence which relates
nite group representation theory to lie algebras as well as crepant resolutions
of gorenstein singularities. on the physics side, we have the graph-theoretic
classication of the modular invariants of wzw models, as well as the relation
between the string theory nonlinear -models and landau-ginzburg orbifolds.
we here propose a unication scheme which naturally incorporates all these
correspondences of the a-d-e type in two complex dimensions. an intricate
web of inter-relations is constructed, providing a possible guideline to establish
new directions of research or alternate pathways to the standing problems in
higher dimensions.

e-mail: yhe@ctp.mit.edu
e-mail: jssong@ctp.mit.edu.

research supported in part by the nsf and the u.s. department of energy under cooperative
research agreement #de-fc02-94er40818.

non-linear sigma

model (b=0)

v

wzw

modular invariants

(fusion rules)

iii

string theory
on orbifolds

(b=0)/

quiver

and tensor
categories

gorenstein
singularities

iv

graph
theory

ii

finite group
representation

theory

i

figure 1: the myriad of correspondences: it is the purpose of this paper to elucidate
these inter-relations in 2-dimensions, so as to motivate a similar coherent picture in
higher dimensions. most of the subsectors in this picture have been studied separately
by mathematicians and physicists, but they are in fact not as disparate as they are
guised.

1 introduction

this paper reviews the known facts about the various a-d-e classications that arise
in mathematics and string theory and organizes them into a unied picture. this
picture serves as a guide for our on-going work in higher dimensions and naturally
incorporates diverse concepts in mathematics.

in the course of their research on supersymmetric yang-mills theories resulting
from the type iib d-branes on orbifold singularities [1], as prompted by collec-
tive works in constructing (conformal) gauge theories (e.g., [4] [5] [6] and references
therein), it was conjectured by hanany and he that there may exist a mckay-type
correspondence between the bifundamental matter content and the modular invari-
ant partition functions of the wess-zumino-witten (wzw) conformal eld theory.
phrased in another way, the correspondence, if true, would relate the clebsch-gordan
coecients for tensor products of the irreducible representations of nite subgroups of
su(n) with the integrable characters for the ane algebras dsu(n)k of some integral
weight k.

such a relation has been well-studied in the case of n = 2 and it falls into an
a-d-e classication scheme [7, 9, 11]. evidences for what might occur in the case of
n = 3 were presented in [1] by computing the clebsch-gordan coecients extensively

1

for the subgroups of su(3). indications from the lattice integrable model perspective
were given in [13].

the natural question to pose is why there should be such correspondences. in-
deed, why should there be such an intricate chain of connections among string theory
on orbifolds, nite representation theory, graph theory, ane characters and wzw
modular invariants? in this paper, we hope to propose a unied quest to answer this
question from the point of view of the conformal eld theory description of gorenstein
singularities. we also observe that category theory seems to prove a common basis
for all these theories.

we begin in two dimensions, where there have been numerous independent works
in the past few decades in both mathematics and physics to establish various corre-
spondences. in this case, the all-permeating theme is the a-d-e classication. in
particular, there is the original mckays correspondence between nite subgroups of
su(2) and the a-d-e dynkin diagrams [2] to which we henceforth refer as the al-
gebraic mckay correspondence. on the geometry side, the representation rings of
these groups were related to the groethendieck (cohomology) rings of the resolved
manifolds constructed from the gorenstein singularity of the respective groups [38];
we shall refer to this as the geometric mckay correspondence. now from physics,
studies in conformal eld theory (cft) have prompted many beautiful connections
among graph theory, fusion algebra, and modular invariants [7, 9, 11, 20, 21]. the
classication of the modular invariant partition function associated with dsu(2) wess-
zumino-witten (wzw) models also mysteriously falls into an a-d-e type [8]. there
have been some recent attempts to explain this seeming accident from the super-
symmetric eld theory and brane congurations perspective [15, 17]. in this paper
we push from the direction of the geometric mckay correspondence and see how
calabi-yau (cy) non-linear sigma models constructed on the gorenstein singulari-
ties associated with the nite groups may be related to kazama-suzuki coset models
[20, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28], which in turn can be related to the wzw models. this link
would provide a natural setting for the emergence of the a-d-e classication of the
modular invariants. in due course, we will review and establish a catalog of inter-
relations, whereby forming a complex web and unifying many independently noted
correspondences. moreover, we nd a common theme of categorical axioms that all
of these theories seem to satisfy and suggest why the a-d-e classication and its
extensions arise so naturally. this web, presented in figure 1, is the central idea
of our paper. most of the correspondences in figure 1 actually have been discussed
in the string theory literature although not all at once in a unied manner with a
mathematical tint.

2

our purpose is two-fold. firstly, we shall show that tracing through the arrows
in figure 1 may help to enlighten the links that may seem accidental. moreover, and
perhaps more importantly, we propose that this program may be extended beyond
two dimensions and hence beyond a-d-e. indeed, algebraic geometers have done
extensive research in generalizing mckays original correspondence to gorenstein sin-
gularities of dimension greater than 2 ([37] to [44]); many standing conjectures exist
in this respect. on the other hand, there is the conjecture mentioned above regard-
ing the dsu(n)k wzw and the subgroups of su(n) in general. it is our hope that
figure 1 remains valid for n > 2 so that these conjectures may be attacked by the
new pathways we propose. we require and sincerely hope for the collaborative eort
of many experts in mathematics and physics who may take interest in this attempt
to unify these various connections.

the outline of the paper follows the arrows drawn in figure 1. we begin in 2 by
summarizing the ubiquitous a-d-e classications, and 3 will be devoted to clarifying
these a-d-e links, while bearing in mind how such ubiquity may permeate to higher
dimensions. it will be divided in to the following subsections:

 i. the link between representation theory for nite groups and quiver graph

theories (algebraic mckay);

 ii. the link between nite groups and crepant resolutions of gorenstein singu-

larities (geometric mckay);

 iii. the link between resolved gorenstein singularities, calabi-yau manifolds
and chiral rings for the associated non-linear sigma model (stringy gorenstein
resolution);

 iv. the link between quiver graph theory for nite groups and wzw modu-
lar invariants in cft, as discovered in the study of of string orbifold theory
(conjecture in [1]);

and nally, to complete the cycle of correspondences,

 v. the link between the singular geometry and its conformal eld theory de-
scription provided by an orbifoldized coset construction which contains the
wzw theory.

in 4 we discuss arrow v which lls the gap between mathematics and physics, ex-
plaining why wzw models have the magical properties that are so closely related to
the discrete subgroups of the unitary groups as well as to geometry. from all these

3

links arises 6 which consists of our conjecture that there exists a conformal eld
theory description of the gorenstein singularities for higher dimensions, encoding the
relevant information about the discrete groups and the cohomology ring. in 5, we
hint at how these vastly dierent elds may have similar structures by appealing to
the so-called ribbon and quiver categories.

finally in the concluding remarks of 7, we discuss the projection for future labors.
we here transcribe our observations with the hope they would spark a renewed
interest in the study of mckay correspondence under a possibly new light of cft,
and vice versa. we hope that figure 1 will open up many interesting and exciting
pathways of research and that not only some existing conjectures may be solved by
new methods of attack, but also further beautiful observations could be made.

notations and nomenclatures
we put a e over a singular variety to denote its resolved geometry. by dimension we
mean complex dimension unless stated otherwise. also by representation ring of ,
we mean the ring formed by the tensor product decompositions of the irreducible rep-
resentations of . the capital roman numerals, iv, in front of the section headings
correspond to the arrows in figure 1.

2 ubiquity of a-d-e classications

a n

1

1

.

.

1

1

1

.

.

1

1

2

2

2

2

. . . . .

1

1

2

1

d n

1

3

1

2

3

2

1

1

2

3

4

3

2

1

1

2

3

4

5

6

4

2

6e

e
7

8e

figure 2: the ane dynkin diagrams and labels.

in this section, we summarize the appearance of the a-d-e classications in

physics and mathematics and their commonalities.

it is now well-known that the complexity of particular algebraic and geometric
structures can often be organized into classication schemes of the a-d-e type. the
rst hint of this structure began in the 1884 work of f. klein in which he classied

4

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

theory

nodes

finite subgroup
 of su(2)
simple lie alge-
bra of type ade
quiver dynkin
diagrams
minimal resolu-
tion x  c2/

dsu(2)k wzw
model

landau-
ginzburg
cy
sigma model

nonlinear

irreducible
representations
simple roots

dynkin labels

irreducible
com-
ponents of the excep-
tional divisor (basis
of h2(x, zz))
modular
invari-
ants / wzw primary
operators
chiral
operators
twisted fields

primary

matrices

clebsch-gordan
coecients
extended
cartan matrix
adjacency
matrix
intersection
matrix

fusion
coecients

chiral
coecients
correlation
functions

ring

table 1: a-d-e correspondences in 2-dimensions. the same graphs and their ane
extensions appear in dierent theories.

the discrete subgroups  of su(2) [3]. these were noted to be in 1-1 correspondence
with the platonic solids in ir3, and with some foresight, we write them as:

 type a: the cyclic groups (the regular polygons);

 type d: the binary dihedral groups (the regular dihedrons) and

 type e: the binary tetrahedral (the tetrahedron), octahedral (the cube and the

octahedron) and icosahedral (the dodecahedron and the icosahedron) groups,

where we have placed in parenthesis next to each group the geometrical shape for
which it is the double cover of the symmetry group.

the ubiquity of kleins original hint has persisted till the present day. the a-
d-e scheme has manifested itself in such diverse elds as representation theory of
nite groups, quiver graph theory, lie algebra theory, algebraic geometry, conformal

5

eld theory, and string theory. it will be the intent of the next section to explain the
details of the correspondences appearing in table 1, and we will subsequently propose
their extensions in the remainder of the paper.

3 the arrows of figure 1.

in this section, we explain the arrows appearing in figure 1. we verify that there are
compelling evidences in favor of the picture for the case of 2c-dimensions, and we will
propose its generalization to higher dimensions in the subsequent sections, hoping
that it will lead to new insights on the mckay correspondence as well as conformal
eld theory.

3.1

(i) the algebraic mckay correspondence

in the full spirit of the omnipresent a-d-e classication, it has been noticed in 1980
by j. mckay that there exists a remarkable correspondence between the discrete
subgroups of su(2) and the ane dynkin graphs [2]. indeed, this is why we have
labeled the subgroups in the manner we have done.

definition 3.1 for a nite group , let {ri} be its set of irreducible represen-
tations (irreps), then we dene the coecients mk

ij appearing in

rk  ri = m

mk

ijrj

j

(3.1)

to be the clebsch-gordan coecients of .

for   su(2) mckay chose a xed (not necessarily irreducible) representation
r in lieu of general k in 3.1 and dened matrices mr
ij. he has noted that up to
automorphism, there always exists a unique 2-dimensional representation, which for
type a is the tensor sum of 2 dual 1-dimensional irreps and for all others the self-
conjugate 2-dimensional irrep. it is this r = 2 which we choose and simply write
the matrix as mij. the remarkable observation of mckay can be summarized in the
following theorem; the original proof was on a case-to-case basis and steinberg gave
a unied proof in 1981 [2].

theorem 3.1 (mckay-steinberg) for  = a, d, e, the matrix mij is 2i mi-
nus the cartan matrix of the ane extensions of the respective simply-laced simple
dynkin diagrams ba, cd and be, treated as undirected c2-graphs (i.e., maximal eigen-
value of the adjacency matrix is 2).

6

moreover, the dynkin labels of the nodes of the ane dynkin diagrams are precisely
the dimensions of the irreps. given a discrete subgroup   su(2), there thus exists
a dynkin diagram that encodes the essential information about the representation
ring of . indeed the number of nodes should equal to the number of irreps and thus
by a rudimentary fact in nite representation theory, subsequently equals the number
of conjugacy classes of . furthermore, if we remove the node corresponding to the
trivial 1-dimensional (principal) representation, we obtain the regular a-d-e dynkin
diagrams. we present these facts in the following diagram:

clebsch-gordan
coecients
for
 = a, d, e



dynkin diagram
of ba, cd, be



cartan matrix and
dual coxeter labels
of ba, cd, be

this is arrow i of figure 1.

proofs and extension of mckays results from geometric perspectives of this orig-
inally combinatorial/graph-theoretic theorem soon followed; they caused fervent ac-
tivities in both algebraic geometry and string theory (see e.g., [30, 37, 38]). let us
rst turn to the former.

3.2

(ii) the geometric mckay correspondence

in this section, we are interested in crepant resolutions of gorenstein quotient singu-
larities.

definition 3.2 the singularities of cn/ for   gl(n, c) are called goren-
stein if there exists a nowhere-vanishing holomorphic n-form3 on regular points.

restricting  to su(n) would guarantee that the quotient singularities are gorenstein.

definition 3.3 we say that a smooth variety fm is a crepant resolution of a
singular variety m if there exists a birational morphism  : fm  m such that the
canonical sheaves km and k em are the same, or more precisely, if (km ) = k em .

for n  3, gorenstein singularities always admit crepant resolutions [38]. on
the other hand, in dimensions greater than 3, there are known examples of termi-
nal gorenstein singularities which do not admit crepant resolutions. it is believed,
however, that when the order of  is suciently larger than n, there exist crepant
resolutions for most of the groups.

3gorenstein singularities thus provide local models of singularities on calabi-yau manifolds.

7

the traditional a-d-e classication is relevant in studying the discrete subgroups
of su(2) and resolutions of gorenstein singularities in two complex-dimensions. since
we can choose an invariant hermitian metric on c2, nite subgroups of gl(2, c) and
sl(2, c) are conjugate to nite subgroups of u(2) and su(2), respectively. here,
motivated by the string compactication on manifolds of trivial canonical bundle,
we consider the linear actions of non-trivial discrete subgroups  of su(2) on c2.
such quotient spaces m = c2/, called orbifolds, have xed points which are isolated
gorenstein singularities of the a-d-e type studied by felix klein.

as discussed in the previous sub-section, mckay[2] has observed a 1-1 correspon-
dence between the non-identity conjugacy classes of discrete subgroups of su(2) and
the dynkin diagrams of a-d-e simply-laced lie algebras, and this relation in turn
provides an indirect correspondence between the orbifold singularities of m and the
dynkin diagrams. in fact, there exists a direct geometric correspondence between the
crepant resolutions of m and the dynkin diagrams. classical theorems in algebraic
geometry tell us that there exists a unique crepant resolution ( fm , ) of the gorenstein
singularity of m for all   su(2). furthermore, the exceptional divisor e = 1(0)
is a compact, connected union of irreducible 1c-dimensional curves of genus zero4
such that their intersection matrix is represented by the simply-laced dynkin dia-
gram associated to . more precisely, each node of the diagram corresponds to an
irreducible ip1, and the intersection matrix is negative of the cartan matrix of the
dynkin diagram such that two ip1s intersect transversely at one point if and only
if the two nodes are connected by a line in the diagram. in particular, we see that
the curves have self-intersection numbers 2 which exhibits the singular nature of
the orbifold upon blowing them down. simple consideration shows that these curves
form a basis of the homology group h2( fm, zz) which is seen to coincide with the root
lattice of the associated dynkin diagram by the above identication. now, combined
with the algebraic mckay correspondence, this crepant resolution picture yields a
1-1 correspondence between the basis of h2( fm , zz) and the non-identity conjugacy
classes of . we recapitulate the above discussion in the following diagram:

h2( fm , zz) of the
blow-up



dynkin
diagram of 



non-identity conju-
gacy classes of 

this is arrow ii in figure 1. note incidentally that one can think of irreducible
representations as being dual to conjugacy classes and hence as basis of h 2( fm, zz).
this poses a subtle question of which correspondence is more natural, but we will
ignore such issues in our discussions.

4we will refer to them as ip1 blow-ups.

8

subgroup 
ak cyclic

f (x, y, z)
x2 + y2 + zk+1
x2 + y2z + zk1 dk binary dihedral
x2 + y4 + z3
x2 + y3z + z3
x2 + y5 + z3

e6 binary tetrahedral
e7 binary octahedral
e8 binary icosahedral

order of 
k + 1
4(k  2)
24
48
120

table 2: algebraic surfaces with quotient singularities

it turns out that m is not only analytic but also algebraic; that is, m is isomorphic
to f 1(0), where f : c3  c is one of the polynomials in table 2 depending on .
the orbifolds dened by the zero-loci of the polynomials are commonly referred to as
the singular ale spaces.

3.3

(ii, iii) mckay correspondence and scft

one of the rst relevance of a-d-e series in conformal eld theory appeared in
attempts to classify n = 2 superconformal eld theories (scft) with central charge
c < 3 [20]. furthermore, the exact forms of the a-d-e polynomials in table 2
appeared in a similar attempt to classify certain classes of n = 2 scft in terms
of landau-ginzburg (lg) models. the lg super-potentials were precisely classied
by the polynomials, and the chiral ring and quantum numbers were computed with
applications of singularity theory [23]. the lg theories which realize coset models
would appear again in this paper to link the wzw to geometry.

in this subsection, we review how string theory, when the b-eld is non-vanishing,
resolves the orbifold singularity and how it encodes the information about the coho-
mology of the resolved manifold. subsequently, we will consider the singular limit of
the conformal eld theory on orbifolds by turning o the b-eld, and we will argue
that, in this singular limit, the dsu(2)k wzw fusion ring inherits the information
about the cohomology ring from the smooth theory.

3.3.1 orbifold resolutions and cohomology classes

our discussion here will be general and not restricted to n = 2. many remarkable
features of string theory stem from the fact that we can pull-back much of the
physics on the target space to the world-sheet, and as a result, the resulting world-
sheet conformal eld theory somehow encodes the geometry of the target space. one

9

example is that cft is often5 insensitive to gorenstein singularities and quantum
eects revolve the singularity so that the cft is smooth. more precisely, aspinwall
[33] has shown that non-vanishing of the ns-ns b-eld makes the cft smooth. in
fact, string theory predicts the euler characteristic of the resolved orbifold [30]; the
local form of the statement is

conjecture 3.1 (stringy euler characteristic) let m = cn/ for  
su(n) a nite subgroup. then, there exists a crepant resolution  : fm  m such
that

( fm ) = |{conjugacy classes of }| .

(3.2)

furthermore, the hodge numbers of resolved orbifolds were also predicted by vafa for
cy manifolds realized as hypersurfaces in weighted projective spaces and by zaslow
for kahler manifolds [29]. in dimension three, it has been proved [38, 40] that every
gorenstein singularity admits a crepant resolution6 and that every crepant resolution
satises the conjecture 3.1 and the vafa-zaslow hodge number formulae. for higher
dimensions, there are compelling evidences that the formulae are satised by all
crepant resolutions, when they exist.

as the euler characteristic in mathematics is naturally dened by the hodge
numbers of cohomology classes, motivated by the works of string theorists and the
fact that fm has no odd-dimensional cohomology7, mathematicians have generalized
the classical mckay correspondence [38, 40, 41] to geometry.

the geometric mckay correspondence in 2-dimensions actually identies the co-
homology ring of fm and the representation ring of  not only as vector spaces but as
rings. given a nite subgroup   su(2), the intersection matrix of the irreducible
components of the exceptional divisor of the resolved manifold is given by the neg-
ative of the cartan matrix of the associated dynkin diagram which is specied by
the algebraic mckay correspondence. hence, there exists an equivalence between
the tensor product decompositions of conjugacy classes and intersection pairings of

5not all cft on singular geometry are smooth. for example, there are examples of singular
cfts dened on singular backgrounds, such as in the case of gauge symmetry enhancement of the
type iia string theory compactied on singular k3 where the b-eld vanishes [34]. later, we will
discuss a tensored coset model [36] describing this singular non-linear sigma model and relate it to
the algebraic mckay correspondence.

6in fact, a given gorenstein singularity generally admits many crepant resolutions [48]. string
theory so far has yielded two distinguished desingularizations: the traditional cft resolution with-
out discrete torsion and deformation with discrete torsion [32]. in this paper, we are concerned only
with kahler resolutions without discrete torsion.

7see [40] for a discussion on this point.

10

homology classes. indeed in [42], ito and nakajima prove that for all   su(2) and
for abelian   su(3), the groethendieck (cohomology) ring of fm is isomorphic to
the representation ring of .

the geometric mckay correspondence can thus be stated as

conjecture 3.2 (geometric mckay correspondence) let , m, and fm
be as in conjecture 3.1. then, there exist bijections

basis of h ( fm, zz) 

{irreducible representations of }

basis of h( fm, zz) 

{conjugacy classes of } ,

and there is an identication between the two ring structures.

3.3.2 question of ito and reid and chiral ring
in [40], ito and reid raised the question whether the cohomology ring8 h ( fm ) is
generated by h 2( fm). in this subsection, we rephrase the question in terms of n = 2
scft on m = cn/,   su(n). string theory provides a way9 of computing the
cohomology of the resolved manifold fm . let us briey review the method for the
present case [30]:

the cohomology of fm consists of those elements of h (cn) that survive the pro-
jection under  and new classes arising from the blow-ups. in this case, h 0(cn) is
a set of all constant functions on cn and survives10 the projection, while all other
cohomology classes vanish. hence, all other non-trivial elements of h ( fm ) arise from
the blow-up process; in string theory language, they correspond to the twisted chiral
primary operators, which are not necessarily all marginal. in the n = 2 scft of
non-linear sigma-model on a compact cy manifold, the u(1) spectral ow identi-
es the chiral ring of the scft with the cohomology ring of the manifold, modulo
quantum corrections. for non-compact cases, by considering a topological non-linear
-model, the a-model chiral ring matches the cohomology ring and the blow-ups still
correspond to the twisted sectors.

an n = 2 non-linear sigma model on a cy n-fold x has two topological twists
called the a and b-models, of which the brst non-trivial observables [52] encode

8henceforth, dim m = n is not restricted to 2.
9it is believed that string theory somehow picks out a distinguished resolution of the orbifold,

and the following discussion pertains to such a resolution when it exists.

10this cohomology class should correspond to the trivial representation in the mckay

correspondence.

11

the information about the kahler and complex structures of x, respectively. the
correlation functions of the a-model receive instanton corrections whereas the classical
computations of the b-model give exact quantum answers. the most ecient way of
computing the a-model correlation functions is to map the theory to a b-model on
another manifold y which is a mirror11 of x [49]. then, the classical computation of
the b-model on y yields the full quantum answer for the a-model on x.

in this paper, we are interested in kahler resolutions of the gorenstein singularities
and, hence, in the a-model whose chiral ring is a quantum deformation of the classical
cohomology ring. since all non-trivial elements of the cohomology ring, except for
h 0, arise from the twisted sector or blow-up contributions, we have the following
reformulation of the geometric mckay correspondence which is well-established in
string theory:

proposition 3.1 (string theory mckay correspondence) let  be a
discrete subgroup of su(n) such that the gorenstein singularities of m = cn/ has
a crepant resolution  : fm  m. then, there exists a following bijection between the
cohomology and a-model data:

basis of l

i>0

h i( fm)  {twisted chiral primary operators} ,

(3.3)

or equivalently, by the geometric mckay correspondence,

{conjugacy classes of }  {twisted elements of the chiral ring} . (3.4)

thus, since all h i, i > 0 arise from the twisted chiral primary but not necessar-
ily marginal elds and since the marginal operators correspond to h 2, we can now
reformulate the question of whether h 2 generates h  as follows:

do the marginal twisted chiral primary elds generate the entire twisted
chiral ring?

this kind of string theory resolution of orbifold singularities is arrow iii in figure 1.
in 4, we will see how a conformal eld theory description of the singular limit of
these string theories naturally allows us to link geometry to representation theory. in
this way, we hint why mckay correspondence and the discoveries of [8] are not mere
happy ukes of nature, as it will become clearer as we proceed.

11mirror symmetry has been intensely studied by both mathematicians and physicists for the past
decade, leading to many powerful tools in enumerative geometry. a detailed discussion of mirror
symmetry is beyond the scope of this paper, and we refer the reader to [49] for introductions to the
subject and for references.

12

dynkin diagram of modular invariants level of wzw

an
dn
e6
e7
e8

n  1
2n  4
10
16
28

table 3: the ade-dynkin diagram representations of the modular invariants of the
dsu(2) wzw.

3.4

(i, iv) mckay correspondence and wzw

when we calculate the partition function for the wzw model with its energy mo-
mentum tensor associated to an algebra cgk of level k, it will be of the form12:

z( ) = x
b,bp

(k)
+

b( )mb,bb( )

+ is the set of dominant weights and b is the ane character of cgk. the

where p (k)
matrix m gives the multiplicity of the highest weight modules in the decomposition
of the hilbert space and is usually referred to as the mass matrix. therefore the
problem of classifying the modular invariant partition functions of wzw models is
essentially that of the integrable characters  of ane lie algebras.

in the case of cgk = dsu(2)k, all the modular invariant partition functions are

classied, and they fall into an a-d-e scheme ([7] to [11]). in particular, they are
of the form of sums over modulus-squared of combinations of the weight k weyl-kac
 for dsu(2) (which is in turn expressible in term of jacobi theta functions),
character k
where the level k is correlated with the rank of the ade dynkin diagrams as shown
in table 3 and  are the eigenvalues for the adjacency matrices of the a-d-e dynkin
diagrams. not only are the modular invariants classied by these graphs, but some
of the fusion ring algebra can be reconstructed from the graphs.

though still largely a mystery, the reason for this classication can be somewhat
traced to the so-called fusion rules. in a rational conformal eld theory, the fusion
coecient n


ij is dened by
k

i  j = x

12we henceforth use the notation in [7]


k

13

n 

ij 

k

k

(3.5)

where i,j,k are chiral13 primary elds. this fusion rule provides such vital information
as the number of independent coupling between the elds and the multiplicity of the
conjugate eld 
k appearing in the operator product expansion (ope) of i and
j. in the case of the wzw model with the energy-momentum tensor taking values
in the algebra cgk of level k, we can recall that the primary elds have integrable
representations b in the dominant weights of cgk, and subsequently, (3.5) reduces to

nb
bb b.

b  b = m
bp k

+

indeed now we see the resemblance of (3.5) coming from conformal eld theory to (3.1)
coming from nite representation theory, hinting that there should be some underlying
relation. we can of course invert (3.1) using the properties of nite characters, just
as we can extract n by using the weyl-kac character formula (or by the verlinde
equations).

conformal eld theorists, inspired by the a-d-e classication of the minimal
models, have devised similar methods to treat the fusion coecients. it turns out
that in the simplest cases the fusion rules can be generated entirely from one special
case of b = f , the so-called fundamental representation. this is of course in analogy to
the unique (fundamental) 2-dimensional representation r in mckays paper. in this
case, all the information about the fusion rule is encoded in a matrix [n]ij = n j
f i,
to be treated as the adjacency matrix of a nite graph. conversely we can dene
a commutative algebra to any nite graph, whose adjacency matrix is dened to
reproduce the fusion rules for the so-called graph algebra. it turns out that in the
cases of an, d2n, e6 and e8 dynkin diagrams, the resulting graph algebra has an
subalgebra which reproduces the (extended) fusion algebra of the respective a-d-e
dsu(2) wzw models.

from another point of view, we can study the wzw model by quotienting it by
discrete subgroups of su(2); this is analogous to the twisted sectors in string theory
where for the partition function we sum over all states invariant under the action of
the discrete subgroup. of course in this case we also have an a-d-e-type classication
for the nite groups due to the mckay correspondence, therefore speculations have
risen as to why both the discrete subgroups and the partition functions are classied
by the same graphs [7, 13], which also reproduce the associated ring structures. the
reader may have noticed that this connection is somewhat weaker than the others
hitherto considered, in the sense that the adjacency matrices do not correspond 1-1
to the fusion rules. this subtlety will be addressed in 4 and 5.

13chirality here means left- or right-handedness not chirality in the sense of n = 2 superelds.

14

indeed, the graph algebra construction has been extended to dsu(3) and a similar
classication of the modular invariants have in fact been done and are shown to
correspond to the so-called generalized dynkin diagrams [7, 10, 13]. on the other
hand, the clebsch-gordan coecients of the mckay type for the discrete subgroups of
su(3) have been recently computed in the context of studying d3-branes on orbifold
singularities [1]. it was noted that the adjacency graphs drawn in the two dierent
cases are in some form of correspondence and was conjectured that this relationship
might extend to dsu(n)k model for n other than 2 and 3 as well. it is hoped that this
problem may be attacked by going through the other arrows.

we have now elucidated arrows i and iv in figure 1.

4 the arrow v: -model/lg/wzw duality

we here summarize the link v in figure 1 for ale spaces, as has been established in
[36].

it is well-known that application of catastrophe theory leads to the a-d-e clas-
sication of landau-ginzburg models [23]. it has been subsequently shown that the
renormalization group xed points of these theories actually provide the lagrangian
formulations of n = 2 discrete minimal models [27]. what is even more surprising
and beautiful is gepners another proposal [21] that certain classes of n = 2 non-
linear sigma-models on cy 3-folds are equivalent to tensor products of n = 2 minimal
models with the correct central charges and u(1) projections. witten has success-
fully veried the claim in [28] using a gauged linear-sigma model which interpolates
between calabi-yau compactications and landau-ginzburg orbifolds.

in a similar spirit, ooguri and vafa have considered lg orbifolds14 of the tensor
product of sl(2, ir)/u(1) and su(2)/u(1) kazama-suzuki models15 [61] and have
shown that the resulting theory describes the singular conformal eld theory of the
non-linear sigma-model with the b-eld turned o. in particular, they have shown

14 the universality classes of the lg models are completely specied by their superpotentials w ,
and such a simple characterization leads to very powerful methods of detailed computations [22, 25].
generalizations of these models have many important applications in string theory, and the ope
coecients of topological lg theories with judiciously chosen non-conformal deformations yield the
fusion algebra of rational conformal eld theories. in [59], gepner has shown that the topological

lg models with deformed grassmannian superpotentials yield the fusion algebra of the dsu (n)k

wzw, illustrating that much information about non-supersymmetric rcft can be extracted from
their n = 2 supersymmetric counterparts. gepners superpotential could be viewed as a particular
non-conformal deformation of the superpotential appearing in ooguri and vafas model.

15the sl(2, ir)/u (1) coset model describes the two-dimensional black hole geometry [62], while

the su (2)/u (1) kazama-suzuki model is just the n = 2 minimal model.

15

ale type level of wzw

an
dn
e6
e7
e8

n  1
2n  4
10
16
28

table 4: the wzw subsector of the ooguri-vafa conformal eld theory description
of the singular non-linear sigma-model on ale.

that the singularity on an1 ale space is described by the

sl(2)n+2

u (1)  su (2)n2

u (1)

zzn

(4.1)

orbifold model which contains the dsu(2)n2 wzw theory at level k = n2. the coset
descriptions of the non-linear -models on d and e-type ale spaces also contain
the corresponding wzw theories whose modular invariants are characterized by the
d and e-type resolution graphs of the ale spaces. the full orbifoldized kazama-
suzuki model has fermions as well as an extra feigin-fuchs scalar, but we will be
interested only in the wzw sector of the theory, for this particular sector contains
the relevant information about the discrete group  and the cohomology of gc2/. we
summarize the results in table 4.

we now assert that many amazing a-d-e -related properties of the dsu(2) wzw
conformal eld theory and the mckay correspondence can be interpreted as conse-
quences of the fact that the conformal eld theory description of the singularities
of ale spaces contains the dsu(2) wzw. that is, we argue that the wzw theory
inherits most of the geometric information about the ale spaces.

4.1 fusion algebra, cohomology and representation rings

comparing the table 4 with the table 3, we immediately see that the graphical repre-
sentations of the homology intersections of h2( gc2/, zz) and the modular invariants
of the associated dsu(2) wzw subsector are identical.

let us recall how dsu(2)k wzw model has been historically related to the nite
subgroups of su(2). meanwhile we shall recapitulate some of the key points in 3.4.
the nite subgroups  of su(2) have two innite and one nite series. the alge-
braic mckay correspondence showed that the representation ring of each nite group

16

admits a graphical representation such that the two innite series have the precise
a and d dynkin diagrams while the nite series has the e6,7,8 dynkin diagrams.
then, it was noticed that the same dynkin diagrams classify the modular invariants
of the dsu(2)k wzw model, and this observation was interesting but there was no a
priori connection to the representation theory of nite subgroups. it was later dis-
covered that the dynkin diagrams also encode the dsu(2)k wzw fusion rules or their
extended versions16. independently of the wzw models, the dynkin diagrams are
also well-known to represent the homological intersection numbers on gc2/, which
are encoded the chiral ring structure of the sigma-model when b 6= 0. what ooguri
and vafa have shown us is that when the b-eld is set to zero, the information about
the chiral ring and the discrete subgroup  do not get destroyed but get transmitted
to the orbifoldized kazama-suzuki model which contains the dsu(2)k wzw.

let us demonstrate the fusion/cohomology correspondence for the a-series. let
ci be the basis of h 2( gc2/zzn, zz) and qij their intersection matrix inside the an1
ale space. the dsu(2)k wzw at level k = n  2 has k + 1 primary elds a, a =
0, 1, . . . n  2. then, the fusion of the fundamental eld 1 with other primary elds

1  a = n1a

b b

(4.2)

is precisely given by the intersection matrix, i.e. n1a
matrix whose components are the fusion coecients (n1)ab = n1a
matrices ni, i = 2, . . . , k recursively by the following equations

b = qab. now, let n1 be the
b, and dene k  1

n1n1 = n0 + n2

n1n2 = n1 + n3

n1n3 = n2 + n4   

n1nk1 = nk2 + nk

n1nk = nk1

(4.3)

where n0 = id(k+1)(k+1). that is, multiplication by n1 with nj just lists the neigh-
boring nodes in the ak+1 dynkin diagram with a sequential labeling. identifying the
primary elds i with the matrices ni, it is easy to see that the algebra of ni gener-
ated by the dening equations (4.3) precisely reproduces the fusion algebra of the i
for the dsu(2)k wzw at level k = n  2. this algebra is the aforementioned graph
algebra in conformal eld theory. the graph algebra has been known for many years,
but what we are proposing in this paper is that the graph algebra is a consequence

16see [7] for a more complete discussion of this point.

17

of the fact that the wzw contains the information about the cohomology of the
corresponding ale space.

furthermore, recall from 3.1 that the intersection matrix is identical to the
clebsch-gordan coecients mij, ignoring the ane node. this fact is in accordance
with the proof of ito and nakajima [42] that the cohomology ring of gc2/ is isomor-
phic to the representation ring r() of . at rst sight, it appears that we have
managed to reproduce only a subset of clebsch-gordan coecients of r() from the
cohomology or equivalently the fusion ring. for the a-series, however, we can easily
nd all the clebsch-gordan coecients of the irreps of zzn from the fusion algebra
by simply relabeling the irreps and choosing a dierent self-dual 2-dimensional rep-
resentation. this is because the algebraic mckay correspondence produces an an1
dynkin diagram for any self-dual 2-dimensional representation r and choosing a dif-
ferent r amounts to relabeling the nodes with dierent irreps. the graph algebras
of the dsu(2)k wzw theory for the d and e-series actually lead not to the fusion
algebra of the original theory but to that of the extended theories, and these cases
require further investigations.

string theory is thus telling us that the cohomology ring of gc2/, fusion ring of
dsu(2) wzw and the representation ring of  are all equivalent. we summarize the
noted correspondences and our observations in figure 3.

4.2 quiver varieties and wzw

in this subsection, we suggest how ane lie algebras may be arising so naturally in
the study of two-dimensional quotient spaces.

based on the previous studies of yang-mills instantons on ale spaces as in [45],
nakajima has introduced in [46] the notion of a quiver variety which is roughly a
hyper-kahler moduli space of representations of a quiver associated to a nite graph
(we shall turn to quivers in the next section). there, he presents a beautiful geometric
construction of representations of ane lie algebras. in particular, he shows that
when the graph is of the a-d-e type, the middle cohomology of the quiver variety
is isomorphic to the weight space of integrable highest-weight representations. a
famous example of a quiver variety with this kind of ane lie algebra symmetry is
the moduli space of instantons over ale spaces.

in a separate paper [42], nakajima also shows that the quotient space c2/ admits
a hilbert scheme resolution x which itself can be identied with a quiver variety asso-
ciated with the ane dynkin diagram of . the analysis of [46] thus seems to suggest
that the second cohomology of the resolved space x is isomorphic to the weight space
of some ane lie algebra. we interpret nakajimas work as telling physicists that

18

finite subgroups of su(2)

representation
theory graphs

graphs

mckay

2c /

2c /~

b=0

wzw fusion

rules

modular invariants of

su(2)

k

su(2)

k

wzw scft

sigma-model

figure 3: web of correspondences: each nite group   su (2) gives rise to an
isolated gorenstein singularity as well as to its representation ring r. the cohomology
ring of the resolved manifold is isomorphic to r. the dsu (2)k wzw theory at level
k = # conjugacy classes of   2 has a graphical representation of its modular invari-
ants and its fusion ring. the resulting graph is precisely the non-ane version of mckays
graph for . the wzw model arises as a subsector of the conformal eld theory description
of the quotient singularity when the b-eld has been set to zero. we further note that the
three rings in the picture are equivalent.

the dsu(2)k wzw has every right to be present and carries the geometric information
about the second cohomology. let us demonstrate our thoughts when  = zzn. in
this case, we have dim h 2 = n  1, consisting of n  1 ip1 blow-ups in a linear chain.
we interpret the h 2 basis as furnishing a representation of the dsu(2)k wzw at level
k = n  2, as the basis matches the primary elds of the wzw. this interpretation
agrees with the analysis of ooguri and vafa, but we are not certain how to reproduce
the result directly from nakajimas work.

4.3 t-duality and branes
in [14, 15, 16, 17], the dsu(2)k wzw theory arose in a dierent but equivalent context
of brane dynamics. as shown in [36], the type iia (iib) string theory on an an1
ale space is t -dual to the type iib (iia) theory in the background of n ns5-branes.
the world-sheet description of the near-horizon geometry of the colliding ns5-branes
is in terms of the dsu(2)k wzw, a feigin-fuchs boson, and their superpartners. more

19

precisely, the near-horizon geometry of n ns5-branes is given by the wzw at level
n  2, which is consistent with the analysis of ooguri and vafa.

it was conjectured in [15], and further generalized in [16], that the string theory
on the near horizon geometry of the ns5-branes is dual to the decoupled theory on
the world-volume of the ns5-branes. in this paper, our main concern has been the
singularity structure of the ale spaces, and we have thus restricted ourselves only
to the transverse directions of the ns5-branes in the t -dual picture.

5 ribbons and quivers at the crux of correspon-

dences

there is a common theme in all the elds relevant to our observations so far. in general
we construct a theory and attempt to encode its rules into some matrix, whether it
be fusion matrices, clebsch-gordan coecients, or intersection numbers. then we
associate this matrix with some graph by treating the former as the adjacency matrix
of the latter and study the properties of the original theory by analyzing the graphs17.
therefore there appears to be two steps in our program: rstly, we need to study
the commonalities in the minimal set of axioms in these dierent elds, and secondly,
we need to encode information aorded by these axioms by certain graphical repre-
sentations. it turns out that there has been some work done in both of these steps, the
rst exemplied by the so-called ribbon categories and the second, quiver categories.

5.1 ribbon categories as modular tensor categories

prominent work in the rst step has been done by a. kirillov [53] and we shall adhere
to his notations. we are interested in monoidal additive categories, in particular, we
need the following:

definition 5.1 a ribbon category is an additive category c with the following
additional structures:

 braiding: a bifunctor  : c  c  c along with functorial associativity and

commutativity isomorphisms for objects v and w :

av1,v2,v3 : (v1  v2)  v3  v1  (v2  v3),

rv,w : v  w  w  v ;

17there is interesting work done to formalize to sub-factors and to investigate the graphs generated

[58].

20

 monoidality: a unit object 1  obj c along with isomorphisms 1  v 

v, v  1  v ;

 rigidity of duals: for every object v we have a (left) dual v  and homomor-

phisms

ev : v   v  1,
iv : 1  v  v ;

 balancing: functorial isomorphisms v : v  v , satisfying the compatibil-

ity condition

v w = rw,v rv,w (v  w ).

of course we see that all the relevant rings in figure 1 fall under such a category.
namely, we see that the representation rings of nite groups, chiral rings of non-
linear -models, groethendieck rings of exceptional divisors or fusion rings of wzw,
together with their associated tensor products, are all dierent realizations of a rib-
bon category 18. this fact is perhaps obvious from the point of view of orbifold string
theory, in which the fusion ring naturally satises the representation algebra of the
nite group and the wzw arises as a singular limit of the vanishing b-eld. the
ingredients of each of these rings, respectively the irreps, chiral operators and coho-
mology elements, thus manifest as the objects in c. moreover, the arrows of figure 1,
loosely speaking, become functors among these various representations of c whereby
making our central diagram a (meta)graph associated to c. what this means is that
as far as the ribbon category is concerned, all of these theories discussed so far are
axiomatically identical. hence indeed any underlying correspondences will be natural.

what if we impose further constraints on c?

definition 5.2 we dene c to be semisimple if

 it is dened over some eld ik and all the spaces of homomorphisms are nite-

dimensional vector spaces over ik;

 isomorphism classes of simple objects xi in c are indexed by elements i of some
i  xi (in particular,

set i. this implies involution  : i  i such that x 
0 = 0);

 schurs lemma: hom(xi, xj) = ikij;

18of course they may possess additional structures, e.g., these rings are all nite. we shall later

see how niteness becomes an important constraint when going to step two.

21

 complete finite reducibility:  v  obj c, v = l

nite, i.e., almost all ni  zz+ are zero.

nixi, such that the sum is

ii

clearly we see that in fact our objects, whether they be wzw elds or nite group
irreps, actually live in a semisimple ribbon category. it turns out that semisimplicity
is enough to allow us to dene composition coecients of the clebsch-gordan type:

xi  xj = m n k

ijxk,

which are central to our discussion.

let us introduce one more concept, namely the matrix sij mapping xi  xj
represented graphically by the simple ribbon tangle, i.e., a link of 2 closed directed
cycles of maps from xi and xj respectively into themselves. the remarkable fact is
that imposing that

 sij be invertible and that

 c have only a nite number of simple objects (i.e., the set i introduced above

is nite)

naturally gives rise to modular properties. we dene such semisimple ribbon category
equipped with these two more axioms as a modular tensor category. if we dene
the matrix tij = iji with i being the functorial isomorphism introduced in the
balancing axiom for c, the a key result is the following [53]:

theorem 5.1 in the modular tensor category c, the matrices s and t generate
precisely the modular group sl(2, zz).

kirillov remarks in [53] that it might seem mysterious that modular properties au-
tomatically arise in the study of tensor categories and argues in two ways why this
may be so. firstly, a projective action of sl(2, zz) may be dened for certain objects
in c. this is essentially the construction of moore and seiberg [54] when they have
found new modular invariants for wzw, showing how wzw primary operators are
objects in c. secondly, he points out that geometrically one can associate a topo-
logical quantum eld theory (tqft) to each tensor category, whereby the mapping
class group of the riemann surface associated to the tqft gives rise to the mod-
ular group. if the theories in figure 1 are indeed providing dierent but equivalent
realizations of c, we may be able to trace the origin of the sl(2, zz) action on the
category to the wzw modular invariant partition functions. that is, it seems that
in two dimensions the a-d-e scheme, which also arises in other representations of c,
naturally classies some kind of modular invariants. in a generic realization of the
modular tensor category, it may be dicult to identify such modular invariants, but
they are easily identied as the invariant partition functions in the wzw theories.

22

5.2 quiver categories

we now move onto the second step. axiomatic studies of the encoding procedure
(at least a version thereof) have been done even before mckays result.
in fact,
in 1972, gabriel has noticed that categorical studies of quivers lead to a-d-e-type
classications [55].

definition 5.3 we dene the quiver category l(, ), for a nite connected
graph  with orientation , vertices 0 and edges 1 as follows: the objects in this
category are any collection (v, f ) of spaces v,   0 and mappings fl, l  1. the
morphisms are  : (v, f )  (v , f ) a collection of linear mappings  : v  v 

compatible with f by e(l)fl = f 
l b(l) where b(l) and e(l) are the beginning and the
ending nodes of the directed edge l.

finally we dene decomposability in the usual sense that

definition 5.4 the object (v, f ) is indecomposable i there do not exist ob-
jects (v1, f1), (v2, f2)  l(, ) such that v = v1  v2 and f = f1  f2.

under these premises we have the remarkable result:

theorem 5.2 (gabriel-tits) the graph  in l(, ) coincides with one of
the graphs an, dn, e6,7,8, if and only if there are only nitely many non-isomorphic
indecomposable objects in the quiver category.

by this result, we can argue that the theories, which we have seen to be dierent
representations of the ribbon category c and which all have a-d-e classications
in two dimensions, each must in fact be realizable as a nite quiver category l in
dimension two. conversely, the nite quiver category has representations as these
theories in 2-dimensions. to formalize, we state

proposition 5.1 in two dimensions, nite group representation ring, wzw
fusion ring, gorenstein cohomology ring, and non-linear -model chiral ring, as rep-
resentations of a ribbon category c, can be mapped to a nite quiver category c. in
particular the clebsch-gordan coecients n k
ij of c realize as adjacency matrices of
graphs in l 19.

now l has recently been given a concrete realization by the work of douglas and
moore [5], in the context of investigating string theory on orbifolds. the objects in

19here the graphs are a-d-e dynkin diagrams. for higher dimension we propose that there still

is a mapping, though perhaps not to a nite quiver category.

23

the quiver category have found representations in the resulting n = 2 super yang-
mills theory. the modules v (nodes) manifest themselves as gauge groups arising
from the vector multiplet and the mappings f (edges which in this case are really
bidirectional arrows), as bifundamental matter. this is the arrow from graph theory
to string orbifold theory in the center of figure 1. therefore it is not surprising that
an a-d-e type of result in encoding the physical content of the theory has been
obtained. furthermore, attempts at brane congurations to construct these theories
are well under way (e.g. [6]).

now, what makes a-d-e and two dimensions special? a proof of the theorem
due to tits [55] rests on the fact that the problem can essentially be reduced to a
diophantine inequality in the number of nodes and edges of , of the general type:

x

i

1
pi

 c

where c is some constant and {pi} is a set of integers characterizing the problem at
hand. this inequality has a long history in mathematics [57].
in our context, we
recall that the uniqueness of the ve perfect solids in ir3 (and hence the discrete
subgroups of su(2)) relies essentially on the equation 1/p + 1/q  1/2 having only 5
pairs of integer solutions. moreover we recall that dynkins classication theorem of
the simple lie algebras depended on integer solutions of 1/p + 1/q + 1/r  1.

since gabriels theorem is so restrictive, extensions thereto have been done to relax
certain assumptions (e.g., see [56]). this will hopefully give us give more graphs and
in particular those appearing in nite group, wzw, orbifold theories or non-linear -
models at higher dimensions. a vital step in the proof is that a certain quadratic form
over the q-module of indices on the nodes (eectively the dynkin labels) must be
positive-denite. it was noted that if this condition is relaxed to positive semi-denity,
then  would include the ane cases ba, cd, be as well. indeed we hope that further
relaxations of the condition would admit more graphs, in particular those drawn for
the su(3) subgroups. this inclusion on the one hand would relate quiver graphs to
gorenstein singularities in dimension three due to the link to string orbifolds20 and on
the other hand to the wzw graph algebras by the conjecture of hanany and he [1].
works in this direction are under way. it has been recently suggested that since the
discrete subgroups of su(4,5,6,7) have also been classied [11], graphs for these could
be constructed and possibly be matched to the modular invariants corresponding to
dsu(n) for n = 4, .., 7 respectively. moreover, proposals for unied schemes for the
modular invariants by considering orbifolds by abelian  in su(2,3,..,6) have been
made in [12].

20in this case we get n = 1 super-yang-mills theory in 4 dimension.

24

let us summarize what we have found. we see that the representation ring of
nite groups with its associated (, ), the chiral ring of nonlinear -model with its
(, ), the fusion ring of the wzw model with its (, ) and the groethendieck ring
of resolved gorenstein singularities with it (, ) manifest themselves as dierent
realizations of a semisimple ribbon category c. furthermore, the requirement of
niteness and an invertible s-matrix makes c into a modular tensor category. the
a-d-e schemes in two dimensions, if they arise in one representation of c, might
naturally appear in another. furthermore, the quiver category l has a physical
realization as bifundamentals and gauge groups of susy yang-mills theories. the
mapping of the clebsch-gordan coecients in c to the quivers in l is therefore a
natural origin for the graphical representations of the diverse theories that are objects
in c.

6 conjectures

finite subgroups of su(3)

representation
theory graphs

graphs

mckay

3

c /

~c /3

b=0

wzw fusion

rules

modular invariants of

su(3)

k

su(3)

k

wzw scft
or

some related theory

n=2 sigma-model

figure 4: web of conjectures: recently, the graphs from the representation theory
side were constructed and were noted to resemble those on wzw dsu(3)k side [1].
the solid lines have been suciently well-established while the dotted lines are either
conjectural or ill-dened.

we have seen that there exists a remarkably coherent picture of inter-relations
in two dimensions among many dierent branches of mathematics and physics. the

25

organizing principle appears to be the mathematical theory of quivers and ribbon
category, while the crucial bridge between mathematics and physics is the conformal
eld theory description of the gorenstein singularities provided by the orbifoldized
coset construction.

surprisingly, similar features have been noted in three dimensions. the clebsch-
gordan coecients for the tensor product of irreducible representations for all discrete
subgroups of su(3) were computed in [1, 50], and a possible correspondence was
noted, and conjectured for n  3, between the resulting dynkin-like diagrams and
the graphic representations of the fusion rules and modular invariants of dsu(3)k wzw
models. furthermore, as discussed previously, the geometric mckay correspondence
between the representation ring of the abelian discrete subgroups   su(3) and the
cohomology ring of gc3/ has been proved in [42]. hence, the situation in 3-dimensions
as seen in figure 4 closely resembles that in 2-dimensions.

now, one naturally inquires:

are there graphical representations of the fusion rules and modular in-
variants of the dsu(n)k wzw model or some related theory that contain the
clebsch-gordan coecients for the representations of   su(n)? and,
in turn, are the clebsch-gordan coecients related to the (co)-homological
intersections on the resolved geometry gcn/ that are contained in the chi-
ral ring of the n = 2 -model on cn/ with a non-vanishing b-eld?
most importantly, what do these correspondences tell us about
the two conformal eld theories and their singular limits?

as physicists, we believe that the mckay correspondence and the classication of
certain modular invariants in terms of nite subgroups are consequences of orbifold-
ing and of some underlying quantum equivalence of the associated conformal eld
theories.

we thus believe that a picture similar to that seen in this paper for 2-dimensions
persists in higher dimensions and conjecture that there exists a conformal eld theory
description of the gorenstein singularities in higher dimensions. if such a theory can
be found, then it would explain the observation made in [1] of the resemblance of
the graphical representations of the representation ring of the nite subgroups of
su(3) and the modular invariants of the dsu(3)k wzw. we have checked that the
correspondence, if any, between the nite subgroups of su(3) and the dsu(3)k wzw
theory is not one-to-one. for example, the number of primary elds generically
does not match the number of conjugacy classes of the discrete subgroups. it has
been observed in [1], however, that some of the representation graphs appear to be

26

subgraphs of the graphs encoding the modular invariants. we hope that the present
paper serves as a motivation for nding the correct conformal eld theory description
in three dimensions which would tell us how to project the modular invariant graphs
to retrieve the representation graphs of the nite graphs.

based on the above discussions, we summarize our speculations, relating geometry,
generalizations of the a-d-e classications, representation theory, and string theory
in figure 4.

7 conclusion

inspired by the ubiquity of a-d-e classication and prompted by an observation
of a mysterious relation between nite groups and wzw models, we have proposed
a possible unifying scheme. complex and intricate webs of connections have been
presented, the particulars of which have either been hinted at by collective works
in the past few decades in mathematics and physics or are conjectured to exist by
arguments in this paper. these webs include the mckay correspondences of various
types as special cases and relate such seemingly disparate subjects as nite group
representation theory, graph theory, string orbifold theory and sigma models, as well
as conformal eld theory descriptions of gorenstein singularities. we note that the
integrability of the theories that we are considering may play a role in understanding
the deeper connections.

this paper catalogs many observations which have been put forth in the math-
ematics and physics literature and presents them from a unied perspective. many
existing results and conjectures have been phrased under a new light. we can sum-
marize the contents of this paper as follows:

1. in two dimensions, all of the correspondences mysteriously fall into an a-d-e
type. we have provided, via figure 1, a possible setting how these mysteries
might arise naturally. moreover, we have pointed out how axiomatic works done
by category theorists may demystify some of these links. namely, we have noted
that the relevant rings of the theories can be mapped to the quiver category.

2. we have also discussed the possible role played by the modular tensor category
in our picture, in which the modular invariants arise very naturally. together
with the study of the quiver category and quiver variety, the ribbon category
seems to provide the reasons for the emergence of ane lie algebra symmetry
and the a-d-e classication of the modular invariants.

27

3. we propose the validity of our program to higher dimensions, where the pic-
ture is far less clear since there are no a-d-e schemes, though some hints of
generalized graphs have appeared.

4. there are three standing conjectures:

 we propose that there exists a conformal eld theory description of the

gorenstein singularities in dimensions greater than two.

 as noted in [1], we conjecture that the modular invariants and the fusion
rings of the dsu(n), n > 2 wzw, or their generalizations, may be related
to the discrete subgroups of the su(n).

 then, there is the mathematicians conjecture that there exits a mckay
correspondence between the cohomology ring h ( gc n/, zz) and the repre-
sentation ring of , for nite subgroup   su(n).

we have combined these conjectures into a web so that proving one of them
would help proving the others.

we hope that figure 1 essentially commutes and that the standing conjectures repre-
sented by certain arrows therewithin may be solved by investigating the other arrows.
in this way, physics may provide us with a possible method of attack and explanation
for mckays correspondence and many other related issues, and likewise mathemat-
ical structures may help to clarify and rigorize some observations made from string
theory.

it is the purpose of this writing to inform the physics and mathematics community
of a possibly new direction of research which could harmonize ostensibly dierent and
diverse branches of mathematics and physics into a unied picture.

acknowledgments

we would like to express our sincere gratitude to a. hanany and y.s. song for
reviewing our paper, b. feng for valuable discussions, and g. tian for his patience
and explaining the mathematical subtleties of ale spaces. we are especially grateful
to c. vafa for helpful comments and for correcting our mistake on the preliminary
version of the paper.

y.h.h. would like to express his thanks to i. savonije, m. spradlin and the
schmidts and above all ad catharinae sanctae alexandria et ad maiorem dei glo-
riam. j.s.s. would like to thank a.m.w. for inspiration. and indeed we are eternally
indebted to our parents for their ever-loving support.

28

references

[1] a. hanany and y.h. he, non-abelian finite gauge theories. hep-th/9811183.

[2] j. mckay, graphs, singularities, and nite groups. proc. symp. pure. math. 37

(1980) 183.
r., steinberg, subgroups of su(2) and dynkin graphs. ucla preprints, 1981.

[3] f. klein, vorlesungen uber das ikosaeder und die auosung der gleichungen

vom funften grade, teubner, leipzig, 1884.

[4] m. douglas and b. greene, metrics on d-brane orbifolds. hep-th/9707214.

m. douglas, b. greene, and d. morrison, orbifold resolution by d-branes. hep-
th/9704151.
s. kachru and e. silverstein, 4d conformal field theories and strings on orb-
ifolds. hep-th/9802183.
a. lawrence, n. nekrasov and c. vafa, on conformal field theories in four
dimensions. hep-th/9803015.
m. bershadsky, z. kakushadze, and c. vafa, string expansion as large n ex-
pansion of gauge theories. hep-th/9803076.
a. hanany and a. zaaroni,on the realization of chiral four-dimensional
gauge theories using branes. hep-th/9801134.
a. hanany and a. uranga, brane boxes and branes on singularities. hep-
th/9805139.
r. leigh and m. rozali, brane boxes, anomalies, bending and tadpoles. hep-
th/9807082.

[5] m. douglas and g. moore, d-branes, quivers, and ale instantons. hep-

th/9603167.

[6] a. kapustin, dn quivers from branes. hep-th/9806238.

[7] p. di francesco, p. mathieu, d. senechal, conformal field theory. springer-

verlag, ny 1997.
s. ketov, conformal field theory. world scientic, singapore (1994).

[8] a. cappelli, c. itzykson, and j.-b. zuber, commun. math. phys. 113, 1 (1987).

[9] d. gepner and e. witten, string theory on group manifold. nuc. phys. b278,

493 (1986).

29

d. bernard and j. thierry-mieg, bosonic kac-moody string theories. phys.
lett. 185b, 65 (1987).

[10] t. gannon, the classication of su(m)k automorphism invariants. hep-

th/9408119.

[11] t. gannon, the cappelli-itzykson-zuber a-d-e classication.

math.qa/9902064.

[12] m. abolhassani and f. ardalan, a unied scheme for modular invariant par-

tition functions of wzw models, hep-th/9306072.

[13] p. di francesco and j.-b. zuber, su(n) lattice integrable models associated

with graphs. nuclear physics b, 338, 1990, pp602-646.
l. begin, p. mathieu and m. walton, dsu(3)k fusion coecients. mod. phys.
lett. a7, 3255 (1992).

[14] c. callan, jr., j. harvey, and a. strominger, world sheet approach to heterotic

instantons and solitons. nucl. phys. b359 (1991) 611.

[15] d.-e. diaconescu and n. seiberg, the coulomb branch of (4,4) supersymmetric

field theories in 2 dimensions. hep-th/9707158.

[16] d.-e. diaconescu and j. gomis, neveu-schwarz five-branes at orbifold singu-

larities and holography. hep-th/9810132.

[17] o. aharony, m. berkooz, d kutasov and n. seiberg, linear dilatons, ns5-branes

and holography. hep-th/9808149.

[18] i. klebanov, from threebranes to large n gauge theories. hep-th/9901018.

[19] e. witten, chern-simons gauge theory as a string theory. hep-th/9207094.

[20] w. boucher, d. friedan, and a. kent, phys. lett. b172 (1986) 316.

p. di vecchi, petersen, m. yu, and h.b. zheng, phys. lett. b174 (1986) 280.
a.b. zamolodchikov and v.a. fateev, zh. eksp. theor. fiz 90 (1986) 1553.

[21] d. gepner, exactly solvable string compactications on manifolds of su(n)

holonomy. phys. lett. b199 (1987) 380.
 space-time supersymmetry in compactied string theory and superconfor-
mal models. nucl. phys. b296 (1988) 757.

30

[22] b.r. greene, c. vafa, and n.p. warner, calabi-yau manifolds and renormal-

ization group flows. nucl. phys. b324 (1989) 371.
w. lerche, c. vafa, and n.p. warner, chiral rings in n = 2 superconformal
theories. nucl. phys. b324 (1989) 427.

[23] c. vafa and n.p. warner, catastrophes and the classication of conformal the-

ories. phys. lett. b218 (1989) 51.

[24] t. eguchi and s.k. yang, n = 2 superconformal models as topological field

theories. mod. phys. lett. a5 (1990) 1693.

[25] k. intrilligator and c. vafa, landau-ginzburg orbifolds. nucl. phys. b339 (1990)

95.
c. vafa, topological landau-ginzburg models. mod. phys. lett. a6 (1991) 337.

[26] e. martinec, algebraic geometry and eective lagrangians. phys. lett. b217

(1989) 413.

[27] e. witten, on the landau-ginzburg description of n = 2 minimal models. int.

j. mod. phys. a9 (1994) 4783.

[28] e. witten, phases of n = 2 theories in two-dimensions. nucl. phys. b403

(1993) 159.

[29] c. vafa, string vacua and orbifoldized lg models. mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989)

1169.
e. zaslow, topological orbifold-models and quantum cohomology rings. comm.
math. phys. 156 (1993) 301. hep-th/9211119.

[30] l. dixon, j. harvey, c. vafa, and e. witten, strings on orbifolds i, ii. nucl.

phys. b261 (1985) 678, nucl. phys. b274 (1986) 285.

[31] r. dijkgraaf, c. vafa, e. verlinde, and h. verlinde, the operator algebra of

orbifold models. comm. math. phys. 123 (1989) 485.

[32] c. vafa, modular invariance and discrete torsion on orbifolds. nucl. phys.

b273 (1986) 592.

[33] p. aspinwall, resolutions of orbifold singularities in string theory, in mirror
symmetry ii ed. g. greene and s.-t. yau, ams and international press (1997).

[34] p. aspinwall, enhanced gauge symmetries and k3 surfaces. phys. lett. b357

(1995) 329. hep-th/9507012.

31

[35] d. anselmi, m. billo, p. fre, and a. zaaroni, ale manifolds and conformal

field theories. int. j. mod. phys. a9 (1994) 3007, hep-th/9304135.

[36] h. ooguri and c. vafa, two-dimensional black hole and singularities of cy

manifolds. nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 55.

[37] g. gonzales-sprinberg and j. verdier, construction geometrique de la corre-

spondence de mckay. ann. sci. ecole norm. sup. 16 (1983), 409-449.

[38] y. ito, crepant resolutions of trihedral singularities, proc. japan. acad. 70

(1994) 131.
 crepant resolution of trihedral singularities and the orbifold euler character-
istic. int. j. math. 6 (1995) 33.
 gorenstein quotient singularities of monomial type in dimension three. j.
math. sci. univ. tokyo 2 (1995) 419, alg-geom/9406001.
s.s. roan, minimal resolutions of gorenstein orbifolds in dimension three. topol-
ogy 35 (1996) 489.

[39] s.s. roan, orbifold euler characteristic, in mirror symmetry ii ed. g. greene

and s.-t. yau, ams and international press (1997).

[40] y. ito and m. reid, the mckay correspondence for finite subgroups of

sl(3, c). alg-geom/9411010.
m. reid, mckay correspondence. alg-geom/9702016.

[41] v. batyrev and d. dais, strong mckay correspondence, string-theoretic hodge

numbers and mirror symmetry. alg-geom/9410001.

[42] y. ito and h. nakajima, mckay correspondence and hilbert schemes in dimen-

sion three. alg-geom/9803120.

[43] a. sardo-inrri, resolutions of orbifold singularities and the transportation

problem on the mckay quiver. alg-geom/9610005.

[44] j.-l. brylinski, a correspondence dual to mckays. alg-geom/9612003.

[45] p. kronheimer and h. nakajima, yang-mills instantons on ale gravitational

instantons. math. ann. 288 (1990) 263.

[46] h. nakajima, instantons on ale spaces, quiver varieties, and kac-moody al-

gebra. duke math. j. 76 (1994) 365.

32

[47] h. nakajima, gauge theory on resolution of simple singularities and simple lie

algebras. int. math. res. notices (1994) 61.

[48] d. joyce, on the topology of desingularizations of calabi-yau orbifolds. alg-

geom/9806146.

[49] mirror symmetry i, ii. ed. b. greene and s.-t. yau, ams and international

press (1997).

[50] t. muto, d-branes on three-dimensional nonabelian orbifolds. hep-th/9811258.

[51] b. greene, c. lazaroiu and m. raugas, d-branes on nonabelian threefold quo-

tient singularities. hep-th/9811201.

[52] e. witten, topological quantum field theory. comm. math. phys. 117 (1988)

353.
 topological sigma model. comm. math. phys. 118 (1988) 411.  mirror
manifolds and topological field theory. hep-th/9112056.

[53] a. kirillov, on inner product

in modular

tensor categories

i & ii,

math.qa/9508017 and q-alg/9611008.

[54] g. moore and n. seiberg, naturality in conformal field theory, nuc. phy. b313

(1988) p16-40.

[55] p. gabriel, unzerlegbare darstellugen i. manuscripta math. 6 (1972) 71-103.

i. n. bernstein, i. m. gelfand, v. a. ponomarev, coxeter functors and gabriels
theorem. russian math. surveys, 28, (1973) ii.

[56] l. a. nazarova and a. v.roiter, representations of partially ordered sets in

investigations in the theory of representations. izdat. nauka, leningrad 1972.

[57] j. humphereys,

introduction to lie algebras and representation theory.

springer-verlag, ny 1972.

[58] j. bockenhauser and d. evans, modular invariants, graphs and -induction for

nets and subfactors i, ii, iii. hep-th/9801171, 9805023, 9812110.

[59] d. gepner, fusion rings and geometry. comm. math. phys. 141 (1991) 381.

[60] c. vafa, topological mirrors and quantum rings in mirror symmetry i. ed. b.

greene and s.-t. yau, ams and international press (1997).

33

[61] y. kazama and h. suzuki, new n = 2 superconformal field theories and

superstring compactication. nucl. phys. b321 (1989) 232.

[62] e. witten, on string theory and black holes. phys. rev. d44 (1991) 159.

34

