a candidate for a background independent formulation of m theory

lee smolin

center for gravitational physics and geometry

department of physics

the pennsylvania state university
university park, pa, usa 16802

march 10, 1999, revised dec 26,1999

abstract

a class of background independent membrane eld theories are studied, and several properties
are discovered which suggest that they may play a role in a background independent form of m
theory. the bulk kinematics of these theories are described in terms of the conformal blocks of an
algebra gq on all oriented, nite genus, two-surfaces. the bulk dynamics is described in terms of
causal histories in which time evolution is specied by giving amplitudes to certain local changes
of the states. holographic observables are dened which live in nite dimensional states spaces
associated with boundaries in spacetime. we show here that the natural observables in these
boundary state spaces are, when gq is chosen to be spin(d) or a supersymmetric extension of it,
generalizations of matrix model coordinates in d dimensions. in certain cases the bulk dynamics
can be chosen so the matrix model dynamics is recoverd for the boundary observables. the bosonic
and supersymmetric cases in d = 3 and d = 9 are studied, and it is shown that the latter is, in
a certain limit, related to the matrix model formulation of m theory. this correspondence gives
rise to a conjecture concerning a background independent form of m theory in terms of which
excitations of the background independent membrane eld theory that correspond to strings and
d0 branes are identied.

0
0
0
2

 

n
a
j
 

0
1

 
 

4
v
6
6
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

 smolin@phys.psu.edu

1

1

introduction

in this paper a proposal is made for a background independent formulation of m theory[1]. this is
based on a particular case of a general formulation for a background independent membrane eld
theory previously proposed with markopoulou[2]. that work was, in turn, a natural extension of
the spin network formalism that has been shown to characterize the exact gauge and dieomor-
phism invariant states of a large class of theories of quantum gravity[3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], including
supergravity[9, 10].

the spin network states are background independent, in the sense that they make no reference to
any background metric or elds, because they result from an exact, non-perturbative quantization
of the commutation relations of the gravitational elds. however, as they are constructed through
a canonical quantization procedure, they do depend on the background topological and dierential
structure. as s duality[1] and mirror manifolds[11] in string theory indicates the presence of
symmetries mixing manifolds with dierent topology, this dependence must also be eliminated if
one wants to construct a successful background independent form of m theory. in [2] it was shown
that this can be accomplished simply by thickening the graphs which underlie the spin network
states so that they become membranes. the labels on the spin networks are then replaced by
the conformal blocks vg of a chiral theory based on a quantum group or supergroup, gq for a
two-manifold, sg of genus g. the full space of states is then the conformal blocks of all compact
oriented two-surfaces,

vg.

h = xg

(1)

in quantum general relativity[15, 16], in 3 + 1 the level is proportional to the inverse cosmological
constant,

k =

6
g2

(2)

as a consequence, the theory reduces to the spin network formalism in the limit that the cosmo-
logical constant, , vanishes

because the graphs of the spin network formalism have been thickened to two-surfaces, no em-
bedding manifold need be assumed because there are states in h that carry appropriate information
to construct both a manifold (of any dimension and topology) and the embedding of a two surface
in it[2]. in fact, as we shall discuss below, what is naturally constructed are pseudomanifolds, whose
defects may be the background independent analogues of branes[20].

in [18, 19] it was suggested that because of its resemblance to a background independent mem-
brane theory, and the fact that such a theory may have a set of dynamically determined continuum
limits which are classical spacetimes of dierent dimension and topology, an appropriately chosen
member of this class of theories might be a background independent form of m theory. in [18]
it was also shown that a theory of this kind can incorporate sl(2, z) string duality symmetry,
leading to a non-perturbative description of string network states.
in this paper a new connec-
tion between the background independent membrane theories described in [2] and string theory is
reported, which leads to a proposal for a background independent form of m theory.

this new connection is the discovery of a certain class of observables, which are related to the
coordinates of matrix model descriptions of membrane theory. as we will see, the bosonic matrix
model in d dimensions can be recovered when gq is chosen to be the quantum deformation of
spin(d) and a certain choice of the dynamics is made. in certain cases this can be extended to

2

a supersymmetric matrix model in d dimensions, by exending gq to a superalgebra which has
a spin(d) subalgebra.
in the 9 dimensional case relevant for the dewit-hoppe-nicolai-banks-
fischler-shenker-susskind [21, 22] matrix model the appropriate superalgebra is, as we will discuss,
su (16|1).

the natural physical interpretation of these observables which is suggested here is that they
are the background independent versions of the coordinates of d0 branes. this is because we are
able to argue that if the theory, in the form given below, has a semiclassical limit which is at
11 dimensional spacetime, those observables will indeed give the positions in the 9 dimensional
transverse space, dened by the light cone coordinates of a physical observer, of zero-dimensional
objects on which strings end.

to see how this description emerges, it is necessary to understand the way in which the holo-
graphic principle is expressed in the background indepenedent theories described in [2]. in fact, the
holographic principle, in a cosmological form discussed in [2, 24, 70], is a major part of the proposal
made in [2]. as this theory has neither a background spacetime nor asymptotic or external regions,
it is naturally cosmological. there is no place outside of the dynamical system for the observer
to live. as was discussed in [23], in such a case all the observables of the quantum theory will be
associated with closed surfaces that are dynamically embedded in the spacetime. these observables
describe what an observer living on the surface could measure about the physics on its interior.
these surfaces will play a major role in this paper, they will be referred to as holographic surfaces.
as there is no asymptotic region, the areas of these surfaces will be generally nite1. by the
bekenstein bound[25], the state spaces on which these boundary observables act must have nite
dimension, proportional to the exponential of of the area, in planck units. in [16, 26, 27] it was
shown that, at least in the cases of quantum general relativity and supergravity, with a non-zero
cosmological constant, this condition is met2.

in these theories the boundary state spaces are naturally spaces of intertwiners (or conformal
blocks) for gq on punctured surfaces, with the punctures representing points where excitations of
the quantum geometry in the interior may end. it is these punctures which are identied with d0
branes. to explain why, it is necessary to understood how dynamics is formulated in this theory.

the main idea is that the dynamics is given in terms of a causal histories framework, rst
proposed for quantum gravity in [30]. in this kind of theory, a history, m, is constructed from
a given initial state by a series of local evolution moves. these resemble the bubble evolution in
general relativity and as a result, these histories have a natural analogue of the causal structure of
general relativity. this makes it possible to identify the analogues of light cones, horizons, spacelike
surfaces and many-ngered time precisely at the quantum level, prior to any continuum limit being
taken3.

the dynamics is specied by the choice of local moves and the amplitudes that are assigned to
them. thus, in this kind of theory a new kind of fusion between quantum theory and spacetime is
achieved in which states are identied with quantum geometries that represent spacelike surfaces,
and histories are both sequences of states in a hilbert space and discrete analogues of the causal

1more specically, the operators that measure the areas of these surfaces will have nite (and generally discrete)

spectra.

2for pure quantum general relativity, the constant of proportionality is not equal exactly to 1/4. this apparently

indicates that there is a nite multiplicative renormalization of newtons constant[16].

3indeed, these structures provide the framework for formulating the existence of one or more classical limits as a

dynamical problem, analogous in some respects to non-equilibrium critical phenomena[31, 20, 32, 34].

3

structures of classical spacetimes.

the connection with string theory arises because small perturbations of states are parameterized
by closed loops drawn on the two surfaces sg [35]. the small perturbations of a history m are then
in one to one correspondence with the embeddings of certain time like combinatorial two dimensional
surfaces in m. as argued in [35], if the theory has a classical limit then the amplitudes for these
perturbations must reproduce the actions for excitations of string worldsheets.

when such an excitation takes place within a surface associated with a holographic observer,
it can end on one of that surfaces punctures. thus, the punctures are structures on which strings
end, which is to say they are d0 branes. the question is then to discover the observables that
describe the congurations of the d0 branes, and to deduce their eective dynamics.

the holographic principle, in the background independent form proposed in [2, 70], plays a
central role in achieving this. there is a natural correspondence between bulk and boundary
states, which is suggested by topological quantum eld theory[36], and conrmed in the case of
quantum general relativity[16, 26] and supergravity[27], with a cosmological constant. this is that
the hamiltonian constraint, which codes the spacetime dieomorphism invariance, is satised by
the application of recoupling identities of quantum groups on the quantum states of the theory.
in a histories, rather than a canonical theory, this must be imposed in a way which is consistent
with causality, so that information is not propagated from the bulk to the boundary faster than
the causal structure of the quantum spacetimes allowed. below, in section 3, we will see how to do
this4.

once the map between bulk and boundary states is understood, the next step is identifying
the holographic observables that describe the boundary states, and giving them a physical inter-
pretation. a clue for how to do this comes from penroses original work on what he called the
spin-geometry theorem[37]. this theorem associates to generic, large, spin networks with n free
ends an assignment of n points on an s2. we show here that a similar result is true in any di-
mension, and that this implies that the observables which describe the punctures/d0 branes in the
present theory are closely related to those of a matrix model. in the case that gq is spin(d) or an
appropriate supersymmetric extension of it we nd that the observables associated with a surface
with n punctures then corresponds to a matrix model in d dimensions.

this paper is divided into 11 sections. the next is devoted to an exposition of background
independent membrane eld theory[2, 18] in the causal histories formulation of markopoulou[30].
enough detail is given, and the basic concepts are stressed, so that no prior knowledge of loop
quantum gravity need be assumed.

section 3 is then devoted to certain conceptual and technical points regarding the treatment
of gauge and dieomorphism invariance in this class of theories. this is necessary preparation
for the main work of the paper, which is the uncovering of the relationship to string theory. we
begin this in section 4 where we review the results of [35] that show that small perturbations of
the states are described by loops embedded in the quantum geometry so that small perturbations
of causal histories are associated with embeddings of combinatorial time like two surfaces in the
histories. this leads us in section 5 to the identication of punctures on the holographic surfaces
where strings may end as d0 branes.

in section 6 we identify observables that code the dynamics of these punctures and show that
they are closely related to those of the matrix model. we then show that in d = 3 there is a

4as discussed in [24], this may resolve several puzzles concerning the holographic hypothesis.

4

surprising relationship between the observables that describe the d0 branes and penroses original
spin network formalism [37]. this suggests a certain simplication of the operators that represent
the d0 brane dynamics.

finally, in section 7-10 we show that the bulk dynamics may be chosen so that the dynamics of
the punctures which is induced by the bulk-to-boundary map reduces, in the appropriate limits, that
given by the matrix models. the bosonic and supersymmetric matrix models in d = 3 are studied
in sections 7 and 8; in 9 and 10 we study their counterparts in d = 9. the main results of the paper
are then summarized in the concluding section. these are the basis of three conjectures we then
state, which concern the form of the background independent form of m theory. we also discuss
there several implications of the conjecture, which should be explored in future work. the most
important of these is that there are consequences for the ads/cf t conjecture[38, 39, 40]. if both
that and the present conjecture are true, than we can deduce the exact form of the hilbert spaces
and operator algebras for the boundary conformal eld theories in ads spacetimes. similarly, there
are consequences for counting states of black holes.

2 background independent membrane eld theory

in this section we summarize the general structure dened in [2], and the motivation coming from
results in both string theory and in quantum general relativity and supergravity. for more details
the reader is referred to [2, 18, 30].

2.1 the kinematics of background independent membranes

we would like to describe a class of membrane theories in which the embedding space has no prior
existence, but is instead coded completely in the degrees of freedom that live on the two surfaces.
as the background is not assumed to exist a priori, there are no embedding coordinates. instead,
the kinematical structure is given by the choice of a quantum group or supergroup gq where q will
be assumed to be taken at a root of unity. gq has a nite list of nite dimensional representations,
which will be labeled j, k, l . . ..

using standard constructions from conformal eld theory[41, 42, 43, 44] or representation
theory[45] there is associated to each oriented closed two-surface s of genus g a nite dimen-
sional space v g, which is called the space of conformal blocks of wzw theory based on gq. the
surface may also be punctured, which means that there are a set of n marked points, labeled by
a set of representations, {j} of gq. the same construction yields a nite dimensional vector space
v g,n
{j} . when the manifold is s2, v s 2

{j} is called the space of intertwiners.

these spaces may be constructed in the natural way described in [41, 43, 44] from v s 2

jkl, which is
called the trinion. an arbitrary surface is constructed by joining three punctured spheres at labeled
circles, taking the direct product of the v s 2
jkl over all the three-punctured spheres and summing over
labels. every way of decomposing s in terms of trinions yields a basis of v s , where the basis
elements are labeled by the circles and intertwiners.

the full state space of the theory is dened to be

v g

h =mg

5

(3)

l

j

k

figure 1: a trinion which represents the intertwiner of three representations of gq.

as this is the fundamental assumption of this theory, let us take a moment to stress it. it means
that the fundamental things that the world is composed of are only systems of relations, involving
nothing but the multiplication and decomposition of representations of some fundamental algebra
gq. at the fundamental level, spacetime is nothing but a coarse grained description of processes
in which these systems of relations evolve. there is no background geometry or topology, nor are
there elds, particles, strings or branes that move in them. these must emerge from the kinematics
and dynamics of the states in h.

2.2 how quantum geometry is coded into conformal blocks

let us begin with geometry. it may seem that this arena is too poor to describe quantum geometry.
however, this is not the case. there are in fact bases of states in h, whose elements may be associ-
ated in an a natural way with quantum geometries of d dimensions, for any d. the construction for
d = 3 is particularly simple[2], i discuss it in detail and then briey mention describe the extension
to larger dimension5.

d = 3 pseudomanifolds from conformal blocks

we consider, for large g, a decomposition of the genus g surface, s g into a number, p , of 4-
punctured spheres. we label these bi
d, with i = 1, . . . , p . the decomposition is achieved by
cutting sg along a number, n , of circles which we will label c, with  = 1, . . . , n . we can
represent the decomposition by a 4-valent framed graph , with p nodes representing the bi
d and
n edges representing the circles c (see figure (2).). an associated basis of states in v g is given
by assigning a representation ja of gq to each circle c (or edge of ) and assigning a basis in the
space of 4 intertwiners i to each bi
g,d, (or node of ). these basis elements may then be labeled
|, ja, i >. given such a choice of basis for each g yields a basis for all of h.

now to each element, |, ja, i >, of this basis we may associate a dual 3 dimensional pseudo-
manifold e|, ja, i]. dual to each node of  we construct a 3 simplex, with 2 dimensional faces
that correspond to the 4 edges incident on it. tying the faces together, following the framing

5this construction is relevant for the connection to loop quantum gravity, but it is not used in the derivation of

the matrix model and may be skipped by readers interested mainly in that result.

6

figure 2: a simple example of two surface, and its dual graph .

figure 3: a simple example of two surface, divided into four punctured spheres. the dual 3-
manifold is the boundary of the four-simplex.

that follows from the orientation on the surfaces, one constructs a simplicial pseudomanifold of 3
dimensions, whose faces are labeled by the representations ja and whose simplices are labeled by
intertwiners. (for a simple example, see (3).)

the pseudomanifold e|, ja, i] inherits the labeling from the state |, ja, i >. the faces are
labeled by the representations j and the simplices by the intertwiners i. we may give these a
geometrical interpretation, which is motivated by the results of quantum general relativity in 3 + 1
dimensions[7, 5, 6, 50]. to each representation j we may assign a quanta of d  1 dimensional
area, given by

a[j] = ld1

p lanckqc[j]

(4)

where c[j] is the quadratic casimir of gq. this matches the result of the computation of the
area operator in quantum general relativity[5, 6] and supergravity[10] in 3 + 1 dimensions. in those
cases the operator for the volume of a simplex was also computed and found to be given by a nite,
positive hermitian operator v ol on v s 2

j1,j2,j3,j4.

for a general gq we must make choices of area and volume operators, the rst of which are
functions of the representations, j the second of which are positive operators on the v s 2
j1,j2,j3,j4.
while these may be suggested by the results from canonical quantum gravity, there is no need

7

they be chosen so, and they may be chosen for a general gq. once choices of the area and volume
operators are made, the labeled pseudomanifold e|, ja, i] has a geometrical interpretation in
terms of volumes and areas.

the statement that the states in h are naturally associated with pseudomanifolds means that
the simplicial manifold dual to a state |, ja, i > may or may not be consistent with the application
of the manifold conditions on the simplices of dimension 0 and 1. this means that a general state
|, ja, i > can be associated with a 3 dimensional geometry, but one with defects of dimensions0
and 1. in some cases these defects resemble orientifolds, in that they may arise from a combinatorial
manifold by identication of lower dimensional simplices. when considered in isolation, these
identied surfaces will behave as defects, inheriting dynamics from the fundamental dynamics on
h. these must be considered to be an inherent part of the theory; i will argue in the conclusion
that at least in some cases the higher dimensional analogues of these may give rise to the d-branes.
we will also need to be able to talk about quantum geometries with boundaries. these are
described by states that live in the spaces of conformal blocks associated with punctured surfaces,
which we denoted v g,m
ja . we may also consider the space of all states with the same boundary,
given by6

hm

ja = mg

v g,m
ja

.

(5)

the d = 4 case

the key point in the above construction was to associate a 3-simplex as a region r of a two-
surface , with its connections to its 4 neighbors across its 4 triangles associated to a set of labeled
punctures, ci which, when cut, separate r from . for the case d = 3 it is natural to take r to
have genus 0. the reason for this choice is that each puncture can be associated to a region of r,
each of which bounds all the others. the meaning of this is that the dual skeleton of the surface
of the three simplex can be drawn on r in such a way that its nodes are at the punctures and the
edges that connect each pair of nodes are represented as lines that join the punctures. we may note
that these lines may be themselves labeled with representations to give an intertwiner or conformal
block on the four-punctured sphere.

when we go up to d = 4 we want to represent 4simplices by regions r of a two surface, with 5
punctures, each labeling a 3-simplex that is shared between this four simplex and its neighbors. r
should have thus have the topology of a 5 punctured surface, with the property that each puncture
can be surrounded by a region of r, such that each of the ve regions shares a border with each of
the other four. the minimal genus for r is then 1 because the torus is the lowest genus on which
ve colors can be required for coloring a map.

we may now repeat the above construction. we need operators to represent 3-area and 4-
volume. the former must be a positive function of the representation labels, j, while the latter
must be a positive operator in v g=1
j1,....,j5 symmetric in all labels, for each set j1, . . . , j5. given v we
then label a basis of states in each v g=1
j1,....,j5 by a set of eigenvalues vi. (if these are degenerate they
can be supplemented by other geometric operators.).

for gq related to so(4) or a supersymmetric extension of it, these operators can be derived
from a canonical quantization of 4 + 1 dimensional general relativity or supergravity. this has not

6sometimes the superscript m will be dropped when it is clear from the context.

8

yet been done, but there is no reason it should not exist. in any case, all that is required for the
present construction is a choice of of area and volume operators for the group gq

we now proceed to associate labeled 4-pseudomanifolds to conformal blocks of high genus
surfaces by following the construction for d = 3. given a very large genus surface, s g with g
chosen so it can be decomposed into a number p , of 5-punctured toruss, which are called t i, with
i = 1, . . . , p . we x such a decomposition, which is achieved by cutting sg along a number, n ,
of circles which we will label c, with  = 1, . . . , n . the sets of eigenvalues (vi, a), then label a
basis of states |(vi, a) >, in v g. to each such state we associate a labeled pseudomanifold by the
following construction. we construct it from p 4-simplices, si, each corresponding to a t i. each
is attached to 5 others along the circles c. this gives us a 4 dimensional pseudomanifold which
is associated to the decomposition (and hence the choice of basis in v g). to each 4-simplex we
associate the four volume given by the eigenvalue vi and to each 3-simplex the three area given by
the eigenvalue a. the result is a 4 dimensional pseudomanifold, each of whose 3 and 4 dimensional
simplices has been assigned a volume.

the construction works in reverse as well, given a 4 dimensional pseudomanifold, whose n
3-simplices and p 4-simplices are labeled by eigenvalues in the spectra of the 3-area and 4-volume
operators, we can construct a two surface s g for some g, by gluing together p 5-punctured tori.
the correspondence between labels on the pseudomanifolds and states in the spaces of intertwiners
on the 5-punctured tori yields a state in v g.

2.3 the general case

to generalize the construction to general d we must choose the genus of the regions r such that it
can be divided into d + 1 regions, each of which shares a boundary with each of the others. these
will have at least genus d  3. each of the d + 1 regions is then punctured and the punctures
on neighboring regions are joined. to complete the construction one needs to nd the appropri-
ate volume and area operators, presumably from a canonical quantization of supergravity in the
appropriate dimension.

finally, we may note that dierent bases are associated with dierent geometrical decompo-
sitions of h, of dierent dimension d. this means that the dimension as well as the topological
and metric properties of the associated quantum geometry are dynamical quantities, they are de-
termined completely by the states. which dimension, topologies and geometries emerge in the
classical limit is a dynamical problem. we may also note that superpositions of states that give
rise to an interpretation in terms of a d dimensional quantum geometry will in certain cases be
interpretable as states associated with quantum geometries of dimensions d 6= d.

these are all features that we would expect of a truly background independent quantum theory

of gravity.

2.4 reduction to quantum general relativity and supergravity

quantum general relativity and supergravity, with a cosmological constant, , provide prototypes
for the class of theories just described. in the euclidean case, gq = su (2)q for general relativity
and gq = su (2|n )q for supergravity, for n at least up to 2. the quantum deformation is given by
the cosmological constant, with q = e2/k+2, with the level k given by (2). the main results here

9

are based on the existence of a closed form expression for the vacuum state, which is given by[12],

cs(a) = e

3

g2 r y (a)cs

(6)

where y (a)cs is the chern-simons invariant of the sen-ashtekar connection[13, 14]. a lot is
known about this sector of the theory[48, 49], including the fact that the semiclassical behavior is
that of small uctuations around desitter or anti-desitter spacetime[12, 15]. the supersymmetric
extensions are also known[9]. an important fact is that the observables algebra of this theory
requires that the spin networks be quantum deformed[17], as described in [45].

in the case of a spacetime with boundary, a class of boundary conditions has been studied in
which chern-simons theory is induced on the boundary[16]. with  6= 0 there is a class of exact
solutions to the quantum constraints, labeled by the conformal blocks for all the possible choices of
punctures on the spatial boundary; the number of these solutions is consistent with the bekenstein
bound[16].

similar results have been found also in the lorentzian case[26], in which case gq = su (2)q 
su (2)q, where, however the representations and intertwiners are restricted by the balanced condi-
tion jlef t = jright, rst proposed in [47].

finally, we note that when we take   0 this implies, by (2, that q  1 so that the states
reduce to ordinary spin networks[45, 17]. quantum general relativity in this limit has been studied
in great detail7 [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 48, 49, 50], and the results found have been veried by rigorous
theorems[51, 52, 53, 54].

2.5 holographic observables

there are several lines of argument that point to the conclusion that in a quantum theory of
gravity, all observables should be associated with boundaries, of dimension, in the continuum limit,
1 less than the spatial dimension. these include the arguments for the holographic hypothesis of
t hooft[55], whose relevance for string theory has been argued by susskind[56]. we know from
several examples that the holographic principle may be satised in a quantum theory of gravity,
although its exact formulation, for cosmological theories, remains controversial[57, 58, 24, 69].

there are a parallel set of arguments in the literature on quantum gravity and cosmology, put
forward originally by crane[36], and continued in [23, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 70], to the eect that
observables in a cosmological theory must be associated with a splitting of the universe into two
pieces. according to this point of view, such a splitting may correspond to a situation in which
a subsystem of the universe, delineated by the boundary, is studied by observers who are able to
make measurements only on the boundary. one may then set up what is called a relational[61] or
pluralistic[23, 62] quantum cosmology in which there is a space of states and an observable algebra
associated to every possible such spatial boundary. these dierent state spaces are tied together
by linear maps whose structure is determined by a functor from the category of cobordisms of
d  1 dimensional surfaces[36, 23]. this is done in such a way that the hilbert space associated
to the whole universe is always one dimensional, making it impossible to construct any non-trivial
observables associated to the universe as a whole. given that no observers have access to the entire
universe, this is argued in [36, 61, 23, 62, 63, 64, 65, 70] to be a necessary property of a realistic

7for a recent review of what is by now a large literature, see [8].

10

 j  

 k 

 l  

 m 

 n 

s  + 
v    2  s 
s  - 

j klmn 

figure 4: a quantum geometry |, ja, i > is cut along 5 circles, yielding two bounded quantum
geometries, s 

g , which meet on a boundary which is represented by a 5-punctured s2.

quantum theory of cosmology8.

in the present setting we can realize this approach to holographic observables by associating
algebras of observables with dierent ways of splitting the two-surfaces into two parts, each repre-
senting dierent halves of a quantum geometry, split along a boundary. this is done in the following
way. given a quantum state, |, ja, i > cut the surface sg[] along any subset of n of its circles ca
which results in the splitting of sg into two pieces, which we will call s 
g . the splitting introduces
an abstract surface, which may be taken to be a punctured s2, with n punctures. these punctures
inherit the labels ja on the n circles.

s 
g are each a quantum geometry with boundary constructed from the graph dual to s 

g . it
is interesting to ask how the boundary is described in the picture described above, in which there
are bases of states which have a dual description in terms of a labeled d dimensional combinatorial
pseudomanifold. in this picture, the pseudomanifold must have a d  1 dimensional boundary, s 
g
which is composed of n d  1 dimensional simplices, labeled by the ja. in a continuum limit, this
surface will correspond to a d  1 dimensional surface which divides space into two parts.

g may gain about s +

according to the holographic principle, the physical information that observers living on the
g must then be represented in terms of a eld theory on the
ja . the
ja then contains all the information that observers may learn about the

boundary s 
boundary. there is a state space naturally associated with that boundary, which is v s 2
algebra of observables on v s 2
interior s +

g by measurements made on the boundary.

this picture is realized in quantum general relativity [16, 23, 26], for the case of non-vanishing

cosmological constant.

8a general formulation of a cosmological holographic principle, applicable to background independent theories,
was given in [70]. as we showed there, that principle can be satised in the class of theories dened in [2] when the
dynamics satises certain restrictions.

11

we may note that for nite numbers of punctures, the dimension of the boundary state space
v s 2
ja is nite, even as q  1. in quantum general relativity, this is consistent with the bekenstein
bound, because the area of the boundary is given by l2

note that we have dened two dierent surfaces that are associated with the boundary. there is
the 2 dimensional surface, which is the punctured s2 on which the boundary state space, v s 2
ja , lives.
then there is the d  1 dimensional pseudomanifold, s 
g . for d = 3, these surfaces coincide,
the latter gives a simplicial description of the punctured s2, with a puncture inside each triangular
face. however, for d > 3 they are dierent. the construction of the dual pseudomanifold will
give us an embedding of the s2 in the combinatorial pseudomanifold s 
g . in the limit of a large
number of punctures, this must go over into the embedding of a 2-brane in the d  1 dimensional
boundary. this 2-brane is made of 0-branes, which are the punctures in the surface. this is the
basis of the correspondence to m theory we will develop below.

p lppc(j) [16].

to develop this picture we must have a clear understanding of how the holographic principle is
realized in this background independent context. the main mystery of the holographic principle
may be stated in this context as follows. the state space of a nite area boundary must be
nite dimensional, by the bekenstein bound. however, there seems to be an innite dimensional
space of possible states for the elds in the interior. the problem is how the reduction from a
potentially innite number of bulk states to a nite dimensional space of states, observable on the
boundary, is achieved. in the present case, the theory must provide a map  which reduces the
innite dimensional space of bulk states, hn
ja, to the nite dimensional space of boundary states,
v s 2
ja . there is a natural proposal for this map[2, 36] which is motivated by the results of quantum
general relativity and supergravity with nite  [16, 26]. this is that the map is given by chern-
simons theory. a state |, ja, i > hn
ja corresponds to a framed gq spin network with n open
ends, with labels ja. by standard constructions[42, 43, 45] it can be read as an n -intertwiner for
gq and hence as an element of v s 2

ja . we denote the resulting linear map by

 : hn

ja  v s 2
ja .

in these cases we will use the tilde to denote

  | > |  > v s 2
ja

(7)

(8)

this choice is motivated by results from quantum general relativity and supergravity in 3 + 1
dimensions.
in the canonical formalism of quantum gravity and supergravity, the map  is is
realized as the loop transform [4] of the chern-simons state (6) in the presence of boundary states
given by conformal blocks of the punctured boundary. the details of this are described in [16]. one
way to say this is that there is a sector of states in which the hamiltonian constraint of quantum
general relativity (and supergravity) is equivalent to the recoupling relations of framed su (2)q (or
su (2|1)) spin networks[16, 17, 10]. what we are going to do is use the natural extension of this
result to dene the relationship between the bulk and surface states in m theory.

in a histories formalism of the kind we will use here, the denition of the map will have to be
supplemented by giving time slicings of both the boundary and the interior. we will be able to do
this after we have explained how histories are constructed in this theory.

12

figure 5: an example of a substitution move. histories m are made up of successive applications
of such moves.

2.6 the form of the local evolution operator

we now turn to the dynamics given to these background independent membrane eld theories.
for reasons given in [2] we describe the dynamics in terms of a causal histories framework, rst
proposed for quantum general relativity in [30]. in this approach the dynamics is given by a set of
local replacement moves. in each such move a specied m- punctured surface spast is removed from
the surface s. this results in m free ends, with labels j. a new surface with matching labels,
sf uture is then inserted in its place. (see figure (5).) this corresponds to the removal of a state
ja and its replacement by a state |f uture >. given a choice of operator h in each v s 2
|past > in hm
ja
and using  to associate |past > and |f uture > to states in v s 2
ja , the amplitude for each such move
is given by

a(move) =< f uture|h| past > .

(9)

a causal history, m is specied by the choice of an initial state,

|0 >= |, ja, i > h,
followed by a sequence i = 1, 2, 3, . . . of substitution moves. the result is a sequence of states,
|0 >, |1 >, . . . , |i >, each resulting from the previous one by a substitution move.

the amplitude for a history is then given by the product

a[m] = yi

a(i)

(10)

the dynamics is then dened conventionally by summing over all histories between given initial
and nal states.

as the substitution rules are local, this results in a structure which is in many ways analogous to
a continuous lorentzian spacetime[30, 2]. just as a classical spacetime may be constructed from a
given initial surface by a series of local, bubble evolution steps, in which the spatial hypersurface
is evolved within a compact region, a causal history m may be seen as a spacetime structure
generated by local evolution moves on a state representing a quantum spacelike surface.

the precise way to describe this is to note that m has the structure of a causal set c [30, 2]9.
to each of the regions removed or inserted by a substitution move, one associates an element q  c.

9recall that a causal set is a partially ordered set with no closed causal curves that is locally nite. the application

of causal sets to quantum gravity was proposed rst in [28, 29].

13

figure 6: examples of past/future pairs that are used in the substitution moves in quantum general
relativity. these come from cuts of the thickened four simplex.

a partial ordering may be dened on c as follows: p > q if there is a series of substitution moves
that begins with the removal of q and ends with the insertion of p, such that in each step the
set removed overlaps the set inserted in the previous move. it is then easy to see that c has the
structure of a causal set. we call it c[m].

the causal set c[m] gives to m discrete analogues of many of the properties of lorentzian
spacetimes, such as many ngered time, light cones, and horizons[30, 2]. various aspects of this
are described in more detail in [30, 63, 2, 20]. we may note that the association of fundamental
quantum histories with causal structures and quantum states with quantum geometries makes this
class of theories generalizations of both general relativity and quantum theory. each history m,
is both a sequence of states in a hilbert space, h, dened without reference to any background
structure and a causal structure which shares many properties with a lorentzian spacetime.

this ends the summary of the class of background independent membrane theories proposed in

[2]. to summarize, a member of this class of theories is given by the following choices:

 1) the algebra or superalgebra, gq.

 2) the choice of substitution moves used in the evolution.

 3) the choice of the operators h that give the amplitudes for the causal histories m.

particular choices have been suggested for the theory corresponding to quantum general rela-
tivity in the euclidean [46, 47] and lorentzian[30] case. (see figure (6)). the question that we
may now address is whether there are any choices that give continuum limits described by string
theory.

14

3 consequences of a planck scale causal structure

there are several important issues we must clarify, before we go on to study the possible relationship
with string theory.

3.1 the continuum limit

the most important physical question regarding the class of theories we have just dened is whether
there exists for any of them a continuum limit which reproduces classical general relativity in some
dimension, coupled to some set of quantum elds. the main conjecture we are pursuing in this line
of work is that if any of these theories has a continuum limit, there must be a consistent description
of small perturbations around that limit, and this in turn must reproduce a string perturbation
theory, because there is strong evidence that all successful perturbative gravitational theories are
string theories. the main question, to be discussed below, is then how to construct observables of
the fundamental theory that will describe these string-like, perturbative degrees of freedom, when
the continuum limit exists.

we will return to the problem of the continuum limit in the conclusions. this is the main

question that we will not be able to solve in this paper.

3.2 spacetime dieomorphisms, gauge xing and discrete causal structure

to discuss the issue of gauge invariance we need some language to describe a causal set. given the
causal set c[m] we can dene an acausal set to be a set of elements qi  c[m] such that there are
no causal relations amongst them. an antichain a is a maximal acausal set, which means that no
p  c[m] can be added to a without violating the condition that it be an acausal set[63, 64].

a time slicing t = a(t) for t = 0, 1, 2, . . . is a sequence of antichains such that every p  c[m]
is in some a(t). this is just like a time slicing in general relativity, except that the time parameter
is discrete.

as in general relativity, there are many possible slicings of a history. these may be distinguished
by gauge conditions. whenever we refer to a slicing we will have to give conditions that pick it out.
this is especially important when we come to the description of physical time evolution. in
general relativity the hamiltonian on the physical, gauge invariant, state space is a function of the
elds on the boundary. to give the correct interpretation of the present setting, which insures that
if there is a classical limit it will go over to the correct description of evolution in the classical theory,
we must ask whether the local evolution moves are physical or gauge. this is an issue because in
general relativity the hamiltonian constraint generates both changes in the time coordinate and
local evolution moves.

in the kinds of theories dened in [30, 2] the local evolution moves generate physical evolution
because the causal set c[m] corresponds to the causal structure of spacetime. thus the past set and
future set in a single local evolution move must correspond to physically dierent sets of events,
because they have dierent causal relations with the other events, and this corresponds in the
classical theory to distinct physical spacetime events. another way to say this is that the causal
set associated to a history in general relativity is a spacetime dieomorphism invariant. as such,
the causal set c[m] of a discrete quantum history is also a gauge invariant description that, in the
classical limit, (if one exists) must correspond to the spacetime dieomorphism invariant causal set
of a lorentzian spacetime.

15

one consequence of this is that, unlike the case of state sum models of topological quantum
eld theories, the sum over histories is not a projection operator. this is because there is no
history where nothing happens to the states. every history is a sequence of real changes to the
states and these then correspond to a spacetime invariant description of real events.

this does not mean that states must not satisfy additional conditions, corresponding to the
conditions on initial data in the classical theory. but these conditions are dierent from the sum
over histories, as each quantum history must correspond, in the case that there is a classical limit,
to a spacetime dieomorphism invariant description of a classical history.

3.3 slicing conditions in the bulk and on the boundary

there are special issues, in both the classical and quantum theory, when a nite boundary has
been introduced. note that to every antichain a  c[m] is associated a state |a > hn
ja. thus to
a time slicing a(t) is a sequence of states |a(t) > hn
ja. by (7) this induces a sequence of states
|t > v s 2
ja .

the question is then which slicing in the bulk is to correspond to a choice of slicing on the
boundary. there is a unique answer which is dictated by causality. given a history m with
boundary and a time slicing t on the boundary, we dene the maximally past slicing, a(t), to be
one that agrees with t on the boundary and is past inextendible in the interior. this means that
for each slice a(t), which is an antichain in the interior, there is no past replacement move, which
would remove a connected subset a  a(t), disjoint from the boundary, and replace it with elements
a such that,

1) a < a in c, and
2) (a(t)  a)  a is an antichain.
conceptually, such a slicing is one in which each spatial slice is as close to the past lightcone of
a given slice of the boundary as it can be and still be a complete spacelike slice. it is not dicult
to argue that for bounded histories m of the kind dened here, given a slicing of the boundary,
such a slicing of the interior can always be chosen.

it is interesting to note that in the continuum limit the slice approaches the past light cone
of the cut of the boundary. thus, when  < 0 the limit that the boundary is taken to innity
should reproduce the ads/cf t correspondence. it is also intriguing to note that when  = 0
this description must reproduce the heaven description of newman and collaborators[59] in which
solutions to einsteins equations are described completely in terms of data on cuts of i +.

given such a slicing we then have a sequence of states |t > hn

ja. by the holographic map, eq.

(7) this will induce a sequence of states |t > in the boundary state space v s 2

ja given by

as a consequence, there must be a time evolution operator u (t, s) on v s 2

ja such that

|t >=   |t >

|t >= u (t, s)|s >

(11)

(12)

we will be concerned to identify this operator. to do so, we need to identify a set of operators
in v s 2
ja which we may use to understand the dynamics of the induced boundary states |t >. to do
this it is helpful to have a physical interpretation for the information in the boundary state space
v s 2
ja . as we now show, a very interesting interpretation is suggested by studying the properties of
the small perturbations around bounded histories.

16

4 small perturbations, and the identication of string world sheets

now that we have cleared away some technical and conceptual issues, we are ready to come to the
heart of the matter, which is the identication of small perturbations of a history m with string
worldsheets embedded, in a suitable sense, in m.

let us begin by considering an arbitrary history and asking what small perturbations look like.
a history is a sequence of states |i >= |i , ji
i > each generated from the previous one by a local
a , i 
move. thus, a perturbed history |i  >= |i 
i >
each diering from the original by a small change. we must then ask what are small changes of
the states |i , ji

i > will involve a series of states |i 

a, i
, ji 

, ji 

a , i 

a, i

i >.

this question was analyzed in [35]. here i summarize the main ideas of that paper, which may

be referred to for details.

changes in the states are of two kinds, changes in the genus, g and changes in the state in vg.
we will exclude the rst kind as the substitution moves generally change the genus; we then look
for changes that leave the genus xed so that they cannot be substitution moves. these are then
small changes in the states that cannot be confused with evolution moves.

a, i

to see what small changes in the states are allowed that do not change the genus, let us pick
a basis constructed from a trinion decomposition of the surfaces s g. the states |i > are then
i >, where the circles ca arise from the trinion decomposition10. note
parameterized as |i , ji
that we are not allowed to change one of the ja arbitrarily, as the labels on the three circles of
each trinion must be such that there is at least one invariant element of j1  j2  j3.
in the
case of su (2) this condition yields the triangle inequality, plus the condition that the sum of the
spins is an integer. to satisfy these conditions one will in general have to change two of the three
labels of the circles bounding each trinion, as well as the intertwiner. thus we reach an important
conclusion, which is that the small excitations of the states |i , ji
i > are not local. instead, the
small excitations of a state |, ja, i > are constructed from closed loops  drawn on the surface
s g[].

a, i

to see this in more detail, note that given an elementary representation l and a closed loop 

on s g each state | >= |, ja, i > has a consistent perturbation given by

dl

  | >= | >= |, j

a, 

i >

(13)

where j
holds for the intertwiners.

a = j  l when  intersects ca and is unchanged otherwise, and an analogous condition

given a xed trinion decomposition, this denes the operator dl
now that we know what a consistent perturbation of a state is, we can ask what a consistent
perturbation of a history is. taking into account the discrete many ngered time of the causal
histories, we note that a consistent perturbation of a history must give a consistent perturbation of
every state that may be obtained by slicing the history to produce a maximal acausal set. as shown
in [30, 2], every such slicing is associated with some state in h. a consistent perturbation will be
one that is a linear combination of perturbations of the form of (13) for every possible slice. this
will be true if it gives a loop  for every slice of m that produces a state of the form of a linear
combination of the basis states | >= |, ja, i > associated with some trinion decomposition.

 on the space v g.

10note that for su (2) the trivalent intertwiners are unique, but this is not the case for larger groups.

17

furthermore, we require that the perturbation be causal, which means that in any sequence of
states, |i > that denes a history, m, the changed labels in |j > are in the future of the changed
labels in |i > whenever j > i.

as argued in [35] the result is that consistent perturbations of a history m are parameterized
by a choice of a fundamental representation l of gq and an embedding of a timelike (with respect to
the induced causal structure c of m) surface  in m. the change in amplitude of the perturbed
history can then be expressed as a spin system on this surface, whose couplings are induced from
the amplitudes of the fundamental histories and depend both on the choice of evolution moves and
their amplitudes and the embedding. details are given in [35].

however, even without giving any details we can make the following argument. suppose that
the history m is semiclassical so that it is a critical point of the path integral and represents
in a suitable limit a classical manifold. then the degrees of freedom of the perturbed histories
must contain the massless modes associated with small perturbations around the classical limit.
these must be carried by the induced worldsheet theory, since that codes the small perturbations
around any history. this means that the eective theory dened on the worldsheet must carry the
massless spin 2 degrees of freedom, as we know these must be present if the theory, as assumed,
has a classical limit dominated by m. but this means that in the continuum limit that worldsheet
theory must reproduce the action for a critical string theory.

hence, the original non-perturbative theory must be a background independent formulation
of string theory, in the sense that the theory of small perturbations around the classical limit
reproduces perturbative string theory. in fact, one may also argue that the leading term in the
change in the amplitude of the perturbed history is proportional to the induced area of the time
like two surface , and so matches the nambu action[35].

5 the identication of punctures as d0 branes

the string world sheets we have identied must be closed, unless they end on boundaries. it is
natural to identify d0 branes as points on boundaries where strings end11. a setting that permits
this is the following. let us x an n -punctured surface, sja, which we may for simplicity assume is
an s2. let us consider a piece of a history consisting of a sequence of states |i >= |0 >, |1 >, |2 >
, . . ., generated by local moves from an initial state |0 >, which are chosen to live in the space hn
ja
with xed boundary, which matches sja. we will restrict attention to histories in which the local
moves act only in the interior of the quantum geometries of the states |i >, so that each state in
the sequence has a boundary in the same space sja. these may be considered to represent a piece
of a causal history in which we have restricted the evolution on the boundary so as to not change
the number and labels of the punctures12.

let us denote a particular such history by m+, where the + indicates that it is half of a
compact history, and so may be joined by another piece m such that each of the states in m+
matches one in m by being joined on sja. now small perturbations of m+ correspond to choices
of fundamental representations and loops drawn on each state, |i >. however, we may note that

11it might be objected that these are not necessarily bp s states, and so do not share all the properties of d-branes
in string theory. it might be better to say that these are objects that will behave as d0 branes in the appropriate
dynamical setting. to avoid inventing a new terminology, we will simply call them d0 branes.

12boundary conditions that realize this condition in general relativity and supergravity are described in [16, 26].

18

it is no longer necessary that the loops be closed, instead they may end on the punctures of the
sja. this identies these punctures as d0 branes, i.e. as zero dimensional spatial objects on which
strings can end.

there are other similarities between the punctures and d0 branes.

if a punctures label ja
is one of the fundamental representations, than only one string may end on it. however if ja
is a larger representation, than as many strings can end on it as there can be products of the
fundamental representations that have ja in their decomposition. as a result, punctures can be
combined according to the laws of multiplication of representations of gq.

for example, in the case gq = su (2)q the smallest punctures are associated with j = 1/2,
and only one string can end on each one. the symmetry group associated with a puncture is
consequently su (2). but n strings can end on a puncture of spin n/2. the associated symmetry
group is su (n+1). thus by combining punctures one raises the symmetry from su (2)n to su (n+1)
to see what the eect of this should be in a semiclassical description, we must look inside
each representation, at the behavior of the classical object represented. for example, a state in the
vector representation must correspond to a vector in d dimensional space. small perturbations
then correspond to small motions of the classical object. in the case of su (2), linearization around
a vector gives so(2), while linearization around a spinor gives u (1).

in the linearized approximation, the representation labels associated with the d0 branes become
charges which generate the subgroup that preserves the classical object. in this approximation, the
products of representations becomes the addition of abelian charges that characterize, in the semi-
classical theory, the superpositions of d0 branes. in our example, the combination of n punctures
then induces, in the linearized approximation, a symmetry enhancement from u (1)n to u (n). this
is in agreement with what happens when n d-branes are combined in the semiclassical picture.

we then hypothesize that in the continuum limit the punctures are associated with d0 branes.

the rest of this paper is devoted to exploring the consequences of this identication.

6 punctures and matrix models

the rst problem is to nd the operators that, acting on the boundary state space v s 2
ja , describe
the dynamics of the punctures. we begin with the observation that changes in v s 2
ja correspond to
change in an intertwiner, with xed puncture labels. what are the most local observables which
measure these changes? a complete, in fact overcomplete, set of observables in v s 2
ja correspond to
wilson loops, taken in the fundamental representation of g:

t [] = t r(cid:20)er

a(cid:21)

(14)

where  is a non-intersecting loop in the punctured boundary s 2  {} and a is the at connection
on the punctured surface that denes the phase space whose quantization gives v s 2
ja

the simplest of the loops in v s 2

ja are those that surround a single puncture. however, these have
xed values given by ja, so they contain information that does not vary in time. in quantum general
relativity with appropriate boundary conditions, these correspond to the areas of the regions of the
boundary containing the punctures, by xing the boundary as we have we have in essence xed the
areas of the regions of the boundary.

19

c

a

d

g

b

ab

f

e

figure 7: the tab operator. the shaded region is the punctured boundary s 2  {}.

the next simplest observables correspond to loops ab that surrounds two punctures, a and b.
to dene these we x a base point p  s 2  {} and dene loops a based at p that sorround a
single puncture a. we then dene composite loops ab = b a. we then have a matrix of operators

tab  tab

(15)

the expectation values of these operators will, in fact, contain all the observable information
concerning the states in the boundary hilbert space, v s 2
ja . they encode all the information about
the congurations of the punctures. as there is no xed background geometry, this information
must be coded, as it is here, in relational variables that give information about relationships between
pairs of punctures. but if, as we have argued, the punctures correspond to d0 branes, then, for an
appropriate choice of gq, this matrix of operators should correspond to the matrix description of the
dynamics of d0 branes, hypothesized by banks, fischler, shenker and susskind. in that description
there is a matrix of operators x i
ab for every transverse coordinate i in light cone coordinates of at
11 dimensional minkowski spacetime.

we will rst establish a correspondence for any odd dimension d. for a d dimensional matrix
model we have a matrix of coordinates x i
ab, with i = 1, . . . , d. to establish a correspondence we
have to rst choose the algebra gq appropriately and then nd out where this transverse coordinate
i lives. as there is no background manifold there is no transverse space, this has to emerge in the
appropriate continuum limit.

in odd dimension d we can represent the bosonic matrix model by choosing gq = spin(d). we
will take traces of holonomies in a spinor representation of spin(d) in which there are d gamma
matrices i. we may then dene the classical phase space functions,

from (16) we have a matrix of quantities given by

t i[] = t r(cid:20)ier

a(cid:21)

t i

ab = t r(cid:20)ierab

a(cid:21)

(16)

(17)

we make several comments on these variables. first, note that the diagonal elements use ab = aa,
the curve that wraps twice around the single puncture.

20

g
a

c

i

2

1

d

f

b

e

ab

g

figure 8: the t i
ab operator. the i in the circle stands in the classical theory for the trace of the
phase space observable against i. in the quantum theory it stands for a formal operator in which
the i is contracted against another open 2 line that acts somewhere else in the state.

second, note that as in the matrix model, we can consider the n eigenvalues ri

a of the d, n  n
matrixes t i
ab. these give us n points in rd. in the limit n   the usual arguments from the
original matrix mode[21, 22] may be used to dene a mapping from an s2 into rd. thus, in this
limit we see emerge a description of a membrane moving in rd.

ab, t j

however there are some dierences with the usual matrix model. first, there are constraints
coming from the conditions that the trace of the holonomy around single punctures are xed. the
eect of these will depend on the dimension. then we must notice that the t i
ab are not a commuting
set, instead {t i
cd}  1/k whenever a or b is equal to c or d. thus the quantities (17) cannot
correspond directly to the coordinates of a matrix model. however, recall that in 2 + 1 and 3 + 1
dimensions the cosmological contant is inversely proportional to a power of k, so that   0 when
k   (see (2). this suggests that we should seek to recover the standard matrix model, which
corresponds to supergravity in 11d with vanishing cosmological constant, in the limit k  . we
will then need to rescale the elds so as to recover the matrix model in the limit k  .

finally, we must also note that the quantities (17) are not gauge invariant. they are non-
vanishing when evaluated on the classical phase space, which is the at connections on the punctured
surface. if we turn them into operators in the space of intertwiners they will vanish, because only
gauge invariant quantities are non-vanishing. this is because we are constructing the theory in
terms of gauge invariant quantities; and any particular coordinates on a background manifold
which emerges from this description will be gauge non-invariant. for this reason we will proceed to
rst construct formal operators that represent pieces of gauge invariant quantities, which include
the t i[]. we then combine these to form gauge invariant operators.

one of the gauge invariant quanties we can construct is closely related to the hamiltonian of
so that,

the d dimensional matrix model. to do this rst nd a set of momentum functionals p ab

i

{t i

ab, p cd

j } = i

jc

ad
b

(18)

these must exist, but we will not construct them explicitly, instead, the appropriate quantum
operators will be constructed below. we may then construct a classical hamiltonian that matches
that of the bosonic sector of the matrix model, in the limit k   in which the t i
abs become

21

g
commuting variables.

h =

g2
2

t r [pipi] +

where g is a dimensionless coupling constant.

1

g2 t r(cid:16)[t i, t j], [ti, tj](cid:17)

(19)

what this means is that a system which is closely related to the matrix model may be coded in
the classical phase space of the boundary observables. however, this is only a step, for in the present
theory the dynamics has already been given by the substitution moves in the bulk. the dynamics
of the punctures will then be induced by the bulk-to-boundary map, applied as discussed in section
3. what we then want to know is whether the bulk evolution moves can be chosen so that the
dynamics of the matrix model is induced as an eective quantum dynamics of the punctures. to do
this we will proceed in two steps. first, we construct a quantum hamiltonian, h, on the boundary,
state space v s 2
ja which yields (19) to leading order. second, we will nd a set of substitution moves
and amplitudes which reproduce the quantum dynamics generated by h.

we will carry this out rst for the bosonic matrix models in d = 3, then we extend the
correspondence, in turn to the supersymmetric matrix model in d = 3 the bosonic matrix model
in d = 9, and, nally, a supersymmetric matrix model in d = 9 that reduces in a certain limit to
the dwhn-bfss model.

7 the d = 3 matrix model

we rst study the bosonic matrix model in d = 3 in which case we take gq = suq(2).

we begin by asking how the classical limit should emerge. as the punctures must correspond,
in the reduction to quantum general relativity, to quanta of area, the continuum limit must be the
limit of large area, in planck units. in the cases associated with general relativity or supergravity
in 3 + 1 dimensions,in which g = su (2) or osp(1|2),it is known that the area of a surface with

n punctures with labels j is proportional to ppc(j) where c(j) is the quadratic casimer

operator. furthermore, as shown in [16] the most probable way of reaching the limit of large area,
in which the bekenstein bound is saturated, is the one in which each puncture carries a minimum
area, corresponding to the smallest representation, j1/2 of gq. in this case the dimension of the
boundary state space saturates the bekenstein bound as the area is taken to innity. this tells us
that we should expect the continuum limit to emerge in the case that all the punctures have the
same value j = j1/2. for these, most probably states, the limit of large area is n  , where n
is the number of punctures.

7.1 matrix valued operators on v s 2
j .

aa  vi are xed by the condition that the wilson
in the case of d = 3, the the diagonal elements t i
loops around single punctures are xed in terms of k and the representation label. physically, this
means that the vectors vi
a live in s2. this is reminiscent of the spin geometry theorem, which was
the motivation for the original introduction of the spin network formalism by penrose in the early
1960s[37]. there a map is found between su (2) spin networks with n ends, labeled by spins j
and n points on a two sphere. this is gotten by constructing an operator xab which connects the
ath to the bth external edge with a spin 1 line. if | > is an ordinary su (2) spin network, with n

22

a

b

b

as

i
:
ab

a

b

a

a

i

b

b

figure 9: the denition of the operator si
ab in the d = 3 cases. the added trinions are in grey, all
the labels are in the adjoint representation. the remainder of the surface is indicated by , other
ends on the boundary are not shown.

ends, then the map  produces in this case an su (2) intertwiner | >13. since xab acts adjacent
to the ends, its action on intertwiners | > is well dened. penrose then nds that the expectation
values,

yab 

= cos(ab)

(20)

< | xab| >

< | >

for a 6= b dene n (n  1)/2 angles ab which, in the case that they do not vanish, may be
interpreted consistently to give relative angles between n points in a two sphere[37]. this is called
the spin-geometry theorem.

in fact, it is easy to show that for g = su (2)q,

tab =

162jajb

k2

xab

(21)

thus, the g = su (2) case of the construction of the previous section is closely related to
penroses spin geometry theorem. this correspondence suggests the following construction, which
we will shortly extend to general gq. we introduce a set of formal operators si
ab that act on the
bulk state space, hn

ja, these act as follows. (see figure (9).)

ja. given a state |, ja, i > hn

we break the tube going to the puncture a along a circle ca with label ja. we then insert a
new trinion as follows. two of the three punctures of the trinion join the two sides separated at
ca, with identical labels ja. the third we label with the adjoint representation adj of gq and leave
open for the moment. we then do the same with the puncture b. we then introduce a third trinion
one puncture of which is tied to the free puncture of the new trinion inserted adjacent to a. a
second puncture is joined to the free puncture adjacent to b. each of these have labels adj. at the
third puncture, we introduce an operator that corresponds to tracing over the gamma matrix i.
this is a formal operation, it means that this operator stands for a family of operators where the i
index is contracted with another i index, with a tube labeled by adj. we call the resulting formal
operator si

ab.

13the application of  is equivalent to the operation penrose called the evaluation of a spin network.

23

g
g
this then induces an operator in v s 2

map (7). given | > v s 2

ja , which we call si
ja let |& > be any state in hn

ab, dened with the help of the holographic
ja such that

  |& >= | >

(22)

this is non-unique but it doesnt matter, because we are about to act only on the edges that are
adjacent to the punctures, and these are xed. then we dene the action of si

ab on | > by

si
ab  | >   si

ab  |& > .

it is also straightforward to show that si

ab is related to t i

ab in the su (2)1 case by

t i
ab =

162jajb

k2

si
ab

(23)

(24)

the spin geometry theorem then gives us some insight into the meaning of the o diagonal
ab at least for d = 3. when treated as classical phase space variables,

elements of the tab and t i
the combination

may be interpreted as an su (2) element that rotates the point vi
can see from this that the o diagonal elements of t i
measure the distance on the s2 between the the points vi

a and vi
b.

y ab
ab = abtab +  ab

i t i
ab

(25)
b on the s2. one
ab are proportional to the sin(ab), thus they

a into the point vi

however, we may also note from the denition of the operators (16) and (23) that the ab
elements of < |t i
ab| > will vanish when the edges a and b come from disconnected pieces of
the spin network | >. (as this is a formal operator it means it vanishes when the index i is
contracted against any operator.) this means that the o diagonal elements vanish when the ends
corresponding to the points fall into disconnected clusters, corresponding to  having disconnected
pieces.

thus, a potential of the form of that in (19) is minimized either by the points lying on top of

each other, or falling into disconnected clusters.

7.2 construction of the quantum matrix model hamiltonian on the space of

intertwiners

ja . care must be taken as si

we now are ready to express the matrix model dynamics, given classically by (19), in terms of
operators on v s 2
ab by powers of k and k is taken to
innity in the limit that denes the vanishing of the cosmological constant and hence the limit in
which the matrix model is recovered. we know that it is the t i
abs that must be the basic operators
that dene the matrix model, as it is these that go into the commuting coordinates of the matrix
theory in the limit that k  . but when computing it is easier to work with the si
ab as they have
a simple action on states.

ab diers from t i

we may use (24) to write a quantization of the potential energy term of classical matrix model

hamiltonian, (19), as an operator on v s 2
ja

v =

1

k (cid:19)8
g2 (cid:18) 2

t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17) .

24

(26)

a 

b 

i

d 

c 

figure 10: the action of the potential energy term, t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17) of the d = 3 matrix model

on the boundary. the action of the operator is to add the shaded gure. in this and the following
gures, unmarked wide shaded lines are in the adjoint representation.

to dene the kinetic energy term we need to dene the conjugate momentum operator, ab
i
that

{ si

ab, cd

j } = i

jc

ad
b

such

(27)

this is dened diagramatically below in figure (12). we may then write the hamiltonian corre-
sponding to the matrix model.

h =

g2k4

322 t rhiii +

1

k (cid:19)8
g2 (cid:18) 2

t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17) .

(28)

here we have used the fact that all the punctures are taken in the fundamental representation
j = 1/2, which is necessary to have the largest entropy per area of the holographic surface.

7.3 realizing the d = 3 matrix theory hamiltonian in terms of local evolution

moves

we now proceed to show that there is a choice of the fundamental dynamics that reproduce the
hamiltonian of the d = 3 matrix model acting on the boundary state space v s 2
ja . the potential
energy term in (28), is formally given by,

v = t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17)

(29)

we may note that the si
ab do not have exactly the same commutation
relations as those of the dwhn-bfss model. rather we have [ si
bc] 6= 0, as can be easily
checked explicitly. thus, it is necessary to choose an operator ordering when realizing (29) as an
operator. we make the simplest choice of symmetric ordering, which is shown in fig. (11).

ab operators, like the t i

ab, si

we can then form the potential energy operator (29) by acting four times as indicated. the
result is indicated in figure (10), it is an operator that sums over all 4-tuples of edges a, b, c, d and
adds adjacent to the punctures the graph indicated there. the gure added may be visualized as
an h, with the external edges labeled by adjs going to the four edges immediately adjacent to the

25

adj 

adj 

a 

a 

adj 

+

adj 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

adj 

=
adj 

figure 11: the denition of symmetric ordering used in the denition of the potential energy
operator shown in fig. (10).

nodes a, b, c, d and the cross-piece labeled by an i  adj  adj, which is summed over. the latter
is the result of the antisymmetrization in (29). finally, the overall weight is

1
g2 w(i)

(30)

where in standard notation [45]

w(i) =

the next step is to invent the momentum operators ab

we chose them so that, on v s 2
ja

i

(2, i, 2) (cid:16)1  22
i (cid:17)
i which are to be conjugate to the si

(31)

ab.

[ si

ab, cd

j ] = ihi

jc

ab
d

(32)

j can then be dened on a basis of states in v s 2

cd
ja given by intertwiners of gq, decomposed so that
there are two framed edge of spin r and s linking the edges that go to c and d to a trinion, which
has a third edge of spin u going outward(see figure (12).) for every c and d such a basis can be
constructed. the action of cd
j on this state is to remove the component where r = s = u = adj
and replace it with the state in which the now opened edge u is traced with i. we then compute
the square of ab

in the basis described is indicated in figure (13).

ab
i

ab
i

by adding the kinetic and potential energy together with the weights given by (28), we have

i . the action pi

the matrix hamiltonian for the evolution of the state in v s 2
ja ,

h =

g2k4

322 t r(cid:16) i i(cid:17) +

1

k (cid:19)8
g2 (cid:18) 2

t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17)

we can then form the evolution operator on v s 2

ja as

u (s, t) = ei(ts) h .

(33)

(34)

with this hamiltonian in hand, we are prepared to ask whether there is a choice of evolution
move and amplitude that reproduces its eect in appropriate circumstances. let us begin with

26

a

b

a

b

i
:
ab

a

a

b

b

2

2

2

a

i

b

2

figure 12: the action of the momentum operator ab

i . 2 denotes the adjoint representation.

a

b

2

:

a

a

a

b

b

b

a

b

a

b

2

figure 13: the action of the kinetic energy term, t r(cid:16) i i(cid:17) of the d = 3 matrix model on the

boundary.

27

p
g
g
p
g
g
the simplest possible circumstance, which is where the holographic surface bounds a small region,
containing only the parts of the surfaces s g on which the replacement operator acts. in this case
the map  is trivial, and we can in the right limits, establish an exact correspondence between the
replacement moves and their amplitudes and the hamiltonian (33).

it is harder to establish the correspondence for evolution moves that act far from the holographic
surface, and this has not yet been done. it is likely that this will be where supersymmetry plays a
crucial role, to enforce a non-perturbative version of a non-renormalization theorem, that will imply
that one can move the evolution move from close to the boundary to deep inside the bulk without
changing the form of the hamiltonian that describes the dynamics induced on the punctures in the
boundary.

for the present we restrict ourselves to the simplest case, which is where the bulk contains the
simplest possible states on which the dierent terms of the matrix model hamiltonian may act.
because of the existence of the free coupling constant g, the case where the evolution move acts
just inside the holographic surface is sucient to pick out a set of evolution moves that match for
both large and small g.

we are looking for a replacement move rmatrix of the form discussed in section 5 and an
operator h in the space v s 2
ja that bounds the region where the replacement occurs. in the simplest
case, we may identify that surface with the holographic surface on which the hamiltonian (33) acts.

we will consider rst the limit g2  0 and then the limit g2  .
in the rst case we are interested to match the potential energy in (33) to a single action of
a replacement move. the simplest case to study is that where n = 4. we take the initial state
in h4
ja to be the simplest possible one, indicated in figure (10) in which the four edges are tied
together by a four punctured sphere. this state is labeled by an intertwiner on the four punctured
sphere, which we may indicate simply as | >. in this case the map (7) commutes with the action
of h because the region cut out by the evolution move is the whole interior. the eect of the
evolution move may be arrived at by simply lifting the eect of h from v s 2
ja. the kinetic
energy term does not act, while the potential energy term (29) increases the genus by g = 8, as
shown in figure (14). if the nal state after the replacement move is indicated by |f inal > then
in this case the amplitude is given by

ja to hn

a[figure (14) ] =< f inal|e h | >

i

k (cid:19)8
g2 (cid:18) 2

< f inal| v | >

(35)

here we have taken the time interval to be one because the initial state has been completely replaced
in the interior, corresponding to one time step in any slicing.

to see the eects of the kinetic energy dominate we consider instead the limit where g2 is large,
in which case the leading order term is its action on states in hn
ja where the interior surface has
genus 4. the action is shown in figure (15). the change in genus is g = 3. indicating the
initial and nal states in h4

ja by |in > and |out > the amplitude is

a[figure (15)] =< f uture|ei h | past >

ig2k4

322 < f uture|t r(cid:16) ab

i

ab

i (cid:17) | past >

(36)

the replacement operator r must reduce to these two limits. the simplest choice that does

this is to take the sum of two operators

r = rk + rv

28

(37)

a 

c 

b 
b 

d 

i 

a 

c 

b 

d 

figure 14: the replacement move, rv ,

in the bulk that induces the potential energy term,

t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17) of the matrix model on the boundary in the simplest case.

a
a

b

a

b

figure 15: the replacement move, rk , in the bulk that induces the kinetic energy term, t r(cid:16) i i(cid:17)

in the simplest case in which it acts.

29

to summarize, the rst of these moves is a genus g = 3 move shown in figure (15). the
amplitude for it is given by

a[rk] =

ig2k4

322 < f uture|t r(cid:16) ab

i

ab

i (cid:17) | past >

(38)

the second move is the genus g = +8 indicated in figure (14), to which we assign an amplitude

a[rv ] =

i

k (cid:19)8
g2 (cid:18) 2

< f uture| v | past >

(39)

these choices complete the denition of the theory for the case gq = su (2)q.

8 extension to osp(1|2)

we now extend the matrix model to include fermions, keeping for this section still to the d = 3
case. this can be done by extending the algebra to gq = osp(1|2). it is easy to see that the two
moves r1 and r2 we have just dened correspond to the bosonic part of the d = 3 matrix model
hamiltonian. the only adjustment that needs to be made is that the spin 1 and spin 1/2 edges are
replaced, respectively, by the adjoint and fundamental representations of osp(1|2).

we must then add a third replacement move to correspond to the fermionic term in the matrix
model. as we did with the bosonic part we rst construct the hamiltonian on the boundary state
space, v s 2

ja , and then pick an evolution move and amplitude that reproduces it.

the algebra osp(1|2) has ve generators, which are the three angular momenta, j ij and the

supersymmetry generators qa, where a = 1, 2. the algebra includes,

[j ij, qa] = ij a

b qb

(40)

where j ij are the generators of spin(3) and ij a
are its usual representation via pauli matrices.
the fundamental representation of osp(1|2) is three dimensional, and comprises the spin 0 and
1/2 representations of su (2). we write its components as a = (0, 1, 2) = (0, a). the adjoint
representation is generated by the graded symmetric generators j ( a b), where

b

where g(0) = 1, g(a) = 0. the embedding of the generators in the fundamental representation is

j ( a b) =

1

2hj

a b + (1)g( a)g( b)j

b ai

(41)



0 !
a b =   ab qb

qa

(42)

b is imbedded in the 2  2 block a, b = a, b of  a b and [qa] b

a is represented by

[qa]0

thus, a
b = [qa]b
we may construct the superconnection one-form

b and [qa]0

0 = a

0 = 0.

a

b = aabab b
a

a

+ dq

a
d b.

(43)

30

the phase space of the boundary theory is then given by the at superconnections on the punctured
s2 representing the boundary. we then dene the supersymmetric extensions of the d0 brane
coordinates on the phase space of the boundary theory to be

t ab

ab = t r(cid:18)aberab
a(cid:19)
ab = t r(cid:18)qaerab
a(cid:19)

t a

(44)

(45)

quantum operators corresponding to these may be constructed as we did in the last section,

using instead of spin(3) the fusion algebra of osp(1|2)q.

the hamiltonian is constructed from two sets of operators, corresponding to the fundamental
and the adjoint representation, respectively. to see how these correspond to the usual coordinates
of the matrix model we write the adjoint rep. operators as

a b
ab = s

s

b a

ab =   sab

ab
a
ab

and the fundamental representation elds as



a

ab !
ab =   a

ab

b
ab

0 !

(46)

(47)

ab which are, in terms of su (2) reperesentations, a

we see that we have auxillary elds ab and a
matrix-valued scalar and spinor.

conjugate to s a b

ab we have canonical momenta  a b
c d} = ( a b)
c d c

a b
ab , cd

{s

ad
b

ab , satisfying

(48)

(49)

(50)

while the fermions satisfy

{

a
ab, cd

b }+ = 

a
bc

ad
b

in terms of these osp(1|2) representations the supersymmetric d = 3 matrix model is

h susy,d=3 =

g2
2

t rh

a b a bi +

1

g2 t r(cid:16)[s

a b, s

c d][s a b, s c d](cid:17) + t r(cid:16)  ah s

a b,  bi(cid:17)

if one expands it is not dicult to see that the auxilary elds ab and a
n = 1, d = 3 matrix model,

ab decouple, leading to the

h susy,d=3 =

g2
2

t rhiii +

1

g2 t r(cid:16)[si, sj][si, sj](cid:17) + t r(cid:16) aab

i

h si, bi(cid:17)

(51)

we then proceed as before to represent these as operators in the space of intertwinors for the
quantum deformation of osp(1|2), which may be constructed as the space of states of the osp(1|2)
chern-simons theory corresponding to the at superconnections on the punctured surface. the
operators that corresponds to s a b
ab are exactly those shown in figures (9)
and (12) where the adjoint representation of osp(1|2) is now used. for the fermionic variables we
use the operator shown in figure (16)

ab and its momenta  a

31

figure 16: the action of the fermionic operator corresponding to the fundamental representation
of osp(1|2). note that the intertwinor shown is allowed in the representation theory of osp(1|2)
as the condition that the spins must add up to be even is not satised[68].

the fermionic part of the matrix model hamiltonian is then expressed as an operator on v s 2
ja

by translating the expression

h f =

into the action shown in figure (17)14.

42

k2 t r(cid:16)  ah s

a b,  bi(cid:17)

(52)

the fermionic momentum variable  a =  a is constructed by following the same procedure

we used for the bosonic momenta. it yields the operator shown in figure (18).

we then nd a replacement operator which in the simplest case reproduces (52). the change
of genus in this case is g = +1. it is given in figure (19). the corresponding amplitude is given
by,

a[(figure 19)] = i < f uture|h f | past >

(53)

the full replacement operator for gq = osp(1|2) is then given by the osp(1|2) replacement

operators

r = rk + rv + rf

(54)

9 the bosonic matrix model in d = 9

the procedure we have just used in d = 3 can be used to construct a background indepedent
membrane theory associated with a matrix model in any dimension d. the basic idea in each
case is that the matrix coordinates are given by operators dened like the si
ab in the space of
intertwiners of the punctured sphere for some group gq. in the bosonic case gq will generally be
the quantum deformation of so(d) gotten by quantizing chern-simons theory on a three manifold
which is the punctured sphere cross the interval. in the supersymmetric case the construction may
be considerably more complicated, as we saw in the d = 3 case, where auxiliary elds entered the
construction. in this case they decoupled but this is not gauranteed to happen in the general case.

14note that the factor of 42/k2 are determined as in the bosonic case by the requirement that the operators that

correspond to the coordinates of the matrix model become commuting in the limit k  .

32

b

c

a

b

c

a

figure 17: one of two terms of the fermionic term of the matrix model, (52). this is the simplest
state in which it can act. in the d = 3 theory grey tubes are in the 3-dimensional fundamental
representation of osp(1|2) and thicker grey tubes are in the 5-dimensional adjoint representation.
in the other term the order of the two thick grey tubes is reversed.

a

b

a

b

a

a

a
:
ab

b

b

a

a

b

figure 18: the action of the fermionic momentum operator.

c

a

c

a

ab

b

figure 19: the replacement move in the bulk that induces the fermionic term of the matrix model,
(52).

33

g
g
p
g
g
figure 20: the denition of the operator si
ab in the d = 9 case. the sums are k, l = v  v 2  v 3 
v 4 =     c. the i stands for the projection of the vector representation v . the remainder
of the surface is indicated by , other ends on the boundary are not shown.

a

b

s kl

i
:
ab

k

l

v

b

b

a

b

a

i

b

v

figure 21: the action of the momentum operator in the d = 9 case. ab
i .

we now briey sketch the d = 9 case which is appropriate for the dwhn-bfss matrix model.

full details will appear elsewhere[71].

it is straightforward to extend the denition of the d = 3 bosonic matrix model to a bosonic
matrix model in 9 dimensions, by choosing for gq the quantum deformation of soq(9). the classical
phase space of the holographic observables will be given by the conformal blocks constructed from
the quantization of a spin(9) chern-simons theory. the classical matrix model coordinates will be
given by (17) with the traces and the i taken in the 16 dimensional spinor representation of so(9),
which we denote by . the corresponding quantum operators si
ab is shown in fig. (20), it is similar
to the d = 3 case, but a bit more complicated. the reason is that the calculation of the quantum
operator involves the decomposition of the product of spinor representations, and above d = 3 this
includes more than the adjoint and a scalar. in d = 9 we have,  = c v v 2 v 3 v 4 where
v = r9 and v p stands for the p-fold antisymmetric product. with the trace part proportional to
c removed, this replaces the adjoint representation when we extend from the su (2) case to the
spin(9) case. the momentum operator is dened in fig. (21), which works just as in the d = 3
case.

34

p
g
g
the potential energy and kinetic energy terms are modied appropriately, so that the adjoint
representation of su (2) is everywhere replaced by the sum over the decomposition of     c.
the matrix model hamiltonian is then represented in v s 2
j by the hamiltonian (33) and the simplest
operator in the bulk which induces it is again given by the two replacement operators rk and rv
as in (37), where in each case the adjoint representation is replaced by the tracefree sum   c.

10 the supersymmetric extension in d = 9

what remains to arrive at a theory that includes the full dwhn-bfss matrix model is then only
to include the fermionic degrees of freedom. to do this one must pick an appropriate superalgebra
gq so that one can write a superconnection of the form (43) corresponding to the supersymmetric
extension of the matrix model. the spinor representation of so(9) is 16 dimensional, to incorporate
one spinor degree of freedom what is required is a superalgebra with a 17 dimensional fundamental
representation whose bosonic subalgebra has a spin(9) subalgebra.

there are several choices for gq which each give rise to a theory whose degrees of freedom include
those of the dwhn-bfss matrix model. one of the simplest, which involves only one fermionic
matrix variable, is su (16|1). given that the norm in the spinor representation of spin(9) is
symmetric we have the inclusions, spin(9)  so(16)  su (16). this has a fundamental 17
dimensional representation, which is the smallest supermultiplet of spin(9) comprising the scalar
and the spinor. this is the analogue of the 3 dimensional representation of osp(1|2) used in the
supersymmetric d = 3 matrix model and in supersymmetric spin networks in d = 3 + 1[68].

a consequence of the unication in a larger group, however is the inclusion of additional bosonic
degrees of freedom. this is seen by the fact that the symmetric product of spinor representations
of spin(9) involves

16 sym 16 = r  v  v 4 = 1  9  126

(55)

the 126 is the four index antisymmetric tensor in d = 9. in terms of indices this corresponds to

sa sym sb = ab  ab

i v i  ab

ijklv ijkl

(56)

abcd is the antisymmetric product of 9 dimensional gamma matrices ab

where ab
that the matrix model degrees of freedom have been extended from x i
naturally the four (or, by duality, ve) index antisymmetric tensor elds and a scalar:

ab to x (ab)

ab

. this means
a
, so as to include

x (ab)

ab = absab + ab

i x i

ab + ab

ijklv ijkl

ab

the resulting theory involves then the addition of central charges to the d = 9 superalgebra,

{qa, qb} = ab + hab

i p i + ab

ijklz ijkl

(57)

(58)

this is, of course, not surprising as the usual matrix model superalgebra closes on shell, and we
are working in a formalism in which the supersymmetry should be manifest. it is possible that
these additional degrees of freedom provide an alternative way for the transverse ve-brane to be
represented in the matrix model; this will be discussed elsewhere[71].

one can then dene the theory in terms of the same three replacement moves as the osp(1|2)
case, indicated in (54), with the appropriate replacements of osp(1|2) representations with su (16|1)

35

representations. the adjoint representation of osp(1|2) is replaced the tracefree symmetric tenor
representation of su (16|1) (which contains the vector and 4-form of so(9)) and the 3-dimensional
fundamental representation of osp(1|2) is replaced by the 17-dimensional fundmamental represen-
tation of su (16|1).

an alternative supersymmetric extension of the bosonic 9 dimensional theory arises from choos-
ing gq = osp(16|2). this has a bosonic subalgebra so(16)  sp(2). this doubles the supersym-
metry to an su (2) = sp(2) doublet of supersymmetry charges qa

i , i = 1, 2.

in either case it is then natural to consider extending the theory by choosing for gq the algebra
osp(1|32), which has been suggested is the full supersymmetry algebra of m theory[72].
it is
possible that this gives rise to a covariant formulation of the matrix model, this will also be discussed
in [71].

11 conclusions

we conclude by summarizing the main results and conjectures, after which we indicate some direc-
tions for future work.

11.1 summary of results

w began this paper with a summary of the construction of a class of background independent
quantum theories of gravity described in [2, 18]. these theories are found by extending the spaces of
states and histories of quantum general relativity and supergravity so that the algebra of observables
are based on an arbitrary quantum group, gq. the space of states is constructed from the spaces
of conformal blocks on all nite genus two-surfaces, which gives rise to their interpretation as
background independent membrane eld theories. the dynamics is expressed in the causal histories
framework[63] which describes dynamics in terms of a sum over histories, each of which is endowed
with a discrete causal structure.

the main results of this paper concern a class of observables, which are dened on boundaries.
the boundary state spaces are spaces of conformal blocks, or intertwiners, on punctured surfaces.
as these observables are known in 3+1 quantum general relativity and supergravity, in the presence
of certain boundary conditions, to coordinatize a certain, perhaps complete, subspace of physical
states, we call them holographic observables.
in these cases these boundary state spaces have
dimensions which grow exponentially as the area of the boundary, as required by the bekenstein
bound. we found that a complete set of observables on these boundaries may be used to construct
a generalization of the matrix models, in which there are non-trivial commutators, proportional
to 1/k between the matrix coordinates. we argued that the cosmological constant vanishes in the
limit k  , as has been shown quantum general relativity and supergravity in 2 + 1 and 3 + 1
dimensions. this led to the suggestion that the standard matrix models may be reproduced in
the limit k  . for gq = spin(d) the holographic observables si
ab provide a representation of
a matrix-like system in the boundary state space v s 2
j that in the limit k   and large n will
reproduce the degrees of freedom and dynamics of the matrix models (19). we have seen that in
d = 3 the choice gq = osp(1|2) leads naturally to its supersymmetric extension and that in d = 9
the choice gq = su (16|1)leads to a theory which includes the dwhn-bfss matrix, model, with
some additional degrees of freedom.

36

there were additional results concerning the relationship between the bulk theory and the
boundary theory. the dynamics of the bulk theory is expressed in the causal histories framework
in terms of a set of local moves, to which the theory assigns amplitudes. we posited a particular bulk
to boundary map between the innite dimensional space of bulk states and the nite dimensional
space of boundary states.
in quantum general relativity and supergravity in 3 + 1 this map is
known to express the hamiltonian constraint, we posited here that it holds generally. given this
map the question arises as to whether the dynamics of the bulk theory can be chosen so that the
matrix dynamics is induced for the boundary observables. we showed that this is true in both the
bosonic and supersymmetric cases we studied in d = 3 and d = 9.

these were the main results of this paper. we made in addition several conjectures concerning

the relationsip of these results to m theory.

11.2 conjectures
in sections 3-5 we argued that the holographic observables dened on v s 2
j may be interpreted as
holographic observables in the sense of [70]. this means that they receive information about the
information on the maximal past slicing. in the continuum limit, if there is one, this maximal past
slicing becomes the past lightcone of the boundary s on which the holographic observables are
dened.

the key problem in any background independent approach to quantum gravity is to show
that there is a continuum limit which reproduces the semiclassical description of general relativity
coupled to some set of quantum elds or strings. while there are promising results so far in 1 + 1
dimensions[32] we do not yet have the tools to show this in the present case. it must then be our
rst conjecture:

 c1 the background independent membrane theory described above with gq taken to be
the quantum deformation of su (16|1) and dynamics given by the three replacement moves
rk + rv + rf has a set of continuum limits, corresponding to consistent backgrounds of m
theory including at 11 dimensional spacetime.

in this case, the argument in section 3 then tells us that the holographic surfaces v s 2

j should
represent a screen in at 11 dimensional spacetime, which recieves information from the past light
cone. given that the matrix coordinates si
ab can be interpreted in the limit k   and n  
to reproduce the matrix model we may deduce the second conjecture.

 c2 in that continuum limit, and in the limits k, n  , the matrix observables si

ab describe
the embedding of the punctured two surface on which the holographic observables are dened
in the r9 which represents the transverse directions in the lightcone coordinates of an observer
in 10 + 1 spacetime.

we have also made a third conjecture

 c3 the theory with gq = su (16|1) is a broken phase of a theory with gq = osp(1|32)
which will be a background independent form of m theory. its holographic observables will
provide a covariant extension of the matrix model in d = 11 and it will contain other phases
corresponding to the consistent perturbative string theories.

37

11.3 directions for future work

much needs to be done in order to develop the theory described here so that the conjectures just
made can be refuted or conrmed. i close with a description of some of the questions that may be
attacked.

11.4 the existence of the continuum limit

the main dynamical problem yet to be attacked is the existence of the continuum limit. a fun-
damental point is that, if there is a continuum limit, the causal structure induced on m will
corresponds directly to that of the actual spacetime geometry. this makes the problem of the
continuum limit very dierent from that of a euclidean theory. one consequence is that the con-
tinuum limit in such a theory cannot be described in terms of the conventional second order critical
phenomena[31, 20]. this is because the causal structure is a degree of freedom, so there is no
xed metric to dene a euclidean continuation. instead it is analogous to non-equilibrium critical
phenomena such as directed percolation or the growth of soap bubbles[31, 20].

detailed studies such lorentzian critical phenomena for quantum theories of gravity are in
progress in 1 + 1[32, 33] and 2 + 1 dimensions[34]. one result is the discovery of a universality
class for 1 + 1 quantum gravity that is not liouville theory[32]. of great importance would be the
extension of these methods to the study of supersymmetric theories. in this regard it is interesting
to note that there exists a possible connection15 between supersymmetry and causality in 1 + 1
dimensional matrix models of evolving causal histories.

these studies are necessary preliminaries for an attack on the continuum limit of the full theory.
in particular, control over the continuum limit of 1 + 1 dimensional theories of this kind may be
sucient to discover those choices of algebras gq and evolution laws for which the continuum limit
exists. this is because, according to the argument of [35], summarized above, a causally evolving
spin network (or spin foam) cannot have a continuum limit unless the 1+ 1 dimensional spin system
that describe its small perturbations itself has a continuum limit which reproduces a critical string
theory.

it is also intriguing that non-equilibrium critical phenomena of the kind we expect to nd in
these theories, can be self-organized, in the sense of bak et al[66], leading to the possibility of
self-tuning critical phenomena. it is intriguing to speculate that the self-tuning may extend to the
selection of algebras (or more properly, subalgebras) such that continuum limits exist. if this is the
case than the existence of the classical world may be a self-organized critical phenomena.

one thing which is unusual about the continuum limit in this theory is that it will have to
pick out the dimension of space. at the quantum level generic states can be decomposed in
dierent ways as superpositions of states that correspond to pseudomanifolds of denite dimension.
it is interesting to speculate on the mechanisms whereby the dierent bases which are dual to
pseudomanifolds of dierent dimensions may decohere in the case of very high genus, perhaps
leading to a statistical theory of compactication.

15pointed out by j. ambjorn and s. gupta.

38

11.5 extensions of the matrix model

the results described above suggest that there ought to be an extension of the dwhn-bfss
matrix model which incorporates four form degrees of freedom and a central extension of the
supersymmetry algebra. this is under investigation[71]. this may also lead to a supercovariant
formulation of the matrix model.

11.6 uniqueness of the evolution moves

in the present paper we were interested just to show that there exist choices of evolution moves
and amplitudes such that the matrix model was recovered for the description of the holographic
degrees of freedom. the form of the laws we have found here is neither beautiful nor unique. it is
then interesting to investigate whether there are more elegant forms for the evolution laws.

of great importance is the question of whether the bulk moves still induce the matrix hamilto-
nian when they act deep inside a very high genus surface. one may conjecture that supersymmetry
will protect the form of the induced boundary action, due to a non-perturbative renormalization
theorem.

11.7 defects and branes

as mentioned in section 2, the correspondence between quantum geometries in d dimensions and
states in h reproduces pseudomanifolds. these have defects which are identied surfaces of codi-
mension 2 or greater. given the fundamental dynamics on h these defects will evolve. these may
then be something like the branes of string theory. these are not d-branes because the excita-
tions which we have identied as strings do not end on them, rather they must be magnetically
charged. thus, the theory predicts that there are d0 branes associated with the holographic sur-
faces on which strings end, and dual magnetic branes, associated with defects that arise in the dual
transformation between conformal blocks and combinatorial pseudomanifolds.

11.8 symmetry breaking and algebraic compactication

there is a natural mechanism for symmetry breaking in this class of theories, which is the follow-
ing. let us consider a basis state |, j, i > for an open tube network, with all the representations
chosen to be in the representation associated with rv , where v is the fundamental spinor repre-
sentation of spin(d)  gq. then small perturbations live in the d  r dimensional subspace of v .
the result is that the algebra that describes the small perturbations is reduced from spin(d) to
spin(d  r).

the simplest example is in the case that j is in the fundamental representation, in which case
as we saw above, small perturbations live in the d  1 dimensional subspace associated with the
tangent space to sd1. the symmetry group is then reduced to spin(d  1). for the case d = 3,
spin(3) = su (2) and the small perturbations in the presence of j = 1/2 are associated with u (1).
in the general case gq will be reduced to a subalgebra, hq.

this means that the theory may have in principle many continuum limits, associated with
dierent reductions of gq. this may lead to a theory of compactications of the theory that is
entirely algebraic.

39

11.9 relationship to the ads/cft conjecture

the basic picture which has emerged is that of an algebraic description of a membrane whose
dynamics, given the map , may be described in a dual picture given by the embedding of n
points in sd1. this sphere is understood to be the transverse surface associated with the past
in the limit n   this surface may be pictured itself as a two
light cone of some observer.
dimensional membrane embedded in sd1. in the presence of a symmetry breaking state of the
kind just dened, this will reduce to the embedding of a membrane in sdr1.

we also note that the whole picture is well dened when the algebra gq has been quantum
deformed and q is taken at a root of unity. this is because in this case the list of representations is
nite, which means that the sum over histories that denes the amplitudes of observable processes
(observable with respect to observers inside the universe) is nite. thus, the level k denes a kind
of infrared cuto.

it is then not surprising that in 2 + 1 and 3 + 1 dimensions, where the correspondence between
the quantum theories and the classical theories are well understood, the level k is associated with
the cosmological constant. in 3 + 1 dimensions the exact relation is given by (2) [16, 26]. we may
also note that in this case the area of the s2 grows proportionally to n . as discussed in section 2,
we may choose the area operator in higher dimensions so that this is true as well for the sdr1
that the membrane embeds in, in that limit.

let us then consider the limit n  , in which we keep the cosmological constant, and hence
k, xed. let us also assume that we have picked the sign of the cosmological constant, as well as
the pattern of symmetry breaking, so that if there is a continuum limit, it may be a d  r + 1
dimensional ads spacetime. it then follows that in the limit n   the sdr1 in which the
holographic surface embeds must become the boundary of a spatial slice of the ads spacetime.
this is because its area will go to innity and, by the symmetry of the classical limit, it will be a
metric sphere of that area. the only such embedded metric spheres with innite area are in the
boundary.

if the ads/cft conjecture is also true then we reach the following conclusion. there is a

inclusion,

f : hads  v s 2


(59)

where hads is the physical hilbert space of the conformal eld theory that describes the degrees
of freedom at the boundary of d  r + 1 dimensional ads spacetime and v s 2
 is the n   limit
of the space of conformal blocks v s 2

ja of the n punctured s2 for the reduced algebra hq.

in the 3+1 dimensional case, this implies that the boundary states for quantum general relativity
and supergravity with a cosmological constant should be constructible in terms of conformal blocks
on a punctured s2, in the limit that the number of punctures is taken to innity. this is conrmed
in detail, for the reduction down to general relativity and n = 1, 2 supergravity[16, 26, 27] for the
full n = 8 case, the conjecture is that the state space of the boundary theory lives in the n  
limit of the space of intertwiners of osp(2|4)  osp(2|4). this will be discussed in more detail in
[67].

11.10 black hole state counting

an important problem that this framework should open up a solution for is the entropy of black
holes far from extremality, where the specic heat is negative. these are non-bps states, however,

40

the present framework suggests that black hole boundary states should still be expressible in terms
of d0 branes on an appropriate boundary. evidence for this is given by the black hole state
countings in [60] which use a modication of the chern-simons boundary conditions in [16, 26].
to study this one writes a path integral formula for the thermal partition function of the theory.
this will dene the statistical mechanics of the d0 branes. this will be discussed in more detail
elsewhere.

11.11 quantum cosmology from the inside

the class of theories we have discussed here are examples of a new kind of quantum theory of
cosmology in which there is no observables that acts directly on the wavefunction of the universe.
this is good, because were there, we would have to worry about who could observe them. instead,
given a quantum history m, or a class of such histories, there are a large number of hilbert spaces
that describe what observers inside the universe may observe. this is of course closely related to
the holographic principle, as discussed here and in [2, 24, 70]. the general form of such theories is
discussed in [63, 64, 73] and interpretational issues are discussed in [65].

what is most gratifying about this class of theories is the manner in which those structures
which seem necessary to solve foundational issues, such as how to describe what observers inside the
universe may measure in a quantum cosmology, turn out to coincide precisely with those structures
which are necessary to solve technical problems concerning the existence of background independent
quantum theories of gravity with good continuum limits.

acknowledgments

this work arose out of joint work with fotini markopoulou, whose suggestions and criticisms have
been crucial. the holographic map  described here is a realization of ideas rst proposed by louis
crane[36] concerning the relationship between bulk and boundary states in quantum gravity, and
his picture has been an important inspiration for the work leading up to the present conjecture. i am
also indebted to arivand asok, chris beetle, john brodie, surya das, michael dine, brian greene,
sameer gupta, eli hawkins, chris isham, stuart kauman, yi ling, shahn majid, seth major,
juan maldacena, roger penrose, michael reisenberger, carlo rovelli, steve shenker and edward
witten for conversations and criticisms at various stages of this work. i am especially indebted
to louis kauman for pointing out an error in a construction in the rst draft of this paper. i
am grateful to itp in santa barbara and the theoretical physics group at imperial college for
hospitality during the course of this work. this work was supported by the nsf through grant
phy95-14240.
i am also very grateful for support and encouragement from the jesse phillips
foundation.

references

[1] c. m. hull and p. k. townsend, unity of superstring dualities, nucl. phys. b348 (1995) 109;

e. witten, string theory in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b443 (1995) 85.

[2] f. markopoulou and l. smolin quantum geometry with intrinsic local causality preprint, dec.

1997, gr-qc/9712067, phys.rev. d58 (1998) 084032.

41

[3] t. jacobson and l. smolin, nonperturbative quantum geometries nuclear physics b299 (1988)

295-345.

[4] c. rovelli and l. smolin, phys rev lett 61 (1988) 1155; nucl phys b133, 80 (1990);the

physical hamiltonian in nonperturbative quantum gravity,phys.rev.lett.72(1994)446

[5] c. rovelli and l. smolin discreteness of area and volume in quantum gravity nuclear physics

b 442 (1995) 593. erratum: nucl. phys. b 456 (1995) 734.

[6] c. rovelli and l. smolin, spin networks and quantum gravity gr-qc/9505006, physical

review d 52 (1995) 5743-5759.

[7] l smolin: in quantum gravity and cosmology, eds j perez-mercader et al, world scientic,

singapore 1992; the future of spin networks gr-qc/9702030 in the penrose feshscrift.

[8] c. rovelli, gr-qc/9710008.

[9] t. jaocobson, new variables for canonical supergravity class. quant. grav. 5 (1988) 923;
d. armand-ugon, r. gambini, o. obregon, j. pullin, towards a loop representation for
quantum canonical supergravity, hep-th/9508036, nucl.phys. b460 (1996) 615; h. kunitomo
and t. sano the ashtekar formulation for canonical n=2 supergravity, prog. theor. phys.
suppl. (1993) 31; takashi sano and j. shiraishi, the non-perturbative canonical quantiza-
tion of the n=1 supergravity, nucl. phys. b410 (1993) 423, hep-th/9211104; the ashtekar
formalism and wkb wave functions of n=1,2 supergravities, hep-th/9211103; k. ezawa,
ashtekars formulation for n=1, n=2 supergravities as constrained
bf theories, prog.theor.phys.95:863-882,1996, hep-th/9511047.t. kadoyoshi and s. no-
jiri, n=3 and n=4 two form supergravities, mod.phys.lett.a12:1165-1174,1997,
hep-th/9703149; l. f. urrutia towards a loop representation of connection theories dened
over a super-lie algebra hep-th/9609010.

[10] yi li and l. smolin, supersymmetric spin networks and quantum supergravity, hep-

th/9904016, to appear in physical review d

[11] see, for example, p. s. aspinwall, b. r. greene, d. r. morrison multiple mirror manifolds and
topology change in string theory, hep-th/9301043, phys. lett. b303 (1993) 249-259; calabi-
yau moduli space, mirror manifolds and spacetime topology change in string theory, hep-
th/9309097, nucl. phys. b420 (1994) 184-242; brian r. greene, david r. morrison, andrew
strominger, nucl.phys. b451 (1995) 109-120, hep-th/9504145.

[12] h. kodama, prog.theor.phys.80:1024,1988.

[13] a. sen, gravity as a spin system phys. lett. b119 (1982) 89; quantum theory of a spin 3/2

system in einstein spaces, int. j. of theor. phys. 21 (1982) 1.

[14] a ashtekar, phys. rev. lett., 57 (1986) 2244; phys. rev. d36 (1987) 1587.

[15] l. smolin and c. soo, the chern-simons invariant as the natural time variable for classical

and quantum cosmology nucl. phys. b449 (1995) 289, gr-qc/9405015

42

[16] l. smolin, linking topological quantum eld theory and nonperturbative quantum gravity gr-

qc/9505028, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6417.

[17] s. major and l. smolin, quantum deformation of quantum gravity gr-qc/9512020, nucl. phys.
b 473 (1996) 267; r. borissov, s. major and l. smolin, the geometry of quantum spin networks
gr-qc/9512043, class. and quant. grav. 12 (1996) 3183.

[18] f. markopoulou and l. smolin non-perturbative dynamics of algebraic (p,q) string networks

preprint, december 1997, hep-th/9712148, phys.rev. d58 (1998) 084033

[19] l. smolin, towards a background independent approach to m theory, hep-th/9808192, to ap-
pear in a special issue of chaos, solitons and fractals on  superstrings, m,f,s....theory
(1998).

[20] s. kauman and l. smolin, combinatorial dynamics in quantum gravity

[21] b. dewitt, j. hoppe, h. nicolai, nuclear physics b305 (1988) 545.

[22] t. banks, w. fishler, s. h. shenker, l. susskind, m theory as a matrix model: a conjecture hep-
th/9610043; phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112; lubos motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring
interactions, hep-th/9701025; tom banks, nathan seiberg, strings from matrices, nucl.phys.
b497 (1997) 41-55,h ep-th/9702187 ; r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, matrix string
theory, nucl.phys. b500 (1997) 43-61, hep-th/9703030.

[23] l. smolin, the bekenstein bound, topological quantum eld theory and pluralistic quantum

cosmology, gr-qc/9508064

[24] l. smolin, holography, ination and causality preprint in preparation (1999).

[25] j. d. bekenstein, lett. nuovo cim 11 (1974).

[26] l. smolin, holographic formulation of quantum general relativity. , hep-th/9808191.

[27] yi ling and l. smolin, holographic formulation of n =2 supergravity, preprint in preparation.

[28] l. bombelli, j. lee, d. meyer and r. d. sorkin, spacetime as a causal set phys. rev. lett. 59

(1987) 521.

[29] g. t hooft, quantum gravity: a fundamental problem and some radical ideas. carg`ese summer
school lectures 1978. publ. recent developments in gravitation. carg`ese 1978. ed. by m.
levy and s. deser. plenum, new york/london, 323; quantization of space and time in
3 and in 4 space-time dimensions, lectures held at the nato advanced study institute
on quantum fields and quantum space time, carg`ese, july 22  august 3, 1996. gr-
qc/9608037; the scattering matrix approach for the quantum black hole: an overview. j. mod.
phys. a11 (1996) pp. 4623-4688. gr-qc/9607022.

[30] f. markopoulou, dual formulation of spin network evolution preprint, march 1997, gr-

qc/9704013.

[31] f. markopoulou and l. smolin causal evolution of spin networks gr-qc/9702025. cgpg

preprint (1997), nuclear physics b, nucl.phys. b508 (1997) 409-430.

43

[32] j. ambjorn and r. loll, non-perturbative lorentzian quantum gravity, causality and topol-
ogy change,nucl.phys. b536 (1998) 407-434, hep-th/9805108; j. ambjorn, j.l. nielsen, j.
rolf, r. loll, euclidean and lorentzian quantum gravity - lessons from two dimensions,
hep-th/9806241.

[33] s, gupta, in preparation.

[34] r. borissov and s. gupta, propagating spin modes in canonical quantum gravity, gr-

qc/9810024.

[35] l. smolin, strings as perturbations of evolving spin-networks, hep-th/9801022

[36] l. crane, clocks and categories, is quantum gravity algebraic? j.math.phys. 36 (1995) 6180-
6193, gr-qc/9504038; topological eld theory as the key to quantum gravity, hep-th/9308126,
in knot theory and quantum gravity ed. j. baez, (oxford university press); categorical
physics, hep-th/9301061.

[37] r. penrose, theory of quantized directions unpublished manuscript.; in quantum theory and
beyond ed t bastin, cambridge u press 1971; in advances in twistor theory, ed. l. p. hugh-
ston and r. s. ward, (pitman,1979) p. 301; in combinatorial mathematics and its applica-
tion (ed. d. j. a. welsh) (academic press,1971); theory of quantized directions unpublished
manuscript.

[38] juan m. maldacena, hep-th/9711200, hep-th/9803002.

[39] e. witten, hep-th/9802150, hep-th/9803131.

[40] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov, a.m. polyakov, phys.lett. b428 (1998) 105-114, hep-th/9802109.

[41] g. moore and n. seiberg, classical and quantum conformal eld theories comun. math. phys.

123 (1988) 177.

[42] e. witten, quantum eld theory and the jones polynomial commun. math. phys. 121 (1989)

351

[43] l. crane, commun. math. phys. 135 (1991) 615; phys. lett. b 259 (1991) 243.

[44] e. verlinde, fusion rules and modular transformations in 2d conformal eld theory nucl. phys.
b 300 (1988) 360; g. moore and n. yu. reshetikhin, a comment on quantum group symmetry
in conformal eld theory, nucl. phys. b 328 (1989) 557; n. yu. reshetikhin and v. g. turaev,
ribbon graphs and their invariants derived from quantum groups, commun. math. phys. 127
(1990) 1; invariants of 3-manifolds via link polynomials and quantum groups, invent. math.
103 (1991) 547; v turaev o viro: topology 31 (1992) 865.

[45] l.kauman,s.l.lins,

temperley-lieb

recoupling

theory

and

invariants

of

3-manifolds,princeton u press, 1994.

[46] m. reisenberger, a lattice worldsheet sum for 4-d euclidean general relativity , gr-qc/9711052;
m. reisenberger and c. rovelli, sum over surfaces form of loop quantum gravity, gr-
qc/9612035

44

[47] j. barrett and l. crane, relativistic spin networks and quantum gravity, gr-qc/9709028 ;
l. crane, on the interpretation of relativistic spin networks and the balanced state sum, gr-
qc/9710108; j. baez, spin foam models, gr-qc/9709052; a. barbieri quantum tetrahedra and
simplicial spin networks gr-qc/9707010.

[48] b. bruegmann, r. gambini and j. pullin, phys. rev. lett. 68, 431 (1992); gen. rel. and

grav. 251 (1993);

[49] r. gambini and j. pullin, loops, knots, gauge theories and quantum gravity cambridge uni-

versity press, 1996.

[50] r. loll, nucl. phys. b444 (1995) 619; b460 (1996) 143; r. depietri and c. rovelli, geometry
eigenvalues and scalar product from recoupling theory in loop quantum gravity, gr-qc/9602023,
phys.rev. d54 (1996) 2664; simonetta frittelli, luis lehner, carlo rovelli, the complete spec-
trum of the area from recoupling theory in loop quantum gravity gr-qc/9608043; r. borissov,
ph.d. thesis, temple, (1996).

[51] d. rayner, class. quan. grav. 7 (1990)111; 7 (1990) 651.

[52] a. ashtekar and c. j. isham, class and quant grav 9 (1992) 1069

[53] a ashtekar j lewandowski d marlof j mourau t thiemann: quantization of dieomorphism
invariant theories of connections with local degrees of freedom, gr-qc/9504018, jmp 36 (1995)
519; a. ashtekar and j. lewandowski, quantum geometry i: area operator gr-qc/9602046;
j. lewandowski, volume and quantization gr-qc/9602035.

[54] t. thiemann, quantum spin dynamics i-v, class.quant.grav. 15 (1998) 839-905, 1207-1512.
gr-qc/9606092, gr-qc/9606089, gr-qc/9606090, gr-qc/9705020, gr-qc/9705021, gr-qc/9705019,
gr-qc/9705018, gr-qc/9705017

[55] g. thooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity gr-qc/9310006.

[56] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, hep-th/9409089, j. math. phys. (1995) ; strings, black
holes and lorentz contractions hep-th/9308139; phys. rev. lett. 71 (1993) 2367; phys. rev.
d 49 (1994) 6606; d 50 (1994) 2700; l. susskind and p. grin, partons and black holes
hep-th/9410306

[57] w. fischler, l. susskind, holography and cosmology, hep-th/9806039.

[58] gary t. horowitz, donald marolf, a new approach to string cosmology, jhep 9807 (1998)

014, hep-th/9805207.

[59] simonetta frittelli, carlos n. kozameh, ezra t. newman, carlo rovelli, ranjeet s. tate,
fuzzy spacetime from a null-surface version of gr, class.quant.grav. 14 (1997) a143-a154,
gr-qc/9603061; on the quantization of the null-surface formulation of gr phys.rev. d56
(1997) 889-907, gr-qc/9612010; savitri v. iyer, carlos n. kozameh, ezra t. newman, the
vacuum einstein equations via holonomy around closed loops on characteristic surfaces.,
gr-qc/9502020; simonetta frittelli, carlos kozameh, ted newman, lorentzian metrics from
characteristic surfaces, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 4975-4983, gr-qc/9502025.

45

[60] k. krasnov, gr-qc/9603025, phys.rev. d55 (1997) 3505-3513; gr-qc/9605047, gen.rel.grav.
30 (1998) 53-68; a. ashtekar, j. baez, a. corichi, k. krasnov, phys.rev.lett. 80 (1998)
904-907, gr-qc/9710007; gr-qc/9902015.

[61] c. rovelli,int. j. of theor. phys. 35 (1996) 1637, quant-ph/9609002.

[62] l. smolin the life of the cosmos oxford and wiedenfeld and nicolson, 1997.

[63] f. markopoulou, the internal description of a causal set: what the universe looks like from

the inside, gr-qc/9811053.

[64] f. markopoulou, quantum causal histories, hep-th/9904009.

[65] f. markopoulou and l. smolin, causal quantum cosmology, preprint in preparation.

[66] p. bak, c. tang and k. wiesenfeld, phys. rev. lett. 59 (1987) 381; phys. rev. a 38 (1988)

364; per bak how nature works oxford: oxford university press, 1997.

[67] y. ling and l. smolin, preprint in preparation.

[68] y. ling and l. smolin, supersymmetric spin networks and quantum supergravity, hep-

th/9904016, to appear in physical review d.

[69] r. bousso a covariant entropy conjecture hep-th/9905177; holography in general space-times

hep-th/9906022.

[70] f. markopoulou and l. smolin, holography in a quantum spacetime, hep-th/9910146.

[71] l. smolin, preprint in preparation.

[72] p. townsend, (m)embrane theory on t 9, nucl. phys. (proc. suppl) 68 (1998) 11-16; hep-
th/9507048, in particles, strings and cosmology, ed. j. bagger et al (world scientic,1996);
hep/9612121; i. bars, hep-th/9608061; hep-th/9607122; petr horava, m-theory as a holo-
graphic field theory, hep-th/9712130, phys.rev. d59 (1999) 046004

[73] f. markopoulou, an insiders guide to quantum causal histories, hep-th/9912137, to appear in

the proceedings of quantum gravity 99 meeting, held in sardinia, italy, on sept. 1999

46

a

b

b

a

a

b

b

ax
ab:

g
g
j

a

b

a

b

a

a

a
:
ab

b

b

a

a

b

p
g
g
 j   

 k   

 l   

2 

vs 
j k l   

