hep-th/9903210; lptens-99-07; damtp-1999-14

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
3
1

 

 
 

2
v
0
1
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

curvature terms in d-brane actions

and their m-theory origin

constantin p. bachas1, pascal bain2

laboratoire de physique theorique de l ecole normale superieure 3

24 rue lhomond, 75231 paris cedex, france

and

michael b. green4

department of applied mathematics and theoretical physics

silver street, cambridge cb3 9ew, uk

we derive the complete (curvature)2 terms of eective d-brane actions, for arbi-
trary ambient geometries and world-volume embeddings, at lowest order (disk-level) in the
string-loop expansion. these terms reproduce the o( 2) corrections to string scattering
amplitudes, and are consistent with duality conjectures. in the particular case of the d3-

brane with trivial normal bundle, considerations of sl(2, zz) invariance lead to a complete

sum of d-instanton corrections for both the parity-conserving and the parity-violating parts

of the eective action. these corrections are required for the cancellation of the modular

anomalies of massless modes, and are consistent with the absence of chiral anomalies in

the intersection domain of pairs of d-branes. we also show that the parity-conserving
part of the non-perturbative r2 action follows from a one-loop quantum calculation in the
six-dimensional world-volume of the m5-brane compactied on a two-torus.

2/99

1 email: bachas@physique.ens.fr
2 email: bain@physique.ens.fr
3 unite mixte du cnrs, umr8549 .
4 email: m.b.green@damtp.cam.ac.uk

1. introduction

the dynamics of p-branes is well-approximated by eective world-volume (p + 1)-

dimensional eld theories of various kinds when p < 5.

in the case of dp-branes the

eective world-volume actions consist of the sum of a wesszumino (wz) part that is

parity-violating, and of a parity-conserving part whose rst term is the diracborninfeld

(dbi) action (see [1,2] for reviews).

the wz term describes the coupling of a dp-brane to the bulk ramondramond
(r  r) elds and can be motivated in a variety of manners [3,4,5,6,7,8,9] . it has the
structure of an anomaly cancelling term and can indeed be determined by requiring the

consistent cancellation of the chiral gauge and gravitational anomalies that arise when pairs

of d-branes intersect in certain congurations [8,9]. such terms have a simple topological

description which results in the expression for the (p + 1)-form wz term

zm (p+1) l(p)disk

w z = t(p)zm (p+1)

c  trn(cid:16)e2f(cid:17)   a(42rt )

a(42rn )!1/2

,

(1.1)

where t(p) is the tension of the dp-brane and the trace is in the fundamental representation
of the world-volume gauge group, u (n ). the expression a is the dirac roof genus and
its square root has the expansion in even powers of the curvature two-form,

q a(r) = 1 

1
48

p1(r) +

1

2560

p2
1(r) 

1

2880

p2(r) + . . . ,

(1.2)

where p1 and p2 are the rst two pontryagin classes. the components of the curvature
with tangent-space indices are denoted by rt in (1.1) while rn denotes the components
in the normal bundle (the denitions of our notation are made precise in the appendices).
the r  r (p + 1)-form potentials pulled back to the dp-brane are contained in c =
c(0) + c(1) . . . + c(9), where the odd forms contribute in the iia theory and the even
ones in the iib theory, the structure of (1.1) may also be determined by considering

the scattering of gravitons on a world-sheet with disk topology [10,11,12], which we will

refer to as the tree-level contribution. as usual, since these terms are responsible for the

cancellation of anomalies they receive no perturbative corrections.

the dbi action for a single dp-brane [13,14] encapsulates the exact dependence on

the eld strength of the borninfeld vector potential for constant eld strengths, and can

be xed by considerations of t-duality and lorentz covariance [15]

zm (p+1) l(p)

dbi = t(p)zm (p+1)

erdet(cid:16)(g + b )y y  + 2f(cid:17).

(1.3)

1

here and in the following, we will use greek indices from the middle of the alphabet

(, , ...) for the space-time coordinates, greek letters from the beginning of the alphabet

(, ...) for the world-volume coordinates, and latin letters (a, b, ...) for the normal bundle

(see appendix a for more details). in contrast to the wz action, the expression (1.3) does

not include gravitational-curvature eects induced by the ambient geometry and/or by

non-trivial world-volume embeddings. such eects will generically require the addition of

terms that again involve powers of the riemann curvature with nontrivial values in both

the tangent bundle and the normal bundle. in section 2 we will determine the structure of

these terms by considering the scattering of gravitons and of ripples (open strings) in the

world-volume of the d-brane. a residual ambiguity will be xed by invoking heterotic/type

ii duality in six dimensions. our analysis in section 2 will be restricted to the lowest-order

terms, which arise from world-sheets with the topology of a disk and which are quadratic
in the curvature expansion. for simplicity we will also assume constant dilaton and rr
backgrounds, as well as vanishing b and f elds, but we allow for arbitrary ambient
geometries and world-volume embeddings.

in section 3 we will consider the particular case of d3-branes. we will explain why the

curvature-squared terms receive non-perturbative d-instanton corrections that are neces-

sary in order to ensure that the type iib theory maintains the requisite sl(2, zz) invariance
[16,17] in the presence of d3-branes. the terms at issue are of the form f (, )r2, where

r denotes the components of the riemann curvature and the function f (, ) has specied

properties under modular transformations of the complex scalar eld of the iib theory,

  1 + i2 =

1
b

s hc(0) + iei ,

(1.4)

where c(0) is the r  r scalar and  is the type iib dilaton.5 in the special case of a
trivial normal bundle we will see that the complete expression for the r2 terms in the

d3-brane action will be given by,

(1.5)

1

r2 =



162 zm (4)
where ( ) is the dedekind function, r  1
two-form, and r  1

zm (4) l(3)
4g 

rehlog ( ) tr(rr  ir  r)i,
2 r d  d  is the so(1, 3)-valued curvature
 r d   d  is its hodge dual. the expression (1.5) has
s 4(2)7 and
s will be used to distinguish the string couplings

5 the d-brane tensions and the gravitational coupling are given by 22

(p) = (42)3p. the symbols a

2
(10)t 2
in the iia and iib theories, respectively, and the dilaton  has zero vacuum expectation value.

s and b

(10) = 2

2

a small-coupling expansion (2  ) that contains the tree-level terms that arise from
the disk calculations in section 2 together with an innite series of d-instanton corrections.

one argument for the form (1.5) of the d3-brane action, based on type iia/f-theory

duality [18], will be described in the rst part of section 3. the f-theory background
contains 24 (p, q) seven-branes, each making an equal contribution to the r2 terms of the

eective low-energy action. this universal piece of the seven-brane action is related by
t-duality to the r2 terms of the d3-brane action. on the type-iia side, on the other

hand, these same terms come from a one-loop amplitude which was computed in [19,20].

comparing the two sides leads to expression (1.5) .

a dierent argument for the structure of (1.5) follows by careful consideration of

its properties under sl(2, zz) transformations. we will see in the second part of section

3 that the conjectured action transforms under sl(2, zz) transformations in precisely the

appropriate manner to cancel the  -dependent anomalous transformation of the determi-

nant of the massless world-volume elds. this anomaly results from the chiral couplings

of the world-volume elds to the sl(2, ir) noether current. a  -independent modular

anomaly remains, but it is the integral of a topological density which integrates to an

integer multiple of 2 in consistent backgrounds

the emphasis in section 4 is on the relationships between the nonperturbative curva-

ture terms in the d3-brane of the iib theory and properties of the m5-brane compactied
on t 2. besides specializing to the case of a trivial normal bundle, we also only consider the

parity conserving terms. we will make use of the various dualities that relate m-theory on
t 2 to the type iia and iib theories compactied on s1 [21,22] to relate the d3-brane to

higher-dimensional branes. t-duality on the circle relates the iib theory to the iia the-

ory, and converts an unwrapped d3-brane into a wrapped d4-brane. the instanton terms

in the d3-brane are now interpreted as the world-lines of d-particles which form bound

states with the d4-brane [1]. these are the expected threshold bound states of a quantum
mechanical system with n = (4, 4) supersymmetry. as we will see, the exact expression
for the d-instanton measure that is extracted from the function f (, ) is consistent with

the fact that the witten index for this d-particled4-brane is one. the d4-brane in turn

may be interpreted as the m5-brane wrapped around the circular eleventh dimension of

m-theory. the d-particle bound states are then simply the kaluzaklein excitations in
the double dimensional reduction of the m5-brane. in this picture the r2 terms can be

3

deduced by a calculation of a one-loop eect in the world-volume of the compactied m5-

brane which will be described in section 4. this is analogous to the manner in which the
r4 terms of the bulk theory were deduced in [23].

section 5 summarizes our conclusions, and outlines how our arguments could be
extended in several directions. we discuss in particular why non-perturbative r4 terms

are expected in the world-volume action of a seven-brane, and how the analysis of sections

3 and 4 could be extended to account for non-trivial normal bundles. finally we comment

on the relevance of our results in the context of the ads/cft correspondence.

2. disk-level curvature terms

in this section we will extract the r2 terms of the classical d-brane action from

disk-level scattering amplitudes, combined with a duality argument and the requirement

of reparametrization invariance. we begin by reviewing the calculation [24,25] of the

disk diagram for (a) the elastic scattering of a graviton o a d-brane, (b) the absorption

of a graviton whose energy is carried away by two ripples (represented by open strings)

in the world-volume of the d-brane, and (c) the elastic scattering of two such world-

volume ripples. these processes can all be conveniently expressed in terms of the standard

amplitude for the scattering of four open-string gauge bosons [26]

a(1, k1; 2, k2; 3, k3; 4, k4) = n k(1, 2, 3, 4)

(2k1k2)(2k1k4)
(1 + 2k1k2 + 2k1k4)

,

(2.1)

where kr and r are momentum and polarization vectors, p kr = 0 , and n is a normal-

ization constant. the kinematic factor is dened in the usual manner

k(1, 2, 3, 4) = 16 t12345678

8

k11 12 k23 24k35 36 k47 48

(2.2)

with t8 the well-known eighth-rank tensor, which is antisymmetric in each of the four pairs
of consecutive indices and symmetric under interchange of two pairs.

equation (2.1) can be interpreted as the amplitude for any of the processes (a), (b)

or (c) that describe the scattering of closed or open strings in the background of a static

dp-brane oriented along the rst p spatial directions. the massless brane excitations cor-

respond to external open strings with momentum kr restricted to the tangent hyperplane.
normal and tangent open-string polarizations describe, respectively, the transverse oscil-

lations of the d-brane, and the gauge bosons living on its world-volume. amplitudes with

4

an external graviton of momentum p and polarization  can be obtained by the formal

replacements [24,25]

2k1  p , 2k2  (dp) ,

and

12  d
 ,

(2.3)

where the diagonal matrix d has a +1 entry for a direction tangent to the world-volume

of the static dp-brane and 1 for a normal direction. note that the constraint p kr = 0

is still obeyed, even though the transverse momentum of the graviton is not necessarily

conserved in the process. it can be checked that with the above identications the low-

energy limit of these amplitudes is compatible with the born-infeld action (1.3) coupled

to the type-ii supergravity lagrangian. the comparison xes the normalization constant

n  

1
8

t(p) 2 yopen

(2)1/2

(2.4)

where the product runs over open-string external legs, and the sign depends on whether

the external leg is a world-volume gauge-boson or a transverse brane oscillation. note that
our normalization of the graviton vertex operator, g =  + 2 eipx , diers from
the one in reference [24].

we rst consider the elastic scattering of a graviton, and expand the corresponding

amplitude to subleading order in the momenta

a(1, p1; 2, p2) = 

1
8

t(p) 2 k(1, 2)

=

1
2

t(p) k(1, 2) (cid:18) 1

q2t

+

(t/4)(q2)
(1  t/4 + q2)
+ o(4)(cid:19)
22

24

(2.5)

where q2 = p1 d p1/2 is the square momentum owing along the world-volume of the
dp-brane, and t = 2p1p2 is the momentum transfer in the transverse directions. the
kinematic factor following from the identications (2.3) reads

k(1, 2) =(cid:18)2q2 a1 +

t
2

a2(cid:19)

with

a1 = tr(1d) p12p1  p12d1p2  p121dp1
 p121dp1  p121p2 + q2 tr(12) +n1  2o

5

(2.6)

(2.7)

a2 = tr(1d) (p12dp2 + p2d2p1 + p2d2dp2)
+ p1d1d2dp2  p2d21dp1 + q2 tr(1d2d)
 q2 tr(12)  tr(1d)tr(2d) (q2  t/4) +n1  2o

(2.8)

note that a two-point function at tree level usually vanishes when the on-shell relations

and the momentum conservation are used. in our case, since the momentum is conserved

only in the directions parallel to the world-volume of the brane, the disk-level two-point

function does not vanish.

the leading term in the momentum expansion of the amplitude (2.5) contains poles
from the exchange of open (1/q2) and closed (1/t) string states, plus contact terms, all con-

sistent with the dirac-born-infeld lagrangian and the two-derivative supergravity action.

the subleading term in the amplitude, on the other hand, can be attributed entirely to the
o(2) contact interactions of two gravitons on the world-volume of the d-brane. indeed,
the trilinear vertices in the bulk as well as the graviton/ripple mixing on the world-volume

are protected by supersymmetry and should not receive any string corrections. thus there

are no 1pi contributions to the subleading term of the disk amplitude. note that cor-

rections to the above vertices can be of course generated by eld redenitions, so that a

particular choice of elds is implicitly assumed in our discussion. for bulk elds this is

the standard choice in which the higher-derivative corrections to the type ii supergravity
lagrangian are at least (curvature)4, and are of subleading order compared to the terms

considered here.

possible o(2) corrections to the dbi action, consistent with space-time and world-
volume reparametrization invariance, are enumerated in appendix b. they depend on

various pull-backs of the ambient curvature and on the second fundamental form of the

world-volume, . at the linearized level around at space and a static d-brane,  contains
an open-string excitation, and the bulk ricci tensor r = r
 is zero. as a result (see
appendix b) terms involving  and r do not contribute to the two-graviton amplitude

(2.5). one further ambiguity is related to the gauss-bonnet combination

lgb =

g
322(cid:16)rr  4 r r + r2(cid:17) .

(2.9)

here and in the following r, rab and r are obtained by contracting tangent indices
only. the gauss-bonnet combination is a topological invariant in four dimensions, but it

is a total derivative at quadratic order in all dimensions. hence it does not contribute to

6

the elastic scattering of a graviton o the d-brane. modulo all these ambiguities, there

exist nine remaining independent terms whose coecients can be xed by comparing with

the string-theory amplitude (2.5).

this straightforward but tedious comparison leads to the following result for the

(curvature)2 corrections to the dbi action,

cp even = c elgb + t(p)egh1 
l(p)

1
24

(42)2
322 

 (rr  2 r r  rabrab + 2 rab rab) + o(4)i,

(2.10)

where we included the still arbitrary coecient, c, of the gaussbonnet term which has
dimensions of (length)4 and which we will x in a minute. this expression involves

components of the curvature in both the tangent and the normal bundles. it is strictly-

speaking only valid for totally-geodesic embeddings of the world-volume (such that  = 0,

see appendix a) in a ricci-at ambient space-time. we will see below how to generalize

the formula to other embeddings.

the ambiguous coecient of the gauss-bonnet term can be xed by the following

indirect argument. consider type iia theory compactied on a k3 surface, which is dual
to the heterotic string on t 4 [16]. a wrapped d4-brane carries a d0-brane charge induced

by the presence of the gravitational wz term in the world-volume action (1.1) [7],

1
48



1

82 zk3

tr(r  r) = 1 .

(2.11)

now comparison with the spectrum of the heterotic string leads to the following mass

formula on the type-iia side [27]

m = t(4)n4vk3 + t(0)n0

(2.12)

with n4 and n0 the d4-brane and d-particle charge. the dbi action contribution to the
mass is proportional to the k3 volume which does not give the required shift. however,
this is given by including the r2 term in the action. the presence of this term results in

a contribution that is proportional to the euler class of the manifold,

 zk3

d4 lgb =

1

322 zk3

d4g rr = 24.

(2.13)

we use here the fact that k3 is ricci at, and that all curvatures with normal-bundle

indices are zero. substituting in (2.10) and using the standard expressions for the tensions

7

t(0) and t(4) gives the correct bps mass formula for the type iia theory compactied on
k3, provided we set the coecient c = 0.

we will note two pieces of evidence that give partial conrmation of our result. first,

consider a d-particle sitting at a point of a static curved space-manifold, such as a calabi-
yau space. it can be checked that the only potential o(2) corrections in this case could
come from the contraction of two curvatures with all indices in the normal bundle. such

terms are explicitly absent in (2.10), consistently with the fact that the mass of the d-
particle should not receive any  corrections.6 the second consistency check is based on
space-time supersymmetry. consider a n = 4 supersymmetric compactication of type
ii theory to four dimensions with 16 d3-branes and 64 orientifold three-planes. we will

discuss this compactication in more detail in section 3. the gravitational wess-zumino

term receives contributions both from the d3-branes and from the o3-planes, adding up

altogether to 24 times the contribution of one d3-brane [18]. supersymmetry relates these

cp-odd wess-zumino terms to their cp-even counterparts (see, for example, [28]).
if
we assume that the coecients of the cp-odd (curvature)2 terms for an o3-plane and a

d3-brane are in the same proportion as their cp-even counterparts, then the coecient
of rr agrees with the one found above. this conrms independently the choice
of the gauss-bonnet coecient c = 0.

let us consider nally the case of arbitrary world-volume embeddings, which are not

totally geodesic ( 6= 0). we have found that the following lagrangian
322 (cid:16)(rt )(rt )

cp even = t(p)egh1 
l(p)

 2(rt )(rt )  (rn )ab(rn )ab + 2 rab rab(cid:17) + o(4)i,

(42)2

1
24

(2.14)

generalizes (2.10) and reproduces correctly the two other scattering amplitudes, (b) and (c),

computed in [25]. these are the amplitudes involving open strings, which correspond to ge-

ometric brane excitations (but not to world-volume gauge bosons). in the above lagrangian
rt and rn are the world-volume curvature and the so(9 p) gauge eld strength, which
in the case of a totally geodesic embedding reduce to the pull-backs of the ambient cur-
vature (see appendix a), and we have dened rab  rab + g
a|b|  . as
previously, our arguments cannot x the coecients of terms involving the bulk ricci ten-

g 

sor or the trace of the second fundamental form  both of which vanish by virtue of the

6 we thank m. douglas for this argument.

8

mass-shell conditions at linearized level. we have not checked whether comparison with
the above scattering amplitudes leaves any residual ambiguities in the o(2) disk-level ac-
tion, beyond those corresponding to local redenitions of the geometric brane coordinates
y ().

the cp-odd (curvature)2 terms in the disk-level d-brane action derived in [9] must

involve closed forms on the world-volume, in order to be invariant under gauge transfor-
mations of the r  r potentials. hence, for non-geodesics embeddings, they must also be
expressed in terms of the world-volume and so(9  p) curvatures,

cp odd = t(p)(cid:16)c(p+1) +
l(p)

22

24

c(p3)  [tr(rt  rt )  tr(rn  rn )](cid:17).

(2.15)

we will now focus our attention on non-perturbative corrections to the d3-brane

action. to this end, we will specialize for simplicity to the case where the ambient space-

time is the direct product of the worldvolume times a normal space. the terms that survive

in (2.14) and (2.15) in this special case can be combined together as follows

zm (4) l(3)tree

r2

=

1

192 zm (4)h2 tr(rr) + 1 tr(r  r)i,

(2.16)

where  is dened in (1.4) and r will stand from now on for the so(1,3)-valued curvature

two-form on the world-volume of the d3-brane.

3. instanton corrections to the d3-brane action

the conjectured sl(2, zz) invariance of type iib theory requires that the d3-brane

world-volume theory be invariant under sl(2, zz) transformations of the supergravity back-

grounds. if one keeps only the two-derivative terms in the eective action, the invariance
is guaranteed by the standard montonenolive duality of four-dimensional n = 4 su-
persymmetric yangmills theory. more generally, it is also true that the sum of dbi

and non-gravitational wz terms of the d3-brane action exhibits electromagnetic dual-

ity [29,30,31]. this is consistent with sl(2, zz) invariance in the special limit in which

gravitational-curvature and covariant acceleration terms can be neglected.

the r2 terms obtained from disk amplitudes, on the other hand, do not by them-

selves respect sl(2, zz) invariance. to see why, it is useful to rst rescale the metric
from string to the einstein frame, g = e/2ge
 . in this frame the dilaton drops out
of the nambu-goto action, while the parity-conserving and parity-violating r2 terms are

9

multiplied, respectively, by e and by c(0). since sl(2, zz) transformations do not act

on the einstein-frame metric whereas  transforms as a modular parameter, invariance is

explicitly lost. this applies both to the parity conserving terms that multiply 2 and to
the gravitational wz terms that multiply 1.

our purpose in this section is to explain how d-instanton corrections to the eective

d3-brane action restore invariance under sl(2, zz). one way to understand the presence

of instanton corrections is to compactify a transverse direction and then perform a t-

duality tranformation that changes the d3-brane into a d4-brane. now the d4-brane forms

threshold bound states with d-particles [1], whose euclidean trajectories can wrap around

the compact dimension. taking these euclidean trajectories into account is equivalent in

t-dual language to summing the d-instanton corrections. as it turns out the eective

wilsonian action with its instanton corrections still leads to an anomalous phase of the

partition function under modular transformations. this phase cancels, however, precisely
the anomalous contribution of the massless n = 4 vector multiplet living on the d-brane,
provided also that the metric background satises an appropriate consistency condition.

3.1. duality between type iia on k3  t 2 and f-theory on k3  t 4

the d-instanton corrections to the r2 terms of the d3-brane action are, in the special
case of a trivial normal bundle discussed here, summarized by (1.5) . 7 more explicitly,

the eective wilsonian action contains a cp-even piece

zm (4) l(3) cp even

r2

=

1

322zm (4)

log|( )|2 tr(rr)

where the logarithm of the dedekind function has the weak-coupling expansion,

log|( )|2 = 


6

2 (cid:20)q +

3q2
2

+

4q3

3    + cc(cid:21) .

(3.1)

(3.2)

the rst term is the coecient of the perturbative disk diagram contribution, and the
series of powers of q = e2i are the d-instanton corrections. likewise, the cp-odd piece

of the eective wilsonian action reads

zm (4) l(3) cp odd

r2

= 

i

322 zm (4)

log

( )
( )

tr(r  r).

(3.3)

7 a non-trivial normal bundle poses some extra diculties which we will comment on briey

later.

10

where the logarithm may be expanded as

log

( )
( )

=

i
6

1 (cid:20)q +

3q2
2

+

4q3
3

+     cc(cid:21) .

(3.4)

the rst term, which again arises from the perturbative disk diagram, coincides with the
c(0) term in (2.15) (for p = 3 and when the normal bundle is trivial) whereas the series of
powers of q stand again for the d-instanton corrections. the derivative with respect to 

of this expression can be written in terms of the imaginary part of the second eisenstein

form, which is holomorphic but not modular covariant.

one way of arriving at the above action, outlined in reference [18], can be rephrased
in terms of the duality between f-theory compactied on k3  t 4 and type-iia theory
compactied on k3t 2, which is also dual to heterotic theory on t 6. the exact expression
for the r2 terms in the type iia theory can be derived from a one-loop calculation [19,20]
and is a function of the torus kahler modulus t . on the f-theory side, on the other hand,

these terms come from the sum of the actions on 24 (p, q) seven-branes compactied to
four dimensions on t 4. a maximum of eighteen of these may be seven-branes with the
same values of p and q, but fortunately the r2 terms of interest are the same for all types
of seven-branes. furthermore, a t-duality in the four t 4 directions maps these r2 terms
for a (p, q) seven-brane to the corresponding terms for a d3-brane. this chain of dualities
therefore predicts that the r2 terms in the d3-brane action are exactly 1/24th of the
corresponding type-iia loop amplitude, if one identies  in the former with the kahler

modulus t in the latter. comparing with the exact type-iia expression [19,20] leads then

to the conjectured action (1.5) on an individual d3-brane.

let us explain this argument in some more detail. in the case of a d7-brane, the

disk-level action contains the terms

(3.5)

zm (8) l(7)

r2 =

1
b
s

1

192

1

(42)2 zm (8) (cid:16)e tr(rr) + c(4)  tr(rr)(cid:17) .

switching from the string to the ten-dimensional einstein frame eliminates the dilaton
dependence of this action. since both the einstein-frame metric and the four-form c(4)
are inert under sl(2, zz) transformations, we can conclude that (3.5) is sl(2, zz) invariant
and must thus describe the r2 terms in the world-volume action of any (p, q) seven-brane.
after compactication on t 4 the above seven-brane action reduces to the leading, disk-level
term of the d3-brane action (1.5) provided we identify the modular parameter

 =

(42)2

b
s

c(4) + i v(4)

e (cid:19)

(cid:18)zt 4

11

(3.6)

where v(4)

e is the volume of the four-torus in the ten-dimensional einstein frame. it can be
checked that this identication is the one dictated by the t-duality transformation that

maps the seven-branes to d3-branes.

from the seven-brane point of view the instanton corrections arise from euclidean
trajectories of d3-branes wrapped around the compact t 4 and the quantity q = e2i
is the semi-classical measure corresponding to a singly-wrapped trajectory.8 it is worth

noting that in the eight-dimensional compactication of f-theory both the dilaton and the

conformal factor of the metric of the -model that is induced on the seven-branes vary as

functions of the transverse two-dimensional space. this variation however precisely cancels

out (see for instance [37]) when one considers the einstein metric, which is consistent with
the fact that the modulus v(4)

e should not depend on the precise locations of the seven-

branes.

it is important to check that the instanton corrections to the wess zumino action do

not aect the anomaly inow argument of [8]. for example, consider the conguration in

which a d3-brane intersects a d7-brane on a line, along which chiral fermions propagate.

the consequent gravitational anomalies in the intersection domain are supposed to be

cancelled by anomalous inow from the branes. the anomalous variation of the wz

action of the d3-brane under space-time reparametrizations depends only on the source
term in the anomalous bianchi identity for the r  r one-form eld strength. but this
is not aected by the non-perturbative d-instanton corrections because the semi-classical

measure q has trivial monodromy around the d7-brane,

zs1

d log

( )
( )

=

i
6b

s zs1

d c(0) =

i
6

,

(3.7)

where s1 is a circle around the d7-brane. the anomalous variation in the intersection

domain therefore comes entirely from the disk-level part of the d3-brane wz action. a

similar argument should ensure that instanton eects in the d7-brane do not aect the

inow argument.

as we will explain in the concluding remarks, a chain of reasoning analogous to
the one described in this subsection also requires the presence of nonperturbative r4

contributions to the seven-brane action, coming from localized d-instantons.

8 see [32,33,34,35,36] for discussions of such extended d-brane instantons in other contexts.

12

3.2. modular anomalies

the elements of sl(2, zz) are generated by the transformations t , which acts as
a shift    + 1, and s, which acts as the inversion   1/ . the corresponding
transformations of the logarithm of the dedekind function are

log ( + 1) = log ( ) + i


12

,

log (1/ ) = log ( )  i


4

+

1
2

log .

(3.8)

as a result, the eective wilsonian action (1.5) is not by itself sl(2, zz) invariant. this

situation is familiar from other related examples [38,39,40,41]. the  -dependent variation

of the wilsonian action should cancel the anomalous contributions of the massless modes,
which are the gauge boson and its fermionic partners in the abelian n = 4 vector multiplet
that describes the low-energy dynamics of the d-brane. the constant part of the variation

(3.8) on the other hand, leads to a net anomalous variation equal to the integral of a

topological density the rst pontryagin class of the manifold wrapped by the world-

volume of the d3-brane. this is an integer multiple of 2 in consistent backgrounds, for

which the rst pontryagin class is an integer multiple of 24.

to understand the modular anomaly of the massless d3-brane modes, we need to
consider the action for n = 4 supergravity coupled to the n = 4 maxwell theory [42,43].
both the maxwell eld and its fermionic partners contribute anomalous variations of the

partition function. one way of analyzing the anomaly of the fermions is to start with a

gauge-invariant description of the iib theory in which there are three scalar elds,  , 

and , that parameterize the group manifold of sl(2, ir). these package into a zweibein,
v a
i , which is an sl(2, ir) matrix

1

v a
i =

2 (cid:18) 2 cos  + 1 sin  2 sin  + 1 cos 

cos 

sin 

(cid:19) .

(3.9)

the global sl(2, ir) acts by matrix multiplication on v from the left while the local u (1)

acts from the right. the u (1) gauge potential is the composite eld

the eld  transforms as

a =  

1
22

.

(x)  (x) + (x),

under the local u (1) (where 0    2 is the gauge parameter) and by

   

i
2

c + d(cid:19)
log(cid:18) c + d

13

(3.10)

(3.11)

(3.12)

under the sl(2, ir) transformation which acts on the eld  in the usual manner,

  a =

a + b
c + d

where a =(cid:18) a b
d(cid:19) .

c

(3.13)

notice that a is invariant under sl(2, ir).

this local u (1) also acts as a phase rotation on the four weyl fermions whose charge

is 1/2. on the other hand the fermions are inert under sl(2, ir).
of anomalies the eld  can be eliminated by xing the gauge, and then the remaining

in the absence

scalars  and  parameterize the coset sl(2, ir)/u (1) where the u (1) is identied with
a compact so(2)  u (1) subgroup of sl(2, ir). at rst this appears to be impossible,
even in the absence of d-branes, because of an apparent anomalous coupling of the u (1)

current to four gravitons and the u (1) eld strength. this arises from an anomalous

hexagon diagram with circulating chiral gravitini and dilatini. however, the anomalous

u (1) transformation of the fermion determinant can be cancelled by a local counterterm

proportional tor  f  trr4 [44]. the modular anomaly in ten dimensions arises because

of the transformation of  under sl(2, zz) which leads to an anomalous variation of this

counterterm.

a similar phenomenon occurs on the world-volume of the d3-brane where a triangle

anomaly arises from the one-loop diagram coupling the divergence of the u (1) current to

two gravitons. the world-volume gauginos which have a chiral coupling to the u (1) are

circulating inside the loop. the anomalous phase of the partition function is given by the

standard expression

sgauginos = 4 

1

2zm (4)

(x) i1/2(r) =

1

962 zm (4)

(x) tr(r  r) ,

(3.14)

where i1/2(r) is the dirac index and the overall coecient follows from the u (1) charge
of the four weyl fermions. this u (1) anomaly can be cancelled by the addition of a

counterterm in the world-volume action

zm (4) l(3)

counter = 

1

962 zm (4)

 tr(r  r).

(3.15)

since  is an angular variable this expression is unambiguous only if the rst pontryagin

class is an integer multiple of 12  a milder restriction on consistent backgrounds than

the one that we will encounter shortly. although (3.15) cancels the local u (1) anomaly it

violates the symmetry of the action under sl(2, zz) transformations since  transforms as

14

in (3.12). the t transformation is nonanomalous but under an s transformation (3.15)

transforms by

sgauginos =

(3.16)

i

1922 zm (4)

log(cid:16) 

(cid:17) tr(r  r),

which is therefore the fermionic contribution to the modular anomaly. put dierently, we

can use the gauge symmetry to eliminate the auxiliary eld ( = 0), but then an sl(2, zz)

transformation must be accompanied by a compensating u (1)-gauge transformation, under

which the fermionic determinants would have exactly the same anomalous variation as

above.

this fermionic contribution only cancels part of the  -dependence in the modular

transformation of (3.1) and (3.3). an additional contribution to the modular anomaly

arises from the action of sl(2, zz) on the world-volume maxwell eld strength [45,46].

the maxwell eld is inert under the local u (1), so one must calculate directly the anomaly

in the current of the sl(2, ir) symmetry which is a good global symmetry of the low-

energy equations of motion. it should be possible to calculate this anomaly as a triangle

diagram with two external gravitons and one insertion of the sl(2, ir) current. here we

will instead use directly the results of [45,46] for the anomalous transformation of the

maxwell eld partition function. as with the fermion determinant, the t transformation

is nonanomalous but the s transformation leads to the anomalous phase,

smaxwell =

1

322 rezm (4)

log  h

1
2

r  r +

2i
3

tr(r  r)i .

(3.17)

this combines with the contribution of the fermion determinant, (3.16), to cancel the

 -dependent part of the variation of the cp-odd term (3.3), which is the contribution

of the massive string modes. likewise, the anomalous phase of the maxwell partition

function cancels the variation of the cp-even term (3.1) for ricci-at backgrounds for
which 1
2 r  r = tr(r r). recall that our d3-brane action was only obtained
modulo terms involving the ricci tensor of the bulk.

the modular transformation (3.8) has also a  -independent part which gives rise to

an anomalous phase equal to a constant multiple ofr tr(r r). for consistency this must

be an integer multiple of 2. this condition is fullled by consistent compactications for

which the rst pontryagin class is an integer multiple of 48,

1
48

p1(r) = 

1
48

1

82z tr(r  r)  zz .

(3.18)

this condition is fulllled in particular in the special case of a k3 surface.

15

it is also interesting to understand how the modular anomaly cancels in the f-theory
background of section 3.1, or equivalently the heterotic theory compactied on t 6. we
have already argued that the net contribution to the  -dependent part of the anomaly from

massive string modes is equal to 24 times that of a single d3-brane, in accordance with

the result of [19,20]. this should cancel the  -dependent part of the modular anomaly
coming from the n = 4 supergravity coupled to u (1)22 super-yang-mills theory, which
is the eective theory at a generic point of moduli space. to see how this works out

precisely, one must use the fact that the u (1) charges of the gravitini, dilatini and gaugini
are, respectively, 1
2 , and that the dilatini have opposite chirality compared
to the other fermionic elds [42,43]. furthermore, the expression of the dirac index for a
spin 3

2 and  1

2 ,  3

2 eld is [47]

i3/2(r) = i1/2(r)(cid:16)d  1  tr(eir/2  1)(cid:17) = 21 i1/2(r) +   

(3.19)

where in the second equality we consider only the four-form relevant for d = 4 space-

time dimensions. finally the chirality of the graviphotons is opposite to that of the gauge

bosons. putting all this together one nds the following contributions to the modular
anomaly, in units in which the contribution of an entire n = 4 vector multiplet is one,

2
3

22 
| {z }

gauge bosons

1
2

) 

 22  (
|
{z

gaugini

4
6

}

2
3

 6 
| {z }

graviphotons

dilatini

gravitini

+ (
|

3
2

) 
{z

4
6

}

+ 21 
|

1
2 
{z

4
6

}

.

(3.20)

the total is indeed 24, consistently with the absence of anomalies as well as with the

heterotic/type iia/f-theory duality conjectures.

4. m-theory interpretation

another strategy for obtaining the nonperturbative r2 contributions is to make
use of the dualities that relate string theory to m-theory. for example, the bulk r4
terms in the eective action of ten-dimensional type ii string theory can be obtained

from the one-loop feynman diagrams that contribute to four-graviton scattering in eleven-
dimensional supergravity compactied on t 2 [23]. the quanta circulating around the loop
are interpreted as d-particles in the type iia and d-instantons in the type iib descriptions

of the theory. the correspondence requires the identication of the complex iib coupling

 = 1 + i2 with the complex structure of the two-torus in m-theory,

  u =

r9
r11

ei ,

16

(4.1)

where  is the angle of the torus whose cycles have length 2r9 and 2r11. this identi-

cation follows from the standard relations connecting type-iia theory and m-theory:

r11 = lsa

s ,

lp =  22

(2)8!1/9

(11)

= ls (a

s )1/3 ,

(4.2)

as well as the t-duality transformation relating the iia and iib descriptions:

rb = l2

(4.3)

s/ra , b

s = a

sr rb
ra .

here ra = r9 sin and rb are the radii of the ninth dimension in the iia and iib re-
spectively descriptions, ls =  is the string length scale and lp the eleven-dimensional
planck length. the expectation value of the r  r scalar is c(0) = cot. the ten-
dimensional type iib string theory is recovered in the limit of vanishing t 2 volume,
v (2) = 42r9r11sin  0, with xed complex structure.

as we will now show the r2 term in the cp-even part of the d3-brane and d4-

brane actions can also be obtained by an extension of this argument. we consider m-

theory in the presence of an m5-brane that is wrapped around the cycles of a two-torus.

this is interpreted as a d4-brane in the type iia description and a d3-brane in the

type iib interpretation. we will consider a one-loop diagram with two external gravitons

scattering in the world-volume of the m5-brane. the circulating quanta with non-vanishing

momentum in the eleventh direction are now interpreted as bound states of d-particles

with the d4-brane. in the type iib description they correspond to the d-instantons in the

d3-brane whose contributions have been resummed in expression (1.5).

this one-loop eect can be in principle computed as the sum of feynman diagrams

with the component elds of the chiral (2, 0) tensor multiplet of the m5-brane circulating

in the loop. a more ecient method for obtaining this expression is to make use of the

manifestly supersymmetric rst-quantized light-cone gauge formalism of [23] in which the

amplitude is described as a trace over the states of the superparticle circulating around

the loop and coupled to two external gravitons. this method, inspired by the string-

theory calculation, will be sucient to nd the cp-even part of the action. the eleven-
dimensional coordinates are labelled x0, . . . x9, x11 and the light-cone gauge is dened so
that x +(t) = (x 0(t) + x 1(t))/2 = p+t + x+. the two-torus will be chosen to be
in the x9, x11 directions while the m5-brane will be oriented in the x0, x1, x2, x3, x9, x11

17

directions. the light-cone gauge vertex operator of a graviton with transverse momentum

pi (i = 2, . . . , 9, 11) and polarization ij is [48]

v (, p) = 2(cid:18) 1

32silspl sjmspm +   (cid:19) ij eipx ,

(4.4)

(where it is also necessary to set p+ = 0 as usual in dening light-cone gauge vertex
operators). the real so(9) spinor sa (a = 1, . . . , 16) is the + projection of a covariant
so(10, 1) spinor and it satises the anticommutation relations {sa, sb} = ab. we have
only indicated here the term in v (, p) which is quartic in the spinor coordinates, since

other terms do not contribute to the amplitude of interest. we have also xed the overall

normalization so as to make contact with the string-theory amplitude of section 2.

in evaluating the loop amplitude, we can restrict ourselves to the special kinematic

setup in which the polarizations of the two external gravitons, as well as their momenta, are
in the directions x2, x3 which are the world-volume directions transverse to the light-cone
and t 2 directions. this will be sucient if we are not interested in the normal bundle.

more generally, it is sucient that the polarizations and momenta have no components in

the eleventh dimension. the expression for the loop amplitude is :

a(1, p1; 2, p2) =

1

2v (2) xl9,l11z

d4k

(2)4 trs yr=1,2z 

0

dtrv (r, pr)e(gij li lj +k2

r ) tr , (4.5)

where the trace is over the fermionic modes and r = 1, 2 labels the two graviton ver-

tices. the four-dimensional continuous momenta in the legs of the loop are denoted

kr = k +ps=1,r pr and gij li lj is the square of the kaluza-klein momentum in the

compact directions, x9 and x11. this special conguration of momenta and polarizations

is sucient to determine the parity-conserving part of the amplitude. however, a more

general conguration would be necessary to extract the parity-violating piece which is

proportional to the world-volume form and has vector indices associated with all four

world-volume directions.

we will rst discuss the trace over the fermionic modes, s. the m5-brane breaks half
of the thirty-two supersymmetries, preserving those of denite chirality 0123911.
decomposing the so(9) spinor s into two eight-dimensional majorana-weyl so(8) spinors
sr and sl, this relation translates into the usual relation between right and left moving
spinors in the type ii theories in the presence of a d-brane,

sl = 239sr  (3)sr,

18

(4.6)

substituting this decomposition into the trace, the kinematic factor takes the form

k(1, 2) =

1
16

trsr yr=1,2

r,ij pr,l pr,m (srilsr) (sr(3)jm(3)sr).

(4.7)

now one can use the relation (3)jm(3) = j m

m , with d the matrix introduced
in section 2, and the well known fact that the trace over eight srs is proportional to the

j  d m

d j

t8 tensor. the nal result agrees precisely with the kinematic factor k(1, 2) given in eqs.

(2.6-8).

next, we shall evaluate the integrals over the momenta and over the two proper

times tr. since we are only interested in the four-derivative terms, we can set to zero the
external momenta in the integrand. then, letting t  t1 + t2, and integrating over the
loop momentum k and over the dierence (t1  t2)/2 we nd

a(1, p1; 2, p2) =

k(1, 2)

1282v (2) z 

0

et|l9l11 |2/v(2)2 .

(4.8)

dt

t xl9, l11

we have here used the explicit form for the square of the kaluza-klein momentum

gij li lj =

42
v (2)2|l9  l11|2,

(4.9)

where  = u is the complex structure of the torus, and we have absorbed a factor of 42

by a rescaling of t. poisson resumming over l9 leads to

a(1, p1; 2, p2) =

k(1, 2)

1282 (cid:16) 2

v (2)(cid:17)1/2z 

0

dt

t3/2 xw9, l11

e2(w2

9v(2)/t+l2

11t/v(2))2i1l11w9 ,

(4.10)

which is the starting point for analyzing the various contributions.

in the analysis that follows, we will see that the wilsonian action in ten non-compact
dimensions corresponds to the l11 6= 0 contributions in the above sum, that is to non-zero
momentum along the hidden eleventh dimension of string theory. on the other hand, the
contributions with l11 = 0 and w9 6= 0 will reproduce the one-loop open-string amplitude,
which is saturated by massless modes in the ten-dimensional iia (r9  ) or iib (r9 
0) theory. we may further separate the l11 6= 0 sum into contributions with w9 6= 0 and

19

e2(v(2)w2

9 /t+l2

11t/v(2))2il11w91

k1/2(2|w9l11|2) e2iw9l111

 1/2
2

t3/2 xw96=0, l116=0
642v (2) xw96=0, l116=0(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
xn=1 xn|n

642v (2)



1

=

=

1/2

l11

w9(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
n (cid:0)e2in + c.c.(cid:1)

1

w9 = 0. the terms with w9 6= 0 give a
dt
anon pert =

v (2)(cid:17)1/2z 

1282(cid:16) 2

1

0

(4.11)

this reproduces precisely the non-perturbative d-instanton sum in the expansion (3.2) of

the cp-even part of the eective action, and gives an independent conrmation of our

non-perturbative conjecture.

the terms with w9 = 0 and any value of l11 (including the term with l11 = 0) are
quadratically ultraviolet divergent. the total divergence may be isolated by converting

the sum over the kaluzaklein charge, l11, to a sum over winding number in the eleventh
dimension, w11, by the poisson resummation,

atree =

1

1282(cid:16) 2

v (2)(cid:17)1/2z 

0

e2l2

11t/v(2)

dt

t3/2xl11

=

ev(2)w2

11/2t =

dt

1

=

1282z 
1
2
643 (2)
v (2) +

0

t2 xw11
1282z 

1

0

dt
t2

(4.12)

the nite piece reproduces the tree-level part of the eective d-brane action (noting
(2) = 2/6 and that the m-theory amplitude must be multiplied by the size of the
hidden dimension, 2r11 in order to make the comparison with the string amplitude).

the divergence is now isolated entirely in the zero winding number term, w9 =
w11 = 0. in any microscopic denition of m-theory this divergence would be regularized
and replaced by a nite value. however, we can argue that its regularized value must be

zero by an elementary use of duality. this follows from the fact that in the decompactied
theory (r9, r11  ) the divergent term corresponds to a r2 term in the eective ve-
brane action, proportional to 1/l2
p which is the only scale in the theory. compactifying
one large dimension (x11) would then give a r2 term proportional to

r11/l2

p = (a

s )2/3/ls .

(4.13)

since a fractional power of the string coupling constant has no sensible interpretation in

the iia theory, we conclude that the divergent piece in (4.12) must be discarded.

20

the remaining terms in the double sum (4.8) that have not been accounted for are

the terms with l11 = 0 and w9 6= 0. these add up to
dt

1

aone loop =

1282(cid:16) 2

v (2)(cid:17)1/2z 

0

t3/2 xw96=0

ev(2)2w2

9/t ,

(4.14)

corresponding precisely to the one-loop contributions of the bps open-string modes living

on the d-brane. these bps states consist of the massless vector multiplet on the d3-brane,

as well as of its winding-mode descendants when some transverse dimensions are compact.

notice that the w9 = 0 term in the annulus diagram must be subtracted in computing

the 1pi action, since it corresponds to a (potential) tree-exchange of a supergraviton [49].

the sum (4.14) has a logarithmic divergence which is responsible for the cp-even one-loop

modular anomaly of section 3.

the weakly-coupled type iia theory is obtained in the limit r11  0, r9  , in
which the m5-brane reduces to the d4-brane. in this case, the instanton terms vanish and

the amplitude reduces to the perturbative terms. the weakly-coupled type iib theory on
the other hand is obtained in the limit of vanishing volume for the two-torus, v (2)  0
with  = u held xed. the n th term in the non-perturbative sum (4.11) comes from

the sector of n d-instantons (and anti d-instantons) conned to the world-volume of the

of the d4-brane. this is analogous to the case of the ten-dimensional d-instanton where

the t-dual quantum mechanics problem of n d-particles propagating in the world-volume

brane. the measurepn|n 1/|n| can be identied with the bulk term in the witten index of
the measure ispn|n 1/n2 [50]. the extra factor of 1/|n| comes from the fact that there are
boundary contribution to the witten index is 1 pn|n 1/|n| so that the total witten

these numbers are equal in the d4-brane. the arguments of [51,52,50] suggest that the

index is equal to one. this agrees with the expectation that there should be threshold

an unequal number of bosonic and fermionic moduli in the ten-dimensional case whereas

bound states of this system.

in principle, we should also be able reproduce the parity violating rr term in (1.5)
by considering a loop correction in the m5-brane, but we have not done this. nevertheless,

from (1.5) and using the usual t-duality relations between the iib and iia theories it also

follows that the instanton terms disappear in the d4-brane. in that case, the gravitational
contribution to the wz term in the d4-brane action is simply proportional to c(1) tr(r
r), as in [7,8,9].

21

5. comments and discussion

we have given various arguments for establishing the r2 terms that are relevant

to the gravitational interactions of p-branes in string and m-theory. these terms are

the rst nontrivial corrections in the low energy expansion of the world-volume action

and are relevant for a p-brane in a curved background. even at this low order we have

left several questions unanswered. for example, we determined the complete action for

geodesic and non geodesic world-volume embeddings at tree level (a disk world-sheet),

including contributions from nontrivial normal bundle. however, our discussion of the

nonperturbative eects was restricted to situations in which the normal bundle is trivial.

the discussion of nonperturbative eects in section 4 was incomplete in two respects.

firstly, we again limited our discussion to situations in which the normal bundle is trivial.

secondly, it was limited to the parity-conserving part of the action. these restrictions

arose, in part, from our use of a light-cone formalism which cannot be applied in any obvious

manner to the most general kinematic congurations. since the m5-brane plays a central

and subtle role in the circle of dualities it would be interesting to understand in detail how
the r  r terms in the d3-brane can be deduced from a loop calculation in the m5-brane.
the restriction to congurations with trivial normal bundle was more than a technical

convenience. there is a well-known problem [53,54,55] with chiral anomalies that arises

when embedding the m5-brane in m theory. after toroidal compactication and t duality
to the type iib theory the normal bundle is associated with the chiral so(6)  su (4) r
symmetry of the d3-brane embedded in ten dimensions. the possible mixed anomalies

in this symmetry and in sl(2, zz) will require special restrictions on terms in the world-

volume action that involve the normal bundle curvature. these should be analogous to the

terms involving the tangent bundle curvature that we found are necessary for the absence

of modular anomalies.

another issue that we have not addressed in any detail is the structure of higher
curvature terms in seven-branes. in section 3 we saw how the r2 terms on a compactied

seven-brane are related by t-duality to those of the d3-brane. however, we know that there
are also r4 terms in the seven-brane world-volume action. according to (1.1) the disk-
level cp-odd wz term in the world-volume action of a d7-brane is of the form c(0) y8(r),
where y8(r) denotes an eight-form that is the linear combination of tr(r  r  r  r)
and (tr(r  r))2 that follows from (1.2). similarly, considerations of scattering on the
seven-brane world-volume will lead to cp-even r4 terms. arguments similar to those

22

given in this paper imply the presence of nonperturbative contributions to these r4 terms.

the necessity for such contributions can be seen in particular by considering the f-theory

background consisting of 24 (p, q) seven-branes, which is dual to the heterotic or type-i
string compactied to eight dimensions on t 2. the known structure of the r4, as well
as the r2f 2 and f 4 terms in this background [33,35,34,56,57,58,59] implies that in the

type-i language the quartic action of both orientifold seven-planes and d7-branes should

receive non-trivial d-instanton corrections. although we will not discuss the details here,
it should again be possible to motivate the form of these nonperturbative r4 terms by the
absence of modular anomalies. furthermore, as with the r2 terms in the d3-brane, the
m-theory origin of such terms should emerge from duality relations between type-i string
theory on t 2 or f-theory on k3 and eleven-dimensional m-theory compactied on t 2  i
with i the nite-length interval of the horavawitten conguration [60]. the d-instanton

contributions on the string theory side should presumably arise from a one-loop calculation

of four graviton scattering in the above compactication of m-theory.

finally, we have not addressed interesting issues concerning the compatibility of the

curvature terms in the d3-brane world-volume action and the correspondence between type
iib superstrings in ads5s5 and n = 4 supersymmetric yangmills theory. one obvious
issue is the consistency of the higher-order curvature terms in the world-volume action of

a test d3-brane probe parallel to the ads5 boundary. these curvature terms are a priori
nonzero since the riemann curvature is nonzero in this background. however, there are

surely other world-volume terms that we have not addressed, which include powers of the
self-dual fth-rank eld strength, f5 = dc(4), which is also nonzero in this background. it
would be interesting to check whether these corrections are consistent with the statement

that supersymmetry protects the energy per unit volume of a stack of n parallel d3-

branes. another interesting question is how the d-instanton terms in the d3-brane action

contributions are interpreted in terms of the contributions of yangmills instantons.

aknowledgements

we are grateful to e. cremmer, m. douglas, k. forger, m. gaberdiel, g. gibbons,

r. minasian, m. petropoulos, b. pioline and s. silva for useful discussions, and to a.

tseytlin for a critical reading of the manuscript.

23

appendix a. the geometry of submanifolds

we will here collect some standard facts on the geometry of submanifolds which can

be found in standard texts, such as [61,62]. the embedding of the d-brane worlvolume
in the ambient spacetime is described by the ten coordinate functions y ( ), with  =
0,    , 9 a space-time index and  = 0,    p a world-volume index. the tangent vectors
y  dene a local frame for the tangent bundle. we may also dene an orthonormal
frame for the normal bundle, 

a with a = p + 1,    9, such that

a 


b g = ab

and 

a y  g = 0 .

(a.1)

both the y  and the 
a transform as vectors under target-space reparametrizations.
furthermore the former are vectors of world-volume reparametrizations, while the latter

transform as vectors under local rotations of the normal bundle.

with the help of these local frames we can pull back any tensor from the target

space-time onto the tangent and/or normal bundles by contraction. the only non-trivial

pull-back of the ambient metric is the induced world-volume metric

g = g y y  .

(a.2)

the riemann tensor, on the other hand, can be pulled back in many dierent ways. using

its symmetry properties, and the fact that the sum over a cyclic permutation of three

indices is zero, we can write down the following six independent pull-backs,

r , ra , rab , r{ab} , rabc

and

rabcd ,

(a.3)

where the curly brackets denote the symmetric combination of the two normal (and hence

also the two tangent) indices. these pulled-back riemann curvatures transform as tensors

of world-volume reparametrizations and normal-frame rotations, but are scalars under

reparametrizations of the target space. we may furthermore contract tangent indices with

g and normal indices with ab. since on the d-brane world-volume the ambient metric

can be decomposed as

g = y y  g + 

a 

b ab ,

(a.4)

the contraction of spacetime indices before being pulled back does not give rise to any new

tensors.

24

covariant derivatives can be dened with the target-space connection 

, the ane
 constructed out of the induced metric, and the composite

world-volume connection (t )
so(9-p) gauge eld

ab

 = ,[a (cid:0)g  + g

y (cid:1) ,b] ,

(a.5)

which is dened implicitly by requiring that the normal frame be covariantly constant.

one important tensor is the covariant derivative of the tangent frame, also known as the

second fundamental form

 = 


 = y   (t )

 y  + 

 y  y  .

(a.6)

it is a symmetric world-volume tensor and a vector of the ambient space-time. using the

fact that g is covariantly-constant one can show that the tangent-space projection of 
vanishes, 
 = 0. with no loss of information we may thus project it on the normal

bundle

  
a

 ,ag .

(a.7)

in the special case of a point-particle trajectory, 

  is the covariant acceleration which is
everywhere normal to the world line. a submanifold with zero second-fundamental form

is called auto-parallel or totally geodesic.

the central equations in the theory of submanifolds are the gauss-codazzi equations.

they relate the world-volume curvature rt , constructed out of the ane connection t ,
and the eld strength rn of the so(9  p) gauge connection , to pull-backs of the
space-time riemann tensor plus combinations of the second fundamental form,

b

  a

b

b

  b

a

(cid:1)
(cid:1) .

(a.8)

(a.9)

and

(rt ) = r + ab(cid:0)a
 + g(cid:0)a
 = rab

ab

(rn )

notice that if the ambient space-time is at these world-volume curvatures can be expressed

entirely in terms of the second fundamental form . conversely, if the world-volume is a

totally geodesic manifold the curvature forms of the induced connections coincide with the

pull-backs of the ambient curvature.

25

appendix b. the systematics of (curvature)2 terms

we will here discuss the systematics of possible o(2) terms which can appear as
part of the d-brane actions. invariance under reparametrizations of the world-volume and

of the ambient space, as well as under local rotations of the normal frame, dictate that

possible terms are formed by full contractions of covariant tensors. at linearized level

around at space and a static d-brane background the curvature tensor is proportional

to a closed-string (graviton) excitation, and the second fundamental form is proportional

to an open-string (geometric brane) excitation. we assume that all vertices that do not

contain at least two gravitons, four open strings, or one graviton and two open strings, are

protected by supersymmetry and receive no higher-order corrections. thus the terms that
will interest us are of the type r2, r2 and 4  all of which are o(2).

as discussed in the main text, our arguments cannot determine any terms that vanish

by virtue of the lowest-order equations of motion. these equations impose the vanishing

of the bulk ricci tensor and of the trace of the second fundamental form,

r

 = 0 and

  g

 = 0 .

(b.1)

since both r and  will vanish at linearized level by virtue of the mass-shell conditions,

such terms do not contribute to the amplitudes of interest.

we will rst consider the case 

 = 0, corresponding to totally-geodesic embed-
dings. since  contains an open-string excitation at the linearized level, this restriction

is appropriate when comparing with the two-graviton amplitude (2.5). one set of allowed

terms are the squares of the six curvature pull-backs (a.3),

rr, rara, rabrab,
r{ab}r{ab}, rabcrabc, rabcdrabcd.

(b.2)

a second set of invariants can be constructed by squaring the (partially or fully) contracted

pulled-back curvatures. the partial contractions of the six riemann curvatures in (a.3)

give rise to six dierent two-index tensors. however, the vanishing of the bulk ricci tensor

imposes three independent relations among them. we will choose as the three independent

two-index tensors those obtained by contracting tangent indices, and will denote them by
r, ra, and rab (the hat is there to remind us that these tensors are not the pull-backs

26

of the bulk ricci tensor). further contraction of the remaining indices gives rise to a single
independent scalar r. in total there are therefore four new possible quadratic terms,

r r,

ra ra,

rab rab,

r2.

(b.3)

comparison with the two-graviton amplitude xes the coecients of all the terms in (b.2)

and (b.3), modulo one residual ambiguity corresponding to the gauss-bonnet combination.

let us turn now to invariants constructed with the second fundamental form .

recalling that  is traceless, we nd four terms of the type 4,

()(),
()(),

()(),
()(),

(b.4)

where we have suppressed in an obvious notation the normal index of . likewise, there
are six invariants of the type 2r,

r(),
r( 
 ),

r
ab a
rab a

b 
 ,
b ,



b 
r
{ab} a
 ,
r ().

(b.5)

one can use the gauss-codazzi equations to rewrite some of the above invariants in terms

of the world-volume curvatures rt and rn . there are four possible contractions of these
curvatures,

(rt )(rt ) , (rt )(rt ) , (rt )2 and (rn ) ab

 (rn )

ab .

(b.6)

four additional invariants are the cross terms involving one world-volume curvature and

the corresponding pull-back tensor. all these terms are linear combinations of the in-

variants (b.4) and (b.5). as discussed in the main text we have found an action that

reproduces correctly the three scattering amplitudes of section 2. we did not however
analyze systematically the most general combination of the above invariants for  6= 0.

we have also excluded from our considerations terms of the type d2r, d2, 2d

or dr, other than those obtained after an integration by parts from one of the invari-
ants discussed before. such terms, if present, would have given o(2) corrections to the
one-point function of the graviton, the propagator of an open string, the vertex of three

open strings, or to the mixing of an open with a closed string  all of which are presum-

ably protected by supersymmetry for some eld choice. as a check of this argument we
have veried explicitly that d2r and dr terms would, if present, make unacceptable

contributions to the three string amplitudes discussed in section 2.

27

references

[1] j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9611050.
[2] c.bachas, lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9806199.
[3] j. polchinski, dirichlet-branes and ramond-ramond charges, hep-th/9510017; phys.

rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724.

[4] c.g. callan, c. lovelace, c.r. nappi and s.a. yost, loop corrections to superstring

equations of motion, nucl. phys. 308 (1988) 221.

[5] m. li, boundary states of d-branes and dy-strings, hep-th/9510161; nucl. phys.

b460 (1996) 351.

[6] m. douglas, branes within branes, hep-th/9512077.
[7] m. bershadsky, v. sadov and c. vafa, d-branes and topological eld theories, hep-

th/9511222; nucl. phys. b462 (1996) 420.

[8] m.b. green, j.a. harvey and g. moore, i-brane inow and anomalous couplings on

d-branes, hep-th/9605033; class. quant. grav. 14 (1997) 47.

[9] y-k. e. cheung and z. yin, anomalies, branes and currents, hep-th/9710206; nucl.

phys. b517 (1998) 69.

[10] b. craps and f. roose, anomalous d-brane and orientifold couplings from the bound-
ary state, hep-th/9808074; phys.lett. b445 (1998) 150-159; (non-)anomalous d-
brane and o-plane couplings: the normal bundle, hep-th/9812149.

[11] b. stefanski, gravitational couplings of d-branes and o-planes, hep-th/9812088.
[12] j.f. morales, c.a. scrucca and m. serone, anomalous couplings for d-branes and

o-planes, hep-th/9812071.

[13] e.s. fradkin and a. tseytlin, non-linear electrodynamics from quantized strings,

phys. lett. b163 (1985) 123.

[14] r.g. leigh, dirac-born-infeld action from dirichlet sigma model, mod. phys. lett.

a4 (1989) 2767.

[15] c. bachas, d-brane dynamics, hep-th/9511043; phys. lett. b374 (1996) 37.
[16] c.m. hull and p. k. townsend, unity of superstring dualities , hep-th/9410167; nucl.

phys. b438 (1995) 109-137

[17] j.h. schwarz, an sl(2,z) multiplet of type iib superstrings, hep-th/9508143; phys.

lett. b360 (1995) 13-18; erratum-ibid. b364 (1995) 252.

[18] k. dasgupta, d.p. jatkar and s. mukhi, gravitational couplings and z2 orientifolds,

hep-th/9707224; nucl. phys. b523 (1998) 465.

[19] j. harvey and g. moore, fivebrane instantons and r2 couplings in n = 4 string

theory, hep-th/9610237; phys. rev. d57 (1998) 2323-2328.

[20] a. gregori, e. kiritsis, c. kounnas, n. a. obers, p. m. petropoulos and b. pioline,
r2 corrections and non-perturbative dualities of n = 4 string ground states, hep-
th/9708062; nucl. phys. b510 (1998) 423-476.

28

[21] j.h. schwarz, the power of m-theory, hep-th/9510086; phys. lett. b367 (1996)

97-103.

[22] p.s. aspinwall, some relationships between dualities in string theory, hep-th/9508154

nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 46 (1996) 30-38.

[23] m. b. green, m. gutperle and p. vanhove, one loop in eleven dimensions, hep-

th/9706175; phys. lett. b409 (1997) 177-184.

[24] m.r. garousi and r.c. myers, superstring scattering from d-branes, hep-th/9603194;
nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 193-224; world-volume interactions on d-branes, hep-
th/9809100; nucl.phys. b542 (1999) 73-88.

[25] a. hashimoto, i. r. klebanov, decay of excited d-branes, hep-th/9604065; phys. lett.
b381 (1996) 437-445; scattering of strings from d-branes, hep-th/9611214; nucl.
phys. proc. suppl. 55b (1997) 118-133.

[26] m. green, j. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory, cambridge u. press (1987).
[27] s. ramgoolam and d. waldram, zero-branes on a compact orbifold, hep-th/9805191;

j.high energy phys. 9807 (1998) 009.

[28] s. theisen, fourth order supergravity, nucl. phys. b263 (1986) 687; addendum-ibid.

b269 (1986) 744.

[29] g.w. gibbons and rasheed, sl(2,r) invariance of non-linear electrodynamics cou-

pled to an axion and a dilaton, hep-th/9509141; phys. lett. b365 (1996) 46-50.

[30] a. tseytlin, self-duality of born-infeld action and dirichlet 3-brane of type iib su-

perstring theory, hep-th/9602064; nucl. phys. b469 (1996) 51-67.

[31] m.b. green and m. gutperle, comments on d3-branes, hep-th/9602077; phys. lett.

b377 (1996) 28-35.

[32] h. ooguri and c. vafa, summing up d-instantons, hep-th/9608079; phys. rev. lett.

77 (1996) 3296-3298.

[33] c. bachas, c. fabre, e. kiritsis, n. a. obers and p. vanhove, heterotic / type i

duality and d-brane instantons, hep-th/9707126; nucl. phys. b509 (1998) 33-52.

[34] c. bachas, heterotic versus type i, hep-th/9710102; nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 68

(1998) 348-354.

[35] e. kiritsis and n. obers, heterotic/type-i duality in d < 10 dimensions, threshold
corrections and d-instantons, hep-th/9709058; j. high energy phys. 9710 (1997)
004.
i. antoniadis, b. pioline and t. r. taylor, calculable e1/ eects, hep-th/9707222;
nucl. phys. b512 (1998) 61-78.
i. antoniadis and c. bachas, branes and the gauge hierarchy, hep-th/9812093; phys.
lett. b450 (1999) 83.

[36]

[37]

[38] j. p. derendinger, s. ferrara, c. kounnas and f. zwirner, on loop corrections to
string eective eld theories: eld-dependent gauge couplings and -model anomalies,
nucl. phys. b372 (1992) 145.

29

[39] g.l. cardoso, d. lust, and b.a. ovrut, moduli dependent non-holomorphic contri-
butions of massive states to gravitational couplings and c2 terms in z(n ) orbifold
compactication, hep-th/9410056; nucl. phys. b436 (1995) 65.

[40] v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, on gauge couplings in string theory, hep-th/9502077;

nucl. phys. b444 (1995) 191.

[41] v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, field dependent gauge couplings in locally supersym-
metric eective quantum eld theories, hep-th/9402005; nucl. phys. b422 (1994) 57.

[42] m. de roo, matter coupling in n = 4 supergravity, nucl. phys. b255 (1985) 515.
[43] e. bergshoe, i. koh and e. sezgin, coupling of yang mills to n = 4, d = 4 super-

gravity, phys. lett. 155b (1985) 71.

[44] m. gaberdiel and m. green, an sl(2, zz) anomaly in iib supergravity and its f-theory

interpretation, hep-th/9810153; j. high energy phys. 9811 (1998) 026.

[45] c. vafa and e. witten, a strong coupling test of s-duality, hep-th/9408074; nucl.

phys. b431 (1994) 3-77.

[46] e. witten, on s-duality in abelian gauge theory, hep-th/9505186; mod. phys. lett.
a10 (1995) 2153; e. verlinde, global aspects of electric-magnetic duality, hep-
th/9506011; nucl. phys. b455 (1995) 211.

[47] l. alvarez-gaume and p. ginsparg, the structure of gauge and gravitational anom-

alies, ann. phys. 161 (1985) 423; erratum-ibid. 171 (1986) 233.

[48] m.b. green, m. gutperle and h. kwon, sixteen fermion and related terms in m-

theory on t 2, hep-th/9710151; phys. lett. b421 (1998) 149.

[49] c. bachas and e. kiritsis, f 4 terms in n = 4 string vacua, hep-th/9611205;

nucl.phys.proc.suppl. 55b (1997) 194-199.

[50] m.b. green and m. gutperle, d-particle bound states and the d-instanton measure,

hep-th/9711107; j. high energy phys. 9801 (1998) 005.

[51] p. yi, witten index and threshold bound states of d-branes, hep-th/9704098; nucl.

phys. b505 (1997) 307-318.

[52] s. sethi and m. stern, d-brane bound states redux, hep-th/9705046; commun. math.

phys. 194 (1998) 675-705.

[53] e. witten, five-brane eective action in m-theory, hep-th/9610234 ; j.geom.phys.

22 (1997) 103-133.

[54] l. bonora, c. s. chu and m. rinaldi, perturbative anomalies of the m-5-brane, hep-
th/9710063 ; jhep 9712 (1997) 007, anomalies and locality in field theories and
m theory, hep-th/9712205.

[55] d. freed, j. a. harvey, r. minasian and g. moore, gravitational anomaly cancel-
lation for m-theory fivebranes, hep-th/9803205 ; adv.theor.math.phys. 2 (1998)
601-618.

[56] w. lerche and s. stieberger, prepotential, mirror map and f-theory on k3, hep-

th/9804176.

30

[57] k. foerger and s. stieberger, higher derivative couplings and heterotic-type i du-

ality in eight dimensions, hep-th/9901020.

[58] w. lerche, s. stieberger and n. p. warner, prepotentials from symmetric products,

hep-th/9901162.

[59] w. lerche, s. stieberger and n. p. warner, quartic gauge couplings from k3 ge-

ometry, hep-th/9811228.

[60] p. horava and e. witten, heterotic and type i string dynamics from eleven dimen-
sions, hep-th/9510209; nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506; eleven-dimensional supergrav-
ity on a manifold with boundary, hep-th/9603142; nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 94.

[61] l.p. eisenhart, riemannian geometry, princeton u. press, 1926.
[62] s. kobayashi and k. nomizu, foundations of dierential geometry, j. wiley & sons,

new york 1969, vol.2.

31

