a candidate for a background independent formulation of m theory

lee smolin

center for gravitational physics and geometry

department of physics

the pennsylvania state university
university park, pa, usa 16802

march 10, 1999

abstract

it is proposed that the background independent membrane eld theory constructed with markopoulou

is, when the algebra of observables is based on osp(10|16), a background independent form of m
theory. the space of states is the space of conformal blocks on all compact two-surfaces of nite
genus. histories are sequences of certain local moves acting on the states, and have dynamical
causal structure. all observables arise by decomposing the states along arbitrary surfaces. a map
is constructed which projects the bulk states onto nite dimensional state spaces dened on these
surfaces, which we then call holographic surfaces. string worldsheets arise from small perturbations
of the histories. d0 branes are identied as points on the holographic surfaces where the strings
end. it is found that their kinematics is identical, in the limit of vanishing cosmological constant,
to that of the dwhn-bfss matrix model. the requirement that the dynamics of the matrix model
be reproduced leads to a proposal for the fundamental evolution law.

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
9
1

 
 

1
v
6
6
1
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

 smolin@phys.psu.edu

1

1

introduction

in this paper a proposal is made for a background independent formulation of m theory[1]. this is
based on a particular case of a general formulation for a background independent membrane eld
theory previously proposed with markopoulou[2]. that work was, in turn, a natural extension of
the spin network formalism that has been shown to characterize the exact gauge and dieomor-
phism invariant states of a large class of theories of quantum gravity[3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8], including
supergravity[9, 10].

the spin network states are background independent, in the sense that they make no reference to
any background metric or elds, because they result from an exact, non-perturbative quantization
of the commutation relations of the gravitational elds. however, as they are constructed through
a canonical quantization procedure, they do depend on the background topological and dierential
structure. as s duality[1] and mirror manifolds[11] in string theory indicates the presence of
symmetries mixing manifolds with dierent topology, this dependence must also be eliminated if
one wants to construct a successful background independent form of m theory. in [2] it was shown
that this can be accomplished simply by thickening the graphs which underlie the spin network
states so that they become membranes. the labels on the spin networks are then replaced by the
conformal blocks vg of a chiral theory based on a quantum group or supergroup, gq for a two
manifold of genus g. the full space of states is then the conformal blocks of all compact oriented
two-surfaces,

h = xg

vg.

(1)

following the clue from quantum general relativity[12, 15, 16], the level is proportional to the
inverse cosmological constant,

k =

6
g2

(2)

as a consequence, the theory reduces to the spin network formalism in the limit that the cosmo-
logical constant, , vanishes

because the graphs of the spin network formalism have been thickened to two-surfaces, no em-
bedding manifold need be assumed because there are states in h that carry appropriate information
to construct both a manifold (of any dimension and topology) and the embedding of a two surface
in it[2]. in fact, as we shall discuss below, what is naturally constructed are pseudomanifolds, whose
defects may be the background independent analogues of branes[20].

in [18, 19] it was suggested that because of its resemblance to a background independent mem-
brane theory, and the fact that such a theory may have a set of dynamically determined continuum
limits which are classical spacetimes of dierent dimension and topology, an appropriately chosen
member of this class of theories might be a background independent form of m theory. in [18] it
was also shown that a theory of this kind can incorporate sl(2, z) string duality symmetry, leading
to a non-perturbative description of string network states. in this paper it is proposed that the
theory with gq = osp(10|16) and a particular evolution law, to be specied below, is that theory.
the main evidence for this which will be presented here is that there is a set of observables
that may be naturally associated with the coordinates, in a transverse surface of some holographic
observer, of d0 branes. these observables closely resemble, for gq = osp(10|16), the matrix co-
ordinates of the dewit-hoppe-nicolai-banks-fischler-shenker-susskind [21, 22]matrix models and,
under a natural set of assumptions, their eective dynamics is that of the matrix model.

2

in fact, the holographic principle, in a cosmological form discussed in [2, 24], is a major part
of the proposal made in [2]. as this theory has neither background spacetime nor asymptotic or
external regions, it is naturally cosmological. there is no place outside of the dynamical system
for the observer to live. as was discussed in [23], in such a case all the observables of the quantum
theory will be associated with closed surfaces that are dynamically embedded in the spacetime.
these observables describe what an observer living on the surface could measure about the physics
on its interior. these surfaces will play a major role in this paper, they will be referred to as
holographic surfaces.

as there is no asymptotic region, the areas of these surfaces will be generally nite1. by the
bekenstein bound[25], the state spaces on which these boundary observables act must have nite
dimension, proportional to the exponential of of the area, in planck units. in [16, 26, 27] it was
shown that, at least in the cases of quantum general relativity and supergravity, with a non-zero
cosmological constant, this condition is met2.

in these theories the boundary state spaces are naturally spaces of intertwiners (or conformal
blocks) for gq on punctured surfaces, with the punctures representing points where excitations of
the quantum geometry in the interior may end. it is these punctures which are identied with d0
branes. to explain why, it is necessary to understood how dynamics is formulated in this theory.

the main idea is that the dynamics is given in terms of a causal histories framework, rst
proposed for quantum gravity in [30]. in this kind of theory, a history, m, is constructed from
a given initial state by a series of local evolution moves. these resemble the bubble evolution in
general relativity and as a result, these histories have a natural analogue of the causal structure of
general relativity. this makes it possible to identify the analogues of light cones, horizons, spacelike
surfaces and many-ngered time precisely at the quantum level, prior to any continuum limit being
taken3.

the dynamics is specied by the choice of local moves and the amplitudes that are assigned to
them. thus, in this kind of theory a new kind of fusion between quantum theory and spacetime is
achieved in which states are identied with quantum geometries that represent spacelike surfaces,
and histories are both sequences of states in a hilbert space and discrete analogues of the causal
structures of classical spacetimes.

the connection with string theory arises because small perturbations of states are parameterized
by closed loops drawn on the two surfaces sg [35]. the small perturbations of a history m are then
in one to one correspondence with the embeddings of certain time like combinatorial two dimensional
surfaces in m. as argued in [35], if the theory has a classical limit then the amplitudes for these
perturbations must reproduce the actions for excitations of string worldsheets.

when such an excitation takes place within a surface associated with a holographic observer,
it can end on one of that surfaces punctures. thus, the punctures are structures on which strings
end, which is to say they are d0 branes. the question is then to discover the observables that
describe the congurations of the d0 branes, and to deduce their eective dynamics.

the holographic principle, in the background independent form proposed in [2], plays a central

1more specically, the operators that measure the areas of these surfaces will have nite (and generally discrete)

spectra.

2for pure quantum general relativity, the constant of proportionality is not equal exactly to 1/4. this apparently

indicates that there is a nite multiplicative renormalization of newtons constant[16].

3indeed, these structures provide the framework for formulating the existence of one or more classical limits as a

dynamical problem, analogous in some respects to non-equilibrium critical phenomena[31, 20, 32, 34].

3

role in achieving this. there is a natural correspondence between bulk and boundary states, which
is suggested by topological quantum eld theory[36], and conrmed in the case of quantum general
relativity[16, 26] and supergravity[27], with a cosmological constant. this is that the hamiltonian
constraint, which codes the spacetime dieomorphism invariance, is satised by the application of
recoupling identities of quantum groups on the quantum states of the theory. in a histories, rather
than a canonical theory, this must be imposed in a way which is consistent with causality, so that
information is not propagated from the bulk to the boundary faster than the causal structure of
the quantum spacetimes allowed. below we will see how to do this4.

once the map between bulk and boundary states is understood, the next step is identifying
the holographic observables that describe the boundary states, and giving them a physical inter-
pretation. the clue for how to do this comes from penroses original work on what he called the
spin-geometry theorem[37]. this theorem associates to generic, large, spin networks with n free
ends an assignment of n points on an s2. we show here that a similar result is true in higher
dimension, and that this implies that the observables which describe the punctures/d0 branes in
the present theory are closely related to the dwhn-bfss matrix model. in essence, what we nd
is that the correspondence between spin networks and points on a two sphere, given by penroses
spin geometry theorem, is a prototype for the connection between the bulk states and the induced
surface states of the d0 branes seen by the holographic observers.

as we show below, once this relationship between open spin networks and points on an d  1
sphere is generalized to d dimensions, the dwhn-bfss matrix model is recovered, given natural
and weak assumptions about the fundamental dynamics. further, one can choose the fundamental
evolution law such that the dwhn-bfss hamiltonian is, in certain limits, recovered for the full
quantum dynamics of the d0 branes, as well as their eective dynamics.

this paper is divided into 13 sections. the next is devoted to an exposition of background
independent membrane eld theory[2, 18] in the causal histories formulation of markopoulou[30].
enough detail is given, and the basic concepts are stressed, so that no prior knowledge of loop
quantum gravity need be assumed.

section 3 is then devoted to certain conceptual and technical points regarding the treatment
of gauge and dieomorphism invariance in this class of theories. this is necessary preparation
for the main work of the paper, which is the uncovering of the relationship to string theory. we
begin this in section 4 where we review the results of [35] that show that small perturbations of
the states are described by loops embedded in the quantum geometry so that small perturbations
of causal histories are associated with embeddings of combinatorial time like two surfaces in the
histories. this leads us in section 5 to the identication of punctures on the holographic surfaces
where strings may end as d0 branes.

in section 6 we identify observables that code the dynamics of these punctures and show that
they are closely related to those of the matrix model. in section 7 we show that there is a surpris-
ing relationship between the observables that describe the d0 branes and penroses original spin
network formalism [37]. this suggests a certain simplication of the operators that represent the
d0 brane dynamics. the next step, carried out in section 8, is the construction of the sum over
histories that gives the denition of the eective action for the expectation values of the holographic
observables.

finally, in section 9, we are prepared to state the fundamental conjecture describing the rela-

4as discussed in [24], this may resolve several puzzles concerning the holographic hypothesis.

4

tionship between the gq = osp(10|16) version of the background independent membrane theory
described in [2] and m theory. the remainder of the paper is devoted to carrying out two simple
checks of the conjecture which assume the existence of a continuum limit. the rst, carried out in
section 10, is to show that, when there is a continuum limit, the eective action must reproduce
the matrix model in the appropriate limit. the second, described in sections 11 and 12, is the con-
struction of an explicit choice of the fundamental dynamics of the theory, such that the quantum
hamiltonian that governs the dynamics of the punctures, moving on the holographic surfaces, is,
in a certain limit, identical to that of the matrix model.

the result of this paper is then the formulation of a conjecture which, if true, provides us with
the explicit form of a quantum theory of gravity that is both a background independent form of
m theory and a straightforward extension of the structures discovered by explicit non-perturbative
quantization methods to describe the physical degrees of freedom of quantum theories of gravity.
the consistency checks described here stand as evidence towards the conjecture, but much more
needs to be done to establish or refute it. the most important is to develop techniques to explicitly
carry out the demonstration that the theory does indeed have a good continuum limit. otherwise, it
is a fully consistent quantum theory of the evolution of quantum geometry, but one whose solutions
do not have a limit describable in terms of classical spacetimes5.

the concluding section discusses several implications of the conjecture, which may be explored
in future work. the most important of these is that there are consequences for the ads/cf t
conjecture[38, 39, 40]. if both that and the present conjecture are true, than we can deduce the
exact form of the hilbert spaces and operator algebras for the boundary conformal eld theories in
ads spacetimes. similarly, there are consequences for counting states of black holes.

2 background independent membrane eld theory

in this section we summarize the general structure dened in [2], and the motivation coming from
results in both string theory and in quantum general relativity and supergravity. for more details
the reader is referred to [2, 18, 30].

2.1 the kinematics of background independent membranes

we would like to describe a class of membrane theories in which the embedding space has no prior
existence, but is instead coded completely in the degrees of freedom that live on the two surfaces.
as the background is not assumed to exist a priori, there are no embedding coordinates. instead,
the kinematical structure is given by the choice of a quantum group or supergroup gq where q will
be assumed to be taken at a root of unity. gq has a nite list of nite dimensional representations,
which will be labeled j, k, l . . ..

using standard constructions from conformal eld theory[41, 42, 43, 44] or representation
theory[45] there is associated to each oriented closed two-surface s of genus g a nite dimen-
sional space v g, which is called the space of conformal blocks of wzw theory based on gq. the
5it is important to emphasize that the theory is completely nite in any case. we assume that the niteness of all
measures of quantum geometry discovered in quantum general relativity[7, 5, 6] and supergravity[10] holds generally.
thus, the problem of the continuum limit does not concern ultraviolet issues or the existence of the theory. instead, it
is an infrared problem, directly analogous to the problem of the emergence of critical behavior in ordinary statistical
physics.

5

l

j

k

figure 1: a trinion which represents the intertwiner of three representations of gq.

surface may also be punctured, which means that there are a set of n marked points, labeled by
a set of representations, {j} of gq. the same construction yields a nite dimensional vector space
v g,n
{j} . when the manifold is s2, v s 2

{j} is called the space of intertwiners.

these spaces may be constructed in the natural way described in [41, 43, 44] from v s 2

jkl, which is
called the trinion. an arbitrary surface is constructed by joining three punctured spheres at labeled
circles, taking the direct product of the v s 2
jkl over all the three-punctured spheres and summing over
labels. every way of decomposing s in terms of trinions yields in this way yields a basis of v s ,
where the basis elements are labeled by the circles and intertwiners.

the full state space of the theory is dened to be

h = mg

v g

(3)

as this is the fundamental assumption of this theory, let us take a moment to stress it. it means
that the fundamental things that the world is composed of are only systems of relations, involving
nothing but the multiplication and decomposition of representations of some fundamental algebra
gq. at the fundamental level, spacetime is nothing but a coarse grained description of processes
in which these systems of relations evolve. there is no background geometry or topology, nor are
there elds, particles, strings or branes that move in them. these must emerge from the kinematics
and dynamics of the states in h.
let us begin with geometry.

it may seem that this arena is too poor to describe quantum
geometry. however, this is not the case. there are in fact bases of states in h, whose elements
may be associated in an a natural way with quantum geometries of d dimensions, for any d. to
construct them, consider for each suciently large g, a decomposition of the genus g surface, s g into
a number, p , of d + 1 punctured spheres. we label these bi
d, with i = 1, . . . , p . the decomposition
is achieved by cutting sg along a number, n , of circles which we will label ca, with  = 1, . . . , n .
we can represent the decomposition by a d + 1 valent framed graph , with p nodes representing
the bi
d and n edges representing the circles ca (see figure (2).). an associated basis of states in
v g is given by assigning a representation ja of gq to each circle ca (or edge) of  and assigning a
basis in the space of d + 1 intertwiners i to each bi
g,d, (or node) of . these basis elements may
then be labeled |, ja, i >. given such a choice of basis for each g yields a basis for all of h.

6

figure 2: a simple example of two surface, and its dual graph .

figure 3: a simple example of two surface, divided into four punctured spheres. the dual 3-
manifold is the boundary of the four-simplex.

now to each element, |, ja, i >, of this basis we may associate a dual d dimensional pseu-
domanifold e|, ja, i]. dual to each node of  we construct a d simplex, with d  1 dimensional
faces that correspond to the d + 1 edges incident on it. tying the faces together, following the
framing that follows from the orientation on the surfaces, one constructs a simplicial pseudoman-
ifold of d dimensions, whose faces are labeled by the representations ja and whose simplices are
labeled by intertwiners. (for a simple example, see (3).)

the pseudomanifold e|, ja, i] inherits the labeling from the state |, ja, i >. the faces are
labeled by the representations j and the simplices by the intertwiners i. we may give these a
geometrical interpretation, which is motivated by the results of quantum general relativity in 3 + 1
dimensions[7, 5, 6, 49]. to each representation j we may assign a quanta or d  1 dimensional
area, given by

a[j] = ld1

p lanckqc[j]

(4)

where c[j] is the quadratic casimer of gq. this matches the result of the computation of the
area operator in quantum general relativity[5, 6] and supergravity[10] in 3 + 1 dimensions. in those
cases the operator for the volume of a simplex was also computed and found to be given by a nite,
positive hermitian operator v ol on v s 2
j1,j2,j3,j4. we may then seek to extend this result to a volume

7

operator in d dimensions on the space of intertwiners of each d-simplex. the exact form of this
operator has not been computed for general dimension.

once choices of the area and volume operators are made, the labeled pseudomanifold e|, ja, i]

has a geometrical interpretation in terms of volumes and areas.

the statement that the states in h are naturally associated with pseudomanifolds means that
the simplicial manifold dual to a state |, ja, i > may or may not be consistent with the application
of the manifold conditions on the simplices of dimension d  2 or less. this means that a general
state |, ja, i > can be associated with a d dimensional geometry, but one with defects of dimension
d  2 and lower. these defects resemble orientifolds, in that they may arise from a combinatorial
manifold by identication of lower dimensional simplices. when considered in isolation, these
identied surfaces will behave as defects, inheriting dynamics from the fundamental dynamics on
h. these must be considered to be an inherent part of the theory; i will argue in the conclusion
that at least in some cases these may be considered to be analogous to d-branes.

we will also need to be able to talk about quantum geometries with boundaries. these are
described by states that live in the spaces of conformal blocks associated with punctured surfaces.
we denote by v g,m
the space of conformal blocks on a surface of genus g with m punctures labeled
by ja, a = 1, . . . , m. we may also consider the space of all states with the same boundary, given
by6

ja

hm
ja = mg

v g,m
ja

.

(5)

finally, we may note that dierent bases are associated with dierent geometrical decompo-
sitions of h, of dierent dimension d. this means that the dimension as well as the topological
and metric properties of the associated quantum geometry are dynamical quantities, they are de-
termined completely by the states. which dimension, topologies and geometries emerge in the
classical limit is a dynamical problem. we may also note that superpositions of states that give
rise to an interpretation in terms of a d dimensional quantum geometry will in certain cases be
interpretable as states associated with quantum geometries of dimensions d 6= d.

these are all features that we would expect of a truly background independent quantum theory

of gravity.

2.2 reduction to quantum general relativity and supergravity

quantum general relativity and supergravity, with a cosmological constant, , provide prototypes
for the class of theories just described. in the euclidean case, gq = su (2)q for general relativity
and gq = su (2|n )q for supergravity, for n at least up to 2. the quantum deformation is given by
the cosmological constant, with q = e2/k+2, with the level k given by (2). the main results here
are based on the existence of a closed form expression for the vacuum state, which is given by[12],

cs(a) = e

3

g2  r y (a)cs

(6)

where y (a)cs is the chern-simons invariant of the sen-ashtekar connection[13, 14]. a lot is
known about this sector of the theory[47, 48], including the fact that the semiclassical behavior is
that of small uctuations around desitter or anti-desitter spacetime[12, 15]. the supersymmetric

6sometimes the superscript m will be dropped when it is clear from the context.

8

extensions are also known[9]. an important fact is that the observables algebra of this theory
requires that the spin networks be quantum deformed[17], as described in [45].

in the case of a spacetime with boundary, a class of boundary conditions has been studied in
which chern-simons theory is induced on the boundary[16]. with  6= 0 there is a class of exact
solutions to the quantum constraints, labeled by the conformal blocks for all the possible choices of
punctures on the spatial boundary; the number of these solutions is consistent with the bekenstein
bound[16].

similar results have been found also in the lorentzian case[26], in which case gq = su (2)q 
su (2)q, where, however the representations and intertwiners are restricted by the balanced condi-
tion jlef t = jright, rst proposed in [46].

finally, we note that as   0, q  1 and the states reduce to ordinary spin networks. quantum
general relativity in this limit has been studied in great detail7 [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 47, 48, 49], and the
results found have been veried by rigorous theorems[50, 51, 52, 53].

2.3 holographic observables

there are several lines of argument that point to the conclusion that in a quantum theory of
gravity, all observables should be associated with boundaries, of dimension, in the continuum limit,
1 less than the spatial dimension. these include the arguments for the holographic hypothesis of
t hooft[54], whose relevance for string theory has been argued by susskind[55]. we know from
several examples that the holographic principle may be satised in a quantum theory of gravity,
although its exact formulation, for cosmological theories remains controversial[56, 57, 24].

there are a parallel set of arguments in the literature on quantum gravity and cosmology,
put forward originally by crane[36], and continued in [23, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64], to the eect that
observables in a cosmological theory must be associated with a splitting of the universe into two
pieces. according to this point of view, such a splitting may correspond to a situation in which
a subsystem of the universe, delineated by the boundary, is studied by observers who are able to
make measurements only on the boundary. one may then set up what is called a relational[60] or
pluralistic[23, 61] quantum cosmology in which there is a space of states and an observable algebra
associated to every possible such spatial boundary. these dierent state spaces are tied together
by linear maps whose structure is determined by a functor from the category of cobordisms of
d  1 dimensional surfaces[36, 23]. this is done in such a way that the hilbert space associated
to the whole universe is always one dimensional, making it impossible to construct any non-trivial
observables associated to the universe as a whole. given that no observers have access to the
entire universe, this is argued in [36, 60, 23, 61, 62, 63, 64] to be a necessary property of a realistic
quantum theory of cosmology.

as we showed in [2] this structure may be realized completely in the class of theories dened in
this section. this is done in the following way. given a quantum state, |, ja, i > cut the surface
sg[] along any subset of n of its circles ca which results in the splitting of sg into two pieces,
which we will call s 
g . the splitting introduces an abstract surface, which may be taken to be a
punctured s2, with n punctures. these punctures inherit the labels ja on the n circles.

g are each a quantum geometry with boundary constructed from the graph dual to s 
s 

g . it
is interesting to ask how the boundary is described in the picture described above, in which there

7for a recent review of what is by now a large literature, see [8].

9

 j  

 k 

 l  

 m 

 n 

s  + 
v    2  s 
s  - 

j klmn 

figure 4: a quantum geometry |, ja, i > is cut along 5 circles, yielding two bounded quantum
geometries, s 

g , which meet on a boundary which is represented by a 5-punctured s2.

are bases of states which have a dual description in terms of a labeled d dimensional combinatorial
pseudomanifold. in this picture, the pseudomanifold must have a d  1 dimensional boundary, s 
g
which is composed of n d  1 dimensional simplices, labeled by the ja. in a continuum limit, this
surface will correspond to a d  1 dimensional surface which divides space into two parts.

g may gain about s +

according to the holographic principle, the physical information that observers living on the
g must then be represented in terms of a eld theory on the
ja . the
ja then contains all the information that observers may learn about the

boundary s 
boundary. there is a state space naturally associated with that boundary, which is v s 2
algebra of observables on v s 2
interior s +

g by measurements made on the boundary.

this picture is realized in quantum general relativity [16, 23, 26], for the case of non-vanishing

cosmological constant.

we may note that for nite numbers of punctures, the dimension of the boundary state space
v s 2
ja is nite, even as q  1. in quantum general relativity, this is consistent with the bekenstein
bound, because the area of the boundary is given by l2

note that we have dened two dierent surfaces that are associated with the boundary. there is
the 2 dimensional surface, which is the punctured s2 on which the boundary state space, v s 2
ja , lives.
then there is the d  1 dimensional pseudomanifold, s 
g . for d = 3, these surfaces coincide,
the latter gives a simplicial description of the punctured s2, with a puncture inside each triangular
face. however, for d > 3 they are dierent. the construction of the dual pseudomanifold will
give us an embedding of the s2 in the combinatorial pseudomanifold s 
g . in the limit of a large
number of punctures, this must go over into the embedding of a 2-brane in the d  1 dimensional
boundary. this 2-brane is made of 0-branes, which are the punctures in the surface. this is the
basis of the correspondence to m theory we will develop below.

p l ppc(j) [16].

to develop this picture we must have a clear understanding of how the holographic principle is

10

realized in this background independent context. the main mystery of the holographic principle
may be stated in this context as follows. the state space of a nite area boundary must be
nite dimensional, by the bekenstein bound. however, there seems to be an innite dimensional
space of possible states for the elds in the interior. the problem is how the reduction from a
potentially innite number of bulk states to a nite dimensional space of states, observable on the
boundary, is achieved. in the present case, the theory must provide a map  which reduces the
innite dimensional space of bulk states, hn
ja, to the nite dimensional space of boundary states,
v s 2
ja . there is a natural proposal for this map[2, 36] which is motivated by the results of quantum
general relativity and supergravity with nite  [16, 26]. this is that the map is given by chern-
simons theory. a state |, ja, i > hn
ja corresponds to a framed gq spin network with n open
ends, with labels ja. by standard constructions[42, 43, 45] it can be read as an n -intertwiner for
gq and hence as an element of v s 2

ja . we denote the resulting linear map by

 : hn

ja  v s 2
ja .

in these cases we will use the tilde to denote

  | > |  > v s 2
ja

(7)

(8)

this choice is motivated by results from quantum general relativity and supergravity in 3 + 1
dimensions.
in the canonical formalism of quantum gravity and supergravity, the map  is is
realized as the loop transform [4] of the chern-simons state (6) in the presence of boundary states
given by conformal blocks of the punctured boundary. the details of this are described in [16]. one
way to say this is that there is a sector of states in which the hamiltonian constraint of quantum
general relativity (and supergravity) is equivalent to the recoupling relations of framed su (2)q (or
su (2|1)) spin networks[16, 17, 10]. what we are going to do is use the natural extension of this
result to dene the relationship between the bulk and surface states in m theory.

in a histories formalism of the kind we will use here, the denition of the map will have to be
supplemented by giving time slicings of both the boundary and the interior. we will be able to do
this after we have explained how histories are constructed in this theory.

2.4 the form of the local evolution operator

we now turn to the dynamics given to these background independent membrane eld theories.
for reasons given in [2] we describe the dynamics in terms of a causal histories framework, rst
proposed for quantum general relativity in [30]. in this approach the dynamics is given by a set of
local replacement moves. in each such move a specied m- punctured surface spast is removed from
the surface s. this results in m free ends, with labels j. a new surface with matching labels,
sf uture is then inserted in its place. (see figure (5).) this corresponds to the removal of a state
ja and its replacement by a state |f uture >. given a choice of operator h in each v s 2
|past > in hm
ja
and using  to associate |past > and |f uture > to states in v s 2
ja , the amplitude for each such move
is given by

a(move) =< f uture|h| past > .

(9)

a causal history, m is specied by the choice of an initial state,

|0 >= |, ja, i > h,
followed by a sequence i = 1, 2, 3, . . . of substitution rules. the result is a sequence of states,
|0 >, |1 >, . . . , |i >, each resulting from the previous one by a substitution move.

11

figure 5: an example of a substitution move. histories m are made up of successive applications
of such moves.

the amplitude for a history is then given by the product

a[m] = yi

a(i)

(10)

the dynamics is then dened conventionally by summing over all histories between given initial
and nal states.

as the substitution rules are local, this results in a structure which is in many ways analogous to
a continuous lorentzian spacetime[30, 2]. just as a classical spacetime may be constructed from a
given initial surface by a series of local, bubble evolution steps, in which the spatial hypersurface
is evolved within a compact region, a causal history m may be seen as a spacetime structure
generated by local evolution moves on a state representing a quantum spacelike surface.

the precise way to describe this is to note that m has the structure of a causal set c [30, 2]8.
to each of the regions removed or inserted by a substitution move, one associates an element q  c.
a partial ordering may be dened on c as follows: p > q if there is a series of substitution moves
that begins with the removal of q and ends with the insertion of p, such that in each step the
set removed overlaps the set inserted in the previous move. it is then easy to see that c has the
structure of a causal set. we call it c[m].

the causal set c[m] gives to m discrete analogues of many of the properties of lorentzian
spacetimes, such as many ngered time, light cones, and horizons[30, 2]. various aspects of this
are described in more detail in [30, 62, 2, 20]. we may note that the association of fundamental
quantum histories with causal structures and quantum states with quantum geometries makes this
class of theories generalizations of both general relativity and quantum theory. each history m,
is both a sequence of states in a hilbert space, h, dened without reference to any background
structure and a causal structure which shares many properties with a lorentzian spacetime.

this ends the summary of the class of background independent membrane theories proposed in

[2]. to summarize, a member of this class of theories is given by the following choices:

 1) the algebra or superalgebra, gq.
8recall that a causal set is a partially ordered set with no closed causal curves that is locally nite. the application

of causal sets to quantum gravity was proposed rst in [28, 29].

12

figure 6: examples of past/future pairs that are used in the substitution moves in quantum general
relativity. these come from cuts of the thickened four simplex.

 2) the choice of substitution moves used in the evolution.

 3) the choice of the operators h that give the amplitudes for the causal histories m.

particular choices have been suggested for the theory corresponding to quantum general relativity[46].

(see figure (6)). the question that we may now address is whether there are any choices that give
continuum limits described by string theory.

3 consequences of a planck scale causal structure

there are several important issues we must clarify, before we go on to study their possible relation-
ship with string theory.

3.1 the continuum limit

the most important physical question regarding the class of theories we have just dened is whether
there exists for any of them a continuum limit which reproduces classical general relativity in some
dimension, coupled to some set of quantum elds. the main conjecture we are pursuing in this line
of work is that if any of these theories has a continuum limit, there must be a consistent description
of small perturbations around that limit, and this in turn must reproduce a string perturbation
theory, because there is strong evidence that all successful perturbative gravitational theories are
string theories. the main question, to be discussed below, is then how to construct observables of
the fundamental theory that will describe these string-like, perturbative degrees of freedom, when
the continuum limit exists.

13

we will return to the problem of the continuum limit in the conclusions. this is the main

question that we will not be able to solve in this paper.

3.2 spacetime dieomorphisms, gauge xing and discrete causal structure

to discuss the issue of gauge invariance we need some language to describe a causal set. given the
causal set c[m] we can dene an acausal set to be a set of elements qi  c[m] such that there are
no causal relations amongst them. an antichain a is a maximal acausal set, which means that no
p  c[m] can be added to a without violating the condition that it be an acausal set[62, 63].

a time slicing t = a(t) for t = 0, 1, 2, . . . is a sequence of antichains such that every p  c[m]
is in some a(t). this is just like a time slicing in general relativity, except that the time parameter
is discrete.

as in general relativity, there are many possible slicings of a history. these may be distinguished
by gauge conditions. whenever we refer to a slicing we will have to give conditions that pick it out.
this is especially important when we come to the description of physical time evolution. in
general relativity the hamiltonian on the physical, gauge invariant, state space is a function of the
elds on the boundary. to give the correct interpretation of the present setting, which insures that
if there is a classical limit it will go over to the correct description of evolution in the classical theory,
we must ask whether the local evolution moves are physical or gauge. this is an issue because in
general relativity the hamiltonian constraint generates both changes in the time coordinate and
local evolution moves.

in the kinds of theories dened in [30, 2] the local evolution moves generate physical evolution
because the causal set c[m] corresponds to the causal structure of spacetime. thus the past set and
future set in a single local evolution move must correspond to physically dierent sets of events,
because they have dierent causal relations with the other events, and this corresponds in the
classical theory to distinct physical spacetime events. another way to say this is that the causal
set associated to a history in general relativity is a spacetime dieomorphism invariant. as such,
the causal set c[m] of a discrete quantum history is also a gauge invariant description that, in
the classical limit, (if one exists) must correspond to the spacetime dieomorphism causal set of a
lorentzian spacetime.

one consequence of this is that, unlike the case of state sum models of topological quantum
eld theories, the sum over histories is not a projection operator. this is because there is no
history where nothing happens to the states. every history is a sequence of real changes to the
states and these then correspond to a spacetime invariant description of real events.

this does not mean that states must not satisfy additional conditions, corresponding to the
conditions on initial data in the classical theory. but these conditions are dierent from the sum
over histories, as each quantum history must correspond, in the case that there is a classical limit,
to a spacetime dieomorphism invariant description of a classical history.

3.3 slicing conditions in the bulk and on the boundary

there are special issues, in both the classical and quantum theory, when a nite boundary has
been introduced. note that to every antichain a  c[m] is associated a state |a > hn
ja. thus to
a time slicing a(t) is a sequence of states |a(t) > hn
ja. by (7) this induces a sequence of states
|t > v s 2
ja .

14

the question is then which slicing in the bulk is to correspond to a choice of slicing on the
boundary. there is a unique answer which is dictated by causality. given a history m with
boundary and a time slicing t on the boundary, we dene the maximally past slicing, a(t), to be
one that agrees with t on the boundary and is past inextendible in the interior. this means that
for each slice a(t), which is an antichain in the interior, there is no past replacement move, which
would remove a connected subset a  a(t), disjoint from the boundary, and replace it with elements
a such that,

1) a < a in c, and
2) (a(t)  a)  a is an antichain.
conceptually, such a slicing is one in which each spatial slice is as close to the past lightcone of
a given slice of the boundary as it can be and still be a complete spacelike slice. it is not dicult
to argue that for bounded histories m of the kind dened here, given a slicing of the boundary,
such a slicing of the interior can always be chosen.

it is interesting to note that in the continuum limit the slice approaches the past light cone
of the cut of the boundary. thus, when  < 0 the limit that the boundary is taken to innity
should reproduce the ads/cf t correspondence. it is also intriguing to note that when  = 0
this description must reproduce the heaven description of newman and collaborators[58] in which
solutions to einsteins equations are described completely in terms of data on cuts of i +.

given such a slicing we then have a sequence of states |t > hn

ja. by the holographic map, eq.

(7) this will induce a sequence of states |t > in the boundary state space v s 2

ja given by

as a consequence, there must be a time evolution operator u (t, s) on v s 2

ja such that

|t >=   |t >

|t >= u (t, s)|s >

(11)

(12)

we will be concerned to identify this operator. to do so, we need to identify a useful set of
operators in v s 2
ja which we may use to understand the dynamics of the induced boundary states
|t >. to do this it is helpful to have a physical interpretation for the information in the boundary
state space v s 2
ja . as we now show, a very interesting interpretation is suggested by studying the
properties of the small perturbations around bounded histories.

4 small perturbations, and the identication of string world sheets

now that we have cleared away some technical and conceptual issues, we are ready to come to the
heart of the matter, which is the identication of small perturbations of a history m with string
worldsheets embedded, in a suitable sense, in m.

let us begin by considering an arbitrary history and asking what small perturbations look like.
a history is a sequence of states |i >= |i , ji
i > each generated from the previous one by a local
a , i 
move. thus, a perturbed history |i  >= |i 
i >
each diering from the original by a small change. we must then ask what are small changes of
the states |i , ji

i > will involve a series of states |i 

a, i
, ji 

, ji 

a , i 

a, i

i >.

this question was analyzed in [35]. here i summarize the main ideas of that paper, which may

be referred to for details.

15

changes in the states are of two kinds, changes in the genus, g and changes in the state in vg.
we will exclude the rst kind as the substitution moves generally change the genus; we then look
for changes that leave the genus xed so that they cannot be substitution moves. these are then
small changes in the states that cannot be confused with evolution moves.

a, i

to see what small changes in the states are allowed that do not change the genus, let us pick
a basis constructed from a trinion decomposition of the surfaces s g. the states |i > are then
i >, where the circles ca arise from the trinion decomposition9. note
parameterized as |i , ji
that we are not allowed to change one of the ja arbitrarily, as the labels on the three circles of
each trinion must be such that there is at least one invariant element of j1  j2  j3.
in the
case of su (2) this condition yields the triangle inequality, plus the condition that the sum of the
spins is an integer. to satisfy these conditions one will in general have to change two of the three
labels of the circles bounding each trinion, as well as the intertwiner. thus we reach an important
conclusion, which is that the small excitations of the states |i , ji
i > are not local. instead, the
small excitations of a state |, ja, i > are constructed from closed loops  drawn on the surface
s g[].

a, i

to see this in more detail, note that given an elementary representation l and a closed loop 

on s g each state | >= |, ja, i > has a consistent perturbation given by

dl

i >

  | >= | >= |, j

a, 

(13)

where j
holds for the intertwiners.

a = j  l when  intersects ca and is unchanged otherwise, and an analogous condition

given a xed trinion decomposition, this denes the operator dl
now that we know what a consistent perturbation of a state is, we can ask what a consistent
perturbation of a history is. taking into account the discrete many ngered time of the causal
histories, we note that a consistent perturbation of a history must give a consistent perturbation of
every state that may be obtained by slicing the history to produce a maximal acausal set. as shown
in [30, 2], every such slicing is associated with some state in h. a consistent perturbation will be
one that is a linear combination of perturbations of the form of (13) for every possible slice. this
will be true if it gives a loop  for every slice of m that produces a state of the form of a linear
combination of the basis states | >= |, ja, i > associated with some trinion decomposition.

 on the space v g.

furthermore, we require that the perturbation be causal, which means that in any sequence of
states, |i > that denes a history, m, the changed labels in |j > are in the future of the changed
labels in |i > whenever j > i.

as argued in [35] the result is that consistent perturbations of a history m are parameterized
by a choice of a fundamental representation l of gq and an embedding of a timelike (with respect to
the induced causal structure c of m) surface  in m. the change in amplitude of the perturbed
history can then be expressed as a spin system on this surface, whose couplings are induced from
the amplitudes of the fundamental histories and depend both on the choice of evolution moves and
their amplitudes and the embedding. details are given in [35].

however, even without giving any details we can make the following argument. suppose that
the history m is semiclassical so that it is a critical point of the path integral and represents
in a suitable limit a classical manifold. then the degrees of freedom of the perturbed histories
must contain the massless modes associated with small perturbations around the classical limit.

9note that for su (2) the trivalent intertwiners are unique, but this is not the case for larger groups.

16

these must be carried by the induced worldsheet theory, since that codes the small perturbations
around any history. this means that the eective theory dened on the worldsheet must carry the
massless spin 2 degrees of freedom, as we know these must be present if the theory, as assumed,
has a classical limit dominated by m. but this means that in the continuum limit that worldsheet
theory must reproduce the action for a critical string theory.

hence, the original non-perturbative theory must be a background independent formulation
of string theory, in the sense that the theory of small perturbations around the classical limit
reproduces perturbative string theory. in fact, one may also argue that the leading term in the
change in the amplitude of the perturbed history is proportional to the induced area of the time
like two surface , and so matches the nambu action[35].

5 the identication of punctures as d0 branes

the string world sheets we have identied must be closed, unless they end on boundaries. it is
natural to identify d0 branes as points on boundaries where strings end. a setting that permits this
is the following. let us x an n -punctured surface, sja, which we may for simplicity assume is an
s2. let us consider a piece of a history consisting of a sequence of states |i >= |0 >, |1 >, |2 >, . . .,
generated by local moves from an initial state |0 >, which are chosen to live in the space hn
ja with
xed boundary, which matches sja. we will restrict attention to histories in which the local moves
act only in the interior of the quantum geometries of the states |i >, so that each state in the
sequence has a boundary in the same space sja. these may be considered to represent a piece of a
causal history in which we have restricted the evolution on the boundary so as to not change the
number and labels of the punctures10.

let us denote a particular such history by m+, where the + indicates that it is half of a
compact history, and so may be joined by another piece m such that each of the states in m+
matches one in m by being joined on sja. now small perturbations of m+ correspond to choices
of fundamental representations and loops drawn on each state, |i >. however, we may note that
it is no longer necessary that the loops be closed, instead they may end on the punctures of the
sja. this identies these punctures as d0 branes, i.e. as zero dimensional spatial objects on which
strings can end.

there are other similarities between the punctures and d0 branes.

if a punctures label ja
is one of the fundamental representations, than only one string may end on it. however if ja
is a larger representation, than as many strings can end on it as there can be products of the
fundamental representations that have ja in their decomposition. as a result, punctures can be
combined according to the laws of multiplication of representations of gq.

for example, in the case gq = su (2)q the smallest punctures are associated with j = 1/2,
and only one string can end on each one. the symmetry group associated with a puncture is
consequently su (2). but n strings can end on a puncture of spin n/2. the associated symmetry
group is su (n+1). thus by combining punctures one raises the symmetry from su (2)n to su (n+1)
to see what the eect of this should be in a semiclassical description, we must look inside
each representation, at the behavior of the classical object represented. for example, a state in the
vector representation must correspond to a vector in d dimensional space. small perturbations

10boundary conditions that realize this condition in general relativity and supergravity are described in [16, 26].

17

then correspond to small motions of the classical object. in the case of su (2), linearization around
a vector gives so(2), while linearization around a spinor gives u (1).

in the linearized approximation, the representation labels associated with the d0 branes become
charges which generate the subgroup that preserves the classical object. in this approximation, the
products of representations becomes the addition of abelian charges that characterize, in the semi-
classical theory, the superpositions of d0 branes. in our example, the combination of n punctures
then induces, in the linearized approximation, a symmetry enhancement from u (1)n to u (n). this
is in agreement with what happens when n d-branes are combined in the semiclassical picture.

we then hypothesize that in the continuum limit the punctures are associated with d0 branes.

the rest of this paper is devoted to exploring the consequences of this identication.

6 the dynamics of punctures and the connection to the matrix

model

the next problem is to nd the operators that, acting on the boundary state space v s 2
ja , describe
the dynamics of the punctures. we begin with the observation that changes in v s 2
ja correspond to
change in an intertwiner, with xed puncture labels. what are the most local observables which
measure these changes? a complete, in fact overcomplete, set of observables in v s 2
ja correspond to
wilson loops, taken in the fundamental representation of g:

t [] = t r(cid:20)er

a(cid:21)

(14)

where  is a non-intersecting loop in the punctured boundary s 2  {} and a is the at connection
on the punctured surface that denes the phase space whose quantization gives v s 2
ja

the simplest of the loops in v s 2

ja are those that surround a single puncture. however, these have
xed values given by ja, so they contain information that does not vary in time. in quantum general
relativity with appropriate boundary conditions, these correspond to the areas of the regions of the
boundary containing the punctures, by xing the boundary as we have we have in essence xed the
areas of the regions of the boundary.

the next simplest observables correspond to loops ab that surrounds two punctures, a and b.

thus we have a matrix of operators

tab  tab

(15)

the expectation values of these operators will, in fact, contain all the observable information
concerning the states in the boundary hilbert space, v s 2
ja . they encode all the information about
the congurations of the punctures. as there is no xed background geometry, this information
must be coded, as it is here, in relational variables that give information about relationships between
pairs of punctures. but if, as we have argued, the punctures correspond to d0 branes, then this
matrix of operators should correspond in some way to the matrix description of the dynamics of
d0 branes, hypothesized by banks, fischler, shenker and susskind. in that description there is
a matrix of operators x i
ab for every transverse coordinate i in light cone coordinates of at 11
dimensional minkowski spacetime.

to establish a correspondence we have to rst choose the algebra gq appropriately and then
nd out where this transverse coordinate i lives. as there is no background manifold there is no

18

c

a

d

g

b

ab

f

e

figure 7: the tab operator. the shaded region is the punctured boundary s 2  {}.

transverse space, this has to emerge in the appropriate continuum limit. we must then hypothesize
that in the continuum limit the punctured boundary surface s 2
j will go over to a spacelike slice of
a null surface corresponding to the transverse surface in lightcone coordinates, in a at spacetime,
such that the punctures become the d0 branes.

what limit should correspond to this classical limit? as the punctures must correspond, in the
reduction to quantum general relativity, to quanta of area, the continuum limit must be the limit
of large area, in planck units. however, as shown in [16] the most probable way of reaching the
limit of large area, in which the bekenstein bound is saturated, is the one in which each puncture
carries a minimum area, corresponding to the smallest representation.

we then choose all the punctures to have the same value j = jspinor then the classical limit
is n  , where n is the number of punctures. this means that the dynamics of the operators
tab should reproduce the bfss model in the limit of large n .

to make the correspondence between the punctures and the d0 branes we will work rst in gen-
eral spatial dimensions d. we choose gq so that it has a maximally compact even subgroup which
is spin(d). this is accomplished by choosing gq = osp(d|n ), where n is the dimension of the
fundamental representation of spin(d). we will also take all the punctures in this representation.
the n dimensional representation of spin(d) carries a representation for a cliord algebra

clif f (d), generated by -matrixes, i. we may then dene the classical phase space functions,

t i[] = t r(cid:20)ier

a(cid:21)

(16)

we may note that these quantities are not gauge invariant. they are non-vanishing when evaluated
on the classical phase space, which is the at connections on the punctured surface. if we turn
them into operators in the space of intertwiners they will vanish, because only gauge invariant
quantities are non-vanishing. this is because we are constructing the theory in terms of gauge
invariant quantities; and any particular coordinates on a background manifold which emerges from
this description will be gauge non-invariant.

for this reason we proceed as follows. first we construct formal operators that represent pieces
of gauge invariant quantities, which include the t i[]. we then combine these to form gauge
invariant operators.

19

g
a

c

i

2

1

d

f

b

e

ab

g

figure 8: the t i
ab operator. the i in the circle stands in the classical theory for the trace of the
phase space observable against i. in the quantum theory it stands for a formal operator in which
the i is contracted against another open 2 line that acts somewhere else in the state.

from (16) we have a matrix of quantities given by

ab = t r(cid:20)ierab
t i

a(cid:21)

(17)

where for the diagonal elements we may take ab = aa, the curve that wraps twice around the
single puncture. we may note that, because the labels of the punctures have been chosen to be the
same, the vectors t i
aa associate,
for each at connection a on sjf und, a point on sd1. in the limit n   the t i
aa thus give a
mapping from the s2 into sd1. thus, in this limit we see emerge a description of a membrane
moving in sd1.

aa will have the same length11. thus, the diagonal elements vi

a  t i

but we have not just the diagonal entries, but a whole matrix. thus, we have a structure
very close to that of the matrix model but where the target space is sd1. to complete the
correspondence to the matrix model, we must suppose that a has been chosen so that all the
points vi
a where pi is the
coordinate of p in rd and piwi
a = 0. to leading order, we may take d  1 dimensional coordinates
a correspond to points in rd1 clustered near the
 so that i = (, d). then the components v
origin, which is taken to coincide to rst order with the tangent space of p.

a are near p, the north pole of sd1. in this case we may write vi

a = pi + wi

physically, this means that the original vectors vi

a may be taken to live in the sky of an observer
in d + 1 dimensional minkowski spacetime. the transverse plane rd1 is recovered as a small
piece of the sd1. this corresponds to the observation made above that the correspondence to the
d0 brane picture involves a linearization around a point in the phase space of the theory.

we may now construct a hamiltonian that corresponds to this physical picture. as the choice
of p must be arbitrary, this should be invariant under so(d). we rst nd a set of momentum
functionals p ab

so that,

i

{t i

ab, p cd

j } = i

jc

ad
b

(18)

these must exist, but we will not construct them explicitly, instead,the appropriate quantum oper-
ators will be constructed below. we should also note that the t i
ab are themselves not a commuting

11this can be shown explicitly, using identities of products of traces of the i.

20

g
ab, t j

set, instead {t i
cd}  1/k whenever a or b is equal to c or d. however these commutators vanish
in the limit k  , which by (2) means   0. we should only reproduce the matrix model in
that limit, as it corresponds to a membrane moving in at spacetime.

we may then construct a classical hamiltonian that matches that of the bosonic sector of the

matrix model,

h =

g2
2

t r [pipi] +

1

g2 t r(cid:16)[t i, t j], [ti, tj](cid:17)

(19)

where g is a dimensionless coupling constant.

what this means is that the matrix model may be coded in the classical phase space of the
boundary observables. however, this is only a step, for in the present theory the dynamics has
already been given by the substitution moves in the bulk. what we then want to know is whether
these moves can be chosen so that the dynamics of the matrix model is induced as an eective
quantum dynamics of the punctures. to do this we will proceed in three steps. first, we construct
an eective action formalism that allows us to construct the eective action for the boundary
observables in terms of the amplitudes assigned for the bulk histories. we will show that, under
the assumption that the theory has a good continuum limit, that eective action is identical to
the classical action of the matrix theory. second, we construct a quantum hamiltonian, h, on the
boundary, state space v s 2
ja which yields (19) to leading order. finally, we will be able to nd a set
of substitution moves and amplitudes which reproduce the quantum dynamics generated by h.

before carrying out this program, however, we nd a simplication of the operators t i

ab.

7 the penrose spin-geometry theorem and its correspondence to

a d = 2 matrix model

the picture that has just emerged is strikingly similar to the original spin network formalism
introduced by roger penrose in the early 1960s[37]. there a map is found between su (2) spin
networks with n ends, labeled by spins j and n points on a two sphere. this is gotten by
constructing an operator xab which connects the ath to the bth external edge with a spin 1 line.
if | > is an ordinary su (2) spin network, with n ends, then the map  produces in this case an
su (2) intertwiner | >12. since xab acts adjacent to the ends, its action on intertwiners | > is
well dened. penrose then nds that the expectation values,

yab 

< | xab| >

< | >

= cos(ab)

(20)

for a 6= b dene n (n  1)/2 angles ab which, in the case that they do not vanish, may be
interpreted consistently to give relative angles between n points in a two sphere[37]. this is called
the spin-geometry theorem.

in fact, it is easy to show that for g = su (2)q,

12the application of  is equivalent to the operation penrose called the evaluation of a spin network.

tab =

162jajb

k2

xab

(21)

21

a

b

b

as

i
:
ab

a

b

a

a

i

b

b

figure 9: the denition of the operator si
ab. the added trinions are in grey, all the labels are in the
adjoint representation. the remainder of the surface is indicated by , other ends on the boundary
are not shown.

thus, the g = su (2) case of the construction of the previous section is closely related to
penroses spin geometry theorem. this correspondence suggests the following construction, for
general gq. we introduce a corresponding formal set of operators si
abthat act on the bulk state
space, hn

ja, these act as follows. (see figure (9).)

ja. given a state |, ja, i > hn

we break the tube going to the puncture a along a circle ca with label ja. we then insert a
new trinion as follows. two of the three punctures of the trinion join the two sides separated at
ca, with identical labels ja. the third we label with the adjoint representation adj of gq and leave
open for the moment. we then do the same with the puncture b. we then introduce a third trinion
one puncture of which is tied to the free puncture of the new trinion inserted adjacent to a. a
second puncture is joined to the free puncture adjacent to b. each of these have labels adj. at the
third puncture, we introduce an operator that corresponds to tracing over the gamma matrix i.
this is a formal operation, it means that this operator stands for a family of operators where the i
index is contracted with another i index, with a tube labeled by adj. we call the resulting formal
operator si

ab.

this then induces an operator in v s 2

ja , which we call si
ja let |& > be any state in hn

ab, dened with the help of the holographic
ja such that

map (7). given | > v s 2

  |& >= | >

(22)

this is non-unique but it doesnt matter, because we are about to act only on the edges that are
adjacent to the punctures, and these are xed. then we dene the action of si

ab on | > by

it is also straightforward to show that si

ab is related to t i

ab in the su (2)1 case by

si
ab  | >   si

ab  |& > .

t i
ab =

162jajb

k2

si
ab

(23)

(24)

the spin geometry theorem then gives us some insight into the meaning of the o diagonal
ab at least for d = 3. when treated as classical phase space variables,

elements of the tab and t i

22

g
g
the combination

may be interpreted as an su (2) element that rotates the point vi
can see from this that the o diagonal elements of t i
measure the distance on the s2 between the the points vi

a and vi
b.

y ab
ab = abtab +  ab

i t i
ab

(25)
b on the s2. one
ab are proportional to the sin(ab), thus they

a into the point vi

however, we may also note from the denition of the operators (16) and (23) that the ab
elements of < |t i
ab| > will vanish when the edges a and b come from disconnected pieces of
the spin network | >. (as this is a formal operator it means it vanishes when the index i is
contracted against any operator.) this means that the o diagonal elements vanish when the ends
corresponding to the points fall into disconnected clusters, corresponding to  having disconnected
pieces.

thus, a potential of the form of that in (19) is minimized either by the points lying on top of

each other, or falling into disconnected clusters.

because they are simpler, and correspond exactly to penroses spin geometry theorem, we will
work from now on with the operators si
abs. this also allows a smoother limit
as k  , which we need to go to the matrix model. to construct the quantum hamiltonian on
the boundary state space, v s 2

ab in place of the t i

ja momentum operators ab

i must be found such that

{ si

ab, cd

j } = i

jc

ad
b

(26)

the quantum hamiltonian on v s 2
then,

ja that corresponds to the bosonic sector of the matrix model is

h =

g2
2

t rhiii +

1

g2 t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17) .

(27)

8 the sum over histories and the eective action

the connection between the fundamental dynamics and the eective action can be expressed by a
small modication of the standard methods. given a bounded history m as described previously
we have an amplitude given by (10). we will choose a slicing on the boundary, which as we discussed
above, gives a past inextendible slicing in the bulk. the map  then gives rise to a sequence of
states |t > v s 2
ja . let us probe the small excitations of these states by introducing an external
current j ab

ab operators. we then have the partition function

i (t) which couples to the si

z[j(t)](m )  eiw [j(t)]  xm|#moves=m

a[m]eipt

<t| si

ab|t>j ab

i (t)

(28)

where the sum is over all bounded histories built on a given initial bulk state |0 > with the same
nal bulk state |f >, with a xed number m of moves. we note that this expression is non-trivial
because the sequence of holographic states |t > are functionals of the histories, given (7). since the
histories are completely specied by nite data, there is no ambiguity in the measure. further, for
quantum groups gq with q at a root of unity, there are a nite number of representations allowed, so
that there are a nite number of histories with a xed number of moves, and the sum is completely
nite.

23

we may note that, as the number of moves will be related to a spacetime dieomorphism
invariant function in the classical limit, the sum (28) can be taken as the fundamental denition of
the theory. if it is wished one may also compute

z[j(t)] =



xm =1

z[j(t)](m ).

(29)

any divergences in this sum should be considered infrared divergences as they would arise from the
dominance of histories in which a bounded region of the universe takes an innite amount of time
to evolve from a given initial state to a given nal state.
we now may compute the in-out expectation value,

we then form the eective action in the standard manner,

y i
ab(t) =

w [j(t)]
j ab
i (t)

|j=0.

[ y i

ab(t)] = w [j ab

i (t)]  xt

y i
ab(t)j ab

i (t)

(30)

(31)

9 the fundamental conjecture

we recall that the fundamental dynamics is given by a choice of 1) the algebra gq, 2) the funda-
mental evolution moves, and 3) the amplitudes of those moves. once these are given, the sum over
histories (28) is the exact statement of the dynamics of the holographic observables of the theory.

we may now state in physical terms the fundamental conjecture of this paper:
for gq = osp(10|16)q there is a choice of the evolution moves and amplitudes such that
1) when q  1, the theory has a good continuum limit in which 10 + 1 dimensional minkowski

spacetime emerges as an approximation to the dominant histories in the path integral (28).

2) in the limit n   the dynamics of the punctures on a suitably chosen holographic surface

are equivalent to the same limit of the dwhn-bfss matrix model.

the rst part of this conjecture is a dynamical problem that requires detailed calculations to
demonstrate. we are not going to carry that out here. instead, we shall make two simple checks
of the conjecture. for these we will assume that there exists a continuum limit such that 1) is true
and show that, under this assumption, 2) follows13.

10 the continuum limit and the lowest order eective action

in this section we argue that if the theory has a continuum limit, the eective action is given, to
lowest order, by the matrix model.

13one might object that there is no string theory in 10 + 1 dimensions, but the objects we identied as d0 branes
were selected by being points on the boundary where strings can end. is this a contradiction? no it is not, what
we showed above is only that there are objects that behave as timelike worldsheets, that if there is an appropriate
continuum limit would behave as string worldsheets. but if in 10 + 1 dimensions there are no examples of critical
string theories than the result will be that these worldsheets do not behave as critical strings in 10 + 1 dimensions.
this does not prevent them from becoming critical in lower dimensional compactications.

24

as a rst step we must give a more precise criteria for the existence of the continuum limit. this
is that in the limit q  1 there is a history m0 that dominates the sum over histories, (28) that,
further, correspond to d + 1 dimensional minkowski spacetime (m, ). this correspondence must
be at the level of the causal structures. this is to say that there must be an embedding  of c[m]
into (m, ) that preserves the causal structure.  must then map combinatorial surfaces of various
dimensions dened by the history m into the subsets of (m, ) of the appropriate dimension.

further, this correspondence must be such that the holographic surfaces on which the observ-
ables are dened are taken, under , to timelike surfaces that each bound a worldline of an observer
in the classical spacetime (m, ). when n is nite, the area of this boundary is nite, and is thus
small compared to the innite extent of a spatial slice of minkowski spacetime. in this same limit,
the time slicing t of that timelike surface must correspond to a clock carried by that observer and
the sd1 in which the points corresponding to the punctures on that surface are represented at
any given t must correspond to the backwards light cone of the event on the worldline labeled by t.
in this same limit, the eective action (31) will be determined by the dominant history, m0, so

that it will be approximated by

[ y i

ab(t)]0 = w [j ab

i (t)]0  xt

y i
ab(t)j ab

i (t)

where

y i
ab(t) =

w [j(t)]0
i (t)

j ab

|j=0.

and w [j(t)]0, the zeroth order approximation to the eective action, is given by,

z0[j(t)](m )  eiw [j(t)]0  a[m0]eipt

<t| si

ab|t>j ab

i (t)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

to lowest order, the eective action will be governed by the symmetries of the theory. these are
u (n ), because the n representations j have been chosen to be identical, and so(d), because in
this case they describe n points on sd1. the so(d) must correspond to rotations in the spatial
slice of the minkowski spacetime simultaneous with t in the frame of the observer.

as we saw above, the dwhn-bfss model corresponds to a limit of this in which the sd1 is
linearized around a point p so that the sphere of null direction is approximated by the transverse
surface rd1 and so(d) is approximated by the euclidean group in rd1. translations corre-
spond to small changes in the point p  p = p + r, where piri = 0. the eect of this on the
variables s

ab is to add a small diagonal term,
s
ab  s

ab = s

ab + abr

where, as above,  = 1, d  1. as the points are all near p, the eective action only depends on
the transverse coordinates y 

in the classical limit, the interactions are weak, and the eective action [ y 

ab(t)] must be given
ab(t) consistent with the symmetries, which are u (n ) and (35). this

ab(t).

by the lowest order terms in y 
is

0[ y 

ab(t)] = z dt a t r(cid:16) y

 y

(cid:17) + b t r(cid:16)[ y , y ][ y, y](cid:17)

(36)

where a and b are constants that cannot be determined from symmetry considerations. thus, we
have shown that if there is a classical limit, the dynamics of the matrix model is recovered. this
is just a rst check, which conrms our identication of puncture variables with the d0 branes of
the matrix theory.

25

a 

b 

i

d 

c 

figure 10: the action of the potential energy term, t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17) of the matrix model on the

boundary. the action of the operator is to add the shaded gure. in this and the following gures,
unmarked wide shaded lines are in the adjoint representation.

11 realizing the (m)atrix theory hamiltonian in terms of local

evolution moves

we now proceed to a second check of the conjecture, which is to show that there actually is a choice
of the fundamental dynamics that reproduce the hamiltonian of the matrix model acting on the
boundary state space v s 2
ja . we do this for the group gq = su (2)q, after which we will extend the
result to gq = osp(10|16).

the rst step is to formulate the su (2) version of the dwhn-bfss matrix model hamiltonian
ab dened by

ja . this will be constructed from the operators si

in the holographic state space v s 2
(23). the potential energy term in (27), is formally given by,

v = t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17)

(37)

we may note that the si
ab do not have exactly the same commutation
relations as those of the dwhn-bfss model. rather we have [ si
bc] 6= 0, as can be easily
checked explicitly. thus, it is necessary to choose an operator ordering when realizing (37) as an
operator. we make the simplest choice of symmetric ordering, which is shown in fig. (11).

ab operators, like the t i

ab, si

we can then form the potential energy operator (37) by acting four times as indicated. the
result is indicated in figure (10), it is an operator that sums over all 4-tuples of edges a, b, c, d and
adds adjacent to the punctures the graph indicated there. the gure added may be visualized as
an h, with the external edges labeled by adjs going to the four edges immediately adjacent to the
nodes a, b, c, d and the cross-piece labeled by an i  adj  adj, which is summed over. the latter
is the result of the antisymmetrization in (37). finally, the overall weight is

where in standard notation [45]

1
g2 w(i)

w(i) =

i

(2, i, 2) (cid:16)1  22
i (cid:17)

26

(38)

(39)

adj 

adj 

a 

a 

adj 

+

adj 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

adj 

=
adj 

figure 11: the denition of symmetric ordering used in the denition of the potential energy
operator shown in fig. (10).

a

b

a

b

i
:
ab

a

a

b

b

2

2

2

a

i

b

2

figure 12: the action of the momentum operator ab

i . 2 denotes the adjoint representation.

the next step is to invent the momentum operators ab

i which are to be conjugate to the si

ab.

we chose them so that, on v s 2
ja

[ si

ab, cd

j ] = ihi

jc

ab
d

(40)

j can then be dened on a basis of states in v s 2

cd
ja given by intertwiners of gq, decomposed so that
there are two framed edge of spin r and s linking the edges that go to c and d to a trinion, which
has a third edge of spin u going outwards(see figure (12).) for every c and d such a basis can be
constructed. the action of cd
j on this state is to remove the component where r = s = u = adj
and replace it with the state in which the now opened edge u is traced with i. we then compute
the square of ab

in the basis described is indicated in figure (13).

ab
i

ab
i

by adding the kinetic and potential energy together we have the matrix hamiltonian for the

i . the action pi

evolution of the state in v s 2
ja ,

h =

g2
2

t r(cid:16) i i(cid:17) +

1

g2 t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17)

(41)

27

p
g
g
a

b

2

:

a

a

a

b

b

b

a

b

a

b

2

figure 13: the action of the kinetic energy term, t r(cid:16) i i(cid:17) of the matrix model on the boundary.

we can then form the evolution operator on v s 2

ja as

u (s, t) = ei(ts) h .

(42)

with this hamiltonian in hand, we are prepared to ask whether there is a choice of evolution
move and amplitude that reproduces its eect in appropriate circumstances. let us begin with
the simplest possible circumstance, which is where the holographic surface bounds a small region,
containing only the parts of the surfaces s g on which the replacement operator acts. in this case
the map  is trivial, and we can in the right limits, establish an exact correspondence between the
replacement moves and their amplitudes and the hamiltonian (41).

it is harder to establish the correspondence for evolution moves that act far from the holographic
surface, and this has not yet been done. it is likely that this will be where supersymmetry plays a
crucial role, to enforce a non-perturbative version of a non-renormalization theorem, that will imply
that one can move the evolution move from close to the boundary to deep inside the bulk without
changing the form of the hamiltonian that describes the dynamics induced on the punctures in the
boundary.

for the present we restrict ourselves to the simplest case, which is where the bulk contains the
simplest possible states on which the dierent terms of the matrix model hamiltonian may act.
because of the existence of the free coupling constant g, the case where the evolution move acts
just inside the holographic surface is sucient to pick out a set of evolution moves that match for
both large and small g.

we are looking for a replacement move rmatrix of the form discussed in section 5 and an
operator h in the space v s 2
ja that bounds the region where the replacement occurs. in the simplest
case, we may identify that surface with the holographic surface on which the hamiltonian (41) acts.

we will consider rst the limit g2  0 and then the limit g2  .
in the rst case we are interested to match the potential energy in (41) to a single action of
a replacement move. the simplest case to study is that where n = 4. we take the initial state
in h4
ja to be the simplest possible one, indicated in figure (10) in which the four edges are tied
together by a four punctured sphere. this state is labeled by an intertwiner on the four punctured
sphere, which we may indicate simply as | >. in this case the map (7) commutes with the action
of h because the region cut out by the evolution move is the whole interior. the eect of the

28

p
g
g
a 

c 

b 
b 

d 

i 

a 

c 

b 

d 

figure 14: the replacement move, rv ,

in the bulk that induces the potential energy term,

t r(cid:16)[ si, sj][ si, sj](cid:17) of the matrix model on the boundary in the simplest case.
evolution move may be arrived at by simply lifting the eect of h from v s 2
ja. the kinetic
energy term does not act, while the potential energy term (37) increases the genus by g = 8, as
shown in figure (14). if the nal state after the replacement move is indicated by |f inal > then
in this case the amplitude is given by

ja to hn

a[figure (14) ] =< f inal|e h | >

i
g2 < f inal| v | >

(43)

here we have taken the time interval to be one because the initial state has been completely replaced
in the interior, corresponding to one time step in any slicing.

to see the eects of the kinetic energy dominate we consider instead the limit where g2 is large,
in which case the leading order term is its action on states in hn
ja where the interior surface has
genus 4. the action is shown in figure (15). the change in genus is g = 3. indicating the
initial and nal states in h4

ja by |in > and |out > the amplitude is

a[figure (15)] =< f uture|ei h| past >

ig2
2

< f uture|t r(cid:16) ab

i

i (cid:17) | past >
ab

(44)

the replacement operator r must reduce to these two limits. the simplest choice that does

this is to take the sum of two operators

r = rk + rv

(45)

to summarize, the rst of these moves is a genus g = 3 move shown in figure (15). the
amplitude for it is given by

a[rk] =

g2
2

< f uture|t r(cid:16) ab

i

i (cid:17) | past >
ab

(46)

the second move is the genus g = +8 indicated in figure (14), to which we assign an amplitude

a[rv ] =

1
g2 < f uture| v | past >

(47)

these choices complete the denition of the theory for the case gq = su (2)q.

29

a
a

b

a

b

figure 15: the replacement move, rk , in the bulk that induces the kinetic energy term, t r(cid:16) i i(cid:17)

in the simplest case in which it acts.

12 extension to osp(10|16)

we may now extend the moves just dened to the choice of gq = osp(10|16). it is easy to see that
the two moves r1 and r2 we have just dened correspond to the bosonic part of the dwhn-bfss
hamiltonian. the only adjustment that needs to be made is that the spin 1 and spin 1/2 edges are
replaced, respectively, by the adjoint and fundamental representations of osp(10|16), respectively.
we must then add a third replacement move to correspond to the fermionic term in the dwhn-
bfss theory. as we did with the bosonic part we rst construct the hamiltonian on the boundary
state space, v s 2

ja , and then pick an evolution move and amplitude that reproduces it.

for future convenience we may consider the general n = 1 supersymmetric extension of so(d),
which is osp(d, n ) where n is the dimension of the fundamental representation of spin(d). this
has generators qa, where a = 1, . . . , n . the algebra includes,

[j ij, qa] = ij a

b qb

(48)

where j ij are the generators of spin(d) and ij a
fundamental representation.

b = 1

2 [[ij]]a

b are its representatives in the

we may then extend the fundamental representation of spin(d) to an n + 1 dimensional
fundamental representation of osp(d|n ) by adding a zeroth spinor component and extending
a, b, c to (0, 1, . . . , n ) = (0, a). (for convenience we denote these by a, b, . . ..) we embed the
b into the n  n block a, b = a, b and dene a representation for [qa] b
a
b =
0 = 0. these may be unied into a single adjoint representation ( a b) =
[qa]b
{(ab), qa = (0a)}.

a such that [qa]0

0 = a

b and [qa]0

if aij are the so(d) components of the connection and a are the spin 3/2 elds we may

construct the superconnection one-form

a

a
b = aijij

b

a + dq

a
d b.

(49)

the phase space of the boundary theory is then given by the at superconnections on the punctured
s2 representing the boundary. we then dene the supersymmetric extensions of the d0 brane

30

a

b

a

b

a

a

a
:
ab

b

b

a

a

b

figure 16: the action of the fermionic momentum operator.

coordinates on the phase space of the boundary theory to be

ab = t r(cid:18)ierab
t i
ab = t r(cid:18)qaerab
t a

a(cid:19)
a(cid:19)

(50)

(51)

ab

ab

quantum operators corresponding to these may be constructed immediately as we did in the
last section, using instead of spin(d) the fusion algebra of osp(d|n )q. the two operators that
correspond to(50) and (51) may be gotten by writing the formal operators s( a b)
by following the
procedure for s(ab)
in the spin(d) case and instead inserting the formal symmetrization in the
ab = s(0a)
indices ( a, b). we will use s(ab)
to refer to the fermionic part.

as before to refer to the bosonic part and also use a

ab

ab

we then generalize the momentum variable to ( a b) by following the same procedure we used

before. we will use where appropriate a = (0a) for the fermionic momentum.

the fermionic part of the matrix model hamiltonian is then expressed as an operator on v s 2

ja as

h f = t r(cid:16) a h s(ab), bi(cid:17)

(52)

this may be represented as an operator on v s 2
the result is shown in figure (17).

ja by following the same procedure we did before.

we then nd a replacement operator which in the simplest case reproduces this. the change of
genus in this case is g = +1. it is given in figure (18). the corresponding amplitude is given by,

a[(figure 18)] =< f uture|h f | past >

the full replacement operator for gq = osp(d|n ) is then given by

r = rk + rv + rf

(53)

(54)

for the case gq = osp(10|16) this reproduces the hamiltonian for the dwhn-bfss matrix

model when the limit k   is taken.

31

p
g
g
b

c

a

b

c

a

figure 17: one of two terms of the fermionic term of the matrix model, (52). this is the simplest
state in which it can act. thin grey tubes are in the n dimensional spinor representation, thicker
grey tubes are in the adjoint representation of osp(d, n ). in the other term the order of the two
thick grey tubes is reversed.

c

a

c

a

ab

b

figure 18: the replacement move in the bulk that induces the fermionic term of the matrix model,
52 in the simplest case.

32

g
g
13 conclusions

in this paper we have formulated a conjecture for the form of m theory at the fundamental,
background independent, level. we have shown how the holographic principle is naturally formu-
lated in the context of a large class of background independent theories of quantum gravity. we
have shown that small perturbations of histories in these theories are necessarily associated with
string-like excitations, which has allowed us to identify the d0 branes with the punctures on the
holographic surfaces where the strings end. we then found that the matrix variables naturally
emerge as coordinates that describe the dynamics of these punctures. this led to the formulation
for the central conjecture, which is that for gq = osp(10|16) there is a choice of dynamics such that
1) there exists a continuum limit and 2) the dynamics of the punctures in this limit is described by
the dwhn-bfss matrix model. finally, we were able to check the consistency of this conjecture
by showing that if 1) is true, then 2) follows. this led to the identication of a particular set of
evolution moves and amplitudes.

there are several big issues that remain, which are the subject of ongoing work. we close by

briey mentioning each of them.

13.1 the existence of the continuum limit

the main dynamical problem yet to be attacked is the existence of the continuum limit. a fun-
damental point is that, if there is a continuum limit, the causal structure induced on m will
corresponds directly to that of the actual spacetime geometry. this makes the problem of the
continuum limit very dierent from that of a euclidean theory. one consequence is that the con-
tinuum limit in such a theory cannot be described in terms of the conventional second order critical
phenomena[31, 20]. this is because the causal structure is a degree of freedom, so there is no
xed metric to dene a euclidean continuation. instead it is analogous to non-equilibrium critical
phenomena such as directed percolation or the growth of soap bubbles[31, 20].

detailed studies such lorentzian critical phenomena for quantum theories of gravity are under
study in 1+1[32, 33] and 2+1 dimensions[34]. one result is the apparent discovery of a universality
class for 1 + 1 quantum gravity that is not louiville theory[32]. of great importance would be the
extension of these methods to the study of supersymmetric theories. in this regard it is interesting
to note that there exists a possible connection14 between supersymmetry and causality in 1 + 1
dimensional matrix models of evolving causal histories.

these studies are necessary preliminaries for an attack on the continuum limit of the full theory.
in particular, control over the continuum limit of 1 + 1 dimensional theories of this kind may be
sucient to discover those choices of algebras gq and evolution laws for which the continuum limit
exists. this is because, according to the argument of [35], summarized above, a causally evolving
spin network (or spin foam) cannot have a continuum limit unless the 1+ 1 dimensional spin system
that describe its small perturbations itself has a continuum limit which reproduces a critical string
theory.

it is also intriguing that non-equilibrium critical phenomena of the kind we expect to nd in
these theories, can be self-organized, in the sense of bak et al[65], leading to the possibility of
self-tuning critical phenomena. it is intriguing to speculate that the self-tuning may extend to the

14pointed out by j. ambjorn and s. gupta.

33

selection of algebras (or more properly, subalgebras) such that continuum limits exist. if this is the
case than the existence of the classical world may be a self-organized critical phenomena.

13.2 uniqueness of the evolution moves

in the present paper we were interested just to show that there exist choices of evolution moves
and amplitudes such that the matrix model was recovered for the description of the holographic
degrees of freedom. the form of the laws we have found here is neither beautiful nor unique. it is
then interesting to investigate whether there are more elegant forms for the evolution laws.

of great importance is the question of whether the bulk moves still induce the matrix hamilto-
nian when they act deep inside a very high genus surface. one may conjecture that supersymmetry
will protect the form of the induced boundary action, due to a non-perturbative renormalization
theorem.

13.3 defects and branes

as mentioned in section 2, the correspondence between quantum geometries in d dimensions and
states in h reproduces pseudomanifolds. these have defects which are identied surfaces of codi-
mension 2 or greater. given the fundamental dynamics on h these defects will evolve. these may
then be something like the branes of string theory. these are not d-branes because the excita-
tions which we have identied as strings do not end on them, rather they must be magnetically
charged. thus, the theory predicts that there are d0 branes associated with the holographic sur-
faces on which strings end, and dual magnetic branes, associated with defects that arise in the dual
transformation between conformal blocks and combinatorial pseudomanifolds.

13.4 symmetry breaking and algebraic compactication

there is a natural mechanism for symmetry breaking in this class of theories, which is the follow-
ing. let us consider a basis state |, j, i > for an open tube network, with all the representations
chosen to be in the representation associated with rv , where v is the fundamental spinor repre-
sentation of spin(d)  gq. then small perturbations live in the d  r dimensional subspace of v .
the result is that the algebra that describes the small perturbations is reduced from spin(d) to
spin(d  r).

the simplest example is in the case that j is in the fundamental representation, in which case
as we saw above, small perturbations live in the d  1 dimensional subspace associated with the
tangent space to sd1. the symmetry group is then reduced to spin(d  1). for the case d = 3,
spin(3) = su (2) and the small perturbations in the presence of j = 1/2 are associated with u (1).
in the general case gq will be reduced to a subalgebra, hq.

this means that the theory may have in principle many continuum limits, associated with
dierent reductions of gq. this may lead to a theory of compactications of the theory that is
entirely algebraic.

13.5 relationship to the ads/cft conjecture

the basic picture which has emerged is that of an algebraic description of a membrane whose
dynamics, given the map , may be described in a dual picture given by the embedding of n

34

points in sd1. this sphere is understood to be the transverse surface associated with the past
in the limit n   this surface may be pictured itself as a two
light cone of some observer.
dimensional membrane embedded in sd1. in the presence of a symmetry breaking state of the
kind just dened, this will reduce to the embedding of a membrane in sdr1.

we also note that the whole picture is well dened when the algebra gq has been quantum
deformed and q is taken at a root of unity. this is because in this case the list of representations
is nite, which means that the sum over histories (28) that denes the amplitudes of observable
processes (observable with respect to observers inside the universe) is nite. thus, the level k
denes a kind of infrared cuto.

it is then not surprising that in 2 + 1 and 3 + 1 dimensions, where the correspondence between
the quantum theories and the classical theories are well understood, the level k is associated with
the cosmological constant. in 3 + 1 dimensions the exact relation is given by (2) [16, 26]. we may
also note that in this case the area of the s2 grows proportionally to n . as discussed in section 2,
we may choose the area operator in higher dimensions so that this is true as well for the sdr1
that the membrane embeds in, in that limit.

let us then consider the limit n  , in which we keep the cosmological constant, and hence
k, xed. let us also assume that we have picked the sign of the cosmological constant, as well as
the pattern of symmetry breaking, so that if there is a continuum limit, it may be a d  r + 1
dimensional ads spacetime. it then follows that in the limit n   the sdr1 in which the
holographic surface embeds must become the boundary of a spatial slice of the ads spacetime.
this is because its area will go to innity and, by the symmetry of the classical limit, it will be a
metric sphere of that area. the only such embedded metric spheres with innite area are in the
boundary.

if the ads/cft conjecture is also true then we reach the following conclusion. there is a

inclusion,

f : hads  v s 2


(55)

where hads is the physical hilbert space of the conformal eld theory that describes the degrees
of freedom at the boundary of d  r + 1 dimensional ads spacetime and v s 2
 is the n   limit
of the space of conformal blocks v s 2

ja of the n punctured s2 for the reduced algebra hq.

in the 3+1 dimensional case, this implies that the boundary states for quantum general relativity
and supergravity with a cosmological constant should be constructible in terms of conformal blocks
on a punctured s2, in the limit that the number of punctures is taken to innity. this is conrmed
in detail, for the reduction down to general relativity and n = 1, 2 supergravity[16, 26, 27] for the
full n = 8 case, the conjecture is that the state space of the boundary theory lives in the n  
limit of the space of intertwiners of osp(2|4)  osp(2|4). this will be discussed in more detail in
[66].

13.6 black hole state counting

an important problem that this framework should open up a solution for is the entropy of black
holes far from extremality, where the specic heat is negative. these are non-bps states, however,
the present framework suggests that black hole boundary states should still be expressible in terms
of d0 branes on an appropriate boundary. evidence for this is given by the black hole state
countings in [59] which use a modication of the chern-simons boundary conditions in [16, 26]. to
study this one writes a path integral formula analogous to (28) for the thermal partition function

35

of the theory. this will dene the statistical mechanics of the d0 branes. this will be discussed in
more detail elsewhere.

13.7 quantum cosmology from the inside

the class of theories we have discussed here are examples of a new kind of quantum theory of
cosmology in which there is no observables that acts directly on the wavefunction of the universe.
this is good, because were there, we would have to worry about who could observe them. instead,
given a quantum history m, or a class of such histories, there are a large number of hilbert spaces
that describe what observers inside the universe may observe. this is of course closely related to
the holographic principle, as discussed here and in [2, 24]. the general form of such theories is
discussed in [62, 63] and interpretational issues are discussed in [64].

what is most gratifying about this class of theories is the manner in which those structures
which seem necessary to solve foundational issues, such as how to describe what observers inside the
universe may measure in a quantum cosmology, turn out to coincide precisely with those structures
which are necessary to solve technical problems concerning the existence of background independent
quantum theories of gravity with good continuum limits.

acknowledgments

this work arose out of joint work with fotini markopoulou, whose suggestions and criticisms have
been crucial. the holographic map  described here is a realization of ideas rst proposed by louis
crane[36] concerning the relationship between bulk and boundary states in quantum gravity, and
his picture has been an important inspiration for the work leading up to the present conjecture. i
am also indebted to arivand asok, john brodie, surya das, michael dine, brian green, sameer
gupta, chris isham, stuart kauman, yi ling, shahn majid, seth major, juan maldacena, roger
penrose, michael reisenberger, carlo rovelli, steve shenker and edward witten for conversations
and criticisms at various stages of this work. this work was also presented to seminars at the
university of amsterdam, slac, marseille, and the karpaz winter school, and i am grateful
for many helpful comments on these occasions. this work was supported by the nsf through
grant phy95-14240. i am also very grateful for support and encouragement from the jesse phillips
foundation.

references

[1] c. m. hull and p. k. townsend, unity of superstring dualities, nucl. phys. b348 (1995) 109;

e. witten, string theory in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b443 (1995) 85.

[2] f. markopoulou and l. smolin quantum geometry with intrinsic local causality preprint, dec.

1997, gr-qc/9712067, phys.rev. d58 (1998) 084032.

[3] t. jacobson and l. smolin, nonperturbative quantum geometries nuclear physics b299 (1988)

295-345.

[4] c. rovelli and l. smolin, phys rev lett 61 (1988) 1155; nucl phys b133, 80 (1990);the

physical hamiltonian in nonperturbative quantum gravity,phys.rev.lett.72(1994)446

36

[5] c. rovelli and l. smolin discreteness of area and volume in quantum gravity nuclear physics

b 442 (1995) 593. erratum: nucl. phys. b 456 (1995) 734.

[6] c. rovelli and l. smolin, spin networks and quantum gravity gr-qc/9505006, physical

review d 52 (1995) 5743-5759.

[7] l smolin: in quantum gravity and cosmology, eds j perez-mercader et al, world scientic,

singapore 1992; the future of spin networks gr-qc/9702030 in the penrose feshscrift.

[8] c. rovelli, gr-qc/9710008;

[9] t. jaocobson, new variables for canonical supergravity class. quant. grav. 5 (1988) 923;
d. armand-ugon, r. gambini, o. obregon, j. pullin, towards a loop representation for
quantum canonical supergravity, hep-th/9508036, nucl.phys. b460 (1996) 615; h. kunitomo
and t. sano the ashtekar formulation for canonical n=2 supergravity, prog. theor. phys.
suppl. (1993) 31; takashi sano and j. shiraishi, the non-perturbative canonical quantiza-
tion of the n=1 supergravity, nucl. phys. b410 (1993) 423, hep-th/9211104; the ashtekar
formalism and wkb wave functions of n=1,2 supergravities, hep-th/9211103; k. ezawa,
ashtekars formulation for n=1, n=2 supergravities as constrained
bf theories, prog.theor.phys.95:863-882,1996, hep-th/9511047.t. kadoyoshi and s. no-
jiri, n=3 and n=4 two form supergravities, mod.phys.lett.a12:1165-1174,1997,
hep-th/9703149; l. f. urrutia towards a loop representation of connection theories dened
over a super-lie algebra hep-th/9609010.

[10] yi li and l. smolin, superspin networks and quantum supergravity preprint in preparation.

[11] see, for example, p. s. aspinwall, b. r. greene, d. r. morrison multiple mirror manifolds and
topology change in string theory, hep-th/9301043, phys. lett. b303 (1993) 249-259; calabi-
yau moduli space, mirror manifolds and spacetime topology change in string theory, hep-
th/9309097, nucl. phys. b420 (1994) 184-242; brian r. greene, david r. morrison, andrew
strominger, nucl.phys. b451 (1995) 109-120, hep-th/9504145.

[12] h. kodama, prog.theor.phys.80:1024,1988.

[13] a. sen, gravity as a spin system phys. lett. b119 (1982) 89; quantum theory of a spin 3/2

system in einstein spaces, int. j. of theor. phys. 21 (1982) 1.

[14] a ashtekar, phys. rev. lett., 57 (1986) 2244; phys. rev. d36 (1987) 1587.

[15] l. smolin and c. soo, the chern-simons invariant as the natural time variable for classical

and quantum cosmology nucl. phys. b449 (1995) 289, gr-qc/9405015

[16] l. smolin, linking topological quantum eld theory and nonperturbative quantum gravity gr-

qc/9505028, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6417.

[17] s. major and l. smolin, quantum deformation of quantum gravity gr-qc/9512020, nucl. phys.
b 473 (1996) 267; r. borissov, s. major and l. smolin, the geometry of quantum spin networks
gr-qc/9512043, class. and quant. grav. 12 (1996) 3183.

37

[18] f. markopoulou and l. smolin non-perturbative dynamics of algebraic (p,q) string networks

preprint, december 1997, hep-th/9712148, phys.rev. d58 (1998) 084033

[19] l. smolin, towards a background independent approach to m theory, hep-th/9808192, to ap-
pear in a special issue of chaos, solitons and fractals on  superstrings, m,f,s....theory
(1998).

[20] s. kauman and l. smolin, combinatorial dynamics in quantum gravity

[21] b. dewitt, j. hoppe, h. nicolai, nuclear physics b305 (1988) 545.

[22] t. banks, w. fishler, s. h. shenker, l. susskind, m theory as a matrix model: a conjecture hep-
th/9610043; phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112; lubos motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring
interactions, hep-th/9701025; tom banks, nathan seiberg, strings from matrices, nucl.phys.
b497 (1997) 41-55,h ep-th/9702187 ; r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, matrix string
theory, nucl.phys. b500 (1997) 43-61, hep-th/9703030.

[23] l. smolin, the bekenstein bound, topological quantum eld theory and pluralistic quantum

cosmology, gr-qc/9508064

[24] l. smolin, holography, ination and causality preprint in preparation (1999).

[25] j. d. bekenstein, lett. nuovo cim 11 (1974).

[26] l. smolin, holographic formulation of quantum general relativity.

[27] yi ling and l. smolin, holographic formulation of n =2 supergravity, preprint in preparation.

[28] l. bombelli, j. lee, d. meyer and r. d. sorkin, spacetime as a causal set phys. rev. lett. 59

(1987) 521.

[29] g. t hooft, quantum gravity: a fundamental problem and some radical ideas. carg`ese summer
school lectures 1978. publ. recent developments in gravitation. carg`ese 1978. ed. by m.
levy and s. deser. plenum, new york/london, 323; quantization of space and time in
3 and in 4 space-time dimensions, lectures held at the nato advanced study institute
on quantum fields and quantum space time, carg`ese, july 22  august 3, 1996. gr-
qc/9608037; the scattering matrix approach for the quantum black hole: an overview. j. mod.
phys. a11 (1996) pp. 4623-4688. gr-qc/9607022.

[30] f. markopoulou, dual formulation of spin network evolution preprint, march 1997, gr-

qc/9704013.

[31] f. markopoulou and l. smolin causal evolution of spin networks gr-qc/9702025. cgpg

preprint (1997), nuclear physics b, nucl.phys. b508 (1997) 409-430.

[32] j. ambjorn and r. loll, non-perturbative lorentzian quantum gravity, causality and topol-
ogy change,nucl.phys. b536 (1998) 407-434, hep-th/9805108; j. ambjorn, j.l. nielsen, j.
rolf, r. loll, euclidean and lorentzian quantum gravity - lessons from two dimensions,
hep-th/9806241.

38

[33] s, gupta, in preparation.

[34] r. borissov and s. gupta, propagating spin modes in canonical quantum gravity, gr-

qc/9810024.

[35] l. smolin, strings as perturbations of evolving spin-networks, hep-th/9801022

[36] l. crane, clocks and categories, is quantum gravity algebraic? to appear in the special issue
of j. math. phys. on quantum geometry, categorical physics, in knot theory and quantum
gravity ed. j. baez, (oxford university press).

[37] r. penrose, theory of quantized directions unpublished manuscript.; in quantum theory and
beyond ed t bastin, cambridge u press 1971; in advances in twistor theory, ed. l. p. hugh-
ston and r. s. ward, (pitman,1979) p. 301; in combinatorial mathematics and its applica-
tion (ed. d. j. a. welsh) (academic press,1971); theory of quantized directions unpublished
manuscript.

[38] juan m. maldacena, hep-th/9711200, hep-th/9803002.

[39] e. witten, hep-th/9802150, hep-th/9803131.

[40] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov, a.m. polyakov, phys.lett. b428 (1998) 105-114, hep-th/9802109.

[41] g. moore and n. seiberg, classical and quantum conformal eld theories comun. math. phys.

123 (1988) 177.

[42] e. witten, quantum eld theory and the jones polynomial commun. math. phys. 121 (1989)

351

[43] l. crane, commun. math. phys. 135 (1991) 615; phys. lett. b 259 (1991) 243.

[44] e. verlinde, fusion rules and modular transformations in 2d conformal eld theory nucl. phys.
b 300 (1988) 360; g. moore and n. yu. reshetikhin, a comment on quantum group symmetry
in conformal eld theory, nucl. phys. b 328 (1989) 557; n. yu. reshetikhin and v. g. turaev,
ribbon graphs and their invariants derived from quantum groups, commun. math. phys. 127
(1990) 1; invariants of 3-manifolds via link polynomials and quantum groups, invent. math.
103 (1991) 547; v turaev o viro: topology 31 (1992) 865.

[45] l.kauman,s.l.lins,

temperley-lieb

recoupling

theory

and

invariants

of

3-manifolds,princeton u press, 1994.

[46] j. barrett and l. crane, relativistic spin networks and quantum gravity, gr-qc/9709028 ;
l. crane, on the interpretation of relativistic spin networks and the balanced state sum, gr-
qc/9710108; j. baez, spin foam models, gr-qc/9709052.

[47] b. bruegmann, r. gambini and j. pullin, phys. rev. lett. 68, 431 (1992); gen. rel. and

grav. 251 (1993);

[48] r. gambini and j. pullin, loops, knots, gauge theories and quantum gravity cambridge uni-

versity press, 1996.

39

[49] r. loll, nucl. phys. b444 (1995) 619; b460 (1996) 143; r. depietri and c. rovelli, geometry
eigenvalues and scalar product from recoupling theory in loop quantum gravity, gr-qc/9602023,
phys.rev. d54 (1996) 2664; simonetta frittelli, luis lehner, carlo rovelli, the complete spec-
trum of the area from recoupling theory in loop quantum gravity gr-qc/9608043; r. borissov,
ph.d. thesis, temple, (1996).

[50] d. rayner, class. quan. grav. 7 (1990)111; 7 (1990) 651.

[51] a. ashtekar and c. j. isham, class and quant grav 9 (1992) 1069

[52] a ashtekar j lewandowski d marlof j mourau t thiemann: quantization of dieomorphism
invariant theories of connections with local degrees of freedom, gr-qc/9504018, jmp 36 (1995)
519; a. ashtekar and j. lewandowski, quantum geometry i: area operator gr-qc/9602046;
j. lewandowski, volume and quantization gr-qc/9602035.

[53] t. thiemann, quantum spin dynamics i-v, class.quant.grav. 15 (1998) 839-905, 1207-1512.
gr-qc/9606092, gr-qc/9606089, gr-qc/9606090, gr-qc/9705020, gr-qc/9705021, gr-qc/9705019,
gr-qc/9705018, gr-qc/9705017

[54] g. thooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity gr-qc/9310006.

[55] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, hep-th/9409089, j. math. phys. (1995) ; strings, black
holes and lorentz contractions hep-th/9308139; phys. rev. lett. 71 (1993) 2367; phys. rev.
d 49 (1994) 6606; d 50 (1994) 2700; l. susskind and p. grin, partons and black holes
hep-th/9410306

[56] w. fischler, l. susskind, holography and cosmology, hep-th/9806039.

[57] gary t. horowitz, donald marolf, a new approach to string cosmology, jhep 9807 (1998)

014, hep-th/9805207.

[58] simonetta frittelli, carlos n. kozameh, ezra t. newman, carlo rovelli, ranjeet s. tate,
fuzzy spacetime from a null-surface version of gr, class.quant.grav. 14 (1997) a143-a154,
gr-qc/9603061; on the quantization of the null-surface formulation of gr phys.rev. d56
(1997) 889-907, gr-qc/9612010; savitri v. iyer, carlos n. kozameh, ezra t. newman, the
vacuum einstein equations via holonomy around closed loops on characteristic surfaces.,
gr-qc/9502020; simonetta frittelli, carlos kozameh, ted newman, lorentzian metrics from
characteristic surfaces, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 4975-4983, gr-qc/9502025.

[59] k. krasnov, gr-qc/9603025, phys.rev. d55 (1997) 3505-3513; gr-qc/9605047, gen.rel.grav.
30 (1998) 53-68; a. ashtekar, j. baez, a. corichi, k. krasnov, phys.rev.lett. 80 (1998)
904-907, gr-qc/9710007; gr-qc/9902015.

[60] c. rovelli,int. j. of theor. phys. 35 (1996) 1637, quant-ph/9609002.

[61] l. smolin the life of the cosmos oxford and wiedenfeld and nicolson, 1997.

[62] f. markopoulou, the internal description of a causal set: what the universe looks like from

the inside, gr-qc/9811053.

40

[63] f. markopoulou, models of causal quantum histories preprint in preparation.

[64] f. markopoulou and l. smolin, causal quantum cosmology, preprint in preparation.

[65] p. bak, c. tang and k. wiesenfeld, phys. rev. lett. 59 (1987) 381; phys. rev. a 38 (1988)

364; per bak how nature works oxford: oxford university press, 1997.

[66] l. smolin, in preparation.

41

