hub-ep 99/10

upr-835t

hep-th/9903028

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

m
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
2
0
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

intersecting orbifold planes and local anomaly

cancellation in m-theory

michael faux1, dieter lust1 and burt a. ovrut2

1institut fur physik, humboldt universitat

invalidenstrae 110, 10115 berlin, germany

2department of physics, university of pennsylvania

philadelphia, pa 191046396, usa

abstract

a systematic program is developed for analyzing and cancelling local anomalies

on networks of intersecting orbifold planes in the context of m -theory. through a

delicate balance of factors, it is discovered that local anomaly matching on the lower-

dimensional intersection of two orbifold planes may require twisted matter on those

planes which do not conventionally support an anomaly (such as odd-dimensional

planes). in this way, gravitational anomalies can, in principle, tell us about (twisted)

gauge groups on subspaces which are not necessarily ten-, six- or two-dimensional.
an example is worked out for the case of an s1/z2  t 4/z2 orbifold and possible
implications for four-dimensional physics are speculated on.

1 introduction

anomalies have been curiously adept at providing insight into fundamental concepts and

indicating new phenomena. the role [1] of local gauge and gravitational anomaly can-

cellation [2] in fomenting the so-called rst superstring revolution is well known. but

the ongoing development of nonperturbative string dynamics has also relied strongly

on constraints imposed by anomaly cancellation in eective eld theories. since the

nonperturbative picture is now understood to involve an eleven-dimensional description,

eleven-dimensional supergravity has become a central tool in the exploration of the yet-

mysterious underpinnings of whatever dynamics comprise m-theory. anomalies have an

important place in this story.

in this paper, we develop a systematic method for analyzing m-theory orbifold anoma-

lies in situations where there are various orbifold planes of dierent dimensionalities which

intersect. particularly, we indicate a way in which the requirement of local anomaly can-

cellation on subspaces corresponding to the intersection of two orbifold planes can require

twisted matter propagating on the entirety of one of the planes regardless of whether that

plane actually supports a separate local anomaly. this works because fermions propa-

gating on an intersecting plane can couple to currents localized on the intersection via

projections which are chiral from the point of view of the (lower-dimensional) intersec-

tion. the associated contributions to the anomaly are distinguishable by virtue of divisors

which properly modify standard index theory results in these situations.

eleven-dimensional supergravity has a solitonic supervebrane with chiral zero-modes.

hence, vebrane worldvolume gravitational anomalies posed an early puzzle to the con-

sistent realization of m-theory eective actions. as anticipated in [3] and realized in [4],

the cancellation of these anomalies requires an extension of the minimally coupled super-

gravity action in the form of a coupling gx7, where g is the four-form eld strength and
x7 is a seven-form involving the eleven-dimensional riemann tensor. the chiral modes on
the vebrane worldvolume also couple to the normal bundle involving so(5) spacetime

symmetries not broken by the presence of the vebrane. the cancellation of associated

so(5) anomalies posed a further puzzle which was analyzed and partially solved in [5]

and more recently resolved in [6] by a subtle mechanism involving the cgg interaction

present in the minimally coupled theory.

chiral anomalies also arise in orbifold compactications of m-theory. such construc-

tions provided some of the initial impetus for the current faith in a unied description of

the ve erstwhile separate ten-dimensional string theories, and thereby have played a role

in the so-called second superstring revolution. generally, orbifolding eleven-dimensional

1

supergravity removes from the bulk gravitino and the bulk three-form potential all but a

chiral projection on any even-dimensional hyperplane xed by the action of the discrete

group that denes the orbifold. in cases where there are ten- or six-dimensional xed

planes, the cancellation of gravitational anomalies induced by couplings involving these

projections poses yet more puzzles to the consistent realization of m-theory orbifolds, only

some of which have been completely resolved.

the prototype m-theory orbifold was described by horava and witten in [8, 9], where

the connection between eleven-dimensional supergravity and the e8  e8 heterotic string
was rst indicated. in this case, one of the spatial dimensions was compactied on s1/z2,
which is an orbifold with two ten-dimensional xed hyperplanes. in this case cancellation

of induced gravitational anomalies necessitates the presence of ten-dimensional e8 gauge
matter propagating on each of the two ten-planes. these, of course, provide the two e8
factors known previously from the perturbative heterotic string perspective, in which the

eleventh dimension is re-interpreted as the (small) string coupling constant.

a central aspect of the horava-witten analysis was the requirement of anomaly can-

cellation independently at each point in eleven-dimensional spacetime. since the one-loop

anomalies in that case derive from from the coupling of the eleven-dimensional gravitino

to ten-dimensional currents, the anomaly is characterized by expressions which dier from

those obtained from usual index theorems. this dierence is a specic factor of 1/2 de-

rived from the fact that there are two orbifold planes.

one would like to have a guiding principle for constructing realistic models of nature

from m-theory. in perturbative string theory, the requirement of modular invariance was

eventually understood to imply anomaly freedom. in m-theory we have no such principle

which we can point to which oers an explanation for anomaly freedom. but we do

have the requirement of anomaly freedom itself. this turns out to be a powerful tool

in its own right.

it is conceivable that anomaly cancellation in eective theories are

somehow equivalent to the microscopic consistency requirements related to a fundamental

description of m-theory.

in this paper, we oer a concise and self-contained account of the anomaly cancellation
issues associated with three basic m-theory constructions: the m-vebrane, the s1/z2
orbifold, and the t 5/z2 orbifold. these are reviewed using the specic tools used after-
ward to analyze the more interesting s1/z2  t 4/z2 orbifold, and are presented in detail
for the reason that the same calculations involved constitute necessary sub-analyses in

the latter case. the m-vebrane in particular is central to all phenomenological construc-

tions based on m-theory. furthermore, the independent presentations of these situations

using our specic tools enable us to focus on individual generic aspects such as the con-

2

cept of anomaly inow and the issue of wandering vebranes which can mediate phase

transitions.

in section 2 we review the cancellation of the worldvolume gravitational anomaly for

the m-vebrane. this allows us to motivate and introduce the basic tools common to

anomaly analyses for all m-theory orbifolds, and also to set our notation. the basic

tools are the anomaly polynomials mentioned above, the cgg and gx7 chern-simons
interactions and special objects called brane-currents important for describing magnetic

and electric sources for g concentrated on sub-manifolds.

in section 3 we review the cancellation of gravitational and gauge anomalies in the
context of the horava-witten s1/z2 orbifold. this entire analysis carries over as a sub-
analysis in the more complicated case analyzed in section 6. numerical details derived in

section 3 are essential to the analysis of section 6.

in section 4 we review the cancellation of the gravitational anomaly in the context
of the t 5/z2 orbifold [10, 11]. this scenario comprises another sub-analysis for the case
studied in section 6, but an orthogonal one. the presentation in this section also allows

useful parallels to be drawn in section 6 relating to paradoxes which are discussed in that

section.

in section 5 we explain an eect not present in the case of the z2 orbifold anomalies,
but which is essential to anomalies in orbifolds with intersecting xed-planes. this i-

brane eect mirrors a synonymous eect in the context of intersecting d-branes, and

involves an interplay between electric and magnetic sources for g supported on separate

but intersecting orbifold planes. the eect forms a crucial ingredient to the analysis of

section 6.

section 6 involves a detailed local anomaly analysis in the case of a s1/z2  t 4/z2
orbifold. this orbifold is essentially an amalgamation of the two z2 orbifolds reviewed
in sections 3 and 4, but there are important new features. the rst one is that, due

to the larger discrete group, the bulk supersymmetry is halved again on the xed-plane

intersections. this allows for a richer twisted sector, enables a local green-schwarz mech-

anism precluded in the former cases and involves the interesting i-brane eect described

in section 5. most importantly, the analysis indicates how one can infer seven-dimensional

twisted states based on their relationship to anomalies on the six-dimensional subspaces

corresponding to the intersections with the ten-planes. there is a paradox, however,

which leaves an unanswered question. as far as we are aware, ours is the rst analysis

into the local aspects of anomaly cancellation in m-theory orbifolds other than the two

z2 orbifolds described above.

in section 7 we conclude and speculate on implications our results may have for even

3

more complicated orbifolds related to realistic four-dimensional physics.

we also include three appendices.

appendix a includes tables describing some results from group theory required by the

analysis described in section 6.

appendices b and c serve as brief encyclopedias to the relevant anomaly polynomials

used in the main part of the paper. these appendices are included for reference pur-

poses and are meant to be practical and concise. for this reason the relationship of these

polynomials to index theorems is de-emphasised. appendix b includes the polynomials

relevant to ten-dimensional anomalies. this also includes two well-known classic exam-

ples from ten-dimensional supergravity to illustrate how these same polynomials are used

in more straightforward analyses. these are included for the benet of readers without

much familiarity with anomaly polynomials. appendix c includes a similar encyclopedia

involving the analogous six-dimensional anomaly polynomials and also includes examples.

2 the m-fivebrane and brane-currents

the m-vebrane describes a prototypical spacetime defect supporting a potential anomaly.

this six-dimensional object has worldvolume elds transforming as a d=6 n=2 tensor
multiplet 1. this includes ve scalars parameterizing the position of the vebrane in

eleven-dimensional spacetime as well as an anti self-dual two-form (ie: the three-form

eld strength satises h = h) and a pair of antichiral spin 1/2 elds. the tensor and

the fermions each contribute to a gravitational anomaly at one loop. this anomaly is

characterized by an eight-form which can be computed via the relation

i8(1 loop) = i (3form)

grav

(r)  2 i (1/2)

grav(r) ,

(2.1)

where the minus signs indicate anti self-duality and negative chirality respectively, and

the absolute values of the two coecients reect the multiplicities of the indicated elds.
the polynomials i (3form)
grav(r) encode the contributions to a six-dimensional
gravitational anomaly due to a single self-dual tensor eld and a single chiral spin 1/2

grav (r) and i (1/2)

fermion. these are determined by index theorems and given explicitly in appendix c as

equation (c.1). substituting the polynomials given in (c.1) into the expression (2.1) we

easily determine

i8(1 loop) =

1

(2)3 4!(cid:16) 1

8tr r4  1

32(tr r2)2(cid:17) ,

1in our conventions, n = 2 describes 16 supercharges, and is therefore twice the minimum in six-

dimensions. the same superalgebra is sometimes called n = 4 in the literature because it corresponds

to n = 4 in four dimensions.

4

(2.2)

where r is the six-dimensional riemann tensor expressed as an so(5, 1)-valued two-form.

the worldvolume fermions also couple to so(5) currents associated with the normal

bundle. this gauge group is inherited from the bulk so(10, 1) dieomorphism group,

which is broken by the presence of the vebrane to so(5, 1)  so(5). whereas the

so(5, 1) transformations include the vebrane worldvolume dieomorphisms, with one-

loop anomaly described by (2.2), the so(5) anomaly is more subtle. its cancellation was

resolved in [6], and involves mathematics which we will not need or describe in this paper.

the normal bundle anomaly can be considered independently. we therefore suppress this

issue in the balance of this paper.

the one-loop anomaly (2.2) is canceled via inow from classical variation of the

eleven-dimensional action. the classical variation can include an anomalous contribution

localized on the vebrane worldvolume provided the four-form g of eleven-dimensional

supergravity couples magnetically to the vebrane via modications to the dg bianchi

identity. the anomaly inow arises specically due to the variation of the following terms
in the action 2,

s =    



3 z c  g  g +z g  x7 .

(2.3)

the cgg interaction is required by the minimally-coupled supergravity while the gx7
term is an additional higher-derivative interaction required by the vebrane anomaly

cancellation. this also requires that x7 transform into a total derivative under local
so(10, 1) lorentz transformations as x7 = dx 1
6 . the precise form of x7 is dictated by
the anomaly cancellation.

a magnetic source for g:

in the presence of a single vebrane, the four-form g satises the bianchi identity

dg =  (5)
w 6 ,

(2.4)

where the ve-form  (5)
w 6 is, in the terminology of [7], a brane-current with support localized
on the vebrane worldvolume, w 6. such objects have received critical attention in various

papers, notably [5, 6, 7], and have an interesting and somewhat involved mathematical

description. the essential features necessary for our purposes are summarized as follows.

an ( 11  d ) - form (11d)

is a brane-current if it has localized support on the d-
dimensional defect m d and if it satises properties of being closed, integrating to one

m d

2the normalizations are chosen as follows. we start with the conventions employed in [6], and apply

a further scaling c  2 c (so the object we call c is the one called c/ 3 in [6]). this determines the

coecient of the rst term to be /3. with this scaling, quanta of g-ux are measured in units ofr g
rather than (2)1r g, which also explains why there is no factor of 2 in equation (2.4).

5

over any normal ber of the embedding space, and performing as a generalized dirac

delta function by collapsing integrals to the support manifold,r m d   =rm d . fur-

thermore, provided that manifolds m d1 and m d2 intersect transversally, the product of
two associated brane-currents is itself a brane-current. thus, if m d1 and m d2 intersect at

right angles in eleven-dimensions,

(11d1)
m d1

 (11d2)

m d2  (11i)

m d1m d2 ,

(2.5)

where i = d1 + d2  11 is the dimensionality of the transversal intersection m i =
m d1  m d2. subtleties involving non-transversal intersections are discussed and resolved

in [7].

a vebrane coupled as in (2.4) will contribute one unit of g-ux. this is seen by

integrating (2.4) over the ve dimensions transverse to the vebrane worldvolume using a

region bounded by a four-cycle  which encompasses the vebrane. stokes theorem then

allows us to express the left-hand side of the integrated bianchi identity as an integral over

, while the right-hand side is unity by virtue of a dening property of the brane-current
(5)

w 6. thus,r g = 1.

anomaly inow:

it is straightforward to determine the variation of the gx7 term. using an integration by
parts and applying the bianchi identity (2.4) we determine

(cid:16)z g  x7(cid:17) = zw 6

x 1
6 .

(2.6)

note that the brane-current (5)
w 6 included in the bianchi identity collapses the eleven-
dimensional integral to a six-dimensional integral over w 6. the gx7 inow contribution
is characterized by the closed gauge-invariant eight-form x8 which gives rise to (2.6) upon
descent. thus we can write

i8(gx7) = x8 ,

(2.7)

where x8  dx7 and x7 = dx 1
one-loop anomaly given in (2.2).

6 . this inow contribution must cancel against the

the total anomaly:

the total worldvolume gravitational anomaly is given by the sum of the one-loop anomaly

(2.2) and the inow contribution (2.7). thus, i8(total) = i8(1 loop)+i8(gx7). we require
that this total anomaly vanish. using equation (2.7), this indicates that x8 must be equal

6

to i8(1 loop), which is given as (2.2). thus,

x8 =

8tr r4  1

1

(2)3 4!(cid:16) 1

32(tr r2)2(cid:17) .

(2.8)

note that the cgg term does not contribute to the vebrane gravitational anomaly.

it does, however, contribute importantly to the normal bundle anomaly (which we are

suppressing). this is described in [6]. in more general contexts, such as the orbifolds

analyzed below, the cgg term provides a crucial ingredient and cannot be neglected.

comments:

the above analysis is easily generalized to the presence of any number of unit-charge

vebranes. if there are n5 vebranes, then (2.4) is replaced with

dg =

 (5)
w 6
i

n5xi=1

(2.9)

where w 6

i is the worldvolume of the ith vebrane. in this case, each vebrane will support
an independent set of worldvolume elds (comprising a d=6 n=2 tensor multiplet) which
contributes to a one-loop anomaly localized on w 6
i . at the same time there will be an
inow contribution to the total anomaly concentrated on each vebrane due to the sum

of terms in (2.9), and arising due to the variation of the same gx7 term derived above.
the one-loop anomaly and the inow anomaly will cancel each other independently on

each vebrane.

since eleven-dimensional supergravity has unit-charge vebranes as a solitons, then, by

virtue of the above discussion, any quantum theory which has eleven-dimensional super-

gravity as its low-energy description should involve as well the particular gx7 interaction.
this term also proves crucial to the unraveling of further puzzles presented upon orbifold

compactication.

3 m-theory on r10  s1/z2

the simplest orbifold of eleven-dimensional supergravity has had a signicant impact.

this construction [8, 9] provided simple answers to longstanding puzzles associated with

the role of eleven-dimensions in the scheme of string-theory, provided a satisfying picture

of the strongly-coupled dynamics of the e8  e8 heterotic string and has opened the
door to a wealth of new ideas pertaining to nonperturbative fundamentals in physics.

one thing that makes this construction so powerful is the ease with which some of the

essential calculations can be done, a common feature of orbifold models.

7

orbifolds are dened by discrete projections which act both on the spacetime manifold

and on the eld content of the theory. these dene a set of invariant hypersurfaces, known

as orbifold planes, which provide the main focus for analytical attention. in the case of
the s1/z2 orbifold , there are two parallel ten-dimensional orbifold planes within eleven
dimensional spacetime. our primary interest in this paper is in more complicated orbifolds

which involve intersecting networks of xed-planes. nevertheless, much of the analysis

in those cases is identical to that associated with simpler orbifolds without xed-plane

intersections. so in this section we briey but completely review the anomaly analysis
for the case of the s1/z2 orbifold. since this analysis uses the same tools which we will
need later on, this enables a necessary appreciation for the some of the computational

mechanics used in more general situations. it also supplies results which carry over to

other orbifolds whose orbifold group includes a similar projection as a subgroup.

the structure of the orbifold:

start with eleven-dimensional supergravity on r10  s1/z2. the r10 factor is parame-
terized by xa  {x1, ..., x10}, while the one compact dimension is parameterized by x11,

which takes values on the interval [, ] with endpoints identied. truncate the theory
via a z2 projection which acts on the compact dimension as x11  x11. there are then
two ten-dimensional hyperplanes xed by this projection, namely the surfaces dened by
x11 = 0 and x11 = .

demanding z2-invariance of the eleven-dimensional interaction term cgg implies
that the three-form c is odd under the z2 projection described above. thus, cabc 
cabc, where a, b, c  {1, ..., 10}. the components cabc therefore vanish on the xed
hyperplanes. however, c(11)ab  c(11)ab. therefore, from the point of view of the
two ten-dimensional xed-planes, the three-form c contributes one nonvanishing tensor

c(11)ab.

half the supersymmetries of the eleven-dimensional theory are broken on the two ten-

planes by the z2 projection. thus, on the xed-planes the one tensor c(11)ab organizes
along with the other elds surviving the z2 projection into a d=10 n=1 supergravity
multiplet. this constitutes the untwisted sector of the orbifold.

we allow for a twisted sector involving ten-dimensional yang-mills multiplets in

the adjoint representation of some gauge group gi propagating on the ith ten-plane. as
reviewed below, anomaly cancellation uniquely selects this group.

the one-loop anomaly:

a gravitational anomaly arises due to the coupling of chiral projections of the bulk grav-

8

itino to currents localized on the two xed-planes. since the two ten-planes are indis-

tinguisable aside from their position, this anomaly is similar on each of the two, and

can be computed using standard formulae if proper care is used. the reason why ex-

tra care is needed is that the anomaly in question actually derives from the coupling of

eleven-dimensional fermions to ten-dimensional currents, whereby standard index theorem

results (such as those described in appendix b) can be applied directly only in the small-

radius limit when the two xed-planes coincide. this is because it is only in this limit

that we describe ten-dimensional fermions coupled to ten-dimensional currents. thus, the

gravitino-induced anomaly on a given ten-plane is one-half of that described by the index

theorem results using the (ten-dimensional) untwisted spectrum described above.

the gaugino elds living in twisted yang-mills multiplets also contribute a gravita-

tional anomaly, as well as mixed and a pure-gauge anomalies. however, since the twisted

elds are ten-dimensional these can be computed directly using the standard formulae

(without multiplying by 1/2).

it is then straightforward to compute the one-loop anomaly using the formulae de-

scribed in appendix b. the local anomaly on the ith xed-plane is characterized by the

following twelve-form,

i12(1 loop)i = 1

grav(r)  i (1/2)

grav(r)(cid:17)

4(cid:16) i (3/2)
2(cid:16) ni i (1/2)

+ 1

grav(r) + i (1/2)

mixed(r, fi) + i (1/2)

(3.10)

gauge(fi)(cid:17) ,

where the various constituent polynomials are given explicitly in (b.1) and (b.2), and ni
is the dimension of the adjoint representation of gi. as explained in appendix b, each
term includes a factor of 1/2 because the relevant fermions are majorana-weyl (having

half the degrees of freedom of a weyl spinor) while the rst two terms obtain an additional

factor of 1/2 (accounting for an overall coecient of 1/4) for the reasons described above.

using (b.1) and (b.2) we easily compute the polynomial i12(1 loop)i. the result has a
tr r6 term, with coecient proportional to (ni  248). however, the anomaly can only
be cancelled if the twelve-form i12(1 loop)i factorizes as the product of a two-form and
an eight-form. this is because the one-loop anomaly can only be canceled through an

additional anomalous variation of the classical action which is necessarily so-factorized.

the reason why the classical contribution is so-factorized is because this contribution

arises only through the noninvariance of independent factors in the chern-simons
interactions cgg and gx7. but so(9, 1) does not enable factorization of tr r6 (which
is therefore said to be the irreducible part of the anomaly), so this term must vanish

identically. therefore the dimension of the group gi must be ni = 248. without yet

9

specifying which 248-dimensional group is permitted, we substitute 248 for ni, obtaining

i12(1 loop)i =

16 trr4 trr2  15

64 (trr2)3 + 1

16 trr4 tr f 2

i

1

2 (2)5 6!(cid:16)  15

+ 5

64 (trr2)2 tr f 2

i  5

8trr2 tr f 4

i + tr f 6

(3.11)

i (cid:17) ,

where factors tr f 2
i

involve a trace over the adjoint representation of gi. as explained
above, it is necessary that this polynomial factorize as the product of a two-form and an

eight-form. it is straightforward to algebraically impose this restriction, from which the

following is found to be a necessary requirement,

trf 6

i = 1

24 trf 4

i trf 2

i  1

3600 (trf 2

i )3 .

(3.12)

there is exactly one nonabelian lie group with this property, e8. given the property
(3.12), as well as the conventional e8 denition of a tr operation, tr f 2  30 tr f 2, and
the two other e8 identities listed in appendix a, after a small amount of straightforward
algebra the anomaly polynomial (3.11) can be reexpressed as follows,

i12(1 loop)i = 1

3  i 3

4 (i) + x8  i4 (i) ,

where x8 is the eight-form given in (2.8) and i4 (i) is a four-form given by

i4 (i) =

1
162 ( tr f 2

i  1

2 trr2 ) .

(3.13)

(3.14)

the factorization (3.13) was rst presented in [8], and provides the key to anomaly can-

cellation. the rst term of (3.13) is canceled by inow mediated by the cgg interaction

while the second term is canceled by inow mediated by the gx7 interaction.

as in the case of the vebrane described in the previous section, the one-loop anomaly

(3.11) is cancelled via inow from classical variation of the eleven-dimensional action.

this can include an anomalous contribution localized on the two ten-planes provided the

bianchi identity dg is appropriately modied. anomaly inow then arises due to the

variation of the same two terms (2.3) which were instrumental to the vebrane anomaly

cancellation. a remarkable feature of m-theory is that for this orbifold, as well as the

one presented in the next section, anomaly cancellation does not require any additional

counterterms.

magnetic couplings:

the modications to the dg bianchi identity which enables the necessary inow mech-

anism can be derived in a systematic way. since dg is a ve-form, the most general
modication with local support on the ten-plane m 10
i would have to be a gauge-invariant

10

four-form wedged with the one-form brane current (1)
. the most general gauge-invariant
m 10
four-form which is available for this purpose would be some linear combination of tr r2
and tr f 2
i . in a fully general analysis, we would leave the coecients of these two terms
unspecied, nding later that they are xed by anomaly cancellation. not suprisingly it is

i

precisely the combination i4 (i) given in (3.14) which is required. for the sake of economy
we sacrice a very small amount of ultimately irrelevant generality by specializing to this

case. so the appropriately modied bianchi identity is given by

dg =

2xi=1

i4 (i)   (1)
m 10

i

,

(3.15)

where i4 (i) is the four-form given in (3.14) and  (1)
m 10
support on the ith ten-plane.

i

is a one-form brane-current with

anomaly inow:

to determine how the cgg term transforms, we need to determine how the three-form

potential c transforms. to determine this, we need an explicit form for g. this is

determined as the object whose exterior derivative reproduces the right-hand side of (3.15).

this implies

g = dc +

2xi=1 (cid:16) (b  1)  (1)

i

m 10

 0

3 (i) + 1

2 b (i) i4 (i)(cid:17) ,

(3.16)

3 (i) is the chern-simons three-form determined by d0

where 0
3 (i) = i4 (i), while (i) is a
zero-form with the two properties d(i) = 2(1)
(i) = 1, and b is a real parame-
m 10
ter unspecied by the bianchi identity. this parameter is, however, xed by anomaly

and 2

i

cancellation, as described below.

since the eld strength g must be gauge invariant, this requires that c have the

following transformation property under gauge transformations and local lorentz trans-

formations,

c =

2xi=1

(b  1) 1

2 (i)   (1)
m 10

i

.

(3.17)

unless b = 1, equation (3.17) implies that c has a nontrivial transformation rule. in fact,

as will be shown, anomaly cancellation requires b = 2, so this allows for anomaly inow

through the resulting noninvariance of the cgg interaction.

using the properties of the brane-currents described in section 2, it is then straight-

forward to determine the transformation of the two interactions cgg and gx7. for the

11

case of the cgg interaction we determine

( 



3 z c  g  g ) = 


3

2xi=1

1

4 (b  1) b2 zm 10

i

1

2 (i)  i4 (i)  i4 (i) .

(3.18)

to obtain this result, we note that, since g is gauge invariant, only the variation of the

this tells us that r cg 2 = (b  1)pirm 10

factor c on the left-hand side of (3.18) contributes. using the explicit result (3.17),
2 (i)(g 2 |), where the bar indicates that g 2
1
is evaluated on the ith xed ten-plane. since cabc| = 0, only the terms [acbc](11)
contribute to dc|, so that dc| necessarily includes a dx11 factor. since both c and
(1)
also contain dx11 factors, we can therefore neglect the rst two terms on the right
m 10
hand side of (3.16) when evaluating g 2| (because dx11  dx11 = 0). as a result, g 2| is
proportional to  2

(i) = 1 so that the product g 2 is well-dened on m 10
i

i

i

. equation (3.18)

describes anomaly inow to the two xed ten-planes due to the cgg interaction.

similarly, we determine

(z g  x7) = 

2xi=1 zm 10

i

i4 (i)  x 1
6 .

(3.19)

to obtain (3.19) , we have integrated by parts and used the bianchi identity (3.15).

equation (3.19) describes inow to the two ten-planes due to the gx7 interaction.

the anomaly inow can be described by a pair of twelve-forms i12(inow)i which give

rise to (3.18) and (3.19) upon descent. thus,

i12(cgg)i = 


12

(b  1) b2 i 3

4 (i)

i12(gx7)i = i4 (i)  x8 .

(3.20)

these two contributions must conspire to cancel against the quantum anomaly given in

(3.13).

the total anomaly:

the total anomaly is given by the sum of the one-loop anomaly (3.13) and the inow

contributions (3.20). thus, i12(total) = i12(1 loop) + i12(cgg) + i12(gx7). we require
that this total anomaly vanish. nicely, the second term of (3.13) is canceled by i12(gx7)i.
the rst term of (3.13) is canceled by i12(cgg)i provided b satises the cubic equation
b3  b2  4 = 0. this equation has one real root, so anomaly cancellation uniquely selects

b = 2 .

(3.21)

this value of b is xed by the consistency requirements. it is gratifying that this require-

ment is satised by a rational (indeed, integer) value for b. in contrast to the vebrane

12

worldvolume anomaly, the cgg term provides a crucial ingredient to the removal of the

gravitational anomaly.

comment 1:

the above analysis is easily generalized to the case where vebranes propagate in the
r10  s1/z2 background. if there are n5 vebranes, then (3.15) is replaced with

dg =

2xi=1

i4 (i)   (1)
m 10

i

+

(5)
w 6
i

,

n5xi=1

(3.22)

is the worldvolume of the ith vebrane. in this case, consistency is automati-

where w 6
i

cally assured because any additional anomalies associated with the vebranes are removed

by the mechanism described in section 2.

comment 2:

an essential point is that the factorization criterion (3.12) diers from the analogous

criterion encountered in the eective eld theory describing the perturbative heterotic

string, obtained as the limit that the eleventh dimension shrinks to zero size.

in that

limit, the theory becomes ten-dimensional and the two orbifold ten-planes coincide. the

quantum anomaly is then replaced by the sum of the two previously independent poly-

nomials i12(1 loop)1 and i12(1 loop)2 since these are now evaluated on the same manifold.
furthermore, the d=11 supergravity theory collapses to d=10 n=1 supergravity and

the inow mechanism involving the cgg and the gx7 terms mutates into the ordinary
green-schwarz mechanism mediated by the surviving two-form, which also requires fac-

torization of the quantum anomaly polynomial. however, since the quantum anomaly in

the small-radius limit is given by the sum of the two polynomials described above, the

factorization criterion is not the same. (the ten-dimensional requirement is derived in ap-

pendix b and given as (b.7), which should be compared with (3.12)). the ten-dimensional

condition does allow e8  e8 as an allowed gauge group, as one would expect, but it also
has another solution, so(32), which is not relevant to the full m-theory construction.

the fact that so(32) is found in the small-radius limit but not on the expanded orbifold

can be phrased as an inability to pull apart the gauge group so(32) to enable anomaly

cancellation on independent orbifold planes. the gauge group e8  e8, on the other
hand, does have the ability to be pulled apart so that each e8 factor can be naturally
associated with one of the two xed ten-planes in the z2 orbifold. the concept of pulled
apart twisted matter illustrates one dierence between what we refer to as collective

anomaly constraints compared to local anomaly constraints, the former referring to

weaker conditions which apply in the collapsed limit when orbifold planes coelesce.

13

4 m-theory on r6  t 5/z2

there is another m-theory orbifold which gave rise, through a detailed analysis of local

anomaly cancellation, to yet another important insight into a subtle mechanism of m-
theory. in this case d=11 supergravity on r6t 5/z2, which was rst analyzed in [10, 11],
a curious degeneracy rst implicated the role of wandering vebranes in mediating phase

transitions.

as in the case of the s1/z2 orbifold described in the previous section, the t 5/z2
orbifold has a set of parallel xed-planes which are indistinguishable aside from their po-
sition. but in the t 5/z2 case, there are thirty-two xed-planes rather than two, and their
dimensionality is six rather than ten. due to important dierences from the previous case,

and also because much of the analysis in the more complicated orbifolds with intersect-

ing xed planes again parallels this discussion, it is worthwhile to briey but completely
review the anomaly analysis for the case of the t 5/z2 orbifold.

structure of the orbifold:

start with eleven-dimensional supergravity on r6  t 5. the r6 factor is parameter-
ized by x  {x1, ..., x6}, while the ve compact dimensions are parameterized by xi 
{x7, ..., x11}, which each takes values on the interval [, ] with endpoints identied.

truncate the theory via a z2 projection which acts on each of the ve compact coordi-
nates as xi  xi. there are 25 = 32 six-dimensional hyperplanes xed by this projection,
namely the surfaces dened when each of the ve xi independently assumes the value 0

or .

demanding z2 invariance of the eleven-dimensional cgg interaction term implies
that the three-form c is odd under the z2 projection. thus, c  c and cij 
cij. the components c and cij therefore vanish on the xed six-planes. however,
ci  ci. therefore, from the point of view of the six-dimensional xed-planes, the
three-form c contributes ve nonvanishing tensors ci.

half the supersymmetries of the eleven-dimensional theory are broken on the xed-

planes by the z2 projection. thus, on the xed-planes the ve six-dimensional two-
forms ci organize along with the other elds surviving the z2 projection into d=6
n=2 supermultiplets. since there are no six-dimensional vector elds surviving the z2
projection, it follows that the relevant supersymmetry is the chiral n=2b theory. this is

because the alternative, the nonchiral n=2a theory, necessarily involves vector elds. the

n=2b supergravity multiplet includes ve self-dual two-forms, so the remaining ve anti

self-dual components must organize into matter supermultiplets. in the n=2b theory, the

14

only matter multiplet is the tensor multiplet (which includes one anti self-dual two-form).

thus, in addition to the n=2b supergravity, we have ve d=6 n=2 tensor multiplets in

the untwisted sector. the anomaly due to the self-dual and anti self-dual two-forms

cancel each other. so the anomalous untwisted couplings involve two chiral spin 3/2

elds coming from the supergravity multiplet and ten antichiral spin 1/2 elds coming

two each from the ve tensor multiplets.

we also allow for a twisted sector involving some number ni of d=6 n=2 tensor
multiplets to propagate on the ith six-plane. the anomalous twisted couplings therefore

involve ni anti self-dual tensor elds and 2ni antichiral spin 1/2 elds.

the one-loop anomaly:

a gravitational anomaly arises due to the coupling of chiral projections of the bulk grav-

itino to currents localized on the thirty-two xed-planes. since the six-planes are indis-

tinguisable aside from their position, this anomaly is similar on each of the thirty-two,

and can be computed using standard formulae if proper care is used. the reason why

extra care is needed is that the the anomaly in question actually derives from the coupling

of eleven-dimensional elds to six-dimensional currents, whereby standard index theorem

results (such as those described in appendix c) can be applied directly only in the small-

radius limit when the thirty-two xed-planes coincide. this is because it is only in this

limit that we actually describe six-dimensional elds coupled to six-dimensional currents.

thus, we can compute the gravitino-induced anomaly on a given six-plane as 1/32 of that

described by the index theorem results using the (six-dimensional) untwisted spectrum

described above.

the twisted tensor multiplets also contribute a gravitational anomaly. however,

since the twisted elds are six-dimensional these can be computed directly using the

standard formulae (without multiplying by 1/32).

it is then straightforward to compute the one-loop anomaly using the formulae de-

scribed in appendix c. the local anomaly on the ith six-plane is characterized by the

grav(r)  10 i (1/2)

grav(r) + i (3form)

grav(r)(cid:17)
grav (r)(cid:17) ,

(4.23)

following eight-form,

i8(1 loop)i =

1

32(cid:16) 2 i (3/2)
ni(cid:16) 2i (1/2)

where the various constituent polynomials are given explicitly in (c.1), and ni is the
number of twisted tensor multiplets. the rst line describes the untwisted anomaly and

includes an additional factor of 1/32 for the reasons described in the previous paragraph.

the second line describes the twisted anomaly coming from ni tensor multiplets.

15

we compute the anomaly by substituting the explicit polynomials given in (c.1) into

the expression (4.23). after a small amount of algebra the result organizes as

i8(1 loop)i = (ni  1

2 ) x8 ,

(4.24)

where x8 is given in (2.8). since the number of tensor multiplets should be integer, it is
apparent that another mechanism is required to cancel this anomaly. in fact, as in the
case of the vebrane described in section 2 and also in the s1/z2 orbifold described in
section 3, the one-loop anomaly (4.24) is canceled via inow from classical variation of

the eleven-dimensional action. this can include an anomalous contribution localized on

the thirty-two xed planes provided the bianchi identity dg is appropriately modied.

anomaly inow then arises due to the variation of the gx7 term.

magnetic couplings:

since dg is a ve-form, the most general modication with local support on the six-plane
m 6
i would have to be a zero-form (ie: a number) multiplying the ve-form brane current
(5)
m 6
i

. so the appropriately modied bianchi identity is given by

dg =

gi  (5)
m 6
i

,

32xi=1

(4.25)

where  (5)
m 6
i
yet-unspecied rational magnetic charges assigned independently to each of the m 6
i .

is a ve-form brane-current with support on the ith six-plane m 6

i and gi are

anomaly inow:

it is straightforward to determine the transformation of the gx7 interaction. this is
found to be

(z g  x7) = 

gi zm 6

i

32xi=1

x 1
6 .

(4.26)

to obtain (4.26) we have integrated by parts and used the bianchi identity (4.25). equa-

tion (4.26) describes inow to the six-dimensional xed planes due to the gx7 interaction.
note that in this case the cgg interaction does not contribute inow to the local gravi-

tational anomaly.

the anomaly inow is characterized by the eight-form i8(gx7)i which gives rise to

(4.26) upon descent. thus,

this contribution must conspire to cancel against the quantum anomaly given in (4.24).

i8(gx7)i = gi x8 ,

(4.27)

16

the total anomaly:

the total anomaly is given by the sum of the one-loop contribution (4.24) and the inow

contribution (4.27). thus, i8(total)i = i8(1 loop)i + i8(gx7)i, which tells us

i8(total)i = (ni  gi  1

2) x8 .

we require that this total anomaly vanish. this requires that

ni  gi = 1
2 .

(4.28)

(4.29)

note that whereas ni is necessarily an integer, the magnetic charge gi can be half-integer.
the anomaly vanishes for a given choice of magnetic charge gi provided there are ni =
gi+1/2 tensor multiplets. since ni should be a nonnegative integer this tells us that there is
a minimum magnetic charge equal to 1/2 with permissible values at successively greater

integer increments. thus, the allowed values of gi are given by 1/2, +1/2, +3/2, ....

comment 1:

the above analysis is easily generalized to the case where vebranes propagate in the
t 5/z2 background. if there are n5 vebranes, then (4.25) is replaced with

dg =

32xi=1

gi  (5)
m 6
i

+

(5)
w 6
i

,

n5xi=1

(4.30)

where w 6
i

is the worldvolume of the ith vebrane. in this case, consistency is automati-

cally assured because any additional anomalies associated with the vebranes are removed

by the mechanism described in section 2.

global constraints and wandering vebranes:

if we integrate the bianchi identity (4.30) over the compact t 5, the left-hand side vanishes

due to stokes theorem (since there is no boundary) and the right-hand becomes n5 +pi gi

(since the brane-currents integrate to unity). therefore

n5 +xi

gi = 0 .

(4.31)

now, if we sum equation (4.29) over the 32 xed points using this constraint, we determine

a second global constraint given by n5 +pi ni = 16. thus, the total number of twisted

tensor multiplets plus the number of vebranes must be 16. since each vebrane also

supports a tensor multiplet, this tells us that we have a total of 16 tensor multiplets.

there are various ways to realize all of these constraints. for instance, if there are no

17

vebranes (so that n5 = 0), one could place tensor multiplets on 16 of the 32 xed points,
and assign magnetic charge +1/2 to these same 16 xed points and magnetic charge

1/2 to the remaining 16 xed points which do not support tensor multiplets. there are

numerous other possibilities. however, there is no way to solve all of the constraints in a

way which treats all 32 xed-planes identically unless we allow n5 6= 0.

the most symmetrical individual solution has n5 = 16 and identical magnetic charge
gi = 1/2 for each of the thirty-two xed planes. these assignments satisfy the global
constraint (4.31). since gi = 1/2, the local constraint (4.29) requires that ni = 0, so
that there are no twisted tensor multiplets in this solution.

the presence of vebranes also allows for a unied description (rst presented in [11])

which symmetrically encorporates all of the distinct vacua. this is obtained if all twisted

tensors are associated with vebranes wrapping the xed six-plane in question. a picture

emerges by which vebranes can detach from a given six-plane, taking one tensor and

one unit of charge with it, and wander throughout the bulk. similarly, a wandering

vebrane can move to and wrap a particular six-plane, thereby adding one tensor to the

twisted spectrum of that plane and simultaneously increasing the magnetic charge by one.

the wandering branes will have their anomalies canceled by the mechanism explained in

section 2, whereas the six-planes will have any local anomaly canceled by the similar

mechanism explained above in this section. in this way all of the unique non-symmetrical

congurations are linked by phase transitions mediated by the vebranes!

comment:

one may ponder another mechanism whereby, on a xed six-plane, a twisted tensor eld

mediates a green-schwarz mechanism locally via counterterms in the action describing
the tensor dynamics. for the case of the t 5/z2 orbifold, however, this isnt possible. this
is because the anomaly eight-form is proportional to x8, which is not factorizable due
to the presence of tr r4. in the case of the orbifold presented in section 6, however, we

nd a scenario where we have six-dimensional orbifold planes which can support tensors,

but where the anomaly can indeed factorize. in that case, such a local green-schwarz

mechanism is not only possible, but necessary.

5 the i-brane eect

the orbifolds analyzed in sections 3 and 4 are the simplest possible examples. in those
cases, all of the orbifold planes are of the same dimensionality (ten in the s1/z2, and six
in the t 5/z2 case) and do not intersect each other. more generally oribifolds will involve

18

xed planes of mixed dimensionalities which can intersect. in this case, the analysis of

local anomaly cancellation is considerably more involved. the presence of intersections

allows for a type of inow mechanism not encountered in the simpler examples. in this

section, we describe this eect in generality in a self-contained manner.

in the next

section, we analyze a z2  z2 orbifold which involves this eect as a necessary ingredient.
brane physics has spawned several cousin-eects to the the green-schwarz mecha-

nism. these are necessary to explain anomaly cancellation in various scenarios involving

spacetime defects. whereby the conventional green-schwarz mechanism involves non-

trivial magnetic and also nontrivial electric couplings to the two-form potential in ten-

dimensional n=1 supergravity, neither of which is concentrated on spacetime defects, the

cousin-eects include couplings which are localized either on the worldvolume of branes or

on orbifold points. in the conventional mechanism, a ten-dimensional quantum anomaly

is cancelled by a nonvanishing variation of the classical action involving an interplay

between ten-dimensional magnetic couplings, which appear in the dh bianchi identity,

and ten-dimensional electric couplings, which appear as chern-simons interactions. by

way of comparison, the gravitational anomaly of m-vebranes is removed by an inter-

play between a six-dimensional magnetic coupling to the three-form potential of eleven-

dimensional supergravity which is localized on the worldvolume of the vebrane, and an

eleven-dimensional electric coupling appearing as a chern-simons interaction.

in this

section, we describe a related eect inspired by considerations of intersecting d-branes,

dubbed i-branes and rst presented in [12], and generalized and nicely explained in [7].

the idea behind the i-brane eect which we consider involves magnetic and elec-

tric couplings to the three-form potential which are variously supported on submanifolds.

for instance, a magnetic coupling (appearing in the dg bianchi identity) can be concen-

trated on a d1-dimensional defect. additionally, electric couplings can appear as chern-

simons interactions in the worldvolume lagrangian describing matter propagating on a

d2-dimensional defect. this could be twisted matter concentrated on an orbifold plane.

the electric couplings would then appear also in the classical eld equation for g ob-

tained by the variational principle. thus, the magnetic and electric couplings appear in

the bianchi identity and in the classical eld equations, respectively, as follows

dg = (11d1)

m d1

 yd16

d  g  (11d2)

m d2

 yd23 ,

(5.1)

where yd16 is a closed, gauge-invariant (d1  6)-form coupling magnetically to g, while
yd23 is a closed, gauge-invariant (d2  3)-form coupling electrically to g. the forms
(11d)
m d

are (11  d)-form brane-currents.

19

the second equation in (5.1) derives from a chern-simons interaction localized on

the submanifold m d2, given by

scs(m d2) =z (11d2)

m d2

 g  y 0

d24 ,

(5.2)

where yd23 = d y 0
d24. this is easily veried, as the classical variation /g applied to
(5.2) gives the the right-hand side of the second equation of (5.1), whereas variation of

the g  g kinetic term supplies the left-hand side.

varying (5.2), integrating by parts, and using the rst line of (5.1), it is straightforward

to show that 3

scs(m d2) = z (11i)

m d2m d1 (cid:16) yd16  yd23(cid:17)1

i

,

(5.3)

= zm i(cid:16) yd16  yd23(cid:17)1

i

where i = d1 + d2  11 is the dimensionality of the intersection m i = m d1  m d2. thus,

there is an anomalous classical variation localized on the i-dimensional intersection of
m d1 and m d2. this anomaly is characterized by the (i + 2)-form which gives rise to (5.3)

upon descent. thus,

y (ib)i+2 = yd16  yd23 .

(5.4)

the intersection anomaly (5.4) involes the product of a magnetically-coupled form

localized on one defect with an electrically-coupled form localized on another defect,

while the contribution to the anomaly itself is localized on the intersection.

6 m-theory on s1/z2  t 4/z2

in this section, we consider the simplest nontrivial m-theory orbifold which involves

multiple intersecting xed-planes. this example has xed planes of ten-, seven- and

six-dimensions, the six-planes lying at the intersections of the ten-planes with the seven-

planes. it is actually a second z2 orbifolding of the horava-witten z2 orbifold described
in section 3, and represents a singular limit of m-theory on s1/z2  k3.

the greater complexity of this orbifold compared to the z2 orbifolds necessitates a
greater systematics. we rst dene more precisely the structure of the orbifold, then

develop the needed machinery, and then use this to determine the twisted states.

it

3we use a standard notation to describe forms linked by descent, such that a closed gauge invariant

form zq is written locally as zq = dz 0

q1, where z 0

q1 has gauge variation z 0 = dz 1

q2.

20

x7

x8

x9

x10

x11







+





+





+





+







+



table 1: the action of the orbifold group z2  z2 on
the ve compact coordinates of the orbifold discussed in

section 6. a plus sign indicates no action on the indicated

coordinate and a minus sign indicates a parity reversal,
xi  xi.

turns out that cancelation of the anomaly at six-dimensional orbifold-plane intersections

requires particular twisted states on the entirety of one of the intersecting planes, which

is seven-dimensional. this analysis illustrates how gravitational anomalies can be used to

determine states in extended regions without a continous local anomaly.

the structure of the orbifold:

we consider the specic s1/z2  t 4/z2 orbifold dened as follows. start with eleven-
dimensional supergravity on a spacetime with topology r6  t 5. the ve compact co-
ordinates, {x7, x8, x9, x10, x11} each takes values on the interval [, ] with endpoints

identied.
in addition to the unit element, the orbifold group includes an element 
which reverses the orientation of the eleventh coordinate, x11  x11, an element  which
reverses the orientation on each of the four coordinates xi  {x7, x8, x9, x10}, and the

product  which reverses the orientation of all ve compact coordinates. the action of

the three nontrivial elements are displayed in table 1.

the global structure of this orbifold is determined as follows. the element  leaves
invariant the two ten-planes dened by x11 = 0 and x11 = , while  leaves invariant
the sixteen seven-planes dened when the four coordinates xi individually assume the

value 0 or . finally,  leaves invariant the thirty-two six-planes dened when all ve

compact coordinates individually assume the value 0 or . the  six-planes coincide

with intersections of the  ten-planes with the  seven-planes. the global structure is

nicely visualized by the diagram in gure 1.

thus, this orbifold describes a network six-, seven-, and ten-dimensional xed-planes

21

x 11

x

x7

, x 8

, x 9

, x 10

figure 1: the global structure of orbifold planes in the s1/z2  t 4/z2 orbifold. the
two horizontal lines represent the two ten-dimensional (horava-witten) xed planes

associated with the z2 factor denoted , while the sixteen vertical lines represent the
seven-dimensional xed-planes associated with the z2 action denoted . the thirty-
two six-dimensional xed planes assocated with  are represented by the solid dots.

these coincide with the intersection of the  planes and the  planes. the x in the

gure indicates the presence of a wandering vebrane as described in the text.

which intersect. as described above, chiral projections of bulk objects localized on the

xed-planes induce anomalies at one loop. additional contributions appear via inow

from classical variation of the bulk theory which may include anomalous pieces localized

on defects. these occur when g couples magnetically to the defects via modifations to

the dg bianchi identity, and follow specically due to the variation of the terms shown

in (2.3).

magnetic and electric sources for g:

the most general modied bianchi identity will include terms supported locally on orb-

ifold planes and on vebrane worldvolumes. since dg is a ve-form, a term with local sup-

port on one of the seven-planes would have to be proportional to a closed, gauge-invariant

one-form constructed from the available elds, wedged with the four-form brane-current
(4)
m 7
i
able elds, so this kind of coupling is disallowed. therefore, the most general bianchi

. but there is no way to construct a closed, gauge-invariant one-form from the avail-

identity is given by

dg =

2xi=1

i4(i)  (1)
m 10

i

+

32xi=1

n5xi=1

gi  (5)
m 6
i

+

 (5)
w 6
i

,

(6.1)

where  (1)
m 10

i

has support on the ith ten-plane m 10

i while  (5)
m 6
i

and  (5)

w i have support on the

22

i and on the vebrane worldvolumes w 6

six-planes m 6
is determined by anomaly cancellation on m 10

i , respectively. the four-form i4 (i)
i precisely as described in section 3, and
is dened in equation(3.14). finally, gi are magnetic charges assigned independently to
each of the thirty-two xed six-planes.

the seven-planes do not couple magnetically to g due to their odd-dimensionality.

alternatively, they can couple electrically in the manner described in section 5. this

electric coupling can provide an anomaly at seven-plane/ten-plane intersections due to an

interplay with the ten-dimensional magnetic coupling. we discuss this further below.

a signicant part of our analysis relates to determining the magnetic charges gi. we
will present an argument supporting quarter-integer values for gi in the context of the
z2  z2 orbifold. in addition, there is a (global) restriction which correlates the total

orbifold chargepi gi with other topolological data pertaining to gauge and gravitational

instantons and the number of vebranes, and is obtained by integrating (6.1) over the

ve-cycle spanned by the ve compact dimensions.

the quarter-integer charge quantization can be motivated by the following arguments.
the orbifold in question represents a singular deformed limit of k3  s1/z2, where all
of the k3 curvature is pinched to be concentrated and symmetrically distributed over

the sixteen xed seven-planes associated with the element  of the orbifold group (these

seven-planes are represented by the vertical lines in gure 1). if we start with the smooth

k3, we can represent the singular orbifold limit by the following deformation of the

eleven-dimensional curvature,

tr r2  tr r2 + 2 

 (4)
m 7
i

,

16xi=1

(6.2)

where (4)
m 7
i

has support on the ith xed seven-plane m 7

i ,  = 24 is the euler number of

k3, and rt tr r2 = 0, where the integration is over a four-cycle t . note that this is
consistent with the requirement thatrt tr r2 = 16 2 . if we make the replacement (6.2)

in the rst term on the right-hand side of the bianchi identity (6.1), we generate new

terms given by

1
16

(

1
2

) 

2xi=1

16xj=1

(1)
m 10i  (4)

m 7
j

=

(


32

) (5)
m 6
i

32xi=1

(6.3)

where we have used equation (2.5). these new terms, however, are absorbed by a shift

gi  gi  /32. in this way we see that, in the orbifold limit, the euler character of the
smooth k3 is equally distributed as a magnetic charge /32 = 3/4 at each of the 32

orbifold xed six-planes. this represents the gravitational contribution to the magnetic

23

charge. similar reasoning motivates that gauge instantons can yield only positive integer
or positive half-integer 4 contributions to gi, whereas a resident vebrane should contribute
only positive integer values. thus, a given six-plane m 6
i should have a minimum charge
equal to 3/4 with permissible values at successively greater half-integer increments.

thus, the allowed values of gi would be

gi = 3/4, 1/4, +1/4, ...

(6.4)

as described below, the same restriction on permissible values of gi is found in an inde-
pendent manner by factorization requirements on the anomaly polynomial.

an additional (global) constraint follows from integrating the bianchi identity (6.1)

over all ve compact dimensions. since this region has no boundary, the left-hand side

of the integrated version of (6.1) vanishes due to stokes theorem, since the integrand is

the instanton numbers associated with the bundle e8 (i)  m 10

i and  is the euler number

a total derivative. due to the properties of the brane-currents described in section 2, the

integrated right-hand side of (6.1) reduces to the sum n1 +n2 +n5 +pi gi, where ni are
dened by 162 =rt tr r2. the instanton numbers and the euler number occur since

the brane-current in the rst term of (6.1) collapses the integral to a four-cyle integral

over t . so the generic constraint is

n1 + n2   + n5 +xi

gi = 0 .

(6.5)

however, we can simplify this expression considerably in the orbifold case where, as

we have explained, all of the local curvature which contributes to the euler number is

concentrated on the orbifold-planes, and is more properly absorbed into the magnetic

charges gi. so an explicit  term should not be included in (6.5). similar concerns
apply to any zero-size gauge instanton which is trapped on one of the xed six-planes.

furthermore, any gauge instanton on one of the ten-planes which is not trapped at an

orbifold singularity should be continuously deformable into a vebrane by shrinking its

size to zero. such a vebrane can then detach and move into the bulk. since the two

situations are smoothly related on moduli space, we expect an anomaly-free solution for a

vebrane to imply an anomaly-free solution for the associated instanton (and vice-versa).

it is simpler to work with vebranes and, hence, we omit the instanton terms n1 and n2
in equation (6.5). in the analysis to follow, we therefore replace (6.5) with the minimal

4the half-integer instanton contributions are associated with the ale instantons classied by the

stieel-whitney class.

24

constraint

n5 +

32xi=1

gi = 0 ,

(6.6)

noting that n5 should be a positive integer. we also keep in mind the quarter-integer
quantization of gi.

anomaly inow:

as in the cases of the z2 orbifolds described in sections 3 and 4, the cancellation of the
local anomaly involves one-loop contributions and also inow contributions describing

transformations of the cgg and gx7 terms. there is also another kind of inow at work
in this case which can arise because of the xed-plane intersections. this is an i-brane

contribution of the sort described in section 5. the cgg and gx7 contributions are
easiest to analyze, so we begin by working these out. following this, we independently

analyze the i-brane contribution before moving on to the one-loop anomaly.

to determine how the cgg term transforms, we need to determine how the three-

form potential c transforms. to determine this, we need an explicit form for g. this

is determined as the object whose exterior derivative reproduces the right-hand side of
(6.1). suppressing the vebrane contributions5, this implies the following denition,

g = dc +

2xi=1 (cid:16) (b  1)  (1)

i

m 10

 0

3 (i) + 1

2 b (i) i4 (i)(cid:17) +

32xi=1

1

2 gi (i)  (4)

m 7
i

,

(6.7)

3 (i) is the chern-simons three-form determined by d0

where 0
3 (i) = i4 (i), while (i) is a
zero-form with the two properties d(i) = 2(1)
(i) = 1, and b is a real parame-
m 10
ter unspecied by the bianchi identity. this parameter is, however, xed by anomaly

and  2

i

cancellation, as described below.

since the eld strength g must be gauge invariant, this requires that c have the

following transformation property,

c =

2xi=1

(b  1) 1

2 (i)   (1)
m 10

i

.

(6.8)

unless b = 1, equation (6.8) implies that c has a nontrivial transformation rule.

in

fact, as veried below, anomaly cancellation requires b = 2. this enables anomaly inow

through the resulting noninvariance of the cgg interaction.

5 we suppress the vebrane contribution to g because this involves unnecessary complexity; the

contributions localized on the vebranes do not aect the orbifold-plane anomalies and furthermore, as

described in section 2, the vebrane anomalies are independently resolved.

25

using the properties of the brane-currents described in section 2, it is then straight-

forward to determine the transformation of the two interactions cgg and gx7. for the
case of the cgg interaction we determine

( 



3 z c  g  g ) = 




3


3

2xi=1
32xi=1

1

4 (b  1) b2 zm 10
2 (b  1) b gizm 6

1

i

i

1

2 (i)  i4 (i)  i4 (i)

1

2 (i)  i4 (i) .

(6.9)

to obtain this result, we note that since g is gauge invariant, only the variation of the

i

i

us that r cg 2 = (b  1)rm 10

factor c on the left-hand side of (6.9) contributes. using the explicit result (6.8), this tells
1
2 (i)(g 2 |), where the bar indicates that g 2 is evaluated
. since cabc| = 0, only the terms [acbc](11) contribute to dc|, so that dc|
also contain dx11 factors, we

on m 10
necessarily includes a dx11 factor. since both c and (1)
m 10
can therefore neglect the rst two terms on the right hand side of (6.7) when evaluating
g 2| (because dx11  dx11 = 0). as a result, g 2| is proportional to  2
(i) = 1 so that the
product g 2 is well-dened on m 10

.

i

i

it is interesting to compare equation (6.9) with the analogous expression (3.18) from
the case of the s1/z2 orbifold. in the present case, we nd the same expression for the
inow to the two ten-planes, but we also nd an additional contribution localized on the
six-planes m 6
i

invariant under the full z2  z2 group.

similarly, for the case of the gx7 interaction we determine

(z g  x7) = 

2xi=1 zm 10

i

i4 (i)  x 1

6 

gi zm 6

i

32xi=1

x 1
6 .

(6.10)

to obtain (6.10) we have integrated by parts and used the bianchi identity (6.1). as in

the case of the cgg inow, we nd the same contribution as found in the case of the
s1/z2 orbifold, (3.19) , but we also nd an additional contribution localized on m 6
i .

the anomaly inow can be described by a pair of twelve-forms i12(inow)i describing
, and by a set of thirty-two eight-forms i8(inow)i
i . these are the objects which give rise to

the anomaly on the ten-planes m 10
describing the anomaly on the six-planes m 6

i

the sum of (6.9) and (6.10) upon descent. thus,

i12(inow)i = 

i8(inow)i = 


12

6

(b  1) b2 i 3

4 (i)  i4 (i)  x8

(b  1) b gi i 2

4 (i)  gi x8 .

(6.11)

one might assume that these inow terms should cancel against the one-loop anomaly

similarly to the z2 orbifold anomalies described in sections 3 and 4. this turns out to

26

be only partially true. such cancellation does occur on the xed ten-planes, but the

six-planes are more subtle. in fact, there is another inow contribution, anticipated in

section 5 which contributes to the six-dimensional anomaly.

an i-brane anomaly:

the xed seven-planes can support the special kind of chern-simons interaction described

by equation (5.2),

scs(m 7) =

16xi=1 zm 11

 (4)
m 7
i

 g  y 0

3 (i) ,

(6.12)

where y 0

3 (i) is a chern-simons three-form which can include lorentz as well as a gauge
pieces arising from twisted seven-dimensional yang-mills matter. equation (6.12) de-

scribes an electric coupling of g to each of the sixteen xed seven-planes. if we dene
y4 (i)  dy 0

3 (i), then the most general y4 (i) is given by

(6.13)

y4 (i) =

1

(2)3 4!

3

i (cid:17) ,
32(cid:16) tr r2 +  tr f 2

where r is the eleven-dimensional curvature and fi is a seven-dimensional eld strength
for vector elds propagating on m 7
i with values in the adjoint of a group gi, to be deter-
mined. the parameters  and  are arbitrary rational coecients. the separate numerical

prefactor in (6.13) has been chosen to simplify expressions later on. the interaction (6.12)

allows for an anomaly contribution of the sort described by equation (5.4). this would

arise at a six-dimensional intersection between a ten-plane and a seven-plane as inter-

play between the ten-dimensional magnetic coupling in the bianchi identity (6.1) and the

seven-dimensional electric coupling implied by (6.12). the anomaly contribution on the

six-plane intersection of the ith ten-plane and the jth seven-plane is then given by

i8(ib)ij = i4 (i)  y4 (j) ,

(6.14)

where i takes either the value 1 or 2, while j can assume any value from 1 to 16. an

alternate labeling scheme involving only a single index facilitates analysis later on. so

we adopt the convention of labeling the thirty-two six-planes with a single index, so that

(6.15) is rewritten as

i8(ib)i = i4 (i)  y4 (i) ,

(6.15)

where i now assumes any value from 1 to 32. in this case, i4 (i) is taken on the particular
ten-plane m 10
i while y4 (i) is taken on the particular seven-plane which
also intersects m 6
i .

i which intersects m 6

27

the combination of the inow contributions shown in (6.11) and the i-brane con-

tribution shown in (6.15) must properly conspire with the one-loop anomalies in order

that the theory be consistent. we proceed to analyze rst the cancellation of the ten-

dimensional anomaly and then the six-dimensional anomaly.

6.1 the ten-dimensional anomaly

the anomaly inow to the xed ten-planes was computed above, and expressed in (6.11) as

i12(inow)i. the two terms in i12(inow)i arise due to the classical variation of the cgg
and the gx7 terms respectively. so we can write i12(inow)i = i12(cgg)i + i12(gx7)i.
in fact, since the ten-planes are
another contribution arises from one-loop diagrams.

only invariant under the element , and since (along with the unit operator)  describes

precisely the same z2 group which denes the orbifold analyzed in section 3, it follows that
the computation of the one-loop anomaly in that section applies here as well. so we do

not need to perform a separate computation of the ten-dimensional one-loop anomaly; it

is given by equation (3.13). thus, the three contributions to the ten-dimensional anomaly

are given by the following polynomials,

i12(cgg)i = 


12

(b  1) b2 i 3

4 (i)

i12(gx7)i = i4 (i)  x8

i12(1 loop)i =


3

i 3
4 (i) + i4 (i)  x8 ,

(6.16)

where the inow contributions were computed above, and the one-loop contribution was

computed in section 3 and given as equation (3.13). not suprisingly, the inow terms

i12(cgg)i and i12(gx7)i are also the same as those derived in section 3, given in equation
(3.20).

the total gravitational anomaly is given by the sum of all three contributions in (6.16),

i12(total)i = i12(1 loop)i + i12(cgg)i + i12(gx7)i. we require that this total anomaly
vanish. nicely, the second term of i12(1 loop)i is exactly canceled by i12(gx7)i. the
rst term of i12(1 loop)i is exactly canceled by i12(cgg)i provided b satises the cubic
equation b3 b2 4 = 0. this equation has one real root, so anomaly cancellation uniquely

selects

b = 2 .

(6.17)

this value of b is xed by the consistency requirements.

it is gratifying that this re-

quirement is satised by a rational (indeed, integer) value for b. the sub-analysis of the

28

ten-dimensional anomaly in the z2  z2 case is precisely the same as that given in section
3 for the simpler z2 orbifold.

6.2 the six-dimensional anomaly

we are mostly concerned with the additional anomaly localized on the six-dimensional
xed-planes m 6
i

invariant under the element . since (along with the unit element) 

describes precisely the same z2 group which denes the orbifold analyzed in section 4, one
might believe that we can rely on the computation in section 4 in the same manner that

we relied on the computation of section 3 to obtain the ten-dimensional anomaly. but
things are not so simple in this case because m 6
i are not just invariant under  but are,
in fact, invariant under  and  as well! so the six-planes are invariant under the entire

z2  z2 group. as a result, there are crucial dierences from the z2 orbifold analyzed
in section 4. for one thing, the additional z2 projects out yet another half of the bulk
supercharges, so that the local supersymmetry on these planes is d=6 n=1 rather than

d=6 n=2 as in section 4. this not only changes the untwisted spectrum, and therefore

the one-loop anomaly from that of the z2 case, but it also means that we have the freedom
to include a richer twisted spectrum of additional local states due to the richer structure

of n=1 supersymmetry.

anomaly inow:

anomaly inow to the xed six-planes was computed above, and expressed as i8(inow)i
in (6.11), where the two terms arise due to the classical variation of the cgg and the

gx7 terms respectively. so we can write i8(inow)i = i8(cgg)i + i8(gx7)i. another
contribution i8(ib)i arises from the i-brane mechanism also described above and given
as equation (6.15). we set b = 2 as required by the removal of the anomaly on the ten-

planes. thus, the three inow contributions to the six-dimensional anomaly are given by

the following polynomials,

i8(gx7)i = gi x8

i8(cgg)i =  1

3  i 2

4 (i)

i8(ib)i = i4 (i)  y4 (i) ,

(6.18)

where x8 is given in (2.8), while i4 (i) is given in (3.14) and y4 (i) is given in (6.13). as
explained earlier, the notation is such that i assumes any value from 1 to 32.

the combination of the three contributions shown in (6.18) must conspire with the

29

one-loop anomalies in order that the theory be consistent. we proceed to analyze the one-

loop contributions, and then discuss the conspiracy which renders the theory consistent.

the one-loop anomaly:

the quantum contributions consist of three separate pieces:

a contribution i8(sg)i arises from the bulk supergravity due to the coupling of chi-
ral projections of the gravitino to so(5, 1) currents associated with dieomorphisms

of the xed six-planes. on a given six-plane, only the components c(11) and c(11)ij
(where i, j = 1, ..., 4) survive the z2  z2 projection from the three-form cijk. these
contribute one two-form and six scalars, while the eleven-dimensional metric supplies

a six-dimensional metric and eleven more scalars corresponding to g(11)(11) and gij. so
the bosonic untwisted spectrum consists of a metric tensor, one two-form and seventeen

scalars. these organize along with the surviving fermions into a d=6 n=1 supergravity

multiplet coupled to four n=1 hypermultiplets and one n=1 tensor multiplet.

since the total anomaly is distributed equally over the thirty-two six-planes, and since

we can only apply the index theorem results in the (small-radius) limit when all six-planes

coincide, we conclude that the anomaly on a given hyperplane is 1/32 of that described by

the index theorem results using the untwisted spectrum associated with the bulk fermions.

collectively, these involve one chiral spin 3/2 eld, ve antichiral spin 1/2 elds and one

each of self-dual and anti-self-dual tensors. the anomalies due to the tensors cancel each

other, so that

i8(sg)i = 1

grav (r)  5 i (1/2)

(6.19)

32(cid:16) i (3/2)

grav (r)(cid:17) .

another contribution, i8(e8)i, arises from the e8 matter propagating on the xed
ten-planes. to begin with, we assume that  acts trivially on the ten-dimensional vector

multiplets, so that the e8 gauge group is not broken by the orbifold action. a given ten-
dimensional e8 vector supermultiplet decomposes into a d=6 n=2 e8 vector multiplet,
which further decomposes into an n=1 vector multiplet and an n=1 hypermultiplet. the

rst of these involves chiral gauginos while the second involves antichiral hyperinos. the

anomalies due to these two factors would cancel against each other. however, the six-

planes are xed under both z2 factors  and . the second z2, denoted , acts on the
e8 supermatter to project out the n=1 hypermultiplet, leaving a contribution only from
the n=1 e8 vector multiplet, which is anomalous. since there are sixteen xed six-planes
within a given ten-plane, the contribution i8(e8)i localized on a given six-plane is 1/16
of that described by the index theorem results pertaining to (ten-dimensional) chiral e8

30

grav (r) + i (1/2)

m ixed (r, fi)adj + i (1/2)

(6.20)

gau ge (fi)adj(cid:17) ,

gauginos, so that

i8(e8)i = 1

16(cid:16) 248 i (1/2)

where fi takes values in the adjoint 248 representation of the e8.

the element  can also act nontrivially on the e8 vectors, breaking the group to a
maximal subgroup. for instance, the 248 decomposes into e7  su(2) representations
as (133, 1)  (1, 3)  (56, 2). we could realize the z2 on the e8 elds to project out the
six-dimensional hypermultiplets from the (133, 1)  (1, 3) elds and project out the six-

dimensional vector multiplets from the (56, 2) elds. in this case, we would be left with

e7  su(2) adjoint vectors and 112 hypermultiplets transforming as (56, 2). another
possibility would break e8 to spin(16), leaving us with the adjoint 120 coupled to a
hypermultiplet in the 128 spinor representation. the two possibilities described by the

e7  su(2) and spin(16) cases correspond to the only z2 subgroups of e8 [13]. therefore
there are only three possibilities, e8  e8, e8  e7  su(2) and e8  spin(16). we
will analyze only the rst possibility in detail, and make comments about the other two

afterwards.

the third contribution i8(gi) arises from twisted matter which we are free to add to the
xed planes. in fact, we are free to add twisted matter of two signicantly dierent sorts.

on the one hand, we can include six-dimensional elds propagating on any or all of the

thirty-two six-planes, consisting of some number of d=6 n=1 vector, hyper and/or tensor

multiplets. on the other hand, we are also free to add seven-dimensional elds propagating

on any or all of the sixteen seven-planes, consisting of seven-dimensional vector multiplets.

each of these possibilities will contribute to the six-dimensional anomaly. in the rst case,

the chiral elds living in the six-dimensional multiplets will couple anomalously to the

six-dimensional lorentz and gauge currents. in the second case, even though the seven-

dimensional gauginos will not contribute to an anomaly on the seven-planes (since they

are non-chiral), they will couple anomalously to six-dimensional currents on the subplanes

xed by the entire z2  z2 group. these are, of course, the same six-planes where six-
dimensional twisted elds can propagate, represented by the solid dots in gure 1.

the reason why the seven-dimensional elds can contribute to the six-dimensional

anomaly mirrors the way in which ten-dimensional e8 gauginos contribute to the six-
dimensional anomaly. as described above, each ten-dimensional chiral gaugino decom-

poses into one six-dimensional chiral gaugino and one six-dimensional antichiral hyperino.

in that case, the extra z2 projection which leaves the six-planes xed serves to remove
the hyperinos, so that there is a net (six-dimensional) chirality to the projected fermions.

similarly, a seven-dimensional gaugino also decomposes into a six-dimensional gaugino

31

and a six-dimensional hyperino 6. once again the extra z2 projection will remove the
hyperinos, so that the projected elds have a net (six-dimensional) chirality.

we rst consider the case where we add six-dimensional twisted matter. if, on the ith

six-plane we add nv i vector multiplets, nhi hypermultiplets, and nt i gauge-singlet tensor
multiplets, the relevant anomaly is given by

i8(gi) = (nv  nh  nt )i i (1/2)

grav (r)  nt i i (3form)

grav

(r)

+i (1/2)

m ixed(r, fi)adj,r + i (1/2)

gau ge(fi)adj,r ,

(6.21)

where the mixed and pure gauge anomalies involve eld strength tensors fi taking values
in both the adjoint (in the case of vector multiplets), and in the r representation (for the

case of hypermultiplets). to make sense of equation (6.21), we should use the polynomials
given in (c.1) and (c.2), and replace the trace f 2
i contribution in the mixed anomaly and
the trace f 4
i contribution in the gauge anomaly as

trace f n

i  tr f n

h tr f n
i ,

(6.22)

i x

where tr is an adjoint trace, h is the number of hypermultiplets transforming in the
r representation, and tr is a trace over the r representation. note that the total
number of vector multiplets is nv i = dim (gi) while the total number of hypermultiplets

is nhi =p h  dim (r). the relative minus sign in (6.22) reects the antichirality of

the hyperinos.

-invariant seven-plane m 7

now consider the case where we add seven-dimensional twisted matter. if on a given
i we add nv i vector multiplets in the adjoint of gi, these will
contribute to anomalies on the embedded - and -invariant six-planes due to the extra

 projection. in the simplest case,  will remove all but a six-dimensional hypermultiplet

from the seven-dimensional elds. there are other possibilities where  breaks gi to a
maximal subgroup analgous to the situation involving the  projection on the e8 elds
discussed above. once again, we will consider rst the simplest case, where  does not

break gi and comment on the other possibilities later.

since there are two xed six-planes within a given seven-plane, it follows by reasoning

described above that the contribution to the six-dimensional anomaly on each of the two

six-planes due to the seven-dimensional gauginos will be given by

i8(gi) =

grav (r) + i (1/2)

m ixed(r, fi)adj + i (1/2)

1

2(cid:16) nv i i (1/2)

gau ge(fi)adj(cid:17) ,

(6.23)

6this is easy to see from the bosonic components of the seven-dimensional yang-mills multiplet, which

comprises three scalars and one vector; upon torroidal compactication of one dimension, the seven-

dimensional vector will give a six-dimensional vector and a fourth scalar, giving the bosonic components

of one d=6 n=1 hyper and one d=6 n=1 vector multiplet

32

where the factor of 1/2 arises because the anomaly is equally distributed over the two

xed six-planes. to make sense of equation (6.23), we should use the explicit polynomials

given in (c.1) and (c.2), making the substitution indicated in (6.22). if gi is unbroken by
, then only the adjoint vectors will contribute, so the h would be zero. if gi is broken
to a maximal subgroup by , then vectors in the adjoint of the subgroup will contribute

along with some number of hypermultiplets.

it is also possible to include seven-dimensional adjoint gi vectors and to include ad-
ditional six-dimensional hypermultiplets which also transform under gi. in this case, the
anomaly due to the vectors would be given by (6.23), while that due to the hypers would

be given by (6.21).

in all cases, the only distinguishing qualication is a division by two, as seen in equation

(6.23), for the anomaly due to any seven-dimensional eld. any purely six-dimensional

eld contributes to the anomaly without such a division, as in (6.21). it turns out that

further considerations concerning the factorizability of the anomaly polynomial require

factors of two in such a way that implies the existence of seven-dimensional twisted matter.

this is one of the essential points of this paper.

our strategy is to include unspecied twisted states in a suciently powerful way

that anomaly cancellation will select both gauge groups and also the dimensionality of

the appropriate elds for us. to do this, we need a certain economy which is had by

encorporating the various possibilities involving six- and seven-dimensional states in a

unied package. this is facilitated in an obvious way by writing the complete twisted

anomaly precisely as in equation (6.21), but with two important distinctions. the rst

distinction is that, since seven-dimensional elds contribute one-half the anomaly on a

given six-plane as six-dimensional elds, we consider nv i in (6.21) to include this potential
divisor. thus, nv i  dim(gi)/ where  is 1 or 2 depending on the dimensionality of the
elds in question,

 = ( 1 

sixdimensional elds

2  sevendimensional elds

.

(6.24)

the second distinction is that when we substitute the anomaly polynomials (c.1) and
i contributions not with (6.22) but rather

(c.2) we should replace the trace f 2

i and trace f 4

with the obvious extension

trace f n

i 

1


tr f n

i x

h tr f n
i ,

(6.25)

where tr is an adjoint trace, h is the number of six-dimensional hypermultiplets trans-
forming in the r representation, and tr is a trace over the r representation. in this

33

generalized formulation, the fact that seven-dimensional elds contribute one-half of the

mixed and gauge anomalies as do six-dimensional elds is encorporated in the parameter

.

the complete quantum anomaly on a given six-plane is given by the sum of (6.19),

(6.20) and (6.21). to ease our analysis we repeat the three quantum contributions here,

i8(sg)i = 1

grav (r)  5 i (1/2)

grav (r)(cid:17)

32(cid:16) i (3/2)
16(cid:16) 248 i (1/2)

i8(e8)i = 1

grav (r) + i (1/2)

m ixed (r, fi)adj + i (1/2)

i8(gi) = (nv  nh  nt ) i (1/2)

grav (r)  nt i (3form)

grav

(r)

gau ge (fi)adj(cid:17)

+i (1/2)

m ixed(r, fi)adj,r + i (1/2)

gau ge(fi)adj,r .

(6.26)

the i8(sg)i contribution arises from chiral projections of the bulk supergravity elds; the
division by 32 reects the fact that this anomaly is equally distributed over the thirty-two
m 6
i . the i8(e8)i contribution arises from chiral projections of the ten-dimensional e8
gauginos; in this case the division by 16 reects the fact that each ten-plane has sixteen

embedded xed six-planes over which this anomaly is equally distributed. finally, the

i8(gi) contribution arises from the (yet-undetermined) twisted elds which can propagate
either on the six-planes or on the seven-planes, the distinction being encoded in the

parameter  as described above. the parameter  is an important algebraic tool for

ascertaining the dimensionality of twisted states indicated by anomaly cancellation.

henceforth, since it is clear that we are working on a particular six-plane m 6

i we will

suppress the i index on objects like gi and nh i.

the total anomaly:

the total anomaly on a given six-plane is given by the sum of the three inow contribu-

tions given in (6.18) and the three quantum contributions presented in (6.26). using the

anomaly polynomials given in (c.1) and (c.2), we can work out the full anomaly polyno-
mial. this will have many terms. however, only the term proportional to tr r4 will not

be factorizable. this term has a coecient proportional to (nh  nv + 29nt  30g  23).
because the tr r4 term cannot factorize, it cannot be removed by a green-schwarz mech-

anism using a local tensor eld and therefore must vanish identically. this poses an

important constraint on the allowed twisted states, given by

nh  nv = 30g + 23  29nt .

(6.27)

if we sum this equation over the thirty-two six-dimensional xed-planes, impose the con-

straint (6.6), and use the following expressions for the total number of hyper, vector and

34

tensor multiplets,

nh = 4 + n5 +x nh
nv = 496 +x nv
nt = 1 + n5 +x nt ,

we arrive at the collective constraint nh  nv + 29nt = 273, which is a more familiar
anomaly requirement. the numbers 4, 496 and 1 which appear in (6.28) describe the

(6.28)

untwisted contributions, since there are 4 untwisted hypers and one untwisted tensor

coming from the bulk supergravity and there are 496 untwisted vectors coming from

the two e8 factors. also, each vebrane contributes one hypermultiplet and one tensor
multiplet.

in the anomaly polynomial, terms corresponding to mixed and gauge anomalies in-

clude traces over powers of the eld strength f in precisely the combinations shown in

equation (6.25). we should represent all traces in terms a fundamental representation.

there are identities which relate traces over any representation of a given simple gauge

factor in terms of traces over other representations. the dimensions of the most useful

representations for the simple gauge groups is given in table 2, and a useful tabulation

of the trace relations is given in table 3 for the non-exceptional groups and in table 4 for

the exceptional groups.

the anomaly polynomial contains a term proportional to tr f 4, which must factorize as
(tr f 2)2. this is done automatically for the exceptional groups and for su(2) and su(3),

since these groups do not have an independent fourth-order casimir operator. but for

other simple groups this factorization requires a conspiracy involving the multiplicities of
the hypermultiplet representations. if we assume that the proper factorization of the tr f 4

term occurs, then in all cases the mixed and gauge anomalies will involve the following

two factors

1

2



6(cid:16) 1
3(cid:16) 1



tr f 2 x
trf 4 x

h tr f 2(cid:17)  x tr f 2
h trf 4(cid:17)   y ( tr f )2 ,

(6.29)

where we have dened x and y as the generic coecients of the (tr f 2)2 term (which
multiplies tr r2 in the anomaly polynomial to form a mixed anomaly) and the tr f 4 term

(which constitutes the pure gauge anomaly). it is possible to determine the coecients

x and y for each possible simple gauge factor by applying the trace relations given in

35

tables 3 and 4 to the expressions in (6.29). the numbers x and y for generic choice of

simple gauge factor and arbitrary hypermultiplet representation are given in table 5.

we now substitute (6.27) into the anomaly polynomial to remove the tr r4 term. we

also use (6.27) to replace the combination nv  nh in terms of nt and gi. it is then a
matter of straightforward algebra to determine the nal form of the anomaly polynomial.

for convenience, we dene a hatted polynomial by removing a common prefactor,

i8(total) 

1

(2)3 4!

3

2bi8(total) .

(6.30)

now if we compute the total anomaly by summing up the three inow contributions (6.18)
and the three quantum contributions (6.26), then remove the tr r4 term by imposing

(6.27), and nally rewrite all traces over twisted gauge factors using (6.29) we detemine

the complete anomaly to be given by the following expression,

32(1 +  + 8

3g  4nt ) ( tr r2 )2

bi8( total ) = 1

+ 1

16(5   + 8

3 g) tr r2  tr f 2  1

24 (9 + 4g) ( tr f 2 )2

 1

16  tr f 2  tr f 2 + ( 1

32   x) tr r2  tr f 2 + y ( trf 2 )2 ,

(6.31)

where f is the e8 gauge eld and f is the twisted gauge eld. the expression (6.31)
includes unspecied local magnetic charge g, an arbitrary number of local tensor elds

nt , an arbitrary i-brane contribution parameterized by (, ), and an arbitrary twisted
spectrum parameterized by (x, y ).

the anomaly (6.31) cannot vanish identically. this can be seen by the following
simple observations. cancelation of the (tr f 2)2 term would require g = 9/4. using this
result, cancellation of the trr2  trf 2 term would require  = 1. cancellation of the
(tr r2)2 term would then require that nt = 3/2, which is not positive, and therefore not
realizable. so we must resort to a local green-schwarz mechanism to cancel the anomaly.

in the following subsection we attempt to implement this.

6.3 factorizing the anomaly

since the anomaly cannot vanish identically, it can only be removed via a green-schwarz
mechanism realized locally (ie: on the particular six-plane m 6
i ) through the local coupling
of at least one tensor eld. since the xed six-planes have n = 1 supersymmetry, any such

tensor would have an anti self-dual eld strength. therefore, the mechanism necessitates
that the anomaly polynomial (6.31) factorize into a sum of perfect squares 7, one term for

7we thank to stephan theisen for discussions on this point.

36

each tensor eld. the minimal case would involve one twisted tensor eld. in that case,

we would impose that (6.31) factorizes as

32 r ( tr r2  u tr f 2  t tr f 2 )2 ,

(6.32)

bi8(total) = 1

where r, u and t are rational coecients to be determined. we discuss the possibility

of more than one tensor eld below. the one case not covered by the parameterization
(6.32) is where the (tr r2)2 term vanishes but other terms do not. this possibility is

considered separately and found not to be relevant. the reason why we include r as an
overall coecient, rather than inside the brackets multiplying the tr r2 term, is because

the analysis is more tractable this way. equating equation (6.32) with (6.31) generates

six relations encapsulating the factorization requirement,

r = 1 +  + 8

3 g  4 nt

r t = 16 x  1

2 

r u = 5 +   8

3 g

r u t = 

r u2 = 12  16

3 g

r t2 = 32 y .

(6.33)

three of these (those in the left-hand column) relate to terms which include tr f 2 and,

therefore, concern the e8 anomaly. the other three (those in the right-hand column)
relate to terms which include tr f 2 and, therefore, concern the twisted anomaly.

the goal is to nd rational values for the magnetic charge g, the electric parameters
 and  8 and the group-dependent parameters x and y (which are dened in (6.29)) in

such a way that (6.33) determines rational values for r, u and t.

the parameters x and y have a very restricted and group-specialized dependence

on the multiplicities of the hypermultiplets. these relationships are exhibited in table 5.

furthermore, x and y also depend on , the parameter dened in (6.24), which tells us

the dimensionality of the hyperplane on which the twisted states live. therefore, even if

we manage to nd a solution to (6.33), this is not enough, since the values of x and y

must be realizable for some choice of simple gauge factor, hypermultiplet multiplicity and

value 1 or 2 for the parameter . the reason why we can specialize to simple groups is

explained in the following paragraph. realizable, in this instance, means that there is

a choice of nonnegative integer multiplicity h for hypermultiplets transforming in some
representation r for some choice of simple gauge factor g. this choice must describe
precisely the given values of both x and y using the relationships listed in table 5, for

8the parameters  and  have an electric nature since they determine the electric couplings described

by (6.12) and (6.13).

37

either of the cases  = 1 or  = 2. there is a systematic approach that allows one to sift

sequentially through all possibilities.

even if the ultimate solution involves a semisimple group, there are necessary con-

straints pertaining to each simple factor of that group which coincide with those which

we are analyzing. therefore, we do not lose generality by specializing to the case of simple

gauge groups. nevertheless, once we nd a solution to the factorization problem for a

given simple factor, we should explore the possibility that this group can be extended to

include additional simple factors. other constraints discussed below may require such an

extension in generic cases.

if one can nd a solution to (6.33) which includes realizable values for x and y ,

this is still not enough. there remains the extra constraint (6.27) related to the vanishing

of the irreducible part of the anomaly. so, once we have determined a set of rational

parameters which satisfy (6.33) and a gauge group g and hypermultiplet multiplicity h
which give rise to the given x and y , this will determine the total number of twisted

vector multiplets nv and the total number of twisted hypermultiplets nh . but these must
satisfy (6.27). finding a solution which meets all of these criteria is nontrivial.

furthermore, there is yet another constraint. this is the global constaint (6.6) which

tells us that the sum of all 32 magnetic charges plus the number of vebranes must vanish.

this requires that at least one of the six-planes has nonpositive magnetic charge. it is,

therefore, essential that we nd a solution with nonpositive g.

a solution:

it turns out that there is a unique solution to all of the above constraints, for the case of

nonpositive g. we emphasize that the equations which we have developed are sensitive to

each of a large number of coecients involved in a lengthy multifaceted analysis. if any

one of these coecients would change slightly, there would be no solution at all. given the

complexity of the analysis, which involves a delicate array of eects, we nd the existence

of one and only one solution to all of these constraints to be signicant.

nevertheless there remains a paradox associated with the solution. specically, the

solution requires nt = 1/2, which is not an integer value. however, the mere existence
of such a formal solution is remarkable for the reasons expressed above. furthermore,

there are signicant insights which derive from this solution, and indications that the

paradox itself may not be inscrutible. in fact, a similar paradox attended the discoveries
outlined in section 4 in the context of the t 5/z2 orbifold. in that case, a half-tensor mul-
tiplet seemed to be required by anomaly cancellation before a missing inow mechanism

involving the magnetic charge gi was included. so, despite the described shortcoming, we

38

will explain the solution in more detail and speculate on possible resolutions to the above

paradox in due course.

there is another notable aspect to the solution. this is that the necessary magnetic

charge assignment for the six-plane m 6
i

in question turns out to be gi = 3/4. as
discussed earlier, there are reasons to expect such a quarter-integer value for gi in the
context of this orbifold because the construction represents a singularly deformed limit
of k3  s1/z2. one can then interpret part of the local magnetic charge as being

the a remnant of the euler number of the smooth k3 manifold. in fact, this euler

contribution was earlier shown to give precisely the value gi = 3/4.

the one valid solution with nonpositive g to the factorizarion problem described by

the six conditions (6.33) is given by the following rational assignments for the parameters

of the problem,

( nt , g ) = ( 1/2 , 3/4 )

(  ,  ) = ( 5 , 16 )

( x , y ) = ( 1/2 , 1 )

( r , u , t ) = ( 8 , 1 , 2 ) .

(6.34)

as described above, this solution is validated only if we can reproduce the indicated

values for x and y using the relationships in table 5 for some choice of multiplicities

h for hypermultiplets transforming in some representation r for some choice of simple
gauge factor g for either of the cases  = 1 or  = 2. we must also to do this in such

a way that (6.27) is satised. when we substitute the indicated values g = 3/4 and

nt = 1/2 into (6.27), we nd that this extra constraint becomes

nh  nv = 14 .

(6.35)

so we must nd a twisted gauge group which satises both (x, y ) = (1/2, 1) and also

(6.35).

by carefully sifting through the possibilities in table 5, one nds a unique simple

factor which solves this problem. this is to put twisted so(8) gauge matter on the
seven-dimensional plane m 7
i (so that  = 2) and to set the number of hypermultiplets
to zero (so that h = hs = 0 in table 5).
in that case, we would have nh = 0 while
nv = dimg/ = 14, the division by  = 2 indicating that the so(8) gauge elds are
seven-dimensional, as explained above.

it is now evident how the anomaly analysis has required seven-dimensional twisted

matter despite the fact that there is no seven-dimensional anomaly as such.

it is also

39

clear that that this kind of mechanism generalizes to other orbifolds involving intersecting

orbifold planes.

given the values of r, u and t which we have found in (6.34), we can write down the

form of the anomaly. substituting these values into (6.32) we determine

4 ( tr r2  tr f 2  2 tr f 2 )2 .

(6.36)

bi8(total) =  1

rm 6

i

this is the anomaly which should be canceled using a green-schwarz mechanism mediated

by a local tensor eld. if our solution had had nt = 1, it would be clear how to realize this;
the three-form eld strength would satisfy the bianchi identity dh  tr r2tr f 22tr f 2,

and the tensor dynamics would include a chern-simons interaction proportional to
b  (tr r2  tr f 2  2tr f 2) . the self-duality of h would be maintained because

the magnetic and electric couplings implied by these are the same. due to the modied

dh bianchi identity, the tensor b would transform in just such a way that the resulting

transformation of the chern-simons interaction would cancel the anomaly (6.36). how-

ever, since our formal solution has nt = 1/2, it is unclear whether we actually have a
tensor whose dynamics could include these modications.

the global constraint (6.6) is satised for our solution by assuming that each of the

32 xed points exhibits identical behavior. thus, we would have a charge of gi = 3/4
for each of the thirty-two six-planes m 6

i , impling pi gi = 24. equation (6.6) would

then be balanced by including 24 independent vebranes wandering in the bulk. we

remark that in this case the magnetic charge associated with the xed-planes is identical

to that ascribable to the pinched curvature of the singularly-deformed k3 manifold, as

explained early in this section.

additional tensors:

in principle, we can involve more than one twisted tensor eld. as explained above, this

would imply a weaker factorization constraint than the one indicated by (6.33). with more

tensor elds, we would generalize that constraint to impose that bi8(total)i factorize as a

sum of perfect squares, one for each tensor eld. but the possibility of reasonable solutions

for the case nt > 1 is hampered by the independent constraint (6.27) necessary to remove
the irreducible part of the local anomaly. for the case nt = 1 this relation becomes
nh  nv = 30g  6 which implies twisted matter living in relatively small gauge groups for
reasonable (ie: relatively small) values of the magnetic charge because, in that case, 30g6

is not a large number. for example, we already described one (formal) solution with nt =
1/2 and seven-dimensional twisted gauge group g = so(8). with an arbitrary number of

twisted tensors, the constraint (6.27) becomes nh  nv = 30g + 23  29nt , which quickly

40

becomes a large negative number as nt increases. the problem is compounded because
the global constraint (6.6) requires that we nd at least one solution with nonpositive

magnetic charge. these considerations indicate that smaller values of nt , such as nt = 2,
where we would have nh  nv = 30g  35, are more likely to lead to reasonable solutions
than larger values of nt . but even for the case nt = 2, the problem of systemetizing the
factorization criterion analogous to (6.33) becomes comparably unweildy since there are

many more variables. we have been unable to nd a solution to the factorization problem

for the case nt = 2 which also satises nh  nv = 30g  35. it is also apparent that
seeking solutions for nt  3 would be a computational morass unlikely to yield interesting
solutions.

hidden instantons:

one aspect which we have not emphasized in our analysis involves the possible scenarios

described in the paragraph following equation (6.20) whereby the  projection can be

realized in nontrivial ways to break the e8 gauge group to e7su(2) or spin(16), thereby
describing the eect of hidden instantons on the xed points. these possibilities can

be analyzed in a manner very similar to that which we have presented. the essential

dierence is that the contribution i8(e8)i given in (6.20) is replaced with an analogous
contribution i8(e7  su(2))i or i8(spin16)i, which are straightforward to dene and to
compute. when we repeat the above analysis for these cases we do not nd interesting

solutions involving nonpositive g for the spin(16) case. however, the e7  su(2) case is
very intriguing, but involves a dierent set of puzzles which, at this time, are suciently

muddy that we should avoid further expansion on the subject. this involves work-in-

progress.

7 conclusions

the precise characterization of anomalies in general situations involving m-theory orb-

ifolds involves an interesting array of eects. on the one hand are the quantum anomaly

and also the various inow contributions enabled by modications to the dg bianchi iden-

tity and the standard chern-simons terms in eleven-dimensional supergravity. these two

contributions alone are sucient to understand anomaly cancellation in the simplest cases,

such as the m-vebrane and orbifolds which only break half of the bulk supersymmetry.

in situations involving more supersymmetry breaking, things are more involved. when

there are intersecting orbifold planes, an i-brane eect occurs which involves an in-

terplay between electric sources of g localized on one hyperplane and magnetic sources

41

of g localized on the intersecting plane. finally, local (twisted) tensor elds are gener-

ally needed to supply a local green-schwarz mechanism to cancel against the quantum

anomaly, the inow anomaly and also the i-brane anomaly.

we have presented, in detail, a particular example corresponding to an s1/z2  t 4/z2
orbifold which has seven- and ten-dimensional orbifold planes which interesect at addi-

tional six-dimensional planes. in this case, it is shown how local anomaly cancellation

on the six-planes requires so(8) gauge matter propagating on each of the sixteen seven-

planes. but there remains an unresolved paradox associated with this situation, which is

that it requires nt = 1/2. a related problem had been previously noted by other authors
[14, 15] in the context of the heterotic string. the authors of [14] have independently

indicated a need for sixteen 28s of so(8). the analysis in this paper complements the

results of that paper by oering an alternative m-theoretic and local explanation for these

same factors, associating them with seven-dimensional submanifolds.

the s1/z2  t 4/z2 orbifold represents a particular degeneration of s1/z2  k3 cor-
responding to the singular z2 orbifold limit of the k3 factor. in [14] the authors also
analyzed a separate case corresponding to the singular z3 orbifold limit of the k3 factor.
in that case, they did not nd the same peculiarities present in the z2 case. since that
z2  z3 construction also has intersecting orbifold planes of precisely the same dimension-
ality as the one featured in this paper, it would be most interesting to repeat our analysis

in that context. this is also work-in-progress.

a possibility suggested by this paper is that that gravitational anomaly cancellation
on ten-, six- and two-dimensional orbifold planes within complicated t 7 orbifolds, for

example, involving four-dimensional xed planes and/or intersections would require gauge

groups and particle spectra which would have relevance to realistic models. this would

bring gravitational anomalies into four-dimensional physics in a novel way.

42

appendix a: tables

in this appendix we compile some results and identities from group theory which are

necessary to undertake the detailed analysis described in section 6.

tr

tr

tr

trs

su(n)

1

2n2  1

so(n)

1
2n(n  1)

n

n

2(n 2)/2

sp(n)

n(2n + 1)

2n n(2n  1)

g2

f4

e6

e7

e8

7

26

27

56

14

52

78

133

248

table 2: representation dimensions used in the

denitions of the various trace operations. the

trace tr refers to the adjoint representation, tr

refers to the fundamental representation, tr refers

to the antisymmetric tensor representation and

trs refers to the spinor representation.

43

su(n) tr f 2 = 2n tr f 2

tr f 4 = 2n tr f 4 + 6 (tr f 2 )2

tr f 4 = 1

2 (tr f 2 )2 for su(2) or su(3)

so(n) tr f 2 = (n  2) tr f 2

tr f 4 = (n  8) tr f 4 + 3 (tr f 2)2

tr f 6 = (n  32) tr f 6 + 15 tr f 2 tr f 4

trs f 2 = 2(n 8)/2 tr f 2

trs f 4 = 2(n 10)/2 tr f 4 + 3  2(n 14)/2 (tr f 2 )2

sp(n) tr f 2 = (2n + 2) tr f 2

tr f 4 = (2n + 8) tr f 4 + 3 (tr f 2)2

tr f 2 = (2n  2) tr f 2

tr f 4 = (2n  8) tr f 4 + 3 (tr f 2)2

table 3: trace relations for the non-exceptional classical

groups.

44

g2 tr f 2 = 4 tr f 2

tr f 4 = 5

2 (trf 2 )2

tr f 4 = 1

4 (tr f 2)2

f4 tr f 2 = 3 tr f 2

tr f 4 = 5

12 (trf 2 )2

tr f 4 = 1

12 (tr f 2)2

e6 tr f 2 = 4 tr f 2

tr f 4 = 1

2 (trf 2 )2

tr f 4 = 1

12 (tr f 2)2

e7 tr f 2 = 3 trf 2

tr f 4 = 1

6 (tr f 2)2

tr f 4 = 1

24 (tr f 2)2

e8 tr f 2  30 trf 2

tr f 4 = 1

100 (tr f 2)2

tr f 6 = 1

7200 (tr f 2 )3

table 4: trace relations for the exceptional

groups.

45

.

x

0

su(n)

y

factorization criteria

4/

h = 2n/

su(2)

1
6(h  4/)

1
3(h  16/)

su(3)

1
6(h  6/)

1
3(h  18/)

so(n)

q  1/

q  2/

h = (n  8)/ + 2q

q  2(n 12)/2 hs

sp(n)

h + 1/

2h  2/

h = 2n(1/  h) + 8(1/ + h)

g2

f4

e6

e7

e8

1
6(h  4/)

1
6(h  10/)

1
6(h  3/)

1
18(h  5/)

1
6(h  4/)

1
18(h  6/)

1
6(h  3/)

1
36(h  4/)

5/

6/

table 5: values of the numbers x and y , which are dened in equation

(6.29), for the cases of each individual simple gauge factor, as functions

of the numbers of hypermultiplets transforming in various represen-

tations and as functions of the parameter , dened in (6.24). the

multiplicity h refers to the fundamental representation whereas h and

hs refer to the antisymmetric tensor representation and spinor repre-
sentation, respectively. the right-hand column lists necessary criteria

for the factorization described by the second equation of (6.29) as well

as the denition of the parameter q.

46

.

nh  nv

su(n)

(n 2 + 1)/ + s

su(2)

su(3)

2h  3/ + s

3h  8/ + s

so(n)

1
2n(n  15)/ + (2n + 32)q + s

sp(n) n(2n + 15)/  h n(2n  15) + s

g2

f4

e6

e7

e8

7h + s  14/

26h + s  52/

27h + s  78/

56h + s  133/

248/

table 6: expressions for nh  nv for the simple
gauge groups expressed as functions of the rep-

resentation multiplicities and as functions of the

paramenter , dened in (6.24). the multiplic-

ities h, h and q are dened in the caption for

table 5, while s is the number of gauge singlet hy-

permultiplets. note that the factorization criteria

listed in the right-hand column of table 5 have

been used.

47

appendix b: anomalies in ten dimensions

the essential tools used to study orbifold anomalies are specic polynomials used to

describe the anomalies themselves. for a given theory, the relevant polynomial can be

readily assembled given the zero-mass spectrum using results from index theory. but since

each chiral fermion or self-dual tensor contributes to an anomaly in a linearly independent

way, it is practical to have ready-made building-block polynomials associated with each

type of eld. in this way, one can readily determine the anomaly polynomial in a given

situation and use this to explore the consistency of the theory and as a guide to additional

structure. in this paper, an emphasis is put on the nuts-and-bolts aspects of assembling

these polynomials and using them to ones advantage. for this reason, and also for the

reason of making this paper reasonably self-contained, we include an encyclopedic reveiw

of these polynomials in this and the following appendix. the exact relationship to index

theorems is relatively unimportant for our purposes. so these have been de-emphasized.

the presentation in this appendix paraphrases the more comprehensive presentation

found in [16].

ten-dimensional eld theories involve three types of elds which contribute to anoma-

lies at one loop. these are chiral spin 3/2 fermions, chiral spin 1/2 fermions, and self-dual

(or anti self-dual) ve-forms. the total anomaly can be deduced via descent equations

from a formal twelve-form. following are master formulae for deducing the twelve form

from a given theory. the rst of these gives the contribution to purely gravitational

anomalies due to a chiral spin 3/2, chiral spin 1/2, and self-dual ve-form eld, respec-

tively,

i (3/2)
grav(r) =

i (1/2)
grav(r) =

i (5form)
grav (r) =

1

56

(2)5 6!(cid:16) 55
(2)5 6!(cid:16) 
(2)5 6!(cid:16) 

1

1

tr r6 

75
128

tr r4 trr2 +

35
512

1
504

496
504

tr r6 

1
384

tr r4 trr2 

tr r6 +

7
12

tr r4 tr r2 

5
72

(tr r2)3(cid:17)

4608

5

(trr2)3,(cid:17)
(tr r2)3(cid:17) .

(b.1)

in these expressions, the riemann tensor is regarded as an so(9, 1)-valued two-form,
b. the trace is over the so(9, 1) indices a, b, and the coordinate indices are sup-

(r)a
pressed. wedge products are assumed. we note that these formulae are additive for each

eld of a given type. for instance, relevant theories contain a number of chiral spin 1/2

elds living in vector multiplets. the anomaly due to chiral gauginos would be the second

equation of (b.1) times the total number of these gauginos.

next are the master formulae for mixed and pure gauge anomalies, which are due only

48

to chiral spin 1/2 fermions,

i (1/2)
mixed(r, f ) =

i (1/2)
gauge(f ) =

trr4 tr f 2 +

5
64

(trr2)2 tr f 2 

5
8

16

1

(2)5 6!(cid:16) 1

1

(2)5 6!

tr f 6

trr2 trace f 4(cid:17)

(b.2)

in these expressions, the yang-mills eld strengths are two-forms which take values in the

adjoint representation of the gauge group, and tr denotes an adjoint trace.

the above master formulae for i (1/2) and i (3/2) are for chiral (11 = ) weyl spinors.
if the fermions in question are majorana-weyl, which is possible in ten-dimensions, and

have therefore half of the degrees of freedom of a weyl spinor, then the formula should be

multipled by 1/2. for antichiral spinors (11 = ) the formula should be multiplied
by -1.

b.1 iib supergravity

the ten-dimensional type iib supergravity theory has a single self-dual ve-form eld

strength (with analogous four-form potential), a pair of chiral spin-3/2 majorana-weyl

gravitinos, and a pair of antichiral spin-1/2 fermions. thus, the total anomaly is described

by

i12 = i (3/2)

grav(r)  i (1/2)

grav(r) + i (5form)

grav (r) .

(b.3)

the coecients of the i (1/2) and i (3/2) terms each include a factor of two, since there

are two each of the relevant eld types, and also a factor of one-half since the relevant

elds are majorana-weyl spinors and therefore have half the degree of freedom of a weyl

spinor, as described above. thus, the overall coecients for these terms have absolute

value one. adding up the various contributions supplied by equation (b.1), we nd the

result i12 = 0 ! thus, the iib supergravity theory is anomaly-free.

b.2 n=1 supergravity coupled to yang-mills matter

the fermionic elds of the d=10 n=1 supergravity multiplet comprise a chiral majorana-

weyl spin-3/2 gravitino and an antichiral majorana-weyl spin-1/2 dilatino. there are

no (anti) self-dual 5-forms. this multiplet couples to yang-mills supermultiplets which

contains chiral majorana-weyl spin-1/2 gauginos living in the adjoint representation of

some gauge group g. thus, the total anomaly is described by

i12 = 1

grav(r)  i (1/2)

grav(r) + i (1/2)

mixed(r, f ) + i (1/2)

2(cid:16) i (3/2)

grav(r)(cid:17) + 1

2(cid:16)n i (1/2)

49

gauge(f )(cid:17) , (b.4)

where n = dim(g). adding up the various contributions, we then arrive at the total

anomaly polynomial for a generic super yang-mills theory coupled to d = 10 n = 1

supergravity,

i12 =

1

2 (2)5 6!(cid:16) 496  n

504

tr r6 

224 + n

384

trr4 trr2 +

5

4608

(64  n) (trr2)3

+

1
16

trr4 tr f 2 +

5
64

(trr2)2 tr f 2 

5
8

trr2 tr f 4 + tr f 6(cid:17) (b.5)

to cancel this anomaly via a green-schwarz mechanism, it is necessary that the twelve-

form factorize into the product of a four-form and an eight-form. for a judicious choice
of gauge group, it is possible that trf 6 factorizes into a linear combination of trf 2 trf 4
and (trf 2)3. but so(9, 1) does not enable such a factorization of tr r6; this piece must

vanish identically. therefore n = 496. in this case, (b.5) becomes

i12 =

1

2 (2)5 6!(cid:16) 

15
8

trr4 trr2 

15
32

(trr2)3 +

1
16

trr4 tr f 2

+

5
64

(trr2)2 tr f 2 

5
8

trr2 tr f 4 + tr f 6(cid:17) .

(b.6)

there is only one possibility to factorize this result into the product of a two-form and

an eight form, which requires the following property to be satised by g,

trf 6 = 1

48 trf 4 trf 2  1

14400 (trf 2)3 .

(b.7)

there are exactly two 496-dimensional nonabelian lie groups with this property, so(32)

and e8  e8. given the property (b.7), the anomaly polynomial (b.6) may be expressed
as

i12 = 

15

2 (2)5 6!

(trr2  1

30trf 2)  x(8) .

where x(8) is an eight-form given by the following expression,

x(8) = 1

8 trr4 + 1

32 (trr2)2  1

240 trr2trf 2 + 1

24 trf 4  1

7200 (trf 2)2 .

(b.8)

(b.9)

for so(32) there is an identity tr = 30 tr, and for e8 a similar identity denes the

operation tr. therefore,, in both cases we can rewrite (b.9) as

x8 = 1

8 trr4 + 1

32 (trr2)2  1

8 trr2trf 2 + 5

4 trf 4  1

8 (trf 2)2 .

(b.10)

appendix c: anomalies in six dimensions

six-dimensional eld theories also involve three types of elds which contribute to anoma-

lies at one loop. these are chiral spin 3/2 fermions, chiral spin 1/2 fermions, and self-dual

50

(or anti self-dual) three-forms. the total anomaly can be deduced via descent equations

from a formal eight-form. following are master formulae for deducing the eight form from

a given theory. the rst of these gives the contribution to purely gravitational anomalies

due to a chiral spin 3/2, chiral spin 1/2, and a self-dual three-form eld, respectively

i (3/2)
grav(r) =

i (1/2)
grav(r) =

i (3form)
grav (r) =

1

1

(2)3 4!(cid:16) 
(2)3 4!(cid:16) 
(2)3 4!(cid:16) 

1

49
48

trr4 +

43
192

(trr2)2,(cid:17)
(trr2)2(cid:17)
(trr2)2(cid:17) .

1
240

trr4 

1
192

7
60

trr4 +

1
24

(c.1)

in these expressions the riemann tensor is regarded as an so(5, 1)-valued two-form,
b. the trace is over the so(5, 1) indices a, b, and the coordinate indices are sup-

(r)a
pressed. wedge products are assumed. we note that these formulae are additive for each

eld of a given type. for instance, relevant theories contain a number of chiral spin 1/2

elds living in vector multiplets. the contribution to the total anomaly due to chiral

gauginos would be the second equation of (b.1) times the total number of these gauginos.

next are the master formulae for mixed and pure gauge anomalies, which are due only

to chiral spin 1/2 fermions,

i (1/2)
mixed(r, f ) =

i (1/2)
gauge(f ) =

4

1

trr2 trace f 2(cid:17)

(2)3 4!(cid:16) 1
(2)3 4!(cid:16)  trace f 4(cid:17)

1

(c.2)

in these expressions, the yang-mills eld strengths are two-forms which take values ac-

cording to whichever group representation the gauge elds transform in.

c.1 d = 6 , n = 2

in six dimensions, there are two distinct n = 2 supergravity multiplets, one chiral and the
other non-chiral 9. the chiral supergravity multiplet is denoted n = 2b and comprises a
sechsbein, ve self-dual two-forms b(+)
ij (ie: the three-form eld strengths satisfy h = h),
and two chiral spin 3/2 gravitinos. this multiplet can couple only to n = 2 tensor

9by n = 2 we refer to theories with twice the number of supercharges in the minimal d = 6 super-

gravity theory. since the minimal, or n = 1 theory in d = 6 has four complex supercharges, it follows

that d = 6, n = 2 supergravity theories have eight complex supercharges. however, since eight complex

supercharges coincides with the n = 4 theory in four dimensions, these theories are sometimes (not in

this paper) called n = 4.

51

multiplets, which each comprise ve real scalars, a single anti self-dual two-form, and two

antichiral spin 1/2 gauginos.

for the n = 2b supergravity multiplet coupled to n n = 2 tensor multiplets, the

quantum anomaly is characterised by the following eight-form,

grav (r) + i (3form)

grav

(c.3)

i8 =(cid:16) 2i (3/2)

grav(r) + 5i (3form)

grav (r)(cid:17)  n(cid:16) 2i (1/2)

(r)(cid:17) .

there are no mixed or pure gauge contributions since there are no spin-1 gauge elds

in the theory. the coecients of the various contributions in (c.3) follow from the eld

content of the multiplets specied in the preceeding paragraph. the rst two terms in

(c.3) are the contribution from the n = 2b supergravity multiplet while the second two

terms are the contributions from the tensor multiplets. using the formulae in (c.1) we

determine that

i8(r) =

1

n  21

(2)3 4!

8

(cid:16) trr4  1

4 (trr2)2(cid:17) .

(c.4)

since trr4 cannot factorize, the rst term in this expression must vanish if the theory is

to be anomaly-free. this then requires that n = 21 .

c.2 d = 6 , n = 1

in six dimensions there is only one supergravity multiplet with n = 1 supersymmetry.

this multiplet is chiral and comprises a sechsbein, a single self-dual two-form and a chiral

spin-3/2 gravitino. there are three distinct matter multiplets to which this multiplet can

couple. these are the vector multiplet which includes a spin-1 gauge eld and a chiral

spin-1/2 gaugino, the hypermultiplet which includes four real scalars and an antichiral

spin-1/2 fermion, and the tensor multiplet which includes a single real scalar, a single

anti self-dual two-form and an antichiral spin-1/2 fermion. each of these multiplets con-

tributes to a gravitational anomaly. to evaluate a potential gauge anomaly, we have to

specify the group representation relevent to each multiplet. we restrict to the case where

vector multiplets transform in the adjoint and tensor multiplets are gauge singlets. the

representation of hypermultiplets can be chosen freely.

to begin, we restrict to the case where g is simple. we will generalize this to the case

where g is semi-simple below. thus, given a gauge group, the only freedom we allow is in

the choice of representation for the hyper multiplets, some of which can be gauge singlets,

and the number of gauge-singlet tensor multiplets. for the case of perturbative string

eective theories, nt = 1. including nonperturbative eects can change this, however.
similarly, m-theory also gives rise to nt 6= 1 eective theories.

52

if we include nv vector multiplets, nh = p n hyper multiplets with n hyper-

multiplets in the representation r, and nt tensor multiplets, then the total anomaly is
described by the following eight-form,

i8 = i (3/2)

grav(r) + ( nv  nh  nt ) i (1/2)

grav(r) + ( 1  nt ) i (3form)

grav (r)

mixed(r, f ) + i (1/2)

+(cid:16) i (1/2)
x

n(cid:16) i (1/2)

gauge(f )(cid:17)adj

gauge(f )(cid:17)r

mixed(r, f ) + i (1/2)

(c.5)

which follows directly from the discussion above, given the eld content of the various

multiplets. note that the subscripts adj and r refer to the representations being traced
over in the respective anomaly polynomial, and that n is the number of hypermultiplets
in the representation r . using the formulae in (c.1), we then compute

i8 =

( nh  nv + 29nt  273 ) trr4

+

( nh  nv  7nt + 51 ) ( tr r2 )2

1

(2)3 4!(cid:16) 1

240
1
192

n tr f 2
 )

+

1
4

trr2  (tr f 2  x
 )(cid:17) .
( tr f 4  x

n tr f 4

(c.6)

a more precise description of the traces over the gauge group representations is given

below. we require that the anomaly (c.6) factorize so that the anomaly can be canceled

locally by a green-schwarz mechanism. this requires that the coecient of the rst term
in (c.6) vanishes, as this term is irreducible (ie: it is impossible to factorize trr4). we

thus determine the following requirement

nh  nv + 29 nt = 273 .

(c.7)

for the case of perturbative heterotic string compactications, one nds generically that

nt = 1, since there is only one tensor in the relevant eective theory.
equation (c.7) reduces to nh nv = 244, a commonly cited string requirement. note that
in m-theory we expect more than a single tensor eld since the eleven-dimensional three-

in that case,

form c can provide us with several two-forms upon dimensional reduction. in addition,

vebranes, which are important ingredients in m-theory, provide additional two-forms

since their dynamics involve six-dimensional tensor multiplets.

53

we impose (c.7). thus we can reexpress the anomaly (c.6) as follows,

i8 =

1

(2)3 4!

3

2(cid:16) 9  nt

8

( tr r2 )2 +

n tr f 2
 )

1
6

trr2  (tr f 2  x
 )(cid:17) .
( tr f 4  x

n tr f 4



2
3

(c.8)

this expression needs some care to be evaluated properly, especially if semisimple groups

are allowed. if the gauge group involves n simple factors, g1  g2     gn and if the

hypermultiplets trasform as (r1, r2, ..., rn ) then it turns out that trf 2 = p ntr f 2
and trf 4 = p trf 4


 where n is the number of multiplets
transforming as r, and n are the number of multiplets transforming as (r, r) under
the g  g subgroup. for example, in the case of two gauge factors g1  g2, we would
nd n1 = dimr2, n2 = dimr1 and n12 = 1. for vector multiplets transforming in the

 + 6p< ntrf 2

  trf 2

adjoint, we have the relation tr f n =p tr f n

 .

using the relationships discussed above, we generalize (c.8) to the case of semisimple

gauge group g1  g2     gn with the representation structure described above, and nd
the following anomaly polynomial,

i8 =

1

(2)3 4!

3

2(cid:16) 9  nt

8

( tr r2 )2 +

1
6

tr r2 x

x (2)

 

2

3 x

x (4)

 + 4x<

y(cid:17) ,(c.9)

where the following abbreviations have been used,

x (2)

 = tr f 2

  n tr f 2


x (4)

 = tr f 4

  n tr f 4


y = n tr f 2

  tr f 2
 .

(c.10)

the form of the anomaly polynomial (c.9) was presented in [17], with the same conven-
tions used here, but for the special case nt = 1. note that the terms n tr f 2
, n tr f 4

have an implicit sum over the dierent representations which might be included, and that

n therefore represents a set of multiplicities, one for each such representation. a similar
statement applies to the denition of y.

acknowledgements

m.f. would like to thank jens erler and andre mimiec for helpful discussions.

54

references

[1] m.b.green and j.h.schwarz, anomaly cancellations in supersymmetric d = 10

gauge theory and superstring theory, phys.lett. b149 (1984) 117.

[2] l.alvarez-gaume and e. witten, gravitational anomalies, nucl.phys. b234 (1984)

269.

[3] c.vafa and e.witten, a one-loop test of string duality, nucl.phys. b447 (1995)

261-270, hep-th/9505053.

[4] m.j.du, j.t.liu and r.minasian, eleven dimensional origin of string/string du-

ality: a one loop test, nucl.phys. b452 (1995) 261-282, hep-th/9506126.

[5] e.witten, five-brane eective action in m-theory, j.geom.phys. 22 (1997) 103-133,

hep-th/9610234.

[6] d.freed, j.a.harvey, r.minasian and g.moore, gravitational anomaly cancelation

for m-theory vebranes, adv.theor.math.phys. 2 (1998) 601-118 hep-th/9803205.

[7] y.e.cheung and z.yin, anomalies, branes, and currents, nucl.phys. b517 (1998)

69-91, hep-th/9710206.

[8] p.horava and e.witten, heterotic and type i string dynamics from eleven dimen-

sions, nucl.phys. b475 (1996) 94-114, hep-th/9510209.

[9] p.horava and e.witten, eleven-dimensional supergravity on a manifold with bound-

ary, nucl.phys. b460 (1996) 506-524, hep-th/9603142.

[10] k.dasgupta and s.mukhi, orbifolds of m-theory, nucl.phys. b465 (1996) 399-412,

hep-th/9512196.

[11] e.witten, five-branes and m-theory on an orbifold, nucl.phys. b463 (1996) 383-

397, hep-th/9512219.

[12] m.green, j.a.harvey and g.moore, i-brane inow and anomalous couppings on

d-branes, class.quant.grav. 14 (1997) 47-52, hep-th/9605033.

[13] m.berkooz, r.g.leigh, j.polchinski, j.h.schwarz, n.seiberg and e.witten, anoma-

lies, dualities, and topology of d=6 n=1 superstring vacua, nucl.phys. b475 (1996)

115-148, hep-th/9605184.

55

[14] g.aldazabal, a.font, l.e.ibanez, a.m.uranga and g.violero, non-perturbative

heterotic d=6, n=1 orbifold vacua, nucl.phys. bf b519 (1998) 239-281, hep-

th/9706158.

[15] p.s.aspinwall and d.r.morrison, point-like instantons on k3 orbifolds, nucl.phys.

b503 (1997) 533-564, hep-th/9705104.

[16] m.green, j.schwarz, and e.witten, superstring theory, cambridge university press,

1987.

[17] j.h.schwarz, anomaly-free supersymmetric models in six dimensions, phys.lett b

(1996) 223-230, hep-th/9512053.

[18] r.gopakumar and s.mukhi, orbifold and orientifold compactications of f-theory

and m-theory to six and four dimensions, nucl.phys. b479 (1996) 260-284, hep-

th/9607057.

[19] e.witten, on flux quantization in m-theory and the eective action, j. geom.

phys. 22 (1977) 1-13, hep-th/9609122.

56

