hep-th/9903237
brown-het-1176
rh-02-99
pupt-1839

9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
6
2

 
 

1
v
7
3
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ads/cft and the information paradox

david a. lowe

department of physics, brown university, providence, ri 02912, usa

lowe@het.brown.edu

and

larus thorlacius

department of physics, princeton university, princeton, nj 08544, usa

and

university of iceland, science institute, dunhaga 3, 107 reykjavk, iceland

lth@raunvis.hi.is

abstract

the information paradox in the quantum evolution of black holes is studied within the

framework of the ads/cft correspondence. the unitarity of the cft strongly suggests
that all information about an initial state that forms a black hole is returned in the

hawking radiation. the cft dynamics implies an information retention time of order
the black hole lifetime. this fact determines many qualitative properties of the non-local

eects that must show up in a semi-classical eective theory in the bulk. we argue that
no violations of causality are apparent to local observers, but the semi-classical theory in
the bulk duplicates degrees of freedom inside and outside the event horizon. non-local

quantum eects are required to eliminate this redundancy. this leads to a breakdown of
the usual classical-quantum correspondence principle in lorentzian black hole spacetimes.

march, 1999

1. introduction

hawkings information paradox [1] is an important theoretical problem, which must
be resolved by any theory that claims to provide a fundamental description of quantum
gravity. the usual argument for information loss in black hole evolution is made in the
context of a low-energy eective theory, dened on a set of smooth spacelike hypersurfaces
in a geometry describing the formation and subsequent evaporation of a large mass black
hole. the key assumption in the argument is that the eective theory is a conventional
local quantum eld theory. if, on the other hand, we assume that black hole evolution
is a unitary process we are led to the conclusion that spacetime physics is non-local on
macroscopic length scales. the nature of this non-locality must be subtle, for it is certainly
not apparent in our everyday low-energy activities. it should only become manifest under
extreme kinematic circumstances, such as those that relate inertial and ducial observers
in a black hole geometry.

some evidence for the required sort of non-local behavior has been found in string
theory [2]. the commutator of operators corresponding to an observer inside the event
horizon and an observer, who measures low-energy hawking radiation well outside the
black hole, is non-vanishing in string theory, in spite of the fact that these observers
are spacelike separated. these observers are related by a trans-planckian boost, but if
one instead considers a pair of spacelike separated observers with low-energy kinematics
the eect is strongly suppressed and one recovers conventional local causality. these
results suggest that the usual reasoning for information loss fails in the context of string
theory but they have a limited range of validity, being obtained by perturbative, o-shell
calculations in light-front string eld theory. similar arguments can also be made by
convolving appropriate wavepackets with the s-matrix [3].
in this case a macroscopic
characteristic length scale appears in the amplitude, indicating non-local eects. the
analyticity of s-matrix is, however, consistent with conventional causality.

recent progress towards a non-perturbative formulation of string theory has pro-
vided new tools with which to explore these issues. in the present paper we re-examine
the information problem from a modern point of view, using in particular the ads/cft
correspondence [4], which states that string theory in a certain background spacetime is
equivalent to a supersymmetric gauge theory that lives on the boundary of the spacetime.
the fact that the gauge theory is unitary strongly supports the view that no information
is lost in the quantum mechanical evolution of black holes, but it is less clear how the
unitarity is implemented from the spacetime point of view.

in section 2 we briey review the ads/cft correspondence in euclidean space, and
discuss the denition of the lorentzian correspondence by straightforward analytic contin-
uation. black hole backgrounds, and their cft descriptions are described in section 3. a

1

simple gedanken experiment is considered in section 4, which allows us to infer qualitative
features of the non-locality that must be present in the eective theory in the bulk. the
dual gauge theory description implies an information retention time for the black hole,
which plays a crucial role in these arguments. we conclude that local observers inside
or outside the black hole see no violation of causality. we argue, however, that the semi-
classical eective theory duplicates degrees of freedom inside and outside the event horizon,
and that non-local quantum eects are required to eliminate this redundancy. classically
there are no such non-local eects, thus the usual classical-quantum correspondence prin-
ciple breaks down in black hole spacetimes.

2. review of ads/cft correspondence

as described in [5,6], the natural relation between cft and ads correlators is

hexpzs d

0oicf t = z(0) ,

(2.1)

where 0() is the boundary value of a eld in the bulk, o is the dual operator in the
cft, and z is the string partition function on ads space with boundary conditions 0.
this statement is made in the euclidean formulation. it is made plausible by a remarkable
theorem of graham and lee [7] that says that for any suciently smooth metric boundary
values, there exists a unique smooth solution in the bulk.

in the following we will need to formulate the ads/cft correspondence in lorentzian
signature spacetime. luscher and mack [8] have shown that the euclidean greens func-
tions of a quantum eld theory invariant under the euclidean conformal group can be
analytically continued to lorentzian signature, and the resulting hilbert space of states
carries a unitary representation of the innite-sheeted universal covering group of the
lorentzian conformal group. the natural lorentzian spacetime is an innite-sheeted cov-
ering of minkowski space and thus the natural spacetime to consider in the bulk is the
universal covering space of ads.

let us review how this analytic continuation proceeds for the case of ads5. projective

coordinates for anti-de sitter space a with a = 1,    6 satisfy

(6)2  (4)2  (k)2 = r2 ,

(2.2)

where k = 1, 2, 3, 5 and r is the radius of curvature of the ads space. in the boundary
limit we can drop the r2 term, and parameterize the coordinates as

6 = r cosh ,

4 = r sinh ,

k = rek ,

(2.3)

2

where ek is a unit four-vector. the euclidean conformal group so(5, 1) acts in an obvious
way on the  coordinates. the set of euclidean coordinates to be used for the boundary
eld theory are (x4, ~x) (with ~x = xj, j = 1, 2, 3)

x4 =

sinh 

cosh  + e5 ,

~x =

~e

cosh  + e5 .

(2.4)

the analytic continuation corresponds to taking  = i with  <  < , which leads
to an innite-sheeted covering of minkowski space m with coordinates (, ek).

a single copy of minkowski space can be embedded in m by taking the subspace

 <  <  and e5 >  cos  . the usual minkowski coordinates are

x0 =

sin 

cos  + e5 ,

~x =

~e

cos  + e5 .

(2.5)

this space is conformal to the boundary at innity of the poincare patch of anti-de sitter
space, which is dened by the coordinates (x, z)

ds2 =

r2
z2 (dx2  dz2) .

(2.6)

the boundary at innity corresponds to z = 0. scale/radius duality is manifest in this set

of coordinates as illustrated by the d-instanton/yang-mills instanton duality. the scale
factor of the yang-mills instanton translates into the position along the radial z coordinate
of the d-instanton in the bulk [9].

to generate translations with respect to the global time  , one acts with the conformal
hamiltonian of the eld theory h = 1
2 (p 0 + k 0). luscher and mack show h is positive
and self-adjoint [8], and that there is a unique vacuum state annihilated by h, invariant
under conformal transformations.

in the following, we will take the point of view that the lorentzian theory in the bulk
is dened by this analytic continuation of the euclidean correlation functions. as we will

see later, this is a rather subtle point. alternative proposals for the lorentzian version of
the ads/cft correspondence have appeared in the literature. an example is the eternal
black hole solution considered in [10], where the dynamics is described instead by two
disconnected boundary eld theories.

3. the information puzzle and ads black holes

hawkings information paradox arises when one considers the quantum mechanical
evolution of black holes [1,11]. the issues are most sharply dened for a black hole that is

3

formed by gravitational collapse from non-singular initial data and subsequently evaporates
by emitting apparently thermal hawking radiation. if the initial conguration is described

by a pure quantum state and the hawking radiation is truly thermal then this process

involves evolution from a pure state to a mixed one, which violates quantum mechanical
unitarity. a related problem involves perturbations on a background extremal black hole.

the resulting non-extremal black hole will emit hawking radiation until it approaches

extremality once more and the question of unitarity arises in this context. in both of the
above settings one can also consider an equilibrium conguration where energy is fed into

a black hole at the same rate that it evaporates. in this case the paradox arises from the

fact that an arbitrary amount of information can be encoded into the infalling matter over

time and most of this information will be absent from the outgoing hawking radiation if
it is truly thermal.

in order to take advantage of some of the recent developments in fundamental grav-

itational theory one would like to formulate analogous questions in the context of black

hole evolution in anti-de sitter spacetime. this presents us with some immediate prob-
lems. for one thing ads gravity does not have a well posed initial value problem due to

the global causal structure of the ads spacetime. while spacelike slices of ads spacetime

have innite volume, null signals can propagate from innity into any given region in a
nite ane parameter. as a result it is problematic to dene unitary quantum mechanical

evolution in ads space even in the absence of black holes.

this problem can be circumvented in a number of ways. we can for example impose

boundary conditions at innity, which in the absence of black hole formation lead to
unitary evolution. the important point is that within some such framework we can study

the formation and evaporation of a black hole whose lifetime is short compared to the light-

crossing time of the ads geometry. we can choose parameters in such a way that this

black hole is nevertheless large compared to the planck scale and thus carries a signicant
amount of information. the question of possible information loss associated with the

evolution of the black hole is then eectively decoupled from the unitarity problem of the

underlying ads geometry.

there also exist black hole solutions in ads space where the schwarzschild radius is
large compared to the characteristic ads length scale. for such black holes there is no

separation of scales and thus dicult to disentangle the two unitarity problems. on the

other hand, as we shall see below, such black holes are extremely unstable and not so
useful for studying the information problem in the rst place.

another way to proceed would be to consider the asymptotically at geometry of an

extremal d-brane, whose near-horizon limit is locally isomorphic to ads spacetime. the

4

asymptotically at region then regulates the infrared pathology of the ads geometry and
one can consider evolution from initial data (subject to physical boundary conditions at the
d-brane horizon). one would again want to study black holes which are small compared
to the characteristic ads length scale which in this case is the size of the extremal d-
brane throat. there of course also exist solutions describing black holes that are larger
than the throat scale. these are just the non-extremal p-branes of the higher-dimensional
supergravity theory. they have non-vanishing hawking temperature and their evolution
leads to an information problem of the usual type. on the other hand, once we are far
from extremality the gauge theory correspondence, which is the main new tool at our
disposal, is no longer useful. there is a rather subtle problem with regulating the infrared
problems in this manner. the thermodynamic behavior is sensitive to the asymptotic
boundary conditions, i.e. whether the conformal boundary in euclidean signature is taken
in the following, we make the choice sn  s1, which
to be sn  s1 or rn  s1 [12].
is appropriate for the black holes we want to study, whereas the near-horizon limit of a
d-brane gives rise to rn  s1.

the metric of a static schwarzschild black hole in n + 1-dimensional asymptotically

ads spacetime can be written

ds2 = (cid:0)

r2
r2 + 1 



rn2(cid:1)dt2 +(cid:0)

r2
r2 + 1 



rn2(cid:1)1

dr2 + r2d2

n1 ,

(3.1)

where r is the ads radius of curvature and  is proportional to newtons constant in n + 1
spacetime dimensions times the black hole mass,

 =

8( n

2 )gn m

(n  1)(n2)/2 .

(3.2)

as we approach the black hole from large r the metric has a coordinate singularity at the
ads-schwarzschild radius r = rs, where

r2
s
r2 + 1 



rn2
s

= 0 .

(3.3)

in the limit of small black hole mass,  << rn2, the black hole parameters approach
those of a black hole of equal mass in asymptotically at spacetime,

while in the large mass limit,  >> rn2, we instead have

rs  1/(n2) ,

rs  (r2)1/n .

5

(3.4)

(3.5)

one obtains the hawking temperature in the standard way by continuing to the euclidean
section and requiring the horizon to be smooth,

th =

nr2

s + (n  2)r2
4r2rs

.

(3.6)

in the small mass limit this reduces to th  (n  2)/4rs, which is the usual hawking
temperature of a schwarzschild black hole in asymptotically at spacetime, but in the large
mass limit we nd that the ads black hole has positive specic heat, th  nrs/4r2.

we can now use the stefan-boltzmann law to estimate the lifetime of an ads black

hole. for small black holes we nd

leading to a lifetime which grows as a power of the black hole mass,

d
dt  2/(n2) ,

  n/(n2) .

(3.7)

(3.8)

if we choose parameters so that rs is a macroscopic length (in an ads background with
even larger radius of curvature) then the black hole will slowly evaporate, at a rate reliably
predicted by semi-classical considerations.

in the large mass limit the behavior is very dierent. in this case the evaporation rate

grows with mass,

d
dt  2 ,
leading to a lifetime that is bounded from above,

0    1/ .

(3.9)

(3.10)

the approximation of large mass breaks down as rs  r, so  should be interpreted as
the time that elapses before the black hole has evaporated to a size of order the ads
length scale. the subsequent evaporation rate will be independent of the original black
hole mass so the total lifetime is obtained by adding some constant to  . the parameter 0
in equation (3.10) is the value of  in the limit where the original black hole mass becomes

innite. a black hole of arbitrarily large initial mass will reduce to a size of order the ads
scale within this time, which means that such objects are violently unstable. they do not
provide us with the slowly evolving background geometries that are required for setting up
the information puzzle. in fact the instability will most likely prevent them from forming
in gravitational collapse in the rst place. this does not preclude their existence in thermal

6

equilibrium with a high-temperature thermal bath but since the heat bath is already in
a mixed quantum state that is not the ideal conguration for studying the information
problem.

the upshot of all this is that, for the purpose of studying information issues in black
hole evolution, we want to consider black holes that are macroscopic, i.e. large compared
to the string scale, but at the same time small compared to the ads scale. this means
that their schwarzschild radius is also small compared to the radius of the transverse
compact space that accompanies the ads geometry. the favored conguration in this case
is in fact not the ads/schwarzschild black hole that we have been discussing but rather a
higher-dimensional black hole that is localized somewhere on the transverse compact space
[13]. this is not really a problem for our discussion. the semi-classical expressions (3.4)
for the schwarzschild radius, (3.7) for the evaporation rate, and (3.8) for the black hole
lifetime still remain valid if we remember to replace the n of adsn by the number of space
dimensions of the higher-dimensional geometry.

the 2 + 1-dimensional black hole is a rather special case. the metric for the non-

rotating btz black hole [14] takes the form

ds2 = (

r2
r2  m)dt2  (

r2
r2  m)1dr2  r2d2 ,

(3.11)

where  has period 2. the relationship between m and the black hole mass depends on
which geometry one uses as a zero-mass reference. two choices oer themselves. one is
to dene ads3 to have zero mass, in which case we have

m = 1 + 8gn mads .

(3.12)

since m is required to be positive we see that 2 + 1-dimensional black holes have a non-
vanishing minimum mass with this denition. the other denition, which is perhaps more
natural from the point of view of black hole physics, is to dene the m = 0 geometry in
(3.11) to have vanishing mass, so that

m = 8gn mbt z ,

(3.13)
in this case the schwarzschild radius, rs = mr, goes to zero when the mass is taken
to zero, and ads3 appears as an isolated smooth geometry in a family of solutions with
naked singularities which formally have negative mass.

the hawking temperature of the black hole (3.11) is th = m/2r and the entropy
is s = mr/2gn . the lifetime of such 2 + 1-dimensional black holes is formally innite.
this is because the rate of hawking radiation slows down as m approaches zero. this is

7

not a problem because such small 2 + 1-dimensional black holes are not relevant to the
physics. here the ads/cft correspondence involves string theory on a background of the
form ads3  s3  m and black holes with schwarzschild radius small compared to the size
of the s3 are unstable to form 5 + 1-dimensional black holes that are localized on the s3.
those black holes have a nite lifetime, given by (3.8) with n = 5.

let us now consider the description of macroscopic black holes, that are nevertheless

small compared to the scale of the transverse geometry, from the gauge theory point of
view. we begin with the ads5 case. in the canonical ensemble, witten [15] has shown
there is a phase transition from a large mass ads-schwarzschild solution to an ads space

with certain discrete identications, generalizing the work of hawking and page for 3 + 1
dimensions [16].
in the gauge theory, this is reected as a deconnement transition in
the gauge theory as the temperature is lowered. for the ads3 case, there is no analog
of the hawking-page phase transition, and instead there is a smooth cross-over as the
temperature decreases. to obtain a stable phase containing the intermediate mass black

holes that we will be interested in, it is convenient to consider the microcanonical ensemble

instead. in general it will be necessary to impose additional constraints on the ensemble,
by requiring that the energy density be suciently well-localized, to ensure that only single

black hole states dominate the ensemble. the gauge theory version of this ensemble will

likewise be a microcanonical ensemble with additional constraints. to determine the form
of these constraints one must follow through the mapping of the energy-momentum tensor

of the gravity theory into operators in the gauge theory. this is of course a dicult task

once one wishes to go beyond the linearized approximation, but is nevertheless a well-
dened procedure. analogous constraints appear in the discussion of black hole entropy

in matrix theory given in [17].

4. unitarity vs. locality

the static schwarzschild solution (3.1) describes a black hole in equilibrium with a
thermal gas in an ads background. in order to study the information problem we want

instead to consider the evolving geometry of a black hole which forms by gravitational

collapse in ads space and then evaporates as it emits hawking radiation. we will not
attempt to write down such a solution but rather choose parameters in such a way that

the black hole evaporates slowly compared to all microscopic timescales and has a long

lifetime. the geometry is then described to a good approximation by (3.1) with  varying
slowly with time. in order to separate the issue of black hole information loss from the

usual unitarity problem in ads space we will also assume that this macroscopic black hole

8

is formed in an ads background with a very large radius of curvature so that the lifetime
(3.8) is small compared to the light-crossing time.

we can now imagine describing the bulk of the evolution of the black hole in terms
of a low-energy eective theory dened on a set of nice slices [18,19,2] that foliate the
slowly evolving spacetime and approach the local free-fall frame of infalling matter at (and
inside) the event horizon but also approach the frame of ducial observers far away from
the black hole. if the low-energy eective theory on the nice slices is a local quantum eld
theory then it follows from standard arguments [11] that the quantum state of the hawking
radiation will be correlated to that of the infalling matter. if we further assume that the
black hole completely evaporates, leaving only outgoing hawking radiation behind, then
the nal state cannot be a pure quantum state. on the other hand, the evolution of states
in a local quantum theory is unitary and therefore the nal state should be a pure state if
the initial conguration before the black hole forms is described by a pure state.

this apparent contradiction must somehow be resolved in a fundamental theory and
a number of scenarios have been put forward [20]. the conjectured ads/cft correspon-
dence supports the view that black hole evolution is unitary since the gauge theory is
manifestly unitary. this in turn means that the low-energy eective theory cannot be a
local quantum eld theory1. this is not a problem in the ads/cft context because the
duality map that relates the gauge theory and spacetime physics is quite non-local, as has
been emphasized in recent work [21,22,23].

in the following we will assume the validity of the ads/cft conjecture and ask what
its implications are for the propagation of information in black hole spacetimes. for this
purpose it is useful to consider gedanken experiments which highlight the conict between
unitarity and locality [24]. let us in particular examine a simple experiment which involves
correlated degrees of freedom inside and outside the event horizon. imagine a pair of spins
prepared in a singlet state well outside the black hole. here spin should be understood
as some internal label because conventional spin can in principle be detected by its long
range gravitational eld and is therefore not suitable for this experiment. one of the spins
is then carried inside the black hole, where a measurement of the spin is made, at some
point a. meanwhile, an observer o outside the black hole makes measurements on the
hawking radiation. if all the information about the quantum state inside the black hole
is encoded in the hawking radiation, this observer can eectively measure a component

1 a possible loophole to this argument would be that information is stored in planck-mass

remnant states. the existence of such remnants would imply an enormous peak in the density of

states around the planck scale. this, however, is in conict with the gauge theory calculations of

black hole entropy.

9

of the spin that went inside the black hole. the observer then passes inside the event
horizon, where he can receive a signal from point a, which potentially contradicts his
previous measurement, in violation of the laws of quantum mechanics. there is no real
paradox here from the spacetime point of view, for if o is to learn of the contradiction
before hitting the singularity then the signal sent by a has to involve frequencies beyond
the planck scale [24]. if, on the other hand, the signal from a is generated using only low-
energy physics then o will have entered a region of strong curvature before receiving it.
either way the analysis of the gedanken experiment requires knowledge of physics beyond
the planck scale and the apparent contradiction only arises if we make the (unwarranted)
assumption that this physics is described by local quantum eld theory.

let us reconsider this experiment using the boundary gauge theory. there is only
a single quantum state on any given time slice from the boundary point of view, so no
contradiction can arise between the spin measurements. during the evaporation phase, the
hamiltonian of the boundary theory, to a good approximation, generates evolution in the
asymptotic time t in the ads-schwarzschild spacetime (3.1). this time variable belongs
to a coordinate system which only covers a region of spacetime exterior to the black hole
and is therefore awkward for describing the fate of observers that enter the black hole.
the history of such an observer is more economically described if we instead evolve our
quantum state using a dierent timelike generator, one which is associated with the free
fall frame at the horizon and connects the interior and exterior regions of the black hole
[25]. it is, however, an important matter of principle that the evolution in asymptotic time
must contain all information about the infalling matter, even inside the black hole region.
this is guaranteed by the unitarity of the boundary gauge theory.

the scale/radius duality [4] tells us that an object far outside the black hole is de-
scribed by a localized conguration in the gauge theory, but as the black hole is approached
the same object will be represented by an excitation of much larger transverse size in the
gauge theory if the system evolves in asymptotic time. this should be a correct approx-
imate statement in asymptotically ads backgrounds, but note that here we are going
beyond the application of scale/radius duality in the unperturbed ads background. the
black hole is represented by an system of particles in the gauge theory with xed total
energy. as an object falls into the black hole the gauge theory conguration that describes
it spreads in transverse size and at the same time gets entangled with the particles that
make up the black hole. while the exact quantum state of the system of object plus black
hole contains the information that the object continues its plunge towards the singularity,
this information is not readily available to outside observers. in fact the only way to access
it is through careful observations of correlations in the entire train of outgoing hawking
radiation, as we discuss further below.

10

let us return to our gedanken experiment. in order for an outside observer to conduct
a measurement on the spin that entered the black hole, he or she measures correlations

between hawking particles emerging from the black hole at dierent times. one could

imagine a more active type of measurement where the outside observer attempts to probe
the black hole in various ways. this would only serve to excite the black hole and be

counterproductive since the state of the spin would now be entangled with that of the

probes in addition to the original black hole.

the gauge theory conguration that describes the black hole containing the spin at a
behaves as a conventional thermodynamic system. ideally we would like to calculate the
entropy and lifetime using the cft description, but such a calculation requires a better

understanding of the strongly coupled cft in the large n limit. but we stress these

are nevertheless completely well-dened computations in the cft. the best we can do at
present is to assume the validity of the ads/cft correspondence and infer that the gauge

theory answers coincide with the semi-classical gravity results.

with an understanding that the entropy and the rate of hawking radiation can be

obtained from the cft point of view, we can then invoke a result of page [26,27]. this
states that no useful information is emitted from a thermodynamic system that is radiating,

until its coarse grained entropy has been reduced by a factor of two. the time this takes

for an evaporating black hole is of order the black hole lifetime.
in other words, there
is an information retention time in the gauge theory description of the black hole. the

existence of an information retention time was postulated in references [24] and [28] but

the ads/cft correspondence now provides a concrete realization of that idea.

the information transfer between inside the event horizon and outside the event hori-

zon thus eectively takes place only when a time of order the lifetime of the black hole
has elapsed, from the point of view of a distant outside observer. it is also important to

determine at what point the outside measurements begin to have signicant inuence on

infalling observers inside the black hole. let us think of this, for the moment, in the con-
text of a low-energy eective theory, dened on a set of nice slices. if we assume that the

eective theory is a local eld theory that has been evolved forward from a non-singular

initial conguration described by some pure quantum state, and we further stipulate that
all information about the initial state is to be found in the outgoing hawking radiation,

then the degrees of freedom on that part of the nice slice that is inside the black hole can

carry no information about the initial state [29]. in other words, all information about the

initial state must be bleached out of the infalling matter immediately upon crossing the
event horizon, in blatant violation of the equivalence principle. for a large mass black hole

the horizon sits in a region of weak curvature where tidal eects are small and an object in

11

free fall should pass through more or less unaected. this is, of course, just a statement
of the information paradox in the context of a local eective eld theory of gravity.

in the boundary theory this appears in the form of a somewhat dierent puzzle.
there the infalling object is described by a spreading eld conguration which is getting
entangled with the ambient elds describing the black hole. this entanglement gets very
complicated as the object is thermalized into the black hole conguration, yet it is very
delicate. the slightest change in the combined conguration could drastically change the
results of subsequent correlation measurements on the hawking radiation, leading the
outside observers to conclude that the infalling object did indeed get bleached as it passed
through the horizon.

for a resolution of this puzzle we again have to appeal to the ads/cft correspon-
dence. since we know that an infalling object encounters no obstacle at the horizon of a
large black hole in the supergravity description, the gauge theory dynamics must somehow
miraculously preserve the integrity of infalling matter even if it appears, to a casual out-
side observer, to be thermalized as it interacts with the black hole conguration. this is
very reminiscent of the discussion in reference [21] of low-energy, large impact parameter
gravitational scattering. on the supergravity side the particles hardly interact at all and
move past each other with only a small deection, but on the gauge theory side the objects
completely merge during the collision and interact strongly, but then somehow disentangle
themselves and go their separate ways.

some recent work [30,31,23] has shown explicitly in certain examples how the gauge
theory dynamics, at large n, leads to a local and causal description of semi-classical low-
energy supergravity. building on this, we can argue that the information transfer to the
outgoing hawking radiation must take place near the black hole singularity from the point
of view of infalling observers. consider once again the gedanken experiment involving
spins. the observer inside the black hole cannot be inuenced by the outside measurements
until their result has been communicated inside, but the outside measurements cannot be
completed until at least of order the black hole information retention time has passed
according to asymptotic ads-schwarzschild clocks. in order to receive a signal carrying
outside results before hitting the singularity, the observer inside would have to undergo a
proper acceleration of order exp(m 2/(n2)) (in n + 1 dimensions). such an acceleration
would require trans-planckian energies, which are simply not available to a low-energy
observer. we therefore conclude that the observation of hawking radiation does in fact
bleach out a low-energy observer inside the horizon, but the bleaching only takes place at
the singularity, where life is less than good anyway.

since the singularity is by denition not in the causal past of any of the outgoing
hawking radiation it is clear that this information transfer is non-local on a macroscopic

12

scale. causality in the boundary gauge theory does not guarantee causality on the space-
time side. it does lead to an approximate causality in the bulk physics in at or near-at

spacetime, but our black hole example illustrates that even this macroscopic causality
must break down near spacetime singularities. we note that this breakdown occurs al-
ready at the level of a perturbative 1/n expansion in the boundary gauge theory. the

time evolution operator must be unitary, order by order in a 1/n expansion.

further insight into the nature of this non-locality in the nice slice theory can be gained

by considering physics in the euclidean continuation. the analytic continuation from
euclidean space completely determines arbitrary correlation functions in the lorentzian

cft, and in particular correlators corresponding to the above gedanken experiment. we
learn from the theorem of graham and lee [7] that in euclidean signature, the classical bulk
geometry is smooth, and there is a one-to-one mapping between the eld congurations

in the bulk, and those on the boundary. in euclidean signature, we see no sign of any
non-locality in the bulk theory. only when we analytically continue to lorentz signature

does the singularity arise, hidden behind the event horizon. classically, this leads to too
many degrees of freedom in the bulk. the degrees of freedom inside and outside the

event horizon are independent. quantum mechanically, the picture in lorentz signature is
radically dierent. the cft tells us the degrees of freedom inside are to be identied with

degrees of freedom outside the event horizon. this implies the usual classical-quantum
correspondence principle breaks down for black hole spacetimes. the degrees of freedom
in the correct quantum description in the bulk do not smoothly go over to the classical

degrees of freedom of the supergravity theory. the information paradox arises when we
ask questions involving these degrees of freedom that are duplicated in the classical theory.

non-local eects are required in a semi-classical description on a set of nice slices, to see
that these degrees of freedom are in fact redundant.

this set of arguments also implies the cft formulation resolves the singularity of the
black hole [32,25] and allows us to propagate states smoothly past the point where the black
hole has evaporated. classically, this point looks like a timelike (or null) naked singularity

in the spacetime. thus from the lorentz point of view, the analytic continuation from
euclidean signature leads to denite boundary conditions on this naked singularity.

acknowledgments

the research of d.l. is supported in part by doe grant de-fe0291er40688-task
a. the research of l.t. is supported in part by a doe outstanding junior investigator

award de-fg02-91er40671.

13

references

[1] s.w. hawking, breakdown of predictability in gravitational collapse, phys. rev.

d14 (1976) 2460.

[2] d.a. lowe, j. polchinski, l. susskind, l. thorlacius and j. uglum, black hole

complementarity vs. locality, phys. rev. d52 (1995) 6697, hep-th/9506138.

[3] d.a. lowe, the planckian conspiracy: string theory and the black hole information

paradox, nucl. phys. b456 (1995) 257, hep-th/9505074.

[4] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal theories and gravity, atmp

2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.

[5] e. witten, anti de sitter space and holography, atmp 2 (1998) 253, hep-

th/9802150.

[6] s.s. gubser, i. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from noncrit-

ical string theory, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105, hep-th/9802109.

[7] c.r. graham and j.m. lee, einstein metrics with prescribed conformal innity on

the ball, adv. math. 87 (1991) 186.

[8] m. luscher and g. mack, global conformal invariance and quantum field theory,

comm. math. phys. 41 (1975) 203.

[9] t. banks and m.b. green, non-perturbative eects in ads5  s5 string theory and

d = 4 yang-mills, jhep 5 (1998) 002, hep-th/9804170.

[10] v. balasubramanian, p. kraus, a. lawrence and s.p. trivedi, holographic probes

of anti-de sitter spacetimes, hep-th/9808017.

[11] s.w. hawking, particle creation by black holes, comm. math. phys. 43 (1975)

199.

[12] a. peet and s. ross, microcanonical phases of string theory on adsm  sn, jhep

12 (1998) 020, hep-th/9810200.

[13] r. gregory and r. laamme, black strings and p-branes are unstable, phys. rev.

lett. 70 (1993) 2837, hep-th/9301052.

[14] m. banados, c. teitelboim and j. zanelli, the black hole in three-dimensional

spacetime, phys. rev. lett. 69 (1992) 1849, hep-th/9204099.

[15] e. witten, anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transition, and connement in

gauge theories, atmp 2 (1998) 505, hep-th/9803131.

[16] s.w. hawking and d.n. page, thermodynamics of black holes in anti-de sitter

space, comm. math. phys. 87 (1983) 577.

[17] d.a. lowe, statistical origin of black hole entropy in matrix theory, phys. rev.

lett. 81 (1998) 256, hep-th/9802173.

[18] r.m. wald, unpublished, 1993.
[19] p. kraus and f. wilczek, self-interaction correction to black hole radiance, nucl.

phys. b433 (1995) 403, gr-qc/9408003.

14

[20] for reviews of the information problem see f.ex. j. preskill, do black holes de-
stroy information? hep-th/9209058; s. giddings, quantum mechanics of black
holes, hep-th/9412138; a. strominger, les houches lectures on black holes, hep-
th/9501071; l. thorlacius, black hole evolution, hep-th/9411020.
[21] l. susskind,holography in the flat space limit, hep-th/9901079.
[22] j. polchinski, s-matrices from ads space-time, hep-th/9901076.
[23] v. balasubramanian, s.b. giddings, and a. lawrence, what do cfts tell us

about anti-de-sitter space-times, hep-th/9902052.

[24] l. susskind and l. thorlacius, gedanken experiments involving black holes, phys.

rev. d49 (1994) 966, hep-th/9308100.

[25] t. banks, m.r. douglas, g.t. horowitz and e. martinec, ads dynamics from con-

formal field theory, hep-th/9808016.

[26] d.n. page, average entropy of a subsystem, phys. rev. lett. 71 (1993) 1291, gr-

qc/9305007.

[27] s. sen, average entropy of a subsystem, phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 1, hep-

th/9601132.

[28] d.n. page, information in black hole radiation, phys. rev. lett. 71 (1993) 3743,

hep-th/9306083.

[29] l. susskind, l. thorlacius, and j. uglum, the stretched horizon and black hole

complementarity, phys. rev. d48 (1993) 3743, hep-th/9306069.

[30] s.r. das, brane waves, yang-mills theories and causality, hep-th/9901004.
[31] g.t. horowitz and n. itzhaki, black holes, shock waves, and causality in the

ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9901012.

[32] g. horowitz and s. ross, possible resolution of black hole singularities from large

n gauge theory, jhep (1998) 9804:015, hep-th/9803085.

15

