9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
1
3

 
 

1
v
8
6
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

superstring,unications and dualities

joseph kouneiher,

u.m.r 7596 (c.n.r.s, universite diderot paris7)

2, place jussieu 75005 paris, france

kouneiher@paris7.jussieu.fr

abstract

i describe our understanding of physics near the planck length, in particular the
great progress of the last four years in string theory. superstring theory, and a recent
extension called m theory, are leading candidates for a quantum theory that unies
gravity with the other forces. as such, they are certainly not ordinary quantum
eld theories. however, recent duality conjectures suggest that a more complete
denition of these theories can be provided by the large n limits of suitably chosen
u (n ) gauge theories associated to the asymptotic boundary of spacetime.

1 introduction

as we all know, quantum eld theory has been extremely successful in providing
a description of elementary particles and their interactions. however, it does not
work so well for gravity. if we naively try to quantize general relativity  which
is a classical eld theory  using the methods of quantum eld theory, we run
into divergences which cannot be removed by using the conventional renormaliza-
tion techniques of quantum eld theory. an example of such a divergent graph
contributing to e  e scattering has been shown in fig.1.
string theory is an attempt to solve this problem[1]. the basic idea in string
theory is quite simple. according to string theory, dierent elementary particles,
instead of being point like objects, are dierent vibrational modes of a string. fig.2
shows some of the oscillation modes of closed strings and open strings. however,
the typical size of a string is extremely small, being of the order of the planck length
( 1033cm.). thus in all present day experiments these will appear to be point-like
objects, and string theory will be indistinguishable from an ordinary quantum eld
theory.

this simple idea has drastic consequences. one nds that

iassns-i.h.p-mars,99

1

figure 1: divergent contribution to e  e scattering in quantum general relativity. in
this diagram the solid lines denote the electron propagator and the broken lines denote
graviton propagator.

figure 2: some vibrational modes of closed and open strings

 a consistent quantum string theory does not suer from any ultraviolet diver-

gences.

 the spectrum of such a string theory automatically contains a massless spin
two state which has all the properties of a graviton  the mediator of gravi-
tational interaction.

thus string theory automatically gives us a nite quantum theory of gravity! how-
ever, there are problems in the immediate application of string theory to our world.
one nds that:

 string theory is consistent only in (9+1) dimensional space-time instead of the

(3+1) dimensional space-time in which we live.

 instead of a single string theory there are ve consistent string theories in

(9+1) dimensions. they are named as:

type iia, type iib, type i,

e8  e8 heterotic

and

so(32) heterotic

2

as we shall see, the rst problem is resolved using the idea of compactication.

the second problem is partially resolved using the idea of duality.

2 a review of perturbative string theory

string theory is based on the simple idea that elementary particles, which appear as
point-like objects to the present day experimentalists, are actually dierent vibra-
tional modes of strings. the energy per unit length of the string, known as string
tension, is parametrized as (2)1, where  has the dimension of (length)2. as
we shall describe later, this theory automatically contains gravitational interaction
between elmentary particles, but in order to correctly reproduce the strength of
this interaction, we need to choose  to be of the order of 1033cm. since  is
the only length parameter in the theory, the typical size of a string is of the order
of   1033cm  a distance that cannot be resolved by present day experi-

ments. thus there is no direct way of testing string theory, and its appeal lies in its
theoretical consistency.

a

b

figure 3: propagation of a closed string.

the basic principle behind constructing a quantum theory of relativistic string
is quite simple. consider propagation of a string from a space-time conguration
a to a space-time conguration b. during this motion the string sweeps out a
two dimensional surface in space-time, known as the string world-sheet (see fig.3).
the amplitude for the propagation of the string from the space-time position a to
space-time position b is given by the weighted sum over all world-sheet bounded
by the initial and the nal locations of the string. the weight factor is given by
es where s is the product of the string tension and the area of the world-sheet.
it turns out that this procedure by itself does not give rise to a fully consistent
string theory. in order to get a fully consistent string theory we need to add some
internal fermionic degrees of freedom to the string and generalize the notion of area
by adding new terms involving these fermionic degrees of freedom. the leads to ve

3

( a )

( b )

figure 4: (a) a closed string, and (b) an open string.

(apparently) dierent consistent string theories in (9+1) dimensional space-time, as
we shall describe.

in the rst quantized formalism, the dynamics of a point particle is described by
quantum mechanics. generalizing this we see that the rst quantized description
of a string will involve a (1+1) dimensional quantum eld theory. however unlike a
conventional quantum eld theory where the spatial directions have innite extent,
here the spatial direction, which labels the coordinate on the string, has nite extent.
it represents a compact circle if the string is closed (fig.4(a)) and a nite line interval
if the string is open (fig.4(b)). this (1+1) dimensional eld theory is known as the
world-sheet theory. the elds in this (1+1) dimensional quantum eld theory and
the boundary conditions on these elds vary in dierent string theories. since the
spatial direction of the world-sheet theory has nite extent, each world-sheet eld
can be regarded as a collection of innite number of harmonic oscillators labelled
by the quantized momentum along this spatial direction. dierent states of the
string are obtained by acting on the fock vacuum by these oscillators. this gives
an innite tower of states. typically each string theory contains a set of massless
states and an innite tower of massive states. the massive string states typically
have mass of the order of (1033cm)1  1019gev and are far beyond the reach
of the present day accelerators. thus the interesting part of the theory is the
one involving the massless states. we shall now briey describe the spectrum and
interaction in various string theories and their compactications.

2.1 the spectrum

there are ve known fully consistent string theories in ten dimensions. they are
known as type iia, type iib, type i, e8  e8 heterotic and so(32) heterotic string
theories respectively. here we give a brief description of the degrees of freedom
and the spectrum of massless states in each of these theories. we shall give the
description in the so called light-cone gauge which has the advantage that all states

4

in the spectrum are physical states.

1. type ii string theories: in this case the world-sheet theory is a free eld the-
ory containing eight scalar elds and eight majorana fermions. these eight
scalar elds are in fact common to all ve string theories, and represent the
eight transverse coordinates of a string moving in a nine dimensional space.
it is useful to regard the eight majorana fermions as sixteen majorana-weyl
fermions, eight of them having left-handed chirality and the other eight hav-
ing right-handed chirality. we shall refer to these as left- and right-moving
fermions respectively. both the type ii string theories contain only closed
strings; hence the spatial component of the world-sheet is a circle. the eight
scalar elds satisfy periodic boundary condition as we go around the circle.
the fermions have a choice of having periodic or anti-periodic boundary condi-
tions. it is customary to refer to periodic boundary condition as ramond (r)
boundary condition[?] and anti-periodic boundary condition as neveu-schwarz
(ns) boundary condition[?]. it turns out that in order to get a consistent string
theory we need to include in our theory dierent classes of string states, some
of which have periodic and some of which have anti-periodic boundary condi-
tion on the fermions. in all there are four classes of states which need to be
included in the spectrum:

 ns-ns where we put anti-periodic boundary conditions on both the left-

and the right-moving fermions,

 ns-r where we put anti-periodic boundary condition on the left-moving
fermions and periodic boundary condition on the right-moving fermions,
 r-ns where we put periodic boundary condition on the left-moving fermions

and anti-periodic boundary condition on the right-moving fermions,

 r-r where we put anti-periodic boundary conditions on both the left- and

the right-moving fermions.

finally, we keep only about (1/4)th of the states in each sector by keeping
only those states in the spectrum which have in them only even number of left-
moving fermions and even number of right-moving fermions. this is known
as the gso projection[?]. the procedure has some ambiguity since in each of
the four sectors we have the choice of assigning to the ground state either even
or odd fermion number. consistency of string theory rules out most of these
possibilities, but at the end two possibilities remain. these dier from each
other in the following way. in one possibility, the assignment of the left- and
the right-moving fermion number to the left- and the right-moving ramond
ground states are carried out in an identical manner. this gives type iib
string theory. in the second possibility the gso projections in the left- and
the right-moving sector dier from each other. this theory is known as type
iia string theory.
typically states from the ramond sector are in the spinor representation of the
so(9,1) lorentz algebra, whereas those from the ns sector are in the tensor

5

representation. since the product of two spinor representation gives us back
a tensor representation, the states from the ns-ns and the rr sectors are
bosonic, and those from the ns-r and r-ns sectors are fermionic. it will be
useful to list the massless bosonic states in these two string theories. since
the two theories dier only in their r-sector, the ns sector bosonic states are
the same in the two theories. they constitute a symmetric rank two tensor
eld, an anti-symmetric rank two tensor eld, and a scalar eld known as
the dilaton.1 the rr sector massless states of type iia string theory consist
of a vector, and a rank three anti-symmetric tensor. on the other hand, the
massless states from the rr sector of type iib string theory consist of a scalar,
a rank two anti-symmetric tensor eld, and a rank four anti-symmetric tensor
gauge eld satisfying the constraint that its eld strength is self-dual.
the spectrum of both these theories are invariant under space-time supersym-
metry transformations which transform fermionic states to bosonic states and
vice-versa. the supersymmetry algebra for type iib theory is known as the
chiral n=2 superalgebra and that of type iia theory is known as the non-
chiral n=2 superalgebra. both superalgebras consist of 32 supersymmetry
generators.
often it is convenient to organise the innite tower of states in string theory
by their oscillator level dened as follows. as has already been pointed out
before, the world-sheet degrees of freedom of the string can be regarded as a
collection of innite number of harmonic oscillators. for the creation operator
associated with each oscillator we dene the level as the absolute value of the
number of units of world-sheet momentum that it creates while acting on the
vacuum. the total oscillator level of a state is then the sum of the levels of
all the oscillators that act on the fock vacuum to create this state. (the fock
vacuum, in turn, is characterized by several quantum numbers, which are the
momenta conjugate to the zero modes of various elds  modes carrying zero
world-sheet momentum.) we can also separately dene left- (right-) moving
oscillator level as the contribution to the oscillator level from the left- (right-)
moving bosonic and fermionic elds. finally, if e and p denote respectively
the world-sheet energy and momentum2 then we dene l0 = (e + p )/2 and
l0 = (e  p )/2. l0 and l0 include contribution from the oscillators as well
as from the fock vacuum. thus for example the total contribution to l0 will
be given by the sum of the right-moving oscillator level and the contribution
to l0 from the fock vacuum.

2. heterotic string theories: the world-sheet theory of the heterotic string theo-

1although from string theory we get the spectrum of states, it is useful to organise the spectrum in
terms of elds. in other words the spectrum of massless elds in string theory is identical to that of a
free eld theory with these elds.

2we should distinguish between world-sheet momentum, and the momenta of the (9+1) dimensional
theory. the latter are the the momenta conjugate to the zero modes of various bosonic elds in the
world-sheet theory.

6

ries consists of eight scalar elds, eight right-moving majorana-weyl fermions
and thirty two left-moving majorana-weyl fermions. we have as before ns
and r boundary conditions as well as gso projection involving the right-
moving fermions. also as in the case of type ii string theories, the ns sector
states transform in the tensor representation and the r sector states transform
in the spinor representation of the so(9,1) lorentz algebra. however, unlike
in the case of type ii string theories, in this case the boundary condition on
the left-moving fermions do not aect the lorentz transformation properties of
the state. thus bosonic states come from states with ns boundary condition
on the right-moving fermions and fermionic states come from states with r
boundary condition on the right-moving fermions.
there are two possible boundary conditions on the left-moving fermions which
give rise to fully consistent string theories. they are:

 so(32) heterotic string theory: in this case we have two possible boundary
conditions on the left-moving fermions: either all of them have periodic
boundary condition, or all of them have anti-periodic boundary condition.
in each sector we also have a gso projection that keeps only those states
in the spectrum which contain even number of left-moving fermions. the
massless bosonic states in this theory consist of a symmetric rank two
eld, an anti-symmetric rank two eld, a scalar eld known as the dilaton
and a set of 496 gauge elds lling up the adjoint representation of the
gauge group so(32).

 e8  e8 heterotic string theory: in this case we divide the thirty two
left-moving fermions into two groups of sixteen each and use four possible
boundary conditions, 1) all the left-moving fermions have periodic bound-
ary condition 2) all the left-moving fermions have anti-periodic boundary
condition, 3) all the left-moving fermions in group 1 have periodic bound-
ary conditions and all the left-moving fermions in group 2 have anti-
periodic boundary conditions, 4) all the left-moving fermions in group 1
have anti-periodic boundary conditions and all the left-moving fermions
from group 2 have periodic boundary conditions. in each sector we also
have a gso projection that keeps only those states in the spectrum which
contain even number of left-moving fermions from the rst group, and also
even number of left-moving fermions from the second group. the mass-
less bosonic states in this theory consist of a symmetric rank two eld,
an anti-symmetric rank two eld, a scalar eld known as the dilaton and
a set of 496 gauge elds lling up the adjoint representation of the gauge
group e8  e8.

the spectrum of states in both the heterotic string theories are invariant under
a set of space-time supersymmetry transformations. the relevant superalge-
bra is known as the chiral n=1 supersymmetry algebra, and has sixteen real
generators.
using the bose-fermi equivalence in (1+1) dimensions, we can reformulate both

7

the heterotic string theories by replacing the thirty two left-moving fermions
by sixteen left-moving bosons. in order to get a consistent string theory the
momenta conjugate to these bosons must take discrete values. it turns out
that there are only two consistent ways of quantizing the momenta, giving us
back the two heterotic string theories.

3. type i string theory: the world-sheet theory of type i theory is identical to

that of type iib string theory, with the following two crucial dierence.

 type iib string theory has a symmetry that exchanges the left- and the
right-moving sectors in the world-sheet theory. this transformation is
known as the world-sheet parity transformation. (this symmetry is not
present in type iia theory since the gso projection in the two sectors
are dierent).
in constructing type i string theory we keep only those
states in the spectrum which are invariant under this world-sheet parity
transformation.

 in type i string theory we also include open string states in the spectrum.
the world-sheet degrees of freedom are identical to those in the closed
string sector. specifying the theory requires us to specify the boundary
conditions on the various elds. we put neumann boundary condition on
the eight scalars, and appropriate boundary conditions on the fermions.

the spectrum of massless bosonic states in this theory consists of a symmetric
rank two tensor and a scalar dilaton from the closed string ns sector, an anti-
symmetric rank two tensor from the closed string rr sector, and 496 gauge
elds in the adjoint representation of so(32) from the open string sector. this
spectrum is also invariant under the chiral n=1 supersymmetry algebra with
sixteen real supersymmetry generators.

2.2

interactions

so far we have discussed the spectrum of string theory, but in order to fully de-
scribe the theory we must also describe the interaction between various particles in
the spectrum. in particular, we would like to know how to compute a scattering
amplitude involving various string states. it turns out that there is a unique way of
introducing interaction in string theory. consider for example a scattering involving
four external strings, situated along some specic curves in space-time. the pre-
scription for computing the scattering amplitude is to compute the weighted sum
over all possible string world-sheet bounded by the four strings with weight factor
es, s being the string tension multiplied by the generalized area of this surface
(taking into account the fermionic degrees of freedom of the world-sheet). one such
surface is shown in fig.5. if we imagine the time axis running from left to right,
then this diagram represents two strings joining into one string and then splitting
into two strings,  the analog of a tree diagram in eld theory. a more complicated
surface is shown in fig.6. this represents two strings joining into one string, which

8

figure 5: a string world-sheet bounded by four external strings.

then splits into two and joins again, and nally splits into two strings. this is the
analog of a one loop diagram in eld theory. the relative normalization between
the contributions from these two diagrams is not determined by any consistency
requirement. this introduces an arbitrary parameter in string theory, known as the
string coupling constant. however, once the relative normalization between these
two diagrams is xed, the relative normalization between all other diagrams is xed
due to various consistency requirement. thus besides the dimensionful parame-
ter , string theory has a single dimensionless coupling constant. as we shall see
later, both these parameters can be absorbed into denitions of various elds in the
theory.

what we have described so far is the computation of the scattering amplitude
with xed locations of the external strings in space-time. the more relevant quan-
tity is the scattering amplitude where the external strings are in the eigenstates
of the energy and momenta operators conjugate to the coordinates of the (9+1)
dimensional space-time. this is done by simply taking the convolution of the above
scattering amplitude with the wave-functions of the strings corresponding to the
external states.
in practice there is an extremely ecient method of doing this
computation using the so called vertex operators. it turns out that unlike in quan-
tum eld theory, all of these scattering amplitudes in string theory are ultraviolet
nite. this is one of the major achievements of string theory.

out main interest will be in the scattering involving the external massless states.
the most convenient way to summarize the result of this computation in any string
theory is to specify the eective action. by denition this eective action is such
that if we compute the tree level scattering amplitude using this action, we should
reproduce the s-matrix elements involving the massless states of string theory. in

9

figure 6: a more complicated string world-sheet.

general such an action will have to contain innite number of terms, but we can
organise these terms by examining the number of space-time derivatives that appear
in a given term in the action. terms with the lowest number of derivatives con-
stitute the low energy eective action,  so called because this gives the dominant
contribution if we want to evaluate the scattering amplitude when all the external
particles have small energy and momenta.

the low energy eective action for all ve string theories have been found. the
actions for the type iia and type iib string theories correspond to those of two well
known supergravity theories in ten space-time dimensions, called type iia and type
iib supergravity theories respectively. on the other hand the actions for the three
heterotic string theories correspond to another set of well-known supersymmetric
theories in ten dimensions,  n = 1 supergravity coupled to n=1 super yang-mills
theory. for type i and the so(32) heterotic string theories the yang-mills gauge
group is so(32) whereas for the e8  e8 heterotic string theory the gauge group is
e8  e8. the emergence of gravity in all the ve string theories is the most striking
result in string theory. its origin can be traced to the existence of the symmetric
rank two tensor state (the graviton) in all these theories. this, combined with the
result on niteness of scattering amplitudes, shows that string theory gives us a
nite quantum theory of gravity.

the eective action of all ve string theories are invariant under the transfor-

mation

    2c,

gs  ecgs,

(2.1)

together with possible rescaling of other elds. here  denotes the dilaton eld,
gs denotes the string coupling, and c is an arbitrary constant. using this scaling

10

property, gs can be absorbed in . put another way, the dimensionless coupling
constant in string theory is related to the vacuum expectation value hi of .
the perturbative eective action does not have any potential for , and hence
hi can take arbitrary value. one expects that in a realistic string theory where
supersymmetry is spontaneouly broken, there will be a potential for , and hence
hi will be determined uniquely.
in a similar vain one can argue that in string theory even the string tension,
or equivalently the parameter , has no physical signicance. since  has the
dimension of (length)2 and is the only dimensionful parameter in the theory, the
eective action will have an invariance under the simultaneous rescaling of  and
the metric g :

  ,

g  g ,

(2.2)

together with possible rescaling of other elds. using this scaling symmetry  can
be absorbed into the denition of g .

2.3 compactication

so far we have described ve dierent string theories, but they all live in ten space-
time dimensions. since our world is (3+1) dimensional, these are not realistic string
theories. however one can construct string theories in lower dimensions using the
idea of compactication. the idea is to take the (9+1) dimensional space-time as the
product of a (9 d) dimensional compact manifold m with euclidean signature and
a (d + 1) dimensional minkowski space rd,1. then, in the limit when the size of the
compact manifold is suciently small so that the present day experiments cannot
resolve this distance, the world will eectively appear to be (d + 1) dimensional.
choosing d = 3 will give us a (3+1) dimensional theory. of course we cannot choose
any arbitrary manifold m for this purpose; it must satisfy the equations of motion of
the eective eld theory that comes out of string theory. one also normally considers
only those manifolds which preserve part of the space-time supersymmetry of the
original ten dimensional theory, since this guarantees vanishing of the cosmological
constant, and hence consistency of the corresponding string theory order by order in
perturbation theory. there are many known examples of manifolds satisfying these
restrictions e.g. tori of dierent dimensions, k3, calabi-yau manifolds etc. instead
of going via the eective action, one can also directly describe these compactied
theories as string theories. for this one needs to modify the string world-sheet action
in such a way that it describes string propagation in the new manifold m  rd,1,
instead of in at ten dimensional space-time. this modies the world-sheet theory
to an interacting non-linear -model instead of a free eld theory. consistency
of string theory puts restriction on the kind of manifold on which the string can
propagate. at the end both approaches yield identical results.

the eect of this compactication is to periodically identify some of the bosonic
elds in the string world-sheet eld theory  the elds which represent coordinates
tangential to the compact circles. one eect of this is that the momentum carried

11

by any string state along any of these circles is quantized in units of 1/r where r
is the radius of the circle. but that is another novel eect: we now have new states
that correspond to strings wrapped around a compact circle. for such a states, as
we go once around the string, we also go once around the compact circle. these
states are known as winding states and play a crucial role in the analysis of duality
symmetries.

-31
10

cm

10

10

light years

figure 7: example of compactication. the two dimensional cylinder appears to be one
dimensional if the radius is very small.

it turns out that there are many dierent choices for this six dimensional com-
pact manifold (case d = 3). thus each of the ve string theories in (9+1) dimensions
gives rise to many possible string theories in (3+1) dimensions after compactica-
tion. some of these theories come tantalizingly close to the observed universe. in
particular one can construct models with:

 gauge group containing the standard model gauge group su (3)  su (2) 

u (1),

 chiral fermions representing three generations of quarks and leptons,
 n=1 supersymmetry,
 gravity.

furthermore unlike conventional quantum eld theories which are ultraviolet di-
vergent but renormalizable, and quantum general relativity which is ultraviolet di-
vergent and not renormalizable, string theories have no ultraviolet divergence at
all!

2.4 vacuum selection and dynamics

so how do we go from explaining broad patterns to making precise predictions?
the main problem is that string theory has many approximately stable vacua, cor-
responding to dierent shapes and sizes for the rolled-up dimensions. the physics

12

that we see depends on which of these vacua we are in. thus we need to understand
the dynamics of the theory in great detail, so as to determine which vacua are truly
stable, and how cosmology selects one among the stable vacua.

until recently our understanding of string theory was based entirely on perturba-
tion theory, the analog of the feynman graph expansion, describing small numbers
of strings interacting weakly. however, we know from quantum eld theory that
there are many important dynamical eects that arise when we have large num-
bers of degrees of freedom and/or strong couplings. some of these eects, such as
connement, the higgs mechanism, and dynamical symmetry breaking, play an es-
sential role in the standard model. if one did not know about them, one could not
understand how the standard model hamiltonian actually gives rise to the physics
that we see.

string theory is seemingly much more complicated than eld theory, and so
undoubtedly has new dynamical eects of its own. i am sure that all the exper-
imentalists would like to know, how do i falsify string theory? how do i make
it go away and not come back? well, you cant. not yet. to understand why,
remember that in the 50s wolfgang pauli thought that he had falsied yangmills
theory, because it seems to predict long range forces not seen in nature. the eld
equations for the weak and strong forces are closely parallel to those for electromag-
netism, and so apparently of innite range. it is the dynamical eects, symmetry
breaking and connement, that make these short range forces. just as one couldnt
falsify yangmills theory in the 50s, one cannot falsify string theory today. in par-
ticular, because we cannot reach the analog of the parton regime where the stringy
physics is directly visible, the physics that we see is ltered through a great deal of
complicated dynamics.

there is a deeper problem as well. the feynman graph expansion does not con-
verge, in eld theory or string theory. thus it does not dene the theory at nite
nonzero coupling. one needs more, the analog of the path integral and renormal-
ization group of eld theory.

happily, since 1994 we have many new methods for understanding both eld
theories and string theory at strong coupling. these have led to steady progress on
the questions that we need to answer, and to many new results and many surprises.
this progress is the subject of the rest of my lectures.

3 unications

the next step in understanding the weak, strong and electromagnetic interactions
will probably require the inclusion of gravity as well. there are many reasons for
making this statement, but i will focus on two, one based on supersymmetry and
one based on the unication of the couplings.

13

 1,2,3


g

1

-30
10

10 9

15

10

gev

figure 8: the three gauge couplings and the dimensionless gravitational coupling as
functions of the energy. here g = gne2/8.

3.1 supersymmetry

what is supersymmetry? i will answer this in more detail later, but for now let me
give two short answers:

a. a lot of new particles.

b. a new spacetime symmetry.

answer a is the pragmatic one for a particle experimentalist or phenomenologist.
in answer b, i am distinguishing internal symmetries like avor and electric charge,
which act on the elds at each point of spacetime, from symmetries like lorentz
invariance that move the elds from one point to another. supersymmetry is of the
second type. if the widely anticipated discovery of supersymmetry actually takes
place in the next few years, it not only means a lot more particles to discover.
it also will be the rst new spacetime symmetry since the discovery of relativity,
bringing the structure of the particle interactions closer to that of gravity; in a sense,
supersymmetry is a partial unication of particle physics and gravity.

the unication of the couplings is depicted in 3.1. this is usually drawn with a
rather dierent vertical scale. here the scale is compressed so that the three gauge
couplings can hardly be distinguished, but this makes room for the fourth coupling,
the gravitational coupling. newtons constant is dimensionful, so what is actually
drawn is the dimensionless coupling gne2 with e the energy scale and  = c = 1.
this dimensionless gravitational coupling depends strongly on energy, in contrast
to the slow running of the gauge couplings.

it is well-known that the three gauge couplings unify to good accuracy (in su-
persymmetric theories) at an energy around 2  1016 gev. note however that the
fourth coupling does not miss by much, a factor of 20 or 30 in energy scale. this

14

is another way of saying that the grand unication scale is near the planck scale.
in fact, the planck scale mp = 2  1019 gev is deceptively high because of various
factors like 4 that must be included. figure 1 suggests that the grand unication
of the three gauge interactions will actually be a very grand unication including
gravity as well. the failure of the four couplings to meet exactly could be due to
any of several small eects, which i will discuss briey later.3

figure 1 also shows why the phenomenologies of the gauge interactions and grav-
ity are so dierent: at accessible energies the coupling strengths are very dierent.
for the same reason, the energy scale where the couplings meet is far removed from
experiment. nevertheless, we believe that we can deduce much of what happens at
this scale.

3.2 supersymmetry and strong coupling

the key that makes it possible to discuss the strongly coupled theory is supersym-
metry. one way to think about supersymmetry is in terms of extra dimensions 
but unlike the dimensions that we see, and unlike the small dimensions discussed
earlier, these dimensions are fermionic.
in other words, the coordinates for or-
dinary dimensions are real numbers and so commute with each other: they are
bosonic; the fermionic coordinates instead satisfy

ij = ji .

(3.3)

for i = j this implies that 2
i = 0, so in some sense these dimensions have zero size.
this may sound rather mysterious but in practice the eect is the same as having
just the bosonic dimensions but with an extra symmetry that relates the masses
and couplings of fermions to those of bosons.

to understand how supersymmetry gives new information about strong cou-
pling, let us recall the distinction between symmetry and dynamics. symmetry tells
us that some quantities (masses or amplitudes) vanish, and others are equal to one
another. to actually determine the values of the masses or amplitudes is a dy-
namical question. in fact, supersymmetry gives some information that one would
normally consider dynamical. to see this, let us consider in quantum theory the
hamiltonian operator h, the charge operator g associated with an ordinary sym-
metry like electric charge or baryon number, and the operator q associated with a
supersymmetry. the statement that g is a symmetry means that it commutes with
the hamiltonian,

for supersymmetry one has the same,

[h, g] = 0 .

[h, q] = 0 ,

(3.4)

(3.5)

3i will also discuss briey the idea of low energy string theory, in which 3.1 is drastically changed.

15

but there is an additional relation

q2 = h + g ,

(3.6)

in which the hamiltonian and ordinary symmetries appear on the right. there
are usually several gs and several qs, so that there should be additional indices
and constants in these equations, but this schematic form is enough to explain
the point. it is this second equation that gives the extra information. to see one
example of this, consider a state |i having the special property that it is neutral
under supersymmetry:
(3.7)

q|i = 0 .

to be precise, since we have said that there are usually several qs, we are interested
in states that are neutral under at least one q but usually not all of them. these are
known as bps (bogomolnyiprasadsommereld) states. now take the expectation
value of the second relation (3.6) in this state:

h|q2|i = h|h|i + h|g|i .

(3.8)

the left side vanishes by the bps property, while the two terms on the right are
the energy e of the state |i and its charge q under the operator g. thus

e = q ,

(3.9)

and so the energy of the state is determined in terms of its charge. but the energy
is a dynamical quantity: even in quantum mechanics we must solve schrodingers
equation to obtain it. here, it is determined entirely by symmetry information.
(there is a constant of proportionality missing in (3.9), because we omitted it
from (3.6) for simplicity, but it is determined by the symmetry.)

since the calculation of e uses only symmetry information, it does not depend
on any coupling being weak:
it an exact property of the theory. thus we know
something about the spectrum at strong coupling. actually, this argument only
gives the allowed values of e, not the ones that actually appear in the spectrum.
the latter requires an extra step: we rst calculate the spectrum of bps states at
weak coupling, and then adiabatically continue the spectrum: the bps property
enables us to follow the spectrum to strong coupling.

the bps states are only a small part of the spectrum, but by using this and
similar types of information from supersymmetry, together with general properties
of quantum systems, one can usually recognize a distinctive pattern in the strongly
coupled theory and so deduce the dual theory. actually, this argument was already
made by montonen and olive in 1977, but only in 1994, after this kind of reasoning
was applied in a systematic way in many examples starting with seiberg, did it
become clear that it works and that electricmagnetic duality is a real property of
supersymmetric gauge theories.

16

3.3 beyond four dimensions

it is very likely that at lengths near the
gravity is the dynamics of spacetime.
planck scale (lp = 1033 cm) it becomes evident that spacetime has more than the
four dimensions that are visible to us. that is, spacetime is as shown in gure 2a,
with four large dimensions (including time) and some additional number of small
and highly curved spatial dimensions.

a physicist who probes this spacetime with wavelengths long compared to the
size of the small dimensions sees only the large ones, as in gure 2b. i will rst give
two reasons why this is a natural possibility to consider, and then explain why it is
a good idea.

the rst argument is cosmological. the universe is expanding, so the dimensions
that we see were once smaller and highly curved. it may have been that initially
there were more than four small dimensions, and that only the four that are evident
to us began to expand. that is, we know of no reason that that the initial expansion
had to be isotropic.

the second argument is based on symmetry breaking. most of the symmetry
in nature is spontaneously broken or otherwise hidden from us. for example, of
the su (3)  su (2)  u (1) gauge symmetries, only a u (1) is visible. similarly the
avor symmetry is partly broken, as are the symmetries in many condensed matter
systems. this symmetry breaking is part of what makes physics so rich:
if all of
the symmetry of the underlying theory were unbroken, it would be much easier to
gure out what that theory is!

suppose that this same symmetry breaking principle holds for the spacetime
symmetries. the visible spacetime symmetry is so(3, 1), the lorentz invariance of
special relativity consisting of the boosts and rotations. a larger symmetry would
be so(d, 1) for d > 3, the lorentz invariance of d + 1 spacetime dimensions.
so extra dimensions are cosmologically plausible, and are a natural extension of the
familiar phenomenon of spontaneous symmetry breaking. in addition, they may be
responsible for some of the physics that we see in nature. to see why this is so,
consider rst the following cartoon version of grand unication. the traceless 3 3
and 2 2 matrices for the strong and weak gauge interactions t into a 5 5 matrix,
with room for an extra u (1) down the diagonal:




3  3 x, y
2  2
x, y




(3.10)

now let us try to do something similar, but for gravity and electromagnetism.
gravity is described by a metric g , which is a 4 4 matrix, and electromagnetism
by a 4-vector a. these t into a 5  5 matrix:


 g

a




a



(3.11)

17

in fact, if one takes einsteins equations in ve dimensions, and writes them out
in terms of the components (3.11), they become einsteins equations for the four-
dimensional metric g plus maxwells equation for the vector potential a. this
elegant unication of gravity and electromagnetism is known as kaluzaklein the-
ory.

for future reference it is useful to look at a simple example. this is a massless
scalar eld in ve spacetime dimensions, with one dimension periodic with period
2r. let x with  = 0, 1, 2, 3 be the coordinates for the large dimensions, and x4
be the periodic coordinate; the index m runs over all ve values. the wave equation
is

0 = m n

2

xm x n (x) =(cid:18)

2

x x  +

2

2x 4(cid:19) (x).

(3.12)

(3.13)

(3.14)

as in the waveguide, separate variables and expand the x4 dependence in a complete
set of modes,

n(x) = n(x)einx4/r.

then the nth mode satises

0 =(cid:18)

2

x x  

n2

r2(cid:19) n(x)

which is the klein-gordon equation for a scalar eld of mass m = n/r. at low
energies only the n = 0 mode is detectable, but at energies above 1/r one sees
a characteristic innite tower of states. for this simple geometry the states are
spaced evenly in mass. more complicated compact spaces would of course give a
more complicated spectrum, but the average density of states depends only on the
number of additional dimensions. from another point of view, consider how the
spectrum behaves as r  : the innite tower comes down in mass and forms the
continuum characteristic of a noncompact dimension.

if one looks at the dirac equation in the higher-dimensional space, one nds a
possible explanation for another of the striking patterns in nature, the existence
of quark and lepton generations. that is, a single spinor eld in the higher-
dimensional space generally reduces to several four-dimensional spinor elds, with
repeated copies of the same gauge quantum numbers.

unication is accompanied by new physics. in the case of grand unication this
includes the x and y bosons, which mediate proton decay. in kaluzaklein theory
it includes the dilaton , which is the last element in the matrix (3.11).
i will
discuss the dilaton further later, but for now let me note that it is likely not to have
observable eects. of course, in kaluzaklein theory there is more new physics:
the extra dimension(s)!

at energies greater than the inverse size of the small dimensions, one can excite
particles moving in those directions. the states are quantized because of the nite
size, and each state of motion looks, from the lower-dimensional point of view, like

18

a dierent kind of particle. thus the signature of passing such a threshold is a
whole tower of new particles, with a spectrum characteristic of the shape of the
extra dimensions.

4 dualities

few words have been used with more dierent meanings than the word duality.
even within the restricted framework of string theories, duality originally meant a
symmetry between the s and the t-channels in strong interactions (coming from the
demands in the s-matrix approach of the sixties of regge behavior without xed
poles and analiticity, which were shown to imply the existence of an innite number
of resonances) [72]. somewhat related ideas, also termed duality, appear in the
context of conformal field theory (cft) as simple consequences of locality and
associativity of the operator product expansion (ope) [73].

duality symmetry plays an important role in statistical mechanics (for a review
and references to the literature see for instance [74]), in particular in the analy-
sis of the phase diagram of spin systems. it can also be understood as a way to
show the equivalence between two apparently dierent theories. on a lattice system
described by a hamiltonian h(gi) with coupling constants gi the duality transfor-
mation produces a new hamiltonian h (g
i on the dual
lattice. in this way one can often relate the strong coupling regime of h(g) with the
weak coupling regime of h (g). an important application was the determination
of the exact temperature at which the phase transition of the two-dimensional ising
model takes place [75].

i ) with coupling constants g

more recently, the word duality (space-time duality) has been introduced
in yet another sense. t-duality is a symmetry which relates physical properties
corresponding to big spacetime radius with quantities corresponding to small radius.
this will be our main theme in this review and from now on we will refer to it as just
duality (a general reference is [76]). s-duality is a (conjectural) symmetry relating
the strong coupling regime with the weak coupling one, a bold generalization of
the original conjecture by montonen and olive [77]. still more interesting (and
speculative), there is a duality of dualities: s-duality for strings corresponds to
t-duality for vebranes and conversely (see [78] for a general review). another
formally very similar property is -duality, a property of the free energy of strings
at nite temperature [79] which relates the high and the low temperature phases.
for example, for the 10-dimensional heterotic string

f () =

2
2 f (2/).

(4.15)

the physical interpretation of this symmetry is, however, somewhat uncertain due
to the presence of the hagedorn temperature.

19

4.1 duality in field and string theory

one important idea in the recent developments is duality. this refers to the equiva-
lence between seemingly distinct physical systems. one starts with dierent hamil-
tonians, and even with dierent elds, but when after solving the theory one nds
that the spectra and the transition amplitudes are identical. often this occurs be-
cause a quantum system has more than one classical limit, so that one gets back to
the same quantum theory by quantizing either classical theory.

this phenomenon is common in quantum eld theories in two spacetime di-
mensions. the duality of the sine-gordon and thirring models is one example;
the high-temperaturelow-temperature duality of the ising model is another. the
great surprise of the recent developments is that it is also common in quantum eld
theories in four dimensions, and in string theory.

a particularly important phenomenon is weakstrong duality. i have emphasized
that perturbation theory does not converge. it gives the asymptotics as the coupling
g goes to zero, but it misses important physics at nite coupling, and at large
coupling it becomes more and more useless. in some cases, though, when g becomes
very large there is a simple alternate description, a weakly coupled dual theory
with g = 1/g. in one sense, as g   the quantum uctuations of the original
elds become very large (non-gaussian), but one can nd a dual set of elds which
become more and more classical.

another important idea is electricmagnetic duality. a striking feature of maxwells

equations is the symmetry of the left-hand side under e  b and b  e. this
symmetry suggests that there should be magnetic as well as electric charges. this
idea became more interesting with diracs discovery of the quantization condition

qeqm = 2n ,

(4.16)

which relates the quantization of the electric charge (its equal magnitude for protons
and electrons) to the existence of magnetic monopoles. a further key step was the
discovery by t hooft and polyakov that grand unied theories predict magnetic
monopoles. these monopoles are solitons, smooth classical eld congurations.
thus they look rather dierent from the electric charges, which are the basic quanta:
the latter are light, pointlike, and weakly coupled while monopoles are heavy, fuzzy,
and (as a consequence of the dirac quantization) strongly coupled.

in 1977 montonen and olive proposed that in certain supersymmetric unied
theories the situation at strong coupling would be reversed: the electric objects
would be big, heavy, and strongly coupled and the magnetic objects small, light and
weakly coupled. the symmetry of the sourceless maxwells equations would then
be extended to the interacting theory, with an inversion of the coupling constant.
thus electricmagnetic duality would be a special case of weakstrong duality, with
the magnetically charged elds being the dual variables for the strongly coupled
theory.

the evidence for this conjecture was circumstantial: no one could actually nd
the dual magnetic variables. for this reason the reaction to this conjecture was

20

skeptical for many years. in fact the evidence remains circumstantial, but in recent
years it has become so much stronger that the existence of this duality is in little
doubt.

4.2 string duality, d-branes, m-theory

existence of duality symmetries in string theory started out as a conjecture and still
remains a conjecture. however so many non-trivial tests of these conjectures have
been performed by now that most people in the eld are convinced of the validity
of these conjectures. a review of this subject and more references can be found in
ref.[2].

a duality conjecture is a statement of equivalence between two or more appar-
ently dierent string theories. two of the most important features of duality are as
follows:

 often under the duality map, an elementary particle in one theory gets mapped
to a composite particle in a dual theory and vice versa. thus classication
of particles into elementary and composite loses signicance as it depends on
which particular theory we use to describe the system.

 often duality relates a weakly coupled string theory to a strongly coupled
string theory and vice versa. in many simple cases the coupling constants g
and eg in the two theories are related via the simple relation:

(4.17)

g =eg1 .

thus a perturbation expansion in g contains information about non-perturbative
eects in the dual theory. in particular the tree level (classical) results in one
theory can contain contribution from perturbative and non-perturbative terms
in the dual theory. this also clearly shows that duality is a property of the
full quantum string theory, and not of its classical limit.

thus there are two aspects of duality

elementary  composite
classical  quantum

let me now give some examples of dual pairs of string theories.
 (9+1) dimensional so(32) heterotic and type i string theories are conjectured

to be dual to each other.[3, 4]

 so(32) heterotic string theory compactied on a four dimensional torus (de-
noted as t 4) is conjectured to be dual to type iia string theory compactied
on a dierent four dimensional manifold, denoted by k3.[5]

 type iib string theory is conjectured to be self-dual, in the sense that the
type iib string theories at two dierent couplings g andeg related by eq.(4.17)

are conjectured to describe the same physical theory.[5]

21

m-theory

type iia

type iib

type i

so(32) heterotic

e8 x e8 

heterotic

figure 9: the ve string theories, and m-theory, as limits of a single theory.

 heterotic string theory compactied on a six dimensional torus, denoted by

t 6, is conjectured to be self-dual in the same sense as above.[6, 7]

returning to string duality, g.4.2 gives a schematic picture of what was learned
in 1995. before that time there were ve known string theories. these diered
primarily in the way that supersymmetry acts on the string, and the type i theory
also in that it includes open strings. we now know that starting with any one of
these theories and going to strong coupling, we can reach any of the others. again,
the idea is that one follows the bps states and recognizes distinctive patterns in
the limits. the parameter space in the gure can be thought of as two coupling
constants, or as the radii of two compact dimensions.

so due to the fact that a duality conjecture relates two apparently dierent the-
ories, we see that it gives a unied picture of all string theories. the situation is
summarized in fig.4.2.4 according to this picture the apparently dierent string
theories and their compactications are just dierent limits of the same theory, with
a large parameter space.5 there is no universally accepted name for this central
theory,  i have chosen to call it u -theory for the purpose of this talk. u can be
taken to stand for unknown or unied. some small regions of the parameter space
of u -theory, which can be represented by some weakly coupled string theory, are
reasonably well understood and correspond to the weak coupling regime of the ve
dierent string theories and their compactications. but for most of the parame-
ter space u -theory does not have a description in terms of weakly coupled string
theory. note that in one corner of the parameter space of u -theory, there is a the-
ory called m -theory [9, 3, 10, 11, 12] which has not been introduced before. at

4 one should keep in mind that this is only a schematic representation. each string theory gives
rise to many weakly coupled string theories after compactication. also dierent compactications of a
string theory may be separated by innite distance in the moduli space if in order to go from one to the
other one needs to pass through the decompactication limit. finally, not all components of u -theory
may belong to the same moduli space, i.e. there may not be a continuous path connecting them such
that each point on the path represents a solution of the eld equations [8], but it is expected that they
are all connected via intermediate congurations which are not necessarily solutions of eld equations.

5in string theory parameters themselves are related to vacuum expectation values of dierent elds

and are expected to be determined dynamically.

22

present not much is known about m -theory except that its low energy limit is the
eleven dimensional supergravity theory, and that various string theories and their
compactications approach m -theory in certain limits. however, unlike string the-
ory, m -theory does not have any coupling constant, and no systematic procedure
for doing computations in m -theory beyond the low energy supergravity limit is
known. (as we shall discuss later, matrix theory is an attempt in this direction.) it
is generally believed that due to the absence of a coupling constant, understanding
m -theory will require a full understanding of u -theory, and for this reason u -theory
has often been identied with m -theory. however, we shall keep the distinction be-
tween the two, and reserve the name m -theory for the unknown eleven dimensional
theory which arises in a certain limit of u -theory.

we have emphasized that the underlying spacetime symmetry of string theory is
so(9, 1). however, the m-theory point in the gure is in fact a point of so(10, 1)
symmetry: the spacetime symmetry of string theory is larger than had been sus-
pected. the extra piece is badly spontaneously broken, at weak coupling, and not
visible in the perturbation theory, but it is a property of the exact theory. it is in-
teresting that so(10, 1) is known to be the largest spacetime symmetry compatible
with supersymmetry.

another way to describe this is that in the m-theory limit the theory lives
in eleven spacetime dimensions: a new dimension has appeared. this is one of the
surprising discoveries of the past few years. how does one discover a new dimension?
it is worthwhile explaining this in some more detail. the d0-brane mass is related
to the characteristic string mass scale ms and the dimensionless string coupling gs,
by

md0 =

.

(4.18)

ms
gs

when gs is small this is heavier than the string scale, but when gs is large it is
lighter. further, the d0-brane is a bps state and so this result is exact.
if one
considers now a state with n d0-branes, the mass is bounded below by n md0, an
in fact this bound is saturated: there is a bps bound state with

mn d0 = n

ms
gs

(4.19)

exactly. now observe that for gs large, all of these masses become small. what can
the physics be? in fact, this is the spectrum associated with passing a threshold
where a new spacetime dimension becomes visible. the radius of this dimension is

r =

gs
ms

.

(4.20)

that is, small gs is small r and large gs is large r.
in particular, perturbation
theory in gs is an expansion around r = 0: this is why this dimension has always
been invisible!

23

4.3 duality symmetries of string theory



in string theory and two-dimensional conformal field theory duality is an im-
portant tool to show the equivalence of dierent geometries and/or topologies and
in determining some of the genuinely stringy implications on the structure of the
low energy quantum field theory limit. duality symmetry was rst described
on the context of toroidal compactications [80]. for the simplest case of a single
compactied dimension of radius r, the entire physics of the interacting theory is
left unchanged under the replacement r  
/r provided one also transforms the
dilaton eld     log (r/) [81]. this simple case can be generalized to arbi-
trary toroidal compactications described by constant metric gij and antisymmetric
tensor bij [83]. the generalization of duality to this case becomes (g +b)  (g +b)1
and    1
2 log det(g + b). in fact this transformation is an element of an innite
order discrete symmetry group o(d, d; z) for d-dimensional toroidal compactica-
tions [84, 85]. the symmetry was later extended to the case of non-at conformal
backgrounds in [87]. in buschers construction one starts with a manifold m with
metric gij, i, j = 0, . . . d  1, antisymmetric tensor bij and dilaton eld (xi). one
requires the metric to admit at least one continuous abelian isometry leaving invari-
ant the -model action constructed out of (g, b, ). choosing an adapted coordinate
system (x0, x) = (, x),  = 1, . . . d 1 where the isometry acts by translations of
, the change of g, b,  is given by

g0 = b0/g00,

g00 = 1/g00,
g = g  (g0g0  b0b0)/g00
b0 = g0/g00,
b = b  (g0b0  g0b0)/g00,
 =  

1
2

log g00.

(4.21)

the nal outcome is that for any continuous isometry of the metric which is a
symmetry of the action one obtains the equivalence of two apparently very dierent
non-linear -models. the transformation (4.21) is referred to in the literature as
abelian duality due to the abelian character of the isometry of the original -model.
if n is the maximal number of commuting isometries, one gets a duality group of
the form o(n, n; z) [89]. duality symmetries are useful in determining important
properties of the low-energy eective action, in particular in questions related to
supersymmetry breaking and to the lifting of at directions from the potential
[86]. although the transformation (4.21) was originally obtained using a method
apparently not compatible with general covariance, it is not dicult to modify the
construction to eliminate this drawback [90]. a particularly useful interpretation
of (4.21) is in terms of the gauging of the isometry symmetry [88]. the duality
transformation proceeds in two steps: i) first one gauges the isometry group, thus
introducing some auxiliary gauge eld variables a. the gauge eld is required to
be at and this is implemented by adding a lagrange multiplier term of the form
da. it is naively clear that if we rst perform the integral ovel , this provides a

24

-function da on the measure, implying that a = dx is a pure gauge (we consider a
spherical world sheet for simplicity). fixing x = 0 the original model is recovered.
ii) the second step consists of integrating rst the gauge eld a. since there is no
gauge kinetic term, the integration is gaussian, yielding a lagrangian depending on
the original variables and the auxiliary variable . after xing the gauge the dual
action follows. in [88] it was further shown that if one starts with a conformal eld
theory (cft), conformal invariance is preserved by abelian duality. the proof was
based on an analogy between the duality transformation and the gko construction
[103].

of more recent history is the notion of non-abelian duality [93, 94, 95, 96],
which has no analogue in statistical mechanics. the basic idea of [93], inspired in
the treatment of abelian duality presented in [88], is to consider a conformal eld
theory with a non-abelian symmetry group g. in this case the gauge eld variables
a and the lagrange multipliers live in the lie algebra associated to g. the duality
transformation proceeds in the two steps described above.

in the abelian case it is also possible to work out the mapping between some
operators in the original and dual theories, as well as the global topology of the
dual manifold [90]. thus for g abelian we have a rather thorough understanding
of the detailed local and global properties of duality. in the non-abelian case global
information can only be extracted for -models with chiral currents [96]. for these
models it is possible to perform a non-local change of variables in the lagrange
multiplier term such that the lagrangian keeps its local expression and from it the
global properties of the dual model can be worked out. the same construction does
not work for general -models without chiral isometries.

5 the canonical approach

some suggestions have been made in the literature pointing (at least in the simplied
situation where all backgrounds are constant or dependent only on time) towards
an understanding of duality as particular instances of canonical transformations
[85, 115].

in this section we are going to show that this idea works well when the back-
ground admits an abelian isometry [116], laying duality on a simpler setting than
before, namely as a (privileged) subgroup of the whole group of (non-anomalous,
that is implementable in quantum field theory [117]) canonical transformations
on the phase space of the theory.

we will proof that buschers transformation formulae can be derived by perform-
ing a given canonical transformation on the hamiltonian of the initial theory. we
believe that this is a minimal approach in the sense that no extraneous structure
has to be introduced, and all standard results in the abelian case (and more) are
easily recovered using it. in particular it is possible to perform the duality transfor-
mation in arbitrary coordinates not only in the original manifold (which was also
possible in rocek and verlindes formulation) but also in the dual one. the mul-

25

tivaluedness and periods of the dual variables can be easily worked out from the
implementation of the canonical transformation in the path integral. the gener-
alization to arbitrary genus riemann surfaces is in this approach straightforward.
the behavior of currents not commuting with those used to implement duality can
also be claried. in the case of wzw models it becomes rather simple to prove that
the full duality group is given by aut(g)l  aut(g)r, where l, r refer to the left-
and right-currents on the model with group g, and aut(g) are the automorphisms
of g, both inner and outer. due to the chiral conservation of the currents in this
case, the canonical transformation leads to a local expression for the dual currents.
in the case where the currents are not chirally conserved, then those currents asso-
ciated to symmetries not commuting with the one used to perform duality become
generically non-local in the dual theory and this is why they are not manifest in
the dual lagrangian. all the generators of the full duality group o(d, d; z) can be
described in terms of canonical transformations. this gives the impression that the
duality group should be understood in terms of global symplectic diemorphisms.
it would be useful to formulate it in the context of some analogue of the group of
disconnected dieomorphisms, but for the time being such a construction is lacking.
concerning non-abelian duality, it seems to fall beyond the scope of the hamil-
tonian point of view. there is one example [118] in which the non-abelian dual
has been constructed out of a canonical transformation but it is still early to say
whether the general case can be treated similarly.

5.1 the abelian case

we start with a bosonic sigma model written in arbitrary coordinates on a manifold
m with lagrangian

l =

(gab + bab)()+ab

(5.1)

1
2

where x = (  )/2, a, b = 1, . . . , d = dimm . the corresponding hamiltonian is

h =

1
2

(gab(pa  bac

 c)(pb  bbd

 d) + gab

 a

 b)

(5.2)

 a  da/d. we assume moreover that there is a killing vector eld ka,
where 
lkgab = 0 and ikh = dv for some one-form v, where (ikh)ab  kchcab and
h = db locally. this guarantees the existence of a particular system of coordinates,
adapted coordinates, which we denote by xi  (, x), such that ~k = /. we
denote the jacobian matrix by ei
this denes a point transformation in the original lagrangian (5.1) which acts
on the hamiltonian as a canonical transformation with generating function  =
xi()pi, and yields:

a  xi/a.

api

pa = ei
xi = xi().

26

(5.3)

once in adapted coordinates we can write the sigma model lagrangian as

l =

1
2

g( 2  

 2) + (  + 



)j + (   



)j+ + v

where

g = g00 = k2
1
2

(g0 + b0)x

j =

v =

1
2

(g + b)+xx

j+ =

1
2

(g0  b0)+x.

(5.4)

(5.5)

in nding the dual with a canonical transformation we can use the routh function
with respect to , i.e. we only apply the legendre transformation to (, ). the
canonical momentum is given by

and the hamiltonian

p = g  + (j+ + j)

g1p2

1
2

h = p   l =
1
+
2

g1(j+ + j)2 + 

  g1(j+ + j)p +
(j+  j)  v.



g

 2 +

1
2

the hamilton equations are:

 =

h
p
p = 

= g1(p  j+  j)
h
+ j+  j)
= (g






and the current components:

j+ =
j =

1
2
1
2

g+ + j+ =

g + j =

p +

1
2
1
p 
2

1
2
1
2



g

+

g





j+  j
j+  j

2

.

2

(5.6)

(5.7)

(5.8)

(5.9)

the generator of the canonical transformation we choose is:

it can easily be seing that the current conservation j+ + +j = 0 is equivalent
to the second hamilton equation p = h/.
2is 1

2zd,d=s 1

d  d =

    

(5.10)

f =

)d

(

1

1



that is,

p =

f

p = 



= 
f
= 
 

27



.

(5.11)

this generating functional does not receive any quantum corrections (as explained
in [117]) since it is linear in  and .
if  was not an adapted coordinate to a
continuous isometry, the canonical transformation would generically lead to a non-
local form of the dual hamiltonian. since the lagrangian and hamiltonian in our
case only depend on the time- and space-derivatives of , there are no problems
with non-locality. the transformation (5.11) in (5.7) gives:

 2 + g1(j+ + j)



+

h =

g1 

1
2
gp2
  (j+  j)p +

1
2

g1(j+ + j)2  v.

1
2

since:

 =

 h
p

= gp  (j+  j),

we can perform the inverse legendre transform:

2

1
2


l =
g1(
g1j(  + 

  
 
 2) + g1j+(
) + v  2g1j+j.





)

(5.12)

(5.13)

(5.14)

from this expression we can read the dual metric and torsion and check that they
are given by buschers formulae6:

g00 = 1/g00,

b0 = 

g0
g00

,

g = g 

g0g0  b0b0

g00

g0 = b0/g00,
b = b 

g0b0  g0b0

g00

(5.15)

=
2 log g00 [87] [81]. we have not been able to nd any argument justifying this

for the dual theory to be conformal invariant the dilaton must transform as 
  1
transformation within the canonical transformations approach.

the dual manifold m is automatically expressed in coordinates adapted to the
~k = / . we can now perform another point transformation,
dual killing vector
with the same jacobian as (5.3) to express the dual manifold in coordinates which
are as close as possible to the original ones.



the transformations we perform are then: first a point transformation a 
{, x}, to go to adapted coordinates in the original manifold. then a canonical
transformation {, x}  {, x}, which is the true duality transformation. and
nally another point transformation {, x}  a, with the same jacobian as the
rst point transformation, to express the dual manifold in general coordinates.

6the minus signs in g0 and b0 can be absorbed in a redenition   .

28

it turns out that the composition of these three transformations can be expressed
a and the corresponding

in geometrical terms using only the killing vector ka, a  e0
dual quantities7.

it is then quite easy to check that the total canonical transformation to be made

in (5.1) is just

 a

kapa  a 
a

 a  ka pa,

whose generating function is8

f =

1

2zd

   =

1

2zd

ad a  bdb.

(5.16)

(5.17)

one then easily performs the transformations in such a way that the dual metric
and torsion can be expressed in geometrical terms as

gab = gab +

and

where

1
k2 (kakb  (va  a)(vb  b))

gab = gab 
1

(1 + k.v)2 [(k2 + (v  )2)kakb  2(1 + k.v)(k(a(v  )b)]

bab = bab 

2
k2 k[a(v  )b],

k(a(v  )b) =
k[a(v  )b] =

1
(ka(vb  b) + kb(va  a))
2
1
(ka(vb  b)  kb(va  a)).
2

(5.18)

(5.19)

(5.20)

(5.21)

these formulae are the covariant generalization of (5.15). the canonical approach
has been very useful in order to obtain the dual manifold in an arbitrary coordinate
system. with the usual approaches it is expressed in adapted coordinates to the dual
isometry. this happens because the dual variables appear as lagrange multipliers
and after an integration by parts only the derivatives of them emerge, being then
adapted coordinates automatically.

some other useful information can be extracted easier in the approach of the

canonical transformation.

7note that we must raise and lower indices with the dual metric, i.e. eia = gij ej

implies a = a, but a = ka(k2 + v2) + ~e a  v (where ~e a  ea
have moreover  2 = k2 + v2 + gv and k2 = 1/k2.

b, which
), ka = ka but ka = (a  (~ea  v))/k2. we
8the one-form   ada is dual to the killing vector ~k: (~k) = 1, (~e) = 0, but it is of course
dierent from k  ka/k2 da (the former is an exact form, whereas the latter does not even in general
satisfy frobenius condition k  dk = 0).

a, eia = gabei

29

from the generating functional (5.10) we can learn about the multivaluedness
and periods of the dual variables [90]. since  is periodic and in the path integral
the canonical transformation is implemented by [117]:

k[()] = n (k)z d()eif [,()]k[()]

(5.22)

where n (k) is a normalization factor, k( + a) = k() implies for : ( + 2) 
() = 4/a, which means that  must live in the dual lattice of . note that (5.22)
suces to construct the dual hamiltonian.
it is a simple exercise to check that
acting with (5.12) on the left-hand side of (5.22) and pushing the dual hamiltonian
through the integral we obtain the original hamiltonian acting on k[()]:

hk[()] = n (k)z d()eif [,()]hk[()]

(5.23)

this makes the duality transformation very simple conceptually, and it also im-
plies how it can be applied to arbitrary genus riemann surfaces, because the state
k[()] could be the state obtained by integrating the original theory on an arbi-
trary riemann surface with boundary. it is also clear that the arguments generalize
straightforwardly when we have several commuting isometries.

one can easily see that under the canonical transformation the hamilton equa-

tions are interchanged:



= (g

p = 
h
 =
p



+ j+  j)

h

= g1(p  j+  j)  p = (g1(

  = gp  j+ + j



+ j+ + j))



,

(5.24)

and that the canonical transformed currents conservation law is in this case equiv-
alent to the rst hamilton equation.

in the chiral case j = 0 (i.e. g0i = b0i) and g is a constant, therefore we can

normalize  to set g = 1 and :

the hamiltonian is

l =

1
2

( 2  

 2) + (   



)j+ + v.

h =

1
2

p2
  j+p +

1
2

(j+ + 



)2  v.

(5.25)

(5.26)

the action is invariant under  = (x+), a u (1)l kac-moody symmetry. the u (1)
kac-moody algebra has the automorphism j+  j+. this is precisely the eect
of the canonical transformation. the equation of motion or current conservation is:

j+ = + + j+ = p + 


 p = j+.



(+ + j+) = 0.

(5.27)



transforms under the canonical transformation in j c.t.

+ =

30

one can also follow the transformation to the dual model of other continuous
symmetries. the simplest case is as usual the wzw-model which is the basic model
with chiral currents. consider for simplicity the level-k su (2)-wzw model with
action

k

12 z t r(g1dg)3.

(5.28)

(5.29)

(5.30)

s[g] = k

2 z d2t r(g1+gg1g) +

the left- and right-chiral currents are

j+ =

k
2

+gg1

j = 

k
2

g1g.

parametrizing g in terms of euler angles

g = ei3/2ei2/2ei3/2,

j+ are given by:

j 1
+ =
j 2
+ =
j 3
+ =

k
2
k
2
k
2

( cos  sin + + sin +)
(sin  sin + + cos +)

(+ + cos +),

(5.31)

+,j 3

+  j 3

 since j 3

if we perform duality with respect to  
and similarly for the right currents.
 + constant, j 3
  j 3
+ is the current component adapted
to the isometry. for these currents it is easy to nd the action of the canonical
transformation because only the derivatives of  appear. for j 1,2
+ there is an
explicit dependence on  and it seems that the transform of these currents is very
non-local. however due to its chiral nature, one can show that there are similar
chirally conserved currents in the dual model. to do this we rst combine the
currents in terms of root generators:

j (+)
+ = j 1
j ()
+ = j 1

+ + ij 2
+  ij 2

+ = ei(i+  sin +) = eij(+)
+
+ = ei(i+ + sin +) = eij()
+ .

from chiral current conservation j ()

+ = 0 we obtain

j()

+ = ij()
+ .

(5.32)

(5.33)

in these equations only ,  appear, and after the canonical transformation we can
reconstruct the dual non-abelian currents (in the previous equations the canonical
transformation amounts to the replacement   ) which take the same form as the
original ones except that with respect to the transformed j 3
+ the roles of positive and
negative roots get exchanged. one also veries that j a
 are unaected. this implies
therefore that the eect of duality with respect to shifts of  is an automorphism

31

of the current algebra amounting to performing a weyl transformation on the left
currents only while the right ones remain unmodied. this result although known
[92] is much easier to derive in the hamiltonian formalism than in the lagrangian
formalism where one must introduce external sources which carry some ambiguities.
the construction for su (2) can be straightforwardly extended to other groups. this
implies that for wzw-models the full duality group is aut(g)l  aut(g)r, where
aut(g) is the group of automorphisms of the group g, including weyl transforma-
tions and outer automorphisms. for instance if we take su (n ), the transformation
j+  j t
+ , i.e. charge conjugation, follows from a canonical transformation of the
type discussed. it suces to take as generating functions for the canonical trans-
formation the sum of the generating functions for each generator in the cartan
subalgebra. it is important to remark that the chiral conservation of the currents
is crucial to guarantee the locality of the dual non-abelian currents.
if the con-
served current with respect to which we dualize is not chirally conserved locality is
not obtained. the simplest example to verify this is the principal chiral model for
su (2), which although is not a cft serves for illustrative purposes. the equations
of motion for this model imply the conservation laws:

j a

+ + +j a

 = 0

where

j =

k
2

gg1.

(5.34)

(5.35)

if we perform duality with respect to the invariance under  translations we know
how j 3
 transform, since they are the currents associated to the isometry. with the
canonical transformation is possible to see as well which are the other dual conserved
currents. since the dual model is only u (1)-invariant one expects the rest of the
currents to become non-local [118]. in terms of the root generators introduced in
(5.32) the conservation laws

are expressed:

j ()

+ + +j ()

 = 0

j()

+ + +j()

  i(j()

+ + +j()

 ) = 0.

(5.36)

(5.37)

performing the canonical transformation we obtain that the dual conserved currents
are given by:

 = exp (iz d(  + cos 
j (+)
 =  exp (iz d(  + cos 
j ()



))(i  sin )



))(i + sin )

(5.38)

which cannot be expressed in a local form.

32

6 an alternative to string theory?

in quantum mechanics we have the usual position-momentum uncertainty relation

xp  2 .

(6.39)

quantum gravity seems to imply a breakdown in spacetime at the planck length,
so perhaps there is also a position-position uncertainty relation

xx  l2
p .

(6.40)

this has been discussed many times, and there are many ways that one might try
to implement it. we will do this as follows. suppose that we have n nonrelativistic
particles. in normal quantum mechanics the state would be dened by n position
vectors

xi ,

i = 1, . . . , n .

(6.41)

let us instead make these into hermitean matrices in the particle-number index

xij ,

i, j = 1, . . . , n .

(6.42)

it is not obvious what this means, but we will see that it leads to an interesting
result. for the hamiltonian we take

h =

1
2m

d1xm=1

nxi,j=1

(pm

ij )2 + m 5

d1xm,n=1

nxi,j=1

|[x m, x n]ij|2 .

(6.43)

the rst term is just an ordinary nonrelativistic kinetic term, except that we now
have n 2 coordinate vectors rather than n so there is a momentum for each, and
we sum the squares of all of them. the indices m and n run over the d  1 spatial
directions, and m and m  are large masses, of order the planck scale. the potential
term is chosen as follows. we want to recover ordinary quantum mechanics at low
energy. the potential is the sums of the squares of all of the components of all
of the commutators of the matrices xij, with a large coecient.
it is therefore
large unless all of these matrices commute. in states with energies below the planck
scale, the matrices will then commute to good approximation, so we do not see the
new uncertainty (6.40) and we recover the usual quantum mechanics. in particular,
we can nd a basis which diagonalizes all the commuting x m
ij . thus the eective
coordinates are just the n diagonal elements x m
ii of each matrix in this basis, which
is the right count for n particles in ordinary quantum mechanics: the x m
ii behave
like ordinary coordinates.

the hamiltonian (6.43) has interesting connections with other parts of physics.
first, the commutator-squared term has the exact same structure as the four-gluon
interaction in yangmills theory. this is no accident, as we will see later on. second,
there is a close connection to supersymmetry. in supersymmetric quantum mechan-
ics, one has operators satisfying the algebra (3.5,3.6). again in general there are

33

several supersymmetry charges, and the number n of these qs is signicant. for
small values of n , like 1, 2 or 4, there are many hamiltonians with the symme-
try. as n increases the symmetry becomes more constraining, and n = 16 is the
maximum number. for n = 16 there is only one invariant hamiltonian, and it is
none other than our model (6.43). to be precise, supersymmetry requires that the
particles have spin, that the hamiltonian also has a spin-dependent piece, and that
the spacetime dimension d be 10. in fact, supersymmetry is necessary for this idea
to work. the vanishing of the potential for commuting congurations was needed,
but we only considered the classical potential, not the quantum corrections. the
latter vanish only if the theory is supersymmetric.

so this model has interesting connections, but let us return to the idea that we
want a theory of gravity. the interactions among low energy particles come about
as follows. we have argued that the potential forces the xij to be diagonal: the
o-diagonal pieces are very massive. still, virtual o-diagonal excitations induce
interactions among the low-energy states. in fact, the leading eect, from one loop
of the massive states, produces precisely the (super)gravity interaction among the
low energy particles.

so this simple idea seems to be working quite well, but we said that we were
going to fail in our attempt to nd an alternative to string theory. in fact we have
failed because this is not an alternative: it is string theory. it is actually one piece
of string theory, namely the hamiltonian describing the low energy dynamics of n
d0-branes.

we have discussed this model because the model is important for a number of
reasons. in fact, it is conjectured that it is not just a piece of string theory, but is
actually a complete description. the idea is that if we view any state in string theory
from a very highly boosted frame, it will be described by the hamiltonian (6.43) with
n large. particle physicists are familiar with the idea that systems look dierent
as one boosts them: the parton distributions evolve. the idea here is that the d0-
branes are the partons for string theory; in eect the string is a necklace of partons.
this is the matrix theory idea of banks, fischler, shenker, and susskind (based on
earlier ideas of thorn), and at this point it seems very likely to be correct or at
least a step in the correct direction.

to put this in context, let us return to the point made earlier that the perturba-
tion theory does not dene the theory for nite g. in fact, every indication is that
the string description is useful only near the ve cusps of the gure in which the
string coupling becomes weak. in the center of the parameter space, not only do we
not know the hamiltonian but we do not know what degrees of freedom are sup-
posed to appear in it. it is likely that they are not the one-dimensional objects that
one usually thinks of in string theory; is it more likely that they are the coordinate
matrices of the d-branes.

34

7 application of string theory to gauge the-
ories

we shall now discuss application of string theory to gauge theories. since we have
been discussing maldacena conjecture, we shall rst discuss its application, and then
turn to the (historically older) subject of gauge theories from branes.

7.1 maldacena conjecture

since the maldacena conjecture relates string theory to gauge theory, we can use
it to study gauge theories using known results in string theory. this may sound
strange, as we understand gauge theories much better than string theory; however
as we shall see, in some region in the parameter space the string theory side is
better understood, and hence can be useful in deriving gauge theory results. for
this let us look at the relation (??) between the string theory and the gauge theory
parameters. if we consider the t hooft large n limit [48] on the gauge theory side:

gy m  0,

n  ,

  g2

y m n = xed ,

(7.44)

then it corresponds to the following limit in string theory:

gst  0,

r


= (4)1/4 = xed .

(7.45)

the smallness of gst implies that in this limit we can use classical string theory. let
us now further take the limit when the t hooft coupling  is large. in this case
r/ is large and hence we can approximate string theory by its supergravity limit
for computation of greens functions with external momenta small compared to the
string scale. since these greens functions are related to the correlation functions
of gauge invariant operators in the gauge theory, we conclude that in the t hooft
large n limit with large t hooft coupling , the gauge theory correlation functions
can be computed by studying classical type iib supergravity theory on s5  ads5!
note that ordinary large n perturbation theory in gauge theory is useless in this
limit, as it involves a series expansion in . thus this approach can give genuinely
new results in gauge theory.

here i shall discuss one example  the computation of (non-dynamical) quark
anti-quark potential in the n = 4 supersymmetric gauge theory.[49, 50] it turns
out that using the maldacena conjecture this problem can be mapped to the geo-
metric problem of nding the minimal area surface bounded by a xed curve at the
boundary of ads5 as illustrated in fig.10. this problem is easily solved, and the
nal answer for the potential is:

v (r) = 

42(2g2
(( 1

y m n )
4 ))4r

1

2

,

(7.46)

35

ads 5

c

s

figure 10: computation of wilson line  or equivalently, the quark anti-quark potential
 using maldacena conjecture. here c is a closed curve in the four dimensional space-
time, regarded as the boundary of ads5, and s is a surface of minimal area in the interior
of ads5 subject to the condition that c is its boundary. the wilson line associated with
the curve c in the n = 4 supersymmetric gauge theory is given by the area of the surface
s in ads5.

where r is the separation between the quark and the anti-quark. although the
r dependence of the potential follows from the conformal invariance of the gauge
theory, the dependence on the coupling constant gy m is novel since it is linear
instead of quadratic as expected from perturbation theory.

one can also use the maldacena conjecture to study n = 4 supersymmetric
gauge theories at nite temperature t .[43, 51] in this case we need to make the
time direction

 euclidean, and
 periodic with period 2t 1.

this theory turns out to be dual to type iib string theory on s5  k, where k is
a new ve dimensional manifold representing the euclidean black hole solution in
ads5. the boundary of this new manifold k is r3  s1, which is to be identied
with the three space and the periodic time direction of the gauge theory. as in
the case of the zero temperature theory, in the t hooft large n limit, with large t
hooft coupling  for the gauge theory, the relevant type iib string theory can be
approximated by classical type iib supergravity theory on s5 k. this description
can be used to study various properties of the nite temperature gauge theory in
this limit. thus for example, the problem of nding the mass spectrum in the nite

36

temperature gauge theory can be mapped to the problem of nding eigenvalues of
certain dierential operators on k. as an example we quote the relevant dierential
equation for determining the mass mn of the nth scalar glueball (from the point
of view of three dimensional gauge theory obtained in the high temperature limit
of the four dimensional gauge theory)

2t 2 1


d

dh(5  )

dfn

di = m2

nfn ,

(7.47)

where , denoting the radial coordinate in k, lies in the range 1   < . fn
satises the boundary conditions

= 0

dfn
d
fn  1

at  = 1

as    .

(7.48)

this converts a non-perturbative quantum eld theory problem to a classical eigen-
value problem. this eigenvalue problem can be solved by numerical methods.[52]

so far we have talked about supersymmetric gauge theories. it is natural to ask
if these techniques can be used for getting information about pure su (n ) gauge
theories. it was shown by witten [51] that pure su (n ) gauge theory is dual to
m -theory on s4  k7, where k7 is a particular seven dimensional manifold related
to the euclidean black hole solution in the seven dimentional anti-de sitter space.
the temperature of this black hole, which is a parameter labelling the manifold k7,
corresponds to the ultraviolet cut-o in the su (n ) gauge theory. in the limit

n  ,

gy m  0,

g2
y m n = xed but large ,

(7.49)

m -theory can be approximated by classical eleven dimensional supergravity the-
ory. thus various properties of gauge theory in this limit can be studied using the
classical supergravity theory on s4  k7. in particular one can prove connement
and existence of a mass gap in the gauge theory in this limit. however, since pure
su (n ) gauge theory is asymptotically free, in order to take the continuum limit,
one needs to take the ultraviolet cut-o to innity, and the t hooft coupling g2
y m n
to zero keeping a certain combination xed. unfortunately in this limit the classical
supergravity is no longer a good approximation to m -theory. thus application of
these ideas to the study of large n gauge theory in the continuum limit remains an
open problem.

7.2 gauge theories from branes

let me now discuss another approach that has been useful in deriving gauge theory
results from string theory.[53, 54, 55, 56] this involves the study of branes. histor-
ically this preceeds the maldacena conjecture, and in fact maldacena arrived at his
conjecture by examining a special conguration of branes.

37

*

a)

b)

c) 

figure 11: a) a d0-brane with two attached strings. b) a d1-brane (bold) with attached
string. c) a d2-brane with attached string.

branes are static classical solutions in string theory which are known to exist
in many string theories.
in string theory strings usually move freely. however,
some string theories also predict localized objects, sort of like defects in a crystal,
where strings can break open and their endpoints get stuck. these are known as d-
branes, short for dirichlet (a kind of boundary condition  see jackson) membranes.
depicted in g.??, they can be points (d0-branes), curves (d1-branes), sheets (d2-
branes), or higher-dimensional objects. they are dynamical objects  they can
move, and bend  and their properties, at weak coupling, can be determined with
the same machinery used elsewhere in string theory.

even before string duality it was found that one could make d-branes starting
with just ordinary strings (for string theorists, i am talking about t -duality). now
we know that they are needed to ll out the duality multiplets. they have many

38

interesting properties. one is that they are smaller than strings; one cannot really
see this pictorially, because it includes the quantum uctuations, but it follows from
calculations of the relevant form factors. since we are used to thinking that smaller
means more fundamental, this is intriguing, and we will return to it.

a p-brane denotes a static conguration which extends along p spatial direc-
tion (the tangential directions) and is localized in all other spatial directions (the
transverse directions). thus the solution is invariant under translation along the p
directions tangential to the brane, as well as the time direction, and approaches the
vacuum conguration as we go away from the brane in any one of the transverse
direction. thus in this language,

1-brane

2-brane

0-brane





string

membrane

particle

etc. typically the quantum dynamics of a conguration of p-branes is described by
a (p + 1) dimensional gauge eld theory,[57, 58] and the coupling constant of this
quantum eld theory is related to the coupling constant of the string theory of which
the brane conguration is a solution. in this case duality symmetries relating strong
and weak coupling limits of the original string theory can be used to derive duality
relations involving the quantum eld theories describing the dynamics of the brane.
this approach has been used to derive many dierent results in supersymmetric
gauge theories. some example are:

 derivation of montonen-olive duality [59] in n = 4 supersymmetric gauge

theories.[60]

 derivation of seiberg-witten like results [61] in n = 2 supersymmetric gauge

theories.[53, 54, 56]

 derivation of a special kind of symmetry, known as the mirror symmetry,[62]

in (2+1) dimensional gauge theories.[55]

 derivation of seiberg dualities [63] involving n = 1 supersymmetric gauge

theories in (3+1) dimensions.[64, 65]

existence of branes in string theory has also given rise to the possibility that the
standard model gauge elds arise from branes rather than in the bulk of space-time.
this corresponds to novel compactications in which gravity lives in the bulk of the
ten dimensional space-time, but the other observed elds (quarks, leptons, gauge
particles etc.) live on a brane of lower dimension[69]. in particular we might imagine
a scenario in which the standard model elds live on a three brane, the directions
transverse to the three brane being compact, and the directions tangential to the
three brane describing the usual three dimensional space. there may also be other
branes, separated from us in the extra directions, forming shadow worlds ! this
situation has been illustrated in fig.12. since the usual gauge and matter elds
live on the brane, they do not see the extra transverse directions; the only long
range interaction which sees the extra directions is gravity. this allows the extra

39

our brane

bulk

shadow brane

figure 12: possibility of novel compactications involving branes. our brane hosts the
standard model elds, the (9+1) dimensional bulk hosts gravity and its superpartners,
and the shadow brane hosts other elds which communicate to us via gravitational inter-
action. supersymmetry may be broken at a high scale in the shadow brane, and yet have
relatively small eect in our brane due to the weakness of gravitational interactions.

dimensions to be much larger ( 1mm) than in the conventional compactication
scheme, the most stringent bound coming from tests involving the inverse square law
of newtonian gravity.[70] this fact has been used in recent proposals for superstring
model building.[71]

8 summary

it is now time to summarise the main results. we have seen that string theory has
had a reasonable success in providing a consistent quantum theory of gravity. in
particular we have achieved:

 finiteness of perturbation theory,
 partial resolution of the problems associated with quantum theory of black

holes,

 explicit realization of holographic principle for a special class of space-time,

and

 (3+1) dimensional theories with gravity, gauge interactions, chiral fermions

and n = 1 supersymmetry, closely resembling the standard model.

string theory has also provided us with an internally consistent and beautiful theory.
in particular string duality provides us with

 unication of many dierent string theories,
 unication of elementary and composite particles, and
 unication of classical and quantum eects.

progress in string theory has also dramatically improved our understanding of su-
persymmetric quantum eld theories.

40

unfortunately, there are still no concrete new predictions of string theory at low
energies. we shall have to wait and see if the situation improves during the next
few years.

references

[1] m. green, j. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory vol. 1 and 2, cam-

bridge university press (1986);
d. lust and s. theisen, lectures on string theory, springer (1989);
j. polchinski, hep-th/9411028.

[2] a. sen, [hep-th/9802051].

[3] e. witten, nucl. phys. b443 (1995) 85 [hep-th/9503124].

[4] j. polchinski and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 525 [hep-th/9510169].

[5] c. hull and p. townsend, nucl. phys. b451 (1995) 525 [hep-th/9505073].

[6] a. font, l. ibanez, d. lust and f. quevedo, phys. lett. b249 (1990) 35;

s. rey, phys. rev. d43 (1991) 526.

[7] a. sen, int. j. mod. phys. a9 (1994) 3707 [hep-th/9402002] and references

therein.

[8] a. dabholkar and j. harvey, [hep-th/9809122].

[9] p. townsend, phys. lett. 350b (1995) 184 [hep-th/9501068].

[10] j. schwarz, phys. lett. b367 (1996) 97 [hep-th/9510086].

[11] p. aspinwall, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 46 (1996) 30 [hep-th/9508154].

[12] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506 [hep-th/9510209]; nucl.

phys. b475 (1996) 94 [hep-th/9603142].

[13] a. sen phys. lett. b329 (1994) 217 [hep-th/9402032].

[14] c. vafa and e. witten, nucl. phys. b431 (1994) 3 [hep-th/9408074].

[15] s. kachru and c. vafa, nucl.phys. b450 (1995) 69 [hep-th/9605105];

v. kaplunovsky, j. louis and s. theisen, phys. lett. b357 (1995) 71 [hep-
th/9506110].

[16] s. hawking, nature 248 (1974) 30; comm. math. phys. 43 (1975) 199.

[17] j. bekenstein, lett. nuov. cim. 4 (1972) 737; phys. rev. d7 (1973) 2333;

phys. rev. d9 (1974) 3192;
g. gibbons and s. hawking, phys. rev. d15 (1977) 2752..

[18] l. susskind, [hep-th/9309145];

l. susskind and j. uglam, phys. rev. d50 (1994) 2700 [hep-th/9401070];
j. russo and l. susskind, nucl. phys. b437 (1995) 611 [hep-th/9405117].

41

[19] a. sen, mod. phys. lett. a10 (1995) 2081 [hep-th/9504147];

a. peet, nucl. phys. b456 (1995) 732 [hep-th/9506200].

[20] a. strominger and c. vafa, phys. lett. b379 (1996) 99 [hep-th/9601029].

[21] c. callan and j. maldacena, nucl. phys. b472 (1996) 591 [hep-th/9602043].

[22] a. dhar, g. mandal and s. wadia, phys. lett. b388 (1996) 51 [hep-

th/9605234].

[23] s. das and s. mathur, phys. lett. b375 (1996) 103 [hep-th/9601152].

[24] j. maldacena and a. strominger, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 861 [hep-th/9609026].

[25] m. green and m. gutperle, [hep-th/9701093];

m. green and p. vanhove, phys. lett. b408 (1997) 122 [hep-th/9704145];
m. green, m. gutperle and p. vanhove, phys. lett. b409 (1997) 177 [hep-
th/9706175];
m. green, m.gutperle and h. kwon, phys. lett. b421 (1998) 149 [hep-
th/9710151];
m. green and m. gutperle, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 046007 [hep-th/9804123];
m. green and s. sethi, [hep-th/9808061].

[26] n. berkovits and c. vafa, [hep-th/9803145].

[27] e. kiritsis and b. pioline, nucl. phys. b508 (1997) 509 [hep-th/9707018];

phys. lett. b418 (1998) 61 [hep-th/9710078];
b. pioline, phys. lett. b431 (1998) 73 [hep-th/9804023];
j. russo and a. tseytlin, nucl.phys. b508 (1997) 245 [hep-th/9707134];
j. russo, phys. lett. b417 (1998) 253 [hep-th/9707241]; [hep-th/9802090];
a. kehagias and h. partouche, phys. lett. b422 (1998) 109 [hep-th/9710023].

[28] t. banks, w. fischler, s. shenker and l. susskind, phys. rev. d55 (1997)

5112 [hep-th/9610043].

[29] w. taylor, hep-th/9801182.

[30] l. susskind, [hep-th/9704080].

[31] a. sen, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 51 [hep-th/9709220].

[32] n. seiberg, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 3577 [hep-th/9710009].

[33] k. becker and m. becker, nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 48 [hep-th/9705091].

[34] k. becker, m. becker, j. polchinski and a. tseytlin, phys. rev. d56 (1997)

3174 [hep-th/9706072].

[35] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h.verlinde, nucl. phys. b500 (1997) 43 [hep-

th/9703030].

[36] y. okawa and t. yoneya, [hep-th/9806108];

w. taylor and m. van raamsdonk, [hep-th/9806066];
m. fabbrichesi, g. ferretti and r. iengo, jhep06(1998)2 [hep-th/9806012];
[hep-th/9806166];

42

j. mccarthy, l. susskind and a. wilkins, [hep-th/9806136];
u. danielsson, m. kruczenski and p. stjernberg, [hep-th/9807071];
r. echols and j. grey, [hep-th/9806109].

[37] m. douglas, h. ooguri and s. shenker, phys. lett. b402 (1997) 36 [hep-

th/9702203];
m. douglas and h. ooguri, [hep-th/9710178].

[38] d. kabat and w. taylor, phys. lett. b426 (1998) 297 [hep-th/9712185].

[39] j. david, a. dhar and g. mandal, [hep-th/9707132].

[40] m. dine, r. echols and j. grey, [hep-th/9810021].

[41] j. maldacena, [hep-th/9711200].

[42] l. brink, j. schwarz and j.scherk, nucl. phys. b121 (1977) 77.

[43] e. witten, [hep-th/9802150].

[44] s. gubser, a. polyakov and i. klebanov, [hep-th/9802109].

[45] g. t hooft, [gr-qc/9310026].

[46] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377.

[47] l. susskind and e. witten, [hep-th/9805114].

[48] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b72 (1974) 461.

[49] j. maldacena, [hep-th/9803002].

[50] s. rey and j. yee, [hep-th/9803001].

[51] e. witten, [hep-th/9803131].

[52] c. csaki, h. ooguri, y. oz and j. terning, [hep-th/9806021];

r. de mello koch, a. jevicki, m. mihailescu and j. nunes, [hep-th/9806125];
m. zyskin, [hep-th/9806128].

[53] a. sen, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 562 [hep-th/9605150].

[54] t. banks, m. douglas and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b387 (1996) 278 [hep-

th/9605199].

[55] a. hanany and e. witten, nucl. phys. b492 (1997) 152 [hep-th/9611230].

[56] e. witten, nucl. phys. b500 (1997) 3 [hep-th/9703166].

[57] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724 [hep-th/9510017].

[58] e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 335 [hep-th/9510135].

[59] c. montonen and d. olive, phys. lett. b72 (1977) 117;

h. osborn, phys. lett. b83 (1979) 321.

[60] p. townsend, phys. lett. b373 (1996) 68 [hep-th/9512062];

m. green and m. gutperle, phys. lett. b377 (1996) 28 [hep-th/9602077];
a. tseytlin, [hep-th/9602064].

43

[61] n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 19 [hep-th/9407087]; nucl.

phys. b431 (1994) 484 [hep-th/9408099].

[62] k. intrilligator and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b387 (1996) 513 [hep-th/9607207].

[63] n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b435 (1995) 129 [hep-th/9411149].

[64] s. elizur, a.giveon and d. kutasov, phys. lett. b400 (1997) 269 [hep-

th/9702014];
s. elizur, a. giveon, d. kutasov, e. rabinovici and a. schwimmer, nucl.
phys. b505 (1997) 202 [hep-th/9704104].

[65] e. witten, nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 658 [hep-th/9706109].

[66] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 135 [hep-th/9602070].

[67] e. caceres, v. kaplunovsky, i. mandelberg, nucl. phys. b493 (1997) 73 [hep-

th/9606036].

[68] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263

[hep-ph/9803315];
i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali,
ph/9804398];
k. dienes, e. dudas and t. gherghetta, [hep-ph/9803466], [hep-ph/9806292].

[hep-

[69] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 135 [hep-th/9602070].

[70] e. caceres, v. kaplunovsky, i. mandelberg, nucl. phys. b493 (1997) 73 [hep-

th/9606036].

[71] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263

[hep-ph/9803315];
i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali,
ph/9804398];

[hep-

[72] j. scherk, rev. mod. phys. 47 (1975) 123.
[73] l. alvarez-gaume, g. sierra and c. gomez, topics in conformal field theory,
in knizhnik memorial volume, eds. l. brink, d. friedan and a.m. polyakov,
world scientic, singapore, 1989.

[74] j.m. droue and c. itzykson, quantum field theory and statistical mechan-

ics, cambridge u. press, 1990.

[75] h.a. kramers and g.h. wannier, phys. rev. 60 (1941) 252.

[76] a. giveon, m. porrati and e. rabinovici, phys. rep. 244 (1994) 77.

[77] c. montonen and d. olive, phys. lett. b72 (1977) 117.

[78] a. sen, int. j. mod. phys. a9 (1994) 3707.
[79] k.h. obrien and c.-i tan, phys. rev. d36 (1987) 1184; e. alvarez and m.a.r.
osorio, nucl. phys. b304 (1988) 327; j.j. atick and e. witten, nucl. phys.
b310 (1988) 291.

44

[80] l. brink, m.b. green and j.h. schwarz, nucl. phys. b198 (1982) 474; k.
kikkawa and m. yamasaki, phys. lett. b149 (1984) 357; n. sakai and i. senda,
prog. theor. phys. 75 (1984) 692.

[81] e. alvarez and m.a.r. osorio, phys. rev. d40 (1989) 1150.

[82] k. narain, phys. lett. b169 (1986) 41.

[83] k. narain, h. sarmadi and e. witten, nucl. phys. b279 (1987) 369.

[84] a. shapere and f. wilczek, nucl. phys. b320 (1989) 609.

[85] a. giveon, e. rabinovici and g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b322 (1989) 167.

[86] a. font, l.e. ibanez, d. lust and f. quevedo, phys. lett. b245 (1990) 401; s.
ferrara, n. magnoli, t.r. taylor and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b245 (1990)
409; h.p. nilles and m. olechowski, phys. lett. b248 (1990) 268; p. binetruy
and m.k. gaillard, phys. lett. b253 (1991) 119.

[87] t.h. buscher, phys. lett. b194 (1987) 51, b201 (1988) 466.

[88] m. rocek and e. verlinde, nucl. phys. b373 (1992) 630.

[89] a. giveon and m. rocek, nucl. phys. b380 (1992) 128.
[90] e. alvarez, l. alvarez-gaume, j.l.f. barbon and y. lozano, nucl. phys. b415

(1994) 71.

[91] l. alvarez-gaume, aspects of abelian and non-abelian duality, cern-th-

7036/93, proceedings of trieste93.

[92] e. kiritsis, nucl. phys. b405 (1993) 109.

[93] x. de la ossa and f. quevedo, nucl. phys. b403 (1993) 377.

[94] a. giveon and m. rocek, nucl. phys. b421 (1994) 173.

[95] m. gasperini, r. ricci and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b319 (1993) 438.
[96] e. alvarez, l. alvarez-gaume and y. lozano, nucl. phys. b424 (1994) 155.

[97] c. hull and b. spence, phys. lett. b232 (1989) 204.

[98] c.p. burgess and f. quevedo, phys. lett. b329 (1994) 457.

[99] s. elitzur, a. giveon, e. rabinovici, a. schwimmer and g. veneziano, remarks

on non-abelian duality, cern-th-7414/94, hep-th/9409011.

[100] l. alvarez-gaume and e. witten, nucl. phys. b234 (1984) 269.

[101] a.s. schwarz and a.a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b399 (1993) 691.

[102] p.b. gilkey, j. di. geom. 10 (1975) 601.

[103] p. goddard, a. kent and d. olive, comm. math. phys. 103 (1986) 105.

[104] t. banks, d. nemeschansky and a. sen, nucl. phys. b277 (1986) 67.

[105] m.e. peskin, introduction to string and superstring theory ii, proceedings
of the theoretical advanced study institute in elementary particle physics,
university of california, santa cruz, 1986, vol.1.

45

[106] c. callan, d. friedan, e. martinec and m. perry, nucl. phys. b262 (1985)

593.

[107] g.t. horowitz and d.l. welch, phys. rev. lett. 71 (1993) 328.

[108] e. witten, phys. rev. d44 (1991) 314.

[109] p. ginsparg and f. quevedo, nucl. phys. b385 (1992) 527.

[110] g. moore, nucl. phys. b293 (1987) 139; e. alvarez and m.a.r. osorio, z.

phys. c44 (1989) 89.

[111] v.p. nair, a. shapere, a. strominger and f. wilczek, nucl. phys. b287 (1987)

402.

[112] f. david, nucl. phys. b368 (1992) 671.

[113] r. branderberger and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b316 (1989) 391.
[114] e. alvarez, j. cespedes and e. verdaguer, phys. rev. d45 (1992) 2033; phys.

lett. b289 (1992) 51; phys. lett. b304 (1993) 225.

[115] k.a. meissner and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b267 (1991) 33.
[116] e. alvarez, l. alvarez-gaume and y. lozano, phys. lett. b336 (1994) 183.

[117] g.i. ghandour, phys. rev. d35 (1987) 1289; t. curtright, dierential ge-
ometrical methods in theoretical physics: physics and geometry, ed. l.l.
chau and w. nahm, plenum, new york, (1990) 279; t. curtright and g.
ghandour, using functional methods to compute quantum eects in the liou-
ville theory, ed. t. curtright, l. mezincescu and r. nepomechie, proceedings
of nato advanced workshop, coral gables, fl, jan 1991; and references
therein.

[118] t. curtright and c. zachos, phys. rev. d49 (1994) 5408.

[119] b.e. fridling and a. jevicki, phys. lett. b134 (1984) 70; e.s. fradkin and

a.a. tseytlin, ann. phys. 162 (1985) 31.

[120] e. witten, comm. math. phys. 92 (1984) 455.

[121] a.m. polyakov and p.b. wiegmann, phys. lett. b131 (1983) 121, b141 (1984)

223.

[122] i. bars and k. sfetsos, mod. phys. lett. a7 (1992) 1091.

[123] i. antoniadis and n. obers, nucl. phys. b423 (1994) 639.

[124] e. kiritsis and n. obers, a new duality symmetry in string theory, cern-

th 7310/94, hep-th/9406082.
radkin and a.a. tseytlin, ann. phys. 162 (1985) 31.

[125] e. witten, comm. math. phys. 92 (1984) 455.

[126] a.m. polyakov and p.b. wiegmann, phys. lett. b131 (1983) 121, b141 (1984)

223.

46

[127] i. bars and k. sfetsos, mod. phys. lett. a7 (1992) 1091.

[128] i. antoniadis and n. obers, nucl. phys. b423 (1994) 639.

[129] e. kiritsis and n. obers, a new duality symmetry in string theory, cern-

th 7310/94, hep-th/9406082.

47

