9
9
9
1

 
r
a

 

m
5
2

 
 

1
v
7
1
2
3
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

kek-th-617
march 1999

space-time and matter

in iib matrix model

- gauge symmetry and dieomorphism -

s. iso and h. kawai

high energy accelerator research organization

kek oho 1-1, tsukuba, ibaraki, japan

abstract

we pursue the study of the type iib matrix model as a constructive
denition of superstring. in this paper, we justify the interpretation
of space-time as distribution of eigenvalues of the matrices by showing
that some low energy excitations indeed propagate in it. in particular,
we show that if the distribution consists of small clusters of size n, low
energy theory acquires local su (n) gauge symmetry and a plaquette
action for the associated gauge boson is induced, in addition to a
gauge invariant kinetic term for a massless fermion in the adjoint
representation of the su (n). we nally argue a possible identication
of the dieomorphism symmetry with permutation group acting on the
set of eigenvalues, and show that the general covariance is realized in
the low energy eective theory even though we do not have a manifest
general covariance in the iib matrix model action.

 e-mail : satoshi.iso@kek.jp
e-mail : hikaru.kawai@kek.jp, address after april 1999, kyoto university

1 introduction

several proposals have been given as constructive denitions of superstring
[1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. type iib matrix model [1, 2, 3], a large
n reduced model of maximally supersymmetric yang-mills theory, is one of
those proposals. it is dened by the following action:

s = 

1
g2 t r(

1
4

[a, a][a, a] +

1
2

[a, ]),

(1.1)

where a and  are n  n hermitian matrices,  = 1, , , 10 and  is a
it is formulated in a mani-
ten dimensional majorana-weyl spinor eld.
festly covariant way, which is suitable for studying nonperturbative issues of
superstring theory. also since it is a simple model of an ensemble of zero di-
mensional matrices, it is particularly appropriate for numerical simulations.
in fact we can in principle predict dimensionality of space-time, low energy
gauge group and matter contents by solving this model. in this paper, we
pursue this line of analysis and report some results on possible structures
of the low energy eective theory and the origin of local space-time gauge
symmetry and dieomorphism invariance. these analysis gives justication
of our interpretation of space-time as distributed eigenvalues of the matrices
a.

we rst list several important properties of the iib matrix model. this
model can be regarded as a large n reduced model of ten dimensional n = 1
supersymmetric su(n) yang-mills theory. it was shown [13] that a large
n gauge theory can be equivalently described by its reduce model, namely
a model dened on a single point. in this reduction procedure space-time
translation is represented in the color su(n) space and eigenvalues of ma-
trices are interpreted as momenta of elds. as a constructive denition of
superstring, on the other hand, we will see that we need to interpret eigen-
values of matrices as coordinates of space-time points, which interpretation
is t-dual to the above.

since our iib matrix model is dened on a single point, the commutator

of the supersymmetry

( (1)a = i 1

(1)

= i

2[a, a]1

,

(1.2)

vanishes up to a eld dependent gauge transformation and we can no longer
interpret this supersymmetry as space-time supersymmetry in the original

1

sense. however, after the reduction, we acquire an extra bosonic symmetry

a = c1,

(1.3)

whose transformation is proportional to a unit matrix 1 and an extra super-
symmetry

( (2)a = 0

(2)

= 2

.

combinations of these two supersymmetries (1.2) and (1.4)
q(1) = q(1) + q(2), q(2) = i(q(1)  q(2)),

satisfy commutation relations

[ 1

q(i), 2

q(j)] = 2 12p(ij)

(1.4)

(1.5)

(1.6)

where p is the generator of the translation (1.3) and i, j = 1, 2. therefore,
if we interpret eigenvalues of the matrices a as our new space-time coor-
dinates, the above symmetries can be regarded as ten-dimensional n = 2
space-time supersymmetries. since the maximal space-time supersymmetry
guarantees the existence of graviton, it supports the conjecture that the iib
matrix model is a constructive denition of superstring. this is one of the
major reasons to interpret the eigenvalues of a as coordinates of the newly
emerged space-time.

the second important and confusing property is that the model has the
same action as the low energy eective action of d-instantons [14]. we
should emphasize here dierences between these two theories since we are
led to dierent interpretations of space-time. from the eective theory point
of view, the eigenvalues represent the coordinates of d-instantons in the
ten dimensional bulk space-time which we have assumed a priori from the
beginning of constructing the eective action. on the other hand, from the
constructive point of view we cannot assume such a bulk space-time itself in
which matrices live, since not only elds but also the space-time should be
dynamically generated as a result of dynamics of the matrices and should be
constructed only from the matrices. the most natural interpretation is that
the space-time consists of n discretized points and the eigenvalues represent
their space-time coordinates. one of the main purposes of this paper is to

2

conrm this interpretation of the space-time and make sure that low energy
excitations propagate in this space-time.

final important property is that the type iib matrix model has no free
parameters. the coupling constant g can be always absorbed by eld redef-
initions:

( a  g1/2a
  g3/4.

(1.7)

this is reminiscent of string theory where a shift of the string coupling con-
stant is always absorbed to that of the dilaton vacuum expectation value
(vev). in the previous analysis of the schwinger-dyson equation of iib ma-
trix model [2], we have introduced an infrared cut-o , which gives string
coupling constant gst = 1/n2. but through more careful analysis of dy-
namics of the eigenvalues [3], we have shown that there is no such infrared
divergences associated with innitely separated eigenvalues and the infrared
cuto  we have introduced by hand can be determined dynamically in terms
of n and g. roughly speaking, as we will study in the present paper, the
density of the eigenvalues represents dilaton vev and gives the string coupling
constant. more solid relation requires knowledge of double scaling limit and
we hope to report in a separate paper.

there are several reasons we believe that iib matrix model is a construc-
tive denition of the type iib superstring. first this action can be related
to the green-schwarz action of superstring[15] by using the semiclassical
correspondence in the large n limit:

 i[ , ]  { , },

t r  z d2qg.

(1.8)

in fact eq.(1.1) reduces to the green-schwarz action in the schild gauge[16]:

sschild = z d2[qg(

1
4{x , x }2 

i
2

{x , }) + qg].

(1.9)

through this correspondence, the eigenvalues of a matrices are identied
with the space-time coordinates x() of string world sheet. this is consis-
tent with our interpretation that the eigenvalues of the matrices represent
space-time coordinates.

3

the correspondence can go farther beyond the above identication of
the model with a matrix regularization of the rst quantized superstring.
namely, we can describe arbitrary number of interacting d-strings and anti-
d-strings as blocks of matrices, each of which corresponds to matrix regu-
larization of a string. o-diagonal blocks induce interactions between these
strings [1, 17]. thus it must be clear that the iib matrix model is denitely
not the rst quantized theory of a d-string but the full second quantized
theory.

it has also been shown [2] that wilson loops satisfy the string eld equa-
tions of motion for the type iib superstring in the light cone gauge, which is
the second evidence for the conjecture that the iib matrix model is a con-
structive denition of strings. we consider the following regularized wilson
loop [2, 18]:

w(c) = t r[

exp{i(k

na + n)}].

(1.10)

m

yn=1

here k
n are momentum densities distributed along a loop c, and we have
also introduced fermionic sources n .  in the argument of the exponential
is an infrared cuto associated to space-time extension. in the large n limit,
 should go to 0 so as to satisfy the double scaling limit. there is still some
subtly how to take this double scaling limit in which we get an interacting
string theory.

considered as a matrix regularization of the green schwartz iib super-
string, iib matrix model describes interacting d-strings. on the other hand
in the analysis of the wilson loops iib matrix model describes joining and
splitting interactions of fundamental iib superstrings as wilson loops. from
these considerations, it is plausible to conclude that if we can take the correct
double scaling limit, iib matrix model becomes a constructive denition of
the type iib superstring. furthermore we believe that all string theories are
connected by duality transformations, and once we construct a nonperturba-
tive denition of any one of them, we can describe vacua of any other strings,
in particular, the true vacuum in which we live.

once we are convinced that iib matrix model is a constructive denition
of superstring, we can simply go on to do numerical calculations [19]. but
before doing so we will clarify in this paper how we can read the space-
time geometry from matrix congurations and also propose a scenario of
obtaining local space-time gauge symmetry and dieomorphism symmetry.

4

it is amusing that these fundamental symmetries can arise from a very simple
matrix model dened on a single point.

dynamics of eigenvalues, that is, dynamical generation of space-time was
rst discussed in our previous paper [3]. an eective action of eigenvalues
can be obtained by integrating all the o-diagonal bosonic and fermionic
components and then diagonal fermionic coordinates (which we call fermion
zeromodes). if we quench the bosonic diagonal components xi
 (i = 1...n)
3 and neglect the fermion zeromodes i, the eective action for xi
 coincides
with that of the d = 4 n = 4 supersymmetric yang mills theory and van-
inclusions of fermion
ishes respecting stability of supersymmetric moduli.
zeromodes and also of non-planar contributions lift the degeneracy and we
can obtain a nontrivial eective action for space-time dynamics. in our pre-
vious paper [3] we estimated this eective action by perturbation at one loop,

which is valid when all eigenvalues are far from one another |xi xj| >> g.

of course this one-loop eective action is not sucient to determine the full
space-time structure, but we expect that it captures some of the essential
points for the formation of the space-time. one of important properties of
the eective action is that as a result of grassmannian integration of the
fermion zeromodes, space-time points make a network connected locally by
bond interactions. this becomes important when we extract dieomorphism
symmetry from our matrix model. this is discussed in section 4.

the organization of the paper is as follows. in section 2, we briey re-
view our previous results on the dynamics of the space-time and show how
a network picture of the space-time arises. here is an analogy with the dy-
namical triangulation approach to quantum gravity. in section 3 we derive a
low energy eective theory in some particular eigenvalue distributions con-
sisting of small clusters of size n. the eective theory acquires local su(n)
gauge symmetry and we show that the associated gauge eld indeed propa-
gate in the distribution. this supports our interpretation of the space-time.
furthermore we show that a massless fermion eld in the adjoint represen-

3 in this paper we consider matrix congurations near simultaneously diagonalizable
ones. then the eigenvalues and the diagonal components of matrices coincide and we
obtain the same eective action for them at least up to one-loop perturbation in o-
diagonal components. we expect that the classical space-time picture is valid only in
such a case. for more general congurations, the classical space-time picture is broken
and non-commutativity of space-time will become important [20]. we leave it for future
analysis.

5

tation appears with a gauge invariant kinetic term. in this way, low energy
eective theory is formulated as a lattice gauge theory on a dynamically
generated random lattice. in section 4, we study the origin of gravity and
dieomorphism symmetry in the space-time. we show that invariance un-
der permutations of the eigenvalues leads to the dieomorphism invariance.
background metric is shown to be encoded in the density correlation of the
eigenvalues. section 5 is devoted to conclusions and discussions.

2 dynamics of eigenvalues and space-time

generation

in this section we briey review our previous analysis [3] on the dynamics
of the eigenvalues to clarify some of important properties. let us consider
expansion around the most generic classical moduli where the gauge group
su(n) is broken down to u(1)n 1. then diagonal elements of a and 
appear as zeromodes while the o-diagonal elements become massive. we
may hence integrate out the massive modes rst and obtain an eective action
for the diagonal elements.

we thus decompose a into diagonal part x and o-diagonal part a.

we also decompose  into  and :

a = x + a; x =

1

 =  + ;  = 


x1


x2





2

. . .

,




. . .

xn


,




n

(2.1)

 and i

where xi
 = 0, re-
spectively, since the gauge group is su(n). we then integrate out the o-
diagonal parts a and  and obtain the eective action for supercoordinates
of space-time se[x, ]. the eective action for the space-time coordinates

 satisfy the constraints pn

 = 0 and pn

i=1 xi

i=1 i

6

se[x] can be obtained by further integrating out :

(2.2)

z dades[a,] = z dxdese[x,]
= z dxese [x],
 and qn 1
i=1 q16
=0 dxi

i=1 q9

where dx and d stand for qn 1
, respectively.
perturbative expansion in g2 around diagonal backgrounds (x, ) is valid
when all of the diagonal elements are widely separated from one another:
|xi  xj| >> g1/2. at one loop, it is easy to integrate over the o-diagonal
components.
after adding a gauge xing and the fadeev-popov ghost term associated

=1 di

with the broken symmetry su(n)/u(1)n 1

sg.f. + sf.p. = 

1
2g2 t r([x, a]2) 

1
g2 t r([x, b][a, c]),

(2.3)

the action can be expanded up to the second order of the o-diagonal com-
ponents a,  as

s2 + sg.f. =

1

)2 aij



((xi

  xj

2g2 xi6=j
+( i  j) ij aij





ji

 aij   
+ 

ji

(i  j) aij

 ).

(xi

  xj

) ij

(2.4)

the rst and the second terms are the kinetic terms for a and  respectively,
while the last two terms are a  vertices. a bosonic o-diagonal compo-
 is transmuted to a fermionic o-diagonal component ij emitting
nent aij
a fermion zeromode i or j. this vertex conserves su(n) indices i and j.
note that the propagators for a and  damp as 1/(xi  xj)2 or 1/(xi  xj)
respectively.
integration over all the o-diagonal components gives an eective action

for the zeromodes, xi

 and i:

z d ad dbdc e(s2+sg.f .+sf.p.) = yi<j

det( + s

(ij))1

 es1loop

e

[x,],

(2.5)

7

where

(ij) = ijij xij
s



(xij)4 .

here ij and xij

 are abbreviations for i  j and xi

  xj
.

the eective action can be expanded as

s1loop
e

tr ln( + s

(ij))

[x, ] = xi<j
= xi<j

tr(

s4
(ij)
4

+

s8
(ij)
8

),

(2.6)

(2.7)

which is a sum of all pairs (ij) of space-time points. here the symbol tr in
the lower case stands for the trace for lorentz indices. other terms in the
expansion vanish due to the properties of majorana-weyl fermions in ten
dimensions. note that, since s
(ij) contains two fermion zeromodes, the rst
term s4
(ij) contains 8 fermion zeromodes ij along a link (ij) and the second
term s8
(ij) contains full 16 fermion zeromodes. hence, when integrating the
fermion zeromodes, the second term acts as a delta function for the grassman
variables 16(i  j). integration over the fermion zeromodes gives the nal
eective action s1loop
several comments are in order. the rst comment is about supersymme-
[x, ] has n = 2 supersymmetry

try. the one-loop eective action s1loop
e
which is a remnant of the original one:

[x] for the bosonic eigenvalues xi
.

e

 = i 1i

i = 2.

(cid:26) xi

(2.8)

transformations for 1 = 2 and 1 = 2 correspond to those generated by
n = 1 supersymmetry generator q and its covariant derivative d. in this
sense zeromodes of xi and i can be viewed as supercoordinates of n = 1
superspace.
the next comment is infrared convergence. the partition function is
obtained by integrating over all the boson and fermion zeromodes. a naive
expectation is that, since the bosonic coordinates originally parameterize the
supersymmetric moduli, the integral over xi diverges. however, as proved in
[3], the integral converges for nite n to all orders of perturbation theory
due to the damping property of the propagators. at one loop this infrared

8

convergence can be easily seen since two fermion zeromodes in s
(ij) always
appear with a damping factor 1/(xi  xj)3 and a condition for saturating 16
fermion zeromodes requires 1/r24 damping when two clusters of eigenvalues
are put apart with distance r. this shows that all points are gathered as a
single bunch and hence space-time is inseparable. this is consistent with the
explicit calculations of the partition function [21]

e

the one-loop eective action for xi is given by further integrating out
the fermion zeromodes i. non-vanishing contributions in the expansion of
exp(s1loop
[x, ]) come from terms which saturate all the fermion zero-
(ij)) in the action s1loop
mode integrals di. since the terms tr(s4
contains 8 or 16 fermion zeromodes ij respectively along a link (ij), this ex-
pansion can be visualized as summing over graphs in which some of the n c2
pairs among the n space-time points xi ( i = 1...n) are connected by a term
with 8 fermion zeromodes tr(s4
(ij))/4 or a term with 16 fermion zeromodes
(tr(s4

(ij)) or tr(s8

e

(ij))/8:

(ij)))2/32 + tr(s8
z dxdes1loop

e

[x,] = z dxd xg:graph

y(ij):bond of g

[(

tr(s4
(ij))
4

) or (

1
2

(

tr(s4
(ij))
4

= xg:graphz dx w [x; g].

)2 +

tr(s8
(ij))
8

)]

(2.9)

here w [x; g] is a boltzmann weight for a graph g and conguration x.
in this way, we arrive at network picture of the space-time. the network is
induced by fermion zeromode integrations.

integrations over the fermion zeromodes give interactions along a link (ij)
of the graph, which is of order 1/(xij)3 for each fermion zeromode between
two points (ij). that is, the terms with 8 or 16 fermion zeromodes give bond
interactions of order 1/(xij)12 or 1/(xij)24.4 in this manner we obtain net-
works of space-time coordinates connected by bonds with these interactions.
since the bond interactions suppress connection between two distant points

4 note that the bond interactions induced by terms with 8 fermion zeromodes are not
scalars and depend on relative angles between several links xi  xj in a graph. on the
other hand, interactions induced by terms with 16 zeromodes are scalars since s8
(ij) acts
as a delta function for ij .

9

at least by a factor of order 1/(xij)12, only closer points tend to be connected
and the network becomes local. also to saturate the grassman integral, we
need 16(n  1) fermion zeromodes. hence number of bonds is of order n
which is much smaller than possible number of pairs n(n  1)/2 in the large
n limit.
in this sense n discretized space-time points are weakly bound.
all the allowed networks must be summed in determining the dynamics of
the eigenvalues. this reminds us of summation of all triangulations in the
dynamical triangulation approach to quantum gravity. we come back to this
analogy in section 4..

as shown in [3], if we neglect the rst type of bond interactions with
8 fermion zeromodes in (2.9), the  integration can be performed exactly
and the dynamics of eigenvalues is governed by the statistical system of a
branched polymer. since the hausdor dimension of the branched polymer
is four, we may conjecture that other interactions will make eigenvalue distri-
bution a smooth four dimensional manifold, which may be classied as a new
universality class near the branched polymer phase. numerical simulation is
still under investigation.

3 local gauge invariance

once we describe the space-time as dynamically generated distribution of the
eigenvalues, low energy eective theory in the space-time can be obtained by
solving dynamics of uctuations around the background x. both of the
space-time x and matters a are unied in the same matrices a and
should be determined dynamically. low energy uctuations are in general
composites of a and , and it is natural from the analysis of the schwinger-
dyson equation for the wilson loops that a local operator in the space-time
is given by a microscopic limit of the wilson loop operators, such as

w(k; o) = t r[o(a, ) exp(ika)].

(3.1)

here o(a, ) is some operator made of a and .
in order to identify
the total momentum of this operator as k, the operator o(a, ) should be
invariant under a constant shift of a, that is, translation in the space-time
coordinates.

in the rst approximation around the diagonal background x, the coor-

10

dinate representation of this operator is given by

d10k
w(x; o) = z
(2)10 exp(ikx) w(k; o)
xi=1

oii(10)(x  xi).

n



(3.2)

here we have replaced a by x + a and take the leading term. oii is the
ii component of the operator o. due to the delta function, the operator has
a support only on the area where eigenvalues distribute. vanishing of the
operator w(x; o) outside of the area of the distributed eigenvalues supports
our interpretation of the space-time. of course if we take into account higher
terms in the expansion, the operator becomes dim and extended around the
background x.

we can apply a similar analysis to strings which propagate in the space-
time. in the 1/n expansion, correlation between wilson loop operators can
be evaluated by summing over all surfaces made of feynman diagrams con-
necting the wilson loops at the boundary. this surface is interpreted as
string world sheet connecting strings at the boundaries. each su(n) in-
dex xi
 of a loop in the diagrams represents a coordinate on the world sheet
and it takes value in the eigenvalue distribution in the leading approxima-
tion around the diagonal background x. hence string world sheet evolves
only in the space-time of the eigenvalue distribution and again supports our
interpretation of the space-time.

it is generally dicult to obtain how uctuations propagate in the eigen-
value distribution, which is reminiscent of the qcd eective theory: ex-
citations are expressed as composite operators of microscopic variables and
their low energy dynamics can be discussed only through the symmetry argu-
ment, namely the argument based on the chiral symmetry. also in our case
we will show that there are eigenvalue distributions around which symme-
try arguments allow us to discuss low energy dynamics for some excitations.
suppose that eigenvalue distribution forms clusters consisting of n eigenval-
ues. at length scale much larger than the size of each cluster, the su(n)
symmetry is broken down to su(n)m where m = n/n. we can expand a
and  around such a background x similarly to the analysis in the previous

11

section. first write a and  in block forms:

a =



 = 


 a12

 a22


a11
a21
...

11 12
21 22
...

...

. . .

...

. . .

amm



mm

,

.






(3.3)

each block aij
further decomposed

 or ij is an n  n matrix and the diagonal blocks can be

1 + aii
aii
 = xi

ii = i1 + ii

(3.4)

where 1 is an n  n unit matrix and tr aii
 = 0. here tr means trace for the
submatrix of n  n. we interpret each cluster of the eigenvalues as a space-
time point with an internal structure su(n). since each su(n) symmetry
acts on the variables at the position i independently, the unbroken su(n)m
symmetry can be regarded as local gauge symmetry. indeed under a gauge
transformation g of the unbroken su(n)m symmetry

g =

g1

g2

. . .

gm







 su(n)m  su(n),

(3.5)

 and ii, transform as adjoint matters (i.e. site
the diagonal block elds, aii
variables in the lattice gauge theory) while the o-diagonal block elds, aij

and ij, as gauge connections (i.e. link variables):

  gi aii
aii
g
i
ii  gi
iig
i
 g
aij
  giaij
j
ij  giijg
j .

12

(3.6)

some of the dynamics for low energy excitations is governed by this local
gauge invariance. gauge elds live on the links and transform as the link
variables in the lattice gauge theory. in our case, we have too many such
elds (at least 10 boson elds aij
 for a link (ij) ) but only one unitary link
variable is assured to be massless by the gauge symmetry and others will
acquire mass dynamically. therefore, in deriving low energy eective theory,
we rst apply polar decomposition to aij
 into unitary and hermitian degrees
of freedom and identify all the unitary components in various o-diagonal
block elds by setting them one common eld u ij on each link.

among various elds in the dynamically generated random lattice, some
elds will survive in the low energy eective theory. here let us consider
simple elds made of a single microscopic variable a or . as we will
see soon, the o-diagonal block elds become massive except the unitary
component u ij. the gauge eld u ij is assured to be massless due to the
gauge invariance. next, stability of the cluster type eigenvalue distribution
we have assumed requires that the diagonal bosonic elds aii
, which break
this distribution, should become massive dynamically. finally, the diagonal
fermionic block eld ii can be massless and we should investigate their low
energy action.

we henceforth integrate out the o-diagonal blocks rst while keeping
the unitary degrees of freedom u ij and obtain an eective action for other
variables which survive in the low energy eective theory.

we add a gauge xing term for broken generators su(n)/su(n)m

sg.f. =

1

2g2 xi6=j

 aij

tr|xij

 |2,

(3.7)

and also its associated fadeev-popov term. the action can be expanded as
before. lower order terms in the action are composed of the following terms:

s2 + sg.f. =

1

tr((xij

2g2 xi6=j
2 ii(aij

 )2|aij
 ji  ijaji

 )).

 |2  jixij

 ij

(3.8)

the rst and the second terms are the kinetic terms for the o-diagonal block
elds aij
 and ij. the third term corresponds to the term of the zeromode
 insertion in the previous section. integrating out the fermion elds in the

13

o-diagonal blocks ij, the third term in (3.8) becomes

ii



tr(

aij


xij

(xji)2 (aji



ii  jjaji

 )).

1

g2 xi6=j

(3.9)


 ii and a hopping term
it consists of a mass-like term proportional to
ii jj between i and j.

integration over aij
 can be performed, with its
unitary component u ij kept xed, by replacing

ii

aij
 = 0
 = g2 
aij
  aji

(xij)2 u ij  u ji.

(3.10)

in the second equation, the damping factor 1/(xij)2 corresponds to the prop-
agation of the hermitian degrees of freedom while the appearance of the link
variable u ij corresponds to keeping the unitary degrees of freedom. this
replacing makes the mass-like term in (3.9) vanish and the hopping term

ii

tr(

 g2xi6=j

 xij



(xij)4 u ij jju ji).

(3.11)

this is a gauge invariant kinetic term for an adjoint fermion eld ii on a
(random) lattice generated dynamically by the distributed eigenvalues. the
elds ii can hop between any pair of points in the space-time, but since the
hopping parameter is suppressed by 1/(xij)3, the propagation is expected to
become local in the continuum limit.

other terms in the action generate a plaquette action for the gauge eld

u ij as follows. relevant terms in the action are

s4 =

1

g2 xi6=j6=k6=l

tr(aij

 ajk

  aij

 ajk

 )akl

 ali
 .

(3.12)

by integrating out the hermitian degrees of freedom of the o-diagonal blocks
with the procedure (3.10), this action itself vanishes s4 = 0. however inter-
actions generated by (s4)2 induce a kinetic term for the gauge eld;

(s4)2  xi6=j6=k6=l

g4

(xij)2(xjk)2(xkl)2(xli)2 tr(u iju jku klu li)tr(u ilu lku kju ji).

(3.13)

14

this is the plaquette action generated by a wilson loop for the adjoint repre-
sentation and hence the gauge eld u ij indeed propagates in the space-time
of eigenvalue distribution. again the gauge eld can hop between any pair of
space-time points, but the hopping is suppressed by 1/x8 for distant points
and we will recover locality in the continuum limit.

to summarize this section, supposing that distribution of the eigenvalues
consists of small clusters with size n, we have shown that the low energy eec-
tive theory contains several massless elds such as the gauge eld associated
with the local su(n) gauge symmetry and fermion eld in the adjoint rep-
resentation of su(n) gauge symmetry. gauge invariant kinetic terms were
also derived. thus our system is a lattice gauge theory on a dynamically
generated random lattice. it is invariant under a permutation for the set of
the n discrete space-time points, since the permutation group sn is a sub-
group of the original su(n) symmetry. it is the most dierent point from
the ordinary lattice gauge theory on a xed lattice, which becomes impor-
tant in deriving the dieomorphism invariance of our model. we will come
back to this point in the next section. although the permutation invariance
requires that all space-time points are equivalent, locality in the space-time
will be assured due to the suppression of the hopping terms between distant
points. in general, however, we need a sucient power for the damping of
the hopping terms in order to assure locality in the continuum limit. though
we do not yet know the real condition for locality, we expect that terms with
lower powers are canceled due to supersymmetry or by averaging over gauge
elds.

4 gravity and dieomorphism invariance

as we have seen in section 2, the one-loop eective action for the space-time
points is described as a statistical system of n points whose coordinates are
xi
. integration over the fermion zeromodes  gives the boltzmann weight,
which depends on a graph (or network) connecting the space-time points
locally by order n number of bond interactions;

z = xg:graphz dx w [x; g].

(4.1)

15

w [x; g] is a complicated function of a conguration x and a graph g. an
important property is that the weight is suppressed at least by a damping
1/(xi  xj)12 when two points i and j are connected. this system is, of
5 of n space-time points, which is
course, invariant under permutations sn
a subgroup of the original symmetry su(n), while the boltzmann weight
for each graph g is not. the invariance is realized by summing over all
possible graphs. in other words the system becomes permutation invariant by
rearrangements of bonds in the network of space-time points. this reminds
us of the dynamical triangulation approach to quantum gravity [22], where
the dieomorphism invariance is believed to arise from summing all possible
triangulations. it is amusing that our system satises both of locality and
permutation invariance simultaneously by summing over all possible graphs.
in this section we see that the permutation invariance of our system ac-
tually leads to the dieomorphism invariance. to see how the background
metric is encoded in the eective action for low energy excitations, let us con-
sider, as an example, a scalar eld i propagating in distributed eigenvalues.
the eective action will be given by

(i  j)2

2

s = xi,j

f (xi  xj) +xi

m(i)2

(4.2)

where f (x) is a function decreasing suciently fast at innity to assure lo-
cality in the space-time. introducing the density function of the eigenvalues

(x) = xi

(10)(x  xi)

(4.3)

and a continuous eld (x) which satises (xi) = i, the action can be
rewritten as

s = z dxdyh(x)(y)i
here the expectation h...i for the density and the density correlation means
that we have taken average over congurations x and networks g of the

f (x  y) + mz dxh(x)i(x)2.

(4.4)

((x)  (y))2

2

5in this section we consider general eigenvalue distributions in which all eigenvalues
have indegenerate space-time coordinates. if we take the cluster type distribution consid-
ered in the previous section, the permutation symmetry responsible for the dieomorphism
invariance should be sn/n.

16

space-time points. normalizing the density correlation in terms of the density

h(x)(y)i = h(x)ih(y)i(1 + c(x, y))

(4.5)

1

s =

and expanding (x)  (y) = (x  y)(x) +   , the action becomes
2 z dxh(x)i(cid:20)z dyh(y)i(x  y)(x  y)f (x  y)(1 + c(x, y))(cid:21)
(x)(x) + mz dxh(x)i(x)2    .

(4.6)

this expansion shows that the eld (x) propagating in the eigenvalue dis-
tribution feels the density correlation as the background metric while the
density itself as vacuum expectation value of the dilaton eld. namely we
can identify

g(x)  z dyh(y)i(x  y)(x  y)f (x  y)(1 + c(x, y))
ge(x)  h(x)i.

(4.7)

(4.8)

if the density correlation respects the original translational and rotational
symmetry, that is, if they are not spontaneously broken, the metric becomes
at g  . (normalization can be absorbed by the dilaton vev.) the fact
that the background metric is encoded in the density correlations as above
indicates that our system is general covariant even though the iib matrix
model action (1.1) dened in at ten dimensions does not have manifest
general covariance.

then let us see how the dieomorphism invariance is realized in our
model. the action (1.1) is invariant under the permutation sn of the eigen-
values, which is a subgroup of su(n). under a permutation

xi  x(i)

for   sn ,

(4.9)

the eld i transforms into (i). then, from the denition of the continuous
eld (x), we should extend the transformation (4.9) into x,

such that (xi) = x(i). under this transformation, the eigenvalue density
transforms as a scalar density and the eld (x) as a scalar eld. on the other

x  (x)

(4.10)

17

hand, the metric transforms as a second rank tensor, if the function f (x y)
decreases rapidly around x = y and the y integral in (4.7) has support only
near y = x. the tensor property of the metric is also required from the
invariance of the action under the transformation (4.10). in this way, the
invariance under the permutation of the eigenvalues leads to the invariance
of the low energy eective action under general coordinate transformations.
background metric is encoded in the density correlation of the eigen-
values. since we have started from the poincare invariant type iib matrix
model action (1.1), the density correlation is expected to be translational and
rotational invariant and we may obtain low energy eective action in a at
background. a nontrivial background can be induced dynamically if lorentz
symmetry is spontaneously broken and the eigenvalues are non-trivially dis-
tributed.

a nontrivial background can be also described by condensing a graviton
operator [23]. bosonic parts of graviton and dilaton operators are given by

s(k)  t r(ff 
d(k)  t r(f 2eika).

eika) + (  )

(4.11)
(4.12)

condensation of them induces extra terms in iib matrix model action;

scond = z dk(x h(k)s(k) + h(k)d(k)).

(4.13)

we can similarly obtain an eective action for uctuations around a diagonal
background from this modied matrix model action. condensation of dilaton
changes the yang-mills coupling constant g locally in the space-time. since
g is the only dimensionful constant in our model and thus determines the
fundamental length scale, a local change in g will lead to a local change in
the eigenvalue density. this is consistent with our earlier discussion that the
dilaton expectation value is encoded in the eigenvalue density. on the other
hand, condensation of graviton induces asymmetry of the space-time. for
condensation of k = 0 graviton mode, it is obvious that the condensation can
be compensated by a eld redenition of matrices a

a  (

 + h

)a,

(4.14)

and the two models, the original iib matrix model and the modied one with
the k = 0 graviton condensation, are directly related through the above eld

18

redenition. the density of the eigenvalues is mapped accordingly and the
density correlation is expected to become asymmetric in the modied matrix
model. for more general condensation, if the graviton operator s(x) (co-
ordinate representation of (4.11)) changes only local property of dynamics of
the eigenvalues, the density correlation will become asymmetric locally in the
space-time around x and therefore induces a local change in the background
metric.

our low energy eective action is formulated as a lattice gauge theory
on a dynamically generated random lattice. since the lattice itself is gener-
ated dynamically from matrices, we must sum over all possible graphs. in
this way, our system is permutation sn invariant, which is responsible for
the dieomorphism invariance. the background metric is encoded in the
density correlation of the eigenvalues and the low energy eective action be-
comes manifestly general covariant. the graviton operator is represented
as uctuation around the background space-time and constructed from the
o-diagonal components of the matrices. microscopic derivation of the prop-
agation of the graviton is dicult to obtain, but once we have claried the
underlying dieomorphism symmetry, it is natural that the low energy ef-
fective action for the graviton is described by the einstein hilbert action.
employing this dieomorphism invariance and the supersymmetry, we will
be able to derive the low energy behavior of the graviton multiplets, which
will be reported in a separate paper.

5 conclusions and discussions

in this paper we have discussed a possibility to interpret the space-time in
type iib matrix model as distributed eigenvalues. we have shown that, if
we suppose that eigenvalue distribution consists of small clusters with size
n, the low energy theory acquires su(n) local space-time gauge symmetry.
this gauge invariance can predict the existence of the gauge eld propagating
in the space-time of distributed eigenvalues. also we have obtained a gauge
invariant kinetic action for a fermion in the adjoint representation of su(n).
low energy behavior for these elds is described in terms of a lattice gauge
theory on a dynamically generated random lattice and hence supports our
interpretation of the space-time.

since the type iib matrix model is proposed as a constructive denition

19

of superstring, we need to show the existence of the massless graviton and the
dieomorphism invariance of the low energy eective theory. one plausible
argument for the existence of massless graviton is based on the maximal su-
persymmetry (d = 10 n = 2 susy). we have shown that the dieomorphism
invariance of our model is originated in the invariance under permutations of
the eigenvalues. our model realizes the invariance in an interesting way by
summing all possible graphs connecting the space-time points. the dieo-
morphism invariance restricts the low energy behavior of the model and gives
another reasoning for the existence of massless graviton. background metric
for propagating elds is encoded in the density correlation of the eigenvalues
while the dilaton vev is encoded in the eigenvalue density. curved back-
ground can be described as a nontrivial distribution of eigenvalues whose
density correlation behaves inhomogeneously.

both of these fundamental symmetries, local gauge symmetry and the
dieomorphism symmetry, are originated in the su(n) invariance of the
matrix model. these symmetries have been attempted to unify by many
physicists, beginning with kaluza and klein [24].
it is amusing that our
matrix model can unify them in a natural way and complicated structures
are hidden in such a simple matrix model.

there are still several problems unanswered. one is the low energy su-
persymmetry in the eective theory in a dynamically generated distribution
of eigenvalues. since we have obtained a massless gauge boson and an ad-
joint fermion, we may expect n = 1 low energy supersymmetry. we need to
clarify how n = 2 supersymmetry in type iib matrix model acts on the low
energy elds. since n = 1 ten dimensional yang-mills theory is anomalous
by itself, other elds (e.g. supergravity multiples) must be required massless
to cancel anomalies. also the low energy gauge group might be restricted or
projected.

next problem is locality in the low energy eective theory. the gauge
invariant kinetic terms (3.11) or (3.13) have hopping parameters suppressed
due to the inverse powers of distances, but the suppression seems insucient
to assure locality or a well behaved infrared property. as for the action
(3.11), we may obtain more suppressed hopping terms since the link variable
u ij between distant points can uctuate much and averaging over the gauge
eld may reduce the strength of eective hopping parameters.

we have also more fundamental or conceptual issues. we have obtained
nonabelian gauge symmetry from type iib matrix model by assuming a par-

20

ticular eigenvalue distribution. this indicates that this vacuum is not a per-
turbative vacuum of type iib superstring. instead we may wonder if this is a
perturbative vacuum of heterotic string or type i string realized in a nonper-
turbative way within type iib matrix model. as we saw in the introduction,
our matrix model contains both of the world sheets of the fundamental iib
string and the d-strings. by a semiclassical correspondence (1.8), we have
identied iib superstring in the schild gauge where tr is interpreted as inte-
gration over a d-string world sheet. we can also construct an f-string world
sheet in terms of surfaces made of feynman diagrams whose su(n) index
represents a space-time coordinate of a world sheet point. in both cases, if
we assume an eigenvalue distribution consisting of small clusters, an internal
structure appears on the world sheet and hence current algebra may arise.

another issue is how to describe global topology in type iib matrix model.
the simplest example is a torus compactication. a possible procedure of
a torus compactication [25] is to identify a with a + r by embedding
a derivative operator into our matrix conguration. therefore n is taken
innity from the beginning. since this procedure has a subtlety in the large
n limit, we need a careful examination of the double scaling limit.

we also do not yet know how we can describe chiral fermions in lower
dimensions after compactication. our compactication procedure looks dif-
ferent from the ordinary kaluza-klein compactication but there is some
similarity. in the ordinary case, isometry of a compactied space leads to
local gauge symmetry in four dimensional space-time while in our case the
internal structure arises from assuming the cluster type eigenvalue distri-
bution.
in our description of four dimensional space-time, eigenvalues are
conned in four directions and shrunk in the other six directions. our com-
pactication therefore can be regarded as a segment compactication in an
ordinary picture. we need to investigate how chiral fermions can arise in
such a compactied space-time.

these problems and issues are under investigations and we want to discuss

more in the near future.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank y. kitazawa, t. tada and a. tsuchiya for discussions
and especially h. aoki for the collaboration in the early stage.

21

references

[1] n. ishibashi, h. kawai, y. kitazawa and a. tsuchiya, nucl. phys. b498

(1997) 467, hep-th/9612115.

[2] m. fukuma, h. kawai. y. kitazawa and a. tsuchiya, nucl.phys.b510

(1998)158, hep-th/9705128.

[3] h. aoki, s. iso, h. kawai, y. kitazawa and t. tada, prog. theor. phys.

99 (1998) 713, hep-th/9802085.

[4] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. shenker and l. susskind, phys. rev. d55

(1997) 5112, hep-th/9610043.

[5] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h.verlinde, nucl.phys. b500 (1997) 43.

[6] v. periwal, hep-th/9611103.

[7] t. yoneya, prog.theor.phys. 97 (1997) 949, hep-th/9703078.

[8] j. polchinski, talk at nishinomiya yukawa memorial symposium (nov.

1998), to appear in prog. theor. phys. suppl., hep-th/9903165.

[9] h. sugawara, hep-th/9708029.

[10] h.

itoyama, a. tokura, prog.theor.phys. 99 (1998) 129, hep-
th/9708123; phys.rev. d58 (1998) 026002, hep-th/9801084; b. chen,
h. itoyama, h. kihara, hep-th/9810237; h. itoyama and a. tsuchiya,
hep-th/9812177; k. ezawa, y. matsuo and k. murakami, phys.lett.
b439 (1998) 29, hep-th/9802164.

[11] n. kim and s. j. rey, hep-th/9704158; t. banks and l. motl, hep-
th/9703218; d. a. lowe, hep-th/9704041; s. j. rey, hep-th/9704158; p.
horava, hep-th/9705055; m. krough, hep-th/9801034, hep-th/9803088;

[12] several variants of type iib matrix model have also been proposed; a.
fayyazuddin , y. makeenko, p. olesen, d.j. smith and k. zarembo,
hep-th/9703038; c. f. kristjansen and p. olesen, hep-th/9704017; j.
ambjorn and l. chekhov, hep-th/9805212.
s. hirano and m. kato, hep-th/9708039; i. oda, hep-th/9806096; hep-
th/9801085; phys.lett.b427 (1998) 267, hep-th/9801051

22

n. kitsunezaki and j. nishimura, nucl.phys. b526 (1998) 351; t. tada
and a. tsuchiya, hep-th/9903037.

[13] t. eguchi and h. kawai, phys. rev. lett. 48 (1982) 1063.

g. parisi, phys. lett. 112b (1982) 463.
d. gross and y. kitazawa, nucl. phys. b206 (1982) 440.
g. bhanot, u. heller and h. neuberger, phys. lett. 113b (1982) 47.
s. das and s. wadia, phys. lett. 117b (1982) 228.
j. alfaro and b. sakita, phys. lett. 121b (1983) 339.

[14] j. polchinski, phys.rev.lett. 75 (1995) 4724; e. witten, nucl. phys.

b443 (1995) 85.

[15] m. green and j. schwarz, phys. lett. 136b (1984) 367.

[16] a. schild, phys. rev. d16 (1977) 1722.

[17] i. chepelev, y. makeenko and k. zarembo, hep-th/9701151; a.
fayyazuddin and d.j. smith, hep-th/9701168; i. chepelev and a. a.
tseytlin, hep-th/9705120; b. p. mandal and s. mukhopadhyay, hep-
th/9709098; n. d. hari dass and b. sathiapalan, hep-th/9712179; y.
kitazawa and h. takata, hep-th/9810004; n. hambli, hep-th/9812008.

[18] k. hamada, phys.rev.d56 (1997) 7503, hep-th/9706187.

[19] see [3] and t. hotta, j. nishimura, a. tsuchiya, hep-th/9811220;
m. nakajima and j. nishimura, nucl.phys. b528 (1998) 355, hep-
th/9802082; w.krauth and m.staudacher, hep-th/9902113 for numeri-
cal analysis of eigenvalue distribution.
for an evaluation of the partition function; w.krauth, h. nicoli and
m.staudache, phys.lett.b431 (1998) 31, hep-th/9803117; w.krauth
and m.staudacher, phys.lett.b435:350-355,1998, hep-th/9804199; s.
bal and b. sathiapalan, hep-th/9902087.

[20] a. connes, comm. math. phys. 182 (1996) 155; hep-th/9603053; a.

connes, m. douglas and a. schwarz, hep-th/9711162.

[21] m. green and m. gutperle, jhep 9801 (1998) 005, hep-th/9711107;
phys.rev.d58 (1998) 046007, hep-th/9804123; g.moore, n. nekrasov
and s. shatashvilli, hep-th/9803265; v. a. kazakov, i. k. kostov and

23

n. a. nekrasov, hep-th/9810035; p. vanhove, hep-th/9903050. also see
papers in [19].

[22] j. ambjorn, b durhuus and t. jonsson, quantum geometry, cambridge

(1997).

[23] condensation of graviton is discussed in the paper by yoneya from a
slightly dierent point of view; t. yoneya, talk at nishinomiya yukawa
memorial symposium (nov. 1998), to appear in prog. theor. phys.
suppl., hep-th/9902200.

[24] t. l. kaluza, sitz, bal. akad., (1921) 966; o. klein, z. phys. 37 (1926)
895. also see recent discussions, f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 80(1998)
4851, hep-th/9801184.

[25] washington taylor, phys.lett. b394 (1997) 283, hep-th/9611042.

24

