9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
8
2

 

 
 

1
v
1
0
2
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

rome prep.1250/99
hep-th/9904201

the confining branch of qcd

m. bochicchio

infn sezione di roma

dipartimento di fisica, universita di roma la sapienza

piazzale aldo moro 2 , 00185 roma

abstract

we show that, as a consequence of a physical interpretation based on the
abelian projection and on the qcd string, four-dimensional qcd connes
the electric ux if and only if the functional integral in the berwise-dual
variables admits a hyper-kahler reduction under the action of the gauge
group.

april 1999

1 introduction

it has been conjectured long ago that quark connement in qcd would
arise because the electric ux lines are squeezed into long ux tubes by the
condensation of the magnetic charge [1, 2]. this mechanism of connement
is known as the dual meissner eect, since it is dual, in the sense of elec-
tric/magnetic duality, to the connement of magnetic uxes, that arises in a
type-two superconductor, because of the condensation of the electric charge
[3].
since the electric ux lines would span two-dimensional surfaces embedded
into the four-dimensional space-time, the dual meissner eect leads to an
eective theory of qcd in terms of closed strings [4].
the absolute connement of the electric ux requires indeed that the ux
line cannot break into an open string.
more analytically, the string functional integral would arise as the string so-
lution of the migdal-makeenko equation [5, 6] in the large-n limit of qcd
[7, 8]. this is the string program, that has received recently a new revival,
most notably because of the implementation in the string setting of the zig-
zag symmetry [4].
a distinctive feature of the string program is that the existence of the string
is assumed as an ansatz for the solution of the migdal-makeenko equation.
in fact it is dicult to see how the strings would arise directly in terms of
the functional integral over the four-dimensional gauge connections.
a remarkable achievement in this direction was the representation of the par-
tition function of the two-dimensional gauge theory as a sum over branched
coverings of the two-dimensional space-time [9]. these coverings are inter-
preted as the string world sheets, giving evidence in favour of the string
solution of pure gauge theories.
yet this representation is obtained from the exact result for the two-dimensional
partition function, without a direct link to gauge congurations in the func-
tional integral.
in an unrelated development, the cotangent bundle of the moduli of holo-
morphic bundles on a riemann surface has played a key role in the seiberg-
witten solution of the coulomb branch of some four-dimensional supersym-
metric gauge theories [10].
branched covers appear in these solutions as the spectral curves of the charac-

1

teristic equation associated to a holomorphic one-form that labels cotangent
directions to the moduli of holomorphic bundles [11].
the pre-potential, the unique holomorphic function that determines the low-
energy eective action of the supersymmetric theory, is constructed by means
of the spectral curve.
more precisely, certain submanifolds of the cotangent bundle, that corre-
spond to moduli of representations of the fundamental group of the un-
derlying two-dimensional base manifold, admit an integrable bration by
jacobians of branched coverings of the base two-dimensional manifold, the
hitchin bration, that in turn is equivalent to assign the pre-potential.
while no direct link to physical four-dimensional elds may be attributed to
these coverings in the framework of the seiberg-witten solution, a link to
the string program would possibly arise, if the cotangent bundle of unitary
connections in two-dimensions could be embedded into the four-dimensional
qcd functional integral. such an embedding was found in [12].
it was found there that the correct variables to dene this embedding are
neither the four-dimensional gauge connections, a, nor their dual variables,
ad, but a partial mixing of them, that correspond to a partial or berwise
duality transformation [12].
the coordinates of the cotangent bundle of unitary connections, t a, appear
naturally as the shift ad = a+ is performed for two dualized polarizations
among the four components of the four-dimensional gauge connection.
in addition,
it was found in [13], that there is a dense embedding into
the qcd functional integral, of an elliptic bration of the moduli space
of parabolic k(d) pairs into (an elliptic bration of) the quotient of the
cotangent bundle by the action of the gauge group.
the last space admits a hitchin bration by the moduli of line bundles over
branched spectral covers, thus giving a dense embedding of these objects into
the qcd functional integral.
while in [13] the integrability properties of the hitchin bration were used
to reduce the problem of computing the functional integral in the large-n
limit to the evaluation of the saddle-point of a certain eective action that
contains the jacobian of the change of variables to the collective eld of the
hitchin bration, in this paper we shall address the following, more qualita-
tive issue, that relates to the string program.
what is the locus in the functional integral of the conning branch of qcd,
that is, what is the locus in the moduli space of parabolic k(d) pairs, whose

2

image by the hitchin map contains only riemann surfaces spanned by closed
strings ?
a partial answer to this question was given in [14]. in [14] a physical interpre-
tation of the occurrence of hitchin bundles in the berwise dual functional
integral was given, in the light of t hooft concept of abelian projection [15].
this interpretation identies the branch points of the spectral covers as mag-
netic monopoles and the parabolic points as electric charges.
since connement requires magnetic condensation and t hooft alternative
excludes electric condensation, the conning branch is the locus,
in the
parabolic k(d) pairs, whose image by the hitchin map has no parabolic
singularity on the spectral cover [14], a not completely trivial condition.
it should be noticed that this idea is in complete analogy with the two-
dimensional case [9], in which the partition function is localized on branched
coverings of the base compact space-time, without parabolic points. in fact
the occurrence of parabolic points would imply the presence in the vacuum
to vacuum amplitudes of strings diagrams with the topology of open strings,
a situation that it is appropriate to the coulomb rather than the conne-
ment phase. this last statement may be exemplied thinking to a torus with
two parabolic points as a topological cylinder, a vacuum diagram of an open
string theory.
we will nd in this paper that the connement locus is characterized pre-
cisely by the condition that the residues of the higgs current, , on the
parabolic divisor be nilpotent.
this condition turns out to be equivalent to the existence of a (dense in the
large-n limit) hyper-kahler reduction of the cotangent bundle of unitary
connections under the action of the gauge group.
the conning branch of qcd is, therefore, the hyper-kahler locus of the
hitchin bration of parabolic bundles, embedded in the qcd path integral
as prescribed by berwise duality.
on the other side, this is precisely the locus for which spectral covers with
the topology of closed string diagrams, but not open ones, occur in the func-
tional integral. the dual mechanism of superconductivity and the string
interpretation are therefore compatible, as it should be, and as it has been
for long time believed [4].
one more comment. it is a rather strange fact that the same or analogue
objects, that are used to construct the seiberg-witten solution of four-
dimensional su sy theories in the coulomb branch, appear here as giving

3

rise to a physical string interpretation of the qcd functional integral, with
an associated hyper-kahler structure but no supersymmetry.
in fact we think that the explanation of this fact has much to do with duality
as opposed to supersymmetry.
the seiberg-witten solution starts from supersymmetry, through the struc-
ture theorem for the low-energy eective action, as determined by the pre-
potential, and ends up with a non-linear geometric realization of the abelian
electric magnetic/duality of the eective theory in the coulomb branch, in
terms of a legendre transformation of the pre-potential [10].
we start instead from the non-abelian duality of the microscopic theory, as
dened by the functional integral, to gain, by means of berwise duality and
the embedding of parabolic bundles, control over the large-n limit [13] and
a mathematical realization of the dual meissner eect [14] at the same time.

2 the nilpotent condition

in this section we show that the spectral covers that are in the image by the
hitchin map of parabolic k(d) pairs have no parabolic divisor if and only
if the levels of the complex moment maps are nilpotent on each point of the
parabolic divisor.
this in turn is a necessary and sucient condition for the moduli space of
parabolic k(d) pairs to admit a hyper-kahler structure. in [16, 13] a spe-
cial name was used to characterize this closed subspace: parabolic higgs
bundles.
in any case the connement criterium of this paper explains the physical
meaning of the hyper-kahler structure, a mathematical condition whose
meaning was suspected to be physically relevant but not elucidated in [13].
indeed, there it was argued that the two cases of the parabolic k(d) pairs
and of the parabolic higgs bundles present equivalent diculties from the
point of view of solving the large-n limit, in fact diering by contributions
of order of 1
n . we now argue that parabolic higgs bundles correspond to the
conning branch of qcd in the berwise-dual variables.
the functional integral for qcd in [13] is dened in terms of the variables
(az, az, z, z), obtained by means of a berwise duality transformation
from (az, az, au, a u), where (z, z, u, u) are the complex coordinates on the

4

product of two two-dimensional tori, over which the theory is dened.
(az, az, z, z) dene the coordinates of an elliptic bration of t a, the
cotangent bundle of unitary connections on the (z, z) torus with the (u, u)
torus as a base.
the set of pairs (a, ) that are solutions of the following dierential equa-
tions (elliptically bered over the (u, u) torus) is embedded into the space of
parabolic k(d) pairs [14, 13]:

fa  i   =

a =

a  =

1
|d|
1
|d|
1
|d|

x
p

x
p

x
p

0

ppdz  dz

ppdz  dz

ppdz  dz

(1)

where p is the two-dimensional delta-function localized at zp and (0
p, p, p)
are the set of levels for the moment maps [13]. the space of parabolic k(d)
pairs consists of a parabolic bundle with a holomorphic connection a and a
parabolic morphism . eq.(1) denes a dense stratication of the functional
integral over t a because the set of levels is dense everywhere in function
space, in the sense of the distributions, as the divisor d gets larger and
larger.
according to hitchin [17], there is a hitchin bration of parabolic k(d)
pairs, dened by u(1) bundles over the following spectral cover:

det(1  z) = 0

(2)

the spectral cover depends only from the eigenvalues of z. the condition
that the spectral cover has no parabolic point is therefore the condition that
the eigenvalues of z have no poles. we notice that the residues of the poles
of z are determined by the levels of the complex moment maps. in fact
z can be made meromorphic with residue at the point p conjugated to the
level p by means of a gauge transformation g in the complexication of the
gauge group, that gauges to zero the connection az, berwise:

 

  

1
|d|
1
|d|

x
p

x
p

gpg1pdz  dz = 0

g1 p gpdz  dz = 0

(3)

5

from this equation it follows that the residues of the eigenvalues of z are
proportional to the eigenvalues of p. if the eigenvalues of  have no poles on
the covering, p must have zero eigenvalues and therefore must be nilpotent
and vice versa, that is the conclusion looked forward.
there is however an apparent puzzle. though the eigenvalues of  cannot
have poles on the covering if the levels of the complex moment maps are
nilpotent, the traces of powers of z, that are expressed through symmetric
polynomials in the eigenvalues, certainly are meromorphic functions on the
torus. how can this happen if the eigenvalues of  have no poles on the cov-
ering? the answer is the following, as we have found by a direct check in the
su(2) case. if p is nilpotent, the eigenvalues of z have singularities that
are not parabolic but that look in the coordinates of the z torus branched
singularities, for example z
2 . however we should remind the reader that
the eigenvalues are really dierentials on the covering. therefore z
2 should
be really interpreted as z
2 ), that is, in fact, smooth on a
simply branched covering. there is no singularity on the covering.
yet, symmetric powers of the eigenvalues of z may have meromorphic sin-
gularities on the torus.
it remains to show that if the residue of  is nilpotent the quotient is hyper-
kahler. this is a known result [16]. this concludes our proof.
in fact a slightly stronger statement holds. if the residues of the higgs eld
are nilpotent, eq.(1) can be interpreted as the vanishing condition for the
moment maps of the action of the compact su(n) gauge group on the pair
(a, ) and on the cotangent space of ags [18]. the quotient under the
action of the compact gauge group of the set:

2 dz, that is d(z

1

1

1

1

fa  i   

1
|d|

x
p

0

ppdz  dz = 0

a 

a  

1
|d|
1
|d|

x
p

x
p

nppdz  dz = 0

nppdz  dz = 0

(4)

with xed eigenvalues of the hermitian moment map is, by a general result
[19], the same as the quotient dened by the complex moment maps:

a 

1
|d|

x
p

nppdz  dz = 0

6

a  

1
|d|

x
p

nppdz  dz = 0

(5)

under the action of the complexication of the gauge group.

3 conclusions

our conclusion is that if qcd connes the electric charge the functional
integral in the berwise dual-variables dened in [12, 13] must be localized on
the hyper-kahler locus of parabolic k(d) pairs, the parabolic higgs bundles.
this space is characterized by a nilpotent residue of the higgs current. these
are precisely the parabolic k(d) pairs whose image by the hitchin map
contain spectral covers arbitrarily branched, but with no parabolic points.
the physical interpretation is that there is a monopole condensate in the
vacuum but no electric condensate and only closed electric strings occur into
vacuum to vacuum diagrams.

references

[1] g. t hooft, high energy phys. zichichi editor, bologna (1976) .

[2] s. mandelstam, phys. rep. 23 c (1976) 245.

[3] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 138 (1978) 1.

g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 153 (1979) 141.

[4] a.m. polyakov,

 the wall of the cave, pupt-1812, hep-th/9809057.

[5] yu. m. makeenko and a. a. migdal, phys. lett. 88 b (1979) 135.

[6] a. jevicki and b. sakita, nucl. phys. b 165 (1980) 511.

[7] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 72 (1974) 461.

[8] e. witten, proc. nato ias, plenum, new york (1980).

[9] d. gross and w.taylor iv, nucl. phys. b 403 (1993) 395 .

7

[10] n.seiberg and e.witten, nucl. phys. b 426 (1994) 19, erratum ibid. b

430 (1994) 485, hep-th/9407087.

[11] r.donagi and e.witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 299.

[12] m. bochicchio,  four-dimensional qcd and berwise duality , hep-

th/9810013, jhep01(1999)005.

[13] m. bochicchio,

four-dimensional qcd
and the collective eld of the hitchin bration , hep-th/9810015,
jhep01(1999)006.

 the large-n limit of

[14] m. bochicchio,  the abelian projection versus the hitchin bration of

k(d) pairs in four-dimensional qcd , hep-th/ 9904200.

[15] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 190 (1981) 455.

[16] h. konno, j. math. soc. japan 45 (1993) 461.

e. markman, compositio mathematica 93 (1994) 55.
n. nekrasov, comm. math. phys. 180 (1996) 587.
h. u. boden and k. yokogawa,  moduli spaces of parabolic higgs
bundles and parabolic k(d) pairs over smooth curves: i  alg-geom
/9610014.
r. donagi and e. markman, spectral covers, algebraically completely
integrable, hamiltonian systems, and moduli of bundles  alg-geom
/9507017.

[17] n. j. hitchin, duke math. j. 54 (1987) 91.

[18] n.chriss, v.ginzburg  representation theory and complex geometry

, birkhauser (1997).

[19] n. j. hitchin, a. karlhede, u. lindstrom and m. rocek, comm. math.

phys. 108 (1987) 535.

8

