9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

0
3

 
 

2
v
0
2
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

cosmology vs. holography

department of physics, stanford university, stanford, ca 94305-4060, usa

nemanja kaloper and andrei linde

(april 1999)

the most radical version of the holographic principle asserts that all information about physical
processes in the world can be stored on its surface. this formulation is at odds with inationary
cosmology, which implies that physical processes in our part of the universe do not depend on the
boundary conditions. also, there are some indications that the radical version of the holographic
theory in the context of cosmology may have problems with unitarity and causality. another formu-
lation of the holographic principle, due to fischler and susskind, implies that the entropy of matter
inside the post-inationary particle horizon must be smaller than the area of the horizon. their
conjecture was very successful for a wide class of open and at universes, but it did not apply to
closed universes. bak and rey proposed a dierent holographic bound on entropy which was valid
for closed universes of a certain type. however, as we will show, neither proposal applies to open,
at and closed universes with matter and a small negative cosmological constant. we will argue,
in agreement with easther, lowe, and veneziano, that whenever the holographic constraint on the
entropy inside the horizon is valid, it follows from the bekenstein-hawking bound on the black hole
entropy. these constraints do not allow one to rule out closed universes and other universes which
may experience gravitational collapse, and do not impose any constraints on inationary cosmology.

pacs: 98.80.cq

su-itp-99/6

hep-th/9904120

i. introduction

recently a new set of ideas was put forward, which
was called the holographic principle [1,2]. according
to this set of ideas, under certain conditions all the infor-
mation about a physical system is coded on its boundary,
implying that the entropy of a system cannot exceed its
boundary area in planck units.

this principle was motivated by the well-known re-
sult in black hole theory: the total entropy sm of mat-
ter inside of a black hole cannot be greater than the
bekenstein-hawking entropy, which is equal to a quar-
ter of the area of the event horizon in the planck units,
sm  sbh = a
4 [3]. one can interpret this result as a
statement that all the information about the interior of
a black hole is stored on its horizon.

the main aim of the holographic principle is to ex-
tend this statement to a broader class of situations. this
principle, in its most radical form, would imply that our
world is two-dimensional in a certain sense, because all
the information about physical processes in the world is
stored at its surface. this conjecture is very interesting,
and physical implications of its most radical version could
be quite signicant. there has been a lot of activity re-
lated to the use of the holographic principle in quantum
gravity, string theory and m-theory. for example, there
is a conjecture that the knowledge of a supersymmetric
yang-mills theory at the boundary of an anti-de-sitter
space may be sucient to restore the information about
supergravity/string theory in the bulk [4].

however, if one tries to apply the holographic principle
to cosmology, one immediately recognizes several prob-
lems. for example, a closed universe has nite size, but

it does not have any boundary. what is the meaning of
the holographic principle in such a case? if the universe
is innite (open or at), then it does not have bound-
aries either. in these cases, one may try to compare the
entropy inside of a box of size r with its area, and then
take the limit as r  . but in this limit the entropy
is always larger than the area [5].
another possibility is to compare the area of a domain
of the size of the particle horizon (the causally connected
part of the universe) with the entropy of matter inside
this domain. but this is also problematic. the entropy
produced during reheating after ination is proportional
to the total volume of inationary universe. during in-
ation, the volume inside the particle horizon grows as
e3ht, whereas the area of the horizon grows as e2ht.
clearly, the entropy becomes much greater than the area
of the horizon if the duration of ination is suciently
large. this means that an inationary universe is not
two-dimensional; information stored at its surface is
not rich enough to describe physical processes in its in-
terior. in fact, one of the main advantages of ination
is the possibility to study each domain of size h 1 as
an independent part of the universe, due to the no-hair
theorem for de sitter space. this makes the events at the
boundaries of an inationary universe irrelevant for the
description of local physics [6]. thus, the most radical
version of the holographic principle seems to be at odds
with inationary cosmology.

one may try to formulate a weaker form of this princi-
ple, which may still be quite useful. for example, fischler
and susskind proposed to put constraints only on the
part of the entropy which passed through the backward
light cone [5]. this formulation does not confront ina-

1

tionary cosmology because it eliminates from the consid-
eration most of the entropy produced inside the light cone
during the post-inationary reheating of the universe.
they further concentrated on investigation of those sit-
uations where cosmological evolution is adiabatic. from
the point of view of inationary cosmology, this means
that they considered the evolution of the universe after
reheating. the largest domain in which all of the entropy
crossed the boundary when the evolution is adiabatic is
bounded by the light cone emitted after ination and re-
heating.
in what follows we will loosely call this light
cone of size o(h 1) particle horizon, even though the
true particle horizon, describing the light cone emitted
at the beginning of ination, is exponentially large.

 a [5]. this conjecture is rather nontrivial.

fischler and susskind argued that in the case of adi-
abatic evolution the total entropy of matter within the
particle horizon must be smaller than the area of the
horizon, s <
indeed, the origin of the bekenstein-hawking constraint
on the entropy of a black hole is the existence of the
event horizon, which serves as a natural boundary for
all processes inside a black hole. but there is no event
horizon in a non-inationary universe, and the idea to
replace it by the particle horizon requires some justi-
cation. also, the bekenstein-hawking constraint on the
entropy is valid even if the processes inside a black hole
are non-adiabatic. thus it would be desirable to inves-
tigate this proposal and nd a way to apply it to the
situations when the processes can be non-adiabatic.

remarkably, fischler and susskind have shown that
their conjecture is valid for a at universe with all possi-
ble equations of state satisfying the condition 0  p  .
this result suggests that there may be some deep rea-
sons for the validity of holography. however, they also
noticed that their version of the holographic principle is
violated in a closed universe. one may consider this ob-
servation either as an indication that closed universes are
impossible or as a warning, showing that the holographic
principle may require additional justication and/or re-
formulation. indeed, this principle is not a rigid scheme
but a theory in the making.
it may be quite success-
ful in many respects, but one should not be surprised to
see some parts of its formulation change. for example,
bak and rey suggested to replace the particle horizon
by an apparent horizon in the formulation of the holo-
graphic principle, claiming that their proposal does not
suer from any problems in the closed universe case [7].
there were many attempts to apply various formula-
tions of the holographic principle to various cosmological
models, but the existing literature on cosmic holography
is somewhat controversial. the entropy of the observed
component of matter (such as photons) is well below 1090
[6]. meanwhile the constraint s <
 a applied to our part
of the universe implies that s < 10120 [5], which does
not look particularly restrictive. holography could be
quite important if it were able to rule out some types of
cosmological models, but this possibility depends on the
formulation and the range of validity of the holographic

principle. one may try to use holography to solve the
cosmological constant problem [8,9], but the progress in
this direction was very limited. recently it was claimed
that holography puts strong constraints on inationary
theory [10], but the authors of ref. [11] argued that this
is not the case. holographic considerations were used in
investigation of the pre-big bang theory [1214], and on
the basis of this investigation it was claimed that this
theory solves the entropy problem in the pre-big bang
theory [14], which is at odds with the results of [15].

the main goal of this paper is to examine the ba-
sic assumptions of cosmic holography and check which
of them may require modications. we will try to nd
out whether holography indeed puts constraints on var-
ious cosmological models. we will show, in particular,
that the original formulation of the holographic princi-
ple should be reconsidered more generally, and not only
when applied to closed universes. the holographic en-
tropy bound proposed in [5], as well as the formulation
proposed in [7], is violated at late stages of evolution of
open, at and closed universes containing usual matter
and a small amount of negative vacuum energy density.
at the beginning of their evolution, such universes can-
not be distinguished from the universe with a positive or
vanishing vacuum energy density. thus there is no obvi-
ous reason to consider such universes unphysical and rule
them out. however, when the density of matter becomes
diluted by expansion, a universe with a negative vacuum
energy collapses, and the condition s <
lated long before the universe reaches the planck density.
the investigation of universes with a negative cosmo-
logical constant gives an additional reason to look for a
reformulation of the cosmological holographic principle.
our approach will be most closely related to the approach
outlined by easther and lowe [11], and by veneziano
[14]. they argued that the entropy of the interior of a
domain of size h 1 cannot be greater than the entropy of
a black hole of a similar radius. we will extend their dis-
cussion and propose a justication for the entropy bound
obtained in ref. [5] for the case of an expanding nonin-
ationary (or post-inationary) universe. we will argue,
in agreement with [11,14], that in those cases where the
holographic bound of ref. [5] is valid, it is equivalent to
the bekenstein-hawking bound, which does not require
any assumptions about adiabatic evolution. this bound
alone cannot resolve the entropy problem for the pre-big
bang cosmology and does not lead to any constraints on
ination.

 a becomes vio-

ii. cosmology and holography

a. flat universe with p = 

let us begin with a brief review of [5]. we will restrict
our attention to the case when gravitational dynamics is
given by the einsteins equations, and the evolution is

2

adiabatic. first we will consider at homogeneous and
isotropic frw universes, whose metric is

s
a  t

1

+1 .

(8)

ds2 = dt2 + a2(t)(cid:0)dr2 + r2d(cid:1) .

(1)

we will use the units 8gn = 1. for simplicity we will
consider matter with the energy-momentum tensor t
= diag(, p, p, p). the independent equations of motion
are

h 2 = /3 ,

 + 3h( + p) = 0 ,

(2)

where h = a/a is the hubble parameter,  and p are
the energy density and pressure, and the overdot denotes
the time derivative. we will assume that  > 0, p = ,
and that the energy-momentum tensor satises the dom-
inant energy condition ||  1. this will generalize the
results of [5] obtained for 0    1, and is in fact the
correct sucient condition for the validity of the holo-
graphic bounds in at and open frw universes.

the solutions of (2) for  > 1 can be written as

a(t) = t

2

3(+1) .

(3)

here we took by denition a = 1 at the planck time t = 1.
density decreases as  = 0
3(+1)2 is
the density at t = 1. (for  = 1 one has the usual
de sitter solution.) the particle horizon is dened by
the distance covered by the light cone emitted at the
singularity t = 0:

a3(+1) , where 0 =

4

lh (t) = a(t)z t

0

dt
a(t)

= a(t)rh (t) ,

(4)

where rh is the comoving size of the horizon dened by
the condition dt
a = drh . suppose rst that  > 1/3.
then the comoving horizon is

and

rh = lh /a =

3( + 1)
3 + 1

3+1
3(+1) ,

t

lh =

3( + 1)
3 + 1

t =

2

3 + 1

h 1 .

(5)

(6)

at the planck time t = 1 one has lh = 3(+1)
3+1 which
generically is o(1). the volume of space within the dis-
tance lh from any point was also o(1). the entropy
density at that time could not be greater than o(1), so

one may say that initially (cid:0) s

 1. later the to-
h /a3, whereas
tal entropy inside the horizon grows as l3
the total area a of the particle horizon grows as l2
h.
therefore

a(cid:1)0 =  <

thus the ratio s
a does not increase in time for 1   >
1/3, so if the holographic constraint s
 1 was satised
at the planck time, later on it will be satised even better
[5].

<

a

a similar result can be obtained for 1    1/3.
however, investigation of this case involves several subtle
points. first of all, in this case the integral in eq. (4)
diverges at small t. this is not a real problem though.
it is resolved if one denes the particle horizon as an
integral not from t = 0, but from the planck time t = 1.
a more serious issue is the assumption of adiabatic
expansion of the universe. if one makes this assumption,
then one can show that the holographic bound is satised
for all  in the interval 1    1, which generalizes
the result obtained in [5]. however, the universe with
1 +   2/3 (i.e. with   1) is inationary. the
density of matter after ination becomes negligibly small,
so it must be created again in the process of reheating of
the universe. this process is strongly nonadiabatic.

as we already mentioned in the introduction, in in-
ationary cosmology the bounds of ref. [5] refer to the
post-inationary particle horizon, which means that the
integration in eq. (4) should begin not at t = 0 or at
t = 1 but after reheating of the universe. one can easily
verify that the bounds obtained in [5] are valid in this
case as well.

b. closed universe

the metric of a closed frw universe is

ds2 = dt2 + a2(t)(d2 + sin2 d) ,

(9)

where the spatial part represents a 3-sphere, with  be-
ing the azimuthal angle and d the line element on the
polar 2-spheres. the lightcones are still bounded by the
particle horizon. however, due to the curvature of the
3-sphere, the light rays must now travel along the az-
imuthal direction in order to maximize the sphere of
causal contact. the comoving horizon is the extent of
the azimuthal angle traveled by light between times 0
and t:

h =

lh
a

= z t

0

dt
a(t)

.

(10)

the boundary area of the causal sphere is then given by

a  4a2(t) sin2 h .
the volume inside of this sphere is

(11)

s
a  

lh
a3 = 

rh
a2 .

this yields

(7)

v = z h

0

d sin2  d = (2h  sin 2h ) .

(12)

assuming a constant comoving entropy density , we nd

3

s
a

= 

2h  sin 2h
4a2(t) sin2 h

.

(13)

here we have explicitly retained the contribution from
the comoving entropy density , which was ignored in
[5].

consider for simplicity a cold dark matter dominated
universe, with p  . in this case a = amax sin2(h /2).
the moment h =  corresponds to the maximal expan-
sion, a = amax. but at that time the light cone emitted
from the north pole of the universe converges at the
south pole, the area of the horizon (10) vanishes, and
the holographic bound on the ratio s/a becomes violated
[5]. note that in all other respects the point h =  is
regular, so one cannot argue, for example, that the vi-
olation of the holographic bound is a result of violent
quantum uctuations of the light cone.

c. open, closed and at universes with  < 0

let us return to the discussion of the at universe case
and look at eq.
(7) again. the size of the comoving
horizon rh can only grow. despite this growth, the holo-
graphic bound is satised for  > 0, p > , because the
value of a2 grows faster than rh in this regime. but this
bound can be violated if a2 grows more slowly than rh ,
and it will denitely be violated in all cases where a at
space can collapse.

usually, cosmologists believe that closed universes col-
lapse, whereas open or at universes expand forever. but
the situation is not quite so simple. if there is a su-
ciently large positive cosmological constant, then even a
closed universe will never collapse. on the other hand,
if the cosmological constant is negative, then, even if
it is extremely small, eventually it becomes dominant,
and the universe collapses, independently of whether it
is closed, open or at. in all of these cases the holographic
principle, as formulated in [5], will be violated.

for simplicity, we will consider a at universe (k = 0)
with a negative vacuum energy density  < 0, so that
 = p/  . we will assume that   1 in planckian
units. for example, in our universe  cannot be greater
than 10122. in an expanding universe  = 0
a3(+1)  ,
and the friedmann equation

3h 2 =

0

a3(+1)  

can be rewritten as

a = 

1

3r 0

a3+1  a2 .

(14)

(15)

because of the presence of the cosmological term, in gen-
eral we cannot write the integrals in a simple form. how-
ever, the exact form of the solutions is not necessary for
our purpose here.

first of all, we see that a vanishes at a3(+1) = 0, af-
ter which a becomes negative and the universe collapses.

4

this happens within a nite time after the beginning of
the expansion. from the denition of the particle hori-
zon and (15), one can nd the value of lh at the turning
point:

lh(turning) =



2(+1) , 1
2 )
b(
3( + 1)

,

(16)

where b(p, q) is the euler beta function. putting these
formulas together, we see that at the turning point

s
a  

1

2(1+)

(17)

a0

up to factors of order unity. for 1   > 1, the power
of  is positive and so the ratio s/a is very small at
the turning point. now, we can consider what hap-
pens near the nal stages of collapse, where the en-
ergy density reaches the planckian scales. by symme-
a(turning) lh (turning)  (3+1)/[6(+1)]
try, lh  2
at this time, whereas /a3  1. hence, eq. (8) yields
s/a  (3+1)/[6(+1)]  1 when  > 1/3. therefore,
we see that the ratio s/a reaches unity at some time
after the turning point, and that the holographic bound
becomes violated thereafter, but still well in the classical
phase, when the universe is still very large. indeed, we
can estimate the density of matter at that time to be
  
a universe where the only energy density is in form
of a negative cosmological constant is called the anti de
sitter space (ads). in string theory, ads spaces typically
emerge after compactifying string or m theory on an in-
ternal, compact, einstein space of positive constant cur-
vature. many interesting applications of the holographic
principle have been elaborated for the pure ads space.
it is therefore quite interesting that in the cosmological
context an ads background containing matter describes
a collapsing friedmann universe with a negative vacuum
energy, in which the cosmological holographic principle
is violated.

2  1.

+1

d. ads spaces with matter and an alternative

formulation of cosmic holography

in order to cure the problems of the original formula-
tion of the cosmological holographic principle, bak and
rey proposed a dierent formulation [7]. they suggested
to consider the so-called apparent horizon instead of the
particle horizon and claimed that in this case the holo-
graphic bound holds even in a closed universe. we will
not present here a detailed discussion of their proposal.
instead we will consider here their holographic bound in
the three-dimensional spatially at universe (d = 3), see
eq. (16) of [7]:

4

3a2(t) a(t)  1.

(18)

this condition is violated when the universe approaches
the turning point at a3(+1) = 0, when one has a = 0.
this violation occurs even much earlier than in the origi-
nal formulation of the cosmological holographic principle
of ref. [5].

one can propose two possible interpretations of these
results. first of all, one may argue that closed universes
are impossible, and that the universes with a negative
cosmological constant are also impossible. we do not see
how one could justify such a statement. after all, the
main reason why the holographic constraint was violated
in both cases studied above was related to the possibility
of gravitational collapse. it would be very odd to expect
that the holographic principle which was motivated by
the study of black holes should imply that gravitational
collapse cannot occur.

another possibility is that the formulations of the cos-
mic holography proposed in [5,7] should be somewhat
modied in the cases when the universe may experience
collapse. an investigation of this possibility is in progress
[16,17]. it would also be interesting to understand the
reasons why the holographic inequalities were correct in
the at universe case. we will discuss this issue in the
next section.

iii. black holes as big as a universe

the simplest way to understand the holographic bound
on the entropy of the observable part of the universe is
related to the theory of black holes. in what follows we
will develop further an argument given by easther and
lowe [11], and by veneziano [14].

the simplest cosmological models are based on the as-
sumption that our universe is homogeneous. but how
do we know that it is indeed homogeneous if the only
part of the universe that we can see has size h 1? we
cannot exclude the possibility that if we wait for another
10 billion years, we will see that we live near the center
of an expanding but isolated gravitational system of size
o(h 1) in an asymptotically at space. then we can
apply the bekenstein bound to the entropy of this sys-
tem, s <
 er, where e  r3 is the total energy and
r  h 1 is the size of this system, with h 2  , in
planck units. this gives s <
 h 2, which coincides with
the holographic bound.

of course, the idea that our part of the universe is
a small isolated island of size h 1 is weird, but we do

if one takes into account ination, then particle horizon is
exponentially large. still we can see (by means of electro-
magnetic radiation) only a small part of the universe of size
 h 1
 t. it is important that this scale, rather than the
particle horizon, determines the largest size of a black hole
which can be formed in an expanding universe.

not really advocate this view here. rather, we simply
say that since we cannot tell whether the universe is ho-
mogeneous, or it is an island of a size somewhat greater
than h 1, the bound s <
homogeneous universe as well.

 h 2 must hold for a usual

one can look at this constraint from a dierent per-
spective. it is well known that if our universe is locally
overdense on a scale of horizon with 
 = o(1), the over-
dense part will collapse and form a black hole of a size
h 1 [18]. then the entropy of this part of the universe
will satisfy the black hole bound s <
 h 2. again, there
is no indication that 
 = o(1) on the horizon scale, but
since we cannot exclude this possibility on a scale some-
what greater than the present value of h 1, the bound
should apply to the homogeneous universe as well.

the bound s <

instead of debating the homogeneity of our universe,
one can imagine adding a sucient amount of cold dark
matter to a part of our universe of size r. this would
not change its entropy, but it would lead to black hole
formation. then one can nd an upper bound on the
entropy of a black hole of size r: s <
 r2. if one takes
r  h 1, one again nds that s <
 h 2.
 r2 implies that the density of en-
tropy satises the constraint s = s/r3 < 1/r. thus
one could expect that it is possible to get a more strin-
gent constraint on the density of entropy by consider-
ing black holes of size greater than h 1. however, ac-
cording to carr and hawking [18], black holes formed
in a at universe cannot have size greater than o(h 1).
this constraint has a dynamical origin, and is not related
to the size of the particle horizon. usually the dier-
ence between h 1 and the particle horizon is not very
large, but during ination this dierence is very signi-
cant: h 1 remains nearly constant, whereas the particle
horizon grows exponentially.

if an inationary domain is homogeneous on a scale
o(h 1), then it is going to expand exponentially, in-
dependently of any inhomogeneities on a larger scale.
such a domain is not going to collapse and form a black
hole until ination ends and we wait long enough to see
the boundaries of the domain. but this will not happen
for an exponentially long time. nevertheless the holo-
graphic constraints on the entropy can be derived for the
processes after ination, just as in the case considered
above. these constraints will be related to the size of
the largest black hole which can be formed during the
expansion of the post-inationary universe, r  h 1,
rather than to the exponentially large size of the parti-
cle horizon in an inationary universe. as a result, the
holographic bounds do not lead to the constraints on the
duration of ination, inationary density perturbations,
and other parameters of inationary theory discussed in
[10].

if the universe is non-inationary and closed, or if it
has a negative cosmological constant, then, prior to the
point of maximal expansion, the holographic constraints
on the entropy within the regions of size h 1  t coin-

5

cide with the constraints for the at universe case. once
the universe begins to collapse, the constraints cannot be
further improved because the typical time of formation of
a black hole of size o(t) at that stage will be of the same
order of magnitude as the lifetime of the universe. but
this fact does not imply the impossibility of collapsing
universes.

note that in our consideration we did not make any
assumptions about the adiabatic evolution of the uni-
verse. thus, the cosmological holographic constraints on
entropy are as general as their black hole counterparts.
in fact, we believe that these two constraints have the
same origin.

iv. holography vs. inflation

as we already mentioned, all holographic constraints
discussed in this paper apply only to the post-inationary
universe. inationary cosmology in its spirit is somewhat
opposite to holography. the possibility of solving the
horizon, homogeneity, isotropy, and atness problems is
related to the superluminal stretching of the universe,
which erases all memory about the boundary conditions.
the speed of rolling of the inaton scalar eld approaches
an asymptotic value which does not depend on its initial
speed. the gradients of the elds and the density of par-
ticles which existed prior to ination (if there were any)
become exponentially small. all particles (and all en-
tropy) which exist now in the universe have been created
after ination in the process of reheating. this process
occurs locally, so the properties of particles as well as
their entropy do not depend on the initial conditions in
the universe.

in order to investigate this issue in a more detailed
way, let us consider the simplest version of inationary
cosmology where the universe during ination expands
only 1030 times (the minimal amount which is necessary
for ination to work). we will also assume for simplicity
that ination occurs at the gut scale, so that h  106
and the temperature after reheating is t  103 in the
planck units.
in such a case the size of the particle horizon after
ination will be lh  h 1  1030  1036, the area
a  l2
h  1099,
which clearly violates the bound s < a. this means that
the information stored at the surface of an inationary
domain cannot describe dynamics in its interior.

h  1072, and the entropy s  t 3l3

in practice, it is extremely dicult to invent ination-
ary theories where the universe grows only by a factor of
1030 because typically in such models 
 = o(1) at the
scale of the horizon. in the simplest versions of chaotic
ination the universe grows more than 101000000 times
during ination. the situation becomes especially dra-
matic in those versions of inationary cosmology which
lead to the process of eternal self-reproduction of ina-
tionary domains. in such models the universe is not an

expanding ball of a huge size, but a growing fractal con-
sisting of many exponentially large balls. in the process
of eternal self-reproduction of the universe all memory
about the boundary conditions and initial conditions be-
comes completely erased [6].

of course, one can use the version of the holographic
principle describing the post-inationary evolution of the
universe, as discussed in the previous sections. however,
in realistic inationary models the energy density at the
end of ination falls more than 15 orders of magnitude
below the planck density, and the most interesting part
of dynamics of the universe where quantum gravity could
play a signicant role is already over.

there is another interesting aspect of relations between
ination and holography. the holographic bound on the
present entropy of the universe is s <
 h 2. one has
h 1  1060 in the planck units. this gives the constraint
(19)

s <
 h 2  10120 .

meanwhile, the entropy of matter in the observable part
of the universe is smaller than 1090. if one thinks about
cosmology in terms of the information which can be
stored on the horizon (or, to be more accurate, on a sur-
face of a sphere of size h 1), one can be encouraged by
the fact that the holographic bound is satised with a
wide safety margin, s/a <
 1030. on the other hand, if,
as we have argued, the information stored on the sphere
of size h 1 is not related to the initial conditions at the
beginning of ination, then its importance is somewhat
limited. in such a case the only information about the
universe that we gained is the bound s <
is 30 orders of magnitude less precise than the observa-
tional constraint on the entropy. but what is the origin
of these 30 orders of magnitude?

 10120, which

let us look back in time and assume that there was no
ination and the evolution of the universe was adiabatic.
our part of the universe today has size  1028 cm. at
the planck time its size l would be 1028 cm multiplied
by tp
, where t0 is the present value of the temperature
t0
of the universe, and tp  1 is the planck temperature.
(note that the scale of the universe is inversely propor-
tional to t during adiabatic expansion.) one therefore
nds l  103 cm, which is 1030 times greater than the
planck length. that is exactly the reason why we need
the universe to inate by the factor of 1030. (the true
number depends on the value of reheating temperature
after ination.)

if the universe did not inate at all, it would be very
holographic. a typical homogeneous part of the universe
soon after the big bang would have planck size, it would
contain just one or two particles, and the constraint s <
a would be saturated. but we would be unable to live
there.

let us assume, for the sake of the argument, that in-
ation starts and ends at the planck density, and it has
planckian temperature after reheating.
if the universe
during this period inated by more than 1030 times, then

6

our part of the universe after ination would have the size
103 cm, i.e. 1030 in planck units, just as we estimated
its entropy would be 1090. then the universe
above.
expands by tp
t0  1030 times, and the area of our do-
main becomes 10120. this makes it clear that the fac-
tor of 1030 which characterizes the discrepancy between
the holographically natural value of entropy 10120 and
the observed value 1090 is the same factor which appears
in the formulations of the entropy problem and atness
problem [14].

thus, in the nal analysis, the reason why one has

s <
 1030a in our universe is related to ination. with-
out ination one would have s  a, and a typical locally
homogeneous patch of the universe would collapse within
the planck time. the safety margin of 30 orders of mag-
nitude created by ination makes the universe very large
and long-living, but simultaneously prevents the holo-
graphic constraint on entropy from being very informa-
tive.

a nontrivial relation between the holographic con-
straint and ination does not mean that one can iden-
tify the entropy problem (existence of a huge entropy
s  1090 in our part of the universe) and the hologra-
phy problem (discrepancy between the holography bound
10120 and the true value of entropy 1090). for example,
in one of the recent versions of the pre-big bang sce-
nario the stage of the pre-big bang ination begins from
a state which can be identied with a black hole with a
large area of the black hole horizon [19]. in this case, the
initial entropy of the gravitational conguration by de-
nition satises the bekenstein-hawking bound, which co-
incides with the holographic bound. if one assumes that
the entropy of matter inside the black hole saturates the
bekenstein-hawking bound (this is just an assumption
which does not follow from the black hole theory), then
the holography problem will be resolved [14]. however,
one should still determine the origin of the enormously
large black hole entropy in this scenario, which consti-
tutes the entropy problem [15].

v. conclusions

the idea that all information about physical processes
in the world can be stored on its surface is very power-
ful. it has many interesting implications in investigation
of the nonperturbative properties of m-theory. however,
it is rather dicult to merge this idea with cosmology.
the universe may not have any boundary at all, or it
may expand so fast that boundary eects become irrel-
evant for the description of the local dynamics. in this
paper we have shown that some of the formulations of
the holographic principle should be modied not only in
application to a closed universe, but also for open, closed
and at universes with a negative cosmological constant.
we believe that the cosmological holographic constraints
on entropy, in those cases where they are valid, can be

understood using the bekenstein-hawking bound on the
entropy of black holes. these constraints are rather non-
trivial, but if applied to our part of the universe they
are much weaker than the observational constraints, as
well as the constraints which follow from the theory of
creation of matter after ination. we believe that these
constraints do not permit one to rule out the universes
which may experience gravitational collapse, and they
do not impose any additional constraints on inationary
cosmology.

the constraints on entropy represent only one aspect
of the holographic principle. a stronger form which has
been advocated requires the existence of a theory living
on the boundary surface which would describe physical
processes in the enclosed volume. validity of this con-
jecture in the cosmological context has not been demon-
strated, and in fact one may argue that there exists a
general obstacle on the way towards the realization of
this idea.
in the theory of black holes, the role of the
holographic surface is played by the black hole horizon.
its area, and correspondingly the number of degrees of
freedom living on the horizon, remains constant if one
neglects quantum gravity eects. thus it is not unrea-
sonable to assume that there exists a unitary quantum
theory associated with the black hole horizon. however,
in an expanding universe the number of degrees of free-
dom associated with the cosmological horizon, or with
a horizon of a would-be black hole which provides holo-
graphic constraints on entropy, rapidly changes in time.
for example, in a closed universe the initial area of the
horizon is vanishingly small, then it grows until it reaches
the maximum, and subsequently it disappears. thus the
number of degrees of freedom associated with such a sur-
face strongly depends on time even when the evolution
of the universe is adiabatic and the total number of de-
grees of freedom in the bulk is conserved. therefore one
may wonder whether the holographic theory existing on
such a surface will violate unitarity.
in addition, the
disappearance of degrees of freedom after the moment
of a maximal expansion suggests that the second law of
thermodynamics may be violated. the situation with
causality in such a theory is not clear as well. indeed,
information about the new degrees of freedom which are
going to appear or disappear on the holographic surface
is stored in the bulk. this information does not propa-
gate along the surface, rather it crosses the surface when
new particles enter the apparent horizon. but this sug-
gests that the creation of the new degrees of freedom in
the holographic theory will not look like an eect caused
by the earlier existing conditions at the surface.

it remains to be seen whether one can overcome all
of these problems and make the holographic principle a

the authors are grateful to raphael bousso for the discus-
sion of this point.

7

frolov, physics of black holes (dordrecht, netherlands:
kluwer academic,1989).

[19] a. buonanno, t. damour, and g. veneziano, nucl. phys.

b543, 275 (1999), hep-th/9806230.

useful part of the modern cosmological theory includ-
ing inationary theory. we should note, however, that
quantum cosmology is extremely complicated and coun-
terintuitive in many respects.
it is still a challenging
task to unify m-theory and inationary cosmology. any
progress in this direction would be very important. one
may expect that the ideas borne out by the investigation
of quantum dynamics of black holes and enriched by the
study of supergravity and string theory will play the key
role in the development of a nonperturbative approach
to quantum cosmology.

we wish to thank r. bousso, w. fischler and l.
susskind for valuable discussions. this work has been
supported in part by nsf grant phy-9870115.

[1] g. t hooft, eprint gr-qc/9321026, published in salam-
festschrift: a collection of talks, eds. a. ali, j. ellis and
s. randjbar-daemi (world scientic, 1993).
[2] l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36 6377 (1995).
[3] j. bekenstein, phys. rev. d9 3292 (1974); phys. rev.
d30 1669 (1984); gr-qc/9409015; s. hawking, phys. rev.
d 14, 2460 (1976).

[4] j.m. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231
(1998), hep-th/9711200; s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov,
a.m. polyakov, phys. lett. b428 105 (1998); e. witten,
adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 253 (1998), hep-th/9802150;
p. claus, r. kallosh, j. kumar, p. townsend, a. van
proeyen, jhep 9806, 004 (1998); l. susskind and e.
witten, hep-th/9805114.

[5] w. fischler and l. susskind, hep-th/9806039.
[6] a.d. linde, particle physics and inationary cosmology

(harwood, chur, switzerland, 1990).

[7] d. bak and s.-j. rey, hep-th/9902173.
[8] t. banks, hep-th/9601151.
[9] a. cohen, d. kaplan and a. nelson, hep-th/9803132.

[10] s.k. rama and t. sarkar, phys. lett. b450, 55 (1999).
[11] r. easther and d.a. lowe, phys. rev. lett. 82, 4967

(1999), hep-th/9902088.

[12] d. bak and s.-j. rey, hep-th/9811008.
[13] a.k. biswas, j. maharana and r.k. pradhan, hep-

th/9811051.

[14] g. veneziano, phys. lett. b454, 22 (1999), hep-

th/9902126.

[15] n. kaloper, a.d. linde, and r. bousso, phys. rev. d59,

043508 (1999), hep-th/9801073.

[16] r. bousso, private communication.
[17] l. susskind, private communication.
[18] b. j. carr and s. w. hawking, mon. not. roy. astr. soc.
168, 399 (1974); b. j. carr, astrophys. j. 201, 1 (1975);
d. k nadezhin, i. d. novikov and a. g. polnarev, astron
zh 55, 216 (1978) [sov. astron. 22, 129 (1978)]; i. d.
novikov and a. g. polnarev, astron. zh. 57, 250 (1980)
[sov. astron. 24 147 (1980)]; i. d. novikov and v. p.

8

