9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
2

 

 
 

1
v
2
1
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

nbi-he-99-15
aei-100
2 apr 1999

a new perspective on matter coupling

in 2d quantum gravity

j. ambjrn, a,1 k. n. anagnostopoulos a,2 and r. loll b,3

a the niels bohr institute,

blegdamsvej 17, dk-2100 copenhagen , denmark

b max-planck-institut fur gravitationsphysik,

albert-einstein-institut,

am muhlenberg 5, d-14476 golm, germany

abstract

we provide compelling evidence that a previously introduced model of non-perturba-
tive 2d lorentzian quantum gravity exhibits (two-dimensional) at-space behaviour
when coupled to ising spins. the evidence comes from both a high-temperature
expansion and from monte carlo simulations of the combined gravity-matter sys-
tem. this weak-coupling behaviour lends further support to the conclusion that
the lorentzian model is a genuine alternative to liouville quantum gravity in two
dimensions, with a dierent, and much smoother critical behaviour.

1email ambjorn@nbi.dk
2email konstant@nbi.dk
3email loll@aei-potsdam.mpg.de

1

1 introduction

at the end of the twentieth century, the non-perturbative quantization of gravity
remains an elusive goal for theoretical researchers. there is not even a consensus
on how the problem should best be tackled. for example, considering pure-gravity
approaches, we have on the one hand euclidean path-integral methods, which are
close to usual formulations of (non-generally covariant) quantum eld theories and
well-suited for numerical simulations. on the other hand, in canonical quantization
approaches it is  at least in principle  easier to address questions about the be-
haviour of spatial three-geometries, but the complicated structure of the constraints
tends to lead to computational diculties.4 unfortunately, very little is known
about the relation between the covariant and canonical approaches. in part this is
due to the signature problem of the path-integral formulations: the sum over all
space-time geometries is usually taken over riemannian, and not over the physical
lorentzian (pseudo-riemannian) four-metrics modulo dieomorphisms. the prob-
lem of how to relate the two sectors by an appropriately generalized wick rotation
remains unresolved.

our aim is to investigate the possible consequences of taking the lorentzian
structure seriously within a path-integral approach. in order to gauge the diculties
this involves and to circumvent technical problems, we rst addressed the issue in
two space-time dimensions, where there already exists a well-understood theory of
(euclidean) quantum gravity, namely, liouville gravity. in [1], we proposed a new,
lorentzian model of 2d quantum gravity, obtained by taking the continuum limit of
a state sum of dynamically triangulated two-geometries. the lorentzian aspects of
the model were two-fold: rstly, the sum was taken only over those two-geometries
which are generated by evolving a one-dimensional spatial slice and which allow
for the introduction of a causal structure. secondly, the lorentzian propagator
was obtained by a suitable analytic continuation in the coupling constant. the
rst aspect turned out to be the crucial one, leading to a continuum theory of 2d
quantum gravity inequivalent to the usual liouville gravity. this was shown in
[1], where both the loop-to-loop propagator and various geometric properties of the
model were calculated explicitly. the hausdor dimension of the quantum geometry
is dh = 2, and points to a much smoother behaviour than that of the euclidean case
(where dh = 4).

however, we must emphasize that dh = 2 does not imply a at geometry. the
model of lorentzian gravity dened in [1] allows for arbitrarily large uctuations
of the spatial volume from one time-slice to the next. this is illustrated by fig.
1, which shows a typical surface generated by the monte carlo simulations, to be
described in sec. 3. the length of the compact spatial slice uctuates strongly with
time (pointing along the vertical axis). using the results of [1], one easily derives

4alternatively, one could embed quantum gravity in a larger, unied theory like string theory
or (the as yet non-existent) m-theory. however, these are still far from giving us any detailed
information about the quantum gravity sector.

2

figure 1: a typical discrete history of pure lorentzian gravity with volume n=1024.

that in the thermodynamic limit and for large times the average spatial volume l
and uctuations around l behave like

hli =

1


and

hli = qhl2i  hli2 =

1
2

(1)

respectively, for a given cosmological constant . this demonstrates that even in
the continuum limit the uctuations are large, and of the same order of magnitude
as the spatial volume itself.

we managed in [1] to further trace the dierence between the two quantum the-
ories to the presence or absence of so-called baby universes. these are outgrowths
of the two-geometry giving it the structure of branchings-over-branchings, which are
known to dominate the typical geometry contributing to the euclidean state sum.
on the other hand, in the lorentzian state sum, one can suppress the formation
of such branchings with respect to the preferred spatial slicing (which is not present
in the euclidean picture, where no directions are distinguished). there is also a
physical motivation for suppressing the generation of baby universes, since the asso-
ciated (discrete) geometries can usually not be embedded isometrically in a smooth
lorentzian space-time.
if nevertheless one did decide to generalize the evolution
rules of the lorentzian model to allow for such branchings (and keep only a weaker
notion of causality, c.f.
[1]), one would rederive the usual euclidean liouville re-
sults. in what follows, when talking about the lorentzian model, we will mean the

3

unmodied model without branching baby universes, i.e. the model of 2d quantum
gravity that does not lie in the same universality class as liouville gravity. we also
would like to point out that from the point of view of a canonical quantization the
lorentzian model is much more natural. the inclusion of topology changes of space
into a canonical scheme would require a so-called third quantization of geometry.

in liouville gravity, matter couples strongly to geometry, perhaps even too
strongly in the sense that the combined system becomes inconsistent when the cen-
tral charge of the (conformal) matter exceeds one. arguments have been presented
which link the strong deformation of geometry to the creation of baby universes
[9]. it is therefore conceivable that the lorentzian model of gravity  where baby
universes are absent  has a weaker and less pathological coupling to matter.

2, with nearest-neighbour interaction p<ij> ij between

in order to understand the behaviour of the combined gravity-matter system,
we are considering here the coupling of the gravitational model of reference [1] to
an ising model of spin- 1
in [1] we made a careful analysis of the implications of the
its spins i = 1.
lorentzian signature for the sum over space-time metrics. the most straightforward
way of obtaining the continuum limit consisted in performing the calculations in
the discretized model with purely imaginary coupling (corresponding to euclidean
signature) and only afterwards rotating back to the lorentzian sector. moreover,
it turned out that certain simple properties, like the fractal dimension of space-time,
were independent of the analytic continuation.

we will apply the same philosophy in the present context by analyzing the ising
model coupled to 2d gravity with coupling constants corresponding to the euclidean
signature sector. nevertheless we will continue to talk about lorentzian gravity
coupled to matter, because the choice of two-dimensional euclidean geometries con-
tributing to the path integral is dictated by the requirement that after the rotation
to lorentzian signature they should be causal and non-singular. the matter observ-
ables we will consider are the critical exponents for the ising model, characterizing
the underlying c = 1/2 fermionic continuum model coupled to gravity, which are
not expected to change under the rotation to lorentzian signature.
in order to
determine the universality class of the interaction between matter and gravity it is
therefore convenient to work entirely within the euclidean sector of our lorentzian
gravity model.

for xed regular two-dimensional lattices, and in the absence of an external
magnetic eld, the ising model can be solved exactly in a variety of ways (see,
for example, [3, 4, 5]). the partition function (for the square lattice) was found
by onsager. its critical behaviour is characterized by a logarithmic singularity of
the specic heat and the critical exponents near the curie temperature,  = 0,
 = 0.125, and  = 1.75, for the specic heat, the spontaneous magnetization and
the susceptibility respectively.

for the case of the usual euclidean 2d gravity, described by an ensemble of planar
random surfaces, coupling to ising spins was rst considered in [6], where an exact
solution was obtained with the help of matrix model methods. it could be shown

4

that in the presence of gravity, the matter behaviour is softened to a third-order
phase transition, characterized by critical exponents  =1,  = 0.5, and  = 2 [7].
on the other hand, the geometry is roughened, as exemplied by the increase from
1/2 (pure 2d liouville gravity) to 1/3 of the entropy exponent string for baby
universes on manifolds of spherical topology.
it is not entirely straightforward to apply the methods used to obtain these ex-
act solutions to the lorentzian gravity model. for example, one can write down an
expression for the transfer matrix generalizing that of the onsager solution by im-
posing a length cuto l0 on the length of spatial slices. however, a major stumbling
block to understanding the behaviour of its eigenvalues as l0   is the fact that
as a consequence of the gravitational degrees of freedom, transitions between spa-
tial slices of dierent length are allowed. this makes the use of fourier transforms
problematic, which are an essential ingredient of this and other algebraic solution
schemes. moreover, the hilbert space dimension for the discrete, nite model is

given by pl0

l=1 2l, which grows rapidly with l0.

in the absence of an analytic exact solution5, one way to try to extract infor-
mation about the matter-coupled model is by performing a series expansion of the
partition function z at high or low temperature, or of suitable derivatives of z. for
at, regular lattice geometries, these have been studied extensively since the early
days of the ising model. it is well-known that the high-t expansion, in particular,
that of the magnetic susceptibility  at zero eld is well-suited for obtaining infor-
mation about the critical behaviour of the theory. we will show that the same is
true for the coupled gravity-ising model, after taking into account some peculiarities
to do with the fact that we have an ensemble of uctuating geometries instead of a
xed lattice. in the limit of large lattice size n, there is a well-dened expansion in
terms of u := tanh , where the coupling  is proportional to the inverse temper-
ature, whose coecients can be determined by diagrammatic techniques. given a
plausible ansatz for the singularity structure of the thermodynamic functions, one
can then extract estimates for the critical point and critical exponents from the rst
few terms of such an expansion. these results are corroborated by performing a
monte carlo simulation of lorentzian gravity coupled to the ising model. apart
from being in good agreement with the high-t expansion, the simulations also allow
us to measure the quantum geometrical properties of the model.

5a matrix model of lorentzian gravity coupled to ising spin has been formulated recently. its

analysis is the subject of a forthcoming publication [10].

5

2 the high-t expansion

recall the usual high-t expansion of the ising model on a xed lattice of volume
n, with partition function

z(, n) = x{i=1}

 p<ij>
e

ij +hpi

i

,

 =

j
kt

,

(2)

where the sum is taken over all possible spin congurations, and j > 0 denotes the
ferromagnetic ising coupling. we will only consider the case of vanishing magnetic
eld, h = 0. the ising spins are located at the lattice vertices, labelled by i, j 
1 . . . v. a convenient expansion parameter at high temperature is u := tanh , which
we can use to re-express

eij = (1 + u ij) cosh .

(3)

substituting (3) into (2), the partition function becomes

z(, n) = (cosh )s x{i}

h1 + u x<ij>

ij + u2 x<ij> x<kl>

(ij)(kl) + . . .i (4)
(5)

=: 2v(cosh )s(1 + xn1

nun),

with v denoting the number of vertices and s the number of nearest-neighbour pairs
(i.e. the number of lattice links). note that the terms  un in eq. (4) are only non-
vanishing if every i in i1i2 . . . in appears an even number of times. representing
spin pairs (ij) by drawing a link between i and j on the lattice, this is equivalent
to the following statement: non-vanishing contributions to n in eq. (5) correspond
to gures of lattice links which are closed polygons, with an even number of links
meeting at each vertex. the coecient n simply counts the number of such gures
at order n that can be put down on a given lattice, and will depend on the lattice
geometry (triangular, square, etc.). it is a polynomial in the variable n.

because of the extensive nature of the free energy f (n) =kt ln z(n), we must
have that (1 + p nun)  en (...) in the thermodynamic limit n  , and we can

therefore write for the partition function per unit volume

ln z() :=

1
n

ln z(, n) =

s
n

cosh  +

v
n

ln 2 + xn1

(0)
n un,

(6)

where (0)
is obtained by taking the term linear in n in n and setting n = 1.
n
note that both connected and disconnected graphs contribute to (0)
n . a simi-
lar relation can be obtained for the magnetic susceptibility at zero eld, (n) =
kt  2
h 2 ln z(n)|h=0. at high temperature, the susceptibility per unit volume can be
expressed as
(7)

n un).
(2)

 = kt (1 + xn1

6

n are the exact analogues of (0)
n

the coecients (2)
in eq. (6), where the counting
now refers to polygon graphs with two odd vertices (vertices with an odd number
of incoming links), and all other vertices even (c.f. [8], but beware of the dierence
in notation for the number of vertices).

since we are primarily interested in the bulk behaviour of the gravity-matter
system, we will in the following for simplicity choose the boundary conditions to be
periodic. that is, we will identify the top and bottom spatial slices of the cylindrical
histories introduced in [1]. clearly this is not going to aect the local properties
of the model. as above, we will denote the discrete volume, i.e. the number of
triangles of a given two-dimensional geometry (with torus topology), by n.
it
follows immediately that such a geometry contains n time-like links, n/2 space-like
links, n/2 vertices and 3n/2 nearest-neighbour pairs.

in quantum gravity the volume n becomes a dynamical variable. for xed
topology, the only coupling constant appearing in the action of pure 2d quantum
gravity is the cosmological constant, multiplying the volume term. the partition
function of the ising model coupled to 2d lorentzian quantum gravity is given by

g(, t, ) = xttt

ent zt () = xttt

ent x{i(t )}

 phijit
e

ij

,

(8)

where the sum is taken over all triangulations t with the topology of a torus and
t time-slices, nt is the number of triangles in t , and zt () the ising partition
function (2) dened on t . fortunately, the summation over volumes in eq. (8) does
not lead to additional complications in the analysis of the thermodynamic properties
of the spin system, since the state sums for xed and uctuating volume are simply
related by a laplace transformation. rewrite relation (8) as

g(, t, ) = xn

en z(, n, t) := xn

en xttn,t

zt (),

(9)

where tn,t denotes the toroidal triangulations of volume n and length t in the time
direction. analogous to eq. (6), we expect the matter part f () of the free energy
density in the gravitational ensemble to behave in the thermodynamic limit (n  
and t  n ) like6
(10)

z(, n, t)  e(cf ())n +o(n ).

(for simplicity, we have set the ferromagnetic coupling to j = 1.) we can now
reexpress eq. (9) as

g(, t, ) = xn

e(c())n +o(n ),

c() = c  f (),

(11)

where c  c( = 0) = ln 2 is the critical cosmological constant of pure gravity,
which was determined in [1]. interesting limiting cases are   0 where f () =
6note that with the conventions used in denition (2), the ground state energy is 3n/2 and

the free energy density f () is negative.

7

1

2 ln 2, reecting the factor 2v in eq. (4) (each spin has two states), and the strong
coupling region    where f ()  3/2 (only the ground state of all spins
aligned contributes to the state sum (2)). the term proportional to the pure gravity
cosmological constant c appearing together with the free energy in (10) has its origin
in the sum over all triangulations,

1 = ecn +o(n ).

xttn,t

(12)

a calculation of z(, n, t) not only determines the thermodynamic properties of the
spin system in the presence of gravity, but at the same time describes gravitational
aspects of the coupled system, for example, the critical cosmological constant c().
conversely, knowledge of c() determines the spin partition function in the innite
volume limit.  the analogue of the high-t expansion (5) in the presence of gravity
is given by

z(, n, t) = (cosh )

3n

2 2

n

2 xttn,t

(1 + xn1

n(t )un).

(13)

we may reexpress the critical cosmological constant of the combined system as

c() = c +

3
2

ln cosh  +

ln 2 + f (u),

1
2

where f(u) is dened in the thermodynamic limit by

pttn,t

(1 + pn1
pttn,t

n(t )un)

1

= en f (u).

(14)

(15)

the coecients  of the power series now depend on the triangulation t . when
counting diagrams of a given type and order n, we must keep in mind that the
vertex neighbourhoods do not look all the same, as they do in the case of a regular
lattice, but that the distribution of coordination numbers (numbers of links meeting
at a vertex) is subject to a probability distribution. the coecients in the high-t
expansion therefore count the average occurrence of a certain diagram type in the
ensemble of triangulations of a xed volume n, for large n.

starting to evaluate the series in (13) order by order, one immediately notices a
qualitative dierence from the regular case. if we had considered a regular triangular
lattice (coordination number 6), the rst non-trivial contribution to the counting
of even diagrams would have appeared at n = 3, where one obtains 3(n) = n,
coming from closed triangle graphs. however, when looking at all two-dimensional
random lattices contributing to the sum over geometries in the gravity case, there
are geometries which have one or several pinches. a pinch is a spatial slice of
minimal length l = 1, which consists of a single link and a single vertex (see fig. 2).
pinches occur even if the total volume of the two-geometry is kept xed, since in the
presence of gravity the length of spatial slices is a uctuating dynamical variable.

8

figure 2: a two-dimensional geometry with a pinch of length 1.

for the gravitationally coupled ising model, the lowest-order contribution to
the power series in u in (13) occurs therefore already at order n = 1. clearly,
such pinching contributions will be present at all orders, in both connected and
disconnected diagrams, on top of the ordinary bulk contributions, coming from
diagrams which do not wind around the spatial direction of the torus in a non-
trivial way. the former have no analogue on regular lattices.

fortunately, it turns out that the pinch contributions are irrelevant, in the sense
that they contribute at a lower order of n, whereas the bulk contributions in n go
like n k, k  1. this can be seen most easily by considering the laplace-transformed
partition function. let us begin by evaluating the zeroth-order term of eq. (13),

g(, t) = xn

en xttn,t

1 := xn

en (cosh )

3n

2 2

n

2 xttn,t

1,

(16)

where for notational brevity we have dened an eective cosmological constant
 =   3
2 ln 2, in accordance with eq. (14). the left-hand side of (16)
can be computed as

2 ln cosh   1

g(, t) = i

dx
2ix

g(x, y =

; e; t),

1
x

(17)

given the explicit form of the propagator derived in ref. [1], to which we also refer
for details of notation. the term proportional to u1 in the laplace transform of (13)
is

 u1 : xn

en xtt l=1

n,t

1 = g(, t) norm

(),

1

(18)

where the second summation is over triangulations with a single pinch of spatial
length l = 1. to arrive at the last expression on the right-hand side, the factor

9

g(, t) has been pulled out. in terms of quantities derived in [1], the normalized
coecient norm

is most easily computed as

1

t1
pt=1

norm

1

() =

g(x, l = 1; t)g(l = 1, y; t  t)

g(x, y; t)

.

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)x=y=0

(19)

we are interested in the behaviour of this expression in the thermodynamic limit,
which is tantamount to letting the cosmological constant approach its critical value,
  c. in this limit, (19) yields simply a constant, norm
feature of congurations with one or several pinches. for example, generalizing to
geometries with a single pinch of length l gives a coecient 2l in the large-volume
limit. as an example of a more complicated conguration, the normalized coecient
for histories with one pinch of length l1 and a second one of length l2 becomes in
this limit7

a0 2. this is a general

1

 ul1+l2 :

a0 3

min(l1,l2)1

xk=0

(1)k

(l1 + l2  k  1)!

(l1  k  1)!(l2  k  1)!k!

.

(20)

by contrast, let us now calculate the rst bulk contribution, which occurs at
order u3. the contribution to 3 is simply n, from counting the number of triangle
graphs in the 2d geometry. taking the laplace transform, we obtain

xn

en n  




g(, t)  hni g(, t).

evaluating the expectation value of n in the continuum limit, one nds

hni = g(, t)1 

a0



g(, t)

4 (1  e2t  t(1  e2t))

a2(1  e2t)

t large



4t
a2

.

(21)

(22)

(23)

(we are using the notation of [1], with t and  the continuum length of the two-
geometry in time-direction and the renormalized cosmological constant.) this di-
verges exactly the way one would expect from a volume term. it reiterates the con-
clusion of [1] that all macroscopic metric variables scale canonically in the lorentzian
gravity model.

7let us take the opportunity to correct some misprints in equation (29) of [1], which has been

used in deriving formula (20). the correct equation reads

g(l1, l2; t) =

f 2t(1  f 2)2bl1+l2

t

l2b2

t al1+l2

t

min(l1,l2)1

xk=0

(l1 + l2  k  1)!

(l1  k  1)!(l2  k  1)!k! (cid:18)

atct
b2

t (cid:19)k

,

where f, at, bt and ct are dened in [1].

10

figure 3: the triangles contributing to the weight at the vertex i.

we conclude that in the thermodynamic limit, pinching terms will be suppressed
since their number is proportional to n 0, whereas the (connected) bulk diagrams
behave like  n 1. for large n, the pinch contributions must therefore factorize
according to

n(t )un) = (1 + n 0 xm1

pm(t )um) (1 + n xn1

(24)

n(t )un + o(n 2)).

(1 + xn1
taking the logarithm, we see that the sum (1 + p pm(t )um)  n 0 will only con-

tribute a constant term to the free energy, which does not aect the universal be-
haviour of the model. we will make no attempt to calculate it explicitly. similar
considerations apply to the high-t expansion of the magnetic susceptibility in the
presence of gravity. the pinch contributions factorize, and we will only need to com-
pute the multiplicity (2)
n of bulk polygon graphs with two odd vertices per triangle
in

  (1 + xn1

(2)
n un).

(25)

our next step will be to derive the probability distribution of the coordination
numbers in the lorentzian gravity model, in the thermodynamic limit as the cos-
mological constant   c = ln 2. recall that when generating an interpolating
space-time between an initial and a nal spatial geometry, the geometry of each
space-time sandwich with t = 1 is independent of the previous one in the sense
that there are no local constraints on how the numbers ki  1 of time-like future-
pointing links can be chosen at each vertex i [1]. having reached a spatial slice at
time t, we can generate the space-time between t and t+1 proceeding from left to
right. to each vertex i at time t we associate ki time-like links (ending at vertices of
the subsequent spatial slice at t+1) and the space-like link to the right of the vertex.
there are therefore exactly ki triangles associated with the vertex i, contributing
with a weight factor ek to the action, as illustrated in fig. 3. since the assignment

11

of the order ki of outgoing time-like links to the vertex is completely independent
of the k-assignments of other vertices, the probability distribution for k outgoing
future-directed links is given by

p(k) = ek(e  1).

(26)

strictly speaking, the argument leading to eq. (26) is only correct in the continuum
limit in which extreme pinching to vanishing spatial length l = 0 does not occur
(for o-critical , relation (26) must be modied to account for the fact that moves
changing the torus topology are forbidden). fortunately this is the only case we are
interested in, and the nal probability distribution is therefore obtained by setting
e = 1/2 in (26), yielding

p(k)  pc(k) =

1
2k .

(27)

for reasons of symmetry, the distribution of incoming time-like links at i (originating
at the slice at t1) is of course identical. given relation (27), we can now compute
the probability distribution p(j) of the vertex order, i.e. of the total number j of
links meeting at a vertex (incoming and outgoing time-like and space-like links),

p(j) =

j3
2j2 ,

j  4.

(28)

with the distribution (27) in hand, we can now embark on the actual counting
of diagrams contributing to the susceptibility coecients (2)
in (25). we will only
n
quote the results up to order n = 5. further details of the counting procedure will
appear elsewhere. the average numbers of diagrams per triangle (i.e. per unit
volume) are listed in the table below.

n

1

2

3

4

5

open

closed disconnected

3
2
8 1
2
43 1
2
214 5
6
1038 1
6

0

0

0

14

134 5
18

0

0

0

17
174 17

18

total

3
2
8 1
2
43 1
2
211 5
6
997 1
2

open graphs are connected graphs without any self-intersections. closed graphs are
connected graphs which are not open. the disconnected graphs consist of two or
more components and contribute with a minus sign.

in order to double-check our results at order 4 and 5, where the counting becomes
n listed

slightly involved, we have performed a numerical check on the coecients (2)

12

above. this was done by computer-generating histories of length t  100, with
an initial spatial slice of length l = 200, and counting diagrams of a given type.
the results are given in the table below and in very good agreement with the exact
calculation. they are based on a total of  3  105 vertices at order 4 and 
9  105 vertices at order 5. we have not listed the counting of disconnected graphs
separately, since it follows closely the counting of closed connected graphs.

n

4

5

open

closed

214.642  0.179
1037.770  0.751

13.996  0.007
134.197  0.098

2.1 evaluation of results

in order to evaluate the results from the high-t expansion, we assume a simple
behaviour of the susceptibility of the form

(u)  a(cid:16)1 

u

uc(cid:17)

+ b

(29)

near the critical point uc, with analytic functions a and b. using the ratio method
(see, for example, [11]), we have tted the susceptibility coecients to

rn =

(2)
n
(2)
n1

=

1

uc(cid:16)1 +

1
n (cid:17).

(30)

plotting the ratios rn linearly against 1/n for n  1 . . . nmax, we have extracted the
following estimates for the critical point uc and the critical susceptibility exponent
:

nmax

critical point

critical exponent

3

4

5

uc = 0.2488

 = 1.820

uc = 0.2462

 = 1.789

uc = 0.2458

 = 1.783

the estimates for the critical exponent should be compared to the exact values
for  for the ising model on a xed, regular lattice and on dynamically triangulated
lattices (ising spins coupled to euclidean quantum gravity), which are reg = 1.75

13

and dt = 2 respectively. the data from the high-t expansion clearly favour  = 1.75
in our model. indeed, the estimates for  are remarkably close to this value, given
that we are working only up to order 5 in the expansion parameter u = tanh .
the conclusion that the critical exponents of the ising model coupled to lorentzian
quantum gravity coincide with those found on regular lattices is also supported by
the monte carlo simulations we have performed.

however, before turning to a detailed description of the simulations we would like
to illustrate how well the high-t expansion works even at this rather low order. we
will compare the dependent cosmological constant c() dened in eq. (14), which
can be measured directly in the monte carlo simulation, with the same quantity
obtained from the high-t expansion. recall that in the thermodynamic limit c()
is essentially given by the spin free energy, eq. (11), which can be computed in the
small- expansion. we have determined the density f (u), dened in eq. (15), by
counting closed polygon graphs in the high-t expansion up to order 6. inserting
this into formula (14) leads to

hight
c

() = c +

1
2

ln 2 +

3
2

ln cosh  + u3 +

5
3

u4 +

35
9

u5 +

263
27

u6.

(31)

in fig. 4 we show the data points for c()  3/2 as measured by the monte
carlo simulation8. since c = ln 2 in pure gravity, the data should approach 3
2 ln 2
for   0 and c = ln 2 for   , both of which are well satised.
in order
to quantify the eect of the u-expansion, we have plotted both the zeroth-order
expression f1() = c + 1
2 ln cosh   3
2, and the improved sixth-order
expression f2() = hight
2. the latter agrees well with the measured
monte carlo values right up to the neighbourhood of the critical ising coupling c.
at the critical point c the measured function c() exhibits a cusp. this reects
the singular part contained in c() which of course cannot be captured by simply
plotting the analytic function (14).

2 ln 2 + 3
()  3

c

3 the monte carlo simulation

monte carlo simulations have been used successfully in the study of euclidean 2d
quantum gravity. the formalism known as dynamical triangulations provides a
regularization of the functional integral well-suited for such simulations, allowing in
addition for a straightforward matter coupling of gaussian elds as well as of spin
degrees of freedom. extensive computer simulations of the combined gravity-matter
systems have been performed, leading to results in perfect agreement with exact
results derived from liouville theory and matrix model calculations.

8the subtraction of 3/2 has been performed to ensure a nite limit as   . it corresponds
to using the action p<ij>(ij  1) in eq. (2), whose ground state has energy zero rather than
3n/2.

14



1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

f1[]
f2[]
3/2 ln(2)
ln(2)



c

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1



0.8

0.78

0.76



0.74

0.72

0.7

0.68

f1[]
f2[]
ln(2)



c

0.2

0.22

0.24



0.26

0.28

0.3

figure 4: the critical cosmological constant as a function of the ising coupling ,
as measured by monte carlo simulations (t = 32, n = 2048), and compared to the
corresponding high-t expansions f1() and f2() at order 0 and order 6.

15

v

w

u

figure 5: the move used in the monte carlo updating of the geometry.

the lorentzian model resembles the dynamically triangulated model in that its
dynamics is associated with the uctuating connectivity of the triangulations con-
tributing to the path integral. this allows us to take over many of the techniques
from the computer simulations of the dynamically triangulated models. we must
specify the update of both the geometry and the matter elds, the latter being stan-
dard: for a given triangulation we update the spin congurations by the same spin
cluster algorithms used for dynamical triangulations. this presents no problems
since our congurations form a subset of the full set of dynamical triangulations
used in euclidean quantum gravity (on the torus). during the update of geometry,
we want to keep the number of time-slices xed while allowing any space-like uc-
tuations compatible with the model. a local change of geometry or move which
is clearly ergodic (i.e. can generate any of the allowed congurations when applied
successively) is shown in fig. 5. it consists in deleting the two triangles adjacent
to a given space-like link (if the resulting conguration is allowed). its inverse is
a split of a given vertex and two neighbouring time-like links into two, thereby
creating a new space-like link, as well as two new triangles. this is a special case
of the so-called grand canonical move sometimes used in dynamical triangulation
simulations [12, 13, 2], and does not preserve the total volume of space-time.

detailed balance equations for the move can be derived from standard consid-
erations [2]. let nv denote the number of vertices (nv = n/2, where n is the
number of triangles), and v a specic vertex. for pure lorentzian gravity without
matter, the equation for detailed balance reads

p (nv )

p (nv  nv +1)

nv kinkout

= p (nv +1)p (nv +1 nv ),

(32)

where p (nv ) = e2nv
is the probability distribution for labelled triangulations,
nv !
and kin and kout count the incoming and outgoing time-like links at v (see fig.
5). we are still free to choose p (nv  nv + 1) and p (nv + 1  nv ) such that
condition (32) is satised. once a transition probability p (nv +1 nv ), say, has
been chosen, it will be tested during the simulation against the uniform probability
distribution between 0 and 1 as follows. choose a random number r ]0, 1]. then,
if the move is allowed (i.e. if the resulting triangulation belongs to the allowed class
of congurations) it is accepted if p (nv + 1  nv ) > r. if it is not allowed, one
proceeds to the next move.

16

it is straightforward to generalize the updating of geometry to include ising spins.
the spin hamiltonian is included in p (nv ), which now becomes a function of both
nv and the spin congurations. when inserting a vertex v, one has to specify at
the same time a spin associated with v. the choice of spin up or down is made
with probability 1/2, and the nal result tested as in the case of the pure geometry
update.

we have performed the computer simulation for surfaces with toroidal topology
and for system sizes of n=2048, 4050, 8192, 16200 and 32768 triangles, and with
a number t=32, 45, 64, 90 and 128 of time-slices respectively. since the moves are
not volume-preserving, xing the system size to n is implemented as follows: we
allow the volume to uctuate within a certain, not too wide range, and collect for
every sweep the rst conguration with volume n. the volume uctuations are
controlled by adding a term  (n)2 to the action, where n is the deviation of
the volume from its desired value n. this term does not aect the ensemble of

congurations collected, since for all of them n = 0. we nd that hni1  .

finally, one checks that the results obtained do not depend on the chosen, allowed
range of volume uctuations. a sweep is a set of approximately nv accepted moves.
for each -value used in the multi-histogramming analysis we perform 1.25  106
sweeps (0.75  1.00  106 for n = 32768). measurements are made every 5 sweeps
and errors are computed by data binning.

3.1 numerical results for the spin system

the determination of the critical properties of the ising spin system coupled to
lorentzian gravity proceeds in two steps (see [14] for a recent, more complete dis-
cussion in the context of 2d euclidean quantum gravity). we rst locate the critical
-value where the system undergoes a transition from a magnetized (at large )
to an unmagnetized phase. next, we perform simulations in the neighbourhood of
the critical value c and use nite-size scaling to determine the critical exponents.
finite-size scaling is also very useful for determining the location of the critical
coupling c itself, since a number of standard observables show a characteristic be-
haviour for  close to c. the following are some of the observables we have used,
together with their expected nite-size behaviour (see [14] for a full list):

 = n(dm2e  h|m|i2)  n /dh
dln |m| = n(cid:16)hei  he|m|i
h|m|i (cid:17)  n 1/dh
dln m2 = n(cid:16) hei  hem2i
hm2i (cid:17)  n 1/dh

(susceptibility)

(33)

(dln|m| 

d ln|m|

d

)

(dln m2 

d ln m2

d

),

(34)

(35)

where  and  are the critical exponents of the susceptibility and of the divergent
spin-spin correlation length, and dh is the hausdor or fractal dimension of space-

17

time. for a at space-time (where of course dh = d = 2), we have d = 2, whereas for
the ising model coupled to euclidean quantum gravity dh = 3 (and dh  4). the
internal energy density e and the magnetization m of the spin system are dened
by

e = 1

nzn ()

dzn ()

d

, m =

1

dzn (, h)

nzn (, h)

dh

.

(36)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)h=0

in order to nd the critical point c, we can use the fact that the pseudo-critical

coupling c(n) at volume n is expected to behave like

c(n)  c +

c

n 1/dh

(37)

close to c = c(n = ), with c a constant. the observables (33)-(35) all have
well-dened peaks which we used for a precise location of c(n), with the help of
multi-histogram techniques. eq. (37) can now be used to extract c and 1/dh.
however, it is advantageous to determine rst 1/dh from the peak values of (34)
and (35), and then substitute this value into (37), thus reducing the number of free
parameters in the t. afterwards, one can check that consistent values for 1/dh
are obtained from the observables (34) and (35) at c, using multi-histogramming.
in our simulations, 1/dh extracted from the peaks was so close to the onsager
value 1/2 that we did not hesitate to use 1/dh = 1/2 in (37). leaving it as a free
parameter one obtains consistent results, but the error in c becomes larger. finally,
we have determined /dh from (33), both from the peak values and at c (and
again using multi-histogramming).

in the table below we have listed the c-values extracted from measuring dln|m|
and dln m2, and assuming that 1/dh = 1/2. for comparison with the high-t results,
we also give the corresponding critical values for the expansion parameter u. similar
results are obtained from the rest of the observables we have measured.

observable

c, using 1
dh

= 1

2 uc = tanh c

dln |m|
dln m2

0.2522 (2)

0.2470 (2)

0.2520 (1)

0.2468 (2)

column 1 of the following table contains the values of 1/dh extracted from the
peak position for all three observables (33)(35) by using relation (37) (with free
parameters c, 1/dh and c). column 2 and 3 give 1/dh extracted directly from
(34) and (35) by using the peak values of the observables and their values at c.

18

observable

1

dh

from peak pos.

1

dh

at peak

1

dh

at c



dln|m|
dln m2

0.52 (2)

0.47 (2)

0.53 (1)



0.531 (2)

0.531 (1)



0.521 (3)

0.520 (3)

lastly, we give the value of /dh extracted from the susceptibility (33),

observable

value at peak value at c



0.883 (1)

0.899 (2)

comparing the estimates for c from the high-t expansion and the monte carlo
simulation, one nds good agreement. the results of the simulation strongly indicate
that the critical exponents are given by the onsager values dh = 1/2 and  =
1.75. again, this corroborates the conclusion already reached by means of the high-
t expansion. further evidence that the system belongs to the onsager and not
the euclidean gravity universality class comes from measuring the magnetization
exponent m/dh and the specic heat exponent /dh. their onsager values are
1/16 and 0, whereas in euclidean gravity they are 1/6 and 1/3. in our model,
the magnetization exponent determined from h|m|i=c  nm/dh was found to
be m/dh = 0.070(1), favouring the onsager value 0.0625 over the euclidean
gravity value 0.1666. the specic heat exponent was obtained from the nite-size
scaling of the values of the specic heat peaks cv  n /dh . a power t yields
/dh = 0.0861(7) at 2/dof = 11.6 whereas a logarithmic t gives 2/dof = 1.57,
supporting the conjecture that  = 0.

we do not have independent measurements of the critical parameters  and dh
from the spin sector alone, but we will determine the hausdor dimension dh in
the next subsection from an analysis of the geometry of lorentzian quantum gravity
coupled to ising spins.

3.2 numerical results for the geometry

as is well-known from both analytical studies [15, 16, 19] and numerous monte carlo
simulations ([17, 16] and references in [2]), nite-size scaling is a powerful tool for
determining the fractal space-time structure of two-dimensional euclidean quantum
gravity. the same technique can be used to investigate the geometric properties of
two-dimensional lorentzian quantum gravity.

in a given triangulation, we dene the distance between two vertices as the
minimal length of a connected path of links between them. in 2d euclidean quantum

19

gravity this notion of distance becomes proportional to the true geodesic distance
between the vertices in the innite-volume limit. we will assume this is also true
for the present model. all dieomorphism-invariant correlation functions of matter
elds must be functions of this geodesic distance. both the geodesic distance and
the fractal dimension appear in the expression for the volume

n(r)  rdh

for

r  n 1/dh ,

(38)

which denotes the number of vertices (or triangles) inside a ball (a disc in dimension
2) of link-radius r. if nv(r) denotes the number of vertices at distance r from a xed
vertex v, relation (38) implies that

nv(r)  rdh1

for

r  n 1/dh .

(39)

finite-size scaling for an observable a then leads to a scaling of the correlation
function integrated over all points at distance r from a vertex according to

ha(r)a(0)in  n 11/dhafa(x),

x = r/n 1/dh .

(40)

the factor n 11/dh comes from the integration over points at distance r from vertex
v, using (39), while a is the genuine dynamical exponent of the correlator.

by measuring correlation functions for various volumes n, one can determine
dh and the critical exponents. we will concentrate here on the hausdor dimension
dh. one rst rescales the height of the measured distributions ha(r)a(0)in to a
common value. however, the distributions measured for dierent n will still have
dierent width as functions of r. by appropriately rescaling r, they can then be
made to overlap in a single, universal function fa(x). from a technical point of
view it is important to work with the shifted variable

x =

r + aa
n 1/dh

,

(41)

where the shift aa may depend on the observable a. using eq. (41) takes into account
in an ecient way the major part of the short-distance lattice artifacts, as has been
discussed carefully in [18, 16, 19]. applying standard procedures from euclidean 2d
quantum gravity then leads to the results summarized in table 1. the observables
appearing in table 1 are: (i) the number nv(r) of vertices at a given (link-)distance
r from a xed vertex v, which may be viewed as the correlation function of the
unit operator in quantum gravity [15]; (ii) the number sup(r) of spins at distance
r from a vertex v which are aligned with the spin at v; (iii) the number sdown(r)
of spins with orientation opposite to the spin at v; (iv) the spin-spin correlation
function s(r) between vertices separated by a geodesic distance r; (v) the function
s(r), obtained by integrating s(r) over all vertices at distance r from a vertex v;
(vi) the distribution sv (l) of spatial volumes, with l denoting the length of a given
time-slice. for the shift aa, we obtained the estimate 4 < aa < 1. unfortunately

20

)
l
(

v
s

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

2048
4050
8192
16200

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

l/n1/dh

figure 6: the distribution of spatial volumes sv (l) at  = c, rescaled according to
eq. (42). we have set dh = 2.0.

our statistics was not good enough to determine it with more accuracy. however,
the fact that it is non-vanishing justies its introduction in the rst place. after a
suitable normalization, we expect the volume distribution to behave like

sv (l)  f (l/n 1/dh ).

(42)

fig. 6 demonstrates clearly that for the ising model at  = c, sv (l) scales as
anticipated when we set dh = 2.0. scaling the ising distributions at  = c(n), the
pseudo-critical point of the magnetic susceptibility, or considering pure gravity leads
to similar results.

we conclude from table 1 that the hausdor dimension of 2d lorentzian quan-
tum gravity is close to the at-space value dh = 2. this is clearly dierent from the
euclidean situation which is characterized by dh = 4 for pure gravity and dh  4 in
the presence of ising spins. the results for the lorentzian gravity-matter system are
particularly convincing for the purely geometric observables nv(r) and sv (l), which
basically coincide with the corresponding measurements obtained in lorentzian pure
gravity.

4 conclusions

we have presented compelling evidence, coming from a high-t expansion as well
as monte carlo simulations, that the critical exponents of the ising model cou-
pled to lorentzian gravity are identical to the exponents in at space. this is in

21

observable

c = 1

2,  = c

c = 1

2,  = c(n)

c = 0

dh

nv

sup

sdown

s

s

sv

2.00(5)

1.92(5)

2.20(3)

2.10(3)

2.05(7)

2.00(4)

2.00(5)

2.08(2)

2.07(2)

2.20(5)

2.05(5)

2.00(3)

2.03(4)









2.00(3)

table 1: the hausdor dimension dh, obtained from the ising model scaling at c
(column 1), at c(n) (column 2) and from pure gravity (column 3).

contrast with the situation in euclidean gravity (i.e. liouville gravity), where the
exponents change9. similarly, the fractal dimension of space-time is unchanged in
the lorentzian model after coupling it to a conformal eld theory (the ising model
at the critical point). in euclidean gravity the fractal properties of space-time are
in general a function of the central change of the conformal eld theory. from the
evidence collected so far, we conclude that matter and geometry couple weakly in
lorentzian gravity and strongly in euclidean gravity.

for the case of the ising model, this dierence can be explained in more detail in
geometric terms. as mentioned earlier, it has been shown in [1] that the dierence
between euclidean and lorentzian gravity is related to the presence or absence
of baby universes. on the other hand, it is by now well understood that baby
universes are at the source of the strong coupling between spins and geometry. this
can happen because the spin conguration of a baby universe can be ipped relative
to that of the parent universe at almost no cost in energy since the baby and
the parent are connected only by a thin tube. the geometry of two-dimensional
euclidean quantum gravity is very fractal, with many pinches at all scales, leading
to typical spin congurations that look very dierent from those on at space-time.
moreover, the presence of ising spins on the surface eectively enhances the fractal
baby universe structure since it is exactly the lowest energy spin congurations
(apart from the ground state) that involve baby universes. the interaction becomes

9the exponents of the ising model coupled to 2d euclidean quantum gravity are equal to those
of the 3d spherical model. it is not understood whether this is a coincidence. more generally, the
exponents of the (m, m + 1) minimal conformal model coupled to 2d euclidean quantum gravity
agree with the critical exponents of the spherical model in 2m/(m + 1) dimensions.

22

so strong that it tears the surface apart when we couple more than two ising spins
to the two-dimensional geometry. this is the origin of the famous c = 1 barrier of
two-dimensional euclidean quantum gravity.

once the creation of baby universes is disallowed, as in the case of the lorentzian
model, the coupling between matter and geometry becomes weak, and the matter
theory has the same critical exponents as in at space-time. this happens although
the typical space-time geometry is by no means at, a fact we have already empha-
sized in the introduction, and which is illustrated by fig. 1. on the contrary, our
model allows for maximal uctuations of the spatial volume which can jump from
(essentially) zero to innity in a single time step. however, as we have been able
to demonstrate, such violent uctuations of the two-geometry are still not sucient
to induce a change in the critical exponents of the ising model. from the above
arguments it seems likely that lorentzian gravity can avoid the c = 1 barrier. this
question is presently under investigation.

acknowledgements

we would like to thank c. kristjansen for comments on a preliminary version of
this article.

references

[1] j. ambjrn and r. loll: non-perturbative lorentzian quantum gravity, causal-

ity and topology change, nucl. phys. b 536 (1998) 407-434, hep-th/9805108.

[2] j. ambjrn, b. durhuus and t. jonsson: quantum geometry, cambridge
monographs on mathematical physics, cambridge university press, cam-
bridge, 1997.

[3] e.w. montroll and g.f. newell: on the theory of the ising model of ferromag-

netism, rev. mod. phys. 25 (1953) 353-389.

[4] b.m. mccoy and t.t. wu: the two-dimensional ising model, harvard univer-

sity press, cambridge, massachusetts, 1973.

[5] c. domb: the critical point, taylor and francis, london, 1996.

[6] v.a. kazakov: ising model on a dynamical planar random lattice: exact solu-

tion, phys. lett. a 119 (1986) 140-144.

[7] d.v. boulatov and v.a. kazakov: the ising model on a random planar lattice:
the structure of the phase transition and the exact critical exponents, phys.
lett. b 186 (1987) 379-384.

23

[8] c. domb: ising model, ch. 6 of phase transitions and critical phenomena, vol.3,

eds. c. domb and m.s. green, academic press, london, 1974.

[9] j. ambjrn, b. durhuus and t. jonsson: a solvable 2-d gravity model with

gamma > 0. mod. phys. lett. a 9 (1994) 1221-1228, hep-th/9401137.

[10] j. ambjrn. l. chekhov and r. loll: a matrix model of 2d lorentzian gravity,

to appear.

[11] a.j. guttmann: asymptotic analysis of power-series expansions, ch. 1 of phase
transitions and critical phenomena, vol.13, eds. c. domb and lebowitz, aca-
demic press, london, 1989.

[12] j. ambjrn, b. durhuus, j. frohlich and p. orland: the appearance of critical

dimensions in regulated string theories, nucl. phys. b 270 (1986) 457-482.
j. ambjrn, b. durhuus and j. frohlich: the appearance of critical dimensions
in regulated string theories. 2. nucl. phys. b 275 (1986) 161-184.

[13] j. jurkiewicz, a. krzywicki and b. petersson: a grand-canonical ensemble of

randomly triangulated surfaces, phys. lett. b 177 (1986) 89-92;
a numerical study of discrete euclidean polyakov surfaces, phys. lett. b 168
(1986) 273-278.

[14] k.n. anagnostopoulos, p. bialas and g. thorleifsson: the ising model on a
quenched ensemble of c = -5 gravity graphs, preprint bielefeld u. bi-th-97-51,
cond-mat/9804137.

[15] j. ambjrn and y. watabiki: scaling in quantum gravity, nucl. phys. b 445

(1995) 129-142, hep-th/9501049.

[16] j. ambjrn, j. jurkiewicz and y. watabiki: on the fractal structure of
two-dimensional quantum gravity, nucl. phys. b 454 (1995) 313-342, hep-
lat/9507014.

[17] s.m. catterall, g. thorleifsson, m. bowick and v. john: scaling and the fractal
dimension of two-dimensional quantum gravity, phys. lett. b 354 (1995) 58-68,
hep-lat/9504009.

[18] j. ambjrn, p. bialas and j. jurkiewicz: connected correlators in quantum

gravity, preprint bohr institute nbi-he-98-23, hep-lat/9812015.

[19] j. ambjrn and k.n. anagnostopoulos: quantum geometry of 2d gravity cou-
pled to unitary matter, nucl. phys. b 497 (1997) 445, hep-lat/9701006; j.
ambjrn, k. n. anagnostopoulos, t. ichihara, l. jensen, n. kawamoto, y.
watabiki and k. yotsuji: the quantum space-time of c = 2 gravity, nucl.
phys. b 511 (1998) 673, hep-lat/9706009.

24

