9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
7

 

 
 

1
v
4
4
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

lessons from quantum field theory

hopf algebras and spacetime geometries

a. connes

d. kreimer

ihes/m/99/22, hep-th/9904044

institut des hautes etudes scientique

le bois-marie, 35 route de chartres

f-91440 bures-sur-yvette, france

we dedicate this paper to moshe flato.

abstract

we discuss the prominence of hopf algebras in recent progress in quan-
tum field theory.
in particular, we will consider the hopf algebra of
renormalization, whose antipode turned out to be the key to a concep-
tual understanding of the subtraction procedure. we shall then describe
several occurences of this, or closely related hopf algebras, in other math-
ematical domains, such as foliations, runge-kutta methods, iterated in-
tegrals and multiple zeta values. we emphasize the unifying role which
the butcher group, discovered in the study of numerical integration of
ordinary dierential equations, plays in qft.

keywords: quantum field theory, noncommutative geometry, renormalization,
hopf algebras, foliations, ode.
msc91 81t15,16w30,46l87,58b30,58f18,34axx.

1 introduction

the leitmotiv of this survey paper is our belief that in some way the true
geometry of spacetime is actually dictated by quantum eld theories as currently
used by particle physicists in the calculation of radiative corrections.

there are two major ingredients in this use of the theory, the rst is the
renormalization technique, with all its combinatorial intricacies, which is per-
fectly justied by its concrete physical roots and the resulting predictive power.

connes@ihes.fr
kreimer@ihes.fr

1

the second is the specic lagrangian of the theory, the result of a long dia-
logue between theory and experiment, which, of course, is essential in producing
meaningful physical results.

this lagrangian is a unique mixture of several pieces, some very geometri-
cal and governed by the external symmetry group of the equivalence principle,
i.e. the dieomorphism group di , the others governed by the internal group of
gauge transformations gauge. the overall symmetry group is the semi-direct
product g = gauge > di , which is summarized by the following exact se-
quence of groups

1  gauge  g  di  1.

but there is more group structure than the external and internal symmetries
of this lagrangian of gravity coupled with matter. our goal in this paper is
to explain how the understanding of the group-theoretic principle underlying
the working machine of renormalization [18] should allow one to improve the
understanding of the geometrical nature of particle physics which was proposed
in [10].

the main point in the latter proposal is that the natural symmetry group
g of the lagrangian is isomorphic to the group of dieomorphisms di (x)
of a space x, provided one stretches ones geometrical notions to allow slightly
noncommutative spaces. indeed, the automorphism group aut(a) of a noncom-
mutative algebra a which replaces the dieomorphism group of any ordinary
manifold has exactly this very feature of being composed of two pieces, one
internal and one external, which, again, can be given equivalently as an exact
sequence of groups

1  int(a)  aut(a)  out(a)  1.

in the general framework of ncg the conuence of the two notions of metric
and fundamental class for a manifold led very naturally to the equality

ds = 1/d,

(1)

which expresses the line element ds as the inverse of the dirac operator d,
hence under suitable boundary conditions as a propagator. the signicance of
d is two-fold. on the one hand, it denes the metric by the above equation,
on the other hand its homotopy class represents the k-homology fundamental
class of the space under consideration. while this new geometrical framework
was immediately useful in various mathematical examples of noncommutative
spaces, including the noncommutative torus [12, 11], it is obvious that it cannot
be a satisfactory answer for spacetime precisely because qft will unavoidably
dress the free propagator, as fig.(1) indicates. it nevertheless emphasizes that
spacetime itself ought to be regarded as a derived concept, whose structure in
we believe follows from the properties of qft if one succeeds describing the
latter in purely combinatorial terms.

whereas it was simple in the undressed case to recover the standard ingredi-
ents of intrinsic geometry directly from the dirac propagator and the algebra a,

2

figure 1: the dressed line element is obtained from the transition of the bare
to the dressed propagator.

it is much more challenging in the dressed case, and we shall naturally propose
the schwinger-dyson equation for the full fermion propagator as the proper
starting point in the general case.

let us now describe various appearances of hopf algebras relevant to quan-
tum field theory. we will start with the hopf algebra of renormalization,
whose antipode turned out to be the key to a conceptual understanding of the
subtraction procedure. we shall then describe several occurences of this, or
closely related hopf algebras, in other mathematical domains, such as foliations
[14], runge-kutta methods [6], iterated integrals [9, 20] and multiple zeta values
[17].

we will nally address the schwinger dyson equation as a prototype of a

generalized form of an ordinary dierential equation (ode).

2 the pertinence of hopf algebras

2.1 renormalization and the antipode in the algebra of

rooted trees

renormalization occurs in evaluating physical observable quantities which in
simple terms can be written as formal functional integrals of the form

z el(,)p (, )[d], l = l0 + li .

computing such an integral in perturbative terms leads to a formal power se-
ries, each term g of which is obtained by integrating a polynomial under a
gaussian el0. such feynman diagrams g are given by multiple integrals over
spacetime or, upon fourier transformation, over momentum space, and are typ-
ically divergent in either case. the renormalization technique consists in adding
counterterms lg to the original lagrangian l, one for each diagram g, whose
role is to cancel the undesired divergences. in good situations to which we are
allowed to restrict ourselves if we take guidance from nature, this can be done
by local counterterms, polynomials in elds and their derivatives.

the main calculational complication of this subtraction procedure occurs for
diagrams which possess non-trivial subdivergences, i.e. subdiagrams which are
already divergent. in that situation the procedure becomes very involved since
it is no longer a simple subtraction, and this for two obvious reasons:
i) the
divergences are no longer given by local terms, and ii) the previous corrections
(those for the subdivergences) have to be taken into account.

3

to have an example for the combinatorial burden imposed by these dicul-
ties consider the problem below of the renormalization of a two-loop four-point
function in massless scalar 4 theory in four dimensions, given by the following
feynman graph:

it contains a divergent subgraph

[2] =

.

[1] = .

we work in the euclidean framework and introduce a cut-o  which we as-
sume to be always much bigger than the square of any external momentum pi.
analytic expressions for these feynman graphs are obtained by utilizing a map
 which assigns integrals to them according to the feynman rules and employs
the cut-o  to the momentum integrations. then [[1,2]] are given by

[[1]](pi) = z d4k

(2  k2)

k2

1

(k + p1 + p2)2 ,

and

[[2]](pi) = z d4l

(2  l2)

l2(l + p1 + p2)2 [[1](p1, l, p2, l)].

it is easy to see that [[1]] decomposes into the form b log  (where b is a real
number) plus terms which remain nite for   , and hence will produce a
divergence which is a non-local function of external momenta

 log z d4l

(2  l2)

l2(l + p1 + p2)2

 log  log(p1 + p2)2.

fortunately, the counterterm l[1]  log  generated to subtract the divergence
in [[1]] will precisely cancel this non-local divergence in [2].

that these two diseases actually cure each other in general is a very non-
trivial fact that took decades to prove [1]. for a mathematician the intricacies
of the proof and the lack of any obvious mathematical structure underlying it
make it totally inaccessible, in spite of the existence of a satisfactory formal
approach to the problem [15].

the situation is drastically changed by the understanding of the mechanism
behind the actual computations of radiative corrections as the antipode in a very
specic hopf algebra, the hopf algebra hr of decorated rooted trees discovered
in [18, 13, 19].

this algebra is the algebra of coordinates in an ane nilpotent group gr,
and all the non-linear aspects of the subtraction procedure are subsumed by the
action of the antipode, i.e. the operation g  g1 in the group gr.

this is not only very satisfactory from the conceptual point of view, but it
does also allow the automation of the subtraction procedure to arbitrary loop

4

order (see [5] for an example of feynman graphs with up to twelve loops) and to
describe the more elaborate notions of renormalization theory, -change of scales,
renormalization group ow and operator product expansions-, from this group
structure [5, 20, 21].

in [13] we characterized this hopf algebra of renormalization, hr, abstractly
as the universal solution for one-dimensional hochschild cohomology. the hopf
algebra hr together with the collecting map (cf.[13]) b+ : hr  hr is the
universal solution of the following hochschild cohomology equation. we let h
be a commutative (not necessarily cocommutative) hopf algebra together with
a linear map l : h  h. the hochschild equation is then bl = 0, i.e.

l(a) = l(a)  1 + (id  l)(a).

we shall see later the intimate relation between this problem and the generalized
form of odes.

renormalization can now be summarized succinctly by saying that it maps
an element g  gr to another element g1
o g  gr. typically, g is associated
with bare diagrams and go is a group element in accordance with a chosen
renormalization scheme. in the ratio g1
o g the undesired divergences drop out.
hence, g1
o g the renormalized green function.
it is precisely this group law which allowed the description of the change of scales
and renormalization schemes in a comprehensive manner [20]. indeed, if g1
o g is
one renormalized green function, and g1
o g)(g1g) another, then we
immediately see the group law underlying the evolution of the renormalization
group.

o delivers the counterterm and g1

o g = (g1

2.2 foliations

quite independently, the problem of computation of certain characteristic clas-
ses coming from dierential operators on foliations led [14] to a very specic
hopf algebra h(n) associated to a given integer n, which is the codimension of
the foliation.

the construction of this hopf algebra was actually dictated by the commu-
tation relations of the algebra a (corresponding to the noncommutative leaf
space) with the operator d (cf.(1)) describing the transverse geometry in the
sense of (1). the structure of this hopf algebra revealed that it could be ob-
tained by a general procedure from the pair of subgroups g0, g1 of the group
di (rn) of dieomorphisms of rn: one lets g0 be the subgroup of ane dif-
feomorphisms, while g1 is the subgroup of those dieomorphisms which x the
origin and are tangent to the identity map at this point. this specic structure
of a hopf algebra not only led in this case to a solution of the computational
problem, but also provided the proper generalization of lie algebra cohomology
to the general hopf framework in the guise of cyclic cohomology (see the paper
cyclic cohomology and hopf algebras by connes and moscovici in this volume).
in [13] we established a relation between the two hopf algebras which led
us to extend various results of [14] to the lie algebra l1 of rooted trees, in

5

particular we extended l1 by an additional generator z1, intimately related
to natural growth of rooted trees.

let us mention at this point that the extended lie algebra l has a radical as
well as a simple quotient. the former is nilpotent and innitely generated, the
latter turns out to be isomorphic to the lie algebra of di (r), thus exhibiting
an intrinsic relation between the two groups.

extension of this relation between h(1) and hr leads to the hopf algebra
of decorated planar rooted trees, explored by r. wulkenhaar [22], whose new
feature is that the decoration of the root provides the information necessary to
dene the notion of parallel transport, while the decorations of other vertices
are mere spacetime indices.

2.3 numerical integration methods

our description in [13] of the simplest realization of the hopf algebra hr and
its related group, together with the elaboration of this group structure in [5, 20],
allowed c. brouder [6] to recognize a far reaching relation with the combinatorics
of numerical analysis as worked out by butcher several decades ago.

indeed, butcher, in his seminal work on the algebraic aspects of runge-
kutta methods (and other numerical integration methods) [7] discovered the
very same hopf algebra and group gr.

let us rst remind the reader of the simplest numerical integration methods

in the integration of a given ordinary dierential equation

y = f (y), y(0) = y0,

(2)

where t  y(t) is a curve in euclidean space e. the runge method, designed
to approximate the value y(h) of y at t = h is given by the formula,

y(h) = y0 + hf (y0 +

h
2

f (y0)).

(3)

the virtue of this simple iteration of f is that the taylor expansion of y for
small h agrees up to order two with the taylor expansion of the actual solution
y(h).

more generally a runge-kutta method is an iterative procedure, governed
by two sets of data, traditionally denoted by a and b, where bi, i = 1, . . . , n,
and aij are scalars while the implicit equations are

xi(h) = y0 + hx aij f (xj(h)),
y = y0 + hx bif (xi(s)).

(4)

(5)

their solution is known to be a sum over rooted trees, involving the very com-
binatorial quantities ascribed to rooted trees by the study of qft, namely tree
factorials, cm weights and symmetry factors [7, 6, 5, 20]. it has been known
since cayley [8] that rooted trees are the correct way to label polynomials in

6

f(n)

.................

figure 2: the tree structure of derivatives.

higher derivatives of a smooth map f : e  e. for instance an nth derivative
f (n) corresponds to a vertex with n adjacent branches, as in fig.(2).

what butcher discovered is that runge-kutta methods naturally form a
group, whose elements are actually scalar functions of rooted trees. he gave
explicit formulas for the composition of two methods as well as for the inverse
method. he also showed how the standard solution of a dierential equation
is obtained from a particular (continuous) method which he called the picard
method. there is a nuance between runge-kutta methods and the butcher
group of scalar functions of rooted trees, but butcher proved that the runge-
kutta methods are dense in the latter group.

in [20] scalar functions of rooted trees were used to parametrize and general-
ize iterated integrals, allowing a unied description of renormalization schemes.
this immediately allowed c. brouder to identify the above group gr (in the
simplest undecorated case) with the butcher group.

the supplementary freedom in constructing group elements or operations on
them provided by the runge-kutta description matches the freedom to choose a
renormalization scheme or to describe the change of a chosen scheme. hence the
group product, as well as the counterterm, -the inverse group element, have im-
mediate and equally elegant counterparts in the runge-kutta language worked
out recently by brouder [6].

moreover, comparing the data a, b of a runge-kutta method with our char-
acterization of the hopf algebra hr by the hochschild cohomology problem
leads us to the following natural framework for the formulation of a univer-
sal dierential equation (which also covers the case of the schwinger-dyson
equation) given a non-linear map f : e  e. the only nuance between our
framework and the butcher framework of an algebra b together with a linear
map a : b  b (cf.[7]) is that we now assume that the abelian algebra b is in
fact a hopf algebra while the map a satises our hochschild equation

a(p ) = a(p )  1 + (id  a)(p ).

the simplest example of such data is already given by the picard method of [7]
where the hopf algebra structure (not provided in [7]) is given by

x = x  1 + 1  x,

a(p )(x) = z x

0

p (u)du,

7

cf.[13]. the dierence between such data and a runge-kutta method is that we
now have translation invariance available. exactly as the runge-kutta method
was producing an element in the butcher group, the above data give a homo-
morphism from the underlying group (by the milnor-moore theorem) to the
butcher group, a situation which is dual to our theorem on the universality of
hr.

we can now reformulate the ode in general as an equation for y  b  e,

y = 1  0 + (l  id)f (y),

where 0  e is the initial datum and f (y) is uniquely dened by f (y)(x) =
f (y(x)) for any x  spec(b).

this is very suggestive: somehow the usual solution curve for an ode should
not be considered as an ultimate solution and the universal problem should be
thought of as a renement of the idea of a scalar time parameter. we regard
butchers work on the classication of numerical integration methods as an
impressive example that concrete problem-oriented work can lead to far reaching
conceptual results.

2.4 iterated integrals and numbers from primitive dia-

grams

the circle of ideas described so far certainly allows us to come to terms with
the combinatorics of the subtraction procedure so that we can now concentrate
only on those diagrams without subdivergences, i.e. the decorations at vertices
of rooted trees.

the proper denition for the integral in the new calculus used in noncom-
mutative geometry is the dixmier trace, i.e.
the invariant coecient of the
logarithmic divergence of an operator trace. a supercial understanding of
qft would lead one to consider it as far too limited a tool to confront the
divergences of qft. this misgiving is based on the ignorance of the plain fact
that the divergence of a subdivergence-free diagram is a mere overall logarith-
mic divergence, and that such diagrams, for which fig.(3) gives archetypical
examples, appear at all loop orders (the expert will notice that the decorations
which are to be used are actually feynman graphs with appropriate polynomial
insertions which are the remainders when we shrink subgraphs to points).

in dimensional regularization the decorations appearing at the rooted trees
deliver a rst-order pole in d4. in other words, the dixmier trace, or rather its
residue guise res, is perfectly sucient to disentangle and determine a general
feynman graph g, making full use of the decomposition dictated by the hopf
algebra structure, which gives the joblist [5] for the practitioner of qft: the list
of diagrams which correspond to analytic expressions suering from merely an
overall divergence.

analyzing the corresponding residues of the decorations and their number-
theoretic properties is a far reaching subject (discussed in part by m. kontsevich
in this issue) which by itself reveals some interesting hopf algebra structures,
based on the algebraic properties of iterated integrals.

8

figure 3: diagrams free of subdivergences and hence delivering a rst order
pole in dimensional regularization. they are typically reecting the skeleton
expansion of the theory.

iterated integrals came to prominence with the work of k.t. chen [9]. es-

sentially, they are governed by two rules, chens lemma

f i
r,t = f i

r,s + f i

s,t + xi=(i ,i )

f i 
r,sf i 

s,t

and the shue product

f i 
r,sf i 

r,s = x

f [i]
r,s ,

where the sum is over all (p, q) shues of the symmetric group sp+q acting on
a string i of, say, n = p + q integers parametrizing the one-forms which give the
iterated integral as their integral over the n-dimensional standard simplex.

if we dene ti to be a tree without sidebranches decorated with these one-
forms in the appropriate order, then each iterated integral corresponds to a map
from such a decorated tree to a real number, so that chens lemma expresses
the familiar group law of the butcher group in this special case. it is then the
shue product which guarantees that iterating one-forms in accordance with a
general rooted tree [20] will not produce anything new: any such integral is a
linear combination of the standard iterated integrals.

most interestingly, the calculus of full perturbative qft can be understood
as a calculus of generalized iterated integrals, where the boundaries r, s are to
be replaced by elements of the butcher group: scalar functions of (decorated)
rooted trees [20]. the group law still holds naturally for such generalized inte-
grals, but the shue product only holds for the leading term in the asymptotic
expansion of bare diagrams [21].

we hope that an investigation of this situation has far reaching consequences
for the understanding of the number-theoretic content of feynman diagrams,
whose richness is underwritten by a wealth of empirical data which provide a
plethora of interesting numbers like multiple zeta values [23], their alternating
cousins [4], and even sums involving non-trivial roots of unity in numerators [3].
it is gratifying then that the regularization of iterated integrals based on
forms dx/x, dx/(1  x), providing the iterated integrals representation of multi-
ple zeta values, is in full accord with the renormalization picture developed here.
the appearance of such numbers in the solution of the knizhnik-zamolodchikov
equation, and the relation to the drinfeld associator upon renormalizing this

9

solution so that it extends to the unit interval, clearly motivates one to in-
vestigate the dierential equations which encapsulate the iterative structure of
green functions in perturbative qft, the bare and renormalized schwinger-
dyson equations.

before we close this survey with a couple of remarks concerning these equa-
tions, let us mention yet another application where the freedom of having tree-
indexed scales, hence elements of the butcher group, will prove essential.

the formulation of operator product expansion clearly takes place in a con-
guration space of the same nature as the fulton-macpherson compactication
[16], known to be stratied by planar rooted trees. however, there is a very
important nuance which can already be fully appreciated in the case of two
points. in that case, the fulton-macpherson space is simply the blow-up of the
diagonal in the space x  x, whereas the geometric data which encodes most
of the semiclassical deformation aspect in a dieomorphism invariant manner
are provided by a smooth groupoid, called the tangent groupoid in [11].

essentially, the relation between the latter and the former is the same as the
relation between a linear space and the corresponding projective space. that
the transition to a linear space is a crucial improvement can be appreciated from
the fact that it is only in the linear space that fourier transform takes its full
power.

it is thus of great interest to extend the construction of the tangent groupoid
from the two-point case to the full set-up of the congurations of n points. this
clearly involves the freedom of having scales available for any strata in the com-
pactication, hence again elements of the butcher group (better, its cousin for
planar rooted trees). this is in full accord with the use of tree-indexed pa-
rameters in the momentum space description of the operator product expansion
undertaken in [20], which clearly shows the necessity of allowing for the full
linear space to be able to describe the variety of renormalization prescriptions
employed by the practitioners of qft.

2.5 the schwinger-dyson equations

recalling that equation (1) demands an understanding of the full dressed line
element (cf. fig.( 1)) , we nally consider schwinger-dyson equations. the prop-
agator, the vertex and the kernel functions provide a system of such schwinger-
dyson equations, whose solution is at the heart of any lagrangian qft [2].
though the fermion propagator, hence the line element, comes to prominence
in these equations due to gauge covariance, a full solution is not yet known for
any qft of interest.

in the simplest form, the schwinger-dyson equation is typically an equation

of the form

(q) =  +z d4k(k)p (k)2k(k, q),

which is the structure of the schwinger-dyson equation for the qed vertex at
zero momentum transfer. here, p is a propagator, hence a geometric series in
a self-energy (so that the resulting equations are highly non-linear) and k is a

10

qed four-point kernel function, actually one which is a typical generator (in its
undressed form) of decorations upon closure of two of its legs.

nevertheless it is not dicult to identify an operator lk such that the

solution is the formal series

(q) =  +xi

li

k(),

where the operator lk amounts to the operator b+ combined with all decora-
tions provided by the kernel k. if the above schwinger-dyson equation is for
the bare vertex, the one for the renormalized vertex  is obtained by multiply-
ing it with the counterterm z which amounts, in full accordance with the g1
o g
notation used before, to the equation

(q) = z +z d4k(k)p (k)2k(k, q),

which neatly summarizes the hopf algebra structure of perturbative qft. from
the above structure, we conclude that runge-kutta methods are fully available
for this system.

let us close this paper by noting an amusing coincidence: if we restrict the
kernel k to the rst two terms k [1], k [2] in its skeleton expansion, restrict p to
the free propagators and label each of the two terms k [1], k [2] by noncommuting
variables k1 and k2 say, then we are naturally led to the equation

(q) =  + k1(cid:20)z d4k

1

k4 (k)k [1](cid:21) + k2(cid:20)z d4k

1

k4 (k)k [2](cid:21) ,

which obviously involves a sum over all words in k1, k2 in its solution and is
fascinatingly close to the k-z equation in two variables considered before.

acknowledgements

d.k. thanks the ihes for extended hospitality and marvelous working condi-
tions. d.k. also thanks the dfg for support as a heisenberg fellow.

references

[1] n.n. bogoliubov, d.v. shirkov, introduction to the theory of quantized

elds, 3rd ed., wiley 1980;
k. hepp, comm.math.phys.2 (1966) 301-326;
w. zimmermann, comm.math.phys.15 (1969) 208-234.

[2] j.d. bjorken, s.d. drell, relativistic quantum fields, mcgraw hill 1965.

[3] d.j. broadhurst, massive 3-loop feynman diagrams reducible to sc prim-
itives of algebras at the sixth root of unity, to appear in eur.phys.j.c,
hep-th/9803091.

11

[4] d.j. broadhurst, d. kreimer, phys.lett.b393 (1997) 403-412, hep-

th/9609128.

[5] d.j. broadhurst, d. kreimer, renormalization automated by hopf algebra,

to appear in j.symb.comp., hep-th/9810087.

[6] c. brouder, runge kutta methods and renormalization, hep-th/9904014.

[7] j.c. butcher, math.comp.26 (1972) 79-106.

[8] a. cayley on the theory of the analytical forms called trees, phil.mag.xiii

(1857) 172-176.

[9] k.t. chen, bull.amer.soc.83 (1977) 831-879.

[10] a. connes, comm.math.phys.182 (1996) 155-176, hep-th/9603053.

[11] a. connes, noncommutative geometry, acad.press 1994.

[12] a. connes, m. douglas, a.schwarz, jhep 9802:003 (1998), hep-

th/9711162.

[13] a. connes, d. kreimer, comm.math.phys.199 (1998) 203-242, hep-

th/9808042.

[14] a. connes, h. moscovici, comm.math.phys.198 (1998) 199-246,

math.dg/9806109.

[15] h. epstein, v. glaser, ann.inst.h.poincare 19 (1973) 211-295.

[16] w. fulton, r. macpherson, annals of math.(2).130 (1994) 183-225.

[17] a. goncharov, polylogarithms in arithmetic and geometry, proc. of icm-94

(zurich), vol.1,2 374-387, birkhauser 1995.

[18] d. kreimer, adv.theor.math.phys.2 (1998) 303-334, q-alg/9707029.

[19] d. kreimer, on overlapping divergences, to appear in comm.math.phys.,

hep-th/9810022.

[20] d. kreimer, chens iterated integral represents the operator product ex-

pansion, hep-th/9901099.

[21] d. kreimer, r. delbourgo, using the hopf algebra of qft in calculations,

hep-th/9903249.

[22] r. wulkenhaar, on the connes-moscovici hopf algebra associated to the

dieomorphisms of a manifold, preprint cpt luminy april 1999.

[23] d. zagier, values of zeta functions and their applications, first european

congress of mathematics, vol. ii, 497-512, birkhauser, boston, 1994.

12

