0
0
0
2

 

n
a
j
 

8
1

 
 

2
v
3
9
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

wegner-houghton equation in low dimensions

j.m. carmonaa, j. polonyib, a. taranconc

a dipartimento di fisica, universit`a di pisa,
via buonarroti, 2, ed. b, 56127 pisa (italy)

b laboratoire de physique theorique, universite louis pasteur,

3, rue de luniversite, 67084 strasbourg cedex (france), and

department of atomic physics, l. eotvos university, budapest, hungary

c departamento de fsica teorica, universidad de zaragoza,

pedro cerbuna 12, 50009 zaragoza (spain)

carmona@mailbox.difiunipi.it

polonyi@fresnel.u-strasbg.fr

tarancon@sol.unizar.es

july 22, 2013

abstract

we consider scalar eld theories in dimensions lower than four in
the context of the wegner-houghton renormalization group equations
(whrg). the renormalized trajectory makes a non-perturbative in-
terpolation between the ultraviolet and the infrared scaling regimes.
strong indication is found that in two dimensions and below the mod-
els with polynomial interaction are always non-perturbative in the
infrared scaling regime. finally we check that these results do not
depend on the regularization and we develop a lattice version of the
whrg in two dimensions.

pacs: 11.10.hi 11.10.kk 11.15.bt 11.10.jj
key words: wegner-houghton equations. renormalization group. low di-
mensional theories. lattice renormalization group.

1 introduction

asymptotically free models gained importance both in high energy and in
condensed matter physics. this is obvious for the latter, where the low
dimensional phenomena invoke eective theories below the upper critical
dimension, d = 4, which are super-renormalizable and their hamiltonians
contain asymptotically free coupling constants only. in the former case the
the asymptotically free models can provide structureless high energy physics
where the cuto can be pushed away at will. what kind of non-perturbative
mechanisms do we encounter as we follow the renormalization group ow of
an asymptotically free model? to distinguish dierent nite energy mech-
anisms we recall that unless the model possesses unbroken scale invariance
there are always two scaling regimes, an ultraviolet and an infrared one sep-
arated by a crossover at the characteristic scale of the model. if there is a di-
mensional coupling constant, say a mass parameter m, in the lagrangian then
the uv and ir scaling regimes are separated by a crossover at p = pcr  m
because m2/p2 or p2/m2 is treated as a small quantity in the uv or the ir
side, respectively. the ir scaling laws are trivial because the radiative cor-
rections to the evolution are suppressed by p2/m2 and what is left is the scale
dependence governed by the canonical dimensions of the coupling constants.
if there are no dimensional coupling constants in the lagrangian, i.e. the
model possesses classical scale invariance then a crossover can be identied
where one of the coupling constants reach the value 1, g(pcr) = 1. the ex-
pression for the dimensionless running coupling constant g(p) must contain
a dimensional parameter, usually called the -parameter and pcr  4.1
non-perturbative eects may originate in the ir scaling regimes. the
classically scale invariant models at the lower critical dimension, such as the
two-dimensional sigma and the gross-neveu model do not support long range
order. thus the ir scaling laws must contain a dynamically generated mass
scale, an eect generated by the infrared or collinear divergences.

the asymptotically free coupling constants may generate non-perturbative
eects in the uv scaling regime, as well, due to their growth. the question is

1it is worthwhile noting that one can introduce the -parameter even in the presence of
any parameter with positive mass dimension in the lagrangian so long as the ir dynamics
remains stable when this latter is removed. in fact, let us write this parameter as m where
m dened in this manner is the mass scale of the model. the running coupling constant
depends on the ratio m/p, g(p) = f (m/p) where the limit m  0 is convergent. in other
words, the evolution of the classically scale invariant system is recovered as p  .

2

whether the scale parameter 4 or the mass m is reached rst as we lower the
cuto. the system remains perturbative for m > 4 because the ir scaling
laws cut o the growth of the asymptotically free coupling constants before
they would reach a dangerously large value. the dynamics of the modes
p < 4 becomes non-perturbative when 4 > m. the four-dimensional
yang-mills models develop linearly rising potential between static external
charges. this is believed to happen due to the large value of the asymptoti-
cally free coupling constant at the ultraviolet side of the crossover, indicated
by the infrared landau pole in perturbative qcd. the quark masses are
supposed to play no important role in the vacuum structure and the chiral
limit m  0 is assumed to be safe and convergent, though non-perturbative.
the infrared singularities are easier to isolate than the non-perturbative
eects arising at the ir end of the uv scaling regime. it has already been
achieved for non-asymptotically free models [1] and superrenormalizable the-
ories [2]. the more complex non-perturbative features should arise at the
ultraviolet side of the crossover where no asymptotic analysis is available.

the goal of the present paper is the study of the scaling laws and their
consequences at the ir end of the uv scaling regime. according to our best
knowledge this source of the non-perturbative eects in asymptotically free
theories has not been studied before in a systematic manner. the problem
is rather involved and demanding, we restrict ourselves to outline only the
way the more detailed analysis should be done. in order to defuse the in-
frared problem we turn to the scalar model with polynomial interaction in
the phase where no spontaneous symmetry breaking occurs. the term n
in the lagrangian of the d-dimensional scalar model is asymptotically free
for n < 2d/(d  2), so we have to trace the evolution of a large number of
coupling constants at low dimensions. we present numerical evidences that
the polinomial interactions at the lower critical dimension or below where in-
nitely many operators are relevant in the uv scaling regime always become
strong, non-perturbative.

the study of the asymptotically free three-dimensional 6 model can bring
some light into the ir landau pole problem of four-dimensional gauge the-
ories by considering the role of the non-renormalizable couplings in the ir
extrapolation of the uv scaling regime. we will show that they aect consid-
erably the evolution of the relevant couplings. this points to the possibility
that the non-renormalizable couplings could suppress the landau pole. the
full solution of the theory where all possible coupling constants are followed
by the renormalization group equation should necessarily yield a non-singular

3

renormalization group ow so long as the theory possesses local interactions.
this suggests that the introduction of the hadronic composite operators in
qcd could defuse its landau pole problem [3].

another issue addressed in this paper is the manner in which the inuence
of the non-renormalizable operators on the dynamics is suppressed and the
universal physics is reached as the cuto is lowered. the usual argument
based on the linearization of the blocking relation is not obviously applicable
due to the presence of innitely many relevant operators. this question is
discussed in the framework of lattice regulation by tailoring the wegner-
houghton equation for lattice regulated models. as a result, the approach
to the low energy physics can be compared for the momentum space cuto
regularization in the continuum and for the lattice regularization, and the
universality, the regulator independence, can be established well beyond the
linearized approximation of the blocking relations.

the organization of this paper is the following. the innitesimal renor-
malization group step, the wegner-houghton equation, is described in sec-
tion ii. the running coupling constants are introduced and their evolution
equations are given in section iii for scalar models. the asymptotic uv evo-
lution is discussed in section iv for d = 2, 3 and 4. section v is devoted to
the demonstration of the diculties in nding a perturbative model in d = 2.
the wegner-houghton equation is derived in the lattice regularization and
its solution is presented in section vi. section vii is for the conclusions.

2 the wegner-houghton equation

there are dierent ways the mixing of a large number of operators can be
traced down. the wegner-houghton equation [4], which we use in the local
potential approximation in this work, is the simplest implementation of the
kadano-wilson blocking [5] in the momentum space and produces the cut-
o dependence of the bare action along the renormalized trajectory. other
methods work with the eective action where the infrared cuto dependence
is sought [6]. dierent schemes should agree in the infrared limit where few
long wavelength modes are left only in the system. we shall make two ap-
proximations in computing the blocked action, the truncation of the gradient
expansion at the leading order, the local potential approximation [7], and the
truncation of the taylor expansion of the local potential in the eld variable
[8]. the higher order terms of the gradient expansion are non-renormalizable

4

according to the power counting. we believe that these coupling constants
which are irrelevant in the ultraviolet scaling regime do not modify our qual-
itative conclusion.

the wegner-houghton (wh) equation [4] describes the evolution of the
eective action as the cuto is lowered. as mentioned in the introduction
we shall consider a scalar model with an intrinsic mass scale which allows
to clearly distinguish the uv and ir scaling regimes. we derive the wh
equation for a scalar eld theory by using a sharp momentum space cuto [3,
9]: we will call this regularization procedure the continuum regularization.
in section 6 we consider an alternative, the lattice regularization.

denote the bare action by sk[], where k is the uv cuto. then, accord-

ing to the usual wilson-kadano procedure,

e 1

 sk [] =z d e 1

 sk[+]

(1)

where k < k in the euclidean space-time. the fourier transform of the elds
(x) and (x) is non-vanishing only for p < k and k < p < k, respectively.
the right hand side is evaluated by means of the loop expansion, so that
eq. (1) gives

sk[] = sk[ + 

0] +



2

tr log 2s + o(2),

where

2s(x, y) =

2sk[ + 
0]
(x)(y)

,

and the saddle point, 

0, is dened by the extremum condition

sk[ + 
0]



= 0,

(2)

(3)

(4)

in which the infrared background eld, (x), is held xed. it can be proved
that the saddle point is trivial, 
0 = 0, as long as the matrix 2s(x, y) is
invertible and the ir background eld is homogeneous, (x) = .

now, each successive loop integral in the n-loop contributions which are

not explicitly written in eq. (2) brings a suppression factor

kd  kd
kd = o(cid:18) k  k
k (cid:19)

5

(5)

due to the integration volume in the momentum space. thus k/k = (k 
k)/k appears as a new small parameter which suppresses the higher loop
contributions in the blocking relation and the exact functional dierential
equation obtained in the limit k  0 includes the one-loop contribution
only. but we should bear in mind that the loop expansion had to be used
at the initial stage of the derivation so the resulting exact equation might
be unreliable in the strong coupling situation. all we know is that the loop
corrections to the evolution equation obtained in the one loop level are van-
ishing.

we will use the gradient expansion for the action,

s[] =



xn=0z ddx un((x), 2n),

(6)

where un is an homogeneous function of order 2n in the derivative. in the
leading order of this expansion, the so-called local potential approximation,
we have

s[] =z ddx(cid:20) z()

2

()2 + u()(cid:21) ,

(7)

and furthermore the simplication z() = 1 will be used to derive a simple
dierential equation for the potential u. this local potential will be then
the only function characterizing the action. if we use now a homogeneous
infrared background eld, (x) = , we obtain from eqs. (2) and (7) an
equation for the local potential uk( = ):

ukk() = uk() +

1
2

tr log[(cid:3) + u 

k ()] + o(k2),

where we have introduced the notation

u 

k () =

2uk()

2

, (cid:3) = 

(8)

(9)

and the trace is taken in the subspace of the eliminated modes. we can
explicitly write the trace in momentum space and get

ukk() = uk() +

ddp
(2)d log[p2 + u 

k ()] + o(k2),

(10)

1

2z

6

where the integration extends over the shell k  k < p < k. in the limit
k  0 one then nds the dierential equation

k


k

uk() = 

dkd
2(2)d log[k2 + u 

k ()],

where d denotes the d-dimensional solid angle

(11)

(12)

d =

.

2d/2

(cid:0) d
2(cid:1)

the wegner-houghton equation (11) represents the one-loop resummed
in
fact, an expansion of the logarithm in the second derivative of the potential
gives

mixing of the coupling constants of the potential uk = pn(gn/n!)n.

k


k

uk() = 

dkd
2(2)d



xn=1

1

n(cid:18) u 

k2 + u 

k ()

k ()(cid:19)n

,

(13)

up to a eld independent constant. this is the usual one loop resummation of
the eective potential [10] except that the loop momentum is now restricted
to the subspace of the modes to be eliminated. actually, the fact that the
r.h.s. includes the running potential uk() rather than the bare one, u(),
indicates that the contributions of the successive eliminations of the degrees
of freedom are piled up during the integration of the dierential equation and
the solution of the renormalization group equation resums the perturbation
series. the solution of the dierential equation interpolates between the bare
and the eective potential as k is lowered from the original cuto  to zero.
finally, let us note that the derivation of eq. (11) shows that the restoring
force for the uctuations into the equilibrium is proportional to the argument
of the logarithm function. thus a nontrivial saddle point should be used when

k2 + u 

k ()  0.

3 evolution of the coupling constants

our eective action is

sk =z ddx(cid:20)1

2

((x))2 + uk((x))(cid:21) ,

7

(14)

(15)

and the initial condition for the evolution equation is given at k = . the
potential uk() is assumed to be polynomial so it is expanded as

uk() =

1
n!

n

xn=0

gn(0)(  0)n.

(16)

we study the model in the symmetric phase, where the saddle point is trivial,
0 = 0. the polynomial structure of the potential is consistent because we
avoid the singularity of eq. (11) at k2
kcr() (recall eq. (14)) which
occurs in a region around  = 0 in the symmetry broken phase [9].

cr = u 

taking the n-th derivative of eq. (16) at  = 0 we obtain the coupling

constant gn(k), and dene the corresponding beta function by

gn(k) =

n = k

n
n uk()|=0,
n
d
n k
dk

gn(k) =


k

uk().

by taking the successive derivatives of eq. (11), we obtain

where

and

n = 

dkd
2(2)dpn(g2, . . . , gn+2),

gn =

gn

k2 + g2

pn =

n
n log[k2 + u 

k ()]

is a polynom of order n in the variables gj, j = 2, . . . , n + 2,

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

p1 = g3,
p2 = g4  g2
3,
p3 = g5  3g3g4 + 2g3
3,
p4 = g6  4g5g3  3g2
4 + 12g2
p5 = g7  5g6g3  10g5g4 + 20g5g2
p6 = g8  6g7g3  15g6g4  10g2

3g4  6g4
3,

120g5g3

3  270g2

4g2

3 + 360g4g4

(21)
4g3  60g4g3
3 + 24g5
3,
3 + 120g5g4g3 + 30g3
4

3 + 30g2
5 + 30g6g2
3  120g6
3.

8

the coupling constants dened through eq. (16) are dimensional param-
eters (the eld variable  has dimension (d2)/2). however, the correspond-
ing dimensionless parameters have more physical sense. we obtain them in
the following way:

gn(k) = kn(1 d

2 )dgn(k) = (k)n(1 d

2 )dgn(k),

where now k runs from 1 to 0. their beta functions are

n = (cid:20)n(cid:18)1 

d

2(cid:19) + d(cid:21) gn + kn(1 d

2 )dn,

(22)

(23)

where the rst and the second term stands for the tree-level and the loop
corrections, respectively. one can see that the super-renormalizable coupling
constants follow asymptotically free scaling law at the tree level.

4 uv scaling laws and their extensions

one can distinguish an ultraviolet and an infrared scaling regime, for k2 
|m2(k)| and for k2  |m2(k)|, respectively.
in the uv regime the scale
dependence comes dominantly from the k2 term of the propagator, see the
denominator of eq. (19); the k-dependence is generated by the phase factor
kd in the ir regime where k2 could be neglected in the inverse propagator.
we will begin at the uv scale with the usual 4 potential (g2  m2)

v() =

1
2

m22 +

1
4!

g44 +

1
6!

g66,

(24)

and see how the dierent couplings are generated when we move towards the
ir regime.

one ignores the g2 term in the denominator of eq. (19) in the asymptotic

uv regime and nds

dg2
dk
dg4
dk
dg6
dk

= 

=

= 

d
2(2)d kd3g4,
2(2)d kd3(cid:18) 3
4  g6(cid:19) ,
d
k2 g2
2(2)d 3g4kd5(cid:18) 10
k2 g2

d

4  5g6(cid:19) ,

9

(25)

where in the last equation we omitted the contribution of g8. consider the
usual strategy in which the coupling constants gn are neglected for n > 4
and the resulting equation is easy to integrate,

1

g4(k)

=

1

g4()

+

3d(cid:16)1 (cid:0) k
(cid:1)4d(cid:17)
(4  d)2(2)dk4d .

(26)

this expression agrees with the result of the minimal subtraction (ms), a
scheme which proved to be specially convenient in the ultraviolet scaling
regime.
it is based on the analytical continuation of the loop integrals in
the ultraviolet domain so the resulting beta functions are mass independent,
i.e. the terms o(g2/k2) are neglected. when extrapolating to the infrared
regime we nd erroneously the mass independent result g4  k4d (g4 
log k in d = 4), g4 tends to zero as k  0. this can be understood by
inspecting (25) where we nd large positive values in the infrared for g4 6= 0
(this conclusion remains valid for nite g6, as well). when the mass term is
retained the beta function assumes the correct behavior and becomes o(kd)
in the infrared. note that the term with g6 acts in the opposite manner than
g4, c.f. the dierent signs in the right hand side of (25), so that it can change
the evolution considerably.

it is instructive to look into the evolution of the dimensionless coupling

constant,

1

g4(k)

= (cid:0) k

(cid:1)4d

g4()

+

(cid:1)4d(cid:17)
3d(cid:16)1 (cid:0) k
(4  d)2(2)d

.

(27)

for 4  d > 0 the one-loop  = 4  d universal critical exponent is reached
for k values suciently below the cuto where k/  0. the latter condition
is needed to get rid of the non-universal cuto eects. the scaling changes
qualitatively as d  4 because the non-universal k   behavior is spread
over the whole k range due to the smallness of 4  d. this is what happens
in the expansion

1 (cid:18) k

(cid:19)4d

 (d  4) ln

k


,

(28)

employed in the dimensional regularization scheme. this generalizes to any
dimension: the marginal coupling constant follows the scaling law extended
from the non-universal cuto regime.

10

the evolution for g2 is of the form

it predicts

dg2
dk

d
2(2)d g4kd3.

= 

dg2
dk  k,

g2  k2 + const

(29)

(30)

in lack of any dimensional constant.

in the ir scaling regime we neglect the k2 term in the denominator of
eq. (19) and using eqs. (18) and (21), we get for g4 (assuming again g6 = 0),

dg4
dk

=

3d

2(2)d kd1 g2

4
g2
2

.

(31)

this evolution is much slower comparing with eq. (26). in fact, for d > 1 we
have now a suppression factor kd1 which makes the coupling to stabilize at
the attractive ir xed point. in the same way, we obtain for g2

dg2
dk

= 

d

2(2)d kd1 g4

g2

,

(32)

with a variation which is slower than that predicted by the uv scaling and
a suppression factor for k  0.
we see that the extraction of the scaling in the limit k  0 from the
uv scaling laws, which is the commonly accepted practice in perturbation
theory is incorrect when the ms scheme is used. one has to come back to
the complete scaling laws in order to describe correctly the ir scaling.

four-dimensional asymptotically free gauge models present an infrared
landau pole in perturbation theory. but this behavior results from the ex-
trapolation from the uv scaling laws. as we have just remarked, the ir limit
of the uv regime is not correct in general, and the mass term can change
considerably the actual behavior in the ir. moreover, at the ir side of the
uv regime, there are nonlinear eects that make important the contribution
of the irrelevant (non-renormalizable) couplings (see fig. 3 (b), commented
in the next section), therefore even the ir limit of the uv scaling can be
inuenced by these couplings. these ideas have been considered qualitatively
in the previous paragraphs, after inspection of eq. (25). let us now examine
them more quantitatively.

11

we take as an example of asymptotically free model the scalar theory in
three dimensions. we know from the epsilon-expansion result [11] that below
four dimensions, the 4 theory does not present an infrared landau pole,
but a xed point located at

 =

162

3

,

(33)

at order  = 4  d. this is the wilson-fisher xed point. for nite , for
example in two and three dimensions, we can get this one-loop result from
our beta functions of the dimensionless coupling constants obtained from
eqs. (23) and (18) in the asymptotic uv regime (that is, ignoring g2), which
for the g4 coupling give

4 = (4  d)g4 + 3g2

4

d
2(2)d ,

giving the ir xed point

g
4 =

(4  d)2(2)d

3d

.

restricting ourselves to the d = 3 case, we nd

g
4 =

42
3  13.15947.

(34)

(35)

(36)

however, in three dimensions g6 is a marginal coupling, and it can be gen-
erated by the rg ow, modifying the position of the xed point (36). if we
include g6 in our analysis, we get the beta functions

4 = g4 +
6 = 3

3
42 g2
42 g4 (10g2

1
42 g6 ,

4 
4  5g6).

(37)

it is immediate to see that the zeros of these beta functions are at the point

4 = 42  39.4784,
g
g
6 = 324  3117.091.

(38)

12

but now let us consider the inclusion of a non-renormalizable coupling, g8.
the beta functions for the (g4, g6, g8) model are

4 = g4 +
6 = 3

3
42 g2
42 g4 (10g2

1
4 
42 g6 ,
4  5g6) 

7
42 (90g4
from them, one obtains the xed point

8 = g8 

4 + 60g2

1
42 g8 ,
4 g6  5g2

6  4g4g8).

g
4 =

42

210(cid:16)195 + 29625(cid:17)  69.01,
g
6 = 42g
4  11563,
4  2.11  106.

4  60g2

4 + 3g2

g
8 = 15g3

(39)

(40)

these values are also obtained in the numerical integration of eqs. (39),
independently of the initial values for the dierent couplings (if they are
dierent from zero, which corresponds to the gaussian xed point).

to assess the importance of this result, the dierence between the physics
around the xed points (38) and (40), recall that the modication of the ir-
relevant operator set at the cuto inuences the overall scale of the model.
thus one has to consider dimensionless quantities in comparing the two cou-
pling constant regions. the most obvious candidate, the dimensionless ratio
between the mass and the four point vertex, g2/g2
4, is trivially vanishing in our
approximation. but g6 is dimensionless and its variation at the xed points
indicates that no adjustment of the overall scale could bring the physics of
these two xed points together.

as we have expected, the non-renormalizable coupling g8 modies the
position of the xed point without changing the blocking procedure, turning
to a situation of strong coupling dynamics in the ir. this is because the
linearity which one assumes to ignore the irrelevant coupling constants is no
longer valid in the strong coupling regime. as g4 and g6 approach their large
ir xed point the linearization fails and new scaling laws are found which
in turn generate new relevant operators [9], overlapping with 8. thus the
strong coupling dynamics may induce a new (and articial) ir scaling regime
even if the uv scaling laws are extrapolated down to low energies.

nothing unusual happens for innitesimal  when one stays in the vicinity
of the gaussian xed point. in that case, linearity applies all along the rg

13

ow from the gaussian xed point to the wilson-fisher xed point given by
eq. (33). however, as we have seen, its location is changed for nite  by
nonlinear eects produced in the ow from one xed point to the other. in
the vicinity of this infrared xed point (which, we stress again, is articial
in the sense that it neglects the inuence of the mass term) we of course
have again the classication of relevant and irrelevant terms, which, in the
case of three and two dimensions, is dierent from the one obtained from
power counting. for example, this ir xed point has in two dimensions just
the mass and the fourth order coupling as relevant parameters, while higher
order couplings are irrelevant.

it is well known that the poles of the xed point action at complex values
of the eld variable make the taylor expansion in the eld unreliable [8]. we
do not see any reason to reject a blocked action only because the potential
is diverging beyond a given eld strength. this kind of internal space sin-
gularity might only indicate a maximal particle density in the system. we
should stay only suciently far from this limiting value of the eld variable
when the evolution equation is truncated. we interpret the dierence of the
two xed points as an indication of the breakdown of the simple universality
which is based on the linearized ow equation around the uv xed point.

so far we considered the extrapolation of the uv scaling laws to the
ir regime. does the conclusion concerning the importance of the non-
renormalizable coupling constant g8 remains valid when the true evolution
equation, with g2 6= 0, is considered? the mass slows down the evolution
but this may happen too late and the strong coupling eects can be found
on the true renormalization group trajectory for small enough renormal-
ized mass, close enough to the critical point. when the mass is large then
crossover freezes the evolution of the coupling constants earlier and the
linearization remains valid. to demonstrate this case recall that the ir limit
of the uv regime means a xed point for the dimensionless couplings. for
a super-renormalizable coupling constant such as g4, which has positive di-
mension, this would mean that the dimensional coupling goes to zero when
k  0. however, we know that for a relevant coupling, the dimensionless
quantity diverges when k  0, so that the dimensional coupling will take
a nite value at the ir. this reasoning can be explicitly checked in fig. 1,
in which we consider the d = 3 scalar theory with just one coupling, g4.
the white points follow the evolution of the uv regime and its extrapola-
tion to k = 0. we observe that indeed the dimensionless coupling reaches
the xed point given by eq. (36), while the dimensional coupling goes to

14

zero. however, if one considers the complete beta function, i.e. retaining
g2 (black points), the behavior is the same in the uv regime, but then the
true trajectory separates from the ir limit of this regime and enters into the
actual ir regime, which implies a divergent dimensionless coupling at k = 0,
and a certain nite value of the dimensional coupling, as explained above.
one can however see numerically that this nite value is stable and almost
does not change when one introduces more and more non-renormalizable
couplings in the rg evolution. this is what one expects when the crossover
captures the coupling constants and slows down their evolution in the regime
of linearizability where the non-renormalizable couplings are unimportant.

in the same way, it might well be that the ir landau pole observed in
four-dimensional gauge theories is just an artifact of a wrong ir limit or the
truncation of the renormalized action. first, the nature of the singularity
can change when one adds non-renormalizable couplings, and then the ir
landau pole would be the reection of the insucient functional form of the
blocked action, and second, the true ir trajectory can be quite dierent from
the ir limit of the uv scaling.

5 asymptotic freedom and the perturbation

expansion

we examine in this section the scaling laws in dimensions d = 2, 3 and 4
from the point of view of the applicability of the perturbation expansion.

as we have seen in the previous section, in the rg evolution of our model
there are two asymptotic scaling regimes, k   and k  0. the latter one
is trivial as mentioned above, because the beta functions (18) are suppressed
by the factor kd and the evolution of the dimensional coupling constants
slows down as k  0. the asymptotic uv scaling is however more involved.
the super-renormalizable (relevant) and the renormalizable (marginal) cou-
pling constants, gn with n < 2d/(d  2) and n = 2d/(d  2) according to the
power counting, respectively, follow their autonomous evolution, the univer-
sal renormalized trajectory2. the non-renormalizable (irrelevant) coupling
constants forget quickly their initial value and take values which are gen-
erated by the universal ow. this general trend is demonstrated by the

2ignoring the triviality in d = 4 where the tree level marginal coupling constant g4 is

actually irrelevant due to the radiative corrections.

15

renormalization group ow shown for d = 4 and 3 in figs. 2 and 3, respec-
tively. in those figures the dimensionless coupling constants are displayed
as the functions of the cuto which is measured in the units of the initial
cuto value, k  k.
in the case of theories with non-gaussian asymptotically free couplings
(the case of our model for d < 4), an excessive growth of these couplings
in the uv regime may produce a non-perturbative situation in the infrared.
we want to study this by comparing the values of the couplings at k = 0. to
do so, we will adopt the convention that a model with positive renormalized
mass square is non-perturbative in the vertex gnn if the radiative correction
o(gn) to the self energy is stronger than the mass term, i.e.

gn(k)

((n  2)/2)! 2(n2)/2 m2(k)  1

(41)

where m2(k) = g2(k). in case this inequality were satised in the infrared
(k = 0), this would mean a non-perturbative situation and the invalidity of
renormalized perturbation expansion.

we remark that we are asking here about the validity of the perturbative
condition at the true, k = 0, infrared xed point, where the rg ow ends.
we are not considering for example the situation at the wilson-fisher ir
xed point in d < 4, which, as was explained in section 4, is the ir limit of
the uv scaling behavior (a xed point which describes the behavior of the
system at the end of the uv regime), and not the real ir xed point if we
ask for the behavior of the system at energy scales much lower than the mass
m(k) (for example, in dimension two, we will see that at the crossover, or
the end of the uv regime, the high order couplings start to take large values,
while they are irrelevant couplings for the wilson-fisher ir xed point; this
is because the true rg ow separates from the extrapolation of the uv ow,
as was explicitely shown in fig. 1 in the case of d = 3).

we now turn to a detailed analysis of the situation at dimensions four,
three and two. since the neglected higher order vertices may inuence the
evolution while we lower the cuto, we have to address the problem of the
system of coupled equations numerically.

the evolution of a non-renormalizable coupling constant, g6 in four di-
mensions, is shown in fig. 2. the irrelevance is expressed by the indepen-
dence of g6(k) on the initial value g6(1) for k  13. the value given in the

3the dierent initial value for the non-renormalizable coupling constants may induce

16

leading order of the perturbation expansion,4 o(g3
4), is reached at k  0.3
for not too large values of g6(1). since the model is in the weak coupling
regime the evolution is rather slow after arriving at this universal value if the
cuto is high enough to provide a long scaling regime. in our case the scale
window 0.3 < k < 1 was insucient and the plateau is reduced into a peak at
k  0.3 before the crossover. but the bringing of g6(1) close to the universal
value creates a plateau even with this limited range of the scales as it can
be seen for g6(1) = 9  108. such a scale independence is the ultimate goal
of the improved action program [12]. as the initial value increases beyond
the plateau level the coupling constant decreases in a monotonous manner
as the cuto is lowered. in order to check the critical exponent coming from
the linearized blocking we need a g6(k) larger than the universal value since
the latter originates in the nonlinear level, o(g3
4). the evolution follows the
linear relation g6  k2 for k < 1 indicated by the dashed line in the last plot
of fig. 2. the infrared scaling regime is 0 < k < 0.1 where g6(k) tends to
zero with k along the universal trajectory. the theory remains perturbative
in d = 4 since it has no relevant non-gaussian coupling constant.

the three-dimensional renormalization group ow is depicted in fig. 3.
the asymptotic infrared scaling laws are rather simple, the super-renormal-
izable coupling constants diverge, the renormalizable one n = 6 converges
and the non-renormalizable ones tend to zero in the infrared, k  0. the
ultraviolet scaling law, above k  0.1 indicates the weak, radiative correction
generated relevance of g6 for the given initial conditions, gn(1). the insensi-
tivity on the initial condition g8(1) for k < 0.3 seen in the last plot supports
the irrelevance of g8. in fact, the evolution of g8(k) follows the linearized
scaling law as long as its value is far form the universal o(g4
4) value. it is
worthwhile noting that the non-renormalizable coupling constants gn(k) al-
ways develop a peak of sign (1)1+n/2 around the crossover, k  0.1. the
appearance of the peak can be understood as the result of the increase of
|gn(k)| from zero as the cuto is lowered in the ultraviolet scaling regime and
the decrease in the infrared side of the crossover.
non-perturbative phenomena may arise at the low energy edge of the
uv scaling regime due to the increase of the asymptotically free coupling
constants, g4 and g6 if the scaling regime is long enough and the initial value of

a dierent overall scale factor. this eect is very weak in our case due to the smallness of
the renormalizable coupling constants.

4which is not applicable for the strongly coupled case (38) or (40).

17

the coupling constants g4(1) and g6(1) are large enough. there is however no
problem in nding a perturbative, asymptotically free theory in the infrared.
the parameter with the highest energy dimension in the lagrangian is g2 =
m2 for d > 2. thus g2 is the largest among the dimensionless coupling
constants according to eq. (23), and it dominates the action and renders
the theory perturbative in the ir limit. the comparison of this conclusion
with eq. (40) reveals the necessity of treating the ir scaling laws properly
in establishing the validity of the renormalized perturbation expansion.

as d approaches 2 more and more coupling constants become super-
renormalizable. the fastest increasing dimensionless non-gaussian coupling
constant during the decrease of the cuto is g4. the critical exponent, the
measure of the speed of the increase become degenerate for innitely many
coupling constants when d = 2. the specialty of the lower critical dimension
is the existence of innitely many super-renormalizable coupling constants,
gn, with equal critical dimension. this degeneracy of the dimensions evolves
the non-gaussian pieces of the action with the same rate as the mass term
on the tree level and the theories are not obviously perturbative any more.
in other words, it remains for the radiative corrections, the last term in the
right hand side of eq. (23) to determine if the theory runs into weak- or
strong-coupling regime at the infrared.

2 = 0.001, gi

the renormalization group equations were integrated out numerically in
two dimensions with the initial conditions (gi
n =
0, n > 4) to nd the evolution of the coupling constants. the result, depicted
in fig. 4, shows a marked increase at the low energy end of the uv scaling
regime. this increase originates from the asymptotically free evolution. the
relevant behavior of a coupling constant is dened on the linearized level of
the blocking, i.e.
in the leading order of the perturbation expansion. this
one-loop result can be obtained by replacing the running coupling constants
in the beta functions by their initial values at the cuto. the local potential
obtained in the one-loop approximation is

4 = 0.01, gi

uk() = v() +

1

2zk<p<

d2p
(2)2 log[p2 + v 

 ()] =

1

8(cid:8)[2 + v 

[k2 + v 

 ()] log[2 + v 

 ()]

 ()] log[k2 + v 

 ()]  2 + k2(cid:9) ,

(42)

18

with

v 
 () = m2() +

g4()

2

2.

(43)

the comparison of the numerical solution with the one-loop evolution is
shown in fig. 5. the one-loop formula (42) cannot be extended down to
k = 0, because there will be a value of k such that k2+m2() = 0, since m2()
is negative. but we only want to compare the results in the perturbative
regime. so we have stopped the evolution in fig. 5 at k  0.3. one can also
see an increase in the one-loop solution at small k which accumulates and
drives the system non-perturbative at lower values of k.

4 = 0.01, gi

the numerical results of fig. 4 show that the initial conditions (gi

2 =
0.001, gi
n = 0, n > 4) correspond to a non-perturbative system.
can we nd initial conditions which yield perturbative dynamics? in order
to answer this question the left hand side of the inequality (41) is plotted
against the initial value for g2 on fig. 6, for the dierent couplings up to
n = 20, at a value of gi
4 = 0.001. the result does not change qualitatively
for dierent values of bare g4. it supports the general trend of having the
systems more perturbative when the gaussian part of the action is increased.
the higher order coupling constants tend to grow faster but it seems that
gn can be brought into the perturbative regime for suciently large initial
mass square. at gi
2 = 0.01, for example, all the couplings are perturbative,
and this perturbative character is more pronounced for the high couplings.
however, the separation between the values of the l.h.s. ratio of eq. (41) at
gi
2 = 0.01 is smaller as we go to higher couplings, and one can ask whether
it has got a limiting value or the trend can be reversed for a suciently
high order coupling. indeed, fig. 7 reveals that this happens for the n = 24
coupling (n = 26), which suggests that one will have a non-perturbative
situation also at this value of bare g2 going to a suciently high order coupling
constant. the situation is the same, even stronger, below two dimensions:
the existence of an innite number of relevant couplings makes that one
cannot assure perturbativity by looking to a nite number of couplings, no
matter what the initial conditions are. we take this and similar other failures
in nding a perturbative theory observed at dierent initial conditions as a
strong numerical indication of the non-perturbative nature of any two and
lower dimensional scalar eld theory with polynomial interaction.

19

6 lattice wegner-houghton equation

the previous sections dealt with the renormalization group ow at nite
scales. we address now a dierent, asymptotic problem, the manner the sen-
sitivity on the initial values of the irrelevant coupling constants is suppressed
during the renormalization. this question is usually rendered trivial by the
universality argument. but there are two reasons to suspect that such a rea-
soning which is based on the linearization of the blocking relation might be
oversimplied; both are related to an innite set of operators.

the reason motivating a more careful check of the universality, mentioned
in the introduction, is that the models at or below the lower critical dimension
contain innitely many relevant operators.
it is not obvious whether the
sum over the interaction vertices is always convergent enough to make the
linearization of the blocking relation a reliable approximation.

another potential problem shows up if one changes innitely many ir-
relevant terms in the action by choosing another regulator. let us compare
the momentum space cuto in the continuum with the lattice regularization.
the propagator is a monotonic function of the momentum in the continuum.
this is not the case on the lattice. in fact, the fermion doubling problem
on the lattice [13] results from the periodicity of the propagator in the rst
brioulline zone, the appearance of 2d  1 new maxima in the propagators in
the uv, non-universal regime. the existence of a maximum of the propagator
in the uv regime contradicts an assumption of the studies of the continuum
models, namely that the propagator decreases monotonically as p  ,
and renders the perturbation expansion non-universal for lattice fermionic
models [14]. there is no species doubling for bosons but their propagator
remains periodic on the lattice and we nd 2d  1 lattice extrema in the uv
regime. the existence of these extrema is an evidence of the slowing down in
the decrease of the propagator as the momentum approaches the boundary
of the rst brioullin zone. this in turn indicates the weaker suppression of
the high energy modes compared to the continuum regularization. does this
mean that the uv scaling laws are dierent in the continuum than on the
lattice? we shall nd an armative answer to this question but this result
does not contradict the universality.

some words of caution are in order at this point. one would object the
interpretation of the modication of the cuto as the introduction of new
irrelevant coupling constants by recalling that the theory ceases to be renor-
malizable in the presence of the non-renormalizable (irrelevant) couplings.

20

the resolution of the apparent paradox is based on the dierence between
the ways the renormalization group is used in statistical and high energy
physics. we are interested in the dynamics close to the cuto in statisti-
cal physics and this is respected by the employment of the blocking which
keeps the complete dynamics unchanged below the actual cuto. the price
of this precision is the appearance of the innitely many irrelevant coupling
constants in the action. we seek the dynamics at nite, xed scales in high
energy physics. since the cuto is sent to the innity this boils down the
problem of keeping the physics cuto independent far from the cuto only.
the obvious gain of such an ease of the conditions is the freedom from the
adjustment of the non-renormalizable parameters. thus one can remove
the cuto when the non-renormalizable parameters are present in the action
without any problem5 as long as the renormalization conditions are imposed
far from the cuto.

the lattice regularization of the scalar model can be described by using
the momentum space as the introduction of the non-renormalizable higher
order derivative terms,

()2 

a
2i

)2

(44)

4
a2 (sin
=   
x=0

1

(2 + 1)!(cid:16) a
2(cid:17)2

2+1!2

.

the cuto dependence of the non-renormalizable coupling constants follows a
tree-level relation arising from the taylor expansion of the sine function. this
is sucient to establish convergent physics at nite scales when a  0 [14],
a claim to be veried in this section numerically by means of the implemen-
tation of the wegner-houghton scheme on the lattice. but this convergence
can not rule out a modication of the scaling laws in the asymptotical uv
regime. in fact, we shall nd a new scaling regime between the region where
the usual universal uv scaling is observed and the uv xed point. the only
eect the dierent adjustments of the non-renormalized coupling constants
may leave on the nite scale physics can be comprised in an overall scale
factor.

it is rather straightforward to repeat the steps leading to eq. (11) on the
it is shown in the appendix that the only change required is the

lattice.

5ignoring again the possibility of the triviality, the appearance of an uv landau pole.

21

modication of the solid angle factor, (k): the lattice evolution equation
(71) is obtained from eq. (11) by replacing eq. (12) by eq. (68). one recovers
the continuum solid angle for d = 2, 2 = 2, in eq. (68) as k  0, thus
the wh equations agree in the ir limit. in fact, one sees numerically that
the behavior of the evolution of the dierent coupling constants in the lattice
rg is qualitatively the same as in the continuum case. but the question
we are interested in is the relation between the regularizations in the uv,
where the coupling constants are introduced, when the physics is the same
at nite scales. it is shown in the appendix that there is a natural relation
between the cutos, 2 = 8/a2, which matches the nite scale physics. we
shall follow the renormalization group ow in terms of the coupling constants
whose dimension is removed by the initial value of the cuto,

gn  gn/2,
in order to avoid the singularities at k = 0.

(45)

let us consider 4 lattice theory which can be studied either numerically
or analytically and whose properties can be matched to those of the contin-
uum theory by the adjustment of g2 and g4. but the situation is more involved
in two dimensions. the reason is again that there are innitely many renor-
malizable coupling constants and one cannot match the nite scale physics
by adjusting g2 and g4. this is demonstrated in fig. 8 where the lattice
model with the initial conditions m2(8) = g2(8) = 0.001, g4(8) = 0.01, and
gn(8) = 0, n > 4 (where we have already made the rescaling eq. (45)) was
evolved in the infrared direction. as the system reached k = kend the contin-
uum wh equation was used to increase the cuto. the result is a perfect
matching of the models in the uv which gives the same low energy physics
in the ir. as we can see in fig. 8, the lattice 4 model in two dimensions
is not the continuum 4 theory. it contains contributions of innitely many
renormalizable other coupling constants. of course, numerically we had to
truncate the equations at a certain coupling (here, at o(22)) but we checked
that these truncation eect hardly inuences the values of the low order
coupling constants.

we have taken for the parameter k2

end the value k2 = 0.3 in fig. 8, while
the crossover is at k2
cr, because the high
order couplings have very large values at the crossover which requires very
ne discretization in the numerical resolution of our dierential equations
to ensure that the way back to the uv is done accurately. however, k2

cr  0.01. we had to use k2

end > k2

22

end

should also be suciently small that the ow be universal there, in other
words to make sure that the irrelevant lattice contributions are suppressed
for k2 < k2
cr.

the choice k2

end > 0 introduces an uncertainty in the matching. to assess
it we repeated the go-return evolution described above and checked the
discretization errors for k2
end = 0.8, 0.5 and 0.3. after then we took the
appropriate bare parameters at the uv end points in both regularizations
and followed the evolutions down to k = 0. the relative dierence,

gn  |gcont

n

n

n

(0)  glatt
|glatt

(0)|

(0)|

(46)

is shown in table 1 for the dierent coupling constants at k = 0. the
smallness of the deviation assures that the ir behavior has practically been
obtained with k2
end = 0.3, and one can trust the conclusions, the approach of
the ow to a universal curve, extracted from fig. 8.

the rst two plots in fig. 8 show that the mass and the quartic coupling
constant run parallel in the suv region of the lattice regularization (see
appendix) and in the continuum. there is no convergence between the
two regularizations in this unusual scaling regime, anticipated above. the
approach to the universal curve starts for k2 < 4, below the suv regime only.
the fact that the renormalization group ow converges to the universal one
in the 2d-th part of the brioullin zone only sets an unexpected high lower
limit on the lattice size when the continuum limit is sought in numerical
simulations. the higher order vertices seem to converge to the universal curve
from the very beginning but the dierence between the two regularizations is
surprisingly large. the universal trajectory of the 4 model is reached later
by the higher order vertices. this eect appears to be a counterpart of the
non-perturbative features seen in figs. 6, 7 and introduces a large uncertainty
in identifying two-dimensional models in dierent regularizations.

7 conclusions

the renormalization group ow of scalar models with polynomial interaction
is considered in the rst part of this paper by solving the wegner-houghton
equation numerically in the local potential approximation for d = 2, 3 and
4.

23

the numerical results showed in this paper suggest that the length of
the uv scaling regime which is needed to generate non-perturbative dynam-
ics in the infrared shrinks to zero as the number of the asymptotically free
coupling constants tends to innity. in other words, the -parameter tends
to the cuto as the lower critical dimension is approached, d  2. such a
behavior limits considerably the values of the coupling constants for a pertur-
bative system in dimension 3 and renders all two- and lower dimensional eld
theories with polynomial couplings non-perturbative. this makes the under-
standing of the noncritical low dimensional condensed matter systems more
involved. the one-dimensional models belong to rst quantized quantum
mechanics and our result is a manifestation of the failure of the convergence
of the perturbation expansion for an anharmonic oscillator.

such a conclusion does not invalidate the well known results for two-
dimensional systems, such as the applicability of the bethe ansatz, bosoniza-
tion and the availability of certain exact information for models with con-
formal invariance. instead, it makes the asymptotic state structure and the
relation between the the dressed particles and the states created by the ap-
plication of the eld operator from the vacuum more involved.

we found an interesting analogy between the infrared landau pole of
the conning four-dimensional yang-mills theories and the low dimensional
scalar models which opens the possibility of an unexpected, nontrivial struc-
ture in the asymptotic states in the low dimensional scalar models. viewed
with interest in particle physics our conclusion suggests that one can avoid
the ir landau pole by following the evolution of the non-renormalizable
operators.

how to nd the non-renormalizable operators whose presence stabilises the
theories at low energies? it is well known that massive lagrangians generate
trivial infrared scaling laws, i.e. the gaussian mass term is the only relevant
operator in the infrared scaling regime. this is because the uctuations are
exponentially suppressed beyond the correlation length so the evolution of
the coupling constants slows down at the infrared side of the crossover. the
theories with dimensional transmutation, i.e. dynamically generated scale
parameter or infrared instability only can support non-perturbative dynamics
in the ir scaling regime. thus the operators sought should be relevant
in the ir regime, their growth being fed by ir or collinear divergences.
there are few known cases only where the low modes are controlled by non-
renormalizable operators. these include the four fermion contact term in
solids inducing the bcs transition [15], the higher order derivative terms in

24

the action which generate inhomogeneous vacuua [16], the common element
being the onset of a bose-einstein condensation [9].

in the second part of the paper the innitesimal renormalization group
scheme is generalized for lattice regularization. the matching of the con-
tinuum and the lattice regularizations is carried out numerically and the
approach of the universal renormalization group ow is demonstrated for the
two-dimensional 4 lattice model. this result suggests that the naive argu-
ment for the universality, which is based on the linearization of the blocking
relations remains valid in the presence of innitely many relevant operators.
other potential troublemakers, the innitely many higher order derivatives
contained in the lattice kinetic energy do generate a new, super uv scal-
ing regime but universality is restored at the ir end of the usual uv scaling
regime. another use of the lattice regulated version of the wegner-haughton
equation is the estimate of the nite size eects in a non-perturbative man-
ner. this provides a useful check of the thermodynamic limit of the numerical
results obtained in general on small lattices.

appendix

the details of the derivation of the wegner-houghton equation in the lattice
regularization are given in this appendix. let us consider the scalar eld
theory regularized on a lattice of lattice spacing a = 1. we want to derive
a wh equation similar to eq. (11). we integrate over spherical shells in the
momentum space for the continuum regularization, because the propagator
has spherical symmetry. this is no longer the case on the lattice, where we
have

(cid:3) =

d

x=1

p2
,

p = 2 sin

p
2

.

(47)

let us see the surfaces of equal value of the lattice propagator in two dimen-
sions by performing the following change of variables:

(px, py)  (p, )

2 = p2

4 sin2 px

2 + 4 sin2 py
tan  = sin(py/2)
sin(px/2)

25




(48)

we can see in fig. 9 the form of the curves of constant propagator for several
values of p2. p can be identied as the momentum scale that runs from
the cuto at p2 = 2 = 8 to the ir p2 = 0. it is also clear in that gure that
the value p2 = 4 separates two regimes, still in the ultraviolet region, that
we could call super-uv (suv), for 8 > p2 > 4, and normal-uv regimes. for
p2  0, the lines are spheres, and our change of variables (48) reduces to the
usual relation between cartesian and polar coordinates.
the absolute value of the jacobian of the transformation (48) is found to

be

j =

jp

,

(49)

r(cid:16)1  p2

4 cos2 (cid:17)(cid:16)1  p2

4 sin2 (cid:17)

where jp is the usual jacobian for the polar change of variables, jp = p.
the transformation (48) can be easily generalized to three and four dimen-
sions; however, we can only treat analytically the integral that appears in
the derivation of the wh equation in the d = 2 case.

to derive the equivalent of the wegner-houghton equation (11) in the
bidimensional lattice regularization we will start from eq. (8), and calculate
the trace by integrating in momentum space over a shell k  k < p < k,
where p is the parameter we have introduced in eq. (48),

1
2

tr log[(cid:3) + u 

k ] =

d2p

1

1

(2)2 log[4 sin2 px

2z
2(2)2z dz k
k
2(2)2 k log[k2 + u 

kk

k ] (k),

+ 4 sin2 py
2

+ u 

k ] =

2

dp j log[p2 + u 

k ] 

with

(k) =z d

8

p64  16k2 + k4 sin2 2

we have to distinguish two dierent regimes in making the integration: (i)
k2 < 4.

in this region the range of values for  is (0, 2).

(50)

(51)

.

(k) =z 2

0

d

8

p64  16k2 + k4 sin2 2

26

=

4

xi=1

i(k),

(52)

where we have split the interval (0, 2) into four intervals (0, /2), (/2, ),
etc. let us consider 1(k). with the change of variable x = tan  and the
notation

k2 = 4  k2,
this integral can be brought into the form

(53)

,

(54)

1(k) =

1

kz 

0

2 dx

p(x2 + b2)(x2 + b2)

where b2 = 4/k2. the integral in eq. (54) is related to the elliptic integral of
the rst kind [17] f (, t),

1(k) = f (cid:20)

2

,

k
4

8  k2(cid:21) ; f (, t) =z 

0

d

p1  t2 sin2 

.

(55)

the result is the same for the other integrals i, i = 2, 3, 4. but f (/2, t) is
a complete elliptic integral, which can be expressed in terms of the hyperge-
ometric function [17, 18]

f (, ; ; z) =

()

()()



xn=0

( + n)( + n)

( + n)

zn
n!

as

(k) = 2f(cid:18)1

2

,

1
2

; 1;

(8  k2)k2

16

(cid:19) .

(56)

(57)

(ii) 4 < k2 < 8. this is the suv region. we split again the integral into
four integrations in the corresponding quadrants. by using the same change
of variables as above, we have to calculate

where

i(k) =z

4 dx

px2(k4 + 16)  4k2(1 + x4)
k2 = k2  4.

,

(58)

(59)

27

special care is needed at the limits of integration (recall fig. 9). it can be
seen that the four integrals can be put together in the form

(k) = 4z 2/k
kz 2/k

k/2

k/2

8

4 dx

=

px2(k4 + 16)  4k2(1 + x4)
p(x  k/2)(2/k  x)(x + k/2)(x + 2/k)

dx

.

(60)

this integral is related again [17] to an elliptic integral and an hypergeometric
function:

(k) =

32

k2 f(cid:20) 

2

,

8

k2  1(cid:21) =

16

k2 f (cid:18)1

2

,

1
2

; 1,

(8  k2)2

k4

(cid:19) .

(61)

we would like to have a common expression for (k) for both cases (i)
and (ii). from eqs. (57) and (61), we nd in fact that the expressions dier
in a factor 2 for k2 = 4! the reason is that actually our integral is divergent
at this point. from eq. (51) we see that the divergent integral is

(k2 = 4) =z 2

0

d

2

| sin 2|

(62)

(in fact, the hypergeometric function (56) converges in general only in the
unit circle |z| < 1 [17]). we will see, however, that this divergence is inte-
grable during the rg evolution from k2 = 8 to k2 = 0, and therefore it has
no physical signicance. in order to have a consistent, single expression for
the cases 8 < k2 < 4 and 4 < k2 < 0, we will make use of the following
property of the hypergeometric functions [17]:

f (cid:18)1

2

,

1
2

; 1, z2(cid:19) =

1

1 + z

f(cid:18)1

2

,

1
2

; 1,

4z

(1 + z2)2(cid:19) ,

0  z < 1.

(63)

let us consider the expression (57) which is valid for k2 < 4. using the

property (63) one nds,

(k) = 2f(cid:18)1

2

,

1
2

; 1,

where we have set

4z

(1 + z2)2(cid:19) = 2(1 + z)f (cid:18)1

2

4z

(1 + z2)2 =

(8  k2)k2

16

.

28

,

1
2

; 1; z2(cid:19) ,

(64)

(65)

this equation has two solutions for z as a function of k:

z =

k2
8  k2

;

8  k2
k2

,

(66)

but only the rst one is admissible for eq. (64), because it gives z < 1 for
k2 < 4, while the second solution gives a value greater than 1 in this region.
now, if we dene k = 8  k2, then we have z = (8  k2)/k2, and eq. (64)
becomes

(k) = 2

8
k2

f(cid:18) 1

2

,

1
2

; 1; z2(cid:19) .

(67)

comparing this last expression with the result (61) for the case 8 < k2 < 4,
we can nally write

,

2

1
2

16
k2

(k) =

f(cid:18)1
and (k2 = k2
k2 = 8  k2
the hypergeometric function f (cid:0) 1

; 1; z2(cid:19) , with z =

if k2 = 8 . . . 4,
if k2 = 4 . . . 0.

8  k2
k2

(68)

from its denition (56). one can obtain a high precision in the evaluation
of the series with a reasonable number of terms (say, around 50) when z is
not very close to 1, say, for 0.7 > z > 0. for 1 > z > 0.7 we have used the
following alternative formula [18]

2 ; 1; z2(cid:1) can be computed directly

2 , 1

f (, ;  + ; z) =

where [18]



xn=0

( + )

( + n)( + n)

[2(n + 1)

(n!)2

(()())2
( + n)  ( + n)  log(1  z)](1  z)n,
(|arg(1  z)| < ,|1  z| < 1),

(z) =

d log (z)

dz

,

(69)

(70)

which gives a better convergence for the function f (cid:0) 1
because it is a series in the variable (1  z2).

2 , 1

2 ; 1; z2(cid:1) near z = 1

29

in conclusion, our generalization of the wh equation (11) for a lattice

regularization in two dimensions is

k


k

uk() = 

(k)k2
2(2)2 log[k2 + u 

k ()],

(71)

where k is the parameter p of eq. (48), and (k) is given by eq. (68).

acknowledgements

we wish to thank v. branchina, s.b. liao, j. alexandre, h. mohrbach, e.
vicari and a. pelissetto for useful discussions. work partially supported
by the spanish mec, accion integrada hispano-francesa hf1997-0041, the
french program, actions integrees franco-espagnol, picasso 98064. j.m.c.
acknowledges support from the eu tmr program erbfmrx-ct97-0122.
he also thanks the spanish mec, the cai european program and dga
(consi+d) for nancial support.

references

[1] f. bloch and h. nordsieck, phys. rev. 52, 54 (1937); t. kinoshita, j.
math. phys. 3, 650 (1962); t.d. lee and m. nauenberg, phys. rev.
133, 1549 (1964).

[2] r. jackiw and s. templeton, phys. rev. d 23, 2291 (1981).

[3] j. polonyi, connement and renormalization, in the proceedings of the
international school enrico fermi, course 80: selected topics in non-
perturbative qcd, varenna, 1995.

[4] f.j. wegner and a. houghton, phys. rev. a 8, 40 (1973).

[5] k.g. wilson, rev. mod. phys. 47, 773 (1975); rev. mod. phys. 55, 583

(1983).

[6] j. polchinsky, nucl. phys. b 231, 269 (1984); c. wetterich, nucl. phys.
b 408, 91 (1993); t.r. morris, int. journ. mod. phys. a 9, 2441 (1994).

30

[7] j.f. nicoll, t.s. chang, h.e. stanley, phys. rev. lett. 33, 540 (1974);
v.i. tpkar, phys. lett. a 104, 135 (1984); a. hasenfratz, p. hasenfratz,
nucl. phys. b 270, 687 (1986); g. felder, comm. math. phys. 111, 101
(1987); a. margaritis, g. odor, a. patkos, z. phys. c 39, 109 (1988);
p. hasenfratz, j. nager, z. phys. c 37, 477 (1988); m. maggiore, z.
phys. c 41, 687 (1989); c. bagnulus, c. berviller, phys. rev. b 41,
402 (1990); c. wetterich, nucl. phys. b 352, 529 (1991); a.e. filippov,
s.a. breus, phys. lett. a 158, 300 (1991); s.b. liao, j. polonyi, ann.
phys. 222, 122 (1993); m. alford, phys. lett. b 336, 237 (1994); u.
ellwanger, z. phys. c 62 503, (1994); p.e. haagensen, y. kubyshin,
j.i. latorre, e. moreno, phys. lett. b 323, 330 (1994); k. halpern, k.
huang, phys. rev. lett. 74, 3526 (1995); s. bornhold, n. tetradis, c.
wetterich, phys. lett. b 348, 89 (1995).

[8] t.r. morris, phys. lett. b 329, 241 (1994); 334, 355 (1994); k. aoki,
k. morikawa, w. souma, j. sumi, h. terao, prog. theor. phys. 95, 409
(1996); 99, 451 (1998).

[9] j. alexandre, v. branchina and j. polonyi, phys. rev. d 58, 16002

(1998).

[10] s. coleman and e. weinberg, phys. rev. d 7, 1888 (1973).

[11] k.g. wilson and m.e. fisher, phys. rev lett. 28, 240 (1972).

[12] k. symanzik, in new developments in gauge theories, ed. g. t hooft et

al. (plenum, n.y., 1980).

[13] h. b. nielsen, m. ninomiya, nucl. phys. b185 20 (1981).

[14] t. reisz, comm. math. phys. 117, 79 (1988).

[15] r. shankar, rev. mod. phys. 66, 129 (1994).

[16] j.l. alonso, j.m. carmona, j. clemente gallardo, l.a. fernandez,
d. iniguez, a. tarancon, c.l. ullod, phys. lett. b 376, 148 (1996);
h.g. ballesteros, j.m. carmona, l.a. fernandez, v. martn-mayor, a.
munoz sudupe, a. tarancon, phys. rev. d 55, 5067 (1997); i. campos,
l.a. fernandez, a. tarancon, phys. rev. d 55, 2965 (1997); j. fing-
berg, j. polonyi, nucl. phys. 486, 315 (1997); h.g. ballesteros, j.m.
carmona, l.a. fernandez, a. tarancon, phys. lett. b 419 303 (1998);

31

v. branchina, h. mohrbach, j. polonyi, phys. rev. d 60, 45006, 45007
(1999); m. dufour-fournier, j. polonyi, phys. rev. d in press.

[17] i.s. gradshteyn and i.m. ryzhik, table of integrals, series, and prod-

ucts, academic press (1980).

[18] handbook of mathematical functions, ed. by m. abramowitz and

i.a. stegun, dover publications (new york, 1965).

32

figure captions

fig. 1: numerical rg evolution for the (a) dimensionless g4 coupling and
(b) dimensional g4 coupling in the d = 3 g44 scalar theory. black
points result from the integration of the complete beta function with
g2 = 0.052, while white points show just the uv regime (see text). in
(a), the ir limit of the uv regime is given by the xed point (36).

fig. 2: renormalization group ow for the dimensionless coupling constant
g6(k) in d = 4. the initial conditions are g2(1) = g4(1) = 0.01, together
with the values of g6(1) = 0.0, 4  108, 9  108, 107 for the dierent
lines in plot (a), and g6(1) = 103 for plot (b). in this last plot the
points of the numerical renormalization group ow are joined by the
linearized scaling g6  k2, shown by a dashed line.

fig. 3: (a) renormalization group ow for the dimensionless coupling con-
stants gn(k), n = 2, 4, 6 and 8 in d = 3. the initial conditions are
g2(1) = g4(1) = 0.01, gn(1) = 0 for n  6. (b) evolution of g8(k)
with the same initial conditions that before except for g8(1) = 6  105,
together with the linearized scaling law g8(k)  k, indicated by the
dashed line.

fig. 4: renormalization group ow for the dimensional coupling constants
in d = 2. the initial conditions are g2(1) = g4(1) = 0.01, gn(1) = 0 for
n  6.

fig. 5: evolution of the dimensional coupling constants obtained in the
one-loop approximation (squares) and numerically (circles) for d = 2.

fig. 6: the left hand side of eq. (41) as a function of the bare mass square

for n = 4,   , 20 in d = 2.

fig. 7: the same as fig. 6 but now including the n = 24 coupling.

fig. 8: matching of lattice and continuum regularizations; we start with
lattice eld theory at the uv, go down to the ir (circles) and then we
come back to the uv with the continuum regularization (squares); see
text.

fig. 9: lines of equal value of the lattice propagator. to the inside, the

lines drawn correspond to p2 = 7.9, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 0.5, 0.1.

33

table captions

table 1: relative dierences between the continuum and lattice coupling
constants at k = 0, eq. (46), after having matched the couplings at the
uv using the parameter k2

end.

34

table 1

end = 0.8 k2
k2
0.0166
0.0028
0.0188
0.0199
0.1793
0.0680
0.0522
0.9300
0.2116
0.0584

end = 0.5 k2
0.0096
0.0011
0.0116
0.0135
0.0992
0.0424
0.0340
0.5558
0.1261
0.0389

end = 0.3
0.0052
0.0002
0.0069
0.0092
0.0494
0.0259
0.0221
0.3226
0.0731
0.0259

g2
g4
g6
g8
g10
g12
g14
g16
g18
g20

35

figure 1

36

figure 2

37

figure 3

a

b

38

figure 4

39

figure 5

40

~g

0



 2=2! 2

~

0

 2=2

2

4
1

2

~


1


f
i
g
u
r
e

6

~g

0



 2=2! 2

~

0

 2=2

2

4
2

2

~


1


f
i
g
u
r
e

7

figure 8

43

figure 9

- p

p

p

p

py

- p

- p

- p

p

px

44

