9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
1

 

 
 

1
v
1
0
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

a new invariant for  models. non-commutative

topological quantum field theories

ioannis p. zois1

mathematical institute, 24-29 st. giles, oxford ox1 3lb uk

1izois @ maths.ox.ac.uk

abstract

we intruduce a new invariant for  models (and foliations more generally)
using the even pairing between k-homology and cyclic homology. we try to cal-
culate it for the simplest case of foliations, namely principal bundles. we end up
by discussing some possible physical applications primarily in quantum gravity
and m-theory.

pacs classication: 11.10.-z; 11.15.-q; 11.30.-ly

keywords: foliations;  models

0.1 introduction and motivation

in [24] we proposed a lagrangian density for the topological part of the non-
sypersymmetric m-theory. the new key ingredient from the geometric point of
view was characteristic classes for foliations. we argued that the corresponding
topological charge should be a new invariant rstly introduc ed in [25].

this invariant can be dened for any foliation in general; as far as physics is
concerned however (and this includes the case of m-theory treated in [24]), we
are primarily concerned with a special kind of folia tions, called at foliations of
bundles. this is due to the fact that a s polyakov had noticed in [6],  models
can be thought of as at principal bundles (se e [24] for more details). thus,
hopefully, our invariant might be of some relevance whenever  models are met
in physics.

we organise this paper as follows:

in section 2 we explain the strategy of
the construction; in section 3 we provide all the details; in section 4 we give the
invariant formula; in section 5 we calculate this invariant for the si mplest case
of a principal bundle and in section 6 we discuss some possible applications in
physics. sections 2,4,5 and 6 contain original meterial whereas section 3 contains
things already known to mathematicians.

we would like to emphasise one point: we see this paper mainly as an applicati
on in physics of various - known to methematicians - techniques belonging to a
more general mathematical subject, called non-commutative geometry and espe-
cially one aspect of it called non-commutative topology. this invariant however,
strictly speaking, is new even for mathematics as well (invariant for foliations.
moreover it is one of the very few times as far as we know that this particular as-
pect of non-commutative geometry, namely non-commutative topology, appears
in physics literature ([25], [30]).

0.2 strategy

0.2.1

instantons

let us recall some facts about instantons. we would like to think of our invariant
as an analogue of the instanton number for foliations.

we consider a principal bundle (p, , m, g), where m is the base manifold
assumed to be compact and 4-dim for brevity, g is su(2) for simplici ty, p is the
total space of the bundle and  is the projection. assuming we have a connection
a on p with curvature f , then the instanton number ignoring constants is simply

rm f  f , i.e. the second chern number c2 of the bundle p .

we would like to think of this number slightly dierently: moreorless by def-
inition, any principal bundle p over m denes an element (k-class) of the group
k 0(m) (we forget equivariant k-theory for simplicity). using the chern-weil

1

homomorphism we get the chern classes of p which belong to the cohomol-
ogy groups h 2(m). considering the (top dimensional) fundamental class [m]
of m in the homology group h(m) of m and taking the pairing between ho-
mology and cohomology, which in this case is just integration over m, we get
the instanton number. we can consider the chern-weil homomorphism from
k 0(m)  h 2(m) as a black box and forget all about cohomology for the
moment; then the instanton number will be the result from pairings between
k-theory and (singular) homology h(m).

our construction since we are dealing with foliations (more accurately with the
space of leaves of foliations) which provide a good example of non-commutative
topological spaces, immitates the above picture: to each foliation we can associate
a homology class which will be the analogue of the fundamental class [m] above;
this class however will belong to an appropriate homology theory called cyclic
homology and it is called transverse fundamental class of the foliation. moreover
one can also construct a class in k-homology, being the analogue of k-theory for
our purpose. then we use a formula for pairings between cyclic homology and
k-homology to get our result.

0.2.2 non-commutative topology

in this subsection we would like to mention briey what non-commutative topol-
ogy is about. as its name suggests, this is one aspect of non-commutative geom-
etry. non-commutative geometry has appeared in physics literature some years
ago mainly through the so called quantised calculus. anyway, the starting
point of non-commutative topology is the fact that given any compact hausdor
space x say, the commutative (c )-algebra c(x) of complex valued functions
dened on x can capture all the toplogical information of the space x itself;
in fact x and c(x) are completely equivalent, one can be uniquely constructed
by the other. conversely, given any commutative algebra a, say, there exists
a compact hausdor space x say, (called the spectrum of a) realising the
commutative algebra a. realising means that the commutative algebra c(x)
of complex valued functions on x is essentially the algebra a.
in mathemat-
ics terminology one says that the categories of compact hausdor spaces and
commutative c -algebras are equivalent. this is the so called gelfands theorem.
we know however that there exist non-commutative c -algebras as well. the
natural question then is whether one can nd a topological realisation for them
just like for the commutative ones. we are looking for a non-commutative ana-
logue of gelfands theorem. this question is not fully answered in mathematics,
it is related to the famous boum-connes conjecture. there are some things al-
ready known in mathematics and these are related to foliations. this is what we
shall be using extensively in this paper. the appropriate framework is that of
k-theory and various homology theories.

during the 70s mathematicians (baum, douglas, kasparov and others) de-

2

veloped a k-theory for arbitrary c -algebras (commutative or not) and it is a
well-known theorem due to serre and swan that in the commutative case this
k-theory reduces to atiyahs original topological k-theory. moreover in the 80s
mathematicians (connes, loday, quillen and others) developed a homology the-
ory called cyclic homology for arbitrary algebras which again in the commutative
case gives in the limit the usual simplicial homology. so non-commutative topol-
ogy, in terms of k-theory and various homology theories gives a generalisation
of ordinary topology through gelfands theorem. a good example of a non-
commutative topological space is the space of leaves of a foliation (see below
for denitions). in general quotients of ordinary topological spaces by discrete
groups give non-commutative (abreviated to nc in the sequel) spaces. good
textbooks are [3] and [29] for an introduction on k-theory of c -algebras and
cyclic homology respectively.

0.2.3 the invariant

in order to construct our invariant for any foliation [25], we use some ideas from
non-commutative geometry [8], [10], [11], [14]. the strategy is as follows: given
any foliation f of a manifold v , namely an integrable subbundle f of t v , one can
associate to it another manifold (f ), called the graph (or holonomy groupoid )
of the foliation introduced in [16]. this is of dimension dimv + dimf . using
the complex line bundle 1/2((f )) of 1/2-densities dened on (f ), we consider
the set (actually vector space) of smooth sections of this line bundle equipped
with a  product, thus obtaining an algebra. we then complete this algebra in
a minimal manner (in standard c -algebra theory this is called the reduced
c -algebra completion), thus we obtain a c -algebra denoted c (f ) which is
naturally associated to our original foliation f . from now on one can forget
the original foliation f of v alltogether and concentrate on its corresponding
c -algebra c (f ). we are interested in the k0 group of c (f ) and in its cyclic
homology groups. if we pick a metric g on the transverse bundle t of f we can
construct in a natural way a c (f )-module e(f ), thus obtaining a class [e(f )] in
k0(c (f )). moreover to our foliation one can associate in a natural way a cyclic
cocycle [f ] in the q-th cyclic homology group of the c -algebra c (f ), called the
fundamental transverse cyclic cocycle of the foliation, where q is the codimension
of the foliation f . then we use the even pairing between k-homology and cyclic
homology in this case, namely we consider the pairing

h[e(f )], [f ]i := (m!)1(f #t r)(e(f ), ..., e(f ))

as was rstly introduced in the abstract algebraic context in [11]. hence we
obtain a complex number as a result from the above pairing and this complex
number characterises our original foliation f .

3

0.3 the constructions in detail:

0.3.1 foliations

let v be a smooth manifold and t v its tangent bundle. a smooth subbundle f
of t v is called integrable i one of the following equivalent conditions is satised:

1. every x  v is contained in a submanifold w of v such that

ty(w ) = fy

where ty denotes the tangent space over y.

(q=codim f ) with fy = ker(p)yy  u.
lie algebra of vector elds on v .

2. every x  v is in the domain u  v of a submersion p : u  rq
3. c (v, f ) = x  c (v, t v ); xx  fxx  v is a lie subalgebra of the
4. the ideal j(f ) of smooth dierential forms which vanish on f is stable

under dierentiation:d(j)  j

the condition 3. is simply frobenius theorem and 4. its dual.

example:
any 1-dimensional subbundle f of t v is integrable, but for dimf  2 the
condition is non-trivial; for instance if v is the total space of a principal bun-
dle with compact structure group, then we know that the subbundle of vertical
vectors is always integrable, but the horizontal subbundle is integrable i the
connection is at.
we shall make extensive use of this fact in this piece of work.

a foliation of v is given by an integrable subbundle f of v . the leaves of the
foliation are the maximal connected submanifolds l of v with tx(l) = fxx 
l, and the partition of v into leaves v = la where a  a is characterised
geometrically by its local triviality: every point x  v has a neighborhood
u and a system of local coordinates (xj), j=1,...,dimv which is called foliation
chart , so that the partition of u into connected components of leaves, called
plaques (they are the leaves of the restriction of the foliation on u), corresponds
to the partition of rdimv = rdimf  rcodimf into the parallel ane subspaces
rdimf  pt.
very simple examples indicate that the leaves l may not be compact even if
the manifold v is and that the space of leaves x := v /f may not be hausdor
for the quotient topology. the rational torus is such an example.

throughout this paper we would mainly restrict our attention to two special
kinds of foliations: we consider a principal bundle p with structure (lie) group
g (assumed compact and connected) over a compact manifold m. the total
space p has automatically a foliation induced by the bration: the leaves are the

4

bers which are isomorphic to the structure group g and the space of leaves is
just the base space m with its manifold topology. we shall be refering to this
foliation as the vertical foliation of the principal bundle and it will be denoted
pv . clearly, the dimension of this foliation is equal to the dimension of the group
g, the integrable subbundle of t p being in this case the vertical subbundle. the
codimension is equal to the dimension of the base space m.

now if in addition a at connection is given on our principal bundle, we
have another foliation of the total space which we shall be referring to as the
horizontal or at foliation and it will be denoted ph.. we shall study this foliation
extensively in the following subsection. the dimension of this foliation equals
the dimension of the base space and the codimension equals the dimension of the
group. from this one can see that the vertical and the horizontal foliations of a
principal bundle are transverse to each other.

now the vertical foliation behaves very well; everything is compact and haus-
dor, as were the spaces we started with to build our bundle. in this case the
general theory of foliations gives nothing more than the well-known theory of prin-
cipal bundles. however, the horizontal foliation can suer from various patho-
logical deects and for this reason it is interesting from the ncg point of view.
let us study it in greater detail.

0.3.2 flat foliation of a principal bundle

to begin with, a at connection on a principal bundle p with structure group
g and base space m, corresponds to reduction of the structure group from g
to a subgroup isomorphic to a normal subgroup of the fundamental group of the
base space 1(m). moreover a (gauge equivalence class of a) at conne ction also
denes a (conjugacy class of a) representation

h : 1(m)  g

if we identify the fundamental group with the group of covering translations
of the universal covering m of m we get an action  of 1(m) on m  g dened
as follows:

 : 1(m)  ( m  g)  ( m  g)

(, ( m, g)) 7 (( m), h()(g))

where we use the obvious notation   1(m), g  g, m  m. this action gives
a commutative diagram:

5

m  g

y

p  = ( m  g)/ p

pr

 m

yq

m

(1)

where pr is the canonical projection,  is the quotient map by , p is uniquely
induced by pr and q is just the map from the universal covering space to the
original space.

this construction is called suspension of the representation h. one can prove
that the map  is a covering map and that if  := imh is endowed with the
induced topology, then h = (p , p, m) is a ber bundle with ber g, total space
p , base m, projection p and structure group .

to study the geometric properties of suspensions we introduce a new topology
on the total space p  of h. we denote by g the set g supplied with the discrete
topology. then the action  of 1(m) on m  g remains continuous and the
map  : m  g  p  induces on p  a new topology which is ner than its
manifold topology. we denote by p  the set p  supplied with this topology. the
topology on m  g and the topology p  are called the leaf topologies. then the
suspension diagram below is a commutative diagram of covering maps:

m  g

y

p 

pr

 m

yq

m

p

(2)

the topological space p  is not connected unless the ber is contractible. a
connected component of p  is called a leaf of h. each point x = ( m, g)  p 
belongs to exactly one leaf which is denoted lx and equals ( m  g). the leaves
are injectively immersed submanifolds of p  but in general not embedded. they
are transverse to the bers of h. conjugate representations h and h  give
suspension bundles h and h  which are isomorphic.

let now x = ( m, g). then the representation

hx : 1(lx)  g

with image g, is called the holonomy representation of the leaf lx at the point
x. the group g is the holonomy group of the leaf lx at the point x. g is the
isotropy group of  in g  g. moreover 1(lx) is isomorphic to the isotropy
group of 1(m) in the point g  g, namely 1(lx) = {  1(m)|h()g = g}.
see also [7].

there is a topological way to characterise these at bundles which is by using
classifying spaces for at bundles in a fashion analogous for ordinary bundles,

6

namely:

let g be a connected lie group and let g denote the same group with the
discrete topology. the milnor join construction for g denes a connected space
bg which is the classifying space for principal g-bundles. the same construction
applied to g yields a connected topological space bg which is an eilenberg-
maclane space k(g, 1), namely 1(bg) = g and j(bg) = 0 for j > 1. the
inclusion i : g  g induces a continuous map bi : bg  bg. as sets these
two spaces are the same with the source having ner topology than the range.
the dierence in these two topologies is measured by introducing the homotopy
ber bg. this is dened by rst replacing bi with a homotopy equivalent weak
bration over bg, then take for bg the (homotopy class of the) ber. the
description then is just the construction of the puppe sequence for bi (cf [17]).
choose a base point in bg and consider its image in bg. then let (bg)
and p (bg) denote the space of based loops and paths with initial point of bg
respectively. let e be the end point map of a path. then one has a bration

where the second map is e. then dene bg via the homotopy pull-back diagram:

(bg)  p (bg)  bg

(bg)  (bg)

y
ye

bg

bg  p (bg)

(3)

y
y

bg bi

a principal g-bundle p over a manifold m is equivalent to giving an open cov-
ering for m and the transition functions. this data denes a continuous map
gp : m  bg. if the transition functions are locally constant, namely if the
bundle p is at, then gp can be factored through bg as a continuous map.
a choice of transition functions which are locally constant is equivalent to
specifying a at g-structure on p . hence p has a horizontal foliation whose
holonomy map a : 1(m)  g denes the classifying map ba : m  bg. con-
versely, given a continuous map ba : m  bg, there is induced a representation
a : 1(m)  g and a corresponding at principal g-bundle pa = m 1(m ) g,
where m is the universal covering of m. the topological type of the g-bundle
pa is determined by the composition

ga : m  bg  bg

the principal bundle is trivial i ga is homotopic to the constant map m  pt.
the choice of the homotopy is equivalent to specifying a global section on pa.

7

0.3.3 groupoids and c-algebras associated to foliations

the next step is to associate the holonomy groupoid to any foliation. in general
a groupoid is roughly speaking a small category with inverses, or more precisely

denition 1:
a groupoid consists of a set , a distinguished subset (0) of , two maps

r, s :   (0) and a law of composition

 : (2) := (1, 2)    ; s(1) = r(2)  

such that:

1.s(1  2) = s(2), r(1  2) = r(1) (1, 2)  (2)
2. s(x) = r(x) = xx  (0)
3.  s() = , r()   =   
4. (1  2)  3 = 1  (2  3)
5. each  has a two sided inverse 1, with 1 = r() and 1 = s()

the maps r, s are called range and source maps.

in the category theory terminology, (0) is the space of objects and (2) is the

space of morphisms.

denition 2:
a smooth groupoid  is a groupoid together with a dierentiable structure on
 and (0) such that the maps r, s are submersions and the object inclusion map
(0)   is smooth, as is the composition map (2)  .

the notion of a 1

2-density on a smooth manifold allows one to dene in a

canonical manner the convolution algebra of a smooth groupoid .

specically, given , let 1/2 be the line bundle over  whose ber 1/2



at

  , r() = x, s() = y, is the linear space of maps

such that

 : kt(x)  kt(y)  c

() = ||1/2()  r

here y =   ; s() = y, x =   ; r() = x, and k = dimt(x) =
dimt(y) are the dimensions of the bers of the submersions r :   (0)
and s :   (0).

then we endow the linear space c 

c (, 1/2) of smooth compactly supported

sections of 1/2 with the convolution product

8

(a  b)() =z1 2=

a(1)b(2)

a, b  c 
integral of a 1-density, namely a(1)b(1

c (, 1/2) where the integral on the rhs makes sense since it is the

1 ), on the manifold x, x = r().

one then can prove that if  is a smooth groupoid and c 

c (, 1/2) is the
convolution algebra of smooth compactly supported 1
2-densities with involution
*, f () = f (1). then for each x  (0), the following denes an involutive
representation x of c 

c (, 1/2) in the hilbert space l2(x):

(x(f ))() =z f (1)(1

1 )

  x,   l2(x)
the completion of c 
r ().
algebra denoted c 

c (, 1/2) for the norm ||f|| = supx(0)||x(f )|| is a c -
moreover one denes the c -algebra c () as the completion of the involutive

algebra c 

c (, 1/2) for the norm

||f||max = sup||(f )||; { involutive hilbert space representation of c 

c (, 1/2)}

after this general introduction to groupoids and to c -algebras associated to

them, now we pass to groupoids and c -algebras associated to foliations.

let (v, f ) be a foliated manifold of codim q. given any x  v and a small
enough open set w in v containing x, the restriction of the foliation f to w has
as its leaf space an open set of rq which we shall call a transverse neighborhood
of x. in other words, this open set w/f is the set of plaques around x. now
given a leaf l of (v, f ) and two points x, y  l, any simple path  from x to
y on l uniquely determines a germ h() of a dieomorphism from a transverse
neighborhood of x to one of y. this depends only on the homotopy class of 
and is called the holonomy of the the path . the holonomy groupoid of a leaf
l is the quotient of its fundamental groupoid by the equivalence relation which
identies two paths 1, 2 from x to y both in l i h(1) = h(2). here by the
fundamental groupoid of a leaf we mean the groupoid  = l  l, r, s are the
two projections, (0) = l and the composition is (x, y)  (y, z) = (x, z). (from
this one can see that every space is a groupoid). the holonomy covering l of a
leaf l is the covering of l associated to the normal subgroup of its fundamental
group 1(l) given by paths with trivial holonomy. the holonomy groupoid or
graph of the foliation is the union  of the holonomy groupoids of its leaves.
given an element  of  we denote by s() = x the origin of the path  and by

9

r() = y its end point, where r, s are the range and source maps as in the general
case.

an element of  is thus given by two points x = s() and y = r() of v
together with an equivalence class of smooth paths : the (t), t  [0, 1] with
(0) = x and (1) = y, tangent to the bundle f , namely with d
dt  f(t)t  r,
identifying 1 and 2 as equivalent i the holonomy of the path 21
at the
1
point x is the identity. the graph  has an obvious composition law. for 1 and
2 in , the composition 1  2 makes sense if s(1) = r(2). the groupoid 
is by construction a (not necessarily hausdor) manifold of dimension dim =
dimv + dimf .

denition 3: the c -algebra of the foliation is exactly the c -algebra

of its graph, as described for arbitrary groupoids above.

for our foliations of interest, the graph  is the following: for the ve rtical
foliation is just the manifold p g whereas for the horizontal foliation is p a m ,
where a is the representation from 1(m) to g induced by the at connection
1-form (via the holonomy). moreover the distinguished subset (0) in both cases
is the manifold we want to foliate, namely p , the total space of our bundle in our
case.

the c -algebras associated to our foliations are: for the vertical foliation is
c(m) tensored with compact operators which act as smoothing kernels along
the leaves which in turn is strongly morita equivalent to just c(m), whereas
for the horizontal foliation is strongly morita equivalent (abreviated to sme) to
c(p )  1(m). (note: the representation of the fundamental group of the base
onto the structure lie group induced by the at connection 1-form used enters
the denition of the crossed product). the rst algebra is commutative (up to
sme), but the second is not! it is for this reason that we can see now that ncg
has an important role to play, in fact we are deeply in the ncg setting. obviously
if the space is simply connected, i.e. 1 vanishes, non-commutativity is lost.
we would like to emphasise that in all cases in the literature where some non-
commutative algebras were used, especially in connection to the well-known
connes-lott model for electroweak theory (or even qcd), these algebras are in
fact sme to commutative ones. hence in terms of topology, this is not a real
non-commutative case.

0.3.4 k-classes associated to foliations

we shall give the general construction for an arbitrary foliation.

let (v, f ) be a foliated manifold and t = t v /f the transverse bundle of
the foliation. the holonomy groupoid  of (v, f ) acts in a natural way on t by
the dierential of the holonomy, thus for every   ,  : x  y determines

10

a linear map h() : tx  ty. we denote this action by h. it is not in general
possible to nd a euclidean metric on t which is invariant under the above action
of . let g be an arbitrary smooth euclidean metric on the real vector bundle t.
thus for   tx we let ||||g = (h, ig)1/2 be the corresponding norms and inner
products and drop subscript g henceforth. using g we dene a c -module e on
the c -algebra c 
r (v, f ) is the completion of
c (, 1/2) which acts by right convolution on the linear
the convolution algebra c 
c (, 1/2r(tc)) denoted  for simplicity and tc is the complexication
space c 
of the transverse bundle t:

r (v, f ) of the foliation. recall that c 

(f )() =zy

(1)f (1

1 )

where y = r(). endowing the complexied bundle tc with the inner product
associated to g and anti-linear in the rst variable, the following formula denes
a c 

c (, 1/2)-valued inner product

for any , n  c 
the space c 

c (, 1/2  r(tc)) one then checks that the completion e of

1 ), n(1

1 )i

h, ni() =zyh(1
c (, 1/2  r(tc)) for the norm
|||| = (||h, i||c 

r (v,f ))1/2

r (v, f ).

becomes a c -module over c 
if one takes also the action h of  on
t into account, with some extra eort one can make e into a (, )-bimodule
(for the denition of the algebra  see below). the rst construction thus gives
r (v, f )) whereas the second gives e as an element
us an element e of k0(c 
of kk0(, ), kasparovs bivariant k-theory. (recall that the 0th kasparovs
bivariant k-group in this case consists of stable isomorphism classes of (, )-
c (, 1/2) on
bimodules). we shall use this action h to dene a left action of c 
e by:

(f )() =zy

f (1)h(1)(1

1 )

c (, 1/2),   e

f  c 
one then can prove that for any f  c 

c (, 1/2) the above formula denes

an endomorphism (f ) of the c -module e whose adjoint (f ) is given by

((f ))() =zy

f #(1)h(1)(1

1 )

where

f #() := ef (1)()

11

and

() = (h()1)th()1  end(tc(r()))

this shows that unless the metric on t is -invariant, the representation 
is not a *-representation, the subtle dierence between (f ) and (f ) being
in particular  is not in general bounded for the c -algebra
measured by .
c (, 1/2). however  is a closable
norms on both endc 
homomorphism of c -algebras, namely, the closure of the graph of  is the graph
of a densely dened homomorphism. then with the graph norm

r (v, f )  c 

r (v,f )e and c 

||x|| = ||x|| + ||(x)||

the domain  of the closure e of  is a banach algebra which is dense in the

r (v, f ). the c -module e is then a (, )-bimodule. this
c -algebra  = c 
particular module e we constructed here will be the one of the two main ingre-
dients which dene the invariant we want and we shall denote it e(f ).

0.3.5 cyclic classes associated to foliations (transverse fun-

damental cyclic cocycle)

we begin with some denitions from cyclic homology:

denition 1:

on .

1. a cycle of dimension n is a triple (, d,r ) where  = n
algebra over c, d is a dierential on s and r : n  c is a closed graded trace
(, d,r ) and a homomorphism  : a  0.

2. let a be an algebra over c. then a cycle over a is given by a cycle

a cycle over a of dimension n is essentially determined by its character which

j=0j is a graded

is the following (n + 1)-linear functional on a:

 (a0, ..., an) =z (a0)d((a1))d((a2))...d((an))

aj  a
one can then prove that this is a cyclic cocycle of a, namely it denes a coho-
mology class in the cyclic homology of a and that the above is a necessary and
sucient statement.

we shall now describe the transverse fundamental class associated to foli-
ations. there is a general construction for arbitrary foliations which is quite
involving since one has to complete the graded algebra. this is so because the
transverse bundle of the foliation may not be integrable and in this case derivation
along transverse directions will not be a dierential.

12

we, however, are primarily interested in our two special kinds of foliations,
the vertical and the horizontal foliation of a principal bundle. these foliations
are transverse, both are integrable so derivatives are dierentials and hence one
does not have to complete the graded algebras. we refer to [14] for the general
construction. here we shall only describe the classes wich are associated to our
two foliations:

the vertical and the horizontal (or at) foliations of the total space of our
principal bundle p will be denoted (pv ) and (ph) respectively. one then has
that there is a natural cycle for the algebra of each foliation, namely:

vertical foliation, cycle denoted [pv ]:
the natural cycle canonically associated to the algebra c 

the vertical foliation consists of:

1. the graded algebra c 

c (p  g, 1/2  r(p 

c (p  g, 1/2) of
h)) where ph is the horizontal

subbundle (i.e. the transverse bundle to the vertical foliation).

2. the dierential d = dv + dh +  where

dh : c (p,rp 

v  sp 

h)  c (p,rp 

v  s+1p 
h)

dv : c (p,rp 

v  sp 

h )  c (p,r+1p 

v  sp 
h)

 means contraction with the section   c (p, pv  2p 
by:

h), where  is dened

(ph (x), ph(y ) = pv ([x, y ]) for any pair of horizontal vector elds x, y 
3.the trace is dened via

c (p, ph) and (ph, pv ) is the isomorphism t p  ph  pv given by ph.

 (w) =z(0)

w

where  is the graph of the vertical foliation  = p  g.

similarly one denes a fundamental class for the horizontal foliation.
one then can dene the character of these cyclesessentially the tracewhich
is a class in the cyclic homology of the appropriate algebra for each foliation [10].

note:
since now we have a cyclic homology class, say  of the algebra of the foliation,

say , we automatically have a map

ki()  c

given by pairing it with k-group elements (i = 0, 1 above) to get index theorems
for leafwise elliptic operators. let us mention here that the analytic index of
an operator elliptic along the leaves of an arbitrary foliation say (v, f ), is an
element of k0(c (v, f )), being in fact a generalisation of the index of families

13

of elliptic operators considered by atiyah and singer. (in the atiyah-singer case
of families of elliptic operators one is dealing with the foliation induced by the
bration, which is the commutative geometry case). the operator itself which is
elliptic along the leaves of the foliation is an element of kk(c (v, f ), c(v )).

0.4 invariant for the nlm

the nal step then is to make use of the general formula for pairings between
k-homology and cyclic homology. in more concrete terms, one has:

denition:
let a be an algebra. then the following equality denes a bilinear pairing

between k-theory and cyclic homology:
1. even case: k0(a) and hc ev(a):

h[e], []i := (m!)1(#t r)(e, ..., e)

for e  k0(a) using the idempotents description and   hc 2m(a) and where
# is the cup product in cyclic homology (see for instance [11] for the precise
denition).

2. odd case: k1(a) and hc odd(a):

h[u], []i =

1
2i

2n(

n
2

+ 1)1(#t r)(u1  1, u  1, u1  1, ..., u  1)

this is an important point because by pairing the c -module e we con-
structed previously naturally associated to the foli ation considered with the
cyclic cocycle naturally associated to the foliation, we get an invariant for arbi-
trary foliations. in particular if we apply this to the horizontal foliation, we get
a complex number which is an invariant for the nlm. namely one has:
h[e(ph)], [ph]i = (m!)1((ph)#t r)(e(ph), ..., e(ph))  c

in more concrete terms, assuming that e(ph)  mk(c (ph)) for some k (where
c (ph) is the corresponding c -algebra to the horizontal foliation) and [ph ] 
z q(c (ph)) where z denotes cyclic cocycles and q is the codimension of the
horizontal foliation, then (ph)#t r  z q(mk(c (ph))) is dened by

((ph)#t r)(a0  m0, ..., aq  mq) = (ph)(a0, ..., aq)t r(m0...mq)

for any ai  c (ph), mi  mk(c), i = 1, ..., q.

14

note: let us mention that the odd case formula is related to the  invariant
for leafwise elliptic operators, see [18], [19] which in turn is related to global
anomalies and to the freedman-townsend invariance (cf [20], [25], [12], [28]).

0.5 an example: principal bre bundles

in order to get some more insight to this pairing we shall try to calculate it for
the case of principal bundles (vertical foliation) which is the simplest example.

we begin by describing the graph in detail: the set  in this case is the
manifold p  g, the distinguished subset (0) = p {e} and denoting the action
(on the right) of g  g on p  p simply by (p, g) 7 pg, one has that the
range and source maps are respectively r(p, g) = p and s(p, g) = pg, the inverse
(p, g)1 = (pg, g1) and the law of composition is (p1, g1)  (p2, g2) = (p1, g1g2) if
p1g1 = p2. obviously the set (2) = p  g  g.
moreover we recall that the c -algebra for the vertical foliation is strongly
morita equivalent to c(m),

we now make use of two important facts:
1. k0(c(m)) = k 0(m), namely serre-swan theorem

and

2. h 

cont(c(m)) = h(m)

where on the rhs we have the ordinary homology of m (with complex coe-

cients) and by denition for the lhs we have h (c(m)) := lim(hc n(c(m)), s)
(see [11] for explanations of the notation), hc  denotes cyclic homology and
cont means restriction to continuous linear functionals.

the rst fact says that for commutative c -algebras one gets atiyahs topolog-
ical k-theory for the underlying space (described in terms of stable isomorphism
classes of complex vector bundles over the space considered) and the second says
that in the commutative case again cyclic homology is roughly speaking the or-
dinary homology of the underlying space (and thus we see that non-commutative
geometry reduces to ordinary geometry in the commutative case).

since we have these two results in our desposal, we shall try to reduce the
whole discussion in terms of bundles and ordinary homology theory because this
is more comprehensible.

in order to describe the pairing then we need the transverse fundamental
cyclic cocycle: we shall give a simple dimensional argument here; the exact com-
putations are rather too technical to be presented in grater detail. the cyclic
cocycle we will get from the vertical foliation will be of dimension equal to the
codimension of the vertical foliation which is equal to the dimension of the base
space of our bundle. moreover as we mentioned above, in this case the c -algebra

15

of this foliation is sme to the algebra of functions on the base c(m). this is a
commutative c -algebra whose cyclic homology is moreorless the de rham coho-
mology of the base space. hence it is not too hard to suspect that we get a top
homology class, which in fact turns out to be the fundamental class of our base
space [m].

for the module denoted e above in this case one uses the following fact: it
is a consequence of serre-swan theorem mentioned above that the link between
topological k-theory and k-theory of commutative c -algebras is that given a
complex vector bundle over m (thus a topological k-class), one considers the cor-
responding c(m)-module of smooth sections of the given complex vector bundle.
c (p  g, 1/2  r(tc)), hence we
thus in this case the module e we get is c 
can recover the corresponding complex vector bundle over m as follows:
if we denote by (p, , g, m) our original principal bundle and we consider the
vertical foliation, then its normal bundle t would be (t m), where t m is the
tangent bundle of m. we prefer the topological k-theory description which in
this case is rather easy to read: the bundle associated to this c(m) module e is:

1/2  pr

1(t m)  (t m)  t m

y

p  g

pr1

y

p

ym

m



(4)

where the bre of the line bundle 1/2 is the linear space of maps  : dimgt(g)
dimgt(g)  c satisfying the well-known property for 1/2-densities. hence in
this case the result will be the number we get if we take the bundle 1/2 
pr
1(t m) seen as a bundle over m, then apply the ordinary chern character
to it and integrate over m. the result will be a combination of the pontryagin
class of t m and the second chern class of p (recall that we assumed m to be
4-dim and p is an su(2) bundle) which is something expected.

there are some subtleties though: we have the bundle 1/2  pr

1(t m)
over the graph which is p  g. we want to see this as a bundle over m. we
1(t m). this is indeed a bundle over m with bre
consider rstly the factor pr
g  g  rdimm but this is neither a vector nor a principal bundle and in order
to talk about characteristic classes one actually needs the one or the other. in
order not to change the topology then, which is what we are mainly interested
in, we can consider the vector bundle t m  adp instead, where adp is the
adjoint bundle to p . to study formally the classes of t m  adp is an exercise
in mathematics (we forget the pull-backs since they can be treated easily). the
point is that we shall get a combination of the pontryagin classes of t m (or
chern if we complexify) and of chern classes of p . the later is known since the
bundle is given whereas the former can be computed from topological information
of m itself. (more details can be found in [5]).

as about the other factor, the 1/2-densities of the graph, seen as a rank 1

16

in this case its class will be 1

real bundle over the graph p  g, is rather dull. it will be determined by 1, the
rst stiefel-whitney class: either trivial (1 = 0) or it is non-orientable (1 = 1).
(note: half densities over a complex manifold say n with dimn = k are slightly
2c1(kt ), where kt  is the
more complicated:
canonical bundle, so it will correspond to spinc structures on n). but we still
have the same problem that over m it is neither a vector nor a principal bundle.
this can be overcome as before; the point is that since it is a dull bundle over
p  g, the projection does not change anything, so as a bundle over m it will
be determined by the topology of p , hence we also have chern classes of p .
what we gave above was a qualitative description and the lesson was that the
invariant will be some combination of chern numbers of p and the pontryagin
number of the tangent bundle t m of m. the key point is that t m appears
because it is the transverse bundle of the vertical foliation. we expect then that
characteristic classes of the transverse bundle should be important in general.

what about the at foliation then, which is the case which is related to nlm
in general and to m-theory in particular in physics? this is a purely nc case.
computations are much harder and a picture involving bundles is impossible since
we do not have serre-swan theorem. moreover cyclic homology of nc algebras has
no relation to the usual topology. we can still say something though: rst of all,
since we have a at principal bundle, all its characteristic classes vanish, so we
get nothing from them. since the base space m is not simply connected, gauge
inequivalent classes of at connections are characterised by their holonomy. so
we expect the holonomy to play some role.

moreover, from the vertical foliation case we saw that the normal bundle of

the foliation also plays a vital role.

note: it is not always true that in the commutative case cyclic homology
identies well with ordinary homology, in fact this is always essentially true only
for h0. there may be many complications. however this point will not be treated
in this article with greater detail. this question is a rather dicult one, for the
things already known one can see [10] and references therein.

0.6 relation to physics

there are three cases in physics where this invariant may play some role:

1. nlm.
as it is well-known,  models classically describe harmonic maps between
two riemannian manifolds (target and source spaces). from the genral remarks
we made in the preceeding section, we said that we expect the invariant to in-
clude the holonomy of the at connection (namely 1 of the source space) plus
the topology of the space of leaves (target space). hence this invariant should
contain information about the topology of both manifolds involved in  models.
characteristic classes of foliations may provide the way to calculate the invariant

17

(analogue of chern-weil theory, see [22]).

moreover, in the at foliation case the invariant describes the topological

charge of the m-theory lagrangian density suggested in [24]

another application is the following (we thank dr s. t. tsou for pointing
this out to us): we know from polyakov ([6]) that yang-mills theories can be
formulated as nlm on the loop space. this point of view very recently exibited
some very nice dualities of the standard model, see [31]. hence the invariant,
for the at foliation case (since nlm can be thought of as a at bundle with
structure group the isometries of the target space), maybe of some relevance also
for yang-mills theories, the setting however will involve loop spaces now! we
do not know exactly what its physical signicance would be. moreover doing
k-theory on loop spaces (innite dimensional manifolds) is considerably harder.
there are however some path integral techniques. (see again [31] and references
therein).

2. instantons with non simply connected boundary.
following largely the case of instantons we suggest that this invariant is related
to interpolation between gauge inequivalent vacua which exist due to the non
simply connectedness of the space considered. clearly there is extra degeneracy
of the vacuum coming from the fact the our space is not simply connected. this
degeneracy is of dierent origin than that of instantons since as it is well-known
for ordinary instantons the degeneracy comes from the dierent topologies of the
bundle considered. in more concrete terms we suppose that this invariant will be
relevant in the following case: let us assume that we try to follow the discussion
in the bpst famous paper on instantons [23]; if we assume that we have a space
whose boundary is not just s3 as in that case but a 3-manifold which has a non-
trivial 1. in this case we want the potential to become at (pure gauge) on the
boundary. however if the boundary is a 3-manifold with a non trivial fundamental
group, then at connections are not unique (up to gauge equivalence of course).
we know more specically that gauge equivalent classes of at connections are in
1-1 correspondence with conjugate classes of representations of the fundamental
group onto the structure group considered. thus in this case the at connection
we choose will not be unique. this extra degeneracy of the vacuum comes from
the dierent possible choices of at connection, which is something noticed for
the rst time (according to our best knowledge). the invariant is related to
interpolation between these extra vacua.

we expect then some relation with the so called ale gravitational instantons

which are important both in quantum gravity and in gauge theory [26], [27].

3. gravity, non-commutative topological quantum field theories (nctqft

for brevity).

in ordinary yang-mills theory, gauge transformations are described as auto-
morphisms of the bundle (namely bre preserving maps) which induce the iden-
tity on the base space (cf for example [13]). sometimes these are called strong
bundle automorphisms. if one wants to generalise this picture and attempts to

18

include the symmetry of general relativity, namely local dieomorphisms of the
base space, then there is a problem because there are local dieomprphisms of
the base space which can not be induced by bundle automorphisms (cf [4]). in
simple words: there are more local dieomorphisms of the base space than
bundle automorphisms. the way that theoretical physicists usually try to go ar-
round this problem is - to begin with, supersymmetry and nally, - supergravity.
the origins of supersymmetry are actually quantum mechanical (multiplets with
same number of bosons and fermions plus symmetry between particles of dier-
ent spin which should exist, if all interactions are eventually unied since gauge
particles have spin-1 whereas the graviton is supposed to have spin-2. another
point of view is to examine the largest possible symmetry of the s-matrix ele-
ments in the framework of relativistic quantum eld theory on minkowski space).
to make the long story short, based on the coleman-mandula theorem (which is
responsible for introducing anti-commuting coordinates), what one actually does
(following the superspace formalism for n=1 supersymmetry coming from obser-
vation that minkowski space is actually poincare/lorentz) is to enlarge the base
manifold (assumed to be spacetime) by adding some fermionic dimensions (non-
commuting coordinates), thus obtaining another space, the socalled superspace.
this superspace, in an analogous fashion, can be seen as the quotient space super-
poincare/lorentz. the action of the superpoincare group can then be described
as coordinate transformations of a particular kind on superspace. generalising
to arbitrary superspace coordinate transformations gives us supergravity.

letting alone some severe criticism of supersymmetric theories (e.g. positive
metric assumption), especially when the discussion comes to supergravity (the
most important experimental problem of supersymmetric theories is the fact that
none of the superparteners of particles has ever been observed, the way phenome-
nologists try to overcome this problem is to assume spontaneously breaking of
supersymmetries; two of the main theoretical problems are: the aspect of super-
gravity as a local gauge theory which is not completely mathematically justied,
for example in n=8 supergravity which is supposed to be the best candidate for
unication and according to recent progress one of the two low energy limits of
m-theory, local dieomorphisms are supposed to come from gauging the group
o(8), an assumption which is based on the observation that ordinary gravity
comes from gauging the poincare group, something which is wrong because of
the existence of the shouldering form on arbitrary curved manifolds; another
important problem is that all extended supersymmetric and supergravity theories
are actually up to now formulated only on-shell, namely classical theories - for
n=1 supergravity though there is another problem, one has more than one o-
shell formulations; trying to be fair, we must mention that the good features of
such theories are that they oer probably the only up to now known hope for uni-
cation plus the fact that they give less divergent theories, something essential
for perturbative quantum els theories), we would like to propose here another
approach; our approach is more in the spirit of non-perturbative quantum eld

19

theories, in fact topological quantum eld theories: instead of enlarging the base
manifold by considering anti-commuting coordinates, we chose to relax the bre
preserving condition, meaning that now we allow bundle maps which are not
bre-preserving; in such a case, bres may be mixed up, for example they may
be tilted or broken. the resulting structure after applying these more general
transformations to our original bundle may no longer be a bre bundle, but it will
still be a foliation. in this case however what we will get as the quotient space
will not necessarily be the manifold we had originally in our bundle construction
(supposed to be space-time) but another space of leaves with the same dimension
and maybe very dierent topology. in this case the dimension of the leaves is
kept xed, equall to the dimension of the lie algebra considered; had we changed
that, the dimension of the space of leaves would have changed accordingly. this
picture is quite close to the picture that string theorists patronise, namely that
space-time is not xed but it emerges as a ground state from some dynamical
process.

the group then of all foliations of the total space with xed codimension is
huge. it denitely contains all foliations which are regular enough in order to
get manifolds dieomorphic to our original one. yet foliations can be really nasty:
in this case the quotient space may not be a manifold at all but a quantum
topological space. all these cases need to be studied. for the moment we know
that whenever the foliations have a corresponding c  algebra which is sme to a
commutative one, then the space of leaves will be a compact hausdor topological
space of the same dimension. if the c -algebras of two foliations can be related
with a *-preserving homomorphism, then the corresponding quotient spaces will
be homeomorphic. what is the appropriate condition on the c  algebras in order
to get dieomorphic manifolds, we do not know (this point is of particular interest
in 4-dim due to the existence of the so-called exotic structures for 4-manifolds).
the main point here is that we can control how much non-commutativity we
want in the c - algebra and then see what this means topologically. at this
point we would like to recall that mathematically, going from classical physics to
quantum is going from commuting algebras to non-commuting ones. the essence
of plancks constant then is that it tells us how much non-commutativity we
want. moreover there is the fundamental theorem for c - algebras representa-
tions, namely that for each c - algebra (commutative or not), there exists a
hilbert space whose space of bounded operators is actually the same as the
original c - algebra. hence for each foliation there exists a corresponding c -
algebra (commutative or not), a corresponding topological space (space of leaves
which may be a manifold or a quantum topological space respectively) and -
nally, a hilbert space as a representation space! all the above are quite exciting
we believe but for the moment we cannot say anything more specic.

let us now turn to something related to the above but a little more concrete:
for the moment let us consider the case where the dimensions of the leaves and
of the space of leaves are kept xed. this situation has some similarities with

20

quantum gravity seen as a tqft (in fact we generalise that picture and we
present a way to consider unied theories-namely gravity and yang-mills theories-
as non-commutative topological quantum field theories). in [26] it was argued
that tqft may provide a framework which is rich enough for the development
of a quantum theory of gravity.
in that aspect, space-time was treated as an
unquantized object whereas the metric was quantum mechanical. the idea in
tqft framework is to nd an invariant z(m) for a topological space m and then
one seeks for a lagrangian density whose partition function yields the invariant
z(m), see [21]. one has to be a little more careful though in order for the atiyahs
axioms for tqft to be satised [2]. in quantum mechanics one usually has a
space of quantum states associated to a given system. often this space of states
refers to a particular instant of time, which can be represented in a 4-dimensional
world by a space-like hypersurface. in tqft this vector space appears as part of
the denition, when the space-time m has a boundary, i.e. a space of dimension 1
less. in more concrete terms, to a (d 1)-dim space  we associate a vector space
v () and to each d-dim space m with m =  we associate a vector z(m), the
partition function of the space m. this point can be generalised, in fact  can
be any embedded submanifold of m with dimension 1 less. one interpretation of
these conditions is that  represents the present instant of time and that the
vectors in v () which are determined by various choices of observables represent
a memory of past facts. the primary problem nonetheless is the construction of
invariants for spaces and the state spaces and partition functions for spaces with
boundary are usually obtained as a by-product. since by our proposal above one
can end up with quantum topological spaces as spaces of leaves of foliations, one
can call this theory non-commutative topological quantum eld theory and we
believe that this can provide a framework for quantum unied theories (including
yang-mills and gravity).

the picture we have then is the following: we start with a g-bundle p over a
4-manifold m. from symmetry considerations, namely we want to include local
dieomorphisms of the base space and relate them to bundle automorphisms
(hence relating general relativity to gauge theory), we end up to consider all
dimg-dim foliations of p . automatically the 4-dim space which is the space
of leaves is somehow quantized, namely it is forced to have one of the leaf
topologies. this is a dierence with tqft as explained in [26] where the metric
was quantised but space-time was unquantized (needless to say, in such a case as
ours, the metric is quantised too automatically). moreover, for each foliation we
have a quotient space of leaves and hence an invariant z(m) which is a complex
number. the boundary of course can be added with its vector space attached to it,
one however has to examine what happens to it as foliations vary. the lagrangian
density whose partition function is this invariant for foliations is an open question.
it should be related to characteristic classes for foliations. a good indication for
that is the fact that the q functor of q-dim haeiger structures or q structures
as they are known in topology (and hence foliations which is an example of a q

21

structure, where q is the codimension of the foliation) is representable, see [1].
so for the moment we do not have a full specic nctqft since we have the
invariant but not the appropriate lagrangian density. we presented though a
generalisation of tqft for non-commutative cases.

another possible application might be the ability to construct deformed yang-
mills theories, see [30]. in that paper, some new compactications of the ikkt
matrix theory on non-commutative tori were introduced which, in a certain sense,
could be realised as deformed yang-mills theories. clearly in this case our in-
variant will be the instanton number of these deformed yang-mills theories.

this picture also suggests that the above described non-commutative topolog-
ical quantum eld theories can be seen as emerging from m-theory compactied
down to some non-commutative spaces (tori or other).

finally, following the lines of [24], a new idea whose results will be reported
elsewhere, is to try to understand the topology of the 11-dim space appearing
in m-theory by imposing topological constraints coming from the requirement
that, for example, a theory containing p-brains must be formulated on a man-
ifold admitting foliations with (p + 1)-dim leaves, which is a very reasonable
preassumption. this may be useful also in the compactication scheme of string
theory. (note: for point particles the topological constraint is trivial because
all manifolds admit foliations with 1-dim leaves!)

22

bibliography

[1] r. bott:lectures on characteristic classes and foliations, springer lnm 279,

1972.

[2] m. f. atiyah: topological quantum eld theories, publ. math. ihes 68,
175-186, (1989). the geometry and the physics of knots, cambridge uni-
versity press, 1990.

[3] wegge-olsen: k-theory and c -algebras, oxford university press, 1992.

[4] g. shardanashvili,o. zakharov: gauge gravitation theory, world scien-

tic, 1991.

[5] hirzebruch: geometrical methods in topology, springer, berlin 1970.

[6] a. polyakov, nucl. phys. b164 (1981), phys. lett. 82b (1979), hep-

th/9607049 princeton preprint 1996.

[7] g. hector - u. hirsch: introduction to the geometry of foliations, vieweg

1981.

[8] a. connes: a survey of foliations and operator algebras, proc. sympos.

pure math., 38 ams 1982.

[9] p. baum, r. douglas: k-homology and index theory, ibid.

[10] a. connes: non-commutative geometry, academic press 1994.

23

[11] a. connes: noncommutative dierential geometry i, ii, ihes publ.

math. 63 (1985).

[12] p. townsend, d. freedman, nucl. phys. b177 (1981) 282.

[13] s. k. donaldson, p.b. kronheimer, the geometry of 4-manifolds, oxford

university press, 1991.

[14] a. connes, g. skandalis, the longitudinal index theorem for foliations,

publ. res. inst. sci. kyoto 20 (1984).

[15] m.f. atiyah - v.k. patodi - i.m. singer: spectral assymetry and rieman-

nian geometry i, ii, iii, math. proc. cambridge philos. soc. 77 (1975).

[16] winkelnkemper. the graph of a foliation. ann. global anal. and geom. 1

no3 (1983) 51.

[17] g.w. whitehead. elements of homotopy theory. springer berlin 1978.

[18] r. douglas - s. harder - j. kaminker: toeplitz operators and the eta in-

variant: the case of s1 , contemp. math. 70 (1988).

[19] r. douglas - s. harder - j. kaminker: cyclic cocycles, renormalisation and

eta invariant, invent. math 103 (1991).

[20] e. witten: global gravitation anomalies, commun. math. phys. 100

(1985).

[21] e. witten: quantum field theories and the jones polynomial, commun.

math. phys. 121 (1989).

topology-changing amplitudes in (2+1)-dim gravity, nucl. phys. b323,
113-140, (1989).

(2+1)-dim gravity as an exactly soluble system, nucl. phys. b311, 46-78,
(1988).

24

[22] f. w. kamber - p. tondeur: foliated bundles and characteristic classes,

lnm 493, springer 1975.

[23] a.a. belavin, a.m. polyakov, a.s. schwartz, y.s. tyupkin. pseudoparticle

solutions of the yang-mills equations. phys. lett. 59b (1975).

[24] i.p. zois: search for the m-theory lagrangian. phys. lett. b 402 (1997)

33-35.

[25] i.p. zois: the duality between two-index potentials and the non-linear 

model in eld theory, d.phil thesis, oxford, michaelmas 1996.

[26] j.w. barrett. quantum gravity as a topological quantum field theory.

nottingham mathematics preprint 1995.

[27] p.b. kronheimer, h. nakajima. yang-mills instantons on ale gravitational

instantons. mathematische annalen 288 (1990) 263.

[28] m. henneaux. uniqueness of the freedman-townsend interaction vertex for

2-form gauge elds. preprint universite libre de bruxelles 1996.

[29] j.-l. loday: cyclic homology, springer, berlin, 1991.

[30] a. connes, m.r. douglas and a. schwarz: noncommutative geometry and
matrix theory: compactication on tori, j. high energy phys. 02 (1998)
003.

[31] s. t. tsou et all: features of quark and lepton mixing from dierential

geometry of curves on surfaces, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 053006.

s. t. tsou et all: the dualised standard model and its applications, talk
given at the international conference of high energy physics 1998 (ichep
98), vancouver, canada.

25

