9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
2
2

 

 
 

1
v
3
5
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

nbi-he-99-10
hep-th/9904153

april 1999

brane descent relations in k-theory

kasper olsen and richard j. szabo

the niels bohr institute
blegdamsvej 17, dk-2100
copenhagen , denmark
kolsen , szabo @nbi.dk

abstract

the various descent and duality relations among bps and non-bps d-branes are
classied using topological k-theory. it is shown how the descent procedures for pro-
ducing type-ii d-branes from brane-antibrane bound states by tachyon condensation
and (1)fl projections arise as natural homomorphisms of k-groups generating the
brane charges. the transformations are generalized to type-i theories and type-ii
orientifolds, from which the complete set of vacuum manifolds and eld contents
for tachyon condensation ia deduced. a new set of internal descent relations is
found which describes branes over orientifold planes as topological defects in the
worldvolumes of brane-antibrane pairs on top of planes of higher dimension. the
periodicity properties of these relations are shown to be a consequence of the fact
that all fundamental bound state constructions and hence the complete spectrum
of brane charges are associated with the topological solitons which classify the four
hopf brations.

1. introduction

one of the most interesting recent realizations about string solitons is that their charges
take values in terms of a generalized cohomology theory of their chan-paton gauge bundles

known as k-theory [1][8]. the original observation [9] that d-branes couple to spacetime
ramond-ramond (rr) elds suggests that their worldvolume topological charges should
be measured by ordinary cohomology classes, and it was long thought that supersymmetry

was necessary to ensure the stability of these solitonic congurations. however, in other
recent developments [10][13] it has been shown that the spectra of superstring theories

can also contain states which correspond to non-bps solitons but which are nevertheless
stable because they carry conserved quantum numbers which prevents them from decay-

ing into the supersymmetric vacuum state. in this framework, d-branes are realized as
topological solitons coming from condensation of the tachyon eld on the worldvolumes

of higher dimensional unstable congurations of branes. these facts tie in nicely with
the properties of the k-groups of a spacetime which can be much more general than the
corresponding cohomology groups. for instance, the k-group can have torsion while the

cohomology group is torsion free [1], lending a natural explanation to the fact that some
d-branes carry torsion charges [10].

the main property of k-theory which parallels the soliton constructions of [10][13] is
its intimate relationship with homotopy theory. a given category of ber bundles always

possesses a classifying space which provides a universal bundle for it. the k-groups of
the category are then related to the homotopy groups of the classifying space. in some

instances it is possible to realize this equivalence in terms of stable homotopy groups of
nite dimensional symmetric spaces. in this paper we will exploit the stable homotopy

properties of k-theory to describe the various relationships that exist between stable and
unstable string solitons. such connections between dierent types of d-branes are known

as descent relations [2, 3, 12] and they form a remarkable web of mappings between bps
and non-bps branes that provides various dierent ways of thinking about the origins of
d-branes. the situation for type-ii d-branes is depicted in g. 1 [12]. if we consider, say, a

dp-brane anti-dp-brane (or dp-brane) bound state pair of type-iib string theory (p odd),
then the spectrum contains a tachyonic excitation whose ground state corresponds to the

supersymmetric vacuum conguration. however, one can consider instead a tachyonic
kink solution on the brane-antibrane pair which describes a non-bps d(p  1)-brane of
the iib theory. this system also contains a tachyonic excitation in its worldvolume eld
theory, so that one can consider a tachyonic kink solution on the d(p  1)-brane which
results in a bps d(p  2)-brane of iib.

another set of relations comes from modding out the p-p brane pair by the operator

1

iib
-
- -
p-p

f

l

(-1)

iia
p

f l

(-1)

iib
p

tachyon
condensation

t-duality

tachyon
condensation

t-duality

iib
p-1

f l

(-1)

iia
p-1

t-duality

tachyon
condensation

iib
p-2

figure 1: the relationships between dierent d-branes in type-ii superstring theory. the
squares represent stable supersymmetric bps branes or a combination of such a brane with
its antibrane, while the circles depict unstable non-bps congurations. the horizontal
arrows represent the result of quotienting the theory by the operator (1)fl, the vertical
arrows the eect of constructing a tachyonic kink solution in the brane worldvolume eld
theory, and the diagonal arrows the usual t -duality transformations.

(1)fl which acts as 1 on all the ramond sector states in the left-moving part of the fun-
damental string worldsheet, and leaves all other sectors unchanged. a careful study of the
open string spectrum of this conguration reveals that the result is a non-supersymmetric
dp-brane of iia, and that a further quotient by (1)fl yields a supersymmetric p-brane of
iib [12, 14]. when combined with the usual t -duality transformations between the type

iib and iia theories, we nd that any p-brane conguration in type-ii superstring theory
may be obtained from a chain of higher dimensional brane congurations. in particular,

all branes of the type-ii theories descend from a bound state of spacetime lling d9-d9
pairs, which agrees with standard mathematical constructions in k-theory [2, 3].

the new understanding of the tachyon in an unstable brane conguration as a higgs
type excitation in the spectrum of string states leads to a topological classication of the

resulting brane charges [15] when d-branes are viewed as the tachyonic solitons. generally,
the topological charges of these objects are determined by the homotopy groups of a
symmetric space g/h, where g is a compact lie group and h is a closed subgroup of

2

g. the bration h
induces a long exact sequence of homotopy groups,

i
 g  g/h, with i the inclusion and  the canonical projection,

. . .  n1(h)

i

 n1(g) 

 n1(g/h)  

 n2(h)  . . .

(1.1)

in this paper we shall be primarily interested in two instances of this homotopy sequence.

the rst one will be related to the weak bott periodicity theorem for the classical lie
groups [16][18], in which case the induced boundary homomorphism  is an isomorphism
so that n1(g/h) = n2(h).
in this case, g is the worldvolume gauge group of
a given conguration of branes and the tachyon scalar eld t is a higgs eld for the
breaking of the gauge symmetry down to the subgroup h. the tachyonic soliton must

be accompanied by a worldvolume gauge eld a of corresponding topological charge in
the vacuum manifold g/h, in order that the energy per unit worldvolume of the induced

lower dimensional brane be nite. a careful study of the tachyon potential [3, 10] shows
that the brane worldvolume eld theory contains nite energy, static soliton solutions

which have asymptotic pure gauge congurations at innity,

t  0 u

,

a  u 1 du

(1.2)

where 0 is a constant, and u is a g/h valued function corresponding to the identity map
(of a given winding number) from the asymptotic boundary of the worldvolume soliton
to the group manifold of g/h. if the induced brane conguration has codimension n in

the higher dimensional worldvolume, then the corresponding soliton carries topological
charge taking values in n1(g/h).

another instance of (1.1) that will be considered in the following will involve the
construction of k-theory classes based on the properties of spinor modules. this mapping

is known as the atiyah-bott-shapiro (abs) construction [17, 19, 20] and it is equivalent
to the physical realization of a d-brane as the tachyonic soliton in the worldvolume of a

bound state system of higher dimensional branes. it is based on an intimate relationship
between k-theory and the structure of cliord algebras, and it yields an explicit form for

the classical tachyon eld as cliord multiplication map by a vector in the sphere bundle

so(n)  so(n + 1)  sn

(1.3)

over the transverse space to the d-brane. this construction will be related to the
case where  is a trivial mapping, i.e. ker  = n1(g/h), so that n1(g/h) =
n1(g)/n1(h). as we will see, one of the natural consequences of this construction
is that the induced d-brane is represented as the topological soliton associated with the

hopf bration [21]

sn1  s2n1  sn

(1.4)

3

there are only four non-trivial hopf brations, for n = 1, 2, 4, 8, which correspond re-

spectively to the real, complex, quaternion and octonion division algebras over the eld
of real numbers. the classifying map of the bration is a generator of

n1(cid:16)spin(n)(cid:17) / n1(cid:16)spin(n  1)(cid:17) = ( z2

z

,
,

n = 1
n = 2, 4, 8

(1.5)

as we will show, the hopf brations determine all the fundamental bound state con-
structions of branes in type-i and type-ii superstring theories, and hence the complete

spectrum of d-brane charges rests on the fact that there are only four such bundles. for
n 6= 1, the topological charge of the corresponding soliton is given by the pontryagin num-
ber density which is proportional to tr(f n/2), where f is the curvature of the associated
topologically non-trivial gauge eld conguration. for n = 1 the charge is determined
by a z2-valued wilson line, as in the standard construction of non-bps branes in type-i
string theory [10]. this fact therefore also realizes all d-branes in terms of more conven-
tional solitons, such as the dirac monopole and the su(2) yang-mills instanton, and it

moreover determines the explicit forms of the non-trivial gauge elds living on the brane
worldvolumes.

in this paper we will give a systematic and exhaustive mathematical classication of
the d-brane descent relations based on the periodicity theorems of topological k-theory.

in addition to providing many deeper insights into the existing properties of branes within
their k-theory/bound state constructions, this analysis will also predict various new de-

scent relations and symmetries among d-branes. all facts about k-theory that are used
are explained throughout the paper. we will consider only the simplest case of a at ten

dimensional spacetime manifold and topologically trivial worldvolume embeddings, leav-
ing the analysis of curved manifolds as an interesting and important future generalization
of the present description (global aspects of the bound state constructions are discussed

in [2, 4]).

in section 2 we will analyse the type-ii theories, mainly to introduce the relevant nota-
tions, constructions and ideas that will be used later on in the case of more involved brane
congurations. we begin by analysing the weak bott periodicity theorem for the stable

homotopy groups of unitary symmetric spaces using the abs construction and the stan-
dard proof of bott periodicity based on the structure of cliord algebra representations

[18]. we describe in detail the descent relations among various branes in this formalism,
and relate them to the analysis of [11]. we then proceed to show that these natural

isomorphisms are nothing but the t -duality transformations between the iib and iia su-
perstring theories. the k-theoretic realization of t -duality has been discussed in [6][8].

for completeness, we shall give some further insight into the structure of the t -duality
maps in complex k-theory, in a slightly dierent spirit than the previous analyses by em-

4

phasizing the transformation properties of the worldvolume elds. we also show how the
(1)fl transformations are realized as natural homomorphisms in terms of equivariant
k-theory1 and show that the mapping between the iia and iib theories under the (1)fl
projection is formally the same as their relationship under t -duality. we compare this
k-theory construction with a boundary state formalism [14] which demonstrates that the
(1)fl quotient is a genuine nonperturbative symmetry of type-ii string theory.

in section 3 we turn our analysis to type-i superstring theory and its associated type-

ii orientifolds. the type-i theories were discussed in [2, 3, 8], while the k-theoretic
description of orbifolds was examined in [4] and an analysis of various orientifold theories
in [5, 6, 8]. here we examine the weak bott homotopy sequence associated with real

k-theory through a careful analysis of real spinor representations, which now takes us
naturally through a chain of type-ii orientifolds in various dimensions. from this anal-

ysis we are able to completely classify the vacuum manifolds for all of these orientifold
theories, and from the abs isomorphism we construct the explicit forms of the classical

tachyon scalar elds in each case. this in turn identies the eld content on the brane
worldvolumes which are relevant to the bound state constructions in these theories. we

show how the bott periodicity theorem in these cases naturally encodes information about
the diversities of brane constructions in various dimensions, and again compare with the
bound state constructions of [10, 11]. generally, the k-theoretic description of type-i

superstring theory is only valid at weak string coupling, but s-duality can still be used
in a heuristic way to say something about the perturbative spectrum of heterotic strings

[2]. we briey describe the dual models related to each of these type-ii orientifolds, and
as an example we discuss, using equivariant k-theory, some relationships to conventional

orbifolds of the type-ii theories as have been described in [12, 13]. these k-theoretical
constructions could have important ramications for the structure of the moduli spaces

of these theories, which have been recently re-examined in [22]. we also describe the
analogs of the (1)fl transformations, pointing out the qualitative dierences with the
corresponding projections of the type-ii models.

in section 4 we present a more systematic analysis of the periodicity properties of the

orientifold models through a more thorough description of the stable equivariant homotopy
sequence and the abs construction for real k-theory[23]. we show that the extended
bott periodicity here implies an unexpected descent relation whereby a p  2-brane lo-
calized at a singular plane of a type-ii orientifold theory is realized as a z2-equivariant
magnetic monopole in the worldvolume of a p-p brane pair located over an orientifold

plane of one higher dimension. these structures illuminate the internal symmetries in-
herent in the real k-theory and also how these groups take into account the rr-charges

1our analysis of the (1)fl projections diers from the results of [5].

5

carried by the orientifold planes. we also illustrate how real k-theory encompasses all of

the brane constructions in a unifying description. within this description, the fundamen-
tal brane constructions are all determined as solitonic congurations associated with the

four hopf brations. this determines string solitons in terms of magnetic monopoles in
the type-ii theories, while in the type-i theories we obtain non-bps branes as kinks, bps
branes as su(2) instantons, and both bps and non-bps branes as spin(8) instantons

(along with their equivariant versions in the case of orbifold and orientifold models). the
internal orientifold symmetries are then determined by equivariant monopoles which also

relate both supersymmetric and non-supersymmetric d-branes.

1.1. k-theory conventions

in the remainder of this section we shall introduce the relevant k-theoretical con-
ventions that will be used in this paper. for concise introductions to the subject, see

[17, 20, 21, 24]. given a compact topological space x, the grothendieck group k(x) is de-
ned as the set of equivalence classes of pairs of complex vector bundles [(e, f )] = [e][f ]
over x, where (e, f )  (e  g, f  g) for any pair of vector bundles (g, g) (which will
correspond to brane-antibrane creation and annihilation with respect to the supersym-
metric vacuum). the group operation is induced by the whitney sum of vector bundles
and the inverse of the class [(e, f )] is [(f, e)]. the map x  k(x) is a contravariant
functor from the category of compact topological spaces to the category of abelian groups.
the inclusion i : pt  x and the projection x  pt with respect to a xed basepoint of
x induce a split short exact sequence in cohomology which leads to the decomposition

k(x) = fk(x)  k(pt)

(1.6)

with k(pt) = z. the subgroup fk(x) = ker i is the reduced k-group of x consisting of

classes of pairs of vector bundles of equal rank (as will be required by tadpole anomaly
cancellation in type-i and type-iib superstring theory). we shall only work in k-theory
with compact support (this will correspond to the statement that a brane has nite
tension). this means that for each class [(e, f )], there is a map t : e  f which is an
isomorphism of vector bundles outside an open set u  x whose closure u is compact
(u will represent the region of the transverse space where the topological soliton charge
is localized while t will be the tachyon eld of a given unstable conguration of branes).

this condition automatically implies that e and f have the same rank, and hence we

shall mostly deal with the reduced k-group fk(x) (this means that we always measure

brane charges with respect to that of the supersymmetric vacuum). the corresponding

virtual bundle may then be represented as

h(e , f )i =h(ker t , coker t )i

6

(1.7)

when x is not compact, we dene k(x) = fk(x +), where x + is the one-point compact-

ication of x. we shall denote the trivial bundle of rank k over x by i k.

the higher k-group k 1(x) is dened as the abelian group of equivalence classes of
pairs [(e, e i)], where  is an automorphism of e (i denotes the identity automorphism)
and e is the vector bundle over s1x with total space [0, 1]e modulo the identication

(0, v)  (1, (v)) v  e. with this denition we have k 1(x)  fk(s1  x) and
k 1(pt) = 0, so that k 1(x) = fk 1(x). similarly one also denes higher degree k-

groups k n(x), with k 0(x) = k(x).

we shall be frequently interested in the k-groups of the product of two spaces y and
w . for this, we introduce the reduced join y  w of y and w , i.e. their disjoint union
with a basepoint of each space identied, which can be viewed as the closed subspace
y  pt  pt  w of the cartesian product y  w . let y  w = y  w/y  w be
the smash product of y and w . note that when w = s1, y  s1 =  y is the reduced
suspension of the topological space y , so that

fk n( y ) = fk n1(y )

the inclusion y  w  y  w and the canonical projection y  w  y  w induce a
split short exact sequence in reduced k-theory, leading to

(1.8)

(1.9)

(1.10)

fk n(y  w ) = fk n(y  w )  fk n(y  w )

= fk n(y ) fk n(w )  fk n(y  w )

the tensor product of vector bundles induces a cup product which gives k(x) the struc-
ture of a z2-graded ring. this yields the canonical homomorphisms

k(y ) z k(w )  k(y  w )

fk(y ) z fk(w )  fk(y  w )

which are induced by the cup product and the canonical projection in (1.9). when either

k(y ) or k(w ) is a free abelian group, the mappings in (1.10) are isomorphisms, leading
to the usual cohomological kunneth theorem.

2. descent equations in type-ii theories

the basic tool in the k-theory correspondence for type-ii theories is the abs con-
struction for the complex k-groups of even dimensional spheres [19]. let spin(m) be the
spin group of dimension 2[ m
2 ] which is a double cover of the isometry group so(m) of the

7

sphere sm. let 2n+1 be the spin(2n+ 1)-module corresponding to the unique irreducible
representation of the complexied cliord algebra c c
2n+1 = c(2n) of dimension 2n, and let

2n denote the spin(2n)-modules corresponding to the two 2n1 dimensional irreducible
representations of c c
2n = c(2n1)  c(2n1) (generally, f(m) denotes the r-algebra of
m  m matrices with entries in the eld f). let r[spin(m)] be the (complex) represen-
tation ring of spin(m), i.e. the grothendieck group constructed from the abelian monoid

generated by the irreducible representations, with respect to the direct sum and tensor
product of spin(m)-modules. then the natural embedding spin(2n)  spin(2n + 1)
induces the graded ring isomorphism [19]

rhspin(2n)i / rhspin(2n + 1)i = k(s2n)

(2.1)

the corresponding reduced groups in (2.1) are isomorphic to z, while they would vanish
for odd-dimensional spheres. this leads to the usual integer spectrum of alternating
dimension dp-brane charges (with p odd for iib and even for iia branes).

2.1. bott periodicity

for type-ii d-branes, the basic relation we shall study is the weak bott periodicity

theorem for stable homotopy groups of unitary symmetric spaces,

. . .  2k1(cid:16)u(n)(cid:17)  2k(cid:16)u(2n)/[u(n)u(n)](cid:17)  2k+1(cid:16)u(2n)(cid:17)  . . . (2.2)

where n = 2k1 and 2k = 9  p is the codimension of a type-iib p-brane worldvolume
mp+1 in the spacetime manifold x. our rst observation will be that the t -duality
mapping between the type-iib and type-iia theories is precisely the natural isomorphism
between homotopy groups at each step in (2.2), showing how a p-brane of iib is mapped
into a p  1-brane of iia, and vice versa. in this subsection we shall start by describing
the details of the isomorphism at the level of the homotopy groups [18].

consider a p-brane in the type-iib theory constructed as the tachyonic soliton of a
bound state of n = 2k1 9-brane 9-brane pairs [2]. the rank 2k spinor bundle of the
2k-dimensional transverse space has a natural grading s+
n induced by the chirality
grading of the associated cliord bundle, where s 
n are the chiral spinor bundles of rank
2k1 which carry the irreducible representation 
2k of the cliord algebra of the transverse
space. the generators i of +
2k  
2k. the spinor
bundles may be extended over the whole spacetime x [2]. the bundle s+
n (resp. s 
n )
is then identied as the chan-paton bundle carried by the 9-branes (resp. 9-branes), so
that these spinor bundles produce a k-theory class [(s+
the gauge symmetry on the spacetime lling 9-brane worldvolume is u(n)  u(n). the
tachyon eld lives in the bifundamental n  n representation of the gauge group (as

2k act o-diagonally as i : 

n ]  fk(x).

2k  

n  s 

n , s 

n )] = [s+

n ]  [s 

8

n : s+

n  s 

required by tadpole anomaly cancellation) and is a map t (b)
n . it vanishes on
the worldvolume mp+1 and approaches its vacuum expectation value t (b)0
at innity in
x, where we assume that the eigenvalues of t (b)0
all have the same modulus [2, 11]. it
therefore breaks the 9-brane gauge symmetry to the type-iib vacuum manifold u(n) 
u(n)/u(n)diag = u(n) (topologically) which represents the stable vortex congurations
of the tachyon eld. the p-brane charge is determined by the winding number of the
tachyon eld at innity which generates the homotopy group 2k1(u(n)). the explicit
representation of the tachyonic conguration is via cliord multiplication by an element
of the sphere bundle (1.3) for n = 2k,2

n

n

t (b)
n (x) =

i xi =

2kxi=1

2kxi=1(cid:18) 0


i xi

+
i xi

0 (cid:19)

(2.3)

where xi are local coordinates of the transverse space to mp+1 in x and 
generators of 

2k. the prescription described above embeds the k-group fk(mp+1) of
the p-brane worldvolume into the spacetime k-group fk(x), such that the rr-charge

takes values in the k-group

i are the

of the transverse space. the precise mapping is given via the cup product in (1.10),

fk(s2k) = 2k1(cid:16)u(n)(cid:17) = z

(2.4)

n )i(cid:17)

(2.5)

leading to

n : k(mp+1) z k(s2k)

h(e , f )i

 k(x)

7 n(cid:16)h(e  s+

n  f  s 

n , e  s 

n  f  s+

where [(e, f )]  fk(mp+1) and we have used the fact that k(sm) for any m is a free

abelian group.

there is a canonical mapping of this system onto a conguration in the type-iia theory
representing a p1-brane of codimension 2k +1 in x, constructed as the tachyonic vortex
of a system of unstable 9-branes [3]. there are now 2n 9-branes (unstable 9-branes in
the iia theory are indistinguishable from unstable 9-branes as they carry no conserved
charge), with gauge symmetry u(2n), whose tachyon condensate t (a)0
has an equal
number of positive and negative eigenvalues [3]. the 9-brane gauge symmetry is therefore
broken to the type-iia vacuum manifold u(2n)/[u(n)  u(n)] representing the stable
soliton congurations of the tachyon eld t (a)
n which lives in the adjoint representation of
2here and in the following it is always implicitly understood that the tachyon eld is multiplied by a
convergence factor which approaches 1 near mp+1 (so that the soliton is located at xi = 0) and ensures
that at |x|  , t (b)

n (x) takes values in the type-iib vacuum manifold, as in (1.2).

n

9

the u(2n) gauge group and generates the homotopy group 2k(u(2n)/[u(n)  u(n)]).
promoting one of the coordinates xp+1 of mp+1 to the transverse space, we identify the
u(2n) chan-paton bundle carried by the 9-branes as the irreducible rank 2k spinor bundle
sn of the 2k + 1 dimensional transverse space to the new p  1-brane worldvolume mp.
then the tachyon eld is a map t (a)
n : sn  sn which produces a higher degree k-theory
class [(sn , s i)]  k 1(x), where

n =  exp i t (a)
n

(2.6)

acts by the natural adjoint action on sn . the natural embedding spin(2k)  spin(2k+1)
identies the corresponding 2k + 1 generators of 2k+1 as the i in (2.3) along with the
chirality matrix

2k+1 = (i)k 1    2k = (3)k

(2.7)

where i will always denote the standard pauli spin matrices. this gives a natural map
t (b)
n (x) 7 t (a)
u(n)]), i.e.

n (x, xp+1) =pi i xi + 2k+1 xp+1 on 2k1(u(n))  2k(u(2n)/[u(n) 

t (a)
n (x, xp+1) = t (b)

n (x) +(cid:18) xp+1 in

0

0

xp+1 in(cid:19)

(2.8)

where t (b)
map (2.8) generates the higher degree k-group

n (x) is the iib tachyon eld (2.3) and in is the n  n identity matrix. the

k 1(s2k+1) = 2k(cid:16)u(2n)/[u(n)  u(n)](cid:17) = z

(2.9)

of the transverse space which labels the induced p  1-brane rr charge. the construction

 k 1(x)

bn : k(mp) z k 1(s2k+1)
h(e , f )i

above denes an embedding fk(mp)  k 1(x), again via the cup product (1.10) giving
7 bn(cid:16)h(cid:16)(e  sn )in , (f  sn )in(cid:17)i(cid:17) (2.10)
for [(e, f )]  fk(mp). the transformation described here is actually nothing but the t -

duality mapping between the type-iib and type-iia theories. starting with the type-iib

theory, a t -duality transformation along one of the longitudinal directions of the p-brane
transforms it into a transverse space direction and maps the p-brane onto a p  1-brane.
it acts on the k-theory classes of x by mapping the 9-brane-antibrane pairs onto n
8-brane-antibrane pairs, of codimension 1 in x, which can each be represented as the

tachyonic kink of an unstable 9-brane in the type-iia theory [3]. this is represented by
the diagonal matrix in (2.8). the p  1-brane itself is then represented as the codimension
2k tachyonic soliton of the bound state of the 8-brane 8-brane pairs connected together
by the same tachyon eld t (b)

n (x) as in the iib case.

10

finally, we come to the second isomorphism in (2.2), which gives a natural map
from the type-iia system above to the type-iib theory describing a p  2-brane, with
worldvolume mp1 obtained by promoting the coordinate xp of mp to the transverse
space, which is described in terms of the bound state of 2n 9-brane 9-brane pairs. the
spinor representation of so(2k) may be mapped into that of so(2k + 2) by dening 2k+1

the new tachyon conguration whose vortex core corresponds to the p2-brane worldvol-

,

(2.11)

2k+2  

2k+2 via

dimensional generators bi of +
bi = 3  i

b2k+1,2k+2 = 1,2  i2n
ume and which generates fk(s2k+2) = 2k+1(u(2n)) is thus t (b)
b2k+1 xp +b2k+2 xp+1, i.e.
2n (x, xp, xp+1) =  t (b)

n (x)! +(cid:18)

(xp  i xp+1) i2n

0
t (b)

n (x)

0

t (b)

2n (x, xp, xp+1) =pibi xi +
(cid:19)

(xp + i xp+1) i2n

0

0

(2.12)
again the form of (2.12) is naturally explained by t -duality. applying a t -duality trans-

formation to the iia system above maps the 8-branes and 8-branes to n 7-branes and
7-branes, which are each of codimension 2 in x and whose tachyonic vortex representa-
tion in terms of 9-brane-antibrane pairs is given by the o-diagonal block matrix in (2.12)
[3]. the p  2-brane is represented as the tachyonic soliton in the 7-brane worldvolume.
in this case, the unstable 9-branes of the iia-theory are mapped into unstable 8-branes

of the iib-theory, each of which gives rise to a tachyonic kink representing a 7-brane or
7-brane. the result is the addition of an extra set of n 7-7 pairs required for k-theoretic

stability [2, 3] of the bound state construction, so that the full system of 7-branes are
connected together by the tachyon eld given by the block diagonal matrix in (2.12). in

this stabilizing operation, the extra set of 7-branes does not interact via the tachyon eld
with the original set of 7-branes.

the intermediate conguration (2.8) can also be regarded as a p  1-brane of the type-
iib theory, obtained as the codimension 1 tachyonic kink of a p-p brane pair. however,
the tachyon eld t (a)
n has winding number 0 in codimension 2k and so this conguration

maps to the trivial (identity) element of fk(x). this is simply the k-theoretic statement

that the p  1-brane is an unstable non-bps conguration of type-iib superstring theory.
it becomes stable upon another tachyon condensation in codimension 1, giving (2.12).3
the map between the tachyon elds (2.3) and (2.12) (relating p-branes and p  2-branes
in the iib theory) is a typical example of the strong bott periodicity isomorphism in
complex k-theory [17]

(2.13)
3notice that the above construction (and the others to follow) applies equally well starting in the
type-iia theory with a brane conguration of codimension 2k + 1 in x, by decomposing the spin group
spin(2k + 1)  spin(2k) and applying the construction to the 2k dimensional subspace.

fk n(x) = fk n2(x)

11

which, according to (2.1) and the above construction, can be described by the abs map

[19]

h(s+

n , s 

n  (s+

7 h(cid:16)s+

n )i
tn 7 (cid:18) tn  i2 i2n  t 
n  i2 (cid:19)

i2n  t1

1  s 

1 ) , s 

t 

1

n  (s+

1  s 

1 )(cid:17)i

(2.14)

the block diagonal matrix in (2.12) corresponds to the representation of p-branes and p-
branes each as bound states of n = 2k1 spacetime-lling 9-brane-antibrane pairs, while
the o-diagonal block matrix in (2.12) corresponds to the tachyonic vortex conguration
of a p  2-brane constructed as the bound state of the p-p pair in codimension 2. thus the
transformation from (2.3) to (2.12) represents the process of tachyon condensation of the
bound state of a p-brane p-brane pair into a p  2-brane, regarded as the bott periodicity

map (2.14) on the spacetime k-theory group fk(x)  fk(x).

the mod 2 periodicity (2.13) follows from the periodicity c c

l  c(2) of com-
plexied cliord algebras [20], and the isomorphism (2.14) comes from the cup product
on the k-groups. taking w = s2 and y to be the n-th reduced suspension of x in (1.10)

l+2 = c c

gives fk(nx) z fk(s2) = fk(nx  s2), which using (1.8) yields the isomorphism

(2.15)

 : fk n(x) z fk(s2)  fk n2(x)

the generator [nc][i 1] of fk(s2) = z may be described by taking nc to be the canonical

line bundle over cp 1, which is associated with the hopf bration s3  s2. then the
isomorphism (2.13) is given by the mapping

h(e , f )i 7 (cid:16)h(e  nc , f  nc)i(cid:17)

(2.16)

for [(e, f )]  fk n(x). this construction shows that the codimension 2 tachyonic soliton

in the worldvolume of a p-p brane pair which represents a type-ii p  2-brane may be
identied with the usual dirac monopole associated with the complex hopf bundle nc
[25]. this k-theoretic fact agrees with the construction of [11] of a vortex-type solution on
the membrane-antimembrane pair in type-iia string theory, whereby the asymptotic eld
congurations (1.2) on the membrane worldvolume resemble exactly those of a magnetic
monopole conguration with charges living in 1(u(1)) = z.

2.2. t -duality transformations

to formalize the t -duality transformation of the spacetime k-groups, we compactify
one of the p-brane worldvolume directions on a circle s1, so that the spacetime manifold
is now the product space x = y  s1. to study the k-theory of this compactication,

12

we use (1.8) and the product formula (1.9) with w = s1 to get

fk(y  s1) = k 1(y )  fk(y )
k 1(y  s1) = (cid:16)fk(y )  z(cid:17)  k 1(y )

where we have used bott periodicity. the splitting of the k-groups here can be understood
by noting that the natural embedding i : y  y  s1 induces a projection on k-

theory i : fk n(y  s1)  fk n(y ) such that ker i = fk n1(y )  fk n(s1). it follows
that the group fk n(y ) labels the corresponding kaluza-klein modes that arise from the
compactication of the spacetime on s1. the other factor fk n1(y )fk n(s1) represents

the unwrapped modes of the d-brane congurations. that this interpretation is indeed
precise can be proven by taking w to be the topological space consisting of a single point

in (1.9), which gives

(2.17)

(2.18)

(2.19)

fk n(y  pt) = fk n(y )

where we have used fk n(pt) = 0. eq. (2.19) shows that as the compactied direction is

shrunk to a point, only the kaluza-klein modes contribute to the d-brane charges which

are now determined by the k-theory classes of the uncompactied nine dimensional space
y .

the extra integer subgroup in the iia case (2.18) relative to the iib case (2.17)
labels the large gauge transformations of the tachyon eld (2.8) around the compactied
direction xp+1  s1. the t (b)
subgroup of (2.18) representing the unwrapped brane charges, and the map t (a)
n 7 n
in (2.6) used to dene an element of k 1(x) has kernel which is isomorphic to z. it is
invariant under the shift

n part of the iia tachyon eld (2.8) generates the fk(y )

t (a)
n  t (a)

n + w 3  in

,

w  z

(2.20)

n (x) is the transition function on the overlap s2k

corresponding to the windings of the tachyon eld around the s1. more precisely, the iib
tachyon eld t (b)
 = s2k1 (generating
2k1(u(n))) that allows one to piece together topologically trivial gauge elds on the
contractible upper and lower hemispheres s2k
  s2k to obtain a gauge eld on s2k with
non-trivial topological u(n) charge. this conguration represents the unbroken part of
the u(2n) gauge eld carried by the unstable 9-branes of the iia theory [3], showing how

+ s2k

the large gauge transformations arise upon target space compactication. on the other
hand, the automorphism (2.6) generates 2k+1(u(2n)) [3, 18], so that the eect of the
large gauge transformations disappears when going from the iia theory to the iib theory.
thus the t -duality mapping in (2.17) and (2.18) shows explicitly how under t -duality a

longitudinal brane coordinate is mapped onto a gauge eld conguration winding around
the compactied direction, and moreover how t -duality interchanges kaluza-klein modes

13

and unwrapped d-brane congurations. the isomorphism mod z between (2.17) and

(2.18) is therefore precisely the natural transformation between the iib and iia tachyon

generators, regarded as the bott periodicity isomorphism on fk(y  s1)  k 1(y  s1).

at the level of unreduced k-theory, the relation (1.6) along with (2.17) and (2.18) show
that the t -duality mapping is indeed a natural isomorphism of the spacetime k-groups.

however, the isomorphism deteriorates in the decompactication limit, whereby only the
unwrapped d-brane congurations contribute to the charge. this can be seen through

the suspension isomorphism [17]

k n(y  r) = k n1(y )

(2.21)

which illustrates the usual result that the t -dual equivalence between the iib and iia
theories only holds upon compactication down to nine dimensions. upon descending

to lower dimensional d-branes (as in (2.12)), we encounter higher dimensional type-ii
toroidal compactications. the appropriate generalization of (2.17,2.18) may be found

inductively from (1.8) and (1.9) to be

fk(y  t m) = k 1(y )2m1 fk(y )2m1  z(2m11)
k 1(y  t m) = (cid:16)fk(y )2m1

 z(cid:17)  k 1(y )2m1

 z(2m11)

(2.22)

(2.23)

the k-groups (2.22) and (2.23) are again isomorphic mod z. now the decompositions
correctly incorporate the dimensionality 2m1 of the spinor representation of the t -duality
group o(m, m; z) [6], and hence of the fact that iib (resp. iia) d-branes belong to the

chiral (resp. antichiral) spinor representations of so(2m) which are interchanged under a
t -duality transformation on t m with m odd. these factors arise from the total number of

possible wrappings (spin structures) around the cycles of t m. the fk(y )2m1 subgroup

of (2.23) representing unwrapped brane charges is generated by the t (b)
n  (3)(m1) part
of the iia tachyon generator t (a)
2mn , while the extra integer subgroups in both the iia and
iib cases come from the higher degree winding numbers of the tachyon elds (see (2.12)).

2.3. (1)fl transformations

we shall now describe the relationships between branes that arise via application of the
klein operator (1)fl, where fl is the left-moving spacetime fermion number operator.
quotienting by (1)fl maps type-iib superstring theory into the type-iia theory. the
operator (1)fl acts on the eld content of the string theory by changing the sign of all
spacetime elds in the rr sector, and therefore the rr charge of a bps d-brane changes

sign and it gets mapped to its antibrane under (1)fl. the induced map on fk(x) is

the involution dened by [(e, f )]  [(f, e)] and therefore the brane congurations which
survive the (1)fl-projection are those whose k-theory class is even under this z2 action.

14

the action on k-theory thereby induces a map

fk(x)  k 1

z2

(x  r0,1)

(2.24)

where in general rp,q is the p + q dimensional real space in which an involution acts
as a reection of the last q coordinates, and kz2 denotes the equivariant k-functor for
the discrete group z2 [26]. it acts as the conventional k-functor on the category of z2-
equivariant bundles over the space x  s1, i.e. the complex vector bundles e whose
ber projection e  x  s1 commutes with the action of z2. the equivariant k-theory
used in (2.24) is a simplied version of the hopkins k-groups k(x) [2, 5] whereby, since
(1)fl acts only on the spectrum of the string theory, the z2 action on x  s1 is simply
taken as an orientation reversing symmetry of s1, with no further geometrical action on
the spacetime x.

we shall rst give an elementary calculation of the right-hand side of (2.24) which will
also prove useful later on when we discuss orientifolds. the basic theorem we shall use is

the six term exact sequence of equivariant k-theory [26]

k 1
z2

(m, a)  k 1
z2

(m)  k 1
z2

(a)

  

  

(2.25)

kz2(a)  kz2(m)  kz2(m, a)

where a is a closed z2-subspace of a locally compact z2-space m, and the relative k-
theory is dened by k n
(m/a) (when the quotient space makes sense).
z2
the horizontal maps in (2.25) are induced by the canonical inclusion and projection, while
the vertical ones come from the boundary homomorphisms . the advantage of using

(m, a) = fk n

z2

this exact sequence is that one may take a to be the xed point set of the group action
on m, such that the quotient space m/a has a free group action on it and its equivariant
cohomology can be computed as the ordinary cohomology of its quotient by z2.

in the present case, we take m = x  r0,1 and a = x  {0}. then m/a is homotopic
to two copies of x r which are exchanged by the involution. since the z2 action on m/a
is free, the equivariant k-groups may be computed by using the homotopy invariance of
the k-functor and the suspension isomorphism (2.21) to get

k n

z2(cid:16)(x  r)  (x  r)(cid:17) = k n(x  r) = k n1(x)

on a the z2 action is trivial, so that

k n
z2

(x  {0}) = k n(x  pt)  r[z2]

where

r[z2] = z  z

15

(2.26)

(2.27)

(2.28)

is the representation ring of the cyclic group z2 [26]. finally, since in this case a is an
equivariant retract of m, we have ker  = k n
(a) and so the horizontal exact sequences
z2
in (2.25) split. in this way we arrive at

(2.29)

z2

fk n

(x  r0,1) =(cid:16)fk n(x)  r[z2](cid:17) fk n1(x)

where we have used (2.19). the doubling of the group fk n(x) in (2.29) from its prod-

uct with the representation ring (2.28) just indicates that each brane has a mirror image
coming from the equivalence relation generated by (1)fl. according to the above deriva-
tion it comes from the trivial part of the z2 action and as such represents the untwisted

brane charges. the other group fk n1(x) comes from the free part of the z2 action and

represents the twisted sector.

to construct explicitly the k-group mapping (2.24) onto the type-iia theory, we
need to act on type-iib brane congurations (k-group classes) which are invariant under
the action of (1)fl. such objects are the p-p pairs corresponding to stable dp-brane
congurations (on which quotienting by (1)fl makes sense). to describe this pair as an

n

element of the spacetime k-group fk(x), we represent the p-brane as the tachyonic vortex
n )]  fk(x)

formed by n = 2k1 9-9 brane pairs, which dene the k-theory class [(s+
with tachyon generators t (b)
acting on the chiral and antichiral spinor bundles s 
n ,
as dened in (2.3). likewise, we represent the p-brane in terms of the bound state of
another set of n 9-9 brane pairs which dene the spacetime k-theory class [(s 
n )]
n are the conjugate spinor bundles dened by
with tachyon generators t
complex-conjugating the transition functions of s 
n (note the change in sign of the rr
charge of the p-brane relative to the p-brane). of course, s 
n , but we shall keep the
two sets of bundles arbitrary to represent the pairing of a brane with its mirror antibrane
in (2.29). the p-p brane pair therefore determines the k-theory class

n , where s 

n = s 

n , s+

n , s 

(b)

(2.30)

h(s+

n , s 

n )i +h(s 

n , s +

n )i =h(s+

n  s 

n , s 

n  s +

n )i  fk(x)

n  (t

(b)
and tachyon eld t (b)
n ). more precisely, the class (2.30) is determined by a pair
(e, f ) of chan-paton bundles each transforming under so(2k) rotations in the indicated
spinor representation +
2k in their bers. the operator (1)fl acts on the category of
vector bundles by interchanging the p-brane and p-brane, i.e. s 
n , and on k-theory
classes by interchanging spacetime lling 9-branes and 9-branes, i.e. [(e, f )]  [(f, e)]
and t (b)
n ). the k-group elements of the form (2.30) are therefore even under the
action of the klein operator and correspond to the elements of the rst direct summand in

n  (t (b)

n  s 

2k

(2.29) for n = 1 which survive the projection. the other direct summand fk(x) represents

the iib brane congurations which are projected out of the spectrum by (1)fl.

the equivalence relation generated by the (1)fl involution identies the classes [s+

s 

n ]  [s 

n  s +

n ] when embedded as elements of the equivariant k-group k 1
z2

16

n 
(x  r0,1).

it follows that there is a well-dened mapping from the subset of classes (2.30) to k 1(x)
given by the projection

n  s 

n , s 

n  s +

h(s+

n )i 7 (cid:20)(cid:18)(s+

n  s 

n ) exp i t (a)

n

, (s+

n  s 

n )ii(cid:19)(cid:21)  k 1(x)

(2.31)

the canonical choice of iia tachyon eld t (a)
(which
is a well-dened operator because of the equivalence relation). however, this tachyon

n acting on s+

n is t (b)+

n  t

n  s 

(b)
n

conguration has winding number 0 in codimension 2k + 1 and as such it is trivial in
k 1(x). this simply represents the fact that the p-p brane pair of the iib theory is
mapped by the (1)fl-projection to an unstable p-brane conguration in the iia theory.
to obtain a non-trivial k-theory class, we must let the tachyon condense in codimension
1, leading to the appropriate iia tachyon eld

t (a)
n = t (b)+

n  t (b)

n + t (1) 3  in

(2.32)

where t (1) = xp+1 is the codimension 1 tachyon eld. with (2.32), the class (2.31) denes
a non-trivial element of k 1(x) in (2.29). this element is the representation of a stable
p  1-brane conguration as the tachyonic soliton of a collection of 2k1 9-branes, used
for the bound state construction of the original iib p-brane, and 2k1 9-branes, used to
(x  r0,1), the 9-branes
build the p-brane. because of the equivalence relation in k 1
z2
are identied in the iia theory as 9-branes, and hence we obtain the usual k-theoretic
representation of the p1-brane in terms of 2k unstable 9-branes of type-iia string theory.

the naive choice of tachyon eld in (2.32) (represented by the rst term) suggests

that one should consider it as a soliton conguration of the iib theory. to do so, we

need a well-dened projection onto fk(x) . since the naive tachyon eld represents the

identity class of k 1(x), it is trivially invariant under an additional (1)fl-projection
(as it represents an unstable non-bps conguration, it carries no rr charge, and so is
unaected by the action of (1)fl). generally, the brane congurations which survive
the modding out of the type-ii theory m times by (1)fl are represented by the k-group

(x  r0,m) =(cid:16)fk n(x)  r[z2](cid:17) fk nm(x)

z2

fk n

(2.33)

whose decomposition is found as before. for the case at hand, the relevant group (2.33) is
obtained for n = m = 2, so that the (1)fl-invariant states reside in the rst summand
and the congurations which are projected out are the same as those in (2.29) for n =
1. the equivalence relation generated by the (1)fl involution now gives [(s+
n )] 
[(s 
projection onto the type-iib theory is now represented by the mapping of classes

n )] as elements of the equivariant cohomology fkz2(x  r0,2). the well-dened

n , s +

n , s 

n  s 

hs+

ni 7 h(s+

n , s 

n )i  fk(x)

17

(2.34)

and the corresponding tachyon eld

t (b)
n = t (b)+

n  t (b)

n

(2.35)

this class of fk(x) represents a stable bps dp-brane constructed out of the bound state

of 2k1 9-9 brane pairs.

it is instructive to compare the k-theory construction above to the boundary state
formalism for the d-branes [10]. a supersymmetric dp-brane boundary state of the type-
iib theory is the sum of contributions from the neveu-schwarz (ns) and ramond sectors

which is invariant under the appropriate gso projection,

|dpi = 1

2(cid:16)|bp, +ins  |bp, ins(cid:17)  1

2(cid:16)|bp, +ir + |bp, ir(cid:17)

(2.36)

where the  label the dierent spin structures, and the relative sign between the ns-ns
and rr contributions distinguishes a brane from its antibrane. the rr contribution ips
sign under the action of (1)fl, while the ns-ns part is invariant. in order to describe
the projection of the string hilbert space onto those states which are even under (1)fl,
the natural procedure is to cancel the odd rr part of the dp-brane boundary state. this
may be achieved by the superposition of a p-brane with a p-brane which is described by

the boundary state

|gbpi = |dpi + |dpi = |bp, +ins  |bp, ins

(2.37)

this state describes an unstable p-brane conguration of the type-iia theory [3] and is
the conguration considered in [12]. on the other hand, one can analyse the twisted and

untwisted sectors of the string hilbert space and show that the result of quotienting by
(1)fl projects onto the ns-ns parts of all iib p-brane boundary states, as in (2.37)
[14]. in this latter case, we nd that the transformation on the spacetime-lling 9-branes
leaves an equal number of (identical) 9-branes and 9-branes in the type-iia theory. that
this is also the conguration that comes from quotienting the p-p system is a natural
consequence of the k-theoretic approach above. namely, the nal conguration of 2k
unstable 9-branes of the type-iia theory comes from combining the 2k1 9-branes used in
the bound state construction of the p-brane and the 2k1 9-branes of the mirror p-brane,
as is implicit in the analysis of [12]. this is in contrast to the naive expectation that the
(1)fl projection would just eliminate all 9-brane contributions. moreover, the k-theory
derivation above shows why the twisted sectors of the (1)fl projection do not contribute
to the rr-charge [14], in that the k 1(x) subgroup of (2.29) comes from the trivial part
of the z2 action on x  s1.

18

2.4. summary

the relations among bps and non-bps d-branes in type-ii superstring theory may

be succinctly summarized in the following diagram representing the k-theory analog of
g. 1:

k(x)

(1)fl
 k 1
z2

(x  r0,1)

(1)fl
 k 2
z2

(x  r0,2)

1 k(x)

 

1 

 k(y s1)=k 1(y s1)

k 1(x)

k 1(x)

 

k(y t 2)=k 1(y t 2)

k(x) = k 2(x)

(2.38)
where  is the bott periodicity isomorphism representing tachyon condensation in codi-
mension 1, and 1 is the projection onto the rst direct summand of (2.33). the map 2
realizes a type-ii p  2-brane as a dirac magnetic monopole in the worldvolume of a p-p
brane pair. the t -duality transformations and the (1)fl projections are formally identi-
cal, in that each one comes from mappings between subgroups of k-group decompositions
in (2.17,2.18) and (2.33), respectively (compare also (2.8) and (2.32)). this shows how

the k-theory description presents a unied description of the d-brane descent relations
and provides further insight into the symmetry transformations between the iia and iib

theories.

3. descent equations in type-i theories

type-i superstring theory may be dened as the quotient of the type-iib theory by

the twist operator  which reverses the orientation of the fundamental string worldsheet.
it acts on chan-paton bundles by conjugation and therefore the d-brane congurations

which survive the -projection are those whose gauge bundles are real, i.e. have structure
group o(n). the corresponding k-theory classes now live in the real k-group ko(x)
[2]. many of the transformations described before based on the structure of cliord

algebras carry through in the same way, except that one must now taken into account the
reality properties of the spinor modules [20, 21]. the only real spinor modules (or, more
precisely, the only ones which are complexications of real representations) are 8k1, 
8k,
while the representations 8k+3, 
8k+4, 8k+5 are the restrictions of quaternionic cliord
modules. the remaining modules 
8k+6 are complex. this property modies the

8k+2, 

19

abs isomorphism (2.1) to [19]

ko(sm) = rohspin(m)i / rohspin(m + 1)i = 

z  z
z2  z

z

for m  0, 4 mod 8
for m  1, 2 mod 8
otherwise

(3.1)

where ro[spin(m)] is the representation ring of real spin(m)-modules.

3.1. bott periodicity and type-ii orientifolds

the weak bott periodicity isomorphism for real k-theory has period 8 and may be

represented by the stable homotopy groups

. . .

 l1(cid:16)o(n)(cid:17)  l(cid:16)o(2n)/[o(n)  o(n)](cid:17) 
 l+1(cid:16)u(2n)/o(2n)(cid:17)  l+2(cid:16)sp(2n)/u(2n)(cid:17) 
 l+3(cid:16)sp(2n)(cid:17)  l+4(cid:16)sp(4n)/[sp(2n)  sp(2n)](cid:17) 
 l+5(cid:16)u(8n)/sp(4n)(cid:17)  l+6(cid:16)o(16n)/u(8n)(cid:17)  l+7(cid:16)o(16n)(cid:17)  . . .

(3.2)

n
2

n
2

, s 

n
2

n
2

is s 

, the 2k1 mirror 9-9 pairs support the gauge bundles (s 

where n = 2[ l
2 ]. for type-i branes the codimension l = 9  p may in general be even
or odd [2, 10]. thinking of the type-i theory as the -projection of iib superstring
theory, a d-brane of codimension l = 2k in x comes from the bound state of 2k1
type-iib 9-9 brane pairs with bundles (s+
) associated with the rank 2k1 spinor
modules 
2k. since the 9-brane rr charge is -invariant, we are left with 2k1 9-9 brane
pairs plus their mirror images under the equivalence relation generated by . since the
, s+
conjugate of s 
)
and so represent the corresponding codimension l antibrane. the total conguration
of 2k 9-brane-antibrane pairs in the type-i theory therefore determines a k-theory class
[(e, f )] where the bers of the real gauge bundles e and f each transform under so(2k)
rotations as +
2k. as we did in subsection 3.3, we may think of [(e, f )] as a k-theory
 s 
class [(s+
)] whereby branes are identied with their antibranes under
the equivalence relation generated by the given involution. similarly, when l = 2k + 1,
the p-brane conguration is described in terms of 2k 9-brane-antibrane pairs whose gauge
bundles (e, f ) transform under the spinor representation 2k+1 of the transverse rotation
group.

2k 
, s +

n
2

 s 

n
2

n
2

n
2

n
2

n
2

20

in either case the tachyon eld is given by

t (i)
n (x) =

i xi

lxi=1

(3.3)

and it breaks the o(n)  o(n) 9-brane gauge symmetry down to o(n)diag. the vacuum
manifold of the type-i theory is therefore homeomorphic to o(n) and the winding number
of the tachyonic soliton conguration labels the induced p-brane charge which lives in the

real k-group

gko(sl) = l1(cid:16)o(n)(cid:17)

(3.4)

the integer-valued charges in (3.4) and (3.1) correspond to the usual stable type-i bps

dp-brane congurations for p = 1, 5, 9 whose type-iib rr-charge is invariant under the
-projection, i.e. whose boundary states |bp, ir in (2.36) are even under . the
z2-charges correspond to stable but non-bps type-i dp-brane congurations for p =
1, 0, 7, 8. for p = 1, 7 they may be constructed as the -projection of the corresponding
p-brane-antibrane conguration of the type-iib theory. for these values of p,  exchanges
iib p-branes with p-branes, i.e.  |bp, ir = |bp, ir, so that the combination (2.37)
is -invariant. for p = 0, 8 there is no iib rr charge and the state is automatically even
under . in all of the cases the net eect of the -projection is to eliminate the tachyon
leading to a stable brane conguration [10].

ii  duality

we shall now describe the sequence of isomorphisms (3.2) in the language of brane con-

gurations, as we did in the type-ii case. for deniteness we shall take l = 2k to be even.
the isomorphism in the rst line of (3.2) arises in a similar way as in the type-ii case by
representing a p  1-brane in codimension 2k + 1 in terms of 2n unstable 9-branes. the
induced charge takes values in the higher ko-group

1

(sl+1) = l(cid:16)o(2n)/[o(n)  o(n)](cid:17)

gko

and the ko-class is determined by the rank 2n spinor bundle s n
eld

2

t (i )
n = t (i)

n  t (i)

n + t (1) 3  in

(3.5)

 s n

2

with tachyon

(3.6)

as in (3.3), eq.
(3.6) shows that the given set of spacetime lling 9-branes interact
via tachyon elds only among themselves and not with their mirror images. there is,

however, a subtlety with this transformation which is related to the doubling (3.6) in rank
of the spinor modules due to the mirror iib 9-branes (representing again a k-theoretic
stabilization). under a t -duality transformation on s1 the operator  is mapped to
  i1, where i1 is the geometrical operator which reects the compactied target space

21

direction. the t -dual of the type-i theory is type-i  superstring theory which is obtained
as the z2 orientifold projection of the type-iia theory by   i1. the relevant k-theory is
given by the real k-group kr(x) [2, 23], i.e. the group of virtual bundles [(e, f )] with
an antilinear involution on both e and f which commutes with the induced action of i1
by pullback. as the type-i  theory contains 2n unstable 9-branes, its d-brane charges
(x) [3]. the relation to the present homotopy analysis

1

live in the real k-group gkr

comes from the fact that if the kr-involution is taken to act trivially on x, then there is
a natural isomorphism

krn(x) = kon(x)

(3.7)

the precise equivariant homotopy properties inherent in real k-theory will be discussed

in more detail in the next section.

we see that the periodicity theorem (3.2) will in fact go beyond describing just toroidal

compactications of the type-i theories. a t -duality transformation of type-i superstring
theory on t m gives a type-ii orientifold on t m/z2 by the operator   im (im, along with
appropriate factors of (1)fl, reects all of the coordinates of the compactication torus
t m).
in the following we shall also describe the structure of these orientifold theories
using k-theoretic properties. a general orientifold has 2m orientifold planes which are
the xed points of the   im involution and which ll all of the non-compact spacetime.
they have dimension 9  m and carry 24m units of 9  m-brane rr-charge. we will
denote them by o(9  m). far away from the orientifold planes, the spacetime looks like
the original x along with its mirror image under the action of the kr-involution which
interchanges the two copies. an elementary result of k-theory shows that for a trivial z2
action on the space x [23]

krn(x  x) = krn(x  s0,1) = k n(x)

(3.8)

where sp,q denotes the p + q 1 dimensional unit sphere in rp,q. the theory far away from
the singularities is therefore equivalent to the original type-ii theory. on the other hand,
branes on top of an orientifold plane have their generic unitary gauge symmetry broken

to the real subgroup, in accordance with the rst part of the sequence (3.2). as we did
in the type-ii cases, we shall follow the orbit of the original stable 9-9 brane pairs in the
homotopy sequence, and in addition keep track of the structure of the orientifold planes

since their rr-charges will be measured by the relevant k-theory groups. at the level
of (3.5,3.6), there are n stable 8-8 brane pairs and two o8 planes which each carry 8
units of rr-charge. tadpole anomaly cancellation requires that the 8-branes be arranged
so as to cancel out the orientifold charge in the supersymmetric vacuum conguration.
note that the k-group mapping between (3.4) and (3.5), i.e. the basic i-i  t -duality,
involves the homotopy groups of real symmetric spaces.

22

m = 2

next we come to the rst isomorphism in the second line of (3.2). this corresponds to

the toroidal compactication of the type-i theory which is t -dual to type-iib superstring
theory on the t 2/z2 orientifold. there are now four o7 planes, each with 4 units of
7-brane rr-charge, and n 7-7 brane pairs which are described in terms of 2n 9-9 brane
pairs, as in (2.12). the appearence of the unitary group in (3.2) is due to the following
facts. the chiral spinor modules 
2 are complex, so that the desired map must be taken
with respect to the real spinor module +
2 , as in (2.12) (see also (2.14)). this
means that the relevant homotopy is dened with respect to a unitary symmetric space.

2  

physically, the appearence of a unitary gauge symmetry can be understood from the
analysis of [27] (see also [28]) where the requirement of closure of the worldsheet operator

product expansion was shown to put stringent restrictions on the actions of discrete gauge
symmetries on chan-paton bundles. in particular, the square of the worldsheet parity

operator  acts on chan-paton indices as

2 :

|dp; abi 7 (2

)a

a |dp; abi (2

 )b

b = (i)(9p)/2 |dp; abi

(3.9)

where a, b are the open string endpoint chan-paton labels of a dp-brane state of the iib
theory, and  denotes the (adjoint) representation of the orientifold group in the chan-

paton gauge group. while the 9-branes have the standard orthogonal subgroup projection
(as required by tadpole anomaly cancellation), (3.9) leads to an inconsistency on 7-branes

which are therefore quantized using the unprojected unitary gauge bundles. thus, while
the naive gauge group on the spacetime lling 9-branes is o(2n)  o(2n)  o(4n), the
inconsistent -projection on iib 7-branes enhances the orientifold symmetry to u(2n)
because from the point of view of worldvolume gauge elds the 9-branes are indistin-

guishable from 9-branes due to the reality property of the relevant spinor bundles. the
requisite tachyon eld t (i)
2n of the corresponding virtual bundle [(e, f )] can be regarded
as a section of e  f and so is required to be z2-equivariant with respect to the orien-
tifold projection (this ensures that the resulting lower dimensional brane congurations
are invariant under the z2-action), i.e. it transforms under the orientifold group as

t (i)
2n   t (i)

2n 1


(3.10)

as shown in [2], the tachyon vertex operator for a p-p brane pair acquires the phase
(i)7p under the action of 2. for the 7-branes this operator is even under 2, and
so the eigenvalues of the vacuum expectation value t (i)0
2n are real. thus the tachyon
eld breaks the u(2n) gauge symmetry down to its orthogonal subgroup o(2n), and

the induced brane charge is given by the winding numbers around the vacuum manifold
u(2n)/o(2n) of the iib orientifold on t 2/z2.

23

what is particularly interesting about this orientifold is that it is equivalent to a more

general, dual description in terms of f -theory [29]. in this description, f -theory on the
third complex kummer surface k3 is the compactication of type-iib superstring theory
on the base space of the elliptic bration k3  cp 1 with complex structure modulus of
the ber given by the axion-dilaton modular parameter of the iib theory. at the special
point of the k3 moduli space where it can be identied with the orbifold t 4/z2 (i.e.
the degenerate k3 with eight d2 singularities), the ber acquires singularities and the
base space is the orbifold limit t 2/z2 of cp 1. the orientifold planes split into 7-branes
in this description and have some dynamics (although they cannot support perturbative
gauge elds). the equivalence between f -theory on k3 and type-i superstring theory
on t 2 is then a starting point for a k-theory description of f -theory. in this particular
compactication of f -theory, the relevant vacuum manifold for tachyon condensation is
(y  t 1,2)

u(2n)/o(2n) and a k-theory subgroup of the full compactication is gkr
(or equivalently gko(y  t 2) [8] as we show in the next subsection). here we have used

the denition t 1,m = (s1,1)m. the relevant k-theory incorporates the charges of the
orientifold planes, as we will discuss further in the following.

2

m = 3

the second isomorphism in the second line of (3.2) describes the mapping onto the i  the-
ory on t 3 which is t -dual to the t 3/z2 orientifold of the type-iia string. there are eight
o6 planes each with 2 units of 6-brane rr-charge. the appearence of a symplectic
gauge group follows from the mathematical fact that the complex spinor module 3 is
the restriction of a quaternionic cliord module, so that the appropriate augmentation
of the spin bundles on the 9-branes is taken with respect to the rank 4 real represen-
tation 3  3. this means that there are now 4n unstable 9-branes which have an
sp(2n) worldvolume gauge symmetry and whose ko-theory class is represented by the
spin bundle sn  sn with tachyon eld

t (i )
2n = t (i)

2n  t (i)

2n + t (1) 3  i4n

(3.11)

this enhanced sp(2n) gauge symmetry comes from the intermediate representation of a
given type-i  p  3-brane in terms of 6-6 brane pairs and will be more easily understood
below at the next isomorphism in terms of 5-branes. again by z2 equivariance the tachyon
eld breaks this symmetry to its complex subgroup u(2n), so that the vacuum manifold
is sp(2n)/u(2n). as shown in [3], the codimension 3 tachyonic soliton in (3.11) coincides

with the usual t hooft-polyakov magnetic monopole.

since m-theory compactied on a circle is the type-iia string, a careful analysis
[30] reveals that this orientifold model is equivalent to m-theory dened on the orbifold

24

limit t 4/z2 of the 4-manifold k3. this lends another clue to the puzzle of how to de-
scribe m-theory in k-theoretic terms [2, 3]. the equivalence with the iia theory when
compactied on a circle shows that its description must then reduce to a vacuum mani-
fold u(2n)/[u(n)  u(n)] describing the stable soliton congurations which represent
the branes with k-group k 1(x), while the equivalence of the type-iia orientifold on
s1/z2 to the m-theory orientifold on s1/z2 is described in terms of the vacuum manifold
(y   s1). now we see that the duality
between m-theory compactied on a k3 surface and type-i  superstring theory on t 3
implies that this 11-dimensional compactication has vacuum manifold sp(2n)/u(2n)

o(2n)/[o(n)  o(n)] and the kr-group gkr
and k-theory group gkr

(y  t 1,3) (or equivalently gko(y  t 3) [8] as we discuss in

the next subsection).

1

3

m = 4

now we come to the isomorphisms in the third line of (3.2). the superstring theory
is type-i on t 4 which is t -dual to the orientifold of type-iib on t 4/z2 which has 16
o5 planes each with a negative unit of 5-brane rr charge. the rank 2 spin modules

4 are again the restrictions of quaternionic cliord modules and yield the real chiral
spinor representations 
4 . there are now 4n 9-9 brane pairs which determine the
ko-theory class [(s+
2n  s 

2n )] with tachyon eld

4  
2n , s 

2n  s+

t (i)
4n = t (i)

2n  (3  3) + t (i)

2  i4n

(3.12)

where the codimension 2 tachyon eld t (i)
is dened as in (2.12). the quaternionic gauge
2
symmetry is naturally explained by (3.9) which shows that 2 = 1 when acting on the
n 5-brane-antibrane states (and also on the corresponding tachyon vertex operator). the
5-branes must therefore be quantized using pseudo-real gauge bundles, i.e. chan-paton

bundles with structure group sp(2n) on the 9-branes and on the 9-branes. this fact
explains, via t -duality transformations, the appearence of symplectic gauge groups in the

m = 3 case above and in the cases to follow. an alternative explanation [2] utilizes the
fact that a type-i 5-brane is equivalent to an instanton on the spacetime lling 9-branes
[31]. the tachyon eld breaks the so(4n)  so(4n) gauge symmetry of the 9-9 brane
conguration to the diagonal subgroup so(4n)diag, which is then further broken down
to sp(2n) by the instanton eld.

k-theory dened with pseudo-real bundles is denoted ksp(x). the induced p  4-
brane charge of type-i superstring theory on t 4 is labelled by the homotopy groups of the
vacuum manifold sp(2n)  sp(2n)/sp(2n)diag which yield the ksp-group

gksp(sl+4) = l+3(cid:16)sp(2n)(cid:17)

25

(3.13)

in the language of the orientifold theory, the replacement of the kr-involution by a z4
generator denes the pseudo-real k-group kh(x) [32] appropriate to orientifold theo-
ries with symplectic chan-paton bundles.4 the present model is dual to a conventional
orbifold of the type-iia theory on t 4/z2 and its moduli space coincides with that of iia
strings on k3 [33].

m = 5

the situation for type-i  theory on t 5 introduces a new chain of dualities which may
be attributed to the fact that the orientifold planes now begin acquiring fractional rr-
charges. this theory is t -dual to the t 5/z2 orientifold of type-iia superstring theory with
32 o4 planes each of fractional magnetic charge  1
2 . this new duality chain can also
be understood in the k-theory language from the change of nature of the chan-paton
spinor bundles on the 9-9 branes at the m = 4 case above. again the spinor module
5 is quaternionic in origin and yields the eight dimensional real spinor representation
5  5. this is consistent with the physical expectations from t -duality of the pseudo-
real vacuum manifold associated with 8n unstable 9-branes carrying the chan-paton
bundle s2n  s2n (with tachyon eld t (i )
4n dened analogously to (2.8)) which appears
in the second isomorphism of the third line of (3.2). a candidate dual theory is the
k3  s1 compactication of type-iib superstring theory, which may then be conjectured
to be dual to a t 5/z2 orientifold of m-theory [34]. this chiral m-theory orientifold has
no d-branes but rather m5-branes on which m2-branes can end. the chiral lift of the
m = 5 string orientifold should then be related to various equivalent k-groups given by
(y  s1,1). along with the recent
construction [35] of m2-branes as tachyonic-type solitons in the worldvolume of m5-m5

(y t 1,5), gko(y t 5), gksp(y  s1) and gkh

gkr

5

1

brane congurations, this could shed more light on the interpretation of m-theory using
k-theory (some related results can also be found in [36]).

m = 6

the type-i superstring on t 6 is t -dual to the iib string on t 6/z2 which has 64 o3
planes each of fractional rr-charge  1
4 lling the non-compact space. the n 3-3 brane
pairs, which are described as the tachyonic kinks of 8n 9-9 brane pairs, have the same
fate according to (3.9) as the 7-branes, and hence the 9-brane gauge symmetry is the
unprojected u(8n). algebraically this owes to the fact that the spinor modules 
6 are
complex and thus form the real spinor representation +
6 . the corresponding ko-
4strictly speaking, the im orientifold projection should be accompanied by the action of the operator
2 (9p)(8p)fl to preserve the z2-equivariant structure in the homotopy sequence. the usage of the

(1)
kh-theory generalization of the orientifold models has been discussed in [5, 6].

6  

1

26

4n  s 

4n , s+

4n  s 

group element is thus [(s+
4n )], and z2 equivariance of the tachyon eld
implies that it breaks the u(8n) gauge symmetry to its pseudo-real subgroup sp(4n).
again this model can be described as the limit of an f -theory compactication on the
orbifold t 8/z2 which has terminal singularities and is not the limit of any suitable smooth
8-manifold. this f -theory compactication should thus reduce to the vacuum manifold
u(8n)/sp(4n) around which the tachyonic windings give rise to k-theory classes in

(y  t 1,6) (or the various other equivalent k-groups).

6

gkr

m = 7

the t 7/z2 orientifold of the type-iia theory has 128 o2 planes each of electric charge
 1
8 . the spinor module 7 is real, so that the 16n unstable 9-branes support the spinor
bundle s4n  s4n and have a real o(16n) gauge symmetry. this reality condition arises
from the intermediate 2-2 brane pairs and again will be explained at the next isomorphism

in terms of d-strings. the tachyon eld breaks the o(16n) gauge symmetry to the unitary
subgroup u(8n), as follows from equivariance with respect to the orientifold group. this
model can be mapped to the compactication of m-theory on t 8/z2, from which we can
(y t 1,7).

identify another limiting vacuum manifold o(16n)/u(8n) and k-group gkr

7

m = 8

the nal isomorphism in the sequence (3.2) maps us into the type-i theory on t 8 which
is t -dual to the type-iib orientifold on t 8/z2 that has 256 o1 planes each of rr-
charge  1
16 . the vacuum manifold is now the real orthogonal group o(16n) because the
intermediate iib d-strings have the usual orthogonal projection according to (3.9). this
is consistent with the fact that the rank 8 chiral spinor modules 
8 are real, and thus
the 16n 9-9 brane pairs support chan-paton bundles which each transform under the
+
2k+8 spinor representation of the transverse rotation group, similarly to the case
we started with. this orientifold is equivalent to the ordinary orbifold compactication
of type-iia superstring theory on t 8/z2, which has fundamental strings condensed in
the supersymmetric vacuum. this latter property and its k-theory origin may again

2k+8  

be combined with the analysis of [35] which shows that the solitonic description of an
m2-brane from the annihilation of a coincident pair of m5-m5 branes reduces (upon
compactication on s1) to a fundamental string stretched between an annihilating pair
of d4-d4 branes in the iia theory. the closure of the bott periodicity sequence (3.2) at
this stage implies that there is no new physics at lower compactications, as is indeed

precisely the case.

27

hopf maps

the strong bott periodicity isomorphisms for real and pseudo-real k-theory take the form

n8

n4

gkr
gkh

(x) = gkr
(x) = gkr

n

(x)

n

(x)

(3.14)

(3.15)

n8

n4

gko
gksp

(x) = gko
(x) = gko

n

n

(x)

(x)

,

,

they can again be deduced from the periodicity relations cl+8 = cl  r(16) and cl+4 =
cl r h(2) of the corresponding cliord algebras [20]. as mappings on k-theory classes
they can be represented via cup products involving spinor bundles, as in (2.14), or equiv-
alently by using hopf brations as in (2.15,2.16). the isomorphism of ko-groups in

(3.14) comes from taking the cup product of an element of gko
[nr]  [i 8] of gko(s8) = z, where nr is the rank 8 hopf bundle over rp 7 associated

with the real hopf bration s15  s8. the corresponding mapping on the real k-theory
groups is obtained via the natural real structure on the complex hopf bundle over cp 7
[23]. this shows that the construction of a p-brane in terms of p + 8-branes (e.g. a type-i

(x) with the generator

n

d-particle from 8-8 brane pairs) is determined by a d-string solitonic conguration which
gives another explicit physical realization of the spin(8) instanton.5 the corresponding
eight dimensional non-trivial gauge connections, and the associated spinor structures, may
be found in [37]. this minimizing solution of the eight dimensional euclidean yang-mills

equations satises a generalized duality condition with respect to the topological 4-form
f  f constructed from the associated eld strength. this identies the explicit form of
the worldvolume gauge elds living on the p + 8-p + 8 brane pair required to produce the

nite energy solitonic p-brane conguration as [37]

ai(x) = 2i

ij

8xj=1

xj

(1 + |x|2)2

(3.16)

where ij are the generators of spin(8). these gauge eld congurations are spin(9) sym-
metric (thereby preserving the manifest spacetime symmetries) and carry unit topological

charge.

similarly, the isomorphism of pseudo-real k-groups in (3.15) comes from taking the
cup product with the class of the rank 2 instanton bundle nh associated with the pseudo-
real hopf bration s7  s4 [25], i.e. the holomorphic vector bundle of rank 2 over cp 3.
thus the relationship between a bps p-brane and a bps p + 4-brane is a 5-brane soliton
which may be identied with an su(2) yang-mills instanton eld. this descent relation

was noted in [11] in the case of a type-i d-string in the worldvolume of a 5-5 brane pair.

5note that for the orientifold models, the equivariance condition (3.10) on the tachyon eld and a
similar one on the worldvolume gauge elds implies that the topological defects arising from the hopf
brations are always equivariant versions of these solitons.

28

the worldvolume gauge symmetry is su(2)  su(2) and the tachyon eld transforms
in its 2  2 representation. the -projection identies the vacuum manifold of the 5-
brane conguration as su(2) = sp(1), and the nite energy static string solution in the
corresponding 5+1 dimensional eld theory has asymptotic boundary s3. by choosing
the asymptotic form of the tachyon eld as in (1.2), the topological stability of the string
is guaranteed by the homotopy group 3(su(2)) = z. arranging the asymptotic form of
the gauge eld on the 5-brane as in (1.2) (and that on the 5-brane to vanish), the string
soliton carries 1 unit of instanton number which is a source of d-string charge in type-i

string theory [31]. these arguments agree precisely with the general homotopy analysis
of the m = 4 case above.

we see that the descent relations in type-ii and type-i superstring theory give natural
realizations of all three higher hopf brations. the elementary hopf bration s1  s1
with discrete ber z2 arises in the construction of a type-i non-bps brane as a codimension
1 kink of a brane-antibrane pair, e.g. the type-i d-particle from a d-string anti-d-string
pair [2, 11]. the double cover of s1 corresponds to the pair of d-strings, and the wind-
ing number of the tachyon eld is labelled by the homotopy group 0(z2) = z2 of the
ber corresponding to the discrete gauge transformation t (1)  t (1). this agrees with
the degenerate situation of describing an 8-brane in terms of a single 9-9 brane pair [3],
whereby the vacuum manifold is o(1) = { t (1)0} and one of the 9-branes carries a z2

wilson line. the cup product with the generator of gko(s1) = z2 then achieves the

mapping of z2-valued ko-theory classes. therefore, the four fundamental hopf bra-
tions are responsible for the complete spectrum of d-brane charges in type-ii and type-i
superstring theory.

these cup products also shed light on the appearence of the rich spectrum of brane
charges in the type-i theories as compared to the type-ii theories. since any real vector

bundle may be regarded as complex, and any complex one as quaternionic, there is a
natural homomorphism between the k-groups of the type-i and type-ii theories,

n

(x)

(3.17)

n

gko

(x)  fk n(x)  gksp

labels type-i 5-brane charge, it must be embedded in the orthogonal structure group as
so(4) = su(2)  su(2) which then doubles the 5-brane charge [2]. thus the natural

as an example of this map, consider the generator of fk(s4) = z, which is the pseudo-real
instanton bundle described above. to realize it as a generator of gko(s4) = z, which
map between the integer-valued k-groups fk(s4) and gko(s4) is multiplication by 2,

z  2z. upon forming cosets in the ring structure of the ko-groups (see (3.1)), we see
how extra z2 charged objects arise in the spectrum of the type-i theories (see [20] for the
mathematical details).

29

3.2. duality transformations

we shall now describe the various transformations among the dual theories described
in the previous section. we will rst discuss the duality between the type-i and type-i 
theories. as in subsection 2.2 we may readily compute

1

gko(y  s1) = (cid:18)gko
(y  s1,1) = (cid:16)gko(y )  z(cid:17)  gko
gkr

(y )  z2(cid:19)  gko(y )

1

(y )

1

(3.18)

(3.19)

where we have used (3.7) and the fact that the orientifold group does not act on the

non-compact space y . modulo the usual discrete groups of gauge transformations, the
k-groups (3.18) and (3.19) of the type-i and type-i  theories are the same. the cyclic
subgroup in (3.18) comes from (3.1), while the integer subgroup in (3.19) comes from the

identity [23]

q+1np

(s0)

(3.20)

n

gkr

(sp,q) = gkr

q+1np

(s1,0) = gko

it arises in exactly the same way as in the type-ii case, i.e. from the tachyon eld (3.3)
which is the large gauge transformation of the o(n) gauge bundle over the sphere sl.
the cyclic subgroup of (3.18) comes from the z2 gauge transformation in the degenerate
codimension 1 vacuum manifold, as explained above. thus the duality transformations
between the type-i and i  theories correctly account for the relevant changes of gauge
eld congurations living on the brane worldvolumes, just as in the type-ii theories.6

again at the level of unreduced k-theory, the two k-groups coincide. by iterating
(3.18) and (3.19), we nd that the same is true of the higher dimensional toroidal com-
pactications demonstrating the explicit mod z equivalence of the type-i and type-i 
models, or equivalently of their t -dual type-ii orientifold theories,

ko(y  t m) =

krm(y  t 1,m) =

n)
kon(y )(m

n)
konm(y )(m

mmn=0
mmn=0

(3.21)

(3.22)

the decompositions of k-groups in (3.21,3.22) contain the relevant degeneracies of wrapped
branes around the cycles of t m, which in the case of (3.22) identies the distribution
of brane charges over the 2m orientifold planes. as in subsection 2.2, each subgroup
n) is generated by a descendent tachyon eld as one cycles through the pe-
konm(y )(m
riodicity maps in (3.2). upon writing the isomorphism between (3.21) and (3.22) in terms

of reduced k-groups, we obtain winding numbers of the tachyon elds corresponding to
large gauge transformations around the various cycles. in the type-ii cases, these winding

6for an alternative construction of the z2 wilson lines, see [8].

30

numbers indicated the precise degeneracy 2m1 associated with the fact that the branes
transformed under the spinor representation of the target space duality group.
in the
present case, we do not know the full duality group of a generic type-ii orientifold, much

less the representation that the brane charges carry. the decompositions into reduced
groups in (3.22) should be a clue as to what the appropriate group theoretic properties
are of the target space dualities in this case. the results are summarized in table 1.

orbifold dualities

as discussed in the previous subsection, all of the type-ii orientifold string theories are
conjectured to be dual to more general conventional orbifold theories (see the second
column of table 1). although we cannot test these relations in general, we can make

a heuristic analysis for the m = 4, 5, 8 cases in table 1. the relevant k-groups for the
type-iia orbifolds on t m/z2 are given by the equivariant cohomology k 1
(y  t 1,m).
z2
these groups can be computed as in subsection 2.3 using the six term exact sequence
(2.25), with the results

k 1
z2
k 1
z2

(y  t 1,4) = (cid:16)k 1(y )16  r[z2](cid:17)  k 1(y )
(y  t 1,8) = (cid:16)k 1(y )256  r[z2](cid:17)  k 1(y )

(3.23)

(3.24)

for the type-iib orbifold on s1 t 4/z2, we use in addition the decompositions (2.17,2.18)
to get

fkz2(y  s1  t 1,4) = (cid:16)fk(y )16  k 1(y )16  z15(cid:17)  r[z2]

 k 1(y )  fk(y )

(3.25)

let us compare the m = 4 line of table 1 with the complex k-group (3.23) which

represents the spectrum of d-brane charges in the orbifold limit of the iia compacti-
cation on k3. both decompositions contain the multiplicities of brane charges localized
on the 16 xed point 5-planes of the given involution. the orientifold k-groups (3.22)
contain in addition the tachyon eld winding numbers around cycles of t 4 as well as the
appropriate windings around the various vacuum manifolds as dictated by the general

homotopy analysis of subsection 3.1. on the other hand, the orbifold k-group (3.23)
contains the mirror image brane charges on the orbifold planes along with the contribu-
tion from the unwrapped iia brane congurations (represented by the second k 1(y )
direct summand). the natural map (3.17) between real and complex k-groups shows

how the iia orbifold charges correspond to precisely the orientifold charges from a given
tachyon conguration, along with the appropriate multiplicity of 2 as discussed at the end
of the previous subsection. the remnant large gauge symmetry of the orientifold charges

31

m

dual theory

type-i
type-i 

f -theory on k3

m-theory on k3

vacuum manifold gkr

o(n)
o(2n )

o(n )o(n )

u (2n )
o(2n )

sp(2n )
u (2n )

0

1

2

3

4

5

(y )3
3

(y )4
3

(y )

(y )4

3

5

(y )10
(y )

(y )  z  (z2)10

1

1

(y )  z
(y )2

(y )  z  (z2)2

m

(y  t 1,m)

(y )5

1

1

2

2

4

2

4

1

2

 z  (z2)6

 z6  (z2)15
1

gko(x)
gko(y )  gko
gko(y )  gko
 gko
gko(y )  gko
 gko
gko(y )  gko
 gko
 gko
gko(y )  gko
 gko
 gko
gko(y )  gko
 gko
 gko
 gko
gko(y )  gko
 gko
 gko
 gko
gko(y )  gko
 gko
 gko
 gko
 gko

(y )3  gko
(y )6  gko
(y )10  gko
(y )5  gko
(y )15  gko
(y )15  gko
(y )21  gko
(y )35  gko
(y )7  gko
(y )28  gko
(y )70  gko
(y )28  gko

 z36  (z2)28
1

6

8

2

4

6

2

4

2

4

6

1

(y )7

(y )6

3

(y )20
(y )6
(y )  z16  (z2)21

5

3

5

(y )35
(y )21

7

(y )

(y )8

3

5

(y )56
(y )56
(y )8
(y )  z71  (z2)36

7

iia on k3

sp(2n)

iib on k3  s1

sp(4n )

sp(2n )sp(2n )

6

f -theory on t 8/z2

u (8n )
sp(4n )

7 m-theory on t 8/z2

o(16n )
u (8n )

8

iia on t 8/z2

o(16n)

table 1: type-ii orientifolds on spacetimes x = y  t 1,m. the general dual orbifold
model in each case is listed along with the corresponding vacuum manifold for tachyon
condensation in the worldvolume of 2[ m
2 ]+1n spacetime lling 9-branes. the last column
represents the distribution of brane charges over the various orientifold planes and their
relevant multiplicities according to some representation of the target space duality group
of the orientifold theory.

32

are then represented by unwrapped orbifold charges. this provides a new relationship

between the given type-ii orientifold theory and its dual. of course, this heuristic com-
parison only holds at the level of the orbifold limit of the k3 moduli space of the iia

orbifold theory. a more precise analysis of this duality should make a comparison with
the full k3 compactication.

the group (3.23) can be seen to account for the usual bps branes of the iia orbifold
theory [12, 13]. this spectrum contains fractional d-particles of unit charge with respect

to the twisted u(1) rr gauge elds at the orbifold planes, with the correct multiplicity
of 4 arising from the possible bulk and twisted charges of the states at each plane giving
a total of 64 such states. the spectrum also contains wrapped d2-branes around non-

vanishing supersymmetric cycles, and d4-branes which wrap around the entire compact
space. however, it is less clear how to identify the spectrum of stable non-bps cong-
urations directly from the decomposition (3.23). for instance, the iia theory on t 4/z2
should contain a z2-charged non-bps 4-brane which comes from the d-particle in the
dual type-i string theory. the spectrum of z2-charges in general can only be identied
under the natural homomorphism between (3.23) and table 1, so that we can take the

latter groups to represent the full brane spectrum of the orbifold theory. the problem
can be traced back to the fact that the duality map in the present case involves an inter-
mediate s-duality transformation [13], whose description in the k-theoretic formalism is

at present not known [2, 5]. other non-bps states in the spectrum of the present model
include d-particles stuck at the xed point planes, and d-strings stretched between pairs

of orbifold xed points with the same magnitude of charge as those of the fractional bps
d-particles [13].

a similar comparison holds between the last line of table 1 and the complex k-group
(3.24) which represents the type-iia orbifold compactication on t 8/z2. the duality
between the m = 5 line of table 1 and (3.25), which represents the orbifold limit of the
iib compactication on k3  s1, is more involved because the latter group contains extra
unwrapped and wrapped brane charges. the 32 o4 planes of the iib orientifold have
brane charges distributed according to table 1. on the other hand, the brane charges

localized at the 16 xed point 5-planes of the iib orbifold (along with the mirror images)
split evenly into two sets of type-ii charges corresponding to wrapped and unwrapped
congurations around the extra s1. now the mapping between the two k-groups accord-
ing to (3.17) matches the symmetrical splitting of the ko-group decomposition for m = 5,
and one may take the k-groups of table 1 to represent the non-bps congurations of these

dual models. it would be interesting to test this matching by explicit string theoretical
constructions.

33

3.3. (1)fl transformations

the generalization of the action of the klein operator (1)fl on the type-i theories
and on the type-iib orientifolds can be deduced from their relationships with the type-
ii theories. let us start from the type-i theory, regarded as the quotient of type-iib
superstring theory by worldsheet parity . regarding the type-iia theory as the quotient
of iib by (1)fl, the type-i  theory may then be obtained as the quotient of iib by the
involution   (1)fl  i1. the grothendieck group kr(x) of virtual complex vector
bundles with such an involution is a generalization of the hopkins k-groups to the category
of real vector bundles over x [2, 5]. thus the action on k-theory by the (1)fl projection
on the type-i theory should induce a map

gko(x)  gkr(x)

(3.26)

the problem we encounter at this stage is a mathematical one. the theory of hopkins
groups k(x) has not been investigated much in the literature, much less its real gen-
eralization. in particular, a product formula such as that given by the right-hand side of
(2.24) is not known in this case. in [5] it was suggested that an analog of the hopkins

formula could be

kr(x) = krz2(x  r1,1)

(3.27)

where the cyclic group acts as the product of the action of i1 on x and an orientation
reversing symmetry of the real space r1,1.

this relationship exemplies the fact that duality transformations and orbifold op-
erations do not always commute [38], in this case within the various interrelationships

between the type-i and type-ii theories. instead of the mapping (3.26), there is a more
natural candidate which comes about in analogy with the t -duality transformations of
the type-i theories. one could consider the action of (1)fl directly on the type-i  theory,
thereby obtaining the map (2.24) into real virtual bundles. the relevant k-group for the
operation of modding out the type-i  theory m times by (1)fl is then

m

z2 (x  r0,m) =(cid:18)gkr

gkr

m

(x)  r[z2](cid:19)  gkr(x)

(3.28)

with a trivial z2 action on the spacetime x. the decomposition (3.28) follows using the
methods of subsection 2.3 applied to the kr-groups and the suspension isomorphism [20]

krn(x  rp,q) = krqpn(x)

(3.29)

for real k-theory. the projection onto the rst direct summand in (3.28), representing
the states which survive the (1)fl projections, can be carried out explicitly on the in-

variant brane-antibrane congurations as in subsection 2.3. the other summand gkr(x)

34

then always represents the orientifold states projected out by the (1)fl involution. the
subsequent (1)fl projections now take us through the entire sequence of type-ii orien-
tifolds described in subsection 3.1. it would be interesting to test the mappings described

here directly using explicit string theoretical constructions (for example, a boundary state
calculation along the lines of [14]).

3.4. summary

again we may succinctly summarize the descent relations among type-i branes and
those of type-ii orientifolds by a diagram representing the various mappings on k-groups:

ko(x)

 ko1(x)



  



(1)fl 

ko(y s1)

=kr1(y s1,1)

kr1
z2

(x  r0,1)

1 kr1(x)

(1)fl 

ko(y t 2)
=kr2(y t 1,2)

kr2
z2

(x  r0,2)

1

kr2(x)

ko8(x)

k

ko(x)

(1)fl 

...

(1)fl 

ko(y t 3)

=kr3(y t 1,3)

!

. . .
ko(y t 8)
=kr(y t 1,8)

kr8
z2

(x  r0,8)

1

kr(x)

(3.30)

again  is the bott periodicity isomorphism representing tachyon condensation in codi-
mension 1, except that now in general it leads to a stable brane conguration (non-trivial
k-theory class). in particular,  realizes a type-i non-bps p  1-brane as a kink in the
worldvolume of a p-p pair. the map 4 acts on ko-groups according to

4 ko(x) = ksp(x)

(3.31)

and it realizes a bps p  4-brane as an su(2) yang-mills instanton in the worldvolume of
four p-p pairs. the map 8 realizes a p8-brane as a spin(8) instanton in the worldvolume
of 16 p-p pairs. the projections 1 are as before. note that the statements about kr-
groups above can be translated into ones about ko-groups upon taking the kr-involution

35

to act trivially on the spacetime x.

4. orientifold symmetries

one subtlety in our description of type-ii orientifolds in the previous section is that
the homotopy classication of kr-theory requires a slightly rened denition. this is in

turn related to a more general periodicity property of real k-theory. in this nal section
we will describe these general symmetries of the orientifold models in some detail, thereby

exposing the rich internal symmetries predicted by the k-theory formalism.

4.1. periodicity in real k-theory

the denition of the higher kr-groups that we have used thus far has been done with
respect to suspensions whereby the kr-involution acts trivially on the sphere. there is a
more general class of real k-groups which are dened by the double index suspensions

krp,q(x) = kr(p,qx)

with p,qx = x  rp,q
+

with this denition we have

krn(x) = krn,0(x)

(4.1)

(4.2)

taking the cup product with the class of the complex hopf line bundle nc over cp 1
with its natural real structure (given by the anti-linear complex conjugation involution)

induces the strong bott periodicity isomorphism [23]

krp+1,q+1(x) = krp,q(x)

(4.3)

showing that in fact krp,q(x) = krqp(x). identifying r1,1 as the space c with complex
conjugation, this (1, 1) periodicity may be cast in the form of a suspension isomorphism

kr(x) = kr(x  c)

(4.4)

thus the k-theory of the orientifold models described in the previous section is naturally

contained within this two-index set of kr-groups.

to understand what the periodicity (4.3) means physically in terms of brane charges,

we appeal to the abs construction for real k-theory. for this, we dene a two-parameter
set of cliord algebras cn,m of the real space rn,m as the usual algebra associated with
rn+m together with an involution generated by the im involution acting on rn,m. a real
module over cn,m is then a nite-dimensional representation together with a c-antilinear

36

involution which preserves the cliord multiplication. the corresponding representation

ring r[spin(n, m)] is naturally isomorphic to the grothendieck group generated by the
irreducible r-modules n,m of the cliord algebra of the space rn  rm with quadratic
form of lorentzian signature (n, m). the abs map is now the graded ring isomorphism
[20, 23]

kr(rn,m) = rhspin(n, m)i / rhspin(n + 1, m)i = konm(s0)

(4.5)

this isomorphism relates the groups on the left-hand side of (4.5) to the cliord algebras
cn,m, so that the (1, 1) periodicity (4.3) is reected in the (1, 1) periodicity of the cliord
algebras, cn+1,m+1 = cn,m  r(2) [20].

let us now consider a p-brane of codimension l = n+m in a type-ii orientifold by im.
the p-brane charge is induced by the tachyon eld which is given by cliord multiplication

on the transverse space rn,m, i.e. t (x) =pi i xi where i are the generators of the spinor
module n,m, and which generates gkr(rn,m). under the abs isomorphism above, this
kr-theory class is multiplied, via the cup product, by the hopf generator of gkr(cp 1) =

z, or equivalently by the spin bundles which carry the spinor representation 1,1. this
gives a class with tachyon eld that generates the kr-group of the new transverse space
rn+1,m+1. this class represents a p  2-brane of the type-ii orientifold by   im+1.
from this mathematical fact we may deduce a new descent relation for type-ii orientifold
theories. a p  2-brane localized at an o(8  m)-plane in a type-ii   im+1 orientifold
may be constructed as the tachyonic soliton of a bound state of a p-p pair located on
top of an o(9  m)-plane in a type-ii   im orientifold. this realizes the branes of
a type-ii orientifold as equivariant magnetic monopoles in the worldvolumes of brane-

antibrane pairs of an orientifold with xed point planes of one higher dimension. the
former orientifold has 2m+1 o(8  m)-planes each carrying rr-charge 23m, while the
latter one has 2m o(9m)-planes of charge 24m. in a sense, in this process of tachyon
condensation the number of xed point planes is doubled while their charges are lowered
by a factor of 2 by a combined operation of charge transfer and dimensional reduction

through the orientifold planes. an example is the non-bps state consisting of a d5-brane
on top of an orientifold 5-plane in the type-iib theory [10], which may be constructed

via a tachyon condensate from a pair of d7-d7 branes on an orientifold 6-plane in the
type-iia theory. the 8 o6-planes each carrying charge 2 are transfered to the 16
o5-planes of charge 1.

this new sort of internal symmetry among the type-ii orientifolds may be thought

of as a type of t -duality symmetry acting on the rr-charges of the orientifold planes,
in analogy with the transformations described in subsection 3.1. by repeated iteration

as before, we obtain an entire hierarchy of novel bound state constructions of d-branes
in various higher dimensions. to describe the eld content, however, we must be careful

37

about identifying the appropriate homotopy of the relevant vacuum manifolds. the clas-

sifying spaces for real vector bundles are described in [39]. consider an orientifold of the
type-iib theory, and a set of brane-antibrane pairs with worldvolume gauge symmetry
u(n)u(n). the u(n) gauge group is endowed with its complex conjugation involution
whose xed point set is the real subgroup o(n). the tachyon eld t is equivariant with
respect to the orientifold group, so that

t (x, y) = t (x, y)

(4.6)

where (x, y)  rn  rm. it breaks the worldvolume gauge symmetry down to u(n)diag.
the relevant homotopy group generated by (4.6) comes from decomposing the one-point
compactication of rn,m into upper and lower hemispheres as described in subsection 2.2,
such that the tachyon eld is the transition function on the overlap. the d-brane charges
thereby reside in the kr-group of the transverse space which is given by

gkr(rn,m) = n,m(cid:16)u(n)(cid:17)r

(4.7)

where the equivariant homotopy group is dened by the maps sn,m  u(n) which obey
the real equivariance condition (4.6). the rened weak bott periodicity theorem for

stable equivariant homotopy in kr-theory then reads

n,m(cid:16)u(n)(cid:17)r

= n+1,m+1(cid:16)u(2n)(cid:17)r

(4.8)

in a similar way one may relate the real k-groups gkr

ble equivariant homotopy of the complex grassmanian manifold u(2n)/[u(n)  u(n)].
in this way we arrive at the real version of the homotopy sequence (2.2). the rst iso-
morphism from a type-iib orientifold to a type-iia orientifold preserves the structure
of the orientifold planes, while the second step of the sequence decreases the xed point

1

(rn,m) = gkr(rn+1,m) to the sta-

plane dimension by 1.

this gives a novel generalization of the t -duality and descent relations between iia
and iib orientifolds, which would be very interesting to reproduce using string theoretic
arguments, as in [10]. note that the relevance of the dirac monopole in the orientifolds

is not surprising, given its prominent role in the type-ii theories of section 2. having
identied these orientifold symmetries, we may now restrict our attention to d-brane

charges living in the groups (4.2), and hence proceed to the real bott periodicity relations,
as in subsection 3.1. the sequence of homotopy groups in (3.2) now arises from the fact

[39] that if the kr-involution acts freely, then the classifying space for stable equivariant
homotopy reduces to the coset space u(2n)/o(2n). the rest of the isomorphisms now

follow as before. note that the gauge elds living on the brane worldvolumes in these cases
must also satisfy an equivariance condition like (4.6). a similar analysis can be done for

38

the (1, 1) peridicity of kh-theory [32] which gives internal relations among branes localized
on o(9  m)+-planes.

4.2. internal symmetries

the real k-groups are in a certain sense universal as they contain all of the other
generalized cohomology theories. this feature follows from the many further internal

symmetries present in kr-theory. in particular, there are the natural periodicity isomor-
phisms [23]

kr(x  s0,m) = kr2m(x  s0,m)

(4.9)

for m = 1, 2, 4. the periodicity of kr-theory with coecients in s0,m follows by using
the multiplication in the elds r, c, h, respectively, and (1, 1) periodicity. note that for

m = 1 we have the isomorphism (3.8), so that (4.9) then reduces to the complex bott
periodicity theorem (2.13), while the m = 4 case leads immediately to the real periodicity

theorem (3.14). in fact, there is the usual decomposition [23]

krn(x  s0,m) = krn(x)  krn+m+1(x)

m  3

(4.10)

the case m = 2 is special and the corresponding kr-groups are isomorphic to the
grothendieck groups generated by the category of self-conjugate vector bundles over x

[23]. this self-conjugate k-theory has bott periodicity 4, which from (3.15) we see is as-
sociated with symplectic chan-paton gauge bundles. this fact has been exploited in [8]

to relate this type of k-theory to certain orientifold compactications of type-ii theories
without vector structure [40], i.e. those with the same number of both o(9  m) and
o(9  m)+ planes of cancelling charge that require no d-branes in the vacuum congu-
ration, and hence have no gauge group. the t -duality transformations in these theories

is also explained in [8]. these transformations, as well as the brane descent relations in
these models, are now natural consequences of the periodicity and homotopy properties of
the kr-groups explained in the previous subsection. it would be interesting to construct

these transformations more explicitly, thus verifying the results of [8]. it would also be
interesting to see if the various duality properties of orientifold compactications without

vector structure [40], which dier somewhat from those described in section 3, can be
deduced from the internal symmetries described in this section.

thus the internal symmetries of kr-theory encompass most of the brane descent
relations which are based on periodicity theorems, and they further emphasize the role

played by hopf ber bundles in the topological classication of d-branes. in addition, the
further symmetry relations in orbifold models may be thought of as originating within

the equivariant structure of kr-theory, and from the usual bott periodicities of the given

39

equivariant k-groups, with solitonic congurations provided by equivariant versions of the

four canonical solitons coming from the hopf brations. it would also be interesting to
study more closely the internal symmetries of type-ii orientifolds arising from quotients
by the operator (1)fl  im, which induce the hopkins k-groups k(x). for instance, as
discussed in [5], the products with the thom spaces of c and c/z2 induce, respectively,
the periodicity isomorphisms which identify the hopkins k-groups of rn,m with rn+2,m,
and of rn,m with rn,m+2. the rst periodicity builds a p  2-brane from a p-p brane pair
through the usual monopole and leaves the orientifold plane structure unchanged, while
the second one realizes a p  2-brane inside a p-p pair through a z2-equivariant monopole
and lowers the dimension of the orientifold planes by 2. this phenomenon is similar to
that described above for the   im orientifolds, and the monopole symmetries can be seen
to naturally arise from the denition of the hopkins k-functor as the usual equivariant

k-functor (see the right-hand side of (2.24)). again it would be most interesting to carry
out these constructions from a more physical standpoint.

acknowledgements: we thank p. di vecchia, f. lizzi, j. mller, r. nest, n. obers,

s. schwede, g. semeno and g. sparano for helpful discussions.

40

references

[1] r. minasian and g. moore, j. high energy phys. 9711 (1997) 002.

[2] e. witten, j. high energy phys. 9812 (1998) 019.

[3] p. horava, type-iia d-branes, k-theory and matrix theory, hep-th/9812135, to ap-

pear in adv. theor. math. phys.

[4] h. garca-compean, d-branes in orbifold singularities and equivariant k-theory,

hep-th/9812226.

[5] s. gukov, k-theory, reality and orientifolds, hep-th/9901042.

[6] k. hori, d-branes, t-duality and index theory, hep-th/9902102.

[7] e. sharpe, d-branes, derived categories and grothendieck groups, hep-th/9902116.

[8] o. bergman, e.g. gimon and p. horava, j. high energy phys. 9904 (1999) 010.

[9] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724.

[10] a. sen, j. high energy phys. 9806 (1998) 007; 9808 (1998) 010, 012; 9810 (1998)

021;
o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, phys. lett. b441 (1998) 133;
m. frau, l. gallot, a. lerda and p. strigazzi, stable non-bps d-branes in type-i
string theory, hep-th/9903123.

[11] a. sen, j. high energy phys. 9809 (1998) 023.

[12] a. sen, j. high energy phys. 9812 (1998) 021;

a. lerda, lectures at the school quantum aspects of gauge theories, supersymme-
try and unication, leuven, belgium, january 1823 1999.

[13] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, j. high energy phys. 9903 (1999) 013.

[14] k. dasgupta and j. park, brane mapping under (1)fl, hep-th/9903125.

[15] g.w. semeno and k. zarembo, solitons on branes, hep-th/9903140.

[16] r. bott, ann. math. 70 (1959) 313.

[17] m. karoubi, k-theory (springer-verlag, 1978).

[18] b.a. dubrovin, a.t. fomenko and s.p. novikov, modern geometry (springer-verlag,

1990).

[19] m.f. atiyah, r. bott and a. shapiro, topology 3 (1964) 3.

[20] h.b. lawson and m.-l. michelsohn, spin geometry (princeton university press,

1989).

[21] d. husemoller, fibre bundles (springer-verlag, 1994).

[22] t. banks, w. fischler and l. motl, j. high energy phys. 9901 (1999) 019;

l. motl and t. banks, on the hyperbolic structure of moduli spaces with 16 susys,
hep-th/9904008.

[23] m.f. atiyah, quart. j. math. oxford 17 (1966) 367.

41

[24] m.f. atiyah, k-theory (benjamin, 1967).

[25] a. trautman, int. j. theor. phys. 16 (1977) 561;

j. nowakowski and a. trautman, j. math. phys. 19 (1978) 1100.

[26] g.b. segal, publ. math. ihes (paris) 34 (1968) 113; 129.

[27] e.g. gimon and j. polchinski, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 1667.

[28] m.r. douglas and g. moore, d-branes, quivers and ale instantons, hep-

th/9603167.

[29] c. vafa, nucl. phys. b469 (1996) 403;
a. sen, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 562;
k. dasgupta, d. jatkar and s. mukhi, nucl. phys. b523 (1998) 465.

[30] n. seiberg, phys. lett. b384 (1996) 81;

n. seiberg and e. witten, in: the mathematical beauty of physics, eds. j.-m. droue
and j.-b. zuber (world scientic, 1997) p. 333.

[31] e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 541;

m.r. douglas, branes within branes, hep-th/9512077.

[32] j.l. dupont, math. scand. 24 (1969) 27.

[33] m. bershadsky, v. sadov and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 399.

[34] e. witten, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 383;

k. dasgupta and s. mukhi, nucl. phys. b465 (1996) 399.

[35] p. yi, membranes from five-branes and fundamental strings from dp-branes, hep-

th/9901159.

[36] h. awata, s. hirano and y. hyakutake, tachyon condensation and graviton pro-

duction in matrix theory, hep-th/9902158;
n. kim, s.-j. rey and j.-t. yee, j. high energy phys. 9904 (1999) 003.

[37] b. grossman, t.w. kephart and j.d. stashe, comm. math. phys. 96 (1984) 431;

100 (1985) 311; phys. lett. b220 (1989) 431;
g. landi, lett. math. phys. 11 (1986) 171;
p. budinich and a. trautman, lett. math. phys. 11 (1986) 315;
l. dabrowski and a. trautman, j. math. phys. 27 (1986) 2022.

[38] a. sen, nucl. phys. b474 (1996) 361.

[39] a.l. edelson, trans. amer. math. soc. 157 (1971) 179.

[40] e. witten, j. high energy phys. 9802 (1998) 006.

42

