mit-ctp-2847
pupt-1844
iassns-hep-99/35
hep-th/9904050

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
7

 

 
 

1
v
0
5
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

n = 1 theories, t-duality, and ads/cft correspondence

martin gremm

joseph henry laboratories, princeton university, princeton, nj 08544

anton kapustin

school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study

olden lane, princeton, nj 08540

abstract

we construct an n = 1 superconformal eld theory using branes of
type iia string theory. the iia construction is related via t-duality
to a iib conguration with 3-branes in a background generated by two
intersecting o7-planes and 7-branes. the iib background can be viewed
as a local piece of an f-theory compactication previously studied by
sen in connection with the gimon-polchinski orientifold. we discuss
the deformations of the iia and iib constructions and describe a new
supersymmetric conguration with curving d6-branes. starting from the
iib description we nd the supergravity dual of the large n eld theory
and discuss the matching of operators and kk states. the matching
of non-chiral primaries exhibits some interesting new features. we also
discuss a relevant deformation of the eld theory under which it ows to
a line of strongly coupled n = 1 xed points in the infrared. for these
xed points we nd a partial supergravity description.

email: gremm@feynman.princeton.edu

on leave of absence from mit, cambridge, ma 02139

email: kapustin@ias.edu

1

i. introduction

brane constructions in string theory provide powerful tools for analyzing eld theories

in diverse dimensions and with varying amounts of supersymmetry [1,2]. for a review

and references see [3]. more recently the maldacena conjecture [46] added a new relation

between the large n limit of conformal eld theories on branes and the near horizon geometry

of the corresponding black brane solutions. the original conjecture was stated for n = 4
sym realized on n 3-branes, but subsequently more general examples were discovered. one

class of such examples are orbifolds of the n = 4 conguration [7,8] and another includes
theories on 3-branes in nontrivial f-theory backgrounds [911]. all of these constructions

give rise to conformal theories with varying amounts of supersymmetry. a third class of

theories arises on 3-branes at a conifold singularity [1216]. these n = 1 theories are not
conformal at all scales, but ow to a line of conformal xed points in the infrared. for all

these theories the correspondence between the large n eld theory and supergravity was

studied in some detail. for branes on a conifold it turned out to be useful to have a type

iia description which is related to the iib conguration via t-duality [13].

in this paper we study a superconformal n = 1 sp(n)sp(n) gauge theory with matter
in the fundamental, bifundamental, and antisymmetric representations. we also discuss a

specic deformation which preserves n = 1 susy but breaks conformal invariance. the
resulting theory has a running gauge coupling and ows to a line of superconformal xed

points in the infrared. for both of these theories we give a iia brane construction as well as

a iib orientifold construction. the latter description allows us to obtain the supergravity

solution that is dual to the large n limit of the conformal eld theory. the type iia

description, on the other hand, provides a simple way to determine the gauge group, the

matter content, and the superpotential of the theories in question.

in most n = 1 theories discussed in the ads/cft literature (see e.g. [7,12]) the r-
current which is the superpartner of the stress-energy tensor can be xed uniquely by eld

theory considerations. for the theories we discuss here this is not the case. there is a one

2

parameter family of candidate r-currents, both in the theory with vanishing beta function,

and in its deformation which ows to a line of xed points. since the r-charges of the elds

are not uniquely determined, there is no eld theory prediction for the dimensions of the

chiral primary operators. on the other hand, once we have a supergravity dual of the large

n eld theory, we know which gauge boson on ads is the superpartner of the graviton. if

we are able to match eld theory operators with supergravity states, we can determine the

r-charges of all elds and therefore the dimensions of all chiral primary operators.

although there is no rm eld-theoretical prediction for the dimensions of elds in the

infrared, for the theory with vanishing beta function the most natural assumption is that all

elds have canonical dimensions, i.e., that the theory is nite. this will be born out by the

supergravity analysis. in the other case, the theory with a running coupling constant, the

correct charge assignment in the infrared is harder to guess. unfortunately the supergravity

analysis in this case is on a considerably less solid footing and depends on circumstantial

evidence. nonetheless our analysis suggests a denite r-charge assignment.

it would be

interesting to nd a eld theory explanation for it.

the type iia construction involves d4-branes compactied on a circle as well as ns5-

branes, d6-branes, and o6-planes. the gauge theory lives on the d4-branes. our con-

struction is very similar to the brane congurations that give rise to elliptic n = 2 models
[2,17,18,11]. one advantage of the iia description is that the moduli space of the gauge

theory is realized geometrically. the at directions correspond to motions of the 4-branes.

similarly, relevant perturbations of the eld theory, such as masses for the matter elds, are

also realized geometrically as motions of the 6-branes. this allows us to identify a 6-brane

conguration that gives rise to a superconformal n = 1 theory on the 4-branes with an
exactly marginal parameter. we can also identify relevant perturbations of the supercon-

formal 4-brane theory that lead to theories with running coupling constants. there is one

particular perturbation that gives rise to a theory that ows to a line of conformal xed

points in the infrared. the moduli space of the perturbed theory has a coulomb branch. a

generic n = 1 theory with a coulomb branch has a low energy eective gauge coupling that

3

varies over the moduli space. the theory we are considering in this paper has the special

feature that the low-energy eective gauge coupling does not depend on the moduli. this

will be relevant when we discuss the supergravity description of these theories.

in order to construct the supergravity duals we t-dualize the iia conguration along the

compact direction. this operation turns the d6-branes and the o6-planes into d7-branes

and o7-planes. the d4-branes turn into d3-branes probing this background. similar probe

theories were studied in [1922], and their relation to supergravity is described in [911].

our iia conguration turns out to be t-dual to 3-branes probing a local piece of an f-theory

compactication [23,24] which is related to the gimon-polchinski model [25]. the simplest

such conguration, consisting of two intersecting o7-planes with four coincident 7-branes on

top of each, corresponds to the iia construction of the superconformal 4-brane theory. in

the type iib construction the ramond-ramond (rr) charges of the 7-branes are cancelled

locally by the charges of the orientifold planes, so the string coupling is constant. since

the type iib description is a perturbative orientifold, we can nd the supergravity dual of

the large n limit of the eld theory along the lines of [9,10]. matching the spectrum of

primary operators with the kk modes allows us to determine the u(1)r charges of all elds

in the conformal theory unambiguously. the matching of non-chiral primaries exhibits a new

interesting feature: we nd a short supergravity multiplet whose eld theory counterpart

becomes short only when n  . we interpret this as the evidence that at higher orders
in 1/n supersymmetry mixes one-particle and two-particle supergravity states.

it should also be possible to nd a supergravity description of the infrared limit of

the deformed theory. although this theory is not conformal, it has a constant low-energy

eective coupling along the coulomb branch, so the supergravity dual will have a constant

dilaton. to nd this dual we need to study the deformations of the backgrounds in iia and

iib and nd an explicit map between them. as mentioned before, this is straightforward

on the iia side, since the deformations correspond to motions of the 6-branes. on the iib

side the situation is more involved. we can analyze the deformations on the iib side by

studying the theory on the 7-branes. the eight-dimensional theory on the 7-branes has

4

six-dimensional matter localized at the intersection of orthogonal 7-branes. we analyze the

moduli space of this impurity theory following [26], and nd an explicit map between the

type iib and type iia deformations. among supersymmetric type iib deformations there

is one that maps to a new iia brane conguration which involves curving d6-branes in the

background of an ns5-brane. the map between deformations also allows us to identify the

iib conguration that gives rise to the non-conformal probe theory with moduli-independent

eective coupling. we do not have a complete supergravity description of this theory, but

a partial description is possible. it supplies enough information to determine the dimension

of all chiral operators in the infrared if we use eld theory considerations as well.

in section ii we discuss the type iia construction of the probe theory and list some eld

theory results that we need in subsequent sections. section iii contains the t-duality, the

analysis of the 7-brane impurity theory, and the map between iia and iib deformations. we

also briey discuss the exotic iia deformation that appears as the counterpart of an ordinary

deformation in iib. in section iv we analyze the large n limit of our eld theories and their

supergravity duals. we discuss the matching of operators with kaluza-klein modes in the

conformal case and present a partial analysis in the non-conformal case.

ii. the iia construction of the field theory

a. the iia brane conguration

a conguration consisting of d4-branes extending in 01236, d6-branes and o6-planes

extending in 0123789, and ns5-branes extending in 012389 preserves four supercharges. we

obtain an n = 1 supersymmetric eld theory in four dimensions after compactifying x6 on
a circle with circumference 2r6. specically we consider congurations with n d4-branes

wrapping the compact x6 direction. we put two o6-planes at x6 = 0, r6 and an ns5-

brane and its image at x6 = r6/2, 3r6/2. in order to cancel the total rr charge, we

place four physical d6-branes on the circle. an example of such a conguration is shown in

5

7

6

fig. 1. brane conguration: the vertical dashed lines are the o6-planes, the solid lines are
the d6-branes, the horizontal line are the d4-branes, and the point represents the ns5-brane. only
half of the x6 circle is shown.

fig. 1.

these brane congurations are very similar to the congurations that give rise to nite

n = 2 theories in four dimensions [17,18,11]. in fact, the conguration we study here can
be obtained from one of the n = 2 congurations in [17] by rotating the ns5-branes from
the 45 directions into the 89 directions. this breaks half of the supersymmetries, giving an

n = 1 theory in d = 4.

using standard techniques [3], we can determine the matter content and the superpo-

tential of the eld theory on the 4-branes. unlike the n = 2 case, the x6 position of the
d6-branes will play an important role in our analysis. we need to distinguish two cases that

are of interest for the analysis in this paper. either all 6-branes intersect the ns5-brane,

or the four 6-branes are split into two groups of two to the left and right of the ns5-brane

(as shown in fig. 1). these two choices give rise to physically inequivalent theories. the

former conguration yields a line of xed points (parametrized by the dilaton expectation

value) that passes through zero coupling, while the latter corresponds to a non-conformal

gauge theory which ows to a line of strongly coupled xed points.

6

b. the conformal case: a eld theory analysis

the theory on the 4-branes turns out to be an sp(2n)1  sp(2n)2 gauge theory with
matter elds ai, i = 1, 2 in the antisymmetric representation of each of the gauge groups,
two bifundamentals q, q, and fundamentals from the 4-6 strings. the brane conguration,
and consequently the eld theory, admit a symmetry which exchanges the two sp factors. to

determine the number and avor representations of the fundamentals we need to understand

the classical gauge theory on the 6-branes. note that the worldvolume of the ns5-brane lies

within the worldvolume of the d6-branes. it was argued in [27] that the 6-branes can break

on the ns5-brane (see also [28]). the gauge group on the four 6-branes turns out to be

u(4)u  u(4)d, where the two u(4) factors act on the upper and lower halfs of the 6-branes
respectively. one-loop eects break the u(4)u  u(4)d symmetry to su(4)u  su(4)d [29].
the matter content of the 6-brane theory includes a bifundamental hypermultiplet from

strings connecting upper and lower halfs of the 6-branes. we will have more to say about

the 6-brane theory when we discuss the deformations of this background. for our present

purposes we only need to know that the gauge group of the 6-brane theory is the avor

group of the probe theory.

the matter content and the superpotential for a 4-brane probe in this background

were worked out in [27]. the fundamentals transform as q = ( , 1, 4, 1), q = ( , 1, 1, 4),
, 1, 4) under sp(2n)1  sp(2n)2  su(4)u  su(4)d. the

, 4, 1), and p = (1,

p = (1,

superpotential reads

w = h1 qa1j1q  h1qa2j2 q + h2qqp + h2 p qq.

(2.1)

here j1 (j2) is the invariant antisymmetric tensor of sp(2n)1 (sp(2n)2). following [30] it is

easy to check that this theory has a line of xed points passing through weak coupling. the

one-loop beta function vanishes and the symmetry between the gauge factors implies that

both antisymmetric tensors have the same anomalous dimension a, both bifundamentals

have q and all fundamentals have q. therefore the beta functions of the gauge coupling

and the yukawa couplings in the superpotential are

7

g  2(n  1)a + 4nq + 8q
h1  2q + a
h2  q + 2q.

(2.2)

setting all beta functions to zero gives two independent constraints on the three coupling

constants. the remaining coupling constant parametrizes a line of superconformal xed

points. since setting all anomalous dimensions to zero satises the constraints, this line

passes through the free point g = h1 = h2 = 0. note that requiring the beta functions to

vanish does not x anomalous dimensions unambiguously. the most natural assumption is

that the dimensions of the elds are unchanged as one moves along the xed line. this would

mean that the theory is nite. the supergravity computation in the last section supports

this conjecture by showing that this is true in the large n limit.

the moduli space of this theory includes subspaces where it ows to theories with more
supersymmetry. for example, giving an expectation value to either q or q proportional to
a unit matrix gives a mass to half of the fundamentals and breaks the gauge group to the

diagonal sp(2n)d. it is a simple matter to show that the resulting theory ows to an n = 2
superconformal theory with gauge group sp(2n), one antisymmetric hypermultiplet, and
four hypermultiplets in the fundamental. giving such expectation values to both q and q
makes all avors massive and breaks the gauge group to su(n). part of the bifundamentals

are eaten by gauge bosons, and the rest give rise to three chiral superelds in the adjoint of

su(n). this theory ows to n = 4 sym in the infrared.

these eld theory results are reproduced in the brane construction if we identify the

positions of the d4-branes with the eld theory moduli in the following way:

x7  qq  q q
x4 + ix5  q q.

(2.3)

(2.4)

giving an expectation value to either of the bifundamentals while keeping the other expecta-

tion value zero corresponds to moving the 4-branes in the positive or negative x7 direction.

8

turning on both bifundamentals corresponds to moving the 4-branes in the x4 and x5 di-

rections as well as x7. the eect of these motions on the 4-brane theory agrees with the

eld theory expectations. if we move the 4-branes o the ns5-branes in the x7 direction, we

can ignore the ns5-brane. the remaining branes preserve eight supercharges, and standard

techniques [3] conrm the matter content and gauge group stated above for the n = 2 case.
moving the 4-branes in x4 and x5 amounts to separating them from all other branes. the

theory on the 4-branes is then n = 4 sym as expected.

c. the non-conformal case

we can deform the background for the 4-brane theory by moving the 6-branes in the

x6 and x4,5 directions. these brane motions are parametrized by expectation values of the
two complex scalars, m, m in the bifundamental hypermultiplet of the (1, 0) theory on the
intersection of the 6-branes and the ns5-branes [27]. more precisely, we relate the positions
of the 6-branes to m, m as follows:

x6  mm  m m
x4 + ix5  m m.

(2.5)

(2.6)

to obtain the conguration shown in fig. 1 we have to set m = diag(m1, m2, 0, 0) and
m = diag(0, 0, m3, m4). these bifundamental expectation values act as mass terms in the
4-brane theory. the corresponding terms in the eld theory superpotential are

w = mq q + mpp.

(2.7)

we will be particularly interested in the case m1 = m2 = m3 = m4.

in this case

the bifundamental expectation values break the su(4)u  su(4)d 6-brane gauge group to
su(2)1su(2)2u(1). after integrating out the massive components of the fundamentals,
the superpotential of the 4-brane theory reads

w = h1 qa1j1q  h1qa2j2 q + h3qq qq + h3 p qqp.

(2.8)

9

the fundamentals now transform as q = ( , 1, 2, 1), q = ( , 1, 2, 1), p = (1,

, 1, 2), and

p = (1,

, 1, 2) under sp(2n)1  sp(2n)2  su(2)1  su(2)2. actually, the superpotential,
eq. (2.8), has an accidental so(4)1so(4)2 global symmetry under which q and q transform
as a (4, 1) while p and p transform as (1, 4).

an analysis along the lines of [30] shows that this theory also has a line of superconformal

xed points. the beta functions are given by

g  4 + 2(n  1)a + 4nq + 4q
h1  2q + a
h3  1 +

q + q.

1
2

(2.9)

demanding that the beta functions vanish, we again nd that two out of the three constraints

are independent, leaving us with a line of xed points. in this case, however, the line does

not pass through weak coupling, since at least one of the anomalous dimensions must be

nonzero. again the vanishing of the beta functions alone does not determine the values of

anomalous dimensions. in the last section we will argue that supergravity considerations

allow us to x this ambiguity for large n and nd a = q = 0, q = 1.

as in the conformal case we can analyze the rg ows both in eld theory and using

the brane picture. from the brane construction it is clear that we ow to the same n = 2
theory as in the conformal case if we move the 4-branes o the ns5-brane in the positive or

negative x7 direction. moving the 4-branes in x4,5 again yields n = 4 sym. the analysis in
the eld theory is a little more involved in this case because the one-loop beta function does

not vanish. this implies that there will be threshold eects in the matching of the running

gauge coupling. on general grounds one would expect the low-energy eective coupling to

depend on the size of the bifundamental expectation values in the eld theory. however, if
we give arbitrary (non zero) expectation values to q and q, elds get integrated out at a
variety of scales. assuming that the expectation value of q is larger than that of q, the
sp(2n)  sp(2n) gauge group is broken to the diagonal group at a scale set by q. the
diagonal sp(2n)d is broken to su(n) at a scale set by q, and nally the fundamentals are

10

integrated out at scale h3q q. matching the gauge couplings at each of these scales we nd
that the low-energy eective coupling does not depend on the bifundamental expectation

values. this is a special feature of this theory that will be important later on.

iii. the type iib description

a. t-duality

in this section we describe the iib conguration which is obtained by t-dualizing the iia

brane conguration of section ii along x6. since /x6 is not a killing vector, performing

this t-duality is not completely trivial. similar t-dualities on iia congurations that pre-

serve n = 2 supersymmetry on the 4-branes have appeared in the literature [11,18]. in the
n = 2 case the t-duality maps the two o6-planes and the four d6-branes to an orientifold
7-plane and four d7-branes. the d4-branes become d3-branes probing this background.

the ns5-brane and its mirror image turn into a z2 orbifold acting on the 7-brane coordi-

nates transverse to the d3-brane. the t-dual of the iia conguration without ns5-branes

was analyzed in [19,22].

our conguration diers from the n = 2 case by the orientation of the ns5-branes.

since this modies the t-duality considerably we discuss it in some detail here.

our rst goal is to t-dualize the ns5-branes and the pair of o6-planes. the other

branes can be added later. we begin by separating the ns5-brane and its image in the x4,5

directions. the t-dual of the two ns5-branes is a two-center taub-nut space. recall that

the two-center taub-nut space can be thought of as a circle bered over r3 so that its

radius vanishes at two points on r3 (the centers). in the present case r3 is parametrized

by x4, x5, x7, while the coordinate along the circle is t-dual to x6. the positions of the

centers correspond to the positions of the ns5-branes in x4, x5, x7. in the iia conguration

the orientifold projection ensures that position of the physical ns5-brane and its image are

related by a reection of the x4,5 coordinates. the t-dual orientifold projection should

11

therefore impose a similar constraint on the location of the centers of the taub-nut. the

taub-nut metric has the following form

+

1
r+

ds2 =   4
b2 +
+  4
b2 +

z

r! d arctan(cid:18) y

x(cid:19)#2

1

+

r!1"d +  z+
r!hdx 2 + dy 2 + dz 2i ,

r+

1

1
r+

+

where

z = z  z0

r2

 = x 2 + y 2 + z 2
.

(3.1)

(3.2)

the r3 base is parametrized by x, y, z, the two centers are located at (0, 0,z0), and  is
the 4-periodic coordinate on the circle ber. the parameter b is the asymptotic radius of

the ber. the reection of x4,5 in the iia picture map into reections of z and one other

coordinate of r3, say y .

we will be interested in the limit when the asymptotic radius of the circle ber, b,

becomes innitely large, while the t-dual circle parametrized by x6 shrinks to zero. in this

limit the two-center taub-nut space becomes an a1 ale space, also known as eguchi-

hanson space. it is useful to change coordinates [31] to transform the metric above into the

eguchi-hanson form:

x =

y =

z =

1
8
1
8
1
8

r4  a4 sin() cos()
r4  a4 sin() sin()

r2 cos()

 = 2,

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

where a2 = 8z0 and  has period 2. the orientifold-induced projection (y, z)  (y,z),
implies the identication (, )  (  ,) for the angular coordinates. the xed locus
of this identication is a two-dimensional submanifold of the eguchi-hanson space which

has the topology of a cylinder. next we want to bring the ns5-brane and its image back

to the origin of the x4,5 plane in the iia description, which corresponds to setting a = 0.

12

for a = 0 the eguchi-hanson metric becomes an orbifold metric on c2/z2. to make this

explicit we can introduce two complex coordinates

z1,2 = r exp(i/2) (cos(/2) exp(i/2)  i sin(/2) exp(i/2)) .

(3.7)

in these coordinates the a = 0 eguchi-hanson metric becomes at. the identication

   + 2 requires that we identify (z1, z2)  (z1,z2) as expected for c2/z2. the
additional orientifold identication acts on the new coordinates as (z1, z2)  (z1,z2), and
acting with both orientifold and orbifold identications ips the sign of z1. the orientifold

projections have two xed planes, z1,2 = 0, which we identify with two o7-planes. to

summarize, the ns5-brane together with two o6-planes become, under t-duality, a pair

of intersecting o7-planes with six common directions.

now let us put in d-branes. the four physical d6-branes in iia are located at x4 =

x5 = 0. under t-duality they become d7-branes wrapping the circle ber of the taub-nut

and located at y = z = 0. in other words, they are wrapped on the invariant cylinder of

the orientifold projection. taking the limit b  , a  0 we nd that the invariant cylinder
develops a neck and becomes a pair of planes z1 = 0 and z2 = 0 in c2/z2. thus the four

physical d7-branes must be located on these planes. recall that these planes are the o7-

planes and therefore have 7-brane charge 4. it follows that the 7-brane charge is cancelled
between the d7-branes and the orientifold planes, and the iib dilaton is constant. finally,

t-duality turns the d4-branes into d3-branes extending in 0123. to summarize, the t-dual

of the iia conguration in the limit when the radius of x6 goes to zero consists of an o7-

plane with four coincident d7-branes in 01236789, another o7-plane with four coincident

d7-branes in 01234589 and 3-branes in 0123. we will refer to the 7-branes extending in

01234589 as 7-branes. the orientifold group for this conguration is

g = {1, (1)flr45, (1)flr67, r4567},

(3.8)

where r reects the coordinates indicated and  is the worldsheet parity.

the splitting of the d6-branes into half-d6-branes discussed in [27] becomes obvious

after t-duality. indeed, it follows easily from the above formulas that the location of the

13

upper half 6-branes, x4 = x5 = 0, x7 > 0 in the type iia conguration maps to the locus

z2 = 0 in iib. similarly, the lower halfs of the 6-branes, x4 = x5 = 0, x7 < 0, map to

z1 = 0. thus the upper halfs of d6-branes map to whole d7-branes located at z2 = 0, while

the lower halfs map to whole d7-branes at z1 = 0.

to specify the theory on the 7-branes completely we need to make a consistent choice

for the action of the orientifolds on the chan-paton factors of the 7-7, 7-7, and 7-7 strings.

there are at least two such choices. one gives rise to an so(8)  so(8) gauge symmetry
[32], and classically the other yields a u(4)  u(4) gauge group on the 7-branes [23,24],
which is broken to su(4)  su(4) by one-loop eects [29]. the second case is related to
the gimon-polchinski [25] orientifold via t-duality. we will be mainly interested in the

second orientifold, which we will refer to as the sen model. both of these orientifolds were

constructed as compact models with a total of four orientifolds and sixteen physical 7-branes

of each kind. the 7-brane gauge groups listed here are the parts of the total 7-brane group

that are visible to a 3-brane probe near one of the intersections.

the theory on a 3-brane probe in the sen model background was analyzed in [22]. the

gauge group, matter content, and the superpotential are in complete agreement with the

theory we discussed in section ii b. thus we conclude that the iia conguration with all 6-

branes on top of the ns5-brane is t-dual to a local piece of the sen model [23,24]. as in the

iia description the at directions of the eld theory correspond to motions of the 3-branes

in the 7-brane background. moving the 3-branes o the intersection point along either of
the o7-planes corresponds to giving en expectation value to one of the bifundamentals q, q,
and moving the 3-branes o both orientifolds gives an expectation value to both q and q.
separating the 3-branes in the direction which the 7- and 7-branes share corresponds to

giving expectation values to the antisymmetric tensors a1, a2.

it is instructive to study the deformations of the sen model and compare these to the

deformations of the corresponding iia construction. the iia construction has the advantage

that all deformations of the background correspond to moving the 6-branes or the ns5-

branes. in the iib picture only some of the deformations are geometric, others correspond

14

to wilson lines. once the map between iia and iib deformations is established, we can

also nd the iib description of the second (non-conformal) iia conguration discussed in

section ii c.

sen [23,24] has studied the deformations of the compact model in great detail. in the

compact case the eld theory on the 7-branes turns out to be a (1, 0) theory in six di-

mensions. since our iib conguration is non-compact, we cannot simply use sens results.

in fact, in our case the theory on the 7-branes is not even six-dimensional, instead it is an

eight-dimensional theory with six-dimensional impurities. such theories have been discussed

previously [26,33].

before we launch into an analysis of the impurity theory we need to discuss the matter

content of the 7-brane theory. a single o7-plane with four coincident 7-branes gives rise

to an n = 1 so(8) theory in eight dimensions. the bosonic degrees of freedom in the
eight-dimensional vector multiplet consist of a vector eld and a complex scalar, both in

the adjoint of the gauge group. the second o7-plane in our conguration breaks half

of the supersymmetries and imposes projections on elds in the vector multiplet. with

the projection matrices for the sen model [25,23], the surviving constant modes of the

elds are a vector and a complex scalar in the 6 + 6. these elds account for the 7-7

strings and there are similar elds on the 7-branes from 7-7 strings. the 7-7 strings are

localized at the intersection of 7- and 7-branes. they yield a single hypermultiplet of the

six-dimensional (1, 0) theory on the intersection, which transforms as a (4, 4) under the

(classical) u(4)7  u(4)7 gauge group.

b. the seven-brane impurity theory

in this section we analyze the supersymmetric vacua of the impurity theory on the 7-

branes and compare them with the vacua of the t-dual iia conguration. we expect the

vacuum eld congurations to be translationally invariant in the six directions common to

the 7- and 7-branes. focusing now on the 7-branes, we see that we can capture the physics

15

by studying the dependence of the 7-brane elds on the remaining two directions transverse

to the 7-branes. the 7-branes and the o7-plane intersect this two-dimensional plane in a

point. to set up the impurity theory we use a complex ane coordinate z on the plane and

dene az = 1

2 (a1 +ia2), where ai are the two components of the so(8) gauge eld living on

the 7-branes. the 7-brane theory also contains a complex scalar, , in the adjoint of so(8)
that describes the transverse uctuations of the 7-branes. the bifundamental (m, m) from
the 7-7 strings is localized at the point z = 0. a very similar theory (without orientifold

projections) was described in [26]. the moduli space of the impurity theory is given by the

solution of the equations

fz z  [, ] = (z)(cid:16)mm  m m(cid:17)

d = (z)m m,

(3.9)

where fz z = az  az  [az, az] and d =   az. these equations are known as hitchin
equations with sources. they are analogous to the d and f atness conditions in ordinary

supersymmetric eld theories. a similar set of equations describes the impurity theory on

the 7-branes.

to make contact with the notation in [23,24] we write all 7-brane elds as antisymmetric

8 8 matrices with certain constraints on the entries. this reects the origin of the elds in
the impurity theory. without the o7-plane, both az and  would transform in the adjoint

of so(8). orientifolding with o7 puts additional constraints on these elds

(z) = p t (z)p 1
a(z) = p at (z)p 1,

where

(3.10)

.

(3.11)

p = 


p4

0

0 p4

,




p4 = 


0

122

122

0




orientifolding also breaks the gauge group from so(8) down to the group of all continuous

so(8)-valued functions satisfying g(z) = p g(z)p 1. in particular, at z = 0 the gauge

16

group reduces to u(4). the orientifold projections allow the bifundamentals to be arbitrary

complex 8  8 matrices that commute with p [25]. the impurity equations are consistent
if the products of the bifundamentals on the r.h.s. of eq. (3.9) are antisymmetrized in the

gauge indices.

we need to nd all, possibly z-dependent, eld congurations that satisfy the impurity

equations, eq. (3.9), modulo gauge transformations. to this end we make the following

ansatz

az =

t
z

,

(z) = 0 +

s
z

.

(3.12)

here t, 0 and s are constant antisymmetric 8  8 matrices. imposing the constraints,
eq. (3.10), determines that 0 transforms in the 6 + 6 of u(4) while t and s transform

as adjoints. the background gauge eld, az, can be interpreted as a at connection that

gives rise to a wilson line around the intersection point at z = 0. the constant part of

the scalar eld, 0, corresponds to the asymptotic (i.e. z  ) positions of the 7-branes
in the directions transverse to the o7-plane, while the singular part, s, parametrizes a

deformation of the shape of the 7-branes.

the moduli space of the impurity equations, eq. (3.9), has several branches with rather

dierent physics. the simplest situation arises if all bifundamental expectation values and

all singular parts of az and  vanish. in that case eq. (3.9) reduces to the condition

[0, 

0] = 0,

(3.13)

which is solved by

0 = 


0 

 0

,




 = diag(1, 2, 1, 2).

(3.14)

as in ref. [23], the two complex parameters, 1,2, parametrize the transverse position of two

pairs of 7-branes. we discuss the corresponding iia deformation in the next section. for

the remainder of this section we set 0 = 0.

17

the impurity equations, eq. (3.9), become inhomogeneous once we turn on an expecta-
tion value for the bifundamental elds. since (1/z)  (z), and the r.h.s. of eq. (3.9) is
proportional to (z), the singular elds above have the right form to satisfy the impurity

equations with nonzero bifundamental expectation values.

the most generic expectation value of the bifundamentals for which the impurity equa-

tions have solutions reads

,

(3.15)

m1 0

0 m2




m = 



0

,

m2 =

m1 =





m1

0 im1

0 m2

0 im2

im1

0 m1

0

im2

0

0

m2







m3

0

im3

0

im3

0

m4

0

im4

0 m3

0

0 im4

0 m4

,





and an expectation value of the same form, but with mi replaced by mi, for m. the
impurity equations determine the expectation values of the other elds in terms of m and
m. the residue of  is given by

s = diag(1, 2),

(3.16)

where

1 =

0

0

0

0 1
0

0 2
0
0

1 0

0 2

0

0









,

2 = 1(1  3, 2  4),

(3.17)

with i  mi mi. the matrix t in the gauge connection has the same structure as s, except
that i is replaced by ti  |mi|2  | mi|2.

before discussing this general solution, we will focus on two special cases.

if we set

mi = mi, the r.h.s. of the rst impurity equation vanishes and only the residue of  is turned

on. this expectation value of the bifundamentals breaks the u(4)  u(4) gauge group to

18

a diagonal subgroup. if all mi are equal this subgroup is u(4)d, and for generic values of

mi we nd u(1)4. since the 7-brane group is broken to a diagonal subgroup, the impurity

theory, eq. (3.9), on the 7-branes and the corresponding impurity theory on the 7-branes

contain the same information. therefore it is sucient to consider only the 7-brane theory.

the eld (z) describes the shape of the 7-branes. for large z the 7-branes asymptote to

the o7-plane as in the unperturbed case, while they approach the o7-plane for small z.

thus we conclude that turning on this bifundamental expectation value deforms pairs of

intersecting 7- and 7-branes into a single smooth 7-brane that interpolates between the 7-

and 7-branes. this result agrees with the f-theory analysis in [24], where this behavior was

interpreted as fusing the 7- and 7-branes together.

there are also solutions of the impurity equations with non-zero gauge connection and

s = 0. we nd one such solution if we set m1 = m2 = m3 = m4, and all other components

of the bifundamentals vanish. for this choice the r.h.s. of the second equation in eq. (3.9)

vanishes, which implies s = 0, and t1 = t2  |m1|2, t3 = t4  |m1|2. this bifundamental
expectation value breaks the u(4)7  u(4)7 7-brane gauge group to a diagonally embedded
u(2)  u(2). note that this deformation is purely non-geometric. since (z) = 0, the
7-branes have the same shape as in the case without any bifundamental expectation values.

it is now a simple matter to identify these two singular solutions with the corresponding

deformations in the iia construction. the rst solution with t = 0, s 6= 0 corresponds to
moving the 6-branes o the ns5-brane in the x4,5 direction. if none of the 6-branes coincide,

the u(4)  u(4) gauge symmetry on the 6-branes is broken to u(1)4. this is in complete
agreement with the impurity analysis. note that a deformation that corresponds to fusing

7 and 7-branes together in the iib description maps into a simple brane motion in the iia

construction, which involves reconnecting the upper and lower halfs of the 6-branes.

the second singular solution with t 6= 0, s = 0 also corresponds to a simple brane
motion in the iia description. we identify turning on m1 with the motion of two pairs of

6-branes in the x6 direction. the classical gauge group on the 6-branes is u(2)  u(2) as
expected from the iib analysis. this brane motion also requires that we reconnect the upper

19

and lower halfs of the 6-branes, so that the resulting 6-brane group is a diagonal subgroup

of the original u(4)  u(4) gauge symmetry. this is in perfect agreement with the analysis
of the 7-brane impurity theory.

it is straightforward to discuss more general choices for the bifundamental expectation

values. the bifundamental expectation values are parametrized by eight complex numbers,

mi and mi, which determine the matrices t and s completely. the four parameters in

t map into the x6 position of the 6-branes in the iia description and the entries in s

correspond to the x4,5 positions. thus we nd complete agreement between the brane

motions in the iia description and the moduli corresponding to singular elds in the impurity

theory.

c. a supersymmetric iia conguration with curving six-branes

the deformations we discussed so far are rather complicated in the iib picture and

correspond to simple brane motions in the iia description. in fact, all simple brane motions

in the iia description are accounted for. however, there is a very simple brane motion in

iib, namely the constant solution of the impurity equations given in eq. (3.14), that should

have a counterpart in the iia description. since this deformation corresponds to moving

pairs of 7-branes o the orientifold, we can nd an explicit equation describing the position

of these branes. in terms of the coordinates in eq. (3.7) this equation reads z2 = const.

starting from this expression we can reverse the coordinate transformations that took us

from the taub-nut space to the at coordinates on c2/z2. this provides an expression

for the world volume of the 7-brane in the taub-nut coordinates. since the 7-branes

wrap the ber of the taub-nut and the ber t-dualizes to the compact x6 direction, it

is straightforward to nd the equation for the worldvolume of the corresponding 6-brane.

the result is x 2

4  cx7  c2/4 = 0, i.e., a parabola in the x4  x7 plane. fig. 2 shows the
iia conguration which is t-dual to the following iib situation: all 7-branes are coincident

with the o7-plane, and one pair of 7-branes is displaced from the o7-plane.

20

7

4,5

fig. 2. type iia conguration for non-zero expectation value of the 6. the dot represents
the ns5-brane, the thick line corresponds to four half 6-branes, the thin line corresponds to two
half 6-branes and the curving line is another 6-brane.

from this picture one can see that turning on the constant complex scalar on the 7-

brane corresponds to fusing two upper halfs of the 6-branes together and moving them o

the ns5-brane as shown in the gure. on the iib side it is obvious that this deformation

preserves all supersymmetries. this is somewhat harder to see on the iia side. presumably

the h-eld produced by the ns5-brane stabilizes the curved worldvolume of the d6-brane.

the eect of this deformation on the probe theory is what we expect from the iib picture.

there we move two 7-branes away from the 3-branes sitting at the intersection point of the

orientifold planes. this gives a mass to half of the fundamentals from 7-3 strings. in the

iia picture the deformation accomplishes the same. in the iib picture moving the 3-branes

along the o7-plane and transverse to the o7-plane corresponds to giving the bifundamental

eld q in the probe theory an expectation value [22]. thus it is possible to move the 3-branes
away from the intersection of the orientifolds towards the intersection of the pair of 7-branes

with the o7-plane by giving an expectation value to one of the bifundamentals. this is also

reected in the iia description. we can move the 4-branes in the negative x7 direction by

giving an expectation value to one of the bifundamentals (see section ii b). this moves the

4-branes o the ns5-brane and towards the intersection of the lower half-6-branes with the

curving 6-brane.

in the iib description moving a pair of 7-branes away from the o7-plane breaks the

21

7-brane gauge group from su(4) down to su(2)  su(2) [23,24]. moving all four 7-branes
together breaks su(4) down to sp(4). this implies that the unbroken gauge group on a

single curving 6-brane should be su(2), while for two coincident curving branes it should

be enhanced to sp(4). it is not at all clear how to see this from the iia description.

d. comparison with f-theory

sen argued [23,24] that the t-dual version of the gp model [25] is related to an f-theory

compactication with certain uxes through collapsed 2-cycles. the naive candidate for

such an f-theory compactication would be a pair of intersecting d4 singularities. how-

ever, this cannot be directly related to the gp orientifold, since it would give rise to an

so(8)  so(8) gauge symmetry and contain tensionless strings, while the gp model has
su(4)  su(4) symmetry and no tensionless strings. the dierence is due to ns (and
possibly rr) 2-form uxes through the collapsed 2-cycle at the intersection of the two d4

singularities. these uxes give a mass to 3-branes wrapping this cycle, thereby preventing

the appearance of tensionless strings. these uxes are not quantized [23,24], so we should be

able to identify moduli in our iia description that correspond to turning them o. the ns

ux is conventionally identied with the position of the ns5-branes on the x6 circle and the

rr ux parametrizes the location of the ns5-branes on the m-theory circle. from the iib

point of view, they are both part of a massless hypermultiplet living at the intersection of

the d4 singularities. in order to turn o the ns ux, we move the ns5-brane and its image

as well as all d6-branes to coincide with one of the o6-planes. this conguration has an

so(8) so(8) gauge symmetry from the eight upper and eight lower halfs of the 6-branes,
as well as tensionless strings from the ns5-brane coincident with its image [34]. in addition

to the hypermultiplet that corresponds to moving the ns5-brane o the orientifold in the

x4, x5, x6, x10 there is now a tensor multiplet whose scalar expectation value corresponds

to separating the two ns5-branes in the x7 direction. all this agrees with the expectations

from f-theory.

22

iv. the large n limit

when the number of d3-branes, n, is large there is a dual description of n = 1 super-
conformal theory on the d3-branes in terms of a supergravity on ads5  x, where x is an
einstein manifold (or orbifold) [4]. this dual description is valid when the thooft gauge

coupling, g2

y m n, is large. in this section we will show how the ads/cft correspondence
works for the conformal gauge theory with su(4)  su(4) avor symmetry discussed in
section ii b, and provide evidence that this theory is nite. we will also provide a partial

analysis of the non-conformal theory of section ii c in the large n limit and argue that

supergravity suggests a denite r-charge assignment for all the elds in the infrared.

a. the conformal case

in the conformal case, x is an orientifold of s5. as explained in the previous section, the

iia conguration with su(4)  su(4) gauge symmetry on the 6-branes is t-dual to a local
piece of the sen model. at the su(4)  su(4) point, the sen model is a perturbative type
iib orientifold with constant string coupling,  [23,24]. thus the near-horizon geometry

of the 3-branes is obtained by orientifolding ads5  s5. similar theories were analyzed in
[911].

let us denote the orientifolded ve-sphere by s5. the metric on s5 is the angular part

of

ds2 = |dz1|2 + |dz2|2 + |dw|2,

(4.1)

where w = x8 + ix9 and the variables z1, z2 are subject to the identications zi  zi. a
u(1)3 subgroup of the so(6) isometry group of s5 commutes with these identications. it

is convenient to take the generators that rotate z1, z2,and w separately as a basis in the lie

algebra of u(1)3. explicitly, the metric on s5 can be written as

ds2

s5 = d2

1 + sin2(1)d2

2 + sin2(2)d2

2 + cos2(2)d3

(4.2)

1 + cos2(1)(cid:16)d2

23

3(cid:17) ,

where 1,2  [0, ], 3  [0, 2], and 1,2  [0, ]. the three angles i parametrize rotations
in the z1,2 and w planes respectively. the periodicity of 1,2 reects the identications on

z1,2. since this periodicity of 1,2 is the only thing which distinguishes s5 from s5, the

eigenvalues of the scalar laplacian on the former can be obtained from those on the latter.

the eigenvalue of the scalar laplacian on s5 is k(k + 4), where k = 0, 1, . . .. in terms of the

angular momenta, mi, associated with the angles i, we have k = |m1|+|m2|+|m3|+2l1+2l2,
where li are non-negative integers. the orientifold projection on the bulk supergravity states

amounts to keeping modes with even m1 and m2.

reduction of ha

in the n = 4 case, the supergravity states with lowest mass squared come from the kk
a, the dilaton mode of the s5. the ads masses of these states are given by
m2 = k(k  4) [35], where k is given above. according to [6], the ads mass of a kk state is
related to the dimension of the corresponding boundary operator by (  4) = m2, which
implies  = k for this tower of kk modes. the decomposition of the other supergravity

elds yield towers of kk states for which  = k +n, where n is a positive integer [6]. we will

see below that only for n = 0 the kk states couple to chiral primary operators. therefore

we will restrict our analysis to the kk modes from the decomposition of ha
a.

the simplest way to identify chiral primaries is to nd all states for which  = 3

2r,

where r is the r-charge which is part of the superconformal algebra. the r-current is a

certain linear combination of the three u(1) currents. to nd this linear combination we

rst need to determine which supercharges survive the orientifold projection. the orientifold

group, z2  z2, is generated by 1 = rz2(1)fl and 2 = rz1z2. orientifolding by the
rst generator breaks so(6) down to su(2)l  su(2)r  u(1)n where u(1)n acts on z2
while su(2)l  su(2)r acts on z1, w. the surviving supercharges (q+, q) transform as
(1, 2)1 with respect to this group. orientifolding by 2 breaks su(2)l  su(2)r down
to u(1)l  u(1)r. we will denote the sum of the u(1)l and u(1)r charges by u(1)2,
the dierence by u(1)3, and refer to u(1)n as u(1)1. the charges of z2, z1, and w under

these three u(1)s are given by (2, 0, 0), (0, 2, 0), and (0, 0, 2), respectively. the supercharge

q+ which survives the second orientifolding has u(1) charges (1, 1,1).

it follows that

24

the r-charge which is in the same superconformal multiplet as the stress-energy tensor is

1

3(2m1 + 2m2  2m3). here 2m1 is the u(1)1 charge, 2m2 is the u(1)2 charge, and 2m3 is
the u(1)3 charge. the normalization is chosen so that q+ has r-charge 1. it follows that

any kk mode with l1 = l2 = 0, m1, m2  0 and m3  0 should couple to a chiral primary
operator in the boundary eld theory.

we discussed the identication of geometric motions of 3-branes with at directions in

the 3-brane eld theory in the previous section (see also [22]). this allows us to determine
the u(1) charges of the elds a1, a2,q, q. the eld theory superpotential then xes the
r-charges of the fundamentals q, q, p, p. the results are summarized in the table below.

u(1)1 u(1)2 u(1)3

a1,2

q
q
q, p

q, p

0

2

0

0

1

0

0

2

1

0

2
0

0

1
1

(4.3)

with these charge assignments in hand it is now a simple matter to match the bulk kk

modes and the chiral primary operators in the eld theory. let us give some examples.

the supergravity spectrum contains a singleton chiral primary with u(1)3 charge 2 and
 = k = 1. this state corresponds to a chiral primary tr(a1j1) + tr(a2j2) in the eld

theory.1 since  = 1, this is a free eld. for  = 2 there are three chiral primary states with

geometric u(1) charges (4, 0, 0), (0, 4, 0), and (0, 0,4). we identify them with trqt j1qj2,
tr qt j2 qj1, and tr(a1j1)2 + tr(a2j2)2. the chiral primary operators with  = 3 are
tr[qa2qt j1 + qt j1a1j1qj2], tr[ qa1 qt j2 + qt j2a2j2 qj1], and tr(a1j1)3 + tr(a2j2)3.
they correspond to the kk states with charges (4, 0,2), (0, 4,2), and (0, 0,6) respec-
tively.

1the antisymmetric representation of sp(n ) is reducible and contains a singlet.

25

the eld theory also contains operators that carry charges under the 7-brane gauge

groups. it was pointed out in [10] that these operators couple to the ads modes coming

from the kk reduction of the 7-brane elds. our conguration includes an o7-plane with

four coincident d7-branes wrapping an s3 dened by |z1|2 + |w|2 = const, and similarly
an o7-plane with four d7-branes wrapped on |z2|2 + |w|2 = const. the two 3-spheres
intersect over a circle. we can focus on the kk modes from the rst s3. these modes

couple to operators that are charged under the su(4)7 subgroup of the su(4)7  su(4)7
global symmetry group of the probe theory. the modes living on the other s3 couple to

similar operators in the eld theory that transform under su(4)7.

the kk reduction of the theory on an o7-plane with four coincident 7-branes was dis-

cussed in [10].

in that case there were twice as many supersymmetries as in ours. the

simplest way to compute the kk spectrum in our case is to use the results of [10] and

impose the additional projection from the o7-plane.

ref. [10] contains a detailed discussion of the 7-brane states and their multiplet structure.

the lowest component of the multiplet is a real eld in the (k, k + 2)0 representation of

su(2)l  su(2)r  u(1)n , where k = 1, 2, . . .. this mode comes from kk reduction of the
components of the 7-brane gauge eld along the s3,

aa = xk

aky k
a ,

(4.4)

where y k

a is the k-th vector spherical harmonic on s3. these modes couple to operators

of dimension  = k + 1 in the boundary eld theory. for simplicity we will only consider

operators with  = 2, 3. the state with  = 2 transforms in the (1, 3)0 and decomposes

into modes with u(1)3 quantum numbers (0, 0, 0) and (0,2,2). the (0, 0, 0) mode has no
u(1)r charge and does not correspond to a chiral primary. the states with u(1)3 charges

(0, 2,2) and (0,2, 2) are complex conjugates of each other, so it is sucient to consider
only one of them, e.g., the rst. it has r-charge 4/3 and is, therefore, a chiral primary.

this state starts out in the adjoint of the so(8)7 gauge group on the 7-brane. since it

has m2 = 1, it is odd under the additional orientifold projection 2. this projection breaks

26

so(8)7 down to su(4)7. as explained in [23,24], states in the adjoint of so(8)7 which are

odd under 1 yield 6 + 6 of su(4)7, while even states give adjoints of su(4)7. it follows
that the (0, 2,2) state yields one complex state in 6 and one complex state in 6. these
kk states correspond to operators qj1q and pj2p, which transform in the 6 and 6 of the

7-brane group respectively.

the  = 3 mode is in the (2, 4)0 representation and decomposes into even modes with

u(1)3 charges (0, 0,2) and (0, 4,2) and their complex conjugates, as well as odd modes
with u(1)3 charges (0, 2, 0) and (0, 2,4) and their complex conjugates. the even (0, 0,2)
mode and the odd (0, 2, 0) mode do not couple to chiral primary operators, because the r-

charge does not match the dimension. the even (0, 4,2) mode couples to a chiral primary
operator in the adjoint of su(4) which we identify as pj2 qj1q. the odd (0, 2,4) mode
couples to a chiral primary in the 6 + 6. the corresponding operators are given by qa1q

and pj2a2j2p.

other scalars on ads come from the decomposition of the complex scalar eld on the 7-

branes. these kk modes are in the (k, k)2 representation of su(2)l  su(2)r  u(1)n and
couple to operators of dimension k + 2 [10]. it is straightforward to decompose and project

these modes as we did for the kk modes of the vector eld. the  = 3 case is especially

simple, since this mode carries only u(1)1 charge. since the r-charge and the dimension do

not satisfy  = 3

2r, this kk mode does not couple to a chiral primary operator. the same

is true for the higher kk modes of the complex scalar eld.

finally, there are also states living on the intersection of the 7-branes and 7-branes which

is an s1 embedded in s5. the kk reduction of these states is straightforward, and we will

not discuss it.

in the above analysis we have focused on chiral primaries.

it is also interesting to

ask whether non-chiral states match between eld theory and supergravity. some of the

non-chiral scalars we have seen, namely the ones coming from the reduction of complex

scalars living on the 7-branes, are descendants of the chiral primaries and therefore match

automatically. on the other hand, the non-chiral scalars which come from the kk reduction

27

of the gauge eld on the 7-branes are primary. one may ask whether the superconformal

multiplet they live in is long or short.

to answer this question we need to recall some facts about unitary representations of the

n = 1 superconformal algebra [36]. for our purposes it is sucient to consider multiplets
whose primary states have zero spin. let the r and  be the r-charge and the dimension of

the primary. unitarity puts restrictions on which values of r and  may occur; the allowed

possibilities are

(i)  = r = 0 (the trivial representation),

(ii)  = 3

2|r| (chiral and anti-chiral representations),
2|r| + 2.

(iii)   3
representations of type (iii) with  > 3

2|r| + 2 contain no null states and therefore are
termed long multiplets. chiral and anti-chiral representations contain null states at level

one, i.e., their primaries are annihilated by half of the supercharges. these representations

are called short. representations of type (iii) which saturate the inequality are also short;

the null states occur at level two. a well-known example of a short multiplet is a linear

multiplet which contains a conserved current. it corresponds to the case r = 0,  = 2.

one can check that all non-chiral primaries coming from the reduction of the gauge eld

on the 7-branes satisfy  = 3

2|r| + 2 and therefore are in short multiplets of type (iii). in
particular, the (0, 0, 0) mode with  = 2 we have found above is in fact the lowest component

of a linear multiplet. it couples to a eld theory operator qq  pp in the adjoint of su(4)7.
the corresponding current is simply the su(4)7 avor current. the matching of non-chiral

primaries with  = 3 is a bit more involved. the (0, 2, 0) mode transforms in 6+6 of su(4)7.
its eld theory counterparts are h1p qj1q + h2qj1a
avor indices are antisymmetrized. the u(1)3 charges of these operators match those of the

1j1q and h1pj2 qq + h2pa

2p, where the

(0, 2, 0) mode. to show that these operators live in short multiplets, i.e., are annihilated by

d2, one needs to use the classical equations of motion. the manipulations one has to go

through are very similar to those in [37], and are subject to the same caveats. the use of

the classical equations of motion is presumably justied in the weakly coupled regime where

28

g2
y m n is small. the supergravity analysis indicates that the operators in question belong to

short multiplets even for large g2

y m n. an even more interesting situation arises when one
tries to match the non-chiral primary with u(1)3 charges (0, 0,2) and  = 3. this mode
lives in the adjoint of su(4)7. we claim that it corresponds to the eld theory operator
h1qa1j1q  h1pa2j2p  h2q qp. evaluating the d2 descendant of this operator using the
classical equations of motion, one nds that it does not vanish. instead, the descendant has

the form (q q)(pp), i.e., it factorizes into a product of two gauge-invariant operators and is

therefore subleading at large n. it follows that this eld theory operator lives in a long

multiplet for nite n, but is close to being in a short multiplet in the sense that its

dimension approaches the unitarity bound as n  . on the supergravity side this means
that the (0, 0,2) one-particle state is in a short multiplet only for n = . for nite n
the multiplet absorbs another short multiplet made of two-particle states and becomes long.

this concludes our analysis of the ads/cft correspondence for the sen model. there

is complete agreement between the spectrum of primary operators in the eld theory and

the scalar kaluza-klein states on ads as required by the ads/cft correspondence [46].

the charge assignments in table 4.3 together with the formula r = 1

3(2m1 + 2m2  2m3)
imply that all chiral elds have canonical dimensions in the infrared. this is the most

natural assumption for a theory with vanishing beta function, but as we pointed out in the

introduction there is no eld theory proof of this. the supergravity computation is only

valid for large n and large g2

y m n. however, given that for g2

y m  1 and n of order 1 the

dimensions are also canonical, it appears likely that the theory is nite for all n.

b. the non-conformal case

next we discuss the deformed n = 1 theory which ows to a line of conformal xed points
in the infrared (section ii c). we have already pointed out that although the wilsonian

gauge coupling in this theory depends on the scale, the low-energy eective gauge coupling

does not vary over the moduli space. this implies that the corresponding iib background

29

should have constant  . indeed, in section iii we showed that the 7-brane background for

this conguration is very similar to the background for the conformal theory. as in the

conformal case, the 7-branes do not bend and are coincident with the o7-planes. the rr

charge of the 7-brane is cancelled locally by the o7-planes, so we expect that the type iib

string coupling is constant. similarly, the gravitational eld of the 7-branes cancels against

that of the orientifold planes. thus it appears that the closed string sector is not aected by

this deformation. the only dierence between the conformal and the non-conformal case is

in the open string sector, namely in the gauge connection on the 7-branes. in the conformal

case it is trivial, while in the non-conformal case it is a at connection which breaks the

su(4)7  su(4)7 group to a diagonally embedded su(2)  su(2). to summarize, the
deformation of the 7-brane background that leads to the non-conformal theory changes the

properties of the theory on the 7-branes, but it appears not to change the closed string

sector.

to nd a supergravity dual for this non-conformal theory, we need to repeat the analysis

above with the new 7-brane background. since the closed string sector is unchanged, the

spectrum of the bulk modes should be the same as before. the matter content of the confor-

mal and the non-conformal theory dier only in the number of avors and their coupling to

the bifundamentals. therefore both theories have the same spectrum of operators that do

not transform under the 7-brane groups. thus it appears that the dimensions of all chiral

primaries uncharged with respect to the avor group are the same as in the conformal case,

i.e., canonical. if antisymmetric tensors and bifundamentals have zero anomalous dimen-

sions then the vanishing of the beta-functions, eq. (2.9), requires that the fundamentals

have dimension 1/2. this is actually the lowest dimension for the fundamental allowed by

unitarity. to show that this assignment of dimensions, or equivalently of r-charges, agrees

with supergravity we would have to show that the kk reduction of the 7-brane theory with

the singular at connection switched on, reproduces the expected dimensions of the chiral

primaries that involve the fundamentals. unfortunately we do not know how to analyze

the excitations of the impurity theory around nontrivial vacua, so we cannot check that

30

our solution is consistent. nevertheless, we get a denite prediction for the infrared dimen-

sions of all elds. it would be interesting to conrm the answer by directly analyzing the

perturbative expansion of the non-conformal theory at large n.

acknowledgments

it is a pleasure to thank o. aharony, e. gimon, j. maldacena, g. moore, e. katz, and

e. witten for helpful discussions. m.g. would like to thank the institute for advanced study

for hospitality while this work was in progress. the work of m.g was supported in part

by doe grants #df-fc02-94er40818 and #de-fc-02-91er40671, while that of a.k. by

doe grant #de-fg02-90er40542.

31

references

[1] a. hanany and e. witten, type iib superstrings, bps monopoles, and three-

dimensional gauge dynamics, nucl. phys. b492, 152 (1997) hep-th/9611230.

[2] e. witten, solutions of four-dimensional eld theories via m theory, nucl. phys.

b500, 3 (1997) hep-th/9703166.

[3] a. giveon and d. kutasov, brane dynamics and gauge theory, hep-th/9802067.
[4] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and supergravity,

adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231 (1997) hep-th/9711200.

[5] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from non-

critical string theory, phys. lett. b428, 105 (1998) hep-th/9802109.

[6] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 253

(1998) hep-th/9802150.

[7] s. kachru and e. silverstein, 4-d conformal theories and strings on orbifolds, phys.

rev. lett. 80, 4855 (1998) hep-th/9802183.

[8] y. oz and j. terning, orbifolds of ads(5) x s**5 and 4-d conformal eld theories,

nucl. phys. b532, 163 (1998) hep-th/9803167.

[9] a. fayyazuddin and m. spalinski, large n superconformal gauge theories and super-

gravity orientifolds, nucl. phys. b535, 219 (1998) hep-th/9805096.

[10] o. aharony, a. fayyazuddin and j. maldacena, the large n limit of n=2, n=1 eld

theories from three-branes in f theory, jhep 07, 013 (1998) hep-th/9806159.

[11] s. gukov and a. kapustin, new n=2 superconformal eld theories from m / f theory

orbifolds, hep-th/9808175.

[12] i.r. klebanov and e. witten, superconformal eld theory on three-branes at a calabi-

yau singularity, nucl. phys. b536, 199 (1998) hep-th/9807080.

[13] a.m. uranga, brane congurations for branes at conifolds, hep-th/9811004.
[14] s. gubser, n. nekrasov and s. shatashvili, generalized conifolds and 4-dimensional

n=1 superconformal eld theory, hep-th/9811230.

[15] r. von unge, branes at generalized conifolds and toric geometry, hep-th/9901091.
[16] j. erlich, a. hanany and a. naqvi, marginal deformations from branes, hep-

th/9902118.

[17] a.m. uranga, towards mass deformed n=4 so(n) and sp(k) gauge theories from brane

congurations, nucl. phys. b526, 241 (1998) hep-th/9803054.

[18] j. park and a.m. uranga, a note on superconformal n=2 theories and orientifolds,

hep-th/9808161.

[19] t. banks, m.r. douglas and n. seiberg, probing f theory with branes, phys. lett.

b387, 278 (1996) hep-th/9605199.

[20] m.r. douglas, d.a. lowe and j.h. schwarz, probing f theory with multiple branes,

phys. lett. b394, 297 (1997) hep-th/9612062.

[21] o. aharony, s. kachru and e. silverstein, new n=1 superconformal eld theories in
four-dimensions from d-brane probes, nucl. phys. b488, 159 (1997) hep-th/9610205.
[22] o. aharony, j. sonnenschein, s. yankielowicz and s. theisen, field theory questions

for string theory answers, nucl. phys. b493, 177 (1997) hep-th/9611222.

[23] a. sen, a nonperturbative description of the gimon-polchinski orientifold, nucl.

phys. b489, 139 (1997) hep-th/9611186.

32

[24] a. sen, f theory and the gimon-polchinski orientifold, nucl. phys. b498, 135 (1997)

hep-th/9702061.

[25] e.g. gimon and j. polchinski, consistency conditions for orientifolds and d-

manifolds, phys. rev. d54, 1667 (1996) hep-th/9601038.

[26] a. kapustin and s. sethi, the higgs branch of impurity theories, adv. theor. math.

phys. 2, 571 (1998) hep-th/9804027.

[27] i. brunner, a. hanany, a. karch and d. lust, brane dynamics and chiral-nonchiral

transitions, nucl. phys. b528, 197 (1998) hep-th/9801017.

[28] s. forste, d. ghoshal and s. panda, an orientifold of the solitonic ve-brane, phys.

lett. b411, 46 (1997) hep-th/9706057.

[29] m. berkooz et al., anomalies, dualities, and topology of d = 6 n=1 superstring vacua,

nucl. phys. b475, 115 (1996) hep-th/9605184.

[30] r.g. leigh and m.j. strassler, exactly marginal operators and duality in four-
dimensional n=1 supersymmetric gauge theory, nucl. phys. b447, 95 (1995) hep-
th/9503121.

[31] m.k. prasad, equivalence of eguchi-hanson metric to two-center gibbons-hawking

metric, phys. lett. b83, 310 (1979)

[32] j.d. blum and a. zaaroni, an orientifold from f theory, phys. lett. b387, 71

(1996) hep-th/9607019.

[33] a. kapustin, d(n) quivers from branes, jhep 12, 015 (1998) hep-th/9806238.
[34] a. hanany and a. zaaroni, branes and six-dimensional supersymmetric theories,

nucl. phys. b529, 180 (1997) hep-th/9712145.

[35] h.j. kim, l.j. romans and p. van nieuwenhuizen, the mass spectrum of chiral n=2

d = 10 supergravity on s**5, phys. rev. d32, 389 (1985).

[36] v.k. dobrev and v.b. petkova, all positive energy unitary irreducible representa-

tions of extended conformal supersymmetry, phys. lett. 162b, 127 (1985).

[37] m. berkooz, a comment on nonchiral operators in sqcd and its dual, nucl. phys.

b466, 75 (1996) hep-th/9512024.

33

