9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
2

 

 
 

2
v
9
0
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

cgpg-99/3-4

quantum causal histories

fotini markopoulou

center for gravitational physics and geometry

department of physics

the pennsylvania state university
university park, pa, usa 16802

march 25, 1999

abstract

quantum causal histories are dened to be causal sets with hilbert spaces
attached to each event and local unitary evolution operators. the reexivity,
antisymmetry, and transitivity properties of a causal set are preserved in the
quantum history as conditions on the evolution operators. a quantum causal
history in which transitivity holds can be treated as directed topological
quantum eld theory. two examples of such histories are described.

fotini@phys.psu.edu

1

1 introduction

in general relativity, with compact rather than asymptotically at boundary con-
ditions, physical observations are made inside the system that they describe.
in
quantum theory, the observable quantities are meaningful outside the system that
they refer to. it is very likely that quantum gravity must be a quantum mechanical
relativistic theory. that is, a theory where the observables can be given as self-
adjoint operators on a hilbert space but which are meaningful inside the system that
they describe.

a rough description of what such a theory involves is the following. observations
made inside the system are closely related to causality in the sense that an inside
observer necessarily splits the history of the system into the part that is in the future,
the part that is in the past, and  assuming nite speed of propagation of information
 elsewhere. the problem is how to do this in a way that is consistent with quantum
mechanics. the issue is that quantum mechanics is linear and as a result of the
superposition principle, quantum mechanical propositions are not distributive, i.e.,
for projection operators p, q, r, p  (q  r) is not equal to (p  q)  (p  r).
having both quantum mechanics and internal observers in the same theory requires
nding propositions that have a non-distributive quantum mechanical aspect and a
distributive causal aspect.

in this paper, we dene quantum causal histories, which are histories that are
both quantum mechanical and causal. assuming that a discrete causal ordering (a
causal set) is a sucient description of the fundamental past/future ordering needed to
qualify observations as being inside the system, we nd that a quantum causal history
can be constructed by attaching nite-dimensional hilbert spaces to the events of the
causal set. it is then natural to consider tensor products of the hilbert spaces on
events that are spacelike separated. we dene quantum histories with local unitary
evolution maps between such sets of spacelike separated events. the conditions of
reexivity, antisymmetry and transitivity that hold for the causal set have analogs in
the quantum history which are conditions on the evolution operators. we nd that
transitivity is a strong physical condition on the evolution operators and, if imposed,
implies that the quantum causal histories are invariant under directed coarse graining.
if the causal set represents the universe, quantum causal histories constitute a
quantum cosmological theory.
its main notable feature is that there is a hilbert
space for each event but not one for the entire universe. hence, no wavefunction of
the universe arises. a consistent intepretation of quantum causal histories and obser-
vations inside the quantum universe can be provided and will appear in a forthcoming
paper [8].

in more detail, the outline of this paper is the following. in section 2 we review
causal set histories and provide a list of denitions of structures that can be found in
a causal history and which are used in the quantum causal histories. in particular,
we concentrate on acausal sets, sets of causally unrelated events.
in section 3, we

2

introduce the poset of acausal sets, equipped with the appropriate ordering relation.
the denition of quantum causal histories is based on this poset and is given in section
4. the properties of the resulting histories are discussed in section 5. the ordering
of a causal set is reexive, antisymmetric and transitive, conditions which are also
imposed on the quantum histories. the consequences of these properties are analyzed
in section 6. in particular, we nd that transitivity leads to directed coarse-graining
invariance. two classes of quantum causal histories are given as examples in section
7. up to this point, the causal histories require a choice of a causal set. in section
8, we remove this restriction and provide a sum-over-histories version of quantum
causal evolution. the quantum causal histories presented here are consistent, but
not all physically meaningful questions can be asked. there are several possibilities
for generalisations, some of which we outline in the conclusions.

2 causal set histories

a (discrete) causal history is a causal set of events that carry extra structure. for
example, the causal histories that were examined in [6, 4, 7] had as events vector
spaces spanned by suq(2) intertwiners. in this section, we review the denition of a
causal set and provide several derivative denitions which will be used in the rest of
this paper.

a causal set c is a partially ordered set whose elements are interpeted as the
events in a history (see [1, 10, 9]). we denote the events by p, q, r, . . ..
if, say, p
precedes q, we write p  q. the equal option is used when p coincides with q. we
write prq when either p  q or p  q holds.

the causal relation is reexive, i.e. p  p for any event p. it is also transitive,
i.e. if p  q and q  r, then p  r. to ensure that c has no closed timelike loops,
we make the causal relation antisymmetric, that is, if p  q and q  p, then p = q.
finally, we limit ourselves to histories with a nite number of events.

given a causal set, there are several secondary structures that we can construct
from it and which come in useful in this paper. we therefore list them here (see
figures 1 and 2):

 the causal past of some event p is the set of all events r  c with r  p. we

denote the causal past of p by p (p).

 the causal future of p is the set of all events q  c with p  q. we denote it by

f (p).

 an acausal set, denoted a, b, c, . . ., is a set of events in c that are all causally

unrelated to each other.

 the acausal set a is a complete past of the event p when every event in the
causal past p (p) of p is related to some event in a. it is not possible to add an

3

event from (p (p)  a) to a and produce a new acausal set.

 similarly, an acausal set b is a complete future of p when every event in the

causal future f (p) of p is related to some event in b.

 an antichain in the causal set c is an acausal set a such that every event in

(c  a) is causally related to some event in a.

similar denitions as the above of past, future, complete past, and complete future

for a single event can be given for acausal sets:

 the causal past of a is p (a) = si p (qi) for all qi  a. similarly, the causal
future of a is f (a) = si f (qi) for all qi  a.

 an acausal set a is a complete past of the acausal set b if every event in p (b) is

related to some event in a.

 an acausal set c is a complete future of b if every event in f (b) is related to

some event in c.

furthermore,

 two acausal sets a and b are a complete pair when a is a complete past of b and

b is a complete future of a.

 two acausal sets a and b are a full pair when they are a complete pair and every

event in a is related to every event in b.

 two acausal sets a and b cross when some of the events in a are in the future

of b and some are in its past.

3 the poset of acausal sets

the set of acausal sets within a given causal set c is a partially ordered set if we
dene the relation a (cid:22) b to mean that a is a complete past of b and b is a complete
future of a. reecting the properties of the underlying causal set, the relation (cid:22) is
reexive, transitive and antisymmetric. let us call this poset a.

it is on this poset of acausal sets that we will base the quantum version of the
causal histories.
its properties, therefore, are important constraints on the corre-
sponding quantum history. the main property of a that characterises the kind of
quantum theory we will obtain in this paper is that, given acausal sets a, b and c, the
following holds (r means either (cid:22) or (cid:23)):

if arc, brc, and a, b do not cross, then arb.

(1)

4

f(p)

b

p

a

p(p)

figure 1: this is a very small causal history. p (p) is the causal past of the event p
while f (p) is its causal future. the acausal set a is a complete past for p, and b is a
complete future.

b

a

figure 2: the acausal sets a and b are a complete pair.

5

that is, given some acausal set c  a, all the acausal sets that are related to c are
also related to each other  except if they happen to cross. if a and b are too close
to each other they may cross and then cannot be related by (cid:22). this means that for
the chosen c there is not a unique complete pair sequence. in selecting one of the
possible sequences we need to make repeated choices of which of two crossing acausal
sets to keep.

4 quantum causal histories

we will now construct the quantum version, qa, of the poset a. we will regard
an event q in the causal set as a planck-scale quantum event with a hilbert space
h(q) that stores its possible states. we require that h(q) is nite-dimensional, which
is consistent with the requirement that our causal sets be nite.

choose an acausal set a = {q1, q2, . . . , qn} in a. since all qi  a are causally
unrelated to each other, standard quantum mechanics dictates that the hilbert space
of a is

h(a) =

h(qi).

(2)

no

i=1

that is, we have a tensor product hilbert space in qa for each acausal set in a.

when two acausal sets are related, a (cid:22) b, there needs to be an evolution operator

between the corresponding hilbert spaces:

eab : h(a)  h(b).

(3)

we will impose one more condition on the causal histories that will make their present
treatment simpler. we will only consider posets a with the following property:

if a (cid:22) b,

dim h(a) = dim h(b).

(4)

this restriction is particularly convenient since it allows us to simply regard h(a)
and h(b) as isomorphic and require that eab is a unitary evolution operator.

the poset of acausal sets a is reexive, transitive and antisymmetric. we would
like to maintain these properties of the causal ordering in the quantum theory as anal-
ogous conditions on the evolution operators. (in other words, we want the quantum
causal history to be a functor from the poset a to the category of hilbert spaces.)
the analogue of reexivity is the existence of an operator eaa = 1a : h(a)  h(a)
for every acausal set a. eaa has to be the identity because any other operator from
h(a) to itself would have to be a new event. antisymmetry means that if eabeba = 1a
then eab = eba = 1a. transitivity in a implies that

in qa. we will return to transitivity and its implications for a and qa in section
6.

ebceab = eac

(5)

6

at each event q, there is an algebra of observables, the operators on h(q). an

observable boa at a becomes an observable bob at b by

bob = eab boae
ab.

(6)

this completes the denition of the causal quantum histories we are concerned
with. in the next section we discuss the evolution of states which is allowed in such
histories. then, in section 6, we will come back to the imposition of transitivity on
the evolution operators, a strong condition that dictates the form of the resulting
histories and their quantum cosmology interpretation.

5 quantum evolution in qa

in this section we discuss the consequences of the denitions of quantum histories
given above.

5.1 products of complete pair sequences

evolution maps between complete pairs that are themselves causally unrelated may
be composed in the standard way, like tensors. that is, consider complete pairs a (cid:22) b
and c (cid:22) d, with a and b unrelated to c or d. then construct the acausal sets a  c
and b  d, which form a new complete pair: (a  c) (cid:22) (b  d). the evolution operator
on the composites,

e(ac)(bd) : h(a)  h(c)  h(b)  h(d),

is the product of the operators on the two pairs,

e(ac)(bd) = eab  ecd.

5.2 projection operators

(7)

(8)

the causal structure of a means that a projection operator on h(a) propagates to
the future of a in the following way. a projection operator

pa : h(a)  v (a)

(9)

that reduces h(a) to a subspace v (a), can be extended to a larger acausal set a  b.
on h(a)  h(b), it is the new projection operator

pab = pa  1b : h(a)  h(b)  v (a)  h(b).

(10)

7

5.3 evolution in a can be independent of c

consider a complete pair a (cid:22) b in which a = a1a2 and b = b1b2. the corresponding
hilbert spaces are

h(a) = h(a1)  h(a2)

and

h(b) = h(b1)  h(b2),

(11)

the evolution operator that corresponds to the causal relation a (cid:22) b is

eab : h(a)  h(b).

(12)

choose some state |i  h(a1) by acting on h(a1) with the projection operator
|ih|. this implies that, in h(a), we have chosen the state |i  |a2i, for any
|a2i  h(a2), using the projection operator (|ih|)  1a2. we can use eab on this
state to obtain the state

|bi = eab (|i  |a2i)

(13)

in h(b).

if, for any reason, we need to restrict our attention to b2, we can trace over b1 to

nd that the original state |i  h(a2) gives rise to the density matrix:

(b2) = trb1 |bihb|)

= trb1 heab (|ih|  1a2) e

abi .

(14)

(15)

at this point, the following question arises. what if a1 is not in the causal past of b2
and, for example, we have these causal relations:
2b

b

1

(16)

a
1

a

2

does the evolution we dened on qa violate causality in the underlying causal set
c?

this question illuminates several features of the quantum causal histories. the
very rst thing to note is that we get the same acausal poset a for many dierent
causal sets. the operator eab refers to a and does not distiguish the dierent possible
underlying causal sets.

a practical way then to avoid the above apparent embarassment is to work, not
with all possible causal sets for the given a, but only with those in which all complete
pairs are full. recall that when a (cid:22) b is a full pair, all events in a are related to all
events in b. there are good physical reasons why causal sets that are made of full
pairs should be preferred and we will return to this in section 7.2 in our discussion of
examples of causal histories.

8

5.4 propagation of a density matrix requires a complete pair

according to (15), given a state |i  h(a), we can obtain the density matrix (b)
for the acausal set b in the future of a. this uses the fact that b is a subset of an
acausal set b that forms a complete pair with a.

consider this conguration:

p
5

p
3

p
1

w

a

p
7

p
6

p
4

p
2

(17)

the initial acausal set is a = {p1, p2}. the acausal set w = {p3, p4} is in the future
of a. given |i  h(a), can we obtain a density matrix on h(w)? the answer is no,
since there is no acausal set that contains w and is maximal in the future of a. (the
problem is the p2  p7 relation.)

there are, therefore, acausal sets in the future of a which cannot be reached by
the evolution map e. in the next section, we will show that it is possible to deal with
this by appropriately coarse-graining the poset a.

6 transitivity and its implications

the main idea in this paper is that the quantum version of some causal history
is a collection of hilbert spaces connected by evolution operators that respect the
structure of the poset a we started with. for this reason, in section 4, we imposed
reexivity, transitivity and antisymmetry to the operators eab.

transitivity is a strong condition on the quantum history. one should keep in
mind that it was rst imposed on causal sets because it holds for the causal structure
of lorentzian spacetimes. signicantly, it does not just encode properties of the
ordering of events but also the fact that a lorentzian manifold is a point set.
in
general relativity, an event is a point and this has been imported in the causal set
approach.

to analyse this a little further, let us introduce a notation that indicates when
two events p and q are related by a shortest causal relation, i.e., no other event occurs
after p and before q. this is the covering relation:

 the event q covers p if p  q and there is no other event r with p  r  q.
we denote this by p  q.

9

the following are worth noting. for a nite causal set, transitivity means that
the order relation determines, and is determined by, the covering relation, since p  q
is equivalent to a nite sequence of covering relations p = p1  p2 . . .  pn = q.
on the other hand, in the continuum (for example the real line r) there are no
pairs p, q such that p  q [2]. hence, in a continuum spacetime, it is simply not
meaningful to consider an ordering that is not transitive. non-transitive ordering
requires distinguishing between the covering relations and the resulting transitive
ones. this distinction is not possible in the continuum case.

in short, for events that are points, it is sensible to expect that if p leads to q and q
to r, then r is in the future of p. if, however, the events were (for example) spacetime
regions of some nite volume, with overlaps, then it is unclear whether transitivity
would hold. (see also section 2.4 in [3].) in the causal histories we consider here,
an event is a hilbert space. it is, therefore, an open question whether it is sensible
to impose reexivity, transitivity and antisymmetry on the ordering of the hilbert
spaces. we choose to rst impose them, then nd what the implications are, and if
they are unphysical, go back and check which of the three conditions should not be
maintained in a quantum causal ordering.

on the positive side, there is a very interesting advantage to maintaining transi-
tivity. using (5), we have the benet of a directed coarse-graining invariance of the
quantum history. for example, if we are handed

p
3

p
4

p
5

p
8

p
6

p
1

p
9

p
7

p
2

(18)

and need to go from h(p1)  h(p2) to h(p3)  h(p4)  h(p5), we can reduce it to

p
3

p
4

p
5

.

p
1

p
2

(19)

clearly, several initial graphs will give the same coarse-grained graph. we return to
this in section 8.

it is very interesting to note that the coarse-graining implied by transitivity can
be used to improve the propagation of density matrices that we discussed in section

10

5.4. we can coarse-grain the causal set depicted in (17) by considering the events
p3, p4, p5, p6, p7 to be the acausal set w. this is a coarse-graining in the sense that we
ignore any causal relations between these events. we then obtain:

p
6

p
4

w

p
5

w

a

p
3

p
1

p
2

p
7

.

(20)

in this causal set, a and w are a complete pair. it is then possible to use an evolution
operator ea w to take the state |i  h(a) to a state in h( w) and then trace over
( w  w) to obtain a density matrix on h(w).

7 examples

in this section, we provide two examples of the quantum causal histories we dened
in section 4.

7.1 discrete newtonian evolution

a discrete newtonian history is a universe with a preferred time and foliation. it is
represented by a poset a which is a single complete pair sequence:

. . . an  an+1  an+2 . . . .

the corresponding quantum history is then

. . . hn  hn+1  hn+2 . . . .

(21)

(22)

with all the hilbert spaces isomorphic to each other.

we can denote by e the evolution operator from hn to hn+1. evolution from hn

to hm is then given by

enm = emn.

(23)

we may compare this universe to the standard one in quantum theory. there,
there is a single hilbert space for the entire universe and evolution is given by the
unitary operator eiht.
in the above, there is a sequence of identical and nite-
dimensional hilbert spaces. since evolution is by discrete steps, we may set t = 1.
then e = eih, for some hermitian operator h and enm = ei(mn)h .

11

7.2 a planar trivalent graph with hilbert spaces on the edges

this example is a history with multingered time [4]. it is a planar trivalent graph
with nite-dimensional hilbert spaces living on its edges. trivalent means either two
ingoing and one outgoing edges at a node, or two outgoing and one ingoing. we
exclude nodes with no ingoing or no outgoing edges.

from a given planar trivalent causal set c, we can obtain what we will call its
edge-set, ec. this is a new graph which has the covering relations of c (the edges,
not including any transitive ones) as its nodes. the covering relations in c are also
ordered and these relations are the edges in ec. figure 3 shows an example of a
causal set and its edge-set.

we now take the poset a of ec and construct a quantum history from it by
assigning hilbert spaces to the nodes of ec. the very interesting property of ec is
that it can be decomposed into pieces. there are two kinds of these,

h(e )
2

h(e )
3

h(e )
6

h(e )
1

h(e )
4

h(e )
5

.

(24)

each one is a complete (and full) pair. (this is generally the case, not only for trivalent
graphs.) such a decomposition is not possible in some general c and therefore, in
view of the problem we encountered in 5.3 above, ec provides an advantage over c.

to be able to employ unitary evolution operators, we need dim h(e1) = dim h(e2)+
dim h(e3) and dim h(e4) + dim h(e5) = dim h(e6). one can check that this can be
done consistently for all the events in the causal set.

although c is trivalent, the nodes of ec have valence 2,3, or 4. the list of possible

edges in c and the corresponding nodes in ec is:

(25)

12

figure 3: a causal set and its edge-set.

there is a substantial interpretational dierence between hilbert spaces on the
(covering) causal relations and on the events. a state space on the edge p  q is most
naturally interpeted as the state space of p as seen by q. if there are two edges
coming out of p, to q and r, then there are two hilbert spaces in ec, interpeted as
the hilbert space of p as seen by q and the hilbert space of p as seen by r. on the
other hand, a hilbert space placed on the event p is absolute, in the sense that is
independent of who is observing it.

8 summing over histories

the quantum causal histories we discussed in this paper require a xed poset a.
this is also necessary in the treatment of observers in a classical causal set universe
in [5]. since there is no physical reason that some causal set should be preferred over
all others, this restriction is unappealing.
in this section we outline a sum-over-
histories version of the evolution in section 4, which also applies to [5] and can be
used in any further work on quantum observers inside the universe.

an acausal set is a set of points. we have considered causal sets where all events
have at least one ingoing and one outgoing edge. then, that a, b are a complete pair
a (cid:22) b means that there is a directed graph with the set a as its domain and the set b
as its codomain. let us denote this graph by (a, b). a graph with b as its codomain
and one with b as its domain may be composed.

when a is given, there is one known graph (a, b) connecting a and b. if a is
not xed, we can sum over all graphs that we can t between a and b (that have a
nite number of nodes). this leads to a sum-over-histories version of the evolution
in section 4.

let us call e

ab the evolution operator (as in equation (3)) when the underlying
graph is (a, b). the transition amplitude from a state |ai  h(a) to a state
|bi  h(b) for this particular graph is

a = hb|e

ab|ai.

13

(26)

if the graph is not xed, we may sum over all the possible ones:

aab = x



hb|e

ab|ai.

(27)

now note that transitivity denes equivalence classes of graphs between given
acausal sets. here is an example of a series of graphs that, by transitivity, have the
same causal relations as far as a and b are concerned. specically, p1, p2, p3  p4 and
p3  p4, p5 in all of these graphs:

p
4

p
5

p
1

p
2

p
3

...

(28)

all of the above correspond to the same evolution operator in (27).

it is intriguing to compare this to the triangulation invariance of topological quan-
tum eld theory. transitivity can be intepreted as a directed triangulation invariance.
we will return to this in future work.

9 conclusions

we saw that it is possible to promote a causal set to a quantum one by taking
the events to be nite-dimensional hilbert spaces. it is natural to consider tensor
products of the hilbert spaces on events that are spacelike separated. this led us to
replace the causal set by the poset of acausal sets a. we dened quantum histories
with local unitary evolution maps between complete pairs in a.

we explored several of the features of these causal histories. a property of a
is that it splits into distinct sequences of complete pairs. consequently, this places
restrictions on which hilbert spaces can be reached from a given one. the condi-
tions of reexivity, antisymmetry and transitivity that hold for a were imposed on
the quantum history as conditions on the evolution operators. the most interesting
consequences were from transitivity, which gave rise to an invariance under directed
coarse-graining. this needs further investigation, since the physical assumption be-
hind transitivity is pointlike events. it will be interesting to consider events which
are extended objects and nd what ordering is suitable in this case.

we were able to tensor together the hilbert spaces for two acausal sets when they
are spacelike separated and have no events in common. however, it is natural to
consider cases where an acausal set is a subset of a larger one. it appears that, if
we need to use acausal sets, we should enrich a with the inclusion relation, that
is, use a poset with two ordering relations, causal ordering and spacelike inclusion.

14

while this is straightforward in the plain causal set case, it becomes tricky in the
quantum histories. for example, we may start from the acausal sets a = {q1, q2} and
a = {q1, q2, q3}. in the poset a we have a  a. in qa, the corresponding state
spaces are h(a) = h(q1)h(q2) and h(a) = h(q1)h(q2)h(q3). however, there
is no natural way in which h(a) is a subspace of h(a). that is, the set inclusion
relation is not directly preserved in the quantum theory.

in the quantum histories we discussed, we restricted the past and future hilbert
spaces to have the same dimension. this is the simplest case and needs to be gener-
alised. a related issue is the properties of the individual hilbert spaces. for example,
if we employ the causal spin network models of [7], the evolution operators should
respect the su(2) invariance of the state spaces. more generally, a discrete quantum
eld theory toy model can be constructed by inserting matter eld algebras on the
events. this will be addressed in future work.

finally, we set up qa having in mind a functor from a poset to hilbert spaces,
taking the elements and arrows of the poset into hilbert spaces and operators which
preserve the properties of the original poset, i.e. reexivity, antisymmetry and tran-
sitivity. it is also possible to use graphs between sets of events (rather than a xed
causal set), as outlined in section 8. in this case, the quantum causal histories become
similar to topological quantum eld theory except, importantly, they are directed
graphs (or triangulations). the coarse-graining invariance relations can be calculated
for given xed valence of the covering relations.

on the interpretational side, the main thing to note is that the causal history is a
collection of hilbert spaces which itself is not a hilbert space. according to quantum
theory, we can take tensor products of events that are not causally related. we cannot,
for example, take the tensor product of all the hilbert spaces in the history to be the
hilbert space of the entire history. as a result, the causal quantum cosmology is not
described in terms of a wavefunction of the universe. individual events (or observers
on the events) can have states and wavefunctions but the entire universe does not.
further discussion of the interpretation of the quantum causal histories will appear
in [8].

acknowledgment

i am grateful to chris isham for his comments on transitivity and the pointlike
structure of spacetime. this paper has beneted from discussions with lee smolin
on quantum theory and the interpetation of such histories as quantum cosmologies. i
am also grateful to sameer gupta and eli hawkins for discussions on causal histories.
this work was supported by nsf grants phy/9514240 and phy/9423950 to the

pennsylvania state university and a gift from the jesse phillips foundation.

15

references

[1] bombelli l, lee j, meyer d and r, 1987, space-time as a causal set, phys rev lett

59 521.

[2] b.a. davey and h.a. priestley, introduction to lattices and order, cambridge

university press, cambridge, 1992.

[3] isham c j, 1993,  quantum logic and the histories approach to quantum theory,

gr-qc/9308006.

[4] markopoulou f, 1997, dual formulation of spin network evolution, gr-qc/9704013.

[5] markopoulou f, 1998, the internal logic of causal sets: what the universe looks like

from the inside, gr-qc/98011053.

[6] markopoulou f and smolin l, 1997, causal evolution of spin networks, nucl phys

b508 409.

[7] markopoulou f and smolin l, 1998, quantum geometry with intrinsic local causal-

ity, phys rev d 58, 084032.

[8] markopoulou f and smolin l, 1999, causal quantum cosmology, to appear.

[9] meyer d a, 1988, the dimension of causal sets, phd thesis, massachussets institute

of technology.

[10] sorkin r, 1990, space-time and causal sets in proc. of silarg vii conf., cocoyoc,

mexico.

16

