hep-th/9904131

iassns-hep-99/38

tifr/th/99-16

9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
0
2

 

 
 

2
v
1
3
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

brane constructions, fractional branes

and anti-desitter domain walls

keshav dasgupta1

school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study

olden lane, princeton nj 08540, u.s.a.

sunil mukhi2

tata institute of fundamental research,

homi bhabha rd, mumbai 400 005, india

abstract

compactications of type iib string theory on ads5  x5, where x5 is an einstein
space, can have one-fourth or half maximal supersymmetry for certain choices of x5.
some of these theories admit exotic domain walls arising from 5-branes wrapping 2-cycles

in x5. we explore the relationship among these domain walls, fractional branes and branes
stretched on intervals. world-volume uxes in the wrapped branes play an important role

in the analysis. we draw some parallels between the ads background with exotic domain
walls and n = 1 supersymmetric mqcd, and identify other extended objects on the ads
side in the dual brane construction. the process of brane creation is used to give an

alternate derivation of the relationship between fractional branes and branes on intervals.

april 1999

1 e-mail: keshav@ias.edu
2 e-mail: mukhi@tifr.res.in

1. introduction

the study of branes at singularities has provided remarkable new insight into geometry

and gauge theory. within this circle of ideas, one should include the study of eld theories

on branes, both at quotient singularities[1,2] and at non-quotient singularities such as

conifolds[3], and the large-n limits of these two classes of congurations which give rise
to string and m-theory compactications on adsp  xq[4,5,6]. recently, useful knowledge
about these models has been obtained using brane constructions, following the original

idea of hanany and witten to realise eld theories by suspending branes between branes.

the simplest example of the above class of models is to consider a smooth space

transverse to the brane, (a trivial singularity, so to speak). for d3-branes in type iib
string theory, the transverse space is r6 and the large-n limit is believed to be dual to the
string theory on ads5  s5. this arises because r6 is a half-line bred over an s5 whose
size varies with distance from the origin, and the large-n limit blows up the varying s5

to instead have a constant size. this leads naturally to the expectation that the large-n

limit will have a nontrivial eect on any singularity that one may introduce.

continuing to work with d3-branes in type iib string theory, the simplest singularity
is a zn ale space. here the transverse space to the branes is r2  (r4/zn) where zn
has the obvious action as a subgroup of su (2) on the complex coordinates of r4.
in

this case, there is an entire xed plane of singularities transverse to the branes. in the

large-n limit, this singular locus gets reduced to the intersection of the xed plane and
an s5, which is a xed circle. the spacetime description becomes ads5  (s5/zn). half
the supersymmetries are broken in this case, as compared with the previous case, thus the

d3-brane gauge theory has n = 2 supersymmetry.

this example can be extended to n = 1 supersymmetry in two distinct ways. one is
to quotient r6 by the action of a group  that sits naturally in su (3), for example z3 or
zkzk . for the z3 case, the transverse space to the branes initially has a point singularity
at the origin, hence the large-n limit gives rise to compactication on a completely smooth

space. in the latter case, there are typically intersecting singularities both before and after

taking the large-n limit, though in special cases the space may be smooth.

the other way to extend these examples is to consider d3-branes transverse to more

general singularities that are not quotient singularities. the prototype of these examples
is the conifold singularity of a calabi-yau manifold. in this case one again gets n = 1
supersymmetry on the brane world-volume. the transverse space has a point singularity,

1

the node of the conifold, while in the large-n limit one has string theory on ads5  t1,1
where t1,1 is a smooth einstein space[7] which is the base of the conifold[8]. the cft

on the d3-brane at a conifold was analysed in ref.[3] and, via brane constructions, in

refs.[9,10].

there are more general 6-dimensional singularities than the conifold (the a-d-e gen-

eralized conifolds were rst described in ref.[11] in the context of noncritical strings, and

subsequently studied in the brane context in refs.[12,13]), which tend to have extended

singular loci rather than a single node. the large-n limits of these cases have also been

investigated[14,15,9,16,17,18].

there are other quotients of the basic conguration which correspond to orientifolding.

though we will not discuss them here, they too, present many interesting features.

in all the examples described above, one can give a dual brane construction by

performing a suitable t-duality. for example, the theory of n d3-branes at a zn ale

space is t-dual to a conguration of n parallel ns 5-branes in type iia string theory, with n
d4-branes stretching between them[19,20]. this is the so-called n = 2 elliptic model[21].
for more general quotient singularities one gets brane box congurations[22,23]. in these

models the spectrum and the superpotential can be read out using denite rules given in

ref.[22]. (however, as was shown recently in an interesting paper by aganagic et. al.[24],

these rules, according to which the superpotential is obtained by drawing closed triangles

across the boxes, are not true in general. to get the right quartic superpotential one has
to use the diamond rule[24]1. these rules reduce to the triangle rules only in special

circumstances.) similarly, the theory of n d3-branes at a conifold is dual to a conguration

of perpendicular ns 5-branes with n d4-branes stretching between them[9,10]. hence

it is possible to look for direct correspondences between brane constructions and ads

compactications.

since we will be interested in relating the above ideas to domain walls, let us briey

review the relevant known results. for concreteness, consider rst the system of n d3-
branes at a conifold. in the ads5  t1,1 model, it was argued[25] that there are two kinds
of domain walls in the ads5 spacetime. a domain wall in 5-dimensional spacetime must

be some kind of 3-brane.

in the present case one can introduce the d3-branes of type

iib string theory, or one can take a d5-brane and wrap it on a 2-cycle of the einstein

space t1,1. we will refer to the latter kind of domain wall as exotic. (alternatively one

1 this resolves a puzzle that was noted in ref.[10].

2

can also wrap an ns 5-brane, which is dual to the d5-brane under s-duality.) domain

walls can be oriented in dierent ways within ads, we will consider the orientations which

preserve all the supersymmetry (thus the brane is parallel to the ads5 boundary).

the key property of domain walls in ads compactications is that the radius of

the ads space jumps when one crosses them.

in terms of the dual gauge theory, the

rank of the gauge group increases or decreases across a domain wall. for the maximally
supersymmetric ads5s5 compactication, the gauge group goes from su (n ) to su (n +
1) across a domain wall made up of a d3-brane. this is the only possible domain wall in
this case, since s5 has no 2-cycles.

in the ads5  t1,1 case, the gauge group of the cft is su (n )  su (n ). inserting
a d3-brane changes the gauge group to su (n + 1)  su (n + 1). however, the exotic
domain wall obtained by wrapping a d5-brane on a 2-cycle of t1,1 (t1,1 is topologically
the same as s2  s3) changes the gauge group to su (n + 1)  su (n ).

the standard domain wall is easy to understand in the brane construction: its eect is

to add an extra d4-brane in the elliptic models, wrapping all the way around the compact

direction. as we will argue in some detail, the exotic domain wall corresponds to a d4-

brane stretching part of the way around a compact direction and then ending on parallel

ns 5-branes (this has been independently noted in ref.[16]).

that such an object can correspond to a wrapped d5-brane in the t-dual picture is

initially surprising, since the t-duality direction would appear to convert the d4 to a d3-

brane. however, this discrepancy of 2 dimensions is resolved by the observation that such

branes in a brane construction are actually fractional branes[26] of the t-dual theory.

fractional branes are interpreted as wrapped branes of 2 higher dimensions, wrapping a

2-cycle of vanishing size that is hidden in the singularity. they are supposed to acquire

their charge and tension from a ux of the 2-form eld bn s,n s through the vanishing

2-cycle, though we will see below that this is not the complete explanation.

since the large-n limit for n d3-branes at a conifold eectively blows up a vanishing
2-cycle of the conifold to a nite s2, the fractional branes at a conifold blow up into exotic

domain walls. since fractional branes have already been associated in refs.[20] with branes

stretched on an interval, the relation between the latter objects and domain walls seems

quite natural. however, we will see that world-volume eld strengths on the wrapped

branes play a crucial role in providing the right properties that are predicted by various

dualities.

3

we will also provide an independent argument for the relationship between domain

walls and stretched branes using the process of brane creation[27].

this paper is organized as follows. in section 2 we review the properties of 3-branes

at a z2 ale space and explain how fractional branes arise and how they are described in
a t-dual picture. although much of this material is known, we clarify the role of world-

volume uxes and the relationship of this system to the process of tachyon condensation

via a vortex solution on a brane anti-brane pair, which has been extensively discussed of

late[28,29,30]. the tachyon is actually absent in the limit relevant to our problem, but

the eld strength associated to the would-be vortex causes the pair to annihilate into a

lower brane. in section 3 we extend these considerations to the conifold singularity. in

particular, we observe that the kahler transition at bn s,n s = 0, t-dual to the crossing of
two ns 5-branes, corresponds to a jump in the total world-volume eld strength. in section

4 we turn to the large-n limit and the associated exotic domain walls. these are identied

with a t-dual description of branes on an interval. we provide a more complete picture

of the jump in the gauge group across such domain walls in the light of our observations

about world-volume uxes. we also relate the model in the presence of such domain walls
to mqcd. in section 5 we examine other wrapped branes in the ads5  t1,1 model, and
describe the corresponding objects in the t-dual brane construction. finally, in section

6 we provide an alternate derivation of the relationship between domain walls and branes

on intervals using the phenomenon of brane creation.

2. d4-branes on an interval: the n = 2 case

consider a pair of ns 5-branes in type iia theory. let us start by taking them parallel,
lling the directions (x1, . . . , x5), coincident in (x7, x8, x9) and separated by a nite interval
along x6. take the x6 direction to be compact. now take a d4-brane that terminates on
each of the ns 5-branes as a 3-brane along (x1, x2, x3), and stretches between them along
x6 (fig. (2.1)). next we t-dualize this circle.

ns5

ns5

ns5

d4

6

x

fig. (2.1): d4-brane on an interval

4

the result of this t-duality was considered in ref.[20] which used the fact that ns

5-branes turn into kaluza-klein monopoles of type iib theory. coincident kk monopoles

describe the near-horizon behaviour of an ale singularity. as they are t-dual to type iia

ns 5-branes, they carry tensor multiplets on their world-volumes. in [20] it was proposed

that the d4-brane on an interval turns into a fractional brane[26] at the ale singularity.
to see this, let us start with a singular z2 ale space2 along directions x6, x7, x8, x9.
the node is really a 5-plane lling the remaining directions. close to the singular point,

the space can be replaced by a 2-centre taub-nut metric with coincident centres. this

is equivalent to saying that we have two coincident kaluza-klein monopoles. we also

know[31] that the z2 orbifold hides half a unit of bn s,n s ux through the shrunk 2-cycle
. the four moduli associated to this ale space are three geometrical parameters, which

can be thought of as the blowup of the ale to form a smooth eguchi-hanson metric, and

the bn s,n s ux.

take a d3-brane transverse to the ale space, lling the directions x1, x2, x3. (more

generally we start with n such d3-branes.) when the ale space is singular, the world-

volume theory of the 3-brane has two branches: a higgs branch, when the brane is sepa-
rated from the singularity along x6, x7, x8, x9, and a coulomb branch when the brane hits

the singularity and dissociates into a pair of fractional branes which can move around
only in the x4, x5 directions. however, if the ale space is blown up, then the coulomb

branch is lifted.

the fractional branes are interpreted as a pair of d5-branes whose 5-brane charges

cancel (hence they are really a d5-brane  anti-d5-brane pair). however, they carry 3-

brane charge by virtue of the cs coupling on d5-branes. denoting the world-volume gauge

eld strength on the d5-brane by f1, we have the coupling

z (bn s,n s  f1)  d+

(2.1)

we haver bn s,n s = 1

where d+ is the self-dual 4-form potential in the type iib string. at the orbifold point
2 and hence half a unit of d3-brane charge. there is an apparent
puzzle here, since the anti-5-brane (whose world-volume gauge eld strength is f2) will
have a coupling

z (bn s,n s  f2)  d+

(2.2)

2 the considerations in this section have a straightforward extension to the case of zn, although

extending them to the other discrete groups of dn or en type could be somewhat nontrivial.

5

hence we would expect the anti-5-brane to acquire a  1
2 unit of d3-brane charge in this
way, resulting in a net d3-brane charge of 0, while we require it to be 1. the resolution

of this puzzle comes from the fact that the b-eld ux is not gauge-invariant. by gauge

transformations, it can be eectively made into a periodic variable taking values from 0 to
1. the correct gauge-invariant quantity on a brane is bn s,n s  f which appears in the
couplings above.

a ux of 1
this contributes 1

2 (which is the same as  1

hence what really happens is the following. viewed as a spacetime eld, bn s,n s has
2 since it is a periodic variable). from eqs.(2.1),(2.2),
2 to the anti-
5-brane. now let us also turn on a world-volume gauge eld strength f2 on the anti-brane

2 a unit of d3-brane charge to the wrapped 5-brane and  1

and give it a ux of +1 unit through the vanishing 2-cycle  (more generally, we assign
unit ux to the relative gauge eld f = f2  f1).
anti-5-brane pair has total 3-brane charge equal to 1.

in this conguration, the 5-brane

examining eqs.(2.1) and (2.2) above, we see that variations of the b-eld act equally

and oppositely on the brane and anti-brane. this changes the relative 3-brane charge on

each of them in such a way that the sum remains constant. thus it is not quite correct to

say that the total 3-brane charge and tension of the brane anti-brane pair arise from the

b-ux. such a statement is valid only if restricted to an individual brane, where one can

always gauge away the world-volume eld strength by a gauge transformation on bn s,n s.
next, perform a t-duality along x6. then the pair of kaluza-klein monopoles turns

into a pair of ns 5-branes in type iia string theory. we expect that the b-eld turns into

a geometrical modulus. in fact, it has been argued [20] that it becomes the separation
of the ns 5-branes along the x6 direction. the way to see this is that a d3-brane at a
z2 ale space has the following terms[1] in its world-volume action3 which depend on the
uxes of the 2-form elds bn s,n s and brr through the vanishing cycle of the ale space:

where

2

z 1
b1 z

(b1 f  f + b2 f  f )

bn s,n s,

b2 z

brr

(2.3)

(2.4)

3 it is known[32] that couplings of this type on d3-branes receive instanton corrections which
convert them into modular forms under sl(2,z) s-duality (a recent discussion can be found in

ref.[33]). it would be interesting to understand the analogous corrections in the present case.

6

the above formula is actually valid for one fractional 3-brane (say the wrapped d5-brane)
and we should replace bn s,n s by bn s,n s  f1. an analogous formula holds for the other
fractional 3-brane (the wrapped anti-d5-brane) with bn s,n sf1 replaced by (bn s,n s

along this direction produces a pair of ns 5-branes in type iia theory whose separation

f2). it follows that, withr f1 = 0 and r f2 = 1, the gauge couplings of the two u (1)
gauge groups are given byr bn s,n s and (1r bn s,n s) respectively. hence t-dualizing
along the x6 circle is proportional tor bn s,n s (in the other direction the separation is
therefore proportional to (1 r bn s,n s)).

the mapping between parameters has been discussed in ref.[20]. we will review

and extend this analysis in the light of our observations about the role of world-volume

gauge eld uxes on the brane. in the brane construction, the two ns 5-branes can move
around on the x6 circle or they can separate from each other along x7, x8, x9. these four

possible motions must correspond, on the orbifold side, to the four deformation parameters

associated to the orbifold string theory: three geometrical deformations (two complex and

one kahler) and a bn s,n s-eld modulus. on the higgs branch, the d3-brane is separated
from the ale singularity along x6, x7, x8, x9. in the t-dual type iia picture, the 4-brane
is separated from the ns 5-branes along x7, x8, x9 and has a wilson line along x6 in its
world-volume. in particular, even taking x7 = x8 = x9 = 0, so that the d4-brane touches

the ns 5-branes, it cannot split into pieces stretching on intervals as long as there is a

wilson line.

going to the coulomb branch, by tuning all of x6, x7, x8, x9 to 0, the picture is some-

what dierent. at this point the d3-brane splits into a pair of fractional branes which can
move independently along x4, x5. the geometric orbifold singularity now cannot be blown

up any more. this is easy to see on the t-dual type iia side, where the d4-brane splits

into two pieces that stretch along the two intervals between the two ns 5-branes (one
from each side of the x6 circle). these partially wrapped 4-branes can move independently
along the ns 5-branes, namely in the x4, x5 directions (fig. (2.2)).

ns5

ns5

ns5

d4

6

x

d4

fig. (2.2): wrapped d4-brane splits in two

7

when the d4-brane segments are separated, the ns 5-branes cannot be separated
along x7, x8, x9 without some cost in energy. this is dual to the statement in the type

iib theory that once a d3-brane has reached the orbifold and split into fractional branes

(i.e. on the coulomb branch), the orbifold singularity can no longer be resolved while

preserving supersymmetry.

we note in passing that since the d4-brane can split into two pieces which can separate

to arbitrary distances, by cluster decomposition we would expect each separate piece (a

d4-brane stretched on an interval) to be a valid state in the theory[26].

in type iib

language, this is equivalent to saying that a single fractional brane makes sense, though

the process of bringing a d-brane to a z2 singularity always generates fractional branes in

pairs.

on the coulomb branch, the ns 5-branes are still free to move around in the x6

direction, as they were in the higgs branch, with the position being t-dual to the ux

of bn s,n s. now we see that this motion also changes the relative tensions of the d4-

branes stretched along intervals (we are referring to the tensions from a (3+1)-dimensional

viewpoint), though the sum remains constant. these two facts are mutually consistent

only because, as we have pointed out above, the b-eld couples oppositely to the two
fractional branes as exhibited in eqs.(2.1),(2.2)4.

to summarise, the type iib picture on the coulomb branch is that the relative world-

volume gauge eld strength f on the 5-brane anti-5-brane pair must be turned on over the

2-cycle  and gives rise to a 3-brane in the space transverse to that cycle. the spacetime

bn s,n s ux over  changes the relative tensions of the wrapped brane and anti-brane

keeping the total constant. in the t-dual type iia picture, the bn s,n s ux corresponds
to the relative location of the ns 5-branes along x6, which has the same eect on the

3-brane tensions of the two nitely extended d4-brane segments.

this phenomenon is reminiscent of tachyon condensation, discussed in refs.[28,29,30].

it is interesting to compare the two. the phenomenon in refs.[28] involves a p-brane anti-

p-brane pair that supports a tachyon. one then allows the tachyon to condense in a

nontrivial conguration, in other words to develop a vev which depends on only two

spatial directions and resembles a vortex solution. the tachyon is charged under the

relative gauge eld f and its condensation is accompanied by an excitation of f with

4 thus in particular, we disagree with a claim made in ref.[20] (below eq.(12)) that the motion

of the ns5-branes in the type iia picture is related to wilson lines.

8

unit ux through a 2-cycle. (this 2-cycle is usually taken to be innite 2-space or else a 2-

torus.) the condensation phenomenon takes us from an unstable conguration consisting
of a p-brane anti-p-brane pair, to a stable conguration of a unit-charged (p  2)-brane.
multi-vortices create multi-charged (p  2)-branes.

our phenomenon involving fractional branes also gives rise to a unit charged (p  2)-
brane from a p-anti-p pair (in this case p = 5). again, the lower brane charge is created

by a ux of f in the world-volume theory. however, in this case the 2-cycle over which

f acquires a ux is of zero size. related to this is the fact that there is no tachyon
in this limit5. hence, going from the brane anti-brane pair to a lower-dimensional brane

does not lower energy, but instead corresponds to a marginal deformation. this means,

for example, that one can also go in the opposite direction: a d3-brane in the plane of

the ale space can split into a d5 anti-d5 pair, which is precisely the phenomenon we

started out to discuss. additionally, the distribution of 3-brane charge and tension between

5-brane and anti-5-brane can be varied by turning on the spacetime b-eld, which keeps

the total 3-brane charge xed.

thus, in the n = 2 supersymmetric example discussed above, of d3-branes at an
ale space, we see how a partially wrapped brane in type iia theory, becomes a fractional

brane in type iib. though this has already been discussed, for example, in ref.[20], we

have identied more precisely the interplay between the world-volume gauge elds and the

bn s,n s ux, which is essential to obtain a consistent picture. world-volume uxes on the

brane anti-brane pair at an orbifold singularity were used in refs.[34,35] in congurations
where the bn s,n s ux was xed at the orbifold value of 1
2 . here, motivated by the
brane construction dual, we have explained how the bn s,n s ux really determines only
the relative tensions of the pair. some consequences of this fact will be relevant in section

4.

our nal observation about this system has to do with a process in which the two
ns5-branes connected by d4-branes pass through each other6. recall the case discussed

5 an argument for this (due to ashoke sen) is the following: consider a brane anti-brane pair
wrapped on a 2-torus, with a 0-brane charge of 2 units. under t-duality, this turns into a pair

of 2-branes wrapped on the dual torus, with a nontrivial su (2) eld strength through it. the

fact that this is not a conguration of minimum energy in its sector corresponds to the tachyonic

instability. however, as the original torus shrinks, the dual torus becomes innite and the su (2)

eld strength (since it has constant ux through the dual torus) goes to zero. thus in the limit,

there is no tachyon.

6 this observation emerged in discussions with ashoke sen.

9

above, of a d4-brane going around x6, which has separated into two segments (fig. (2.2)).

let these be well-separated from each other. now let us bring the two ns5-branes together.

in this limit, one of the segments wraps the entire circle while the other shrinks to zero

length (fig. (2.3)).

ns5

ns5

d4

6

x

fig. (2.3): two ns5-branes coinciding

however, if we continue past this point and let the ns5-branes cross, then the rst d4-

brane segment wraps once around the circle and then a part of the way again. meanwhile

the other segment, which had shrunk to zero size, grows back with the opposite orientation

(fig. (2.4)).

ns5

ns5

ns5

d4
__
d4

d4

6

x

fig. (2.4): two ns5-branes cross (the dotted line is an anti-d4-brane)

the result is that along one direction between the ns5-branes, there is a pair of

segments of a d4-brane and an anti-d4-brane. these can annihilate, so the conguration

is unstable and supersymmetry must be broken.

in the dual picture of fractional 3-branes, one of them goes to zero tension and then

comes back as an anti-3-brane, while the other is like a marginally bound state of a d3-

brane and a fractional 3-brane. clearly this is a non-supersymmetric conguration.

10

3. d4-branes on an interval: the n = 1 case

let us now generalize this to an n = 1 example: d3-branes at a conifold singularity.
this singularity is localized at a point (the origin) in the (x4,    , x9) directions. the
analysis is quite similar to the previous case, except that there is really no coulomb branch

except the origin. the t-dual picture of the conifold is a pair of ns 5-branes of type iia

string theory, as for the z2 ale space, except that one of the 5-branes is rotated with
respect to the other[9,10]. thus the rst ns 5-brane lls the directions (x1, x2, x3, x4, x5)

as in the ale case, while the second one, conventionally called an ns 5-brane, stretches
along (x1, x2, x3, x8, x9). as before, they are separated along x6 which is the t-duality

direction (fig (3.1)).

ns5

ns5

ns5

6

x

fig. (3.1): brane construction dual to conifold

this time the process of bringing a d3-brane (which lls the (x1, x2, x3) directions)
to the conifold involves tuning the 6 coordinates (x4,    , x9) to zero. in the t-dual type
iia description, the process consists of taking a d4-brane that lls (x1, x2, x3, x6), and
bringing it to a xed set of values of the remaining 5 coordinates  these are the (x8, x9)
locations of the ns 5-brane, the (x4, x5) locations of the ns 5-brane and the common x7

location of both of them. finally, a wilson line in the d4-brane world-volume replaces the
x6 location of the d3-brane on the type iib side.

now, unlike in the n = 2 case, the d3-brane cannot really split into fractional branes
which move apart. the reason is clear in the dual picture: the rotation on one ns 5-brane

has lifted the coulomb branch. nevertheless, it is consistent to think of the d4-brane
which wraps around the x6 direction as being made up of a pair of fractional branes which
stretch between the ns 5-brane and the ns 5-brane along opposite sides of the x6 circle.
locally, near one of the ns 5-branes, the d4-brane will behave exactly as for the n = 2
supersymmetric case discussed in the previous section (this fact was exploited in ref.[10]
to extract the spectrum and symmetries of the n = 1 theory). moreover, at the level of

11

world-volume gauge theory too, one can see the origin of the coulomb branch: the gauge

group has two su (n ) factors (assuming we brought n d3-branes to the conifold).

the main dierence between this case and the ale singularity is that here the d4-

brane charge does not need to ow onto the ns 5-brane, but passes right through and
travels around the x6 circle. in the m-theory limit, this means that the d4 and ns 5-branes

do not unify into a single m5-brane, but remain three separate components[10].

it is clear from the geometry in the type iia t-dual picture that one can vary the
gauge couplings by moving the ns 5-branes along the compact x6 direction. just as for

the ale case, this corresponds to changing the relative sizes of two fractional branes, even

if here this is not very meaningful because the original d3-brane cannot really split into

separated fractional branes. nevertheless the phenomenon is one that we have encountered

earlier, that of turning on a unit ux of f in the world-volume theory of a d5 anti-d5

pair, and then varying the spacetime bn s,n s ux. these uxes are now through the

2-cycle of the conifold that has shrunk to zero size.

because of the absence of a coulomb branch, the interpretation in terms of fractional

branes may appear somewhat trivial in the conifold case. however, it is possible for us to

add a single fractional brane to this picture. on the type iib side, we consider the state in

which a single d5-brane wraps the vanishing 2-cycle of the conifold. just as in the case of

the ale singularity, there is a special point in moduli space where this 2-cycle naturally

conceals half a unit of bn s,n s ux, so the result is half a 3-brane. on the type iia side,

this is one extra d4-brane stretching between the ns 5-brane and ns 5-brane along one
side of the x6 circle only (fig. (3.2)).

ns5

ns5

ns5

x6

fig. (3.2): fractional brane at a conifold

thus we see that the identication between fractional branes and branes on an interval

holds for the conifold theory too.

this has an interesting consequence: we had noted above that in the m-theory limit,
a d4-brane wrapped along x6 becomes an m5-brane which passes through the orthogonal

12

m5-branes at xed locations in x6. with the addition of a fractional brane, this no longer

happens. the fractional brane will correspond, in the m-theory limit, to an m5-brane

that ares out and joins smoothly onto the orthogonal m5-branes (fig. (3.3)). as a

result, the m-theory conguration which in the absence of a fractional brane consisted

of three disconnected sets of m5-branes, becomes joined in an obvious way as soon as a
single fractional brane is added to the system. the m5-branes which wrap around x6, x10

are unaected but the two m5-branes which in the type iia limit correspond to the ns5

and ns5 branes respectively, get linked to each other. this reduces the symmetries of

the (3+1)-d eld theory and introduces dynamical eects into the model similar to those
studied in the context of n = 1 supersymmetric qcd in ref.[36]. we will examine some
of these eects in subsequent sections.

m5

m5

m5

x6

fig. (3.3): m-theory limit of fractional

brane at a conifold

the issues discussed above also have a bearing on the kahler transition discussed in

the context of the brane construction dual to generalized conifolds, in ref.[9,18]. this is a
phase transition in a limited sense: by separating the branes along the x7 direction one
can go around this point in moduli space, but if we keep the x7 locations equal then we pass

through a singularity. in ref.[9] it was pointed out that on the conifold (type iib) side, this

transition is a non-geometrical analogue of the well-known op transition (in the latter
case we would keep the 5-branes coincident along x6 and change their x7 separation until
they pass through each other). unlike the op, obtained by formally varying a p 1 from

positive to negative size, the present kahler transition arises by varying the bn s,n s ux

from a positive to a negative value.

from our discussion, we get some new insight into this process. we will conne our-

selves to the simple conifold and ask what happens when the ns5-brane passes through the

ns 5-brane. in the absence of d4-branes stretching between the 5-branes, this transition

is trivial: the conguration of an ns5-brane followed by an ns 5-brane is equivalent to the

13

one with reverse ordering by an overall translation along x6. however, when a d4-brane

is stretched around the x6 circle, something more nontrivial happens. as we have seen,

this d4-brane is a wrapped d5 anti-d5 pair in the type iib description. suppose initially

r bn s,n s =  where  is a small positive number. now varyr bn s,n s so that it passes

through zero and becomes . at this point, we need to change f1 and f2 so that we can
re-interpret the system as having positive bn s,n s-ux. the required change is:

f1 = 0  f1 = 1
f2 = 1  f2 = 2

(3.1)

this allows us to claim that the bn s,n s ux is (1  ), which is positive and within the
desired range. notice that in the process, f is unchanged but f+ has jumped. the total

d3-brane number is conserved, as it must be since the system initially consisted of one

d3-brane at the conifold.

note that the jump in f+ does not really correspond to the creation of any object as

we pass through this phase transition. the world-volume action of the d5 anti-d5 pair

contains the couplings:

z (cid:0)f  d+ + (bn s,n s  f+)  (bn s,n s  f+) + f  f(cid:1)

(3.2)

where the rst term is a chern-simons coupling and the remaining ones come from the

dirac-born-infeld action7. the gauge transformation that we performed leaves the whole

expression above unchanged.

thus we learn that the kahler transition for the simple conifold can be interpreted as a

jump in the value of the total world-volume eld strength f+ on the brane anti-brane pair.

the situation will be more interesting for the generalized a-d-e conifolds[11], considered

in the present context in refs.[14,15,9,16,18], where the brane construction has several ns

and ns 5-branes and by passing them through each other the ordering is changed. this

should be worth exploring in more detail.

7 as pointed out in ref.[37], for a brane anti-brane pair the terms which come from the dbi

action, unlike the chern-simons terms, have to be added rather than subtracted, because they

involve a scalar product rather than a wedge product of tensors.

14

4. domain walls

we have been discussing two related theories, one involving n d3-branes at a z2 ale

singularity, and the other involving the same branes but at the node of a conifold. we will

now be interested in the large-n limit of these two theories.

in this limit, the former system is dual to type iib string theory compactied on
ads5  (s5/z2), where z2 reverses 4 of the 6 directions in which the s5 is embedded.
the latter, on the other hand, is dual to type iib theory on ads5  t1,1 where t1,1 is
the einstein manifold discussed in ref.[7], where it is obtained as a particular quotient
of the form su (2)  su (2)/u (1) preserving supersymmetry. in the present context, the
emergence of this space is a consequence of the fact that the conifold is a bration of a

half-line over t1,1.

these two cases correspond to compactications of string theory with 1

2 and 1
4 -
maximal supersymmetry respectively. in both cases, our goal is to understand what be-

comes of a fractional brane, namely a d5-brane that was wrapped around the singularity,

once we introduce n d3-branes and go to large n. since the considerations are reasonably

analogous for the two cases, we will only discuss the second one in detail. for this, we will

need some details of the geometry of the space t1,1.

the metric of t1,1 can be expressed in terms of 5 angular coordinates, , 1, 1, 2, 2

as[8]:

ds2 =

1
6

2xi=1

(d2

i + sin2i d2

i ) +

1
9

(d + cos1d1 + cos2d2)2

(4.1)

t1,1 is topologically just s2  s3. the s2 here is precisely the result of blowing up
the vanishing 2-cycle in the conifold. the blowing up is not the usual resolution of the

singularity, but rather a change in geometry induced by the distortion of space in the

neighbourhood of n d3-branes.

hence we start with the type iib theory on a conifold, with n d3-branes located at
the node. wrap a d5-brane on the s2 factor of the base t1,1, = s2  s3. this is the
domain wall of ref.[25].

as we will see below, this s2 is really the dierence (in the sense of homology) of the
two s2s which form the base of the u (1) bration giving t1,1. in other words, the the s2
on which the 5-brane is wrapped to give a domain wall can be written

s2 = (s2)1  (s2)2

15

(4.2)

in the brane construction, (s2)1 is just the compactied (45) plane while (s2)2 is the
compactied (89) plane[10]. this means that the dual object to the domain wall in the

type iia picture is something that carries a charge away from the (45) plane and deposits

it on the (89) plane.

a 4-brane ending on the rst ns 5-brane carries away a charge from it, and if it also

terminates on the ns 5-brane then it deposits the charge on that. moreover, since the

boundary of a 4-brane ending on a 5-brane is like a 3-brane (in the (0123) directions), the

transverse space to the boundary is a 2-dimensional space, namely the (45) plane or the

(89) plane respectively. hence such a 4-brane carries charge away from the (45) plane and

deposits it on the (89) plane.

this shows that the dual to the domain wall is a 4-brane stretched between the ns
and ns 5-branes. it does not go all the way around the x6 direction, but stretches along

only one of the two segments between the branes. thus, as promised, we see that the

brane on an interval (which we have identied above with a fractional brane) maps onto

an exotic domain wall formed by a d5-brane wrapping a cycle of nite size, once we go to

the near-horizon ads description.

we can exploit the relationship between this model and the n = 1 supersymmetric
mqcd model of ref.[36] to make this more precise. as we pointed out in section 3, a d4-

brane stretched between an ns5 and an ns5 brane becomes joined into a single m5-brane

in the m-theory limit, illustrated in fig. (3.3). the conguration in this gure resembles
the brane construction of ref.[36] with the dierence that here the x6 direction is compact
(as a result, the model with n fractional branes has gauge group su (n + n) su (n ) with
negative -function for the rst factor and positive -function for the second. for large

n , these -functions will only show up to subleading order in 1/n .)

now we are interested in going to an ads limit, so we start with n d3-branes at a
conifold singularity and then wrap a d5-brane around the s2 cycle of t1,1. in the brane
construction, this corresponds to n d4-branes wrapping all the way around x6 and an

additional d4-brane stretching along one direction between the ns and ns 5-branes. in

the m-theory limit of this conguration, the fully wrapped d4-branes turn into n m5-
branes toroidally wrapped on x6, x10. these are decoupled from the remaining branes of

the problem. the single d4-brane on an interval, along with the ns and ns 5-branes on

which it ends, turns into a single m5-brane which was extensively analyzed in ref.[36]. in
our conventions, it is appropriate to dene v = x4 + ix5 and w = x8 + ix9 (these dier from
the conventions in ref.[36] by the interchange x7  x9). we will also need the variable

16

t = exp(x6 + ix10/r), although this is not periodic in x6 so we should use it only for a
nite range of values of x6. the result of ref.[36] is that the single m5-brane in question
is wrapped on a holomorphic curve  in the complex (v, w, t) space given by (recall that

there is a single d4-brane for the moment, so the parameter n in ref.[36] is equal to 1):

v = w1 = t

(4.3)

recalling that the v and w-planes are related[10] to what we have been calling (s2)1 and
(s2)2 above, these equations give a precise meaning to our earlier statement that the
fractional brane is an object wrapping (s2)1  (s2)2 and stretching along x6.

from the brane construction, it is clear that the gauge group jumps from su (n ) 
su (n ) to su (n + 1)  su (n ) as we cross such a domain wall, as predicted in ref.[25]
from dierent considerations. in our picture, the enhancement of the gauge group is due

to open strings connecting the d4-brane on the interval and the remaining d4-branes to

which it is parallel and coincident over a segment. however, we will see shortly that the

full story is more interesting.

to complete the above arguments, we must show that s2 of t1,1 is (s2)1  (s2)2.
a basis of vielbeins on t1,1 is given in appendix (a) of ref.[8]. one can make various
2-forms out of these, but the question is which ones are in the cohomology. in particular,

we can write the two 2-forms

sin 1 d1 d1  sin 2 d2 d2

(4.4)

both of which live only on the two s2 factors in t1,1, and are independent of the u (1)
bre.

both these 2-forms can be written formally as exact forms, namely the above expres-

sions are equal to

d(cos 1 d1  cos 2 d2)

(4.5)

however, the expressions in brackets above are ill-dened when any of the i is equal to 0
or , since in that case we are at the north or south pole of one of the 2-spheres and the

coordinate i is undened there. however, the term with the + sign can be modied to:

d(d + cos 1 d1 + cos 2 d2)  de

(4.6)

where e is one of the ve vielbeins, and is globally dened because  is allowed to have

gauge transformations. it follows that the term with the + sign in eq.(4.4) is genuinely

17

exact, leaving the one with the minus sign as the representative of the second cohomology.
from this in turn one deduces that in homology, the s2 factor in s2  s3 is the dierence
of the two s2s parametrized by 1, 1 and 2, 2 respectively, or in our brane construction,
by x4, x5 and x8, x9 respectively.

returning now to the exotic domain wall, we have observed that it is the large-n

version of a fractional brane. at a z2 singularity or a simple conifold, a very natural
conguration (the one studied in previous sections) consisted of a pair of fractional branes.

the analogue in the large-n limit will be a 5-brane anti-5-brane pair wrapped around the

2-cycle of the einstein space t1,1.

in ref.[25] it was observed that while a 5-brane wrapped on s2 is an exotic domain wall
which increments the gauge group from su (n ) su (n ) to su (n + 1) su (n ), an anti-
5-brane wrapped on the same cycle reduces the gauge group back to su (n )  su (n ).
according to our picture, the way to understand this is that the wrapped 5-brane is a

fractional 3-brane, while the wrapped anti-5-brane is a fractional anti-3-brane. the two

can then simply annihilate. but now from the analysis in the previous sections, we see

that there is a new possibility. suppose that on the wrapped 5-brane anti-5-brane pair we

turn on a unit ux of the relative world-volume gauge eld f. the result is that the pair

annihilates into a d3-brane. on the gauge theory side, the gauge group is incremented
from su (n )  su (n ) to su (n + 1)  su (n + 1).

this can be understood in two steps. suppose we choose to turn on a unit ux of

f by assigning f1 = 0, f2 = 1. then the wrapped 5-brane increases the gauge group
from su (n )  su (n ) to su (n + 1)  su (n ) while the second one further enhances
it to su (n + 1)  su (n + 1). we see that the dierence between the two factors of
the gauge group is only partly a matter of convention. if we choose conventions where

a 5-brane (with no uxes) increments the rst factor, then an anti-5-brane decreases the

same factor. however, as we will show directly below, a ux ofr f1 = m1 on the 5-brane
decreases both factors by m1 units, and a ux ofr f2 = m2 increases both factors by m2

units. as a result, a 5-brane with an arbitrary ux m1 ends up changing the gauge group
to su (n + 1 m1) su (n  m1) while an anti-5-brane with an arbitrary ux m2 changes
it to su (n  1 + m2)  su (n + m2). in particular, it follows that an anti-5-brane with
one unit of ux increments the second factor and not the rst.

to show that world-volume uxes have the claimed eect on the gauge group of the

theory, we use an observation in ref.[25]. the baryon-like operators constructed there have
quantum numbers (n + 1, 1) and (1, n + 1) under the global su (2)  su (2) symmetry

18

group of the theory. this can be traced to the (n + 1)-fold degeneracy of the ground

state for wrapped d3-branes (which classically are just non-relativistic charged particles
localized on s2). this degeneracy is attributed to the fact that 5-form ux through t1,1
gives rise to magnetic ux through s2, which imposes a minimum angular momentum on
the charged particle propagating on s2. the world-volume uxes in our picture are simply

additional to the magnetic ux coming from wrapped 5-branes. on a 5-brane, m1 units of
this ux decrease the degeneracy8 from n + 1 to n  m1 + 1, implying that the baryons
have su(2) quantum numbers equal to (n  m1 + 1, 1) and (1, n  m1 + 1). it follows that
the world-volume ux alone would convert the gauge group to su (n m1)su (n m1),
which is what we wanted to show.

one may ask whether our picture of the relationship between world-volume uxes and

the tachyon condensation phenomenon on the brane anti-brane pair survives the large-n
limit. the string theory on ads5  t1,1 is the large-n limit of n d3-branes at a conifold,
and we have argued in a previous section that for any n there is no tachyon on the pair.

however, in the large-n limit the geometry of the spacetime is completely modied. one

consequence is that the exotic domain wall has a nite tension even in the absence of

bn s,n s-uxes and world-volume eld strengths. this tension will be of order the product
of the d5-brane tension and the volume of s2, or roughly

1

gs()3  r2 

n

gsn ()2

(4.7)

this contrasts with the fact that the corresponding object in at space would be tensionless.

since that fact was crucial in arguing for the absence of tachyons on the brane anti-brane

pair, it remains to be understood what is the correct statement that one can make about

tachyons on a domain-wall anti-domain-wall pair.

the fact that the bn s,n s ux through s2 changes the tension of the domain wall can

be seen quite directly. in this situation there is a nonzero eld strength of hrr = dbrr
through the s3 factor on one side of the domain wall. the bn s,n s ux creates a net
3-brane charge, which is a ux of dd+. thus we have nonzero and correlated values of
bn s,n s, dbrr and dd+, as expected from the fact that the spacetime type iib theory

8 the degeneracy is decreased and not increased because the world-volume gauge eld couples

has a couplingr bn s,n s  dbrr  dd+.

with the opposite sign from bn s,n s.

19

5. other extended objects

in the type iib compactication on ads5  t1,1 there are stable objects arising from
wrapped branes over various cycles. for example, a fat string arises[25] from wrapping
a d3-brane over the s2 factor in t1,1. this object can be easily identied in the t-dual
brane construction. it is a 2-brane stretching between the ns and ns 5-branes. thus it
extends for a nite distance along x6 and for an innite distance along one of x1, x2, x3

depending on how we choose to orient the string.

in the brane construction it is clear that if we stretch a d2-brane and a d4-brane

between an ns and ns 5-brane then all supersymmetries will be broken, in agreement

with the fact that this fat string is not expected to be a bps object. however, from
the fact that s2 is a nontrivial homology cycle, the fat string appears to be stable. it is

interesting to compare this string with the qcd string arising in the model of ref.[36].

evidently the fat string is rather dierent. the qcd string, while also non-bps, can

annihilate in groups of n where the mqcd gauge group is su (n). for n = 1, the case of

a single fractional brane, the qcd string would therefore be unstable. moreover, even for

arbitrary n, it is given by an m-theory membrane wrapped in a way quite dierent from
what we have described above. for example, while our membrane stretches along x6, the
qcd string arises from a membrane at a xed value of x6.

besides the d3-brane and the d5-brane, one can also wrap ns5-branes or more gen-
erally (p, q) 5-branes on s2. these are all obtained from a d5-brane using s-duality. on

the brane construction side, the picture is clearest after going to the m-theory limit. in

this limit, we have a conguration as in fig. (3.3). if we had started with a d5-brane, the
horizontal tube of m5-brane in the gure would have been wrapped on the x10 direction
while extending along the x6 direction. if instead we start with a (p, q) 5-brane, then this
tube is wrapped on a (p, q) cycle of the 2-torus whose coordinates are x6, x10.

next, consider the d3-brane wrapped on s3. before taking the large-n limit, this

corresponds to the much-discussed bps state which becomes massless at the conifold

point in the moduli space of a calabi-yau manifold[38]. at large-n, this state is no longer

massless, and instead corresponds to the baryon of ref.[25]. after t-dualizing, this state
should be a 2-brane wrapped on some combination of the x4, x5 and x8, x9 directions.

this is because, as shown in ref.[10], the direction  in the metric of t1,1 (see eq.(4.1))
is identied with the t-duality direction x6. the cycle s3 can be viewed as a bration

of  over a 2-sphere parametrized by some combination of 1, 1, 2, 2. according to the

20

analysis of ref.[10], these map to the x4, x5, x8, x9 directions. thus, t-dualizing along the
x6 direction converts the wrapped 3-brane to a 2-brane wrapped over a 2-cycle in these 4

directions.

in fact, as pointed out in ref.[10], the x4, x5 and x8, x9 pairs of directions should each

correspond to 2-spheres rather than planes as they do in the brane construction. this

limitation of the brane construction makes it somewhat dicult to understand in more

detail the state obtained by wrapping a 2-brane over the 2-cycle above.

finally, a d5-brane wrapping s3 gives rise to a fat membrane.

in the t-dual

picture, this object will be similar to the baryon above, except that it has two additional
dimensions lling a plane in the x1, x2, x3 directions. thus it is a d4-brane stretching
along, say, x1, x2 and a 2-cycle in x4, x5, x8, x9. although this object does not stretch
along x6, it is wrapped on x10. hence again it will have (p, q) duals which are wrapped on
a (p, q)-cycle of the x6, x10 2-torus. these will correspond in the type iib theory to (p, q)
fat membranes obtained by wrapping (p, q) 5-branes over s3.

it is intriguing that mqcd too has a membrane in it, the qcd domain wall, described

as an m5-brane wrapping a supersymmetric 3-cycle[36]. the conguration above also lifts

to an m5-brane wrapping a 3-cycle, but it is not expected to be a bps object, and the

wrapping directions are rather dierent. nevertheless, we nd it curious that our model and

mqcd both have some kind of fat string and domain wall that are described respectively

by an m-theory membrane and a 5-brane. this may be related to the fact that our model

in the presence of exotic domain walls resembles mqcd, as noted in section 4.

6. fractional branes and brane creation

in this section we will give a new argument for the existence of fractional branes in

conifold like models. the argument is based on the technique of brane creation. certain

congurations of branes suspended between two innitely extended branes can be thought

of as being created by crossing the two extended branes. since we are looking for the

t-dual of such models, it will be simpler to t-dualize the initial conguration and then

represent the crossing by turning on a wilson line in the nal picture. this wilson line

will give rise to congurations which will be interpreted as the t-dual of the suspended

brane.

however, as we shall see, not all congurations of suspended branes lead to fractional

branes. the existence of fractional branes is due to some special properties of taub-nut

21

spaces which appear as a consequence of t-duality on the innitely extended branes. we

start with a conguration of a fundamental string between two d4-branes.

consider two d4-branes along

d4 :
d4 :

3

2

1

0
0     5

4     
8 

6

7

(6.1)

where x9 is a compact direction. initially the two d4-branes are at a nite distance along
x9. when they cross on the circle, an f-string is created. the reason is that a d4 is

a magnetic source of the 3-form potential c, and when another d4 crosses the rst

one there is a jump in the ux of the corresponding eld strength g. due to the

chern-simons coupling r g  a on the world volume of the d4-brane (a is the gauge
eld) this jump leads to a coupling r a on the world-line of the intersection point. this

corresponds to a source term for the world-volume gauge eld, which will in general break

supersymmetry. to get a bps state, according to ref.[39], we have to excite another
world-volume scalar, say x9. therefore when one d4 crosses another, it pulls out a piece

of the second d4 as a spike. this spike is a fundamental string[27,40,41].

we would like to determine the t-dual of this conguration, of two d4-branes con-

nected by a f-string. to do this we instead t-dualize the initial conguration, of the two

d4 before crossing, and then turn on a wilson line in the nal picture. the t-duality is
made along x9. the d4-branes will become two d5-branes intersecting along a (wrapped)

string.

the relative velocity of the d4-branes translates into a time-varying wilson line on

the circle [41]:

z d2x   x9

(1)

t 

x9

(2)

t !

t9 z d2x   a9

(1)

t 

a9

(1)

t !

(6.2)

the rhs is a 1 + 1d chiral anomaly r  ab aab, where  is the gauge-transformation

parameter. this anomaly is due to a chiral fermion propagating along the intersection of
the two d5 branes9.

9 since this fermion at the intersection is chiral, we cannot give it a mass by moving the two
d5-branes apart. that this is the case is apparent from the world-volume directions of the two

d5 branes or, in the t-dual, of the two d4-branes. this shows that brane creation can only occur

if we have have branes which together ll out eight spatial directions

22

the term which cancels the anomaly is

s =z hrr  a  f

(6.3)

on the world volume of each d5. hrr = dbrr, the pullback of the background three

form, in the absence of any source. the cancellation takes place via anomaly inow. we

have a coupling, eq (6.3) , in 5 + 1d spacetime. along a 1 + 1d subspace of this, chiral

fermions propagate and give rise to the anomaly eq.(6.2). now in the original picture,

of two d4-branes crossing, we saw that on each d4-brane there is a change of ux of g.

therefore here, since d5-branes are a magnetic source of hrr, we nd that changing the

wilson line produces a change of ux of hrr. in other words, a gauge transformation

a = d on the world-volume will vary eq.(6.3) by r dhrr  (f ). since dhrr 6= 0 in

the presence of a magnetic source of hrr ux, we end up with:

s = z d2x  abaab

(6.4)

this is the inow which cancels the anomaly.

thus in the t-dual picture we get 0-branes (which are chiral fermions coming from the

string joining the d5-branes) on the two d5-branes. the anomaly is cancelled by inow.

to summarise, we see that in the d4-d4 system the ux change creates a spike to preserve

supersymmetry, while in the d5-d5 system the ux change creates an anomaly inow to

cancel the anomaly due to chiral fermions.

now consider another example of a d4-brane between an ns5-brane and a d6-brane.

this conguration is closely related to the congurations we have been studying in the

previous sections. the orientations of the branes are as follows:

n s5 :
d4 :
d6 :

0 1
0 1
0 1

4

5    
2 3
2 3   6   
2 3    7
9

8

we are considering this conguration because a d4-brane gets created when we move a
d6 across ns5 along x6, which is chosen to be a compact direction of radius r. we want
to determine the resulting conguration after performing a t-duality along x6.

the idea, as before, is to t-dualize the initial conguration of an ns5 and a d6-brane.

the crossing of the branes will now be reected as an asymptotic wilson line on the 7 + 1

dimensional gauge theory.

23

the reason why a d4-brane is created when we move a d6 across an ns5 is as follows.

on the world volume of the ns5-brane there propagates a chiral (2,0) tensor multiplet
whose elds are (b+

, 5). the ns5-brane and the d6-brane are magnetic sources of the
spacetime 2-form potential bn s,n s and 1-form rr potential a respectively. the relevant

coupling on the world volume of the ns5-brane is

z a  d =z a  dc4

(6.5)

dc4 = d is the six dimensional dual of a world-volume scalar. from the previous

arguments we see that there is a source ofr c4 on the world volume of the ns5 when it

is crossed by a d6-brane. by itself, such a c4 background will break supersymmetry. to
preserve supersymmetry we need to excite a scalar x6 which will satisfy

2x6 = (x)(y)

(6.6)

where x, y are coordinates of the world-volume. observe that 2 involves all the six

coordinates of the ns5-brane, but (x)(y) depends only on two of these coordinates.

therefore the spike will be translationally invariant along three directions. this implies

that we have a four-brane. a similar conclusion can also be arrived at by doing a series

of s and t-dualities to the d4-d4 system. the t-dualities are all done orthogonal to the

compact direction.

from the d6-brane side we have a coupling

z bn s,n s  f =z bn s,n s  dc4

(6.7)

this clearly leads to the same result.

now, as before, consider t-dualizing the initial conguration. the ns5 brane will

become a taub-nut space and the d6-brane will become a d7-brane wrapping the taub-
nut space (which has a non-trivial metric along the (x6, x7, x8, x9) directions). the
multiplet propagating on the taub-nut 5-plane, i.e. along the (x0, x1, x2, x3, x4, x5)
directions, is again (b+
the ten-dimensional rr 4-form d+

 comes from reducing
(x) l2(y), where x, y are coordinates along
the 012345 directions and the taub-nut space respectively, and l2(y) is the normalizable

 , 5). the self-dual antisymmetric tensor b+

 as b+

harmonic two-form on taub-nut space. the ve scalars can be identied as follows: two

of them come from the axion-dilaton of type iib and another two arise as an l2 reduction

24

of the ns-ns and rr b-elds of the type iib theory. the fth scalar is the gravity

uctuation. various couplings of these elds with background iib elds can be worked out

easily starting from the non-selfdual action of iib supergravity.

the d7-brane wrapping the taub-nut space will give rise to a d3-brane bound to it.

the charge of the d3-brane is given by the non-trivial bn s,n s background on the taub-

nut. to see this, consider some of the couplings on the world volume of the d7-brane (we

are neglecting constant factors in front of each terms):

z e + z d+  f  bn s,n s + z d+  f  f + ...
these couplings are derived from the wz couplingr c  ebf , where c is the formal sum
of the rr potentials. the rst termr e gives the charge of the d7-brane.

now the motion of the d6 will turn into a wilson line on the d7. the point where

(6.8)

the two branes, ns5 and d6, touch is the zero of the wilson line. any positive value of the

wilson line will tell us how far apart the two branes are after crossing. however, observe

that there is no global cycle now. far away from the centre of the taub-nut, the space
looks like r3  s1 but there is no non-trivial circle at the centre. therefore, we cannot
turn on a at connection on this space. instead, a self-dual connection can be turned on10.

this self-dual connection satises the following equation on the taub-nut space:

f = da = l2

(6.9)

where l2 is the unique normalizable harmonic two-form on the taub-nut space. this

harmonic two form, being normalizable, goes to zero at innity, hence we have a at

connection there. at innity there is an s1 and therefore the at connection corresponds

to a wilson line.

in such a background, we can decompose the eld strength f as

f = l2 + f1

(6.10)

10 we would like to thank anton kapustin and angel uranga for discussions on this point.

25

f1 will now appear as a gauge eld on the d7 (or taub-nut plane). inserting eq.(6.10)
in eq.(6.8) and integrating out l2, we have the following couplings:

7  brane :

5  brane :

3  brane :

z e +z d+  f1  f1
z d+  (bn s,n s  f1)
z d+

(6.11)

the term r d+ is just the d3-brane charge. this is the usual d3 which appears as an

instanton on the d7. in the original picture this will correspond to a d4 stretching all the
way around the compact circle x6.

the 5-brane term is more interesting. this also gives rise to a d3-brane charge. but
11. therefore we have here another source of d3-

the charge is measured by r bn s,n s
brane charge  a wrapped ve brane. if r bn s,n s is fractional we will get a fractional
r crr  f m  bn for m + n > 4 do not contribute to the result. this fractional brane is

d3-brane here. since bn s,n s and l2 are dened only on the taub-nut space, terms like

related to the discussions of the previous sections. we will make the identication more

precise shortly.

another point to consider is the following.

in the original picture we can have a

situation in which the d6-brane is xed but now the ns5 brane moves.

in the t-dual

picture for this case we will have the following sources of d3-brane charge:

z d+  b  b +z d+  b  f

(6.12)

the rst measures the t-dual of the d4 around the circle and the second measures the d4

between between two branes. to see this observe that the role of b and f gets exchanged

in (5.8). this is clear from the fact that the quantity which is physically observable, i.e
gauge invariant, is b  f ; and it measures the relative distance between the two branes,
ns5 and d6.

now consider the asymptotic region in the taub-nut space (which is being wrapped

by a d7). we have a time varying wilson line there. this is the manifestation of the
motion of a d6 on the circle x6 in the original picture. due to the varying wilson line

11 this is because, as discussed in section 3, we can gauge away the world volume eld strength

f1 by a b-eld gauge transformation

26

we have an apparent anomaly, as before, in 1 + 1d. to cancel this anomaly we need the

following wz coupling

s =z g5  a1  f1

s = z f1

where g5 = dd+ in the absence of any source. under a local gauge transformation
a1 = d we get

(6.13)

this equation holds because dg5 6= 0 in the presence of a d3-brane. the source in question
is precisely the d3-brane whose charge is measured by the non trivial bn s,n s background.

therefore we see that the t-dual of a d4-brane between an ns5-brane and a d6-brane

is a d3-brane bound to a d7-brane and a taub-nut space. the charge of the d3-brane

is given by the non trivial bn s,n s background on the taub-nut.

at this point we would like to give a consistency check for the identication of the

d3-brane charges made above. consider a situation in which, in the original picture, the

d6-brane crosses the ns5-brane on a circle many times. every time it crosses the ns5, it

creates a new d4-brane between the two branes. for example, when it crosses the second

time there will be a new d4 plus the original one which was created in the rst crossing.

this makes the total count as one complete d4, i.e a d4 starting and ending on the ns5,

and two d4-branes stretched between ns5 and d6. similarly the third crossing will give

a count of three complete d4-branes plus three stretched d4s, and so on. thus after
(n + 1) crossings we nd a total of 1 + 2 + 3 + .... + n = n(n+1)
complete d4-branes12. for
large n, this grows as n2/2. in the t-dual picture, motion along x6 will be replaced by a

2

background f = nl2. from eq.(6.8) we see that this gives a d3-brane charge of

n2

2 z d+

conrming the identication that the third term in eq.(6.8) measures the t-dual of the d4

starting and ending on the ns5. in addition to that we also have, from eq.(6.8), another

term which goes as

nz d+  bn s,n s

12 another way to see this is the following: consider an innite sequence of ns5 branes along
a non compact x6 direction separated by a distance r. when a d6-brane moves along x6 crossing

all the ns5-branes, we see that the number of d4-branes increases linearly.

27

this is just the charge of the n d4-branes, which, at the nth crossing, were between the

ns5 and d6. the number of such d4-branes obviously grows as n. therefore the third

term in eq.(6.8) does indeed measure, in the t-dual, the charge of a d4 between the ns5

and a d6.

however in the process of creating many d4-branes by crossing the ns5 and d6-branes

many times we should be careful not to violate the s-rule[27]. that this rule is respected

can be seen from the construction of multiple images. we have a situation in which there

is an innite array of ns5-branes. the various d4-branes created by crossing d6-branes

now do not join the same ns5-branes (although for the purpose of calculating the number

of complete d4-branes we have broken the d4-branes on the array of ns5-branes). this

is illustrated in fig.(6.1).

ns5

ns5

ns5

ns5

d6

d4

x6

d4

d4

d4

fig. (6.1): d6-brane crossing ns5-branes.

now let us return to the conifold. as described in the previous sections, what we want

is the t-dual of a d4-brane between two ns5-branes which are along the 12345 and 12389

directions respectively. the t-dual of two intersecting ns5-branes gives a conifold[9,10].

since brane creation is a local process, the above analysis tells us that the d4-brane

becomes a d3 brane. we observed that in the previous case the charge of the d3 was

given by the bn s,n s background. for the present case, the situation will be the same.

on the conifold there can be a non-trivial bn s,n s background on the 2-cycle. therefore

the d3-brane charge will now be given byrs 2

this is just a d5-brane wrapped on the base of the conifold13.

bn s,n s. as discussed above, physically

base

13 another way to see this is the following: for a bunch of d3-branes placed at the conifold
point we know that the dynamics of the d3-branes is governed by an n = 1, su (n )  su (n ) 

u (1) gauge theory with matter ai, bi(i = 1, 2) in the antisymmetric representation of the gauge

group[3,9,10] and with a quartic superpotential. the d-term equation is given by

d = |a1|2 + |a2|2  |b1|2  |b2|2  

where  is the coecient of the fi term in the 3 + 1d gauge theory. this  is also the conifold

28

for the case of two parallel ns5-branes the t-dual is an a1 singularity. at the
2 . therefore we have a fractional d3-brane whose charge is

orbifold point, r bn s,n s = 1

half-integral.

another interesting case where we can use brane creation to predict the t-dual of

some conguration is the original hanany-witten setup. consider the following brane

conguration:

n s5 :
d5 :
d3 :

0 1
0 1
0 1

4

3

5    
2
2     7
9
2    6   

8

as before we assume the x6 direction to be compact and the d3 to lie between the two

ve branes. this conguration gives rise to n = 3, d = 3 gauge theory.

if we take a conguration of an ns5 and a d5 with no d3-brane between them then

we can create a d3 by crossing the two branes. the analysis of brane creation for this

conguration is identical to the previous discussions. the ns5-brane is a source of bn s,n s.

therefore moving a ns5-brane across a d5 amounts to changing the bn s,n s ux on the

world volume of the d5 brane. due to the coupling r bn s,n s  f on the d5, we see

that a d3-brane gets created in the process. a similar argument can be given for the case

in which a d5 crosses an ns5-brane.

now we t-dualize the initial conguration. the ns5-brane becomes a taub-nut

space and the d5 becomes a d6 completely wrapping the taub-nut space. the motion

of the branes in the original picture gets replaced by an asymptotically varying wilson line

on d6 which goes from negative to a positive value.

as before, we can analyse the world volume coupling on a d6 which is wrapping a

taub-nut space completely. integrating out the l2 we have the following sources of d2

brane charge:

z c +z c  (bn s,n s  f1)

(6.14)

the rst term is the usual t-dual of a d3 completely wrapping the x6 circle. the second

term will give rise to d2-brane charge fromr bn sn s.

op factor[3]. in the t-dual picture a op transition will be viewed as a motion of one of the
ns5-brane along x7[42]. this motion will give mass to the d4-brane placed between the two
ns5-branes. therefore, in the conifold model, as we move the ns5 along x7 a two cycle grows

giving mass to the d3-brane. this is only possible if the d3-brane was a wrapped d5-brane. we

thank mike douglas for discussions on this point.

29

asymptotically, due to a varying wilson line we have an apparent anomaly. this is

cancelled by the term r g4  a1  f1, g4 = dc in the absence of any source. therefore

the t-dual of a hanany-witten type conguration is a d2 brane bound to a d6 and a

taub-nut space. the charge of the d2 brane is given by the background bn s,n s eld.

we can lift this conguration to m-theory and try to see what the brane creation

process implies. a conguration of an ns5-brane and a d5 brane intersecting on a 2 + 1

dimensional space in type iib theory can be described as m-theory on a toric hyper-kahler

manifold[43]. on the iib side, as we have seen before, one can move the branes across

each other to create a d3 between them. how does one interpret this in m-theory?

the iib conguration of an ns5 and a d5-brane on a circle t-dualizes to the con-

guration, described above, of a taub-nut space and a d6-brane. when we lift that

conguration to m-theory, these just become a pair of intersecting taub-nut spaces.

this space has sp(2) holonomy and is a toric variety. the low energy dynamics of a single

taub-nut space is governed by a u (1) gauge multiplet. from the above analysis we found

that the t-dual of a d3-brane between two 5-branes was a d4-brane carrying a d2-brane

charge. in m-theory we expect this to go to an m5-brane wrapped on a 3-cycle of the

hyper-kahler manifold, and carrying an m2-brane charge.

acknowledgements:

we would like to thank d.-e. diaconescu, mike douglas, anton kapustin, govindan

rajesh, savdeep sethi, shishir sinha, david tong, sandip trivedi, angel uranga, edward

witten and zheng yin for many valuable discussions. we are particularly grateful to

ashoke sen for sharing several valuable insights with us. the work of kd is supported in

part by the u.s. dept. of energy under grant no. de-fg02-90-er40542.

30

references

[1] m. douglas and g. moore, d branes, quivers and ale instantons, hep-th/9603167.
[2] m. douglas, b. greene and d. morrison, orbifold resolution by d-branes, nucl.

[3]

phys. b506 (1997) 84; hep-th/9704151.
i. klebanov and e. witten, superconformal field theory on threebranes at a calabi-
yau singularity, nucl.phys. b536 (1998) 199; hep-th/9807080.

[4] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and supergrav-

ity, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231; hep-th/9711200.

[5] s. kachru and e. silverstein, 4d conformal field theories and strings on orbifolds,

phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 4855; hep-th/9802183.

[6] a. lawrence, n. nekrasov and c. vafa, on conformal field theories in four di-

mensions, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 199; hep-th/9803015.

[7] l. j. romans, new compactications of chiral n = 2, d = 10 supergravity, phys.

lett. 153b (1985) 392.

[8] p. candelas and x. c. de la ossa, comments on conifolds, nucl. phys. b342 (1990)

246.

[9] a. uranga, brane congurations for branes at conifolds, jhep 01 (1999) 022;

hep-th/9811004.

[10] k. dasgupta and s. mukhi, brane constructions, conifolds and m-theory, hep-

th/9811139, nucl. phys. b, to appear.

[11] d. ghoshal, d. jatkar and s. mukhi, kleinian singularities and the ground ring of

c = 1 string theory, nucl. phys. b395 (1993), 144; hep-th/9206080.

[12] m. bershadsky, v. sadov and c. vafa, d-strings on d-manifolds, nucl. phys. b463

(1996) 398; hep-th/9510225.

[13] h. ooguri and c. vafa, two-dimensional black hole and singularities of cy man-

ifolds, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 55; hep-th/9511164.

[14] b.s. acharya, j.m. figueroa-ofarrill, c.m. hull and b. spence, branes at conical

singularities and holography, hep-th/9808014.

[15] d. morrison and r. plesser, non-spherical horizonsi; hep-th/9810201.
[16] s. gubser, n. nekrasov and s. shatashvili, generalized conifolds and four dimen-

sional n = 1 superconformal theories; hep-th/9811230.

[17] e. lopez, a family of n = 1 su (n )k theories from branes at singularities, jhep

02 (1999) 019; hep-th/9812025.

[18] r. von unge,  branes at generalised conifolds and toric geometry, jhep 02

(1999) 023; hep-th/9901091.

[19] b. andreas, g. curio and d. lust, the neveu-schwarz five-brane and its dual

geometries, jhep 10 (1998) 022; hep-th/9807008.

31

[20] a. karch, d. lust and d. smith, equivalence of geometric engineering and hanany-

witten via fractional branes, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 348; hep-th/9803232.

[21] e. witten, solutions of four dimensional field theories via m-theory, nucl. phys.

b500 (1997) 3; hep-th/9703166.

[22] a. hanany and a. zaaroni, on the realization of chiral four dimensional gauge

theories using branes, jhep 05 (1998) 001; hep-th/9801134.

[23] a. hanany and a. uranga, brane boxes and branes on singularities, jhep 05

(1998) 013; hep-th/9805139.

[24] m. aganagic, a. karch, d. lust, a. miemiec, mirror symmetry for brane congu-

rations and branes at singularities; hep-th/9903093.

[25] s. s. gubser and i. r. klebanov, baryons and domain walls in an n = 1 super-

conformal gauge theory, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 125025; hep-th/9808075.

[26] j. polchinski, tensors from k3 orientifolds, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 6423; hep-

th/9606165;
m. douglas, enhanced gauge symmetry in m(atrix) theory, jhep 07 (1997) 004;
hep-th/9612126;
d.-e. diaconescu, m. douglas and j. gomis, fractional branes and wrapped
branes, jhep 02 (1998) 013; hep-th/9712230.

[27] a. hanany and e. witten, type iib superstrings, bps monopoles, and three-

dimensional gauge dynamics, nucl. phys. b492 (1997) 152; hep-th/9611230.

[28] a. sen, stable non-bps states in string theory, jhep 06 (1998) 007; hep-

th/9803194;
a. sen, stable non-bps bound states of bps d-branes, jhep 08 (1998) 010,
hep-th/9805019;
a. sen, tachyon condensation on brane-antibrane systems, jhep 08 (1998) 012,
hep-th/9805170.

[29] e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, jhep 12 (1998) 019; hep-th/9810188.
[30] e. gava, k.s. narain and m.h. sarmadi, on the bound states of p-branes and p+2-

branes, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 214; hep-th/9704006;
o. bergman and m. gaberdiel, stable non-bps d-particles, phys. lett. b441
(1998) 133; hep-th/9806155;
p. horava, type iia d-branes, k-theory and matrix theory ; hep-th/9812135.

[31] p. aspinwall, enhanced gauge symmetries and k3 surfaces, phys. lett. b357

(1995) 329; hep-th/9507012.

[32] k. dasgupta, d. jatkar and s. mukhi, gravitational couplings on z2 orientifolds,

nucl. phys. b523 (1998) 465; hep-th/9707224.

[33] c. bachas, p. bain and m.b. green, curvature terms in d-brane actions and their

m-theory origin; hep-th/9903210.

[34] a. sen, bps d-branes on non-supersymmetric cycles; hep-th/9812031.

32

[35] o. bergman and m. gaberdiel, non-bps states in heterotic-type iia duality;

hep-th/9901014.

[36] e. witten, branes and the dynamics of qcd, nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 658; hep-

th/9706109.

[37] piljin yi, membranes from five-branes and fundamental strings from dp-branes;

hep-th/9901159.

[38] a. strominger, massless black holes and conifolds in string theory, nucl. phys.

b451 (1995) 96; hep-th/9504090.

[39] c. callan and j. maldacena, brane dynamics from born-infeld action, nucl. phys.

b513 (1998) 198; hepth/9705084.

[40] u. danielsson, g. ferretti and i. klebanov, creation of fundamental strings from

crossing d-branes, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 1984; hep-th/9705084.

[41] c. p. bachas, m. douglas, m. b. green, anomalous creation of branes, jhep 07

(1997) 002; hep-th/9705074.

[42] a. giveon and d. kutasov, brane dynamics and gauge theories; hep-th/9802067.
[43] j. p. gauntlett, g. w. gibbons, g. papadopoulos and p.k. townsend, hyper-kahler
manifolds and multiply intersecting branes, nucl. phys. b500 (1997) 133; hep-
th/9702202.

33

