9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
4
1

 

 
 

1
v
4
0
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

superstring perturbation theory

and ramond-ramond backgrounds

ill-(th)-99-02
hep-th/9904104

david berenstein

and

robert g. leigh

department of physics

university of illinois at urbana-champaign

urbana, il 61801

february 16, 2014

abstract

we consider perturbative type ii superstring theory in the covari-
ant nsr formalism in the presence of nsns and rr backgrounds. a
concrete example that we have in mind is the geometry of d3-branes
which in the near-horizon region is ads5  s5, although our methods
may be applied to other backgrounds as well. we show how confor-
mal invariance of the string path integral is maintained order by order
in the number of holes. this procedure makes uses of the fischler-
susskind mechanism to build up the background geometry. a simple
formal expression is given for a -model lagrangian. this suggests a
perturbative expansion in 1/g2n and 1/n . as applications, we con-
sider at leading order the mixing of rr and nsns states, and the
realization of the spacetime supersymmetry algebra.

email:berenste@hepux0.hep.uiuc.edu
email:rgleigh@uiuc.edu

1

1 introduction

the quantization of superstrings in non-trivial backgrounds has become an
urgent problem since it has been realized that there is a direct relationship
to the strong coupling dynamics of gauge eld theories. in particular, one is
often interested in conformal eld theories which are related to spacetimes
which contain an anti-desitter factor.[1] for examples with ads3 and back-
grounds of nsns elds, several cases have been worked out[2, 3, 4, 5, 6] for
nite n. the more interesting case with rr backgrounds, corresponding
to congurations of d-branes, are much more dicult. work on ads3 has
been presented in ref. [7], while ads5  s5 has been discussed in the green-
schwarz formalism[8, 9]. ref.
[10] discusses the latter in the context of an
expansion around at spacetime.

in this paper, we consider rr backgrounds in the covariant rns formal-
ism. we begin with the theory in at spacetime and demonstrate, that in
the large n limit, string perturbation theory organizes itself into a -model
which is exactly conformal. this procedure may be thought of as summing
of worldsheet holes, with closed string loops suppressed because of large n.
we check conformal invariance of the string path integral explicitly at lead-
ing non-trivial order, an application of the fischler-susskind mechanism.[11]
the -model is of a non-standard type because of the rr background, but
can be written formally in a way which is useful for perturbative calculations.
the case of ads5  s5 is of particular interest. this model has a great
deal of symmetry and it is possible that a free conformal eld theory de-
scription exists, perhaps similar to the ns backgrounds with ads3. there
are a number of oddities, centering around the properties of superconformal
ghosts, as well as the properties of the spacetime supersymmetry algebra,
which remain elusive.[12] the present construction however is certainly not
such an exact description, and must be discussed in the context of a weak
curvature expansion. the analysis may be applied to other cases as well,
such as the d1 d5 system, but we conne our attention here to ads5 s5.
the paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we discuss general proper-
ties of string perturbation theory and demonstrate that in the large n limit,
the leading eect corresponds to a sum over worldsheet boundaries. we argue
that these eects can be accounted for by a formal -model which includes the
rr background. in order to dene the -model it is necessary to introduce
an operator which acts like the square-root of the picture-changing operator,
p1/2. in section 3, we discuss the conformal invariance of this -model at

1

lowest order in  and demonstrate that the fischler-susskind mechanism
properly resums the background geometry.
in section 4, we discuss some
simple aspects of the spectrum of excitations around this background, and
demonstrate that at a given level, r and ns states mix. in section 5, we con-
sider the realization of spacetime symmetry charges in terms of worldsheet
currents and comment on the supersymmetry algebra. our analysis here
is limited by our incomplete knowledge of the properties of p1/2. further
comments and speculations are reserved for the nal section.

2 background of d3-branes: summing over

boundaries

the basic idea here for computing the partition function is familiar from eld
theory: consider a scalar eld theory, with a background eld turned on. the
one-loop determinant may be thought of as being built up by summing over
multiple insertions of the background.
x

x

xx

x

=

+

+

+ ....

x

x

indeed, in string theory in nsns backgrounds, it is well known that
summing over multiple insertions of vertex operators simply exponentiates
those vertex operators, resulting in a -model. here, we repeat this analysis
in the case of interest, with rr-backgrounds, and we will discover in exactly
what sense the rr vertex operator exponentiates. we will nd that it is
possible to write a formal expression (involving one term) that quanties the
eect of the rr-background. this is necessarily formal, because it involves an
operator which changes ghost number in a non-standard way. the alternative
is to remove this operator, but at the expense of introducing an innite
number of non-local operators into the -model. the utility of the formal
expression is that it automatically generates the correct combinatorics, and
has a clear interpretation for any non-zero s-matrix element.

let us begin by discussing the classical geometry exterior to a collection

of n d3-branes. the background is given by

ds2 = f (r)1/2dx2

 + f (r)1/2dx2
k

(1)

2

s/r4, r being the radial perpendicular coordinate. the
where f (r) = 1 + r4
radius of curvature satises r4
s = 4gn2. in addition, there is a self-dual
rr ve-form eldstrength, with total ux n, and the dilaton is constant.
one notes that for large gn, the curvature of spacetime is everywhere small,
and therefore solving the equations of motion at rst order in  is a very
good approximation. furthermore, it has been argued from spacetime con-
siderations that the near-horizon geometry is exact to all orders in  and
g.

our rst task is to understand these results directly from string pertur-
bation theory, where we integrate open string loops to all orders. in fact,
the parameter that controls this perturbative expansion is rs/r, so we will
consider very large r: we are expanding around at spacetime. furthermore,
for r2
s >> , it is possible to neglect the eects of higher string modes, even
in the near-horizon limit.

in principle, since we are including open string loops to all orders, it would
seem that we also need to include closed string loops. however, closed string
loops are suppressed in large n: they contribute at order g2  (gn)2  1
n 2 ,
and can be safely ignored. open string loops contribute at order gn since
the worldsheet boundary can be placed at any of the n d-branes.

to begin, let us consider the eects of a single boundary. polchinski[13]
computed the tadpoles of the graviton and rr 4-form potential in the pres-
ence of a d-brane to determine that a single d-brane carried one unit of
rr-charge. the same calculation can be used to deduce that the gravita-
tional eld at a distance r from a d3-brane has strength g(x) = r4
s/2r4.
in this calculation, the information about polarizations is lost. this infor-
mation may be recovered by a consideration of scattering of gravitons o of
a d-brane.[14, 15] the result is that the polarization manifestly preserves
so(6)  so(3, 1),

g(x) =

r4
s
2r4 t 

r4
s

2r4 (cid:16)

(cid:17)
  k

(2)

this is the leading term in an expansion of the supergravity metric (1) and
we will see that it is consistent from the point of view of the string path
integral as well.

if we are at large r, we can think of this as a gravitational uctuation,

3

with (on-shell) vertex operator in the (0,0) picture1

vg = 

+

2

 t  g(x)x  x  +
(  g(x)) x 
  g(x)
2 !2
x (   g(x))    


2


2

 (3)

we will nd that it is necessary to modify this vertex operator by contact
terms; we will see that this is equivalent to going to n = 1 superspace.

the rr vertex operator in the ( 1

2, 1
vrr = st c1...5 (cid:18)1 + 1

2 )-picture takes the form2
(cid:19) sh1...5e/2e /2

2

where

1...5h1...5 = kg(x)

(4)

(5)

the normalization of vrr may be determined by factorization.

the rst step is to check under which conditions the operator (3) is well-
dened; instead of dening it to be normal-ordered, we require that the singu-
larities are absent. there are both quadratic divergences (contact terms)[16]
and logarithmic divergences to consider. we will conne our attention to the
x x part of the graviton vertex operator. the other terms follow from
worldsheet supersymmetry.

the prefactor g(x) will be dealt with by expansion around a xed con-
guration: g(x) = hg(x)i + x hg(x)i + . . .. point-splitting vg (eq.
(3)), we nd

z d2z vg = z d2z : vg : +tr t 2(2)()z d2z : g(x) :
ln||2 z d2z : g(x)tx  x  : + . . .



1
2

(6)

in the ellipsis are the fermion terms. there are higher order terms in , but
they are all proportional to (derivatives of) g. now, because g(x) is a
2 ln|z  z|2 and h(z)(z)i = 1/(z  z).
(the 4 is introduced to account for the diering normaliza-

1our normalizations are hx(z)x(z)i =  

g(x)

furthermore, g(x) =
tions of metric and vertex operator.)

4

2c is charge conjugation, 1 is 10-dimensional chirality, and (k) is chirality in the

6(4)-dimensional subspace.

4

harmonic function, g(x) vanishes, at least away from the branes. thus
vg is dened up to a contact term. this contact term may be removed by
modifying vg by terms which vanish on the (tree-level) equations of motion.
in fact, these modications are equivalent to introducing n = 1 superspace

x = x + i + i  +  f

whereupon the vertex operator is written:

vg = t z d2zz d2 g(x)dx dx.

(7)

(8)

the new terms in the vertex operator which are relevant for the contact
terms are

gt(  +   + f f )

(9)

(10)

the fermionic terms in the vertex operator are just the appropriate covari-
antizations

(g 

 + x g),

etc. these give additional contractions which cancel the contact term.

thus we have shown that the vertex vg is well-dened. the rr vertex
operator requires no such treatment, as there are no contact terms;3 it is
regular, as long as g = 0. with these operators in hand, we are prepared to
consider string worldsheets with multiple insertions. we will nd that there
are additional logarithmic short-distance singularities, which can be canceled
by the fischler-susskind mechanism, namely by modifying the function g.
this calculation appears in section 3.

let us consider the scattering of string states o of the d-branes at low
momentum transfer. the momentum transfer is the fourier transform of the
coordinate r. we want to show that the contributions to this scattering are
dominated by the exchange of massless states. the boundary on the d-brane
may then be replaced in this factorization limit, by an insertion of a massless
background vertex.

indeed, this is what we would expect from looking at a born-oppenheimer
approximation to the scattering. in essence, if each boundary has this prop-
erty, then the relevant limit for calculating amplitudes involves long thin
tubes attached to the brane, so each boundary is eectively shrunk to zero
size, and can be replaced by a local insertion of a massless vertex operator,

3this assumes the spin eld s  is normal-ordered.

5

r4 for the massless state in consideration.

which depends on r. this dependence comes about as each long thin tube
extends from where the interaction takes place to the d-brane, and hence
involves the greens function  1
the fact that the amplitude factorizes into a long thin tube for each
boundary is a non-trivial statement, as one might imagine that there might
be hard momentum owing from one hole to another, thus making the bound-
aries big. we will argue that these eects cancel each other by supersym-
metry.
indeed, in a low momentum scattering, the amplitude of external
states factorizes onto a one point function of a vertex operator that is almost
on-shell and massless, on a riemann surface with m > 1 holes. as we have
more than one hole in the surface, the diagram without insertion is a self
energy diagram of the brane conguration, and by supersymmetry vanishes;
addition of the massless state insertion to this diagram is zero on-shell, as it
probes the self-energy of the brane externally. the argument breaks down
for m = 1, as this probes the tree level contribution to the mass of the
brane, and this is the d-brane tension. thus, the relevant limit of moduli
space that contributes to the amplitude involves long thin tubes for all the
insertions, and hence we get only eects from massless vertex operators in
the full calculation.

summing over this restricted moduli space of zero size holes integrates
these vertex operator insertions over a riemann surface with xed complex
structure. we sum over all inequivalent surfaces, and since the boundaries
are all identical, we should divide out by the permutation symmetry to avoid
overcounting. the sum over boundaries generates the series

1 +



xm=1

1

m! (cid:18)z

vb(cid:19)m

= expz

d2zvb

(11)

with vb a massless string state generated by the boundary. that is, the sum
over boundaries generates an expression which has a sigma model interpre-
tation where we modify the action by

s  s +z

d2zvb(r)

(12)

where r is the impact parameter quantum eld on the worldsheet. the sum
over spin structures implies that vb is given by the combined graviton and
self dual rr tadpole which we extracted in eqs. (8),(4) above.

from the point of view of string perturbation theory around at space-
time, this corresponds to a partial resummation. as far as the metric is

6

concerned, the exponentiation is standard. for the rr background, as dis-
cussed, the combinatorics are right for exponentiation, but the superconfor-
mal ghost factors make this problematic. a -model for these backgrounds
may be written, formally, in several ways. the basic issue is that we wish to
write an expression with zero ghost charge. in an s-matrix element, it would
be convenient to take the external states in a xed picture, and the insertion
of eq. (12) implies that each term in vb should be in the same picture.

there may exist a eld redenition which mixes ghosts and matter elds
similar to ref. [17, 7] that would sidestep this problem but instead we propose
to formally write the -model as

srr  z p1/2 p1/2v(1/2,1/2)

(13)

where p1/2 ( p1/2) increases the l(r)-ghost charge by 1/2 and satises p 2
1/2 =
p+1 ( p 2
1/2 = p+1). such operators are clearly not well-dened. however, this
expression has two important properties: it generates the correct combina-
torics, and is unambiguous for any non-zero s-matrix element. the basic
point is that in an expansion of this exponential, the rr background ver-
tex only contributes in pairs (on any topology). using this -model, one
can systematically compute perturbative corrections. for a given on-shell s-
matrix element on a given topology, one introduces the correct background
ghost charge explicitly, then takes each vertex operator, and each background
vertex in the (0, 0) picture, dened as above. further issues involving the
properties of p1/2 may be found in sections 5,6.

an alternative procedure would be the following. since the one-point
function of vrr is zero on any topology, one could attempt to write non-local
expressions of the form

srr  z v(+1/2,+1/2)z v(1/2,1/2) + . . .

(14)

but the combinatorics of such an action are not correct: one needs to correct
this at order v 4 and so on. an action with an innite number of non-local
terms is certainly not a terribly convenient representation.

3 fischler-susskind and the -model

having discussed the general form of string perturbation theory in this back-
ground, we now give an explicit calculation of the modications to the back-
ground which follow from conformal invariance of the string path integral.

7

the calculation is an application of the fischler-susskind mechanism for a
pair of colliding worldsheet holes. thus we consider two background vertex
operators, dened above, and bring them close together.

v

v

background

the calculation of the short-distance singularity is somewhat involved but
straightforward, and we present here only the result. the quadratic diver-
gences (contact terms) cancel exactly, given the modied form of the vertices
discussed above. for simplicity, we write here the contributions to only the
x x part

z d2z vg(z) z d2z vg(z) =

4 ln||2z d2z x g x (t2) 

 g

+ x g x (t2) 
 g x t 

 g

(tr t2)x g x g  x t 
+(g  g)(t2)x  x  + gg tx  x !

 g

1
2



(15)

since g(x) depends only on r, using the form of t discussed earlier this
reduces to

z d2z vg(z) z d2z vg(z) =
4 ln||2z d2z (4gg  (g  g)) x  x  + . . .

(16)

which is in the form of a graviton vertex operator.

there is also a logarithmically divergent contribution of the same form

from two background rr vertices. after some dirac algebra, we nd

z d2z vrr(z) z d2z vrr(z) =
4 ln||2z d2z (4gg + 2(g  g)t) x  x 

(17)

8

to obtain this result, the normalization of the rr vertex operator is required,
as given in (4), and discussed in section 5.

the total logarithmic divergence in the graviton channel is then of the

form

4 ln||2z d2z(g  g)(cid:16)

  3k

(cid:17) x  x  + . . .

(18)

note that the terms in r r have cancelled precisely between ns and r con-
tributions.4 in this sense, we have started in the right coordinate system.
the divergence (18) may be removed by modifying the graviton back-

ground through the addition of a term

 2(cid:18) 2

(cid:19) g2(x)(cid:16)

  3k

(cid:17) x  x  + . . .

(19)

where the ellipsis contains fermionic terms, determined by supersymmetry.
these terms have a logarithmically divergent self-contraction which exactly
cancels that of eq. (18). to see this, one can use eq. (6) with g replaced
by 2g2: since g2 is not harmonic, there is a non-zero contribution from
g2.

at this order then, the graviton background has the form

1

2 (cid:26)(cid:18) g 

1
2

g2(cid:19) 

1



2 n(f 1/2  1)

3
2

 +(cid:18) g +

g2(cid:19) k
 + (f 1/2  1)k

(cid:27) x  x  + . . .
o x  x  + . . .

(20)

(21)

where f = 1 + 2 g(r) is the harmonic function appearing in the supergravity
metric. thus we see that at lowest order, the fischler-susskind mechanism
does build up properly the background geometry of the 3-branes. similar
calculations may be performed without diculty to demonstrate the appro-
priate modication of the rr background. we believe that this works to all
orders in rs
r ; comments in this regard may be found in a later section of this
paper. certainly, this is not in disagreement with spacetime arguments that
the near-horizon geometry is exact.[18, 19]

we present the following worldsheet argument that this is exact to all
orders in rs/r. since /r2
s is small, it is useful to consider an expansion
of the -model in powers of curvature. in order to simplify this expansion,
one goes to normal coordinates around a point. in terms of this expansion

4even if this were not true, a eld redenition can remove such terms.

9

in curvature, the ramond background is a rst order perturbation, and the
curvature correction to the metric is second order. in contrast, for the co-
ordinates we were using before, which are not normal coordinates, the rst
correction comes from the christoel symbols, which are set to zero locally
on the normal coordinate system.

this can be done for the full geometry, but for simplicity, we specialize
now to the near horizon region. for ads5  s5, expanding around zero in
the normal coordinates we have

ds2  dxdx + ax2

adsdx2

ads  ax2

s5dx2

s5 + . . .

where a is determined by the curvature of the space. also

vrr = p1/2 p1/2s sh

(22)

(23)

with h  [c(ads + s5)]. the  matrices used are products of the ve
gamma matrices tangent to ads5 and s5 respectively.
again we consider the collision of two background vertices. the alge-
bra is straightforward, and we proceed by cancelling the logarithmic correc-
tions from the square of the ramond background, and the curvature self-
contraction. this produces the beta function for the graviton, and it reads

(r + (h 2)) log(||2) = 0

(24)

we have used the p1/2 operators for the ramond vertex. as we have two
ramond vertex operators and to leading order they are on-shell (they are
constant), the factors of p1/2 give us a picture-changing operator, and the
result is unambiguous. we thus reproduce the supergravity equations of
motion for the graviton. this computation generalizes to any weakly coupled
string theory at small curvature in the presence of rr backgrounds and gives
the supergravity equations of motion.

this computation is one-loop in the -model and thus is correct to leading
order in . again according to [18, 19], this result is exact for the near-
horizon geometry to all orders in .

4 spectrum: mixing of rr and nsns states

we have suggested in the above discussions that the -model may be consis-
tently dened, and it is exactly conformal. the next step would be to dis-
cuss the spectrum of excitations around the background. since the -model

10

is known and exactly conformal, in principle one could write equations for
vertex operators which make them of dimension (1, 1). the best we can do
at present is to compute vertex operators for these excitations perturbatively
in the normal coordinate expansion, starting with at spacetime operators.
note that in the approximation in which we are working, the spacing
of states is as shown in the accompanying gure. the gap between levels
is of order  while the spacing between s5 harmonics is of order 1/rs.

i

s
c
n
o
m
r
a
h

 

5

s

1/rs

chiral modes(cid:13)

level 1(cid:13)



we expect this spectrum to be modied by the background. the leading
eect is to mix states at the same level. because of the rr background, the
states which in at space are rr and nsns mix with one another, which
means that there are no longer separately conserved number operators in the
r- and ns-sectors. at most, we can expect that a linear combination is still
a good quantum number, and thus organizes the spectrum, although it seems
unlikely that even this is true at nite n.

let us consider the one-loop partition function. in at spacetime, bosonic
symmetries which act on states come in the ns sector, and thus spacetime
symmetries may be thought of as acting on, for example, the nsns part
of the partition function and the rr part separately. once we turn on the
background, this can no longer be true: there will be spacetime symmetries in
the rr sector and thus at best we can classify states as bosonic or fermionic

11

(cid:13)
(cid:214)
a
(which cancel by supersymmetry).

in this section, we simply demonstrate this mixing at lowest order in
. the mixing is of order one. in principle, one can systematically com-
pute higher order corrections. the basic idea is again an application of the
fischler-susskind mechanism. we consider some arbitrary (1, 1) operator
oeipx inserted on the worldsheet. we compute the eects of the background
perturbatively by considering the eects of background vertex operators.

o

background

the leading eect will come from a single rr insertion

vrr = z d2z p1/2 p1/2(ch) sse/2e /2

the operator product of vrr with the vertex o will be of the form

z d2z

1

|z  z|2 (ch)h qqoeipxi

(25)

(26)

this is logarithmically divergent, and converts ns to r and vice versa. if
need be this can be brought back to, say, the (0, 0) or ( 1
2)-picture by
applying the picture-changing operator.5

2 , 1

thus the leading order eect is to mix ns with r:

(cid:18)on s

or (cid:19) = (cid:18) 0 m

m 0 (cid:19)(cid:18)on s
or (cid:19)

(27)

where m and m are suitable (logarithmically divergent) mixings that may
be computed from the operator products mentioned above (we consider an
explicit example below.)
in order to eliminate the divergence, we should
modify the vertex operators, in two steps. first, we diagonalize

od  on s + or

(28)

5note that at lowest order, we can assume that the picture changing operator is un-
changed from its at-space value. higher order corrections must take this consistently into
account.

12

and then modify the operator od to eliminate the divergence. in the weak
curvature limit, it is sucient to consider

: od eikx :: odeikx : eikx

(29)

going beyond the weak curvature approximation is a dicult problem, equiv-
alent to solving for the explicit form of the vertex operators in this back-
ground, and we do not attempt such an analysis here. the modication of
the momenta accounts for the change in the mass of states in the background
and is the only source of a logarithmic divergence within the vertex operator.
in principle, this analysis may be carried out for any state in the string
spectrum, although it is technically challenging. we conne the discussion to
a demonstration of the mixing eect for components of the massless gravity
multiplet. for these states, the analysis reduces to that of ref.
[20] for
supergravity in ads5  s5.
on s = z d2z h(n s)
or = z d2z h(r)

(x  + ik  )( x  + ik   )eikx (30)
sse/2e /2eikx
(31)

begin then with massless states:





we note that

vb  on s = z d2z e/2e /2eikxs s  2 ln  h(n s)

 kk(ch)
(32)

and

 (ch) ee 
these results are equivalent to a mixing matrix of the form:

vb  or = z d2z 2 ln  h(r)

 2 ln   

0

 kk(ch)
h(n s)

h(r)

 (ch)

0

(33)

(34)

!

and agrees with the supergravity analysis of [20]. this mixing suggests that
the spacetime symmetries will not respect the splitting between r and ns.

5 spacetime algebra: p1/2 bites back

let us consider the realization of spacetime symmetries on the worldsheet
and their algebra. it is in this discussion that we will see that our limited

13

knowledge of p1/2 is problematic. we will discuss a few simple aspects here,
and return to a fuller discussion in a subsequent publication.

we know that in the presence of d-branes, half of the supersymmetry
is broken, but is recovered in the near-horizon region as a superconformal
symmetry. our rst task is to recover this fact in string perturbation theory.

it is natural to dene supercharges

q = i dz se/2
q = i dz se /2

(35)

(36)

which certainly generate symmetries in at spacetime. in an rr background,
at lowest order in , there is only one linear combination

q  p1/2q + k p1/2 q

(37)

retained. to see this, we simply need to require that the supersymmetry
annihilates the background

q  vb = 0

(38)

this calculation in fact is another way to x the normalization of the rr ver-
tex operator. at lowest order, our lack of understanding of p1/2 is irrelevant.
at higher orders, we need to know p1/2, and furthermore we expect that eq.
(37) is further modied by functions of r. once this happens, there is no pos-
sible splitting between holomorphic and anti-holomorphic elds. this eect
can be computed from worldsheet considerations (given p1/2) by a further
application of fischler-susskind. from the spacetime point of view, they are
determined by the requirement that q be associated to a covariantly constant
spinor.

we note the very important point here that the holomorphic and anti-
holomorphic charges mix with one another in the rr background. there is
nothing really exotic about this: given a conserved current j, we can write

j +  j = 0, and the spacetime charge t = h dz j +h dz j is well-dened,

being independent of contour. only in special cases are j and j separately
conserved.

in the near-horizon limit, we expect that exactly this happens, and the
other linear combination of spacetime supercharges s, comes back. indeed,
in normal coordinates for the near-horizon case, we begin with 32 super-
charges, and eq. (38) does not eliminate any. however, the supercharges are

14

still dressed by functions of x and so do not split into holomorphic and anti-
holomorphic currents. this is the only way the full superconformal symmetry
algebra can be reproduced.

in general, in order to compute such eects reliably, we need to under-
stand in more detail the operator p1/2. we believe that these obstacles can
be overcome.

6 conclusions and discussion

in this paper, we have analyzed the background produced by d3-branes. we
have discussed how a -model description can be used. the background
geometry is recovered by summing over boundaries of worldsheets, and sys-
tematically applying the fischler-susskind mechanism. our results suggest
to us that an exact string conformal eld theory description may exist. in
order to derive such a description from perturbation theory requires further
understanding of the square root of the picture changing operator. our re-
sults indicate that this is not such an unnatural object. with this operator
we can construct a perturbation expansion which is independent of the zero
mode of the bosonized superconformal ghost system. this indicates that
picture-changing is still a property of these -models, but the detailed form
is modied by the background.

it is plausible that the approach of [7] is related to these remarks. the
case of ads3 discussed there is considerably dierent however. in particular,
there are half as many supersymmetries as for ads5, and consequently more
freedom to choose pictures, and as well the target space of the -model is
a group manifold. it seems dicult to imagine that a free-eld realization
exists in that the mixing of holomorphic and anti-holomorphic currents would
seem to invalidate the idea of a spectrum generating algebra.

acknowledgments: we wish to thank f. larsen for collaboration at an
early stage of this work. research supported in part by the united states
department of energy grant de-fg02-91er40677 and an outstanding ju-
nior investigator award.

references

15

[1] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and
supergravity, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.

[2] a. giveon, d. kutasov, and n. seiberg, comments on string theory

on ads3, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 733780, hep-th/9806194.

[3] s. elitzur, o. feinerman, a. giveon, and d. tsabar, string theory on

ads3  s3  s3  s1, hep-th/9811245.

[4] d. kutasov, f. larsen, and r. g. leigh, string theory in magnetic

monopole backgrounds, hep-th/9812027.

[5] j. de boer, h. ooguri, h. robins, and j. tannenhauser, string theory

on ads3, jhep 12 (1998) 026, hep-th/9812046.

[6] d. kutasov and n. seiberg, more comments on string theory on

ads3, hep-th/9903219.

[7] n. berkovits, c. vafa, and e. witten, conformal eld theory of ads

background with ramond-ramond ux, hep-th/9902098.

[8] r. r. metsaev and a. a. tseytlin, type iib superstring action in

ads5  s5 background, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 109, hep-th/9805028.

[9] r. kallosh and j. rahmfeld, the gs string action on ads5  s5,

phys. lett. b443 (1998) 143, hep-th/9808038.

[10] a. rajaraman and m. rozali, on the quantization of the gs string

on ads5  s5, hep-th/9902046.

[11] w. fischler and l. susskind, dilaton tadpoles, string condensates

and scale invariance, phys. lett. b171 (1986) 383.

[12] d. berenstein, r. g. leigh, and f. larsen, unpublished,.

[13] j. polchinski, dirichlet branes and ramond-ramond charges, phys.

rev. lett. 75 (1995) 47244727, hep-th/9510017.

[14] i. r. klebanov and l. thorlacius, the size of p-branes, phys. lett.

b371 (1996) 5156, hep-th/9510200.

16

[15] s. s. gubser, a. hashimoto, i. r. klebanov, and j. m. maldacena,

gravitational lensing by p-branes, nucl. phys. b472 (1996) 231248,
hep-th/9601057.

[16] m. b. green and n. seiberg, contact interactions in superstring

theory, nucl. phys. b299 (1988) 559.

[17] n. berkovits, covariant quantization of the green-schwarz

superstring in a calabi-yau background, nucl. phys. b431 (1994)
258272, hep-th/9404162.

[18] t. banks and m. b. green, nonperturbative eects in ads5  s5
string theory and d = 4 susy yang-mills, jhep 05 (1998) 002,
hep-th/9804170.

[19] r. kallosh and a. rajaraman, vacua of m theory and string theory,

phys. rev. d58 (1998) 125003, hep-th/9805041.

[20] h. j. kim, l. j. romans, and p. van nieuwenhuizen, the mass

spectrum of chiral n=2 d = 10 supergravity on s5, phys. rev. d32
(1985) 389.

17

