upr-843t, pupt-1856

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
7

 

 
 

1
v
4
5
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

moduli spaces of fivebranes on elliptic calabi-yau threefolds

ron donagi1, burt a. ovrut2 and daniel waldram3

1department of mathematics, university of pennsylvania

philadelphia, pa 191046395, usa

2department of physics, university of pennsylvania

philadelphia, pa 191046396, usa

3department of physics, joseph henry laboratories,

princeton university, princeton, nj 08544, usa

abstract

we present a general method for calculating the moduli spaces of vebranes wrapped on

holomorphic curves in elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds, specically in the context of

heterotic m theory. the cases of vebranes wrapped purely on a ber curve, purely on a curve

in the base and, generically, on a curve with components both in the ber and the base are each

discussed in detail. the number of irreducible components of the vebrane and their properties,

such as their intersections and phase transitions in moduli space, follow from the analysis. even

though generic curves have a large number of moduli, we show that there are isolated curves that

have no moduli associated with the calabiyau threefold. finally, we present several explicit

examples of the moduli spaces of vebrane curves computed within horavawitten theory, two

of which correspond to potentially realistic three family models with grand unied gauge group

su (5).

1

introduction

if string theory is to be a model of supersymmetric particle physics, one should be able to nd

four-dimensional vacua preserving n = 1 supersymmetry. the rst examples of such backgrounds

arose as geometrical vacua, from the compactication of the heterotic string on a calabiyau

threefold. recent advances in string duality have provided new ways of obtaining geometrical

n = 1 vacua, by compactifying other limits of string theory and, in particular, by including branes

in the background.

of particular interest is the strongly coupled limit of the e8e8 heterotic string. the low-energy
eective theory is eleven-dimensional supergravity compactied on an s1/z2 orbifold interval, with
a set of e8 gauge elds on each of the ten-dimensional orbifold xed planes [15, 16]. to construct
a theory with n = 1 supersymmetry one further compacties on a calabiyau threefold x [2].

one is then free to choose general e8 bundles which satisfy the hermitian yangmills equations.
furthermore one can include some number of ve-branes. the requirements of four-dimensional

lorentz invariance and supersymmetry means that these branes must span the four-dimensional

minkowski space, while the remaining two dimensions wrap a holomorphic curve within calabiyau

threefold [2].

in the low-energy four-dimensional eective theory, there is an array of moduli. there are

geometrical moduli describing the dimensions of the calabiyau manifold and orbifold interval.

there are bundle moduli describing the two e8 gauge bundles. and nally, there are moduli
describing the positions of the vebranes. it is this last set of moduli, together with the generic

low-energy gauge elds on the vebranes, upon which we shall focus in this paper.

we shall look at this question in the particular case of an elliptically bered calabiyau threefold

with section. this expands on the discussion of we gave in a recent letter [4]. there we used this

special class of manifolds to construct explicitly an array of new particle physics vacua. the general

structure of the constructions was given in detail in a second paper [5]. this is the companion

paper which explains the structure of the ve-brane moduli space as well as the nature of gauge

enhancement on the ve-branes.

the constructions in [4] and [5] used the analysis of gauge bundles on elliptic calabiyau

threefolds given by friedman, morgan and witten [2], donagi [2] and bershadsky et al. [2]. the

vacua preserved, for example, su (5) or so(10) gauge symmetry with three families. the presence

of the ve-branes allowed a much larger class of possible backgrounds. the number of families is

given by an index calculated in this context by curio and andreas [2, 2]. curio [2] also gave explicit

examples of bundles where this index was three. subsequently, the case of non-simply connected

elliptic calabiyau threefolds with bisections have been discussed in [2]. the generic form of the

corresponding low-energy theories has been discussed in various places [2]. the most general form

including vebranes was given in [2], while the rst explicit model with non-standard gauge bundles

1

was discussed in [2].

in constructing these vacua the vebranes cannot be chosen arbitrarily [2]. the boundaries
of s1/z2 and the vebranes are all magnetic sources for the four-form eld strength g of eleven-
dimensional supergravity. the fact that there can be no net magnetic charge for g in the calabi

yau xes the homology class of the vebranes in terms of the gauge bundles and calabiyau

space. as discussed in [2], to describe real vebranes this homology class must be eective in

x. mathematically, then, the problem we wish to solve is to nd the moduli space of holomorphic

curves in x in a given eective homology class.

in this paper, we are considering this problem in the specic case of m vebranes. however,

the moduli space is quite general and, although we do not discuss it here, should have applications

to other supersymmetric brane congurations, where branes wrap a two-cycle in a calabiyau

threefold.

specic to the m theory case, we will also include the moduli corresponding to moving the
vebranes in s1/z2 and, in addition, their axionic moduli partners [2]. these latter elds are
compact scalars which arise as zero modes of the self-dual three-form h on the vebranes. the
other zero modes of h lead to low-energy gauge elds. generically the gauge group is u (1)g, where

g is the genus of the holomorphic curve [2]. since we will be able to calculate g at each point in

the moduli space, we will also be able to identify the low-energy gauge multiplets.

one consequence of considering elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds with section is that

there is a dual f theory description [2]. for the vebranes, those wrapping purely on the ber of

x correspond to threebranes on the f theory side [2]. rajesh [2] and rajesh and diaconescu [2]

have recently argued that vebranes lying wholly in the base of x correspond to blow-ups of the

corresponding curve in the f theory vacuum. we will not comment in detail on this interesting

correspondence. however, we note that, locally, the moduli spaces match those expected from

duality to f theory. we also comment on how the global structure is encoded on the m theory

side through a twisting of the axion modulus. this will be discussed further in [2]. a further

point we will only touch on is the structure of additional low-energy elds which can appear when

vebranes intersect [2]. we will, however, clearly identify these points in moduli space in our

analysis. finally, we will also ignore any non-perturbative corrections. in general, since the low-

energy theory in only n = 1, one expects that some of the directions in moduli space are lifted by

non-perturbative eects, in particular by instantonic membranes. some of these eects have been

analyzed in [2].

specically, we do the following.

in section 2, we briey review the anomaly cancellation

condition in heterotic m-theory, discuss how that constraint leads to non-perturbative vacua with

vebranes and review some aspects of homology and cohomology theory required in our analysis.

properties of elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds and a discussion of their algebraic and

2

eective classes are presented in section 3. section 4 is devoted to studying the simple case of the

the moduli spaces of vebranes wrapped purely on the elliptic ber. we also comment on global

structure of the moduli space and the relation to f theory. in section 5, we present two examples of

vebranes wrapping curves with a component in the base. we analyze, in detail, the moduli space

of these two examples, including the generic low-energy gauge groups on and possible intersections

of the vebrane. techniques developed in sections 4 and 5 are generalized in section 6, where we

give a procedure for the analysis of the moduli spaces of vebranes wrapped on any holomorphic

curve, generically with both a ber and a base component. we note a particular exceptional case

which occurs when the vebrane wraps an exceptional divisor in the base. finally, in sections 7, 8

and 9 we make these methods concrete by presenting three specic examples, two with a del pezzo

base and one with a hirzebruch base. two of these examples correspond realistic three-family,

non-perturbative vacua in horava-witten theory.

2 heterotic m theory vacua with vebranes

2.1 conditions for a supersymmetric background

as we have discussed in the introduction, the standard way to obtain heterotic vacua in four

dimensions with n = 1 supersymmetry, is to compactify eleven-dimensional m theory on the
manifold x  s1/z2  m4 [2]. here x is a calabiyau threefold, s1/z2 is an orbifold interval,
while m4 is four-dimensional minkowski space. this background is not an exact solution, but
is good to rst order in an expansion in the eleven-dimensional planck length. to match to the

low-energy particle physics parameters, the calabiyau threefold is chosen to be the size of the

grand unied scale, while the orbifold is somewhat larger[2]. in general, there is a moduli space

of dierent compactications. there are the familiar moduli corresponding to varying the complex

structure and the kahler metric on the calabiyau threefold. similarly, one can vary the size of

the orbifold. these parameters all appear as massless elds in the low-energy four-dimensional

eective action. in general, there are additional low-energy scalar elds coming from zero-modes

of the eleven-dimensional three-form eld c. these moduli, which are familiar from string theory

compactications, have been analyzed in the m theory context in various papers [2]

the second ingredient required to specify a supersymmetric background is to choose the gauge

bundle on the two orbifold planes.

in general, one can turn on background gauge elds in the

compact calabiyau space. supersymmetry implies that these elds cannot be arbitrary. instead,

they are required to satisfy the hermitian yangmills equations

fab = fab = 0

gabfab = 0

(2.1)

here a and b are holomorphic indices in x, a and b are antiholomorphic indices, while gab is the

3

kahler metric on x. having xed the topology of the gauge bundle, that is, how the bundle is

patched over the calabiyau manifold, there is then a set of dierent solutions to these equations.

there are additional low-energy moduli which interpolate between these dierent solutions.

in

general, the full moduli space of bundles is hard to analyze. however, when the calabiyau

threefold is elliptically bered, the generic structure of this moduli space can be calculated and has

been discussed in [9, 19, 2].

the nal ingredient to the background is that one can include vebranes [2].

in order to

preserve supersymmetry and four-dimensional lorentz invariance, the vebranes must span the

four-dimensional minkowski space while the remaining two dimensions wrap a holomorphic curve

within the calabiyau threefold [2]. in addition, each brane must be parallel to the orbifold xed
planes. thus it is localized at a single point in s1/z2. again, there are a set of moduli giving the
positions of the ve-branes within the calabiyau manifold as well as in the orbifold interval. as

we will discuss below, there are also extra moduli coming from the self-dual tensor elds on the

vebranes [2]. these elds generically give some eective n = 1 gauge theory in four-dimensions.

finding the moduli space of the vebranes, and some information about the eective gauge theory

which arises on the vebrane worldvolumes will be the goal of this paper.

in summary, the m theory background is determined by choosing

 a spacetime manifold of the form x  s1/z2  m4, where x is a calabiyau threefold

 two e8 gauge bundles, v1 and v2, satisfying the hermitian yangmills equations (2.1) on x

 a set of vebranes parallel to the orbifold xed planes and wrapped on holomorphic curves

within x.

this ensures that we preserve n = 1 supersymmetry in the low-energy four-dimensional eective

theory.

2.2 cohomology condition

the above conditions are not sucient to ensure that one has a consistent background. anomaly

cancellation on both the ten-dimensional orbifold xed planes and the six-dimensional vebranes is

possible only because each is a magnetic source for the supergravity four-form eld strength g =

dc [2]. this provides an inow mechanism to cancel the anomaly on the lower dimensional space.
in general, the magnetic sources for g are ve-forms. explicitly, if 0  x11   parameterizes the

orbifold interval, one has [2]

dg = j1  (x11) + j2  (x11  ) + x

i

j (i)
5  (x11  x(i))

(2.2)

4

where j1 and j2 are four-form sources on the two xed planes and j (i)
5
source localized at the position of the i-th ve-brane in x. the explicit one-form delta functions
give the positions of the orbifold xed planes at x11 = 0 and x11 =  and the ve-branes at
x11 = x(i) in s1/z2.

is a delta-function four-form

compactifying on x  s1/z2, we have the requirement that the net charge in the internal space
must vanish, since there is nowhere for ux to escape. equivalently, the integral of dg over any
ve-cycle in x  s1/z2 must be zero since dg is exact. integrating over the orbifold interval then
implies that the integral of j1 + j2 + pi j (i)
5 over any four cycle in x must vanish. alternatively,
this means that the sum of these four-forms must be zero up to an exact form, that is, they must

vanish cohomologically.

explicitly, the source on each orbifold plane is proportional to

jn  trfn  fn 

1
2

trr  r

(2.3)

where fn for n = 1, 2 is the e8 eld strength on the n-th xed plane, while r is the spacetime
curvature. the full cohomology condition can then be written as

(t x) = w(v1) + w(v2) + [w ]

with

w(v ) = 

(t x) =

1
2

2  82 tr6r  r

1

60  82 tr248f  f
p1(t x) = 

1

(2.4)

(2.5)

where the right-hand sides of these expressions really represent cohomology classes, rather than

the forms themselves. the traces are in the adjoint 248 of e8 and the vector representation of
[w ] represents the total cohomology class of the ve-branes, which we will discuss in a
so(6).

moment. note that  is half the rst pontrjagin class. it is, in fact, an integer class because we

are on a spin manifold. on a calabiyau threefold it is equal to the second chern class c2(t x),
where the tangent bundle t x is viewed as an su (3) bundle and the trace is in the fundamental

representation. thus, the cohomology condition simplies to

[w ] = c2(t x)  w(v1)  w(v2)

(2.6)

what do we mean by the cohomology class [w ]? we recall that we associated four-form delta

function sources to the ve-branes in x. the class [w ] is then the cohomology class of the sum of

all these sources. recall that the ve-branes wrap on holomorphic curves within the calabiyau

threefold. the sum of the ve-branes thus represents an integer homology class in h2(x, z). in
general, one can then use poincare duality to associate an integral cohomology class in h 4(x, z)
to the homology class of the vebranes, or also a de rham class in h 4

dr(x, r). this is the class

5

[w ] which enters the cohomology condition, though we will throughout use the same expression
[w ] for the integral homology class in h2(x, z), the integral cohomology class in h 4(x, z), and
the de rham cohomology class in h 4

dr(x, r).

2.3 homology classes and eective curves

let us now turn to analyzing the cohomology condition (2.6) in more detail. one nds that the

requirement that [w ] correspond to the homology class of a set of supersymmetric vebranes puts

a constraint on the allowed bundle classes [4, 5].

since the sources are all four-forms, equation (2.6) is clearly a relation between de rahm

cohomology classes h 4

dr(x, r). however, in fact, the sources are more restricted than this. in
general, they are all in integral cohomology classes. by this we mean that their integral over any

four-cycle in the calabiyau threefold gives an integer. (as noted above, this is even true when we
no longer have a calabiyau threefold but only a spin manifold, and c2(t x) is replaced by 1
2 p1(x).)
the class [w ] is integral because it is poincare dual to an integer sum of vebranes, an element of
h2(x, z). note that there is a general notion of the integer cohomology group h p(x, z) which, in
general, includes discrete torsion groups such as z2. this maps naturally to de rahm cohomology
h p
dr(x, r). however, it is important to note that the map is not injective. torsion elements in
h p(x, z) are lost. the integral classes to which we refer in this paper are to be identied with the
images of h p(x, z) in h p

dr(x, r).

in general, [w ] cannot be just any integral class. we have seen that supersymmetry implies

that vebranes are wrapped on holomorphic curves within x. thus [w ] must correspond to the

homology class of holomorphic curves. furthermore, [w ] must refer to some physical collection

of vebranes.

included in h2(x, z) are negative classes like [c] where c is, for example, a
holomorphic curve in x. these have cohomology representatives which would correspond to the

absence of a ve-brane, contributing a negative magnetic charge to the bianchi identity for g and

negative stress-energy. such states are physically not allowed. the condition that [w ] describes

physical, holomorphic vebranes further constrains c2(t x), w(v1) and w(v2) in the cohomology
condition (2.6).

in order to formalize these constraints, we need to introduce some denitions. we will use the

following terminology.

 a curve is a holomorphic complex curve in the calabiyau manifold. a curve is reducible

if it can be written as the union of two curves.

 a class is a homology class in h2(x, z) (or the poincare dual cohomology class in h 4(x, z)).
in general, it may or may not have a representative which is a holomorphic curve. if it does,

then a class is irreducible if it has an irreducible representative. note that there may be

6

other curves in the class which are reducible, but the class is irreducible if there is at least

one irreducible representative.

 a class which can be written as a sum of irreducible classes with arbitrary integer coecients

is called algebraic.

 a class is eective if it can be written as the sum of irreducible classes with positive integer

coecients.

note that we will occasionally use analogous terminology to refer to surfaces (or divisors) in x.

these are holomorphic complex surfaces in the calabiyau threefold, so they have four real dimen-

sions, and their classes lie in h4(x, z).

physically, the above denitions correspond to the following. a curve w describes a collection

of supersymmetric vebranes wrapped on holomorphic two-cycles in the calabiyau space. a

reducible curve is the union of two or more separate ve-branes. a general class in h2(x, z) has
representatives which are a general collection of ve-branes, perhaps supersymmetric, perhaps not,

and maybe including negative vebranes of the form mentioned above. an algebraic class, on the

other hand, has representatives which are a collection of only ve-branes wrapped on holomorphic

curves and so supersymmetric, but again includes the possibility of negative vebranes. finally, an

eective class has representatives which are collections of supersymmetric vebranes but exclude

the possibility of non-physical negative vebrane states.

from these conditions, we see that the constraint on [w ] is that we must choose the calabiyau

threefold and the gauge bundles v1 and v2 such that

[w ] must be eective

(2.7)

as it stands, it is not clear that [w ] = c2(t x)  w(v1)  w(v2) is algebraic, let alone eective.
however, supersymmetry implies that both the tangent bundle and the gauge bundles are holo-
morphic. there is then a useful theorem that the classes of holomorphic bundles are algebraic1,

and so [w ] is in fact necessarily algebraic. however, there remains the condition that [w ] must be

eective which does indeed constrain the allowed gauge bundles on a given calabiyau threefold.

1this is a familiar result for chern classes (see [12]). for e8, or other groups, it can be seen by taking any matrix

representation of the group and treating it as a vector bundle, that is, by embedding e8 in gl(n, c). the second

chern class of the vector bundle is then algebraic and is some integer multiple p of the class w(v ), where the factor is

related to the quadratic casimir of the representation. we conclude that w(v ) is rationally algebraic: it is integral,

and a further integral multiple of it is algebraic.

7

2.4 the theory on the vebranes, n = 1 gauge theories and the vebrane

moduli space

while two of the vebrane dimensions are wrapped on a curve within the calabiyau manifold,

the remaining four dimensions span uncompactied minkowski space. the low-energy massless

degrees of freedom on a given vebrane consequently fall into four-dimensional n = 1 multiplets.

at a general point in moduli space there are a set of complex moduli (mi, mi) describing how
the vebrane curve can be deformed within the calabiyau three-fold. these form a set of chiral
multiplets. in addition, there is a single real modulus x11 describing the position of the vebrane

in the orbifold interval. this is paired under supersymmetry with an axion a which comes from

the reduction of the self-dual three-form degree of freedom, h, on the vebrane to form a further

chiral multiplet. when the vebrane is non-singular, that is, does not intersect itself, touch another

vebrane, or pinch, at any point, the remaining degrees of freedom are a set of u (1) gauge multiplets,

where the gauge elds also arise from the reduction of the self-dual three-form. the number of

u (1) elds is given by the genus g of the curve. in summary, generically, we have

chiral multiplets:

vector multiplets:

(x11, a), (mi, mi)
g multiplets with u (1)g gauge group

(2.8)

for each distinct vebrane.

when the vebrane becomes singular, new degrees of freedom can appear. these correspond to

membranes stretched between parts of the same vebrane, or the vebrane and other vebranes,

which shrink and become massless when the vebrane becomes singular. they may be new chiral

or vector multiplets.

in the following, we will not generally identify all the massless degrees of

freedom at singular congurations but, rather, concentrate on describing the degrees of freedom on

the smooth parts of the moduli space.

in conclusion, we have seen that xing the calabiyau manifold and gauge bundles, in general,

xes an element [w ] of h2(x, z) describing the homology class of the holomorphic curve in x
on which the vebranes are wrapped. in order to describe an actual set of vebranes, [w ] must

be eective, which puts a constraint on the choice of gauge bundles. in general, there are a great

many dierent arrangements of vebranes in the same homology class. the vebranes could move

about within the calabiyau threefold and also in the orbifold interval. in addition, there can be

transitions where branes split and join. the net eect is that there is, in general, a complicated

moduli space of ve-branes parameterizing all the dierent possible combinations. in the low-energy

eective theory on the vebranes, the moduli space is described by a set of chiral multiplets. in

order to describe the structure of this moduli space, it is clear that we need to analyze the moduli

space of all the holomorphic curves in the class [w ], including the possibility that each vebrane
can move in s1/z2 and can have a dierent value of the axionic scalar a.

8

3 elliptically bered calabiyau manifolds

the moduli spaces we will investigate in detail in this paper are those for ve-branes wrapped on

smooth elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds x. consequently, in this section we will briey

summarize the structure of x, then identify the generic algebraic classes and nally understand

the conditions for these classes to be eective.

3.1 properties of elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds

an elliptically bered calabiyau threefold x consists of a base b, which is a complex surface,

and an analytic map

 : x  b

(3.1)

with the property that for a generic point b  b, the ber eb = 1(b) is an elliptic curve. that is,
eb is a riemann surface of genus one with a particular point, the origin p, identied. in particular,
we will require that there exist a global section, denoted , dened to be an analytic map

 : b  x

(3.2)

that assigns to every point b  b the origin (b) = p  eb. we will sometimes refer to this as
the zero section. the requirement that the elliptic bration have a section is crucial for duality to

f theory. however, one notes that from the m theory point of view it is not necessary.

in order to be a calabiyau threefold, the canonical bundle of x must be trivial. from the

adjunction formula, this implies that the normal bundle to the section, nb/x , which is a line bundle
over b and tells us how the elliptic ber twists as one moves around the base, must be related to

the canonical bundle of the base, kb. in fact,

nb/x = kb

(3.3)

further conditions appear if one requires that the calabiyau threefold be smooth. the canonical

bundle kb is then constrained so that the only possibilities for the base manifold are as follows [10],

 for a smooth calabiyau manifold the base b can be a del pezzo (dpr), hirzebruch (fr) or

enriques surface, or a blow-up of a hirzebruch surface.

these are the only possibilities we will consider. the structure of these surfaces is discussed in

detail in an appendix to [5]. in the following, we will adopt the notation used there.

it will be useful to recall that, in general, there is a set of points in the base at which the bration

becomes singular. these form a curve, the discriminant curve , which is in the homology class

12kb, as can be shown explicitly by considering the weierstrasse form of the bration.

9

3.2 algebraic classes on x

since [w ] is algebraic, we need to identify the set of algebraic classes on our elliptically bered

calabiyau manifold. this was discussed in [4, 5], but here we will be more explicit. it will be

useful to identify these classes both in h2(x, z) and h4(x, z). in general, the full set of classes
will depend on the particular bration in question. however, there is a generic set of classes which

are always present, independent of the bration, and this is what we will concentrate on.

simply because we have an elliptic bration, the ber at any given point is a holomorphic curve

in x. consequently, one algebraic class in h2(x, z) which is always present is the class of the
ber, which we will call f . the existence of a section means there is also a holomorphic surface in

x. thus the class of the section, which we will call d, denes an algebraic class in h4(x, z).

some additional algebraic classes may be inherited from the base b. in general, b has a set of

algebraic classes in h2(b, z). one useful fact is that for all the bases which lead to smooth calabi
yau manifolds, one nds that every class in h2(b, z) is algebraic. this follows from the lefschetz
theorem [12] which tells us that we can identify algebraic classes on a surface s with the image
of integer classes in the dolbeault cohomology h 1,1(s). one then has the following picture. in
general, the image of h 2(s, z) is a lattice of points in h 2(s, r). choosing a complex structure on
s corresponds to xing an h1,1-dimensional subspace within h 2(s, r) describing the space h 1,1(s).

generically, no lattice points will intersect the subspace and so there are no algebraic classes on s.
the exception is when h2,0 = 0, which is the case for all the possible bases b. then the subspace
is the whole space h 2(s, r) so all classes in h 2(s, z) are algebraic.

if  is an algebraic class in h2(b, z), there are two ways it can lead to a class in x. first,
one can use the section  to form a class in h2(x, z). if c is some representative of , then the
inclusion map  gives a curve (c) in x. the homology class of this curve in h2(x, z) is denoted
by . second, we can use the projection map  to pull  back to a class in h4(x, z). for a
given representative c, one forms the bered surface 1(c) over c. the homology class of this

surface in h4(x, z) is then denoted by . this structure is indicated in figure 1.

in general, these maps may have kernels. for instance, two curves which are non-homologous

in b, might be homologous once one embeds them in the full calabiyau threefold. in fact, we

will see that this is not the case. one way to show this, which will be useful in the following, is to

calculate the intersection numbers between the classes in h2 and h4. we nd

h2(x, z)


h4(x, z)



d

  

kb  

f

0

1

(3.4)

where the entries in the rst column are the intersections of classes in b. the intersection of 
with d is derived by adjunction, recalling that the normal bundle to b is nb/x = k 1
b . two

10

pe

b

-1c
=

s

(c)

c

figure 1: generic algebraic classes on x, where [c] =  and the ber class [ep] = f are in
h2(x, z), and [1(c)] =  and base class [b] = d are in h4(x, z).

classes are equivalent if they have the same intersection numbers. if we take a set of classes i
which from a basis of h2(b, z), we see that the matrix of intersection numbers of the form given
in (3.4) is non-degenerate. thus, for each nonzero   h2(b, z), we get nonzero classes  and
 in h2(x, z) and h4(x, z).

as we mentioned, the algebraic classes we have identied so far are generic, always present

independently of the exact form of the bration. there are two obvious sources of additional

classes. consider h4(x, z). first, we could have additional sections non-homologous to the zero-
section . second, the pull-backs of irreducible classes on b could split so that () = 1 + 2.
this splitting comes from the fact that there can be curves on the base over which the elliptic

curve degenerates, for example, into a pair of spheres. new classes appear from wrapping the

four-cycle over either one sphere or the other. now consider h2(x, z). we see that the possibility
of degeneration of the ber means that the ber class f can similarly split, with representatives

wrapped, for instance, on one sphere or the other. finally, the presence of new sections means

there is a new way to map curves from b into x and, in general, classes in h2(b, z) will map
under the new section to new classes in h2(x, z).

in all our discussions in this paper, we will ignore these additional classes. this will mean that

our moduli space discussion is not in general complete. however, this restriction will allow us to

analyze generic properties of the moduli space. in summary, we have identied the generic algebraic

classes  in h2(x, z) as classes in b (since these are all algebraic for the bases in question) mapped
via the section into x, together with the ber class f ; while in h4(x, z) the generic algebraic classes

11

are the pull-backs () of classes in b, together with the class d of the section. furthermore,

distinct algebraic classes in b lead to distinct algebraic classes in x.

3.3 eective classes on x

we argued in the previous section that a generic algebraic class [w ] in h2(x, z) on a general x
can be written as

[w ] =  + f f

(3.5)

where  is an algebraic class in b (which is then mapped to x via the section) and f is the ber

class, while f is some integer. if [w ] is to be the class of a set of ve-branes it must be eective.

what are the conditions, then, on  and f such that [w ] is eective?

we showed in [5] that the following is true. first, [w ] is eective if and only if  is an eective

class in b and f  0 for any del pezzo or enriques surface. second, this is also true for a hirzebruch

surface fr, with the exception of when  happens to contain the negative section s and r  3.
here, following the notation of [5], we write a basis of algebraic classes on fr as the negative section
s and the ber e. in this case, there is a single additional irreducible class s  (r  2)e. in

this paper, for simplicity, we will not consider these exceptional cases for which the statement is

untrue. thus, under this restriction, we have that

w =  + f f is eective in x   is eective in b and f  0

(3.6)

this reduces the question of nding the eective curves in x to knowing the generating set of

eective curves in the base b. for the set of base surfaces b we are considering, nding such

generators is always possible (see for instance [5]).

the derivation of this result goes as follows. clearly, if  is eective in b and f is non-negative

then since eective curves in b must map under the section to eective curves in x, we can conclude

that [w ] is eective. one can also prove that the converse is true in almost all cases. one sees

this as follows. first, unless a curve is purely in the ber, in which case  = 0, the fact that x is

elliptically bered means that all curves w project to curves in the base. the class [w ] similarly

projects to the class . the projection of an eective class must be eective, thus if [w ] is eective

in x then so is  in b. the only question then is whether there are eective, irreducible, curves

in x with negative f . to address this, we use the fact that any irreducible class in h2(x, z) must
have non-negative intersection with any eective class in h4(x, z) unless all the representative
curves are contained within the representative surfaces. we start by noting that if  is an eective

class in b then  must be an eective class in h4(x, z). this can be seen by considering any
given representative of b and its image in x. from the intersection numbers given in (3.4) and

12

the generic form of [w ] (3.5) we see that, if  is an eective class in b, then

  [w ] =   

d  [w ] = kb   + f

(3.7)

from the rst intersection one simply deduces again that if [w ] is eective then so is . now

suppose that f is non-zero. then w cannot be contained within b and so, from the second

expression, we have f  kb  . we recall that for del pezzo and enriques surfaces kb is nef,
so that its intersection with any eective class  is non-negative. thus, we must have f  0 for [w ]

to be eective. the exception is a hirzebruch surface fr for r  3. we then have kb  e = 2 > 0
but kb s = 2r < 0. this implies that there could be eective classes of the form s +f f with
f negative. indeed, the existence of such a class can be seen as follows. consider a representative

curve c of s in fr with r  3 (in fact, the representative is unique). it is easy to see that c is
topologically p1 (see equation (9.10) below). the surface 1(c) above c should thus be an elliptic
bration over p1. however, as shown in equation (9.11) below, in fact, c is contained within the

discriminant curve  of the calabiyau bration. thus all the bers over c are singular. the
generic singular ber is a p1, suggesting that sc is a p1 bration over p1. in fact it can be shown
that sc is indeed itself the hirzebruch surface fr2 (or a blow-up of such a surface). what class
is our original curve c in the new surface fr2? if we write the classes of fr2 as s  and e ,
we identify e  = f since this is just the ber class of the fr2. in addition, one can show that
s = s  + (r  2)e . however, we know that s  itself is an irreducible class, so s  = s + (2  r)f

is irreducible in h2(x, z). thus we see there is one new irreducible class with negative f which
saturates the condition that f  (r  2).

4 the moduli space for vebranes wrapping the elliptic ber and

the role of the axion

probably the simplest example of a vebrane moduli space is the case where the vebranes wrap

only the elliptic ber of the calabiyau threefold. by way of introduction to calculating moduli

spaces, in this section, we will consider this case, rst for a single vebrane and then for a collection

of vebranes. these congurations are well understood in the dual f-theory picture as collections

of d3-branes [2]. we end the section with a discussion of the connection between our results and

the f-theory description.

4.1 [w ] = f

if it wraps a ber only once, the class of the vebrane curve is simply given by

[w ] = f

13

(4.1)

a vebrane wrapping any of the elliptic bers will be in this class. one might imagine that there

are other vebranes in this class, where not all the vebrane lies at the same point in the calabi

yau threefold. instead, as one moves along the vebrane in the ber direction, the vebrane could

have a component in the base directions. however, if the curve is to be holomorphic, every point

in the vebrane curve must lie over the same point in the base. similarly, in order to preserve

n = 1 supersymmetry, the brane must be parallel to the orbifold xed planes, so it is also at a

xed point in the orbifold. since these position moduli are independent, the moduli space appears
to be b  s1/z2. the two complex coordinates on b form a pair of chiral n = 1 superelds. the
metric on this part of the moduli space should simply come from the kahler metric on the base b.

however, we have, thus far, ignored the axionic scalar, a, on the vebrane world volume. we
have argued that this is in a chiral multiplet with the orbifold modulus x11. furthermore, it is
compact, describing an s1. however, at the edges of the orbifold this changes. it has been argued

in [6, 7] that there is a transition when a vebrane reaches the boundary. at the boundary, the brane

can be described by a point-like e8 instanton. new low-energy elds then appear corresponding
to moving in the instanton moduli space. similarly, some of the vebrane moduli disappear.
throughout this transition the low-energy theory remains n = 1. thus, since the x11 degree of

freedom disappears in the transition, so must the axionic degree of freedom. consequently the
axionic s1 moduli space must collapse to a point at the boundary. we see that the full (x11, a)
moduli space is just the bration of s1 over the interval s1/z2, where the s1 is singular at the
boundaries, that is, the orbifold and axion part of the moduli space is simply s2 = p1.

the fact that the axionic degree of freedom disappears on the boundary can be seen in another

way. in the vebrane equation of motion, one can write the self-dual three-form eld strength h in

terms of a two-form potential, b, in combination with the pull-back onto the vebrane worldvolume

of the eleven-dimensional three-form potential c as [13]

h = db  c

(4.2)

under the z2 orbifold symmetry c is odd unless it has a component in the direction of the orbifold.
since the vebrane must be parallel to the orbifold xed-planes this is not the case. this implies

that h must also be odd. consequently, h must be zero on the orbifold xed planes implying that

the axion a also disappears on the boundary.

in summary, the full moduli space is given locally by

m(f ) = b  p1
a.

(4.3)

where the subscript on p1
a denotes that this part of moduli space describes the axion multiplet.
globally, this p1 could twist as we move in b; so m(f ) is really a p1 bundle over b. we will

return to this point below. what about the vector degrees of freedom? since the ber is elliptic,

14

the vebrane curve must be topologically a torus. thus we have

g = genus (w ) = 1

(4.4)

and there is a single u (1) vector multiplet in the low-energy theory.

4.2 [w ] = nf

the generalization to the case where the vebrane class is a number of elliptic bers is straightfor-

ward. the class

[w ] = f f

(4.5)

where f  1, means we have a collection of curves which wrap the ber f times. in general, we

could have one component which wraps f times or two or more components each wrapping a fewer

number of times. in the limiting case, there are f distinct components each wrapping only once.

a single component must wrap all at the same point in the base. in addition, it must be at a

xed point in the orbifold interval and must have a single value of the axionic scalar. two or more
distinct components can wrap at dierent points in the base and have dierent values of x11 and a.

as homology cycles, there is no distinction between the case where some number n of singly

wrapped components overlap, lying at the same point in the base, and the case where there is a

single component wrapping n times. both cases represent the same two-cycle in the calabiyau

manifold. physically, they could be distinguished if the n singly wrapped components were at
dierent points in s1/z2 or had dierent values of the axion. however, if the values of x11 and a
were also the same, by analogy with d branes, we would expect that we could not then distinguish,

in terms of the scalar elds on the branes, the n singly wrapped vebranes from a single brane

wrapped n times. from the discussion in the last section, each singly wrapped vebrane has a
moduli space given locally by b  p1

a. thus for f components, we expect the full scalar eld

moduli space locally has the form

a(cid:1)f
m(f f ) = (cid:0)b  p1

/zf

(4.6)

where we have divided out by permutations since the vebranes are indistinguishable. the am-

biguous points in moduli space, which could correspond to a number of singly wrapped vebranes

or a single multiply wrapped vebrane, are then the places where two or more of the points in the
f b  p1
a factors coincide. note, in addition, that this is again only the local structure of m(f f ).
we do not know how the p1
a factors twist as we move the vebranes in the base. thus, globally,
m(f f ) is the quotient of a (p1)f bundle over bf .

in a similar way, the gauge symmetry on the vebranes also follows by analogy with d-branes.

at a general point in the moduli space, we have n distinct vebranes each wrapping a torus and

15

so, as in the previous section, each with a single u (1) gauge eld. when two branes collide in the

calabiyau threefold, and are at the same point in the orbifold and have the same value of the

axion, we expect the symmetry enhances to u (2). the new massless states come from membranes

stretched between the vebranes. the maximal enhancement is when all the vebranes collide and

the group becomes u (n).

4.3 duality to f theory and twisting the axion

the results of the last two sections are extremely natural from the f theory point of view. it has

been argued that vebranes wrapping an elliptic ber of x correspond to threebranes spanning

the at m4 space on the type iib side [2]. to understand the correspondence, we rst very briey
review the relation between m and f theory [2].

the duality states that the heterotic string on an elliptically bered calabiyau threefold

x is dual to f theory on a calabi-yau fourfold x  bered by k3 over the same base b. the

m theory limit of the heterotic string we consider here is consequently also dual to the same

f theory conguration. in addition, the duality requires that the k3 bers should themselves be

elliptically bered. this means that the fourfold x  also has a description as an elliptic bration
over a threefold base b . since the base of an elliptically bered k3 manifold is simply p1, this
implies that b  must be a p1 bration over b. as a type iib background, the spacetime is b   m4,
where m4 is at minkowski space. the complex structure of the elliptic bers of x  then encode
how the iib scalar doublet, the dilaton and the ramond-ramond scalar, vary as one moves over

the ten-dimensional manifold b   m4. as such, they describe some conguration of seven-branes
in type iib.

m theory vebranes which wrap the elliptic ber in x, map to threebranes spanning m4 in
the dual f theory vacuum. as such, the three-brane is free to move in the remaining six compact

dimensions. thus we expect that the threebrane moduli space is simply b . however, we have
noted that b  is a p1 bration over b. thus we see that locally the moduli space as calculated

on the f theory side exactly coincides with the moduli space of the vebrane given in (4.3) above.
the p1 ber in b  is precisely the orbifold coordinate x11 together with the axion a. for a

collection of f threebranes, we expect the moduli space is simply promoted to the symmetric
product b f /zf . again, locally, this agrees with the moduli space (4.6) of the corresponding m
theory vebranes. similarly, it is well known that a threebrane carries a single u (1) gauge eld, as

does the m theory vebrane. for a collection of f threebranes this is promoted to u (f ), which was

really the motivation for our claim for the vector multiplet structure calculated in the m theory

picture.

in general, the arguments given in the previous two sections were only sucient to give the

local structure of the axion multiplet part of the vebrane moduli space. we did not determine

16

how the axion ber p1

a twisted as one moved the vebrane in the calabiyau manifold. from
duality with f theory, we have seen that, in general, we expect this twisting is non-trivial. in fact,

it can also be calculated from the m theory side. we will not give the details here but simply

comment on the mechanism. a full description will be given elsewhere [25]. the key is to recall

that the self-dual three-form on the vebrane (4.2) depends on the pull-back of the supergravity

three-form potential c. this leads to holonomy for the axion degree of freedom as one moves the

vebrane within the calabiyau threefold. the holonomy can be non-trivial if the eld strength g

is non-trivial. however, from the modied bianchi identity (2.2), we see that this is precisely the
case when there are non-zero sources from the boundaries of s1/z2 and also from to vebranes in
the bulk. in general, one can calculate how the axion twists, and hence how p1
a twists, in terms of

the dierent sources.

this phenomenon is interesting but not central to the structure of the vebrane moduli spaces,

such as the dimension of the space, how its dierent branches, or the genus of the vebrane curve.

thus, for simplicity, in the rest of this paper we will ignore the issue of how a twists as one moves a

given collection of vebranes within the calabiyau manifold. consequently, the moduli spaces we

quote will strictly only be locally correct for the axion degrees of freedom. so that it is clear where
the extra global structure can appear, we will always label the p1 degrees of freedom associated
with the axions as p1
a.

5 two examples with vebranes wrapping curves in the base

the discussion of the moduli space becomes somewhat more complicated once one includes classes

where the vebrane wraps a curve in the base manifold. again, we will take two simple examples

to illustrate the type of analysis one uses. in both cases, we will assume, for specicity, that the

base manifold is a dp8 surface, though the methods of our analysis would apply to any base b.
throughout, we will use the notation and results of [5]. a dp8 surface is a p2 surface blown up at
eight points, p1, . . . , p8. in general there are nine algebraic classes in the base: the class l inherited
from the class of lines in the p2 and the eight classes of the blown-up points e1, . . . , e8. in the
following, we will often describe curves in dp8 in terms of the corresponding plane curve in p2.

5.1 [w ] = l  e1

we rst take an example where the vebrane class includes no ber components

[w ] = l  e1

(5.1)

where l and e1 are the images in the calabiyau manifold of the corresponding classes in the
base. since  = l  e1 is an eective class in the base, (see [5]), from (3.6) we see that [w ] is
eective in x, as required.

17

w

s

c =

-1

(c)

c

b

figure 2: the curve w and its image in the base c

if we knew that the curve lay only in the base, the moduli space would then simply be the

space of curves in a dp8 surface in the class l  e1, which is relatively easy to calculate. in general,
however, w lies somewhere in the full calabiyau threefold. the fact that its homology class is

the image of a homology class in the base does not imply that w is stuck in b. nonetheless, we do

know that, under the projection map  from x to b, the curve w must project onto a curve c in

the base as shown in figure 2. furthermore the class of c must be  = l  e1 in b. what we can
do is nd the moduli space of such curves c in the base and then ask, for each such c, what set

of curves w in the full calabiyau manifold would project onto c. that is to say, the full moduli

space should have a bered structure. the base of this space will be the moduli space of curves c

in b, while the ber above a given curve is the class of w in x which projects onto the given c.

in our example, the moduli space of curves c in the class  = le1 is relatively easy to analyze.
in p2,  describes the class of lines through one point, p1. a generic line in p2 is a homogeneous
polynomial of degree one,

ax + by + cz = 0

(5.2)

where [x, y, z] are homogeneous coordinates on p2. since the overall coecient is irrelevant, a given
line is xed by giving [a, b, c] up to an overall scaling. thus the moduli space of lines is itself p2.

furthermore, we see that a given point in the line is specied by xing, for instance, x and y up
to an overall scaling. consequently, we see that, topologically, a line in p2 is just a sphere p1.

for the class , we further require that the line pass through a given point p1 = [x1, y1, z1]. this

18

provides a single linear constraint on a, b and c,

ax1 + by1 + cz1 = 0

(5.3)

we now have only the set of lines radiating from p1 and the moduli space is reduced to p1.
topologically, the line in p2 is still just a sphere and, generically, its image in dp8 will also be a
sphere.

there are, however, seven special points in the moduli space. a general line passing through p1
will not intersect any other blown-up point. however, there are seven special lines radiating from

p1 which also pass through a second blown-up point. (to be a dp8 manifold, the eight blow-up
points must be in general position, so no three are ever in a line.) this is shown in figure 3. let

us consider one of these seven lines, say the one which passes through p2. the transform of such a
line to dp8 splits into two curves

c = c1 + c2

(5.4)

the rst component c1 projects back to the line in p2. the second component corresponds to a
curve wrapping the blown up p1 at p2 and so has no analog in p2. specically, the classes of the
two curves are

[c1] = l  e1  e2,

[c2] = e2

using the results in the appendix to [5], we see that

[c1]  [c1] = [c2]  [c2] = 1

(5.5)

(5.6)

it follows that both curves are in exceptional classes in dp8 and so cannot be deformed within
the base. hence, no new moduli for moving in the base appear when the curve splits. from the
form of (5.5), we see that, when the curve splits, c1 remains a line in p2 so is topologically still a
sphere, while c2 wraps the blown up p1 and, so, is also topologically a sphere. furthermore, the
intersection number

[c1]  [c2] = 1

(5.7)

implies that the two spheres intersect at one point. what has happened is that the single sphere

c has pinched o into a pair of spheres as shown in figure 4. in summary, for the moduli space of

curves c in the base, in the homology class  = l  e1, we have,

[c]

l  e1

genus moduli space
p1  7 pts.

0

(l  e1  ei) + (ei)

0 + 0

single pt.

19

(5.8)

p

2

p

1

p

3

figure 3: the moduli space of lines in the class l  e1. the solid lines represent two examples of
the special case where the proper transform of the line splits into two components

figure 4: splitting a single sphere into a pair of spheres

20

where in the second line i = 2, . . . , 8.

the next step is to nd, for a given curve c, how many curves w there are in the full calabi

yau space which project onto c. furthermore, w must be in the homology class l  e1. let
us start with a curve c at a generic point in the moduli space (5.8), that is, a point in the rst line

of the table where the curve has not split. any curve w which projects onto c must lie somewhere

in the space of the elliptic bration over c. thus, we are interested in studying the complex surface

sc = 1(c)

(5.9)

this structure is shown in figure 2. by denition, this surface is an elliptic bration over c which,
means it is a bration over p1. in general, the surface will have some number of singular bers.

this is equal to the intersection number between the discriminant curve , which gives the position

of all the singular bers on b, and the base curve c. recall that [] = 12kb. using the results
summarized in the appendix to [5], since the base is a dp8 surface and intersection numbers depend
only on homology classes, we have

[]  [c] = 12 (3l  e1      e8)  (l  e1) = 24

(5.10)

thus we see that, generically, sc is an elliptic bration over p1 with 24 singular bers. this implies
[12] that

sc is a k3 surface

(5.11)

the curve c is the zero section of the bration. further, projection gives us a map from the

actual curve w to its image c in the base. the projection only wraps c once, so, since c is not

singular, the map is invertible and w must also be a section of sc. our question then simplies
to asking: what is the moduli space of sections of sc in the class l  e1?

to answer this question, we start by identifying the algebraic classes in sc. we know that we
have at least two classes inherited from the calabiyau threefold: the class of the zero section c,

which we write as dc, and the class of the elliptic ber, fc . specically, under the inclusion map

dc and fc map into the corresponding classes in x

ic : sc  x

ic dc = [c] = l  e1

ic fc = f

where ic  is the map between classes

ic  : h2(sc, z)  h2(x, z)

21

(5.12)

(5.13)

(5.14)

these are the only relevant generic classes in x. however, there may be additional classes on sc
which map to the same class in x so that the map ic  has a kernel. that is to say, two curves
which are homologous in x may not be homologous in sc. however, we note that a generic k3
surface would have no algebraic classes since h2,0 6= 0 (see the discussion in section 3.2). given

that in our case of an elliptically bered k3 with section we have at least two algebraic classes, the

choice of complex structure on sc cannot be completely general. however, generically, we have
no reason to believe that there are any further algebraic classes. for particular choices of complex

structure additional classes may appear but, since here we are considering the generic properties

of the moduli space, we will ignore this possibility.

now, we require that w , like c, is also in the class l  e1 in the full calabiyau space.
this immediately implies, given the map (5.13), that w is also in the class dc of the zero section c
in sc. furthermore, we can calculate the self-intersection number of this class within sc. this can
be done as follows. recall that the riemannhurwitz formula [12] applied to the curve c states

that

2g  2 = deg kc

(5.15)

where g is the genus and kc is cohomology class of the canonical bundle of c. the adjunction
formula [12] then gives

deg kc = (ksc + dc )  dc

(5.16)

where ksc is the canonical class of the k3 surface sc. using the fact that the canonical class of a
k3 surface is zero, ksc = 0, and that c is a sphere so g = 0, it follows from (5.15) and (5.16) that

dc  dc = 2

(5.17)

this implies that the section cannot be deformed at all within the surface sc. in conclusion, we
see that there is, generically, no moduli space of curves w which project onto c. rather, the only

curve in sc in the class l  e1 is the section c itself. we see that, generically, the curve w
can only move in the base of x and cannot be deformed in a ber direction.

recall that a vebrane wrapped on w also has a modulus describing its position in s1/z2, as
well as the axionic modulus. together, as was discussed in the previous section, these form a p1

moduli space. thus, we conclude that the moduli space associated with a generic curve in (5.8) is

locally simply

mgeneric = (cid:0)p1  7 pts.(cid:1)  p1

a

(5.18)

as discussed above, since the axion can be twisted, globally, this extends to a p1

a bundle over p1.
physically, we have a single vebrane wrapping an irreducible curve in the calabiyau threefold,

22

which lies entirely within the base b. the curve can be deformed in the base, which gives the rst

factor in the moduli space, but cannot be deformed in the ber direction. it can also move in the

orbifold interval and have dierent values for the axionic modulus, which gives the second factor

in (5.18). since the curve has genus zero, there are no vector elds in the low-energy theory.

thus far we have discussed the generic part of the moduli space. the full moduli space will

have the form

m(l  e1) = (cid:0)p1  7 pts.(cid:1)  p1

a  mnon-generic

(5.19)

where the additional piece mnon-generic describes the moduli space at each of the special 7 points
where the curve c splits into two components. to analyze this part of the moduli space, we must

consider each component separately, but we can use the same procedure we used above. the fact

that the image c splits, means that the original curve w must also split in x

w = w1 + w2

(5.20)

with c1 being the projection onto the base of w1 and c2 the projection of w2. let us consider the
case where the line in p2 also intersects p2. then the homology classes of w1 and w2 must split as

[w1] = l  e1  e2

[w2] = e2

(5.21)

note that one might imagine adding nf to [w1] and nf to [w2], still leaving the total [w ]
unchanged and having the correct projection onto the base. however, from (3.6), we see that one

class would not then be eective and so, since w1 and w2 must each correspond to a physical
vebrane, such a splitting is not allowed.

if we start with w1, to nd the curves in x which project onto c1 and are in the homology
class l  e1  e2, we begin, as above, with the surface sc1 = 1(c1) above c1. calculating
the number of singular bers, we nd

  [c1] = 12 (3l  e1      e8)  (l  e1  e2) = 12

(5.22)

since c1 is a sphere, we have an elliptic bration over p1 with 12 singular bers, which implies
that [12]

similarly, if we consider [c2] = e2,

sc1 is a dp9 surface

  [c2] = 12 (3l  e1      e8)  e2 = 12

(5.23)

(5.24)

since the curve c2 is also a sphere, it follows that we again have an elliptic bration over p1 with
12 singular bers, and hence we also have

sc2 is a dp9 surface

(5.25)

23

thus, we are considering the degeneration of the k3 surface sc, which had 24 singular bers, into a
pair of dp9 surfaces sc1 and sc2, each with 12 singular bers. on a given dp9 surface, say sc1, we
are guaranteed, as for the k3 surface, that there are at least two algebraic classes, the section class

dc1 and the ber class fc1. however, the dp9 case is more interesting than the case of a k3 surface
since there are always other additional algebraic classes. on a dp9 surface, h2,0 = 0. consequently,
as was discussed in section 3.2, whatever complex structure one chooses, all classes in h2(dp9, z)
are algebraic. thus, one nds that the algebraic classes on dp9 form a 10-dimensional lattice. since
there are only two distinguished classes on the calabiyau threefold (namely l  e1 and the
ber class f ), this implies that distinct classes in sc1 must map to the same class in x. that is to
say, curves which are not homologous in sc1 are homologous once one considers the full threefold
x.

the full analysis of the extra classes on sc1 will be considered in section 6.3. suce it to say
that for w1 to be in the same class as c1 in the full calabiyau threefold, it must also be in the
same class within sc1. thus, we are again interested in the moduli space of the section class dc1
in sc1. now, we recall (see, for instance, the appendix to [5]) that the canonical class for a dp9 is
= fd. so by the analogous calculation to (5.17), using the fact that dc1  fd = 1
simply ksc1
since c1 is a section, we have that

dc1  dc1 = 1

(5.26)

this means that the curve c1 cannot be deformed within sc1. thus, as in the k3 case, the only
possible w1 is the section c1 itself.

an identical calculation goes through for the other component w2. furthermore, the analysis is
the same at each of the other six exceptional points in moduli space. given that the curve has split

into two components at each of these points, we have two separate moduli describing the position
of each component in s1/z2 as well as two moduli describing the axionic degree of freedom for each
component. it follows that

mnon-generic = 7(cid:0)p1

a  p1
a(cid:1)

(5.27)

where 7(p1  p1) = p1  p1      p1  p1. we nd, then, that the full moduli space has a

branched structure,

m(l  e1) = (cid:0)p1  7 pts.(cid:1)  p1

a  7(cid:0)p1

a  p1
a(cid:1)

(5.28)

where, globally, the rst factor, mgeneric, in fact, extends to a p1 bundle over p1. we can also
describe the way each copy of p1
a, the set of
points where the two components intersect, is glued to a ber of the p1

a is attached to mgeneric: the diagonal of p1

a  p1

a  p1

a bundle mgeneric.

24

p1
a

p1

1p
a

1p
x a

...

p1
a p1
x
a

xp1
a p1
a

1
a p1
p
x
a

figure 5: the moduli space m(l  e1).

physically, as we discussed above, at a generic point in the moduli space we have a single

vebrane wrapping a curve which lies solely in the base of the calabiyau threefold and is topo-
logically a sphere. the curve can be moved in the base and in s1/z2 but not in the ber direction.
in moving around the base there are seven special points where the vebrane splits into two curves

intersecting at one point, as in figure 4. these are each xed in both the base and the ber of the
calabiyau manifold, but can now each move independently in s1/z2. the two vebranes can then
be separated so that they no longer intersect. in making the transition from one of these branches

of the moduli space to the case where there is a single vebrane, the two vebranes must be at the
same point in s1/z2 and have the same value of the axionic scalar a. they can then combine and
be deformed away within the base as a single curve. this structure is shown in figure 5. note

that, unlike the pure ber case (4.6), the two curves w1 and w2 are distinguishable, since they
wrap dierent cycles in the base, so we do not have to be concerned with modding out by discrete

symmetries.

since in our example all the curves are topologically spheres, there are generically no vector

elds in the low-energy theory. however, at the points where there is a transition between the

two-vebrane branch and the single vebrane branch, additional low-energy elds can appear.

these correspond to membranes which stretch between the two vebranes becoming massless as

the vebranes intersect.

25

5.2 [w ] = l  e1 + f

we can generalize the previous example by including a ber component in the class of w , so that

[w ] = l  e1 + f

note that from (3.6) this class is eective.

we immediately see that one simple possibility is that w splits into two curves

where

w = w0 + wf

[w0] = l  e1,

[wf ] = f

(5.29)

(5.30)

(5.31)

the moduli space of the w0 component will be exactly the same as our previous example, while for
the pure ber component, as given in equation (4.3), the moduli space is locally b  p1
a. since the
base in this example is dp8 here we conclude that, when the curve splits, this part of the moduli
space is just the product of the moduli spaces for w0 and wf , that is

m(l  e1)  (cid:0)dp8  p1
a(cid:1)

(5.32)

where m(l  e1) was given above in (5.28). physically we have two vebranes, one wrapped
on the ber and one on the base, which can each move independently. as discussed above, for

the curve wrapped on the base there are certain special points in moduli space where it splits

into a pair of vebranes, so that, at these special points, we have a total of three independent

vebranes. since the curves of the base are all topologically spheres, their genus is zero. hence,

the only vector multiplets come from the vebrane wrapping the ber which, being topologically

a torus with g = 1, gives a u (1) theory. generically, the ve brane wrapping the ber wf does
not intersect the vebranes in the base w0. however, there is a curve of points in the moduli
space of wf where both vebranes are in the same position in s1/z2, with the same value of a,
and w0 lies above wb in the calabiyau bration. generically, this gives a single intersection.
however, there is a special point, when the base curves splits, as in (5.20) and (5.21), and the ber

component intersects exactly the point where the two base curves intersect. at such a point in

moduli space, we have three vebranes intersecting at a single point in the calabiyau threefold.

these dierent possible intersections are shown in figure 6. generically, we expect there to be

additional multiplets in the low-energy theory at such points.

we might expect that there is also a component of the moduli space where the curve w does

not split at all, that is, where we have a single vebrane in the class l  e1 + f . to analyze
this second possibility we simply follow the analysis given above, where we rst consider the moduli

26

w

f

w

0

b

w

f

w

f

w

0

w

0

b

b

figure 6: possible enhancements in the moduli space of [w ] = l  e1 + f . the rst gure is
where the curve in the base w0 does not split. the second gives two possible cases when w0 splits.

space of the image c of w in the base and then nd the moduli space of curves which project down

to the same given curve c.

since the projection of f onto the base is zero, the image of [w ] in the base is  = l  e1, as
above. thus many of the results of the previous discussion carry over to this situation. the moduli
space of c is given by (5.8). at a generic point in moduli space sc = 1(c) is a k3 surface, while
at the seven special points where c splits, the surface above each of the two components of c is

a dp9 surface. if we consider rst a generic point in the moduli space, w is again a section of the
k3 surface, but must now be in the class l  e1 + f . how many such sections are there? it
turns out that for generic k3 there are none. we can see this as follows. by adjunction, since the

genus of c was zero, we showed in equation (5.17) that its class in sc satises dc  dc = 2. the
identical calculation applies to any section, since all sections have genus zero. thus, in particular,

we have

[w ]c  [w ]c = 2

(5.33)

where by [w ]c, we mean the class of w in sc. however, from the map between classes (5.13), it
is clear that [w ]c = dc + fc . since dc is the class of the zero section, we have dc  fc = 1. for
the ber class we always have fc  fc = 0. hence, we must also have

[w ]c  [w ]c = 0

(5.34)

this contradiction implies that there can be no sections of sc in the class l  e1 + f . in
other words, we have shown that, generically, we cannot have just a single vebrane in the class

l  e1 + f . rather, the vebrane always splits into a pure ber component and a pure base
component, as described above.

what about the special points in the moduli space where the curve c splits into two? do we still

have to have a separate pure ber component? the answer is no, for the reason that, as discussed

27

above, the space above each component is a dp9 surface and, unlike the k3 case, there are many
more algebraic classes on dp9 than just the zero section and the ber. specically, suppose there
is no separate pure ber component in w and consider the point where c splits into c1 + c2 with
[c1] = l  e1  e2 and [c2] = e2. the actual curve w must also split into w1 and w2. given that
each component must be eective, we then have two possibilities, depending on which component

includes the ber class

[w1] = l  e1  e2 + f,

[w2] = e2

or

(5.35)

[w1] = l  e1  e2,

[w2] = e2 + f

let us concentrate on the rst case, although a completely analogous analysis holds in the second

example. above, we calculated the number of curves in the case where the class contains no f . we

found, for instance, that if [w2] = e2 then w2 is required to be precisely the section c2 and there
is no moduli space for moving the curve in the ber direction. the situation is richer, however, for

the class with an f component. we will discuss this is more detail in section 6.3 below, but it turns

out that there are 240 dierent sections of dp9 in the class [w1] = l  e1  e2 + f . it is a
general result, just repeating the calculation that led to (5.26), that any section of the dp9 has self-
intersection 1. consequently none of the 240 dierent sections in the class l  e1  e2 + f
can be deformed in the ber direction and, hence, they simply provide a discrete set of dierent w1
which all map to the same c1. furthermore, one can show that none of these sections intersect the
base of the calabiyau manifold. thus, since, in the case we are considering, w2 lies solely in the
base, we nd that w1 and w2 can never overlap. their relative positions within the calabiyau
threefold are shown in figure 7.

it is important to note that these curves are completely stuck within the calabiyau threefold.

they cannot combine into a single curve and move away from the exceptional point in the moduli

space of c (the projection of w into the dp8 base) where c splits into two curves. furthermore,
we have argued that they cannot move in the ber. thus, the only moduli for this component of

the moduli space are the positions of the two vebranes in the orbifold interval and the values of

their axions, giving a moduli space of

p1

a  p1
a

(5.36)

furthermore, since all the sections of dp9 are topologically spheres, there are no vector multiplets
in this part of the moduli space. as we noted above, the vebranes cannot overlap. hence, there

is no possibility of additional multiplets appearing. finally, we note that there were seven ways c

could split into c1 + c2, and, for each splitting, w can decompose one of two ways (5.35). since
for each decomposition there are 240 distinct sections, we see that there is a grand total of 3360

ways of making the analogous decomposition to that we have just discussed.

28

w

1

c

1

b

c=

w

2

2

figure 7: w = w1 + w2 in the case where [w1] = l  e1  e2 + f and [w2] = e2.

in conclusion, we see that the full moduli space for [w ] = l  e1 + f has a relatively rich
structure. it splits into a large number of disconnected components. the largest component is

where w splits into separate ber and base components, w = w0 + wf . the moduli space is then
given by (5.32), which includes the possibility of the base component splitting. there are then 3360

disconnected components where w splits into two irreducible components, one of which includes

the ber class f . we can summarize this structure in a table

[w ]

(l  e1) + (f )

genus

0 + 1

(l  e1  e2) + (e2) + (f ) 0 + 0 + 1
(l  e1  e2 + f ) + (e2)

0 + 0

moduli space

(cid:0)(cid:2)p1  7 pts.(cid:3)  p1

a(cid:1)  (cid:0)dp8  p1
a(cid:1)

p1

a  (cid:0)dp8  p1
a  p1
a(cid:1)
a  p1
p1
a

(5.37)

here, the rst column gives the homology classes in x of the dierent components of w . the

rst two rows describe the moduli space (5.32) where w splits into w0 + wf , rst for a generic
component in the base and then at one of seven points where the base component splits. the nal

row describes one of the 3360 disconnected components of the moduli space (5.36). from the genus

count, we see that in the rst two cases we expect a u (1) gauge eld on the vebrane which wraps

the ber, while in the last case there are no vector multiplets. as we have noted, the component

of the moduli given in the rst two rows has the possibility that the vebranes intersect leading

to additional low-energy elds, as depicted in figure 6. the disconnected components, have no

such enhancement mechanism. furthermore, their moduli space is severely restricted since neither

vebrane can move within the calabiyau manifold.

29

6 general procedure for analysis of the moduli space

from the examples above, we can distill a general procedure for the analysis of the generic moduli

space. we start with a general vebrane curve in the class

[w ] =  + f f

(6.1)

furthermore, [w ] is assumed to be eective, so that, by (3.6),  is some eective class in h2(b, z)
and f  0. we need to rst nd the moduli space of the projection c of w onto the base. one then

nds all the curves in the full calabiyau threefold in the correct homology class which project
onto c. in general, we will nd that the above case, where the space sc = 1(c) above c was
a k3 surface, is the typical example. there, we found that no irreducible curve which projects

onto c could include a ber component in its homology class. hence, [w ] splits into a pure base

and a pure ber component. one exception, as we saw above, is when sc is a dp9 surface. in the
following, we will start by analysing the generic case and then give a separate discussion for the

case where dp9 appears.

6.1 decomposition of the moduli space

any curve w in the calabiyau threefold can be projected to the base using the map . in general,

w may have one or many components. typically, a component will project to a curve in the base.

however, there may also be components which are simply curves wrapping the ber at dierent

points in the base. these curves will all project to points in the base rather than curves. thus,

the rst step in analyzing the moduli space is to separate out all such curves. we therefore write

w as the sum of two components, each of which may be reducible,

w = w0 + wf

(6.2)

but with the assumption that none of the components of w0 are pure ber components. for general
[w ] given in (6.1), the classes of these components are

[w0] =  + nf

[wf ] = (f  n)f

(6.3)

with 0  n  f , since each class must be separately eective. note that, although w0 has no
components which are pure ber, its class may still involve f since, in general, components of w0
can wrap around the ber as they wrap around a curve in the base. except when n = f , so wf = 0,
w has at least two components in this decomposition and so there are at least two ve-branes.

in general, the decomposition (6.2) splits the moduli space into f + 1 dierent components

depending on how we partition the f ber classes between [w0] and [wf ]. within a particular
component, the moduli space is a product of the moduli space of w0 and wf . if mf ((f  n)f ) is

30

the moduli space of wf and m0( + nf ) is the moduli space of w0, we can then write the full
moduli space as

m( + f f ) =

f

[

n=0

m0( + nf )  m((f  n)f )

(6.4)

the problem is then reduced to nding the form of the moduli spaces for w0 and wf . the latter
moduli space has already be analyzed in section 4.2. we found that, locally,

m((f  n)f ) = (cid:0)b  p1

a(cid:1)f n

/zf n

(6.5)

thus we are left with m0( + nf ), which can be analyzed by the projection techniques we used
in the preceding examples.

projecting w0 onto the base, we get a curve c in the class  in b. let us call the moduli space
of such curves in the base mb(). this space is relatively easy to analyze since we know the form
of b explicitly. in general, it can be quite complicated with dierent components and branches as

curves degenerate and split. to nd the full moduli space m0( + nf ), we x a point in mb()
giving a particular curve c in b which is the projection of the original curve w0 in the calabiyau
threefold. in the following, we will assume that c is not singular. by this we mean that it does

not, for instance, cross itself or have a cusp in b. if it is singular, it is harder to analyze the space

of curves w0 which project onto c. in general, c splits into k components, so that

we then also have

c = c1 +    + ck

 = 1 +    + k

(6.6)

(6.7)

where i = [ci] and, so, must be an eective class on the base for each i. clearly if the curve in
the base has more than one component then so does the original curve w0, so that

w0 = w1 +    + wk

(6.8)

with (wi) = ci. in general, the class of w0 will be partitioned into a sum of classes of the form

[wi] = i + nif

(6.9)

where, for each curve to be eective, ni  0 and n1 +    + nk = n, leading to a number of dierent
possible partitions.

one now considers a particular component ci. to nd the moduli space over ci, one needs
to nd all the curves wi in x in the cohomology class i + nif which project on ci. recall,
in addition, that we have assumed in our original partition (6.2) that [wi] contains no pure ber

31

components. repeating this procedure for each component and for each partition of the n bers

into {ni}, gives the moduli space over a given point c in mb() and, hence, the full moduli space.
consequently, we have reduced the problem of nding the full moduli space m0( + nf ) to
the following question. to simplify notation, let r be the given irreducible curve ci in the base,
and let v be the corresponding curve wi in the full calabiyau threefold. let us further write the
class i of ci as  and write m for ni. our general problem is then to nd, for the given irreducible
curve r in the eective homology class , what are all the curves v in the calabiyau threefold

in the class  + mf , where m  0 which project onto r. necessarily, all the curves v which
project into r lie in the surface sr = 1(r). by construction, sr is elliptically bered over the
base curve r. furthermore, typically, the map from v to r wraps r only once. it is possible that

r is some number q of completely overlapping curves in b, so that [r] = q for some eective

class  in b. then the map from v to r wraps the base curve q times. this will occur in one of

the examples we give later in the paper, but here, since we are discussing generic properties, let us

ignore this possibility. then, assuming r is not singular, the map is invertible and we see that v

must be a section of the bered surface sr.

furthermore, we note that sr can be characterized by the genus g of the base curve r and the

number of singular bers. the former is, by adjunction, given by

2g  2 = (kb + )  

(6.10)

the latter is also a function only of the class  of r and can be found by intersecting the discriminant

class [] with . since [] = 12kb, the number of singular bers must be of the form 12p with

p = kb  

(6.11)

where p is an integer. if p is negative, the curve r lies completely within the discriminant curve of

the the elliptically bered calabiyau manifold. this means that every ber above r is singular.

the form of sr then depends on the structure of the particular bration of the calabiyau threefold.
since we want to consider generic properties of the moduli space, we will ignore this possibility and

restrict ourselves to the case where p is non-negative. we note that this is not very restrictive. for

del pezzo and enriques surfaces kb is nef, meaning that its intersection with any eective class
in the base is non-negative. hence, since  must be eective, we necessarily have p  0. the only

exceptions, are hirzebruch surfaces fr with r  3 and where  includes the negative section s.

finally, then, nding the full moduli space m0( + nf ) has been reduced to the following

problem

 for a given irreducible curve r in the base b with homology class , nd the moduli space of
sections v of the surface sr = 1(r) in the homology class +mf in the full calabiyau
threefold x, where m  0.

32

sr is characterized by g = genus (c), as given in (6.10), and p, where 12p is the num-
ber singular elliptic bers, as given in (6.11). consequently, we write this moduli space as

m(g, p; m).

we will assume that p  0. this is necessarily true, except when b is an fr surface with r  3
and  contains the class of the section at innity s.

6.2 the generic form of m(g, p; m)

to understand the sections of sr, we start by nding the algebraic classes on sr. as for the k3
surface, a generic surface s has no algebraic classes since h2,0 6= 0. for sr, we know that two
classes are necessarily present, the class of the zero section dr and the ber class fr. however,
generically, there need not be any other classes. addition classes may appear for special choices of

complex structure, but here we will consider only the generic case. the obvious exception is the

case where g = 0 and p = 1. from equations (6.10) and (6.11), this implies that r is an exceptional
curve in b. the surface sr is then an elliptic bration over p1 with 12 singular bers, which is a
dp9 surface. in this case h2,0 = 0 and every class in h2(sr, z) is algebraic. we will return to this
case in the next section. the inclusion map ir : sr  x, gives a natural map between classes in
sr and in x

in general, with only two classes the map is simple. by construction, we have

ir : h2(sr, z)  h2(x, z)

irdr = 

irfr = f

(6.12)

(6.13)

just as in the k3 example, we will nd that the existence of only two classes strongly constrains

the moduli space m(g, p; m). we can nd the analog of the contradiction of equations (5.33)

and (5.34) as follows. let ksr be the cohomology class of the canonical bundle of the surface.
since both v and r are sections, they have the same genus g. by the riemannhurwitz formula

and adjunction, we have

2g  2 = (ksr + dr)  dr = ksr  dr + dr  dr

(6.14)

where dr is the class of the zero section, and

2g  2 = (ksr + [v ]r)  [v ]r = ksr  [v ]r + [v ]r  [v ]r

(6.15)

where [v ]r the class of v in sr. we also have, for the ber, by a similarly calculation, since it has
genus one and, since two generic bers do not intersect, fr  fr = 0, that

0 = (ksr + fr)  fr = ksr  fr

(6.16)

33

finally, since we require in x that [v ] =  + mf , from the map (6.13) we must have

substituting this expression into (6.15) and using (6.14), we nd

[v ]r = dr + mfr

[v ]r  [v ]r = dr  dr

(6.17)

(6.18)

on the other hand, given that fr  dr = 1 because the ber intersects a section at one point, we
can compute the self-intersection of [v ]r = dr + mfr, explicitly, yielding

[v ]r  [v ]r = dr  dr + 2m

(6.19)

comparing (6.18) with (6.19), we are left with the important conclusion that we must have m = 0.

this implies that, generically, no component of w0 can contain any bers in its homology class.
we conclude that

m(g, p; m) = 

unless m = 0

(6.20)

in fact, we can go further. since we require m = 0, we see from (6.17) that v is in the same

class dr as the zero section r. using the riemannroch formula and kodairas description of
elliptically bered surfaces, one can show that the canonical class of sr is given by

then, substituting this expression into (6.14), we see that

ksr = (2g  2 + p) fr

dr  dr = p

(6.21)

(6.22)

thus we see that for p > 0, r is an exceptional divisor and cannot be deformed in sr. consequently,
all the vebrane can do is to move in the orbifold direction and change its value of a, so we have
a moduli space of p1
a.

if p = 0, the bration is locally trivial.

it may or may not be globally

trivial. however, it is always globally trivial when pulled back to some nite cover of the base.

every section is in the class dr and the moduli space simply corresponds to moving the vebrane
in the ber direction and in s1/z2 and a. if the original bration was globally trivial, this yields a
moduli space of e  p1
a, where e is an elliptic curve describing motion of v in the ber direction.
if it was only locally trivial, then these deformations in the ber directions still make sense over

the cover, but only a nite subset of them happens to descend, so the actual moduli space consists
in this case of some nite number of copies of p1
a.

in summary, we see that, generically, if we exclude the case g = 0, p = 1 where sr is a dp9

surface,

m(g, p; m) = 

for m > 0

(6.23)

34

while if m = 0 we have,

m(g, p; 0) =

n p1
a

e  p1
a

p1
a




if p = 0 and the bration is not globally trivial

if p = 0 and the bration is globally trivial

(6.24)

if p > 0

where n is some integer depending on the global structure of sc. in each case, the gauge group
on the vebrane is given by u (1)g where g is the genus of the curve r in the base b. since both

r and v are sections of sr, this is equal to the genus of the curve v in the space x.

6.3 the dp9 exception and m(0, 1; m)

as we have mentioned, the obvious exception to the above analysis is when sr is a dp9 surface.
this occurs when the base curve r is topologically p1 and there are 12 singular elliptic bers in

sr, that is if [r] =  in the base b,

2g  2 = (kb + )   = 2,

p = kb   = 1

(6.25)

as we mentioned above, this implies that r is an exceptional curve in the base. in this case, dr
and fr are not the only generic algebraic classes on sr. rather, since h2,0 = 0, every integer class
in dp9 is algebraic. the surface dp9 can be described as the plane p2 blown up at nine points
which are at the intersection of two cubic curves. consequently, there are ten independent algebraic
classes on dp9, the image l of the class of a line in p2 and the nine exceptional divisors, e 
i for
i = 1, . . . , 9, corresponding to the blown up points. here we use primes to distinguish these classes

from classes in the base b of the calabiyau threefold (specically, the ei classes in b when the
base is a del pezzo surface).

the point here is that, in the full calabiyau manifold x, there are only two independent classes

associated with sr, namely, the class of the base curve  and the ber class f . consequently,
if ir : sr  x is the inclusion map from the dp9 surface into the calabiyau threefold, the
corresponding map between classes

ir : h2(sr, z)  h2(x, z)

(6.26)

must have a non-empty kernel, since it maps the ten independent classes on sr mentioned above
into only two in x. recall that our goal is to nd the set of sections v of sr which are in the
class  + mf in x. previously, we found that generically there were no such sections unless

m = 0. this followed from equations (6.14) to (6.19). now, the appearance of a kernel in the

map (6.26), means that [v ]r is no longer necessarily of the form dr + mfr, as in equation (6.17).
consequently we can no longer conclude that we must have m = 0. in fact, as we will see, there

are several dierent sections v in the same class  + mf in x with m > 0.

35

g

f

figure 8: the space dp9

let us start by recalling why a dp9 surface is also an elliptic bration. viewed as p2 blown up at
nine points, we have the constraint that the nine points lie at the intersection of two cubics. this is

represented in figure 8. the cubics can be written as two third-order homogeneous polynomials in
homogeneous coordinates [x, y, z] on p2. let us call these polynomials f and g. clearly any linear

combination af + bg denes a new cubic polynomial. by construction, this polynomial also passes

through the same nine points. since the overall scale does not change the cubic, the set of cubics is
given by specifying a and b up to overall scaling. thus, we have a p1 of cubics passing through the

nine points. since each cubic denes an elliptic curve, we can think of this as an elliptic bration
over p1. furthermore, the cubics cannot intersect anywhere else in p2. the space of cubics spans
the whole of the plane and, further, it blows up each intersection point into a p1 of distinct points,
one point in p1 for each cubic passing through the intersection. thus the space of cubics is giving

an alternative description of the dp9 surface. in addition, we note that each of the exceptional
i, the blow-ups of the intersection points, is a p1 surface which intersects each ber at a
divisors e 
single point, and so corresponds to section of the bration. furthermore, the anti-canonical class

of dp9 is given by

ksr = 3l  e 

1      e 

9 = fr

(6.27)

and is precisely the class of the cubics passing through the nine intersection points. it follows that

ksr = fr

(6.28)

which, since g = 0 and p = 1, agrees with the general expression (6.21).

it is natural to ask if there are other sections of dp9 aside from the exceptional curves e 

i. we
rst note that any section of dp9 is exceptional, with [v ]r  [v ]r = 1. this follows from (6.15)

36

and (6.27), recalling that any section will have genus zero and intersects the ber (the anti-canonical

class) only once. next, we recall that there is a notion of addition of points on elliptic curves. con-

sequently, we can add sections point-wise to get a new section. thus, we see that the set of sections

forms an innite abelian group containing all the exceptional curves on the dp9 surface. from the
point of view of curves in p2, these additional exceptional classes correspond to curves of higher

degree passing through the nine intersection points with some multiplicity (see for instance [5]). in

general, we can write an exceptional class (except the classes e 

i) as

such that

q = ql  x qie 

i

q, qi  0,

q2  x q2

i = 1,

3q  x qi = 1

(6.29)

(6.30)

where the rst condition is required in order to describe an eective curve in p2, the second

condition gives q  q = 1 and the third condition gives q  fr = 1. the appearance of an innite
number of exceptional classes means that these equations have an innite number of solution for

i = 1, . . . , 9.

having identied all the relevant classes in dp9, we can now turn to a description of the
map (6.26). first, we note that the group structure of the set of sections means that we can

choose any section as part of the basis of classes. in our case, we have singled out one section as

the class of the base curve r. thus, without loss of generality, we can identify this class with one

of the e 

i, for example, e 

9. thus we set

dr = e 
9

(6.31)

by construction, we know that dr maps to  and fr maps to f under ir. thus, in terms of
l and e 

i, we have, using (6.27) and the generic result (6.13),

9 = 

ire 
ir (cid:0)3l  e 

1      e 

9(cid:1) = f

(6.32)

we now need to understand how the remaining independent classes e 

8 map under ir. we
rst note that, since all these classes are sections, they must project onto the class  in the base.

1, . . . , e 

the only ambiguity is how many multiples of the ber class f each contains. thus, we know

ire 

i =  + cif

(6.33)

for some ci. the easiest way to calculate ci is to recall that a class in h2(x, z) is uniquely
determined by its intersection numbers with a basis of classes in h4(x, z). a suitable basis was
given in section 3.2. it particular, we can consider the intersection of e 
i with the class d of base

37

e 

i  e 

b of the full calabiyau threefold. we note that e 

9 = 0 for i = 1, . . . , 8, so the extra sections
i do not intersect the base r of the dp9. however, since r describes the intersection of b with

the dp9 surface sr, we see that the extra classes cannot intersect b. thus, we must have

ire 

i  d = 0

for

i = 1, . . . , 8

(6.34)

from the table of intersections (3.4), using (6.25), we see that we must have ci = 1 for i = 1, . . . , 8.
together with the result (6.32) we nd,in conclusion, that the map (6.26) is given by

irl = 3 + 3f

ire 

i =  + f

for

i = 1, . . . , 8

(6.35)

demonstrating explicitly that the map has a kernel.

ire 

9 = 

having identied the map, we would now like to return to our original question, which was how

many sections are there in the class  + mf and what is their moduli space. the second part

is easy to answer. we have noted that all sections are exceptional with self-intersection 1. this

implies that they cannot be moved within the dp9 surface. however, they can move in the orbifold
and have dierent values of the axion. consequently, each section has a moduli space of p1
a. if
there are a total of n (m) sections for a given m, then the total moduli space m(0, 1; m) has the

form

m(0, 1; m) = n (m)p1
a

(6.36)

the value of n (m) is a problem in discrete mathematics. recall that the class of a general section

had the form given in (6.29). under the map ir this maps into

irq =  + (q9 + 1) f

(6.37)

where we have used the condition 3q  p qi = 1. thus, we can summarize the problem as nding
the number of solutions to

with

q2  x q2

i + 1 = 0
3q  x qi = 1

q  0,

qi  0,

q9 = m  1

(6.38)

(6.39)

we will not solve this problem in general, but just note the solution of m = 0 and m = 1. the

former case is not actually included in the above form, since it implies q9 = 1. however, this
case is easy to analyze since, with m = 0, we see, from (3.4) and (6.25), that the intersection of

38

[v ] =  with the base class d of the calabiyau manifold is 1. consequently, a component of

v must lie in the base b. since, by assumption, v is irreducible, this means that the whole of v

lies in b. thus, v can only be the base section r in the dp9 surface. thus we conclude that, for
a dp9 surface sr, n (0) = 1. that is,

m(0, 1; 0) = p1
a

(6.40)

corresponding to moving the single curve r in s1/z2. this result was used in analyzing the example
in section 5.1.

for m = 1, there are 240 solutions to the equations (6.38), that is n (1) = 240. the easiest way

to see this is to note that m = 1 implies q9 = 0. thus, we can ignore e 
9. eectively, one is then
trying to count the number of exceptional curves on a dp8 surface. this is known to be a nite
number, 240 [14]. explicitly, they are of the following forms

e 
i

l  e 

i  e 
j

2l  e 

i1      e 
i5

3l  2e 

i  e 

i1      e 
i6

4l  2e 

i1      2e 

i3  e 

i4      e 
i8

5l  2e 

i1      2e 

i6  e 

i7  e 
i8

(6.41)

6l  2e 

i1      2e 

i7  3e 
i8

where all the indices run from 1 to 8. one can see, using (6.35), that all these classes map under

ir to  + f . again, since none of these sections can move in the dp9 surface, the moduli space
is simply 240 copies of p1
a,

m(0, 1; 1) = 240 p1
a

(6.42)

this result was used in analyzing the example in section 5.2. we also note that none of these

sections intersects the base section r.

7 a three-family dp8 example

in the previous section we have given a general procedure for analyzing the moduli space of ve-

branes wrapped on a holomorphic curve in a particular eective class in the calabiyau manifold.

the problem is of particular importance because it has been shown [3, 4, 5] that including ve-

branes in supersymmetric m theory compactications greatly enlarges the number of vacua with

reasonable grand unied gauge groups and three families of matter.

39

in the the remaining sections, we apply this procedure to the some specic examples which arise

in the construction of phenomenological models. we will nd that the moduli spaces are very rich.

nonetheless, we will nd that there are isolated parts of moduli space where the number of moduli

is greatly reduced. we will not describe the full moduli spaces here, but rather consider various

characteristic components.

let us start with the example given in [4] and expanded upon in [5]. there, the base b was a

dp8 surface and the class of the vebranes was given by

[w ] = 2e1 + e2 + e3 + 17f

(7.1)

where l and ei for i = 1, . . . , 8 are the line class and the exceptional blow-up classes in the dp8.
since 2e1 + e2 + e3 is eective in dp8, this describes an eective class in the calabiyau manifold.
this choice of vebrane class, together with a non-trivial e8 bundle v1, led to a low-energy su (5)
theory with three families.

7.1 general decomposition

let us follow exactly the procedure laid down in the previous section. first, we separate from w

all the pure ber components, writing it as the sum of w0 and wf as in (6.2). we write

[w0] = 2e1 + e2 + e3 + nf,

[wf ] = (17  n)f

(7.2)

with 0  n  17. unless n = 17, we have at least two separate vebranes. this splits the moduli

space into several dierent components depending on the partition of 17 into n and 17  n, as given

in (6.4). the moduli space for the pure ber component wf is just the familiar form, read o
from (6.5)

m((17  n)f ) = (cid:0)dp8  p1

a(cid:1)17n

/z17n

(7.3)

more interesting is the analysis of the w0 moduli space. as described above, the rst step in
the analysis is to project w0 onto the base. this gives the curve c which is in the homology class

[c] = 2e1 + e2 + e3

(7.4)

we then need to nd the moduli space mb(2e1 + e2 + e3) of c in the base. we recall that the
del pezzo surface dp8 can be viewed as p2 blown up at eight points. the exceptional classes ei
each have a unique representative, namely the exceptional curve p1 at the i-th blown-up point.

furthermore, we have the intersection numbers ei  ej = ij. thus [c] has a negative intersection
number with each of e1, e2 and e3. this implies that it must have a component contained

40

completely within each of the exceptional curves described by e1, e2 and e3. since these are all
distinct, c must be reducible into three components

where

c = c1 + c2 + c3

[c1] = 2e1

[c2] = e2

[c3] = e3

(7.5)

(7.6)

none of these components can be moved in the base, since they all have negative self-intersection

number. consequently, we have

mb(2e1 + e2 + e3) = single pt.

corresponding to three vebranes, each wrapping a dierent exceptional curve.

since the projection c splits, so must the curve w0 itself. we must have

w0 = w1 + w2 + w3

(7.7)

(7.8)

we can partition the ber class in [w0] in dierent ways. in general we write

[w1] = 2e1 + n1f

[w2] = e2 + n2f

[w3] = e3 + n3f

(7.9)

with n1 + n2 + n3 = n and ni  0 since each curve must be separately eective. the problem of
nding the full moduli space has now been reduced to nding the moduli space of w1, w2 and w3
separately.

we see that, unless n = 17, we have at least four separate ve-branes, one wrapping the

pure ber curve wf and one wrapping each of the three curves w1, w2 and w3. as discussed in
section 4.2, the pure ber component can move in the base b, as well as in the orbifold. furthermore

it has transitions where it separates into more than one vebrane. the components wi, meanwhile,
are stuck above xed exceptional curves in the base. they are free to move in the orbifold and

may be free to move in the ber direction (this will be discussed in the following sections). the

wi components cannot intersect since the exceptional curves in the base over which they are stuck
cannot intersect. however, the pure ber components can intersect the wi, leading to the possibility
of additional low-energy elds appearing.

7.2 the w2 and w3 components

we start by analyzing the w2 and w3 components. as usual, we are interested in the number of
sections of the surface sci which are in the class ei + nif in the full calabiyau manifold for
i = 2, 3. in each case, the base curve ci wraps an exceptional curve p1 of one of the blown-up points

41

in dp8. such a case is familiar from the examples given in sections 5.1 and 5.2. the corresponding
surface sci, as expected, since ci wraps an exceptional curve, is a dp9 manifold. explicitly, for
both c2 and c3 we have

and the number of singular bers in the bration is given by 12pi, where

gi = genus(ci) = 0

thus, we see that

pi = kdp8  ei

= (3l  e1      e8)  ei = 1

sci is a dp9 surface for i = 2, 3

(7.10)

(7.11)

(7.12)

the moduli space for each wi, for i = 2, 3, is then the moduli space of sections of the dp9 surface
in the homology class ei + nif in the full calabiyau space x. since in this case gi = 0 and
pi = 1, it follows that we are interested in the moduli spaces m(0, 1; ni) discussed in section 6.3.

let us concentrate on w2, since the moduli space of w3 is completely analogous. we recall
from section 6.3 that, for a given n2, there are a nite number of sections of the dp9 in the class
e2 + n2f in x. furthermore, all these sections are exceptional with self-intersection 1 and so
there is no moduli space for moving these curves within dp9. since the curve c2 is also xed in the
base, we see that there are no moduli for moving w2 in the calabiyau threefold. all we are left
with are the moduli for moving in s1/z2 and the axion modulus.

we showed in section 6.3 that there was precisely one section in the class e2 and 240 in
e2 + f . rather than do a general analysis, let us consider some examples for which n2 = 2.
that is

[w2] = e2 + 2f

(7.13)

consequently, we will be interested in the moduli space m(0, 1; 2). we know from the previous

discussion that

m(0, 1; 2) = n (2)p1
a

(7.14)

here, we will not evaluate n (2) but content ourselves with several specic examples. from the

general map (6.35), with  = e2, we see that we can, for instance, write the class of w2 as

or

[w2] = ic2  (cid:0)l  e 

9(cid:1)
1  e 

[w2] = ic2  (cid:0)2l  e 

1  e 

2  e 

3  e 

9(cid:1)
4  e 

42

(7.15)

(7.16)

or many other decompositions which we will not discuss here. we might be tempted to include the

case where

[w2] = ic2  (cid:0)3l  e 

9(cid:1)
2      e 

(7.17)

however, this is not a section. this can be seen directly from the fact that it fails to satisfy

the equations (6.38). alternatively, we note that the nine blown up points in dp9 are not in
general position. if a cubic passes through eight of them, then it also passes through the ninth.

consequently, the class 3l  e 

9, which is the class of a cubic through eight of the
nine points, always splits into two classes: the ber fc2 = 3l  e 
9 and the base e 
1.
consequently, the example (7.17) is always reducible, splitting into a pure ber component and the

2      e 

1      e 

section in the class e 
1.

since all the sections are genus zero like the base, we have a simple table for the cases given

in (7.15) and (7.16)

[w2] in dp9
1  e 
l  e 
9

2l  e 

1  e 

2  e 

3  e 

4  e 
9

genus moduli space

0

0

p1
a
p1
a

(7.18)

all the other possible sections in the class e2 + 2f will have the same genus and moduli space.

7.3 the w1 component

the remaining component w1 is considerably more interesting. we start by noting that the projec-
tion c1 = 2r, where r is the exception curve corresponding to e1. this implies that the projection
map from w1 to r is a double cover. for the same reason as in the previous section, we have that
the bered space sr above r satises

sr is a dp9 surface

(7.19)

however, the fact that w1 is a double cover implies that, unlike all the cases we have considered
thus far, w1 is not a section. hence, the w1 moduli space is not given by m(0, 1; n1). however,
we can still analyze its moduli space using the general map between classes (6.35).

suppose, for simplicity, we choose n1 = 2, that is

[w1] = 2e1 + 2f

(7.20)

since other cases can be analyzed in an analogous way. as above, we will not consider all possibilities

for the class of w1 in the dp9. instead, we will restrict our discussion to a few interesting examples.

43

for instance, using (6.35) with  = e1, some possibilities are

[w1] = ir (cid:0)2e 
1(cid:1)
= ir (cid:0)e 
2(cid:1)
1 + e 
= ir (cid:0)l  e 
1(cid:1)
= ir (cid:0)3l  e 
7(cid:1)
1      e 

(7.21a)

(7.21b)

(7.21c)

(7.21d)

we can analyze the moduli spaces in the dp9 surface of each of these dierent cases by consid-
ering the right-hand sides of (7.21) as classes of curves through some number of points in p2. in

examples (7.21a) and (7.21b), the curves are always reducible to just two copies of an exceptional

curve in dp8 and, hence, have no moduli for moving in dp9. since the curve r is also xed in the
base, these cases have no moduli for moving in the calabiyau manifold at all.

the third case, (7.21c), corresponds to a line (topologically p1) in p2 through one point. as
such, as discussed in section 5.1, its moduli space is p1. furthermore, there are special points in the

moduli space where the line passes through one of the other blown-up points in dp9 and the curve
becomes reducible (in analogy to the process described in figure 3). we can have, for instance,

where the classes in dp9 are

w1 = u1 + u2

[u1]r = l  e 

1  e 
2

[u2]r = e 
2

(7.22)

(7.23)

what was previously a single sphere has now been reduced to a pair of spheres, each an exceptional

curve, which intersect at a single point (as in figure 4).

the last case, (7.21d), is even more interesting. this class corresponds to a cubic in p2 passing

through 7 points. a cubic is an elliptic curve and so has genus one. a general cubic has a moduli
space of p9. however, by being restricted to pass through seven points, the remaining moduli space
is simply p2. at special points in the moduli space the cubic can degenerate. first, we can have

a double point. this occurs when the discriminant of the curve vanishes. it corresponds to one of

the cycles of the torus pinching, as shown in figure 9. the vanishing of the discriminant is a single
additional condition on the parameters and so gives a curve, which we will call w1, in p2. when
the cubic degenerates, the blown up curve is a sphere. thus, it has changed genus. we can now
go one step further. at certain places, the discriminant curve w1 in p2 has a double point. this
corresponds to places where the curve becomes reducible. the curve w1 splits into two

with, for instance, u1 and u2 describing a line and a conic,

w1 = u1 + u2

[u1]r = l  e 

1  e 
2

[u2]r = 2l  e 

3      e 
7

44

(7.24)

(7.25)

figure 9: pinching a torus at one point and at a pair of points

note that each of the resulting curves is exceptional and so has no moduli space in the dp9.
however, we note that this splitting can happen (cid:0)7
2(cid:1) = 21 dierent ways. the two curves intersect
at two points, corresponding to a double pinching of the torus into a pair of spheres, as in figure 9.

for completeness, we note that there is one further singularity possible. that is where the cubic

develops a cusp. however, the topology remains that of a sphere, so we will not distinguish these

points.

we can summarize these branches of moduli space in the following table

[w1] in dp9

2e 
1

e 

1 + e 
2
l  e 
1
1  e 
2) + (e 
2)
1      e 
7
1      e 
7

(l  e 

3l  e 

3l  e 

(l  e 

1  e 

2) + (2l  e 

3      e 
7)

genus

0 + 0

0 + 0

0

0 + 0

moduli space

p1

a/z2

a  p1
p1

a  p1
a

(cid:0)p1  8 pts.(cid:1)  p1

a

p1

a  p1
a

(7.26)

1

0

(cid:0)p2  w1(cid:1)  p1
(w1  21 pts.)  p1
a

a

0 + 0

p1

a  p1
a

note that in the rst line, we mod out by z2 since the vebranes wrap the same curve in the
calabiyau manifold and so are indistinguishable. this is not the case in the second example.

we note that there is another type of splitting possible for the fourth example. the cubic could

pass though one of the additional blown up points. it would then pass through eight of the nine

points. however, as we have discussed above, it must then also pass through the ninth point. the

curve w1 would then decompose into a pure ber component plus two sections, namely

w1 = u1 + u2 + u3

(7.27)

with

[u1]r = fr = 3l  e 

1      e 
9,

[u2]r = e 
8,

[u3]r = e 
9

(7.28)

thus we see that, unlike the case for w2 and w3, it is also possible to have a transition where a
ber component splits o from w1.

let us end this section with an important observation. we have not discussed the full moduli

space of w here but only various characteristic branches. there is, however, a certain type of

45

branch that we would like to emphasize. consider a branch where we choose n = 17, so that

wf = 0, and split the curve w as follows

w = w0 = w1 + w2 + w3

(7.29)

with, for example

[w1] = 2e1 + 2f,

[w2] = e2 + 5f,

[w3] = e3 + 10f

(7.30)

from our previous discussion, w2 and w3 are required to be sections of the dp9 surface above
the exceptional curve in the class e2 and e3 respectively. as such, they have no moduli to move
within the calabiyau threefold. furthermore, we have seen an example in the second line of the

table (7.26) where w1 splits into two components, neither of which can move in the calabiyau
space. consequently, we see that there is a component of moduli space where we simply have four

vebranes, each wrapping a xed curve within the calabiyau threefold. furthermore, none of the

vebranes can intersect. we then have a very simple moduli space. it is

p1

a  p1
a

a  p1

a  p1

(7.31)

corresponding to moving each vebrane in s1/z2 and changing the value of the axions. thus, even
when the vebrane class is relatively complicated, we see that there are components of the moduli

space with very few moduli.

8 a second three-family dp8 example

in this section, we will briey discuss a second example of a realistic vebrane moduli space. again,

we will take the base

and choose the vebrane class

b is a dp8 surface

[w ] = l  e1 + e2 + e3 + 27f

(8.1)

(8.2)

this gives a three family model with an unbroken su (5) gauge group, as can be seen explicitly using
the rules given in [4] and [5] (taking  = 1
2 in the equations given there). from the condition (3.6),
since l  e1 + e2 + e3 is eective in the base, [w ] is an eective class as required.

to calculate the moduli space, rst, one separates the pure ber components, partitioning w

as w = w0 + wf , as in (6.2), with

[w0] = l  e1 + e2 + e3 + nf,

[wf ] = (27  n) f

(8.3)

46

where 0  n  27. as usual, unless n = 27, this implies that we have at least two distinct

vebranes. this partition splits the moduli space into 28 components, as in (6.4). the moduli

space of the wf component is the usual symmetric product given in (6.5)

m((27  n)f ) = (cid:0)fr  p1

a(cid:1)27n

/z27n

(8.4)

next, we analyze the moduli space of w0 for a given n. if we project w0 onto the base, we get

the curve c in the class

[c] = l  e1 + e2 + e3

(8.5)

we then need to nd the moduli space mb(l  e1 + e2 + e3) of such curves in the base. the last
two classes correspond to curves wrapping exceptional blow-ups and so, as in the previous section,

c must be reducible. we expect that there is always one component wrapping the exception curve

in e2 and another component wrapping the exceptional curve in e3.

in general, there are eight distinct parts of mb(l  e1 + e2 + e3), with dierent numbers of

curves in the base. in general, c decomposes into k curves as

c = c1 +    + ck

(8.6)

with

[ci] = i,

1 +    + k = l  e1 + e2 + e3

(8.7)

as c splits, so does w0. in general we can partition the n ber components in dierent ways, so
that

w = w1 +    + wk,

[wi] = i + nif

(8.8)

where ni  0 and n1 +    + nk = n. the eight dierent parts of the moduli space of c can be

47

summarized as follows

[ci]

genus (ci) moduli space

[c1] = l  e1

[c2] = e2
[c3] = e3

[c1] = l  e1  e2

[c2] = 2e2
[c3] = e3

[c1] = l  e1  e3

[c2] = e2
[c3] = 2e3

[c1] = l  e1  ei

[c2] = e2
[c3] = e3
[c4] = ei

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

p1  7 pts.

single pt.

single pt.

single pt.

i = 4, . . . , 8

(8.9)

the analysis if very similar to that in section 5.1. the c2 and c3 components are always stuck on
the exceptional curves in e2 and e3 and so have no moduli. in the rst row in the table, c1 is a
curve in the dp8 corresponding to a line through the blown-up point p1. as such it has a moduli of
p1, except for the seven special points where it also passes through one of the other seven blown-up

points. if it passes through one of the points p4, . . . , p8, the curve splits into two curves and we have
a total of four distinct vebranes. this case is given in the last row in (8.9). if it passes through

p2 or p3, generically, we still only have three components, but now c2 or c3 is in the class 2e2 or
2e3 respectively. these are the second and third rows in (8.9). all the curves are spheres so have
genus zero. in conclusion, we have

mb(l  e1 + e2 + e3) = p1

(8.10)

where there are seven special points in the moduli space: the ve cases given in the last row

in (8.9), where c splits into four curves, and the two further points where the class of c2 and c3
changes as given in the second and third rows of (8.9). we see that, unlike the previous example,

mb is more than just a single point.

let us concentrate on a generic point in moduli space, as in the rst row of (8.9). as we noted

above, w0 then splits into three distinct components,

w0 = w1 + w2 + w3

(8.11)

with

[w1] = l  e1 + n1f,

[w2] = e2 + n2f,

[w3] = e3 + n3f

(8.12)

48

where n1 + n2 + n3 = n and ni  0.

we note that w2 and w3 are exactly of the form we analyzed in section 7.2 above. recall that
each component is a curve stuck above the exceptional curve c2 or c3 in the base. the space
sci = 1(ci), for i = 2, 3, above each exceptional curve was given by

sci is a dp9 surface for i = 2, 3

(8.13)

this means we have gi = 0 and pi = 1 and the corresponding moduli spaces are given by m(0, 1; ni).
these spaces were given in (6.36) and are a discrete number n (ni) of copies of p1
a, corresponding
to dierent sections of a dp9 surface. we have

m(0, 1; ni) = n (ni)p1
a

for i = 2, 3

(8.14)

there are no moduli for moving the curves within either the base or the ber of the calabiyau

manifold. since gi = 0 there are no vector multiplets on the vebranes.

we now turn to w1. this is essentially of the form we considered section 5.2. there, we showed

that the surface sc1 is given by

sc1 is a k3 surface

(8.15)

that is to say, the genus g1 of c1 is zero and there are p1 = 2. thus we are interested in the moduli
space m(0, 2; n1). from the general discussion in section 6.2, we nd from equation (6.24) that
the moduli space for w1 is empty unless n1 = 0. one then has

m(0, 2; 0) = p1
a

(8.16)

putting this together with the moduli space for w2 and w3 given in (8.14), and recalling the form
of the c moduli space (8.9), we can write, for this generic part of the moduli space of w0,

m0(l  e1 + e2 + e3 + nf )

= (cid:0)(cid:2)p1  7 pts.(cid:3)  p1

a(cid:1)  n (n2)p1

a  n (n3)p1

a + mnon-generic

(8.17)

where we must have n1 = 0, and n2 + n3 = n in the decomposition (8.12). we have three distinct
vebranes, two of which, w2 and w3 are stuck in the calabiyau threefold. the third vebrane can
move within the base of the calabiyau. each vebrane wraps a curve of genus zero and so there

are no vector multiplets. the full w moduli space is constructed, for each n, from the product of

this space together with the wb moduli space given in (8.4).

we will not consider all the seven possible exceptional cases in the moduli space of c, listed

in (8.9). rather, consider just one of the cases where c splits into four components,

[c1] = l  e1  e4,

[c2] = e2,

[c3] = e3,

[c4] = e4

(8.18)

49

with the corresponding split of w0 as

[w1] = l  e1  e4 + n1f,

[w2] = e2 + n2f,

[w3] = e3 + n3f,

[w4] = e4 + n4f

(8.19)

with ni  0 and n1 + n2 + n3 + n4 = n. let us further assume that n = 27 so that wf = 0 and there
are no pure ber components. each of the ci is an exceptional curve in the base. consequently,
we have

sci is a dp9 surface for i = 1, 2, 3, 4

(8.20)

(for c1 the calculation is just as in section 5.2). thus we have gi = 0 and pi = 1 for each curve
and so we have the moduli spaces

m(0, 1; ni) = n (ni)p1
a

for i = 1, 2, 3, 4

(8.21)

where, as usual, n (ni) counts the number of distinct sections in each dp9. in particular, we are are
no longer required to take n1 = 0. we now have a total of four distinct vebranes, wrapping w1,
w2, w3 and w4. all these curves are stuck in the calabiyau threefold, so that a given connected
part of the moduli space has the form

p1

a  p1
a

a  p1

a  p1

(8.22)

(here we have assumed that either n1 or n4 is non-zero so that this branch of moduli space if not
connected to the generic branch discussed above.) as in the previous section, we see that there are

disconnected components of the moduli space with very few moduli. each curve has genus zero, so

there are no vector multiplet degrees of freedom.

9 two simple hirzebruch examples

in this section, we will briey discuss two simple examples where the base is a hirzebruch surface fr.
these are p1 brations over p1, characterized by a non-negative integer r. following the notation

of [5], they have two independent algebraic classes, the class s of the section of the bration at

innity and the ber class e. these have the following intersection numbers

s  s = r,

s  e = 1,

e  e = 0

the canonical bundle is given by

kb = 2s  (2 + r)e

50

(9.1)

(9.2)

eective classes in fr are of the form  = as + be with a and b non-negative. thus, from (3.6), a
general class of eective curves in the calabi-yau threefold can be written as

[w ] = as + be + f f

(9.3)

where a, b and f are all non-negative. (note, however, that, as discussed above equation (3.6),

there is actually an additional eective class for r  3, which we will ignore here.)

for any realistic model with three families of matter and realistic gauge groups, if the hidden

e8 group is unbroken, then the coecients a and b are typically large [5]. the moduli space is then
relatively complicated to analyze. thus, for simplicity, we will consider only two very simple cases

with either a single s class or a single e class.

9.1 [w ] = s + f f

we consider rst

and

b is a fr surface with r  2

[w ] = s + f f

(9.4)

(9.5)

using the general procedure we outlined above. note that we require r  2 to exclude the trivial
case of f0, which is just the product p1  p1, and f1, which is actually the del pezzo surface dp1.
we recall that the rst step is to split o any pure ber components from w , writing it as a

sum of w0 and wf as in (6.2)

[w0] = s + nf,

[wf ] = (f  n)f

(9.6)

with 0  n  f . as usual, unless n = f , this implies we have at least two distinct vebranes. this

splits the moduli space into f + 1 components as in (6.4). the moduli space of wf has the familiar
form, from (6.5),

m((f  n)f ) = (cid:0)fr  p1

a(cid:1)f n

/zf n

(9.7)

next we turn to analyzing the w0 moduli space for a given n. projecting w0 onto the base

gives the curve c in the homology class

[c] = s

(9.8)

our rst step is then to nd the moduli space mb(s) of c in the base. this, however, is very
simple. since the self-intersection of s is negative, there is a unique representative of the class s,

namely the section at innity. thus

mb(s) = single point

(9.9)

51

the second step is the to nd all the curves w0 in the class s + nf in the calabiyau threefold
which project onto c. to answer this, we need to characterize the surface sc = 1(c). we recall
that this will be an elliptic bration over c and is characterized by the genus g of c and the number
12p of singular bers. since c is a section of the hirzebruch surface, it must be topologically p1.

consequently

as usual the number of singular bers is given by 12p, where

g = genus(c) = 0

p = kb  [c]

= (2s + (2 + r)e)  s = 2  r

(9.10)

(9.11)

thus we see that for r  3 we have a negative number of singular bers. this is reecting the fact

that the curve c is contained within the discriminant curve of the calabiyau elliptic bration.

thus the elliptic curve over c is singular everywhere. this is a non-generic case we wish to avoid

in discussing the moduli space. thus, we will assume r < 3. given that f0 and f1 do not give new
surfaces, we are left with restricting to r = 2 and so

b is f2

(9.12)

then we have p = 0 which implies the elliptic bration is locally trivial. if we assume that the

surface sc is also a globally trivial bration, it is then simply the product

sc = p1  e

(9.13)

where e is an elliptic curve. comparing with the notation of section 6, we have g = p = 0 and

so we are interested in the moduli space m(0, 0; n). however, we have argued, (6.24), that these
spaces are empty unless n = 0. in this case m(0, 0; 0) = e  p1
a, where the rst factor comes from
moving the vebrane within s1/z2 and the second factor comes from moving it within sc. (again,
here we are assuming that sc is a globally as well as locally trivial bration.) in particular, the
curve is a section of sc and, so, can lie at any point on the elliptic curve e.

thus, we see that the only partition (9.6) allowed is where n = 0. in that case the moduli space

of the curve w0 is simply

the full moduli space is then the product

m0(s) = e  p1
a

m(s + f f ) = (cid:0)e  p1

a(cid:1)f
a(cid:1)  (cid:0)f2  p1

zf

52

(9.14)

(9.15)

generically, we have f + 1 vebranes. one is w0, which lies over the section at innity in f2 and
can be at any position in the elliptic ber over the base as well as in s1/z2. the other f vebranes
are pure ber components, which can each be at arbitrary points in the base and in s1/z2. since
the genus of c is zero, so is the genus of w0. thus, generically, the only vector multiplets come
from wf . at a generic point in moduli space, we therefore have u (1)f gauge symmetry.
it is
possible for the ber components to intersect w0, in which case we might expect new massless
elds to appear in the low-energy theory.

9.2 [w ] = e + f f

now consider the case where again

but we take

b is a fr surface with r  2

[w ] = e + f f

(9.16)

(9.17)

as always, we rst split o the pure ber components in w , writing w = w0 + wf with f + 1
dierent partitions

[w0] = s + nf,

[wf ] = (f  n)f

the moduli space of wf is the familiar form

m((f  n)f ) = (cid:0)fr  p1

a(cid:1)f n

/zf n

(9.18)

(9.19)

to analyze the the moduli space of w0, we project onto the base, giving the curve c with

thus c is in the ber class of the fn base. since fn is a p1 bration over p1, the ber can lie at
any point in the base p1 so we have that the moduli space of c is given by

[c] = e

(9.20)

mb(e) = p1

(9.21)

next we need to nd all the curves w0 which project onto a given c. we rst characterize the
surface sc = 1(c). since c is a ber of fr, it must be topologically p1. hence

the number of singular bers, 12p, in the elliptic bration sc given in terms of

g = genus(c) = 0

p = kb  [c]

= (2s + (2 + r)e)  e = 2

53

(9.22)

(9.23)

for any r. this implies that sc is an elliptic bration over p1 with 24 singular bers, that is

sc is a k3 surface

(9.24)

in the notation of section 6, we have g = 0 and p = 2 and so we are interested in the moduli space

m(0, 2; n). however, we have argued, (6.24), that these spaces are empty unless n = 0, in which
case m(0, 2; 0) = p1
s1/z2.

a. that is, the curve is completely stuck within sc, but is free to move within

thus the only partition (9.18) allowed is where n = 0. in this case, the full moduli space of w0

is then given by

m0(e) = p1  p1
a

(9.25)

the rst factor of p1 reects the moduli space of curves c in the base (9.21). the second factor
reects the fact that, for a given c, the moduli space of w0 is m(0, 2; 0) = p1
a. we note that there
are no moduli for moving w0 in the direction of the elliptic ber. the full moduli space is then
given by the product

m(e + f f ) = (cid:0)p1  p1

a(cid:1)f
a(cid:1)  (cid:0)fr  p1

zf

(9.26)

as in the previous example, generically we have f + 1 vebranes. one is w0 which, in the base,
can be deformed in the base and can move in s1/z2, but has no moduli for moving in the elliptic
ber. the other f vebranes are pure ber components, which can each be at arbitrary points in
the base and in s1/z2. again, since the genus of c is zero, so is the genus of w0. thus, generically,
the only vector multiplets come from wf . at a generic point in moduli space we have, therefore,
u (1)f gauge symmetry. it is possible for the ber components to intersect w0, in which case we
might expect new massless elds to appear in the low-energy theory.

acknowledgments

b.a.o. and d.w. would like to thank angel uranga for helpful discussions. r.d. is supported

in part by an nsf grant dms-9802456 as well as by grants from the university of pennsylvania

research foundation and hebrew university. b.a.o. is supported in part by a senior alexander

von humboldt award, by the doe under contract no. de-ac02-76-er-03071 and by a university

of pennsylvania research foundation grant. d.w. is supported in part by the doe under contract

no. de-fg02-91er40671.

references

[1] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 135 (1996).

54

[2] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 135 (1996).

[3] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, nonstandard embedding and five branes in het-

erotic m-theory, upr-0815t, hep-th/9808101.

[4] r. donagi, a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, non-perturbative vacua and particle

physics in m-theory, upr-823t, hep-th/9811168.

[5] r. donagi, a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, holomorphic vector bundles and non-

perturbative vacua in m theory, upr-827t, hep-th/9901017.

[6] o. ganor and a. hanany,

[7] n. seiberg and e. witten,

[8] k. uhlenbeck and s. t. yau

[9] r. friedman, j. morgan and e. witten, commun. math. phys. 187 679 (1997).

[10] d. r. morrison and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b476 437 (1996).

[11] rajesh

[12] griths and harris

[13] i. bandos et al., covariant action for the superve-brane of m theory, phys. rev. lett. 78,

4332 (1997), hep-th/9701149;

m. aganagic, j. park, c. popescu and j. h. schwarz, world volume action of the m theory

ve-brane, nucl. phys. b496, 191 (1997) hep-th/9701166;

p. s. howe, e. sezgin and p. c. west, covariant eld equations of the m theory ve-brane,

phys. lett. b399, 49 (1997) hep-th/9702008.

[14] seminaire sur les singularites des surfaces, proceedings 1976-1977, springer lnm 777,

m.demazure et. al. eds..

[15] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 506 (1996).

[16] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b475 94 (1996).

[17] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k.s. stelle and d. waldram, the universe as a domain wall,

hep-th/9803235, to be published in phys. rev. d

[18] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k. s. stelle and d. waldram, heterotic mtheory in five dimensions,

upr-804t, hep-th/9806051.

55

[19] r. y. donagi, asian j. math. 1 214 (1997).

[20] k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b456 (1995) 130.

[21] m. bershadsky, v. sadov and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 420.

[22] b. andreas, on vector bundles and chiral matter in n = 1 heterotic compactications,

hub-ep-98-16, hep-th/9802202.

[23] g. curio, phys. lett. b435 39 (1998).

[24] a. grassi, internat. j. math. 4 203 (1993).

[25] r. donagi, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, in preparation.

56

