generalized  uncertainty  principle  in  quantum  gravity  from  micro-black  hole

                                                                gedanken  experiment

                                              fabio scardigli1
                                   institute for theoretical physics, 
              university of bern, sidlerstrasse 5, ch-3012 bern, switzerland. 

abstract: we review versions of the generalized uncertainty principle (gup) obtained in
string theory and in gedanken experiments carried out in quantum gravity. we show how a
gup can be derived from a measure gedanken experiment involving micro-black holes at the
planck scale of spacetime. the model uses only heisenberg principle and schwarzschild
radius and is independent from particular versions of quantum gravity. 

pacs  numbers: 04.60 - quantum theory of gravitation

                    

     1postal address: via europa 20, 20097 s. donato milanese, milano, italy.
e-mail: scardus@galactica.it 

1

1. generalized  uncertainty  principle  in  string  theory

s depend on whether or not r(e) >  

in string theory the generalized uncertainty principle (gup) has been well described since
the works of g. veneziano et al. [1] in 1986-90. there have been studied ultra high energy
scatterings of strings in order to see how the theory tackles the inconsistences of quantum
gravity at the planck scale. the authors find interesting effects, new as regarding to those
found in usual field theories, originating from the soft short-distance behaviour of string
theory. they studied particularly the hard processes excitable at short distance as high-energy
fixed-angle scatterings. they find that it is not possible to test distances shorter than the
s=(  )1/2 ( is the string tension). another scale is dinamically
characteristic string length 
generated, the gravitational radius (i.e. schwarzschild) r(e) ~ (gne)1/(d-3) and the approaches
towards 
distances of the order of r(e) appear, indicating a classical gravitational instability that can be
attributed to black hole formation. if, on the contrary, r(e) <  
irrelevant: there are not black holes with a radius smaller than the string length. in this case,
the analysis of short distances can go on and it has been shown that the larger momentum
transfer do not always correspond to shorter distances. precisely the analysis of the angle-
m (
 < 
distance relationship suggests the existence of a scattering angle 
= scattering angle) the relation between interaction distance and momentum transfer is the
 >> 
/ b (b=impact parameter), while, when 
classical one (i.e. a  la heisenberg) with <q> ~  
the classical picture is lost and becomes important a new regime where <q> ~ b. this suggests
a modification of the uncertainty relation at the planck scale in the form of

m such that when 

s. if the latter is true, new contributions at

s, those contributions are

m

[1]

(where y is a suitable constant) and consequently the existence of a minimal observable
length of the order of string size  
s. an analogous result has been obtained by konishi et al.
with an analysis based on the renormalization group. the proportionality constant y depends
on the particular version of string theory adopted. 
the notion of minimal observable length has been described during the last years in the more
modern language of duality [2]. an example is provided by the target-space duality (t-
duality). it arises, for example, when the target space is a five dimensional manifold of the
form m4s1. it can be shown that the classical solution of the movement equations for the
closed bosonic string compactified on the circle s1 of radius r is

[2]

2

 with the identification

this solution can be derived from a hamiltonian of type

it can be noted that under the t duality

we have

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

the t duality can be interpreted as follows: a massless particle on a circle of radius r has a
quantized momentum of p=n/2r. a string can also wrap m times around a circle with a
momentum p=mr. the duality symmetry exchanges the two spectra, exchanging also r with 
/r. simply, one cannot compress a circle below a certain length scale. the physical
predictions of the theory are invariant under the replacement of the radius r of the fifth
dimension with  /2r. thus, we cannot differentiate physically between a very small and a
very large radius for the additional dimension. this invariance suggests the existence of a
minimum length rmin ~ ()1/2, and can be generalized to more than one extra dimension with a
topology that is more complex than just  a product of circles. strings do not see spacetime in
the same way as do point particles. when one probes small distances on the string scale,
instead of probing them one just watches the propagation of larger strings.
on these grounds we should say that in string theory the very notion of ordinary continuum
spacetime ceases to make sense below the minimum length of the string scale 
this picture has been quite deeply modified by the work of shenker et al. [3]. it seems to be
possible to probe spacetime also below the string scale. in fact previous results in string
theory, which found evidence that the minimum length is the string scale, were based on the
use of strings themselves as probes. the new approach uses d branes as probes and it should
be able to test the behavior of string theory at distances far shorter than the string scale 
s . 

s . 

2. gup  in  black  hole  gedanken  experiments

several other types of analysis have been performed during the last years about uncertainty
relations and measurability bounds in quantum gravity (see e.g. [4], [5]). all of them are

3

characterized by a 'deformation' of the classical heisenberg uncertainty relation. among the
more interesting works is that of m.maggiore [6]. he obtains an expression of a gup by
analyzing a gedanken experiment for the measurement of the area of the apparent horizon of a
black hole in quantum gravity. this rather model-independent approach provides a gup
which agrees in the functional form with the similar result obtained in the framework of string
theory. 
the gedanken experiment proceeds by observing the photons scattered by the studied black
hole. the main physical hypothesis of the experiment is that the black hole emits hawking
radiation. recording many photons of the hawking radiation we are able to obtain an 'image'
of the black hole. besides, measuring the direction of the propagation of photons emitted at
different angles and tracing them back, we can (in principle) locate the position of the center
of the hole. in this way we make a measure of the radius rh of the horizon of the hole. this
measure suffers two kinds of errors. the first one is, as in heisenberg classical analysis, the
resolving power of the microscope

where  is the scattering angle. besides during the emission process the mass of the black
hole varies from m+m to m (with m=h/c) and the radius of the horizon changes
accordingly. the corresponding error is intrinsic to the measurement and it values

or

[7]

[8]

[9]

by means of the obvious inequality

, the errors x(1) and x(2) are combined linearly

(this step contains some arbitrariness) to obtain

[10]

the numerical constant k cannot be predicted by the model-independent arguments presented.
we shall develop in the present work an approach based on a gedanken experiment involving
a planckian micro-black hole. this approach will allow us to obtain a gup without the use of
hawking effect or other refined effects: we use only heisenberg relation and the notion of
gravitational (i.e. schwarzschild) radius.

4

the notion of gup has been further investigated  by several authors by linking it to the
deformed poincare' algebra. the mathematical structure that encodes the gup in a natural
way is that of a deformed heisenberg algebra

[11]

this gives an interpretation of the gup at a purely kinematical level, independently from any
specific dynamical theory.
from the preceding equation the gup follows

[12]

where we have used p2 = p2 +(p)2 and we suppose to be in the regime p2 +m2  2 and 
p  . 

3. gup  from  a  micro-black  hole  gedanken  experiment

in the present section we want to derive an expression of a gup from the analysis of the
measure process carried out in presence of gravity. the basic idea is that at planck level
spacetime admits great fluctuations of the metric and therefore the possibility of many
(virtual) micro-black holes. this structure has been referred to as a spacetime foam structure
and it has been discussed in innumerable papers (see e.g. [7]) and employed to calculate many
different properties in the quantum theory of gravity. for example it serves as intuitive
physical model for the calculus of the microscopic origin of black hole entropy (see e.g. [8]).
 we shall apply the heisenberg principle to the measure process and we shall show how the
formation of a micro-black hole affects the measure process itself. starting from the principle
written in the form px   
/ 2 and reminding that in our high energy situation e  cp, we
can cast the heisenberg inequality2 in the form ex    c / 2. 

when  we observe a space region of width x, we should expect that the metric field in that
region undergoes quantum fluctuations with an amplitude in energy of e      c / 2x. this

                    

     2 we remind of course that only p and x are conjugate operators in hilbert space and
that the relation ex   c/2 must be seen as a simple algebraic tool without any operatorial
meaning. 

5

energy is confined in the region of width x.

the gravitational radius 

 

associated with the energy e falls usually well
inside the region x. but when we shrink the

observed region, the fluctuation  e grows up
and the corresponding rg becomes wider, untill
it reaches the same width of  x (see fig.1). it
is easy to show that this critical length is the
planck length [9] and the associated energy is

p. a micro-black hole originates. if one want to observe more refined

the planck energy 
details, he should concentrate in that region an energy greater than the planck energy 
p and
this would enlarge further the gravitational radius rg , hiding in this way more details of the
region beyond the event horizon of the microhole.

 it emerges clearly that the minimum observable
region has a width equal to lp. every more
refined detail is hidden by the event horizon
and every effort to shrink further the region  x
would result in a greater quantum fluctuation of
the energy and therefore of the amplitude of the
unobservable region. because rg  goes linearly
with e, while  x goes with an inverse
proportion with  e, we could summarize the
situation in the diagram of fig. 2.

[13]

we have

the simplest way to combine the preceding inequalities into a single one is the linear way

[14]

that, in term of p, reads

6

[15]

p.

we obtain in this way a generalization of the uncertainty principle to cases in which the
gravity is important and to energy of the order of 
we should say that in the present gedanken experiment the continuity of spacetime holds up
to any length. spacetime is continuous near or inside the microhole and when the microhole
has evaporated spacetime behaves yet as a continuum. the gup can be obtained without
renouncing to the continuity. there is a difference between this approach and several other
visions which present spacetime as a lattice: e.g. naive spacetime foam; certain interpretations
of spacetime, given by loop quantum gravity, as a polymeric structure; quantum geometry
(topological transitions). the continuity of spacetime at every scale is in agreement with the
recent results [3] obtained in string theory. 
this derivation is based on the heisenberg principle (which is supposed to be valid untill the
planck length is reached) and on the schwarzschild radius, that again derives from the
finiteness of the speed of light. this derivation is independent from particular versions of
quantum gravity or from gravitational effects in curved spacetime (e.g. hawking effect) and
also from particular models of the micro-objects (strings etc.). 

4. discussion  and  conclusion 

several interesting notes can be made about the gup obtained in the previous section and the
micro-black hole mechanism examinated. one of the most intriguing is the following. it is
well known that we cannot look inside the region occupied by a black hole, because of the
presence of the event horizon, and this situation persists for all the lifetime of the hole.
precisely, if there were not any gravitational effect and the heisenberg classical uncertainty
principle were valid also beyond the planck scale , we would expect that the planck energy



p , concentrated in a region of amplitude lp , take a time equal to 

to

p (for

escape from the region considered. that region would be re-testable after a time 
example, with a light flash). however, the presence of gravity during the measure process
causes the formation of a microhole and therefore of an horizon. the horizon does not permit
to the energy to escape from the hole (apart from the little amount of energy escaping away
by hawking evaporation). the region inside the microhole remains therefore unobservable for
a time very much longer than the time the light takes to travel a planck distance. the time
during which the region inside a microhole remains unobservable (or untestable) is clearly
equal to the lifetime of the planckian micro hole itself: a strightforward calculation, based on
the hawking evaporation, gives for it a time of about 2000 
p = planck time). there is a
sort of 'plasticity' of spacetime, which seems to be able to 'remember' for a long time the 'too
large' deformations suffered (that is those causing the formation of an event horizon). we can
summarize the situation by introducing an "unobservability principle", settling that a region

p (

7

of width lp cannot be observed, or tested (after a first observation), not even in principle, for
a time equal to

[16]

this un-observability time results to be longer than that we would have if the gravity did not
exist. of course this considerations are true if the semiclassical formulae (i.e. hawking
radiation) here employed keep their validity also at the planck level.
finally we note that a microhole lifetime of the order of ~ 103  
of the order of  e ~ ( 
p ) ~ 1016 gev. this result is very interesting and it is in
contrast with the more common views. it seems to indicate that there could be micro holes
also at energies less than the planck threshold. 1016 gev is quite similar to the grand
unification energy. so quantum-gravitational effects may be far closer in energy to every day
physics than previously believed. quite astonishingly, a similar result has been obtained, in a
totally different way, by calculations in 11-dimensional m-theory [10]. may be quantum
gravity could be nearer than we have ever thought !

p  implys a wideness in energy

/ 4000  

5. acknowledgements

the author wishes to thank juan maldacena and the anonymous referee to have drawn his
attention on the paper in reference [3].

8

references

[1] g. veneziano, europhys.lett. 2 (3) p. 199 (1986).
     d. amati, m. ciafaloni, g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 197 (1987) 81; phys. lett. b 216
     (1989) 41.
     d.j. gross, p.f. mende, phys. lett. b 197 (1987) 129; nucl.phys. b 303 (1988) 407.
     k. konishi, g. paffuti, p. provero, phys.lett. b 234 (1990) 276. 

[2] e. witten, physics today, april 1996, p. 24.
     c.j. isham, structural issues in quantum gravity, lanl gr-qc 9510063.
     c. kounnas, cargese lectures on string theory, july 1996.

[3] m.douglas, d. kabat, p.pouliot, s. shenker, nucl.phys. b 485 (1997) 85.

[4] l. ahluwalia, phys.lett. b 339 (1994) 301.
     g. amelino-camelia, mod.phys.lett. a9 (1994) 3415.
     g. amelino-camelia, phys. lett. b 392 (1997) 283.
     g. amelino-camelia, j. ellis, n.e. mavromatos, d.v. nanopoulos, int. j. mod. phys. a,
     vol 12 (1997) 607.
     p. kuusk, j. ord, kinematics and uncertainty relations..., lanl hep-th 9707216.
     a. kempf, uncertainty relation in quantum mechanics..., lanl hep-th 9311147.
     a. kempf, qft with nonzero minimal uncertainties..., lanl hep-th 9405067. 

[5] g. padmanabhan, class.quant.grav. 4 (1987) l 107.
     see, moreover, the review articles of
     l.j. garay, int.j.mod.phys. a, vol 10 (1995), 145.
     p.gibbs, the small scale structure of spacetime, lanl hep-th 9506171.

[6] m. maggiore, phys. lett. b 304 (1993) 65.
     m. maggiore, phys.rev. d 49 (1994) 5182.

[7] s.w. hawking , nucl.phys. b 144 (1978) 349.
     t. jacobson, thermodynamics of spacetime..., lanl gr-qc 9504004.

[8] c. rovelli, phys.rev.lett. 77 (1996) 3288.
     f. scardigli, class.quantum grav. 14 (1997) 1781.

[9] f. scardigli, nuovo cimento, 110 b (1995) 1029.

[10] p.horava, e.witten, eleven dimensional supergravity..., lanl hep-th 9603142.
       p.horava, m-theory as a holographic field theory, lanl hep-th 9712130.
       m.j.duff, scientific american, february 1998, p.54-59.

9

