9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
3
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
5
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the innite energy limit of the ne structure

constant equal to 1/4?

antonio f. ranada

departamento de fsica teorica

universidad complutense, 28040 madrid, spain

20 march 1999

abstract

a recently proposed topological mechanism for the quantization of
the charge gives the value e0 = hc for both the fundamental electric
and magnetic charges. it is argued here that the corresponding ne
structure constant 0 = 1/4 could be interpreted as its value at
innite energy.

this letter proposes an argument in favour of the idea that the innite
energy limit of the ne structure constant is equal to 1/4. the argument is
based on two grounds: (i) a recent topological mechanism for charge quan-
tization which implies that the fundamental electric and magnetic charges
are both equal to e0 = hc = 3.3 e, the corresponding ne structure con-
stant being 0 = 1/4 [1]; and (ii) the appealing and plausible idea that, in
the limit of very high energies, the interactions of charged particles could be
determined by their bare charges (this meaning the value that their charges
would have if they were not renormalized by the quantum vacuum, see for
instance section 11.8 of [2]). a warning is however necessary: the concept of
bare charge is more complex than what was thought some time ago, so that
it is better now to speak of charge at a certain scale. to be precise, when
the expression bare charge will be used here, it will be taken as equivalent

e-mail: afr1@s.ucm.es

1

a. f. ranada, is () equal to 1/4?

2

and synonymous to innite energy limit of the charge or, more correctly,
charge at innite momentum transfer, dened as e = 4hc, where
 = lim (q2) when q2

 .

the possibility of a nite value for  is an intriguing idea worth of study.
indeed, it was discussed very early by gell-mann and low in their classic and
seminal paper qed at small distances [3], in which they showed that it is
something to be seriously considered. however, they could not decide with
their analysis whether e is nite or innite. the standard qed statement
that it is innite was established later because of perturbative calculations,
but it can not be said that the alternative presented by gell-mann and low
had been denitely settled.

the innite energy charge e of an electron is partially screened by the sea
of virtual pairs that are continuously being created and destroyed in empty
space. it is hence said that it is renormalized. as the pairs are polarized, they
generate a cloud of polarization charge near any charged particle, with the
result that the observed value of the charge is smaller than e. moreover,
the apparent electron charge increases as any probe goes deeper into the
polarization cloud and is therefore less screened. this eect is dicult to
measure, as it can only be appreciated at extremely short distances, but it
has been observed indeed in experiments of electron-positron scattering at
high energies [4]. in other words: the vacuum is dielectric. on the other
hand, it is paramagnetic, since its eect on the magnetic eld is due to the
spin of the pairs. as a consequence, the hypothetical magnetic charge would
be observed with a greater value at low energy than at very high energy,
contrariwise to the electron charge.

the name bare charge is appropriate for e, as it is easy to understand
intuitively. when two electrons interact with very high momentum transfer,
each one is so deeply inside the polarization cloud around the other that no
space is left between them to screen their charges, so that the bare values,
i.e. e, interact directly. as unication is assumed to occur at very high
energy, it is an appealing idea that  = gut (it is true that one could
imagine that (q2) has a plateau at the unication scale corresponding to a
critical value smaller than , but we assume the simpler situation in which
that plateau does not exist). this suggests that a unied theory could be a
theory of bare particles (in the sense of neglecting the eect of the vacuum).
if this were the case, nature would have provided us with a natural cuto, in
such a way that gut = .

a. f. ranada, is () equal to 1/4?

3

the charge quantization mechanism given in [1] is based on a topological
model endowed with a structure induced by the topology of the magnetic
and electric force lines, which are represented as the level curves of a cou-
ple of complex scalar elds ,  [1, 5, 6, 7], the electromagnetic tensor f
being expressed in terms of these scalars by a certain precise transformation
t : ,  7 f. the scalars ,  obey highly nonlinear equations. surpris-
ingly however these nonlinear equations are transformed exactly into maxwell
equations by the transformation t . consequently, the f of the model are
standard maxwell elds (although behaving in a particular way around the
innity), so that it is equivalent to maxwell standard theory in any bounded
spacetime domain.

a consequence of that topological structure is that the charge inside any
volume is always equal to nhc, the integer n being understood as the degree
of a map between two spheres. it turns out that each electric line around
a point charge is labelled by a complex number, the value of (r, t) along
it, in such a way that there are exactly n lines with the same label, taking
into account the orientation of the map (the same would apply to a magnetic
charge, with  instead of ). as this topological mechanism operates at the
classical level and since the charge is necessarily aected by the quantum
vacuum [2] to give the dressed observed value, the fundamental charge e0 =
hc must be interpreted as the innite energy value of both the electric
and magnetic charges e and g. in other words, the model predicts that
e = g = e0.

(it is perhaps worth mentioning that, in a dierent context, these topo-
logical ideas have inspired a model of ball lightning in which this phenomenon
is assumed be a magnetic knot coupled to a plasma [8, 9]. the linking of
magnetic lines turns out to have a stabilizing eect which allow the reballs
to last for much more time than expected.)

as a consequence of these considerations, the argument announced in the

rst line which leads to the equalities gut =  = 1/4 goes as follows:

1. the value of the fundamental charge implied by the topological mech-
anism [1] e0 = hc is in the right interval to verify e0 = e = g, that is
to be equal to the common value of both the fundamental electric and mag-
netic innite energy charges. this is so because, as the quantum vacuum is
dielectric but paramagnetic, the following inequality must be satised then:
e < e0 < g, as it is indeed, since e = 0.3028, e0 = 1, g = e/2 = 20.75, in
natural units.

a. f. ranada, is () equal to 1/4?

4

note that it is impossible to have a complete symmetry between electricity
and magnetism simultaneously at low and high energy. the lack of symmetry
between the electron and the dirac monopole charges would be due, in this
view, to the vacuum polarization: according to the topological model, the
electric and magnetic innite energy charges are equal and verify eg =
e2
0 = 1, but they would be decreased and increased, respectively, by the sea
of virtual pairs, until the electron and the monopole charge values verifying
the dirac relation eg = 2 [10]. the qualitative picture seems nice and
appealing.

2. let us admit as a working hypothesis that two charged particles inter-
act with their bare charges in the limit of very high energies (as explained
above). there could be then a conict between (i) a unied theory of elec-
troweak and strong forces, in which  = s at very high energies, and (ii) an
innite value of . this is so because unication implies that the curves
of the running constants (q2) and s(q2) must converge asymptotically
to the same value gut. it could be argued that, to have unication at a
certain scale, it would be enough that these two curves be close in an energy
interval, even if they cross and separate afterwards. but, in that case, the
unied theory would be just an approximate accident at certain energy in-
terval. on the other hand, the assumption that both running constants go
asymptotically to the same nite value gut gives a much deeper meaning
to the idea of unied theory, and is therefore much more appealing. in that
case, e must be expected to be nite, and the equality gut =  must
be satised.

3. the value 0 = e2

0/4hc = 1/4 = 0.0796 for the innite energy
ne structure constant  is thought provoking and tting, since gut is
believed to be in the interval (0.05, 0.1) (some say furthermore that close
to 0.08). this rearms the assert that the fundamental value of the charge
given by the topological mechanism e0 could be equal to e, the innite
energy electron charge (and the innite energy monopole charge also), and
supports the statement that gut must be equal to 0 and to 1/4. all this
is certainly curious and intriguing since the topological mechanism for the
quantization of the charge [1] is obtained just by putting some topology in
elementary classical low energy electrodynamics [5].

the conclusion of this letter is that the following three ideas must be
studied carefully: (i) the complete symmetry between electricity and mag-
netism at the level of the innite energy charges, both being equal to hc,

a. f. ranada, is () equal to 1/4?

5

the symmetry being broken by the dielectric and paramagnetic quantum vac-
uum; (ii) that the topological model on which the topological mechanism of
quantization is based could give a theory of high energy electromagentism at
the unication scale; and (iii) that the value which it predicts for the innite
energy ne structure constant 0 = 1/4 could be equal to  and also to
gut, the constant of the unied theory of strong and electroweak interac-
tions. in this way the three quantities, both the electric and magnetic ne
structure constants at innite momnetum transfer and gut, would be equal
and there would be a complete symmetry between electricity, magnetism and
strong force at the level of bare particles (i.e. at q2 = ), this symmetry
being broken by the eect of the quantum vacuum.

a. f. ranada, is () equal to 1/4?

6

references

[1] ranada, a.f. & trueba, j.l., phys. lett. b 422 (1998) 196-200,

and references therein to previous work.

[2] milonni, p.w., the quantum vacuum. an introduction to quan-

tum electrodynamics (academic press, boston, 1994).

[3] gell-mann, m. & low, f., phys. rev. 95 (1954) 1300-1312.

[4] levine, i., koltick, d. et al (topaz collaboration) phys. rev.

lett. 78 (1997) 424-427.

[5] ranada, a.f., j. phys. a: math. gen. 25 (1992) 1621-1641; j.

phys. a: math. gen. 23 (1990) l815-820.

[6] a. f. ranada and j. l. trueba, phys. lett. a 202 (1995) 337.

[7] a. f. ranada and j. l. trueba, phys. lett. a 232 (1997) 25.

[8] ranada, a.f. & trueba, j.l. nature 383 (1996) 32.

[9] ranada, a.f., soler, m. & trueba, j.l., j. geophys. res. d 103

(19998) 23309-23313.

[10] dirac, p.a.m., proc. roy. soc. a 133 (1931) 60-67.

