9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
2
2

 

 
 

1
v
0
5
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

spin-99/8, itfa-99-4, hep-th/9904150

sigma models for bundles on calabi-yau:

a proposal for matrix string compactications

christiaan hofman1 and jae-suk park1,2

1spinoza institute

university of utrecht

leuvenlaan 4, 3508 ta utrecht

and

2institute for theoretical physics

university of amsterdam

valckenierstraat 65, 1018 xe amsterdam

the netherlands

we describe a class of supersymmetric gauged linear sigma-model, whose target space is

the innite dimensional space of bundles on a calabi-yau 3- or 2-fold. this target space

can be considered the conguration space of d-branes wrapped around the calabi-yau. we

propose that this model can be used to dene matrix string theory compactications. in

the infrared limit the model ows to a superconformal non-linear sigma-model whose target

space is the moduli space of bps congurations of branes on the compact space, containing

the moduli space of semi-stable bundles. we argue that the bulk degrees of freedom

decouple in the infrared limit if semi-stability implies stability. we study topological

versions of the model on calabi-yau 3-folds. the resulting b-model is argued to be

equivalent to the holomorphic chern-simons theory proposed by witten. the a-model and

half-twisted model dene the quantum cohomology ring and the elliptic genus, respectively,

of the moduli space of stable bundles on a calabi-yau 3-fold.

april, 1999

1. introduction

it is by now well established that non-perturbative string theory ts into a greater

scheme, involving also 11 dimensional supergravity, which we call m-theory [1]. a full

microscopic foundation for this theory is however still lacking. in the matrix theory pro-

posal of [2], the full dynamics of uncompactied m-theory was proposed to be captured

by a certain large n limit of supersymmetric matrix quantum mechanics. this matrix

quantum mechanics arises as the quantum theory of many partons, which are the only

degrees of freedom left in the innite momentum frame in the uncompactied situation.

the partons can be identied with the d-particles in the corresponding type iia string

theory. when the theory is compactied on a circle, this leads to matrix string theory [3],

which is described by the maximal nws = (8, 8) supersymmetric u (n ) yang-mills theory

in 1+1 dimensions. in the infrared, this theory describes the ordinary string moving on a
symmetric product of the transverse target space r8.

a full description of non-perturbative string theory crucially involves d-branes [4].

d-branes are eectively described by (supersymmetric) gauge theories, living on the world-

volume. even general congurations of d-branes are described by gauge theories involving

non-trivial gauge congurations; the dierent branes are described by the uxes in the

gauge theory [5]. congurations of d-branes may therefore be viewed as a stringy descrip-

tion of vector bundles (or more generally sheaves) [6]. matrix (string) theory compactied

on a non-trivial manifold should involve also the degrees of freedom for branes wrapped

around cycles in the compactication manifold. indeed, it was already shown in [2] that

membranes could be described in the original m(atrix) theory. the simplest compactica-

tion manifolds are tori. the compactied m(atrix) theory is described by a supersymmetric

gauge theory living on the dual torus [2][7]. for the circle, this leads to the matrix string
theory. for compactications on a higher dimensional torus s1  t n, we may view the

linear sigma model whose target space is the innite dimensional space provided by the

full gauge theory on the dual torus bs1  bt n from a matrix string perspective as a gauged
gauge theory on the torus bt n. the covariant derivatives on the dual torus are identied

with (some of) the adjoint scalars that live on the world-sheet, and which are now innite

dimensional matrices.

in this sense, it is a sector of the large n matrix string theory.

these gauge theories automatically describe the dynamics of the wrapped d-branes on the

torus, which are represented by the uxes in this gauge theory. we may even view the

gauge theory on the dual torus as the conguration space of the wrapped d-branes.

1

in this paper we propose to describe compactications of the matrix string related to

more general calabi-yau manifolds by gauged linear sigma models whose target space is

the innite dimensional space of gauge bundles. as for the torus, we may view this linear

target space as the bre of an innite rank gauge bundle on the worldsheet. also the gauge

group is innite dimensional, and is formed by the gauge transformations in the bundle

on the calabi-yau manifold.

in general, not all the supersymmetry will be preserved.

for example for compactications on k3 and cy3, we should have nws = (4, 4) and
nws = (2, 2) supersymmetry respectively. note that in general the target space not only
is described by the pure gauge bundles, but also include certain (adjoint) scalars, which

describe the movement of branes in the bulk. we should remark that such a model is not

directly related to matrix string theory compactied on the calabi-yau manifold under

consideration.

indeed, for the torus we know that the gauge theory lives on the dual

torus. therefore, this model should more appropriately be considered as the matrix string

compactied on some dual manifold. this dual manifold should be a certain moduli space

of bundles. for example, the dual torus can be considered the moduli space at bundles on

the torus, while also for the compactication on k3 surfaces the compactication manifold

of the matrix string is a dual k3, which is identied as a certain moduli space of bundles

on the k3 space where the gauge bundles live.

formally the infrared limit of the matrix string corresponds to the limit where the

bulk string coupling constant becomes zero. the theory then ows to a superconformal

non-linear sigma model, whose target space is locus of vanishing potential; this is the mod-

uli space of the gauge bundles describing the linear sigma model. this target space should

then be be identied with the space on which the fundamental string lives  or rather a

symmetric product of it, as the matrix string described second quantized string theory.

indeed, this was found for the uncompactied matrix string [3]. also for compactications
on four dimensional calabi-yau manifolds k3 and t 4, it is known that the appropriate

moduli space of bundles is related to the symmetric product of the manifold. this sym-

metric product is in general smoothed out, as the resolution of the quotient singularity is

a marginal deformation of the matrix string theory. for higher dimensional compactica-

tions, the interaction of the strings corresponds to an irrelevant operator. therefore, we

do not expect the infrared target space to be given by a symmetric product in any limit

in parameter space. for calabi-yau 3-folds, we do not know of any relation in general

between the infrared target space of our proposed model and a symmetric product (it may

however be that asymptotically for well separated strings this space looks like a symmetric

2

product). for certain special cases however where calabi-yau manifold is a k3-bration

and the dimension of the infrared target space is exactly 6, it is known that this space is a

calabi-yau manifold [8]. but certainly, we should at least nd a nite dimensional infrared

target space, if we want to make sense out of this theory. this already puts very strong

conditions on the model, and seems to imply that we can not dene our model beyond the

calabi-yau case. even if the infrared target space is not a symmetric product, we may still

identify our model as a compactication of matrix string theory, but in a more generalized

sense. the only thing we can not do is the identication of the usual string theory in a

geometrical way.

apart from a proposal for matrix string compactication on calabi-yau manifolds,

the model we describe in this paper can also be considered as a natural scheme to study

topological properties of stable holomorphic bundles on calabi-yau manifolds. because

of the relation between these bundles and bps congurations of branes, we could also

physically view this as a model studying these bps states. natural elements to study

are counting formulae, which have natural physical interpretations as black hole entropies,

and (quantum) intersection rings of these conguration spaces. these calculations will

unfortunately be outside the scope of this paper, although we make a start by studying

certain properties of the topologically twisted models. we hope to come back to these

interesting properties in the future.

the paper is organized as follows. in the section 2, we argue why gauged linear sigma

models are the natural setting to study matrix string theory compactications. we then

give an overview of the general gauged linear sigma approach that we will be using. we

will use for this the language of equivariant cohomology, rather than the more standard

superspace approach, so this part can also be considered as an introduction of our notations.

we also comment on possible relations with the non-linear sigma model approach proposed

by douglas et al. [9][10].

in section 3, we introduce the actual model describing bundles on a calabi-yau 3-fold.

we start with describing some properties of the space of bundles which we need for the

formulation of the model. after that, the construction of the model will be straightforward.

we then study the infrared limit of the theory, described by a non-linear sigma model. then
we study the case where the calabi-yau 3-fold is of the form k3  t 2. this relates the
model to the matrix string description of the ve-brane [11]. we conclude this section by

studying the decoupling from bulk degrees of freedom.

in section 4, we consider topologically twisted versions of the model, along the lines

of [12][13]. the localization and observables in the a- and b-model are studied.

3

2. preliminaries

in this section we review some salient features of nws = (2, 2) gauged linear sigma
models (glsm) [14][15], in a language suitable for our purpose. this also involves an

innite dimensional generalization of the usual glsm, which can be described in the

language of equivariant cohomology. we also briey compare our proposal the one of

douglas et al., in terms of non linear sigma models.

2.1. nws = (2, 2) gauged linear sigma model and equivariant dolbeault cohomology

we shall now describe the gauged linear sigma models (glsm) in some more detail,

but still in a quite general sense. the glsms we describe are slightly generalized, as we

allow for an equivariant extension of the supersymmetry; that is we allow the supersymme-

try algebra to be closed up to certain gauge transformations. also, we want to generalize

to allow for innite dimensional target spaces. we will concentrate on theories which have

nws = (2, 2) worldsheet supersymmetry, as this is the amount of supersymmetry expected
for calabi-yau 3-fold compactications. this amount of supersymmetry generally requires

a target space which allows for a kahler structure. furthermore, as we want to get a linear

sigma model, the target space will generally be at. to have an anomaly free theory, we

will also require that the rst chern class of the kahler manifold vanishes. so we consider

a at kahler manifold, which we denote a. the path integral of the sigma model on 

with target space a involves the space of all maps a :   a. because of the kahler
structure, we can split up these coordinates into complex coordinates ai and their complex
 of the two dimensional scalars ai are
conjugates a. the left and right super-partners i
spinors on the worldsheet and holomorphic tangent vectors in the target space. the 

indices will denote worldsheet spinor indices. when we restrict to a point in , we see from

this and the supersymmetry commutation relations (which are trivial on a point) that the

left and right supercharges act as two copies d of the exterior derivative d on a. in terms

of eld theory, we may also state this as the relation that the supersymmetry restricted to
a point on  reduces to a brst symmetry on the target space a, as d2 = 0. the kahler

structure on the target space a implies that we have nws = (2, 2) supersymmetry, due to
the decomposition d =  +  of the exterior derivative.

now we consider the case that a group g acts on a preserving the complex and

kahler structures. one may attempt to dene a sigma model for the quotient space

a/g by gauging the symmetry g. the problems one may encounter is that we rarely

4

have a good quotient and the kahler structure may not descend to it. the nws = (2, 2)

gauged sigma model however resolves these problems in whole sale! to describe it, we

use the relation between the supersymmetry on the worldsheet and the brst symmetry

(exterior derivative) in the target space noted above. the brst cohomology is naturally

generalized in the gauged situation to so called equivariant cohomology. the heart of

the construction is an automatic equivariant extension of the space a to ag = eg g a
where g acts freely.1 the left and right supercharges now act on a as two copies of g-

equivariant exterior derivatives (the exterior derivatives in ag), which satisfy the modied

commutation relations

dg = d  iaia,

g = iala
d2

(2.1)

where a denotes the generator of the g-action, ia denotes the contraction with the vector
eld v a associated with g-action and la is the lie-derivative with respect to this vector

eld. the g-equivariant cohomology of a is the ordinary cohomology of the extended

space ag. the super-partners of a become equivariant dierential one forms on a. as

for the ordinary derivative d we have a decomposition of the equivariant derivative dg as
dg = g + g, such that

2
g = 0,

{g, g} = iala,

2
g = 0,

(2.2)

which denes equivariant dolbeault cohomology [18].

such a decomposition again implies an extension to extended nws = (2, 2) worldsheet

supersymmetry, using the equivariant derivatives above to construct the worldsheet su-

persymmetry generators. we denote the nws = (1, 1) supercharges by q = s + s,

where  denotes the left and right spinor indices on the worldsheet . if we reduce 

to a point then q are two copies of the equivariant exterior derivative dg and  denote

the charges under an internal symmetry of a graded equivariant cohomology. such graded

equivariant dierentials rst appeared as twisted supercharges of four-dimensional n = 4

sym [19], and in general are called balanced equivariant dierentials [20]. the further

decomposition q  s  s in the kahler case gives rise to dierentials of a balanced

1 for details on equivariant cohomology the reader is referred to the papers [16][17]. we will

always use the cartan model.

5

equivariant dolbeault cohomology [21] on the target space. the supercharges satisfy the

following commutation relations following (2.2)

{s+, s+} = i++,

{s, s} = i,

{s+, s} = ig1

{s+, s} = ig1

s ala,
s ala,

{s+, s} = 0,

{s+, s} = 0,

s2
 = 0,
s2
 = 0,

(2.3)

where  =   va
la are the covariant derivatives on the worldsheet  and gs
is the string coupling constant, which has scaling dimension one on the worldsheet .
here we have introduced gauge elds v on  and the group g is extended to a group
of local gauge transformations on . note that  is an adjoint scalar for this gauge
group.2 we see that in eect the equivariant extension leads on the worldsheet to a
gauging of the symmetry by g. we should note that the above supersymmetry algebra

is the dimensional reduction of the n = 4 supersymmetry in 4 dimensions, where the

elds  and  are the reduced components of the gauge eld [14][15]. we may interpret
these supercharges as dierentials of a balanced g  p-equivariant cohomology, where p
denotes the group of translations along . the internal consistency of the commutation
relations (2.3) determines a nws = (2, 2) vector multiplet
s v++

s+ +





ys
xs+

v

s+ 

s 

s+ d

s +

(2.4)

ys
xs+

ys
xs+

the supersymmetry above and this vector multiplet can be found also from dimensional

reduction of the four dimensional n = 1 supersymmetry and vector multiplet. the com-

plex scalar (, ) then corresponds to the components along the compactied directions.
physically, the extension of a to ag is just gauging of the global symmetry g of the target
space a. the supermultiplet associated with the bosonic eld ai (x) is completely deter-
mined by the complex structure on a. decomposing ai = ai + a as earlier the ai should
extend to a chiral (holomorphic) multiplet, i.e. sai = 0

i


s ai

s+ i
+

s+

s

.

h i

(2.5)

2 note that the gauge eld v is anti-hermitian in this convention, while also  = .

6

an important property of the nws = (2, 2) supersymmetric model is the u (1) r-

symmetry. the left and right r-charges (jl, jr) of the supercharges are set to the following

values

s+ : (+1, 0),

s+ : (1, 0),

s : (0, +1),

s : (0, 1).

(2.6)

the r-charges of the elds in the vector multiplet are then determined by the assignment

of zero charges to the gauge eld; this gives

table 1

v++ v



 d +  +



jl

jr

0

0

0

0

+1 1

0

0 +1

0 1

1 +1

0 +1

0 1

0

together with the obvious left and right spin charges they determine the graded form

degrees of balanced equivariant dolbeault cohomology.

the action functional of the theory is dened by

s(r, r) =s+s s+ sz

r
gs

(2.7)

d2x(cid:16) tr() + k(cid:0)ai, a(cid:1)(cid:17)
s+ sz d2x tr 
s+ sz d2x w(cid:0)a(cid:1),

s+sz d2x tr  +
s+sz d2x w(cid:0)ai(cid:1) +

1
gs

+

+

r
gs
1
gs

where k(ai, a) denotes the kahler potential of the at space a and r = i +/2 belongs

to the center of lie(g)  lie(g). the trace is some suitable trace in a representation of

the gauge group g. the action functional s is obviously invariant under the nws = (2, 2)
the supersymmetry, since (s+  s)ai = (s+  s) = 0.

from (2.4) we see that the generators of balanced equivariant dolbeault cohomology

consist of the bosonic elds in a nws = (2, 2) vector multiplet. the remaining bosonic

auxiliary elds d and hi form a crucial ingredient of the theory. imposing the algebraic

equation of motions for these elds one always has

d =

hi =

1
g2
s
1

(  ) ,

gs (cid:18) w
ai(cid:19) ,

7

(2.8)

where  is the equivariant momentum map  : a  lie(g) for the action of g on a. the

potential energy v in the sigma model above is given by

v = g2

s kdk2 +xi

khik2 +

1
g2

s xi (cid:0)kalaaik2 + kalaaik2(cid:1) +

1
2g2

s(cid:13)(cid:13)[, ](cid:13)(cid:13)2

.

(2.9)

here for the auxiliary elds hi and d the on-shell values (2.8) should be substituted. in
the infrared limit gs  0 the dominant contributions to the path integral come from maps
a :   m to the locus of vanishing potential, modulo gauge transformations. we see
from (2.9) that this is described by a symplectic quotient at level :

m =(cid:0)h 1

i

(0)  1()(cid:1)/g.

(2.10)

the group action preserves the condition hi = 0 and the subvariety h 1
the complex and kahler structures by restriction. the quotient space m inherits the
kahler structure from the ambient space a by the restrictions and the reduction.
if 

(0)  a inherits

i

takes on a generic value, the group g acts freely and m is a smooth kahler manifold. for
such a case the infrared limit of the theory can be identied with the non-linear sigma-

model with target space m. for non-generic  the quotient space develops singularities
or even may not exist at all. the infrared theory however should make sense also in

these situations. for such cases however one always has some extra degrees of freedom

not described by the moduli space, due to the extension of a to ag. if we vary  within

the set of regular values the target space in general undergoes birational transformations.

this is a physical realization of the variation of symplectic quotients. the well-known

relation between the symplectic and geometrical invariant theory (git) quotients also is

an important part of the story [22]. the essential point is that the condition hi = 0 is
preserved by the complexied group action g c, while the condition d = 0 is only preserved

by the real group action. the complex gauge group in general does not act freely on
the submanifold h 1

i (0), so that taking the quotient directly would lead to unwanted
singularities. the git quotient considers the complex quotient by restricting to some
stable subset h 1

(0), on which the complexied gauge group acts freely, and

i

(0)s  h 1

i

sets

h 1

i

(0)//g c := h 1

i

(0)s/g c.

a proper condition for the stability should give rise to the equivalence h 1

i

(0)//g c = m

for generic and regular .

8

if c1(m) = 0 the theory in the infrared limit is expected to ow to a nws = (2, 2)
superconformal theory. the chiral operators of such a conformal theory by denition cor-

respond to elements of g-equivariant de rham or dolbeault cohomology on the space a,

carrying a suitable grading. the equivariant cohomology is a powerful mathematical tool.

note that if the moduli space is smooth, the equivariant cohomology on a is equivalent to

the ordinary cohomology on the moduli space. when the moduli space develops singulari-

ties, the ordinary cohomology is not well dened, while there is in general no problem with

the equivariant cohomology on a. thus we may even see the equivariant cohomology as a

string-inspired generalization of ordinary cohomology. from the viewpoint of the gauged

linear sigma model this cohomology corresponds to the classical part of the story. the

quantum properties of the theory are even more striking and beautiful, as exploited many

papers such as [14][15][23].

some finite dimensional examples

we now consider some examples, mainly to indicate the comparison of our notation

with the standard supersymmetry approach. we may also see this example as a sector of

uncompactied matrix string theory, in the presence of extra branes. we start with u (n )

super-yang-mills in two dimensions. the theory contains a vector multiplet, containing

the u (n ) connection one-forms (on the worldsheet) v, the adjoint complex scalar  and
fermions, as in (2.4). the action functional of the theory is dened by the formula

s(r, r) = s+s s+ sz

d2x tr  +

s+sz d2x tr  +

s+ sz d2x tr .

r
gs

r
gs

the expression is similar to the superspace expression, where we integrate over the

fermionic coordinates, and replace the scalar  by the full vector supereld. this is equiv-

alent, because the berezin integral over the fermionic coordinates pics out exactly the

supersymmetry transforms of the scalars, as in the expression above. we now generalize

to the model for the grassmannian considered in [15]. so we introduce k complex scalars

in the fundamental representation of g = u (n ) and combine them into a n  k matrix

q. in the space of all such matrices we introduce a complex structure such that sq = 0.
the g-action on such a space is given by q  gq where g  g. the above condition deter-

mines a chiral and an anti-chiral multiplet and the supersymmetry transformation laws.

the corresponding action functional for this glsm is then given by

on the space of matrices q we have a natural hermitian structure given by r d2x tr qq.
s+ sz d2x tr .
s(r, r) = s+s s+ sz

d2x tr( + qq) +

s+sz d2x tr  +

r
gs

r
gs

9

the above action functional denes a glsm for the grassmannian g(n, k)  the space of
n complex planes in ck. after turning on the fi term  the model ows to a nws = (2, 2)
non-linear sigma model whose target space is g(n, k), as can be seen from the localization

equations [15].

2.2. digression: comments on gauged non-linear sigma models

in this subsection we briey comment on the non-linear generalization of the gauged

sigma-model and its possible applications. the main motivation for this section is to

compare the proposal of douglas et al. on matrix string theory on calabi-yau [9][10] with

our proposal.

to begin with we consider an example of u (1) theory. besides from the nws =
(2, 2) vector multiplet we introduce three complex scalars i, i = 1, . . . , 3 representing the
holomorphic coordinates of complex 3-dimensional kahler manifold x, i.e. si = 0. we
assume that i are not charged under the u (1) symmetry. these conditions lead to three
chiral multiplet and determine the supersymmetry transformation laws. let k(i, ) be

a kahler potential of x. then the action functional is dened by

s(r, r) = s+s s+ sz

d2x(cid:16) + k(cid:0)i, (cid:1)(cid:17)

(2.11)

the resulting theory has two decoupled sectors; one is the u (1) sym theory, where the i
are all zero, and the other is the supersymmetric non-linear sigma model.3

the above model can easily be generalized to the non-abelian version. we simply
replace the gauge group by u (n ) and the complex scalars i by u (n ) adjoint-valued

complex scalars, and consider the following action functional

s = s+s s+ sz

d2x tr(cid:16) + k(cid:0)i, (cid:1)(cid:17)

+

1
gs

s+sz d2x tr w(i) +

s+ sz d2x tr w(),

1
gs

(2.12)

where k is a gauge covariant real functional and w(i) is a gauge covariant holomorphic
functional of the i. the above action functional has manifest nws = (2, 2) supersymmetry.
this type of model has several interesting mathematical structures  matrix versions of

3 after adding the topological term dened by the pull-back of the kahler form on m , we have

the standard action functional for nws = (2, 2) non-linear sigma model.

10

kahler metrics, christoel symbols, riemann tensor etc. however it is unclear what the

conditions are for having a consistent quantum theory.

as we assume that string theory is a consistent theory, at least the action for d-

branes moving on curved space should be consistent. furthermore, when this curved space

is kahler, we expect them to be described by a gauged non-linear sigma model as above, as

argued by douglas [9]. so the criteria for the gauged non-linear sigma model for describing

d-branes on kahler manifolds should then be sucient. such criteria, called the axioms

of d-brane geometry, were formulated by douglas, and were suggested to be used as a

starting point for dening matrix theory on a curved space x [9]. one of these axioms is

the requirement that the moduli space of vanishing potential (modulo gauge symmetry)

is the n th symmetric product of x. comparing to our point of view, this moduli space

should be identied with the quotient space (2.10), so that we would need

(cid:0)h 1

i

(0)  1(0)(cid:1) /u (n ) = sn x.

(2.13)

here x is the base manifold represented by the center of mass of the matrix coordinates
i, i.e., { 1
n tr i}. another important axiom is the mass condition, which states that the
o-diagonal matrix elements have masses proportional to the geodesic distance between

the points on the diagonal. it is shown that the axioms require m to be ricci-at, and x
the holomorphic potential w(i) to the following minimal form

w(i) = 1[2, 3].

(2.14)

it is also shown that those axioms can be used to determine the matrix version of a kahler

potential k in terms of the kahler potential of base manifold x [10].

however it was demonstrated that such a model can be constructed only for ricci-
at manifolds x with vanishing six-dimensional euler density [24].4 this result implies

that matrix string theory compactications on calabi-yau 3-folds based on a nws = (2, 2)
non-linear matrix sigma-model is not satisfactory so far.

in this paper we take an alternative approach. instead of a 3n 2 complex dimensional
conguration space (described by the matrices i) we consider the innite dimensional

4 an example of such a manifold is the direct product s  c where s is a hyper-kahler surface.
then we actually expect to have a nws = (4, 4) theory. it is not even clear if a non-linear choice
for k always allows for a suitable w(i) maintaining nws = (4, 4) supersymmetry. clearly the
choice (2.14) is compatible only with at s.

11

linear space of all bundles on a calabi-yau 3-fold. the infrared target space will then

be the moduli space of stable bundles representing bps conguration of d-branes on

this calabi-yau. also the gauge group will be innite dimensional, consisting of gauge

transformations in the bundles. our model will be dened only on calabi-yau manifolds

as we will see shortly. it would be conceivable that we could relate to a non-linear sigma

model by integrating out massive degrees of freedom in the infrared theory. these massive

modes would be higher modes on the calabi-yau where the bundles are dened. this

would also reduce the gauge group to the nite dimensional u (n ) gauge group found in

the approach of douglas. in this way, the non-linear sigma model would turn up as an

eective theory related to our linear sigma model.

3. sigma model for bundles on calabi-yau 3-folds

in this section we construct a nws = (2, 2) gauged linear sigma model whose target

space is the innite dimensional space of bundles on a calabi-yau 3-fold.

3.1. the basic settings

we now come to the explicit construction of the model. consider a calabi-yau 3-fold
x with kahler form  and holomorphic 3-form 3,0. we x a rank n c bundle e over

x, endowed with a hermitian structure. we x the topological type of the bundle, by

specifying its chern character ch(e), or rather the mukai vector ch(e)qba(x). for a

calabi-yau 3-fold, the mukai vector is given by

q =(cid:18)ch0(e), ch1(e), ch2(e) 

p1(x)

48

ch0(e), ch3(e) 

p1(x)

48

ch1(e)(cid:19),

where p1(x) is the rst pontryagin class of the calabi-yau manifold. we may sum over
dierent topological types later. the bundles may be seen as describing d-branes wrapped

around the calabi-yau manifold x. the d-brane charges are precisely given by the com-

ponents of the mukai vector [6][25]. we will denote these d-branes by their part wrapped

around the calabi-yau. for example, the rank n = ch0(e) corresponds to the number
of d6 branes wrapped around x and more generally the charges q3n(e)  ch3n(e)
correspond to d2n-branes wrapped around cycles in x [26]. in a type iib setting, these
branes do not exist in the total ten-dimensional space-time. to get a type iib brane, one

should wrap the brane around another direction; this will of course be the spatial direction

12

of the matrix string. the d6-brane (in our notation) then corresponds in the full type iib
string theory to a d7-brane.

we denote by lie(g) the lie algebra of g = u (n ) and by end(e) = e  e  the

bundle of endomorphisms. let a be the innite dimensional space of all connections, and

g the innite dimensional group of gauge transformations g : x  g. as usual a is an
ane space, and a tangent vector is represented by a  1(x, end(e)). we want to
use this (innite dimensional) linear space a and the group g as the target space and

gauge group respectively for a glsm. to t the above data in the framework described

in the previous section we need some preparations  complex structure, kahler potential,

dolbeault equivariant cohomology and a holomorphic potential leading to integrability.

given the complex structure on x, we may introduce a complex structure on the space

of connections a as follows. let a denote a connection one-form, which is decomposed
into its holomorphic and antiholomorphic components a = a1,0 + a0,1. one introduces a
complex structure a by declaring a0,1  0,1(x, end(e)) to be a holomorphic tangent
vector. endowed with this complex structure a becomes an innite dimensional at kahler

manifold with kahler form  given by

(a1,0, a0,1) =

i

82 zx

tr(a1,0  a0,1)    .

(3.1)

the group of gauge transformations g acts with isometries on this space. the kahler

potential for  is given by

1

42 k(cid:0)a1,0, a0,1(cid:1) =

i

82 zx

 tr(f  f )  ,

(3.2)

where  is a kahler potential for . thus both the complex structure and kahler moduli

in a depend on those in the base space x.

now we consider g-equivariant dierentials s and s on a (they constitute the operators

g and g in (2.2)) such that

sa0,1 = i0,1,

sa0,1 = 0,

sa1,0 = 0,

sa1,0 = i 1,0,

s0,1 = 0,
s0,1 =  a,
s 1,0 = a,
s 1,0 = 0,

s = 0,

s = 0,

(3.3)

where 0,1  0,1(x, end(e)) represents a holomorphic (co)-tangent vector on a and the
adjoint scalar   0(x, end(e)) is the generator of an innitesimal g-action on a. we

13

have {s, s}a = ida satisfying (2.2). using these equivariant dierentials, we have an
equivariant kahler identity

i

42

ssk(cid:0)a1,0, a0,1(cid:1)

f =

=

i

42 zx

tr(if )     +

i

42 zx

tr(cid:0)0,1  1,0(cid:1)    ,

(3.4)

where the second term can be identied with the kahler form  and the rst term is the
moment map aa,  : a  lie(g) = 6(x, end(e)) for the action of g on a,

(a) =

1
42 f     =

1
122 (f )     ,

(3.5)

where  is the adjoint of wedge multiplication by .  is known as an equivariant kahler

form.

the kahler structure on the space of bundles does not give enough structure for

our purpose. the moduli space of bundles, which in the end will get identied with the

infrared target space of our model, should be a nite dimensional space. the space of

gauge equivalence classes of bundles however can never be nite dimensional. this can

easily be seen as follows. using the kahler structure on x, we can decompose the curvature
two-form of the bundle e into type according to f = f 2,0 +f 1,1 +f 0,2. using the moment
map , we can restrict only the f 1,1 part of the curvature. the f 0,2 part however will

not be restricted, thus leading to an innite dimensional space of deformations. there is

a natural way to further restrict the set of gauge bundles. to this end, we consider the
innite dimensional subvariety a1,1 of all connections for which the curvature is of type

(1, 1), so

f 0,2

a = 0.

(3.6)

thus 2
a = 0 for a  a1,1. this condition endows the bundle e with a holomorphic
structure. the moduli space of holomorphic bundles is the set of bundle isomorphism

classes. it can be given by the following complex quotient

a1,1/g c,

(3.7)

where g c is the complexication of g. as discussed in the last section, we can restrict the

model by adding a holomorphic potential w as in (2.7) to the model. indeed, we are even

forced to do so, as the moduli space (2.10) would otherwise not be nite dimensional. the
holomorphic potential should be a holomorphic functional of the coordinates a0,1 on a.

14

furthermore, it should be gauge invariant at least for gauge transformations connected to

the identity. this essentially xes the holomorphic potential to the holomorphic chern-

simons functional, which is given by

w(a0,1) =zx

3,0  tr(cid:16) 1

2

a0,1  a0,1 +

1
3

a0,1  a0,1  a0,1(cid:17).

(3.8)

note that this potential through (2.8) gives rise to exactly the condition (3.7) in the

infrared,

w
a0,1 = 0  f 0,2

a = 0.

(3.9)

note that the construction of this holomorphic potential is only possible on a calabi-
yau manifold, as it makes use of the holomorphic 3-form 3,0. this functional was rst

considered by witten [27], but was interpreted there as the action functional rather than

a superpotential for his eective open string theory. we come back to the relation of his

model to ours later in this paper.

we have now dened all the data needed for the construction of a nws = (2, 2) gauged

linear sigma model associated with the innite dimensional pair (a, g).

3.2. the nws = (2, 2) glsm

to construct the glsm explicitly, we consider a vector bundle e over x  , with
structure group u (n ). the group of all gauge transformations in this vector bundle will
be denoted g, and a is the space of all connections on e. we denote by e, g and a
the restrictions of e, g and a respectively to x  {pt}. we will use spinor notation for
the world-sheet  and dierential form notation for the calabi-yau x. the supercharges

evaluated at a point {pt}   are dierentials of balanced g-equivariant dolbeault coho-

mology on a. the nws = (2, 2) supersymmetry algebra is dened by the commutation
relations (2.3). in terms of innitesimal generator , , which are sections of k 1/2
,
, we denote  = s+ + +s + + s + + s+. the
and +, +, which are sections of k
supercharges transform as scalars on the calabi-yau 3-fold x.

1/2




the glsm related to gauge bundles on the cy has the following eld content. first,

there is the nws = (2, 2) vector multiplet as in the diagram (2.4). the world-sheet vector
multiplet transforms as an adjoint valued scalar on x. the explicit transformation laws are

given in appendix a. the covariant derivatives on the worldsheet are dened as  =
 + v, and its curvature is f = [++, ]. the elds in the vector multiplet
(v, , d, ) will have worldsheet scaling dimensions (1, 3/2, 2, 0). secondly we have

15

chiral and anti-chiral multiplets from the connection one-form a = a1,0 + a0,1 on x
according to our choice of complex structure on a, we build up chiral (sa0,1 = 0)
multiplets from a0,1. the transformations in the chiral multiplet are as in the following

diagram

0,1


s a0,1

s+ 0,1
+

s+

s

h 0,1

(3.10)

the explicit transformation rules for a chiral multiplet can be found in appendix a.

similarly, the elds in the a1,0 multiplet form a anti-chiral (sa1,0 = 0) multiplets

1,0


s a1,0

s+ 1,0

+

s+

s

h 1,0

(3.11)

note that, as a is a gauge eld, any commutator with a should be replaced by a
covariant derivative. we will write the covariant dolbeault operator related to a0,1 and
a1,0 as a =  + a0,1 and a =  + a1,0 respectively.

the left and right u (1) r-charges (jl, jr) for the chiral and anti-chiral matter mul-

tiplets are given in table 2.

table 2

a 1,0
+

1,0


0,1
+

0,1

 h 1,0 h 0,1

jl

0 1

0

+1

0

jr 0

0

1

0

+1

1

1

+1

+1

the action functional can be given as in the general formula (2.7). using the particular

form of the kahler and super potential as given above, this can be written

s(r, r) =  s+s s+ sz
d2xzx
d2xzx
s+sz
s+sz
d2x w(cid:0)a0,1) + c.c.,

r
gs
1
gs

dx tr() + c.c.

+

+

dx tr() + s+s s+ sz

d2x k(a1,0, a0,1)

(3.12)

where dx denotes the volume form on x. since s+s has u (1) r-charge (1, 1), w(a0,1)
should have charges (1, 1) to be symmetric under the r-symmetry. since a naturally
has charges (0, 0), the only choice left is to assign charges (1, 1) to 3,0.

16

the model is realized as an eight-dimensional u (n ) gauge theory on the product

manifold   x. some of the supercharges in this theory are broken due to the nontriv-

ial background. the surviving supercharges should be covariantly constant on x, while

spinors on the worldsheet . they can then be identied with scalars on x, by a trivial
twist.5 these are our supercharges s, s. as explained, we regard our model as a lin-
ear sigma model in two dimensions with innite dimensional target space a and gauged

isometry group g. we may regard the calabi-yau 3-fold as a parameter space describing

a continuous family of pairs (a, g). as we discussed earlier a inherited both its complex

and kahler structure from x. there is no inconsistency here since the supercharges are

topological when restricted to x. the path integral is then independent of the size of x

and we can take the limit vol(x)  0 to recover the two-dimensional sigma-model on .

the number of bose and fermi elds coincides with those of n = 1 sym theory in ten

dimensions.

3.3. the infrared limit

for nite string coupling constant gs arbitrary bundles on the calabi-yau contribute
to the path integral. in the infrared limit gs  0 the dominant contributions to the path
integral come from the space of all maps from the worldsheet  to the vanishing locus of

the potential v (given ib in (2.9)) modulo the g action. with our choice of kahler and

super potential, these are determined by the following conditions

and

f 0,2 = 0,

f  i = 0,

da = 0,

[, ] = 0.

(3.13)

(3.14)

the connections solving the rst two equations are called einstein-hermitian (eh) con-

nections [29]. they correspond to einstein-hermitian vector bundles. the moduli space

of eh connections is the symplectic quotient

meh = (a1,1  1())/g.

(3.15)

5 the model can thus be identied with a twisted version of eight-dimensional super yang-

mills, similar to the approach of [28] in four dimensions.

17

we denote by m
uhlenbeck-yau theorem the moduli space m

eh the moduli space of irreducible eh connections. by the donaldson-
eh is dieomorphic to the moduli space of

-stable holomorphic vector bundles dened by the git quotient [30][31]

a1,1//g c = a1,1

s /g c

(3.16)

if the connection is irreducible, the condition da = 0 implies that  = 0. the two

equations in (3.14) have non-trivial solutions if an eh connection is reducible. typically

a reducible connection gives rise to a singularity in meh. the equations (3.13) do not

guarantee that we always have irreducible connections. from the equations in (3.14) we

see that such a reducible connection also gives rise to a non-compact direction in the

localization manifold. these non-compact directions are not specially related to these

singularities; the moduli space meh (x) is non-compact even if there are no reducible
connections.6

a fundamental result of witten for nws = (2, 2) gauged linear sigma models states

that the physics of the infrared super conformal theory is smooth even if the target space

develops singularities [14].

in many respects the string theory compacties the target

space and we may constructively identify the infrared target space as the moduli space of

semistable torsion free sheaves on x. note that the notion of (semi-)stability is variable

depending on the polarization. if one changes the polarization the moduli space may un-

dergo a sequence of birational transformations. wittens analysis implies that the physics

is independent of the polarization. in our case the kahler form  on x determines the

polarization of stability (-stability). the (semi-)stability plays an important role in the

model, and is also related to stability of bound states of wrapped d-branes [6].

we briey discuss the role of the fi term . in general, the second equation in (3.13)

is called the weak einstein condition. the parameter  is constant along the worldsheet

. however,  can be a real function on x. if it is constant the second equation in (3.13)

is called the einstein condition with factor . in the more general case one can relate the

weak einstein condition to the einstein condition by a conformal change of the hermitian

6 according to gieseker the moduli space of stable bundles is an open subset of the moduli
space of semi-stable bundle. this provides the gieseker compactication for the moduli space of

stable bundles by taking the closure. the denition of stable bundles involves torsion free sheaves.

one may consult a nice book [29] for details.

18

metric on the bundle e. we will here take  to be constant. the einstein condition then

directly implies that  is given by

 =(cid:18)zx

ch1(e)    (cid:19).(cid:18) n
6 zx

    (cid:19)

(3.17)

thus depends only the the cohomology classes of  and c1(e).

we may now conclude that our model ows to a non-linear sigma model for a calabi-

yau with semi-stable bundles. we expect that the resulting sigma-model is superconformal

since meh inherits a calabi-yau structure. the case of rank n corresponds to a calabi-
yau 3-fold with n d6-branes bounded with d2n-branes classied by the chern characters
ch3n(e). for example the equation (3.17) implies that if the volume of the d4-brane
collapses to zero we should have  = 0. the condition to preserve supersymmetry translates

to stability. eh bundles can only exist when the following topological condition is met

zx(cid:0)2n ch2(e)  ch1(e)  ch1(e)(cid:1)    0,

(3.18)

where the equality holds if and only if e is projectively at. if we do not have any d2-
and d4-branes the bundles are at. for ch1(e) = 0, that is when there are no d4-branes,
the above condition reduces to

zx

ch2(e)    0.

(3.19)

this is a direct generalization of the condition in four dimensions that only asd con-

nections survive. the more general condition (3.18) is just a slight modication of this

restriction.

3.4. reduction to matrix string theory of five-branes compactied on a k3 surface

here we briey comment on relation with matrix string theory of ve-branes, whose

world-volume is compactied on a k3 surface.

we consider the case that that the calabi-yau 3-fold x is a product manifold x =
k3  t 2. we will consider the limit of vanishing t 2. then we can t -dualize along the
t 2-direction to reduce our model to a gauged linear sigma model for bundles on k3. this
amounts to the simple dimensional reduction along the t 2 direction. the vector q of

d-brane charges reduces to the mukai vector for the bundle on k3. the connection (0, 1)-
form in six dimensions then decomposes into a0,1   , where a1,0 is the component along

19

the k3 and  the component along the torus, which becomes a complex adjoint scalar

on the k3 surface. more generally, the chiral multiplet (3.11) decomposes into two chiral

multiplets; one including the connection (0, 1)-form on the k3 surface,

0,1


s a0,1

s+ 0,1
+

s+

s

,

(3.20)

h 0,1

and the other with the adjoint complex scalar  ,



s 

s+ +

s+

s

.

h

(3.21)

after the above reduction the holomorphic superpotential w (3.9) reduces to

w4 =zk3

2,0  tr  f 0,2,

(3.22)

where 2,0 denotes the holomorphic symplectic form on the k3 surface. since 2,0 is

a nowhere vanishing non-degenerated 2-form we may regard  as a holomorphic two-
form  2,0 :=  2,0. this should of course be extended to the full chiral multiplet (3.21).

similarly the kahler potential k in (3.2) decomposes into

k4 =zk3

tr(cid:16)if  f   2,0   0,2(cid:17),

(3.23)

where  is a kahler potential for k3. the action functional is given by the same formula

(3.12), where w and k are replaced by their respective expressions given above.

the worldsheet supersymmetry of the resulting model enhances to nws = (4, 4) su-
persymmetry. the adjoint chiral multiplet with bosonic component  in (3.21) combines

with the nws = (2, 2) vector multiplet in (2.4) into a nws = (4, 4) vector multiplet. in this
correspondence, the scalars  and  combine into a self-dual 2-form b+ and a real scalar

c, as follows

b+ =  2,0 +  0,2 + im  ,

c = re .

(3.24)

this gives exactly the eld content of the twisted n = 4 sym on k3 studied by vafa and

witten [19].

20

in the infrared limit the theory reduces to a nws = (4, 4) non-linear sigma model.

the target space is given by the solutions of the following equations, modulo the gauge

transformations

and

f 0,2 = 0,

f  i = 0,

da = da = 0,

[, ] = [, ] = [,  ] = [,  ] = 0.

(3.25)

(3.26)

note that the eh condition reduces to the condition of asd connections on k3.7 if the

eh connection is irreducible, the equations can only be solved by  =  = 0. then the

target space of this model is the moduli space of stable bundles on k3, which can be
identied with the moduli space m

asd of irreducible anti-self-dual (asd) connections on
the k3 surface. our model in the infrared limit can be identied with the matrix string

theory of the ve-brane compactied on k3 discussed in [33][11][32], which was based on
orbifold conformal eld theory.8 our reduced model describes the matrix string theory of
the ve-brane as a gauged linear sigma model in accordance with our general philosophy.9

this moduli space is known to be the birational to a symmetric symmetric product of a
(dual) k3 surface m

asd = sn fk3 in general. in this way, we can identify the infrared
limit of the model on k3 as a system of (weakly coupled) fundamental strings on fk3,

in accordance also with the axioms of d-brane geometry [9]. the model in the infrared

limit describes the higgs branch of a d1  d5 system where the d5-brane is wrapped

around k3. by applying t and s duality the model describes the matrix string theory

of the ve-brane wrapped around k3. the model describes six-dimensional interacting

7 this is deformed by the fi parameter , which also is a natural deformation in the k3

situation [32].

8 our gauge theoretic description has an obvious problem due to the non-compactness of the
moduli space of instantons. we better regard the infrared target space as the moduli space of

torsion-free coherent sheaves, as emphasized in [6]. if the moduli space contains strictly semi-stable

sheaves, which is inevitable in certain cases, the identication with orbifold conformal theory may

be problematic. the torsion free sheaves are also relevant to matrix string theory in the presence

of k ve-branes [34]. the infrared target space is then the moduli space of torsion-free sheaves on
r4 via the adhm description.

9 the nws = (4, 4) world-sheet supersymmetry evaluated at a point on the worldsheet denes

a balanced g-equivariant hyper-kahler cohomology [35].

21

micro matrix strings and can be regarded as a microscopic denition of iib string theory
on ads3  s3  k3 due to a celebrated conjecture of maldacena [36].

the above identication is evidence that our model for bundles on calabi-yau can

be regarded as the matrix string theory of calabi-yau compactications. the model was

already suggested in [21] based on a similar approach. if we perform dimensional reduction

along the world-sheet our reduced model becomes the vafa-witten model of n = 4 super-

yang-mills theory on k3. the partition function of this topological eld theory computes

the euler characteristic of the moduli space of instantons [19].

3.5. decoupling the bulk degrees of freedom

stable bundles appear naturally in the context of non-perturbative string theory [6].

they correspond to the stable bps congurations of branes wrapped around non-trivial

cycles in the compactied part x of the bulk space time z. these are also naturally

associated with extremal black-hole solutions of the low energy eective supergravity. a

suitable counting of the number of stable orbits corresponds to counting the microscopic

degrees of freedom of these black holes. the asymptotic growth of the degeneracy then

gives the black-hole entropy. in our context the natural object to study is the elliptic genus

directly relevant to the four-dimensional black-hole. the semi-stable orbits which are not

stable correspond to marginally stable brane conguration. they correspond to branes

wrapped around certain vanishing cycles in x. physically such states are new massless

(tensionless) states free to escape to the bulk z. indeed, in the strictly semi-stable case

the equations (3.14) (or (3.26) in the case of k3) allow for nontrivial solutions for  (and

 ), which describe the degrees of freedom outside the x. such an orbit also introduces

singularities in the moduli space, indicating that the degrees of freedom of the bundle do

not contain all the information necessary to describe the system.

now we examine the above properties in the context of our models for x = cy3, k3.

we note that the equations for the infrared target space (3.13)(3.14) or (3.25)(3.26) are
precisely the equations for bps congurations for d-branes wrapped around x [6].10 for-

mally, from the viewpoint of the string world-sheet, the infrared limit corresponds to

the limit where the bulk string coupling constant becomes zero. the string theory then

10 as was remarked in [6], this bps condition should be valid only in the limit of vanishing
string coupling. this is consistent with our description, as we nd these equations only at the

infrared limit.

22

ows to a superconformal non-linear sigma-model whose target space is the moduli space

of semi-stable bundles together with the linear space spanned by the zero-modes of the

equations in (3.14) or (3.26) for the adjoint complex scalars ( for cy3 and (,  ) for
k3). these zero-modes represent the bulk degrees of freedom transverse to the compact

space x. when the brane conguration is stable there are no zero-modes for the adjoint

scalars. the stable bundles hence represent congurations of branes which are completely

decoupled from the bulk. the matrix string only propagates on the compact space x.

consequently the infrared superconformal theory on the string world-sheet involving

stable bundles describes the decoupled matrix string theory. the m(atrix) conjecture as

well as maldacenas conjectures state that such a theory is dual to string/m theory in a

non-trivial background given by the near horizon limit [37][36]. as far as the description in

terms of matrix string theory is concerned the decoupling mechanism is exactly the same for

both cy3 and k3. thus it seems to be natural to conjecture that the infrared conformal
theory for the cy3 case has an analogous dual description. the natural conjecture is
duality with iib string theory on ads3  s1  cy3. here the ads3 space comes from
the worldsheet and the norm of , while the s1 is described by the phase of . there are

several problems with such a relation. first of all, compactication on a calabi-yau 3-fold

needs, in terms of type iib, 7-branes wrapped around the calabi-yau. these are hard to

describe, especially in the context of m-theory. also, the near-horizon geometry for these

7-branes is not so well behaved. secondly, the dilaton in this case is not constant, so that

we can not tune it to a small value. this implies that we can not identify a region in

moduli space where the string is weakly coupled. this makes it very hard indeed to make

use of such a correspondence.

as a superconformal non-linear sigma-model the chiral rings can be described by

a topological sigma-model [38][12][13]. these topological quantities will be important

ingredients for checks of the m(atrix) and maldacena conjecture. another interesting

quantity is the elliptic genus (the half-twisted model). for the k3 case the elliptic genus

of the world-sheet superconformal theory [39] is used to test the duality [40].

4. applications: twisted models

given a nws = (2, 2) glsm natural objects to study are supersymmetric indices  the
euler characteristic, the elliptic genus, and the chiral rings. those topological and pseudo

topological quantities contain interesting information both for physics and mathematics.

23

the (pseudo) topological quantities are most naturally studied using topologically twisted

versions of the supersymmetric theory we have been studying. these twisted versions

are the subject of this section.

it could also be a starting point for the study of the

generalized mirror conjecture [26] from a sigma model viewpoint [13][41][14]. an obvious

benet of the glsm is that those (pseudo) topological quantities attributed to the infrared

superconformal non-linear model can be evaluated in a dierent regime of the theory.

the euler characteristic of the moduli space of stable eh bundles corresponds to the

holomorphic casson invariant which was dened by thomas [8][42]. the elliptic genus is

the stringy generalization of this quantity. the elliptic genus is particularly relevant for the

four-dimensional black-hole entropy. the correlation functions of the a-model correspond

to the quantum intersection pairing of the moduli space of stable bundles. this gives a

stringy generalization of donaldson-witten type invariants on a calabi-yau 3-fold. we also

remark that the mathematical denition of these classical invariants involve hard technical

obstacles. as a folk theorem one expects that string theory may soften many, if not all, of

these problems.

we begin with the description of the a-model and then proceed with the b-model.

the half-twisted model computing the elliptic genus can be treated along the lines of the

a-model. we will not consider it here. as usual we perform a wick-rotation on the

worldsheet, and use holomorphic coordinates on .

4.1. the a-model

the a-model (and the half twisted model) can be dened following the standard

recipe [13][14]. the observables of the theory are given by g-equivariant dierential forms

on the target space a.

in the infrared limit these observables can be identied with

dierential forms on the moduli space meh, and therefore ow to the usual observables

in a topological non-linear sigma model [12].

in the a-model the twist on the worldsheet is performed such that + =  and  =

 become worldsheet scalars. they are then set equal to constants on . the other

generators + and  are set to zero. thus we are keeping the supercharges s+ and s,

which now transform as world-sheet scalar under the two-dimensional rotation group. as

there is no source for confusion, we leave out the subscript  in the rest of this subsection.

the brst operator of the model is then given by  = s + s. the resulting model

computes the quantum cohomology ring of the moduli space of holomorphic vector bundles

24

over the calabi-yau 3-fold x. the twisting maps the nws = (2, 2) vector multiplet to a

basic vector multiplet and an anti-ghost multiplet according to

(v++, +) (vz, z),

(v, ) (vz, z),

(, +, , d) (, , , d).

the (anti) chiral multiplets containing the target space vector elds are twisted in the

following way, giving rise to basic multiplets and anti-ghosts

(a1,0, 1,0

(a0,1, 0,1

 ) (a1,0, 1,0),
+ ) (a0,1, 0,1),

( 1,0

(0,1

+ , h 1,0) ( 1,0
 , h 0,1) (0,1

z , h 1,0
z , h 0,1

z ),

z ).

the brst transformation laws for the basic elds are

a1,0 =i 1,0,

a0,1 =i0,1,

 1,0 =  a
0,1 =   a,

vz =iz,

vz =iz,

z =  z,

z =  z,

 = 0.

(4.1)

for the anti-ghost multiplets we have

 =  i  i,
gs
2
gs
2

 =(cid:16)+id 
  =(cid:16)id +

fz z 

fz z 

1
2
1
2

[, ](cid:17),
[, ](cid:17),

 1,0

z =  h 1,0
z = + h 0,1

z + (avz  za1,0),
z + ( avz  za0,1).

0,1

(4.2)

we omitted the transformation laws for the auxiliary elds d, h 1,0

z

and h 0,1

z

. they can

easily be found from the general supersymmetry transformations. the worldsheet scaling

dimensions for the elds are rearranged such that they correspond to their worldsheet

form degree. hence the elds (vz, z, fz z) have dimensions (1, 1, 2), while all the other

(worldsheet scalar) elds have zero dimension.

the two brst supercharges are identied with the holomorphic and anti-holomorphic

dierentials of g-equivariant dolbeault cohomology satisfying the following commutation

relations [43]

s2 = 0,

{s, s} = il(),

s2 = 0.

(4.3)

25

they dene the operators  and  on the space ag. the twisted theory is dened for
arbitrary riemann surfaces . the u (1) r-charges (jl, jr) of the original elds before
twisting are identied with the degrees of g-equivariant dierential forms on a.

the localization equations are read o from the transformation rules,

f 0,2 = 0,
g2
s
2

fz z = 0,

f  i 

avz  za1,0 = 0,
avz  za1,0 = 0,

 = 0,

da = 0,

[, ] = 0.

(4.4)

(4.5)

for  = cp1 one can show that, under certain condition, the path integral is localized
to the moduli space of holomorphic maps   meh . the eh condition is slightly
changed from the condition for the ir target space meh . in the ir however, the extra
term proportional to the eld strength on the worldsheet will become zero. as we are

describing a topological theory, and the xed points are not changed in the ir, taking the

ir limit does not have any eect on the correlation functions of the theory. therefore we

can simply ignore this term.

fermion zero-modes

as we have mentioned, the theory has two classically conserved ghost numbers. the

ghost numbers are related to the r-charges of the untwisted theory as (jl, jr). note
that the brst operators s and s have ghost numbers (1, 0) and (0, 1) respectively. the

basic bosonic elds v and a have vanishing ghost numbers. furthermore, we nd the

following ghost numbers for the fermionic elds.



1,0

z



0,1
z

0,1

z

1,0
+

z

(1, 0)

(0, 1)

(1, 0)

(0, 1)

on the rst line are the worldsheet scalars, on the second line the worldsheet one-forms,

and on the last line the ghost numbers.

as is well known at the quantum level these symmetry is broken due to the anomaly

related to the index or the riemann-roch theorem. basically, this is due to the fermionic

zero-modes. so let us look in more detail to these zero-modes. we assume in the following

that the gauge bundle on x is always stable, that is, semi-stability implies stability. in

26

this case, there are no covariantly constant adjoint scalar sections. therefore, all the elds

that are scalars on the x have no zero-modes. these include the fermionic elds , bar

and . therefore the remaining fermions that may have zero-modes are the one-forms

on x. as we see above, there is a pair of worldsheet scalars, and a pair of worldsheet

one-forms. the number of covariantly constant adjoint valued one-forms on x equals the

complex dimension n of the moduli space meh of bundles. therefore, the total ghost
number anomaly for  a genus g worldsheet is n(1  g), for both the ghost numbers. this

means that in order to have a nonvanishing correlation function hoai, the total ghost
numbers of the observables oa should be equal to this number.

observables and correlation functions

the observables of the a-model are easy to construct. we begin with observables to

be inserted on a point in . by denition those observables are g-equivariant dierential

forms on the space a of all connections. those observables generate cohomology rings

of the moduli space of eh connections via restriction and reduction. equivalently those

observables ow to the usual observables of the non-linear sigma model in the infrared

limit.

from  = 0 we see that an arbitrary g-invariant polynomialq() of  with degree r

is an observables. it corresponds to an equivariant 2r-form, (more precisely an (r, r)-form).

the other observables can be obtained by the usual descent procedure. equivalently we

may use the universal bundle to construct those observables. from the bianchi identity

daf = 0 and the transformation laws in (4.1), we have the following generalized bianchi
identity

df = 0,

where

d = s + s + a + a,
f =  + i 1,0 + i0,1 + f 2,0 + f 1,1 + f 0,2

we dene a generalized chern class cn by

cn =

(1)n
(2)nn!

tr f n.

we expand the generalized chern class as

cn = xp+q+r+s=2n

v r,s
p,q

27

(4.6)

(4.7)

(4.8)

(4.9)

where the upper indices denote the form degree on x while the lower indices denote the

degree of the ghost number. now it follows from the bianchi identity (4.6) that we have

the following descent equations

(s + s +  + )cn = 0,

which can be written in terms of the observables as

sv r,s

p,q + sv r,s

p1,q+1 + v r,s1

p,q+1 + v r1,s

p,q+1 = 0.

we dene

vp,q() =zx

3r,3s  v r,s
p,q

(4.10)

(4.11)

(4.12)

where 3r,3s  h 3r,3s(x), 0  r, s  3 and 0  p, q. then we have equivalently

sv r,s

p1,q + sv r,s

p,q1 = 0.

(4.13)

the relation (4.11) implies that the q = s + s cohomology depends on the d-cohomology
on x. from the hodge diamond for hr,s(x)

1

0

0

0

h2,1

0

1

h1,1

h1,1

1

0

h1,2

0

0

0

1

(4.14)

we see immediately that we can discard some of the v r,s

p,q for dening non-trivial observables.
in calculating correlation functions with these observables, the ghost numbers (r, s) should

add up to the total ghost number anomaly, which is (d, d), where d is the dimension of the

moduli space. this is related to the fact that the calculation of the correlation function

can be reduced to an integral over the moduli space of the corresponding form. as only the

integral of a top form gives a non zero integral, we nd only non zero correlation functions

when the abovementioned condition is met.

among other observables the equivariant kahler form f (3.4) plays an important

role (here  should be replaced by ). it can be identied with the rst chern class of
a g-equivariant determinant line bundle l over a1,1. after reduction to meh the line
bundle becomes the determinant line bundle with the rst chern class given by the kahler

28

form  on meh . the expectation value < expf > corresponds to the quantum volume

form of meh . it is also easy to introduce anti-symmetric tensor elds on meh. if we

pick a two-dimensional homology cycle 2 on x we may construct the following observable

 =

1

42 z2

tr(cid:16)if + 0,1  1,0(cid:17),

(4.15)

the s and s cohomology class of  depends only on the homology class of 2. on meh
 becomes an element of type (1, 1) in the cohomology of meh.

as a last remark, note that the eh condition depends on the class of the kahler

form  on x. as we vary  the target space meh may undergo a sequence of birational

transformations. however the quantum intersection form must depend smoothly on the

kahler form, as required by the supersymmetry. the dierence in behaviour is due to

sigma-model instanton corrections, which smooth out these transition [14].

4.2. the b-model

we now turn to the b-twisting of the nws = (2, 2) model. in this b-model we set

 = 0, while the  become constant functions on the worldsheet . therefore the

operators s become the brst charges for this topological model. we let the brst
generator be given by  = + s +  s+, satisfying 2 = 0. after twisting some elds will
transform dierently under the two-dimensional lorentz group. for example, the twisted

nws = (2, 2) vector eld contains several worldsheet one-forms. these are given by

(v++, +, ) (vz, z, z),

(v, , ) (vz, z, z),

(4.16)

hence these elds form a multiplet of worldsheet one-forms. furthermore, the other elds

in this multiplet become worldsheet scalars. they are anti-ghost in the twisted model. for

the (anti) chiral multiplet containing the target space gauge elds, we nd the following

anti-ghosts

0,1
+  0,1
z ,

  0,1
0,1
z .

all the other elds become worldsheet scalars after twisting.

the brst charges s satisfy the following commutation relations

s2
 = 0,

{s+, s} = 0.

(4.17)

29

as remarked earliwer, they are related to the (anti-)holomorphic derivatives on the space

a. we therefore introduce the following linear combinations of the brst charges

s = s+ + s,

s = s+  s.

(4.18)

then s becomes the anti-holomorphic dierential of the g-equivariant cohomology on a,
while s is the adjoint of the holomorphic equivariant dierential s with respect to the
inner product on a. in the infrared limit s and s become the  and  operators on the

moduli space meh of eh connections. in the following we will work exclusively with the
operator s, as we are mainly interested in the -cohomology on the moduli space.

it is also convenient to introduce the following combinations of the fermions in the

six dimensional gauge multiplet,

1,0 = 1,0

+ + 1,0
 ,

0,2 = (cid:16)( 1,0

+  1,0

 )  0,3(cid:17)

(4.19)

note that 0,2 could also be identied with a (1, 0) form or vector, using the metric
instead of 3,0.

we have the following brst transformation laws for the basic elds coming from the

matter elds,

sa1,0 =i 1,0,

s 1,0 =0,

sa0,1 =0,

s 0,2 =f 0,2,

for the one-forms from the vector eld we nd

svz = iz,

sz = iz,

sz = 0,

svz = iz,

sz = iz,

sz = 0.

and nally for the anti-ghosts

s0,1

s0,1

z =  az  avz + za0,1,
z =  az  avz + za0,1,
1
2
1
2

[z, z] 

[z, z] +

1
2
1
2

s+ =(f  i) 

s =(f  i) +

fz z  zz,

fz z  zz.

30

(4.20)

(4.21)

(4.22)

from these transformations we read o the following xed point equations (here we

used both the s transformation rules)

and

f 0,2 = 0,

f  i = 0,

zz = 0,

fz z + [z, z] = 0,

az = az = 0,
avz  za0,1 = 0,
avz  za0,1 = 0,

(4.23)

(4.24)

note that the last two equations in (4.23) are hitchins self-duality equations in two di-
mensions [44]. on a cylinder or cp1 these equations have no non-trivial solutions.11 thus

fz z = z = 0. then the connection vz is at and can be gauge transformed away. what

we are left with from the above equations are

za0,1 = za0,1 = 0.

(4.25)

thus the path integral is localized to a copy of the moduli space meh (x) of eh connec-

tions on x.

the action functional for the b-model can be written in the form

s(e2) =

1
e2 sv +

1
e2 w,

(4.26)

modulo terms which vanish by the fermion equations of motion. the precise form for

v and w is given in appendix b. we introduced a coupling constant e for convenience

later. the part w comes from the holomorphic potential; it is invariant under the brst

symmetry generated by s, although it is not exact. we may now follow the standard

recipe for the b-model as put forward in [13]. the correlation functions of the theory are

identied with periods of dierential forms on meh .

11

if we consider a riemann surface  with genus()  1, the moduli space of the hitchin

equations may play an important role.

31

fermion zero-modes

as for the a-model, also the b-model has two classically conserved ghost numbers,

given by the r-charges (jl, jr). so the brst operators have ghost number (1, 0) and
(0, 1) respectively. we will consider here only the total ghost number 1
2 (jl + jr). the
bosonic elds v and a again have vanishing ghost number. for the fermions, the worldsheet
scalars  and one-form 0,1 have ghost number 1, while the worldsheet scalars 1,0, 0,2
and the one-form  have ghost number 1.

again, there is an anomaly related to the index. as for the a-model we assume that

the gauge bundle on x is always stable, so that the adjoint scalars on x  and  have

no zero-modes. we remain with possible zero-modes for the adjoint forms. note that the
forms 1,0 and 0,2 have the same number of zero-modes on x, as they can be related
by using 3,0. the number of covariantly constant adjoint-valued one-forms on x is the

complex dimension n of the moduli space of bundles. here it is essential that the condition
c1(m) = 0 is met. otherwise, the number of  zero-modes and  and  zero-modes would
be dierent. this would not even lead to an acceptable quantum theory, as this would

mean that the fermion determinant is not real. the total ghost number anomaly for  a

genus g worldsheet is w = 2n(1  g). this means that in order to have a nonvanishing

correlation function, the total ghost number of the observables should be equal to this

number.

with the assumption for the bundle on x that semi-stability implies stability, we nd

that there are no zero-modes on x for the adjoint scalars ,  and . by going to the

infrared theory, we may therefore disregards these elds completely in this case. we then

only remain with the one-forms on x. in the more general case when there are strictly

semi-stable bundles, the situation becomes much harder to analyze. we will not deal with

this situation in this paper.

some observables

now we consider the observables of the b-model. we will only be concerned with

situations where semi-stability implies stability, that is there are no strictly semi-stable

bundles. we also restrict to the case of genus zero. as remarked above, we can therefore

disregard all the scalars of the theory, while also the worldsheet dependence is trivial.

therefore, we will lokk only at the sector that is laft, and replace the worldsheet by a

point.

32

the brst transformation laws together with the bianchi identity daf = 0 imply the

following generalized bianchi identity

(s + a + a)(cid:0)i 1,0 + f 2,0 + f 1,1 + f 0,2(cid:1) = 0.

(4.27)

we remark that the above relation is part of the generalized bianchi identity (4.6) of the

a-model. adopting the same procedure as for the a-model we have the following partial

descent equations

sv r,s

0,q + v r,s1

0,q+1 + v r1,s

0,q+1 = 0.

thus we can construct the following observables

v0,q =zx

3r,3s  v r,s
0,q,

(4.28)

(4.29)

satisfying sv0,q = 0. then v0,q  h q
cohomology is the dolbeault cohomology on a. an interesting observable is

s (a). note that the s-

s(a,v0 t 1,0a)  h 0,q
0,3  tr(cid:16) 1,0  1,0  1,0(cid:17).

v0,3 =

i

483 zx

(4.30)

it expresses the anti-holomorphic 3-form on the moduli space. another intersting observ-

able is

v0,1 =

i

82 zx

1,2  tr(cid:16) 1,0  f 1,1(cid:17).

(4.31)

the (1, 2)-form 1,2 parametrizes a deformation of the complex structure on the calabi-

yau. it was proposed to dene some special coordinates in the generalized mirror symmetry

conjecture of [26] (or rather its complex conjugate).

to have a well-dened b-model we need to nd observables corresponding to elements

vp,q of the dolbeault cohomology h q
to construct observables having p 6= 0 is 2,0. however the transformation law s0,2 = f 0,2
in (4.20) implies that there are no such observables. we do however have s0,2 = 0 at the

s (a,vp t 1,0a) with p 6= 0. the natural eld to use

xed point locus to which the path integral is localized. for example the candidate for

the marginal operator v1,1 generating the complex structure deformation of the moduli
space mem is

v1,1 =

1

82 zx

2,1  tr(cid:16) 1,0  0,2(cid:17),

where 2,1  h 2,1(x). we then have

sv1,1 = 

1

82 zx

2,1  tr(cid:16) 1,0  f 0,2(cid:17).

33

(4.32)

(4.33)

thus v1,1 certainly reduces to an element of h 1
s (meh, t 1,0meh ). following [13] one
may try to add v1,1 to the action s(e2) and modify the s transformation law in a suitable
way, such that the total action deformed by this observable is invariant under s. the
problem with this approach however is that the condition f 0,2 = 0 is not the equation

of motion of any eld. the resolution of this will involve a deformation to holomorphic

chern-simons theory.

mapping to open string field theory of the b-model on x

our starting point is the observation that w(a0,1) is invariant under the brst trans-
formation of our b-model, since sa0,1 = 0 and w depends only on a0,1. thus we can

regard w as an observable in our b-model and consider the following generalized action
functional12

s(e2) = 

+

tr 3,0 (cid:16)a0,1  a0,1 +

ik

82 zx
s
e2 v + w.

2
3

a0,1  a0,1  a0,1(cid:17)

(4.34)

now the condition f 0,2 = 0 may occur by the a0,1 equation of motion.

as noted above, we want to make sense out of the action functional deformed by

the observable (4.32). thus we consider the following more general action functional,

including both the deformation above and the deformation by (4.32),

s(e2, t) = 



ik

82 zx
82 tzx

k

tr 3,0 (cid:16)a0,1  a0,1 +
3,0  tr(cid:0) 1,0  0,2(cid:1) +

2
3

a0,1  a0,1  a0,1(cid:17)
s
e2 v + w.

(4.35)

here the   h 1(x, t 1,0x) ( = 1,    , h2,1(x)) form a basis. note that the vector index
of  should be contracted in the action above. the above action functional is invariant
under the following modied transformation laws (compare with (4.20))

sa1,0 = i 1,0,
sa0,1 = it 1,0,

s 1,0 = 0,

s0,2 = f 0,2.

(4.36)

12 the holomorphic chern-simons form is not invariant under large gauge transformations, but
transforms only by integral periods of the integral periods of the 3-form 3,0 [8]. we will not
concern ourselves here with this subtlety.

34

note that we still have s2 = 0.13 we note that the above perturbation is the variation of
complex structure on a induced from the variation of complex structure on the calabi-yau

x, i.e.,

s  s + isi,

(4.37)

where i  1(a, t 1,0a). this relates very elegantly to the fact that adding trx 3,0 
tr(cid:0) 1,0  2,0(cid:1)  1(a, t 1,0a) to the action functional s(e2) generates a marginal de-

formation corresponding to the variation of complex structure on a!

now we take e2  0 in s(e2, t) to see that the path integral (the partition function)
is localized to the moduli space of stable bundles. the fermionic zero-modes ( , i)
of ( 1,0, 2,0) are identied14 as   h 1,0(end(e), a) and i  h 0,2(end(e), a) 
h 0,1(end(e), a). consequently the partition function for the action functional s(e2,  )
is identied with the generating functional of the original b-model correlation functions

of the marginal vertex operators

z  =z d(bose)d(f ermi)es (e2,t) =(cid:10)exp(cid:0)ktv 1,1



(cid:1)(cid:11)b .

now following the standard argument for the b-model [13] we should have

z  zmeh

  i1 . . . id 

(4.38)

(4.39)

where  is the holomorphic d-form on the moduli space meh.

finally we regard the action functional s(e2, t) in (4.35) as a brst-exact deforma-

tion of a theory dened by the following action functional

i(t) = 

ik

82 zx

3,0  tr(cid:16)a  a +

2
3

a  a  a(cid:17) 

k

82 tzx

3,0  tr(cid:0) 1,0  0,2(cid:1) .

(4.40)

here we follow the recipe of [17][43]. being a brst exact deformation we expect that the
theory is independent of e2 since we have the same localization. here we also assume that
z ).15 then we may take an extreme that
there are no zero-modes of (z, z, , 0,1

z , 0,1

13 we obviously have s2a1,0 = s2a0,1 = 0, while s20,2 = it a 1,0. however the later is
closed on shell, which is good enough. we can also make the algebra being closed o-shell by
introducing an auxiliary eld h 0,2, i.e., s0,2 = f 0,2  h 0,2 and sh 0,2 = it a 1,0.

14 this is modulo the gauge symmetry.
15 in such a situation our b-model reduces to a cohomological eld theory on the calabi-yau

3-fold x.

35

e2   and simply drop the original s(e2) from the action s(e2, t) to arrive at the
equivalent action functional i(t).

we remark that the fermionic term in i(t) is crucial for ensuring the global fermionic

symmetry (4.36), relating the holomorphic cherns-simons theory with the variation of

hodge structure on the moduli space of stable bundles. the term also ensures a well-

dened path integral measure similarly to the situation in [17][43]. we view our model as

a constructive denition of the path integral of holomorphic chern-simons theory.

so we argued that the b-model of our matrix string on a calabi-yau x is equivalent

to wittens open string eld theory of the b-model [27]. recently vafa suggested such

an extension of mirror symmetry involving stable bundles on calabi-yau [26]. it is based
on the new understanding of mirror symmetry as t -duality of t 3-bered calabi-yau with

d-branes [45]. the extended mirror conjecture involves stable bundles on one side and

minimal lagrangian submanifolds on the mirror side. for calabi-yau 3-folds vafa conjec-

tured mirror symmetry between wittens open string eld theories of the a- and b-models

[27]. a closely related proposal was suggested by kontsevich [46] and tyurin [47]. it is

not clear how our approach is related to vafas conjecture. we should mention that in fact

vafa gave a formula for the classical value of the holomorphic 3-form on the moduli space

of bundles. this holomorphic 3-form basically is the observable (4.30). in our model it

would not be very natural to calculate this observable, but rather the (quantum corrected)

value of correlation functions involving this observable. this is closer to the integration of

(powers of) this 3-form over 3-cycles in the moduli space.

our b-model, equivalent to the model (4.40), computes the variation of hodge struc-

tures on the moduli space of stable bundles. our a-model computes the quantum coho-

mology ring of the moduli space of stable bundles. following the well-known argument for

conjectural mirror symmetry via nws = (2, 2) superconformal theory, realized as a sigma
model with the calabi-yau as a target space, we may conjecture that there are mirror

pairs among our a- and b-models involving mirror calabi-yaus as well as mirror stable

bundles (allow for torsion-free sheaves) along the lines of the mirror symmetry for higher

dimensional calabi-yau [48].

we would like to thank robbert dijkgraaf, erik verlinde and herman verlinde for

useful discussions. jsp is grateful to ralph thomas for sending his phd thesis and com-

acknowledgements

munications.

36

appendix a. supersymmetry transformation rules

in this appendix we write down the explicit nws = (2, 2) transformation rules. they

are written in terms of the supersymmetry transformation  = s+ ++s ++ s ++ s+.

for the vector multiplet (v, , , , , d) the supersymmetry transformations are

given by

v++ = i++ + i+ +,

v = i + i ,

 = igs+  igs +,

 = igs+  igs+ ,

+ = +i+d 

 + = i+d +

 = +id +

  = id 

1
2g2
s
1
2g2
s
1
2g2
s
1
2g2
s

+[, ] 

+[, ] 

[, ] +

[, ] +

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

+f 

+f 

f 

f 

1
gs
1
gs
1
gs
1
gs

++ ,

++,

+,

+ ,

d = +



1
2
1
2

++ +

++  

1
2gs
1
2gs

[, +] +

[, +] 

1
2
1
2

++ +

+ + 

1
2gs
1
2gs

+[, ]

+[, ].

(a.1)

we have dened the covariant derivatives on the worldsheet as  =  + v, and its

curvature is f = [++, ].

the supersymmetry transformation rules for the adjoint chiral multiplet (a, , h)

are given by

a =i+ + i+,

+ = + +h + ++a + gs

1+[, a],

 =  h + +a + gs

1[, a],

h =  i++  i[+, a] +

+ i++ + i+[, a] 

i
gs
i
gs

[, +]

+[, ].

37

(a.2)

the transformation rules for the adjoint anti-chiral multiplet ( a, , h) are given by

 a =i+  + i +,
 + = + + h + ++ a + gs
  =   h + + a + gs

1+[, a],
1[, a],

 h =  i++   i[+, a] +

+ i+ + + i+[, a] 

i
gs
i
gs

[, +]

+[, ].

(a.3)

appendix b. action for the b-model

in this appendix we give the explicit form of the action for the b model in terms of

the action fermion v and the brst invariant term w , appearing in (4.26).

the action fermion is given by

v =zx

tr(cid:18)0,2  f 2,0 +

i
2

za0,1

z +

i
2

za0,1

z 

i
2

(+ + )f 1,1

(b.1)

(b.2)

i
2
1



+

+

[z, a]  0,1

z 

i
2

[z, a]  0,1

z

2(cid:16)f  i +
2(cid:16)f  i 

1

1
2
1
2

[z, z] +

[z, z] 

1
2
1
2

fz z + zz(cid:17)+
fz z + zz(cid:17)(cid:19).

the remaining terms in the action are given by

w =zx(cid:16)f 0,2  f 0,2  a0,1

+  0,1

  3,0(cid:17).

note that it is invariant under the brst symmetry s of the b-model.

38

references

[1] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b443 (1995)

85, hep-th/9503124.

[2] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. schenker, and l. susskind, theory as a matrix model: a

conjecture, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112-5128, hep-th/9610043.

[3] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, and h. verlinde, matrix string theory, nucl. phys. b500

(1997) 43, hep-th/9703030.

[4] j. polchinski, dirichlet branes and ramond ramond charges, hep-th/951001;

j. polchinski, s. chaudhuri, and c. johnson, notes on d-branes, hep-th/9602052;
j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9611050.

[5] e. witten, bound states of strings and p-branes, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 335350,

hep-th/9510135.

[6] j. harvey and g. moore, one the algebras of bps states, commun. math. phys. 197

(1998) 489 hep-th/9609017.

[7] w. taylor, d-brane eld theory on compact spaces, phys. lett. b394 (1997) 283,

hep-th/9611042.

[8] r.p. thomas, a holomorphic casson invariant for calabi-yau 3-folds, and bundles

on k3 brations, math.ag/9806111.

[9] m.r. douglas, d-branes in curved space, hep-th/9702048;

d-branes and matrix theory in curved space,
th/9707228

lecture given at strings 97. hep-

[10] m.r. douglas, a. kato and h. ooguri, d-brane actions on kahler manifolds hep-

th/9708012

[11] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, notes on matrix and micro strings, hep-

th/9709107.

[12] e. witten, topological sigma models, commun. math. phys. 118 (1988) 411.
[13] e. witten, mirror manifolds and topological eld theory, hep-th/9112056.
[14] e. witten phases of n = 2 theories in two dimensions, nucl. phys. b403 (1993)

159-222, hep-th/9301042.

[15] e. witten, the verlinde algebra and the cohomology of the grassmannian, hep-

th/9312104.

[16] m. atiyah and r. bott, the momentum map and equivariant cohomology, topology

23 (1984) 1.

[17] e. witten, two dimensional gauge theories revisited, hep-th/9204084.
[18] j.-s. park, n=2 topological yang-mills theory on compact kahler surfaces, comm.

math. phys. 163 (1994) 113, hep-th/9304060.

[19] c. vafa and e. witten, a strong coupling test of s-duality, nucl. phys. b431 (1994)

3-77, hep-th/9408074.

39

[20] r. dijkgraaf and g. moore, balanced topological eld theories, commun. math. phys.

185 (1997) 411-440, hep-th/9608169.

[21] r. dijkgraaf, b.j. schroers and j.-s. park, n=4 supersymmetric yang-mills theory

on a kahler surface, hep-th/9801066.

[22] f. kirwan, cohomology of quotients in symplectic and algebraic geometry, math. notes

31. princeton univ. press, (princeton, 1984).

[23] d.r. morrison, m.r. plesser summing the instantons: quantum cohomology and mir-
ror symmetry in toric varieties, nucl. phys. b440 (1995) 279-354, hep-th/9412236

[24] ph. brax, t. wynter, limits of matrix theory in curved space, hep-th/9806176
[25] m. green, j. harvey and g. moore, i-brane inow and anomalous couplings on d-

branes, hep-th/9605033.

[26] c. vafa, extending mirror conjecture to calabi-yau with bundles, hep-th/9804131.
[27] e. witten, chern-simons gauge theory as a string theory, hep-th/9207094.
[28] m. bershadsky, a. johansen, v. sadov and c. vafa, topological reduction of 4d sym

to 2d models, nucl. phys. b448 (1995) 166 hep-th/9501096.

[29] s. kobayashi, dierential geometry of complex vector bundles, iwanami shoten, pub-

lishers and princeton univ. press, 1987.

[30] s.k. donaldson, innite determinants, stable bundles and curvature, duke math. 54

(1987) 231.

[31] k.k. uhlenbeck and s.t. yau, the existence of hermitian yang-mills connections on

stable bundles over kahler manifolds.

[32] r. dijkgraaf, instanton strings and hyperkahler geometry, hep-th/9810210.
[33] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, and h. verlinde, 5d black holes and matrix strings, hep-

th/9704018.

[34] o. aharony, m. berkooz and n. seiberg, light-cone description of (2,0) supercon-
formal theories in six dimensions, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 119-153, hep-
th/9707079.

[35] c. hofman and j.-s. park, sigma models for quiver variety, to appear.
[36] j.m. maldacena the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and supergravity,

hep-th/9711200.

[37] n. seiberg, why is the matrix model correct?, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 3577-3580,

hep-th/9710009.

[38] w. lerche, c. vafa and n.p. warner, chiral rings in n=2 superconformal theories,

nucl. phys. b324 (1989) 427.

[39] r. dijkgraaf, g, moore, e. verlinde, and h. verlinde, elliptic genera of symmetric
products and second quantized strings, commun. math. phys. 185 (1997) 197, hep-
th/9608096.

40

[40] j. de boer, six-dimensional supergravity on s3xads3 and 2d conformal eld theory,

hep-th/9806104;
large n elliptic genus and ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9812240.

[41] m. bershadsky, s. cecotti, h. ooguri and c. vafa kodaira-spencer theory of gravity
and exact results for quantum string amplitudes, commun. math. phys. 165 (1994)
311-428, hep-th/9309140.

[42] r.p. thomas, gauge theory on calabi-yau manifolds, phd thesis.
[43] j.-s. park, holomorphic yang-mills theory on compact kahler manifolds, nucl. phys.

b423 (1994) 559, hep-th/9305095 ;
s. hyun and j.-s. park, n=2 topological yang-mills theories and donaldsons polyno-
mials, j. geom. phys. 20 (1996) 31-53, hep-th/9404009.

[44] n.j. hitchin, the self-duality equations on a riemann surface, proc. london math.

soc. 3, 55 (1987) 59.

[45] a. strominger, s.-t. yau and e. zaslow, nucl. phys. b479 (1996) 243.
[46] m. kontsevich, homological algebra of mirror symmetry, proceedings of the interna-

tional congress of mathematicians, pp. 120, birkhauser, 1995, alg-geom/9411018.

[47] a. tyurin, geometric quantization and mirror symmetry math/9902027
[48] b. greene, d. morrison, m. plesser, mirror manifolds in higher dimension, comm.

math. phys. 173 (1995) 559, hep-th/9402119

41

