april 1999

some speculations on the gauge coupling

in the ads/cft approach

p. olesen

the niels bohr institute, blegdamsvej 17,

dk-2100 copenhagen , denmark.

e-mail: polesen@nbi.dk

abstract

we propose the principle that the scale of the glueball masses in the ads/cft approach
to qcd should be set by the square root of the string tension. it then turns out that the
strong bare coupling runs logarithmically with the ultraviolet cuto t if rst order world
sheet uctuations are included. we also point out that in the end, when all corrections are
included, one should obtain an equation for the coupling running with t which has some
similarity with the equation for the strong bare coupling.

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
6

 

 
 

1
v
4
3
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

the remarkable duality between supersymmetric su(n) gauge theory and type iib string
theory in anti de-sitter space times a compact space [1] and its nite temperature generaliza-
tion to non-supersymmetric gauge theories [2] have been much discussed. it was pointed out
by gross and ooguri [3] that the four dimensional non-supersymmetric theory constructed
this way corresponds to four dimensional large n qcd only in a limit where the tempera-
ture t approaches innity and at the same time the coupling  = g2
y m n goes to zero. more
precisely, the limits to be taken are [3]

t   and  

b

ln(t /qcd)

.

(1)

here qcd is a renormalization group invariant, so it should not change by simultaneous
changes of t and . to actually take these limits is not feasible at the moment, since the
supergravity approximation breaks down for   0.
in the supergravity approximation to the ads/cft approach the temperature t plays
the role of an ultraviolet cuto, and the coupling t = g2
y m n   is the bare coupling at
the scale t . the string tension in the saddle point approximation is then proportional to
t t 2 [2, 3, 4]. here the coupling is, however, an arbitrary parameter (as long as it is large),
and does not seem run with the scale t .

this causes a problem [5] concerning the comparison of the string tension and the glueball
masses in the strong coupling limit [2, 6].
in an underlying string picture the glueball
masses are expected to be proportional to the square root of the string tension, like in
lattice gauge theory even away from the continuum limit, but this is not true here where the
glueball masses are proportional to the temperature t without any t factor. therefore,
in the strong coupling limit the glueball spectrum does not appear to be consistent with an
underlying string picture, where the glueballs would come from closed strings, and hence
should have masses proportional to the square root of the string tension [5]. although this
situation could certainly be improved as one goes from g2n   to g2n  0, it is strange
that the ads/cft approach does not involve a string picture behind the glueballs even in
the strong coupling limit.

this problem indicates that the denition of the bare coupling should be reconsidered.
in the following we therefore propose the (renormalization) principle that the scale of the
glueball masses [2, 6],

glueball masses = const. t (1 + o(1/t )),

(2)

should be the right string scale, so t should be proportional to the square root of the string
tension. for consistency of the supergravity calculation around the saddle point, the coupling
t should still go to innity as t  . to invoke this renormalization condition is clearly
not possible in the leading order, since it would require t to be of order one. however, when
uctuations of the string are included, the string tension acquires logarithmic corrections [7].
the reason for this somewhat unexpected behavior is that two of the transverse bosonic world
sheet elds become massive, whereas the remaining six transverse elds remain massless. the
massive elds then contribute a logarithmic term to the string tension 2,

string tension  2 =

8
27

t t 2  4t 2 ln

t 2
2 (1 + o(1/t )) .

(3)

2

here  is an arbitrary scale introduced to regulate the sum over the modes of the world
sheet uctuations through the heat kernel for a laplace-type operator o

tr ln o = (422/e)s 1

(s) z 

0

dt
t1s tr eto,

(4)

where s  0. the factors multiplying  have been selected in order to simplify the string
tension (3). the tr ln is thus evaluated using analytic regularization, and the scale  is
somewhat similar to the arbitrary scale introduced in dimensional regularization. the two
scales t and  are a priori of dierent origin, since t is the scale at which supersymmetry
is broken by the boundary conditions, whereas  is a scale needed to treat the logarithmic
behavior of the massive string modes.

the equation for the string tension (3) can be considered as expressing  in terms of
t and t , but if we have additional information on the string tension, one can equally
well consider the equation as giving t in terms of t and . now, in accordance with the
renormalization principle stated above, we impose as a boundary condition that the square
root of the string tension is proportional to the scale t of the glueball masses. therefore to
leading order in the inverse coupling we require

qstring tension =  = c t,

(5)

where c is some number which in principle can be xed if one knows enough about the
glueball masses for higher spins by tting the regge trajectory to these high spins. hence
we get

t =

27c2
8

+ 27 ln

t
  27 ln

t
   for t  .

(6)

therefore the coupling does run with the scale, and the bare coupling goes logarithmically
to innity (for t  ) when t  . the scale dependent behavior (6) is thus needed in
order that the glueball masses are proportional to the square root of the string tension. this
is the main result of this note.

one could ask what should happen in the end, when all calculations are done some time
in the future (taking into account that the supergravity approximation must break down for
small , so corrections to the metric should be included) so that it makes sense to consider
also the small coupling. we would then expect that , being the square root of the string
tension, becomes the qcd scale, and hence

2
t 2  e2b/y m (t ),

(7)

where y m (t )  b/ ln(t /) is the qcd coupling at scale t . thus, the right physics is
obtained by performing the limit t  . then eq. (3) would be replaced by

8
27

t  4 ln

t 2

2 + e   1

t

, ln

t

! =

2
t 2  0 for t  

(8)

with  xed. here e represents the additional 1/t corrections to the string tension divided
by t 2, coming from higher order expansions of the string action (including the fermions as

3

well corrections to the supergravity approximation) used to compute the uctuations in the
wilson loop around the saddle point. these corrections depend on powers of the inverse
coupling and could also in general depend on the cuto. in the interpretation of eq. (8) it
is important that  is renormalization group invariant, which denes t as a function of t
through eq. (8).

in an expansion of the action in orders of uctuations of the world sheet, in general
the higher order terms do not contribute to the linear term (string tension)l, but rather
produce terms of order 1/l or smaller. thus, in general it is not so easy to get contributions
to the function e from the higher order terms. however, if for example the higher order
uctuations produce new mass terms, these can still contribute to the string tension. such
terms should involve masses of order 1/t or lower. also, corrections to the metric may
contribute to the string tension.

using (8) we then get

t  27 ln

t
 

27

8e   1

t

, ln

t

! for t  .

(9)

this is an implicit equation for t . computing more and more terms in e change the
functional dependence of t on ln(t /). then, if everything goes well, eq. (9) should have
a solution [3]

approaching zero in this limit.

t  b/ ln(t /) for t  ,

(10)

it should be emphasized that a solution of the type (10) cannot in general be the only
solution of (8). for example, if e only contains a nite number of signicant terms and does
not depend on ln(t /), then e.g. a strong, logarithmically divergent coupling is always a
solution, because for this particular case e can be ignored for the strong coupling in eq. (8),
since for t   the 1/t dependence of e is insignicant relative to the leading terms on
the left hand side of eq. (8). this is valid more generally if e is analytic in 1/t , which
presumably is equivalent to having no phase transition [3] in going from strong to weak
coupling. in this case eq. (3) is a rudimentary version of eq. (8). also, if e only has a nite
number q of signicant terms, eq. (8) is a polynomial equation of order q, and hence can
have q solutions, some of which may be invalid because they are complex. if there are an
innite number of terms in e the situation is of course quite dierent. a phase transition
may occur so that e is not analytic in 1/t .
actually e does not have to be terribly complicated to produce an answer which looks
much like the right one, as the following hypothetical example shows. suppose we obtain

e =

k
t

(11)

in a calculation where corrections to the metric are included, so that it makes sense to
consider small values of t . here k is a positive constant, and it is assumed further that
higher order terms are absent or have very small coecients and can be ignored. then from
(8) we nd that t satises

t  27 ln(t /)t + 27k/8 = o(2/t 2)  0,
2

(12)

4

where  is xed, so that the right hand side of this equation is sub-logarithmic, of order
1/t 2. thus we have the two solutions

t  27 ln(t /) + o(1/ ln(t /)) and k/[2 ln(t /)] + o(1/ ln3(t /)),

(13)

corresponding to a strong coupling1 and to the right logarithmically decreasing behavior of
the asymptotically free qcd coupling, respectively, provided we identify the so far arbitrary
scale  with the qcd scale . if k = 2b we would then get the right answer for the weak
coupling. since there are two solutions for the coupling, we have the option of taking the
weak coupling t as the right solution. of course, this assumes that the formula (11) really
includes corrections such that the metric makes sense even for small t .

this is certainly a ctitious example, and higher order terms in 1/t could play an
important role. however, the example shows that the strong weak coupling transition
could happen in a relatively simple way, and it would anyhow be of interest to compute the
next 1/t order, since it could give the right functional dependence of the coupling on the
logarithm. it would then be interesting to see how far the coecient of the inverse logarithm
is from the right value b. we do not expect to get the right value of b, of course, before the
problems connected with the break down of the supergravity approximation at small t have
been settled. this would presumably imply that the coecient k does not have the right
value 2b, or that there is no 1/t correction (k = 0), or that the weak coupling solution
becomes complex. further, it could be that k is not really a constant, but depend on the
cuto t . for example, if k = k ln(t /), where k is a positive constant, corresponding to
e = k ln(t /)/t , we would again get the strong coupling limit as in (13) but the other
solution would be a constant k/4.

in conclusion, the main points of this paper are:

 proportionality between the glueball masses and the square root of the string tension
requires the bare strong coupling to run with t . if, in contrast, the coupling is consid-
ered as an arbitrary parameter, there is no underlying string picture of the glueballs
in the strong coupling limit.

 in the end, when all corrections are included, we get an equation for the coupling
which has a number of solutions (if there is no phase transition between weak and
strong coupling). one of these solutions is hopefully the right one exhibited in eq. (1),
but another one is presumably the running bare strong coupling (6). if there is a phase
transition, these two solutions would be on dierent branches.

 there exists a very simple case which exhibits the strong and weak coupling, namely

the behavior (11).

 there exists a curious relation between the bare strong coupling and the asymptotically
(14)

free one, namely

t  27b/y m + 27c2/8 for t  .

1this is not the same as the bare strong coupling in eq. (6), which was derived in the strong coupling
regime where  = ct , in contrast to the xed  behavior relevant when all corrections are included. however,
the logarithmic divergence of the strong coupling is exactly the same in the two cases.

5

this might indicate that the regulator theory (with t  ) has a dual relation to
qcd, so that the former is a strong coupling version of the latter, and vica versa. of
course, it could also be that this relation is purely accidental.

we end by the remark that the running coupling t  ln(t /) discussed in this note
can be understood as a renormalization needed in strings with extrinsic curvature [8]. it
was pointed out in ref. [7] that when world sheet uctuations are included, the string in the
ads/cft approach becomes rigid, and hence it is well known that there are renormalizations
[8]. the physical situation in the present case is, however, dierent from the one discussed
in the literature on strings with extrinsic curvature.

references

[1] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200.

[2] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 505, hep-th/9803131.

[3] d. j. gross and h. ooguri, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 106002, hep-th/9805129 (1998).

[4] a. brandhuber, n. itzhaki, j. sonnenschein, and s. yankielowicz, j. high energy phys.
9806 (1998) 001, hep-th/9803262; phys. lett. b434 (1998) 36, hep-th/9803137; s-j.
rey and j-t. yee, hep-th/9803001; s-j. rey, s. theisen, and j-t. yee, nucl. phys.
b527 (1998) 171, hep-th/9806125.

[5] j. greensite and p. olesen, j. high energy phys. 9808 (1998) 009, hep-th/9806235.

[6] c. csaki, h. ooguri, y. oz, and j. terning, j. high energy phys. 9901 (1999)017.

[7] j. greensite and p. olesen, hep-th/9901057 (1999).

[8] w. helfrich, j. phys. 46 (1985) 1263; l. peliti and s. leibler, phys. rev. lett. 54 (1985)
1690; d. forster, phys. lett. 114a (1986) 115; a. polyakov, nucl. phys. b268 (1986)
406; p. olesen and s. k. yang, nucl. phys. b283 (1987) 73; h. arodz, nucl. phys. b450
(1995) 189; p. orland, nucl. phys. b428 (1994) 221.

6

