9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
7
2

 

 
 

1
v
1
9
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ucb-pth-99/11, lbnl-43079, nsf-itp-99-22
hep-th/9904191

wilson loops and minimal surfaces

nadav drukker1,2, david j. gross1 and hirosi ooguri3,4

1institute for theoretical physics, university of california,

santa barbara, ca 93106

2department of physics, princeton university,

princeton, nj 08544

3department of physics, university of california,

berkeley, ca 94720-7300

4lawrence berkeley national laboratory,
mail stop 50a-5101, berkeley, ca 94720

drukker@itp.ucsb.edu, gross@itp.ucsb.edu, hooguri@lbl.gov

abstract

the ads/cft correspondence suggests that the wilson loop of
the large n gauge theory with n = 4 supersymmetry in 4 dimensions
is described by a minimal surface in ads5  s5. we examine various
aspects of this proposal, comparing gauge theory expectations with
computations of minimal surfaces. there is a distinguished class of
loops, which we call bps loops, whose expectation values are free from
ultra-violet divergence. we formulate the loop equation for such loops.
to the extent that we have checked, the minimal surface in ads5  s5
gives a solution of the equation. we also discuss the zig-zag symmetry
of the loop operator. in the n = 4 gauge theory, we expect the zig-zag
symmetry to hold when the loop does not couple the scalar elds in
the supermultiplet. we will show how this is realized for the minimal
surface.

1

1 introduction

the remarkable duality between 4-dimensional supersymmetric gauge the-
ories and type iib string theory on ads5  s5 background [1] has been
studied extensively over the past year and a half. this conjecture is dicult
to test. as with many dualities, it relates a weakly coupled string theory
to a strongly coupled gauge theory. weakly coupled string theory is well
dened, even though there are technical problems in doing calculations with
ramond-ramond backgrounds. but how can one compare the results to the
gauge theory, which is strongly coupled? even if there is no phase tran-
sition in going from weak to strong coupling in the gauge theory, there is
little that can be said about the strongly coupled gauge theory. by virtue
of non-renormalization theorems, it is possible to calculate some quantities
in perturbation theory and extrapolate to strong coupling. such techniques,
however, raise the question of whether these comparisons can be regarded
as strong evidence for the conjecture or whether the result is dictated by
symmetry alone.

gauge theory without fermions has a non-perturbative formulation on the
lattice. this allows one to dene, if not compute, quantities at arbitrarily
large bare couplings. the lattice formulation of gauge theory enables one to
derive a rigorous form of the loop equation [2], for the large n limit of the
theory. these equations are satised on the lattice and are solved by the
master eld of the theory. the only case where the loop equation has been
explicitly solved is 2 dimensions, where the theory is soluble [3].

the loop equation can also be derived formally in the continuum eld
theory.
it has been shown that the perturbative expansion of the theory
yields a solution to the loop equation. this is also the case for supersym-
metric theories. thus, although there is no formulation of supersymmetric
theories on the lattice, we assume that those theories still satisfy a large n
loop equation. since this equation holds for all couplings we can use it for
strong coupling as well. one of the goals of this paper is to check if the ads5
ansatz for the expectation value of the wilson loop operator satises the loop
equation. to the extent that we were able to reliably estimate properties of
string in ads5, the loop equation is satised. however we were unable to
test them in all interesting cases. in the course of our investigation we will
also learn new facts about wilson loops and strings in anti de-sitter space.
we discuss the best understood and most studied case of the ads/cft

2

correspondence between type iib superstring on ads5  s5 and n = 4
super yang-mills theory with gauge group su(n) in 4 dimensions. we will
concentrate on the case with euclidean signature metric. let us review some
basic facts about this duality1.

the near horizon geometry of n d3-branes is given by the metric

ds2


=

u 2

4gsn

3x=0

dx dx  +q4gsn

du 2

u 2 +q4gsn d2

5,

(1.1)

where gs is the string coupling constant and the string tension is (2)1.
the background contains n units of ramond-ramond ux. the x and u
5 is the metric on s5 with unit radius. the
are coordinates on ads5, and d2
curvature radii of both ads5 and s5 are given by (4gsn)
4 ls where  = l2
s.
we will nd it more convenient to rescale the coordinates x  by 1/4gsn
and introduce new coordinates y i = i/u (i = 1,   , 6), where i are the
coordinates on s5 and 2 = 1. the metric in this coordinate system is

1

ds2


=q4gsny 2

3x=0

dx dx  +

6xi=1

dy idy i .

(1.2)

it is interesting to note that ads5  s5 is conformal to at r10 if the radii of
ads5 and s5 are the same. in this coordinate system, the boundary of ads5
is mapped to the origin y i = 0 of r6.

the gauge theory coupling gy m and the string coupling gs are related
by g2
y m = 4gs. we are interested in the limit of n   while keeping
the t hooft coupling  = g2
y m n nite [6]. after taking the large n limit,
we will consider the region   1, where the curvature is small compared
to the string scale and stringy excitations are negligible. in this case, the
supergravity approximation is reliable. according to the ads/cft corre-
spondence, every supergravity eld has a corresponding local operator in the
gauge theory. correlators of local operators are given by the supergravity
action for elds with point sources on the boundary of ads5 [7, 8]. in the
classical limit one just solves the equations of motion with such sources.

an interesting set of non-local operators in a gauge theory are wilson
loops. it was proposed in [9, 10] that the wilson loop is dened by an open

1for more complete reviews see [4, 5].

3

string ending on the loop at the boundary of ads5. in the classical limit,
the string is described by a minimal surface. due to the curvature of ads5,
the minimal surface does not stay near the boundary, but goes deep into the
interior of space, where the area element can be made smaller. because of
this the behavior of the wilson loop, for large area, is that of a conformal
theory, and the area law does not produce connement.

the gauge theory under discussion does not contain quarks or other elds
in the fundamental representation of the gauge group. to construct the wil-
son loop describing the phase associated with moving a particle in the fun-
damental representation around a closed curve, we place one of the d-branes
very far away from the others. the ground states of the string stretched
from the distant d-brane to the others consist of the w -bosons and their
superpartners in the fundamental representation of the gauge group of the
remaining branes. thus, for large , the expectation value of the wilson
loop is related to the classical action of the string, with appropriate bound-
ary conditions. to the leading order in , we can ignore the eect of the
ramond-ramond ux and use the nambu-goto action, namely the area of
the minimal surface

a =z d1d2
2

g =z d1d2

2y 2 qdet(x x  + y iy i).

(1.3)

because of the y 2 factor, this area is innite. after regularizing the diver-
gence, the innite part was identied as due to the mass of the w -boson
and subtracted [9]. taking 2 parallel lines (with opposite orientation) as a
quark-anti quark pair, the remaining nite part denes the quark-anti quark
potential. such calculations were used to study the phases of the n = 4 super
yang-mills theory and to demonstrate connement in non-supersymmetric
generalizations [11, 12].

we will argue below that the correct action of the wilson loop is not the
area of the minimal surface, but the legendre transform of it with respect to
some of the loop variables. the reason is that some of the string coordinates
satisfy neumann conditions rather than dirichlet conditions. for a certain
class of loops, this legendre transform exactly removes the divergent piece
from the area. as the result, the expectation values of such loops are nite.
the appropriate wilson loop for n = 4 super yang-mills theory is an

operator of the form (suppressing all fermion elds for the moment)

w [c] =

1
n

trp exp(cid:18)i (ia x + i yi)ds(cid:19) ,

4

(1.4)

where a are the gauge elds and i are the six scalars in the adjoint repre-
sentation, and c represents the loop variables (x(s), yi(s)). (x(s)) deter-
mines the actual loop in four dimensions, (yi(s)) can be thought of as the
extra six coordinates of the ten-dimensional n = 1 super yang-mills theory,
of which our theory is the dimensionally reduced version. it turns out that
minimal surfaces terminating at the boundary of ads5 correspond only to
loops that satisfy the constraint x2 = y2. this constraint was derived before,
and we study in greater depth its origin and meaning. in [9], the constraint
was introduced as a consequence of the fact that the mass of the open string
and the higgs vev are proportional to each other. we will show that the
constraint also has a geometric interpretation in terms of a minimal surface
in ads5  s5. another interpretation of the constraint has to do with the
n = 4 supersymmetry; the loops obeying the constraint are bps-type ob-
jects in loop-space. after discussing various aspects of loops obeying the
constraint, we present some idea on how to extend the calculation to a more
general class of loops.

the loop equation is a dierential equation on the loop space. we evalu-
ate, using string theory on ads5, the action of the loop dierential operator
l on a certain class of wilson loops. on a smooth loop c, we nd the dif-
ferential operator annihilates the vacuum expectation of the loop hwi, in
accord with the loop equation as derived in the gauge theory. on the other
hand, for a loop with a self-intersection point, the gauge theory predicts that
lhwi is non-zero and proportional to g2
y m n. we point out the gauge theory
also predicts that a cusp (a sharp turning point) in a loop gives a non-zero
contribution to the loop equation, proportional to g2
y m n. we will show that
lhwi for a loop with a cusp evaluated by the minimal surface in ads5  s5
is indeed non-vanishing and proportional to g2
y m n. we have not been able
to reproduce the precise dependence on the angle at the cusp due to our
lack of detailed understanding of loops not obeying the constraint x2 = y2.
for the same reason we were unable to reproduce the expected result at an
intersection.

the paper is organized as follows.

in section 2, we start with a brief review of the wilson loop operator in

5

the pure yang-mills theory. we then point out an important subtlety in
performing the wick rotation in the supersymmetric theory. we will present
some results from the perturbation theory where the subtlety in the wick
rotation plays an interesting role.
in section 3, we turn to string theory in ads5  s5. we will give a precise
specication of boundary conditions on the string worldsheet and the geo-
metric origin of the constraint x2 = y2. for some cases, we can compute the
area of minimal surfaces explicitly. these include loops with intersections or
cusps. for such loops, the areas have logarithmic divergences. after calcu-
lating those areas, we explain the need for the legendre transform and show
that it removes the linear divergence. the absence of a linear divergence
ts well with what we expect for the supersymmetric gauge theory. we will
clarify the issue of zig-zag symmetry, and end the section with a discussion
of loops that do not satisfy the constraint.

section 4, we give a review of the loop equation in the pure yang-mills theory
and derive its generalization to the case of n = 4 super yang-mills theory
in 4 dimensions.

in section 5, we will discuss to what extent the minimal surface calculation
in ads5 is consistent with the loop equation.

to make the body of the paper more readable, some details are presented in
appendices. in appendix a we derive the wilson loop as the rst quantized
action of the w -boson. in appendix b we calculate the area of a minimal
surface near a cusp. in appendix c, we present some more details on the
loop equation of the n = 4 theory.

2 wilson loops in n=4 gauge theory

we dene the wilson loop operator in the supersymmetric gauge theory,
and review some of its basic properties. we pay particular attention to its
coupling to the scalar elds in the supermultiplet.

6

2.1 denition

one of the most interesting observables in gauge theories is the wilson loop,
the path-ordered exponential of the gauge eld,

w =

1
n

trp exp(cid:18)ii adx(cid:19) ,

(2.1)

with the trace in the fundamental representation. the wilson loop can be
dened for any closed path in space, providing a large class of gauge invariant
observables. in fact, these operators, and their products, form a complete
basis of gauge invariant operators for pure yang-mills theory. an appropriate
denition of the loop operator for the n = 4 super yang-mills theory in 4
dimensions will be given below.
one of physical applications of wilson loops stems from the fact that an
innitely massive quark in the fundamental representation moving along the
loop will be transformed by the phase factor in (2.1). thus the dynamical
eects of the gauge dynamics on external quark sources is measured by the
wilson loop. in particular for a parallel quark anti-quark pair, the wilson
loop is the exponent of the eective potential between the quarks and serves
as an order parameter for connement [13].

the maldacena conjecture states that type iib string theory on ads5s5
is dual to n = 4 super yang-mills theory in 4 dimensions. this gauge theory
does not contain quarks in the fundamental representation. to construct the
wilson loop, we separate a single d-brane from the n d-branes and take it
very far away. for large n, we can ignore the elds on the distant d-brane,
except for open strings stretching between it and the other n. the ground
states of the open string are the w -bosons and their superpartners of the
broken, su(n), gauge group. their trajectories should give the same eect
as that of an innitely massive particle in the fundamental representation.

the correlation functions of the w -boson can be written in the rst quan-
tized formalism as an integral over paths. this description is studied in detail
in appendix a. when the 4-dimensional space has the lorentzian signature
metric, the phase factor associated to the loop is given by the vacuum ex-
pectation value of the operator

w =

1
n

trp exp(cid:18)ii (a x + | x|ii)ds(cid:19) .

(2.2)

w =

1
n

trp exp(cid:18)ii (a x  i| x|ii)ds(cid:19) .

7

(2.3)

when the metric is euclidean, there is an important modication to this
formula as

notice the presence of i in the second term in the exponent. the phase-
factor in the euclidean theory is not really a phase, but contains a real
part.

in the above, i are angular coordinates of magnitude 1 and can be re-
garded as coordinates on s5. in the gauge theory, we may consider a more
general class of wilson loops of the form

w =

1
n

trp exp(cid:18)i (ia x + i yi)ds(cid:19) .

(2.4)

with an arbitrary function yi(s). this is the general loop we would get by
dimensional reduction from the 10-dimensional gauge theory, where i would
be the extra six components of the gauge eld. equation (2.3) restricts us to
the case of x2  y2 = 0. this suggests that the metric on the loop variables
(x(s), yi(s)) has the signature (4, 6). it is important to stress that this is not
the signature of ads5  s5 but of the space where the loops are dened2. as
we will show later, the signature of the loop space metric is related to the fact
that the 6 loop variables yi(s) correspond to t-dual coordinates on the string
worldsheet. the constraint x2  y2 = 0 is also related to supersymmetry.
gauge invariance in 4 dimensions requires that the wilson loop close in 4
dimensions, i.e. the loop variables x(s) are continuous and periodic around
the loop. this is not the case for the other 6 variables yi(s), and the loop
may have a jump in these 6 directions.

2.2 perturbation theory

as a warm-up, we study properties of the wilson loops in perturbation the-
ory. to rst order in g2
y m n, the expectation value of the loop hwi is given
2one may regard the extra factor of i in the euclidean case (2.3) as a wick-rotation of
the 6 y-coordinates so that we can express the constraint as x x + yi yi = 0, both in the
lorentzian and the euclidean cases. to avoid confusions, we will not use this convention
and write the i explicitly in all our expressions in the euclidean case.

by

8

hw [c]i = 1  g2

y m ni dsi dsh x(s) x(s)g (x(s)  x(s))

 yi(s) yj(s)gij (x(s)  x(s))i, (2.5)

where g and gij are the gauge eld and scalar propagators. the relative
minus sign comes from the extra i in front of the scalar piece in the exponent
in (2.3). this integral is linearly divergent. with a regularization of the
propagator with cuto  (i.e. replacing 1/x2 with 1/(x2 + 2)), the divergent
piece coming from the exchange of the gauge eld a is evaluated as



82i dsz 

 

| x|

| x|



ds x(s) x(s)


2 = 



(2)2i ds| x| = 

l

(2)2

,

(2.6)

where l is the circumference of the loop. the divergent contribution from
the exchange of the scalars i is



82i dsz 

 

| x|

| x|

ds yi(s) yj(s)

ij
2 =



(2)2i ds| x|

y2
x2 .

combining these terms together, we nd

w = 1 +



(2)2i ds| x| 1 

y2

x2! + nite.

(2.7)

(2.8)

we note that the linear divergence cancels when the constraint x2 = y2 is
satised.

at n-th order in the  = g2

y m n expansion, one nds a linear divergence

of the form

n

 i ds| x|gn  y2
x2! ,

(2.9)

for some polynomial gn(z). we now argue that gn(1) = 0, namely the
linear divergence cancels when x2 = y2, to all order in the perturbative ex-
pansion. the n-th order term is calculated by connected feynman diagrams
with external legs attached to the loop. the linear divergence appears when
all the external legs come together in 4 dimensions. since the feynman rule
of the n = 4 gauge theory is obtained by the dimensional reduction of the

a.

b.

9

fig. 1: (a) at one loop, there is a linear divergence from
the propagator connecting coincident points. the divergence
is proportional to the circumference of the loop. (b) at cusps
and intersections, an additional logarithmic divergence ap-
pears when the 2 external legs approach the singular point.

10-dimensional theory, the 10-dimensional rotational invariance of the feyn-
man rule is recovered in the coincidence limit. therefore the contractions of
the external indices by the feynman rule produce only rotational invariant
combinations of ( x, i yi), namely a polynomial of ( x2  y2). the polynomial
does not have a constant term since a connected feynman diagram for hwi
needs to have at least 2 external lines attached to the loop. therefore the
polynomial vanishes when x2  y2 = 0.
when the loop has a cusp, there is an extra logarithmic divergence from
graphs as shown in g. 1. let us denote the angle at the cusp by . we
choose the angle so that  =  at a regular point of the loop. a one-loop
computation with the gauge eld gives


(2)2 ((  ) cot  + 1) log

l


.

(2.10)

a cusp is a discontinuity of x. there may also be a discontinuity in yi,
which we measure by an angle . we choose  so that  = 0 when yi is
continuous. a one-loop computation with the scalar elds gives



(2)2(cid:18)

  
sin 

cos  + 1(cid:19) log

l


.



combining (2.10) and (2.11) together, we obtain



(2)2

  
sin 

(cos  + cos ) log

l


.

(2.11)

(2.12)

a similar computation at an intersection gives


2

1

sin 

(cos  + cos ) log

l


.

10

(2.13)

3 minimal surfaces in anti de-sitter space

according to the maldacena conjecture, the expectation value of the wilson
loop is given by the action of a string bounded by the curve at the boundary
of space:

hw [c]i =zx=c dx exp(

s[x]),

(3.1)

(3.2)

for some string action s[x]. here x represents both the bosonic and the
fermionic coordinates of the string. for large , we can estimate the path
integral by the steepest descent method. consequently the expectation value
of the wilson loop is related to the area a of the minimal surface bounded
by c as

hwi  exp(

a).

the motivation for this ansatz is that the w -boson considered in section
2.1 is described in the d-brane language by an open string going between
the single separated d-brane and the other n d-branes. in the near horizon
limit, the n d-branes are replaced by the ads5 geometry and the open string
is stretched from the boundary to the interior of ads5.

to be precise, this argument only tells us that the wilson loop and the
string in ads5 are related to each other. the expression (3.1) is schematic at
best, and there may be an additional loop-dependent factor in (3.2). a simi-
lar problem exists in computation of correlation functions of local operators;
there is no known way to x the relative normalization of local operators
in the gauge theory and supergravity elds in ads5. to determine the nor-
malization factor, one has to compute the 2 point functions [14, 15].
in
our case, the normalization factor in (3.2) may depend on the loop variables
c = (x(s), yi(s)). in fact, we will argue below that the correct action to be
used in (3.2) is not the area a of the surface, but the legendre transform
of it. this modication does not change the equations of motion, and the
solutions are still minimal surfaces. however the values of the classical action
for these surfaces are dierent than their areas.

11

we will assume that, to the leading order in , there is no further c de-
pendent factor. otherwise the conjecture would be meaningless as it would
produce no falsiable predictions. on the other hand, one expects a c de-
pendent factor in the subleading order, such as the uctuation determinant
of the surface in ads5. there can also be a factor in the relation between the
w -boson propagation amplitude and the wilson loop computed in appendix
a. such a factor would be kinematic in nature and independent of , and
therefore negligible in our analysis.

3.1 boundary conditions and bps loop

the wilson loop discussed in [9] obeys the constraint

x2 = y2.

(3.3)

this constraint was originally derived by using the coupling of the funda-
mental string to the gauge elds and to the scalars. in our derivation of the
loop operator from the phase factor for the w -boson amplitude in appendix
a, the constraint arises from the saddle point in integrating over dierent
reparametrizations of the same loop; essentially for the same reason as in [9].
in this section, we will give another interpretation of the constraint (3.3),
in terms of the string theory in ads5  s5. for this interpretation we need
to give a precise specication of the boundary condition on the string in
ads5  s5.
we begin with super yang-mills theory in 10 dimensions, which is realized
on space-lling d9-branes. we ignore the fact that this theory is anomalous
since we will reduce it to the anomaly free theory in 4 dimensions. more-
over, we are only interested in the boundary conditions on bosonic variables3.
the wilson loop in 10 dimensions corresponds to an open string worldsheet
bounded by the loop, i.e. we should impose full dirichlet boundary condi-
tions on the string worldsheet. this is natural since, without the wilson
loop operator, the string end-point obeys fully neumann boundary condi-
tions along the d9-brane. the conditions imposed by the wilson loop are
complementary to the boundary conditions on the d9-brane.

3boundary conditions for fermionic variables are not relevant in our analysis of the loop

for large .

ds2


= y 2

dx dx  +

3x=0

6xi=1

dy idy i .

(3.4)

12

to reduce the theory to 4 dimensions, we perform t-duality along 6
directions. an open string ending on the d3-brane obeys 4 neumann and 6
dirichlet boundary conditions. consequently, the wilson loop operator in the
4-dimensional gauge theory imposes complementary boundary conditions;
namely 4 dirichlet and 6 neumann boundary conditions. if the wilson loop
is parametrized by the loop variables (x(s), yi(s)), where yi(s) couples to
the 6 scalar elds, then the 6 loop variables yi(s) are to be identied with
the 6 neumann boundary conditions on the string worldsheet.

we are ready to specify the boundary condition on the string worldsheet

living in ads5  s5, with line element,

choose the string world-sheet coordinates to be (1, 2) such that the bound-
ary is located at 2 = 0. since x  is identied with the 4 dimensional
coordinates where the gauge theory lives, it is natural to impose dirichlet
conditions on x , so that

x (1, 0) = x(1).

(3.5)

the remaining 6 string coordinates y i(1, 2) obey neumann boundary con-
ditions. we propose that these boundary conditions are

j 
1 y i(1, 0) = yi(1),

(3.6)

where j 
given in terms of the induced metric g,

 (,  = 1, 2) is the complex structure on the string worldsheet

j 
 =

1
g

g.

(3.7)

although we do not have a derivation of the boundary condition (3.6)
from rst principles, it can be motivated as follows. because of the identi-
cation of the so(6) symmetries in the ads/cft correspondence, it is clear
that neumann boundary conditions must set yi equal to j 
1 y i up to a
relative normalization of the two. the use of the induced complex structure
j 
 in the neumann boundary condition is required by the reparametriza-
tion invariance on the worldsheet. the fact that the condition x2 = y2 has

a natural interpretation in terms of the minimal surface, as we will explain
below, suggests that the normalization factor is 1, as in (3.6).

13

for a generic choice of the loop variables (x(s), yi(s)), there is a unique
minimal surface in euclidean space obeying the 10 boundary conditions,
(3.5) and (3.6). however the resulting minimal surface does not necessarily
terminate at the boundary y i = 0 of ads5. the condition y i = 0 would be
additional dirichlet conditions, which may or may not be compatible with
(3.6). in fact, one can show that, for a smooth loop, the additional condition
y i(1, 0) = 0 is satised by the minimal surface if and only if the loop
variables obey the constraint x2 = y2. to see this consider the hamilton-
jacobi equation4 for the area a of a minimal surface bounded by a loop
(x (s), y i(s)) in ads5  s5:
y i!2
+  a

(2)2y 4(cid:16)(1x )2 + (1y i)2(cid:17) .

  a
x !2

(3.8)

1

=

since the momenta conjugate to the x s and the y is are given by

a
x  =

1
2y 2 j 

1 x ,

a
y i =

1
2y 2 j 

1 y i,

we obtain

(j 

1 x )2 + (j 

1 y i)2 = (1x )2 + (1y i)2.

(3.9)

(3.10)

if the minimal surface obeys the boundary conditions (3.5) and (3.6), this
becomes

x2  y2 = (j 

1 x )2  (1y i)2.

(3.11)

now impose the additional condition that the string worldsheet terminates
at the boundary of ads5, i.e. y i(1, 0) = 0. obviously 1y i(1, 0) = 0. this
alone tells us that x2  y2  0. moreover, if the boundary is smooth, it
costs a large area to keep j 
1 x  non-zero near the boundary of ads5, so
it has to vanish at the boundary y = 0 [9]. therefore, the condition that
the minimal surface terminates at the boundary of ads5 requires x2 = y2.

4 in general, the hamilton-jacobi equation for the area of a minimal surface on a

riemannian manifold with a metric gij takes the form,

gij (a/x i )(a/x j ) = gij 1x i1x j .

14

when the constraint x2 = y2 is satised, one can reinterpret the 6 neu-
mann condition (3.6) as dirichlet conditions on s5. to see this, it is useful
to decompose the 6 coordinates y i as

y i = y i

(3.12)

where i are coordinates on s5 and y = u1 is one of the coordinates on
ads5. since for a smooth loop the classical solution has y i = (y )i at
the boundary y = 0 of ads5, the neumann conditions (3.6) turn into the
dirichlet conditions on s5 as

i(1, 0) =

.

yi
| y|

(3.13)

this justies the boundary conditions used in [9].

there is yet another interpretation of the constraint x2 = y2, and it has
to do with supersymmetry. the loops we have considered so far couple only
to bosonic elds: the gauge eld a and scalars i. we also need to allow
coupling to the fermionic elds in the exponent. fermionic variables (s)
along the loop couple to the gauginos  as

( x  i yii),

(3.14)

where we are using 10-dimensional gamma matrices  and i with signature
(10,0). this is derived in appendix c. exactly when the constraint is sat-
ised this combination of gamma matrices becomes nilpotent. consequently
only half the components of  couple to , putting the loop in a short repre-
sentation of local supersymmetry in super loop-space. the simplest example
is when the wilson loop is a straight line, when x and y are independent of
s. if  is also constant, this loop is the phase factor associated with the a
trajectory of a free bps particle.

3.2 calculating the area

the computation of the wilson loop in ads5 requires an infrared regulariza-
tion, since the area of the minimal surface terminating at the boundary of
ads5 is innite due to the factor y 2 in the metric. in order to make sense
of the ansatz (3.2), we need to regularize the area. one natural way to do so
is to impose the boundary conditions (3.5) and (3.6) at y = 0, but integrate

15

the area element only over the part of the surface with y  . on the gauge
theory side, the wilson loop requires regularization in the ultraviolet. ac-
cording to the uv/ir relation in the ads/cft correspondence [16], the ir
cuto  in ads5 should be identied with the uv cuto in the gauge theory.

there are a few cases when minimal surfaces can be studied analytically.

(1) parallel lines:
the minimal surface for parallel lines, each of length l and separated by a
distance r, was obtained in [9, 10]. the area of the loop is

2l
2 

42
(1/4)4

l
r

.

a =

(3.15)

(2) circular loop:
the minimal surface in ads5 bounded by a circle of radius r is found in
[17, 18] as

y (r, ) = r2  r2,

(3.16)

where r and  are radial coordinates on a plane in the 4 dimensions, and
we use them as coordinates on the string worldsheet also. the area of the
surface with the cuto  is

a =

1

2z dr rd y 21 + y 2 = rz r22

0

r dr

(r2  r2)

3
2

=

2r
2  1. (3.17)

(3) cusp:
another family of minimal surfaces we can solve analytically is a surface
near a cusp on r4 and its generalization including a jump on s5. we can
nd analytical solutions in this case since the boundary conditions are scale
invariant. using radial coordinates in the vicinity of the cusp, r and , as
world sheet coordinates, the scale invariant ansatz,

y (r, ) =

r

f ()

,

(3.18)

reduces the determination of the minimal surface to a one-dimensional prob-
lem. the resulting surface is depicted in g. 2. when there is also a jump on
s5, one needs to introduce another variable. an analytical solution in this
case is found in a similar way. these solutions are presented in appendix b.

16

y  = e

y  = 0

fig. 2: a minimal surface for a wilson loop with a cusp.
the regularized area is evaluated over the shaded region.

the result is that the area of the surface has a logarithmic divergence as well
as a linear divergence. it behaves as

a =

l
2 

1
2

f (, ) log

l


+    ,

(3.19)

where  and  are the cusp angles in r4 and s5 respectively.

when either  or  vanishes, we can express f (, )/2 in terms of
elliptic integrals. in g. 3. we show the numerical evaluation of the function
f (, 0) in the solid curve. this is to be compared with the perturbative
expression (2.12) shown in the dashed curve. the function f (, 0) is zero
at  =  and has a pole at  = 0. as the angle   0 at the cusp, the
loop goes back along its original path, or backtracks. regularizing the extra
divergence from the pole turns it into a linear divergence which cancels part
of the linear divergence from the length of the loop. this is related to issues
discussed in the section on the zig-zag symmetry.

away from the cusp, the surface approaches the boundary along the y -
direction without a momentum in the x-direction. right at the cusp, how-
ever, the surface has momentum in both the y and r direction. this means
that, although the constraint x2 = y2 is obeyed almost everywhere, it is

17

1(cid:13)

0.8(cid:13)

0.6(cid:13)

0.4(cid:13)

0.2(cid:13)

2(cid:13)

fig. 3: the solid curve shows the function f (, 0)/2,
which appears in the logarithmic divergence of the minimal
surface with the cusp of angle . this is compared with the
perturbative result (2.12) at the cusp shown in the dashed
curve. the dotted curve is half of the perturbative result
(2.13) at an intersection.

modied at the cusp as

x2 = (1 + f 2

0 ) y2,

(3.20)

where f0 = f ( = /2) is the minimal value of f ().

(4) intersection:
the minimal surface for a self-intersecting loop is just the sum of 2 cusps.
the only dierence is that, by the exchange symmetry of the 2 components
of the loop, the intersection forces

= 0

y
| x|

(3.21)

instead of (3.20).

in all the examples above, there is a linear divergence (2)1 in the
regularized area. this is true for any loop. as explained in [9], this leading

p
(cid:13)
p
(cid:13)
18

a.

b.

y  = e

y  = 0

fig. 4: the comparison of the two regularization prescrip-
tions. the boundary conditions are imposed at y = 0 in
(a) and at y =  in (b). the shaded regions represent the
regularized areas.

divergence in the area of the minimal surface in ads5 is proportional to the
circumference of the loop5. the linear divergence arises from the leading
behavior of the surface at small y , i.e. near the boundary of ads5.

in this section, we have computed the regularized area by imposing the
boundary condition at the boundary y = 0 of ads5 and integrating the area
element over the part of the surface y  . this is not the unique way to
regularize the area. another reasonable way to compute the minimal surface
is to impose the boundary conditions, not at y = 0, but at y = . the
area bounded by the loop on y =  is then by itself nite. a comparison
of the two regularization prescriptions are illustrated in g. 4. these two
regularizations give the same values for the area, up to terms which vanish
as   0. for example, consider the circular loop. the solution (3.16) can
also be regarded as a minimal surface with the boundary condition on y = ,

5 we are using the coordinates x  in (1.2) to describe the congurations of the wilson
loops. with these coordinates, there is no factor of  in the relation between the ir cuto
 in ads5 and the uv cuto of the gauge theory [16]. these coordinates are dierent from
the coordinates on the d3-brane probe, by a factor of  [19].

except that the radius of the circle on y =  is now r0 = r2  2. the

area computed in this new regularization is then

19

a =

1

qr2

0 + 2  1 =

2r0
2  1 +



2r0

+ . . . .

(3.22)

thus the results of the two regularizations are the same up to terms which
vanish as   0.
it is straightforward to show that this is also the case
for the parallel lines. we have also veried that when the loop has a cusp
or an intersection, the two regularizations give the same area modulo terms
which are nite as   0, which are subleading compared to the logarithmic
divergence.
when we impose the boundary condition at y = , the constraint on the
loop variables is not exactly x2 = y2, but it is modied. if the loop is smooth,
the modication is only by o() terms6. therefore most of the results in this
paper are independent of the choice between the two ways of imposing the
boundary conditions. the only exception to this rule is the discussion of the
zig-zag symmetry. the zig-zag symmetry of the string worldsheet on ads5
seems to t well with our expectations about the gauge theory when we use
the boundary conditions at y =  rather than at y = 0.

3.3 legendre transformation

the maldacena conjecture implies that the wilson loop is related to a string
ending along the loop on the boundary of space. in the classical limit, we
expect that the string worldsheet is described by a minimal surface. this
argument, however, does not completely determine the value of hwi for large
 since there are many actions whose equations of motion are solved by
minimal surfaces. they dier by total derivatives, or boundary terms. since
the surface has boundaries, such terms can be important. in [9, 10] it was
assumed that one should use the nambu-goto action, so the wilson loop
was given in terms of the area a of the minimal surface. this is what we

6 if the loop has a cusp or an intersection, as we saw earlier, the boundary conditions
imposed at y = 0 imply the constraint x2 = y2 holds almost everywhere along the loop,
except at a cusp or an intersection point. when we impose the boundary conditions at
y = , the constraint is modied in regions of size  near the cusp and the intersection
point.

20

have studied so far. in this section, we argue that hwi is in fact given not
by a but by an appropriate legendre transform.
we have shown that the loop variables yi impose neumann boundary
conditions (3.6) on the coordinates y i. therefore hwi should be regarded
as a functional of the coordinates x  and the momenta pi conjugate to y i,
dened by,

pi =

a
2y i =

1

2

gg2y jgij.

(3.23)

the nambu-goto action is a natural functional of x (s) and y i(s) and is
more appropriate for the full dirichlet boundary conditions. to replace it
with a functional of x (s) and p i(s), we need to perform the legendre
transform

or

l = l  2(cid:16)piy i(cid:17) ,
a = a i d1piy i.

(3.24)

(3.25)

to show that a is a natural functional of (x , p i), we use hamilton-jacobi
theory. under a general variation of the y coordinates, the variation of the
area a of the minimal surface is given by

a = z d1d2  a

y i  

a

y i! y i(1, 2) +i d1

= i d1pi(1, 0)y i(1, 0).

a
2y i y i(1, 0)
(3.26)

here we used the equations of motion. therefore, after performing the leg-
endre transformation, we obtain

 a = i d1y i(1, 0)pi(1, 0).

(3.27)

thus a is a functional of the momenta p i at the boundary, not the coordi-
nates y i.

the neumann boundary conditions (3.6) are conditions on the momenta

p i,

yi
2

= p i = y 2pi.

(3.28)

in fact, if the loop variables yi(s) are continuous, the coordinates y i are
parallel to the momenta pi, as we saw in (3.13). in this case, the legendre
transform gives

21

a = a 

1

2i d1

yi
y 2 y i = a 

1

2i d1| y|

y

= a 

1

2i ds| y|,

(3.29)

in the last step, we have set y =  since the

where  is the regulator.
regularized action is evaluated for y  .
in the previous section, we saw that the area a of minimal surface has
a linear divergence proportional to the circumference of the boundary. by
combining it with (3.29), we nd

a =

1

2i ds (| x|  | y|) + nite

(3.30)

for a smooth loop. therefore the linear divergence cancels when the con-
straint x2 = y2 is satised. the minimal surface in ads5 is supposed to
describe the wilson loop for large coupling . we saw in section (2.2) that
the cancellation of the divergence also takes place to all order in the perturba-
tive expansion . this suggests that the cancellation of the linear divergence
is exact, and a smooth loop obeying x2 = y2 does not require regularization.
we suspect that this is a consequence of the bps property of the loop. when
the loop is a straight line, it preserves a global supersymmetry, not only the
local one.
in that case the lowest order perturbation calculation is exact.
the modied action is zero, the expectation value of the wilson loop is 1.
we were not able to nd an explicit expression for l as a function of
x , p i and their derivatives. we only know how to evaluate it for classical
solutions in terms of the old variables.

by denition, the area a of the minimal surface is positive. on the other
hand, its legendre transform a may be negative and the expectation value

of the loop hwi = exp( a) may be larger than 1. in the pure yang-mills

theory, the wilson loop is a trace of a unitary operator (divided by the rank
n of the gauge group), and its expectation value has to obey the inequality
hwi  1. this is not the case in the supersymmetric theory in the euclidean
signature space since w in (2.3) is not a pure phase, and there is no unitarity
bound on its expectation value.

we have shown that the expectation value of a smooth wilson loop obey-
ing x2 = y2 is nite. if the loop has a cusp or an intersection, the cancellation

is not exact and we are left with the logarithmic divergence.7

a = 

1
2

f (, ) log

l


+ nite.

22

(3.31)

it is interesting to note that the constraint x2 = y2 is not satised either at
a cusp

x2 = (1 + f 2

0 ) y2,

or at an intersection point

= 0

yi
| x|

(3.32)

(3.33)

we suspect that the logarithmic divergences at the cusp and the intersection
are caused by the failure of the loop to satisfy the bps condition at these
points.

3.4 zig-zag symmetry

a wilson loop of the form

w =

1
n

trp exp(ii dsa x)

(3.34)

is reparametrization invariant, in s, namely unchanged by s  f (s). for-
mally it is even invariant under reparametrizations which backtrack (namely
when f (s) is not always positive) since the phase factor going forward and
then backwards will cancel. polyakov has argued in [20] that this zig-zag
symmetry is one of the basic properties of the qcd string. one must
however be careful, even in pure yang-mills theory, since the loop requires
regularization. zig-zag symmetry, in fact, is only true perturbatively for reg-
ularized loops, where the backtracking paths are closer than the ultraviolet
cuto. it was pointed out in [9] that the wilson loop in the supersymmetric
theory (2.3), with the constraint x2 = y2, does not have this symmetry. this
is because the couplings of the wilson loop to the scalar elds i is propor-
tional to | x|, which does not change the sign when the loop backtracks. thus
if the loop stays at the same point i on s5, there is no cancellation of the
coupling to the scalar elds.

7 if  6= 0, the function f (, ) gets a contribution from the legendre transformation.

23

c2

c1

fig. 5: the zig-zag loop; the loop goes in one direction along
c1 and comes back along c2. the two segments c1 and c2
are parallel and their distance  is less that the gauge theory
uv cuto .

in perturbation theory, one can easily prove that the zig-zag symmetry
holds for the wilson loop (2.4) when yi = 0. suppose we have a segment c1
of a loop which goes in one direction and another segment c2 which comes
back parallel to c1 but in the opposite direction, as shown in g. 5. if the
distance  between c1 and c2 is much less than the uv regularization  of the
gauge theory, there is one-to-one cancellation between a feynman diagram 
which has one of its external leg ending on c1 and another diagram  which
is identical to  except that the corresponding leg ends on c2. therefore,
to all order in the perturbative expansion, the segments c1 and c2 do not
contribute to the expectation value of the wilson loop. on the other hand, if
yi = | x|i and i is xed at a point on s5, a diagram with a leg coupled to yi
on c1 and one with the corresponding leg coupled to yi on c2 add up, rather
than cancel each other. the perturbative computation therefore shows no
zig-zag symmetry in this case.

when the coupling  is large, we expect that hwi is related to the minimal
surface. the area functional, and as a matter of fact any other functional
which is an integral over a minimal surface, has zig-zag symmetry. the proof
is simple. if we look at the region y  , the minimal surface bounded by
a backtracking loop is almost identical to the surface bound by the curve
without backtracking if the separation  between c1 and c2 is much less
than the cuto . this is illustrated in g. 6. therefore an action on the
surface given by an integral over the part of the surface in y   is the same

h
e
24

a.

b.

y  = e

y  = 0

fig. 6: the area of a loop with a zig-zag (a) is roughly the
same as the loop without it (b).

with or without the backtracking.

at rst sight, the zig-zag symmetry of the minimal surface appears in
contradiction with the gauge theory expectation since we know the minimal
surface ending along a smooth loop on the boundary of ads5 obeys the
constraint x2 = y2 and therefore yi 6= 0. in the gauge theory, we do not expect
zig-zag symmetry when yi is non-zero and constant. a close examination of
the boundary condition, however, reveals that the situation is more subtle. it
is true that, if we impose the boundary conditions at y = 0, the part of the
surface connecting c1 and c2 do not reach y =  and does not contribute to
the regularized area for y  . therefore zig-zag symmetry holds for hwi.
this is also the case when we impose the boundary condition at y = . in
this case, if   , the minimal surface goes from c1 to c2 along the y = 
surface. therefore the contribution of the segments to the regularized area is
proportional to /2 times the length of the segment and vanish in the limit
  0.
however the physical interpretation of the two computations are quite
dierent. if the boundary conditions are imposed at y = 0, the constraint
x2 = y2 holds provided the segments c1 and c2 are smooth. on the other
hand, if the conditions are imposed on the y =  hypersurface, the minimal

25

fig. 7: (a) a self-intersecting loop which corresponds to
a single trace operator and (b) a pair of loops obtained by
reconnecting the loop at the intersection.

surface bounded by c1 and c2 stays within  from y = , and y2 vanishes
as /  0. if we take the latter point of view, the apparent contradiction
with the gauge theory expectation disappears since the minimal surface in
question is related to the wilson loop which does not couple to the scalar
elds in the segments c1 and c2. this is exactly the situation in which
zig-zag symmetry arises in the gauge theory.

one may argue that the boundary condition at y =  gives a more
precise denition of the wilson loop hwi as a functional of the loop variables
(x(s), yi(s)). the legendre transformation of the area a in section (3.3),
for example, is a way to dene a functional of the momenta p i evaluated at
y =  and not at y = 0. it does not make sense to perform this procedure
at y = 0 since the factor 1/ in the right-hand side of (3.25) needs to be
replaced by .
in most of the cases discussed in this paper, whether we
impose the boundary conditions at y = 0 or y =  does not make much
dierence since the value of the momenta p i stays almost the same in the
region 0  y  . the analysis of zig-zag symmetry, however, seems to
be an exception to this rule. if we use the boundary condition at y = ,
the existence of the minimal surface requires the constraint yi(s) = 0 rather
than x2 = y2 for the backtracking loop, and the result ts well with the gauge
theory expectation. clearly the regularization dependent nature of zig-zag
symmetry needs to be claried further.

an analysis similar to the one given above leads to the following ob-
servations about the wilson loop, which we nd interesting. consider a
self-intersecting loop as in g. 7. the area calculated on the minimal surface
bound by the loop (a) is the same as the sum of the two areas bounded by
the separated loops (b). in the gauge theory, these loops are very dierent

objects. one is a single trace operator and the other a multi-trace operator.
we can even connect two distant closed loops by a long neck without
changing the value of the loop since the minimal surface spanning the neck
region does not contribute to the area. graphically this can be written as

26

(cid:28) i

k
=======
j

l(cid:29) =

1
n

ijkl

(3.35)

this suggests that the parallel transport u = p exp(ir adx) along an open

curve behaves as a random matrix. as in the case of the zig-zag symmetry,
if we impose the boundary condition at y = , the minimal surface exists
only when yi(s) = 0, and we are considering a loop which does not couple to
the scalar elds in the neck region.

3.5 removing the constraint

so far we considered loops of the form (2.3) which satisfy the constraint
x2  y2 = 0. when the loop has a cusp or an intersection, this constraint
is modied as in (3.20) and (3.21). in the gauge theory, we can dene the
loop operator for any (x(s), yi(s)), not necessarily obeying the constraint.
consequently, we need to nd a way to calculate an expectation value of
such a loop in ads5 so that the relation between the gauge theory and string
theory is complete.

the reason given by maldacena for the constraint (and also in appendix
a) is that the w -bosons are bps particles and their charges and masses
are related. to break the constraint, one needs a non-bps object with an
arbitrary mass. fortunately string theory contains many such objects. in-
stead of considering the ground state of the open string corresponding to the
w -boson, one may use excited string states, which have extra mass from the
string oscillations. as shown in the appendix a, an excited string indeed
generates a loop obeying the modied constraint,

y2 = x2 m 2

m 2 + m2 ,

(3.36)

where m = 1 is the original w -boson mass and m is the mass of the
excitations. this makes it possible to relax the constraint, at least for x2 
y2.

27

for the loop obeying the original constraint x2 = y2, the regularized area

has the linear divergence of the form

a =

1

2i ds| x| +    =

1

2i m| x| +    .

(3.37)

we expect that the corresponding computation using the string excitation
replaces m by m 2 + m2 as

a =

1

2i dsm 2 + m2| x| +    =

1

2i ds

x2
| y|

+    .

the legendre transformation turns this into

a = a 
1

=

1

2i ds| y|
2i ds  x2

| y|  | y|! +    .

(3.38)

(3.39)

this shows that the linear divergence is not completely canceled for | x| 6= | y|.
since a highly excited string state may be sensitive to stringy corrections, we
can trust this estimate of the linear divergence only for small deviation from
the constraint. in the following, we will use an approximate expression for
| x|  | y| as

a =

1

i ds(| x|  | y|) +    .

(3.40)

4 the loop equation

since the expectation value of the wilson loop is a measure of connement,
much attention has been given to calculating them.
in particular, in the
large n limit of gauge theory, they satisfy a closed set of equations [2]. in
this section, we rst give a review of the loop equation for pure yang-mills
theory (for more details see [21, 22]). the equation is easy to write down
and is formally satised, order by order, in the perturbative expansion of
the gauge theory. the lattice version of the loop equations are also satised
in the non-perturbative lattice formulation of the theory. however, the only
case where one can solve explicitly for wilson loops is in 2 dimensions. there
indeed they do satisfy the loop equation. we will then formulate the loop

28

equation for the n = 4 super yang-mills theory in 4 dimensions. as far as
we know, the loop equation in this case has not been derived before. we will
nd that the bps condition (3.3) will play a crucial role. we will discuss
details of the construction in appendix c and present only the general ideas
here.

4.1 bosonic theories

the action of pure gauge theory in any number of dimensions is8

s =

1
4g2

y m z dx trff ,

and the wilson loop is given by

w =

1
n

trp exp(cid:18)ii adx(cid:19) ,

(4.1)

(4.2)

where the integral is over a path parametrized by x. the main observation
is that there is a dierential operator on loop space which brings down the
variation of the action df as

lhwi = ii ds x(cid:28)(df)a(s)

1
n

trp t a(s) exp(cid:18)ii adx(cid:19)(cid:29)

(4.3)

where t a(s) is the generator of the gauge group inserted at the point s along
the loop.

there are a few equivalent denitions of l. we will use

l = lim

0i dsz s+

s

ds

2

x(s)x(s)

.

(4.4)

as we will explain below,  has to be taken much shorter than the uv cuto
scale  in order to extract the term df. the insertion of df into the
loop would be zero if we use the classical equation of motion, but quantum
corrections produce contact terms. to see that, one can write the equations

8the complete action contains a gauge xing term and ghosts. those appear also in

the equations of motion, but can be dropped by a ward identity [23].

of motion as the functional derivative of the action s and use the schwinger-
dyson equations, i.e. integration by parts in the functional integral,

29

lhwi = ig2
= ig2

1
n

y mz dai ds
y m*i ds x(s)

trp t a(s) exp(cid:18)ii adx(cid:19) x(s)

es

aa(x(s))



aa(x(s))

1
n

trp t a(s) exp(cid:18)ii adx(cid:19)+.(4.5)

the functional derivative /a(x(s)) in this equation is formally evaluated
as

lhwi =



n 2 i dsi ds (x(s)  x(s)) x(s) x(s) 

(cid:28)trp t a(s)t a(s) exp(cid:18)ii adx(cid:19)(cid:29).

we then use the relation between the generators of su(n),

nmt a
t a

kl = nkml 

nmkl

n

.

(4.6)

(4.7)

ignoring the 1/n term, the trace is broken into two. this gives the correlation
function of two loops. in the large n limit, the correlator factorizes and we
obtain,

lhwi = i dsi ds (x(s)  x(s)) x(s) x(s)hwssihwssi.

(4.8)

here wss is a wilson-loop that start at s and goes to s and wss goes from s
to s. they are closed due to the delta function9.

equation (4.8) shows that lhwi receives contributions from self-inter-
sections of the loop. since the derivation of the equation is rather formal,
it is not clear whether we need to count the trivial case of s = s, in which
case wss = 1 and wss = w . in most of the literature on the loop equation,

9the delta-function is not sharp, but is regularized by the cuto . that means that
the loops wss and wss are not exactly closed loops, and the two ends may be separated
by a distance . this does not contradict gauge invariance since one may consider only
gauge transformations which do not vary much over that scale, so the almost closed
loop are almost gauge invariant. we expect those loops to be equal to the closed loops
up to o() corrections.

30

this trivial self-intersection is ignored. in any case, it can be taken care of
by multiplicative renormalization of the loop operator. in the supersymmet-
ric gauge theory, the leading contribution from the trivial self-intersection
cancels when x2 = y2.

in the denition of the loop derivative l, it is important to take the limit
  0. this procedure isolates the term df, which is a contact term
of the double functional derivative.
if  is of the order of the uv cuto
, there will be other contributions to the loop equation such as ff  x.
when calculating the loop equation in perturbation theory, we can take  to
be arbitrarily small, and in particular   . this is how we view the loop
equation in the continuum theory. in fact, it was shown that the perturbative
expansion of the wilson loop solves the loop equation [23]. when we study
the loop equation the string in ads5, we will consider the same limit   0.
in the lattice regularization, it is not possible to calibrate the variation
of the loop in distance shorter than the lattice spacing .
in this case, a
dierent denition of l is used which does not require taking such a limit.
it is possible to dene a loop derivative localized at a point on the loop,
instead of the integrated version considered above. the entire derivation

goes through by simply dropping one h ds.

4.2 supersymmetric case

we briey summarize how to derive the loop equation in the supersymmetric
theory, leaving the details in appendix c. we derive them only for variations
from constrained loops x2 = y2. one important modication is due to the
extra factor of i in front of the scalars in the wilson loop operator in the
euclidean theory,

w =

1
n

trp exp(cid:18)i (ia x + i yi) ds(cid:19) .

(4.9)

another novelty is the need to include the fermions. the fermions are impor-
tant even when the loop equation is evaluated at the body part (s) = 0 of
super loop-space since the fermions appear as source terms in the equations
of motion for the gauge elds and the scalars. here we will explain the eect
of the extra i. in appendix c, we will discuss how to deal with the fermions.

if we dene loop derivative

l = lim

0i dsz s+

s

ds 

2

x(s)x(s) 

2

yi(s)yi(s)! ,

31

(4.10)

then the relative minus sign combines with the extra i to give
lhwi
ia! trp t a exp(cid:18)i (ia x + i yi) ds(cid:19)+
= i
= i dsi ds(cid:16) x(s) x(s)  yi(s) yi(s)(cid:17) 4(x(s)  x(s))hw1ihw2i. (4.11)

n i ds*  x

aa  i yi 

g2
y m



a simple way to obtain this is by considering the extra i as the wick rotation
of the yi coordinates and repeat the derivation from (4.4) to (4.8). the
right-hand side of the bosonic loop equation contains a cubic divergence
proportional to the circumference of the loop. in the supersymmetric case
this zero-point energy cancels for a smooth loop by the constraint x2 = y2.

4.3 predictions

in this subsection, we evaluate the right-hand side of the loop equation (4.11)
for various types of loops.
in the next section, we will compare it with
computations of the loop using the minimal surface spanned by the loop in
ads5.

in the supersymmetric theory, the trivial self-intersection at s = s does
not contribute to the right-hand side if the loop is smooth and obeys the
constraint x2 = y2. this is related to the fact that such a loop does not
require regularization. to be precise, the constraint only cancels the leading
divergence proportional to 3. since the delta-function in (4.11) has a width
, the taylor expansion of x(s) at s = s gives subleading terms in  such as



3i ds (x2  y2).



(4.12)

however this expression is highly regularization dependent. moreover there
are other contributions of the same order due to the fact that the loops wss
and wss are not precisely closed, as explained in the last footnote. at any
rate, these terms are negligible (by a factor ) compared to the terms we will

nd at cusps and intersections, and we will ignore them for the rest of the
paper.

for a loop with an intersection, the integral over the regularized delta-

32

function in the right-hand side of the loop equation gives

(cos  + cos )i dsi ds | x(s)|| x(s)|4

= (cos  + cos )z 



dxz 



dx 4

 (sin (x  x))

 (x(s)  x(s))

= 

cos  + cos 

22 sin 

.

(4.13)

it is important to note that the result depends explicitly on the uv cuto
2. here we have evaluated the leading term in the 1 expansion only.
there are subleading terms in the expansion which are comparable to (4.12)
at the trivial self-intersection.

a cusp also gives an interesting contribution to the loop equation. this
may be regarded as a special case of the trivial self-intersection.
in fact,
in the literature, this eect is ignored together with that of the trivial self-
intersection10. in the supersymmetric theory, the contribution from the triv-
ial self-intersection at a smooth point on the loop is canceled by the con-
straint x2 = y2. the situation is more interesting at the cusp since the
tangent vector x(s) is discontinuous there. if there is a jump on s5, yi(s) is
also discontinuous. a simple calculation (identical to (2.12), where we found
the log divergence in perturbation theory) shows that the cusp contribute to
the right-hand side of the loop equation as

2(cos  + cos )z 0
(  )(cos  + cos )



dxz 

0

(2)2 sin 

= 

dx 4

 (sin ( x  x))

.

(4.14)

to summarize, we can express the loop equation as



22  xn:cusps

lhwi =
+ xm:intersections

(  n)(cos n + cos n)

2 sin n

hwi+

cos m + cos m

sin m

hwmidfwme! + o 

! , (4.15)

10 in the lattice formulation, the eect of the cusp to the loop equation is not seen since

there is no local denition of a cusp.

33

loop into two at the intersection point m.

where wm and fwm are wilson loops one obtains by detaching the original
5 loop equation in ads5  s5

5.1 general case

in this section, we will examine whether the computation of the loop using
string theory in ads5 agrees with the predictions of the loop equation. a
general form of the loop expectation value is

hwi =  exp(cid:16)

 a(cid:17) .

we assume that the dependence of the prefactor  on the loop variables is
subleading for large . since the loop derivative l does not commute with
the constraint x2 = y2, we need an expression for a when the constraint is
not satised. as we saw in section 3.5, the exponent a has a linear divergence
of the form

a(x, y) =

1

i ds(| x|  | y|) +   

(5.1)

(5.2)

to the leading order in (| x|  | y|). the loop derivative is a second order
dierential operator. when the derivatives act on the exponent and bring it
down twice, the result is proportional to . on the other hand, when they
act on  or on the same a twice, we get things only of order  or less. in
the following, we will pay attention to the leading term in  only. the exact
expression we have to evaluate is therefore,

 lim

0i dsz s+

s

ds   a

x(s)

 a
x(s) 

 a

yi(s)

 a

yi(s)! .

(5.3)

we do not have to include the fermionic derivative. when it acts once on a
bosonic loop, it gives a fermion whose expectation value is zero. there are
also non-zero contributions when it acts twice on a, but they are subleading
in .

let us evaluate (5.3). although the linear divergence 1

in a(x, y) vanishes for the loop obeying the constraint, the variation l does

2h ds(| x|  | y|)

34

not commute with the constraint. thus the linear divergence term gives an
important contribution to (5.3). since the variation of the length functional

l =i ds x2

(5.4)

gives the acceleration x (in the parametrization where | x| = 1) and the same
for y, we obtain

 a

 a

x(s)

 a
x(s) 

   a
yi(s)!
22 (cid:16)x(s)x(s)  yi(s)yi(s)(cid:17) +    .

yi(s)



=

(5.5)

note that it has the same divergence, 2, as the right-hand side of the loop
equation. moreover the powers of  match up in the loop equation and in
(5.5). the    in the right-hand side represents variations of the remaining
terms in a, which are nite for a smooth loop. to compute lhwi, we
integrate (5.5) over s    s  s + . when the loop is smooth, the
acceleration (x, yi) itself is nite. therefore, by taking   0, one nds that
lhwi = 0 in this case. this is consistent with the loop equation. therefore
we reach the rst conclusion that a minimal surface in ads5 bounded by a
smooth loop solves the loop equation.

5.2 loops with cusps

if the loop has a cusp of angle , the tangent vector is discontinuous and x
has a delta-function pointing along the unit vector bisector e

x = 2 cos


2

(s)e.

(5.6)

a similar thing happens when y is discontinuous, with the angle  replacing
 in the above. this delta-function is regularized by , not , since it is
related to the shortest length scale on which the loop is dened. thus the
integral of (5.5) over s and s gives a non-zero result as



22i dsz s+

s

ds(cid:16)x(s)x(s)  yi(s)yi(s)(cid:17)

=

=

4

2(cid:19)
22(cid:18)cos2 
2  sin2 
2
22 (cos  + cos )

35

(5.7)

in comparison with the prediction of (4.14) of the loop equation, we are
missing the factor of (  )/ sin . this, however, is not a contradiction.
the expression for the linear divergence term in (5.2) is an approximation
for small (| x|  | y|). since x2 = (1 + f0) y2 with f0 = f (/2) at the cusp,
this approximation is valid only when f0 is small. apart from this factor,
(5.7) agrees with the prediction of the loop equation that the cusp gives a
non-zero contribution to the loop equation proportional to  = g2
y m n times
2.

when (| x|  | y|) is not small, the expression (5.2) needs to be modied

as

a(x, y) =

1

i ds| x|g  y2

x2! +   

(5.8)

for some function g(z). by repeating the computation that lead to (5.7), we
nd that the contribution of the cusp takes the form

l exp(

 a) = g(f0)(cos  + cos ) exp(

(5.9)
where g(f0) is a function related to g(z). the agreement with (4.14) requires
(5.10)

 a) +    ,

.

g(f (/2)) =

  
8 sin 

proving this would be a very strong evidence for the conjecture.

loops with cusps have also logarithmic divergences, which could con-
tribute to the loop equations. to see that, one may write the logarithmically
divergent term as

1

=

l


f () log

2z dsz ds| x(s)|| x(s)|

1
2
where    is the angle between x(s) and x(s). to check this equation one
should integrate over two straight lines meeting at a point. dierentiating
(5.11) gives a few terms, among them

(x  x)2 + 2

sin 
  

(5.11)

f ()

1

which has the same divergence as the piece that gave (5.7).

x(s)

1


sin 
  

f ()

(5.12)

36

5.3 self-intersecting loops

the situation at a self-intersection is more mysterious since x and y are both
continuous at the intersection point. however we have problems in our ability
to test the loop equation in this case. first of all, yi = 0 at the intersection,
and the function g(z) which appears in the linear divergence term in (5.8)
may be singular at z = | y|/| x| = 0. since we do not know about the function
g(z) except for its behavior near z = 1, it is dicult to tell whether there is
a contribution from the intersection.

the presence of the unknown factor  in (5.1) makes the situation worse.

as we explained before, the wilson loop is

hwi =  exp(cid:16)

 a(cid:17) .

for a self-intersecting loop we expect

lhw1+2i = 

cos  + cos 

sin 

hw1ihw2i,

(5.13)

(5.14)

where w1+2 is the self-intersecting loop and w1 and w2 its two pieces. in
order for this to be consistent with the ads5 computation, we need to nd

l exp(cid:16)

 a1+2(cid:17) = 

cos  + cos 

sin 

12
1+2

exp(cid:16)

( a1 + a2)(cid:17) .

(5.15)

since we do not know the relation between the factors 1, 2 and 1+2, a
quantitative test is dicult in this case. though it seems unlikely that the
ration would be zero.

it would be very interesting to determine the function g(z) what appears
in the linear divergence as it would settle the question as to whether the

intersection gives the contribution to l exp( a) predicted by the loop

equation.

6 discussion

the ads/cft correspondence allows us to calculate certain wilson loops in
terms of minimal surfaces in anti de-sitter space. we presented a few reasons
why only loops satisfying the constraint x2 = y2 (generically) are given in

37

terms of minimal surfaces. for more general loops we run into the problem
of inconsistent boundary conditions.

the constrained loops are invariant under half of the local supersymme-
try in super loop-space. as such they are bps objects and are free from
divergences. the area of the minimal surface is divergent, so it is not the
correct functional that yields the wilson loop. since the minimal surface
satises neumann boundary conditions, its natural to take for the action
the legendre transform of the area. we showed this yields a nite result.

in other examples of the ads/cft correspondence the action has to be
modied as well. in non-supersymmetric cases, such as the near extremal
d3-brane, the eect of adding the boundary term is to subtract l/(2). the
result is nite, but contains a piece proportional to the circumference times
the radius of the horizon. this may be considered a mass renormalization
of the w -boson. the scale of the renormalization is not the uv cuto, but
x2 6= y2, the
rather the scale of supersymmetry breaking.
wilson loop will contain a linear divergence proportional to the uv cuto.
the surface observables on the m5 brane theory, as calculated in ads7 
s4 have quadratic and logarithmic divergences [9, 18, 28]. taking the leg-
endre transformation will eliminate the quadratic divergence, but we are not
sure whether it will also remove the log divergence.

in addition, if

recently there were some attempts to go beyond the classical calculation
and include uctuations of the minimal surfaces [24, 25, 26]. one of the
goals was to nd the luscher term, the coulomb like correction to the
linear potential in a conning phase [27]. any attempt to perform such a
calculation will require using the correct neumann boundary conditions on
the spherical coordinates, and including the appropriate boundary terms.

finally we formulated the loop equations for those loops, and checked if
the ads ansatz satises them. for smooth loops, due to the supersymmetry,
the loop equations should give zero. this is indeed the result we nd also
from the variation of the minimal surface.

this calculation actually requires extending the prescription to loops that
do not satisfy the constraint. we propose that the natural extension for small
deviation from the constraint gives a linear divergence proportional to l.
this term is particularly important when we consider the loop equations for
loops with cusps. the expected result is nite and proportional to . this is
in fact what we nd, but we do not have enough control over the calculation
to compare the coecients.

38

the situation with self-intersecting loops is more mysterious, we expect
a non-zero answer, but cannot reproduce that. there are, however, some
reasons why this test is more dicult than the other cases. in particular, the
constraint is broken by a large amount at the intersection.

classical string theory tells us only how to calculate loops satisfying the
constraint. these are bps objects in loop space, and therefore easier to
control. as we argued, non-bps wilson loops are related to excited open
strings, but we are unable to evaluate them reliably. a similar statement
is true for local operators, one has control only over the chiral operators.
non-chiral operators should be given by excited closed string states. despite
the large eort devoted to testing the maldacena conjecture, there is still no
good understanding of non-bps objects.

acknowledgements

we thank korkut bardakci, sunny itzhaki, juan maldacena, joe polchinski,
bruno zumino. n.d. thanks theory group of uc berkeley and lbnl for
their hospitality. h.o. thanks the institute for theoretical physics at santa
barbara, department of mathematics and physics at university of amster-
dam, and theory group at cern, for their hospitality and for providing
excellent working environments.

the work of h.o. was supported in part by the nsf grant phy-95-14797
and the doe grant de-ac03-76sf00098. this work was supported in part
by the nsf under grant no. phy94-07194.

a derivation of the wilson loop

in this appendix, we will dene the coupling of the wilson loop to the bosonic
elds, a and i, in the n = 4 super yang-mills theory. we will pay special
attention to the eect of the wick rotation to the euclidean signature space.
in a gauge theory containing a matter eld in the fundamental representa-
tion of the gauge group, the wilson loop is derived by writing a correlation
function of the matter elds in terms of the rst quantized path integral over
trajectories of the corresponding particle. the resulting phase factor dictates
the proper coupling of the wilson loop to the gauge eld. the n = 4 super

yang-mills theory in 4 dimensions does not contain such elds. instead we
use w -bosons that appear when we break su(n + 1)  su(n)  u(1).

the bosonic action for the su(n + 1) theory is

39

s =

1
4

f 2

 +

1
2

( d i)2 

1
4

[ i, j]2.

by decomposing the gauge group to su(n)  u(1) as
wi

a =(cid:18) a w
a(cid:19)

w

i =(cid:18) i

wi mi(cid:19) ,

with 2 = 1, the action can be written as

(a.1)

(a.2)

f 2

 +

1
2

(di)2 

1
4

[i, j]2 +

(mi)2 + ([a])2

1
2

s = +

+

+

1
4
1
2
1
2

wi (cid:16)(k  mk)2ij  (i  mi)(j  mj)(cid:17) wj
((d  ia)wi)2 +   
1
(mi)2 +
4

((d  ia)wi)2

f 2
 +

1
2

1
2

= ssu (n ) +

+

1
2

wi (cid:16)(k  mk)2ij  (i  mi)(j  mj)(cid:17) wj +    ,(a.3)
where f and f are the eld strengths of the su(n) and u(1) factors
respectively. the    in the action represents terms in higher powers of wi,
etc. if i is in the 1 direction, the mass term for wi with i 6= 1 becomes

wi (1  m1)2wi  wi i(1  m1)w1.

(a.4)

with approximate mass eigen-values 1  m1. to simplify the following
analysis, we replace these terms with

w(1  m1)2w.

let us consider the correlation function

dw(x)w(x)w(y)w(y)e.

(a.5)

(a.6)

we can integrate over the w eld and nd

40

z dadidwdadmi e s w(x)w(x)w(y)w(y)
= z dmida exp(cid:18)z 1

(mi)2 +

1
4

2

(f)2(cid:19)z dadi essu (n)

hx|

2 (d  ia)2 + 1
 1
hy|

1

2(i  mi)2|yi

1

2 (d  ia)2 + 1
 1

2(i  mi)2|xi.

(a.7)

the correlation functions in this expression can be written as

hx|

1

2(i  mi)2|yi
2 (dia)2 1

2 (im i)2)|yi

 1
2 (d  ia)2 + 1
= z dthx|et ( 1
= z dtz x(t )=y
= z dtz x(t )=y

x(0)=x dx(s)dp(s) er t
x(0)=x dx(s) er t

ds( 1

0

0

ds(i xp 1

2 (p+a+a)2 1

2 (im i)2)

2 x2

+ia x+ia x 1

2 (im i)2).

(a.8)

combining everything together and integrating over y, we obtain

z dydw(x)w(x)w(y)w(y)e
= z dmi er 1
z da er 1

4 (f )2

2r t
x(0)=x dx(s) e 1

2 (m i)2z dtz x(t )=x
eh ds ia xz dadi essu (n) er ds(ia x 1

ds(x2

+m 2)

0

2 2

i +m ii).

(a.9)

lets examine (a.9) carefully. the rst term m 2r 1

2(i)2 is the action of
the i eld, which for large m becomes classical. the second term includes
an integral over all the closed paths through x. to dene the wilson loop
we just look at one such path, leaving the integration over paths for latter.
the next term in the exponent breaks reparametrization invariance and will
set x2
i , as shown below. the next term is the action for the abelian
gauge eld on the single brane and the eect of the wilson loop on it. since

 = 2

41

n  1 and we are taking the probe approximation, we should ignore this
term. as well see, for large m the 2 term will be subleading, so the last
term is simply the wilson loop

hw (x, i)i =z dadi essu (n) er ds(ia xii).

(a.10)

the term with x2 + m 2 is not reparametrization invariant. when we per-
form the integral over dierent parametrizations of the same path (including
the integral over t ) we nd a saddle point. a general parametrization is
s  s(s) such that s(0) = 0 and s( t ) = t . to integrate over dierent
parametrizations, we can perform the path integral over c(s) = ds/ds with
action

z t

0

ds

1

2(cid:18)1

c

2
x

 + cm 2(cid:19) +z t

0


ds(ia x

1
2

 c

2

i + cmii).

(a.11)

for large m the rst term dominates, so it will pick the saddle point

c(s)2 =

x2

m 2 ,

(a.12)

and indeed the 2 piece in the loop drops out.

combining them together, we obtain,

z dydw(x)w(x)w(y)w(y)e
= z dx(s) er ds m| x|z dadi essu (n) er 1

0

ds(ia x+| x|ii).(a.13)

the integral r ds| x|m is the length of the loop times the mass lm. since it

is a c-number independent of , we can ignore it as subleading in the large
 analysis in this paper. for the same reason, possible determinant factors
are also neglected in the above.

the calculation above can also be done in lorentzian signature. the

dierence is an extra i in (a.8)

hx|

2(d  ia)2 + 1
 1
= z dthx|eit (+ 1

1

2 (i  mi)2|yi
2 (dia)2 1

2 (im i)2)|yi.

(a.14)

the rest of the calculation carries through with this i showing up in dierent
places. the nal result is

42

z di eir 1

2 (i)2z dx(s) eir 1
z dadi eissu (n) eir 1

0

0

ds m| x|z da eir 1

ds(a x+| x|ii)

4 (f )2

eir ds a x

(a.15)

though it is less clear now why the term i( x2 + m 2) should dominate the
path integral to set the saddle point.

instead of the w -boson, we may consider a more general particle with an

arbitrary mass with a propagator

by the same calculation as above, we obtain the exponent

1

2(d  ia)2 + 1
(m 2 + m2) +z 1

0

z 1

0

dsq x2

2m2 .

1
2(i  mi)2 + 1
ds ia x +

m| x|

m 2 + m2

(a.16)

(a.17)

ii! .

excited states of the open strings have this propagator and can be used to
construct loops with x2 6= y2.
so far  is a constant. to construct loops which move in the  directions,
we have to use many probe d-branes, one for each value of  the loop goes
through. we start with su(n + m) and break to su(n)  su(m) which
will then be broken to su(n)u(1)m . likewise one should be able to couple
the loop to the fermions to get the supersymmetric loops used in appendix
c

b area of a cusp

b.1 at one point on s5

here we study the minimal surface near a cusp. we consider a loop on a
2-dimensional plane in 4 dimensions, staying at the same point on s5. we
take the opening angle of the cusp to be . we choose radial coordinates r
and  on the plane and use them to parametrize the worldsheet also. the
boundary conditions are (using the rst regularization discussed in 3.2)

y (r, 0) = y (r, ) = 0

(b.1)

to study the behavior of the surface near the cusp, we can use scale invariance
to set

y (r, ) =

using this ansatz, the area is

r

f ()

a =

1

2z dr d

1

rqf 4 + f 2 + f2

l =z dqf 4 + f 2 + f2.

e =

f 2 + f 4

f 4 + f 2 + f2

43

(b.2)

(b.3)

(b.4)

(b.5)

this reduces the minimal surface to a one-dimensional problem with the
eective lagrangian

since l does not depend explicitly on , the energy e given by

is conserved. at the minimum of f , the energy is given by

e = f0q1 + f 2

0 ,

substituting this back in (b.5),

(f0 = f (/2)).

(b.6)


2

0

d

= z /2
= f0q1 + f 2
= f0q1 + f 2

f0

0 z 
0 z 

0

=

i
f0

df

(z2 + f 2

fq(1 + f 2)(f 2  f 2
0 )q(z2 + f 2
,vuut 1 + 2f 2
0  ,

0
1 + f 2

0

arcsin i,q1 + 2f 2

f0

0 + 1)

0 )(f 2 + f 2
dz
0 + 1)(z2 + 2f 2

0 + 1)

(b.7)

where  is an elliptic integral of the third kind. the regularized action is
then

l = zrf ()

dqf 4 + f 2 + f2

0 + 1
0 + 1

z2 + 2f 2

= z dzvuut z2 + f 2
= iq1 + f 2

0 earcsin ivuut

r2

2  f 2
0
1 + 2f 2
0

,vuut1 + 2f 2

0
1 + f 2
0



44

(b.8)

where e is an elliptic integral of the second kind. for small , it diverges
linearly as 2r/  f (). the function f is obtained by solving (b.7) for f0
as a function of  and substituting it into l in the above. the total area is

a =

1

2z l

dr

1

r(cid:18)2r

  f ()(cid:19) =

2l
2 

1
2

f () log

l


.

(b.9)

this is the regular linear divergence plus a logarithmic divergence. after the
legendre transformation, we obtain

a = 

1
2

f () log

l


.

(b.10)

b.2 with a jump on s5

the same analysis can be done for a loop which jumps, at the cusp, to a
dierent point on s5 with a relative angle . we parametrize the string
worldsheet by r and , where  is a coordinate along the large circle con-
necting the 2 dierent points on s5. because of scale invariance, we can
set

y (r, ) =

,

(b.11)

r

f ()

for some function f (). the other angular parameter  is a function of 
only. the area is therefore

a =z dr d

1

rq f2 + (1 + f 2)(1 + f 22).

(b.12)

the problem is integrable since there are two conserved quantities,

e =

1 + f 2

q f2 + (1 + f 2)(1 + f 22)

j =

(1 + f 2) f 2

q f2 + (1 + f 2)(1 + f 22)

.

(b.13)

45

in general the result cannot be written in terms of elliptic integrals, and we
will leave it to the over motivated reader to nd simple expressions for those
integrals. if we set  = , there is no cusp in the x plane. in this case, the
integrals are simplied, and the results are expressed in terms of the elliptic
integrals.

c details of loop equation in n = 4 super

yang-mills theory

the bosonic part of the euclidean wilson loop is

w =

1
n

trper (ia x+i yi) ds

we can dene the bosonic part of the loop derivative to be

l = lim

0z dsz s+

s

ds 

2

x(s)x(s) 

2

yi(s)yi(s)!

(c.1)

(c.2)

the extra i in front of i yi in the exponent conspires with the relative minus
sign in the loop derivative to give the bosonic part of the equations of motion

lhwi = iz ds d(cid:16) x(df)a + i x[i, di]a + i yi(ddi)a
i yi[j, [i, j]]a(cid:17) trp t a(s)er (ia x+i yi) dse

(c.3)

this is a linear combination of the bosonic equations of motion for a and
i, but we are missing source terms due to the fermions. what we would
like to do here is to modify the functional dierential operator l, including
derivatives of fermionic variables, so that the full equations of motion are
reproduced. with such l, the loop equation can be written as

lhwi = i

g2
y m



n z ds*  x

ia! trp t a(s)er (ia x+i yi) ds+
= z dsz ds(cid:16) x(s) x(s)  yi(s) yi(s)(cid:17) 4(x(s)  x(s))w1w2

aa  i yi 

(c.4)

46

the euclidean super yang-mills theory has fermionic elds  which are
euclidean majorana fermions [29] with 16 complex components. the gamma
matrices m satisfy the dirac algebra in 10 dimensions with signature (10,0),
with the index m = (, i). the loop is parametrized by (x(s), yi(s)) and
their superpartner (s) coupling to the gauginos .

a natural choice for the supersymmetrized loop is

w =

1
n

trpher (s)q dser (ia x+i yi) dser (s)q dsi

(c.5)

here q is the generator of supersymmetry of the gauge theory, which acts as

m 

[q, am ] =

i
2
{q, } = 

1
4

m n f m n ,

(c.6)

where we have combined the gauge eld a and the scalars i into the 10-
dimensional gauge eld am and computed the eld strength fn m . one may
also include

[q, xm ] =

m 

(c.7)

i
4

in the exponent, but it does not aect our analysis since we will only be
interested at the top component of the grassmann algebra and at the end of
the calculation we set  = 0. the exponent of the wilson loop is therefore
given by

eq(ia x + i yi)eq

= (ia x + i yi) 

1
2

( x  i yii)

1
16



xf   + . . . .

(c.8)

we will write the loop equation only for loops satisfying the constraint
x2 = y2. therefore xm m = x  i yii is nilpotent. in this case, it is
useful to work in the basis where

x  i yii =(cid:18) 0

2| x| 0(cid:19)

0

 =

1

q| x|(cid:18) 1
2(cid:19)

 =(cid:18) 1
2(cid:19)

(c.9)

47

and

 =  tc

(c.10)
where c is the charge conjugation matrix. the majorana spinor in lorentzian
signature space satises the reality condition  = 0. in the euclidean case,
we do not impose any reality condition [29]. the exponent of the loop (c.8)
in this basis becomes

(ia x + i yi) q| x| 11 +

1

8q| x|f n m 1n m  + . . . .

by applying the fermionic derivative operator





(s)

 (s)

w 





1(s)

 1(s)

w,

1
| x|

(c.11)

(c.12)

we obtain the desired combination for the source terms in the equation of
motion,

| x| 11 = ( x + i yii).

(c.13)

all other terms contain at least one (s) and is not relevant for our analysis
of the loop at  = 0. thus we found the supersymmetric loop derivative
dened by

l = lim

0z dsz s+

s

ds 

2

x(s)x(s) 

2

yi(s)yi(s)

+



(s)



 (s)!

(c.14)
produces the variation of the action. for the loop at  = 0, this completes
the loop equation for the n = 4 super yang-mills theory.

references

[1] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theo-
ries and supergravity, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231 (1997); hep-
th/9711200.

[2] y.m. makeenko and a.a. migdal, exact equation for the loop av-
erage in multicolor qcd, phys. lett. 88b, 135 (1979); y. makeenko
and a.a. migdal, quantum chromodynamics as dynamics of loops,
nucl. phys. b188, 269 (1981).

48

[3] v.a. kazakov and i.k. kostov, nonlinear strings in two-dimensional

u() gauge theory, nucl. phys. b176, 321 (1980)

[4] j.h. schwarz, introduction to m theory and ads/cft duality, hep-

th/9812037.

[5] m.r. douglas and s. randjbar-daemi, two lectures on the ads/cft

correspondence, hep-th/9902022.

[6] g. t hooft, a planar diagram theory for strong interactions, nucl.

phys. b72, 461 (1974).

[7] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, gauge theory corre-
lators from noncritical string theory, phys. lett. b428, 105 (1998);
hep-th/9802109.

[8] e. witten, anti-de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math.

phys. 2, 253 (1998); hep-th/9802150.

[9] j. maldacena, wilson loops in large n field theories, phys. rev.

lett. 80, 4859 (1998); hep-th/9803002.

[10] s-j. rey and j. yee, macroscopic strings as heavy quarks in large n

gauge theory and anti-de sitter supergravity, hep-th/9803001.

[11] e. witten, anti-de sitter space, thermal phase transition, and con-
nement in gauge theories, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 505 (1998);
hep-th/9803131.

[12] a. brandhuber, n. itzhaki, j. sonnenschein and s. yankielowicz, wil-
son loops in the large n limit at finite temperature, phys. lett.
b434, 36 (1998); hep-th/9803137.

[13] k.g. wilson, connement of quarks, phys. rev. d10, 2445 (1974).

[14] d.z. freedman, s.d. mathur, a. matusis and l. rastelli, correlation

functions in the cftd/adsd+1 correspondence, hep-th/9804058.

[15] s. lee, s. minwalla, m. rangamani and n. seiberg, three point func-
tions of chiral operators in d = 4, n = 4 sym at large n, adv.
theor. math. phys. 2, 697 (1998); hep-th/9806074.

49

[16] l. susskind and e. witten, the holographic bound in anti-de sitter

space, hep-th/9805114.

[17] n. drukker, d.j. gross and h. ooguri, announced by gross at the

conference, strings 98,
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/strings98/gross/oh/10.html.

[18] d. berenstein, r. corrado, w. fischler and j. maldacena, the oper-
ator product expansion for wilson loops and surfaces in the large n
limit, hep-th/9809188.

[19] a.w. peet and j. polchinski, uv/ir relations in ads dynamics, phys.

rev. d59, 065006 (1999); hep-th/9809022.

[20] a.m. polyakov, string theory and quark connement, nucl. phys.

proc. suppl. 68, 1 (1997); hep-th/9711002.

[21] a.a. migdal, loop equations and 1/n expansion, phys. rept. 102,

199 (1984).

[22] a.m. polyakov, gauge fields and strings, harwood (1987) 301 p.

(contemporary concepts in physics, 3).

[23] r.a. brandt, a. gocksch, m.a. sato and f. neri, loop space, phys.

rev. d26, 3611 (1982).

[24] s. forste, d. ghoshal and s. theisen, stringy corrections to the wilson

loop in n = 4 super yang-mills theory, hep-th/9903042.

[25] j. greensite and p. olesen, worldsheet fluctuations and the heavy

quark potential in the ads/cft approach, hep-th/9901057.

[26] s. naik, improved heavy quark potential at finite temperature from

anti-de sitter supergravity, hep-th/9904147.

[27] m. luscher, k. symanzik and p. weisz, anomalies of the free loop
wave equation in the wkb approximation, nucl. phys. b173, 365
(1980).

[28] c.r. graham and e. witten, conformal anomaly of submanifold ob-

servables in ads/cft correspondence, hep-th/9901021.

[29] h. nicolai, a possible constructive approach to (super-3)4 (i). eu-

clidean formulation of the model, nucl. phys. b140, 294 (1978).

50

