9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
5
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
6
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

quantum observables, lie algebra homology

and tqft.

albert schwarz

math. dept., university of california, davis, ca 95616, usa

schwarz@math.ucdavis.edu

february 1, 2008

abstract

let us consider a lie (super)algebra g spanned by t where t
are quantum observables in bv-formalism. it is proved that for every
tensor c1...k that determines a homology class of the lie algebra g
the expression c1...k t1
...tk is again a quantum observables. this
theorem is used to construct quantum observables in bv sigma-model.
we apply this construction to explain kontsevichs results about the
relation between homology of the lie algebra of hamiltonian vector
elds and topological invariants of manifolds.

in this paper we obtain some general results about quantum observables
in batalin-vilkovisky formalism. namely, we formulate conditions when a
polynomial expression in quantum variables is again a quantum variable.
this result can be applied in many concrete situations; we use it to analyze
topological bv sigma-model introduced in [4]. we consider bv sigma-model
where the target is a linear symplectic space; the model can be considered as
bv formulation of abelian chern-simons theory. it is well known [6] that the
partition function of this theory is related to ray-singer torsion. we show
that appropriate correlation functions are related to topological invariants
considered in [5].

research supported in part by nsf grant no. dms-9801009, by ihes and by mittag-

leer institute

1

first of all we will remind the notions of cohomology and homology of
lie algebras and describe the relation of these notions to observables in bv
formalism.

2f 

cc 

let g denote a lie algebra with generators t. to dene the cohomology
of g we consider the dierential q = 1
c acting on the space of
polynomials depending on anticommuting ghost variables c. we have q2 =
0 and therefore we can dene cohomology as ker q/im q. to dene k-
dimensional cohomology we restrict ourselves to the space of polynomials of
degree k, (or, equivalently to antisymmetric tensors with k lower indices).
homology of the lie algebra g can be dened as a linear space, dual to the
cohomology; one can give direct denition in terms of a dierential acting
on antisymmetric tensors with upper indices or on functions depending on
anticommuting variables c. if the lie algebra g has dimension n and n-
dimensional (co)homology of g is non-trivial, there exists an isomorphism
between k-dimensional homology and (n  k)-dimensional cohomology of
g (duality). this isomorphism can be constructed by means of duality of
tensors, or, equivalently, by means of superanalog of the fourier transform:
if f (c1, ..., cn ) is a cocycle, then the function

z f (c1, ..., cn ) exp(cc)dc1...dcn

(1)

can be considered as a cycle of the lie algebra g.
(the volume element
on g used in the denition of fourier transform should correspond to a
nontrivial cohomology class of g.) if g is an innite-dimensional lie algebra
one should be more careful with the denition of homology and cohomology;
however, again with appropriate denitions we obtain duality between ( 
k) -dimensional cohomology and k-dimensional homology.

one can generalize the denition of homology and cohomology to the
case when g is a lie superalgebra. in this case one should understand the
antisymmetry of tensors that determine homology and cohomology classes
in the sense of superalgebra. if we use ghost variables c and c we should
assume that (c) = (c) = (t) + 1 (i.e.the parity of these variables is
opposite to the parity of generators t of lie superalgebra g.)
in other
words, q acts on functions dened on g in the case of cohomology and on
g in the case of homology;  stand for the parity reversion.

we will work in the framework of bv-formalism (see [1], [2]).
our starting point is an sp -manifold m (a manifold pasted together from
domains in rn|n by means of transformations preserving volume and odd

2

symplectic form dxidi). one can dene an operator , satisfying 2 = 0,
on an sp -manifold (in local coordinates  = 2/xii). the operator 
transforms a function f into a function f = 1
2 div kf , where kf stands
for the hamiltonian vector eld, corresponding to f . it is related to the
odd poisson bracket {, } coresponding to the odd symplectic form dxidi by
the formula

(kl) = k  l + (1)(k)k  l + (1)(k){k, l}.

(2)

one can describe sp -manifold as an odd symplectic manifold (p -manifold)
equipped with a volume element, that is compatible with symplectic struc-
ture. (the compatibility condition is 2 = 0 where f = 1

2 div kf .)

an action functional in the bv-formalism is an even function s on an
sp -manifold m, obeying the quantum master equation  exp s
h = 0 or
equivalently 2hs + {s, s} = 0. a quantum observable is a function a on
m satisfying ha + {a, s} = 0, or (h + q)a, where qa = {a, s}. it is
important to notice, that a quantum observable a in our denition is not
necessarily an even function on m. the expression

ae

s

h d

zl

where l is a lagrangian submanifold of m depends only on homology class
of l and has the meaning of expectation value of a. if a quantum observable
a can be represented in the form a = hb + {b, s} then its expectation
value vanishes; we say in this case that the observable a is trivial.

proposition. a) if a and b are quantum observables then {a, b} is also
a quantum observable. (in other words quantum observables constitute a lie
superalgebra.)

b)let us suppose that quantum observables t span a lie (super)algebra
t) and that antisymmetric tensor c1,...,k species a

g (i.e. {t, t} = f 
homology class of g. then

t = c1...kt1...tk .

is also a quantum observable.
homology class the corresponding observable is also trivial.

if the tensor c1...k belongs to the trivial

one can derive these statements by means of straightforward calculations
based on the denition of homology, on the relation {s, kl} = {s, k}  l +
(1)(k)k  {s, l} and on the formula (2).

3

notice, that it was proved in [3] that with appropriate denition of sym-
metries in bv-formalism one can construct a one-to-one correspondence be-
tween quantum observables and symmetry transformations. the statement
a) follows immediately from this result (see appendix for more details).

there exist serious diculties in application of the above statement to
quantum eld theory. in quantum eld theory we should consider innite-
dimensonal manifolds; the operator  is ill-dened and therefore we en-
counter the standard problems related to ultraviolet divergences in the de-
nition of quantum observable. however, we will show that formal application
of our theorem leads to interesting results.

let us apply the above consideration to the bv sigma model [4]. let
us denote by e the space of maps of  = t x into m. if x is an odd-
dimensional compact manifold and m is a manifold, equipped with even
symplectic structure we dene an odd symplectic structure on e by means
of the form

f (1, 2) = z

f ()(1(), 2())d

innitesi-
where 1 and 2 are elements of the tangent space tf (e) (i.e.
mal variations of f ), d stands for the standard measure on  = t x,  =
(x, ), where x are coordinates on x and  can be identied with anti-
commuting dierentials of coordinates,  = abdzadzb denotes the symplectic
form on m. the de rham dierential induces an odd vector eld q on e
obeying {q, q} = 0 and preserving the odd symplectic structure on e. the
hamiltonian s of this vector eld satises {s, s} = 0; by denition s is an
action functional of bv sigma model. in other words, s can be determined
from the equation

s

a = ab() b

x

it is important to emphasize the obvious fact that the action functional s is
invariant with respect to symplectic transformations of m and to dieomor-
phisms of x. this means that the corresponding physical quantities should
be invariants of smooth structure of x and symplectic structure of m (if the
symmetries are not anomalous).

notice that s satises not only classical, but also quantum master equa-
tion (i.e. s = 0). the space e is innite-dimensional, therefore  is
ill-dened; however we can use the fact that the equation s = 0 is equiv-
alent to the equation divq = 0. in other words, we should check that the

4

vector eld q is volume preserving. it is clear that for reasonable denition
of the volume element on e this fact is correct.

this construction can be modied in dierent ways. in particular, one
it is equipped with an
can assume that m is a symplectic q-manifold (i.e.
odd vector eld q, obeying {q, q} = 0 and preserving symplectic structure.)
one can suppose, that x is even-dimensional; then instead of even symplectic
structure on m one should consider an odd symplectic structure. in all these
cases one can construct an action functional of bv sigma model. it is shown
in [4], that many interesting models (including chern-simons theory) can be
regarded as particular cases of general construction described above.

we will consider the simplest case when m is a linear symplectic space
and x is odd-dimensional, however, our main ideas can be applied also in
general situation. if m is linear, we can assume that ab does not depend on
 and represent the action functional in the form

s = z aba b
x .

(3)

(indices a, b run over the set {1, ..., dim m}.)

one can consider the elds a as inhomogeneous dierential forms on x;

then the functional (3) can be rewritten as follows:

s = z abadb.

we see that corresponding eld theory can be interpreted as abelian chern-
simons theory in bv-formalism. we will study correlation function of this
theory.
(the partition function can be expressed in terms of ray-singer
torsion [6].)

let us consider the lie algebra h of polynomial hamiltonian vector elds
on m. it can be identied with the lie algebra of polynomials p () on m
with respect to poisson bracket.
(more precisely, we should factorize the
algebra of polynomials with respect to constants.) one can consider h as
an algebra of symmetries of (3). namely, every polynomial p () determines
a vector eld  = ab p
b on m; the same formula where a are regarded
as functions on  species a vector eld on e, preserving the functional s.
corresponding hamiltonian has the form

p = z p ((x, ))dxd.

5

it is clear that {p , s} = 0, i.e. p is a classical observable.

to check that p is a quantum observable, one should prove that cor-
responding vector eld preserves volume element on e (i.e. there exists
no quantum anomaly). in one-loop approximation one can express quantum
anomaly in terms of seeley coecients and zero modes [6]. we assumed that
the manifold x is odd-dimensional; it follows from this assumption that rel-
evant seeley coecients vanish; requiring that x be a homology sphere we
arrive at a conclusion that the symmetries at hand are not anomalous (see
comments at the end of the paper for more precise statements).

it follows from the above consideration that every homology class of the
lie algebra h corresponds to a quantum observable. kontsevich proved
[5] that every homology class of the graph complex constructed in [5] gen-
erates a homology class of h. we will calculate the expectation value of
corresponding quantum observable; the expression we obtain is closely re-
lated to the constructions of [5]. observables we study can be represented
as p c. here  is an oriented graph,  can be constructed by means of
standard feynman rules; every edge contributes ab, every vertex contributes
a1(z)...ak (z). (we assign a point z   to every vertex and two indices
a, b  a to every edge.  can be obtained by means of integration over all
points of  and summation over all indices).

one can check that in the case when p c is a cycle in the graph com-
plex, constructed in [5], the expression p c is a quantum observable. to
verify this fact we x a basis of h consisting of generators t a1....ak that cor-
respond to hamiltonians a1...ak . using feynman rules we construct for
every oriented graph  an element  of antisymmetric part of product h l,
where l is the number of vertices of . namely we assign ab to every edge
and t a1....ak to every vertex; to dene  we take tensor product of elements
of h, corresponding to every vertex, multiplied by the product of all ab,
corresponding to the vertices, and sum over repeating indices. in the case
when p c is a cycle in the graph complex, one can prove that p c de-
termines an element of the homology group of the lie algebra h [5]. this
remark together with the relation between homology of lie algebras and ob-
servables leads to the consideration of the observables p c. we should
expect that expectation values of these observables are invariants of smooth
manifold x; we will see that they coincide with invariants constructed in [5].
now we can calculate expectation values of observables at hand using
again the feynman diagram technique.
(we consider only connected dia-
grams; in other words we normalize the observables dividing by the partition

6

nction.) we obtain new edges connecting the same vertices, the propaga-
tor corresponding to new edges has the form ab(z1, z2). (the propagator
depends on the choice of lagrangian submanifold in the functional integral
for the expectation value; see [5] for the description of (z1, z2).) we do
not discuss the derivation of the diagram technique in detail; very similar
problem is thoroughly analyzed in [7]. taking into account that abbc = ac
we see that one can get non-zero contribution only in the case when new
edges coincide with old ones. the contribution of a graph  to the expecta-
tion value of p c is equal to c, multiplied by the integral over  of the
product of factors (zi, zj), corresponding to the edges of  (here zi, zj  ).
we see that the diagrams for expectation values of observables p c co-
incide with the diagrams for invariants of smooth manifold x dened in [5].
our consideration can be regarded as a heuristic derivation of kontsevich
invariants.

we skipped several subtle points in our exposition. first of all the as-
sumption that our manifold x is a homology sphere is not sucient to ex-
clude anomalies alltogether. however, the anomaly related to non-zero ho-
mology groups in dimensions 0 and dim x can be easily taken into account. (
kontsevich removes one point from x and considers the result as a euclidean
space with topology perturbed in a compact subset to avoid this anomaly.)
our consideration prompts an idea how to generalize kontsevich construc-
tions to the case when x is not a homology sphere. we mentioned already
that the partition function of the model we used is related to ray-singer
torsion. it is well known that in the case when the manifold x is not acyclic
one should consider the torsion as a measure on the linear superspace h(x)
( on the direct sum of cohomology groups of x ); this measure is an invariant
of x ( see for example [6], [8]). the expectation values of observables we
studied can lead to invariants of similar nature.

it seems that the above consideration can be used also to generalize kont-

sevich invariants to the case of manifolds with boundary.

acknowledgment.

i am deeply indebted to m.kontsevich for many

useful discussions.

appendix. quantum and classical observables.

let us formulate some of results of [3]. we consider an sp-manifold m
with volume element d. new volume element d = ed determines an
sp-structure on m i  + 1
2h 
satises the quantum master equation with respect to the new sp-structure
and is physically equivalent to the original action functional s, i.e. for every

4{, } = 0. the functional s = s  1

7

observable a we nave

zl

ae s/hd = zl

aes/hd.

(an observable with respect to s can be considered also as an observable with
respect to s.) one can use the freedom in the choice of volume element on m
to replace the action functional s with physically equivalent action functional
s = 0; then an observable can be characterized as a function a obeying
a = 0 or as a vector eld preserving the odd symplectic structure and the
new volume element. this description of observables makes the statement
a) of proposition 1 obvious and simplies the proof of the statement b).

it follows from the results of [3] that in quantum bv-formalism one can
consider an action functional as a volume element on an odd symplectic
manifold, that is compatible with symplectic structure (determines an sp-
structure). however, such an approach is not convenient if we would like to
relate quantum bv-formalism to the classical one.

in classical case the main object is a solution to the classical master
equation {s, s} = 0 where s is an even function on odd symplectic man-
ifold. a classical observable is a function a obeying {a, s} = 0.
it is
clear the functional s is invariant with respect to the hamiltonian vector
eld ka corresponding to the observable a. we see that in classical case
the identication of observables and symmetries and the fact that observ-
ables constitute a (super) lie algebra are obvious. we can arrive at these
notions taking the limit h  0 in quantum master equation and in the
denition of quantum observable. the most important action functionals
and observables obey both quantum and classical equations (i.e.
satisfy
s = {s, s} = 0, a = 0,
{a, s} = 0). let us consider a solution
s to the classical master equation {s, s} = 0 and a set of observables t
that constitute a lie algebra g.

in other words, we suppose that we have functionals t on m obeying
{s, t } = 0 and {t, t} = f 
 are structure constants of
the lie algebra g. then we can consider a new odd symplectic manifold
m adding ghosts c and corresponding antields c
. (more formally, m =
m  g  g.) one can extend s to m , taking

t, where f 

s = s +

1
2

f 
ccc



we obtain a new solution to the master equation. we will be interested in
classical observables corresponding to the functional s, i.e. functions on m ,

8

obeying { s, t } = 0. it is easy to check that observables depending only on
the ghosts c can be identied with cohomology of the lie algebra g.

if the action functional s satises both classical and quantum master
equation (i.e. {s, s} = 0 and s = 0) and t are not only classical, but
also quantum observables, one can prove the following relation:

zl

aes/hd = z l

ae s/hd.

(4)

here a is an observable for s, corresponding to a homology  of the algebra g
and a is an observable for s corresponding the cohomology class of g that is
dual to . (we dene a lagrangian submanifold l  m as a direct product of
l and lagrangian submanifold in gg that is singled out by the equations
c
 = 0). to dene duality between lie algebra homology and cohomology
we need a non-trivial class of n-dimensional (co)homology of g; the same
class should be used to dene a volume element in m = m  g  g. the
formula (4) follows immediately from the denition of duality in terms of
fourier transform.)

references.

1. i.batalin, g.vilkovisky, quantization of gauge theeories with linearly

dependent generators. phys, rev. d 28 (1983), 2567-2582.

2. a. schwarz, geometry of batalin-vilkovisky quantisation, comm.

math. phys. 155 (1993), no. 2, 249-260.

3. a.schwarz, symmetry transformations in batalin-vilkovisky formal-

ism, lett. math. phys. 31 (1994), no. 4, 299-301.

4. m.alexandrov, a.schwarz, o,zaboronsky, m.kontsevich, the geom-
etry of the master equation and topological quantum eld theory, internat.
j. modern phys. a 12 (1997), no. 7, 1405-1429.

5. m.kontsevich, feynman diagrams and low-dimensional topology, first
european congress of mathematics, vol.ii (paris,1992), 97-121, progr. math.,
120, birkhaeuser, basel, 1994.

6. a.schwarz, the partition function of a degenerate functional, comm.

math. phys. 67 (1979), 1-16.

9

7. s.axelrod, i.singer, chern-simons perturbation theory, in: dierential

geometric methods in theoretical physis, vol. 1, pp. 3-45, new york, 1991.

8, a. schwarz, yu. tyupkin, quantization of antisymmetric tensors and

ray-singer torsion, nucl. phys. b 242 (1984) 436-446.

10

