9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
4
2

 

 
 

2
v
0
0
2
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

rome prep.1249/99
hep-th/9904200

the abelian projection versus the hitchin

fibration of k(d) pairs in four-dimensional qcd

marco bochicchio

infn sezione di roma

dipartimento di fisica, universita di roma la sapienza

piazzale aldo moro 2 , 00185 roma

abstract

we point out that the concept of abelian projection gives us a physical in-
terpretation of the role that the hitchin bration of parabolic k(d) pairs
plays in the large-n limit of four-dimensional qcd.
this physical interpretation furnishes also a simple criterium for the conne-
ment of electric uxes in the large-n limit of qcd.
there is also an alternative, compatible interpretation, based on the qcd
string.

april 1999

1 introduction

some years ago t hooft introduced the concept of abelian projection [1] into
non-abelian gauge theories, in order to explain the connement of quarks in
four-dimensional qcd as a dual meissner eect in a dual superconductor
[2, 3].
the abelian projection allows us, by a careful choice of the gauge, to describe
the physical variables of a non-abelian su(n) gauge theory, without scalar
matter elds, as a set of electric charges and magnetic monopoles interacting
via a residual u(1)n 1 abelian gauge coupling.
the occurrence of magnetic monopoles into a non-abelian gauge theory with-
out matter elds is perhaps the most crucial feature of the abelian projection,
that furnishes a precise understanding of the structure of the phases of non-
abelian gauge theories, according to the following alternatives [4].
if there is a mass gap, either the electric charge condenses in the vacuum
(higgs phase) or the magnetic charge does (connement phase). if there is
no mass gap, the electric and magnetic uxes coexist (coulomb phase).
recently, in an apparently unrelated development [5], some mathematical
control was gained over the large-n limit of four-dimensional qcd, map-
ping, by means of a chain of changes of variables, the function space of the
qcd functional integral into an elliptic bration of hitchin bundles.
hitchin bundles [6] are themselves a bration of u(1) bundles over spectral
branched covers of a riemann surface, that, in the case of [5], is a torus.
in this paper, we point out that the map in [5] is a version, in a perhaps
global algebraic-geometric setting, of the concept of abelian projection [1].
in fact, the branching points of the spectral cover are identied with the
magnetic monopoles of the abelian projection, the parabolic points of the
cover with (topological) electric charges and the u(1) gauge group on the
cover with a global version (on the cover) of the u(1)n 1 gauge group of the
abelian projection.
the identications that we have just outlined provide a physical interpre-
tation of the mathematical construction in [5].
indeed it is precisely this
physical interpretation that explains naturally why the functional integral,
once it is expressed as a functional measure supported over the collective
eld of the hitchin bration, is dominated by a saddle-point condition in the
large-n limit.

1

on the other side, we may think that the mathematical proof, that the vari-
ables of the abelian projection really capture the physics of four-dimensional
qcd in the large-n limit, relies on the fact that those variables may be em-
ployed to dominate the functional integral in the large-n limit.
the only qualitative feature, in the treatment in [5], that was not already
present in the concept of the abelian projection, is the occurrence of rie-
mann surfaces and it is due to the global algebraic-geometric nature of the
methods in [5]. this, however, makes contact, at least qualitatively, with an-
other long-standing conjecture about the qcd connement, the occurrence
of string world sheets [7] and the string program [8].
our last concluding remark is that the electric/magnetic alternative [4] and
the physical interpretation based on the abelian projection, applied in the
mathematical framework of [5], give us a simple qualitative criterium to char-
acterize the connement phase of qcd in the large-n limit: connement is
equivalent to magnetic condensation, in absence of electric (parabolic) sin-
gularities of the spectral covers.
an alternative, compatible interpretation, based on the idea that qcd is
equivalent, in the large-n limit, to a theory of strings [7, 8] is outlined in the
following section. the rest of the paper is devoted to a technical explana-
tion of the correspondence between the abelian projection and the hitchin
bration in four-dimensional qcd.

2 the hitchin bration as the abelian pro-
jection in the gauge in which the higgs cur-
rent is a triangular matrix

the abelian projection, according to [1], is really the choice of a gauge-xing
in such a way that, after the gauge-xing, the theory is no longer locally in-
variant under su(n) but only under its cartan subgroup u(1)n 1. the
important point about this projection is that it is dened strictly locally,
that is, the gauge rotation  performed at each point in space-time to im-
plement the gauge-xing condition, does not depend on the values of the
physical elds in other points of space-time. this then guarantees that all
observables in the new gauge frame are still locally observable. there are no

2

propagating ghosts. but  is not completely dened. there is a subgroup,
u(1)n 1, of gauge rotations that may still be performed. and this is why the
theory, after the abelian projection, looks like a local u(1)n 1 gauge theory.
if one now tries to gauge-x this remaining gauge freedom, one discovers that
it cannot be done locally, without encountering apparent diculties. but lo-
cal gauge-xing is not needed, since the residual gauge symmetry is the one
of a familiar abelian theory.
there may be, however, isolated points, where the local gauge-xing condi-
tion has coinciding eigenvalues, where the gauge symmetry is not u(1)n 1
but a larger group. here singularities appear, the magnetic monopoles. so
we see that, topologically, the full theory can only be topologically equivalent
to the u(1)n 1 gauge theory if the latter is augmented with monopole sin-
gularities where the u(1) conservation laws for the vortices are broken down
into the (less restrictive) conservation laws of the su(n) vortices.
when we try to gauge-x completely, we hit upon the dirac strings, whose
end points are the magnetic monopoles.
in addition to the magnetic monopoles, in the qcd case, the gauge-xed
theory contains also gluon and quark elds, that are charged with respect to
the residual u(1)n 1.
therefore we have a set of electric charges and magnetic monopoles interact-
ing via a residual u(1)n 1 abelian gauge coupling.
we now compare this description with the one that arises in [5], for the pure
gauge theory without quark matter elds.
the functional integral for qcd in [5] is dened in terms of the variables
(az, az, z, z), obtained by means of a partial duality transformation from
(az, az, au, au), where (z, z, u, u) are the complex coordinates on the prod-
uct of two two-dimensional tori, over which the theory is dened.
(az, az, z, z) dene the coordinates of an elliptic bration of t a, the
cotangent bundle of unitary connections on the (z, z) torus, whose base is
the (u, u) torus.
z transforms as a eld strength by gauge transformations and it is a non-
hermitian matrix.
following hitchin [6], the gauge is chosen in which z is a triangular matrix,
for example lower triangular, that leaves a u(1)n 1 residual gauge freedom
as in the abelian projection.
the points in space-time where z has a pair of coinciding eigenvalues, cor-
respond to monopoles.
in addition there are the charged components of

3

(az, az, z, z). we have thus a set of charges and monopoles with a resid-
ual u(1)n 1, according to the abelian projection.
in [5], however, it is found a dense set in the functional integral over (the
elliptic bration of) t a, with the property that the quotient by the action
of the gauge group exists as a hausdor (separable) manifold.
this dense set is dened in [5] as the set of pairs (a, ) that are solutions of
the following dierential equations (elliptically bered over the (u, u) torus):

fa  i   =

a =

a

 =

1
|d|
1
|d|
1
|d|

x
p

x
p

x
p

0

ppidz  dz

ppdz  dz

ppdz  dz

(1)

where p is the two-dimensional delta-function localized at zp and (0
p, p, p)
are the set of levels for the moment maps. the moment maps are the three
hamiltonian densities generating gauge transformations on t a that appear
in the left hand sides of eq.(1) [9].
0
p are hermitian traceless matrices, and p are matrices in the complexica-
tion of the lie algebra of su(n), that determine the residues of the poles
the higgs current .  and  are the z and z components of the one-form
.
eq.(1) denes a dense stratication of the functional integral over t a be-
cause the set of levels is dense everywhere in function space, in the sense of
the distributions, as the divisor d gets larger and larger.
eq.(1) denes the data of parabolic k(d) pairs [10] on a torus valued in
the lie algebra of the complexication of su(n): a holomorphic connection
a of a holomorphic bundle, e, with a parabolic structure and a parabolic
morphism  of the parabolic bundle. the parabolic structure at a point
p [11, 10] consists in the choice of a set of ordered weights, that are pos-
itive real numbers modulo 1, and a ag structure, that is a collection of
nested subspaces f  f  ...fi labelled by the weights 1  2  ...k,
with the associated multiplicities dened as: mi+1 = dimfi+  imfi. a
parabolic morphism, , is a holomorphic map between parabolic bundles,
e 1, e 2, that preserves the parabolic ag structure at each parabolic point p
in the sense that 1
|+). we should now explain

j implies (f 

i > 2

i )  (f 

4

how a parabolic structure arises from eq.(1) and how it follows that  is a
parabolic morphism with respect to the given parabolic structure. though
we are going to choose the gauge in which  is a lower triangular matrix in
most of this paper, we start at an intermediate stage with a gauge in which
0
p is diagonal. the eigenvalues of 0
p modulo 2 and divided by 2 dene the
parabolic weights. their multiplicities will turn out to be the multiplicities
of the yet to be dened ag structure.
fixed 0
p and p in eq.(1), let (ek) be an orthonormal basis of the eigen-
vectors of 0
p in decreasing order. this basis is not necessarily unique if the
eigenvalues have non-trivial multiplicities. however the corresponding ag
structure will not be aected by this lack of uniqueness. let g be the gauge
transformation that puts  and  into lower triangular form. let (gek) be
the transformed basis and let f be the ag obtained by taking the unions
of subspaces generated by the vectors in the transformed basis that are the
images of eigenvectors of the ordered eigenvalues with the given multiplic-
ity in such a way that the multiplicities of the resulting ag are the same
as the multiplicities of the eigenvalues. in addition, by construction,  is a
parabolic morphism with respect to the ag since it is holomorphic and lower
triangular in the basis (gek).
we have thus the data of a parabolic k(d) pair from eq.(1).
there is also a representation theoretic interpretation of eq.(1).
the three equations for the moment maps are equivalent to a vanishing cur-
vature condition for the non-hermitian connection one-form b = a + i plus
a harmonic condition for  away from the parabolic divisor [12].
therefore the set of solution of eq.(1) can be gured out essentially as a
collection of monodromies around the points of the divisor with values in
the complexied gauge group, that form a representation of the fundamental
group of the torus with the points of the parabolic divisor deleted.
t hooft description of the abelian projection previously outlined, applies to
t a and to its dense subset dened by eq.(1) a fortiori. in addition, we
have just shown that there is an embedding of the solutions of eq.(1) into
the parabolic k(d) pairs.
however, on the parabolic k(d) pairs, t hooft concept of abelian projec-
tion can be carried to its extreme consequences.
indeed, in the global algebraic-geometric framework of the hitchin bration
[6, 10] of parabolic k(d) pairs, it is preferable to concentrate ourselves on
the rst eigenvalue and the rst eigenstate of the lower triangular matrix

5

z, since all the information of the original parabolic bundle, up to gauge
equivalence, can be reconstructed from these only data [6].
the rst eigenvalue denes a spectral covering, that is a branched cover of
the two-torus. the eigenspace denes a section of a line bundle, that deter-
mines a u(1) connection on the cover of the torus, instead of the u(1)n 1
bundle on the torus of the abelian projection.
the u(1) connection on the cover, a, and the eigenvalue, , of the higgs
current can be considered as coordinates of the cotangent bundle of unitary
u(1) connections on the cover, or as parabolic k(d) pairs (a, ) on the cover,
valued in the complexication of the lie algebra of u(1).
the system is now completely abelianized. correspondingly, not only the
magnetic charges, but also the electric ones can occur only as gauge invari-
ant topological congurations.
the points in space-time where z has a pair of coinciding eigenvalues, that
in the abelian projection correspond to monopoles, are here, according to
hitchin, simple branching points of the spectral covers, dened by means of
the characteristic equation:

det(1  z) = 0,

(2)

in which the coordinates (u, u) are kept xed.
all the other branching points can be obtained by collision of these simple
branching points, in the same way monopoles can in the abelian projection.
the branching points are the end points of string cuts on the riemann sur-
faces, the dirac strings of the abelian projection.
these riemann surfaces, the only additional global ingredient with respect
to the abelian projection, are interpreted as the world sheets of strings made
by electric ux lines.
a closed string of electric ux is represented by a wilson loop of the u(1)
connection a on the cover, along a non-trivial generator of the fundamental
group of the surface.
in addition, the riemann surfaces, dened by the spectral equation, may
posses parabolic points, associated to poles of the eigenvalues of the higgs
current z, whose origin is in the parabolic singularities of the original
suc(n)-valued k(d) pair, which may be reected into a parabolic struc-
ture for the uc(1)-valued k(d) pair on the cover.
these poles, together with the ones of the u(1) connection, are interpreted as
electric charges. indeed it is not dicult to see that they are electric sources,

6

that appear where a boundary-electric loop shrinks to a point.
therefore, the electric charges occur here as topological objects associated
to the parabolic degree [11] of the uc(1)-valued k(d) pair. on the other
side, magnetic topological quantum numbers are associated, as usual, to the
ordinary degree of the u(1) bundle.
we should mention however that a subtlety arises in our interpretation of
the hitchin bration in terms of the abelian projection. as we mentioned
in the rst part of this section, in the abelian projection the gauge-xing
condition leaves a residual non-abelian gauge symmetry where a magnetic
monopole occurs. this is essentially due to the fact that t hooft chooses to
diagonalize a hermitian functional of the elds. on the contrary, in the case
of the dense set dened by eq.(1), since  is a non-hermitian matrix, it can
only be put in triangular form. this gauge-xing does not leave in general
a residual compact non-abelian gauge symmetry even when the eigenvalues
coincide. however this diculty can be resolved in the following way, antici-
pating somehow some of the conclusions of this paper and the result of [13].
let us require for the moment that the levels of the non-hermitian moment
maps be nilpotent. since these are only n conditions at each parabolic point
they do not modify essentially the entropy of the functional integration in
the large-n limit. the true physical meaning of this choice has to do with
connement and it is explained in [13].
if the residues of the higgs eld
are nilpotent, eq.(1) can be interpreted as the vanishing condition for the
moment maps of the action of the compact su(n) gauge group on the pair
(a, ) and on the cotangent space of coadjoint orbits [14]:

fa  i   

1
|d|

x
p

0

ppidz  dz = 0

a 

a  

1
|d|
1
|d|

x
p

x
p

nppdz  dz = 0

nppdz  dz = 0

(3)

in addition the quotient under the action of the compact gauge group is
hyper-kahler [10]. by a general result of hitchin, karlhede, lindstrom and
rocek [15], the hyper-kahler quotient under the action of the compact gauge
group in eq.(3) is the same as the quotient dened by the non-hermitian

7

moment maps:

a 

a  

1
|d|
1
|d|

x
p

x
p

nppdz  dz = 0

nppdz  dz = 0

(4)

under the action of the complexication of the gauge group. we can there-
fore impose a gauge condition compatible with the compact action in eq.(3)
or a gauge condition compatible with the action of the complexied group in
eq.(4) getting the same moduli space. in the second case we choose the gauge
in which  is diagonal. this condition becomes singular where two or more
eigenvalues coincide. in fact it cannot be extended continuously to the points
where the eigenvalues coincide. there it can only be required that z be a
triangular matrix. however this condition leaves now a residual non-abelian
gauge symmetry in the complexication of the gauge group: the freedom of
making triangular gauge transformations, thus conrming our analogy with
t hooft denition of magnetic monopoles.
to summarize, the ingredients of the hitchin bration of the suc(n)- val-
ued k(d) pairs, are the branching points, that are interpreted as magnetic
monopoles, and the u(1) monodromies around closed loops, that are inter-
preted as electric lines. in addition, the ordinary degree of the u(1) bundle
is interpreted as a (topological) magnetic charge, while the parabolic degree
[11] of the u(1) bundle is interpreted as a (topological) electric charge.
the dierence here, with the letter but not with the spirit of the abelian
projection, is that the system has been completely abelianized, so that both
the magnetic and the electric charges are topological. we are thus given a
set of charges and monopoles with a u(1) gauge group on the covering, in
analogy with the abelian projection.
we call this description a complete abelian projection.
the string interpretation is as follows. the spectral covers are the world
sheets of strings, made by the electric ux lines. the connement condition
is equivalent to requiring that only closed string world sheet occur, since con-
nement requires that the ux lines can never break in absence of quarks.
if the spectral covers posses parabolic points, the same as electric charges in
the complete abelian projection, they are, topologically, riemann surfaces
with boundaries at innity.

8

for example a sphere with two parabolic points is a topological cylinder.
but a cylinder can occur in vacuum string world sheets (we are describing
the contributions to the partition function, the vacuum to vacuum amplitude
indeed) only if open strings propagate.
in fact, a closed string that propagates through the torus breaks into an open
one at the parabolic points, since the parabolic points do not belong to the
world sheet.
on the contrary, when a closed string meets a branching point, for example
in a once-branched double cover of a torus, the closed string is pinched into
another closed string with the form of a double loop intersecting at the (sim-
ple) branching point.
notice also that the branching points do belong to the world sheet.
thus, the string picture is consistent with the interpretation of branching
points as magnetic charges, where the string electric line can self-intersect
but not break, and of parabolic points as electric charges, where closed string
break into open strings with the parabolic points as boundaries.

3 conclusions

our conclusion is that the concept of abelian projection in [1] furnishes a
physical interpretation of the structures that appear in the hitchin bration
of k(d) pairs, as it is embedded in the qcd functional integral in [5].
in addition, there is a complementary consistent string interpretation.
the most relevant consequence of these interpretations is a criterium for
electric connement in the framework of [5], that is the usual criterium of
magnetic condensation of [1].
therefore, if qcd connes the electric charge, the functional measure must
be localized, in the large-n limit, on those parabolic k(d) pairs, whose
image through the hitchin map, contains monopoles but no charges, that is,
in geometric language, on those spectral covers that are arbitrarily branched,
but that do not posses a parabolic divisor.
in turn, this is equivalent to the condition that only spectral covers spanned
by closed strings occur as congurations in the vacuum to vacuum amplitude.
it is amusing to notice that this condition is satised by the string of two-
dimensional qcd in the large-n limit [7].

9

4 acknowledgements

we would like to thank gerard t hooft for several clarifying remarks on the
abelian projection.

references

[1] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 190 (1981) 455.

[2] g. t hooft, high energy phys. zichichi editor, bologna (1976) .

[3] s. mandelstam, phys. rep. 23 c (1976) 245.

[4] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 138 (1978) 1.

g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 153 (1979) 141.

[5] m. bochicchio,  four-dimensional qcd and berwise duality , hep-

th/9810013, jhep01(1999)005.
m. bochicchio,
four-dimensional qcd
and the collective eld of the hitchin bration , hep-th/9810015,
jhep01(1999)006.

 the large-n limit of

[6] n. j. hitchin, duke math. j. 54 (1987) 91.

[7] d. gross and w.taylor iv, nucl. phys. b 403 (1993) 395 .

[8] a.m. polyakov,

 the wall of the cave, pupt-1812, hep-th/9809057.

[9] n. j. hitchin, proc. london math. soc. (3) 55 (1987) 59.
s. k. donaldson, proc. london math. soc. (3) 55 (1987).

[10] h. konno, j. math. soc. japan 45 (1993) 461.

e. markman, compositio mathematica 93 (1994) 55.
n. nekrasov, comm. math. phys. 180 (1996) 587.
h. u. boden and k. yokogawa,  moduli spaces of parabolic higgs
bundles and parabolic k(d) pairs over smooth curves: i  alg-geom
/9610014.
r. donagi and e. markman, spectral covers, algebraically completely

10

integrable, hamiltonian systems, and moduli of bundles  alg-geom
/9507017.

[11] v. b. metha and c. s. seshadri, math. ann. 248 (1980) 205.

[12] c. simpson,  the hodge ltration on nonabelian cohomology , alg-geom

/9604005.

[13] m. bochicchio,  the conning branch of qcd, hep-th/9904201.

[14] a. yu. alekseev and a. z. malkin,  symplectic structure of the moduli

space of at connection on a riemann surface  hep-th/9312004.

[15] n. j. hitchin, a. karlhede, u. lindstrom and m. rocek, comm. math.

phys. 108 (1987) 535.

11

