9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
6
1

 

 
 

2
v
1
0
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

a new invariant for  models

mathematical institute, 24-29 st. giles, oxford ox1 3lb

ioannis p. zois1

1izois @ maths.ox.ac.uk

abstract

we introduce a new invariant for  models (and foliations more generally)
using the even pairing between k-homology and cyclic homology. we try to
calculate it for the simplest case of foliations, namely principal bundles. we
end up by discussing some possible physical applications including quantum
gravity and m-theory. in particular for m-theory we propose an explicit
topological lagrangian and then using s-duality we conjecture on the exis-
tence of certain plane elds on s11.

pacs classication: 11.10.-z; 11.15.-q; 11.30.-ly

keywords: foliations;  models

to my brother demetrios.

0.1 introduction and motivation

in [37] we proposed a lagrangian density for the topological part of the non-
sypersymmetric m-theory using polyakovs at bundle description of non-
linear  models. the new key ingredient from the geometric point of view was
characteristic classes for at bundles. this idea about using characteristic
classes of at bundles came from the denition of a new invariant for haeiger
structures [38].

this invariant can be dened for any foliation in general; as far as physics
is concerned however (and this includes the case of m-theory treated in [37]),
we are primarily concerned with a special kind of folia tions, called at foli-
ations of bundles. this is due to the fact that a s polyakov had noticed in
[18],  models can be thought of as at principal bundles (se e [37] for more
details). thus, hopefully, our invariant might be of some relevance whenever
 models are met in physics.

we organise this paper as follows: in section 2 we explain the strategy of
the construction; in section 3 we provide all the details; in section 4 we give
the invariant formula; in section 5 we calculate this invariant for the si mplest
case of a principal bundle and in sections 6 and 7 we discuss some possible
applications in physics. in section 3 we review some of the techniques from
non-commutative topology which we shall use for dening the invariant. all
other sections contain new original material.

0.2 strategy

0.2.1

instantons

let us recall some facts about instantons. we would like to think of our
invariant as an analogue of the instanton number for foliations.

we consider a principal bundle (p, , m, g), where m is the base manifold
assumed to be compact and 4-dim for brevity, g is su(2) for simplici ty, p
is the total space of the bundle and  is the projection. assuming we have
a connection a on p with curvature f , then the instanton number ignoring

constants is simply rm f  f , i.e. the second chern number c2 of the bundle

p .

we would like to think of this number slightly dierently: moreorless by

1

denition, any principal bundle p over m denes an element (k-class) of
the group k 0(m) (we forget equivariant k-theory for simplicity). using the
chern-weil homomorphism we get the chern classes of p which belong to the
cohomology groups h 2(m). considering the (top dimensional) fundamental
class [m] of m in the homology group h(m) of m and taking the pairing
between homology and cohomology, which in this case is just integration
over m, we get the instanton number. we can consider the chern-weil
homomorphism from k 0(m)  h 2(m) as a black box and forget all
about cohomology for the moment; then the instanton number will be the
result from pairings between k-theory and (singular) homology h(m).

our construction since we are dealing with foliations (more accurately
with the space of leaves of foliations) which provide a good example of non-
commutative topological spaces, immitates the above picture: to each foli-
ation we can associate a homology class which will be the analogue of the
fundamental class [m] above; this class however will belong to an appro-
priate homology theory called cyclic homology and it is called transverse
fundamental class of the foliation. moreover one can also construct a class in
k-homology, being the analogue of k-theory for our purpose. then we use
a formula for pairings between cyclic homology and k-homology to get our
result.

0.2.2 non-commutative topology

in this subsection we would like to mention briey what non-commutative
topology is about. as its name suggests, this is one aspect of non-commutative
geometry. non-commutative geometry has appeared in physics literature
some years ago mainly through the so called quantised calculus. any-
way, the starting point of non-commutative topology is the fact that given
any compact hausdor space x say, the commutative (c )-algebra c(x) of
complex valued functions dened on x can capture all the toplogical infor-
mation of the space x itself; in fact x and c(x) are completely equivalent,
one can be uniquely constructed by the other. conversely, given any commu-
tative algebra a, say, there exists a compact hausdor space x say, (called
the spectrum of a) realising the commutative algebra a. realising means
that the commutative algebra c(x) of complex valued functions on x is
essentially the algebra a.
in mathematics terminology one says that the
categories of compact hausdor spaces and commutative c -algebras are

2

equivalent. this is the so called gelfands theorem.

we know however that there exist non-commutative c -algebras as well.
the natural question then is whether one can nd a topological reali-
sation for them just like for the commutative ones. we are looking for a
non-commutative analogue of gelfands theorem. this question is not fully
answered in mathematics, it is related to the famous boum-connes conjec-
ture. there are some things already known in mathematics and these are
related to foliations. this is what we shall be using extensively in this pa-
per. the appropriate framework is that of k-theory and various homology
theories.

during the 70s mathematicians (baum, douglas, kasparov and others)
developed a k-theory for arbitrary c -algebras (commutative or not) and it
is a well-known theorem due to serre and swan that in the commutative case
this k-theory reduces to atiyahs original topological k-theory. moreover in
the 80s mathematicians (connes, loday, quillen and others) developed a
homology theory called cyclic homology for arbitrary algebras which again
in the commutative case gives in the limit the usual simplicial homology.
so non-commutative topology, in terms of k-theory and various homology
theories gives a generalisation of ordinary topology through gelfands theo-
rem. a good example of a non-commutative topological space is the space
of leaves of a foliation (see below for denitions).
in general quotients of
ordinary topological spaces by discrete groups give non-commutative (abre-
viated to nc in the sequel) spaces. good textbooks are [15] and [42] for an
introduction on k-theory of c -algebras and cyclic homology respectively.

0.2.3 the invariant

in order to construct our invariant for any foliation [38], we use some ideas
from non-commutative geometry [20], [22], [23], [27]. the strategy is as fol-
lows: given any foliation f of a manifold v , namely an integrable subbundle
f of t v , one can associate to it another manifold (f ), called the graph (or
holonomy groupoid ) of the foliation introduced in [29]. this is of dimension
dimv +dimf . using the complex line bundle 1/2((f )) of 1/2-densities de-
ned on (f ), we consider the set (actually vector space) of smooth sections
of this line bundle equipped with a  product, thus obtaining an algebra. we
then complete this algebra in a minimal manner (in standard c -algebra
theory this is called the reduced c -algebra completion), thus we obtain a

3

c -algebra denoted c (f ) which is naturally associated to our original folia-
tion f . from now on one can forget the original foliation f of v alltogether
and concentrate on its corresponding c -algebra c (f ). we are interested
in the k0 group of c (f ) and in its cyclic homology groups. if we pick a
metric g on the transverse bundle t of f we can construct in a natural way a
c (f )-module e(f ), thus obtaining a class [e(f )] in k0(c (f )). moreover
to our foliation one can associate in a natural way a cyclic cocycle [f ] in the
q-th cyclic homology group of the c -algebra c (f ), called the fundamental
transverse cyclic cocycle of the foliation, where q is the codimension of the
foliation f . then we use the even pairing between k-homology and cyclic
homology in this case, namely we consider the pairing

h[e(f )], [f ]i := (m!)1(f #t r)(e(f ), ..., e(f ))

as was rstly introduced in the abstract algebraic context in [23]. hence we
obtain a complex number as a result from the above pairing and this complex
number characterises our original foliation f .

0.3 the constructions in detail:

0.3.1 foliations

let v be a smooth manifold and t v its tangent bundle. a smooth subbundle
f of t v is called integrable i one of the following equivalent conditions is
satised:

1. every x  v is contained in a submanifold w of v such that

ty(w ) = fy

where ty denotes the tangent space over y.

(q=codim f ) with fy = ker(p)yy  u.
the lie algebra of vector elds on v .

2. every x  v is in the domain u  v of a submersion p : u  rq
3. c (v, f ) = x  c (v, t v ); xx  fxx  v is a lie subalgebra of
4. the ideal j(f ) of smooth dierential forms which vanish on f is stable

under dierentiation:d(j)  j

4

the condition 3. is simply frobenius theorem and 4. its dual.

example:
any 1-dimensional subbundle f of t v is integrable, but for dimf  2
the condition is non-trivial; for instance if v is the total space of a principal
bundle with compact structure group, then we know that the subbundle of
vertical vectors is always integrable, but the horizontal subbundle is inte-
grable i the connection is at.
we shall make extensive use of this fact in this piece of work.

a foliation of v is given by an integrable subbundle f of v . the leaves of
the foliation are the maximal connected submanifolds l of v with tx(l) =
fxx  l, and the partition of v into leaves v = la where a  a is
characterised geometrically by its local triviality: every point x  v has a
neighborhood u and a system of local coordinates (xj), j=1,...,dimv which is
called foliation chart , so that the partition of u into connected components
of leaves, called plaques (they are the leaves of the restriction of the foliation
on u), corresponds to the partition of rdimv = rdimf  rcodimf into the
parallel ane subspaces rdimf  pt.
very simple examples indicate that the leaves l may not be compact
even if the manifold v is and that the space of leaves x := v /f may not be
hausdor for the quotient topology. the rational torus is such an example.

throughout this paper we would mainly restrict our attention to two
special kinds of foliations: we consider a principal bundle p with structure
(lie) group g (assumed compact and connected) over a compact manifold
m. the total space p has automatically a foliation induced by the bration:
the leaves are the bers which are isomorphic to the structure group g and
the space of leaves is just the base space m with its manifold topology. we
shall be refering to this foliation as the vertical foliation of the principal
bundle and it will be denoted pv . clearly, the dimension of this foliation
is equal to the dimension of the group g, the integrable subbundle of t p
being in this case the vertical subbundle. the codimension is equal to the
dimension of the base space m.

now if in addition a at connection is given on our principal bundle, we
have another foliation of the total space which we shall be referring to as
the horizontal or at foliation and it will be denoted ph.. we shall study
this foliation extensively in the following subsection. the dimension of this

5

foliation equals the dimension of the base space and the codimension equals
the dimension of the group. from this one can see that the vertical and the
horizontal foliations of a principal bundle are transverse to each other.

now the vertical foliation behaves very well; everything is compact and
hausdor, as were the spaces we started with to build our bundle. in this
case the general theory of foliations gives nothing more than the well-known
theory of principal bundles. however, the horizontal foliation can suer from
various pathological deects and for this reason it is interesting from the
ncg point of view. let us study it in greater detail.

0.3.2 flat foliation of a principal bundle

to begin with, a at connection on a principal bundle p with structure group
g and base space m, corresponds to reduction of the structure group from g
to a subgroup isomorphic to a normal subgroup of the fundamental group of
the base space 1(m). moreover a (gauge equivalence class of a) at conne
ction also denes a (conjugacy class of a) representation

h : 1(m)  g

if we identify the fundamental group with the group of covering trans-
lations of the universal covering m of m we get an action  of 1(m) on
m  g dened as follows:

 : 1(m)  ( m  g)  ( m  g)

(, ( m, g)) 7 (( m), h()(g))

where we use the obvious notation   1(m), g  g, m  m. this action
gives a commutative diagram:

m  g

y

p  = ( m  g)/ p

pr

 m

yq

m

(1)

6

where pr is the canonical projection,  is the quotient map by , p is uniquely
induced by pr and q is just the map from the universal covering space to the
original space.

this construction is called suspension of the representation h. one can
prove that the map  is a covering map and that if  := imh is endowed
with the induced topology, then h = (p , p, m) is a ber bundle with ber
g, total space p , base m, projection p and structure group .

to study the geometric properties of suspensions we introduce a new
topology on the total space p  of h. we denote by g the set g supplied
with the discrete topology. then the action  of 1(m) on m  g remains
continuous and the map  : mg  p  induces on p  a new topology which
is ner than its manifold topology. we denote by p  the set p  supplied
with this topology. the topology on m  g and the topology p  are called
the leaf topologies. then the suspension diagram below is a commutative
diagram of covering maps:

m  g

y

p 

pr

 m

yq

m

p

(2)

the topological space p  is not connected unless the ber is contractible.
a connected component of p  is called a leaf of h. each point x = ( m, g) 
p  belongs to exactly one leaf which is denoted lx and equals ( m  g).
the leaves are injectively immersed submanifolds of p  but in general not
embedded. they are transverse to the bers of h. conjugate representations
h and h  give suspension bundles h and h  which are isomorphic.

let now x = ( m, g). then the representation

hx : 1(lx)  g

with image g,
is called the holonomy representation of the leaf lx at
the point x. the group g is the holonomy group of the leaf lx at the
point x. g is the isotropy group of  in g  g. moreover 1(lx) is
isomorphic to the isotropy group of 1(m) in the point g  g, namely
1(lx) = {  1(m)|h()g = g}. see also [19].

7

there is a topological way to characterise these at bundles which is by
using classifying spaces for at bundles in a fashion analogous for ordinary
bundles, namely:

let g be a connected lie group and let g denote the same group with
the discrete topology. the milnor join construction for g denes a connected
space bg which is the classifying space for principal g-bundles. the same
construction applied to g yields a connected topological space bg which is
an eilenberg-maclane space k(g, 1), namely 1(bg) = g and j(bg) = 0
for j > 1. the inclusion i : g  g induces a continuous map bi : bg 
bg. as sets these two spaces are the same with the source having ner
topology than the range. the dierence in these two topologies is measured
by introducing the homotopy ber bg. this is dened by rst replacing bi
with a homotopy equivalent weak bration over bg, then take for bg the
(homotopy class of the) ber. the description then is just the construction
of the puppe sequence for bi (cf [30]).

choose a base point in bg and consider its image in bg. then let
(bg) and p (bg) denote the space of based loops and paths with initial
point of bg respectively. let e be the end point map of a path. then one
has a bration

(bg)  p (bg)  bg

where the second map is e. then dene bg via the homotopy pull-back
diagram:

(bg)  (bg)

bg  p (bg)

(3)

y
y

bg bi

y
ye

bg

a principal g-bundle p over a manifold m is equivalent to giving an open
covering for m and the transition functions. this data denes a continuous
map gp : m  bg. if the transition functions are locally constant, namely
if the bundle p is at, then gp can be factored through bg as a continuous
map.

8

a choice of transition functions which are locally constant is equivalent to
specifying a at g-structure on p . hence p has a horizontal foliation whose
holonomy map a : 1(m)  g denes the classifying map ba : m  bg.
conversely, given a continuous map ba : m  bg, there is induced a
representation a : 1(m)  g and a corresponding at principal g-bundle
pa = m 1(m ) g, where m is the universal covering of m. the topological
type of the g-bundle pa is determined by the composition

ga : m  bg  bg

the principal bundle is trivial i ga is homotopic to the constant map m 
pt. the choice of the homotopy is equivalent to specifying a global section
on pa.

0.3.3 groupoids and c-algebras associated to folia-

tions

the next step is to associate the holonomy groupoid to any foliation.
in
general a groupoid is roughly speaking a small category with inverses, or
more precisely

denition 1:
a groupoid consists of a set , a distinguished subset (0) of , two maps

r, s :   (0) and a law of composition

 : (2) := (1, 2)    ; s(1) = r(2)  

such that:

1.s(1  2) = s(2), r(1  2) = r(1) (1, 2)  (2)
2. s(x) = r(x) = xx  (0)
3.  s() = , r()   =   
4. (1  2)  3 = 1  (2  3)
5. each  has a two sided inverse 1, with 1 = r() and 1 = s()

the maps r, s are called range and source maps.

in the category theory terminology, (0) is the space of objects and (2)

is the space of morphisms.

9

denition 2:
a smooth groupoid  is a groupoid together with a dierentiable struc-
ture on  and (0) such that the maps r, s are submersions and the object
inclusion map (0)   is smooth, as is the composition map (2)  .

the notion of a 1

2-density on a smooth manifold allows one to dene in a

canonical manner the convolution algebra of a smooth groupoid .

specically, given , let 1/2 be the line bundle over  whose ber 1/2



at   , r() = x, s() = y, is the linear space of maps

such that

 : kt(x)  kt(y)  c

() = ||1/2()  r

here y =   ; s() = y, x =   ; r() = x, and k = dimt(x) =
dimt(y) are the dimensions of the bers of the submersions r :   (0)
and s :   (0).

then we endow the linear space c 

c (, 1/2) of smooth compactly sup-

ported sections of 1/2 with the convolution product

(a  b)() =z1 2=

a(1)b(2)

a, b  c 
integral of a 1-density, namely a(1)b(1

c (, 1/2) where the integral on the rhs makes sense since it is the
1 ), on the manifold x, x = r().

one then can prove that if  is a smooth groupoid and c 

c (, 1/2)
is the convolution algebra of smooth compactly supported 1
2-densities with
involution *, f () = f (1). then for each x  (0), the following denes
c (, 1/2) in the hilbert space l2(x):
an involutive representation x of c 

(x(f ))() =z f (1)(1

1 )

10

  x,   l2(x)
the completion of c 
c -algebra denoted c 

c (, 1/2) for the norm ||f|| = supx(0)||x(f )|| is a
r ().
moreover one denes the c -algebra c () as the completion of the in-

volutive algebra c 

c (, 1/2) for the norm

||f||max = sup||(f )||; { involutive hilbert space representation of c 

c (, 1/2)}

after this general introduction to groupoids and to c -algebras associated
to them, now we pass to groupoids and c -algebras associated to foliations.

let (v, f ) be a foliated manifold of codim q. given any x  v and a
small enough open set w in v containing x, the restriction of the foliation f
to w has as its leaf space an open set of rq which we shall call a transverse
neighborhood of x. in other words, this open set w/f is the set of plaques
around x. now given a leaf l of (v, f ) and two points x, y  l, any simple
path  from x to y on l uniquely determines a germ h() of a dieomorphism
from a transverse neighborhood of x to one of y. this depends only on the
homotopy class of  and is called the holonomy of the the path . the
holonomy groupoid of a leaf l is the quotient of its fundamental groupoid
by the equivalence relation which identies two paths 1, 2 from x to y
both in l i h(1) = h(2). here by the fundamental groupoid of a leaf we
mean the groupoid  = l  l, r, s are the two projections, (0) = l and
the composition is (x, y)  (y, z) = (x, z). (from this one can see that every
space is a groupoid). the holonomy covering l of a leaf l is the covering of
l associated to the normal subgroup of its fundamental group 1(l) given
by paths with trivial holonomy. the holonomy groupoid or graph of
the foliation is the union  of the holonomy groupoids of its leaves. given
an element  of  we denote by s() = x the origin of the path  and by
r() = y its end point, where r, s are the range and source maps as in the
general case.

an element of  is thus given by two points x = s() and y = r() of
v together with an equivalence class of smooth paths : the (t), t  [0, 1]
with (0) = x and (1) = y, tangent to the bundle f , namely with d
dt 
f(t)t  r, identifying 1 and 2 as equivalent i the holonomy of the path
21
1 at the point x is the identity. the graph  has an obvious composition

11

law. for 1 and 2 in , the composition 1  2 makes sense if s(1) = r(2).
the groupoid  is by construction a (not necessarily hausdor) manifold of
dimension dim = dimv + dimf .

denition 3: the c -algebra of the foliation is exactly the c -

algebra of its graph, as described for arbitrary groupoids above.

for our foliations of interest, the graph  is the following: for the ve rtical
foliation is just the manifold p  g whereas for the horizontal foliation is
p a m , where a is the representation from 1(m) to g induced by the at
connection 1-form (via the holonomy). moreover the distinguished subset
(0) in both cases is the manifold we want to foliate, namely p , the total
space of our bundle in our case.

the c -algebras associated to our foliations are: for the vertical foliation
is c(m) tensored with compact operators which act as smoothing kernels
along the leaves which in turn is strongly morita equivalent to just c(m),
whereas for the horizontal foliation is strongly morita equivalent (abreviated
to sme) to c(p )  1(m). (note: the representation of the fundamental
group of the base onto the structure lie group induced by the at connection
1-form used enters the denition of the crossed product). the rst algebra is
commutative (up to sme), but the second is not! it is for this reason that
we can see now that ncg has an important role to play, in fact we are deeply in
the ncg setting. obviously if the space is simply connected, i.e. 1 vanishes,
non-commutativity is lost. we would like to emphasise that in all cases in
the literature where some non-commutative algebras were used, especially
in connection to the well-known connes-lott model for electroweak theory
(or even qcd), these algebras are in fact sme to commutative ones. hence
in terms of topology, this is not a real non-commutative case.

0.3.4 k-classes associated to foliations

we shall give the general construction for an arbitrary foliation.

let (v, f ) be a foliated manifold and t = t v /f the transverse bundle of
the foliation. the holonomy groupoid  of (v, f ) acts in a natural way on t by
the dierential of the holonomy, thus for every   ,  : x  y determines
a linear map h() : tx  ty. we denote this action by h. it is not in general

12

possible to nd a euclidean metric on t which is invariant under the above
action of . let g be an arbitrary smooth euclidean metric on the real vector
bundle t. thus for   tx we let ||||g = (h, ig)1/2 be the corresponding
norms and inner products and drop subscript g henceforth. using g we
r (v, f ) of the foliation. recall
dene a c -module e on the c -algebra c 
c (, 1/2) which
that c 
c (, 1/2  r(tc)) denoted
acts by right convolution on the linear space c 
 for simplicity and tc is the complexication of the transverse bundle t:

r (v, f ) is the completion of the convolution algebra c 

(f )() =zy

(1)f (1

1 )

where y = r(). endowing the complexied bundle tc with the inner product
associated to g and anti-linear in the rst variable, the following formula
denes a c 

c (, 1/2)-valued inner product

h, ni() =zyh(1

1 ), n(1

1 )i

for any , n  c 
of the space c 

c (, 1/2  r(tc)) one then checks that the completion e
c (, 1/2  r(tc)) for the norm

|||| = (||h, i||c 

r (v,f ))1/2

becomes a c -module over c 
r (v, f ). if one takes also the action h of  on t
into account, with some extra eort one can make e into a (, )-bimodule
(for the denition of the algebra  see below). the rst construction thus
r (v, f )) whereas the second gives e as an
gives us an element e of k0(c 
element of kk0(, ), kasparovs bivariant k-theory. (recall that the 0th
kasparovs bivariant k-group in this case consists of stable isomorphism
classes of (, )-bimodules). we shall use this action h to dene a left action
of c 

c (, 1/2) on e by:

(f )() =zy

f (1)h(1)(1

1 )

c (, 1/2),   e

f  c 
one then can prove that for any f  c 

c (, 1/2) the above formula
denes an endomorphism (f ) of the c -module e whose adjoint (f ) is
given by

13

where

and

((f ))() =zy

f #(1)h(1)(1

1 )

f #() := ef(1)()

() = (h()1)th()1  end(tc(r()))

this shows that unless the metric on t is -invariant, the representation 
is not a *-representation, the subtle dierence between (f ) and (f ) being
measured by . in particular  is not in general bounded for the c -algebra
c (, 1/2). however  is a
norms on both endc 
closable homomorphism of c -algebras, namely, the closure of the graph of 
is the graph of a densely dened homomorphism. then with the graph norm

r (v, f )  c 

r (v,f )e and c 

||x|| = ||x|| + ||(x)||

the domain  of the closure e of  is a banach algebra which is dense in

r (v, f ). the c -module e is then a (, )-bimodule.
the c -algebra  = c 
this particular module e we constructed here will be the one of the two
main ingredients which dene the invariant we want and we shall denote it
e(f ).

0.3.5 cyclic classes associated to foliations (transverse

fundamental cyclic cocycle)

we begin with some denitions from cyclic homology:

denition 1:

graded trace on .

1. a cycle of dimension n is a triple (, d,r ) where  = n
graded algebra over c, d is a dierential on s and r : n  c is a closed
(, d,r ) and a homomorphism  : a  0.

2. let a be an algebra over c. then a cycle over a is given by a cycle

j=0j is a

14

a cycle over a of dimension n is essentially determined by its character

which is the following (n + 1)-linear functional on a:

 (a0, ..., an) =z (a0)d((a1))d((a2))...d((an))

aj  a
one can then prove that this is a cyclic cocycle of a, namely it denes
a cohomology class in the cyclic homology of a and that the above is a
necessary and sucient statement.

we shall now describe the transverse fundamental class associated to
foliations. there is a general construction for arbitrary foliations which is
quite involving since one has to complete the graded algebra. this is so
because the transverse bundle of the foliation may not be integrable and in
this case derivation along transverse directions will not be a dierential.

we, however, are primarily interested in our two special kinds of foliations,
the vertical and the horizontal foliation of a principal bundle. these foliations
are transverse, both are integrable so derivatives are dierentials and hence
one does not have to complete the graded algebras. we refer to [27] for
the general construction. here we shall only describe the classes wich are
associated to our two foliations:

the vertical and the horizontal (or at) foliations of the total space of
our principal bundle p will be denoted (pv ) and (ph) respectively. one then
has that there is a natural cycle for the algebra of each foliation, namely:

vertical foliation, cycle denoted [pv ]:
the natural cycle canonically associated to the algebra c 

c (p  g, 1/2)
h )) where ph is the

of the vertical foliation consists of:

1. the graded algebra c 

c (p  g, 1/2  r(p 

horizontal subbundle (i.e. the transverse bundle to the vertical foliation).

2. the dierential d = dv + dh +  where

dh : c (p,rp 

v  sp 

h )  c (p,rp 

v  s+1p 
h)

dv : c (p,rp 

v  sp 

v  sp 
h)
 means contraction with the section   c (p, pv  2p 
dened by:

h)  c (p,r+1p 

h), where  is

15

(ph (x), ph(y ) = pv ([x, y ]) for any pair of horizontal vector elds
x, y  c (p, ph) and (ph, pv ) is the isomorphism t p  ph  pv given
by ph .

3.the trace is dened via

 (w) =z(0)

w

where  is the graph of the vertical foliation  = p  g.

similarly one denes a fundamental class for the horizontal foliation.
one then can dene the character of these cyclesessentially the trace
which is a class in the cyclic homology of the appropriate algebra for each
foliation [22].

note:
since now we have a cyclic homology class, say  of the algebra of the

foliation, say , we automatically have a map

ki()  c

given by pairing it with k-group elements (i = 0, 1 above) to get index the-
orems for leafwise elliptic operators. let us mention here that the analytic
index of an operator elliptic along the leaves of an arbitrary foliation say
(v, f ), is an element of k0(c (v, f )), being in fact a generalisation of the
index of families of elliptic operators considered by atiyah and singer. (in
the atiyah-singer case of families of elliptic operators one is dealing with the
foliation induced by the bration, which is the commutative geometry case).
the operator itself which is elliptic along the leaves of the foliation is an
element of kk(c (v, f ), c(v )).

0.4 invariant for the nlm

the nal step then is to make use of the general formula for pairings between
k-homology and cyclic homology. in more concrete terms, one has:

denition:
let a be an algebra. then the following equality denes a bilinear pairing

between k-theory and cyclic homology:

16

1. even case: k0(a) and hc ev(a):

h[e], []i := (m!)1(#t r)(e, ..., e)

for e  k0(a) using the idempotents description and   hc 2m(a) and
where # is the cup product in cyclic homology (see for instance [23] for the
precise denition).

2. odd case: k1(a) and hc odd(a):

h[u], []i =

1
2i

2n(

n
2

+ 1)1(#t r)(u1  1, u  1, u1  1, ..., u  1)

this is an important point because by pairing the c -module e we con-
structed previously naturally associated to the foli ation considered with the
cyclic cocycle naturally associated to the foliation, we get an invariant for
arbitrary foliations. in particular if we apply this to the horizontal foliation,
we get a complex number which is an invariant for the nlm. namely one
has:

h[e(ph)], [ph]i = (m!)1((ph)#t r)(e(ph), ..., e(ph))  c

in more concrete terms, assuming that e(ph)  mk(c (ph)) for some k
(where c (ph) is the corresponding c -algebra to the horizontal foliation)
and [ph]  z q(c (ph)) where z denotes cyclic cocycles and q is the codi-
mension of the horizontal foliation, then (ph )#t r  z q(mk(c (ph))) is
dened by

((ph)#t r)(a0  m0, ..., aq  mq) = (ph)(a0, ..., aq)t r(m0...mq)

for any ai  c (ph), mi  mk(c), i = 1, ..., q.

note: let us mention that the odd case formula is related to the  in-
variant for leafwise elliptic operators, see [31], [32] which in turn is related
to global anomalies and to the freedman-townsend invariance (cf [33], [38],
[25], [41]).

17

0.5 an example: principal bre bundles

in order to get some more insight to this pairing we shall try to calculate
it for the case of principal bundles (vertical foliation) which is the simplest
example.

we begin by describing the graph in detail: the set  in this case is the
manifold p  g, the distinguished subset (0) = p  {e} and denoting the
action (on the right) of g  g on p  p simply by (p, g) 7 pg, one has that
the range and source maps are respectively r(p, g) = p and s(p, g) = pg, the
inverse (p, g)1 = (pg, g1) and the law of composition is (p1, g1)  (p2, g2) =
(p1, g1g2) if p1g1 = p2. obviously the set (2) = p  g  g.
moreover we recall that the c -algebra for the vertical foliation is strongly
morita equivalent to c(m),

we now make use of two important facts:
1. k0(c(m)) = k 0(m), namely serre-swan theorem

and

2. h 

cont(c(m)) = h(m)

where on the rhs we have the ordinary homology of m (with complex co-

ecients) and by denition for the lhs we have h (c(m)) := lim(hc n(c(m)), s)
(see [23] for explanations of the notation), hc  denotes cyclic homology and
cont means restriction to continuous linear functionals.

the rst fact says that for commutative c -algebras one gets atiyahs
topological k-theory for the underlying space (described in terms of stable
isomorphism classes of complex vector bundles over the space considered)
and the second says that in the commutative case again cyclic homology is
roughly speaking the ordinary homology of the underlying space (and thus
we see that non-commutative geometry reduces to ordinary geometry in the
commutative case).

since we have these two results in our desposal, we shall try to reduce the
whole discussion in terms of bundles and ordinary homology theory because
this is more comprehensible.

in order to describe the pairing then we need the transverse fundamental
cyclic cocycle: we shall give a simple dimensional argument here; the exact
computations are rather too technical to be presented in grater detail. the

18

cyclic cocycle we will get from the vertical foliation will be of dimension equal
to the codimension of the vertical foliation which is equal to the dimension
of the base space of our bundle. moreover as we mentioned above, in this
case the c -algebra of this foliation is sme to the algebra of functions on
the base c(m). this is a commutative c -algebra whose cyclic homology is
moreorless the de rham cohomology of the base space. hence it is not too
hard to suspect that we get a top homology class, which in fact turns out to
be the fundamental class of our base space [m].

for the module denoted e above in this case one uses the following fact:
it is a consequence of serre-swan theorem mentioned above that the link
between topological k-theory and k-theory of commutative c -algebras is
that given a complex vector bundle over m (thus a topological k-class),
one considers the corresponding c(m)-module of smooth sections of the
given complex vector bundle. thus in this case the module e we get is
c (p  g, 1/2  r(tc)), hence we can recover the corresponding complex
c 
vector bundle over m as follows:
if we denote by (p, , g, m) our original principal bundle and we consider
the vertical foliation, then its normal bundle t would be (t m), where t m
is the tangent bundle of m. we prefer the topological k-theory description
which in this case is rather easy to read: the bundle associated to this c(m)
module e is:

1/2  pr

1(t m)  (t m)  t m

y

p  g

pr1

y

p

ym

m



(4)

where the bre of the line bundle 1/2 is the linear space of maps  :
dimgt(g)  dimgt(g)  c satisfying the well-known property for 1/2-
densities. hence in this case the result will be the number we get if we
take the bundle 1/2  pr
1(t m) seen as a bundle over m, then apply the
ordinary chern character to it and integrate over m. the result will be a
combination of the pontryagin class of t m and the second chern class of p
(recall that we assumed m to be 4-dim and p is an su(2) bundle) which is
something expected.

there are some subtleties though: we have the bundle 1/2  pr

1(t m)
over the graph which is p  g. we want to see this as a bundle over m.

19

we consider rstly the factor pr
1(t m). this is indeed a bundle over m
with bre g  g  rdimm but this is neither a vector nor a principal bundle
and in order to talk about characteristic classes one actually needs the one
or the other. in order not to change the topology then, which is what we are
mainly interested in, we can consider the vector bundle t m  adp instead,
where adp is the adjoint bundle to p . to study formally the classes of
t m  adp is an exercise in mathematics (we forget the pull-backs since they
can be treated easily). the point is that we shall get a combination of the
pontryagin classes of t m (or chern if we complexify) and of chern classes
of p . the later is known since the bundle is given whereas the former can be
computed from topological information of m itself. for example for simply
connected closed 4-manifolds one has from the hirzebruch signature formula
that (see [17]):

p1 = 3 = 3(b+  b)

where  is the signature.

as about the other factor, the 1/2-densities of the graph, seen as a rank
1 real bundle over the graph p  g, is rather dull. it will be determined
by 1, the rst stiefel-whitney class: either trivial (1 = 0) or it is non-
orientable (1 = 1). (note: half densities over a complex manifold say n
with dimn = k are slightly more complicated:
in this case its class will
be 1
2c1(kt ), where kt  is the canonical bundle, so it will correspond to
spinc structures on n). but we still have the same problem that over m it
is neither a vector nor a principal bundle. this can be overcome as before;
the point is that since it is a dull bundle over p  g, the projection does
not change anything, so as a bundle over m it will be determined by the
topology of p , hence we also have chern classes of p .

what we gave above was a qualitative description and the lesson was
that the invariant will be some combination of chern numbers of p and the
pontryagin number of the tangent bundle t m of m. the key point is that
t m appears because it is the transverse bundle of the vertical foliation. we
expect then that characteristic classes of the transverse bundle should be
important in general.

what about the at foliation then, which is the case which is related to
nlm in general and to m-theory in particular in physics? this is a purely
nc case. computations are much harder and a picture involving bundles
is impossible since we do not have serre-swan theorem. moreover cyclic

20

homology of nc algebras has no relation to the usual topology. we can still
say something though: rst of all, since we have a at principal bundle, all
its characteristic classes vanish, so we get nothing from them. since the
base space m is not simply connected, gauge inequivalent classes of at
connections are characterised by their holonomy. so we expect the holonomy
to play some role.

moreover, from the vertical foliation case we saw that the normal bundle

of the foliation also plays a vital role.

note: it is not always true that in the commutative case cyclic homology
identies well with ordinary homology, in fact this is always essentially true
only for h0. there may be complications. however this point will not be
treated in this article with greater detail. see [24].

0.6 relation to physics

there are three cases in physics where this invariant may play some role:

1. nlm.
as it is well-known,  models classically describe harmonic maps between
two riemannian manifolds (target and source spaces). from the genral re-
marks we made in the preceeding section, we said that we expect the invari-
ant to include the holonomy of the at connection (namely 1 of the source
space) plus the topology of the space of leaves (target space). hence this
invariant should contain information about the topology of both manifolds
involved in  models. characteristic classes of foliations may provide the
way to calculate the invariant (analogue of chern-weil theory, see [35]).

moreover, in the at foliation case the invariant describes the topological

charge of the m-theory lagrangian density suggested in [37]

another application is the following (we thank dr s. t. tsou for pointing
this out to us): we know from polyakov ([18]) that yang-mills theories can
be formulated as nlm on the loop space. this point of view very recently
exibited some very nice dualities of the standard model, see [44]. hence the
invariant, for the at foliation case (since nlm can be thought of as a at
bundle with structure group the isometries of the target space), maybe of
some relevance also for yang-mills theories, the setting however will involve
loop spaces now! we do not know exactly what its physical signicance would
be. moreover doing k-theory on loop spaces (innite dimensional manifolds)

21

is considerably harder. there are however some path integral techniques.
(see again [44] and references therein).

2. instantons with non simply connected boundary.
following largely the case of instantons we suggest that this invariant is
related to interpolation between gauge inequivalent vacua which exist due to
the non simply connectedness of the space considered. clearly there is extra
degeneracy of the vacuum coming from the fact the our space is not sim-
ply connected. this degeneracy is of dierent origin than that of instantons
since as it is well-known for ordinary instantons the degeneracy comes from
the dierent topologies of the bundle considered.
in more concrete terms
we suppose that this invariant will be relevant in the following case: let us
assume that we try to follow the discussion in the bpst famous paper on
instantons [36]; if we assume that we have a space whose boundary is not just
s3 as in that case but a 3-manifold which has a non-trivial 1. in this case
we want the potential to become at (pure gauge) on the boundary. how-
ever if the boundary is a 3-manifold with a non trivial fundamental group,
then at connections are not unique (up to gauge equivalence of course). we
know more specically that gauge equivalent classes of at connections are
in 1-1 correspondence with conjugate classes of representations of the fun-
damental group onto the structure group considered. thus in this case the
at connection we choose will not be unique. this extra degeneracy of the
vacuum comes from the dierent possible choices of at connection, which is
something noticed for the rst time. the invariant is related to interpolation
between these extra vacua.

we expect then some relation with the so called ale gravitational in-
stantons which are important both in quantum gravity and in gauge theory
[39], [40].

3. gravity, non-commutative topological quantum field theories (nc-

tqft for brevity).

in ordinary yang-mills theory, gauge transformations are described as
automorphisms of the bundle (namely bre preserving maps) which induce
the identity on the base space (cf for example [26]). sometimes these are
called strong bundle automorphisms. if one wants to generalise this picture
and attempts to include the symmetry of general relativity, namely local
dieomorphisms of the base space, then there is a problem because there
are local dieomprphisms of the base space which can not be induced by
bundle automorphisms (cf [16]). in simple words: there are more local dif-

22

feomorphisms of the base space than bundle automorphisms. the way that
theoretical physicists usually try to go arround this problem is - to begin with,
supersymmetry and nally, - supergravity. the origins of supersymmetry are
actually quantum mechanical (multiplets with same number of bosons and
fermions plus symmetry between particles of dierent spin which should ex-
ist, if all interactions are eventually unied since gauge particles have spin-1
whereas the graviton is supposed to have spin-2. another point of view is to
examine the largest possible symmetry of the s-matrix elements in the frame-
work of relativistic quantum eld theory on minkowski space). to make the
long story short, based on the coleman-mandula theorem (which is respon-
sible for introducing anti-commuting coordinates), what one actually does
(following the superspace formalism for n=1 supersymmetry coming from
observation that minkowski space is actually poincare/lorentz) is to enlarge
the base manifold (assumed to be spacetime) by adding some fermionic di-
mensions (non-commuting coordinates), thus obtaining another space, the
socalled superspace. this superspace, in an analogous fashion, can be seen
as the quotient space superpoincare/lorentz. supersymmetric yang-mills
theories are principal g-bundles over superspace with g some compact and
connected lie group (usually su(n)) whereas supergravity can be seen as
a principal g-bundle over superspace where g is the superpoincare group
(generalisation of einstein-cartan theory). however the so-called noether
technique which makes local a rigid supersymmetry and which is used mainly
to construct supersymmetric interacting lagrangians actually suggests that
supersymmetric yang-mills theories can be equivalently be seen as principal
g-bundles over ordinary spacetime with g some super lie group.

letting alone some severe criticism of supersymmetric theories (e.g. posi-
tive metric assumption), especially when the discussion comes to supergravity
(the most important experimental problem of supersymmetric theories is the
fact that none of the superparteners of particles has ever been observed, the
way phenomenologists try to overcome this problem is to assume sponta-
neously breaking of supersymmetries; two of the main theoretical problems
are: the aspect of supergravity as a local gauge theory which is not com-
pletely mathematically justied, for example in n=8 d=4 supergravity the-
ory coming from d=11 n=1 supergravity which is supposed to be the best
candidate for unication and according to recent progress one of the two low
energy limits of m-theory, local dieomorphisms are supposed to come from
gauging the group o(8), an assumption which is based on the observation

23

that ordinary gravity comes from gauging the poincare group, something
which is wrong because of the existence of the shouldering form on arbi-
trary curved manifolds; the second important problem is that most of the
extended supersymmetric and supergravity theories are actually up to now
formulated only on-shell, namely they are essentially classical theories -
for n=1 supergravity though there is another problem, one has more than
one o-shell formulations, this in fact has now an explanation from the re-
cently observed string/5-brane duality in d=10 (old brane-scan); - trying to
be fair, we must mention that the good features of such theories are that they
oer probably the only up to now known hope for unication plus the fact
that they give less divergent theories, something essential for perturbative
quantum els theories), we would like to propose here another approach;
our approach is more in the spirit of non-perturbative quantum eld theo-
ries, in fact topological quantum eld theories: instead of enlarging the base
manifold by considering anti-commuting coordinates, we chose to relax the
bre preserving condition, meaning that now we allow bundle maps which
are not bre-preserving; in such a case, bres may be mixed up, for exam-
ple they may be tilted or broken. the resulting structure after applying
these more general transformations to our original bundle may no longer be a
bre bundle, but it will still be a foliation. in this case however what we will
get as the quotient space will not necessarily be the manifold we had orig-
inally in our bundle construction (supposed to be space-time) but another
space of leaves with the same dimension and maybe very dierent topology.
in this case the dimension of the leaves is kept xed, equall to the dimension
of the lie algebra considered; had we changed that, the dimension of the
space of leaves would have changed accordingly. this picture is quite close
to the picture that string theorists patronise, namely that space-time is not
xed but it emerges as a ground state from some dynamical process.

in fact there is a deep result due to thurston which for a given manifold
m, say, it relates the group of local dieomorphisms of m with the group of
foliations of m [3]. in particular thurston proves that one has an isomor-
phism in cohomology after some shift in the degrees between the classifying
space of local dieomorphisms and the classifying space of foliations of a
closed manifold m. if we take m to be the total space of a principal bundle
p over spacetime, then obviously local dieomorphisms of the base space are
included to local dieomorphisms of the total space which in turn are very
closely related to the group of foliations. hence at least in principle looking

24

at the group of foliations of the total space of a principal bundle provides a
framework which is rich enough in order to encorporate local dieomorphisms
of the base space, something we need in order to relate general relativity with
yang-mills theory symmetries and this framework is mathematically rigor-
ous.

the group then of all foliations of the total space with xed codimension
is huge.
it denitely contains all foliations which are regular enough in
order to get manifolds dieomorphic to our original one. yet foliations can
be really nasty: in this case the quotient space may not be a manifold at all
but a quantum topological space. all these cases need to be studied. for
the moment we know that whenever the foliations have a corresponding c 
algebra which is sme to a commutative one, then the space of leaves will
be a compact hausdor topological space of the same dimension. if the c -
algebras of two foliations can be related with a *-preserving homomorphism,
then the corresponding quotient spaces will be homoeomorphic. what is
the appropriate condition on the c  algebras in order to get dieomorphic
manifolds, we do not know (this point is of particular interest in 4-dim due
to the existence of the so-called exotic structures for 4-manifolds). the
main point here is that we can control how much non-commutativity we
want in the c - algebra and then see what this means topologically. at
this point we would like to recall that mathematically, going from classical
physics to quantum is going from commuting algebras to non-commuting
ones. the essence of plancks constant then is that it tells us how much
non-commutativity we want. moreover there is the fundamental theorem for
c - algebras representations, namely that for each c - algebra (commutative
or not), there exists a hilbert space whose space of bounded operators is
actually the same as the original c - algebra. hence for each foliation there
exists a corresponding c - algebra (commutative or not), a corresponding
topological space (space of leaves which may be a manifold or a quantum
topological space respectively) and nally, a hilbert space as a representation
space!

let us now turn to something related to the above but a little more con-
crete: for the moment let us consider the case where the dimensions of the
leaves and of the space of leaves are kept xed. this situation has some
similarities with quantum gravity seen as a tqft (in fact we generalise that
picture and we present a way to consider unied theories-namely gravity and
yang-mills theories-as non-commutative topological quantum field the-

25

ories).
in [39] it was argued that tqft may provide a framework which
is rich enough for the development of a quantum theory of gravity. in that
aspect, space-time was treated as an unquantized object whereas the metric
was quantum mechanical. the idea in tqft framework is to nd an invari-
ant z(m) for a topological space m and then one seeks for a lagrangian
density whose partition function yields the invariant z(m), see [34]. one
has to be a little more careful though in order for the atiyahs axioms for
tqft to be satised [14]. in quantum mechanics one usually has a space of
quantum states associated to a given system. often this space of states refers
to a particular instant of time, which can be represented in a 4-dimensional
world by a space-like hypersurface. in tqft this vector space appears as
part of the denition, when the space-time m has a boundary, i.e. a space
of dimension 1 less. in more concrete terms, to a (d  1)-dim space  we
associate a vector space v () and to each d-dim space m with m = 
we associate a vector z(m), the partition function of the space m. this
point can be generalised, in fact  can be any embedded submanifold of
m with dimension 1 less. one interpretation of these conditions is that 
represents the present instant of time and that the vectors in v () which
are determined by various choices of observables represent a memory of past
facts. the primary problem nonetheless is the construction of invariants for
spaces and the state spaces and partition functions for spaces with boundary
are usually obtained as a by-product. since by our proposal above one can
end up with quantum topological spaces as spaces of leaves of foliations, one
can call this theory non-commutative topological quantum eld theory and
we believe that this can provide a framework for quantum unied theories
(including yang-mills and gravity).

the picture we have then is the following: we start with a g-bundle p
over a 4-manifold m. from symmetry considerations, namely we want to
include local dieomorphisms of the base space and relate them to bundle
automorphisms (hence relating general relativity to gauge theory), we end
up to consider all dimg-dim foliations of p . automatically the 4-dim space
which is the space of leaves is somehow quantized, namely it is forced to
have one of the leaf topologies. this is a dierence with tqft as explained
in [39] where the metric was quantised but space-time was unquantized (need-
less to say, in such a case as ours, the metric is quantised too automatically).
moreover, for each foliation we have a quotient space of leaves and hence an
invariant z(m) which is a complex number. the boundary of course can

26

be added with its vector space attached to it, one however has to examine
what happens to it as foliations vary. the lagrangian density whose parti-
tion function is this invariant for foliations is an open question. it should be
related to characteristic classes for foliations. a good indication for that is
the fact that the q functor of q-dim haeiger structures or q structures as
they are known in topology (and hence foliations which is an example of a
q structure, where q is the codimension of the foliation) is representable, see
[13]. so for the moment we do not have a full specic nctqft since we
have the invariant but not the appropriate lagrangian density. we presented
though a generalisation of tqft for non-commutative cases.

another possible application might be the ability to construct deformed
yang-mills theories, see [43]. in that paper, some new compactications of
the ikkt matrix theory on non-commutative tori were introduced which, in
a certain sense, could be realised as deformed yang-mills theories. clearly
in this case our invariant will be the instanton number of these deformed
yang-mills theories.

this picture also suggests that the above described non-commutative
topological quantum eld theories can be seen as emerging from m-theory
compactied down to some non-commutative spaces (tori or other).

0.7 m-theory

in this section we shall present an application to m-theory. since it is more
extensive, we give it separately.

we know that m-theory consists of membranes and 5-branes living on
an 11-manifold ([11], [12]) and it is non perturbative. this theory has a very
intriguing feature: we can only extract information about it from its limiting
theories, namely either from d=11 n=1 supergravity or from superstrings
in d=10. this is so because this theory is genuinly non perturbative for a
reason which lies in the heart of manifold topology:

let us recall that in string theory, the path integral involves summation
over all topologically distinct diagrams (same for point particles of course).
strings are 1-branes hence in time they swep out a 2-manifold. at the tree
level then we need all topologically distinct simply connected 2-manifolds (ac-
tually there is only one, as topology tells us) and for loop corrections, topol-
ogy again says that topologically distinct non simply connected 2-manifolds

27

are classied by their genus, so we sum up over all riemann surfaces with
dierent genus.

it is clear then that for a perturbative quantum eld theory involving p-
branes we have to sum upon all topologically distinct (p+1)-dim manifolds:
simply connected ones for tree level and non simply connected ones for loop
corrections. thus we must know before hand the topological classication of
manifolds in the dimension of interest. that is the main problem of manifold
topology in mathematics.

but now we face a deep and intractable problem: geometry tells us,
essentially via a no-go theorem which is due to whitehead from late 40s,
that: we cannot classify non simply connected manifolds with dimension
greater or equal to 4! hence for p-branes with p greater or equal to 3, all
we can do via perturbative methods is up to tree level!

what happens for 3-manifolds then (hence for membranes)? the answer
from mathematics is that we do not know if all 3-manifolds can be classied!
so even for 2-branes it is still unclear whether perturbative methods work
(up to all levels of perturbation theory)!

the outlet from this situation that we propose here is not merely to look
only at non perturbative aspects of these theories (i.e. the soliton part of the
theory) and then apply s-duality, as was done up to now, but to abandon
perturbative methods completely from the very beginning. there is only
one way known up to now which can achieve this radical solution to our
problem: formulate the theory as a topological quantum field theory and
hence get rid of all perturbations once and for all.

let us explain how this can be acieved.

our approach is based on one physical principle:

a theory containing p-branes should be formulated on an m-dim mani-

fold which admits q-structures, where q = m  p  1.

n.b.
although we used in our physical principle q-structures which are more
general than foliations, we shall use both these terms meaning essentially the
same structure. the interested reader may refer to [2] for example to see the

28

precise denitions which are quite complicated. the key point however is
that the dierence between q-structures (or haeiger structures as they are
most commonly known in topology) and codim-q foliations is essentially the
dierence between transverse and normal. this does not aect any of what
we have to say, since bott-haeiger theory of characteristic classes is formu-
lated for the most general case, namely -structures. we would also like to
mention the relation between -structures and -spectra which is currently
an active eld in topology.

(for d-branes we need a variant of the above principle, namely we need
what are called plane foliations but we shall not elaborate on this point here).

one way of thinking about this principle is that it is analogous to the
past histories approach of quantum mechanics. clearly in quantum level
one should integrate over all foliations of a given codim.

a piece of warning here: this principle does not imply that all physical
process between branes are described by foliations. although the group of
foliations is huge, in fact comparable in size with the group of local dieo-
morphisms [3], and foliations can be really very nasty, we would not like
to make such a strong statement. what is denitely true though is that
some physical process are indeed described by foliations, hence at least this
condition must be satised because of them.

note:
before going on furter, we would like to make one crucial remark: this
principle puts severe restrictions on the topology that the underlying man-
ifold may have, in case of m-theory this is an 11-manifold. it is also very
important if the manifold is open or closed. this may be of some help, as we
hope, for the compactication problem of string theory or even m-theory,
namely how we go from d=10 (or d=11) to d=4 which is our intuitive di-
mension of spacetime. we shall address this question in the next section.
the nal comment is this: this principle puts absolutely no restriction to
the usual quantum eld theory for point particles in d=4, e.g. electroweak
theory or qcd. this is so because in this case spacetime is just r4 which is
non compact and we have 0-branes (point particles) and consequently 1-dim
foliations for which the integrability condition is trivially satised (essentially

29

this is due to a deep result of gromov for foliations on open manifolds, which
states that all open manifolds admit codim 1 foliations; in striking contrast,
closed manifolds admit codim 1 foliations i their euler characteristic is zero,
see for example in [2], [4] or references therein).

if we believe this principle, then the story goes on as follows: we are on
an 11-manifold, call it m for brevity and we want to describe a theory con-
taining 5-branes for example (and get membranes from s-duality). then m
should admit 6-dim foliations or equivalently codim 5 foliations. we know
from haeiger that the q-functor, namely the functor of codim q haeiger
structures and in particular codim q foliations, is representable. practically
this means that we can have an analogue of chern-weil theory which charac-
terises foliations of m up to homotopy using cohomology classes of m. (one
brief comment for foliations: one way of describing haeiger structures more
generally is to say that they generalise bre bundles in exactly the same way
that bre bundles generalise cartesian product. this observation is also im-
portant when mentioning gerbes later on).

in fact it is proved that the correct cohomology to classify haeiger struc-
tures up to homotopy (and hence foliations which constitute a particular ex-
ample of haeiger structures) is the gelfand-fuchs cohomology. this is a
result of bott and haeiger, essentially generalising an earlier result due to
godbillon and vey which was dealing only with codim 1 foliations, [5].

now we have a happy coincidence: the bott-haeiger class for a codim
5 foliation (which, recall, is what we want for 5-branes on an 11-manifold)
is exactly an 11-form, something that ts well with using it as a lagrangian
density!

the construction for arbitrary codim q foliations goes as follows:

let f
be a codim q foliation on an m-manifold m and suppose its normal bundle
(f ) is orientable. then f is dened by a global decomposable q-form .
let {(ui, xi)}ii be a locally nite cover of distinguished coordinate charts
on m with a smooth partition of unity {i}. then set
 ...  dxm

i

 =xii

idxmq+1

i

since  is integrable,

30

where  some 1-form on m. the (2q+1)-form

d =   ,

 =   (d)q,

(5)

(6)

is closed and its de rham cohomology class is independent of all choices
involved in dening it, depending only on homotopy type of f . thats the
class we want.

clearly for our case we are on an 11-manifold dealing with 5-branes, hence

6-dim foliations, hence codim 5 and thus the class  is an 11-form.

q is the classifying space for r

this construction can be generalised to arbitrary r

q-structures as a mixed
de rham-cech cohomology class and thus gives an element in h 2q+1(br
q; r),
where br
q-structures. note that in fact the
bhgv class is a cobordism invariant of codim q foliations of compact (2q+1)-
dim manifolds. this construction gives one computable characteristic class
for foliations. optimally we would like a generalisation of the chern-weil
construction for glq. that is we would like an abstract gda with the
property that for any codim q foliation f on a manifold m there is a gda
homomorphism into the de rham algebra on m, dened in terms of f such
that the induced map on cohomology factors through a universal map into
h (br
q; r). this algebra is nothing more than the gelfand-fuchs lie coal-
gebra of formal vector elds in one variable.

more concretely, let  be a transitive lie-pseudogroup acting on rn and
let a() denote the lie algebra of formal  vector elds associated to .
here a vector eld dened on on u  rn is called a  vector eld if the local
1-parameter group which it engenders is  and a() is dened as the inverse
limit

a() = limak()

of the k-jets at 0 of  vector elds. in the pseudogroup  let 0 be the set
of elements of  keeping 0 xed and set k
0 equal to the k-jets of elements in
0.

then the k

subgroup k  limk

0 form an inverse system of lie groups and we can nd a
0 is a maximal compact

0 whose projection on every k

31

0  k

subgroup for k > 0. this follows from the fact that the kernel of the projec-
tion k+1
0 is a vector space for k > 0. the subgroup k is unique up to
conjugation and its lie algebra k can be identied with a subalgebra of a().
for our purposes we need the cohomology of basic elements rel k in a(),
namely h(a(); k) which is dened as follows: let a{ak()} denote the
algebra of multilinear alternating forms on ak() and let a{a()} be the
direct limit of the a{ak()}. the bracket in a() induces a dierential on
a{a()} and we write h{a()} for the resulting cohomology group. the
relative group h (a(); k) is now dened as the cohomology of the subcom-
plex of a{a()} consisting of elements which are invariant under the natural
action of k and annihilated by all inner products with elements of k. then
the result is:

let f be a -foliation on m. there is an algebra homomorphism

 : h{a(); k}  h(m; r)

it is a principal k

which is a natural transformation on the category c().
the construction of  is as follows:
let p k() be the dierential bundle of k-jets at the origin of elements
0-bundle. on the other hand  acts transitively
of .
on the left on p k(). denote by a(p ()) the direct limit of the algebras
a(p k()) of dierential forms on p k(). the invariant forms wrt the action
of  constitute a dierential subalgebra denoted a. one can then prove
that it is actually isomorphic to a(a()).

now let f be a foliation on m and let p k(f ) be the dierentiable bundle
over m whose bre at every point say x  m is the space of k-jets at this
point of local projections that vanish on x. this is a k
0-principal bundle. its
restriction is isomorphic to the inverse image of the bundle p k(), hence the
dierential algebra of -invariant forms on p k() is mapped in the algebra
a(p k(f )) of dierential forms on p k(f ).
if we denote by a(p (f )) the
direct limit of a(p k(f )) we get an injective homomorphism  of a(a()) in
a(p (f )) commuting with the dierential.

this homomorphism is compatible with the action of k, hence induces
a homomorphism on the subalgebra of k-basic elements. but the algebra
a(p k(f ); k) of k-basic elements in a(p k(f )) is isomorphic to the algebra
of dierential forms on p k(f )/k which is a bundle over m with contractible
bre k
0/k.hence h(a(p k(f ); k)) is isomorphic via the de rham theorem

32

to h(m; r). the homomorphism  is therefore obtained as the composition

h(a(); k)  h(a(p (f ); k)) = h(m; r)

but we think that is enough with abstract nonsense formalism. let us

make our discussion more down to earth:

consider the gda (over r)

w oq = (u1, u3, ..., u2(q/2)1)  pq(c1, ..., cq)

with dui = ci for odd i and dci = 0 for all i and

wq = (u1, u2, ..., uq)  pq(c1, ..., cq)

with dui = ci and dci = 0 for i=1,...,q where degui = 2i  1, degci = 2i
and  denotes exterior algebra, pq denotes the polynomial algebra in the
cis mod elements of total degree greater than 2q. the cohomology of wq
is the gelfand fuchs cohomology of the lie algebra of formal vector elds
in q variables. we note that the ring structure at the cohomology level is
trivial, that is all cup products are zero. then the main result is that there
are homomorphisms

 : h (w oq)  h (br

q; r)

 : h (wq)  h ( br
for r  2 with the following property ( br

q denotes the classifying space
for framed foliations): if f is a codim q c r foliation of a manifold m, there
is a gda homomorphism

q; r)

f : w oq  (m)

into the de rham algebra on m, dened in terms of the dierential geometry
of f and unique up to chain homotopy, such that on cohomology we have
f = f   , where f : m  br
q classies f . if the normal bundle of f is
trivial, there is a homomorphism

f : wq  (m)

33

with analogous properties.

combining this result with the fact that b 0

q is contractible, we deduce
that a foliation is essentially determined by the structure of its normal bundle;
the chern classes of the normal bundle are contained in the image of the map
 above but we have additional non trivial classes in the case of foliations
(which are rather dicult to nd though), one of which is this bhgv class
which we constructed explicitly and it is the class we use as a lagrangian
density which is purely topological since its degree ts nicely for describing
5-branes.

there is an alternative approach due to simons [9] which avoids pass-
ing to the normal bundle using circle coecients. what he actually does is
to associate to a principal bundle with connection a family of characteris-
tic homomorphisms from the integral cycles on a manifold to s1 and then
dening an extension denoted k 2k
q of h 2k(bglq; z). this approach is re-
lated to gerbes. a gerbe over a manifold is a construction which locally looks
like the cartesian product of the manifold with a line bundle. clearly it is
a special case of foliations (remember our previous comment on foliations).
however this approach actually suggests that they might be equivalent, if the
approach of bott-haeiger is equivalent to that of simons, something which
is not known.

now the conjecture is that the partition function of this lagrangian is

related to the invariant introduced in [38].

in order to establish relation with physics, we must make some identi-
cations. the 1-form  appearing in the lagrangian has no direct physical
meaning. in physics it is assumed that a 5-brane gives rise to a 6-form gauge
eld denoted a6 whose eld strength is simply

da6 = f7

(7)

the only way we can explain geometrically this is that this 6-form is the
poincare dual of the 6-chain that the 5-brane sweps out as it moves in time.
we know that since we have s-duality between membranes and 5-branes,

in an obvious notation one has

f7 = f4

34

(8)

which is the s-duality relation, where

f4 = da3

(9)

observe now that the starting point for 5-brane theory is a6 where the
starting point to construct the bhgv class was the 5-form . how are they
related?

there are three obvious possibilities:
i. d = a6 that would imply that a6 is pure gauge.
ii.df4 =  this is trivial because it implies d = 0, hence d =  = 0.
iii. the only remaining possibility is

a6 = 

(10)

we call this reality condition. so now in principle we can substitute
equations (10) and (5) into (6) and get an expression for the lagrangian
which involves the gauge eld a6.

the euler-lagrange equations which are actually analogous to d=11 n=1

supergravity euler-lagrange equations (see equation (12) below) read:

d  d +

1
5

(d)5 = 0

(11)

the on-shell relation with d=11 n=1 supergravity is established as fol-

lows: recall that the bosonic sector of this supergravity theory is

z f4  f4  a3

where f4 = da3 with euler-lagrange equations

d  f4 +

1
2

f4  f4 = 0

(12)

constraining a3 via (12), by (9), (8), (7), (10) and (5) we get a constraint

for  which can be added to the class  as a lagrange multiplier.

in order to calculate the partition function, some additional diculties
may arise because we do not know what notion of equivallence between fo-
liations is the appropriate one for physics in order to x the gauge and add
faddeev-popov terms as constraints to kill-o the gauge freedom. there

35

are actually four dierent notions of equivalence for foliations: conjugation,
homotopy, integrable homotopy and foliated cobordism.

in principle, one must end up with an equivallent theory starting with
membranes (thats due to s-duality), provided of course a suitable class was
found. clearly the bhgv class for a membrane would be a 17-form.

the nal comment refers to [45]. in that article it was conjectured that
the quantum mechanics of branes could be described as a matrix model. as
it is well-known matrix models use point particle degrees of freedom. this is
rather intriguing since we are talking about m-theory which contains various
p-branes. in our approach though we propose a lagrangian density which
has as fundamental object a mysterious 1-form which, if seen as a gauge
potential, that would imply the existence of some yet unknown underlying
point particle!

0.7.1 plane elds

we now pass on to the second question raised in this application, namely the
restrictions on the topology of the underlying manifold of a theory containing
p-branes via our physical principle.

it is clear from the denition that the existence of a foliation of certain
dim, say d (or equivalently codim q=n-d) on an n-manifold (closed) depends:

a.) on the existence of a dim d subbundle of the tangent bundle
b.) on this d-dim subbundle being integrable.
the second question has been answered almost completely by bott and
in a more general framework by thurston. botts result dictates that for
a codim q subbundle of the tangent bundle to be integrable, the ring of
pontrjagin classes of the subbundle with degree > 2q must be zero. there
is a secondary obstruction due to shulman involving certain massey triple
products but we shall not elaborate on this. however botts result suggests
nothing for question a.) above. let us also mention that this result of
bott can be deduced by another theorem due to thurston which states that
the classifying space b 
q of smooth codim q framed foliations is (q+1)-
connected.

on the contrary, thurstons result reduces the existence of codim q > 1
foliations (at least up to homotopy) to the existence of q-plane elds. this is a
deep question in dierential topology, related to the problem of classication
of closed manifolds according to their rank.

36

now the problem of existence of q-plane elds has been answered only for
some cases for spheres sn for various values of n,q [6]. in particular we know
everything for spheres of dimension 10 and less. we should however mention
a theorem due to winkelnkemper [7] which is quite general in nature and
talks about simply connected compact manifolds of dim n greater than 5. if
n is not 0 mod 4 then it admits a so-called alexander decomposition which
under special assumptions can give a particular kind of a codim 1 foliation
with s1 as space of leaves and a surjection from the manifold to s1. if n is 0
mod 4 then the manifold admits an alexander decomposition i its signature
is zero.

let us return to string theory now: string theory works in d=10 and in
this case we have the old brane-scan suggesting the string/5-brane duality.
the new brane-scan contains all p-branes for p  6 and some d-7 and 8-
branes are thought to exist. however topology says that for a sphere in dim
10 we can have only dim 0 and dim 10 plane elds (in fact this is true for
all even dim spheres), hence by thurston only dim 0 and dim 10 foliations
and then our physical principle suggests that s10 is ruled out as a possible
underlying topological space for string theory.

what about m-theory in d=11 then?

for the case of s11 then it is known that s11 admits a 3-plane eld, hence
by our physical principle a theory containing membranes can be formulated
on s11. for s11 nothing is known for the existence of q-plane elds for q
greater than 3. but now we apply s-duality between membranes/5-branes
and conjecture that:

s11 should admit 5-plane elds.

let us close with two nal remarks:
1. there is extensive work in foliations with numerous results which
actually insert many extra parameters into their study, for example metric
aspects, existence of foliations with compact leaves (all or at least one or
exactly one), with leaves dieomorphic to rn for some n etc. we do not
have a clear picture for the moment concerning imposing these in physics.
let us only mention one particularly strong result due to wall generalising
a result of reeb [8]: if a closed n-manifold admits a codim 1 foliation whose

37

leaves are homeomorphic to rn1, then by thurston we know that its euler
characteristic must vanish, but in fact we have more: it has to be the n-torus!

the interesting point however is that although all these extended objects
theories in physics are expressed as  models [37], hence they involve metrics
on the manifold (target space) and on the worldvolumes ie on the leaves,
in our approach the metric is only used in the reality condition (10) which
makes connection with physical elds (that is some metric on the target
space) where at the same time we do not use any metric on the source space
(worldvolumes-leaves of the foliation).

2. in [37] another lagrangian density was proposed. it is dierent from
the one described here but they are related in an analogous way to the relation
between the polyakov and nambu-goto (in fact dirac [10]) actions for the
free bosonic string: extended objects basically immitate string theory and
we have two formalisms: the  model one which is the lagrangian exhibited
in [37] using polyakovs picture of  models as at principal bundles with
structure group the isometries of the metric on the target space [18]; yet we
also have the embedded surface picture which is the dirac (nambu-goto)
action and whose analogue is described in this work.

in the light of a very recent work [34], we can also make some further
comments: the rst is that the moyal algebra used in order to discuss non-
commutative solitons is actually morita equivalent to the usual commutative
one. this fact can be further veried from the explicit construction of an
algebra homomorphism between noncommutative and ordinary yang-mills
elds based on gelfands theorem. truly noncommutative situations appear
when discussing noncommutative tori.

the next comment refers to the last section of that paper: we already
know that strings in a constant magnetic eld can be described from that
moyal algebra-like spacetime structure and they also discuss what may hap-
pen to 5-branes in m-theory. our point of view coincides with theirs in the
following way: we here propose that this is indeed the case for 5-branes with
a c-eld turned on, namely that this situation can be described by 6-dim
foliations which rather correspond to a free theory of branes but on a non-
commutative topological space, which is actually, in our case, the space of
leaves of the corresponding foliation.

38

bibliography

[1] r. bott and a. haeiger: characteristic classes of -foliations, bull.

am. math. soc. 78.6, (1972)

[2] h. b. lawson: foliations, bull. am. math. soc. 80.3, 1974

[3] w. thurston: theory of foliations of codim greater than 1, comment.

math. helvetici 49 (1974), 214-231

w. thurston: foliations and groups of dieomorphisms, bull. am.
math. soc. 80.2 (1974)

[4] m. l. gromov: stable mappings of foliations into manifolds, izv.

akad. nauk. ussr ser. mat. 33 (1969)

[5] c. godbillon and j. vey: un invariant des feuilletages de codim 1, c

r acad. sci. paris ser ab 273 (1971)

[6] n. steenrod: the topology of bre bundles, princeton 1951

[7] h. e. winkelnkemper: manifolds as open books, bull. am. math.

soc. 79 (1973)

39

[8] g. reeb: feuillages, resultats anciens et nouveaux, montreal 1982

[9] j. simons: characteristic forms and transgression, preprint suny

stony brook

[10] p.a.m. dirac: proc. roy. soc. london a166 (1969)

[11] m. j. du et all: string solitons, phys. rep. 259 (1995) 213

m. j. du: supermembranes, hep-th 9611203

[12] p. c. west: supergravity, brane dynamics and string dualities, hep-th

9811101

[13] r. bott:lectures on characteristic classes and foliations, springer lnm

279, 1972.

[14] m. f. atiyah: topological quantum eld theories, publ. math. ihes
68, 175-186, (1989). the geometry and the physics of knots, cam-
bridge university press, 1990.

[15] wegge-olsen: k-theory and c -algebras, oxford university press,

1992.

[16] g. shardanashvili,o. zakharov: gauge gravitation theory, world

scientic, 1991.

[17] hirzebruch: geometrical methods in topology, springer, berlin 1970.

40

[18] a. polyakov, nucl. phys. b164 (1981), phys. lett. 82b (1979), hep-

th/9607049 princeton preprint 1996.

[19] g. hector - u. hirsch: introduction to the geometry of foliations,

vieweg 1981.

[20] a. connes: a survey of foliations and operator algebras, proc. sym-

pos. pure math., 38 ams 1982.

[21] p. baum, r. douglas: k-homology and index theory, ibid.

[22] a. connes: non-commutative geometry, academic press 1994.

[23] a. connes: noncommutative dierential geometry i, ii, ihes publ.

math. 63 (1985).

[24] a. connes: cyclic cohomology and the transverse fundamental class of
a foliation, pitman res. notes in math., 123, longman harlow 1986.

[25] p. townsend, d. freedman, nucl. phys. b177 (1981) 282.

[26] s. k. donaldson, p.b. kronheimer, the geometry of 4-manifolds, ox-

ford university press, 1991.

[27] a. connes, g. skandalis, the longitudinal index theorem for folia-

tions, publ. res. inst. sci. kyoto 20 (1984).

[28] m.f. atiyah - v.k. patodi - i.m. singer: spectral assymetry and rie-
mannian geometry i, ii, iii, math. proc. cambridge philos. soc. 77
(1975).

41

[29] winkelnkemper. the graph of a foliation. ann. global anal. and geom.

1 no3 (1983) 51.

[30] g.w. whitehead. elements of homotopy theory. springer berlin 1978.

[31] r. douglas - s. harder - j. kaminker: toeplitz operators and the eta

invariant: the case of s1 , contemp. math. 70 (1988).

[32] r. douglas - s. harder - j. kaminker: cyclic cocycles, renormalisation

and eta invariant, invent. math 103 (1991).

[33] e. witten: global gravitation anomalies, commun. math. phys. 100

(1985).

[34] e. witten: quantum field theories and the jones polynomial, com-

mun. math. phys. 121 (1989).

topology-changing amplitudes in (2+1)-dim gravity, nucl. phys.
b323, 113-140, (1989).

(2+1)-dim gravity as an exactly soluble system, nucl. phys. b311,
46-78, (1988).

string theory and noncommutative geometry, hep-th/9908142.

[35] f. w. kamber - p. tondeur: foliated bundles and characteristic

classes, lnm 493, springer 1975.

[36] a.a. belavin, a.m. polyakov, a.s. schwartz, y.s. tyupkin. pseudopar-

ticle solutions of the yang-mills equations. phys. lett. 59b (1975).

[37] i.p. zois: search for the m-theory lagrangian. phys. lett. b 402

(1997) 33-35.

42

[38] i.p. zois: the duality between two-index potentials and the non-linear

 model in eld theory, d.phil thesis, oxford, michaelmas 1996.

[39] j.w. barrett. quantum gravity as a topological quantum field the-

ory. nottingham mathematics preprint 1995.

[40] p.b. kronheimer, h. nakajima. yang-mills instantons on ale gravita-

tional instantons. mathematische annalen 288 (1990) 263.

[41] m. henneaux. uniqueness of the freedman-townsend interaction vertex

for 2-form gauge elds. preprint universite libre de bruxelles 1996.

[42] j.-l. loday: cyclic homology, springer, berlin, 1991.

[43] a. connes, m.r. douglas and a. schwarz: noncommutative geometry
and matrix theory: compactication on tori, j. high energy phys.
02 (1998) 003.

[44] s. t. tsou et all: features of quark and lepton mixing from dieren-

tial geometry of curves on surfaces, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 053006.

s. t. tsou et all: the dualised standard model and its applications,
talk given at the international conference of high energy physics 1998
(ichep 98), vancouver, canada.

[45] t. banks et all: m-theory as a matrix model: a conjecture, phys.

rev. d55 (1997) 5112.

43

