9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
4
2

 

 
 

1
v
5
6
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

branes in anti de sitter spacetime. 

m. trigiante

department of physics, university of wales swansea, singleton park,

swansea sa2 8pp, united kingdom

abstract

an intense study of the relationship between certain quantum theories of gravity realized on curved backgrounds
and suitable gauge theories, has been originated by a remarkable conjecture put forward by maldacena almost
one year ago. among the possible curved vacua of superstring or mtheory, spaces having the form of an anti
de sitter spacetime times a compact einstein manifold, have been playing a special role in this correspondence,
since the quantum theory realized on them, in the original formulation of the conjecture, was identied with the
eective superconformal theory on the world volume of parallel pbranes set on the boundary of such a space
(holography). an important step in order to verify such a conjecture and eventually generalize it, consists in
a precise denition of the objects entering both sides of the holographic correspondence. in the most general
case indeed it turns out that important features of the eld theory on the boundary of the curved background,
identied with the quantum theory of gravity in the bulk, are encoded in the dynamics of the coinciding parallel
pbranes set on the boundary of the same space. the study of pbrane dynamics in curved spacetimes which
are vacua of superstring of mtheory, turns out therefore to be a relevant issue in order to verify the existence
of the holographic correspondence. in the present paper, besides providing a hopefully elementary introduction
to maldacenas duality, i shall deal in a tentatively self contained way with a particular aspect of the problem
of p-brane dynamics in antide sitter spacetime, discussing some recent results.

proceeding of a talk given at the xiii congress of general relativity (sigrav), bari 2027 september 1998.

0.1

introduction

superstring theory has been regarded for a long time as the most promising quantum theory of
gravity (see [1, 2]). indeed it naturally includes the graviton among its massless states. nevertheless
it has intrinsic limits deriving from its own denition. as it is well known, this theory describes
one dimensional extended objects (closed or open strings) vibrating in a ten dimensional minkowsky
spacetime, whose spectrum of vibrational modes are expected to correspond to the observed elds in
nature. from a mathematical point of view the theory is a model dened on the 1 + 1 world sheet
of a string propagating in a 10dimensional target space. a dimensionful parameter characterizing
the string and dening the scale of its vibrational levels is the string length s, whose square will be
denoted by .

consistency of the theory requires its local invariance with respect to dieomorphism and conformal
transformations on the world sheet coordinates and metric. among the massless elds in the spectrum
of the theory there is a scalar  (the dilaton) and a spin2 eld g which is identied with the graviton
eld. one of the vacuum solutions of the theory is the one on which the symmetric tensor gives the
minkowsky metric on the target spacetime (hg i =  ) and hi = 0. superstring theory is
quantized on this vacuum, perturbatively with respect to an eective coupling constant g = exp(0).
versions of the theory on certain other vacua of the form md  k representing compactications of the
ten dimensional target space to a lower dimensional minkowsky space md (d  10) times a suitable
compact ricciat manifold k have been constructed as well. the low energy limit of these theories
is described by a ddimensional supergravity. on the other hand a second quantized formulation of
superstring theory on a curved background characterized by a non ricciat solution of the low
energy eective supergravity theory, is not known so far (except for very special cases) and represents
in general a complicate problem ([3]). as we shall see, one of the potential achievements of the duality
recently conjectured by maldacena (see [4],[5] and references therein), is to shed light on the quantum
spectrum of superstring theory realized on a particular kind of non ricciat vacuum, namely of the
form ads  k, where ads stands for a ddimensional anti de sitter spacetime and k is a suitable
compact (10d)dimensional einstein space. these vacua correspond to the geometry of some regions
of spacetime in presence of extended objects which are believed to belong to the non perturbative
spectrum of superstring theories and therefore may be regarded as nonperturbative vacua of these
theories. in the remaining part of the present introduction i shall try to further formalize these concepts
in a pedagogical fashion, preparing a physical scenario in which to set maldacenas conjecture.

one of the great achievements of the last ten years is the concept of duality: correspondences
have been conjectured and in part veried between regimes of various superstring theories realized
on dierent backgrounds of the form md  k ( see [6] and references therein). the existence of
such dualities would allow to consider the known superstring theories as local eective formulations
on dierent backgrounds of a unique, yet unknown quantum theory living in a higher dimensional
spacetime. among the candidates for this larger quantum theory there is the so called m theory
in (10 + 1)dimensions, whose low energy eective eld theory is the well known 11dimensional
supergravity, and f theory in (10 + 2)dimensions. duality, being a mapping between the spectra
of two dierent superstring theories, at the massless level is realized by means of suitable discrete
transformations on the background elds, which close a group g(z). the largest duality which has
been conjectured is called u duality and the corresponding action on the massless elds g(z) is
believed to be suitable discrete version of the largest global symmetry group g of the eld equations
and bianchi identities of the the underlying low energy supergravity [7]. the study of dualities, and in
particular of the nonperturbative ones, shed some light on the nonperturbative side of superstring

1

theories. for instance it became clear that the full spectrum of these theories should contain not only
0 and 1dimensional objects (particles and strings), but also pextended objects (pbranes) which
were not present in the perturbative spectrum, but nonetheless corresponded to solutions of the low
energy supergravity. among them, those coupled with a certain kind of background elds, namely the
ramondramond elds, are of particular interest. the main feature of the ramondramond (rr)
elds is that they do not couple directly to the fundamental closed string. on the other hand they are
mixed with the other background elds which do couple directly to the closed string (neveu-schwarz
neveu-schwarz elds) through the u duality group g(z). therefore, if the u duality is meant to be
an exact symmetry of a larger quantum theory, the distinction between rr and the other elds is
to be considered an artifact of perturbative superstring theory and therefore one expects to nd in
the nonperturbative spectrum of superstring theory objects coupled to rr elds and thus carrying
a rr charge. since the rr elds are in general (p + 1) forms, they can minimally couple to p
extended objects. a particular kind of these extended objects (namely those preserving a fraction of
the original supersymmetry) received a description in the context of perturbative superstring theory
on at space as dirichelet surfaces [8], that is (roughly speaking) as hypersurfaces on which open
strings start and end. the dynamics of these so called dpbranes is determined by the oscillations of
the open strings attached to them. in ten dimensions the quantum world may be therefore guratively
represented as containing closed strings free to move in the bulk and to interact among themselves
and with dynamical hypersurfaces on which open strings are attached. in eleven dimensions on the
other hand, the conjectured m theory is expected to contain pextended objects as well (m pbranes),
which are solutions of the low energy supergravity.

going back to the suggestive 10dimensional picture of the quantum world previously portrayed
, one may ask which are the limits of such a representation, i.e.
in what physical regime does the
framework of superstring theory on minkowsky background break down? a dbrane is a massive
object, which means that it interacts with the gravitational eld and thus deforms the surrounding
spacetime. from the superstring point of view, being the quantum uctuation of the background
metric associated with a vibrational 0mode of the closed string, this interaction is described through
the emission of a closed string from the brane in the surrounding at spacetime and the amplitude
of such a process, computed in the framework of perturbative string theory by means, for instance,
of boundary state methods, yields the deformation of the minkowsky metric due to the presence of
the extended object. for a single dbrane this deformation is localized around the source in a region
r1 whose thickness is of the order of the string length s. this is an a posteriori consistency check
that the interaction between the dbrane and the closed strings could be correctly computed in the
framework of string theory on minkowsky space, since the closed strings taking part in this interaction
live much longer in the at region r2, complement of r1 in the whole space, rather than in r1. the
situation changes when we consider n coinciding dpbranes. an important feature of these objects
is that parallel dbranes do not exert any force on each other and therefore may be set to coincide
without expense of energy. for this system, the thickness of the curved region r1 around the brane
would be proportional to a certain (positive) power of n, and for n large enough, it would contain
all the physical information on the interaction between the brane and the closed strings. in the limit
n   r1 would ll the whole space and the interaction of the strings with the branes could be
described only in the framework of a superstring theory realized on a new curved vacuum dened by
the near horizon geometry of the branes. let us look at this scenario from the low energy supergravity
point of view.

the system consisting of a large number n of coinciding d branes, is well described by a solution
of the low energy supergravity theory since the curvature in the region r1 is small with respect to

2

1/s. in general pbrane solutions of supergravity are associated with a p + 1form potential a(p+1)
to which they couple and whose integral on their world volume gives their electric charge. (a simple
example is that of an elementary particle (0brane) minimally coupled to a vector potential. its electric
charge is given by the integral of the vector potential along the particle world line.) if a(p+1) is an
elementary eld of the theory, then the solution is an elementary pbrane, characterized by a singular
p-hypersurface hidden by an event horizon. to an elementary pbrane there corresponds a solitonic
(d  p  4)brane coupled to the (d  p  3)form potential dual to a(p+1). this bona de solution
of the theory is non singular. particular kinds of elementary and solitonic pbranes in ddimensions
can be found as solutions of a truncated supergravity model consisting just of the metric, the dilaton
and the (p + 1)form potential [9, 5, 10] which are described by the following metrics :

elementary solution:

ds2 = (cid:18)1 +

solitonic solution:

ds2 = (cid:18)1 +

(d2)

k

red(cid:19) 4ed
rd(cid:19) 4d

k

(d2)

(d2)

dx  dx (cid:18)1 +

dx  dx (cid:18)1 +

k

red(cid:19) 4d
rd(cid:19) 4ed

k

(d2)

dzp  dzqpq

dzp  dzqpq

(1)

the matrix  is the metric on a (p + 1)dimensional minkowsky spacetime and has the following
signature:  = diag(+, , . . . , ). these elementary (solitonic) solutions have a at world volume

parametrized by the d = p+1 (ed = dp3) coordinates x, while zp denote the coordinates along the

directions orthogonal to the world volume (p = 1, . . . , d  p  1). the parameter  is a characteristic
quantity which will have the value 4 in all the cases we shall deal with. finally k represents the
charge of the solution with respect to the corresponding potential. the r = 0 hypersurface represents
the event horizon of the solution and is a coordinate singularity. an important feature of the above
solutions is to have a residual supersymmetry.

in the 11dimensional supergravity (low energy limit of the conjectured m theory) there is an m 2
(elementary) and an m 5 (solitonic) brane solution. in type iib supergravity (d = 10) of particular
interest is the selfdual (since it is coupled to the rr self dual 4form a(4)) 3brane solution. their
metric is immediately computed from eqs. (1):

d = 11 m 2brane:

d = 11 m 5brane:

ds2 = (cid:18)1 +
ds2 = (cid:18)1 +
ds2 = (cid:18)1 +

3

k5

k2

r6(cid:19) 2
r3(cid:19) 1
r4(cid:19) 1

k3

3

2

dx  dx (cid:18)1 +
dx  dx (cid:18)1 +
dx  dx (cid:18)1 +

k5

k2

r6(cid:19) 1
r3(cid:19) 2
r4(cid:19) 1

3 (cid:16)d2r + r2d27(cid:17)
3 (cid:16)d2r + r2d24(cid:17)
2 (cid:16)d2r + r2d25(cid:17)

k3

(2)

d = 10 3brane:

the linear extension of the near horizon region r1 may be characterized by the condition r  r,
r being k1/6
for the 3brane. in this region the
metrics in eqs. (2) may be rewritten in the following form:

for the m 5brane and k1/4

for the m 2brane, k1/3

5

2

3

ds2 = 2dx  dx  (rw)2 d2

2  r2d(dp2)

3

2(d  2)

w =

;  = (cid:18) r

r(cid:19) 1

w

(3)

ed

the above metric describes a spacetime of the form adsp+2  sdp2 (with an abuse of language we
shall denote by anti de sitter space a particular compactication of anti de sitter space, characterized
by the condition  > 0). the parameters k2, k5, k3 are related to the charges these solution have with
respect to the potential they couple to.
indeed, in suitable units, they represent the ux of the
corresponding eld strengths f (4), f (7), f (5) through the spheres s7, s4, s5 respectively. one may
interpret the solutions in eqs. (2) from a microscopic point of view as bound states describing n
coinciding m 2, m 5, d3 branes respectively, each of them carrying a unit of the charge associated
with the potential they couple to. in this picture the parameters ki (i = 2, 5, 3) are proportional to
n .

the solutions (2) describe a spacetime continuum which starts from a at minkowsky geometry
at innite distance from the extended object, then acquires a nonvanishing curvature at nite r till
it forms a throat of width r near the horizon at r = 0, with an antide sitter geometry.

let us spend few more words about the selfdual 3brane solution in type iib supergravity. if
interpreted from the string theory point of view as a bound state of n coinciding d3branes, each
carrying unit of rr charge, its charge with respect to a(4) will be proportional to k3 = gn 4
s
(g being the string coupling constant). according to the d3brane interpretation of this solution
r  s(gn )1/4 and therefore in the limit n   the whole spacetime has the form ads5  s5. it
follows that in this regime a microscopic description of the d3branes would be related to superstring
theory realized on this new curved background. indeed spaces of the form adsp+2  m dp2, where
m dp2 is a suitable einstein manifold, have been shown to be exact solutions of superstring or m
theory (d = 10, 11 respectively) [11] and thus possible vacua for these theories (the space ads5  s5
could be interpreted as a nonperturbative vacuum of superstring theory exhibiting a condensation
of d3branes). nevertheless, as previously emphasized, nding the spectrum of physical excitations
of a string on a curved background (such as the nonperturbative vacua described above) is a very
complicate issue and in general represents an unsolved problem (dierently from the case of a conformal
model on a minkowsky background, in a general curved target space indeed it is no more possible
to construct the hilbert space of quantum states as a fock space built through the action on a vacuum
state of creation operators corresponding to free oscillators). a hint as to the physical content of some
of these theories is provided by a powerful duality conjectured by maldacena almost one year ago.

in section 2 i shall give a pedagogical an tentatively self consistent review of this conjecture and
its formulation as a duality between a singleton superconformal eld theory on the boundary of anti
de sitter space and superstring or m theory in the bulk. in section 3 i shall focus on the particular
case of the m 2brane and discuss some recent results in the analysis of the dynamics of branes in
anti de sitter space.

0.2 ads/cf t duality

let us focus for the moment on a 10dimensional spacetime in which the physics is described by
type iib superstring theory in presence of d3branes. the main idea is that, as the number n of
coinciding d3branes increases (n  1), the physics is described by a new nonperturbative vacuum
which is no more the at minkowsky one on which the superstring theory is perturbatively dened but
has the geometry of (ads5  k 5)n in which the n d3branes are suitably embedded (the subscript
n  reminds that the background spacetime is the near horizon geometry of the n branes and

4

therefore its radius is proportional to n 1/4) . it is reasonable to think that the eective low energy
theory around this vacuum has d3branes as fundamental objects instead of strings and describes
uctuations of these extended objects, around their static conguration described by eq. (2), which
have energy much lower than the string scale (1/). this theory is the eective eld theory on the
world volume on the n coinciding branes in the limit   0 (in this limit the interaction of the branes
with the bulk through emission of closed strings is suppressed). intuitively, in much the same way as
a eld theory of elementary particles and of solitons can be viewed as eective descriptions of a same
quantum theory on two dierent vacua, the theory of superstrings and of branes may be considered
as dual to each other, i.e. the theory dened on the world volume of the n coinciding branes (in
which the branes are the fundamental objects) embedded in their near horizon geometry, for small
uctuations, could be viewed as the eective low energy realization of the quantum theory of strings
on an (ads5  k 5)n vacuum. this is the basic idea which has been formalized by maldacena in his
powerful duality conjecture:

type iib superstring theory realized on (ads5  s5)n and the low energy eective eld theory on

the world volume of the n coinciding d3branes are the same quantum theory.

the same kind of duality was originally conjectured also between m theory (whose physical content
is not known so far) on (adsp+2  s9p)n , describing the near horizon geometry of n m pbranes
for p = 2, 5, and the low energy eective eld theory on the world volume of these branes. in this
case the low energy condition on the world volume theory is expressed in terms of the only length
scale of the 11 dimensional supergravity theory, which is the plank scale p: p  0. this duality is
also referred to as holographic correspondence since it states that the quantum dynamics of elds in
a (p + 2)dimensional spacetime (ads(p+2)) is encoded in a theory dened on a (p + 1) dimensional
subspace.

in the original formulation of the conjecture the inner compact space is a (d  p  2)dimensional
sphere s(dp2). eventually it was suggested that the duality could be formulated on more general
spaces in which the compact einstein space k (dp2) is an homogeneous space of the form g/h [12].
these spaces are maximally symmetric solutions of the supergravity theory and near horizon geometry
of certain pbrane solutions of the same theory. dierently form the case in which k = sphere,
solutions of the form ads(p+2)  (g/h) are in general not maximally supersymmetric, i.e.
they
preserve less supersymmetry than the original theory. maldacenas conjecture has been recently further
extended to spacetime geometries of the form ads  k in which k is an even more general einstein
manifold related to the so called sasaki monifolds [13].

a special role in this duality is played by the anti de sitter spacetime representing the non
compact factor of this vacuum. superstring theory (supergravity) realized on ads(p+2)  k (dp2) is
locally invariant under the general coordinate transformations generated by the space time isometry
group:

g = isom(cid:16)ads(p+2)  k (dp2)(cid:17) = so(2, p + 1)  isom(cid:16)k (dp2)(cid:17)

(4)

since we are dealing with a locally supersymmetric theory, we may include supersymmetry transfor-
mations in the previous statement and say that the quantum theory in the bulk is locally invariant
with respect to the superextension sg of the isometry group in (4), whose structure will be described
in more detail in next section. however it is useful to write the explicit form of sg in the following
way:

isom(cid:16)k (dp2)(cid:17)

 so(n )  k

sg = sc  k

5

sc = 


osp(4/n )
m 2brane
osp(6, 2/n ) m 5brane
su (2, 2/n ) d3brane

(5)

where n (dimension of the spinors in (p + 2) dimensions) gives the number of supercharges preserved
by the background solution (n is the number of killing spinors of the supergravity solution and
depends on the compact manifold k). the group sc is the supersymmetric extension of the group
so(2, p + 1), that is it consists of the so(2, p + 1) bosonic generators plus a number n of fermionic
generators. an important property of the groups so(2, p + 1) and sc is that they act respectively as
the conformal and super conformal groups in p + 1 dimensions.

one of the features of an anti de sitter space is to have a boundary. this boundary ads(p+2) is
a (p + 1) dimensional locus of points having the property of being stable with respect to the action
of the ads(p+2) isometry group so(2, p + 1) (or the superisometry group sc of the anti de sitter
superspace, in the framework of a supersymmetric theory).

parametrizing ads(p+2) by means of the coordinates (, x) in terms of which the metric is written
in the form (3), the boundary may be characterized as the (p + 1)dimensional minkowsky space
m(p+1) spanned by the coordinates x in the limit   0 plus a point at innity   . therefore
the minkowsky part of ads(p+2) (m(p+1)) coincides with the world volume of the n overlapping
pbranes, which is thus stable under the action of the so(2, p + 1) isometry group.

the eective low energy theory on the world volume m(p+1) of the n p branes is obtained by
expanding the borninfeld action sbi on m(p+1) for small oscillations of the branes around the static
position at the boundary of ads(p+2). the action sbi describes a model on m(p+1) in which the local
elds are the coordinates xm () = ((), x(); ym()) of the target spacetime ads(p+2)  k (dp2),
locally depending on the p + 1 world volume coordinates a. the main feature of sbi is that it is
expressed as the integral over m(p+1) of the invariant volume element and thus the isometries of the
target space are global symmetries of the theory. in particular, since the anti de sitter isometry group
so(2, p + 1) acts on m(p+1) as a conformal group, the theory on the world volume of the pbranes
on the boundary is a conformal eld theory (cft). if supersymmetries are taken into account, the
theory is expected to be globally invariant under the whole superisometry group sg, which contains
the superconformal group sc, and thus to be a super conformal eld theory (scft).

the conjectured duality is therefore between superstring (m ) theory on ads(p+2)  k (dp2) and

a scft on the boundary ads(p+2).

this conjecture has been subsequently made more precise by witten [14] who dened a precise
correspondence between quantum states (x) of the theory in the bulk and superconformal operators
o() on the boundary. in particular, according to this picture, the operators o() are interpreted as
vertex operators dening the emission of the corresponding state (x) from the membrane in the bulk.
at the heart of this correspondence is the consideration that either the states (x) or the operators
o() must transform in representations of the same group g dened in eq. (4) or, more in general, of
its superextension sg. witten retrieved also a relation between the masses of the states in the bulk
and the conformal dimensions of the operators on the boundary.

as i previously emphasized the whole spectrum of the quantum theory in the bulk is not known,
nevertheless the low energy part of it consists of the kaluzaklein states of ddimensional supergravity
compactied on ads(p+2)  k (dp2), which have been extensively studied in the eighties [15]. these
states are in one to one correspondence with the harmonic functions on the compact space k (dp2)
and their mass is of order mkk  1/r. they sit in short supermultiplets of the supergroup sg
since their masses are related to quantities characteristic of the isometry algebra of k (dp2) and this

6

property protects them, for large enough supersymmetry , from quantum corrections. in the previously
outlined correspondence, the kaluzaklein states naturally correspond to conformal operators sitting
in short representations of the superconformal group sc acting on the boundary. they are the chiral
operators. besides the kaluzaklein states there are the string or m theory states which sit on
long supermultiplets of sg. their mass is of order m  1/ (  being s or p in the superstring or
m theory case respectively) and are not protected from quantum corrections. these states would
naturally correspond to non chiral operators in the scft on the boundary.

let us recall that the radius of the anti de sitter space r depends on both  and n in the

following way:

r  n 

(6)

where  is 1/4, 1/6, 1/3 for the d3, m 2, m 5 brane respectively. if we send, together with   0 (low
energy limit on world volume theory) n to innity in such a way as to keep r xed, the string or m
theory modes will decouple since their mass will grow as n . in this limit the duality can be restated
as a mapping between a scft on the boundary and treelevel kaluzaklein supergravity in the bulk.
since much is known about the latter, maldacenas duality has so far received several checks from the
study of the large n limit of certain scft (especially in the case of the low energy scft on the
world volume of n coinciding d3branes which is known to be a super conformal su (n ) yangmills
theory. in this framework stringent check of the duality was carried out for instance in [16]).

in the correspondence described above between states of the theory in the bulk and conformal
operators on the boundary belonging to the same representation of the superconformal group, there
is a piece missing. indeed, among the unitary irreducible representations, besides the long and short
supermultiplet, the superconformal group sc admits ultrashort representations (supersingletons) (in a
nonsupersymmetric framework, the ultrashort representations of the ads isometry group so(2, p+1)
are called singletons and were rst found by dirac [17]). supersingletons may be characterized as those
states which saturate the lowest bound on the energy in order for the representation to be unitary.
states in these multiplets dont have a representation in terms of local elds in the bulk since they
can be gauged away everywhere, except on the boundary of the anti de sitter space, where they
admit a eld representation . supersingletons are therefore the natural candidates for describing the
elementary elds of the scft on the boundary. they dont have a counterpart in the theory dened
on the bulk. superconformal eld theories of singletons on ads have been studied extensively in the
eighties [18]. an important property of these ultrashort representations is that all the other unitary
irreducible representations (uir) of sc (in which for instance all the elds in the bulk transform) may
be built from tensor products of two or more singleton states (composite states). this lead, during
the early stages of the research on singleton eld theories, to the hypothesis that all the excitations
of the quantum theory in the bulk could be expressed as composite states of elementary super
singletons living in the boundary (see [5] and references therein) which was a rst kind of holographic
correspondence.

already in these early years moreover the supersingleton scft was suggested (nicolai et al. [19])
to describe the dynamics of physical objects embedded on the boundary of ads(p+2), namely pbranes.
however this correspondence was never proven rigorously and there are two main dierences between
the supersingleton scft studied in the eighties and those which are expected to describe one side of
maldacena duality. the former were dened on a boundary of ads(p+2) with topology sp  s1, they
were (for large enough supersymmetry) free eld theories with a mass term and were related to the
dynamics of a single spherical pbrane embedded in ads(p+2). on the other hand scfts relevant
to maldacena conjecture (as previously pointed out) are dened on a boundary ads(p+2) which is

7

given the topology of a (p + 1)dimensional minkowsky space (plus a point at innity), are interacting
(since they have a nonabelian su (n ) gauge invariance) massless eld theories and are expected to
describe the dynamics of n coinciding pbranes set on ads(p+2).

nevertheless, the characterization of the scft entering maldacena duality as a supersingleton

theory allowed for a group theoretical analysis of the conjecture [20].

there is however an important feature of the supersingleton theory which is in general not xed by
its invariance with respect to sc. indeed we recall that this theory is globally invariant with respect to
the whole superisometry group sg in eq. (5) which contains, besides sc, a bosonic subgroup k. this
group acts as a avour group on the singleton theory and the avour representation of the singletons
with respect to k is independent of their superconformal transformation properties and can in general
be retrieved only from the pbrane dynamics on the boundary. in the maximally supersymmetric case

k (dp2) = s(dp2) the whole isom(cid:16)s(dp2)(cid:17) = so(d  p  1) enters the superconformal group

sc in eqs. (5) and the group k is trivial, therefore all the transformation properties of the singletons
with respect to sg are characterized by the sc quantum numbers. verifying maldacena conjecture
in the most general case requires the knowledge of the avour representation of the singletons with
respect to k. indeed since all the conformal operators of the theory are constructed as composite
structures of the singleton elds, their k quantum numbers will depend on the singleton avour
representation. verifying the matching between the k quantum numbers of the boundary operators
with those of the bulk states would be a new kind of check of maldacena conjecture. to this end it
is crucial to develop a procedure for retrieving the supersingleton action from the quantization of a
n coinciding pbranes set on the boundary of ads(p+2). for n > 1 a classical action on the world
volume of the overlapping branes would be a nonabelian borninfeld action, which is not known at
present. however, if our aim is just to determine the k avour representation of the singletons, this
information could be inferred from the study of a single pbrane on the boundary. indeed one may
consider a system of n + 1 parallel pbranes, of which the rst n  1 are coinciding and set on
the boundary of ads(p+2)  k (dp2) while the remaining one (probe brane) is set at a distance r
from them. in principle then one could quantize (for small uctuations) the world volume borninfeld
action on the probe brane in the limit in which the latter is sent to coincide with the other n (r  0)
(superconformal limit) and retrieve an the superconformal action of free (abelian) massless singletons,
together with their k representation.

quantizing for small oscillations the bi action on the world volume of a brane embedded in a
curved space is a dicult problem because of technical diculties related to the gauge xing of the
local invariances of the theory (in particular the fermionic  symmetry needed in order for the world
volume theory to be supersymmetric). a general method for retrieving the supersingleton action from
the world volume theory of a probe brane on the boundary of an anti de sitter space was dened in
[21], and applied to the case of an m 2brane on the boundary of ads4  s7. this method relied on a
particular parametrization of the anti de sitter superspace dened by using a supersolvable subalgebra
of the superisometry group. the supersolvable parametrization is the super extension of the solvable
parametrization of the anti de sitter space dened in [12], which is related to the coordinates (, x) in
terms of which the metric has the expression (3). the main goal of the supersolvable parametrization
is to allow to write the bi action which is symmetry xed from the very beginning, that is which
depends only on the physical fermionic elds. this gauge xing turns out to be equivalent to xing
the killing spinor gauge dened in [22].

solvable and supersolvable parametrizations dened in [12] and [21] revealed to be a powerful al-
gebraic tool for describing brane dynamics in anti de sitter spaces. they have been applied eventually

8

to the d3 brane in ads5  s5 [23].

the nal goal however is to apply this method to a background of the form ads(p+2)  k (dp2)
where k is an homogeneous manifold of the form g/h or related to a more general sasaki manifold
(n = 2 killing spinors). in these cases indeed, as previously emphasized, the ads/cf t correspon-
dence from a group theoretical point of view becomes nontrivial because the k avour representation
of the singletons enters the game on the scft side, as an input independent of the superconformal
invariance of the theory. this analysis is still work in progress.

0.3 supermembrane in anti de sitter space.

in the present section i shall recall the main facts about anti de sitter spaces and review some recent
results in the study of the m 2brane dynamics in ads4  s7.

an ndimensional anti de sitter spacetime may be described as an hypersurface embedded in
ir2,n1. let x  = (x 0, x 0, x 1, . . . , xn1) denote a coordinate basis for ir2,n1 with respect to which
the at metric has the form:  = diag(+, +, , . . . , ). adsn is dened as the following locus of
points:

x x  = 1

(7)

(for simplicity we have set the radius of adsn equal to 1). this condition is invariant with respect
to the group so(2, n  1) acting on x , which is the isometry group of adsn. dening the light cone
coordinates x  = x 0  x n1 and the coordinates x by setting x  = x +x for  = 0, 1, . . . , n  2,
the condition (7) may be rewritten in the following way:

let us restrict ourselves to the branch x +  0. in the limit x +  1 the above condition reduces to:

x +x  + (x +)2 xx = 1

(8)

x + xx = x 

(9)

which denes an (n  1)dimensional minkowsky space m(n1) spanned by the coordinates x, which
is stable with respect to a scaling x   x . its isometry group is iso(1, n  2)  so(2, n  1).

moreover if we add to it the point p at x + = 0 dening fm(n1) = m(n1)  p (x + = 0), this

compact locus of points denes the boundary of adsn which is stable with respect to the whole group
so(2, n  1). setting  = x + and computing the induced metric on the hypersurface (8) in terms of
the coordinates (, x) one obtains a generalization of the bertottirobinson metric:

ds2 = 2dx  dx  

d2
2

(10)

the anti de sitter space may be alternatively written as an homogeneous manifold in the following
way:

adsn =

so(2, n  1)
so(1, n  1)

(11)

in order to compute the nonlinear action of the isometry group so(2, n  1) on the coordinates
(, x), we shall characterize them as coordinates in the solvable representation of adsn [12]. using
the formalism of coset manifolds, one can associate with each point q in adsn a coset representative

9

l(q) so that the non linear action of the isometry group so(2, n1) on the point q may be represented
in the following way:

g  so(2, n  1)
h(g, q)  so(1, n  1)

g  l(q) = l(q(g, q))  h(g, q)

(12)

in order to dene a parametrization of the manifold, or equivalently l(q), one may use the following
algebra decomposition:

so(2, n  1) = so(1, n  1)  solv

(13)

where solv is an ndimensional solvable1 subalgebra of so(2, n  1). as a consequence of eq. (13)
the anti de sitter space is isomorphic to a group manifold generated by solv and may be globally
identied with it. in this description the local coordinates on adsn are therefore parameters of solv.
the solv algebra is constructed by considering the only noncompact cartan generator d in the
coset (11) and diagonalizing its adjoint action on the algebra so(2, n  1). this denes a grading
on so(2, n  1) which is decomposed into the direct sum of eigenspaces of adjd, namely g(0), g(1)
corresponding to the eigenvalues 0, 1 respectively. solv can be constructed as {d}  g(1), where
g(0) = {d}  so(1, n  2) while g(1) = {t} consists of the n  1 shift operators corresponding to all
the roots having negative value on d. the subalgebra g(1) is an abelian subalgebra of so(2, n  1)
since there is no generator with grading 2 with respect to adjd. associating with the generator d
the parameter log() and with the generators t the parameters x, the coset representative can be
dened as an element of the solvable group exp(solv) as follows:

l(, x) = exp

log()d +

n1x=0

xt


(14)

constructing the vielbeins in this parametrization and then computing the metric on the manifold,
one obtains the expression in eq. (10). from eqs. (14) and (12) one may therefore deduce the action
of so(2, n  1) on the coordinates (, x).

in this parametrization anti de sitter space is represented, roughly speaking, by means of minkowsky
slices m(n1) spanned by the coordinate x and brated along the transverse coordinate   ir+.one
may dene an alternative topology on adsn, by constructing it as the limit of m(n1) as   0 plus
a point at    [21]. thinking of adsn as the near horizon geometry on n coinciding (n  2) branes
set on the  = 0 chart of the boundary, the probe brane introduced in last section, can be dened as
a brane whose wold volume coincides with the m(n1) minkowsky slice at a distance  from the
remaining n branes.

it is possible to check that the action of the group so(2, n  1) on a generic hypersurface m(n1)
at  6= 0 closes a soft conformal algebra, that is a conformal algebra whose structure constants
depend on the coordinate  ( the broken conformal transformations of [4]). in the limit   0 (on
the boundary) the dependence on  of the conformal algebra drops out and the group so(2, n  1)
acts on m(n1) as the usual conformal group. now we can interpret the generators of so(2, n  1)
described above, from the world volume theory point of view, in the following way:

 d the generator of the dilations

1a solvable lie algebra solv is a lie algebra whose kth lie derivative dk(solv) vanishes for some nite k. the kth

lie derivative may be dened by induction in k: dk+1(solv) =(cid:2)dk(solv), dk(solv)(cid:3); d1(solv) = [solv, solv]

10

 t the n  1 translations on m(n1)

 k in g(+1) as the n  1 special conformal transformations

 so(1, n  2) = g(0)/{d} the lorentz transformations on m(n1)

in what follows i shall outline, without entering the details of the calculations, the main conceptual
steps in the procedure introduced in [21] for computing the supersingleton action from the quantum
uctuations of a probe pbrane around the boundary of an anti de sitter space. let us consider
for simplicity the special case of an m 2 probe brane in ads4  s7. as previously pointed out this
spacetime is a maximally supersymmetric solution of the 11dimensional supergravity. with it we
may associate a superspace ads(4/8)  s7 spanned by 10 bosonic coorsinates xm (m = 0, . . . , 9)
and 32 fermionic coordinates a
 where a = 1, . . . , n = 8 and  = 1, . . . , 4 indicizes a 4dimensional
spinor. xm consist in the four coordinates (, x) of ads4 and the seven coordinates ym of s7. the
superspace has the form:

ads(4/8)  s7 =

osp(4/8)

so(1, 3)  so(8)

 s7

(15)

the theory on the world volume m(3) of the m 2 probe brane is described by a borninfeld action
sbi which, as explained in the previous section, is a model dened on m(3) having the background
superspace ads(4/8)  s7 as target space. the local elds in this action are therefore xm () (bosons)
 () (fermions), a being the 3 world volume coordinates. using the conventions of [21] sbi
and a
may be written (in suitable units) in the following form:

sbi = 2zm(3)qdet(hab) + (4!)2zm(3)

a(3)

(16)

where hab(xm (), a
 ()) is the induced metric on the world volume and the second term is the wess
zumino term describing the minimal coupling of the brane with the 3form of the 11dimensional
supergravity.

let us analyze the symmetries of this action. as previously stated, its global symmetries are the
target space superisometries which close the group sg = osp(4/8). its local symmetries are, on the
other hand, the dieomorphisms on the world volume (  ()) and the fermionic symmetry.
the former implies that the only physical degrees of freedom are the oscillations of the membrane in
the directions perpendicular to its world volume (8 bosonic d.o.f.). the latter is a symmetry of the
action with respect to local transformations acting only on half the components of the fermion elds.
these components are dened by a projector of the form p + = (1 + )/2, where  is a 4  4 matrix
depending on the background elds. the invariance of sbi with respect to this local transformation
requires the background elds to be a solution of the 11 dimensional supergravity, which is indeed the
case.the consequence of  symmetry is that the + = p + components of the fermionic elds can be
gauged away, leaving 16 physical fermionic degrees of freedom  which match onshell the 8 bosonic
ones. the supersingletons indeed belong to 8 supermultiplets consisting of a boson and a majorana
fermion each. these elds will be retrieved as quantum uctuations around a suitable solution of the
8 fermionic and 8 bosonic physical degrees of freedom of the brane. the existence of  symmetry is
therefore required in order for the theory on the world volume to be onshell supersymmetric.

a particular solution of the theory is the static one:

x() = a , a = 0, 1, 2

11

()   = const
aym = 0
 = 0

a

(17)

in order to retrieve the supersingleton action the strategy is to x the local symmetries of the theory
and expand the action (16) for small uctuations of the physical d.o.f. around the solution (17) and
then taking the boundary limit   0 where the full superconformal symmetry is restored. the local
dieomorphisms are xed by xing the coordinates x parallel to the brane to the solution (17). fixing
the  symmetry is a more complicate issue. in principle one should compute the components  on
the static solution, set the unphysical components + to zero in the action and allow the physical
ones to uctuate. this is dicult to implement on the action (16) initially expressed in terms of the
whole spinors a
 , since on the anti de sitter background, this dependence is rather complicate and
involves higher powers of the  elds.

this problem has been circumvented in [21] by using the supersolvable parametrization of the
superspace (15) which consists in redening the target space of our  model to be a subspace of the
whole superspace which is a supermanifold generated by a supersolvable algebra (ssolv) (times of
course the sphere s7spanned by ym).2 we start from a decomposition analogous to that in (13):

osp(4/8) = [so(1, 3)  so(8)  q]  ssolv

(18)

the above decomposition is obtained by performing a grading of the superalgebra with respect to
adjd:

osp(4/8)

 g(1)  sg(1/2)  g(0)  sg(1/2)  g(1)

q = sg(1/2)
s = sg(1/2)

so(1, 3)  so(8)  {d} = g(0)

ssolv = {d}  g(1)  sg(1/2) = solv  sg(1/2)

(19)

the spaces g(1) are the same as those dened previously for the anti de sitter space. the subspaces
sg(1/2) are the eigenspaces with of the fermionic generators corresponding to the eigenvalues 1/2 of
adjd: on the world volume theory the s operators (16 components) generate the special superconformal
transformations, while the q operators (16 components) generate the supersymmetry transformations.
dierently from the solvable representation of anti de sitter space, the supergroup exp(ssolv) does
not coincide with the original superspace since the generators q are modded out. nevertheless it can

be shown that adjd on the fermionic generators is represented by an operator e which coincides with

the  symmetry operator  on the static solution (17) (it is expressed as the product of the gamma
matrices along the directions of the world volume). in other words, the symmetry projectors p 
computed on the solution (17) coincide with the projectors of the supersymmetry generators into the
eigenspaces sg(1/2) respectively. therefore the fermionic coordinates parametrizing ssolv are already
the  gauge xed ones. in this parametrization indeed the coordinates are (, x, ym; ). the bi
action dened on this supersolvable target space therefore is  gauge xed from the very beginning
and much simpler to compute.

2the denition of a supersolvable lie algebra is the same as that of a solvable algebra but with the supercommutator

substituted to the commutator

12

expanding this action around the static solution for small uctuations of the physical elds, rescal-
ing the latter by suitable powers of , taking the order 0 of the action and sending   0 it was
possible to retrieve the supersingleton action on the boundary as a free superconformal eld theory
describing 8 massless bosons and 8 massless majorana fermions.

0.4 conclusions

the aim of the present talk is on one hand to give a tentatively selfcontained and hopefully elementary
introduction to maldacenas conjecture and on the other hand to frame within a discussion on the
intense research devoted to verify this conjecture and to possibly extend it, some recent results in
the study of brane dynamics in certain anti de sitter spaces. i emphasized how some aspects of the
supersingleton cft on one side of this duality could be inferred only from the dynamics of pbranes
on the boundary of a ads(p+2)  k (dp2) spacetime for a general compact einstein manifold k.
the knowledge of these aspects would provide the basis for a new stringent check of the conjecture.
so far a method for constructing the supersingleton action on the world volume of a probe brane at
the boundary of ads(p+2)  s(dp2) has been dened by means of a normal coordinate expansion
(small quantum uctuations) of the bi action on the probe brane around the static conguration in
which the latter is set to lie on the boundary of the anti de sitter space. an extension of this method
to more general internal spaces k is still work in progress.

13

bibliography

[1] m. green, j. schwarz, e. witten superstring theory vol 1,2 cambridge university press.

[2] j. polchinski string theory cambridge university press.

[3] r. kallosh, a. tseytlin, jhep 9810:016,1998;

r. metsaev, a. tseytlin, phys.lett.b436:281-288,1998 and references therein;
a. rajaraman, m. rozali, hep-th/9902046;
i. pesando, hep-th/9903086

[4] j. maldacena, adv.theor.math.phys. 2:231-252,1998

[5] m.du, hep-th/9808100

[6] j. schwarz, nucl.phys.proc.suppl. 55b:1-32,1997;

a. sen, nucl.phys.proc.suppl. 58:5-19,1997

[7] c.m. hull, p.k. townsend nucl. phys. b438 (1995) 109

[8] j. polchinski, tasi lectures on dbranes, in tasi 1996

[9] h. lu, c.n. pope, e. sezgin and k.s.stelle, hep-th/9508042 ;

h. lu, c.n. pope, hep-th/9605082;
m.j. du, h. lu and c.n. pope, hep-th/9604052;
h. lu, c.n. pope and k.s.stelle, hep-th/9602140

[10] p. fre, hep-th/9701054

[11] r. kallosh, a. rajaraman, phys.rev. d58:125003,1998

[12] l. castellani, a. ceresole, r. dauria,s. ferrara, p. fre, m. trigiante, nucl. phys. b 527 (1998)

142-170

[13] b.s. acharya, j.m. figueroa-ofarrill, c.m. hull and b. spence, hep-th/9808014

[14] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253.

[15] p.g.o. freund and m.a. rubin, phys. lett b97, (1980) 233;

m.j. du, b.e.w. nilsson and c.n. pope, phys. rep. 130, (1986) 1 ;
f. englert, phys. lett 119b, (1982) 339;
l. castellani, r. dauria and p. fr`e, nucl. phys. 239, (1984) 610 ;
l. castellani, l. j. romans and n. p. warner, nucl. phys. b241, (1984) 429;

14

b. de wit and h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b231, (1984) 506;
b. de wit and h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b281, (1987) 211.

[16] n. dorey , t. j. hollowood , v. khoze, m. mattis, s. vandoren, hep-th/9901128, hep-th/9810243

[17] p.a.m. dirac, j. math. phys. 4, (1963) 901.

[18] c. fronsdal, phys. rev. d26, (1982);

m. flato and c. fronsdal, j. math. phys. 22, (1981) 1100;
e. angelopoulos, m. flato, c. fronsdal and d. steinheimer, phys. rev. d23, (1981) 1278;
e. bergshoe, a. salam, e. sezgin and y. tanii, phys. lett. b205, (1987) 237;
e. bergshoe, m.j. du, c.n. pope and e. sezgin, phys. lett. b199, (1987) 69.;
e. bergshoe, m.j. du, c.n. pope and e. sezgin, phys. lett. b224, (1989) 71

[19] h. nicolai, e. sezgin, y. tanii, nucl. phys.b305 (1988) 483

[20] s. ferrara, c. fronsdal, phys. lett. b433 (1998) 19;

s. ferrara, c. fronsdal, a. zaaroni, nucl. phys.b532(1998) 153;
l. andrianopoli, s. ferrara, phys.lett. b430 (1998) 248;
l. andrianopoli, s. ferrara, lett.math.phys. 46 (1998) 265;
l. andrianopoli, s. ferrara, hep-th/9812067

[21] g. dallagata, d. fabbri, c. fraser, p. fre, p. termonia, m. trigiante nucl.phys. b542:157-

194,1999

[22] r. kallosh, hep-th/9807206

[23] i. pesando, hep-th/9808146 ;

i. pesando, jhep 9811:002,1998

15

