ctp-tamu-14/99

sinp-tnp/99-5

hep-th/9904112

9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
7
1

 

 
 

2
v
2
1
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

(m, n)-string-like dp-brane bound states

j. x. lu1 and shibaji roy2

1center for theoretical physics, department of physics

texas a&m university, college station, tx 77843

e-mail: jxlu@rainbow.physics.tamu.edu

and

2saha institute of nuclear physics

1/af bidhannagar, calcutta 700 064, india

e-mail: roy@tnp.saha.ernet.in

(february 1, 2008)

abstract

an (m, n)-string bound state (with m, n relatively prime integers) in

type iib string theory can be interpreted from the d-string worldsheet point

of view as n d-strings carrying m units of quantized electric ux or quantized

electric eld. we argue, from the d-brane worldvolume point of view, that

similar dp-brane bound states should also exist for 2  p  8 in both type

iia (when p is even) and type iib (when p is odd) string theories. as in p = 1

case, these bound states can each be interpreted as n dp-branes carrying m

units of quantized constant electric eld. in particular, they all preserve one

half of the spacetime supersymmetries.

1

i. introduction

polchinskis seminal work [1] on d-brane has dramatically changed our view on pertur-

bative superstrings. yet, we can use many tools developed in the perturbative framework of

superstrings to do d-brane calculations. these help us, at least in certain cases, to attack

some hard problems in physics such as the information loss puzzle and the entropy problem

in black hole physics. the d-brane picture is also the basis for the recent ads/cf t con-

jectures of maldacena [2]. by denition, a d-brane is a hypersurface carrying a rr charge

in type ii string theory on which an open string can end. from the d-brane worldvolume

point of view, such an ending of a fundamental string (for short, f-string) is characterized

by the non-vanishing u(1) gauge eld strength on the brane at least in the low energy limit.

a conguration of an f-string ending on a dp-brane for every allowable p can actually be

bps saturated, preserving a quarter of the spacetime supersymmetries. at the linearized

approximation, this has been demonstrated by callan and maldacena [3] for p  2 cases

and by dasgupta and mukhi [4] for p = 1 case. the interpretations for p  2 and p = 1

cases are, however, quite dierent. in the former case, the excitation of a worldvolume scalar

eld along a transverse direction is interpreted as the f-string attached to the dp-brane.

whereas, for the latter one, the excitation of this scalar eld due to the introduction of an

f-string ending indicates that one half of the original d-string must bend rigidly to form a

3-string junction.

in spite of our reasonably well understanding of an f-string ending on a dp-brane from

the worldvolume point of view, our understanding of this same ending from the spacetime

point of view is still unsatisfactory1. the well-known p-brane solitonic solutions of type ii

supergravity theories [6,7], nowadays called dp-branes, are merely hypersurfaces carrying

rr charges each of which preserves one half of the spacetime supersymmetries of type ii

string theories. the mass per unit p-brane volume for such a conguration carrying unit

1 for some very recent eorts in this direction see [5].

2

rr charge is just the dp-brane tension. this bps conguration can also be described by

its worldvolume born-infeld action in its simplest form with at background and vanishing

worldvolume gauge eld strength which clearly indicates that each of the spacetime dp-

brane solitonic solutions does not have an f-string ending on it (this also explains why they

preserve 1/2 rather than 1/4 of the spacetime supersymmetries).

as just pointed out, a non-vanishing worldvolume gauge eld strength is an indication

of a string ending on the corresponding dp-brane. in general we expect that such a cong-

uration preserves a quarter of the spacetime supersymmetries. the question that we intend

to address here is: does there exist a bps state for each dp-brane that has a non-vanishing

worldvolume gauge eld strength and yet preserves one half of the spacetime supersymme-

tries? we will argue in this paper that the answer is yes based on known dp-brane results

and the 3-string junction. each of these bps states is actually a non-threshold bound state

of a dp brane carrying certain units of quantized constant electric eld strength or a non-

threshold (f, dp) bound state with f representing the f-strings. there actually exist more

general non-threshold bound states. for example, by the type iib s-duality, we should have

d3 branes carrying both quantized constant electric and magnetic elds. we will discuss

the p = 3 case in this paper and others in the subsequent publications. in the following

section, we will review relevant dp-brane results for the purpose of this paper. in section 3,

we will present our arguments for the existence of such bps states and conclude this paper.

ii. review of some d-brane results

this section is largely based on the discussion of bps states of a fundamental string

(f-string) ending on a dp-brane by callan and maldacena [3] for p  2 and by dasgupta

and mukhi [4] for p = 1 in the linearized approximation. the linear arguments should

be trusted since we are here interested only in bps states. as in [3], we assume that the

massless excitations of a dp-brane are described by the dimensional reduction of the 10-

dimensional supersymmetric maxwell theory. the supersymmetry variation of the gaugino

3

is

 = m n fm n ,

(2.1)

where m, n are the 10-dimensional indices. a bps conguration is the one in which  = 0

for some non-vanishing killing spinor. the ending of an f-string on a dp-brane is equivalent

to placing a point charge on the brane. the coulomb potential due to such a point charge

will give rise to a non-vanishing f0r with r the radial coordinate of the p spatial dimensions

of the worldvolume. with a non-vanishing f0r, it is obvious from eq. (2.1) and  = 0

that the existence of non-vanishing killing spinors (i.e., the preservation of some unbroken

supersymmetries), requires the excitation of one of the scalar elds, say x 9, such that

f9r = rx 9 = f0r. then  = 0 can be expressed in a familiar form as

(1  09) = 0,

(2.2)

which says that one half of the worldvolume supersymmetries are broken by this congu-

ration.

in other words, this conguration of an f-string ending on a dp-brane is still a

bps state which preserves one half of the worldvolume supersymmetries or a quarter of the

spacetime supersymmetries. it is easy to check that f0r = f9r = cp(p  2)/rp1 for p > 2,

f0r = f9r = c2/r for p = 2, and f01 = f91 = c1 for x1 > 0 and f01 = f91 = 0 for x1 < 02 for

p = 1 satisfy the corresponding linearized equations of motion, respectively. this has to be

true to guarantee the existence of the corresponding bps states. in the above, the constant

cp is related to the point charge and can be xed by some charge quantization which will be

discussed later.

to have a clear picture about an f-string ending on a dp-brane, we need to examine

the above bps conguration closely. the cases for p  2 and p = 1 are quite dierent.

so we discuss them separately. let us discuss p > 2 rst. here we can solve x 9 from

f9r = cp(p  2)/rp1 = rx 9 as x 9 = cp/rp2. as explained in [3], the excitation of x 9

2for concreteness, we assume that the original d-string is placed along the x1-axis.

4

amounts to giving the brane a transverse spike protruding in the 9 direction and running o

to innity. this spike must be interpreted as an f-string attached to the dp-brane. callan

and maldacena have shown that the energy change due to the introduction of a point charge

to the dp-brane worldvolume equals precisely to the f-string tension times x 9 which is the

energy of an f-string if the spike is interpreted as the f-string. this also says that attaching

an f-string to a dp-brane does not cost any energy which is not true in the case of p = 1.

the p = 2 case is not much dierent from p > 2 cases apart from the fact that x 9 now

behaves according to x 9 = c2 ln r/ with  a small-distance cuto rather than like a spike.

this x 9, a sort of inverse spike, should also be interpreted as an f-string because of the

underlying d-brane picture and the similar energy relation.3

so far, we have considered only the single-center coulomb solution in the above bps

states describing an f-string ending on a dp-brane for p  2. the bps nature of these

congurations allows multi-center solutions. for example, for p > 2, x 9 is now

x 9 = xi

ci
p

|~r  ~ri|p2 ,

(2.3)

where ci

p can be positive or negative, depending on to which side of the dp-brane an f-string

is attached. this solution represents multiple strings along x 9 direction ending at arbitrary

locations on the brane. this solution is still bps, preserving also a quarter of the spacetime

supersymmetries. the energy change of dp-brane due to the endings of multiple strings is

again equal to the summation of the f-string tension times individual f-string length and

is independent of the locations of the end points. therefore, no attachment energy is spent

for such endings. these multi-center solutions are one of the important properties which we

need in section 3.

the story for p = 1 case is quite dierent. as discussed in [4], the excitation of x 9 is no

3the energy change of d2 due to the introduction of a point charge to the worldvolume can also

be expressed as the f-string tension times x 9. here a large-distance cuto needs to be introduced

to make the calculation meaningful.

5

longer interpreted as an f-string ending on a d-string but as an indication that one side of

the original innitely long and straight d-string or (0,1)-string must be bent rigidly (with

vanishing axion) with respect to the point on the d-string where a point charge is inserted.

let us look at it in some detail since the physics picture for this case consists of the starting

point of our arguments for the existence of the dp-brane bound states in the next section.

in the presence of this point charge, gauss law in one spatial dimension states, in the case

of vanishing axion, that f01 = c1 for x1 > 0 and f01 = 0 for x1 < 04 when the original

d-string or (0,1)-string is along x1 axis. unbroken susy condition f91 = 1x 9 = f01 says

x 9 = c1x1,

x1 > 0,

= 0,

x1 < 0.

(2.4)

because of the special properties of 1 + 1 dimensional electrodynamics, the above solution

is linearly increasing away from the inserted charge, in contrast to p  2 cases. before the

work of dasgupta and mukhi, aharony et al. [8] concluded that three strings are allowed to

meet at one point provided there exist the corresponding couplings and the charges at the

junction point are conserved. schwarz [9] then went one step further to conjecture, based

on his (m,n)-string [10] in type iib theory, that there exists a bps state for such 3-string

junction provided the three strings are semi-innite and the angles are chosen such that

tensions, treated as vectors, add up to zero. with this, one should not be surprised about

the above solution and the natural interpretation, as indicated already in [9] for an f-string

ending on a d-string, that the insertion of the point charge at the origin of the d-string

causes one half of the string to bend rigidly. the solution itself does not spell out the

ending of f-string or (1,0)-string. but a consistent picture requires that the point charge

represents the ending of a semi-innitely long f-string or (1,0)-string (chosen here along

positive x9 direction) coming in perpendicular to the original d-string or (0,1)-string along

x1 direction. the bent segment described by eq. (2.4) that goes out from the junction is a d-

4one can also have an alternative solution of f01 = 0 for x1 > 0 and f01 = c1 for x1 < 0.

6

string carrying one unit of quantized electric ux or schwarzs (1,1)-string (or (1,1)-string

depending on the orientation) in type iib theory which follows from the charge conservation.

the 3-string junction has also been studied by sen [11] from spacetime point of view based

on schwarzs (m,n)-strings in type iib theory. he showed that a 3-string junction indeed

preserves 1/4 of the spacetime supersymmetries and a string network which also preserves

1/4 of the spacetime supersymmetries can actually be constructed using 3-string junctions

as building blocks. such a string network may, to our understanding, correspond to the

multi-center solutions in p  2 cases. the energy change of the d-string due to the ending

of an f-string, unlike the p  2 cases, is no longer equal to the f-string tension times the

attached f-string length, primarily due to the formation of the (1,1)-string bound state.

in summary, the 3-string junction, as the bps state of an f-string ending on a d-string,

is just the consequence of d-brane picture, 1 + 1 dimensional electrodynamics and the

non-perturbative sl(2,z) strong-weak duality symmetry in type iib string theory. one

important point to notice, which is well-known nowadays and will be useful in our later

discussion, is that m f-strings in the (m,n)-string bound state in type iib theory are just

m units of the quantized electric ux.

therefore an (m,1)-string can be viewed as a d-string carrying m units of quantized elec-
tric ux. the (m,1)-string tension is q1/g2 + m2tf with tf = 1/2 the f-string tension.
for small string coupling g and small m, the (m,1)-string tension can be approximated as

(1/g + gm2/2)tf . therefore, (gm2/2)tf should correspond to the linearized energy per unit

length of the worldsheet constant gauge eld strength f01, i.e., ((2f01)2/2g)tf . so we

have f01 = gmtf which xes c1 = gtf for a single f-string. by t-dualities, the electric eld

f due to the ending of f-strings on a dp-brane is quantized according to

1

(2)p2(p3)/2 zsp1

f = gm,

(2.5)

where  denotes the hodge dual in the worldvolume. this is precisely the condition used in

[3] to x the constant cp.

7

iii. dp brane bound states

until now, we understand that the obvious reason for the existence of (m,n)-strings in

non-perturbative type iib string theory is the sl(2,z) strong-weak duality symmetry under

which the nsns and rr 2-form potentials transform as a doublet. however, as we will

explain below, an (m,n)-string bound state is not special at all if it is interpreted as n

d-strings carrying m units of quantized electric ux or eld strength as discussed in the

previous section. we will argue in this section that such a kind of bound states, i.e., a

dp-brane carrying certain units of quantized electric ux or eld lines, actually exist for all

dp branes for 1  p  8. all these bound states are bps saturated and preserve one half

of the spacetime supersymmetries just like an (m,n)-string. the fact that the (m,n)-strings

were discovered earlier is because they can be easily recognized in the non-perturbative type

iib string theory and it happens that m units of quantized electric ux or eld strength can

be identied as m f-strings.

now to present our argument let us begin with a 3-string junction. without loss of

generality and for simplicity, let us focus on an f-string ending on a d-string with zero

axion. as discussed in the previous section, the third string is a d-string carrying one unit

of quantized electric ux. this is a stable bps conguration which preserves a quarter of

the spacetime supersymmetries.

suppose that we do not have an a priori knowledge of schwarzs (m,n)-strings and we

do the linear study as dasgupta and mukhi [4] described in the previous section. the

d-brane picture makes it certain that there must exist a stable bps conguration of an

f-string ending on a d-string which preserves a quarter of the spacetime supersymmetries.

so we must conclude from our linear analysis that this bps state is a 3-string junction. the

f-string remains as an f-string in the junction but the electric charge at the end of the

f-string will create a constant electric eld or ux owing along either side of the d-string

with respect to the end point. at the nal stable state, one side of the d-string remains as

the original d-string but the other side becomes a d-string carrying one unit of quantized

8

electric ux. this appears as 3 dierent kinds of strings meeting at one point.

we know that the d-string carrying one unit of quantized electric ux or eld strength

in the 3-string junction is semi-innite. now let us push the junction point to spatial innity

in such a way that the d-string carrying one unit of quantized electric ux is along one of

the axes while the f-string and the d-string are all at spatial innity. to a local observer,

this d-string carrying one unit of quantized electric ux must appear to be a stable bps

conguration5. further, we must conclude that the d-string carrying certain units of quan-

tized electric ux must be a bps one preserving one half of the spacetime supersymmetries

based on the facts that the 3-string junction preserves a quarter of the spacetime super-

symmetries and there exist bps saturated congurations for both the f-string and d-string

each preserving one half of the spacetime supersymmetries.

in the 3-string junction, we

must also conclude that supersymmetry conditions from any two constituent strings can be

independent and the supersymmetry conditions from the remaining string must be related

to those from the other two strings6.

so we conclude that there exist a bound state of n d-strings carrying m units of quantized

electric ux based on d-brane picture, charge conservation and the linear study discussed

in the previous section. we now know that this bound state is just schwarzs (m,n)-string

which provides one way to identify one unit of quantized electric ux or eld line as an

f-string7. the only thing special for the bound state of n d-strings carrying m units of

quantized electric ux is the 1 + 1 dimensional electrodynamics which states that the gauge

eld strength is constant on one side of a point charge. if we can consistently have a constant

5if one thinks carefully, each of the two ends of an (m,n)-string of schwarz at spatial innity must

be either associated with a 3-string junction or attached to any other allowable object.

6 we know that these are all true from schwarzs (m,n)-strings [10] and sens analysis of spacetime

supersymmetry for 3-string junctions [11].

7another way of such an interpretation is given in [12].

9

electric eld in a dp-brane worldvolume, we nd no reason that a dp-brane carrying certain

units of quantized electric ux should not exist from the above discussion.

to make our arguments for the existence of such dp-brane bound states clear, let us rst

consider a specic p = 3 case. we take p = 3 partially because of the current fashion of

ads5/cf t4 correspondence and partially because of the familiarity of the 1 + 3 dimensional

electrodynamics. we will discuss the general cases for 1  p  8 afterwards.

in the case of d3-brane, we do not have the property of 1 + 1 dimensional electrody-

namics. in general, when an f-string ends on a d3-brane, the f-string will be spike-like, not

rigid, near the end point. but this will not prevent us from doing the same as we did above

for p = 1 case. as we will see, insisting a constant electric eld in any nite spatial region

of worldvolume in a consistent fashion will automatically push the endings of f-strings to

spatial innity. therefore, the spike will appear to be a rigid f-string to any nite region

of space.

the rst question is what kind of electric charge distribution in 1 + 3 dimensions gives

rise to a constant electric eld8. we know that a uniform 2-d surface charge distribution

will do the job. the next question is where this surface should be placed. when we say

a constant electric eld, we mean that the eld is constant not only in magnitude but also

in direction in any nite region of space. so we have to place this charge surface at spatial

innity. otherwise, the direction of the electric eld will be opposite on the two sides of

the surface. for concreteness, let us say that we label x1, x2 and x3 as the 3-space of d3

8it happens in this case that we can also have a bound state of a d3 brane carrying certain units

of quantized constant magnetic eld by the type iib s-duality. there actually exist such bound

states for 2  p  8 [13]. for p = 3, we can have a bound state of a d3 brane carrying both

quantized constant electric and magnetic elds. we will discuss the p = 3 bound states later in

this section. there actually exist similar and more general bound states which will be discussed in

forthcoming papers [14,15].

10

brane and take the charge surface as x2x3-plane and place it at x1 = . now where

does the surface charge come from? it all comes from the endings of parallel nsns-strings,

say along x9 direction, on the x2x3-plane such that the resulting surface charge density is a

constant. this is possible because of the existence of the multi-center solution discussed in

the previous section. since these nsns-strings are parallel to each other, the whole system

is still a bps one, preserving a quarter of the spacetime supersymmetries. note that these

endings of f-strings are now at spatial innity. therefore the spikes describing the endings

of these f-strings have no inuence on the electric eld in any nite region of space. so

everything ts together nicely. in any nite region, we can detect only the d3-brane carrying

a constant electric eld in it. by the same token as in p = 1 case, we must conclude that

this bound state preserves also one half of the spacetime supersymmetries.

because the charge at the end of each of these nsns-strings is quantized, we expect that

the electric eld should also be quantized. if each of these nsns-strings is m f-strings, we

should have here f01 = gmtf with g the corresponding string coupling constant. this can

be obtained by t-dualities from the f01 = gmtf in p = 1 case9.

the discussion for a general p for 2  p  8 is not much dierent from the p = 3 case. to

be concrete, let us take the spatial dimensions of a dp-brane along x1,    , xp. the (p  1)

dimensional surface with uniform charge distribution resulting from the endings of parallel

nsns-strings, say, along x9-direction is taken as a (p  1)-plane along x2,    , xp directions

and is placed at x1 = . then the electric eld resulting from this charge surface will

be constant and along x1-direction in any nite region of space.

it is also quantized as

9to be more precise, we t-dualize the d3 brane born-infeld action with at background and

non-vanishing constant worldvolume eld f01 along x2 and x3 directions. we then end up with a

d-string born-infeld action. therefore we can read f01 = gmtf . noticing the relationship between

the exact tension and linearized tension for p = 1 case, we must have the tension for the d3 brane

bound state as given in eq. (3.1) since the two cases are related to each other by t-dualities.

11

f01 = gmtf for an nsns-string (to be thought of as m f-strings). the rest will be the

same as in the case of p = 3. since f01 = gmtf , we can use the corresponding dp-brane

action to determine the corresponding tension tp(m, n) describing n dp-branes carrying m

units of quantized constant electric eld which is

tp(m, n) =

t p
g qn2 + g2m2,
0

(3.1)

where t p

0 = 1/(2)p(p+1)/2. this expression clearly indicates that the conguration of

n dp-branes carrying m units of quantized constant electric eld with m and n relatively

prime integers is a non-threshold bound state. so we conclude that n dp-branes carrying m

units of quantized constant electric eld consist of a bps non-threshold bound state which

preserves one half of the spacetime supersymmetries.

since the quantized electric ux or eld lines can be interpreted as f-strings, these

bound states should be identied with the (f, dp) bound states which are also related to

the (m,n)-string or (f, d1) by t-dualities along the transverse directions. but here we

must be careful about the notation f in (f, dp). this f actually represents an innite

number of parallel ns-strings along, say, x1 direction, which are distributed evenly over a

(p  1)-dimensional plane perpendicular to the x1-axis (or the strings). as indicated above,

each of these ns-strings is m f-strings if f01 = gmtf . the tension formula eq. (3.1) implies

that we should have one ns-string (or m f-strings) per (2)p1(p1)/2 area over the above

(p  1)-plane. since t-dualities preserve supersymmetries, we can see in a dierent way that

these bound states preserve one half of the spacetime supersymmetries since the original

(f,d1) preserves one half of the spacetime supersymmetries. we will use this identication

and perform t-dualities to construct explicitly the spacetime congurations for these bound

states in a forthcoming paper [16]. we will show there that the tension formula eq. (3.1)

holds and there are indeed m f-strings per (2)p1(p1)/2 area of (p  1)-dimensions. the

spacetime congurations for (f, dp) for p = 3, 4, 6 have been given in [1719], respectively.

once we have the above, it should not be dicult to have a non-threshold bound state

of n d3 branes carrying q units of quantized constant magnetic eld with n, q relatively

12

prime. all we need is to replace the f-strings in the above for p = 3 case by d-strings. if we

also choose the quantized constant magnetic eld along the x1-axis, we must have f23 = qtf

from the discussion in [3] about a d-string ending on a d3 brane. the corresponding tension

is

t3(q, n) =

t 3
g qn2 + q2.
0

(3.2)

this tension formula implies that the linearized approximation on the d3 brane worldvolume

is good only if n  q. this bound state should correspond to the so-called (d1, d3) bound

state. again, we should have an innite number of d-strings in this bound state and there

should be q d-strings per (2)2 area over the x2x3-plane.

similarly, if we replace the f-strings or d-strings by (m,q)-strings in the above, we should

end up with a non-threshold bound state of n d3 branes carrying m units of quantized electric

ux lines and q units of quantized magnetic ux lines with any two of the three integers

relatively prime. the tension for this bound state is

t3(m, q, n) =

t 3
g qn2 + q2 + g2m2.
0

(3.3)

the linearized approximation on the worldvolume is good if either n  q, n  m for xed

and nite g or n  q for small g and nite m. we denote this bound state as ((f, d1),d3).

we should also have an innite number of (m,q)-strings in this bound state. we also have

one (m,q)-string per (2)2 area over the x2x3-plane.

in [14], we will construct explicit conguration for ((f,d1),d3) bound state which gives

the (d1, d3) bound state as a special case. we will conrm all the above mentioned

properties for them. the spacetime congurations for (dp, d(p + 2)) for 0  p  4 have

been given in [13,18,19].

note added: after the submission of this paper to hep-th, we were informed that the

existence of the bound states of dp branes carrying constant electric elds was also discussed

in [20] but in a completely dierent approach of the mixed boundary conditions.

13

acknowledgments

jxl acknowledges the support of nsf grant phy-9722090.

14

references

[1] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724.

[2] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231.

[3] c. callan and j. maldacena, nucl. phys. b513 (1998) 198.

[4] k. dasgupta and s. mukhi, phys. lett. b423 (1998) 261.

[5] d. youm, localized intersecting bps branes, hep-th/9902208.

[6] g. horowitz and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b360 (1991) 197.

[7] m. j. du, r. khuri and j. x. lu, phys. rept. 259 (1995) 213.

[8] o. aharony, j. sonnenschein and s. yankielowicz, nucl. phys. b474 (1996) 309.

[9] j. schwarz, lectures on superstring and m theory dualities, nucl. phys. proc. suppl.

b55 (1997) 1.

[10] j. schwarz, phys. lett. b360 (1995) 13 (see hep-th/9508143 for the most recent revision

of this paper).

[11] a. sen, jhep 9803: 005 (1998).

[12] j. polchinski, string theory, vol.ii (cambridge university press, 1998).

[13] j. breckenridge, g. michaud and r. myers, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 6438.

[14] j. x. lu and s. roy,((f,d1),d3) bound state and its t-dual daughters hep-

th/9905014.

[15] j. x. lu and s. roy, (f,d5) bound state, sl(2,z) invariance and their descendants in

type iia/iib string theory hep-th/9905056.

[16] j. x. lu and s. roy, non-threshold (f,dp) bound states hep-th/9904129.

[17] j. g. russo and a. a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b490 (1997) 121.

15

[18] m.b. green, n. d. lambert, g. papadopoulos and p.k. townsend, phys. lett. b384

(1996) 86.

[19] m. costa and g. papadopoulos, nucl. phys. b510 (1998) 217.

[20] h. arfaei and m. m. sheikh jabbari, nucl. phys. b526 (1998) 278.

16

