itep/th-15/99

tpi-minn-99/21

hepth/xxxyymm

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
7
1

 

 
 

3
v
1
4
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

junctions and the fate of branes in external

fields

a.gorsky 1

institute for theoretical physics, university of minnesota

k.selivanov

itep, moscow, 117259, b.cheryomushkinskaya 25

abstract

we discuss the processes of brane bubble nucleation induced by the external branes.

the quasiclassical solution for the nucleation by the single external brane has been found

in the case when the brane junctions are possible. exponential factor in the production

rate has been calculated. the process induced by the fundamental or d string in the

background of two d3 branes is analyzed and its interpretation from the d3 worldvolume

theory viewpoint is described.

1 introduction

during the recent years branes were recognized as an important ingredient in description of

the nonperturbative sector of string and eld theories. essentially speaking the branes are

multi-dimensional objects having tension and bearing some quantum numbers which can be

considered as the higher-dimensional generalizations of the electric and magnetic charges (see

1permanent address ; itep, moscow, 117259, b.cheryomushkinskaya 25

1

for instance [1] as a review). in general the branes are very natural objects to study, since they

are natural generalizations of the familiar pointlike particles. including them into the string

theory considerations has enriched the string physics as much as maxwell theory physics is

enriched by adding charges and monopoles.

in the context of string theory the branes are mainly considered as background for string

dynamics. some dynamical questions of brane physics have also been studied in the classical

approximation. consideration of the schwinger-type processes in external elds involves the

simplest quasiclassical behavior and the paper is devoted to their analysis.

the spontaneous schwinger-type processes have previously been considered in [2], [3], [4],

[5], [6]solutions to the equations of motion of born-infeld (bi) brane action which support the

string like conguration, representing electrically or magnetically charged pointlike object on

the brane worldvolume, have been discussed in [7][8], [9]. recently similar solutions involving

string junctions were found in [10].

the basic example of the brane tunneling phenomena was analyzed in [2] where the brane

creation in the external rr eld has been described. the rr elds couple to the higher

dimensional generalization of electric charges and like the point particle lagrangian includes a

term involving the potential one form integrated over the worldline of the particle, the p-brane

action includes the rr (or ns) p + 1-form integrated over p + 1-dimensional worldvolume of the

brane; a coecient in front of this term is the higher dimensional generalization of the electric

charge.

we remind that the schwingers pair production in the external electric eld is intuitively

described as virtual charge anticharge pair being accelerated by the external eld in the classi-

cally forbidden region until their energy reaches their mass threshold. the acceleration in the

classically forbidden region is neatly formulated in terms of imaginary time trajectories, that is,

in terms of trajectories in euclidean space which solve the euler-lagrange equations obtained

from the original euler-lagrange equations by the analytical continuation of time. in the case

of uniform external electric eld the corresponding trajectories are circles of a xed radius.

analogously, brane production in the external rr elds is described in terms of the brane

world surfaces which minimize (extremize) the euclidean brane action. in the case of uniform

2

rr eld the corresponding surfaces describing p-brane production are p+1-dimensional spheres

(bubbles) of a given radius. the action computed on such spheres denes the exponential fac-

tor in the production rate. the process described can be characterized as a spontaneous brane

production in the external rr eld.

apart from the spontaneous brane production one can consider induced brane production,

that is production of branes in the presence of some original brane conguration, which is our

main concern here. since in the nonperturbative string theory branes can couple to branes

the external branes can couple to the bubbles and hence can deform them changing the brane

production rate. the physics arising is a higher dimensional generalization of the one discussed

in [11](see also consideration of the case of nonzero temperature [12] or density [13]), where it

was shown that in the particle induced vacuum decay the bubble is deformed in the presence of

external particle(s). the key point concerning the induced decay is the existence of the localized

mode of the particle on the kink or antikink. due to zero mode the initial particle can transfer

its energy into the energy of tunneling. the same phenomenon takes place in the brane bubble

creation thanks to the existence of junction [14] which substitutes the particle-kink vertex in

the higher dimensional case. indeed the initial brane looses almost all its initial energy after

the junction point and this energy leads to the increase of the nucleation rate.

hence the crucial point for our further analysis is the existence of the string junctions when

three (p,q) strings join in the vertex which is subject to the charge conservation and zero

total tension condition [14]. it was shown [16, 17] that the string junction keeps 1/4 of the

original susy and can therefore be treated classically so that the generic string networks can be

developed [18]. more recently junctions have been promoted to the m-theory congurations [19]

where the vertex is resolved smoothly. note also that the analogous webs have been elaborated

for the 5-branes within string or m-theory approach [15]. in what follows we shall use junctions

to nd out the explicit form of the euclidean solution corresponding to the induced tunneling.

when considering strings stretched between external d3 branes interesting interpretation of

the induced tunneling emerges. the key point is that the end of the fundamental (f) string on

the d3 brane can be considered as the point charge [21], the end of the d string as the monopole

[20] and the end of (p,q) string as the dyon. hence any process involving the strings between

3

d3 branes amounts to the specic process in the susy gauge theory on the d3 worldvolume

[27]. for instance the processes with the exchange of the quantum numbers in the bulk have

the interpretation of the nonperturbatively mediated phenomena involving the generic dyonic

states, such as a wellknown process of the scattering of the monopoles to dyons [24]. in what

follows we shall use junction conguration with the background d3 branes [25] to describe such

processes in the external eld.

it is perhaps important that the induced brane production can be given a slightly dierent

interpretation - the one of quantization of the external branes in an external rr eld. the

bubbles then describe contribute to imaginary part in self-energy (self-tension) of the external

branes. contribution of such brane loops has been discussed recently for topological strings

in the m theory framework [26]. furthermore, in terms of the eld theory on the inducing

brane, the external eld is a perturbation of the theory. therefore the induced bubble has

something to do with the renormalization group ow.

the rest of the paper is organized as follows.

in section 2 we introduce some necessary

background. in section 3 we discuss our main example - the induced brane production with

one external brane. the production rate in the leading exponential approximation is calculated

. section 4 contains the consideration of the (p, q) strings between d3 branes in the external

eld and the interpretation of the induced tunneling in terms of the gauge theory on the d3

brane. discussion on the related issues and open questions can be found in section 5.

2 spontaneous brane production

consider a p-brane omitting the fermionic degrees of freedom. its action, essentially, consists

of two pieces

where stension is

s = stension + scharge,

stension = t zv qdet( g + f),

(1)

(2)

the integration is over the p + 1-dimensional world-volume v of the brane, g is the metric

induced on the worldvolume via its embedding into the target space and the coecient t is

4

the tension of the brane. additional contribution f = f  b is due the u(1) ym eld
and the pullback of the background ns two-form b eld . the target space is taken to be the

at euclidean one in the this section, its metric being

ds2 = i(dxi)2.

(3)

the second term scharge is dierent for the fundamental and d branes. for fundamental brane

it has a simple form

scharge = qzv

c,

(4)

where c is ns p + 1 form potential integrated over the worldvolume of the brane. for d brane

the additional cs term comes from the rr external elds and has the structure

where c collects all relevant rr forms. in the most interesting case of d string it includes the

scharge = z exp f  c,

(5)

exited two-form and axion elds

sdstr = z c2 + c0  f .

(6)

in external elds the branes are produced in the form of bubbles. hence if the brane

worldvolume forms a closed manifold (the bubble), the cs term can be rewritten as

scharge = qzu

h,

(7)

where h = dc and u is the manifold with the boundary v . in the simplifying assumption

that h is a uniform d = p + 2-form in the at euclidean space of dimension d 2 the last term

reads

where  is a ux density of the eld h. the two possible signs in eq.(8) refer to possible

scharge = qzu qdet( g),

(8)

orientations of v .

2the assumption about dimension is not restrictive because the d-dimensional euclidean space can be a

subspace of the target space supporting the ux of the eld h; it is energetically protable that the bubbles

are produced in this subspace and in the quasiclassical consideration the rest of the target space is irrelevant.

5

thus, in view of eqs.(2,8), the brane bubble action eq.(1) becomes a sum of surface and

volume terms (the latter having negative coecient for the relevant bubbles)

s = t zv qdet( g)  qzu qdet( g),

(9)

where q is positive for the relevant bubbles. hence there is a competition of the two terms:

the surface term suppresses small bubbles while the volume term blows up suciently large

bubbles. the one which extremize the action eq.(1) is the critical bubble. in the present case

the critical bubble is a p + 1-dimensional sphere of radius

r =

(p + 1)t

q

.

(10)

the critical bubble can be obtained in many ways. we shall now briey describe two of

them because we believe each of them is instructive. probably the simplest one is to make the

spherically symmetric anzatz and to extremize the action eq.(9) with respect to the radius.

this gives an algebraic equation giving the critical radius r from eq.(10). the extremal value

of the action eq.(9)

sc =

1

p + 1

p+1t rp+1

c

denes the exponential of the production rate

esc

(11)

(12)

where p = 2p+1
( p+1
2 )

is volume of unit p-sphere. this type of argument was given in [30].

note that under variation of the form of the bubble the surface term in the action eq.(9) gives

the so-called laplace pressure (or, in other words, trace of the external curvature) multiplied
by tension t , while the volume term gives q, so in this case one gets the equation

t (i

1
ri

) = q,

(13)

where 1
ri

, i = 1, . . . , p + 1 are principal curvatures of the world-volume of the brane. in the case

of spherical symmetry all ris are equal and one comes back to eq.(10). from this picture it

is immediately seen that for p = 0 brane the bubble in any case can only be glued from arcs of

the circle of radius r eq.(10) [11].

6

the other way, followed in [29], consists in choosing among the euclidean coordinates a

time coordinate and assuming the spherical symmetry only for the remaining ones. then

eq.(9) reduces to the eective action

sef f = t pz dtpq1 + 2 

q
p + 1

pz dtp+1

where  is the radial coordinate in the spherical coordinate system:

ds2 = i(dxi)2 = dt2 + dr2 + r2(dp)2

(14)

(15)

and (dp)2 is the metric on the unit p sphere. extremization of sef f from eq.(14) gives an

equations for (t) which denes the critical bubble. one can use time translation symmetry of

the eective lagrangian eq.(14) to reduce the order of the equation for (t) from second one

to the rst one. namely, the rst integral reads

e = 

rp
1 + 2

+ p+1,

(16)

where r is as in eq.(10). since the tunneling proceeds at e = 0 eq.(16) becomes an equation

of the sphere of the radius r. the section t = 0 of the critical bubble is the conguration which

is born in minkowski space and then blown up by the external eld.

3 one brane induced brane production

essentially, the picture of the induced brane production in the external eld looks as follows.

there is an innite brane which do not interact with the external eld so asymptotically its

worldvolume is at. if the worldvolume of this brane (we shall call it external) can glue to (or,

end on) worldvolume of branes which interact with the external eld then the bubble made of

the worldvolume(s) of the new brane(s) can arise somewhere in the middle of the world volume

of the external brane. the brane action computed on such conguration of branes (minus action

computed on the conguration which consists of the external brane alone) denes exponential

factor in the brane production rate. a conguration which emerges (and then blows up)

in minkowski space consists of a spacelike slice of the external brane worldvolume with the

equatorial slice of the bubble somewhere in the middle of it.

7

in string theory, the brane worldvolume can glue to worldvolume of a brane of the same

dimension or to a worldvolume of a brane of higher dimension. in the former case, gluing is

possible for the (p, q)-branes, in the latter case gluing is possible when the higher dimensional

brane bears an excitation of internal degrees of freedom, basically, an excitation of the gauge

eld living on the brane . in the present paper we concentrate on the rst case.

in iib string there are (p, q) strings (1-branes) and (p, q) 5-branes 3. the (p, q)-branes

are branes bearing two types of charges - rr and ns ones , correspondingly there are two types

of cs terms in (p, q)-brane action. as to the tension of the (p, q)-brane, it depends on the

charges in the following way:

tp,q = |p + q|,

(17)

where the complex parameter  encodes axion and dilaton v.e.v. the week string coupling
limit corresponds to   i case. note that in what follows we shall assume that the rr
axion eld is not exited.

from the analysis of the string junctions and (p,q) webs [18, 15], it is known that (p,q)

branes worldvolumes can glue under two conditions: 1)conservation of the charges; 2)mechanical

equilibrium of tension forces. thus, e.g., (1,0)-brane couples to (1,1) and (0,-1) branes, and at

 = i the angle between (1,0) and (1,1) ones will be equal to 3/4, and the angle between the

(1,0) and (0,-1) branes will be equal to /2.

obviously, the conditions of gluing are not locally aected by the external eld. what is

aected by the external led is the shape of the worldvolume (as seen from eq.(13)). however,

for any brane of a given conguration of charges one can choose such a linear combination of

rr and ns external elds that the brane does not feel it in the leading approximation. below

we assume that the external eld is of ns type, while the external brane is a d-brane, that is

with charges of (r, 0) type, and hence it does not interact with the external eld. (r, 0)-brane
can couple to (p, q) and (r  p,q) branes and worldvolumes of the latter are curved by the
external ns eld. locally they are glued according to the same condition 1) and 2) above, that

3actually there are also (p, q) 7 branes but we shall not discuss them later.

8

figure 1: stringy induced euclidean solution.

is the angle (l,0)(p,q) between (l, 0) and (p, q) is dened according to

cos(l,0)(p,q) = 

p + qre
|p + qre|

and analogously the angle (l,0)(rp,q) is given by

cos(l,0)(rp,q) = 

l  p  qre
|p  l + qre|

.

(18)

(19)

note that there is an essential dierence here from the (p,q)-webs case - the internal branes

are not at, their worldvolumes form sort of caps (see fig.1) which are glued to the external

brane worldvolume at the angles dened by eqs.(18),(19), with one of the caps is glued at the

angle dened by eq.(18) from above and the other one - at the angle dened by eq.(19) from

below.

let us turn to the discussion of the gauge eld contribution. thanks to a point junction

gauss law on the worldsheet d string theory has to be modied since the f string inserts the

point source. due to the discontinuity of the electric eld e = g,where g is the iib string

coupling, the a0 component has to be piecewise linear and according to bps condition has

9

to be correlated with one of the scalars representing the transverse uctuation of the string

[16, 17]. this condition is fullled at the junction and is equivalent to the total zero tension

condition.

in the case considered instead of the point like junction point we have junction circle around

the bubble. the gauss law now reads as

dive = g((x  x0(t))  (x + x0(t))

(20)

where  denotes the radius of the circle in the (x,t) plane (the plane of the external string),

x2
0 + t2 = 2. solution to the gauss law constraint provides the discontinuity of the electric

eld. once again bps condition amounts to the total zero tension along the circle which is

consistent with the equations of motion to the gauge eld and scalar. let us emphasize that

we use the bi action to describe the d string. introducing the canonical momentum for the

gauge eld  = lbi

e and performing the legendre transform to the hamiltonian description one
immediately recognizes the action of the string with tension tp,q since the canonical momentum

along the caps is constant due to the equations of motion.

to nd the shape of the caps it is most convenient to turn the second of the two possibilities

described at the end of section 2. a coordinate z, orthogonal to the external brane worldvolume

(see footnote in section 2), will be considered as time in the eective problem. 4 with this

choice, the eective action reads

s = sexternal + s(p,q) + s(lp,q),

(21)

where sexternal includes only tension term for the external brane and s(p,q) and s(lp,q) include

both the tension and cs terms (cf. eq.(14):

s(p,q) = t(p,q)pz t+

0

dtpq1 + 2 

q
p + 1

pz t+

0

dtp+1

(22)

4perhaps, it is worth to stress that this is unphysical time, which is convenient to describe the shape of the

caps, because the caps are obviously spherically symmetric in the rest of coordinates. the physical time - the

one in which the brane production should be interpreted - is, in fact, one of the coordinates along the external

brane.

10

and

s(lp,q) = t(lp,q)pz 0

t

dtpq1 + 2 

q
p + 1

pz 0

t

dtp+1,

(23)

where tensions t(p,q) and t(lp,q) are dened in eq.(17), and t+,  = 0 ( t,  = 0) is a top

(bottom) point of the upper (lower) cap. notice that the volume terms in eq.(22) and eq.(23)

have the same coecient which is traced back to the charge conservation.

instead of eq.(16) of section 2 we now have two rst integrals - the one for the upper cap

and the other - for the lower cap. moreover it is clear that the rst integral constant (e)

vanishes, so the caps are segments of spheres. the radii of the spheres are those of the spheres

in the spontaneous brane production:

for the (p, q)-cap and

r(p,q) =

t|p + q|

q

r(lp,q) =

t|p  l + q|

q

(24)

(25)

for the (l  p,q) cap. given the radii eqs.(24), (25), the segments are uniquely dened by
the angles eqs.(18),(19). to verify that the caps t into a bubble one has to check that the

p-spheres on the boundaries of the segments have the same radius which is indeed the case.

to nd the exponential of the brane production rate one should take the value of the eective

action eq.(22) on the conguration described and subtract from it action computed on the

conguration which consists of the external brane alone.

the contribution from the external string in eq.(22)is, of course, innite. however, the

decay rate is dened by the dierence between the critical value of the action from eq.(22) and

the value of the action when only at external brane (without any bubble) is present. this

dierence is nite and denes the following rate of the induced brane production

 = exp  {

1

p + 2

p+1tp,qrp+1

p,q

1


+

1

p + 2

p+1tp l,qrp+1

p l,q

1


1

(p + 1)(p + 2)



) +

arccos(

p + qre
|p + qre|
p  l + qre
|p  l + qre|

arccos(

) 
t1,0plqp+1|im|p+1rp+1
1,0 }

(26)

 can equally be considered as an imaginary part of the (r, 0) tension in the external ns eld.

11

the eective contribution from the external string comes from the dierence between the

action of the external brane without and with the bubble solution and in the string case reads

sext = t1,02,

(27)

where  is the intersection radius. let us emphasize that the contribution sext can be treated

dierently as the contribution due to the wilson loop along the matching circle. this interpre-

tation is in perfect accord with the gauss law if we attribute the wilson loop to the eective

charges. note once again that the eects due to the classical gauge elds on the caps are

taken into account by tensions of the branes.

let us now comment on the choice of the initial d-brane state. the subtlety concerns the

possibility to have the initial brane at rest. if we consider the initial d-brane one can wonder

about the dependence of the general bi action on the ns b eld and therefore the corresponding

interaction of d brane. to handle this issue for a string we can suppose that gauge elds are
not exited in the initial state and there is no axion c0 eld at all. however in the generic case

the noncommutative geometry induced by ns b eld is involved hence the noncommutative bi

lagrangian actually governs the dynamics.

it is natural to discuss the more general case when two external branes are involved in the

induced process. let us consider two (1, 0) branes as external branes (see g.2) inducing the

tunneling. in this case the bubble describing branes production consists of two caps, one above

and one below , and a barrel in the middle. one of the caps has charges (1, 1), the other
one - (1,1), and the barrel - (0, 1). the external branes (legs), the caps, and the barrells
are glued at the angles dened by eq.(18). notice, that in vicinity of the bubble the external

branes are not parallel and not at. the eective action consists of various pieces - those for

the legs, for the caps and for the barrel. one can see that the caps are again segments of

spheres, while for the barrel the rst integral - analogue of eq.(16) is not zero. its external

curvature has two dierent eigenvalues. what concerns to the legs, there is no volume term

in the eective action for them which allows them to spread to innity, and the rst integral

is again nonzero which makes them curve. there is no principal diculties in describing the

bubble in this case, but the formulae are not as transparent as in the one brane induced case,

12

figure 2: time slice of the euclidean solution with two external branes .

and we will not bother the reader by them.

now, after describing all these induced bubbles, we would like to come back to the spon-

taneous brane creation.

it is now clear, that in addition to the basic case of round bubble

made out of one brane, there are other bubbles of branes spontaneously arising in the external

eld. for example, one can have a bubble glued from two curved branes bearing (p.q) and
(p  l,q) charges (caps) and one at brane in the middle with (l, 0) charge . the
production rate of such bubbles is described by eq.(26) with the change of l to l.

4 nucleation of brane bubbles in d3 background

so far we considered the one-brane induced process in the at space.

it is interesting to

consider the string induced process in the background of two d3 branes far apart from each

other. namely consider the initial f or d string stretched between two d3 branes along some

13

(0,1)

d3

(1,1)

(-1,0)

figure 3: time slice of the euclidean solution for the induced process in d3 background

direction. in this case the ends of the string on d3 branes represent monopoles [20] (d string)

or charges [21] (f string) in the 4d sym theory on the d3 brane worldvolume.

if distance

between d3 branes corresponding to the vacuum expectation value of the scalar in 4d theory

is large we can ignore the metric deformation due to d3 branes and consider the perturbative

domain in 4d theory. the conguration under consideration is presented at fig.3.

in the external b eld the process looks as follows. the initial d string creates a bubble in

the euclidean space which then evolves in minkowski space. since the simplest decay mode for

d string is to f string and (1,-1) string, from the point of view of the 4d observer on d3 brane

the process looks like the exponentially suppressed decay of monopole to charge and dyon in the

external eld during the nite time determined by the bubble action. the same arguments for

the f string amounts to the decay of the charge. note that we can believe such consideration

if the vacuum expectation value of the scalar is much larger then the critical radius, otherwise
the ads5  s5 structure of the near horizon d3 brane metric

ds2 = h  1

2 dx2

|| + h

1

2 (dr2 + r2d2
5)

h = 1 +

4g2

r4

,

(28)

(29)

where x|| are four coordinates along the d3 worldvolume and d2

5 is the ve-sphere metric has

to be taken into account.

let us note that the process looks somewhat unexpected from the point of view of 4d action

on d3 brane where two-form ns eld enter through the bi term while the rr one through

cs one. since the bi action supports the f and d string excitations [7, 8] we can claim that

these excitations are unstable in the rr or ns two form background respectively. having this

14

in mind we can interpret the process from the d3 brane observer viewpoint as the instanton

like monopole decay in the ns b eld (for d string) or charge decay in the rr b eld (for f

string). both processes are exponentially suppressed due to the dyon production rate by the

euclidean tunneling exponent.

the decay rate can be presented in the form

 = fmink exp(seucl),

(30)

where seucl has been found in the previous section while the fm ink stands for the minkowski

part of evolution till the moment when dyonic strings touch d3 branes. minkowski contribution

to the action is purely imaginary

sm ink = iz pm ink(r)dr,

(31)

where pm ink is the canonical momentum conjugate to the the radial variable. the subtle point

is the integration region. in principle there are two dierent situations; in the rst case the

eective potential for the radius has no any additional extremum in the d3 brane background

and the contribution of the minkowski part of the evolution doesnt play the important role.

however one cant exclude the possibility that there is such extremum and the minkowski

evolution allows the nite motion. in this case the amplitude develops the poles related to the

energy levels for the radial variable in the minkowski region. the possibility of such scenario

requires the careful analysis of all gravitational eects and deserves further investigation.

let us turn to the case of two d strings. without external eld we have two monopoles

with the nontrivial moduli space. the brane conguration ts perfectly nahm description of

the moduli space [20]. nahm equations themselves

dsti = ijk[tj, tk]

(32)

describe the condition of the bps invariance of the conguration and s is identied with the

direction along the strings. matrixes ti correspond to the positions of d string ends on the d3

branes. solution to the nahm equations with the proper boundary conditions amounts to the

moduli space of the two-monopole conguration and provides the hyperkahler metric.

15

external eld yields the deformation of the picture. consider the su(2) theory on the

worldvolume of d strings. the external eld enters the lagrangian through the bi action and

hence deforms nahm equations. the new b eld dependent metric can in principle be found

in a standard way using the construction of the spectral curve from the solution of the nahm

equation or using the hyperkahler structure [24].

from the generic point of view the state of two monopoles can be represented by the point

in the moduli space while their slow relative motion is governed by the geodesic motion in

the hyperkahler metric. in the external b eld the unstable submanifold in the moduli space

is developed. indeed assuming that the bubble size is smaller than the distance between d3

branes we have to conclude that any point at this submanifold is unstable due to the decay

of two static monopoles to the dyons due to the bubble solution. the unstability reects the

presence of the negative mode which results in the exponentially suppressed process.

one more interesting comment is in order here. the nahm equations are the monopole

generalization of the adhm construction for instantons. it is also known that the monopole

can be thought of as the chain of instantons. in the brane picture above this can be recognized

viewing the d1 string as the bound state of the innite number of d(-1) branes representing

instantons. since the distance from d3 brane corresponds to the instanton size [28] we can

conjecture that the bubble creation can be considered as the nontrivial deformation of the

instantons of the sizes related with the radius of the bubble .

the case of the nontrivial momenta of monopoles looks more complicated. even in the

absence of the external elds there are some nonperturbative phenomena in this case. we

can mention the scattering at the right angle in the forward collision or the transition to the

dyons at the generic kinematics [24]. in the external eld the picture is even more rich. the

inspection of the matching conditions for the bubble solution with the forward collision of two

d string in the b eld shows that there is a possibility to have dierent kinematics at the nal

state therefore besides the scattering at the right angle there is the exponentially suppressed

processes with generic angle kinematics. moreover there is a plenty of possibilities in the generic

kinematics for the nonperturbative phenomena. for instance there is the process of transition

of the pair of initial monopoles or charges into the generic state of several dyons through the

16

more complicated bubble type solution.

5 discussion

in this paper we developed quasiclassical approach to a higher dimensional generalization of

the induced tunneling processes. utilizing the existence of the brane junction conguration

the explicit quasiclassical tunneling exponent has been calculated. our main example involves

the stringy induced amplitudes but the 5 brane case is treated along the same routing. the

solutions found above can be combined with the string-like solutions to the bi equations of

motion to get the generic webs in the external elds. similar arguments can be applied to more

generic processes analogous to the charge and monopole decays mentioned above. let us also

remark that in the usual eld theory framework there are slightly dierent processes similar

to the induced false vacuum decay via bubble creation, for instance the processes yielding the

baryon number nonconservation. the corresponding nonperturative solution involves instanton-

antiinstanton pair and the collective coordinate relevant for tunneling is the chern number. it

seems that the results of the paper might be useful for the quantitative description of their

higher dimensional analogues.

not much can be said about the quantum corrections to the induced processes. it is not

clear if the quantum correction can be reduced to the geometric characteristics of the solution.

the only remark available concerns the eect of the quantum uctuations of the gauge elds to

the stringy induced process since the relevant 2d ym action is almost topological and depends

only on the area of the manifold which the ym theory is dened on. in our case the relevant

manifold has the topology of the sphere therefore the expectation value of the wilson loop in

2d ym theory is of interest. the wilson loop expectation can be formulated in term of group

characters [31] and even calculated at the large n limit [32]. it appears that the dependence on

the area exibites some phase transition behaviour but for large areas it manifests the standard

area law and therefore actually yields the tension renormalization.

let us mention that the proper playground for the theory with the external ns b eld is the

noncommutative geometry. having in mind that the amplitude of the process of the creation of

17

branes depends nonanalitically on the b eld one can expect that the partition function of the

theory can manifest some singular structure similar to the singularities at the complex coupling

plane in the usual eld theory due to instantons.

some more remarks are in order now. let us consider the gauge theories on the worldvolume

on the emerging branes. the situation is most transparent in the case of 5 brane webs. the

particular conguration of 5 branes with some external 5 brane legs amounts to su(n) 5d

gauge theory on the worldvolume of n 5 branes streched between the external ones [15]. in the

external eld some brane production is possible which means the process of nonperturbative

change of the rank of the gauge group whose rate depends nonanalitically on the external eld.

moreover the brane diagram itself can be treated as a kind of euclidean solution corresponding

to the nonperturbative phenomena from the point of view of the gauge theories on the external

5 branes. finally let us mention that the minkowski evolution of the 5 brane bubbles acquires

the meaning of some rg ow in the theory on their worldvolumes.

it would be interesting to discuss the case when temperature or density play the role of

the inducing factor.

in the temperature case it is necessary to nd the euclidean solution

periodic in the euclidean time. the temperature xes the size of the matching p-sphere and

therefore gives rise to the action on the solution. the formulae in this case are similar with

the substitution of the temperature instead of the tension of the external brane. it is not clear

how the density case has to be treated since the chemical potential for the state with branes

has to be dened properly. let us also note that the induced process can be considered in the

ads spaces generalizing the consideration in [6].

we are thankful to a.mikhailov, m.shifman and m.voloshin for the useful discussions. a.g.

thanks to tpi at university of minnesota were the paper was completed for the hospitality.

the work was supported in part by grants intas-96-0482 and rfbr 97-02-16131 (a.g) and

intas-97-0103 (k.s).

references

18

[1] j.polchinski,hepth/9611050

p.k.townsend, hepth/9612121

[2] c.teitelboim, phys.lett. b167 (1986) 63

[3] c.bachas and m.porrati, phys.lett. b296 (1992) 77; hepth/9209032

[4] f.dowker, j.p.gauntlett, g.w.gibbons and g.t.horowitz, phys.rev. d53 (1996) 7115,

hepth/9512154

[5] r.emparan, phys.lett. b423 (1998) 71; hepth/9711106

[6] j.maldacena, j.michelson and a.strominger, hepth/9812073

[7] c.callan and j.maldacena, nucl.phys. b513 (1998) 198; hepth/9708147

[8] g. gibbons, nucl.phys. b514 (1998) 603 ; hepth/9709027

[9] k. savvidy, hepth/9810163

[10] g.gauntlett, c. koehl, d. mateos, p. townsend and m.zamaklar, hepth/9903156

[11] k.selivanov and m.voloshin, yad.phys. 44 (1986) 1336

k.selivanov and m.voloshin, zhetp.lett. 42 (1985) 422

[12] a.linde, nucl.phys. b216 (1983) 421; erratum-ibid. b223 (1983) 544

i. krive and a. rozhavsky, sov.j.low.temp. 6 (1980) 1272

[13] a.gorsky and v.kiselev, phys.lett. b 304 (1993) 214

[14] j.schwarz, nucl.phys.suppl. b55 (1997) , hepth/9607201

o.aharony, j.sonnenschein and s.yankielowicz , nucl.phys. b474 (1998), hepth/9602009

[15] o.aharony and a.hanany, nucl.phys. b504 (1997) 239; hep-th/9704170

i.brunner and a. karch, phys.lett. b409 (1997) 109; hep-th/9705022

o.aharony, a.hanany and b.kol, jhep 9801 (1998) 002; hepth/9710116

19

[16] k.desgupta and s.mukhi, phys.lett. b423 (1998) 261; hepth/9711094

[17] a.hashimoto, phys.rev. d57 (1998) 6441 ; hepth/9711097

[18] a.sen, jhep 9803 (1998) 005; hepth/9711130

[19] s.-j. rey and j.-t. yee, nucl.phys. b526 (1998) 229; hepth/9711202

m.krogh and s.lee , nucl.phys. b516 (1998) 241; hepth/9712050

y.matsuo and k.okuyama, phys.lett. b426 (1998) 294; hepth/9712070

[20] d. diaconescu, nucl.phys. b503 (1997) 220 ; hepth/9608163

[21] a. strominger, phys.lett. b383 (1996) 44 ; hepth/9512059

[22] j.gauntlett, j.gomis and p. townsend jhep 9801 (1998); hepth/9711205

[23] e.witten, nucl.phys. b460 (1996), hepth/9510135

[24] m. atyah and n. hitchin, the geometry and dynamics of magnetic monopoles, prince-

ton university press (1988)

[25] o. bergman, nucl.phys. b525 (1998) 104

k.hashimoto, hepth/9808185

[26] r.gopakumar and c.vafa,hepth/9809187

[27] e.witten, nucl.phys. b460 (1996), hepth/9510135

[28] t.banks and m.green, jhep 05 (1998) 002; hepth/9804170

i.kogan and g.luzon , nucl.phys. b539 (1999) 121, hepth/9806197

[29] i.kobzarev, l.okun and m.voloshin , sov. j. nucl.fiz. 20 (1975) 644

s.coleman, phys.rev. d15 (1977) 2929

[30] j.s. langer, ann.phys. 41 (1967) 108; 54 (1969) 258

[31] d.gross and w.taylor, nucl.phys. b403 (1993) 395

20

[32] m.douglas and v.kazakov, phys.lett. b319 (1993) 219

b.rusakov, phys.lett. b329 (1994) 338

21

