ffuov-99/06

non-perturbative thermodynamics in

matrix string theory

jesus puente penalba 1

depto. de fsica, universidad de oviedo

avda. calvo sotelo 18

e-33007 oviedo, asturias, spain

abstract

a study of the thermodynamics in iia matrix string theory is presented. the free
string limit is calculated and seen to exactly reproduce the usual result. when energies
are enough to excite non-perturbative objects like d-particles and specially membranes,

the situation changes because they add a large number of degrees of freedom that do
not appear at low energies. there seems to be a negative specic heat (even in the

microcanonical ensemble) that moves the asymptotic temperature to zero. besides, the
mechanism of interaction and attachment of open strings to d-particles and d-membranes

is analyzed.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

9
2

 
 

2
v
4
9
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1e-mail address: jesus@string1.ciencias.uniovi.es

1 introduction.

the matrix theory [1] has supposed an important advance in uncovering the global
properties of m theory or strongly coupled iia string theory. it has answered several

questions as well as oered a number of new problems to be solved. most problems
are related to the fact that the model is formulated in the light cone and it is precisely
the light cone direction the one that is taken to dene the string coupling. this mixes

the degrees of freedom in such a way that calculations are simplied, but somehow lack
the easy interpretation they had in perturbative string theory. objects are not easily

recognized and are, in fact, complicated combinations of the asymptotic states of the
lorentz invariant theory. the study of its thermodynamics was carried out in [8, 9, 11,

10, 7] but it is dicult to directly relate those calculations to the ones in usual perturbative
string theory.

a partial remedy to this was set with the matrix string theory of [3, 14] that put
forward a non-perturbative formulation of string theory. the objects are still strings and
the perturbative limit is not so hard to nd and analyze. in fact, the dierence is in the

way interactions and non-perturbative objects appear. in the usual perturbative string
theory everything lies on the form of the world-sheet:
its topological form accounts for

the dierent interaction terms while its singularities (xed points, boundary conditions...)
are related to non-perturbative eects. in the new approach, the world-sheet is always a

circle and the dynamics is dened by the yang-mills elds on it. their interactions tell
us about the strings interactions and their non-perturbative congurations are related to

d-branes.

previous works studied the general thermal scenario and the relation among the prob-
lems of hagedorn in the dierent matrix string theories [6] and the perturbative free string

limit [12], that is also obtained here from another perspective. the question i have at-
tempted to address in this article is what does this approach add to thermodynamics
when energies are beyond g1. i have analyzed how should non-perturbative yang-mills
congurations be included in the free energy and the result is a more dynamical view of

string and d-brane thermodynamics in the whole energy range.

the calculations support, in the appropriate limit, those done before (in [2]) and unveil
the drastic consequences of including oscillating membranes. the hagedorn problem is

worsened by the appearance of this even more degenerate object and the nal picture at
very high energies seems to be dominated by a single and very excited membrane at very

low temperature.

1

2 review of the matrix strings from the nite tem-

perature point of view.

let us start with the hamiltonian of the matrix model compactied on s1(lightcone)
s1. it is

h =

1
2

r+

2 z 2

0

dtr(p2

i + (dxi)2 + t d +

1
r2

9 (cid:18)e2 hx i, x ji2(cid:19) +

1
r9

t ihx i, i)

pr1

it is in (= l3

(1)
9 ) units. taking the limit of type iia matrix string [3] means
equating r9 = gs and assuming that gs is small. in that limit, congurations with
non-commuting matrices are very heavy and we can consider them decoupled or include
them as solitonic objects.

the hamiltonian of the perturbative objects is a free u(1)m gauge theory that de-
scribes exactly the same elds as the green-schwarz hamiltonian plus a two-dimensional
gauge eld. this one is pure gauge and can be taken to zero but for the solitonic con-

gurations related to the nite circle in which the theory is dened. we shall take those
congurations into account later.

we shall now relate every quantum number of the u(1)m sym to its counterpart in

string theory. the light-cone variables are dened as

p+ = p0 + p11
p = p0  p11

let us remember that the light-cone hamiltonian of strings is

h =

1
2

(p+ + p)

with

p =

p2
i
2p+ +

plus the fermionic part and with

1

2p+ xn (cid:16)i

ni

n + i

n(cid:17)
n i

ni
i

n = nnini

xn

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

here p+ = m
r is discrete. the n are the oscillation numbers. note that the second
quantization of the string elds is already included and is, of course, independent of the
number n. this is the usual treatment of multi-eld systems in perturbative string

theory with a single world-sheet. in the sym, the discrimination in dierent strings is

2

related to the twisted states. one can consider diagonal matrices in which the elementary
elds are not periodic, but, rather, have the following property:

xi,i() = xi+1,i+1( + 2)

...

(6)

xi+k,i+k() = xi,i( + 2)

for a k-times-twisted state. this is allowed by the z m symmetry that is left even after
taking the gs  0 limit. the result is just the same as if we considered that the world-
sheet could have dierent lengths, all multiples of the initial one. this is tantamount to
rescaling the prefactor of the hamiltonian, that is the light-like momentum p+. that is
why these twisted states represent the kaluza-klein momentum number of each object
in the eleventh dimension. they are equivalent in the 0 + 1 sym to the bound states

of the original d0-branes. the total kaluza-klein momentum is therefore m = pk kmk,

if mk is the number of k-times-twisted strings. the sum in m, and particularly in each
mk is the real second quantization of strings because it allows to deal with several string
world-sheets at the same time. to nd out the spectrum, each scalar eld has to be
expanded in a fourier series. the hamiltonian of each term is a harmonic oscillator with

frequency  = 2n so their energy is

h =

m
2r+

+

1
2

r+

m "xn

n(cid:18)nn +

1

2(cid:19) +xn

n(cid:18) nn +

1

2(cid:19)# +

r+p2
i
2m

(7)

it exactly coincides with (3) and (4). we have focused on the bosonic part. the

fermionic one is a fermionic harmonic oscillator that cancels the zero point energy of the
bosonic one. in the original model of d0-branes moving in a circle, these oscillator modes
are mapped by the ip and the taylor construction 1 [5] to the modes of the open strings
in which the second end is stuck in the d-particle after having wound several times around

the circle. n is the total light-like momentum of the system.

we shall now derive the known partition function of free strings from this discrete

light-cone hamiltonian. it is

z = exp [f ()]
where f is the free energy that can be calculated with
r+

 f () = z1 = xosc xm z d8~p exp(

+

m (cid:16) ~pt



2 " m

r+

(8)

(9)

2 + m2(n, nn, n, nn)(cid:17)#)

1i do not explicitly call t-duality to this construction because in this case it is not. from this m-
theory point of view, r9 and r+ are just parameters and t- and s-dualities are just changes of names
and variables.

3

if

m2(n, nn, n, nn) = n + n

(10)

that is the total oscillator number. the integral over the continuous momenta is gaus-

sian and can be performed. besides, the sum over the oscillator states can be decomposed
in mass levels. this yields

 f () = xn xm

m !4
an   r+

exp"



2   m

r+

+

r+
m

n + r+!# .

the coecients an can be related with arguments of number theory to

an =

1
n!

dn

dxn h4(0, x)8ix=0

(11)

(12)

this is the usual relation between thermodynamics and the string non-thermal parti-
tion function. this is usually obtained after the integration of the constraint that relates

the left and right moving oscillators. here, it is got as a count of the number of ways a
sum

x nnn + n nn

(13)

gives the same total n. the result is the same, no matter how dierent they seem because

of the properties of the jacobi theta functions. the constraint for the discrete light-cone
states has been implemented as

n = n + m

(14)

expression (11) is the best we can get when r+ is nite. if we take the limit r+  ,
we can obtain the usual form of the free energy. we have to substitute

m
r+  p+
xm  r+z dp+

(15)

the states with  6= 0 decouple when taking the innite-m limit. also, in order to

obtain a proper time representation, we need to change variables

p+ 

n

t

so that

 f () = r+4xn   1

n!5

an z dt

t

t5e 2n

4t et

(16)

(17)

in the right-hand side we can recognize the integral representation of the bessel func-

tion k, that we use to nally obtain

4

 f () = r+4xn   2

n!5

an k5(2n)

(18)

this has been obtained using classical statistics. quantum statistics can be added

now as a series in r substituting  with r. supersymmetry reduces the series to the odd
terms:

 f () = r+4xn xr,odd

1

r10   2

n!5

an k5(r2n)

(19)

this is exactly what results following the s-representation or analog model, that

consists in separately summing the contributions of each of the elds that appear at each
mass level of the string. from this, using the integral representation of the k function
and the coecients (12), it is direct to obtain the usual modular invariant form. it was

got in a dierent way in [12].

3 the electric ux as a non-perturbative correction.

the last quantum number that we have got left to interpret is the kaluza-klein momentum
of the original d-particles related to the ninth direction. it is mapped, in the matrix string

limit, to the ramond-ramond charge of the matrix d-particles [3, 13] (not the original,
but the new ones). these degrees of freedom, that were perturbative in the original matrix
theory, are now solitonic. the reason is that in every reduction of a ym action to any
number of dimensions, the number of degrees of freedom is d  2 except in the reduction
to 0 + 1 (see [8]). in that case one more coordinate appears in the free theory, which is

essential to the interpretation of the model as a theory in eleven dimensions. with the
transformation to a 1 + 1 theory that has been performed, that degree of freedom has

vanished and only left as a reminder a numerable set of non-equivalent topological sectors.
each sector is characterized by the expectation value of momentum related to the eld
a9. the ux must be

where n is the ramond-ramond charge. that is the same as to say p9 = n
r9

like in the previous section, i shall now give an interpretation to every quantum
number in the picture of string theory. remember that for a general background that

included both d0-branes and fundamental strings one should separate the whole matrix
into diagonal boxes, each containing one twisted state.
if the electric eld related to
the u(1)mi diagonal subgroup of a given box takes an expectation value, then that box
describes a d0-brane; else, it is a fundamental string.

5

 =

1

2 z dtre = n,

(20)

.

the term of the hamiltonian that contains the electric eld, is, in string units:

he =

r+

4 z d

e2
g2
s

.

(21)

if we consider simple, diagonal forms for e, the energy of a d-particle state at rest is

he =

r+
2

n2
g2
s

.

(22)

as before, twisted states of these congurations represent particles with dierent light-

cone momenta. their energy is

he =

r+
2k

n2
g2
s

=

m 2
d0
2p+ .

(23)

the k is in the denominator because -remember- e is not a eld but a momentum. both
numbers, n and k, are completely independent. one can have, for example k 6= 1 for
n = 1. that is got with a k-times-twisted state with, for instance,  = k1 for each
matrix element. this is possible because what must have an integer ux number is the

trace of the eld, not necessarily each matrix component.

each twisted state describes a d-particle. bound states of d-particles in string theory

cannot be seen like that, not even like twisted states in this framework. here, they are
simply eigenstates of the ninth component of the momentum with dierent eigenvalues

or, in the dual system, eld congurations with dierent topological numbers (dierent
n).

the coordinate elds can also in this case be expanded in a fourier series. however,

there is a subtlety here that has to be noticed. it is related to the equations of motion of
the scalar elds in the presence of the electric eld. to see it clearest, let me use the ym

theory in the open space, whose properties are more familiar. one equation is:

which for the electric component and after a fourier transform means that

f  = 0

~p ~e = 0.

(24)

(25)

this is the well known condition of transversality of the electromagnetic waves. after

the dimensional reduction, the only change is that both the momentum and the electric
eld have only components in the remaining directions. in our case, we only have one
dimension and it is compactied. the formula above implies that the electric eld and

the kaluza-klein momentum exclude each other. in the previous section we studied the
ym theory with momentum (oscillator number) but without electric eld. now we are

6

considering the electric eld so the theory is reduced to its zero kaluza-klein mode. this
is the reason why d0-branes are pointlike even when they form twisted states and the size

of the matrix that contains them (m in my notation) may be taken to innity. another
explanation to the absence of oscillators (world-sheet kk momentum) can be obtained
going back through the construction of w. taylor to the original matrix model. then

the electric eld is transformed into the momentum along the ninth direction and the kk
modes (oscillators) are the open strings that stretch between the d-particles that form

the one-dimensional lattice that describes one d0-brane in a circle. the open strings are
represented by the massive gauge elds that appear when the symmetry is broken when

the positions of the d-particles acquire vacuum expectation value. now, if we consider
the d-particle moving with a precise momentum, its conjugate coordinate is completely
unmeasurable and, therefore, it cannot have any expectation value. this prevents the

breaking of the gauge symmetry and the appearance of any massive gauge eld.

this explains why d0-branes are pointlike in this approach. one important conse-

quence is that, for twisted states to be formed, the d-particles must coincide at one
point, unlike what happens with the closed strings. this is not exactly the explanation
given by [3]. their interpretation only included d-particles with m(p+) = n(d0 number),
which is a strange relation between the dirichlet charge and the light-cone momentum.

the string-like excitations were eliminated from the spectrum just because their light-cone
momentum was set to zero in the large-n limit.

before that, let us see how open strings can be attached to the d0-brane in the per-

turbative limit. the mechanism, as pointed out in [3] is the same that causes interaction
between dierent strings. when, at some value of  the eigenvalues of all the spatial

coordinates of the d-particle coincide with those of a close string, some o-diagonal elds
get locally nearly massless. they are responsible for the attachment. however, it seems

to me that this case of d0-branes is a little bit subtler than the strings one. firstly,
whenever a closed string coincides at one point with the position of the d-particle, there
is not any exact enhancement of symmetry. the reason is that the expectation value of
a1 is not proportional to the identity. the system is described by a matrix that consists
of two boxes. one is the d-particle and has an electric eld. the other is the matrix

string. for simplicity, let us assume that both boxes have the same size (both objects
have the same light-cone momentum). in the d0-brane box

while in the string box the eld can be set to 0. therefore

0a1  e = constant

a1  nt(3 + id)

7

(26)

(27)

in the usual matrix string interaction, all elds coincide at one point and there is an
enhancement of symmetry. here, the presence of the 3 eld slightly breaks that symmetry
because o-diagonal elds do not become completely massless. let us compute its mass.
the interesting term of the hamiltonian is

we change

r9[a9, x i]2

(a9, x i)  r1/2

9

(a9, x i)

for the elds to have appropriate dimensions and, taking into account that

< (a9)2 > r2
the corresponding mass of the mediating eld is

9 = g2

m2  g

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

we are supposing that g is very small, so the interchange of these very light elds is

permitted. to deduce from here that the coupling constant of this interaction between the
d-particle and the string is g, it should be necessary to generalize the calculation in [4].

another feature that makes this attachment dierent from perturbative string interactions
is that it has more drastic consequences. the string loses half the supersymmetry due to
the existence of a privileged point that breaks the invariance under reparameterizations.

the point is distinguished in the nal world-sheet that combines both objects (and goes
from 0 to 4) as a discontinuity in the electric eld, that is,

e() = e

e() = 0

if

if

  [0, 2]
  [2, 4]

(32)

the reason for that is that the twisted state crosses both boxes: the one that represents
the d-particle and that of the fundamental string.

we have written before that in a the world-sheet of a single object the electric eld
must be constant because any other conguration is energetically very costly. the reason
why (32) is possible is that the process by which the electric eld of some u(1) extends

itself to the total group that includes both the string and the d-particle is clearly non-
perturbative. however, it is not completely forbidden: it is just the absorption of a string
and its light-cone momentum (p+) by a d-particle when both interact.

in fact, the way the light-cone momentum is shared between the two objects can be

calculated. we have showed how the string is tied to the d0-brane in all the transverse

8

directions, but nothing has been said about the longitudinal one. the diculty is that
the light-cone description we have obliged the d-particle to be in the momentum repre-

sentation. this prevents the explicit appearance of a dirichlet boundary condition. the
only reason for the string to be attached also in the ninth direction is dynamical. we have
to work with the covariant hamiltonian one gets after undoing the change of variables

that took us to the light-cone. the free part is

h = qm 2 + ~p2

t + (p9

total  p9o.s.)2 +qm2o.s. + (p9o.s.)2

(33)

where the subscript o.s. stands for open string, m is the mass of the d-particle and m

is the mass of the string. the minimum of the energy occurs when

po.s.
pd0

=

m
m

(34)

this condition implies that the speeds of both objects coincide and therefore, the dynamics
of the open string is tied to that of the d-particle. the link, however, is not very strong

because the string can go away with just the cost of its kinetic energy

(p9

o.s.)2
2m

.

(35)

this is due to the fact that when an open string is attached to a d0-brane, its two

ends are in the same point and so the string can close and be emitted at no cost.

it would be interesting to add these elds into the partition function of (19). once
we throw away the part of the interaction and take the n   limit, the light-cone
hamiltonian is

hl.c. =

pd0
+
2

po.s.

+
2

+

+

1

+ (cid:20)m 2 + (~pd0
2pd0

t )2(cid:21) +

1

2po.s.

+

hm 2 + (~po.s.

t

)2i

with the constraint

~pd0
t =

m
m

~po.s.

t

pd0
+ =

m
m

po.s.

+

(36)

(37)

it is straightforward to follow the calculation in the previous section and to obtain the

following proper-time representation of the free energy:

 f () = x{m,m}

z dt

t

t5 exp(cid:20)

t
2

(m + m)2 

1
2t

2(cid:21)

we can now substitute the mass spectra

m2 = n
n2
g2

m 2 =

9

(38)

(39)

where n is the oscillator number of the attached string. this gives

 f () = x{n,n}

bn z dt

t

t5 exp


t

2  |n|

g

+ n!2

1
2t



2


(40)

bn is the degeneracy associated to each mass level. this is the result using classical
statistics. the complete result has one more sum that completes the exponential with 
to the usual jacobi 3 and 2 functions for bosons and fermions respectively.

this does not look very familiar. if we want to see the open strings free energy to
emerge from this mess, we have to use the born-oppenheimer approximation. it consists

in classifying the degrees of freedom in fast and slow ones. this approach was used in
[8, 10] to study the dynamics of d0-branes. this case is dierent because the light-

cone direction is not the one dened by g. this means that we have positive as well as
negative ramond-ramond charges and the excitations of them include the whole open

string spectrum, not just the massless sector. anyway, the approximation is valid as long
as the mass of the d-particles is large. here, the fast modes are the open strings and the
slow ones are the movements of the d-particles. to see the open string partition function,

we have to freeze the movements of the d0-branes. we cannot do it with the proper time
representation so we have to go back to the hamiltonian and set, there, all the momenta

to zero (or to a xed value). the hamiltonian is then

h = |n|
g

+ n

(41)

index n is xed, we do not have to sum over it because we do not want to allow the
creation and annihilation of d-branes in our gas. to simplify, consider just one d-brane.
the free energy is simply

 fn() = xr,odd



xn =0

bn e |n|

g 

n r

(42)

there is not an r multiplying the d-particle mass because that part is, in fact, not
thermalized at all; it plays the role of a cosmological constant, it is just the energy of the
vacuum.

this representation of the free energy is not very recognizable so it is better to put

it in an integral form. the steps to follow are
nr) = e |n|

 fn() = e |n|

g x exp(

= e |n|

g x bns 2
1
z 
g x bn

g  1
= e |n|


0

0

z 

(n r)1/2k1/2(nr) =

dt
t

t1/2 exp(
dt
t1/22(0,
t

2r2
2t  nt) =
4
2
2(0, it)
12(it)
2t

)

(43)

10

the last expression is exactly the free energy of the open string theory with dirich-
i have

let boundary conditions in all directions, as obtained in the s-representation.

substituted the laplace series

bn en t

(44)

xn

with the appropriate theta function. it is dierent from the one used for closed strings
because here the central charge breaks the supersymmetry and the contribution of the
i do not spend time with this
fermions is changed: the supermultiplets are shorter.

because the procedure is known and identical to that in the perturbative string theory.

in this approach, the partition function of the slow modes represents a count of the

possible vacuums of the system. this is the way the existence and positions of d-branes
are seen in perturbative string theory.

once we have seen that expression (40) reproduces in the appropriate limit the free
energy of the attached strings, let us study the structure when all the terms are taken
into account. i am specially interested in the modular properties.

the rst thing we have to do is to get rid of the square roots. we get it in two steps;

expanding the root and taking advantage of this trick:

exp tn |n|

g ! = s 2

  tn |n|
g !

1

2

=

t1/2

 z ds

s

s1/2 exp"

k1/2 tn |n|
4s  tn

g ! =
g2!  st#

n2

1

the cost is that we have added another integral. altogether, the free energy is

 f () =
2(2m + 1)2 

 exp"

1
2t



dt
 xz ds
t
2   n2
g2 + n +

s

t

s1/2t11/2bn 
g2!#
1
2s

+ 2sn

n2

we would like to take this mess and put some order, but, as far as i can see, it is only

partially possible. i have found two alternative ways to do so:
2



 f () =

s

 xn6=0z ds
f " 1 + 2s

dt
t

s1/2t11/22 0, i
g2! t

2# exp 

t
2

n2

t! 
4s!

t

n2
g2 

and

 f () =

s



 xz ds
it
2g2 +

2

dt
t
itsn

t! 
s1/2t11/2bn 4 0, i
g2 !  1# exp(cid:18)
4s(cid:19)
n 

t
2

t

"3 0,

11

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

to simplify, i have dened f to be the open string partition function

f (t) =

4
2(0, it)
12(it)

(49)

the introduction of d-branes as rigid non-perturbative corrections to string thermo-

dynamics has always yielded the same result: the critical hagedorn temperature does not
change, although the properties of the transition and the even its existence do depend

on the background. the reason for this stability is that, in fact and as far as d-branes
are solely static objects, the critical temperature only depends on the properties of the

world-sheet eld theory. it is, therefore, an interesting topic to decide if the addition of
the dynamics of d0-brane changes anything. to know that from the canonical ensemble,
we have to calculate the behaviour of the integrand of (40) when t  0. to study the
exponent

exp 

t
2

xn,n

n2
g2 

t
2

n + 82n  tn (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

n

g(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

!

(50)

is enough. the coecients bn have been substituted with their asymptotic expression:

it is possible to evaluate the sum in n with a saddle point approximation. the result of

bn  n9/4e

8n

(51)

that is

exp 

t
2

n2
g2 +

t
2

n2
g2 

xn

82(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

n

g(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+

42

4t ! = xn

exp 

82(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

n

g(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+

42

t !

(52)

the only dependence on t is the last fraction that diverges at t = 0. the critical
temperature is found when that term is compared to the rst mode of the thermal 4
function:

42
t

=

2
c

2t  c = 8

(53)

this is the usual hagedorn temperature both for (type ii) closed and open strings
so the conclusion is that the dynamics of the d-particles with the excitations we have

considered do not change it. remember that the spectrum we have used is the free one,
but that does not mean it is the complete one even when g = 0. the open strings

that stretch between a couple of d-particles have been considered in what precedes as
part of the interaction even when their contribution to the energy does not vanish at zero

coupling. the origin of this confusion is the non-commutativity of the d-brane coordinate
elds. when the o-diagonal terms are taken into account, the separation into individual
objects gets darker and the inclusion of their contribution is a hard task. maybe this states

that we have not considered are responsible for the apparent lack of modular invariance
of the expression obtained.

12

in a very interesting work b. sathiapalan [9] showed an aspect of high temperature
matrix theory that is related to this work. he used the d = 1 + 1 eld theory to

deduce a deconnement-like transition that he related to hagedorn. the energy of
such transition would be non-perturbative so one may question why the results and the
methods of this section (and the following ones) are so dierent. the answer is that the

physical situations described are dierent. the parameter that distinguishes both is the
relative distance of the objects or, if you want, the density of the gas. that separates two

regions in phase space according to whether the typical distance between objects is bigger
or smaller than . if they are bigger, one must consider rst the addition of bps non-
perturbative objects like d-particles and d-membranes because their energies are smaller
than those of o-diagonal elds. this is what could be called a dilute gas approximation
and that is what is being carried out in this work. if the density of the gas is such that

typical distances are smaller than the string length, then one should consider rst the
contribution of o-diagonal modes. that is more dicult and up to now, only qualitative

information could be extracted in [9]. d-objects carry non-perturbative information but
their geometrical nature makes them more tractable.

4 membranes as d2-branes.

the ux that denes a membrane lying along the seventh and the eighth directions is

 =

i

4 z dtr < hx 7, x 8i >= t2a.

(54)

where a is the area of the membrane. it is necessary for that trace not to be null that

n (the size of the matrices) should be innite.
if some elds with that commutation
relation take some expectation values, a membrane is created from the vacuum. it is
important not to confuse these non-commuting elds with the centre-of-mass coordinates
of the membrane whose dynamics is described by the n  n identities that can be added
without changing the commutation relation. that is, the elds that give the d2-brane

charge are in the su(n) part. the expectation values of the non-commuting matrix
elds are related to the extension of the membrane in each direction. notice that neither

the centre of mass nor the lengths are aected by any uncertainty relation but the usual
quantum one. both non-commuting elds can independently have any expectation values.

as an example, we can choose the representation of the elds to be equivalent to the
position and momentum operators dened over a rectangle. the correct normalization
is such that their eigenvalues lie in the segment (3/2)1/3[1, 1]. in the usual quantum
theory, the eigenvalues of the coordinates and the momenta cannot be both continuous
and bounded at the same time; however, the reason has to do with the boundary conditions

13

one imposes to the eigenfunctions. there are not any boundary conditions in this case,
so that does not happen here. to x notation let me write

x 7 = x 7x
x 8 = x 8y

[x, y] = 1.

(55)

here x and y are operators (as matrices) that act over the hilbert space and x 7 and x 8
are numbers. however, as i have already written, they are internal degrees of freedom
and, as such, they are completely independent of the position of the centre of mass. all

excitations over this background should be interpreted as the excitations of the membranes
(d2-branes in the perturbative limit).

it is now our task to study some of the possible excitations of these physical cong-

urations. we shall begin with the quantization of precisely the non-commuting elds so
that we know what are their possible expectation values, that is, the possible areas for

the membrane. this is so because the eigenvalues of the operators are the points in the
target space that are occupied by the membrane. the hamiltonian that concerns them is

h78 = p2

7 + p2

8 +

1
g2
s

x 2

7 x 2
8 ,

(56)

where i have taken  = 1 and i have been loose about constants. a rst approximation
to the energy of the fundamental state is to consider that px  h and minimize the
hamiltonian. the value of x 7 and x 8 that are obtained are:

x 7  x 8  g1/3 = lp.

(57)

this gives the very interesting result that the smallest possible membrane is of the
size of the eleven-dimensional planck area. this also increases the importance of the

non-perturbative eects in string theory. it is known that the energy density of d-objects
is of order g1 in string units; however, the result above means that the rst membrane
state that is excited appears at an energy of order g1/3.

these excitations that i have already discussed are longitudinal along the directions

of the membrane. the transversal ones can be described by elds like

x 6 = f (x, y).

(58)

if we take one, for instance, to be proportional to y, its hamiltonian, with the correct
normalizations would be

h6 =

1

2p+  p2

6 +

(59)

l2
7
g2
s

x 2

6! .

14

the coordinate is no longer free but rather, it oscillates in a harmonic oscillator with
frequency

 =

.

(60)

l7
gs

that is precisely the one-dimensional tension of the membrane in the eighth direction,
that is, integrating out the other dimension. explicitly:

t (8)

1 = z l7

0

t2 = z l7

0

1
gs

=

l7
gs

,

(61)

in  units. we can now interpret these excitations as waves moving in the eighth direction
whose amplitude vibrates in the sixth. it is straightforward to consider other excitations

oscillating in other directions and also moving in the seventh. the interpretation as waves
is quite clear because what the uctuations actually do is to locally rotate the membrane

towards some direction and then leave it back where it was lying.

in fact, we can make a fourier expansion of the elds moving in each direction. we

must impose appropriately chosen boundary conditions. if we choose them to be neu-
mann, the expansion is made in terms of these elds:

n = 2n sin (nx)

(62)

where x is again the n  n matrix dened in (56). these elds parameterize the waves
moving in the seventh direction. others do it in the eighth and there are combinations

that complete the fourier two-dimensional expansion of the membranes vibrating modes.
the mass these elds acquire through the interaction with the background is

e2

n = nnn

l7
gs

.

(63)

where nn is the excitation mode of the harmonic oscillator. notice that, in eleven-
dimensional units,

l7
gs

=

l7
l3
p

(64)

so that if we compactify the seventh direction and consider it the quantum one (make a
ip), the vibrations of the membrane in the other (eighth) direction have the usual string
p(l7)1). just like these, all possible vibrations
spectrum proportional to the new (= l3
of the membrane can be constructed. these elds represent the second quantization of

the classical waves that deform the surface of the membrane. all of them are excited only
at non-perturbative energies so that we can conclude that in the perturbative string limit
the d-branes are completely rigid.

now, i shall explain how perturbative open strings can be formed. let us recall
what gauge symmetry we have left after the non-commutative elds have acquired their

15

expectation values. as i have written before, the matrices can be chosen to be coordinate
and momentum (derivative) operators acting over a one-dimensional space. this gives the

correct commutation relation and their eigenvalues give the eigenvalues of our matrices.
there are many su() matrices that obey that algebra. the dierent possibilities are
related to the dierent representations (coordinate, momentum or mixed) of the basis that

is used to span the hilbert space. changing the representation is equivalent to changing
the gauge. that is the freedom we keep. this is related to the invariance under world-
volume reparameterizations inside the membrane. notice that there is no statistical zn
symmetry involved, which is coherent with the fact that we only have one object.

let us see some cases in which this symmetry is enhanced. consider two membranes
that cross at one line. the case is identical if there is only one membrane that crosses
itself. one world-volume representation would be

a(1
x 6
x 6
b (1
x 7
a(1
b (1
x 7
a(1
x 8
b (1

a, 2
b , 2
a, 2
b , 2
a, 2
b , 2

a) = 1
a
b ) = 0
a) = 0
b ) = 1
b
a) = 2
a
b ) = 2
b

x 8

(65)

where a and b index the membranes and 1 and 2 the directions. the parameters a,b
run inside [1, 1], for example. the crossing occurs at 1
b = 0. in the matrix case,
there are two appropriate representations of x 8 as a momentum of the other coordinates
at that line. they are related to the dierent ways how the momentum (derivative) can
ow across the membrane. figure 1 explains it. mathematically, one can dene x 8 as a
derivative (at 1 = 0) in all these ways:

a = 1

af|=0 = lim
0
bf|=0 = lim
0

f (a + a/b)  f (a)

a/b

f (b + b/a)  f (b)

b/a

(66)

there are three dierent possibilities that correspond to the three ways one can sep-

arate two crossing planes into two surfaces. these representations are, in the matrix
language, gauge equivalent matrices. this gauge enhancement can be seen as responsible

for perturbative splitting-and-joining interactions between membranes.

a similar argument can be used to explain the attachment of the open strings to the

d-brane.

16

figure 1: the three dierent parameterizations of two crossing membranes (seen with
little perspective).

consider, then, a matrix that can be diagonalized into two boxes: one is the mem-
brane and the other is a usual matrix string state. there can be an enhancement of

symmetry if at least at one particular value of  (the original world-sheet) the coordinate
of the string coincides with one of the target space points occupied by the d-brane. that
means that their transverse coordinates must coincide and that the coordinates of the

string which are paralel to the membrane must be equal to one of the eigenvalues of each
non-commuting matrix.

in that case, it is possible to exchange each matrix (seen as a derivative operator
acting over the hilbert space in the representation of the operator of the other direction)

with another like this:

f|i = f (i + 1)  f (i  1)

f|i = (f (i + 1)  f (i  1))
+,i+1  (f ()  f (i + 1))  ,i1  (f ()  f (i  1))

(67)

(68)

if  is the index that marks the eld of the string. we have not cared much about the
normalizations. this change is, in fact, equivalent to interchanging the matrix indices i
and  so that it is a symmetry for both matrices, x 7 and x 8 (this is important). this
symmetry has to exist in any representation of the matrices (any parameterization), in

particular, both where one of them is diagonal. i point this out to remark the necessity for
both eigenvalues of the position of the string to coincide with a point inside the membrane.
this is a locally (in ) conserved gauge symmetry. in this case the enhancement is to a
z2 symmetry (instead of su(2) from a z2, like in the case of closed strings).

this symmetry allows perturbative pointlike interactions between strings and d2-

branes. besides it allows the creation of a kind of twisted states that are related to
the attached open strings and the boundary closed string states. figure (2) is a graphic
explanation. wherever two lines coincide a z2 twist is performed and one eld takes the
role of the other. there can be two special points (or just one) that mark the two ends of

the open string. as can be seen in the gure, the eld that comes out of the membrane

17

point1

open string

point2

sigma=0

sigma=2 pi

figure 2: twisted state of an open string with two membrane points. as  runs, the elds
in the non-commuting su(n) part cannot oscillate or move (horizontal lines) because
their excitations are non-perturbative but the open string eld can go from one point to
the other.

after the twist to substitute the string (straight lines with slope) is the way the momentum

ows back between the two ends of the string. as a nal result of the twist the elds that
represent the two positions inside the membrane (thick lines) are interchanged. this is

possible thanks to the same symmetry that has been described above. in a membrane
state without any open string, the interchange of the value of two diagonal elds is not
permitted because it would change the commutator with the matrix in the other direction.

in this case, the twist has not only swapped the eigenvalues, but also the momentum-like
matrix in such a way that the total action is part of the complete reparameterization

group. somehow, this is the recovery of part of the usual weyl group that appears in
perturbative matrix string theory. moreover, one can consider two membranes so that

the two special points are one in each of them. then the swap of indices strongly reminds
the fact that stretching open strings are represented in the usual sym d-brane action as
o-diagonal elds with the two indices (x ij if i and j are the indices of the branes) and
therefore those that mediate their interchange.

when an open string is part of a twisted state, its only movement can be to continu-

ously change its endpoints. for that it is essential that n is innite so that the spectrum
of eigenvalues of the matrices in continuous. the centre of mass is tied to the membrane

and the only way out it to join the two endpoints so that the twisted state can break
without loss of energy.

once a state like that has been excited, interactions with other external strings are
easier to understand because away from the xed points, the strings behave just like
ordinary matrix strings and interact as usual.

5 membranes with dierent charges and dierent ge-

ometries.

a membrane with opposite charge to the one studied in the previous section would be,

for instance

x 7 = x 7x

18

x 8 = x 8y
[x, y] = 1,

so that

a representation of the elds was

x 7
for the previous case while for the anti-brane it is

x 8 =



x 8 = 


x 7 .

(69)

(70)

(71)

(72)

they are related by a change in the orientation of the base that parameterizes them.

h x 7, x 8i = x 7x 8  id.

the conclusion from this is that it is possible to associate to every membrane the

vector product of the vectors of the basis over its surface. it represents its orientation in
the sense that it goes inwards in one face of the membrane and outwards in the other. if
the vectors of two membranes have the same direction, they have the same charge; else,

they are oppositely charged.

this is also true looking directly at the supersymmetry algebra of the membranes as

bps states, but the form it adopts is dierent. the ramond-ramond charge can be seen
as a central charge of the algebra in the form of a constant anti-symmetric tensor with

two indices.
it is a tensor that transforms covariantly under lorentz transformations.
one can, in particular, consider as before a membrane lying in the seventh and the eighth
directions. its charge has the form

it is very easy to see that after a 180o rotation, the charge changes to

z 78 = z 87 = c.

z78 = z87 = c.

(73)

(74)

this will have interesting consequences when discussing membranes of dierent ge-

ometries, which is done in the following. it also explains, in a very geometrical way why
the coupling to the ramond-ramond forms is opposite in each case. let us consider,

for simplicity, the coupling of the massless level of the closed string to the d2-brane.
it only couples to the graviton and to the ramond-ramond three-form. the coupling

to the graviton involves only the energy-stress tensor and, therefore, it is universal and
independent of the charge. however, the form couples through the integral

z dx7dx8a780.

19

(75)

changing the orientation of the base that spans the plane means changing the sign of
the product dx7dx8 or, equivalently, interchanging the limits of one of the integrals. that
is why

and the coupling to the form has the opposite sign.

z dx7dx8a780 = z dx7dx8a780

(76)

once we have studied plane membranes, it is not dicult to construct the elds we
need to describe any other membrane. the algorithm is: take a parameterization of the

surface and then equate two locally perpendicular coordinates to any representation of
the two non-commuting matrices (x and y) that have been used in the previous section.

an easy example is a cylinder. the elds we need are

with

then

 =   x
x 8 = x 8  y

[x, y] = 1.

x 8 = x 8
x 7 = sin 
x 6 = cos ,

(77)

(78)

(79)

with an appropriate normalization. these three elds describe the cylindrical membrane.
we have needed one more parameter than in the plane case because it extends itself
in three dimensions. the proportion between the expectation values of x 6 and x 7 is
related to the excentricity of the ellipse that appears cutting the cylinder perpendicularly

to its height. it is very interesting to see that even though the energy of this background
corresponds to that of a membrane with that form and surface (t2  a), the total d2-
charge is zero because the trace of both commutators ([ x 7, x 8] and [ x 6, x 8]) vanish
and thus all the supersymmetry is exact and this state cannot be considered bps. what

happens is that, locally, we can dene a conserved charge, but when one integrates over the
surface (sums the trace up) the charge of each point is cancelled against the diametrically
opposed one. this is directly related to the rotational properties of the charge that have

been described a little above. when the surface curves around itself, the orientation of the

20

inner face continuously turns so that the points that stand in front of each other possess
in that sense, a self-interaction can occur such that a closed string
opposite charges.

gets out of the membrane at one point and is reabsorbed at the diametrically opposed
one. this string interchange has the same properties as that of the brane-antibrane
problem. in particular, if the cylinder is small enough, some open-string states become

tachyonic and the system unstable. the conclusion is that this cylindrical membranes
are only semi-stable, and the larger their radii are, the more stable. if the radius of the
cylinder becomes of order , non-perturbative interactions involving o-diagonal elds
that transport d2-charge annihilate the membrane and the supersymmetry is recovered

in all space.

this analysis can be directly generalized to the torus, the sphere and any other closed
it is important to remark that these are curved surfaces embedded in a at

surface.

space-time. if the membrane is toroidal but is wrapping around a toroidal space, this is
not valid. in that case, opposite points are not related by a 180o rotation, but rather by
a r translation. this, of course, does not change the orientation and therefore the total
charge does not vanish.

if we want to describe those wrapped membranes, we can perform a t-duality of the

compactied theory. then the denition of the central charge is

and the potential term

 =

i

4 z dd7d8tr < ha7, a8i >= t2a

v =

1
g2

s z dd7d8trha7, a8i2

.

(80)

(81)

it is clear that a proper choice of the constant elds (proportional to x and y, for

example) one can obtain congurations with non-zero charge.

another interesting situation is a background where two or more membranes of the

same charge coincide. there, we should be able to see an enhancement of the symmetry to
a local (in the world-volume) su(n) gauge symmetry. this happens indeed. the system

is described by a matrix that can be put in the form of two independent boxes, each
representing one membrane. when all the expectation values of all the identity matrices
that represent the centres of mass of the membranes are identical, these two elds

  0 i
i 0 !

and

  0
ii

ii

0 !

(82)

become massless and generate a global su(n) (su(2) in this case) symmetry. the local
symmetry is related to the freedom the boundary closed strings (open strings in the other
picture) have to form twisted states of the kind described in the previous section. the

21

states that connect the two membranes are now massless and are responsible for the
su(n) symmetry restoration at every point in the world-volume. an even better way of

understanding it is to notice that, indeed, the possible choice of two operators as derivative
of the dual ones is local, that is, it can be done for every point in the world-volume.

6 thermodynamical eects of membranes.

as has already been commented, the study of the eects of static, non-dynamical d-branes
in string thermodynamics has been studied at length in several articles [2]. what i would

like to add is a glimpse of what happens to the systems when the thermodynamical energies
are high enough to create pairs of membranes and anti-membranes.
in the traditional

scenarios, the branes were stable because they possess a conserved charge and so cannot
decay; however, when energies are of order g1 a nite density of non-perturbative objects
should appear even if the total charge is zero. in a certain sense, their enormous mass only

acts as a chemical potential that obstructs their nucleation. this aects the system in a
dierent manner if we use the canonical or microcanonical ensemble and if we suppose

the total energy to be nite or we deal with densities.

the picture is clearer if we suppose we are in the microcanonical ensemble and the

total energy is nite.
in that case, the low energy behaviour is protected from non-
perturbative eects (that means: unaected by them) thanks to their mass. only when

the energies are high enough should we consider them. we have seen that the spectrum of
membranes includes the quantization of the classical modes. the number of these modes
grows very fast with the energy but it is not possible (rather: we do not know of any

way) to calculate their degeneracy exactly; nevertheless, there is a computation in [17]
that supplies an asymptotic form for the density of mass states. the formula is

(m) = exp(m4/3)

(83)

this should approximately count the degeneracy of the modes in formulas (56) and (62)

and others alike. it only considers toroidal membranes but it is enough to see the asymp-
totic behaviour. they are the non-pertubative excitations that change the form of the

membrane and come as a quantization of its classical oscillation modes. if we assume that
the temperature at those energies is very near hagedorn, the density of states we should

use is

(e) = h e 

1

g1/3! exp(e4/3) + h  1

g1/3  e! eh e

(84)

the term in the right corresponds to the gas of strings at the hagedorn temperature. it

gives a behaviour shown in gure 3. i have supposed that the membranes begin having

22

th

md2

figure 3: temperature of a iia string gas at non-perturbative energies.

their asymptotic behaviour soon after their rst modes are excited. the temperature can
be seen to be decreasing so that the specic heat is negative. the asymptotic temperature

for very high energies is zero. this is a consequence of the fact that membranes as well
as higher dimensional objects have senseless thermodynamics. nevertheless, the sense
is recovered in this case thanks to the large chemical potential that is the mass. the

negative specic heat is the result of a continuous series of relativistic mass thresholds
being opened. it is exactly the same phenomenon as hagedorn, but with the asymptotic

temperature equalling zero. the huge mass degeneracy makes it much more entropic to
accumulate energy in the form of mass than in the form of kinetic energy (temperature).
the situation when one takes the thermodynamical limit (v   and e  )
is worse because any individual object can survey the whole energy range. in this case

equipartition is broken from the very beginning and, in principle, one membrane would
absorb everything around it until the universe were completely frozen. this picture, how-
ever, has to be changed a little. since we are dealing with the membrane as a single

object, the situation becomes similar to the appearance of black holes at nite temper-
ature. black holes are always much more degenerate than anything around them and

classically one should expect them to grow and grow until nothing else exists. fortu-
nately, this is changed when the rst quantum corrections are introduced: the black hole

can and does reach equilibrium with a gas of massless elds, its own hawking radiation.
this happens because of two things: rstly, the degeneracy of the black hole, large as
it is, is not innite and it always leaves some space for the rest of the objects; and sec-

ondly, interaction makes these objects (the membrane as well as the black hole) have a
nite probability to emit energy in the form of strings. another source of instability for

membranes is that we assume as a natural fact that the total d2-charge of the universe is
zero. this means that pairs of membranes can decay into a very large number of strings.

all this phenomena (emition, pair annihilation and scattering) heat the gas that gets
a nite temperature when the energy density is also nite. presumably this temperature

23

should be lower than hagedorn and go down to zero when the density tends to innity.

a more serious problem is trying to see the perspective that oers the canonical

ensemble. the simple attempt to calculate the free energy is hopeless:

f () = z de(e)ee = z deeeee 4/3

= 

(85)

it has not got any sense at any temperature. this is, of course, due to the fact that

the behaviour of the system is by no means regular at any temperature.

7 speculations about higher dimensional objects and

further comments.

after an intense study of many years [15, 16] on the problem of hagedorn, many conclu-
sions have been achieved but still many doubts remain. the physical picture has evolved
but, although some non-perturbative eects were added [2] the problem has remained

more or less the same because only the dynamics of the strings was studied. the emer-
gence of a fully eleven-dimensional m-theory with unwrapped free membranes seems to

change things beyond non-perturbative energies. moreover, after we have seen the drastic
eects of the oscillating modes of membranes, one could wonder what could happen when

higher dimensional objects like ve-branes enter the scene. any calculation is impossi-
ble at this moment because we do not know the precise spectrum and can only guess

whether all the classical modes of a ve-brane can be excited on the m-ve-brane or not.
the same happens with the nine-brane.
if we naively accept that they do, the result
at extremely high temperatures is the preeminence of the single nine-brane, that is, the

whole space-time oscillating in high frequency modes. as non-perturbative deformations
of space-time, black holes should have an important role to play.

another thing that i want to explain is why branes with dierent dimensions behave so
dierently when, in the light of t-duality, they are basically the same kind of objects. to

understand this better, we look at the construction of t-duality in [5]. a d0-brane moving
in a space compactied in a circle becomes equivalent to a wrapped d1-brane moving

in the dual space. the clearest image is an intermediate one that consists in noticing
that a d0-brane in a circle is equivalent to a linear lattice of them in an open space
with a constant separation. this means that, in fact, the wrapped d-string dynamics

is equivalent to that of an innite number of d-particles. following the argument the
dynamics of a wrapped d-membrane is reproduced by a bidimensional rectangular lattice

of d-particles. however, the d-string or the d-membrane that come out of this description
are rigid and must be wrapping a torus. the d-particle cannot reproduce the oscillations

24

of the higher dimensional objects. to put it short: the dynamics of lower dimensional
d-branes are fully contained in that of the higher dimensional ones, but not vice versa.

8 conclusions.

throughout this work, i have tried to incorporate the advances in the knowledge of non-
perturbative corrections to string theory that has yielded the matrix string theory.

the picture is more dynamical and clearer than had been the previous images of dirichlet
branes. for objects with two dimensions or less, the construction is powerful enough to

allow quite a complete treatment of the whole spectrum.

after the rst, qualitative approach of the global thermal consequences made in [6],

a more quantitative calculation was in need. after reproducing the usual perturbative
string limit, i have introduced the eects of free d-particles. this includes the bound
states among themselves, with closed strings and, also, the open strings whose two ends

are tied to the same d-particle. the expression obtained is not explicitly invariant under
modular transformations, possibly because not all the open string states were included;

however it has a critical temperature that precisely equals the hagedorn one.

regarding the membranes, the complexity of their spectrum makes it much harder to

obtain exact expressions. however it is possible to nd out the symmetry that xes the
open strings to the d2-brane and that is responsible for their perturbative interaction.

apart from this usual perturbative states, i have found the elds that represent the
quantization of the classical oscillations of the membrane as an extended object with a
given tension. the inclusion of these states changes drastically the thermodynamics at

non-perturbative energies and beyond. the canonical description seems imposible while in
the microcanonical ensemble, the system there is dominated by a single large membrane

extremely excited that tends to absorb everything that comes in its way. this cools the
universe so much that the asymptotic temperature is zero.

maybe the most graphic way to understand this cooling is in a more or less cosmological
manner. take the universe to be lled with an enormous energy and that we slowly
decrease it. at the beginning we have a cold gas in thermal equilibrium with the excited

membranes. the number of membranes tends to two because the total d2-charge must
be zero. as we extract energy from the system, it gets hotter because the membranes

are more and more unstable and tend to annihilate between themselves. eventually they
completely dissolve in the string gas that heats up to the hagedorn temperature. in that

moment the picture is the one drawn in [16] with a fat string in equilibrium with the
surrounding sea.

one of the reasons for this strange behaviour is the absence of modular invariance,

25

that is lost when the eleventh dimension is discovered. maybe there is another symmetry
that involves higher dimensional objects (ve-branes) that might correct this in part.

acknowledgements.

i have to thank m. laucelli meana and m. a. r. osorio for discussions on this topic (and
many others).

26

references

[1] t. banks, w. fischler, s. h. shenker and l. susskind, m theory as a matrix model:

a conjecture,phys. rev.d55 (1997) 5112-5128, hep-th/9610043.

[2] m.b.green, wilson-polyakov loops for critical strings and superstrings at nite tem-
perature nucl.phys. b381 (1992)201; temperature dependence of string the-

ory in the presence of world-sheet boundaries phys. lett. b282(1992)380, hep-
th/9201054
m. a. vazquez-mozo, open string thermodynamics and d-branes,phys. lett.

b388(1996)494, hep-th/9607052
j. l. f. barbon and m. a. vazquez-mozo,dilute d-instantons at finite tempera-

ture,nucl.phys. b497 (1997)236, hep-th/9701142
s. lee, l.thorlacius,strings and d-branes at high temperature, phys. lett.

b413(1997)303, hep-th/9707167
a. tseytlin open superstring partition function in constant gauge eld background
at nite temperature, hep-th/9802133

s. a. abel, j. l. f. barbon, i. i. kogan, e. rabinovici, string thermodynamics in
d-brane backgrounds, hep-th/9902058.

m. laucelli meana and j. puente penalba, on the microcanonical description of
d-brane thermodynamics, hep-th/9903039.

[3] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, matrix string theory, nucl. phys. b500,

43 (1997) hep-th/9703030.

[4] g. bonelli, l. bonora and f. nesti, string interactions from matrix string theory,

nucl. phys. b538, 100 (1999) hep-th/9807232.

[5] w.i. taylor, d-brane eld theory on compact spaces, phys. lett. b394, 283 (1997)

hep-th/9611042.

[6] m. laucelli meana and j. puente penalba, matrix strings, compactication scales

and hagedorn transition, phys. lett. b447, 59 (1999) hep-th/9811170.

[7] n. ohta and j.-g.zhou, euclidean path integral, d0-branes and schwarzschild black

holes in matrix theory, nucl. phys. bf b522, 125 (1998) hep-th/9801023.

[8] m. laucelli meana, m.a.r. osorio and j. puente penalba, finite temperature ma-

trix theory, nucl. phys. b531, 613 (1998) hep-th/9803058.

27

[9] b. sathiapalan, the hagedorn transition and the matrix model for strings, mod.

phys. lett. a13, 2085 (1998) hep-th/9805126.

[10] j. ambjrn, y.m. makeenko and g.w. semeno, thermodynamics of d0 branes

in matrix theory, phys. lett. b445, 307 (1999) hep-th/9810170.

[11] s. bal and b. sathiapalan, high temperature limit of the n=2 matrix model,

hep-th/9902087.

[12] g. grignani and g.w. semeno, thermodynamic partition function of matrix su-

perstrings, hep-th/9903246.

[13] t. banks, n. seiberg and s. shenker, branes from matrices, nucl. phys. b490, 91

(1997) hep-th/9612157.

[14] l. motl, proposals on nonperturbative superstring interactions, hep-th/9701025.

t. banks and n. seiberg, strings from matrices, nucl. phys. b497, 41 (1997)
hep-th/9702187.

[15] r.hagedorn nuovo cimento supp.3 147 (1965)

s.frautschi phys. rev. d3 2821 (1971)
r.carlitz phys. rev. d5 3231 (1972)

n.cabbibo and g.parisi phys. rev. b59 67 (1975)
e. alvarez nucl.phys. b269 596 (1986)
m.axenides, s.d.ellis and c.kounnas phys. rev. d37 2964 (1988)
m.mcguigan phys. rev. d38 552 (1988)

n.deo, s.jain and c.-i.tan phys. rev. d45 3641 (1992)

[16] m. laucelli meana, m.a.r osorio and j. puente penalba, phys. lett. b408, 183

(1997) hep-th/9705185.

m. laucelli meana, m.a.r osorio and j. puente penalba, phys. lett. b400, 275
(1997) hep-th/9701122.

[17] e. alvarez and t. ortn, asymptotic density of states of p-branes, mod. phys.

lett. a7, 2889 (1992).

28

