hep-th/9904207
mri-phy/p990411

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
9
2

 

 
 

1
v
7
0
2
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

non-bps states and branes in string theory

ashoke sen 1

mehta research institute of mathematics

and mathematical physics

chhatnag road, jhoosi, allahabad 211019, india

abstract

we review the recent developments in our understanding of non-bps states and branes
in string theory. the topics include 1) construction of unstable non-bps d-branes in type
iia and type iib string theories, 2) construction of stable non-bps d-branes on various
orbifolds and orientifolds of type ii string theories, 3) description of bps and non-bps
d-branes as tachyonic soliton solutions on brane-antibrane pair of higher dimension, and
4) study of the spectrum of non-bps states and branes on a system of coincident d-brane
 orientifold plane system. some other related results are also discussed briey.

1e-mail: asen@thwgs.cern.ch, sen@mri.ernet.in

1

contents

1 introduction

2 unstable non-bps d-branes in type ii string theories

2.1 bps d-branes in type ii string theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 non-bps d-branes in type ii string theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 bps d-branes from non-bps d-branes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

4
4
7
9

3 stable non-bps d-branes on type ii orbifolds and orientifolds

12
3.1 type i d-particle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2 d-branes wrapped on non-supersymmetric cycles of k3 orbifold . . . . . . 14

4 d-branes as tachyonic kink solutions

17
4.1 non-bps d-brane as tachyonic kink on the brane-antibrane pair . . . . . . 17
4.2 the bps d-brane as the tachyonic kink on the non-bps d-brane . . . . . 20

5 stable non-bps branes on the d-brane  orientifold plane system 23
5.1 summary of the results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2 strong coupling description of electrically charged states and magnetically

charged branes

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

5.3 electrostatic self-energy of the electrically charged non-bps particle on the

6 some related developments

d3-brane  o3-plane system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
32
6.1 other non-bps branes in type i string theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.2 k-theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.3 boundary state approach to non-bps branes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.4 open questions and speculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

a conformal field theory of the tachyonic kink solution

39

1

introduction

in this article i shall review the recent progress in our understanding of stable non-bps

branes and states in string theory. these lectures will be based mainly on refs.[1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. we shall work in the convention h = 1, c = 1, and  = 1 (string
tension=(2)1) unless mentioned otherwise.

let us begin with some motivation for studying non-bps branes. there are several

reasons:

2

1. stable non-bps states and branes are very much part of the spectrum of string the-
ory, and our understanding of string theory remains incomplete without a knowledge

of these states.

2. stable non-bps states are the simplest objects whose masses are not protected by
supersymmetry, and yet are calculable in dierent limits of the string coupling.

hence studying the spectrum of these states in these dierent limits might provide
new insight into what happens at nite string coupling.

3. a system of coincident non-bps d-branes typically has, as its world-volume theory,
a non-supersymmetric gauge theory. thus they may be useful in getting results

about non-supersymmetric eld theories from string theory, in the same way that
a conguration of supersymmetric branes can be used to study non-perturbative

aspects of supersymmetric gauge theories.

4. non-bps branes may be relevant for constructing string compactication with bro-

ken supersymmetry.

the plan of this article is as follows. in section 2 we shall discuss the construction
of unstable non-bps d-branes in type iia and type iib string theories. whereas type

iia (iib) string theory admits stable bps branes of even (odd) dimensions, we shall see
that they also admit unstable non-bps branes of odd (even) dimensions. in section 3 we

shall show how on certain orientifolds / orbifolds of type ii string theories these non-bps
branes may give rise to stable non-bps states and branes. the main point here will be to

note that under this orbifolding / orientifolding operation the tachyonic mode responsible
for the instability of the non-bps brane gets projected out. the resulting brane is free
from tachyonic mode and hence is stable. in section 4 we shall discuss the interpretation

of the non-bps branes in type iia and iib string theories as tachyonic kink solution on
a bps d-brane - anti-d-brane pair of one higher dimension in the same theory. we shall

also show how the bps d-brane (anti-d-brane) can be regarded as a tachyonic kink (anti-
kink) solution on a non-bps d-brane of one higher dimension. this gives a set of descent

relations between bps and non-bps d-branes of type ii string theories, and form the basis
of identifying the d-brane charge with elements of k-theory[7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16].

since the actual proof of these relations is technically somewhat complicated, we postpone
the details to the appendix.

3

in section 5 we discuss the spectrum of stable non-bps states and branes on a coinci-
dent d-brane and orientifold plane system. the masses (tensions) of these states (branes)

can be calculated in the strong coupling limit using various duality symmetries of string
theory. although for each system we use a completely dierent method for nding the
spectrum, the nal spectrum of non-bps states and branes on a d-p-brane  orientifold
p-plane system exhibits an unusual regularity as a function of p. whether this signies
any deep aspect of string theory remains to be seen. since the only similarity between

these systems is in their weak coupling perturbation expansion, we suspect that the strong
coupling result may be governed by large order behaviour of this perturbation expansion.

finally in section 6 we discuss some related developments in this subject. this includes a
discussion of some other non-bps branes in type i string theory, the relationship between

k-theory and d-brane charges, and the application of boundary state formalism in the
study of non-bps d-branes. we end with a discussion of some open questions.

2 unstable non-bps d-branes in type ii string the-

ories

2.1 bps d-branes in type ii string theories

open string

d-brane

figure 1: open strings ending on a bps d-brane.

let us begin by reviewing what we know about bps d-branes in type iia/iib string
theories[17]. the dening property of the d-brane is that fundamental strings can end

on a d-brane as shown in fig.1, although type ii string theories in the bulk only contains
closed string states without any end. the open strings with ends on the d-brane can be

4

interpreted as the dynamical modes of the d-brane. in order to compute the spectrum of
these open string states with ends on the d-brane, we impose dirichlet boundary condition

on the open string coordinates along directions transverse to the d-brane, and neumann
boundary condition along directions parallel to the brane world-volume (including time).
a d-brane with p tangential spatial directions is called a d-p-brane.

let us now list some of the properties of d-branes in type ii string theories which will

be useful to us later.

 type iia (iib) string theory admits bps d-2p-brane (d-(2p + 1)-brane) which are
invariant under half of the space-time supersymmetry transformations of the theory.

 a d-p-brane is charged under a (p + 1)-form gauge eld arising in the ramond-

ramond (rr) sector of the theory.

 these bps d-branes are oriented. d-branes of opposite orientation carry opposite

rr charge and will be called anti-d-branes ( d-branes).

(b)

(a)

(c)

(d)

d-brane

d-brane

figure 2: open strings living on a coincident d-brane anti-d-brane pair. although for
clarity we have displayed the brane and the anti-brane to be spatially separated, we shall
analyse the case where they coincide.

next we shall review properties of coincident d-brane  d-brane pair shown in fig.2.

they are as follows:

5

 spectrum of open strings living on the world-volume contains four dierent sectors.

these four sectors can be labelled by 2  2 chan paton (cp) factors:

(b) :

(d) :

(cid:18) 1 0
0 0(cid:19)
(cid:18) 0 1
0 0(cid:19) .

(a) :

(c) :

0

0

(cid:18) 0
1(cid:19) ,
(cid:18) 0 0
1 0(cid:19) ,

(2.1)

 gso projection: physical states in sectors (a) and (b) should have (1)f = 1
whereas those in sectors (c) and (d) should have (1)f = 1. here f denotes
the world-sheet fermion number carried by the state. we use the convention that
the (1)f eigenvalue of the neveu-schwarz (ns) sector ground state is 1. the
gso projection rule follows from the observation that the closed string exchange
interaction between a d-brane and a d-brane and that between a pair of d-branes
have the same sign for nsns sector closed string exchange and opposite sign for
rr sector closed string exchange. in the open string channel this corresponds to
replacing the gso projection operator 1+(1)f
for d d
strings.

for dd strings by 1(1)f

2

2

 since the ns sector ground state has (1)f = 1, it survives the gso projection

in sectors (c) and (d) and gives tachyonic excitations with[18, 19, 20, 21, 22]

m2 = (1/2) .

(2.2)

since the tachyon comes from two dierent sectors it is a complex scalar eld.

 although individually the d-brane as well as the d-brane is invariant under half
of the space-time supersymmetry transformations, the combined system breaks all
supersymmetries.

we shall now study the action of (1)fl on the coincident d-brane  d-brane system,
where fl denotes the contribution to the space-time fermion number from the left-moving
sector of the string world-sheet. (1)fl is known to be an exact symmetry of type iia
and type iib string theories. acting on the closed string hilbert space, it changes the sign

of all the states on the left-moving ramond sector, but does not change anything else.
thus it has trivial action on the world-sheet elds. from this denition it follows that

the space-time elds originating in the ramond-ramond (rr) sector of the world-sheet

6

change sign under (1)fl. since d-branes are charged under rr eld, it follows that
(1)fl must take a d-brane to a d-brane. thus a single d-brane or a single d-brane
is not invariant under (1)fl, but a coincident d-brane  d-brane system is invariant
under (1)fl. hence it makes sense to study the action of (1)fl on the open strings
living on this system, which is what we shall do now.

we begin with the observation that since (1)fl has no action on the world-sheet
elds, we only need to study its action on the cp factors.2 since (1)fl exchanges
d-brane with d-brane, it acts on the cp matrix  as

where

  1(1)1 ,
1 = (cid:18) 0 1
1 0(cid:19) .

(2.3)

(2.4)

this shows that states with cp factors i and 1 are even under (1)fl, whereas those
with cp factors 3 and i2 are odd. (we could replace 1 by 2 in (2.3), but this just
amounts to a change in convention.)

2.2 non-bps d-branes in type ii string theories

we are now ready to dene a non-bps d-2p-brane of type iib string theory[8]. this is
done by following the steps listed below.

 we start with a d-2p  d-2p-brane pair in type iia string theory and take the
orbifold of this conguration by (1)fl.

 in the bulk, modding out iia by (1)fl gives iib.
 acting on the open strings living on the d- d-brane world-volume, (1)fl projection
keeps states with cp factors i and 1 and throws out states with cp factors 3 and
i2.

this denes a non-bps d-2p-brane of type iib string theory.

in order to see that it

describes a single object rather than a pair of objects, we simply note that before the
projection the degree of freedom of separating the two branes reside in the sector with

2we shall focus our attention on the ns-sector states, but a similar analysis can be done separately

for the r-sector states.

7

cp factor 3. since states in the cp sector 3 are projected out, we lose the degree of
freedom of separating the brane antibrane pair away from each other. similarly, starting
from a d-(2p + 1)-brane d-(2p + 1)-brane pair of iib, and modding it out by (1)fl, we
can dene a non-bps (2p + 1)-brane of iia. thus type iib string theory contains bps
d-branes of odd dimension and non-bps d-branes of even dimension, whereas type iia

string theory contains bps d-branes of even dimension and non-bps d-branes of odd
dimension.

let us now list some of the properties of the non-bps d-2p-brane of type iib string
theory. (similar results also hold for the non-bps d-(2p + 1)-brane of type iia string

theory.) these properties follow from their denition, and properties of coincident brane-
antibrane pair reviewed earlier.

 excitations on its world-volume are open strings with dirichlet boundary condition
on the (9  2p) transverse directions, and neumann boundary condition on 2p + 1
tangential directions (including time).

 these open strings carry chan paton factors i or 1.
 physical states with cp factor i has (1)f = 1 and physical states with cp factor

1 has (1)f = 1. (note again that f denotes world-sheet fermion number.)

 the ns sector ground state carrying cp factor 1 has (1)f = 1 and hence is

physical. thus there is a tachyonic mode with

m2 = 

1
2

.

 since tachyon comes from only one sector, it is a real scalar eld.
 the tension of the non-bps d-2p-brane of type iib string theory is given by:

(2)2p(2/g) ,

(2.5)

(2.6)

where g denotes the coupling constant of the string theory. this property can be
derived by taking into account the eect of modding out by (1)fl, and the fact
that the original brane-antibrane system before (1)fl modding had a tension equal
to

(2)2p(2/g) .

8

(2.7)

similarly, the tension of a non-bps d-(2p + 1)-brane of type iia string theory is
given by

(2)(2p+1)(2/g) .

(2.8)

one can also derive the spectrum of open strings with one end on the non-bps brane

and other end on a bps brane, but we shall not discuss it here.

2.3 bps d-branes from non-bps d-branes

let us now consider the eect of modding out a non-bps d-2p-brane of iib by (1)fl,
where (1)fl now denotes the corresponding symmetry of the type iib string theory[8].
in the bulk, modding out type iib string theory by (1)fl gives us back a type iia string
theory. the question we shall be interested in is: what happens to the d-2p-brane after

this modding? this question makes sense as the non-bps d-brane does not carry any
rr charge and hence is invariant under the action of (1)fl. in order to answer this
question we need to study the action of (1)fl on the open string states living on the
d-2p-brane. as before (1)fl does not act on the world-sheet elds, but acts only on the
cp factors. thus we need to nd the action of (1)fl on cp factors. this is done with
the help of the following observations:3

graviton

open string
with cp factor
         i

figure 3: the disk amplitude for two point function of the graviton and translation mode
of the d-brane.

3for deniteness we shall focus our attention on the ns sector states, but a similar analysis can also

be carried out for r sector states.

9

 there is a non-zero two point function of the graviton gm from the closed string
sector and the translation modes x m of the d-2p-brane originating in the cp sector
i of the form:

gmx m ,

(2.9)

where m denotes a direction transverse to the brane and ,  denote directions

tangential to the brane. this coupling follows from expanding the dirac-born-
infeld action on the brane world-volume around the conguration of a at brane in

a at space-time background. this can also be seen by computing a disk amplitude
with a graviton vertex operator inserted at the center of the disk, and the tachyon
vertex operator inserted at the boundary of the disk, as shown in fig.3.4 since the
graviton is even under (1)fl, this shows that states with cp factor i must also be
even under (1)fl.

rr field

open string
with cp factor

1

figure 4: the disk amplitude for the two point function of the tachyon and the rr sector
2p-form gauge eld. the dotted line denotes the (1)fl cut extending from the rr vertex
operator to the disk boundary.

 there is a non-zero two point function of the rr-sector 2p-form gauge eld a(2p)
from the closed string sector and the tachyonic mode t of the d-2p-brane originating

4this does not mean that that a physical on-shell scalar particle on the brane has a nite transition
probability into a graviton state in the bulk. this is disallowed due to various kinematic reasons. however,
the existence of the coupling (2.9) can still be deduced by evaluation the disk amplitude in a region of
unphysical (complex) external momenta; as is done e.g. in deducing the yang-mills three gauge boson
vertex from three string amplitude[23].

10

in the cp sector 1 of the form:

z a(2p)  dt .

(2.10)

this can be seen by computing the disk amplitude with a rr-sector gauge eld
vertex operator inserted at the center of the disk, and the tachyon vertex operator
inserted at the boundary, as shown in fig.4.5 the fact that this amplitude is non-
zero may seem surprising, as the tachyon vertex operator carries a cp factor 1,
and there seems to be no other cp factor inserted at the boundary of the disk.
however, since the rr sector states in type iib string theory appear in the twisted
sector when we regard type iib string theory as type iia string theory modded
out by (1)fl, there is a cut extending from the rr sector vertex operator at the
center all the way to the boundary of the disk. at the point where the cut hits
the boundary we need to insert an extra factor of 1, since (1)fl action on the
cp factors correspond to conjugation by 1. this gives a total of two factors of 1
on the disk boundary and makes the amplitude non-vanishing. from this it follows
that since rr-sector elds are odd under (1)fl, states with cp factor 1 are also
odd under (1)fl.

the net result of this analysis is that states with cp factor i are (1)fl even and
states with cp factor 1 are (1)fl odd. thus under modding out by (1)fl, only states
with cp factor i survive the projection. as we have already seen before, gso projection
requires these states to be even under (1)f . thus the spectrum is identical to that
of open strings living on a bps d-2p-brane of iia, and we conclude that the non-bps
d-2p-brane of type iib string theory, modded out by (1)fl, gives a bps d-2p-brane of
type iia string theory.6

the results of this section have been summarized in fig.5. there is also a similar

relation with iia  iib and (2p)  (2p + 1).

5again, as before, the actual transition between a massless rr sector state and the tachyon is absent

due to kinematic reasons.

6note that at this stage we cannot determine whether the resulting brane is a d-brane or a d-brane,
as both carry the same spectrum of open string. this is a reection of the fact that the orbifolding
procedure has a two-fold ambiguity, so that we could end up either with a d-brane or a d-brane by
following these steps.

11

d-2p - anti-d-2p
pair of iia

d-2p of

iib

d-2p of

iia

figure 5: relationship between bps and non-bps d-branes in type ii string theories.
the horizontal arrow represents the eect of modding out the theory by (1)fl.

3 stable non-bps d-branes on type ii orbifolds

and orientifolds

although we have constructed non-bps d-branes in type iia/iib string theory in the
last section, they are all unstable due to the presence of the tachyonic mode. as we shall

discuss in section 4, if the tachyon condenses to its minimum, then the conguration is
indistinguishible from the vacuum[3]. thus it is natural to ask: what is the use of such a

d-brane?

in this section we shall show that although they are unstable in type iia/iib string

theory, we may get stable non-bps d-branes in certain orbifolds/orientifolds of iia/iib if
the tachyonic mode is projected out under this operation. we shall illustrate this through

two examples.

3.1 type i d-particle

let us consider the following construction:

 start with the non-bps d0-brane (d-particle) of type iib as dened in the last

section.

 mod out the conguration by the world-sheet parity transformation .
the result can be described as a non-bps d-particle of type i string theory, since
in the bulk type iib string theory modded out by  gives a type i string theory. the

crucial question is: is this d-particle stable? or equivalently we may ask: is the tachyonic
mode on the type iib d-particle odd under ? the answer to this question follows

from eq.(2.10) for p = 0, i.e. that the two point function of the tachyonic mode on the

12

d-particle world-volume and the rr sector scalar eld  of type iib string theory is non-
vanishing. since the eld  is known to be odd under , we conclude that the tachyonic

mode of the d-particle is also odd under . thus it is projected out in type i string
theory. in other words, the type i d-particle is stable[6]!

the spectrum of open strings on type i d-particle also includes open strings with one

end on the d-particle and the other end on any one of the 32 nine branes which are present
in type i string theory. the ramond sector states from this sector can be shown to give

rise to 32 massless fermionic zero modes living on the d0-brane. quantization of these
zero modes gives rise to a ground state which transforms in the spinor representation of

the type i gauge group so(32). this also gives an additional explanation of the stability
of the d-particle. since all perturbative states of type i string theory are in the scalar

conjugacy class of so(32), and since a spinor state cannot decay into states in the scalar
conjugacy class, the d-particle is prevented from decaying into perturbative string states
due to charge conservation.

if we consider two or more coincident d-particles in type i string theory, then there are
also possible tachyonic modes coming from open strings with two ends on two dierent d-

particles. it turns out that the  projection does not remove all the tachyonic modes from
these sectors, and two or more coincident d-particles describe an unstable system. this is

consistent with the observation that two particles in the spinor representation of so(32)
can combine and annihilate into perturbative string states, as there is no conservation
law preventing this process.

the existence of the type i d-particle is also relevant for testing the conjectured duality
between type i and heterotic string theory[24, 25, 26, 27]. so(32) heterotic string theory

contains states in the perturbative spectrum which transform in the spinor representation
of so(32). these states are massive, and non-bps. but the lightest state belonging to

the spinor representation of so(32) is stable at all values of the coupling, as they cannot
decay into anything else. thus these states must also exist in the strong coupling limit of

the so(32) heterotic string theory, which is nothing but the weakly coupled type i string
theory. the type i d-particles provide explicit realization of these states.

it is instructive to compare the mass formulae for these so(32) spinor states at the

two extreme ranges of the coupling constant. we shall use the variables of the heterotic
string theory to express this mass formula at the two ends. for small heterotic coupling

13

gh, the perturbative mass formula in the heterotic string theory holds:

qth (a0 + a1 g2

h + a2 g4

h + . . .) ,

(3.1)

where th is the heterotic string tension, and ai are numerical coecients. a0 is computed
at tree level of heterotic string theory, whereas am is computed at m-loop order.

for large heterotic coupling we can use the description of this state as type i d-particle
to compute its mass. as we saw earlier, this has mass of order ti/gi, where ti and
gi are the string tension and coupling constant respectively of the type i string theory.
using standard relationship between the heterotic and type i variables[24]

ti = th g1
h ,

gi = g1
h ,

we see that for large gh the mass of this state is proportional to:

qth(gh)1/2 .

(3.2)

(3.3)

it will be interesting to see if the perturbation expansion (3.1) contains any information
about the large gh behaviour given in (3.3).

3.2 d-branes wrapped on non-supersymmetric cycles of k3 orb-

ifold

in this section we shall discuss another example where the tachyonic mode of a non-bps

d-brane is projected out under an orbifolding operation[8]. we proceed as follows:

 start with a non-bps d-string of type iia string theory wrapped on a circle along

x9 of radius r9 and placed at xi = 0 for 1  i  8.

 compactify three other directions x6, x7, x8.
 mod out the theory by a z2 transformation i4 which changes the sign of x6, . . . x9:
(3.4)

(x6, x7, x8, x9)  (x6,x7,x8,x9) .

i4 :

in the bulk this gives type iia string theory on an orbifold k3. we shall now analyze
the fate of the tachyon eld on the d-string in this orbifold theory. since the d-string
lies along x9, the tachyon eld on its world-steet is a function of x9 and time t. again by

14

considering a two point function between the tachyon and an rr sector gauge eld, one
can show that under the z2 transformation i4,

if we expand t (x9, t) in its fourier mode as:

t (x9, t)  t (x9, t) .

t (x9, t) = xn

tn(t)einx9/r9 ,

tn(t)  tn(t) .

then under i4:

thus

 t0 is projected out.
 for n 6= 0 the combination tn  tn survives the projection under i4.

since the eective mass2 of tn  tn is given by

m2

n = (n2/r2

9)  (1/2) ,

we see that there is no tachyon in the spectrum for
2 .

r9 

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

there are also possible tachyonic modes from open string states stretched between
the original d-string and its image under translation along x6, x7 or x8. demanding that
there are no tachyonic modes from these sectors we also get7

r8 

1
2

, r7 

1
2

, r6 

1
2

.

(3.10)

the net result of this analysis is that we have a stable non-bps state in type iia string
theory on t 4/i4 in the range of parameters described in (3.9), (3.10). the next question
would be: what is the interpretation of this state? there are many ways to answer the
question; we shall explain it by studying the physics at the critical radius r9 = 2.
in fact one can show that the potential for
at this radius t1 are massless modes.

7these relations can be found from eq.(3.9) by a t-duality transformation.

15

9
x =0

d0

9
x =  9
r
d0

figure 6: the d0- d0 brane conguration obtained by marginal deformation of the non-
bps d-string wrapped along x9.

(t1 t1) vanishes identically.8 thus (t1 t1) denotes an exactly marginal deformation
of the boundary conformal eld theory (cft) describing the d-brane. we can study this
deformation using cft techniques. we shall only quote the result here (see section 4, the

appendix and ref.[8] for some of the details). it turns out that this marginal deformation
takes the non-bps d-string of iia to a d0- d0-brane pair situated at the two xed points
x9 = 0 and x9 = r9 respectively as shown in fig.6.

so far what we have described could have been done even before modding out the
theory by i4. let us now study the result of modding out this conguration by i4. it was
shown in ref.[28] that after modding out by i4 a d0-brane at x9 = 0 can be interpreted as a
d2-brane of type iia string theory, wrapped on the supersymmetric 2-cycle[29] associated
with the xed point of i4 at x9 = 0.9 a similar interpretation can be given for the d0-
brane at x9 = r9. thus in the orbifold theory the marginal perturbation by (t1t1) at
r9 = 2 takes the original non-bps state to a pair of d2-branes, wrapped on the 2-cycles
associated with the xed points at x9 = 0 and x9 = r9 respectively. this suggests that
the original conguration is a d-2-brane of iia wrapped simultaneously on both these
2-cycles. this represents a d2-brane wrapped on a non-supersymmetric 2-cycle.

before the projection, the mass of the wrapped non-bps d-string is given by (2r9/g),
whereas the sum of the masses of the d0- d0 pair is given by (2/g). modding out by i4
reduces the mass of each state to half its original value. by comparing the masses of the

various (wrapped) branes we arrive at the following picture:

 at the critical radius the d-2-brane wrapped on the non-supersymmetric cycle is

degenerate with the pair of d-2-branes wrapped on the supersymmetric cycles.

8this and various other issues related to this discussion will be discussed in some detail in section 4.
9although the cycle has zero area, the wrapped d-brane has a nite mass due to the presence of the

anti-symmetric tensor eld ux through the two cycle[30].

16

 below the critical radius the d-2-brane wrapped on the non-supersymmetric cycle
is lighter than the pair of d-2-branes wrapped on the two supersymmetric cycles.

hence this wrapped brane is stable.

 above the critical radius the d-2-brane wrapped on the non-supersymmetric cycle is
heavier than the pair of d-2-branes wrapped on the two supersymmetric cycles. as

a result this wrapped brane is unstable against decay into a pair of supersymmetric
brane congurations.

this construction can be generalized to describe a (2p + 2)-brane ((2p + 1)-brane) of
iia (iib) wrapped on a non-supersymmetric cycle of k3. using this procedure one can

also construct examples of d-branes wrapped on non-bps 2- and 3-cycles of calabi-yau
manifolds. these generalizations have been discussed in ref.[8].

before concluding this discussion we note that the world-volume theory of n coincident
branes of this type gives rise to a non-supersymmetric u(n) gauge theory. this might be
useful in solving non-supersymmetric eld theories via branes.

4 d-branes as tachyonic kink solutions

4.1 non-bps d-brane as tachyonic kink on the brane-antibrane

pair

in this section we shall give an alternative construction of the non-bps d-branes discussed
in section 2[2, 5]. let us start with a coincident pair of d-2p  d-2p branes (p  1) of
type iia string theory. as discussed in section 2, there is a complex tachyon eld t living

on the world-volume of this system. this reects the fact that t = 0 is the maximum
of the tachyon potential v (t ) obtained after integrating out all other massive modes on
the world-volume. there is a u(1)u(1) gauge eld living on the world-volume of the
brane-antibrane system, and the tachyon picks up a phase under each of these u(1) gauge
transformations. as a result, v (t ) is a function only of |t|, and the minimum of the
potential occurs at t = t0ei for some xed t0 but arbitrary , as shown in fig.7. as we
shall argue shortly, at the minimum, the sum of the tension of the d-brane d-brane pair
and the (negative) potential energy of the tachyon is exactly zero[3] i.e.,

2td + v (t0) = 0 ,

(4.1)

17

v(t)

t0

t

figure 7: the tachyon potential on d-brane  d-brane pair.

where td is the d-brane tension. this shows that the tachyonic ground state t = t0
is indistinguishible from the vacuum, since it carries neither any charge nor any energy
density.

but now, instead of considering tachyonic ground state, let us consider a tachyonic
kink solution. for this, consider the minimum energy conguration with the following

properties:

 im(t ) = 0.
 re(t ) independent of time and (2p  1) of the 2p spatial coordinates.
 re(t ) depends on the remaining spatial coordinate x such that

t (x)  t0
t (x)  t0

as

as

x  ,
x   .

(4.2)

this has been shown in fig.8. from this it is clear that as x   the solution goes
to vacuum conguration. thus the energy density is concentrated around a (2p  1)

18

t(x)

0

0

x

figure 8: tachyonic kink solution on the brane-antibrane pair.

dimensional subspace, and the solution describes a (2p  1)-dimensional brane. we now
claim that this (2p  1)-brane associated with the tachyonic kink solution on the brane-
antibrane pair is identical to the non-bps d-(2p  1)-brane of iia.

note that v (t ) cannot be explicitly calculated. thus one might ask how one could

show the equivalence between the non-bps d-brane described in section 2 and the tachy-
onic kink on the brane  antibrane pair described here. this will be discussed in some
detail in the appendix; but here we shall describe the outline of the proof.

 there is a marginal deformation involving bulk and boundary operators which in-

terpolates between the t = 0 conguration and the kink solution.

 one can study the fate of the cft describing the brane-antibrane pair under this

marginal deformation.

 the end result turns out to be a cft which is identical to the cft describing the

non-bps d-brane.

one can also give an intuitive understanding of why a tachyonic kink should behave
like a d-brane. for this note that far away from the kink (large |x|) the conguration

19

represents the vacuum, and hence strings cannot end there. on the other hand, on the
subspace x = 0, the tachyon eld vanishes, and hence we expect the conguration to
behave in a way that a d-brane  d-brane pair would have behaved in the absence of
tachyon vev, i.e. open strings should be able to end there. thus the tachyonic kink should
at least qualitatively behave as a d-brane located at x = 0.

note that the manifold m describing the minimum of the tachyon potential is a
circle s1. in order to get a topologically stable kink solution, we need 0(m) 6= 0. but
0(s1) = 0 since s1 is connected. thus the kink is not topologically stable. indeed it
has tachyonic mode correponding to the freedom of changing t at x   to t0ei. as
   we get back the vacuum conguration, since t  t0 as x   in this case.
this however is completely consistent with the identication of this kink solution with
the non-bps d-(2p 1)-brane of type iia string theory, since, as we have seen earlier, the
latter also has a tachyonic mode living on it. the tachyonic mode on the kink solution can
be identied as the tachyonic mode on the non-bps d-(2p  1)-brane of iia discovered
in section 2.

before we move on to the next subject, let us give an argument in favour of eq.(4.1).

for this, note that if (4.1) had not been true, then the tachyonic kink solution described
here will not have a nite energy per unit (2p  1)-volume, since the energy density,
integrated along the transverse direction (denoted by x in eq.(4.2)) would give innite
answer. on the other hand from the analysis of section 2 we certainly know that a
non-bps d-(2p  1) brane of type iia string theory has nite tension. thus once we
establish the equivalence of the tachyonic kink solution and the non-bps d-brane (as will
be discussed in the appendix), it automatically establishes eq.(4.1).

4.2 the bps d-brane as the tachyonic kink on the non-bps

d-brane

it can be easily seen that there is a z2 symmetry on the world-volume of this non-bps

we can now continue one step further. let us start with a non-bps d-(2p  1)-brane of
iia. as was discussed in section 2, it has a real tachyon et . by studying the disk amplitude
d-brane under which et (and all other modes originating in the cp sector 1) changes
sign. let et0 be the minimum of the tachyon potential ev (et ) obtained after integration

20

v(t)

t0

t

figure 9: the tachyon potential on the non-bps d-brane

out the other massive modes, as shown in fig.9. again one can argue that:

ev (et0) + etd = 0 ,

(4.3)

where etd is the tension of the non-bps d-brane. we now consider a kink solution on
this d-(2p  1)-brane world-volume such that:

 et is independent of time as well as (2p  2) of the spatial coordinates.
 it depends on the remaining world-volume coordinate y such that:

et (y)  et0
et (y)  et0

as

as

y  ,
y   .

(4.4)

this conguration has been shown in fig.10. by the same argument as in the previous
subsection, this describes a (2p  2) dimensional brane. we shall show in the appendix
that this can be identied as the bps d-(2p  2) brane of type iia string theory. the

21

t(y)



0

0

y

figure 10: tachyonic kink solution on a non-bps d-brane.

analysis is again based on nding a series of marginal deformations involving bulk and

boundary operators which connect the et = 0 conguration of the non-bps d-(2p  1)

brane to a solution representing a kink-antikink pair, and using conformal eld theory
techniques to show that this marginal deformation actually interpolates between the non-
bps d-(2p  1)-brane and a bps d-(2p  2)-brane  d-(2p  2)-brane pair.
note that now the manifold fm describing the minimum of the tachyon potential
consists of a pair of points et0. thus 0( fm) 6= 0, and hence the kink is stable as is

expected of a bps d-brane. an argument similar to the one in the previous subsection

can be used to give an intuitive explanation of why the kink should behave as a d-brane
near y = 0 but as vaccuum for large |y|. we can also explain the origin of the rr charge
of the kink from the coupling (2.10) and the fact that yt is non-zero at y = 0. since
yt has opposite sign for the anti-kink, this also shows that the anti-kink must represent
the bps d-(2p  2) brane.

the results of this section, combined with the results of section 2 leads to the set of

descent relations between bps and non-bps d-branes shown in fig.11.

by combining the two main results of this section, we can also represent a bps d-p-
brane as a soliton (vortex) solution on the d-(p + 2)-brane  d-(p + 2)-brane pair in the

22

d-2p of

iia

d-2p of

iib

d-(2p-1)
of iib

d-2p - anti-d-2p
pair of iia

d-(2p-1) of
     iia

d-(2p-2)
  of iia

figure 11: descent relations among bps and non-bps d-branes in type ii string theories.
the horizontal arrows denote the eect of modding out by (1)fl, and the vertical arrows
denote the ect of considering tachyonic kink solution.

same theory[5, 7]. this construction is relevant for relating allowed d-brane charges to

elements of the k-group of space-time[7].

5 stable non-bps branes on the d-brane  orien-

tifold plane system

5.1 summary of the results

we have already introduced the notion of a d-p-brane in type ii string theory. we now

introduce the concept of an orientifold p-plane (o-p-plane)[31, 32]. for this we consider
type ii string theory on rp+1  (r9p/i9p    g), where i9p reverses the sign of all the
coordinates on r9p,  is the world-sheet parity transformation (l  r) and g is identity
for (9 p) = 4m or (4m + 1) and g = (1)fl for (9 p) = (4m + 2) or (4m + 3). one can
show that i9p    g is a symmetry transformation of order 2 in type iia string theory

23

if p is even, and in type iib string theory if p is odd. the origin of r9p will be called
an orientifold p-plane. thus type iia (iib) string theory contains orientifold p-planes of

even (odd) dimensions.

d-brane

open
string

o-plane

image of d-brane

figure 12: transverse section of the coincident d-p-brane  o-p-plane system. although
for clarity we have shown the d-brane and the o-plane as separated in space, we shall
analyze the case where they are on top of each other.

our focus of attention in this section will be a system of parallel d-p-brane  o-p-
plane system. this corresponds to starting with a d-brane and its image under i9p  g,
and then modding out the theory by i9p    g, as shown in fig.12. the world volume
theory of a dirichlet p-brane (d-p-brane) on top of an orientifold p-plane (o-p-plane) has
as its low energy limit an n = 4 supersymmetric so(2) gauge theory.10 the spectrum of
stable states in this theory contains a massive non-bps state carrying unit charge under

this so(2) gauge eld. these arise from open strings stretched between the d-brane and
its image.11 in the weak coupling limit these states have mass of the order of the string

10there is some ambiguity in how we choose the action of this z2 transformation on the cp factors; and
due to this ambiguity we can get dierent kinds of orientifold planes[32, 33]. throughout this paper we
shall only consider orientifold planes of so-type  also known as the o+ planes[33]  carrying negative
rr charge compared to that of a d-brane.
11before the orientifold projection the ground state in this sector is massless and corresponds to the
charged vector bosons and their superpartners, but the orientifold projection removes this state from the
spectrum.

24

scale ms with corrections expressible as a perturbation series in the string coupling gs:

ms(k0 + k1gs + k2g2

s +   ) .

(5.1)

here k0, k1, k2, . . . are numerical constants, with km computed from a diagram with m
open string loops. since the lowest mass state carrying so(2) electric charge must be

stable at all values of the string coupling, it makes sense to ask what would be the masses
of these states in the strong coupling limit. this is one of the questions we address in this

section. the answers were obtained in refs.[1, 2, 4, 5] and have been summarised in table
1.

mass

p
6
c6msgs
5 c5ms(gs)
4 c4ms(gs)
unknown
3

1
2

1
3

cp

known
known

unknown



table 1: masses of electrically charged states on the d-p-brane o-p-plane system in the

strong coupling limit.

in this table, the rst column denotes the value of p, the second column denotes the
mass of the lightest stable electrically charged state on the d-p-brane  o-p-plane system,
cp denotes a numerical constant, and the last column denotes whether the numerical
constant cp is known or unknown at present. we have restricted p in the range 3  p  6
due to the following reason. for p  7, the dilaton does not go to a constant value
asymptotically[34], and as a result the string coupling gs is not a well dened quantity.
on the other hand, for p  2, the self-energy of an electrically charged particle blows up
due to the long range coulomb eld associated with the particle, and hence the mass of
such a state is not a well dened quantity.

we shall review the arguments leading to these results in subsection 5.2. as we can
see from this table, we still do not know the mass of the electrically charged particle
on the d-3-brane  o-3-plane system in the strong coupling limit. although it may be
somewhat premature to look for a pattern among three data points, we note that there
seems to be some regularity in the dependence of this mass on gs for 4  p  6, namely
it seems to go as

ms(gs)

1

7p .

25

(5.2)

considering that for dierent values of p these results are derived using very dierent
techniques, one might wonder if there is a deeper lesson about strongly coupled string

theory in this spectrum. since the only feature that is common between dierent values
of p is the structure of weak coupling perturbation theory, it is tempting to speculate
that the regularity of the strong coupling spectrum is a reection of the regularity of the

weak coupling perturbation theory as a function of p. in that case we can expect that the
information about the strong couping result is somehow contained in the weak coupling
perturbation theory,  in particular in its large order behaviour.

besides stable non-bps states which are electrically charged under the so(2), the

brane world-volume theory also contains branes which are magnetically charged under
the so(2). on the d-p-brane o-p-plane system these are (p  3) branes, and come from
a d-(p  2)-brane, stretched between the brane and its image. such congurations are
allowed according to the rules of refs.[35, 36]. naively, when the d-p-brane and its image
coincide these stretched branes will have vanishing tension. but quantum corrections

must give non-vanishing contribution to the tension, reecting the fact that these are
non-bps branes.12 unfortunately calculating tensions of these non-bps branes in the
weak coupling limit remains an open problem.13 however as we shall see in subsection
5.2, for every value of p between 3 and 6, one can calculate the tensions of these non-bps

branes in the strong coupling limit. the answer has been summarized in table 2.

(tension)

1

(p2)

p
6

5

4

3

ecp

known

known

unknown

known

s

ec6ms
ec5msg 1
ec4msg 1
ec3msg 1

s

s

6

3

2

table 2: tensions of magnetically charged (p  3)-branes on the d-p-brane o-p-plane

system in the strong coupling limit.

the rst column in this table describes the value of p as before. the second column
represents the (p2)-th root of the tension of the magnetically charged (p3)-brane. this
root is taken in order to make it into a quantity of mass dimension 1. ms and gs denote, as
before, the square root of the fundamental string tension and the string coupling constant

12otherwise we should expect a singularity in the moduli space of this system for coincident d-brane

 orientifold plane system. this is known not to be present.

13as we shall see later, this problem is related to nding the last row of table 1.

26

respectively, and ecp denote numerical constants. the last column shows that at present
the coecients ecp are known for p = 3, 5 and 6, but not for p = 4.
we again observe that there is a regularity in this spectrum. in particular the (p 2)-
th root of the tension of the (p  3)-brane on the d-p-brane  o-p-plane system goes
as:

ms(gs)

p

61 .

(5.3)

again it is natural to suspect that this reects some deeper aspect of string theory which

is not understood at present.

5.2 strong coupling description of electrically charged states

and magnetically charged branes

in this subsection we shall review the analysis leading to tables 1 and 2. we shall discuss
each value of p separately, since the strong coupling description of the d-p-plane  o-p-
plane system is dierent for each value of p.
p = 6

in this case the system under study is a d6-brane on top of an o6-plane in type iia
string theory. the strong coupling description of this system is known to be m-theory on
r6,1n , where r6,1 is along the world-volume of the d6o6 system, and n is the double
cover of the atiyah-hitchin space[37] with a rescaled metric[38, 1]. asymptotically, n
locally looks like r3  s1. the planck mass mp of the m-theory, and the radius r of this
s1 are related to ms and gs of type iia string theory via the relations:

mp = ms(gs) 1
3 ,

r = m1

s gs .

the metric on n is given by

ds2 =

r2
4

ds2

ah ,

(5.4)

(5.5)

ah is the standard atiyah-hitchin metric[37]. the so(2) gauge eld a on the

where ds2
brane world-volume is related to the three form gauge eld c of m-theory as

c =   a +   

(5.6)

where  is the unique normalizable harmonic two form on n [39, 40, 41], and    denotes
terms involving other normalizable and non-normalizable dierential forms on n .

27

the topology as well as the metric on n is completely known. in particular n contains
a non-contractible two cycle of minimal area  called the bolt  which has the property
that the integral of the two form  over the bolt is non-vanishing. from the relation (5.6)
and the fact that a membrane is electrically charged under c, it follows that a membrane
wrapped on the bolt will be electrically charged under a. in other words, the electrically
charged stable non-bps state on the world-volume of the d6o6 system is described by
the m-theory membrane wrapped on the bolt of n [1]. the area of the bolt is equal to
3r2. on the other hand, the membrane tension is proportional to m3
p. thus the mass
of the state is given by:

c6m3

pr2 = c6msgs ,

(5.7)

where c6 is a known constant.

following the same logic, the magnetically charged three brane on the d6-o6 world-
volume can be identied as the m-theory ve-brane wrapped on the bolt of n . the
tension of this 3-brane can be calculated by multiplying the ve-brane tension (m6
p) with
the area of the bolt. this is given by

(ec6)4m6

pr2 = (ec6)4(ms)4 ,

(5.8)

where ec6 is a known numerical constant. eqs.(5.7) and (5.8) reproduce the rst rows of

tables 1 and 2 respectively.

p = 5

the system under study is a d5-brane on top of an o5-plane in type iib string theory.

in the strong coupling limit, this theory is s-dual to the weakly coupled type iib string
theory on r5,1 (r4/(1)fl i4) where r5,1 is along the d5-o5 world volume, i4 changes
the sign of the coordinates of r4  the directions transverse to the d5-o5 world-volume,
 and (1)fl changes the sign of all the ramond sector states on the left-moving sector
of the string world-sheet[42]. this can be argued by noting that under s-duality of type
iib string theory  gets transformed to (1)fl and a d5-brane is transformed to an ns
5-brane. thus naively one would think that the dual system should correspond to the

orbifold described above together with an ns 5-brane. but upon examining the spectrum
of massless states originating in the twisted sector of the orbifold theory one nds that

they are already in one to one correspondence with the massless degrees of freedom living
on the d5-o5 system. thus there is no need to add another ns ve brane; in fact adding

28

it will double the number of massless degrees of freedom, and will describe the dual of a
system of two d5-branes on top of an o5-plane.

the relationship between the string scale fms and the coupling constant egs of this dual

theory, and those of the original theory is given by:

fms = ms(gs) 1

2 ,

egs = (gs)1 .

(5.9)

the so(2) gauge eld on the d5-brane  o5-plane world volume corresponds to massless
vector elds originating in the twisted sector of this orbifold theory. the state carrying

electric charge under the so(2) gauge eld corresponds to, in this orbifold theory, the
non-bps d0-brane of iib placed on the orbifold plane[2, 4, 5]. this has mass

c5fms(egs)1 = c5ms(gs)

1

2 ,

(5.10)

where c5 is a known constant. similarly the two brane carrying magnetic charge under
this so(2) gauge eld corresponds to a non-bps d2-brane of type iib string theory,
placed inside the orbifold xed plane. its tension is given by:

(ec5)3fm3

s(egs)1 = (ec5)3(ms)3(gs) 1

2 ,

(5.11)

where ec5 is another known constant. eqs.(5.10) and (5.11) reproduce the second rows of

tables 1 and 2 respectively.
p = 4

the conguration under study is a d4-brane on top of an o4-plane in type iia string
theory. the strong coupling limit of this theory is best described as m-theory on r4,1 
s1  (r5/i5  ), together with a ve-brane (and its image under i5  ) placed at the
origin of r5 with its world-volume extending along r4,1  s1[1]. here r4,1 is along the
world-volume of the original d4-o4 system, s1 is a circle of radius r given in eq.(5.4),
i5 reverses the sign of the coordinates of r5 transverse to the brane world-volume, and
 denotes the transformation which changes the sign of the three form gauge eld of m-
theory. this can be seen by noting that under the type iia - (m-theory on s1) duality,
 of type iia is mapped to  of m-theory, and the four brane of type iia is mapped to
a ve brane of m-theory wrapped on s1. the planck mass mp of m-theory is given in
terms on ms and gs as in eq.(5.4).

the ve-brane world-volume carries a self-dual anti-symmetric tensor eld bm n . the
component b1, where x1 denotes the coordinate along s1 and  is the coordinate along

29

membrane 

image of the
5-brane

5-brane

2r

orbifold plane

figure 13: membrane stretched between the m5-brane and its image under i5  . we
shall consider the case where the 5-brane (and its image) coincide with the orbifold plane.

r4,1, is the so(2) gauge eld a on the d4-o4 system. as displayed in fig.13, the world-
volume of the ve brane placed at the origin of r5 also contains a non-bps string from
the membrane stretched between the ve-brane and its image under i5  [1].14 although
we cannot explicitly compute the tension of this string, by dimensional analysis we see
that this tension must be proportional to m2
p, since this is the only scale in the problem.
since the non-bps string carries bm n charge, this string wrapped on s1 will be

electrically charged under b1 = a. the mass of this state is given by:

c4m2

pr = c4ms(gs)

1

3 ,

(5.12)

where c4 is an unknown numerical constant. on the other hand, the non-bps string with
world-volume along r4,1 will be magnetically charged under the gauge eld b1 = a,
14classically this string should have zero tension when the ve-brane approaches its image, but if this
had been true also quantum mechanically then the moduli space would have a singularity when the ve
brane coincides with the orbifold plane. using the duality between m-theory on t 5/z2 and type iib on
k3[43, 44], one can see that there is no singularity in this region of the moduli space.

30

and its tension will be given by:

(ec4)2m2

p = (ec4)2(ms)2(gs) 2

3 ,

(5.13)

where ec4 is a numerical constant related to c4. eqs.(5.12) and (5.13) reproduce the third

rows of tables 1 and 2 respectively.

p = 3

the system under study is the d3-brane on top of an o3-plane in type iib string

theory. the strong coupling limit of this system is dual to a weakly coupled type iib
string theory in the same background, with the parameters of the dual theory related
to those in the original theory by eq.(5.9). the electrically charged state in the original

theory is mapped to the magnetically charged state in the dual theory. unfortunately at
present we do not know anything about this state, as was discussed earlier in subsection

5.1. on the other hand, the magnetically charged state in the original theory is mapped
to the electrically charged state in the dual theory. this is a perturbative open string

state, and has mass proportional to fms for small egs. thus the mass of the magnetically

charged state in the original theory in the strong coupling limit is give by:

ec3fms = ec3ms(gs) 1

2 ,

where ec3 is a known numerical constant. this reproduces the last row of table 2.

(5.14)

5.3 electrostatic self-energy of the electrically charged non-bps

particle on the d3-brane  o3-plane system

in this subsection we shall give a lower bound on the electrostatic self-energy of the
electrically charged non-bps particle on the d3-brane  o3-plane system in the strong
coupling limit. to do this we go to the dual weakly coupled description where this particle
corresponds to a magnetically charged particle on the d3-brane  o3-plane world-volume.
although we do not know at present how to explicitly construct this state, it is clear that

suciently far away from the center, the magnetic eld around the state will look like the
magnetic eld of a point monopole. let rc be the distance beyond which this happens. if
we normalize the gauge eld on the d3-brane so that the action has the form:

1

egs z d4xff  ,

31

(5.15)

where egs as usual is the string coupling constant in this dual string theory, then the
magnetic eld for r >> rc is of order (1/r2), and hence its contribution to the total
energy of the system from the region r  rc is of order

1

egs zrrc

d3r

r4  (egs)1(rc)1 .

(5.16)

in order to give a lower bound to this expression we need an upper bound on rc. this

is obtained by noting that rc cannot be larger than the string scale (fms)1 in this dual
string theory, since for small egs we expect the lightest massive states in this theory to have
mass of order fms. thus beyond the distance (fms)1, the magnetic eld of the monopole

should approach that of a point monopole. this gives the following lower bound to the
magnetostatic energy:

this exceeds the expected answer ms(gs)

4 from eq.(5.2).

fms(egs)1  ms(gs)

1

1

2 .

(5.17)

this suggests that eq.(5.2) is applicable, if at all, only to the intrinsic mass of the
non-bps particle (if it could be dened at all), and cannot account for the contribution
from the coulomb energy. presumably the issue will be claried once we have an explicit

construction of this non-bps state. it is the same problem which appears in a more severe
form in the case of p = 2. here the electrostatic self-energy is innite, and completely

masks the intrinsic mass of the particle.

6 some related developments

in this section we shall briey discuss some other related developments in this eld. in
particular, we shall discuss

1. construction of other non-bps states in type i string theory[7],

2. relationship between d-brane charge and k-theory[7, 9], and

3. application of boundary state formalism to the study of non-bps states[4].

there are several other related developments[45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52] which will not
be discussed here. at the end we shall also briey discuss some open problems.

32

6.1 other non-bps branes in type i string theory

in the same way that we constructed a d0-brane in type i string theory, one can construct

a d8-brane in this theory. the idea is to start with the non-bps d8-brane of type iib
string theory, and mod it out by the world-sheet parity transformation . the result is a

non-bps d8-brane of type i string theory. the tachyonic mode of the open string with
both ends on the 8-brane is projected out as in the case of the d0-brane. however in type

i string theory there are also space lling d9-branes, and it turns out that open strings
with one end on the d8-brane and the other end on a d9-brane has tachyonic modes

which are not projected out[53]. thus these branes are not stable.

one can also construct non-bps d-instantons in the type i string theory as follows[7].
we can start from a d-instanton anti-d-instanton pair of type iib string theory, and

mod out the theory by the world-sheet parity transformation . the result is a non-bps
d-instanton of type i string theory. one can show that the tachyonic mode is projected

out under this operation; so that the d-instanton is a stable conguration of type i string
theory.

a similar construction can be done by starting with a d7-brane  d7-brane pair of
type iib string theory, and modding out the conguration by . again the tachyonic

mode originating in open strings with both ends on the d7-brane is projected out. but
in this case there is a tachyonic mode in the open strings with one end on the d7-brane
and the other end on the d9-brane. thus the d7-brane is not a stable conguration in

type i string theory[53].

6.2 k-theory

another related development in this eld has been the discovery of the relationship be-

tween elements of the k-group of space-time manifold and d-brane charges on the same
manifold[7]. this is related to the idea of representing a d-brane as a tachyonic soliton on

a d-brane - anti-d-brane pair of higher dimensions. the simplest example is that of type
iib string theory, so we shall only discuss this case. in this case, following the discussions

of section 4 we see that a bps d-(2p + 1)-brane can be regarded as a soliton solution on a
d-(2p + 3)  d-(2p + 3)-brane pair. each of the d-(2p + 3) branes on the other hand can
be regarded as a soliton solution on a d-(2p + 5)-brane d-(2p + 5)-brane pair. following
this argument we see that each stable d-brane in type iib string theory can be regarded

33

as some kind of soliton solution on a sucient number (n) of 9-brane  anti-9-brane pair.
it was shown by witten[7] that the solution representing a system of d-branes (possibly

with some gauge eld congurations on them) can be completely classied by specifying
the u(n) gauge bundles e and f on the 9-brane and the anti-9-brane which characterize
the gauge eld congurations corresponding to this soliton. furthermore, if we add equal

number of extra 9-branes and anti-9-branes to the system with identical gauge bundles h
on them, then the tachyon associated with the open strings stretched between the 9-brane

and the anti-9-brane is a section of a trivial bundle, and hence can condense to the mini-
mum (t0) of the potential everywhere on the 9-brane  anti-9-brane world-volume. since
this conguration is identical to the vacuum, we conclude that adding such extra pairs of
9-brane and anti-9-brane has no eect on the topological class of the soliton. thus the

d-brane charges are classied by specifying a pair of u(n) vector bundles (e, f ) subject
to the equivalence relation

(e, f )  (e + h, f + h) ,

(6.1)

for any u(m) vector bundle h. this is precisely the denition of the k-group of the

space-time manifold.

this is the basic idea of using k-theory to classify d-brane charges. similar analysis
can be carried out for type i and type iia string theories as well. in type i theory the
starting point is the representation of all d-branes as solitons on d9- d9-brane system[7],
whereas in type iia string theory the starting point is the representation of a d-brane as

a soliton on a system of non-bps d9-branes[9].

6.3 boundary state approach to non-bps branes

the boundary state approach[54, 55, 56, 57, 61] to the study of non-bps d-branes was

pioneered by bergman and gaberdiel[4]. corresponding to any d-brane in string theory,
we can associate a boundary state |bi in the closed string sector whose inner product
with a closed string state describes the amplitude for a closed string emission from the d-
brane. furthermore, if |bi and |bi denote the boundary states associated with a pair of
(not necessarily identical) d-branes, then hb|bi describes the one loop partition function
of an open string stretched from the rst d-brane to the second d-brane. the boundary
state |bpi of a bps d-p-brane in type iia or type iib string theory can be written as a

34

sum of two terms:

|bpi =

1
2

(|nsnspi + |rrpi) ,

(6.2)

where |nsnspi and |rrpi denote the contribution to the boundary state from the nsns
and rr sector closed strings respectively. the inner product hbp|bqi can be expressed as

hbp|bqi = t rpq

1 + (1)f

2

,

(6.3)

where t rpq denotes trace over the open string states stretched from the d-p-brane to
the d-q-brane. in this equation the contribution proportional to 1 comes from the nsns
component of the boundary state, whereas the contribution proportional to (1)f comes
from the rr component of the boundary state.
in this notation the boundary state |ebpi describing the non-bps d-p-brane of type

iib or type iia string theory is given by[4, 6]

|ebpi = |nsnspi .

(6.4)

note that the contribution from the rr sector is absent, reecting the fact that the
non-bps d-brane does not carry any rr charge. also the nsns sector contribution to
(6.4) has an extra factor of 2 compared to that in (6.2). this reects the fact that the
non-bps d-brane has an extra multiplicative factor of 2 in its tension.

from eqs.(6.2)-(6.4) it follows that

hebp|ebpi = t rpp(1) .

(6.5)

this shows that the partition function of open string states living on the non-bps d-brane
has no gso projection.

one can also analyse the fate of stable non-bps d-branes in various orbifolds and
orientifolds of type ii string theories using the boundary state approach. let us consider,

for example, the case of type i d-particle. in this case the boundary state is described by

1
2

(|eb0i + 32|b9i + |ci) ,

(6.6)

where |eb0i is the boundary state of the non-bps d0-brane (the (1/2) factor is due
to the  projection), 32|b9i denotes the boundary state corresponding to the 32 bps
d9-branes in the vacuum, and |ci is the crosscap state[54, 55, 56, 57] reecting the eect

35

of  projection. the terms involving |eb0i in the inner product of this boundary state

with itself is given by

1
2

(heb0|eb0i + heb0|ci + hc|eb0i + 32heb0|eb9i + 32heb9|eb0i) .

the sum of the rst three terms gives

t r00

1 + 

2

,

(6.7)

(6.8)

where t r00 denotes trace over open strings with both ends on the d0-brane. on the
other hand the last two terms give

32t r09(1) ,

(6.9)

where t r09 denotes the trace over open string states stretched from the d0-brane to the
d9-brane. there is no  projection in this term, since  relates these open strings to
open strings stretched from the d9-brane to the d0-brane. thus the eect of  projection
is to simply include either the 0  9 or the 9  0 sector, but not both.

since |eb0i, |ci and |b9i are all explicitly known, we can evaluate each term in (6.7)

explicitly. comparing these with (6.8) we can explicitly derive the  projection rules for
the open strings with both ends on the non-bps d0-brane, and check that these rules
agree with the ones derived following the arguments in subsection 3.1. in particular, one

can verify that the tachyonic mode on this d-particle is projected out under .

6.4 open questions and speculations

we shall conclude this article by reviewing some of the open questions and with some
speculations.

1. the various arguments given in favour of the idea that the tachyonic ground state on
the brane anti-brane pair is indistinguishible from the vacuum are all indirect, and

involves rst compactifying one or more directions tangential to the brane world-
volume, followed by switching on the tachyon vev and then taking the radius back to
innity. a direct proof of this on a non-compact brane-antibrane pair, presumably

based on the construction of an explicit classical solution in the open string eld
theory on the brane-antibrane pair describing the tachyonic ground state, is still

lacking. similarly, one should be able to construct an explicit classical solution in

36

this open string eld theory representing the tachyonic kink solution and show that
this solution describes a non-bps d-brane.

2. one of the diculties in understanding the phenomenon of tachyon condensation
on the brane-antibrane pair has been in understanding what happens to the various
u(1) gauge elds living on the original system. the tachyon is charged under one

combination of the two u(1) gauge elds, and hence breaks this gauge symmetry.
however the other linear combination, which we shall denote by a, does not get
broken since the tachyon, as well as all other perturbative open string states living
on the brane-antibrane world-volume, are neutral under this gauge eld.

it has been suggested in ref.[45] that the other u(1) is in the conning phase.

the suggested mechanism for this connement is the condensation of the tachyonic
(p  3)-branes obtained from d-(p  2)-branes stretched between the original d-p-
brane and the anti-d-p-brane. thus for example for p = 3, it involves condensation
of the tachyonic mode of the d-string stretched between the d3-brane and the d3-
brane. it was shown in [45] that this tachyon is magnetically charged under a, and
hence condensation of this tachyon will imply that the corresponding u(1) gauge
theory is in the conning phase.

whereas the general idea is quite appealing, this mechanism is highly non-perturbative
from the point of view of the world-volume theory of the d3-brane  d3-brane pair.
on the other hand the indirect arguments reviewed in this article showing that the

tachyonic ground state is identical to the vacuum conguration are based on open
string tree level analysis. thus there must be a way to see the phenomenon of con-
nement of the u(1) gauge eld a at open string tree level. presumably once we
understand how to describe tachyon condensation using classical open string eld
theory, this issue will be automatically resolved.

3. another open problem, which has already been discussed earlier, is the construction
of magnetically charged non-bps d-(p  3)-brane on the d-p-brane  o-p-plane
system. it is clear that these stable branes must exist in the spectrum, so one should
be able to nd them in the weakly coupled string theory.

4. it would be interesting to investigate the relationship between weak coupling per-
turbation expansion for the mass of a non-bps state and its strong coupling limit.

37

this might give us new insight into string theory at nite coupling.

5. one of the main lessons from our analysis (and of refs.[58, 59, 60]) is that the

existence of tachyons in the spectrum of open string theory does not necessarily
signify a sickness of the theory, but often simply indicates the existence of a ground
state with energy (density) lower than that of the starting conguration. it would

be interesting to investigate if closed string tachyons have a similar interpretation.

6. from our discussion in this article it is clear that all d-branes in type iia (iib)

string theory can be regarded as classical solutions in the open string eld theory
living on a system of non-bps d9-branes (d9-brane  d9-brane pair). it would be
interesting to see if this can also be done for other known objects in string theory,
namely the fundamental string and the ns 5-branes.15 actually fundamental strings
appear as bound state poles in the s-matrix computed from wittens open string
eld theory[62, 63, 64]. on the other hand a formal construction was presented in
[64] showing that any string background represented by a two dimensional conformal

eld theory (of which the ns ve-brane is an example) can be represented as a
classical solution in the purely cubic open string eld theory. if these results can be

made more concrete, then one could take open string eld theory on the non-bps
d9-brane (d9- d9 brane pairs) as the fundamental formulation of type ii string
theories and their orbifolds/orientifolds, since all states in string theory could be
constructed from this eld theory.

acknowledgement: i would like to thank o. bergman, s. elitzur, m. gaberdiel, p. ho-
rava, n. manton, b. pioline, e. rabinovici, a. recknagel, v. schomerus and e. witten
for useful correspondence at various stages of this work. i would also like to thank the

organisers of the apctp winter school for organising an excellent school, and the tata
institute at mumbai, ias at the hebrew university and ctp at mit for their hospitality

during the preparation of this manuscript.

15k-theory does not contain these states, but k-theory uses only a small subset of available open string

elds, namely the tachyon and the gauge bosons.

38

a conformal field theory of the tachyonic kink so-

lution

from our discussion in sections 2 and 4, it follows that a non-bps d-2p-brane of type iib

string theory has two descriptions:

 d-2p  d-2p of type iia string theory modded out by (1)fl, and
 tachyonic kink on d-(2p + 1)  d-(2p + 1) system of type iib string theory.

in this appendix we shall address the issue of proving the equivalence of these two descrip-

tions. we shall focus on the non-bps d0-brane of iib, but extension to the general case
(non-bps d-2p-brane of iib and non-bps d-(2p + 1)-brane of iia) is straightforward.

the details of the analysis of this appendix can be found in ref.[5]. some related analysis
for bosonic string theory can be found in refs.[65, 66, 67, 69, 68].

the outline of the proof is as follows. we begin with the observation that the tachyonic
kink on the d1 d1 pair is a classical solution in the open string eld theory living on the
d1 d1 pair. thus this conguration must be describable by a two dimensional boundary
conformal eld theory. hence we need to

 nd this cft, and
 show that this is equivalent to the cft describing d0  d0 of iia/(1)fl.

the next question is: how do we nd the cft describing the kink? this is done using

the following steps.

 find a series of marginal deformations which connect the d1 d1 pair to the tachy-

onic kink.

 follow what happens to the cft describing the d1 d1 pair under this marginal

deformation.

thus our rst job will be to nd this series of marginal deformations. this is done in

several steps.

1. compactify one direction along a circle s1 of radius r and take the d1- d1 pair to
lie along s1. let x be the coordinate along s1, and a, a be the u(1) gauge elds

39

on d1, d1-branes respectively. the rst step is to increase ax from 0 to 1/2r. this
is a marginal deformation using boundary operators, and gives

exp(ii axdx) = 1 .

(a.1)

in the presence of such a wilson line, open strings with cp factors i and 3 are
periodic under x  x + 2r, since they are neutral under ax, whereas open strings
with cp factors 1 and 2 are anti-periodic under x  x + 2r since they carry
unit charge under ax.

2. let t denote the tachyon eld originating in the sector 1. this has a fourier

expansion of the form:

t (x, t) = xnz

tn+ 1

2

(t)ei(n+ 1

2 ) x

r ,

(a.2)

since it is anti-periodic under x  x + 2r. the mass of the mode tn+ 1

2

is given by

we now note that

m2

n+ 1
2

=

(n + 1

2 )2

r2 

1
2

.

(a.3)

 for r  (1/2) there are no tachyonic modes.
 for r = 1/2, t
 1
in this second step we reduce r from its initial value down to 1/2. this corre-
sponds to a marginal deformation involving bulk operators.

is massless and hence represent marginal boundary oper-

ators in the cft.

2

3. as we shall see later, at r = 12

, (t 1

2  t

 1

2

2

). this is a marginal deformation involving a boundary operator.

operator. in this third step we switch on vacuum expectation value (vev) of (t 1
t
 1
the physical interpretation of switching on the vev of (t 1
we take:

2  t

 1

) is as follows. if

2

) corresponds to an exactly marginal
2 

(t 1

2  t

 1

2

) = i,

t 1

2

+ t

 1

2

= 0,

tn = 0 for

|n| >

1
2

, ,

then

t (x) =  sin

x
2r

.

40

(a.4)

(a.5)

t



 r-

r

0



figure 14: eect of switching on vacuum expectation value of (t 1

2  t

 1

2

as shown in fig.14, this represents a kink.

x

).

note that we have not said so far how much vev we should give to (t 1
will be discussed shortly.

2  t

 1

2

). this

4. after switching on the tachyon vev, we take the radius back to innity. this corre-

sponds to marginal deformation by a bulk operator.

2  t

it will be shown later that when we switch on this marginal deformation, for r > 12,
(t 1
) develops a tadpole for a generic . this is not surprising, since for
r > 12 , (t 1
2  t
) =  is not expected to be a solution of the equations of motion
for arbitrary . however, we nd that there are two values of  for which the

 1

 1

2

2

tadpole vanishes: namely  = 0 and  = 1 (with a suitable normalization of the
tachyon eld). if we take the limit r   at  = 0, we get back the d1- d1 pair.
but if we take the r   limit at  = 1, we should expect to get the kink on the

41

r

step 2

step 4

1/  2

step 3

1



figure 15: the ow in the r   plane from (r = ,  = 0) to (r = ,  = 1).

d1- d1 pair.

this analysis also determines the amount of vev of (t 1
the third step. namely, it should correspond to  = 1.

2  t

 1

2

) to be switched on at

the steps 2, 3 and 4 correspond to the ow in the (r, ) plane as shown in fig.15. note
that if we want to go from the (r = ,  = 0) point to the (r = ,  = 1) point directly,
we need to perturb by (t 1

) at r = , which is a relevant boundary operator.

we now carry out these steps in detail and see what conformal eld theory we get at the
end of these steps. since marginal deformations up to the end of step 2 is straightforward,

2  t

 1

2

we focus on steps 3 and 4. thus our starting point will be the cft at the end of step 2.
this corresponds to

r =

1
2

,

exp(ii axdx) = 1,  = 0 .

(a.6)

the relevant world-sheet elds are a scalar eld x  (xl + xr) representing the coordi-
nate along s1, and a majorana fermion (l, r) representing the world-sheet supersym-
metric partner of x. we impose neumann boundary condition on x and :

xl = xr  xb/2,

l = r  b ,

(a.7)

42

where the subscript b stands for boundary value.16 besides these elds, there are nine
other bosonic coordinate elds, their fermionic partners, and ghost elds, but these will

not play any crucial role in our analysis.

let us now dene h to be the transformation x  x + 2r. the h and (1)f
quantum numbers of the open string states carrying dierent cp factors are then given

as in table 3.

cp factor h (1)f
1
i, 3
-1
1, 2

1
-1

table 3: the (1)f and h quantum numbers of various open string states at the end of

step 2.

using these rules we can determine the complete spectrum of open strings. in partic-

ular vertex operator for (t1/2  t(1/2)) in the 0-picture[70] is given by:

vt  b(eixb/2 + eixb /2)  1 .

(a.8)

this is odd under h and (1)f .

we now use the fact that at r = (1/2), a free boson x is equivalent to a pair of

majorana fermions (, ). the relationship is of the form:

ei2xl  (l + il),

ei2xr  (r + ir) .

(a.9)

thus we have three majorana fermions , , and . we can now rebosonize them as
follows:

i2 l
e

r  ( l

r

+ i l

r

) ,

+ i l

r

) .

(a.10)

(a.11)

or

i2
e

l

r  ( l

r

 and  are scalar elds. the relationship between the currents in the bosonic and the
fermionic variables are as follows:

ll  xl,
rr  xr,

ll  l,
rr  r,

ll  l ,
rr  r .

(a.12)

16for simplicity we shall concentrate on the ns sector states throughout this section, but a similar

analysis can be carried out for the r-sector states as well.

43

from eq.(a.7) and (a.9)-(a.12) we can easily see that putting neumann boundary con-
dition on x and  corresponds to putting neumann boundary condition on , ,  and
:

1
l = r 
2
l = r  b,

b,

1
l = r 
2
l = r  b .

b ,

(a.13)

we can now rewrite the vertex operator for the tachyon eld in terms of the new elds:

vt  b(eixb /2 + eixb /2)  1

 bb  1  b  1 .

(a.14)

now, b  1 can be interpreted as the vertex operator of a constant gauge eld a
along . hence it corresponds to an exactly marginal deformation, as claimed earlier.
furthermore, a is a periodic variable. let us denote by  a suitably normalized a such
that  has periodicity 2.

we shall now study the eect of switching on a on the open string spectrum. this

can be done as follows:

 first of all, since i and 1 commute with 1, we conclude that open string states
with cp factors i, 1 are neutral under a. thus the spectrum in these sectors
remain unchanged.

 since

[1, 3  i2] = 2(3  i2) ,

(a.15)

we see that open strings in sectors 3  i2 carry equal and opposite charges under
a. thus in these sectors switching on a causes a shift in the  momentum
quantization rule:

p  p 


2

.

(a.16)

the coecient of  in this equation has been xed by requiring that  has periodicity

2. from eqs.(a.9)-(a.11) we see that under (1)f  h,    + 2 and   .
thus projection under (1)f  h requires that in each cp sector, for xed set of 
oscillators, p is quantized as n2 + a constant additive term, where n is an integer.
from this we see that shifting  by 2 does not change the quantization law of p.

44

using these rules we can nd the spectrum of open strings for all values of , including
at  = 1. it turns out that the net result for the spectrum at  = 1 is that in the sectors
(3i2) the gso projection gets reversed, without any change in the h-projection. thus
the (1)f and h quantum numbers carried by various open string states at  = 1 are as
given in table 4.

cp factor h (1)f
1
-1
1
-1

1
-1
-1
1

i
1
2
3

table 4. the (1)f and h quantum numbers of open string states at  = 1.

vb

v
t

figure 16: diagram contributing to tachyon one point function to rst order in r. at

the boundary of the disk we must insert a factor of exp(i(/23/2)1h b).

this concludes the analysis in step 3. note that when we combine the spectrum from
all the sectors, there is no net h or (1)f projection, since all combinations of these
quantum numbers appear in the spectrum. thus we can use all combinations of ,  and
 oscillators to create a state from the fock vacuum. if we use  and  as independent

variables, then from (a.11) we see that all the states are invariant under l  l +2,
r  r + 2. since  = l + r, this eectively corresponds to  having a radius
2. this fact will be useful to us later.

45

we now proceed to step 4. this involves switching on the radius deformation and
taking the r   limit. the computation of a correlation function of open string vertex
operators on a disk for a generic value of r and  involves

1h b) at the boundary, corresponding to the -deformation,17
 inserting exp( i
22
 inserting exp(cr d2zxlxr) in the interior of the disk corresponding to the radius
deformation away from r = 12 ,

 inserting open string vertex operators corresponding to external states on the bound-

ary, and

 inserting appropriate number of picture changing operators.

as an example we have displayed in fig.16 the diagram relevant for the computation of
tachyon one point function to rst order in r  (r  12). here vb  elrlr is
the closed string vertex operator in the (1,1) picture representing radius deformation,
(l, r) are the left- and the right-moving components of the bosonized ghosts[70], and
vt  b  1 is the tachyon vertex operator in the (0, 0) picture. this diagram can be
easily computed, and the nal result is that:

hvti  sin() .

(a.17)

this vanishes at  = 0, 1. as mentioned earlier, the  = 0 point corresponds to the
original d-string anti-d-string pair, whereas the  = 1 point corresponds to the tachyonic
kink solution on this pair.

we shall from now on focus on the point  = 1, and analyse the system at a general
value of r. for general r, and a general correlation function of open string vertex
operators, we need to sum over all possible number of insertions of vb = xlxr,
representing the radius deformation in the (0,0) picture, in the interior of the disk with

appropriate weight factors. since we have set  = 1, we have to insert a factor of

exp(cid:16)i

1
22

1i b(cid:17) ,

(a.18)

at the boundary of the disk. the eect of this insertion can be analysed by shrinking the

contour integral along the boundary to inside the disk, and picking up the residue at each

17the coecient of  in the exponent has again been xed by demanding that shifting  by 2 does not

change the s-matrix except for a redenition of the external open string states.

46

figure 17: diagrams contributing to the open string tree level amplitude at a general
value of r and at  = 1. the circles denote closed string vertex operators vb correspond-
ing to the radius deformation, and the crosses denote the open string vertex operators
corresponding to external open string states. at the boundary of the disk, there is also

an insertion of the operator exp(i(1/23/2)1h b).
insertion of vb. the nal result is that[5] it converts each xlxr to lr. such a
perturbation corresponds to decreasing the  radius. thus we conclude that increasing
the x radius at  = 1 is equivalent to decreasing the  radius at  = 0. in particular,
the limit rx   gets converted to r  0.
if we introduce a new t-dual variable :

l = l,

r = r,

r = 1/r ,

(a.19)

then as r  0, r  . at the same time, neumann boundary condition on 
corresponds to dirichlet boundary condition on 

l = r at the boundary .

(a.20)

the net result is that we have a non-compact bosonic coordinate  with dirichlet bound-
ary condition along .

thus we conclude that the tachyonic kink solution on a d1+ d1-brane corresponds
to a d0-brane at  = 0, where  is a new non-compact bosonic coordinate. we can
compute the spectrum of open strings with ends on this d0-brane by starting with the
known spectrum at the end of step 3 as given in table 4, and following it adiabatically as
r increases. we saw that at the end of step 3, the combined spectrum from all sectors

47

has no projection, and  behaves like a bosonic coordinate of radius 2. thus  has
radius (1/2),  the same as that of x. as we increase the x radius to some arbitrary

value r,  radius also gets increased to r. thus the combined spectrum of open strings
will be that on a d0-brane on a circle of radius r, with no gso projection. this is
identical to the one obtained by modding out the d0- d0 pair of iia on a circle of radius
r by (1)fl, as studied in section 2.

this shows that a tachyonic kink on the d-string anti-d-string pair of type iib string

theory corresponds to a non-bps d0-brane of type iib string theory as dened in section
2. the fact that the non-compact coordinate is called  and not x is not of any relevance;
all that matters is the cft describing the system and not how we label the cft.

as stated at the beginning of this appendix, similar analysis can be done for showing
the equivalence of the tachyonic kink on the d-p  d-p pair on iia (iib), and [d  (p 
1) d  (p 1)]/(1)fl in iib (iia). here p is an even integer in type iia string theory,
and is an odd integer in type iib string theory.

one can also consider a t-dual version of the analysis described here to interpolate
between a a d0-brane  d0-brane pair situated at diametrically opposite points on a
circle, and a non-bps d-string wrapped on the same circle. running the ow backwards,
we see that there is a series of marginal deformations which take us from a non-bps
d-string in type iia string theory to a d0-brane  d0-brane pair in the same theory. by
analysing what background corresponds to this deformation on the non-bps d-string, one
discovers that it describes a kink-antikink pair[8]. this allows us to identify a tachyonic

kink on the non-bps d-string to a bps d-particle of type iia string theory. this can
easily be generalized to show that a tachyonic kink on the non-bps d-(p  1) brane
corresponds to the bps d-(p 2) brane in the same theory. again p is even for type iia
string theory and odd for type iib string theory.

references

[1] a. sen, jhep 06, 007 (1998) hep-th/9803194.

[2] a. sen, jhep 08, 010 (1998) hep-th/9805019.

[3] a. sen, jhep 08, 012 (1998) hep-th/9805170.

[4] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, phys. lett. b441, 133 (1998) hep-th/9806155.

48

[5] a. sen, jhep 09, 023 (1998) hep-th/9808141.

[6] a. sen, jhep 10, 021 (1998) hep-th/9809111.

[7] e. witten, jhep 12, 019 (1998) hep-th/9810188.

[8] a. sen, jhep 12, 021 (1998) hep-th/9812031.

[9] p. horava, hep-th/9812135.

[10] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, jhep 03, 013 (1999) hep-th/9901014.

[11] h. garcia-compean, hep-th/9812226.

[12] s. gukov, hep-th/9901042.

[13] k. hori, hep-th/9902102.

[14] e. sharpe, hep-th/9902116.

[15] o. bergman, e.g. gimon and p. horava, hep-th/9902160.

[16] k. olsen and r.j. szabo, hep-th/9904153.

[17] j. dai, r. leigh, and j. polchinski, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2073;

r. leigh, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2767;
j. polchinski, phys. rev. d50 (1994) 6041 [hep-th/9407031];

j. polchinski, s. chaudhury and c. johnson, [hep-th/9602052];
j. polchinski, [hep-th/9611050].

[18] m.b. green, phys. lett. b329, 435 (1994) hep-th/9403040.

[19] t. banks and l. susskind, hep-th/9511194.

[20] m.b. green and m. gutperle, nucl. phys. b476, 484 (1996) hep-th/9604091.

[21] g. lifschytz, phys. lett. b388, 720 (1996) hep-th/9604156.

[22] v. periwal, hep-th/9612215.

[23] j.h. schwarz, phys. rept. 89, 223 (1982).

49

[24] e. witten, nucl. phys. b443, 85 (1995) hep-th/9503124.

[25] a. dabholkar, phys. lett. b357, 307 (1995) hep-th/9506160.

[26] c.m. hull, phys. lett. b357, 545 (1995) hep-th/9506194.

[27] j. polchinski and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460, 525 (1996) hep-th/9510169.

[28] m.r. douglas and g. moore, hep-th/9603167.

[29] k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b456 130 (1995) hep-

th/9507158.

[30] p. aspinwall, phys. lett. b357 329 (1995) hep-th/9507012.

[31] a. sagnotti, open strings and their symmetry groups, talk at cargese summer

inst., 1987;
g. pradisi and a. sagnotti, phys. lett. b216 59 (1989);

m. bianchi, g. pradisi and a. sagnotti, nucl. phys. b376 365 (1992);
p. horava, nucl. phys. b327 461 (1989), phys. lett. b231 251 (1989).

[32] e. gimon and j. polchinski, phys. rev. d54 1667 (1996) [hep-th/9601038].

[33] e. witten, jhep 02, 006 (1998) hep-th/9712028.

[34] a. sen, nucl. phys. b475, 562 (1996) hep-th/9605150.

[35] a. strominger, phys. lett. b383, 44 (1996) hep-th/9512059.

[36] p.k. townsend, phys. lett. b373, 68 (1996) hep-th/9512062.

[37] m.f. atiyah and n.j. hitchin, phil. trans. roy. soc. lond. a315, 459 (1985); the
geometry and dynamics of magnetic monopoles. m.b. porter lectures, prince-

ton, usa: univ. pr. (1988) 133p.

[38] n. seiberg and e. witten, hep-th/9607163.

[39] g.w. gibbons and p.j. ruback, commun. math. phys. 115, 267 (1988).

[40] n.s. manton and b.j. schroers, ann. phys. 225, 290 (1993).

50

[41] a. sen, phys. lett. b329, 217 (1994) hep-th/9402032.

[42] a. sen, nucl. phys. b474, 361 (1996) hep-th/9604070.

[43] k. dasgupta and s. mukhi, nucl. phys. b465, 399 (1996) hep-th/9512196.

[44] e. witten, nucl. phys. b463, 383 (1996) hep-th/9512219.

[45] p. yi, hep-th/9901159.

[46] h. awata, s. hirano and y. hyakutake, hep-th/9902158.

[47] n. kim, s. rey and j. yee, jhep 04, 003 (1999) hep-th/9903129.

[48] m. gutperle and v. periwal, jhep 02, 018 (1999) hep-th/9812003.

[49] m. srednicki, jhep 08, 005 (1998) hep-th/9807138.

[50] o. bergman and b. kol, nucl. phys. b536, 149 (1998) hep-th/9804160.

[51] m.j. strassler, hep-th/9709081, hep-lat/9803009, hep-th/9808073.

[52] i. pesando, on the eective potential of the dp - anti-dp system in type ii theories,

hep-th/9902181.

[53] m. frau, l. gallot, a. lerda and p. strigazzi, hep-th/9903123.

[54] j. polchinski and y. cai, nucl.phys. b296 91 (1988).

[55] c. callan, c. lovelace, c. nappi and s. yost, nucl.phys. b308 221 (1988).

[56] t. onogi and n. ishibashi, conformal field theories on surfaces with boundaries

and crosscaps, mod. phys. lett. a4, 161 (1989).

[57] n. ishibashi, the boundary and crosscap states in conformal field theories,

mod. phys. lett. a4, 251 (1989).

[58] j. polchinski and a. strominger, new vacua for type ii string theory, phys. lett.

b388, 736 (1996) hep-th/9510227.

[59] e. gava, k.s. narain and m.h. sarmadi, on the bound states of p-branes and

(p+2)-branes, nucl. phys. b504, 214 (1997) hep-th/9704006.

51

[60] i. antoniadis, e. gava, k.s. narain and t.r. taylor, duality in superstring com-
pactications with magnetic eld backgrounds, nucl. phys. b511, 611 (1998) hep-

th/9708075.

[61] o. bergman and m. gaberdiel, nucl.phys. b499 183 (1997) hep-th/9701137;

m. li, nucl.phys. b460 351 (1996) hep-th/9510161;
h. ooguri, y. oz and z. yin, nucl.phys. b477 407 (1996) hep-th/9606112;

k. becker, m.becker, d. morrison, h. ooguri, y. oz and z. yin, nucl. phys. b480
225 (1996) hep-th/9608116;

m. kato and t. okada, nucl. phys. b499 583 (1997) 583 hep-th/9612148;
s. stanciu, hep-th/9708166;
a. recknagel and v. schomerus, hep-th/9712186;

j. fuchs and c. schweigert, hep-th/9712257;
s. stanciu and a. tseytlin, hep-th/9805006;

m. gutperle and y. satoh, hep-th/9808080;
f. hussain, r. iengo, c. nunez and c. scrucca, phys. lett. b409 101 (1997) hep-

th/9706186;
m. bertolini, r. iengo and c. scrucca, hep-th/9801110;
m. bertolini, p. fre, r. iengo and c. scrucca, hep-th/9803096;

p. di vecchia, m. frau, a. lerda, i. pesando, r. russo and s. sciuto, nucl. phys.
b507 259 (1997) hep-th/9707068;

m. billo, p. di vecchia, m. frau, a. lerda, i. pesando, r. russo and s. sciuto, nucl.
phys. b526 199 (1998) hep-th/9802088; hep-th/9805091.

[62] e. witten, nucl. phys. b268 253 (1986).

[63] e. witten, nucl. phys. b276 291 (1986).

[64] a. strominger, g. t. horowitz, j. lykken and r. rohm, phys. rev. lett. 57 283

(1986).

[65] c.g. callan, i.r. klebanov, a.w. ludwig and j.m. maldacena, nucl. phys. b422,

417 (1994) hep-th/9402113.

[66] j. polchinski and l. thorlacius, phys. rev. d50, 622 (1994) hep-th/9404008.

[67] a. recknagel and v. schomerus, hep-th/9811237.

52

[68] s. elitzur, e. rabinovici and g. sarkisian, on least action d-branes, nucl. phys.

b541, 246 (1999) hep-th/9807161.

[69] a. sen, hep-th/9902105.

[70] d. friedan, e. martinec and s. shenker, nucl. phys. b271, 93 (1986).

53

