imperial/tp/98-99/26

damtp-1999-41

electroweak vacuum geometry

nathan f. lepora  ,1,2 and t. w. b. kibble  ,1

1) blackett laboratory, imperial college,

prince consort road, london, sw7 2bz, england

2) kings college, cambridge university

cambridge, cb2 1st, england

february 1999

abstract

we analyse symmetry breaking in the weinberg-salam model paying par-

ticular attention to the underlying geometry of the theory. in this context

we nd two natural metrics upon the vacuum manifold: an isotropic metric

associated with the scalar sector, and a squashed metric associated with the

gauge sector. physically, the interplay between these metrics gives rise to

many of the non-perturbative features of weinberg-salam theory.

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
6
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
7
1
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

e-mail: n.f.lepora@ic.ac.uk

e-mail: t.kibble@ic.ac.uk

1 introduction

numerous experiments have shown that perturbative electroweak interactions are

described by the weinberg-salam theory of a broken isospin-hypercharge gauge sym-

metry. within that theory the vacuum is instrumental in breaking the isospin-
hypercharge su(2)i  u(1)y symmetry to a residual electromagnetic u(1)q theory.
physically, the symmetry is broken by the coupling between this vacuum and isospin-

hypercharge gauge elds. this coupling induces mass for the w and z components of

the gauge elds, whilst the photon does not couple, remains massless and represents

the residual gauge theory.

however, in describing the above symmetry breaking weinberg-salam theory
also makes denite predictions about the vacuum structure. owing to the su(2)i 
u(1)y gauge symmetry, vacua are predicted to be degenerate and collectively form

the vacuum manifold. this structure then implies the existence of non-perturbative

solutions, for example the electroweak strings and the sphaleron. thus in describing

electromagnetism in conjunction with a w and z sector, weinberg-salam theory

implies the existence of further non-perturbative solutions related to the vacuum

structure.

by explicit calculation the relevant vacuum manifold m is predicted to be a

three-sphere. this three-sphere is related to the gauge structure by the familiar

relation

m = s 3 =

su(2)i  u(1)y

u(1)q

.

(1)

now a reasonable question is: what is special about this relation? for instance how
does su(2)i  u(1)y /u(1)q dier from so(4)/so(3), which is also isomorphic to
a three sphere.

mathematically, the answer to this question is: so(4)/so(3) and su(2)i 
u(1)y /u(1)q describe dierent metrical structures on the three-sphere. both de-

scribe homogenous metrics, but they dier in the symmetry properties of the metric.

essentially so(4)/so(3) is associated with a homogenous and isotropic metric on

the three-sphere, whilst the other gives a homogenous and anisotropic metric.

within this paper we examine how this mathematical structure relates to the
vacuum structure. it turns out that the anisotropic su(2)i  u(1)y /u(1)q metric

1

is naturally induced by the gauge sector, with the degree of anisotropy specied

by the gauge coupling constants. in addition the isotropic so(4)/so(3) metric is

naturally induced by the scalar sector of weinberg-salam theory. thus eq. (1) is

interpreted as appertaining to the gauge sector geometry of weinberg-salam theory,
whilst s 3 = so(4)/so(3) appertains to the scalar sector.

we then use this framework to interpret the non-perturbative solution spectrum

in terms of the vacuum geometry. such solutions are usually specied in terms of

their boundary conditions on the vacuum manifold. electroweak strings dene em-

bedded circles, whilst the sphaleron denes an embedded two-sphere. with respect

to the geometry we show that these boundary conditions relate to totally geodesic

submanifolds of the three-sphere with respect to both the scalar and gauge metrics.

we also show that the scattering of electroweak strings relate to the holonomy of

their boundary conditions with respect to these metrics.

2 electroweak symmetry breaking

we start by quickly running through the symmetry breaking mechanism in elec-

troweak theory. we use this discussion to make explicit some of the mathematical

structure required for this paper.

the usual approach is taken, whereby a lagrangian describes the interaction of
the gauge elds w   su(2) and y   u(1) with a scalar eld   c2. minimisation
of the scalar potential yields a vacuum with less gauge invariance than the original

symmetry. then orthogonal rotation of the w  and y  elds gives the w, z and

photon basis of mass eigenstates with respect to this vacuum.

the scalar-gauge sector of weinberg-salam theory is described by the lagrangian

l = 

1
4hw  + y , w + yi + (d)(d)  (  v2)2,

with the eld tensors

w  = w   w  + [w , w ],
y  = y   y ,

the covariant derivative

d =  + w  + y ,

2

(2)

(3a)

(3b)

(4)

and h,i the su(2)  u(1) inner product.

there is some freedom in the choice of non-degenerate inner products h,i on
su(2)i  u(1)y , constrained to be invariant under the adjoint action of su(2)i 
u(1)y . we parameterise the possible inner products in the following way

hx, y i = 

1
g2 (2trxy  trxtry ) 

1
g2 trxtry,

(5)

with real, positive parameters g and g. choosing a basis { 1
the pauli spin matrices, and 1

2ia} for su(2), with a
2i12 for u(1), we see that the unit norm generators are

1
2

k

igak=k

1
2

ig12k= 1.

with these generators the covariant derivative explicitly takes the form

d =  +

1
2

igaw 

a +

1
2

igy ,

(6)

(7)

yielding the familiar interpretation of g and g as the isospin and hypercharge gauge

coupling constants.

symmetry breaking is seen through minimisation of the lagrangian (2), one

solution of which is the vacuum solution

(x) = 0 = v


0

1




, w  = y  = 0.

(8)

the other minima of (2) collectively give rise to the vacuum manifold of degenerate

equivalent solutions

m = su(2)i  u(1)y  0 = { :  = v2},

(9)

a three-sphere.

around the vacuum (x) = 0 the gauge eld mass eigenstates are given by
1 , w 

2 , and

w 







z 

q 




xz

exq

= 

= 


cos w  sin w
cos w
sin w

cos w  sin w
cos w
sin w











3

3

w 

y  


1

2ig3
2ig12

1

(10a)

(10b)

,

,




an orthogonal transformation of the elds, so that the covariant derivative becomes

d =  +

1
2

2

xi=1

igiw 

i + xzz  + exqq.

(11)

interpreting q as the photon constrains xq0 = 0, yielding tan w = g/g. this
massless gauge eld q is associated with the a residual u(1)q electromagnetic

gauge symmetry

explicitly the generators are

xz =

1
2

cos 2w

0

i


with  = g2 + g2, e = gg/.

0
1

,




xq = i


1 0

0 0

,




(12)

the massive gauge eld generators { 1

2i1, 1

2i2, xz} form an orthonormal basis

for a vector space m, such that

su(2)i  u(1)y = u(1)q  m,

(13)

with the orthogonality determined by the inner product h,i. this relation draws
particular comparison to the isomorphism m = su(2)i  u(1)y /u(1)q, associating

the space of massive generators with the tangent space to the vacuum manifold at

0.

3 vacuum geometry

for both the scalar and gauge sectors we now explicitly calculate their associated

metrics. we also calculate the associated isometry and isotropy groups for each,

and from these groups specify the corresponding geodesic structures.

having obtained two inequivalent homogenous metrics on the vacuum manifold

we then compare their structure. we relate their isometry and isotropy groups, and

determine when curves are mutually geodesic with respect to both metrics.

3.1 scalar sector

the structure associated with the scalar sector is a vector space of scalar eld values

c2 equipped with a real euclidean inner product re[]. regarding the vacuum

4

manifold as embedded within the vector space of scalar eld values, a natural metric

may be induced on the vacuum manifold by specifying its form on each tangent

space to be that of the euclidean inner product. such a metric is isotropic and

homogenous. its geodesics are the great circles.

explicitly, regard the tangent space to m at   m as an r3 subspace of c2

tm = {  c2 : re[] = 0},

with a corresponding metric induced from the real euclidean inner product

g(t1, t2) = re[t 

1 t2], t1, t2  tm.
this metric has an su(2)i  su(2)k group of isometries,

g(at1, at2)a = g(t1, t2),

a  su(2)i  su(2)k.

(14)

(15)

(16)

the su(2)i represents the usual left isospin su(2) actions upon c2 with generators
2ia}, whilst su(2)k acts upon c2 with the generators { 1
{ 1
2i12},
where k is the complex conjugation operator. this su(2)k contains the hyper-

2i2k, 1

22k, 1

charge u(1)y , and some other additional symmetries of the scalar sector which are

not symmetries of the full gauge theory.

the isotropy group of su(2)i  su(2)k upon m at the point 0 is the subgroup

su(2)ik such that

which is generated by { 1
isomorphism

2i1 + 1

su(2)ik  0 = 0,
22k, 1

2i2  1

(17)

2i2k, 1

2 i3 + 1

2i12}. this gives the

m =

su(2)i  su(2)k

su(2)ik

.

(18)

one should be aware that su(2)  su(2) is the compact covering group of so(4),
just as su(2) is the compact covering group of so(3). thus eq. (18) is an expression
of the more familiar relation s 3 = so(4)/so(3).

given the above isotropy and isometry properties of the metric we can use the

isomorphism (18) to calculate the geodesics upon the vacuum manifold with respect
to the scalar sector metric g(,). this geodesic structure follows from some results of
dierential geometry [1, chapter x]. specically, these results examine the geodesic
structure on the coset space, but this may be simply carried back to m  c2 to

5

give the results that we require. we summarise the full result in an appendix and

give only the answer here.

we rstly need an inner product upon su(2)i  su(2)k which we shall dene as
(19)

{xi + xk, yi + yk} = 2trxiyi  2trxkyk,

with an obvious notation. this then induces

where n has an orthogonal basis { 1

2i1  1

the geodesic structure is then

su(2)i  su(2)k = su(2)ik  n ,
2i2 + 1

22k, 1

2i2k, 1

2i3  1

2i12}.

(20)

the geodesics on m with respect to the metric g(,), which pass through
0 are:

x = {exp(xt)0 : t  r},

(21)

with x  n .

the above geodesic structure is the main result of this section. essentially we

have derived the geodesic structure to consist of the great circles embedded in a

three-sphere. this result is as expected, since we are merely embedding the three-

sphere within a euclidean space. however, it is the method which is of importance.

the same approach may be adopted for the gauge sector, where the result is intu-

itively less clear. also using the same formalism allows direct comparison between

the metrical structures associated with the gauge and scalar sectors.

we conclude this section by exploring some consequences of the two eqs. (19,
20). the space of geodesic generators n is related to the tangent space of m at 0:
(22)

t0m = n  0.

considering a general  = a0  m with a  su(2)i  su(2)k, there is a more
general association

tm = ad(a)n  .

(23)

for consistency the euclidean inner product on tm is equivalent to the inner
product on ad(a)n induced by {,} of eq. (19)

g(x1, x2) = {x1, x2}, xi  ad(a)  n .

(24)

6

this property is essential to the derivation of eq. (21), and motivates the choice

made in eq. (19).

3.2 gauge sector

the main structure associated with the gauge sector is the inner product h,i of
eq. (5). it species several important related features of the gauge sector. first

of all it denes the gauge kinetic term in eq. (2), introducing the gauge coupling

constants as the relative scales. secondly it stipulates the embedding of the massive
gauge generators m in eq. (13) to be perpendicular to u(1)q. finally it renders the
photon xq, z-eld xz and w-eld generators mutually orthonormal.

we shall use this inner product to dene the gauge-sector metric. the denition
is achieved by associating the massive generators m with tangent spaces to the
vacuum manifold in a manner completely analogous to that in the last section.
then the natural inner product h,i on the massive generators m induces a metric
on the vacuum manifold. we nd the corresponding isometry group of this metric
to be the gauge group su(2)i  u(1)y and the isotropy group to be the residual
symmetry u(1)q. thus the metric is homogenous, but anisotropic. its geodesics

are rather complicated in structure.

explicitly, observe that the tangent space (14) may be expressed

t0m = m  0.

(25)

more generally, the corresponding tangent space at  = a0  m is, for any
a  su(2)i  u(1)y ,

tm = at0m = ad(a)m  .

(26)

transitivity over m guarantees a natural isomorphism between any tangent space
and some ad(a)m.

using the isomorphism implied by eq. (26), the inner product h,i associates a

corresponding metric on m

h(x1, x2) = hx1, x2i, x1, x2  ad(a)m.

(27)

the precise form is parameterised by the hypercharge and isospin coupling constants.

7

this metric has an su(2)i  u(1)y group of isometries

h(at1, at2)a = h(t1, t2),

a  su(2)i  u(1)y .

(28)

more precisely, by eq. (26) the action of a  su(2)i  u(1)y upon h(,) is

h(at1, at2)a = had(a)x1, ad(a)x2i = hx1, x2i = h(t1, t2).

(29)

the above isometries represent the maximal subgroup of su(2)i  su(2)k leaving
h,i invariant.

the isotropy group of this isometry group at the point 0 in m is the subgroup

u(1)q such that

giving the isomorphism

u(1)q  0 = 0,

m =

su(2)i  u(1)y

u(1)q

.

(30)

(31)

thus we recover the familiar relation for the vacuum manifold, but now explicitly

associated with the gauge sector metrical structure.

as for the scalar sector the importance of isomorphism (31) is that we may use

the isotropy and isometry properties of the metric to calculate the geodesics upon

the vacuum manifold with respect to the gauge sector metric. again we give only

answer and refer to the full result summarised in the appendix.

the structure is

the geodesics on m with respect to the metric h(,), passing through 0
are:

x = {exp(xt)0 : t  r},

(32)

with x  m.

a short calculation yields the geodesics through 0 associated with the following

generators in m

to be

x =

1
2

ic1g1 +

1
2

ic2g2 + dxz,

c2
1 + c2

2 + d2 = 1

x(t) = veid tan2 wt/2


c sin t/2

cos t/2  id sin t/2

,




8

(33)

(34)

where c = c2 + ic1. this structure is rather complicated, for instance the closed

geodesics from a discrete set such that

d tan2 w  q,
d  q,

c 6= 0,
c = 0.

(35a)

(35b)

geodesics through other points  = a0  m may be simply obtained by acting
correspondingly on eq. (34).

there are a couple of points to observe about the geodesic structure. firstly,

their exists a totally geodesic two sphere through 0 dened by those geodesics

satisfying d = 0. secondly, in the direction perpendicular to the tangent space of

this sphere there exists a closed geodesic satisfying c = 0. because of homogeneity

this is also true for any point on the vacuum manifold.

the above metric is homogenous but anisotropic. its anisotropy is parametrised

by the weak mixing angle w, becoming isotropic when w vanishes. thus one may
interpret the gauge metric h(,) as a continuous and homogenous deformation of
the isotropic euclidean scalar metric g(,). at each point this deformation leaves a
two-sphere and a circle unaected, but deforms relative to the two. in some sense

this structure is analogous to squashing the three-sphere; having the geometry of an

ellipsoid, but with the deformation homogeneous so as to respect the homogeneity

of (31).

we conclude this part of the discussion by observing that the above structure is

rather special to the three-sphere. it is related to the hopf bration. in the hopf

bration picture the metric on the s 1 bres has a dierent length scale to that on

the s 2 base space. one should note that the only other spheres to have a similar

structure are the seven-sphere and the fteen-sphere.

3.3 scalar-gauge geometry

in summary, we found two inequivalent metrics on the electroweak vacuum manifold

associated with the scalar and gauge sectors. we shall now determine how the

structure of these metrics relate to each other. comparing the respective symmetry

groups determines those symmetries which are shared. these shared symmetries

dene two submanifolds whose geodesics are mutually geodesic with respect to the

9

two metrics. these correspond to the two-sphere and the circle mentioned in the

discussion of the gauge sector metric.

the scalar and gauge metrics, g(,) and h(,), have the following isometry group

decompositions with respect to their isotropy groups

su(2)i  su(2)k = su(2)ik  n ,
su(2)i  u(1)y = u(1)q  m,

where the group structure is related by

u(1)q  su(2)ik,
u(1)y  su(2)k,

m  su(2)i  su(2)k.

also, the tangent space to m at 0 is related to m and n by

t0m = m  0 = n  0.

(36a)

(36b)

(37a)

(37b)

(37c)

(38)

it is important to understand how the metrics g(,) and h(,) relate to each

another. by bilinearity of the metrics, at the point 0  m,

g(t1, t2)0 = h(at1, at2)0, a  gl(t0m),

(39)

relating the metrics by a linear map of the tangent space. the eigenspaces of a can

be found by explicitly calculating a, and diagonalising it, this yields

t0m = t z

0m  t w

0 m,

with

t z
0m = mz  0, mz = r  xz,
1
t w
0 m = mw  0, mw = r 
2

i1  r 

1
2

i2.

then the metrics are related such that

g(xz0 + xw 0, yz0 + yw 0)0 =

(40)

(41a)

(41b)

zh(xz0, yz0)0 + w h(xw 0, yw 0)0,

(42)

10

with an obvious notation, and z = 2v2/ cos 2w, w = g2v2. this may be easily
generalised to all   m by considering the action of su(2)i  u(1)y on eq. (42).
decomposition (40) also describes the geodesic structure of m with respect to
g(,) and h(,) in a rather nice way. applying eqs. (21) and (32), the submanifolds

m z = exp(mz)0,
m w = exp(mw )0,

t0m z = t z

0m

t0m w = t w

0 m

(43a)

(43b)

are the only totally geodesic submanifolds of m with respect to both metrics g(,)
and h(,). no other submanifold of m has this property.

one should note that the ad(u(1)q)-irreducible subspaces of m with respect to

the inner product h,i are

m = mz  mw ,

(44)

as found in the decomposition above. these also relate to the mass eigenstates of

the massive gauge elds. this property is in fact very general [2].

4 physical implications

in summary of the previous section we found two homogenous metrics on the vacuum

manifold associated with the scalar and gauge sectors of weinberg-salam theory.

the scalar sector induces an isotropic metric, whilst the gauge sector induces an

anisotropic metric. there is a unique totally geodesic two sphere with respect to

both metrics. geodesic curves with respect to both metrics consist of the geodesics

in this two sphere, and one other circular path whose tangent vector is orthogonal

to the tangent plane of this two sphere.

given this structure one might inquire as to how this relates to the spectrum

of non-perturbative solitonic-type solutions present in weinberg-salam theory. it

transpires that the electroweak strings correspond to the mutually geodesic paths,

whilst the sphaleron corresponds to the mutually geodesic two-sphere. this ap-

proach has the added bonus of interpreting the scattering of electroweak strings in

terms of the holonomy of their respective geodesic. also the dynamical stability

11

of the z-string, as the weak mixing angle approaches /2, is seen to correspond to

extreme anisotropy of the gauge metric.

4.1 electroweak strings

electroweak strings correspond to nielsen-olesen vortices embedded in weinberg-

salam theory [3]. as such their boundary conditions dene circular paths on the

vacuum manifold. thus one might expect that their spectrum and properties should

correspond to the geometry of the vacuum manifold. this is what we nd. their

boundary conditions correspond to the paths that are mutually geodesic with respect

to both metrics.

formally, an electroweak string is dened by the embedding

with the general ansatz

su(2)i  u(1)y  u(1)q



u(1)  1,

(r, ) = fno(r)ex0,

a(r, ) =

gno(r)

r

x ,

(45)

(46a)

(46b)

where x  su(2)i  u(1)y is the vortex generator. one may consider only x  m,
since these minimise the magnetic energy [4]. thus one considers only ansatze with
boundary conditions geodesic with respect to the scalar metric h(,).

the above vortex ansatz is a solution provided that [5]

(i) the scalar eld must be single-valued. hence the boundary conditions describe

a closed geodesic with e2x0 = 0.

(ii) the ansatz is a solution to the equations of motion; then elds in the vortex

do not induce currents perpendicular (in lie algebra space) to it [6]. this may be

equivalently phrased as [4]: x is a vortex generator if re[(x0)x 0] = 0 for all
x  such that hx , xi = 0.

condition (ii) can be conveniently restated in terms of the corresponding metrics:

x is a vortex generator if the associated tangent vector t = x0 satises

g(t, t ) = 0 for all t  such that h(t, t ) = 0.

12

referring to the discussion around eq. (40), we see that t must lie in one of the

eigenspaces of the linear map relating the two metrics. namely x is an element of
either mz or mw , the two ad(u(1)q-irreducible subspaces of m in the decompo-
sition

m = mz  mw .

(47)

it is interesting that the geodesics dened from mz and mw are the only
geodesics which are simultaneously geodesic with respect to both metrics. from a

mathematical point of view this is because these geodesics dene submanifolds of

the vacuum manifold with coincident scalar and gauge metrics (to an overall factor).

from a physical point of view, this may be interpreted as a minimisation of both

the scalar and gauge sectors of the action integral.

from the above it is a fairly trivial exercise to work out the forms of the vortices,

obtaining results in agreement with refs. [3, 5].

4.2 semi-local vortices

when the weak mixing angle becomes /2 the isospin gauge symmetry su(2)i

becomes a global symmetry whilst the hypercharge symmetry u(1)y remains lo-

cal. such a model is interpreted as a complex doublet scalar eld with a gauged

phase. for suitable scalar potentials it admits dynamically stable semi-local vortex

solutions [7], interpreted as the corresponding limit of a z-string. by continuity

the z-string is dynamically stable in a region close to weak mixing angle /2 [3].

we wish to point out that this is related to the gauge metric becoming extremely

anisotropic.

as the weak mixing angle tends to /2 the isospin coupling g tends to zero. for
g = 0, the inner product h,i becomes ill dened. it is well dened only on the
subalgebra u(1)y , where it takes the form

hx, y i/2 = 

1
g2 trxtry.

(48)

by eqs. (27, 43a), the gauge metric is only dened upon the one-dimensional sub-
manifold mz  m, where

h/2(x1, x2) = hx1, x2i/2, x1, x2  mz.

(49)

13

this is interpreted as the limit of extreme anisotropy; this anisotropy picking out
the submanifold mz  m upon which the metric is well dened.

physically, the submanifold mz represents those points that may be reached by

a gauge transformation from 0. other points within the vacuum manifold may

only be reached by a global transformation. this property is related to the stability

of the vortex. to decay, the vortex solution must deform out of mz. such a process

costs large gradient energies that may not be compensated for by a gauge eld [7].

4.3 combination electroweak vortices

when the weak mixing angle vanishes the hypercharge gauge symmetry u(1)y be-

comes a global symmetry whilst the isospin symmetry su(2)i remains local. such

a model is interpreted as a gauged complex doublet scalar eld with a global phase.
then weinberg-salam theory represents the symmetry breaking su(2)i  1. cor-
respondingly there is a two-parameter family of embedded vortices representing

z-strings, w-strings, and combination w-z strings. we wish to point out here that

this is related to the gauge metric becoming isotropic, coinciding with the scalar

metric and thus all geodesics of the scalar sector dene electroweak strings.

when the weak mixing angle vanishes, so that g = 0, the inner product h,i

becomes well dened only on the subalgebra su(2)i,

hx, y i0 = 

1
g2 (2trxy  trxtry ).

analogous to eq. (27), the metric is then dened from h,i0 to be
h0(x1, x2) = hx1, x2i0, x1, x2  su(2)i.

(50)

(51)

then the scalar and gauge metrics coincide upto a factor of the isospin coupling

constant g

g(t1, t2) =

1
g

h0(t1, t2).

(52)

thus the isometry group of the gauge metric increases to su(2)i  su(2)k, with
this su(2)k now representing a set of global su(2) symmetries of the gauge theory

only apparent at vanishing weak mixing angle.

in terms of the electroweak vortex spectrum, condition (ii) is satised for all
vortex generators x  su(2)i, since with respect to the two metrics all vortices are

14

trivially coincident. hence the spectrum of vortex solutions becomes a continuous
family dened by elements x  su(2)i.

it is an interesting question to enquire what happens to these solutions as the

weak mixing angle moves o zero. by continuity one might expect some sort of per-

turbed solution to exist. however it is dicult to see what its boundary conditions

would be since necessarily they can only be a geodesic of either the gauge metric or

the scalar metric, not both.

4.4 non-abelian aharanov-bohm scattering

it is known that the aharov-bohm scattering of particles o a vortex, or one vortex

o another, is controlled by the holonomy of a vortexs boundary conditions [8]. in

this context the term holonomy was used to indicate non-trivial parallel transport of

either a vortex or a charged particle in a circuit around a vortex. we show here that

this holonomy refers precisely to the holonomy with respect to the gauge metric.

associated with the magnetic ux of a vortex is the wilson line integral

u() = p exp z 

0

a  dl!  g,

(53)

at innite radius. the function u(2) dictates the parallel transport of matter

elds around a vortex, such that a fermion doublet  is transported to u(2).

diagonalisation of u then associates components i with phase shifts i. non-

trivial fermionic components i interact with the vortex by an aharanov-bohm

cross section

d
d

=

1

2k

sin2(i/2)
sin2(/2)

,

(54)

whilst trivial components e2k = 1 interact by an everett cross section [9]. the

above holds for parity symmetric theories only. when charges for the left and right

fermion elds dier one must also include the eects of induced fermionic zero modes

substitution of the boundary conditions for the z and w-string, determined in

sec. (4.1), gives the wilson line integral for electroweak strings. for the z-string

whilst for the w-string

uz() = exp(2xz),

uw () = exp(i(1 sin  + 2 cos )).

15

(55)

(56)

vortex boundary conditions restrict u(2)  u(1)q, where explicitly uz(2) =
exp(4 cos2 wxq) and uw (2) = 1. for the scattering of a fermion doublet 
o a z-string this yields phase shifts 1 = 2 cos2 w and 2 = 2. thus upper
components interact with z-strings by an aharanov-bohm cross section, whilst lower

components interact by an everett cross section. fermions interact with w-strings

only by an everett cross section.

in [8] the wilson line integral is related to holonomy, referring to non-trivial

parallel transport around the vortex. referring to our appendix, in particular the

result

the parallel transport of u  tvm along x(t) is u = d(exp(xt))u.

we see that this holonomy refers precisely to the parallel transport with respect to

the gauge sector metric around its closed geodesics. for vortices relevant paths are

geodesic with respect to both metrics.

one should be aware that parity violation in the standard model means that one

must take into account the fermionic zero modes. this is done in ref. [10].

4.5 the sphaleron

finally, we point out that the existence of the sphaleron solution in weinberg-salam

theory is related to the presence an embedded two sphere in the vacuum manifold

that is totally geodesic with respect to both the gauge and scalar metrics. the

dipole moment of a sphaleron is also related to this embedding.

for w = 0 the ansatz

(r) = fsph(r) exp(

i
2

raa)0,

aa(r) = gsph(r)

i
2

abcrbc,

(57a)

(57b)

constitutes a solution to weinberg-salam theory for suitable prole functions fsph,

gsph. it is unstable because the boundary conditions dene a topologically trivial
map s 2  su(2). by continuity this solution is expected to persist to non-zero w,
with perturbations being produced in the elds. such a solution is referred to as

the sphaleron [11].

16

the scalar eld asymptotically maps onto the submanifold m w  m. thus,
as with electroweak strings, the boundary conditions dene a totally geodesic sub-

manifold of the vacuum manifold with respect to both the scalar and gauge metrics.

one should note that m w is the only two-dimensional submanifold of the vacuum

manifold dened so.

to prevent an electric monopole component at non-zero weak mixing angle, the
gauge eld (57b) deforms such that i
23  xz. this implies a preferred axis in the
r3-direction, with the conguration rotationally symmetric about it. inducing, to

lowest order, dipolar perturbations in the electromagnetic eld

qa =

abcbrc
4r3 xq,

(58)

with  parallel to r3, as found by substitution into the eld equations [11].

5 discussion

in this nal section we briey discuss some extensions to this work and make some

comments that may warrant further note.

(i) the general case

the group theory in this paper can be extended to the general symmetry breaking
g  h in a fairly straightforward manner. hence, in general, one may expect
two metrics on the vacuum manifold relating to the scalar and gauge sector. as

in weinberg-salam theory, embedded vortices will be geodesic with with respect to

both metrics, and the aharonov-bohm scattering will relate to the holonomy of the

gauge sector metric.

(ii) simplicity of electroweak theory

crucial to establishing the scalar and gauge metrics on the vacuum manifold was
establishing the isomorphisms with the coset spaces su(2)k  su(2)i/su(2)ik
and su(2)i u(1)y /u(1)q. the rst of which is a symmetric space, and the second
is a non-symmetric homogenous space, interpreted as deformed from the rst. this

structure is in fact quite special, and electroweak theory constitutes the smallest

dimensional example of this.

17

(iii) energetics and curvature

from the metrical structure one has a corresponding curvature of the vacuum man-

ifold. it seems sensible that the energy of embedded vortices should be associated

with the sum of the curvatures of the scalar and gauge metrics on the submanifold of

the vacuum manifold associated with the scalar boundary conditions of the vortex.

coecients of this sum should be related to those of the landau potential, and the

value of this sum should be related to the stability of the vortex.

(iv) insensitivity to the form of the theory

in relating the solitonic spectrum and properties to the metrical structure of the

theory one moves away from the specic details of the lagrangian. thus the met-

rical approach relates more to the general symmetry features of the theory rather

than the specic model of symmetry breaking.

acknowledgements.

this work was supported in part by pparc. n.l. acknowledges epsrc for a

research studentship and kings college, cambridge for a junior research fellowship.

this work was supported in part by the european commission under the human

capital and mobility program, contract no. chrx-ct94-0423.

appendix

we provide here a quick summary of the results of [1, chapter x] that are relevant

to this work.

consider a manifold g/h, where h  g are compact lie groups. then an
important and relevant decomposition is the reductive decomposition of the lie

algebras

which satises

g = h  m,

ad(h)h  h,
ad(h)m  m.

18

(59)

(60a)

(60b)

here m may be associated with the tangent space to m at the trivial coset. one
should note that strictly speaking an inner product h,i on g is required to dene
the reductive decomposition.

given such a decomposition we can associate a g-invariant connection on g/h

having the following properties:

(i) all geodesics in m emanating from the trivial coset are of the form

x(t) = exp(xt)h,

(61)

with x  m.
(ii) considering exp(xt)  g, the parallel transport of a tangent vector y  m
along the curve exp(xt)h is

y  = ad(exp(xt))y.

(62)

(iii) the corresponding g-invariant metric on g/h is associated with the inner
products on g such that at the trivial coset

g(x, y )h = hx, y i,

(63)

identifying tangent vectors with elements of m.

by applying the above result one may examine the case with a vector space v

such that g acts on it by the d-representation. then hv is the isotropy subgroup
at v  v , and we associate the manifold

m = d(g)v =

g
h

.

(64)

given an inner product h,i on g we associate a g-invariant connection on m
from the decomposition g = hv  m. denoting the tangent space at v to m by
tvm = mv, the following properties are apparent
(i) all geodesics emanating from v are of the form

x(t) = d(exp(xt))v.

(ii) the parallel transport of u  tvm along x(t) is

u = d(exp(xt))u.

(iii) the corresponding g-invariant metric on m takes the value at v

g(xv, y v)v = hx, y i.

19

(65)

(66)

(67)

references

[1] s. kobayashi and k. nomizu, foundations of dierential geometry, volume

ii (interscience publishers, 1969).

[2] n. f. lepora and t. w. b. kibble, to be published in phys. rev. d

[3] t. vachaspati, phys. rev. lett. 68 1977 (1992), ibid 69, 216 (1992).

[4] n. lepora and a. c. davis, to be published in phys. rev. d.

[5] t. vachaspati and m. barriola, phys. rev. d69 69, 1867 (1992).

[6] m. barriola, t. vachaspati and m. bucher, phys. rev. d 50, 2819 (1994).

[7] t. vachaspati and a. achucarro, phys. rev. d 44, 3067 (1991). m. hindmarsh,

phys. rev. lett. 68, 1263 (1992).

[8] m. g. alford and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 62, 1071 (1989). f. wilczek and

y. wu, phys. rev. lett. 65, 13 (1990).

[9] a. e. everett phys. rev. d 24, 858 (1981).

[10] n. ganoulis, phys. lett. b298, 63 (1993). a. c. davis, a. p. martin and

n. ganoulis, nucl. phys. b419, 323 (1994).

[11] n. manton, phys. rev. d 28, 2019 (1983). f. klinkhamer and n. manton,

phys. rev. d 30, 2212 (1984).

20

