recent developments in string theory: from

perturbative dualities to m-theory

lectures given by d. lust at the saalburg summer school in september 1998

michael haack1,, boris kors2 ,, dieter lust3,

 martin-luther-universitat halle-wittenberg

institut fur physik, friedemann bach platz 6, 06108 halle/saale, germany

 humboldt universitat zu berlin

institut fur physik, invalidenstr. 110, 10115 berlin, germany

abstract

these lectures intend to give a pedagogical introduction into some of the developments
in string theory during the last years. they include perturbative t-duality and non pertur-
bative s- and u-dualities, their unavoidable demand for d-branes, an example of enhanced
gauge symmetry at xed points of the t-duality group, a review of classical solitonic so-
lutions in general relativity, gauge theories and tendimensional supergravity, a discussion
of their bps nature, polchinskis observations that allow to view d-branes as rr charged
states in the non perturbative string spectrum, the application of all this to the computation
of the black hole entropy and hawking radiation and nally a brief survey of how everything
ts together in m-theory.

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
6

 

 
 

1
v
3
3
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1email: michael@hera1.physik.uni-halle.de
2email: koers@physik.hu-berlin.de
3email: luest@physik.hu-berlin.de

contents

1 introduction

1.1 perturbative string theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 t-duality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 non-perturbative dualities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.1
s-duality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.2 u-duality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.3
string-string-duality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3.4 duality to elevendimensional supergravity and m-theory . . . . . . . . . . .

3
3
4
5
5
6
6
7

2 t-duality

7
8
2.1 closed bosonic string theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.1 compactication on a circle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2 compactication on a torus t d . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2 heterotic string theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3 type iia and iib superstring theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.4 open strings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

3 non perturbative phenomena

18
3.1 solitons in eld theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1.1 black holes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.1.2 magnetic monopoles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.1.3 bps states
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.2 solitons in string theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2.1 extended charges as sources of tensor elds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2.2
solutions of the supergravity eld equations: p-branes . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.2.3 d-branes as p-branes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.2.4 black holes in string theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

4 m-theory

a compactication on t 2 and t-duality

46

50

2

1 introduction

these notes are a summary and a substantial extension of the material that d. lust presented
in his lectures at the summer school at saalburg in 1998. they are intended to give a basic
overview over non perturbative eects and duality symmetries in string theory including recent
developments. after a short review of the status of perturbative string theory, as it presented
itself before the (second) string revolution in 1995, and a brief summary of the recent progress
especially concerning non perturbative aspects, the main text falls into two pieces. in chapter
2 we will go into some details of t-duality. afterwards chapter 3 and chapter 4 will focus on
some non perturbative phenomena. the text is however not meant as an introduction to string
theory but rather relies on some basic knowledge (see e.g. the lectures given at this school by o.
lechtenfeld or [1, 2, 3]). the references we give are never intended to be exhaustive but only to
display the material that is essentially needed to justify our arguments and calculations.

1.1 perturbative string theory

before 1995 string theory was only dened via its perturbative expansion. as the string moves
in time, it sweeps out a two dimensional worldsheet  which is embedded via its coordinates in
a minkowski target space m:

(1)

x (,  ) :   m.

this worldsheet describes (after a wick rotation in the time variable  ) a riemann surface
(possibly with boundary). propagators or general greens functions of scattering processes can
be expanded in the dierent topologies of riemannian surfaces, which corresponds to an expansion
in the string coupling constant gs (see g.1). the reason for this is, that all string diagrams can

+

+

+ ...

figure 1: string perturbation expansion

be built out of the fundamental splitting respectively joining vertex (g.2). this vertex comes
along with a factor gs, which is given by the vacuum expectation value (vev) of a scalar eld
, the so called dilaton:

gs  ehi.

(2)

as there is no potential for the dilaton in string perturbation theory, its vev is an arbitrary

 

g s

figure 2: fundamental string interaction vertex

parameter, which can be freely chosen. only if it is small, the above expansion in riemann
surfaces makes sense. statements about the strong coupling regime on the other hand require
some knowledge about non perturbative characteristics of string theory such as duality relations
combining weakly coupled string theories with strongly coupled ones. first quantizing the string

3

amounts to quantizing the embedding coordinates, regarded as elds of a two dimensional (con-
formal) eld theory living on the world sheet. this is a two dimensional analog of point particle
quantum mechanics. a sensible second quantized string eld theory is very dicult to achieve
and will not be discussed here any further. in the perturbative regime there exist ve consistent

gauge group # of supercharges n

16

16

16

16 + 16

16 + 16

1

1

1

2

2

type

heterotic

heterotic

e8  e8
so(32)

i (includes open strings)

so(32)

iia (nonchiral)

iib (chiral)

-

-

table 1: the ve consistent superstring theories in d=10

ten dimensional superstring theories (see table 1). type iia and iib at rst sight do not contain
any open strings. in fact they do however appear if one introduces the non perturbative objects
called d-branes, which are hyperplanes on which open strings can end. thus from the world sheet
viewpoint a d-brane manifests itself by cutting a hole into the surface and imposing dirichlet
boundary conditions. these objects will be studied in more detail below. to get a string theory
in lower dimensional space-time, such as in the phenomenologically most interesting case d = 4,
one has to compactify the additional space dimensions. there are several methods to construct
fourdimensional string theories and in fact there are many dierent ways to get rid of the extra
dimensions. a priori each compactication gives rise to a dierent string vacuum with dierent
particle content, gauge group and couplings. this huge vacuum degeneracy in four dimensions is
known as the vacuum problem. but despite of the large number of dierent known vacua it has
not yet been possible to nd a compactication yielding in its low energy approximation precisely
the standard model of particle physics.

1.2 t-duality

t-duality (or target space duality) [4] denotes the equivalence of two string theories compactied
on dierent background spaces.
both theories can in fact be considered as one and the same
string theory as they contain exactly the same physics. the equivalence transformation can thus
be considered as some kind of transformation of variables, in which the theory is described. nev-
ertheless we will always use the usual terminology, speaking of dierent theories when we actually
mean dierent equivalent formulations of the same physical theory. t-duality is a perturbative
symmetry in the sense, that the t-duality transformation maps the weak coupling region of one
theory to the weak coupling regime of another theory. thus it can be tested in perturbation
theory, e.g. by comparing the perturbative string spectra. examples of t-dualities are:

het on s1 with radius r
iia on s1 with radius r

t-dual het on s1 with radius rd =
t-dual iib on s1 with radius rd =


r

r .

these are special cases of the so called mirror symmetry. as we will see in chapter 2, t-duality
transformations for closed strings exchange the winding number around some circle with the
corresponding (discrete) momentum quantum number. thus it is clear, that this symmetry
relation has no counterpart in ordinary point particle eld theory as the ability of closed strings
to wind around the compactied dimension is essential.

4

1.3 non-perturbative dualities

at strong coupling the higher topologies of the expansion (g. 1) become large and the series
expansion does not make sense anymore. non perturbative eects dominantly contribute to the
scattering processes. their contributions behave like:

a  e1/gs

or a  e1/g2

s .

(3)

the second exponential (with gs  gym) is the typical non perturbative suppression factor in
gauge eld theoretic amplitudes involving solitons like magnetic monopoles or instanton eects.
solitons also play a role in general relativity in the form of black holes. in general solitons are non
trivial solutions of the eld equations which have a nite action integral. their energy is localized
in space and they have properties similar to point particles. clearly it is of some interest to ask,
what kind of solitonic objects appear in string theory giving rise to the behavior of eq. (3). the
answer is that the string solitons are extended p-(spatial)dimensional at objects called p-branes
(i.e. (p + 1)-dimensional hypersurfaces in space-time). the special values p = 0, 1, 2 therefore
give point particles, strings and membranes respectively. such objects can indeed be found as
classical solutions of the eective low energy eld theories derived from the various superstring
theories (see section 3.2). it was however polchinskis achievement to realize, that some of them
(namely those which do not arise in the universal sector) have an alternative description as hy-
perplanes on which open strings can end [5]. as these objects are necessarily contained in type
iia and iib string theory, it is apparent, that these theories have to contain open strings. unlike
in type i theory the open strings just have to start and end on the p-branes and are not allowed
to move freely in the whole of space-time. it is obvious that the boundary conditions of the open
strings have changed from neumann to dirichlet ones in the space dimensions transvers to the
branes. that is why these p-branes are called d-branes (in contrast to the p-branes from the
universal sector which are sometimes also called ns-branes). note that precisely the d-branes
are responsible for contributions to scattering amplitudes that are suppressed by the rst type of
suppression factor.

this new insight into the nature of the non perturbative degrees of freedom in string theory is
a fundamental ingredient of the recently conjectured non perturbative duality symmetries. like
t-duality, these dualities are supposed to establish an equivalence of two (seemingly dierent)
full string theories, but in their case the duality transformations map the weak coupling regions
of one theory to the strong coupling regions of the other one and vice versa. thus they e.g.
exchange elementary excitations and the solitonic p-branes. several dierent kinds of such non
perturbative dualities have to be distinguished:

1.3.1 s-duality

by s-duality we mean a selfduality, which maps the weak coupling regime of one string theory
to the strong coupling region of the same theory. the existence of such a strong-weak coupling
duality in string theory was rst conjectured in [6] in the context of the compactication of the
heterotic string to four dimensions. after some time accumulating evidence for the s-duality of
the heterotic string compactied on t 6 was found found [7]-[9]. more recently it was realized
that also the type iib superstring in ten dimensions is s-dual to itself [10] and another in both
cases the transformation acts via an element of sl(2, z) on a complex scalar , whose imaginary
parts vev is related to the coupling constant of the string theory (see (2)). in the heterotic
theory it is given by  = a + ie, where  is the dilaton and a the scalar which is equivalent
to the antisymmetric tensor b in four dimensions. for the type iib theory we have instead
 = a + ie/2, where now a is the second scalar present in the ten dimensional spectrum coming
from the rr sector. both theories are invariant under the s-duality transformation

 

a + b
c + d

with (cid:18) a b

d (cid:19)  sl(2, z)

c

(4)

5

combined with a transformation of either the four dimensional gauge bosons, mixing f and its
dual,

f (cid:19) (cid:18) a b
(cid:18) f

d (cid:19)(cid:18) f

f (cid:19) ,

c

or the two antisymmetric tensors

(cid:18) b

 (cid:19) (cid:18) a b

 (cid:19)
d (cid:19)(cid:18) b

b

c





b

(5)

(6)

in the heterotic or type iib case respectively. the case a = 0, a = d = 0, b = c = 1 shows,
that the s-duality transformations comprise the inversion of the coupling constant. in the rst
example the theory is additionally invariant under a t-duality group (see below (37)).

1.3.2 u-duality

the u-duality group (see e.g.
[11] for a review) of a given string theory is the group which
comprises t- and s-duality and embeds them into a generally larger group with new symmetry
generators. the main example is the system type iia/iib in d  8 on t 10d. it will be seen in
section 2.3 that for d  9 type iia and type iib have the same moduli space and are t-dual to
each other in the sense that type iia at large compactication radius is equivalent to type iib at
small radius and vice versa. the two tendimensional theories are dierent limits of a single space
of compactied theories, which will in the following sometimes be called the moduli space of type
ii theory (meaning all compactications of type iia and iib). as indicated above, the theory is
invariant under t-duality, which relates compactications of type iia (iib) to those of type iib
(iia) for a t-duality transformation in an odd number of directions and to those of type iia
(iib) for a transformation in an even number. furthermore it inherits the s-duality of the type
iib in ten dimensions. all these transformations act however only on the scalars of the nsns
sector, i.e. the kaluza-klein scalars coming from the metric and antisymmetric tensor (including
the scalars coming from the ten dimensional rr scalar and rr antisymmetric tensor of iib). it
has however been conjectured [12] that there is a much larger symmetry group called u-duality
group, which contains the s- and t-duality group4 sl(2, z)  so(d, d, z) as its subgroup but
transforms all scalars into each other, including those coming from the rr sector. in particular
the u-duality groups of type ii string theory on a (10  d)-dimensional torus are:

d

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

u-duality

group

sl(2, z)
sl(3, z)

sl(5, z) so(5, 5, z) e6(6)(z) e7(7)(z) e8(8)(z)

e8(8)(z)

where en(n) denotes a noncompact version of the exceptional group en for n = 6, 7, 8 (see e.g.
[13]) and g for any group g means the loop group of g, i.e. the group of mappings from the
circle s1 into g.

1.3.3 string-string-duality

this duality (some aspects of the string-string duality are reviewed in [14]) relates two dierent
string theories in a way that the perturbative expansions get mixed up. the perturbative regime
of the one theory is equivalent to the non perturbative regime of the other one. the elementary
excitations on one side are mapped to the solitonic objects on the other side and vice versa.
examples are:

4the product  is non-commutative, as the s-duality transformation also acts non trivially on the antisym-

metric tensor.

6

 iia on k3
het with gauge group so(32) in d=10  i in d=10

het on t 4

1.3.4 duality to elevendimensional supergravity and m-theory

let us now consider the type iia superstring. at weak coupling it is the known tendimensional
theory. however if we increase the coupling, a new eleventh dimension opens up [15]. or more
precisely stated, the eective lagrangian of the tendimensional type iia supergravity perfectly
agrees with that of the elevendimensional supergravity compactifed on a circle of radius r11, if
the following identication of the type iia string coupling and r11 is made:

g2/3
s = r11.

(7)

the kaluza-klein states of the elevendimensional theory get masses proportional to 1/r11 and
they are mapped by the duality transformation to the d0-branes of the type iia superstring
theory. something analogous happens for the heterotic string, where the strong coupling limit is
dual to elevendimensional theory compactied on an interval s1/z2 [16, 17].

all these dierent dualities have now led to the conjecture that all superstring theories are
connected to each other via duality transformations in dierent dimensions. this suggests, that
there is only one underlying unique fundamental theory and the dierent string vacua are just
dierent weak coupling regions in the moduli space of this fundamental theory called m-theory
(see g. 3). from the type iia string theory we have learned that this m-theory is supposed
to be an elevendimensional theory whose low energy eective lagrangian should coincide with
that of elvendimensional supergravity. however a fundamental formulation of m-theory is still
lacking. we will come back to m-theory in chapter 4 and give more convincing arguments in
favour of the above claims.

11-dim.
sugra

iia

i

m

iib

het

het

figure 3: m-theory

2 t-duality

we are now going to have a closer look at the perturbative dualities, namely t-duality. we
will rst consider the most simple case, the bosonic string on a circle respectively d-dimensional
torus, and afterwards generalize to the superstring. during the investigation of the type i string
we will see that it is unavoidable to introduce d-branes, i.e. hyperplanes on which the open string

7

ends. that is because t-duality changes the boundary conditions of open strings from neumann
to dirichlet.

2.1 closed bosonic string theory

the principal eects of t-duality in closed bosonic string theory can be studied within the context
of

2.1.1 compactication on a circle

the string action of the bosonic string moving in a at background is given in the conformal
gauge:

the resulting equation of motion is simply the two dimensional wave equation:

s =

1

4 z d d x (,  )x(,  ).

(8)

(9)

(10)

leading to the usual decomposition:

(cid:18) 2
2 

2

 2(cid:19) x (,  ) = 0

x (,  ) = x 

r() + x 

l(+)

r and x 

where x 
l are arbitrary functions of their arguments  =    respectively + =  + ,
just constrained to obey certain boundary conditions, which depend on the background the string
is moving in. besides the tendimensional minkowski space also a space-time with one (or several)
dimension(s) compactied on a circle (or higher dimensional torus) has the property of being
ricci at, which is required for the background of any consistent string theory. we rst assume,
that only one coordinate is compact, namely

x 25  x 25 + 2r

and therefore have to implement in our solution (10) the periodicity condition

x 25( + 2,  ) = x 25(,  ) + 2mr

in the compact direction. the general solution is given by

(11)

(12)

x 25

r () = x25

x 25

l (+) = x25

2

r +r 
l +r 

2

p25

r (  ) + ir 
l ( + ) + ir 

2 xl6=0
2 xl6=0

p25

1
l

1
l

r,leil(),
25

25
l,leil( +),

(13)

where we have used

1

1

n 

p25
r =

2 
2 
for m, n  z. the canonical momentum is p25 = (p25
to be supplemented with the usual solution of the wave equation in the non compact directions
2 x).
(i.e.
a string state in 26 uncompactied dimensions is characterized by specifying its momentum

r

r

r )/2 = n/r. the solution in (13) has

m! ,
m!

replace p25

l and p25

r in (13) by the same continous p and both x25

l and x25

r by 1

p25
l =

l +p25

(14)

n +

r

r

8

and oscillations. analogously the states of the compactied string theory depend on the two
quantum numbers m and n, denoting the discrete momentum and winding of the string in the
25th dimension, its momentum in the non compact dimensions and the oscillations (internal and
external ones). the winding is obviously a typical string eect with no analog in eld theory.
the mass of the (perturbative) states is given by m 2 = m 2

m 2

m 2

l = 
r = 

1
2
1
2

pp =

pp =

1
2
1
2

(p25

l )2 +

(p25

r )2 +

r with

l + m 2
2

2


(nl  1),
(nr  1),

(15)

where nl and nr denote both the internal and the external oscillations. t-duality in this case
refers to the symmetry of the mass spectrum under the z2-transformation:

r
 


r
m  n.

,

(16)

as the transformation just maps the perturbative mass spectrum into (and onto) itself, the t-
duality is from the target space point of view a perturbative symmetry. concerning the two
dimensional world sheet point of view however there is an exchange of the elementary excitations
(momentum states) with the solitonic ones (winding states).

it is obvious from (16) and (14) that the transformation maps p25

r to minus
itself. if the whole theory is supposed to be invariant under t-duality this should be especially
the case for all interactions (i.e. the interactions of states in one theory should be the same as
those of the dual states in the other theory). therefore the vertex operators should also be

l to itself and p25

invariant. they contain however phase factors like exp(cid:0)ip25

only invariant if we demand:

l x 25

r x 25

r (cid:1) which are

x 25
l  x 25
l ,
x 25
r  x 25
r ,

i.e. 25

r,i  25

r,i and x25

l (cid:1) and exp(cid:0)ip25
r  x25
r .

(17)

now it is possible to show that this change of the signs of the right-moving 25
r,i leaves all the
correlation functions invariant and therefore is a symmetry of perturbative closed string theory.
it should be emphasized that t-duality thus is a space-time parity operation on the right moving
degrees of freedom only, which will become important in the context of type ii string theory.

the moduli space of a theory which depends on one (or more) parameter(s) is dened as the
range of the parameter(s) leading to distinct physics. in our case the relevant parameter is the
radius of the compactication circle. but whereas in eld theory every radius r  r+ leads to
dierent physics the situation in string theory is dierent. here t-duality relates small with large
radii and there is a smallest (resp. biggest) radius, namely the xed point of the transformation
(16), i.e. rx = . thus the moduli space is m = {r  rx} resp. m = {r  rx}, which

can be expressed in a more formal way as

m = {r  r+/z2} .

(18)

this is a general feature of t-duality, that the moduli space in string theory can be obtained
from the one in eld theory by modding out a discrete symmetry group, namely the t-duality
group. in string theory these parameters or moduli describing dierent vacuum congurations
are typically given by vacuum expectation values of massless scalar elds. in the case of circle
compactication the relevant scalar is

|i = 25

l,125

r,1|0i,

(19)

whose vev corresponds to the radius of the circle (to be more precise, it really corresponds to
the dierence of the radius and rx). the state |0i denotes the vacuum state without winding
or internal momentum.

9

(cid:0)ri/2(cid:1) ~ei, i = 1, . . . , d with (~ei)2 = 2. i.e.
d =(~l =
xi=1r 1

2

d

miri~ei , ~m  zd) .

(21)

2.1.2 compactication on a torus t d

we now want to generalize the results of the previous discussion to the case of higher dimensional
torus compactications on t d (for convenience we set  = 2 throughout this section). a torus
can be dened by identifying points of rd, which lie in a d-dimensional lattice d,

t d = rd/2d,

(20)

where the lattice d can be specied by giving d linear independent vectors in rd, namely

we also need the notion of the dual lattice d, given by the d vectors (cid:0)2/ri(cid:1) ~ei, which is

dened as the lattice of vectors which have integer scalar products with all the elements of d.
in particular the basis vectors satisfy

ea
i ej

a = j
i ,

d

xa=1

d

xi=1

ea
i ei

b = a
b .

(22)

the importance of the dual lattice lies in the fact, that the canonical momenta5 i in the com-
pactied dimensions have to lie in d for compactications on d in order to ensure the single

valuedness of exp(cid:0)ix ii(cid:1), which is the generator of translations in the internal directions. fur-

thermore the metric gij of d is given by

d

xa=1r 1

2

riea

ir 1

2

rjea

j = gij ,

2
ri

ei
a

2
rj

d

xa=1

ej
a = (g1)ij .

in generalization of (19) we now have d2 massless scalars

|iji = i

l,1j

r,1|0i,

i, j = 1, . . . , d.

(23)

(24)

these elds correspond to the moduli of the d-dimensional torus compactication. their vevs
can be regarded as the internal components of the metric, i.e. (23), and the antisymmetric tensor
eld bij, yielding d(d + 1)/2 respectively d(d  1)/2 degrees of freedom. therefore we have to
generalize (8) to contain the antisymmetric tensor. the action for the internal degrees of freedom
of a string moving in a background specied by gij and bij then takes the form6

s =z dd l =

1

8 z dd (cid:16)gij x ix j + bijx ix j  2r(2)(cid:17) .

(25)

the elds x i, gij and bij are all given via their components referring to the basis of d,
namely referring to {ei}. one could as well take all components referring to the standard basis
of r. in this case we will take the indices to be a, b, . . . in contrast to i, j, . . .. from (25) (with
(i, j)  (a, b)) we can deduce the canonical momentum:

a =z 2

0

d

l

( xa)

= pa +

1
4

bab (xb( = 2)  xb( = 0)) = pa +

1
2

bablb.

(26)

5remember that the canonical momenta are in general not the same as the kinematical momenta, denoted by

pi.

6the second term did not show up in the previous section, because there is no antisymmetric tensor in one
dimension. the third term does not play any role for our purposes.  is the dilaton and r(2) the two dimensional
world sheet curvature scalar. we shall return to this background eld action (the linear -model) later on.

10

as already mentioned ~ has to be an element of d. we also have

pa =

1

4 z 2

0

d  x a =

1
2

(pa

l + pa
r)

(27)

and pa

l  pa

r = la (compare e.g. (14)) and therefore we get

1
pa
l,r = a 
2
2
xk=1

=

d

1
2

la

bablb 
nk
rk

(ek)a +

1
2

d

xj,k=1(cid:16) bkj  gkj(cid:17)2

mk
rj

(ej)a,

(28)

where we have expressed the antisymmetric tensor via its components referring to the basis of
the dual lattice, i.e.

bab =

2
rk

(ek)a bkj (ej)b2

rj

,

and we have used (22) and (23) to rewrite

la =

1
2

d

xk=1

mkrkea

k =

mkgkj

2
rj

(ej)a.

d

xj,k=1

(29)

(30)

the pa
l,r are in general no elements of d, but they are the momenta which enter the analog
of (15). that is why the spectrum depends on both, the shape of the torus and the vev of the
antisymmetric tensor eld:

m 2 = nl + nr  2 +

1

2(cid:0)(~pl)2 + (~pr)2(cid:1) .

it is obvious from this equation, that the spectrum is invariant under seperate rotations so(d)l
and so(d)r of the vectors ~pl and ~pr. in order to determine the classical moduli space it is
convenient to look at the lattice d,d which consists of all vectors (~pl, ~pr) and for which we
choose a lorentzian scalar product, i.e. (~pl, ~pr)  (~pl, ~pr) = ~pl  ~pl  ~pr  ~pr. using (23) and
the antisymmetry of bij it is easy to verify that we have

(31)

(32)

(~pl, ~pr)  (~pl, ~pr) =

(mini + nimi)  z.

d

xi=1
i = 2a

that means the inner product is independent of the background elds gij and bij. it can be
i , ri = 1) and bij = 0. in this case
calculated by taking for example gij = ij (i.e. ea
it is obvious, that d,d is even and self-dual, i.e. the length of any element is even (clear from
(32)) and the lattice is equal to its dual. but as the scalar product (32) is independent of the
background elds the same holds for the self-duality and the eveness of the lattice. dierent
values of the d2 parameters (24) lead to dierent such lorentzian lattices d,d and actually all
of them can be obtained by choosing the correct values for the background elds. it is known,
that it is possible to generate all dierent even and self-dual lorentzian lattices via an so(d, d)
rotation of a reference lattice, e.g. the special one considered above (ea
i , ri = 1 and
bij = 0). we have seen however in (31) a hint that not all of them yield a dierent string theory.
in fact one can identify the classical moduli space to be

i = 2a

which is a d2-dimensional manifold.

mclass =

so(d, d)

so(d)  so(d)

,

(33)

11

like in the case of the circle compactication, special points in the moduli space are equivalent
because of stringy eects, while they were not equivalent classically. again the equivalent points
can be mapped to each other via the operation of a discrete t-duality group and it is obvious from
the representation t d = s1  . . .  s1 that this group embraces zd
2 coming from the t-duality
groups of the s1 factors which make up the torus. actually the whole t-duality group of t d is
bigger [4], namely

t-duality = so(d, d, z),

(34)

which consists of all so(d, d) matrices with integer entries. roughly speaking the t-duality
group is generated by the t-duality transformations of the dierent circles, basis changes for the
dening lattice of the torus and integer shifts in bij. instead of showing this in general we include
an extensive treatment of the example d = 2 in the appendix. we also demonstrate the feature
of gauge symmetry enhancement at xed points of the duality group on the moduli space there.

2.2 heterotic string theory

the internal bosonic part of the heterotic string action on a d-dimensional torus including the
coupling to a background gauge eld vaa (a = 1, . . . , d, a = 1, . . . , 16) and a background
antisymmetric tensor is

s =

1

4 z dd(cid:0)(gab + bab)x ax b + (gac  + bac )x a

+vaax a

lx a

l x c
l

(35)

l + . . .(cid:1) .

the background gauge eld is called a wilson line and is a pure gauge conguration in the cartan
subalgebra of the gauge group, which yields however a non trivial parallel transport around non
trivial paths in space time7. the potential for the gauge bosons not in the cartan subalgebra
has for torus compactications no at directions so that it is not possible for them to obtain a
vev. if all the wilson line moduli are zero the gauge group is unbroken (i.e. e8  e8 or so(32))
but for non zero values of the background gauge eld only the subgroup commuting with the
it is broken to u (1)16 for generic values. thus the
wilson line remains a gauge symmetry, i.e.
wilson line parameters are further 16d moduli specifying the vacuum conguration, which is
now characterized by d(d + 16) background elds.

it is obvious from (35) that only the left moving part of the internal action has changed
compared to the bosonic case. that is because the heterotic string is a hybrid construction of a
left moving bosonic and a right moving fermionic string which are compactied on two dierent
tori. the compactication torus for the left moving sector is the product of that one for the
right moving sector times the one dened through the dual of the root lattice of e8  e8 or
so(32). thus it is clear that the right momenta pr from (28) do not change, but the left ones
do. nevertheless it is again possible to show, that the resulting vectors (pl, pr) form an even self
dual lorentzian lattice with signature (d + 16, d). as before all of those can be generated via
so(d + 16, d) transformations of a reference lattice and again the spectrum is invariant under
individual so(d + 16)  so(d) rotations of the left and right momenta. thus the classical
moduli space is

mclass =

so(d + 16, d)

so(d + 16)  so(d)

,

(36)

which is a d(d + 16)-dimensional manifold as one would have guessed. like in the bosonic case
the t-duality group is the maximal discrete subgroup of the numerator of the classical moduli
space (36), namely:

t-duality = so(d + 16, d, z)

(37)

7the expression wilson line refers to both, the gauge conguration and (the trace of the pathordered product

of) the line integral of the vector potential along a closed line: tr(cid:16)p exp(cid:16)h d ~x  ~a(cid:17)(cid:17).

12

and the quantum moduli space is the coset space obtained from the classical one by modding out
this t-duality group.

2.3 type iia and iib superstring theory

the world sheet action in a at space time background for type iia and iib is given by

s =

1

4 z d d (x x + 

r+r + 

ll)

(38)

where we have introduced the notation  = 1
2 (  ). the world sheet fermions r and
l are right respectively left moving. both of them can either obey periodic ramond (r) or
antiperiodic neveu-schwarz (ns) boundary conditions. the zero modes of l/r in the r sector
lead to a vacuum degeneracy such that the ground states transform according to one of the
irreducible spinor representations of so(8), 8s or 8c distinguished by their chirality. the lowest
lying state in the ns sector is a tachyon and the massless ground state transforms as a vector
8v under so(8). in both, the left and right moving spectrum, the gso projection keeps only
one of the irreducible spinor representations in the massless r sector and skips the tachyon in
the ns sector. as the spectrum of the closed string is derived by tensoring the left and the
right spectra and as the two choices 8s or 8c for each individual sector are physically equivalent,
diering only by a space time parity transformation, there are two distinguished string theories,
depending on whether the chirality of the fermions are the same in both sectors or not. in the
rst case we end up with the chiral type iib theory, whose massless particle content is equal
to the one of n = 2 type iib supergravity in ten dimensions (namely (8v + 8s)  (8v + 8s)).
the other alternative leads to the nonchiral type iia theory with the same massless spectrum as
n = 2 type iia supergravity in ten dimensions ((8v + 8s)  (8v + 8c)). space time fermions are
made by tensoring states from the left moving r sector with those of the right moving ns sector
or vice versa, leading for type iia to two gravitinos and dilatinos of opposite chirality and for
type iib to two gravitinos and dilatinos of the same chirality. bosons are obtained in the nsns

iia (8v  8c) + (8s  8v) = (8c + 56c) + (8s + 56s)
iib (8v  8s) + (8s  8v) = (8s + 56s) + (8s + 56s)

table 2: fermionic massless spectrum

and the rr sector. the nsns sector is universal and leads for both theories to the same states:
8v 8v = 1+ 28+ 35, where the occuring states are in turn the dilaton, the antisymmetric tensor
and the graviton, common to all string theories. the rr sector is dierent for both theories. it
is shown in table 3 (the superscript + at the 4-form in the iib spectrum reminds at the fact
that its eld strength is self dual).

iia

iib

(8s  8c) = (8v + 56)
am a(3)
(8s  8s) = 1 + 28 + 35
[mn ] a+

a(2)





[mn p ]

[mn p q]

table 3: massless rr states

let us now have a look at the new features coming up in the context of t-duality in type ii
superstrings [18]. consider rst the case of one compact dimension. we have seen in the bosonic
case that t-duality reverses the sign of the compactied coordinate in the right moving sector

13

(17). this remains true in the type ii string theory. conformal invariance requires then also (as
the supercurrent  1

r should be invariant)

2 r+x 

9
r  9
r.

(39)

this however switches the chirality on the right moving side, i.e. 8s  8c, which had to be ex-
pected as we have already seen in the bosonic case that t-duality is a space-time parity operation
on just one side of the worldsheet. thus the relative chirality between the left and right moving
sectors is changed and a t-duality transformation (in one direction) switches between type iia
and iib:

iia on s1(cid:16) r(cid:17) = iib on s1(cid:16) 
r (cid:17).

(40)

this remains true in higher dimensional torus compactications if we t-dualize in an odd number
of directions. on the other hand, if we t-dualize in an even number of directions, the relative
chirality of the left and the right moving sectors is not changed and in this case t-duality is a
selfduality (compare the discussion in section 1.3.2).

2.4 open strings

while type i string theory contains open superstrings most of the generic features we shall be
interested in already appear with purely bosonic open strings (for which we choose a parametriza-
tion 0    ). for them there are two kinds of boundary conditions possible: the poincare
invariant neumann boundary conditions mean that there is no momentum owing o the edges
of the string:

x |=0, = 0.

(41)

the ends of the string can however move freely in space time. dirichlet boundary conditions on
the other hand break 26-dimensional poincare invariance. they are given by

 x |=0, = 0,

i.e. x |=0, = c.

(42)

now the ends of the open string are xed at position c. that both endpoints are xed at the
same position becomes clear in (45), but in fact the endpoints of all open strings (not charged
under a non abelian gauge group) with dirichlet boundary conditions in  direction are xed to
the same value, as can be deduced by considering a graviton exchange of two open strings [5].
it is of course possible to choose dierent boundary conditions in dierent directions. in case
the open string obeys neumann boundary conditions in the (p + 1) directions x ,  = 0, . . . , p
and dirichlet ones in the remaining x i, i = p + 1, . . . , 25 its end points can just move within the
p-dimensional plane in space transversal to the directions in which dirichlet boundary conditions
are valid (see g. 4). this plane is called dp-brane. introduced in this manner, d-branes are just
rigid objects in space time dened via the boundary conditions of open strings. it will be seen
in the next chapter that they are in fact dynamical degrees of freedom with a tension tp  1/gs.
thus they only seem to be rigid at weak coupling but become dynamical in the strong coupling
regime, hinting at the fact that they have to be identied with the semi solitons already an-
nounced in the introduction (section 1.3).

let us now investigate the role of d-branes for t-duality of open strings. suppose we start
with open strings obeying neumann boundary conditions. now we compactify one coordinate
on a circle of radius r, say x 25, but keeping neumann boundary conditions. the center of mass
momentum in this direction takes only the discrete values p25 = n/r like for the closed strings.
in contrast to the closed string case however there is no analog of a winding state for the open
string as its winding is topologically always trivial. the solutions of the equations of motion for

14

x

1 ,.., x

p-1

x p

xp+1 ,..., x25

figure 4: open strings moving on a dp-brane

the compactied left and right moving coordinates are8:

x 25

r (,  ) =

x 25

l (,  ) =

x25
2 

x25
2

+

c
2

c
2

+ p25(  ) + ir 
+ p25( + ) + ir 

2 xl6=0
2 xl6=0

1
l

1
l

25
l e2il(),

25
l e2il( +).

(43)

we see that the compactied coordinate moves with momentum p25 = n

r on s1
r:

x 25(,  ) = x 25

l (,  ) + x 25

r (,  ) = x25 + 2p25 + osc.

(44)

as the radius is taken to zero only the n = 0 mode survives and the open string seems to move
only in 25 space-time dimensions but nevertheless still vibrates in 26 (or rather in the 24 trans-
verse ones). this is similar to an open string whose endpoints are xed at a hyperplane with 25
dimensions.

this fact can be better understood if one performs a t-duality transformation in the x 25
direction and introduces the t-dual coordinate x 25(,  ) = x 25
r (,  ). this choice
is motivated by the fact that t-duality is a one sided space-time parity transformation on the
right-moving coordinate (see eq. (17) and the comments in the corresponding paragraph). this
coordinate on the t-dualized circle s1

rd with rd = /r now takes the form

l (,  )  x 25

8it is clear from (14) with m = 0 that p25

p25; the additional factors of 2 compared to (13) stem

from the dierent parametrization of the open string world sheet.

x 25(,  ) = x 25

r (,  ) = c + 2p25 + osc

l (,  )  x 25
l =q 

r = p25

2

15

= c + 2 n
r
= c + 2nrd + osc.

 + osc

(45)

thus the boundary conditions have changed for the dual coordinate from neumann to dirich-
let ones, i.e. the end points of the string are xed to the values x 25( = 0) = c respectively
x 25( = ) = c mod 2rd. another way of saying this is that the open string end points
are constrained to move within d24-branes which are seperated from each other by a multiple
of 2rd and are therefore identied as we have compactied the dual coordinate on a circle of
radius rd (see g. 5). like for the closed string t-duality exchanges winding and momentum

0

2 rd

 rd

4

x^25

figure 5: c = 0 mod 2rd

quantum numbers for the open string. before t-dualizing the winding number has been zero.
after the transformation the center of mass momentum is zero as can be seen from (45), i.e. not
only the end points but also the center of mass of the open string is constrained to move in a
24 (spatial) dimensional hyperplane. on the other hand, as the string end points are now xed
in the compactied dimension, it makes sense to talk about winding states. actually these are
states for which n is nonzero in (45) because x 25 and x 25 + 2nrd are identied for any n  z.
let us summarize this point. before t-dualizing the open string ends move within a d25-brane
wrapped around the compact dimension (which is an elegant way to say that they can move freely
in space time). in the dual description however the d25-brane has changed to a d24-brane. this
is a general feature: t-dualizing in a certain compact direction x i turns a dp-brane which is
wrapped around this circle (i.e. the open strings obey neumann boundary conditions in the x i
direction) into a d(p  1)-brane. the inverse is also true. if the dp-brane is xed in the x i
direction before t-dualizing (i.e. the open strings obey dirichlet boundary conditions along x i)
it is turned into a d(p + 1)-brane which is wrapped around the compact ith dimension.

this fact is also crucial for the incorporation of d-branes and open strings in type ii string
theory. we will see in section 3.2.1 that dp-branes with p even only appear in the type iia theory
and those with p odd exist in type iib (see e.g. table 4). as was explained above t-duality in an
odd number of directions switches from iia to iib theory and thus it is necessary for consistency
that t-duality in one direction changes the value of p by plus or minus one.

next we consider the massless spectrum of the bosonic open string. in the dual picture these

massless states are given by states without winding9. this can be seen from the mass formula

9this is true for generic values of rd, but as in the closed string case extra massless states appear for the self

dual radius rd = r = .

(n  1).

(46)

m 2 = (p25)2 +

1


(n  1) =(cid:16) n



rd(cid:17)2

+

1


16

thus the massless states are given by (n = 1, n = 0):

1|0i, 25

1|0i,

(47)

1|0i gives again a massless u (1) gauge boson and the vevs of i

where the rst state is a u (1) gauge boson and the second one a scalar whose vev describes the
x 25 position of the d-brane in the dual space. this easily generalizes to the case of a dp-brane.
then 
1|0i are the (25  p)
coordinates of the dp-brane in the space directions transversal to it. as the open string has no
momentum in these directions the same holds for the u (1) gauge bosons. thus it has become
conventional to speak of the gauge theory living on the world volume of the dp-brane (which
amounts to a dimensionally reduced gauge theory).

so far we have only considered open strings charged under a u (1) gauge group. we now want
to generalize the results to non abelian gauge groups. to do so let us consider orientable open
strings whose end points carry charges under a non abelian gauge group. consistency require-
ments restrict the choice to u (n) for orientable strings (and so(n) respectively u sp(n) for non
orientable ones) [2]. to be more precise one end transforms under the fundamental representation
n of u (n) and the other one under its complex conjugate n. the ground state wavefunction is
thus not only specied by the center of mass momentum of the string but additionally by the
charges of the end points, giving rise to a basis |k; iji (chan paton basis). generally the open
string states can be characterized by their charges with respect to the generators of the cartan
subalgebra u (1)n of u (n), which can be taken as the n dierent n  n matrices with just one
entry 1 on the diagonal. the states |k; iji of the chan paton basis are now those states which
carry charge +1 respectively 1 under the ith respectively jth u (1) generator. obviously the
whole open string transforms as a bifundamental under the tensor product n  n which is just
the adjoint of u (n). from this point of view it seems more appropriate to take as basis for the
ground state wavefunction the combinations |k; ai = pn
ij are the
matrix elements of the u (n) generators and are called chan paton factors. the |k; ai transform
under the adjoint of u (n) if the i index transforms with n and the j index with n. the usual
vector at the massless level 

ij . the factors a

i,j=1 |k; ijia

1|k, ai is now a u (n) gauge boson.

the new feature in toroidal compactication of the open string with gauge group u (n) is the
possible appearance of wilson lines (see footnote 7). if we compactify the 25th dimension on a
circle with radius r a possible background eld with non trivial line integral along this circle is

a25 =

1

2r

diag (1, . . . , n) = i125 ,  = diag(cid:16)eix 251/2r, . . . , eix 25n/2r(cid:17) .

(48)

if i = 0 (or all equal to another constant value) for i = 1, . . . , m and j 6= 0 (and all pairwise
dierent) for j = m + 1, . . . , n the gauge group is broken to u (n)  u (m)  u (1)nm (compare
our discussion of the wilson lines of the heterotic string in section 2.2). thus the i play the role
of higgs elds. another important characteristic of the wilson line is that it changes the value
of momentum p25, where the change depends on the chan paton quantum numbers of the state.
therefore we use the chan paton basis in the following. in particular we have for a ground state
|l/r; iji

p25
(ij) =

l
r

+

j  i
2r

.

(49)

to see this consider rst the case of a u (1) gauge theory and a point particle with charge q.
under a gauge transformation with 1 the background gauge eld vanishes and one knows from
ordinary quantum mechanics that the wavefunction of the particle picks up a phase

exp iqzx25

0

dx25a25! ,

(50)

where x25
is a reference point. thus it is no longer periodic under x 25  x 25 + 2r but gets
0
a phase exp(iq). as the wavefunction in the momentum representation is a plane wave, this

17

non periodicity is equivalent to a shift in the canonical momentum

p25 

l
r 

q
2r

.

(51)

let us now turn to string theory. the background gauge eld (48) is an element of the cartan
subalgebra, i.e. of the subgroup u (1)n of u (n). the string states with chan paton quantum
numbers |iji have charges +1 (1) under the ith (jth) u (1) factor and are neutral with respect
to the others. thus (49) follows immediately from (51). if we insert (49) into (46) we get

m 2 =

(2l + j  i)2

42r2

+

1


(n  1),

(52)

from which we see that for generic  values the only massless states are the diagonal ones (i = j)
giving a gauge group u (1)n (for l = 0 and n = 1). if some of the s are equal we get additional
massless states enhancing the gauge symmetry and conrming our discussion above.

now we want to interpret the situation in the dual picture. from (45) and (49) we see that

the dual coordinate for a string with chan paton labels |iji is given by
j  i
 (cid:19) rd + osc.

(ij)(,  ) = c +(cid:18)2l +

x 25

if we set c = ird we get

x 25
x 25

(ij)( = 0,  ) = ird,
(ij)( = ,  ) = 2lrd + jrd.

(53)

(54)

thus we have n dierent d-branes, whose positions (modulo 2rd) are given by jrd (see g.
6). from (52) we see that generically only open strings with both end points on one and the
same d-brane yield massless gauge bosons (gauge group u (1)n) and strings which are stretched
between dierent d-branes give massive states with masses m  (i  j)rd. obviously the
masses decrease with smaller distances and vanish if the two d-branes take up the same position.
in this picture the coincidence of d-brane positions leads to the encountered gauge symmetry
enhancement. in particular if all d-branes are stuck on top of each other the gauge group is
u (n).

a feature of d-branes which we just mention for later use but without proof is that they break
(part of the) supersymmetry (see e.g. [5, 19]). in the special situation above all the n d-branes
were parallel to each other. in this case half of the supersymmetries are broken (leading to n = 4
in d = 4 for type ii string theory). to break even more supersymmetries one needs more general
congurations of intersecting d-branes. two orthogonal d-branes for example break altogether
3/4 of supersymmetry (giving n = 2 in d = 4) if the number d of dimensions in which just
one of the two branes is extended (but not both) is 4 or 8 (examples are a d4-brane together
with a d0-brane or two completely transverse d2-branes). if d is however 2 or 6 (it is always
even) all of the supersymmetry is broken. in situations with rotated d-branes it is also possible
to get n = 1 supersymmetry in d = 4 (i.e. 1/8 of the susy generators are preserved). for some
further details the reader is referred to [5].

3 non perturbative phenomena

in the previous chapters interactions in string perturbation theory were dened by a summation
over all conformally inequivalent world sheets, each weighted with a factor of the string coupling
constant according to the topology of the respective riemann surface. in this chapter we are going
to look for explicit non perturbative states in string theory to get a more complete description of

18

0



rd

1

 rd

2

...

dr

n

2 rd

figure 6: d-brane conguration in the presence of a wilson line

per  g2

sol  1/g2

the spectrum and possible interactions. one strategy to nd states of non perturbative nature is
to look for non trivial solutions of the classical equations of motion of the low energy approxima-
tion to string theory. we will nd these equations to have brane solutions which depend only on
a subset of the coordinates of space-time, such that the sources of the elds are multidimensional
membranes. they are solitonic in the sense that their masses are proportional to inverse powers
of the string coupling m 2
s, while the states of the perturbative spectrum have masses
proportional to the string coupling constant: m 2
s. they are then called p-branes, if they
extend into p spatial dimensions, thus have (p + 1)-dimensional worldvolume. further we shall
demonstrate that also the d-branes discussed earlier as hyperplanes in space-time, on which open
strings might end with dirichlet boundary conditions, display characteristic features of solitonic
states. by an indirect way of reasoning we shall argue that they are in fact dynamical objects,
i.e. they interact with open strings, thereby couple to gravity and gauge elds, and uctuate in
shape and position. their perturbative degrees of freedom are open strings ending on the brane,
which describe the uctuations of the d-brane by their perturbative spectrum. also we shall nd
their mass spectrum to be of intermediate range, m 2
d  1/gs, which indicates that they are in
between elementary perturbative states and solitons and therefore caused them being adressed as
half-solitonic. the three types of states, perturbative, solitonic and half-solitonic, are mixed by
various (conjectured) s, t and u dualities from the previous chapters. they leave the spectrum
invariant but transform the moduli, thereby in some cases interchanging the perturbative and
non perturbative regimes of the theory.

19

3.1 solitons in eld theory

to motivate later discussions and interpretations, we rst give an introduction into eld theoret-
ical solitons, in particular the black holes of einstein gravity and the thooft-polyakov monopole
of non abelian gauge theories. such solitons are dened to be non trivial solutions to the eld
equations with nite action. regarding the obvious symmetries of their spectrum, we then point
out the idea of s-duality and how it is supposed to be realized in supersymmetric gauge theories.
the bridge to the quantum theory will be built by realizing the bps nature of some of the classi-
cal solutions after embedding these into supersymmetric theories, which is assumed to guarantee
their existence in the spectrum of the quantum theory, too.

3.1.1 black holes

we start with discussing classical solutions to the einstein equations that are not of perturbative
nature as they involve large deviations from the minkowski at space-time. the classical theory
of general relativity originates from the vacuum einstein action

se =z d4x gr

(55)

of pure gravity, where g is the determinant of the metric g and r the curvature scalar. by the
usual methods one then nds the einstein equation, the equation of motion of the metric eld
without matter, which (in d > 2) simply demands the space-time to be ricci at:

r = 0.

(56)

perturbative solutions to these equations are for instance given by gravitational waves, freely
propagating, small deviations from the at metric. the most prominent among the non-pertur-
bative solutions are black holes [20] and the prototype of such is the schwarzschild metric

dr2 + r2(cid:0)d2 + sin2 () d2(cid:1) .

(57)

ds2

s = (cid:18)1 

2m

r (cid:19) dt2 +(cid:18)1 

2m

r (cid:19)1

it is the unique stationary solution of the vacuum einstein equations outside a star that has
collapsed to a pressureless uid of matter. the parameter m is related to the fourdimensional
newton constant gn by m = gnm/c2, m being the mass of the black hole, which is derived by
comparing the asymptotic large r behaviour of the g00 component to the classical non-relativistic
newton law. the schwarzschild metric suers from two obvious divergencies. first the event
horizon at r = 2m which is only a coordinate divergence and involves the change of the metric
signature ( + ++)  (+ ++), in a way the interchange of radial and time directions, while the
curvature and even rr stay nite. when observed from the radial innity, where the
metric tends to at minkowski space-time, no geodesic can reach the horizon at nite values of
the ane parameter which can in case of timelike geodesics be taken to be its proper time. there
is also the physically more dramatic divergence at r = 0, where the square of the curvature tensor
rr diverges as an inverse power of the radial coordinate. such divergencies cannot be
removed by conformal transformations, they imply that geodesics, particle trajectories, cannot
be completed into these points, which is said to be a generic feature of any gravitational collapse.
concerning the global causal structure, the horizon signals the notion, that all timelike or null
geodesics from inside r < 2m are leading into the spacelike singularity, therefore no matter can
escape its destiny of falling into the singularity at the core, which occurs even in nite proper
time. generalizations of the schwarzschild solution are given by the reissner-nordstrom solution
for charged black holes, obtained by adding a maxwell term  1
4 f 2 to the vacuum action, and
the kerr solution that incorporates also rotating black holes and is the most general form of any
stationary solution to the einstein equations of the vacuum plus only electromagnetism. these
metrics are related to more complicated global structures of space time and display dierent types

20

of curvature and coordinate singularities. as we shall later on refer to the charged black holes, we
here give the solutions for the metric and the electromagnetic potential of the reissner-nordstrom
case:

ds2

rn = (cid:18)1 
a = 0 q
r

.

2m
r

+

q2

r2(cid:19) dt2 +(cid:18)1 

2m
r

+

q2

r2(cid:19)1

dr2 + r2(cid:0)d2 + sin2 () d2(cid:1) ,

(58)

obviously q can be interpreted as the total electric charge of the black hole. further analysis
shows, that only in the case m  q the curvature singularity at the radial origin is screened by
a horizon. if m > q the metric actually has two horizons

r = m pm2  q2

which can both be removed by analytic extension. dierent from the schwarzschild case, the
singularity itself is timelike and the causal structure more involved. the case of an extremal
charged black hole is reached if m = q which demands the horizons to coincide and the metric
simplies to

(59)

(60)

(61)

ds2

ex = (cid:18)1 

2m

r (cid:19)2

dt2 +(cid:18)1 

2m

r (cid:19)2

dr2 + r2(cid:0)d2 + sin2 () d2(cid:1) .

an important property of this situation is its vanishing surface gravity

 =

r  r

2r2


= 0,

which is a measure of the local accelaration that appears to aect a particle near the horizon,
as it is being watched from innity. note that the causal structure of space-time of this solution
still is diering from the schwarzschild solution, though the metric might look somewhat simi-
lar. besides the dierences mentioned all black hole solutions have got the feature in common,
that (as long as the positive energy hypothesis holds), any curvature singularity is shielded by a
horizon which, viewed from spatial innity (expressed in asymtotically at coordinates), cannot
be reached by any particle (any space- or timelike geodesic) in nite time.

we shall now introduce concepts of particle physics and thermodynamics into this classical
picture to explain the related problems of the loss of information and hawking radiation. as there
is no complete quantum theory available that allows a consistent treatment of the gravitational
interactions together with the strong and electroweak interactions, we have to rely on semiclassical
methods and sometimes heuristic arguments. let us rst look for the state equation of black hole
thermodynamics. even the most general black hole metric, the kerr black hole, does not depend
on the time and azimutal angle coordinate , such that these dene vector elds along which the
action is constant, i.e. killing vector elds:


t

,

 




.

 

(62)

while in a curved background one cannot simply integrate the eld equations over some space-like
region to get conserved quantities, as usually done in eld theory on minkowski at space-time,
the projections of the energy momentum tensor onto such killing vector elds are conserved.
thus to any killing vector eld  one can associate a conserved charge by integrating its covariant
derivative over the boundary of some spacelike region v

q(v ) 

1

16giv

d d =

1

8gzv

21

d d d =

1

8gzv

d r .

(63)

in the presence of a black hole the volume integral is conveniently split o into a surface integral
over the horizon h and a volume integral over the space time st outside:

q(v ) =

1

8gzst

d dd +

1

16gih

d d .

(64)

the two killing vector elds  and  in particular produce conserved charges that contain besides
other terms the total energy (mass) m and the angular momentum j of the kerr black hole.
using the explicit expressions one can derive the mass formula of smarr:

m =


4

a + 2hj + hq,

(65)

where a is the area of the horizon, h the constant angular velocity at the horizon, j the
total angular momentum, h the electric potential at the horizon. we notice that the extremal
reissner-nordstrom solution with vanishing  and h has mass equal to its electric potential
energy: m = hq. this will be identied to be the bps mass bound later on. by analyzing
the dimensionality of the various quantities (c.f. euler theorem on homogeneous functions), one
further nds the dierential state equation to be:

dm =


8

da + hdj + hdq,

(66)

which is the so called rst law of black hole mechanics. interpreting this as a thermodynamical
relation, suggests to dene the black hole (hawking) temperature th  /2 and its (bekenstein-
hawking) entropy sbh  a/4. it is in fact clear that the black hole must carry entropy anyway,
as throwing matter into it would otherwise destroy such. (on the other hand no such process
could be watched from the asymptotically at region.) the hawking temperature we have recov-
ered here is also known from other arguments, which explains the seemingly arbitrary choice of
numerical coecients. the second law of thermodynamics now translates into the statement that
the horizon of an isolated black hole has non-decreasing area. one should suspect that this black
hole entropy can be computed by a state counting procedure as usual in quantum statistics. this
task has never been solved in the context of qm or qft, as the quantum degrees of freedom of
the black hole are still unknown. we shall later address this question from the point of view of
string theory.

we now briey turn to hawking radiation [21], which refers to the fact that black holes
can radiate particles exhibiting a thermal spectrum. the formalism of quantum eld theory on
curved space-time allows under certain circumstances, as are met when black holes are formed,
non unitary changes of the fock space basis. from this it follows that the vacuum before the
collapse may look like a many particle state afterwards. along these lines one can deduce the
claimed statement that black holes in fact radiate. in a more heuristic manner it can be gured
that after pair-creation of a particle and an antiparticle by vacuum uctuations for instance of
the photon eld near the horizon, one of the two particles is drawn inside the horizon, while the
other one appears to be radiated away from the black hole. by a semiclassical analysis of a eld
propagating along a trajectory close to the future event horizon hawking could demonstrate that
the spectrum of this radiation is approximately that of a black body thermal radiation at the
hawking temperature /2:

n() =

1

e2/  1

.

(67)

the black hole obviously can thermalize its entropy and energy by this mechanism. a very special
case is the extremal reissner-nordstrom black hole with  = 0, so that no hawking radiation
is emitted and it appears to be stable. although this analysis does not take into account the
eect of decreasing the mass of the black hole in the process (back reaction) it is convenient to
cite the riddle of loss of information when throwing matter into the hole that later on radiates

22

away thermalized [22]. the formerly pure quantum state of such matter has lost its coherence.
a proper unitary description of the whole phenomenon is expected to clarify the question but it
still remains to be found. apparently it should have to include a consistent quantum treatment
of the gravitational eld, an outstanding challenge so far. later on we shall reveal some of the
attempts that have been undertaken in string theory recently.

3.1.2 magnetic monopoles

the second type of solitonic objects we shall discuss are the magnetic monopoles of gauge the-
ories. we will proceed very much like in the previous section by looking for classical solutions
to the eld equations, which have nite energy densities and thus have possibly relevant con-
tributions to the quantum theoretical path integral. the magnitude of these contributions will
depend on the coupling and is in general non perturbative. while we could not give a rigorous
answer to the question, if black holes are stable states of the (unknown) quantum theory, this
issue can be addressed in gauge theory, at least in some supersymmetric extension, and leads to
the notion of so called bps saturated states. we now start with the most simple setting, classical
electrodynamics and its maxwell equations.

the idea of magnetic monopoles traces back to dirac who gured out what happened when

symmetrizing the maxwell equations

~ ~e = e,
~ ~b = 0,

~  ~b 
~  ~e +


t

t

~e = ~je,

~b = 0

by generalizing the electromagnetic duality
~e  ~b,

~b   ~e

(68)

(69)

of the vacuum equations to a symmetry of the full classical electromagnetic theory. this is
possible by introducing magnetic currents j
m into the equations. the corresponding particles are
called magnetic monopoles. such a single stationary and point-like monopole of magnetic charge
g at the origin generates a singular magnetic eld

~b = g

~r

4r3

(70)

which itself is created by a vector potential, that cannot be dened globally. in fact it is singular
at least on a half line, the so called dirac string. more mathematically speaking, the bianchi
identity of the eld strength tensor is no longer satised and thus it cannot be exact globally
anymore. the presence of such a dirac string, although classically meaningless, can be probed by
a bohm-aharonov experiment. moving an electron around this string and demanding its wave
function to be single valued imposes the famous dirac quantization condition on the product of
the two charges:

ge = 2n,

(71)

where n is some arbitrary integer. it oers an explanation for charge quantization, even if only
by postulating objects yet unobserved. another way of deriving it [23] is nding that the vector
potentials dened on dierent parts of a sphere around the magnetic charge can only be matched
together on the whole sphere up to gauge transformations

in the overlapping regions, where  is only dened modulo 2g, while the transition function
exp(ie) should be dened uniquely. for n  1 the dirac condition tells us that one of the two

a  a + 

(72)

23

charges is obviously larger than 1 and therefore naiv perturbation theory as an expansion in this
parameter impossible. the apparent symmetries of this generalized setting of electromagnetism
allow an electromagnetic duality interchanging the electric and magnetic elds like in (69) and
simultaneously the two currents j
m and thereby linking the perturbative and non pertur-
bative regimes. this might be thought of as the most simple case of s-duality.

e  j

we shall pursue this idea further by inspecting classical yang-mills gauge theory which will
then be embedded in its supersymmetric extension. the challenge to nd an exact solution to a
phenomenologically interesting classical eld theory, that exhibits properties of a particle, i.e. has
local support in space and is constant in time, was solved by the thooft-polyakov [24, 25] solution
of the su (2) yang-mills-higgs (or georgi-glashow) model. such solutions are called solitons and
they carry properties of monopoles. the basic idea is to embed the electromagnetic u (1) gauge
group in a larger simple group which is spontaneously broken to single out the electromagnetic
u (1) as unbroken symmetry, but now with charge quantization necessarily implicit. the model
is constructed from the lagrangian

l = 

1
4

tr f 2 +

1
2

dada  v (),

(73)

where the gauge eld aa
 and the scalar higgs eld a take their values in the adjoint repre-
sentation of the su (2) gauge group. the potential of the higgs eld is assumed to create a
non-vanishing expectation value alike the double well potential. the derivation of the equations
of motion and the energy momentum tensor is straightforward, the former are

df a = eabcbdc,

(dd)a = 
and the latter comes out in the symmetrized version:

v ()

a

 = f af a

 + dad a  l.

(74)

(75)

from its time component one can read o the energy density and realizes that the classical
vacuum has a constant higgs eld with vacuum expectation value given by the minimum of the
potential. choosing

v () =

,

(76)



4 (cid:0)aa  v2(cid:1)2

this is haai = v2. the constant higgs eld leaves only a smaller gauge group u (1) of rotations
around the direction of its expectation value intact and the manifold of degenerate vacua (the
coset space) is topologically equivalent to a sphere:

mvac = su (2)/u (1)  s2.

(77)

any solution to the eld equations that wants to have nite energy must locally look like a vacuum
eld conguration at spatial innity. therefore at large r any higgs eld has to obtain the vacuum
value aa = v2. this relation denes the sphere mvac in the isospin space, whose points are
connected by gauge transformations of the coset group, rotations in that space. thereby the
asymptotic value of the higgs eld induces a mapping of the spatial innity s2 onto the set
of degenerate vacua s2, which can be characterized by its integer winding number n and is an
element of the second homotopy class of s2:

the constant higgs eld belongs to n = 0, but we shall also nd solutions to the eld equations
with nite energy that have non-vanishing winding number. we construct the concrete form

(78)

2(cid:0)s2(cid:1) = z.

24

of such a vector potential leading to a monopole solution by demanding the energy density to
be decreasing faster than 1/r2 when r   to obtain a nite total energy. consequently the
covariant derivative of the higgs eld has to decrease faster than 1/r and from

a + eabcab

c  0

faster than 1/r

one can nd the most general expression for the gauge potential

aa
 = 

1
ev2 abcbc +

1
v

aa

(79)

(80)

with some arbitrary smooth a. the corresponding eld strength points into the direction of the
higgs eld:

f a =

a

v (cid:18)a  a 

1

ev3 def def(cid:19) .

(81)

integrating the eld equations over the transverse space we then nd the magnetic charge of the
monopole being proportional to the winding number n of the higgs eld around the sphere at
radial innity

g = 

1

2zs2

ijkfjkdxi =

1

2ev3 zs2

ijkabcajbkc dxi =

4n

e

,

(82)

which explains its being called a topological charge in contrast to the electric noether charge.
the dirac quantization condition is thus reproduced up to a factor 1/2, which is due to the fact,
that the fermions we could possibly add into the model were half integer charged, as they were to
lie in the fundamental representation of the su (2). that two seemingly very dierent arguments
reproduced the same quantization condition can be traced back to the topological statement that

2 (su (2)/u (1)) = 1 (u (1)) .

(83)

the lefthandside of the equation gives the range of winding numbers for the higgs, whereas the
righthandside is the possible number of windings of the electromagnetic gauge eld  around the
dirac string. in the latter case we had to plug in the source term by hand to spoil the bianchi
identity, in the former case this is achieved by the winding of the higgs eld automatically.

the general solution for the electromagnetic potential allows a very special and symmetric
choice [26]. on the one hand the eld congurations can neither be gauge invariant under the
full su (2) nor be invariant under the so(3) of spatial rotations because of the spontaneous
symmetry breaking and the non trivial behaviour of the higgs eld at radial innity. on the
other hand any spatial rotation can be accompanied by an appropriate gauge transformation to
cancel the variation of the elds, as the angular dependence of the higgs eld at radial innity is
locally pure gauge. such we can have solutions which are invariant under simultaneous rotations
and gauge transformations. the arbitrariness that remains can be summarized in the according
ansatz

h(ver),

a =

ra
er
aa
i = a
aa
0 = 0,

ij

rj
er

(1  k(ver)) ,

(84)

where ra is the radial unit vector in the isospin space and ri in the minkowski space. to render
charge and mass nite one has to impose boundary conditions on h(r) and k(r) that allow
nite results for the integrated energy-momentum tensor as well as for the integration of the eld
equation of the electromagnetic eld. dening mass and charge by such integrals over spatial

25

regions in the usual manner one can derive the bps (bogomolny-prasad-sommereld) bound on
the lowest possible mass of a monopole:

mm  vg
with equality if and only if v () = 0.
(note as an aside that extremal reissner-nordstrom
black holes are indeed bps saturated.) we shall later see that from the point of view of the
supersymmetric extension of this model the states that satisfy the equality are very special. in
this case the equations of motion can be translated into the dierential (bogomolny) equations
[27]

(85)

x

dk(x)

dx

= k(x)h(x),

x

dh(x)

dx

= h(x) (cid:0)k(x)2  1(cid:1)

which are solved according to the relevant boundary conditions by

h(x) = x coth(x)  1, k(x) =

x

sinh(x)

.

(86)

(87)

plotting the two functions, one immediately realizes how they generalize the well known onedi-
mensional (topologically charged) kink solution. substituting back one nds that these mono-
poles satisfy the bps mass bound with equality holding as well as the dirac charge quantization
condition with minimal winding number (topological charge) 4 = eg, so that we are tempted to
think of them as being the elementary magnetic charges, stable per denition, if charge conser-
vation holds. it was also noticed that the same yang-mills-higgs model can have solutions that
carry both electric and magnetic charges [28]. if one also allows for the topological term

l  l 

e2
322 f f 

(88)

to be present, where the star marks the hodge dual, their magnetic charge can be related to the
-angle, the imaginary part of the gauge coupling [29]. this term is proportional to the instanton
number, it violates parity and locally it can be written as a total derivative. globally it might
lead to an additional violation of the bianchi identity and an extra boundary term in the eld
equation, modifying the electric charge of the state. together we have then got two topological
charges, the winding ne of the gauge eld and the winding nm of the higgs eld, enough to
have dyonic states carrying both types of charges. the dirac condition and the bps bound are
modied to be

q
e

= ne 

nm
2

,

mdyon  vpq2 + g2,

(89)

where nm is related to the magnetic charge g of the dyon by the former dirac condition, while
q is the electric charge of the dyon, now no longer being quantized in integer units of e. the
above discussion was a little sketchy and the situation appears to have become more complicated
than before introducing dyons. we shall return to it from another point of view after looking at
supersymmetric extensions of the model. but now already we can address the issue of duality
that had been conjectured by montonen and olive [30]. they observed that in the model we
considered not only the dyonic charges saturate the bps bound but also the perturbative degrees
of freedom, i.e. the massive gauge bosons, the remaining massless photon and also the higgs
eld. also they found that monopoles do not excert any force onto each other by a cancellation
of attraction and repulsion, mediated by the higgs and gauge boson exchange respectively. this
lead to the assumption that there might be some kind of mapping from the perturbatively light
elds onto the non perturbative dyon spectrum acting in some unknown way on the moduli space
spanned by the vacuum expectation value of the higgs and the couplings, which could be gured
to be a symmetry of the theory, a duality. montonen and olive conjectured that there could exist

26

an entire charge lattice of states which were to be permuted by duality transformations. for the
sake of charge conservation these have to map the lattice onto itself and they therefore found
the most natural form of the duality to be an sl(2, z) group acting on the point lattice in the
complex plane. thus the duality has been called s-duality, as well as its generalization in string
theory, already mentioned in previous chapters. a couple of unanswered questions remained,
among them the problems that quantum corrections should be expected to modify the classical
potential and spectrum considerably and further that it was not possible to match the dyons
and the perturbative elds together into multiplets of the lorentz group. the most important
progress in these issues was achieved in supersymmetric models.

3.1.3 bps states

the success in identifying dualities in supersymmetric gauge theories [37] has been very impres-
sive over the last couple of years. in gauge theories with one supersymmetry (n = 1) seiberg
discovered dualities between the large distance (ir) behaviour of electric and magnetic versions
of the same theory [31]. the most prominent example of all is the treatment of n = 2 extended
supersymmetric models by seiberg and witten that allowed to compute the spectrum of the
theory with gauge group su (2) exactly and identied the condensation of monopoles as a mech-
anism of quark connement [32, 33]. the solution of the theory also involved a duality, when the
gauge symmetry had been broken spontaneously to leave only a single gauge boson massless, i.e.
there exists a version of s-duality on the coulomb branch of the moduli space. much earlier it
had already been found that the amount of supersymmetry necessary to implement the s-duality
in its full conjectured extent is even larger and that only n = 4 supersymmetric yang-mills
(sym) theory would allow the dyons and the gauge bosons to sit in the same representations of
the lorentz group [34]. so let us briey discuss the way topological charges are introduced in
supersymmetric gauge theories and stress the particular role that is being played by states that
saturate the bps bound.

the most general algebra of n supercharges that can be constructed in d = 4 dimensions is

given by (two component weyl formalism):
, qj
, qj
, qj

{qi
{qi
{ qi

 

} = 2ij
} = u ij,
} =   v ij .

p,

(90)

where i, j label the dierent supercharges, , , ,  = 1, 2 the spinor components and c = 0 is
the charge conjugation matrix, p  the momentum operator, u ij = u ji and v ij = v ji being
called central charges. the qi
 are the generators of the supersymmetry and their conjugation
is dened by

qi

 (cid:0)c qi(cid:1) .

(91)

applied to the elds of a given theory they generate the minimal eld content of the super-
symmetrized version of that theory. they carry a representation of the lorentz group so(3, 1)
as well as of some internal symmetry that acts on the supercharges. in the absence of central
charges the algebra simplies and we can easily nd its representation in terms of a physical,
i.e. supersymmetric, multiplet of states. in the case of a massless multiplet (p 2 = 0) we can
choose the lorentz frame in which p  = (e, 0, 0, e) and look for a representation of the little
group so(2) that leaves p  invariant, which can afterwards be promoted to a representation of
the full lorentz algebra by application of the boost operators. (supersymmetry transformations
and boosts commute.) thus we obtain the simplied algebra

, qj

{qi

} = 4eij(cid:18) 0

0

0

1 (cid:19) 

,

, qj

{qi

} = 0,

, qj

{ qi

} = 0.

(92)

27

obviously the upper components anticommute and by the usual positive norm argument they
have to annihilate the physical hilbert space, thus they are trivially represented. in other words:
massless states leave half of the supersymmetry unbroken. the lower components form a clif-
ford algebra and act as raising and lowering operators of the helicity operator, the generator of
rotations around the direction of p . they create an antisymmetric tensor representation of the
internal u (n ) symmetry from a given state of lowest helicity s:

|p , si,

1
4e

(qi

2)|p , si,

1
4e

(qi

2)(qj

2)|p , si, ...

(93)

the series terminates after application of n raising operators, which in the case of n = 1 gives
a spectrum consisting only of two kinds of elds. we shall only be interested in multiplets that
contain no higher spin than s = 1. the possibilities we are then left with are two complex scalars
and a single fermion (chiral multiplet) or a fermion with a vector (vector multiplet), while in
n = 2 one could have a vector with a complex scalar and two fermions (vector multiplet) or two
fermions with two complex scalars (hypermultiplet), counting always on-shell degrees of freedom
after eliminating auxiliary elds. multiplets with s  1 that involve more massless elds can
always be reduced to tensor products of these irreducible representations. such multiplets can
be thought of as the minimal eld content a supersymmetric theory has to contain.

we do not intend to look at the case of massive elds explicitly as the situation gets more
complicated and we shall not be interested in the massive elds with vanishing central charges in
the later discussion. one gets aware at once that the matrix of the supercharge anticommutator
has no vanishing eigenvalues anymore and all supercharges have to be represented non trivially.
the shortest possible multiplets get very much longer than the massless multiplets above, their
internal symmetry is found to be u sp(2n ) . a general classication can be found in the standard
literature [35], a very recent review of this and some of the following is [36].

we now also allow central charges in the superalgebra, which implies n > 1, then look for
the short multiplets as before and will nd them to be bps saturated. therefore we take massive
states with rest frame momentum p  = (m, 0, 0, 0) whose superalgebra is

, qj
, qj
, qj

{qi
{qi
{ qi

} = 2mij ,
} = u ij,
} =   v ij .

(94)

by using the mentioned internal symmetry one can redene the supercharges in a way that
combines the former ones into chiral components and allows to diagonalize the right hand side
of the anticommutator with eigenvalues zi (no summation):

 , ( qj+

{ qi+
 )} = 2 (m  zi) ij,
{ qi , ( qj )} = 2 (m + zi) ij,

(95)

by the positive deniteness of the operator qi ( qi ) (again no summation) we immediately get
the bps bound on the eigenvalues of the central charge matrix: zi  m. also we can identify the
short or bps multiplets that correspond to the massless multiplets in the case of vanishing central
charges. they are created when all the eigenvalues saturate the bound: zi = m. generally the
multiplets contain less and less states when more and more eigenvalues satisfy this relation, as
more supercharges get represented trivially then. these states are of great importance as they
are believed to be not aected (at least not too much) by renormalization, when the classical
supersymmetric theory is taken to be the bare lagrangian of a quantum eld theory. one then
generally expects that the procedure of renormalization might change some or all parameters
of the theory, oating into some xed point of the renormalization group and thus spoiling all

28

the results of classical analysis which we dealt with so far. on the other hand if nothing very
dramatic happens and all parameters vary suciently smoothly, the number of physical elds
should remain unchanged. more precisely stated, if charge and mass are coecients of relevant
or marginal operators in a lagrangian that is at the foundation of a quantum theory, for bps
states their values should after renormalization still coincide if supersymmetry is present and the
number of elds unchanged. in contrast to the coecients of irrelevant operators the renormal-
ized values of such parameters are not determined by renormalization alone but have to be xed
by an experiment. a natural value is assumed to be of the order of the quantum corrections,
but in principle any value can be obtained by adjusting the bare parameters order by order in
perturbation theory as desired. in supersymmetric eld theories there often occurs a cancellation
of perturbative or even all quantum corrections, which then renders the protected parameter to
be a free modulus of the theory, exactly determined by its bare value. (at least the potential
of any supersymmetric eld theory is not aected by perturbative quantum corections.) this
is also the reason why we can imagine consistently to vary the string coupling from strong to
weak by changing its bare value, which is the only free modulus of string theory. because of such
reasoning one hopes that once the bps states are identied in the classical approximation of some
supersymmetric theory, i.e. the lowest order of its perturbative expansion, they should exist also
in the non perturbative, large coupling sector of the moduli space. establishing duality relations
between perturbative and non perturbative sectors of theories very much relies on comparing
the bps spectra of both theories in the respective domain. there is in fact a case in which the
duality argument can be made rigorous. this is the maximal n = 4 supersymmetric extension of
yang-mills theory which we already mentioned earlier to be the only sym theory that provides
the correct multiplets to have full montonen-olive s-duality implemented [34]. this theory is
also conformally invariant and has all its -functions vanishing exactly, so that bps states in-
deed remain unaected by renormalization even if non perturbative eects are taken into account.

we now return to our previous subject of monopoles and dyons in the georgi-glashow model
and relate central charges of the superalgebra of its n = 2 supersymmetric extension to topolog-
ical charges of solitonic solutions of the eld equations [37]. the lagrangian of the sym theory
that includes the former model

l = 

+

1
4

1
2

f a
 f 

a +

1
2

g2tr [1, 2]2 +

2

xi=1(cid:0) a

1
2

i ida

i + da

i da

i(cid:1)

igijtr(cid:0)(cid:2) i, j(cid:3) 1 +(cid:2) i, 5j(cid:3) 2(cid:1)

(96)

i , a scalar a

contains a single n = 2 vector multiplet (a vector gauge boson with eld strength f a
 , two
fermions a
2) in the adjoint representation of the gauge
group.
if one computes the variations of the supersymmetry transformations in terms of the
elds and keeps track of all boundary terms, one nds that the supersymmetry only holds up to
the boundary terms

1 and a pseudo-scalar a

1f 0i

a + a
2

u = z d3x i(cid:18)a
v = z d3x i(cid:18)a

1

1
2

1
2

ijkfajk(cid:19),
a (cid:19).

2f 0i

ijkfajk + a

(97)

these are the generalizations of the topological charges given by the winding of higgs and gauge
eld of the former model. if non vanishing they demand to implement central charges u and v
into the superalgebra:

, qj

{qi

} = iju,

, qj

{ qi

} = ij  v.

(98)

thus the numerical values of the central charges are equal to the topological charges in the
sym theory, which in the non supersymmetric case we identied with the electric and magnetic

29

charges of the classical monopole solutions. bps monopoles are then special solutions that
also saturate the bps bound and which are annihilated by one half of the supercharges.
in
other words the presence of a bps monopole somewhere in the universe can be thought of as
a topological non trivial modication of the vacuum that imposes certain boundary conditions
on the elds at innity and breaks half of the supersymmetry by these conditions. the other
half of the superalgebra acts on the monopole state by creation of fermionic solutions to the
eld equations (dirac equations) in this background. the space of these fermionic zero-modes is
parametrized by the moduli of the monopole solution, its position and charges, i.e. the number
of fermionic zero-modes in the monopole background is related to the dimension of the moduli
space of the monopole. all the states saturating the bps mass bound we have been discussing
so far, reissner-nordstrom extremal black holes and prasad-sommereld monopoles, can be
embedded in supersymmetric theories to yield bps states. while we only deduced their properties
and existence from classical analysis, the supersymmetry is assumed to protect them against
renormalization by quantum eects, so that they remain bps multiplets. in this sense classical
arguments are extrapolated towards quantum exactness. reviews of the whole material can also
be found in [38, 39].

3.2 solitons in string theory

in analogy to solutions to classical eld equations of the previous chapter we shall now discuss
solitonic bps objects in string theory. in the following sections we shall nd two similar but
not completely identical types of candidates for such states, solitonic p-branes and d(irichlet)-
branes. we would like to point out some of their dierences and similarities. we will start with
an introduction into the way how the calculus of dierential forms allows to deduce the possible
spatial dimension of charged objects in string theory on the grounds of the ranks of the tensor
elds occurring in the low energy eective action, the supergravity theories in ten dimensions.
these objects will then rst be established classically as p-branes, solutions of the supergravity
eld equations, that only depend on a subset of the coordinates. they are interpreted as higher
dimensional monopoles and black holes, as they are sources for the generalized electromagnetic
tensor elds as well as for the gravitational metric eld, that are extended in spatial directions also.
integrating the dual electromagnetic eld strengths over the space transverse to the worldvolume
of the branes then allows to introduce the notion of non perturbative, topological charges into
the theory. the second type of states, the d-branes, have been reviewed as defects of space-time
which have (perturbative) open string world sheets ending on them. by indirect arguing many
indications have been found, that they are intermediate states between perturbative excitations
and solitonic p-branes, that share many properties of the latter. in addition to their being classical
solutions of the eective supergravity theory they further provide us with a prescription of how to
handle their perturbative degrees of freedom via the open strings ending on them, which by the
continuity of bps states can be traced back into the strongly coupled non perturbative regime.
this is the key to a perturbative quantum description of strongly coupled string phenomena. we
shall nd an example of such methods in the treatment of black holes.

3.2.1 extended charges as sources of tensor elds

in this introductory section we rst explain the necessary mathematics to generalize classical
electromagnetism to higher dimensions, i.e. the calculus of dierential forms [40, 41, 42]. taking
the entries of the eld strength tensor f  of the usual maxwell theory as coecients of the
2-form

(99)
and the current j correspondingly as a 1-form je  jdx we can rewrite the inhomogeneous
part of maxwells equations

f = 2da = [a]dx  dx = f dx  dx

d f = je,

f =

1
2

f 

(100)

30

and represent the electric charge inside some spatial region by the integral of the eld equation
over the transverse space m

e =zm

f =zm

je,

(101)

using stokes theorem. the homogeneous part of maxwells equations becomes the bianchi
identity df = 0. the dualized set of equations including the magnetic current is then given by
adding ad hoc a term to the eld strength, that is not closed, but its hodge dual is, thus spoiling
the bianchi identity, but not modifying the electric charge denition:

f  f = 2da + ,

d f = je,

df = d = jg.

the magnetic charge becomes

g =z m

f =z m

jg.

the gauge freedom corresponds to adding an exact form to the 1-form potential:

all these statements can easily be generalized to dierential forms of higher degree:

a  a + d.

potential:

gauge freedom:
eld strength:

electric charge:

magnetic charge:

a(p+1) = a1...p+1dx1  ...  dxp+1 ,
a(p+1)  a(p+1) + d(p),
f (p+2) = (p + 2) da(p+1),
e =zm
g =z m

j(dp1)

,

j(p+3)
g

.

e

(102)

(103)

(104)

(105)

one nds that in general jg is a (p + 3)-form, if the electric charge is an object extending into
pe  p space dimensions, while the dual magnetic charge lives in pm  d  4  pe dimensions. in
the classical d = 4 maxwell theory we had of course pe = pm = 0. from this generalized setting
the dirac quantization condition for the product of the two charges can be retained unchanged
as in the dualized maxwell theory. in a bohm-aharonov experiment one would have to move
extended objects around extended singularities and the magnetic potential integrated over non
trivial cycles around its singularities leads to a magnetic charge quantized by exactly the same
formula (71) in integer units of the inverse electric charge times 2.

thus we have found a rule that allows to deduce from the rank of some antisymmetric tensor
eld, rewritten in the language of a dierential form of same degree, the spatial dimension of the
corresponding charge that is the source of the generalized electromagnetic eld corresponding to
that tensor eld. as well this charge is quantized in analogy to diracs condition. we are now
in the position to discuss the dimensionality of the charges we do expect in the various string
models by inspecting their bosonic eld contents, summarized in table 4. some comments are
necessary which will become clear only in the next sections to follow. the universal nsns sector
is common to both heterotic, the iia and the iib model. its 2-form potential couples to the
respective fundamental string itself, i.e. the world sheet coordinates of the string couple to the
space time antisymmetric tensor, as usual in the -model approach. the solitonic object of this
sector is the ns-5-brane, solitonic in the sense of a p-brane as found in the universal bosonic
sector of d = 10 supergravity. it is the magnetic dual of the string and couples magnetically
to the nsns 3-form eld strength. all other charged states listed in the table come from the

31

table 4: forms and charges in various string models

model

potential field strength

pe

pm

universal nsns sector:

heterotic, iia, iib

rr sector:

iia

iib

(self-dual)

m-theory (d = 11)

b(2)

a(1)

a(3)

a(0)

a(2)

a(4)

a(3)

f (3)

f (2)

f (4)

f (1)

f (3)

f (5)

f (4)

1 (fundamental string)

5 (ns-5-brane)

0 (d-particle)

2

-1 (d-instanton)

1 (d-string)

3

2 (membrane)

6

4

7

5

3

5

rr sector, they are assumed to be realized as d-branes. these are string solitons which can
perturbatively be described by open strings with dirichlet boundary conditions and have an in-
terpretation as p-branes in the low energy approximation by supergravity. the meaning of these
statements will be explored in the following sections. all these states are related by several kinds
of (conjectured) duality transformations that also connect the perturbative and non perturbative
degrees of freedom. particularly the fundamental string and the ns-5-brane of the universal iib
sector are related to the d1-brane, the so called d-string, and the d5-brane of the rr sector of
the iib model via s-duality. the 3-branes of the iib are selfdual, referring to the selfdual eld
strength tensor f (5) = f (5) of that theory and the (-1)-brane is apparently an object local in
space and time and therefore usually adressed as an instanton. all these states can be identied
as states arising in some particular compactication of states known from d = 11 m-theory, which
we shall turn to in the nal chapter.

3.2.2 solutions of the supergravity eld equations: p-branes

the next task will be to derive solutions to the low energy eld equations of string theory
[40, 43, 44]. these describe the various elds whose sources are multidimensional objects that
carry mass and charges corresponding to the various eld strengths. we use the eld equation of
the eective theory, supergravity in d = 10 dimensions, to nd solitonic states that display nite
action. their support in space has to be localized and all elds must decrease fast enough at
innity but possibly with non trivial winding. thereby we always focus on the bosonic degrees of
freedom, taking the fermionic elds then given automatically by supersymmetry. the massless
bosonic elds of the string spectra are the graviton g , the antisymmetric tensor eld b with
3-form eld strength and the dilaton  from the universal sector, as well as the various a(p+1)
potentials or their eld strengths f (p+2) from the iia and iib rr sectors. their eective action
is dictated by the according supergravity theory:

se

e =

1

22 z d10x pge r(cid:0)ge(cid:1) 

1

2 xn

1
2n!

eaf 1n f1n!,

(106)

here written in the so called einstein frame and all topological chern-simons terms being dropped.
in the universal sector we have a = 1, n = 3 while in the ramond sectors a = (5  n)/2 and

32

n runs over the relevant form degrees. when commenting on the n = 5 case we shall eventually
ignore the problem that no consistent action for the self-dual 5-form is known so far. the action
(106) can be rephrased into the -model (or string) frame by a weyl rescaling

which results in:

s

e =

ge
  ge

e/2  g
 ,

1

22 z d10x g(cid:18)e2(cid:18)r (g) + 4 
xn

f 1n f1n! ,

1
2n!

1
12

f f(cid:19)

(107)

(108)

the sum now only running over the ramond elds, of course. the latter form can also directly
be derived as a low energy eective action of string theory using the formalism of world sheet
-models. an important thing to notice is, that the dilaton has obtained a universal coupling to
all elds of the universal sector but decouples from the elds of the rr sector. thus we expect
to get dierent dependences of masses and charges on the string coupling hexp ()i for branes
originating from tensor elds of the dierent sectors. the masses of the branes coupling to nsns
elds should be expected to behave like g2
s , while those from the rr sector will interpolate
between g2
s. to avoid certain diculties and for the sake of brevity we now take the
somewhat simpler type of einstein action

and g0

s

se

e =

1

22 z ddx pge(cid:18)re 

1
2 

1
2n!

eaf 1n f1n(cid:19)

(109)

keeping only a single tensor eld and derive the various equations of motion:

1
2

 + s,

re

 =

s 

1

2(n  1)!

ea(cid:18)f1...n1f 1...n1





n  1
n(d  2)

f 2ge

(cid:19) ,

(cid:0)eaf 2...n(cid:1) = 0,

 =

a
2n!

eaf 2.

(110)

the rst one is a generalized einstein equation, the third one the vacuum maxwell equation
and the last one describes a klein-gordon eld coupling somehow to electromagnetism. later
on we shall have to add a source term into the action to get non trivial solutions. this will
lead to additional delta function like, singular sources on the right hand side of the equations
of motion. to make an ansatz, we now split the coordinates into the x,  = 0, ..., p, on a
(p + 1 = n  1)-dimensional hyperplane which is taken to contain the charged object and the
transverse spatial directions ym , m = p + 1, ..., d  1. we then demand usual poincare p (1, p)
invariance in the rst p+ 1 coordinates, the worldvolume of the brane, and isotropy, so(d p 1)
invariance, in the rest of space to be satised by the solution. all the elds necessarily have to
be independent of the internal x coordinates because of translation invariance. we also need
to determine the amount of supersymmetry that is left unbroken by the ansatz. therefore we
have to look for the decomposition of the tendimensional poincare invariant supercharges into
(p + 1) and (d p 1)-dimensional spinors, themselves invariant under the demanded space-time
symmetries. for d = 10 it is found that the tendimensional chirality condition (1  11)10 = 0
implies that also

(1  (p+2))(p+1) = 0,

(1  (10p))(9p) = 0,

(111)

where (d+1)  0  . . . (d1) is the respective chirality operator and d an arbitrary invariant
spinor in the d dimensional subspaces. by inspecting the eigenvalues of these  matrices one

33

nds that for the cases we consider one half of the supersymmetry is broken by the brane ansatz,
which indicates that we might be dealing with a bps state. in fact it is possible to go the other
way round and construct the solutions we shall uncover by just their property of breaking exactly
one half of the supersymmetry [44]. splitting o the metric according to the ansatz we can always
write it

ds2

e = e2a(r)dxdx + e2b(r)dym dym ,

(112)

where both contractions of indices only involve at metrics and r pym ym is the radial distance

in the space orthogonal to the brane. the ansatz for the metric obviously respects lorentz and
translation invariance on the brane and also rotation invariance in the transverse directions.
for the eld strength tensor there are two dierent choices one can think of, as we have the
two options to construct the electric charge from the eld strength tensor itself or the magnetic
charge from its dual, such that one has the two options:

m2...n = 2...nm ec(r),
f e
ym
rn+1 .

m1...mn = g m1...mnm

f m

(113)

the form degrees are related by n = d  n, as both eld strengths are hodge dual in the d-
dimensional space-time. this completes the ansatz.
it of course remains to be veried that
charge and mass of these states take nite values. we now omit lots of technical details which
can be found for instance in [40, 43]. finally one can reduce the three undened functions to a
single one and a couple of parameters, related by:

(d2) ,
4d

e2a(r) = h(r) 4 d
e2b(r) = h(r)
(d2) ,
2

e(r) = h(r)

ec(r) =

h(r)1,

2a
 .

(114)

the remaining function h(r) is harmonic in the transverse space, i.e. obeys the laplace equation:

n m n m h(r) = 0.

(115)

only if we add a source on the right hand side of this equation, we get non trivial solutions for
h(r), as integrable, globally harmonic functions necessarily vanish. adding a source that only
has support on the volume of the brane, a (p + 1)-dimensional charged current, now corresponds
to turning the laplace equation into a poisson equation [45]. an explicit form for such a current
will be discussed later. the solution for h(r) with a brane at the transverse origin can then be
written

h(r) = 1 + /r

d,  > 0,

the parameters being given by:

 = a2 +

2(p + 1) d
,

d  2
for electric solutions
for magnetic solutions

 = (cid:26) +1
1
d = d  p  3.

(116)

(117)

,

in the magnetic case the integration constant  is related to the magnetic charge parameter:

g
2 d

,

 =

34

(118)

while in the electric case it is xed by the charge parameter of the source terms in the action.
in analogy to the denition of charges in electromagnetism we can integrate the eld strength
(p + 2)-form over a surface that encapsulates the p-brane and obtain the charge of an object
that has a (p + 1)-dimensional worldvolume. this charge is the source of the metric eld in the
transverse directions, as well as of the tensor eld. only in the case of a 1-brane we know the
proper quantum theory of the desired object, which is simply the fundamental string. taking
this example one can add a source term into the action (108) which has only support on a two
dimensional submanifold of space-time and whose action there is given by the -model action of
string theory:

(119)

s = 

t2

2 z d2 (cid:16)hhx x g + x x b  2hr(cid:17).

all the analysis can be carried out with the only exception that delta function source terms
appear on the right hand side of the eld equations. this is interpreted in the following way:
the fundamental, microscopic string is the source of a macroscopic eld conguration, the 1-brane
solution of the low energy approximation to string theory. the elds that appear in the world
sheet theory as the massless modes of the string are now (in the worldvolume theory) organized
in supergravity multiplets and their source is the twodimensional string again. its electric charge
under the tensor eld is given by integrating the eld equation

est =

1

22 zm8

e(r) f (r) = 22t2.

(120)

the mass of this 1-brane is dened by the integral over the time component of the energy momen-
tum tensor, which can also be calculated from the -model source and for the given solution is
found to saturate the bps bound, it is equal to the charge of the brane. despite from this case it
is an open question what material branes are made of in general. we can interpret the 1-brane
as the solution coming from the string and the ns-5-brane as its d  4  1 = 5 dimensional mag-
netic dual. for the rest of the p-brane solutions one has no elementary particles at hand. only
by the discovery of polchinski it became plausible that the desired objects are related to d-branes.

let us now point out an aspect of duality in the brane picture. the electric and magnetic
p-brane solutions we have found correspond to a particle like state, which is the source of the
electric eld strength tensor f (n), as well as a solitonic object, the source for the magnetic dual
eld f (dn). this setting allows a notion of duality in the sense that starting from the dual
tensor in the original action and splitting coordinates accordingly would have interchanged the
role of the two charges. in other words, calling the n 2 dimensional state the elmentary and the
d 2 n dimensional the solitonic one is a matter of convention as long as we do not decide which
eld strength is to be called fundamental. thus the ns-5-brane might be as fundamental as the
string itself, though we cannot say very much concerning its quantum theory, which is supposed
to be given by a quantization of its coordinates in the spirit of the polyakov action approach to
string theory. from computing its (topological) charge by using the magnetic dual tensor eld
one can deduce the generalized dirac quantization condition from a bohm-aharonov experiment

22t2t6 = 2n,

(121)

where t6 is the tension of the 5-brane.

we can summarize that we found solutions to classical low energy eective string theory, that
are extended and carry mass and charge under the various tensor elds. their particular values
saturate the bps bound and this allows us to strongly believe in the existence of these states also
in the unknown quantum theory and further expect them not to be renormalized in a way that
would spoil their being bps saturated. the severe and in general unsolved problem remains:
how to give a description of the quantum theory involving branes of higher dimension.

35

we next apply the solutions for the metric and the dilaton to various values for d and p to
get some examples which we of course choose from the string spectra. the expressions for the
eld strengths are obtained as easy. for the fundamental string in d = 10, having a worldvolume
of dimension 2 and correspondingly n = 3, the metric and the dilaton eld read

ds2

e = (cid:16)1 +
e = (cid:16)1 +



r6(cid:17)3/4
r6(cid:17)1/2



dx2

 +(cid:16)1 +

,



r6(cid:17)1/4

dy2

m ,

(122)

an expression that appears to display singularities not completely unfamiliar from those found for
the black hole solutions in general relativity. in fact there are black brane solutions that have
horizons shielding their singularities. they are in many respects similar to higher dimensional
black holes [46] and we shall eventually return to these examples when discussing black holes in
string theory. for the ns-5-brane with n = 7 we get instead

ds2

e = (cid:16)1 +
e = (cid:16)1 +



r2(cid:17)1/4
r2(cid:17)1/2



.

dx2

 +(cid:16)1 +



r2(cid:17)3/4

dy2

m ,

(123)

comparing the solutions for the string and the ns-5-brane, the two regions of space-time, the
brane and the transverse space appear exchanged. also the coupling has been inverted, as
supposed for the electric-magnetic duality of fundamental perturbative states and monopoles.
particularly for the self-dual 3-brane of the ramond sector with n = 5 we get:

ds2

e = (cid:16)1 +

e = 1,



r4(cid:17)1/2

dx2

 +(cid:16)1 +



r4(cid:17)1/2

dy2

m ,

(124)

where there is no distinction between the two types of states, electric or magnetic. finally the
d5-brane metric diers only in the dependence of the dilaton from its s-dual, the ns-5-brane:

e =(cid:16)1 +



r2(cid:17)1/2

,

(125)

as the duality transformation exchanges perturbative and non perturbative states. in this sense
the dualities of string theory are manifest in the supergravity brane solutions. s-duality is an
involution of the iib supergravity that can map the exponential of the dilaton to its inverse and
leave the metric in the einstein frame invariant. thus the d5-brane gets mapped to the above
ns-5-brane solution, while the fundamental string gets mapped to an object with

e =(cid:16)1 +



r6(cid:17)1/2

,

(126)

and otherwise unchanged metric, which is just the d1-brane solution. in a more general anal-
ysis also t-duality can be recovered. after performing a dimensional reduction of iia and iib
supergravity on a circle one nds a unique supergravity in d = 9 that again allows an involution
of its superalgebra and eld content, in general exchanging the elds and charges that originate
from iia and iib. decompactifying afterwards, one recognizes that this entire transformation
realizes the t-duality transformation which is known from the perturbative string theory and
which maps odd dimensional iib branes into even dimensional iia branes and vice versa. this
has to be discussed in the string frame, where any dp-brane has

 +(cid:18)1 +



r d(cid:19)1/2

dy2

m ,

ds2

 = (cid:18)1 +
e = (cid:18)1 +



dx2

r d(cid:19)1/2
r d(cid:19)(p3)/4



36

.

(127)

compactifying along the brane worldvolume now leads to a brane wrapped around the circle
and the rank p + 1 of the tensor eld coupling to the brane is eectively reduced by one. the
involution of the ninedimensional supergravity next is of such nature that a tensor eld of this
kind is mapped to another one that already in the tendimensional theory had the lower rank
p, so that after decompactifying we end up with a brane of one dimension less. on the other
hand starting with a compactication in a direction transvers to the brane, the rank of the
tensor eld is unchanged at rst and it is then being mapped to a tensor eld that had originally
higher rank, but lost an index during the compactication. by decompactifying the additional
dimension opens up and the brane gains an extra dimension in the end. (this discussion is so far
limited to the case of d-branes and has to be modied for ns-branes.) we shall be discussing the
role of the (elevendimensional) superalgebra in m-theory later on, which reveals the particular
importance of central charges for the existence of corresponding branes and should thereby make
the above explanations also more transparent.

3.2.3 d-branes as p-branes

another type of extended geometrical objects in string theory are the d-branes we discussed ear-
lier. these have formerly been introduced as xed hyperplanes in space-time, where open strings
can end on. the necessity of their existence had already been demonstrated by t-duality [47]
when polchinski found an interpretation [48] that allowed to view them as dynamical, charged
objects that uctuate in shape and position and couple to the rr elds of the string world volume
theory. this induced a tremendous amount of work on d-branes and related subjects which left
very little doubt about the statement that d-branes are some sort of non perturbative states of
string theory, relatives of the solitonic p-branes from the previous section. they have a perturba-
tive description by open strings ending on them and their bps nature conserves generic features
of this in the non perturbative regime. there are numerous reviews of d-brane physics, only to
mention [5, 19, 49], so that we restrict ourselves to illustrate polchinskis original computation
of the tension and charge by regarding a scattering process of strings emitted from and absorbed
by d-branes.

we rst show why the p-branes of the nsns sector cannot be the sources of the rr elds. let
us recall the world sheet origin of the various elds that occur in the low energy eective string
actions. in general the states are created by mode operators of the coordinate and spin elds
subject to the constraints of superconformal invariance imposed by the super virasoro operators.
the space time elds are then given by the polarizations of such states, for a massless state in
the universal nsns sector e.g.

|g , b , , kin sn s =(cid:16)g (

1 )

1 + b [

1 ]

1 + 

1 

1(cid:17) |0, kin sn s,

(128)

and their equations of motion express the restriction imposed by the constraints. for these nsns
elds the equations of motion can similarly be determined by the -model approach, which con-
sists in taking the action (119) with the coordinates coupling to the space-time elds as a quantum
eld theory of the coordinates in the usual sense. the space-time elds are coupling constants of
this theory and conformal invariance implies the vanishing of all the -functions. these can be
computed by standard methods in terms of the bare values of the space-time elds. demanding
them to vanish yields the equations of motion order by order in the -model loop expansion
parameter . the one-loop result reproduces the equations known from the bosonic sector of
d = 10 supergravity [50].

the elds of the rr sector on the other hand originate from the tensor product of the space
time spinor elds sa and sa of the left and right moving sectors. thus they are polarizations hab
which after expanding into gamma matrices look like:

|h1...n, kirr = st

a   10
xn=1

in
n!

h1...n (01...n)ab! sb|0, kirr.

(129)

37

to be more precise, the hs are the eld strengths of the rr elds. their equations of motion
are derived by exploring the dirac equations that come along with super virasoro constraints
as well as chirality conditions, while a corresponding -model, necessarily involving a coupling
to the spin vertex, is not known. after rewriting the lorentz tensors into dierential forms the
equations can be summarized by simply demanding the forms to be harmonic

dh = d h = 0,

(130)

which allows to introduce potentials. as we have seen earlier, the degree of the potential de-
termines the dimension of the brane which it naturally couples to. looking at the rr 3-form
with 2-form potential, everything appears to be quite similar to the nsns 3-form eld strength,
except that the latter couples to the coordinates of the world sheet, while the former couples to
the spin eld. but this crucial fact prohibits to interpret the fundamental closed string as the
source of the rr elds. assume a scattering process of an incoming and outgoing closed string
with a vertex operator (129) of the rr eld inserted. because of the rr elds coupling only
via their eld strength to the world sheet, this amplitude always carries a power of the external
momentum. while the diagram itself is to be interpreted as the coupling of the world volume
tensor eld to the macroscopic string, its zero momentum limit is the charge of the string under
that eld, which is vanishing. therefore we are forced to conclude that the p-brane solutions of
the supergravity eld equations, which had fundamental strings as electric or magnetic sources,
cannot be the states that carry the rr charges. there must be dierent elementary objects in
string theory as rr charged elds. these may then have a low energy description as p-branes
that are charged with respect to the rr eld strengths. d-branes are of course thought to be
the right choice.

the observation of polchinski now was the following. one computed the one-loop scattering
amplitude of an open string in the vacuum but with dirichlet boundary conditions at its ends
(signaled by putting ld
0 instead of l0). this can alternatively be seen as two d-branes of any
type ii model exchanging a closed string at tree level [51]:

hd|e22(l0+ l02)/t|ditree  h0|e2t(ld

0 1)|0i1-loop.

(131)

the length of the closed string is parametrized by 22/t = l, while the open string circling
around the cylinder has the length t. the result for this matrix element included a contribution

or

figure 7: open string one-loop or closed string tree-level diagram

of the rr elds of the closed string to the scattering amplitude, indicating a coupling of the rr

38

elds to the brane. one then compares this to the same tree level amplitude in the supergravity
approximation to low energy type ii string theory with a dirichlet brane eective action added
as a source of the elds and a wess-zumino coupling of the rr eld to the coordinates of the
brane. comparing the leading order contributions that come from the dilaton, graviton and
rr elds separately allowed to deduce the charge density and tension of the brane. in fact all
contributions cancel (no force rule) but apparently the d-branes feel a repulsion via rr elds.
we rst look at the string calculation of the open string one-loop vacuum diagram. in general
one has to compute the path integral

zvac = z dhdx dldr
+ll + r+r(cid:17)(cid:17).

vol

exp(cid:16) 

1

4 zcyl

d d h(cid:16)hx x

(132)

the elds have to obey the appropriate boundary conditions, dirichlet at the ends and periodicity
or antiperiodicity around the cylinder. while we shall compute zvac as the one-loop zero-point
function of the open dirichlet string, we could have alternatively called it the tree-level two-
point function of two boundary states in closed string theory. what causes all the problems
in computing such integrals is in particular the integration measure which has to be divided
by the volume vol of the local symmetry group of superconformal transformations and super
weyl rescalings. a mathematically more rigorous treatment can be found in [52], we indicate
the outcome here. first we split the (constant) zero-modes of the coordinate elds from the
integration, which gives a prefactor equal to the (innite) volume vp+1 of the d-brane only,
as constant shifts transverse to the brane are prohibited. (remember that the centre of mass
of the string also has to move on a hyperplane.) then we can formally perform the gaussian
integrations

zvac  det1/2(cid:18) 1

4

1

h

(cid:16)hh(cid:17)(cid:19) det1/2(cid:18) 

4(cid:19) det1/2(cid:18) +
4(cid:19)

apply the old ln det1/2 = 1

2 tr ln trick as well as

(133)

(134)

ln (o) = z 

0

dt

t (cid:0)eto  et(cid:1),

which holds for any operator o with spectrum in the right half plane of positive real part, nally
getting

ln zvac = vp+1tr(cid:18)z 

0

dt
t

et(k2+m 2)(cid:19) .

(135)

here the information about the oscillator spectrum has been translated into the degeneracy of
the mass levels which are being summed over. we have included a factor of 2 for the possible
orientations of the string and omitted the second term in (134) demanding a dierent kind of
regularization for the integral later on. (in unoriented type i theory the factor 2 is missing, but
on the other hand one is forced by the orientifold projection only to consider pairs of branes
at mirror positions, which in the end brings back the appropriate factor.) all the functional
determinants and traces involved have to be performed on the right spaces and superspaces, such
that all the diculties in obeying constraints and boundary conditions have only been hidden
away so far. the functional trace over the string spectrum consists of an integral over momenta
k on the brane as well as a sum over all oscillator levels of spin and coordinate elds:

ln zvac = vp+1z
= vp+1z 

0

dp+1k

(2)p+1 trosc(cid:18)z 
t (cid:0)42t(cid:1)(p+1)/2

dt

0

dt
t

et(k2+m 2)(cid:19)
trosc(cid:16)etm 2/2(cid:17).

39

(136)

the mass m of a state is given by the formula (52) and especially depends on the separation r of
the branes. the knowledge of the discrete mass spectrum of the theory, that is gained from the
oscillator expansion of the elds subject to the super virasoro constraints, now allows to actually
perform the sum over oscillators. the procedure for the spin elds is a little tedious as all allowed
periodicity conditions for going around the cylinder (ns and r combinations or spin structures)
have to be regarded. this can be found in the standard literature, e.g. chapter 9.4 of [2], and
has been explicitly went through in [51]. the result can be written most easily using jacobi 
and dedekind  functions:

ln zvac =

vp+1

2 z 

0

dt

t (cid:0)42t(cid:1)(p+1)/2

er2t xs=2,3,4

(1)s 4

s(cid:0)0| it
2(cid:1)
12(cid:0) it
2(cid:1)

.

(137)

the sum in the integrand is actually vanishing by some identity of  functions but we can split o
the two contributions that cancel each other and by their respective periodicity condition identify
the rr (s = 4) and nsns (s = 2, 3) contributions separately. this implies that we reinterpret
the open string 1-loop amplitude in terms of the tree-level closed string contributions. the poles
of the amplitude arise from the uv region, i.e. small t, and such we expand the integrand around
t = 0 getting the leading contribution:

xs=2,3,4

we dene the propagator

(1)s 4

s(cid:0)0| it
2(cid:1)
12(cid:0) it
2(cid:1)

= (1  1)t4 + o(cid:16)e1/t(cid:17) .

and write the nal result

0



2 z 

(d)(x2) =

dt (cid:0)22t(cid:1)d/2
ln zvac = vp+1(1  1)2(cid:0)42(cid:1)3p

ex2/2t =z

ddp
(2)d

eipx
p2

(9p)(r2) + o(cid:16)er/(cid:17) .

(138)

(139)

(140)

we can summarize the discussion in the following way: the force between d-branes due to the ex-
change of dilaton, graviton and rr eld vanishes by a cancellation of the attractive gravitational
force and the repulsive electric force. this is completely analogous to the behaviour of magnetic
monopoles in eld theory, which do not excert any force on each other by a cancellation of higgs
and vector boson exchange. in particular the contribution of the rr eld to the amplitude does
not vanish. therefore in the eective eld theory the d-brane somehow couples to the rr elds
and thus has to carry a corresponding charge.

the leading contribution of the above string amplitude can also be computed in the low
energy approximation to string theory, which corresponds to widely separated d-branes, large r
or eectively small . we now demonstrate how this is done in the eld theory that is given by
the eective type ii action for the bulk, an appropriate world volume action for the brane and
a coupling term. this will allow to deduce the macroscopic charge density p and brane tension
tp. to decouple the dilaton and graviton propagators one can rewrite the eective action of type
ii supergravity in the einstein frame:

sii

e =

1

22 z d10x (cid:18)g(cid:18)re +
+xp

2(p + 2)!

e(3p)/2(cid:16)dc(p+1)(cid:17)2! .

(d)2 +

1
2

1
12

1

e (db)2(cid:19)

(141)

note the abuse of notation that mixes forms and functions in the integrand and leads to some
changes of signs compared to earlier notations but helps very much to keep notations short. in

40

a similar manner as was sketched above an eective action for open strings in the presence of a
d-brane can be extracted from a proper -model [53, 54]:

sd

e = tpzm(p+1)

dp+1 e(3p)/4pdet (g + b + 2f ),

(142)

where gij and bij are the pullbacks of the metric and the antisymmetric nsns tensor to the
d-brane world volume and f (2) = (p + 2)da(1) is the eld strength of the u (1) gauge potential
a(1) that couples to the boundary of the open string. the world volume coupling constant tp
denes the string tension. the above action is taken as the eective action of the d-brane itself
by noticing that the (perturbative) open strings ending on the brane eectively carry its degrees
of freedom as they are the only perturbative manifestation of d-branes in string theory. thus the
low energy theory of d-branes is the perturbation theory of open strings with dirichlet boundary
conditions. note that the dependence of the d-brane action on the dilaton diers from the type
ii eective action by a factor exp ((p  3)/4), which in the -model frame boils down to the
dierence between the dilaton dependence exp (2) and exp (). thus the eective string
tensions of a d-brane and a p-brane dier by hexp ()i = gs. this fact leads to the name half-
solitons for d-branes. further we add the natural electric coupling of the rr eld to the brane
volume (the pullback of the rr eld onto the worldvolume of the brane):

swz

e = pzm(p+1)

dp+1 c0...p00  pp ,

where the coupling constant p is the charge density. finally one substitutes the identity

1 =z d10x (p+1)(xk  )(9p)(x  a)

(143)

(144)

into the d-brane action, where a is the coordinate of the d-brane in the transverse space, in order
to integrate out the world sheet coordinates (static gauge). altogether we have got a eld theory
with an extended d-brane source for the nsns elds and the rr tensor, whose propagation in
the bulk of space-time is governed by type ii supergravity. this theory might be ill dened as
a quantum eld theory but one can still extract the classical approximation by computing the
tree level contributions to the two-point function of dilaton, graviton and rr eld. therefore we
naively expand the functions of the elds to get all terms that are linear (sources) and quadratic
(propagators) in the elds:

sii
e + sd

e + swz

e =z d10x (cid:18)
+ xi=1,2(cid:18)tp(9p)(x  ai)(cid:18)

1

1
2

(d)2 +

22 (cid:18)gr +
p  3
4

2(p + 2)!(cid:16)dc(p+1)(cid:17)2(cid:19) (145)
 + g(cid:19) + pc(p+1)(9p)(x  ai) + (cid:19) +  .

1

by dropping all coupling and higher terms we restrict ourselves to those, which are relevant
for the tree-level two-point functions. we only did not explicitly expand the metric eld of the
pure gravity einstein-hilbert part around a at background and avoid a discussion of diculties
concerning gauge xing of the gravitational action etc. in this form one can immediately read o
the propagators and source terms and quite easily compute the three contributions to the total
tree level amplitude. the steps are displayed in [19] and the result reads

which is compatible with the string result if

ln zvac = 2vp+12(cid:0)2

p  t 2

p(cid:1) (9p)(cid:0)r2(cid:1) ,

(146)

(147)

holds. the rr charge density of the d-brane is equal to its tension, a version of the bps
mass bound. the modied dirac quantization condition can be deduced from a bohm-aharonov

2
p = t 2

p =



2 (cid:0)42(cid:1)3p

41

experiment as usual. the product of the charge of the brane of p spatial dimensions with the
charge of its d  4  p = 6  p dimensional dual has to be an invisible phase factor:

tpt(6p) = p(6p) =

n
2 .

(148)

this relation is satised by the above d-brane charge densities with n = 1, thus d-branes are
states with minimal rr charge and can be called elementary from this point of view.

we have only recalled the rst of very many considerations that all lead to the conclusions
that d-branes are the rr charged bps states that were missing in the non perturbative part
of the string spectrum before polchinskis discovery. let us collect the facts again: d-branes
break one half of the supersymmetry by the same arguments as for p-branes. they carry charge
density equal to their tension, and they satisfy the minimal version of the dirac charge quantiza-
tion condition. their low energy limit is a supergravity p-brane solution and their perturbative
degrees of freedom are the light modes of open strings ending on them.

3.2.4 black holes in string theory

in this chapter we shall review the application of the ideas concerning d-branes, their interactions
and duality relations to the entropy computation and information loss dilemma of black holes.
there have been several models in various dimensions suggested after the rst treatment in d = 5.
we shall refer to [55, 56] and d = 4, a more complete discussion of the whole material can for
instance be found in [57]. the basic method consists in taking congurations of d-branes and ns-
5-branes, which have a low energy description in terms of supergravity solutions, p-branes, whose
elds, especially their metric, can be written explicitly as in chapter 3.2. these are then being
compactied by a kaluza-klein procedure down to say d = 4 dimensions, which corresponds
to choosing a space-time background vacuum of appropriate topology, most simply the direct
product of a sixdimensional torus t 6 with fourdimensional at minkowski space. while this
background preserves n = 8 supersymmetry in d = 4, which is further reduced to n = 4 by the
presence of the branes, there have also been n = 2 compactications on calabi-yau 3-folds been
considered, which introduce a dependence of the black hole entropy on the topological properties
of the calabi-yau manifold [58]. if this is done in a skilful manner the resulting fourdimensional
metric can be tuned to exactly resemble one of the metrics of black holes we know from general
relativity. particularly generalizations of reissner-nordstrom solutions can be obtained this way.
of course we get a lot more elds by the supersymmetry, which are in general supposed not to
modify the conclusions severely and are omitted in the following. we then intend to count the
degeneracy of the resulting state of a couple of d-branes, ns-5-branes and strings with xed
values of macroscopic energy and charges, whose logarithm simply is the entropy of the resultant
fourdimensional black hole. but as we do not know the non perturbative degrees of freedom
of a d-brane, we have to make sure that we can change the coupling towards the perturbative
regime of the string moduli space without loosing control about the states we are looking at.
the rst thing to notice is then that we shall have to take bps states, which means extremal
reissner-nordstrom black hole solutions. they can be assumed to exist in the non perturbative
as well as in the perturbative spectra. the second point is that the classical p-brane solutions
also include a dependence of the dilaton eld on the radial coordinate of the transverse space,
which is of the kind that it generically tends to blow up at the horizon r = 0, thus preventing
any small coupling treatment at the position of the brane, no matter what the bare coupling is
chosen. (the classical value of the dilaton will coincide with its quantum expectation value, as
the potential goes unrenormalized.) thus the brane conguration we choose also has to take care
to have regular dilaton at the horizon.

we now sketch how the model is constructed in detail and how the state counting proceeds,
following the concrete steps of [56, 57]. one uses n6 d6-branes, n2 parallel d2-branes and n5

42

parallel ns-5-branes of the iia string theory, which are living in a space-time of topology r4t 6,
all being wrapped around the torus. strictly speaking we have not shown that such many brane
states with several intersecting d-branes and ns-branes exist and are stable. in fact, the no
force condition allows to consider rather arbitrary congurations which can also be managed to
be bps saturated. the metric in the non compact four dimensions then has to be tuned to be the
reissner-nordstrom classical solution of general relativity. also one adds open strings carrying
(quantized) purely left moving momentum n/r in one of the compact directions. the d6-branes
have to wrap around all the directions of the torus, while the d2-branes are taken to intersect the
ns-5-branes only in a onedimensional subspace of their respective worldvolumes in a way that
all branes have one compact direction in common. the string momentum is supposed to ow
exactly in that particular direction. the low energy solution for the eld strengths is then given
similar to (113), the rr 4-form eld strength originates from the d2-brane sources, the 2-form
eld strength from the d6-branes and the nsns 3-form eld strength from the ns-5-branes.
these we shall not need again, but we have to make sure that the dilaton is regular. dening
the respective harmonic functions according to (116) by

hp  1 +

npq(4)
p

r

,

we can write the solution for the dilaton

e2 = h1/2

2

5 h3/2
h1

6

,

(149)

(150)

which proves the regularity of the dilaton at the position r = 0 of the branes as well as in the
asymptotically at region r  . thus we can take the coupling to be small everywhere by
choosing its nite value at the horizon extremely small. the unique dependence of the dierent
harmonic functions on the radial coordinate through 1/r results from the fact that they all have
a threedimensional uncompactied transverse space and 1/r is the appropriate greens function
of the laplacian. the values for the charge parameters q(4)
in d = 4 are in fact given by applying
p
the dimensional reduction prescription to the charges in ten uncompactied dimensions. the
tendimensional elds are decomposed according to the lower dimensional lorentz group and then
taken to be independent of the higher compact dimensions. the higher dimensions can thus in the
case of a torus compactication trivially be integrated out, which for the mass of a p-dimensional
d-brane wrapped around the torus gives

m(p)

d =

r9
gs

r8 

r10p

.

(151)

this mass is then inserted in newtons formula for the gravitational potential and compared to
the (classical) large radius behaviour of the g00 component of the metric deduced in (114)

q(4)
p
r

1
2

.

g00 

(152)

thus we can express the parameters in the harmonic functions in geometric quantities and new-
tons constant. a similar charge parameter has to be dened for the discrete momentum of the
open strings:

k =

n q(4)

r

.

(153)

the solution for the metric from (114) is the low energy approximation for a single brane. the
rules for superposing several such branes (harmonic function rule) lead to the string frame line
element

ds2

rn = 

+

1

h2h6
h5h2h6

1 + dx2

2 + dx2

dt2 + h5ph2h6(cid:0)dx2
4 +r h2

h6 (cid:0)dx2

dx2

5 +  + dx2

8(cid:1) +

k

3(cid:1) +
h2h6

h2h6
dx2
9,

1

(dt  dx9)2

(154)

43

where the hp and k denote the tendimensional ancestors of the hp and k before dimensional
reduction. after reducing to d = 4 and switching to the einstein frame we can get back to the
desired reissner-nordstrom metric by a proper choice of the numbers of branes and the radii of
the compactication. the (thermodynamic) bekenstein-hawking entropy can then be found by
computing the area of the horizon

sbh =

a
4g4
n

= 2pn2n6n5n

(155)

and thermodynamical properties can be discussed [59]. this is the point of view of the low energy
approximation through supergravity and its p-brane solutions.

we now turn to string theory by regarding the quantum degrees of freedom of the state that
consits of the branes and strings we have put together to match the reissner-nordstrom metric.
as we have managed to get a solution with a regular dilaton at the horizon, we feel free to
change the coupling constant from the non perturbative to the perturbative regime and discuss
perturbations of the brane state, which are small uctuations of the d-branes positions and
shape that can be described by weakly coupled open strings ending on the d-branes. counting
the degeneracy of the black hole state in four dimensions now means counting all possible con-
gurations of strings attached to a given set of intersecting branes that leave the macroscopic
value of energy, mass and charges invariant, i.e. one has to count the number of states of the
open strings stretching between the d2-branes and the d6-branes that carry the momentum
n/r along the compact direction common to all the branes. thus the degeneracy of the string
spectrum will be responsible for the (statistical) entropy of the black hole. again in other words:
the quantum degrees of freedom of a macroscopic fourdimensional black hole are open strings
travelling in the internal compact space carrying some given amount of energy and momentum.
the details of the degeneracy calculated in a proper way are given in [55, 56], we shall be content
to use only a brief and heuristic treatment. first one has to notice that all the d-branes are cut
into half innite branes at the intersections with the ns-5-branes, thus the number of d-branes
is multiplied by the number of ns-5-branes present: n2n6n5. this conguration is depicted
in gure 8 with arrows indicating the momentum ow. (for a general deduction how branes
can end on branes see [60, 61].) take next into account the dierent possibilities of boundary
conditions an open string can have here (nd, nn, dn, dd) or equivalently the combinations of
branes which it can end on (2-2,2-6,6-2,6-6). counting the two orientations this together gives
2n2n5n6 dierent ways to attach an open string to the d-branes. further one has to observe
that the massless excitation level of these strings contains two fermionic and two bosonic on-shell
degrees of freedom. thus we got a gas of nf = 4n2n5n6 fermions and the same number nb of
bosons moving in a twodimensional space-time and carrying momentum n/r and corresponding
energy. the state density d(nb, nf , n ) of such systems is known from conformal eld theory to
grow exponentially with energy for high excitation levels, according to [62]

d(nb, nf , n )  exp 2r (2nb + nf )n

12

! .

the logarithm of this is the macroscopic entropy

(156)

(157)

s = ln (d(nb, nf , n ))  2pn2n5n6n ,

which perfectly matches the bekenstein-hawking result. the key ingredient to this remarkable
result can be seen in the special property of string theory (or twodimensional conformal eld
theory) to have exponentially growing state density. thus we can say that the specic input
of string theory into this derivation appears crucial for the correct magnitude of the quantum
degeneracy of a macroscopic black hole state of general relativity.

the methods we have sketched above have also been applied to calculate the entropy of non
extremal black holes [63]. these can be constructed most easily from the extremal model by

44

d6

d6

d6

ns5

ns5

d2

d2

d2

n/r

figure 8: the internal brane geometry of a fourdimensional black hole

adding right moving momentum nr/r carried by additional open strings (not to be confused
with the left and right moving sectors of a single closed string) in the compact direction common
to all the branes. naively the above state counting procedure can be repeated and the left and
right moving strings at small coupling contribute independently to the degeneracy:

s = ln (dr(nb, nf , nr)dl(nb, nf , nl)) .

(158)

the result is again in perfect agreement with the bekenstein-hawking area law. in this picture
hawking radiation is gured to arise from a recombination of left and right moving open strings
forming a closed string that leaves the brane and moves freely in the bulk. this enables to
compute the spectrum of the radiation by an evaluation of the tree-level partition function,
which allows by standard methods of statistical physics to obtain the expectation values of the
occupation numbers of string oscillator levels. this is in fact the spectral density of the closed
string radiation from the black hole. indeed one nds a black body spectrum (not surprisingly
for a set of free harmonic oscillators) and one can identify the hawking temperature in terms of
the charges and momentum quantum numbers. as this is a completely unitary computation in
a fully quantum theory, there is a priori no way left for any information (coherence) to dissipate
away. any pure state will stay to be one forever. on the other hand, as has been pointed out
already by the authors of [63], the success of the naive application of the procedure that was
employed to compute the entropy of the extremal black hole is not clear.
it very essentially
relies on the opportunity to change from the strong to the weak coupling regime. starting from
a situation with many d-branes present we would assume to have relevant (if not dominating)

45

corrections due to interactions near the horizon, as the large number of branes leads to an increase
of the dilaton there. these corrections are suppressed by going to the very small coupling regime.
the continuity of the former d-brane conguration and in particular the existence of all of the
degenerate quantum states in both regimes was guaranteed by their bps nature in the extremal
case. this argument does no longer hold for non extremal black holes that are clearly non bps.
they should be aected by renormalization in presumably very dierent manners for dierent
values of the string coupling constant. for instance in [57], there have been arguments given,
why open string loop corrections might not change the results of the small coupling computation,
but a generally excepted answer is not available.

4 m-theory

in this nal chapter we shall hardly be able to give anything more than a little taste of what
m-theory is meant to be, while its nal version surely is still under construction anyway. the
large amount of symmetry that is found in the spectrum and the interactions of string theory
has lend a lot of heuristic evidence to the very tempting conjecture there might be a unique
theory of gravity and supersymmetric gauge theory at the heart of it. this is assumed to incor-
porate all degrees of freedom encountered in string theory in a single type of theoretical model,
the perturbative string excitations as well as all the branes we have found so far. also it has
to reproduce the low energy theory of string theory, the two types of d = 10 supergravity, in
a consistent manner. an astonishing fact is that these requirements appear to be met quite
naturally if one takes this m-theory to be living in an elevendimensional space-time, that after
compactication of a single spatial direction yields in dierent limits the string theories we like.
this explains them all to be connected by duality transformations, as they originate from the
same mother theory. the only free parameter in the procedure appears to be the radius of the
compact additional dimension, while string theory in the critical dimension also has a single free
parameter, its coupling constant. let us start by briey indicating some motivating evidence for
the eleventh dimension.

the maximal dimension, in which any supergravity theory could be dened is d = 11. higher
dimensions necessarily lead to spin 5/2 elds in the theory, which one does not know how to deal
with consistently [64]. this theory is thus naturally assumed to be the low energy eective theory
that approximates m-theory. there is a unique supergravity in d = 11, being scale invariant, i.e.
it does not have any free parameters. this makes us believe, that it itself does not come from
a compactied even higher dimensional and even more unknown theory, as the compactication
should include some scale parameters according to the geometry. as it is also non chiral, in a
dimensional (kaluza-klein type) reduction by a compactication in one direction it leads to type
iia supergravity. the eld content of its bosonic sector contains only a 3-form potential a(3)
plus the metric eld. the eective action follows:

s(d=11)
e

=

1
22

(11) z d11x g(cid:18)r 

1

48(cid:16)da(3)(cid:17)2(cid:19).

(159)

as earlier we did not write fermionic elds and also left out topological chern-simon terms. a
kaluza-klein reduction to d = 10 dimensions is performed by putting the eleventh coordinate x10
on a circle of radius r11. the elds will then be decomposed with respect to the tendimensional
lorentz group and reveal the eld content of d = 10 type iia according to

a  bij  aij10, aijk,
g    g1010, ai  gi10, gij,

(160)

where indices i, j only run from 0 to 9. to make this more precise we can write the elevendimen-
sional line element and potential:

ds2

11 = e4/3(cid:16)dx10 + a(1)

i dxi(cid:17)2

+ e2/3ds2

10,

46

a  {aijk, bij10}.

(161)

the tendimensional elds then are taken to be independent of the eleventh, internal coordinate
for consistency reasons. this assures that any solution derived in the lower dimensional theory is
also a solution of the original one. the eleventh dimension can now be integrated over trivially
and yields a prefactor in front of the action, relating the tendimensional gravitational coupling
constant  to the elvendimensional (11) by

2 =

2
(11)
2r11

.

(162)

the string coupling constant gs = hexp ()i in the tendimensional iia theory is also related to
the radius r11 of the compactication by

r11 = g2/3
s ,

(163)

thus the string coupling constant is revealed to be given by the radius of the additional dimension
of m-theory. this implies that the perturbative regime of string theory does not know anything
about the eleventh dimension as the small coupling sector corresponds to the small radius region.
vice versa the non perturbative regime of string theory should imply a decompactication of the
eleventh dimension. m-theory does by this mechanism automatically include the non perturba-
tive eects of string theory [65]. also the other degrees of freedom of the d = 10 supergravity
theory match together with their ancestors in eleven dimensions. for the fermionic elds this
check is as easy as the one we made above for the bosonic elds, while it also appears to hold (as
it better has to) in the non perturbative sector of the spectrum [10].

in the non perturbative part of its spectrum the elevendimensional supergravity has by the
sake of its 4-form eld strength an electric membrane (m2-brane) as well as a solitonic m5-brane
of the same nature as the p-branes we discussed earlier. from these the states of the type iia
string spectrum can be constructed by a proper choice of the coordinates which are being com-
pactied. the string itself can be seen to be a membrane wrapped around the compact circle, the
string d2-brane is an uncompactied m2-brane, and similarly the d4-brane and the ns-5-brane
descend from the m5-brane. a less obvious case is the d6-brane, which can be traced back to
a kaluza-klein monopole of m-theory [66]. the respective string tensions can be computed on
both sides of this correspondence as a test. they are related by the minimal dirac quantization
conditions and one pair of brane tensions can be xed by hand. but afterwards the relation (162)
between the two coupling constants has to hold, when comparing the rest of the tensions, and in
fact, it does.

a more systematic way to see, how the elds and non perturbative states of low energy string
theory emerge from d = 11 is to analyze the n = 1 supersymmetry algebra [67, 68, 69]. we
shall indicate, how a couple of the features of string theory, including the dierent string models,
their spectra and the duality transformations that relate them, are understood to be descendants
of the supersymmetry in m-theory. this reasoning gives a very comprehensive and systematic
treatment of separate issues in string theory. so let us look at the most general superalgebra in
eleven dimensions. a given (majorana spinor) super charge q has 32 real components, such
that {q, q} is a symplectic sp(32) matrix with 32  33/2 = 528 independent entries. under
the lorentz subgroup so(1, 10) of sp(32) it can be decomposed into irreducible representations,
which are a vector (the momentum), a second rank tensor and a fth rank tensor. the last two
are the possible central terms in the algebra, which thus reads [70]:

{q, q} = (c) p +

1
2

( c) z +

1
5!

(15c) z15 .

(164)

the terms are not central in the sense of central charges, which we introduced in chapter 3.1.3.
those were only allowed for extended supersymmetry, while the central terms here break the

47

lorentz invariance. if we take the tensor elds in the lagrangian to have support only in a par-
ticular subspace, the invariance is restored on the transverse coordinates, which is a hyperplane,
worldvolume of a p-brane. the presence of the charges then modies the eld equations of the
rr tensor elds by adding sources which are topological in the sense that they are locally exact
forms. they are vanishing unless the branes wrap around non trivial cycles in space-time, for
instance

z  = qzm(2)

dx  dx ,

(165)

which is zero, if the brane volume m(2), a 2-cycle, is contractible. by similar arguments as
we used in chapter 3.1.3 one can now deduce that there can be m2-branes and m5-branes as
presumably elementary and solitonic bps states. in fact one also suspects dual m9-branes and
m6-branes to exist. the m2-brane was the rst to be established as a solution to the eld equa-
tions [71] in a similar manner as we followed in chapter 3.2. there have also been extensive
researches for its quantum theory, the quantization of its coordinates [72]. also the m5-brane
is thought to be rather well understood in terms of its worldvolume action [73]. one can, for
instance, give explicit formulas for the metrics and eld strengths and discuss the singularity
structures, the masses and the charges, which veries them to saturate the bps mass bound.
the latter dual branes are still somewhat mysterious and are being under observation.

the easiest way to get an impression what might be happening when these m-theory states,
or better say d = 11 supergravity states, are being compactied down to the critical string
dimension, is again to look at the dimensional reduction of the superalgebra

{q, q} = (c) p +(cid:0)10c(cid:1) p10 +(cid:0)10c(cid:1) z10 +

1

1

+

4!(cid:0)10c(cid:1) z10 +

5!(cid:0)c(cid:1) z,

1
2

( c) z

(166)

where the indices now run from 0 to 9 only. we notice that the central terms in d = 10 originate
from the central terms of d = 11 as well as from the eleventh entry of the momentum. all the
central terms we need as charges of the tensor elds in the d = 10 iia supergravity are present,
such that all the brane solutions we have constructed and conjectured in the previous chapters
could have been foreseen from this simple analysis. in particular we recognize our earlier state-
ment that the states carrying kaluza-klein momentum p10 in the compact direction from the
tendimensional point of view look like d0-branes, charged under the scalar central term of the
iia super algebra. the relation to iib is a little more subtle. it was however found that a torus
compactication of m-theory leads to iib compacied on a circle, where the sl(2, z) acting on
the complex modulus of the torus is exactly mapped to the iib selfduality group that acts on the
complex combinations of the nsns and rr scalars and 2-forms [10]. along similar lines one can
proceed further to recover more dualities of string theory. by combining chiral components of the
supercharges and after performing a chirality ip on one half of the components, one gets from
iia to a chiral type iib superalgebra of only say left handed supercharges. this can be related to
the t-duality of the two type ii string theories in d = 10. also one can truncate the iia theory
down to an n = 1 theory by a one sided parity operation keeping only invariant supercharges.
this then yields the superalgebra of the heterotic theory with all its central terms. it also reveals
that these central terms involve only the sum p + z of momentum and topological winding
charge, therefore it is unaected by exchanging the two. in this way the heterotic t-duality arises
very naturally from symmetries of the truncated d = 11 superalgebra, which are invisible from
ten dimensions. a large part of the web of string dualities has thus been observed emerging from
the superalgebra of the elvendimensional ancestor.

after having returned to the perturbative t-duality we started with, we like to stop our
journey at this point, leaving all the more advanced topics to more specialized reviews, a couple

48

of which we have cited above. the most prominent omissions we have left out surely include the
developments initiated by [74] which allowed the study of gauge theories via the d-brane world
volume eective eld theories or via m-branes [75] alternatively. neither did we explore the ideas
concerning the more realistic non extremal and non supersymmetric black holes in detail and
completely omitted a discussion of the maldacena conjecture of the duality between iib string
theory on anti de sitter space and an ordinary conformal eld theory on its boundary [76, 77, 78].

49

a compactication on t 2 and t-duality

in order to illustrate the statements of section 2.1.2 we will now focus on the compactication of
a bosonic string on a twodimensional torus. we have then four background elds, three coming
from the metric (gij ) and one from the antisymmetric tensor ( bij = ijb) spanning the classical
moduli space

mclass =

so(2, 2, r)

so(2)l  so(2)r 

sl(2, r)

u (1)

here we have introduced the two complex moduli

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)t 

sl(2, r)

u (1)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)u  h|t  h|u .

u = u1 + iu2 =

t = t1 + it2 =

+ i

g12
g22
1

detg
g22  h,
2(cid:16)b + idetg(cid:17)  h,

(167)

(168)

(169)

(170)

where u is the complex structure modulus describing the form of the torus and t is the kahler
modulus (detg gives the volume of the torus). that means we represent the two dimensional
lattice in the complex plane. it is possible to express the metric in terms of u and t as:

g =

2t2

u2 (cid:18) u 2

1 + u 2
u1

2 u1

1 (cid:19) .

one can also write p2

l and p2

r in terms of the moduli:

(~pl)2 =

(~pr)2 =

1

1

2t2u2 |(n1  u n2)  t (m2 + u m1)|2 ,
2t2u2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(n1  u n2)  t (m2 + u m1)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

,

where (n1, n2) are the momentum numbers and (m1, m2) the winding numbers10. the spectrum
is given in (31). it can be shown, as pointed out at the end of section 2.1.2, that its symmetry
group is

t-duality = so(2, 2, z)  sl(2, z)u  sl(2, z)t  zi

2  zii
2 .

(171)

we will demonstrate that this is indeed a group of transformations under which the spectrum is
invariant. to be honest we will just focus on the (~pl)2 + (~pr)2-part of eq. (31). the number
operators

nl/r = xn>0

l/r,n(g, b) gij j
i

l/r,n(g, b)

(172)

can be shown [4] to be manifestly invariant under t-duality because of the non trivial trans-
formation of the oscillators which compensates the transformation of the metric. that (171) is
precisely the entire t-duality group relies on the general result stated at the end of section 2.1.2,
which can also be found in [4]. (in fact the symmetry group contains one further element, namely
symmetry under the worldsheet parity transformation   , implying b  b.) the rst
sl(2, z)u in (171) reects the fact that the target space is a two dimensional torus, whose com-
plex structure modulus always has an sl(2, z) symmetry. not all values of u lead to dierent
complex structures but only those in the fundamental region m = h/sl(2, z) (see g. 10, the
thick lines of the boundary belong to the moduli space, the thin ones not). the transformation

u 

au + b
cu + d

with (cid:18) a b

d (cid:19)  sl(2, z),

c

10this can be checked after a straightforward but tedious calculation with the help of (28).

(173)

50

r

r

r

r

r

r

r

r

r

figure 9: dierent basis vectors can dene the same lattice.

does not change the complex structure of the torus and just amounts to another choice of basis
vectors for the same lattice (see g. 9). this symmetry of the spectrum is classical in the
sense that it does not need any special features of the string but just depends on a symmetry
of the target space. the second sl(2, z)t is stringy from nature. its generators are as usual
t  t + 1, which is a shift in b, and t  1/t , which for b = 0 amounts to an inversion
of the torus volume. invariance under the rst transformation can be understood from (25). if
bij is constant, the second term is a total derivative (namely bij (x ix j)) and thus its
contribution topological. an integer shift in b (i.e. in general a shift by an antisymmetric matrix
with integer entries) amounts to a shift of the action by an integer multiple of 2 and therefore
does not change the path integral.

u 

1/2+  3 /2 i

-1 -1/2

1/2

1

figure 10: moduli space of the complex structure modulus of a torus.

if one considers the special case of a background with b = g12 = 0, i.e. a lattice with
2 and detg = r1r2, we have u = ir1/r2 and
basis {r1, ir2}, leading to g11 = r2
t = ir1r2/2. the element t  1/t , u  u acts on the lattice according to r1/2  2/r2
and r2/2  2/r1.

1, g22 = r2

the rst zi

2 exchanges the complex structure and kahler moduli, u  t , and is a two di-
mensional example of mirror symmetry. it is related to the t-duality of one of the circles making
up the torus. this becomes clear if one looks again at the special case of u = ir1/r2 and
t = ir1r2/2. it translates to r1  r1 and r2/2  2/r2. the corresponding t-duality for
the second circle is achieved by a composition of this zi
2 transformation and twice the sl(2, z)u
transformation u  1/u , t  t , i.e. r1  r2 (altogether this amounts to t  1/u and
2 is given by (t, u )  ( t , u ), which translates into b  b and
u  1/t ). the second zii

51

g12  g12. it is an easy exercise to verify explicitly that the ensembles of all dierent values
(~pl)2 respectively (~pr)2 from (170) are seperately unchanged under the above transformations
and therefore the (target space) perturbative spectrum is invariant. of course, like in the one
dimensional case, the single states are in general not invariant and winding and momentum num-
bers mix under the transformations. to be more precise, the winding and momentum numbers
of the transformed states (tilded quantities) can be expressed via the old ones according to table
5. obviously if (n1, m1, n2, m2) take all values of z4, the same is true for (n1, m1, n2, m2). the

n1

n2

n1  n2

u

transformation
u   1
u  u + 1
t   1
t  t + 1
t  u
u   u, t   t

t

n2
n1
n2
m1

m2
n2

m2

n2
n1  m2 m1 + n2 m1
m1

n1

n1

m1

m1

m2

m2
m1

m1 m1 + m2

n1
m2

n2
m2

table 5: transformation of winding and momentum numbers

invariance of the mass spectrum is of course only a necessary condition for the whole theory to
be invariant under the t-duality group. it is possible to show that the partition function is also
unchanged to all orders in perturbation theory.

t-duality is the remainder of a spontaneously broken gauge symmetry. only at special points
in the moduli space it is partially or completely restored. these points correspond to xed points
or higher dimensional xed manifolds of some of the symmetry transformations of the t-duality
group [4, 18]. to illustrate this fact take the example of the circle compactication at the self
dual radius rx, where the gauge group is su (2)  su (2) (see below). it can be shown in this
case that there are nine massless scalars besides the dilaton, which transform as (3, 3) under
su (2)  su (2). the 3-3 component can furthermore be identied as the modulus r for the
radius of the compactication circle (or to be more precise for its dierence from the self dual
radius). moving away from the self dual radius amounts to giving an expectation value to r
and thereby breaking the gauge symmetry to the generic group u (1)  u (1). however rotating
by  around the 1-axis in one of the su (2)s changes the sign of the 3-3 component. this shows,
that decreasing the value of the radius from the self dual value is gauge equivalent to increasing
it. this fact survives the breaking of the gauge group in the form of t-duality.

the gauge symmetry enhancement at special loci in the moduli space happens of course also
in our two dimensional example. the zi
2 transformation (i.e. t  u ) has the xed line t = u .
in the special case of b = g12 = 0 this amounts to choosing the self dual radius for r2. from
the experience with the circle compactication one therefore expects a symmetry enhancement
according to u (1)4  u (1)2  su (2)2. this actually happens for t = u , which can be seen from
the formulas for the left and right momenta (viewed as complex numbers), namely

pl =

pr =

1
2
1
2

1
t2
1

((n1  t n2)  t (m2 + t m1)) ,
t2 (cid:0)(n1  t n2)  t (m2 + t m1)(cid:1) .

(174)

for b = g12 = 0 we have t = t = it2 and thus four additional massless vectors (c.f. (31) and
see table 6). the last two columns are determined by the level matching condition 1
2|pl|2 + nl =
1
2|pr|2 + nr. if the oscillators carry indices of non compact dimensions, the corresponding vertex

52

0

m1 m2
1
1

0

pl

n1
n2
0 1
0 1 i2

0

pr

i2

0

nl nr

1

0

0

1

table 6: additional su (2) gauge bosons.

operators : x  exp (ik  x) exp(cid:0)i2x 25

r (cid:1) : represent
four new gauge bosons, which together with the generically (for all values of the radius) existing
gauge bosons : x 25
r exp (ik  x) : combine to the gauge elds
l
of su (2)l  su (2)r (in the cartan-weyl basis). this can be checked directly by considering the
currents

l (cid:1) : and : x  exp (ik  x) exp(cid:0)i2x 25

x  exp (ik  x) : and : x  x 25

j1(z) = 2 : cos(cid:16)2x 25
j2(z) = 2 : sin(cid:16)2x 25

l/r(z)(cid:17) : = :
l/r(z)(cid:17) : = :

j3(z) = ix 25

l/r(z).

1

2(cid:16)exp(cid:16)i2x 25
2i(cid:16)exp(cid:16)i2x 25

l/r(z)(cid:17) + exp(cid:16)i2x 25
l/r(z)(cid:17)  exp(cid:16)i2x 25

l/r(z)(cid:17)(cid:17) : ,
l/r(z)(cid:17)(cid:17) : ,

1

(175)

one can verify that the algebra formed by their laurent coecients is given (for the left resp.
right moving currents seperately) by a so called level one su(2) kac-moody algebra

m, jl

(cid:2)jk

n(cid:3) = mm+nkl + iklqjq

m+n,

(176)

which reduces for the jk
0 elements to the usual su (2) lie algebra (the fact that we get a much
bigger (innite) algebra is of course due to the z-dependence of the currents in (175)). for more
details on this point see e.g. [1].

the u (1)2 related to the vectors : x 24
l

r exp (ik  x) : is
enhanced at the self dual value for the radius r1. since the t-duality transformation for this
circle is given by t  1/u and u  1/t (see above) the xed point is t = 1/u . again
we have for b = g12 = 0 four additional gauge bosons which enlarge the symmetry to an
su (2)l  su (2)r, namely:

x  exp (ik  x) : and : x  x 24

m1 m2
1
1

0

0

n1
1
1

n2

pl

0

0

0 2

pr

2

0

nl nr

1

0

0

1

we have used

pl =

pr =

1

2(cid:18)n1 +
2(cid:18)n1 +

1

1
t
1
t

n2  t m2 + m1(cid:19) ,
n2  t (cid:18)m2 

1
t

m1(cid:19)(cid:19)

(177)

and t = t . if we satisfy both conditions u = t and u t = 1 at the same time, all the u (1)s
are enhanced to give the gauge group su (2)4. this is obviously the case for t = u = i, which
is also a xed point of the sl(2, z)t and sl(2, z)u transformations u  1/u and t  1/t
2 transformation t   t , u   u . this is a generalization of the circle compact-
and of the zii
ication in the sense, that we have compactied on two orthogonal circles with self dual radii.

53

on d-dimensional tori it is possible to get in a similar way the gauge group su (2)d

l  su (2)d
r .
to get more general gauge groups we need a non vanishing b. like before the right choice
it is easy to verify that

for t and u is a value that is invariant under a subgroup of (171).

t = u = 1/2 + i3/2 is invariant under t  u , t  1/(t  1), u  1/(u  1) and
t  1  t , u  1  u . in this case the restored symmetry group is su (3)l  su (3)r as we
get twelve additional massless gauge bosons, whose left respectively right momenta make up the
root lattice of su (3) (i.e. we have chosen the compactication torus to be dened by the lattice
dual to the root lattice of su (3)). the new states are summarized in table 7. it is again possible
to show that the internal parts of the corresponding vertex operators together with those of the
generically present gauge bosons generate a level one su (3)l  su (3)r kac-moody algebra.

m1 m2
1

0

n1

0

1 1 1
1
0

1 1
0
1 1 1

1 1
1
0

0

1

n2
1
0

pl

0

0

0

i2
1 2(cid:16) 3
2(cid:17)
2 + i
2(cid:16) 3
2(cid:17)
2  i

0

pr

i2
2(cid:16) 3
2(cid:17)
2 + i
2(cid:16) 3
2(cid:17)
2  i
0

0

0

nl nr

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

table 7: additional su (3) gauge bosons.

54

references

[1] d. lust, s. theisen, lectures on string theory, springer verlag 1989.

[2] m.b. green, j.h. schwarz, e. witten, superstring theory, cambridge university press 1987.

[3] j. polchinski, string theory, cambridge university press 1998.

[4] a. giveon, m. porrati, e. rabinovici, target space duality in string theory, (hep-

th/9401139).

[5] j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, (hep-th/9611050).

[6] a. font, l.e. ibanez, d. lust, f. quevedo, strong-weak coupling duality and nonperturba-

tive eects in string theory, phys. lett. b 249 (1990) 35.

[7] s.-j. rey, the conning phase of superstrings and axionic strings, phys. rev. d 43 (1991)

526.

[8] a. sen, electric magnetic duality in string theory, nucl. phys. b 404 (1993) 109, strong-
weak coupling duality in four-dimensional string theory, int. journ. mod. phys. a9 (1994)
3707, dyon  monopole bound states, selfdual harmonic forms on the multi-monopole mod-
uli space, and sl(2, z) invariance in string theory, phys. lett. b 329 (1994) 217.

[9] a. sen, j.h. schwarz, duality symmetries of 4d heterotic strings, phys. lett. b 312 (1993)

105, duality symmetric actions, nucl. phys. b 411 (1994) 35.

[10] j.h. schwarz, an sl(2, z) multiplet of type iib superstrings, phys. lett. 364 b (1995) 252.

[11] n.a. obers, b. pioline, u duality and m theory, hep-th/9809039.

[12] c.m. hull, p.k. townsend, unity of superstring dualities, nucl. phys. b 438 (1995) 109.

[13] r. gilmore, lie groups, lie algebras, and some of their applications, john wiley & sons

1974.

[14] d. lust, dual string vacua with n = 2 supersymmetry in four dimensions, nucl. phys. b

(proc. suppl.) 62a-c (1998) 375.

[15] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b 443 (1995) 85.

[16] p. horava, e. witten, heterotic and type i string dynamics from eleven dimensions, nucl.

phys. b 460 (1996) 506.

[17] p. horava, e. witten, eleven-dimensional supergravity on a manifold with boundary, nucl.

phys. b 475 (1996) 94.

[18] m. dine, p. huet, n. seiberg, large and small radius in string theory, nucl. phys. b 322

(1989) 301.

[19] c.p. bachas, lectures on d-branes, (hep-th/9806199).

[20] p.k. townsend, black holes, (gr-qc/9707012).

[21] s.w. hawking, particle creation by black holes, comm. math. phys. 43 (1975) 199.

[22] s.b. giddings, quantum mechanics of black holes, (hep-th/9412138).

[23] t.t. wu, c.n. yang, some remarks about unquantized non-abelian gauge fields, phys.

rev. d 12 (1975) 3845.

[24] g. thooft, magnetic monopoles in unied gauge theories, nucl. phys. b 79 (1974) 276.

55

[25] a.m. polyakov, particle spectrum in the quantum field theory, jetp lett. 20 (1974) 194.

[26] m.k. prasad, c.h. sommereld, exact classical solutions for the thooft monopole and

julia-zee dyon, phys. rev. lett. 35 (1975) 760.

[27] e.b. bogomolny, stability of classical solutions, sov. j. nucl. phys. 24 (1976) 449.

[28] b. julia, a. zee, poles with both magnetic and electric charges in nonabelian gauge theory,

phys. rev. d 11 (1975) 2227.

[29] e. witten, dyons of charge e/2, phys. lett. 86 b (1979) 283.

[30] c. montonen, d. olive, magnetic monopoles as gauge particles?, phys. lett 72 b no. 1

(1977) 117.

[31] n. seiberg, electric-magnetic duality in non-abelian gauge theories, nucl. phys. b 435

(1995) 129.

[32] n. seiberg, e. witten, electric-magnetic duality, monopole condensation and connement
in n = 2 supersymmetric yang-mills theory, nucl. phys. b 426 (1994) 19, erratum nucl.
phys. b 426 (1994) 430.

[33] n. seiberg, e. witten, monopoles, duality and chiral symmetry breaking in n = 2 super-

symmetric qcd, nucl. phys. b 431 (1994) 484.

[34] h. osborn, topological charges for n = 4 supersymmetric gauge theories and monopoles

of spin 1, phys. lett. 83 b (1979) 321.

[35] j. bagger, j. wess, supersymmetry and supergravity, princeton university press 1992.

[36] p.c. west, supergravity, brane dynamics and string duality, (hep-th/9811101).

[37] e. witten, d. olive, supersymmetry algebras that include topological charges, phys. lett.

78 b (1978) 97.

[38] d.i. olive, exact electromagnetic duality, (hep-th/9508089).

[39] j.a. harvey, magnetic monopoles, duality and supersymmetry, (hep-th/9603086).

[40] m.j. du, r.r. khuri, j.x. lu, string solitons, (hep-th/9412184).

[41] r.i. nepomechie, magnetic monopoles from antisymmetric tensor gauge fields, phys. rev.

d 31 no. 8 (1985) 1921.

[42] c. teitelboim, monopoles of higher rank, phys. lett. 167 b (1986) 69.

[43] k.s. stelle, bps branes in supergravity, (hep-th/9803116).

[44] c.g. callan, j.a. harvey, a. strominger, supersymmetric string solitons, (hep-th/9112030).

[45] a. dabholkar, g. gibbons, j.a. harvey, f. ruiz ruiz, superstrings and solitons, nucl. phys.

b 340 (1990) 33.

[46] g.t. horowitz, a. strominger, black strings and p-branes, nucl. phys. b 360 (1991) 197.

[47] j. dai, r.g. leigh, j. polchinski, new connections between string theories, mod. phys.

lett. a vol. 4 no. 21 (1989) 2073.

[48] j. polchinski, dirichlet branes and ramond-ramond charges, phys. rev. lett. 75 no. 26

(1995) 4724.

[49] j. polchinski, s. chaudhuri, c.v. johnson, notes on d-branes, (hep-th/9602052).

56

[50] c.g. callan, d. friedan, e.j. martinec, m.j. perry, strings in background fields, nucl.

phys. b 262 (1985) 593.

[51] m.b. green, point-like states for type iib superstrings, phys. lett. 329 b (1994) 435.

[52] j. polchinski, evaluation of the one-loop string path integral, comm. math. phys. 104

(1986) 37.

[53] e.s. fradkin, a.a. tseytlin, non-linear electrodynamics from quantized strings, phys. lett.

163 b (1985) 123.

[54] r.g. leigh, dirac-born-infeld action from dirichlet -model, mod. phys. lett. a vol. 4

no. 28 (1989) 2773.

[55] a. strominger, c. vafa, microscopic origin of the bekenstein-hawking entropy, phys. lett.

379 b (1996) 99.

[56] j.m. maldacena, a. strominger, statistical entropy of fourdimensional extremal black

holes, phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 428.

[57] j.m. maldacena, black holes in string theory, phd thesis, (hep-th/9607235).

[58] k. behrndt, g. lopes cardoso, b. de wit, r. kallosh, d. lust, t. mohaupt, classical and

quantum n = 2 supersymmetric black holes, nucl. phys. b 488 (1997) 236.

[59] r. kallosh, a. linde, t. ortin, a. peet, a. van proeyen, supersymmetry as a cosmic

censor, phys. rev. d 46 (1992) 5278.

[60] p.k. townsend, d-branes from m-branes, phys. lett. 373 b (1996) 68.

[61] a. strominger, open p-branes, phys. lett. 383 b (1996) 44.

[62] j.l. cardy, operator content of twodimensional conformally invariant theories, nucl. phys.

b 270 (1986) 186.

[63] g. t. horowitz, a. strominger, counting states of near extremal black holes, phys. rev.

lett. 77 (1996) 2368.

[64] w. nahm, supersymmetries and their representations, nucl. phys. b 135 (1978) 149.

[65] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys. b 443 (1995) 85.

[66] p.k. townsend, the elevendimensional supermembrane revisited, j. math. phys. 37 (1996)

100.

[67] p.k. townsend, m-theory from its superalgebra, (hep-th/9712004).

[68] p.k. townsend, four lectures on m-theory, (hep-th/9612121).

[69] p.k. townsend, p -brane democracy, (hep-th/9507048).

[70] j.a. de azcarraga, j.p. gauntlett, j.m. izquierdo, p.k. townsend, topological extensions

of the superalgebra for extended objects, phys. rev. lett. 63 n0. 22 (1989) 2443.

[71] e. bergshoe, e. sezgin, p.k. townsend, supermembranes and 11-dimensional supergravity,

phys. lett. 189 b (1987) 75.

[72] b. de wit, m. luscher, h. nicolai, the supermembrane is unstable, nucl. phys. b 320

(1989) 135.

[73] i. bandos, k. lechner, a. nurmagambetov,p. pasti, d. sorokin, m. tonin, covariant action

for the super-five-brane of m-theory, phys. lett. 399 b (1997) 49.

57

[74] a. hanany, e. witten, type iib superstrings, bps monopoles and three dimensional gauge

dynamics, nucl. phys. b 492 (1997) 152.

[75] e. witten, solutions of four-dimensional gauge theories via m theory, nucl. phys. b 500

(1997) 3.

[76] j.m. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and supergravity,

adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231.

[77] e. witten, anti de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253.

[78] s.s. gubser, i. klebanov, a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from non critical string

theory, phys. lett. b 428 (1998) 10.

58

