rims-1228

perturbative or path-integral approach

versus operator-formalism approach

mitsuo abe1, *) and noboru nakanishi2, **)

1research institute for mathematical sciences, kyoto university, kyoto 606-8502, japan

212-20 asahigaoka-cho, hirakata 573-0026, japan

abstract

in the conformal-gauge two-dimensional quantum gravity, the solution obtained

by the perturbative or path-integral approach is compared with the one obtained by
the operator-formalism approach. treatments of the anomaly problem in both ap-

proaches are dierent. this dierence is found to be essentially caused by the fact that
the perturbative or path-integral approach is based on the t-product (covariantized
indeed, this fact induces some
t-product), which generally violates eld equations.
extra one-loop feynman diagrams, which would not exist unless a nonzero contribu-

tion arose from a zero eld. some demerits of the path-integral approach are explicitly
demonstrated.

9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
8

 

 
 

1
v
7
5
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

) e-mail: abe@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp
) professor emeritus of kyoto university. e-mail: nbr-nakanishi@msn.com

1

introduction

1.

quantum eld theory is undoubtedly a very successful theory except for its mathemati-
cally rigorous foundation. the basic quantities of quantum eld theory are quantum elds,

generically denoted by (x), which are operator-valued singular functions of n-dimensional
space-time x. in the standard formulation, their properties are governed by the action s,
which is an n-dimensional integral of the lagrangian density l (a function of quantum elds
at the same space-time point). field equations and canonical (anti)commutation relations
are derived from s by the standard procedure. equal-time (anti)commutation relations

follow from the canonical ones.

field equations and equal-time (anti)commutation relations dene the operator proper-
ties of quantum elds, that is, it is supposed to determine the operator algebra of quantum

elds. next, this operator algebra is represented in terms of state vectors, whose totality
forms an innite dimensional complex linear space equipped with (indenite) inner product.

this way of formulating the theory is operator-formalism approach. evidently, this way of
thinking is most natural as the formulation of quantum elds. nevertheless, this approach

has never been seriously considered as the standard approach to quantum eld theory. the
main reasons for this are as follows. first, it has been unknown how to nd the solution in
this approach. second, it has been unknown how to deal with the divergence problem which

arises from the singular nature of quantum elds.

the present-days standard approach is covariant perturbation theory.

it is based on
the action s, rather than eld equations. decomposing it articially into its free part

and its interaction part, one obtains all greens functions explicitly in terms of feynman
diagrams. furthermore, renormalization theory tells us how to deal with the divergence

problem: divergent contributions are absorbed into counter terms.

path-integral formalism gives us the generating functional, z, of the greens functions. if
path integral is dened as the innite multiple integrals with respect to the expansion coe-

cients of quantum elds in terms of their free wave functions, z reproduces the perturbative
expressions. if path integral is dened by using an expansion in terms of the functions other

than free wave functions, it is not clear whether or not z yields the greens functions which
reproduce the perturbative ones (if expanded), but it is usually supposed that there exists an
appropriate path-integral measure giving the expected results. although we cannot accept
this assumption without reservation,) we do not strictly distinguish perturbative approach

) this problem is particularly relevant in quantum gravity because gravitys free wave functions are
rather articial quantities. for example, the sum over all possible manifolds having a particular metric
signature cannot be realized by a simple innite multiple integral with respect to expansion coecients
because a denite metric signature requires to insert a product of  functions of the determinant and

2

and path-integral one in the present paper.

by taking the logarithm of z, one obtains the generating functional, w , of connected

greens functions. moreover, the eective action  , which is the generating functional of
amputated proper feynman diagrams, is obtained as the functional legendre transform of

w . the renormalization is neatly carried out in  and therefore the anomaly problem is
usually discussed also in  . it should be noted here that perturbation series is not unique
because the decomposition of the action into its free part and its interaction part is generally

altered by a nonlinear redenition of elds. accordingly, the eective action  is a quantity
which generally changes under the redenition of elds. thus, in the path-integral approach,

neither renormalization procedure nor the anomaly problem are quite independent of the
choice of quantum elds. this point becomes crucial when unphysical elds, whose natural

denitions are not necessarily unique, play important roles as in quantum gravity.

now, we have recently succeeded in formulating the method of nding the solution in
the operator-formalism approach. 1) our method is as follows. from the eld equations
and equal-time (anti)commutation relations, we explicitly construct all independent n-

dimensional (anti)commutation relations, by expanding them, if necessary, into the power
series with respect to the parameters involved. we then calculate independent n-dimensional
multiple (anti)commutators. the representation of the eld algebra in terms of state vectors

is constructed by giving all n-point wightman functions (n = 1, 2, . . . ), i.e., vacuum expec-
tation values of simple products of n quantum elds, 1(x1)2(x2)    n(xn), so as to be
consistent with the (n1)ple (anti)commutators and with the energy positivity conditions.)
here, in contrast with the axiomatic eld theory, 2) we need the wightman functions involving
composite elds, where a composite eld is a product of elds at the same space-time point.
when we set some of space-time points coincident in a higher-point wightman function, we

generally encounter divergent terms, which must be simply discarded in such a way that
the resultant be independent of the ordering of the constituent elds of the composite eld
(generalized normal product rule). in this procedure, we do not introduce anything like

a counter term. this is because a well-dened representation of the eld algebra should be
free of divergence; our standpoint is similar to that of the lehmann-symanzik-zimmermann
formalism, 3) in which they developed the renormalized perturbation theory without encoun-
tering any unrenormalized quantities.

of course, it is extremely dicult to carry out our way of nding the solution in real-
istic models. but, fortunately, we can explicitly construct the exact solutions in some two-

principal minors of g into the path integral.

) the wightman function is a boundary value of an analytic function of the variables xi

from the lower half-planes.

0  xj

0 (i < j)

3

dimensional models by our method. 4) - 8) our results are seen to be quite satisfactory, but we
encounter an anomalous phenomenon, which we call eld-equation anomaly, in quantum-
gravity models 4) - 7) (but not in gauge-theory models 8)): by construction, our wightman
functions are consistent with all two-dimensional (anti)commutators but not necessarily

consistent with nonlinear eld equations because there we encounter products of elds at
the same space-time point. in any of the quantum-gravity models which we have exactly
solved so far, one of eld equations is slightly violated at the level of representation.) this
is the eld-equation anomaly. it is dierent from the conventional anomalies which arise
in connection with particular symmetries. rather, as claried in our previous work, 9) vari-
ous conventional anomalies 10) are systematically explained on the basis of the eld-equation
anomaly and their ambiguities are shown to be caused by the nonuniqueness of perturbation

theory. in this sense, we regard the eld-equation anomaly as a more fundamental concept.
the purpose of the present paper is to make comparison between the solution obtained
by the perturbative approach and the one obtained by the operator-formalism approach

explicitly in the conformal-gauge two-dimensional quantum gravity. the exact solution of
this model obtained previously 6) can be written in terms of tree diagrams only.
if the
same were true also in the perturbative solution, no anomaly could be present. as is well
known, however, this model has the conformal anomaly except for d = 26, where d denotes

the number of the scalar elds which can be interpreted as the string coordinates. we
trace the cause of this paradox and nd that the perturbative approach induces some one-

loop feynman diagrams, which would not exist unless a nonzero contribution arose from
a zero eld. the cause of this strange phenomenon is found to be the use of t-product
(covariantized t-product) of quantum elds) in the perturbative or path-integral approach.
more generally, in the present paper, we clarify that various anomalous behaviors of this
model found in the perturbative approach are caused by the use of t-product.

in the present paper, we compare the perturbative or path-integral approach with the
operator-formalism approach in the conformal-gauge two-dimensional quantum gravity,
whose lagrangian density is given in 2.
in 3, 4 and 5, respectively, we discuss this
model by the operator-formalism approach, by the perturbative approach and by the path-
integral approach.
in 6, we criticize the so-called fp-ghost number current anomaly.

the nal section is devoted to discussions.

) the violation is slight in the sense that an anomaly-free equation can be obtained by dierentiating

the original eld equation once or twice.

) t-product is a t-product modied in such a way that 1

0t1(x1) n(xn) = t1

01(x1) n(xn).

4

2. preliminaries

throughout the present paper, we consider the brs formalism of the conformal-gauge

two-dimensional quantum gravity, in which the conformal degree of freedom is already elim-
inated. 11) quantum elds are contravariant tensor-density gravitational eld g, fp ghost
c, fp anti-ghost c , b eld b and scalar elds m (m = 0, 1, . . . , d  1). their brs
transforms are as follows:

 g = gc + gc  (gc),
 c = cc,
 c  = ib,

b = 0,


 m = cm .

(2.1)
(2.2)
(2.3)
(2.4)
(2.5)

since g has only two degrees of freedom because detg = 1 , it is parametrized as

g = ( + h)(1  det h )1/2,

(2.6)

where h is symmetric and traceless (h = 0). correspondingly, c  and b are also
symmetric and traceless. it is convenient to rewrite any traceless symmetric tensor x into
a vector-like quantity x  by

x  =

1
2

x,

(2.7)

where  = 1 for  +  +  =even, = 0 otherwise. according to (2.7), we introduce h, c 
and b.

(2.8)

(2.9)

(2.10)

(2.11)

the brs-invariant action s =r d2xl is given by the lagrangian density

l =

1
2

gm  m 

1
2

bh 

i
2

c  (h),

where g is given by (2.6), that is,

with

l = l0 + l i,

m  m 

i
2

 c c,

m  m

 c c

1
2

l0 =

l i = h

1
22

1
2

bh 
i
2

5

i
2

 c   c+o(h2).

the higher-order terms o(h2) are unnecessary to be specied because they contribute neither
to eld equations nor to canonical (anti)commutation relations. furthermore, they give no

contribution to perturbation theory. thus, we may discard them.

it should be noted that the action is invariant under the fp-ghost conjugation)

c  c ,
c   c,
b  b  i c c  i c   c

+ic c  + ic  c  + o(h),

(2.12)

as in the de donder-gauge case.

analysis can be much simplied by introducing light-cone coordinates x = (x0x1)/2,
because then  = 0 except +++ =  = 2. from (2.10) and (2.11) (o(h2) is omitted),
we have

l0 = +m  m +" 
l i = h+" 1

1
2

b+h+  ic +c+ + ( +   )#,
2 +c +  c+ + c +  c!#

i

+m  +m  ic ++c+ 

2
+ ( +   ).

in subsequent sections, we start with (2.9) together with (2.13) and (2.14). for later conve-
nience, we introduce the following notation.

(2.13)

(2.14)

(2.15)
(2.16)

(2.17)

then we have

et   m  m  2ic c  i c   c,
eet   et   ic   c.
l i
h

=

1

2 eet .

the noether currents of the brs invariance and the fp-ghost number conservation are

given by

jb

 = cm  m  ic cc,
 = ic c,
respectively. they are of course conserved.

jc

(2.18)
(2.19)

) so far, this fact has been overlooked because the fp antighost was treated as a tensor.

6

3. operator-formalism approach

for the sake of comparison, we briey review our previous results of the exact solution

obtained by the operator-formalism approach. 6)

the eld equations are as follows:

h = 0,

b = et ,

x  = 0 for x  = c, c , b,

+m = 0,

(3.1)
(3.2)
(3.3)
(3.4)

where (3.3) for x  = b is derived by dierentiating (3.2). note that c, c , b and m
are the functions of a single variable x only.

canonical quantization is carried out by taking m and c only as the canonical variables.
since they are free elds, their nonvanishing two-dimensional (anti)commutators are easily

obtained; we have

[m (x), n (y)] = 
{c(x), c (y)} = (x  y).

m

i
2

n (x  y),

the commutation relations involving b are calculated by using (3.2):

[b(x), m (y)] = im (x)  (x  y),
[b(x), c(y)] = ic(x)(x  y)  2ic(x)  (x  y),
[b(x), c (y)] = 2ic (x)(x  y) + ic (x)  (x  y),
[b(x), b(y)] = i[b(x) + b(y)](x  y).

(3.5)

(3.6)

(3.7)
(3.8)
(3.9)
(3.10)

evidently, (3.10) is the brs transform of (3.9).

since no new operators are encountered in the right-hand sides of (3.5)-(3.10), we can
easily calculate all multiple (anti)commutators explicitly. we then construct all truncated)
wightman functions so as to be consistent with all multiple (anti)commutators under the
energy positivity condition.

the 1-point functions are, in principle, completely arbitrary. but we set all of them
equal to zero because we should not deliberately violate any of (3.1), fp-ghost number
conservation, brs invariance and o(d) symmetry.

) truncation means to drop the contributions from vacuum intermediate states. the truncated wight-
man function corresponds to the connected greens function. in the present model, the distinction between
truncated and nontruncated appears only for n  4.

7

the nonvanishing truncated n-point wightman functions are those which consist of (n2)
bs and of either c and c  or two m s. diagrammatically, they are represented by tree
diagrams. although we have explicitly constructed all of them, 6) we here quote 2-point and
3-point ones only.

nonvanishing 2-point wightman functions are

h m (x1)n (x2) i = m
h c(x1)c (x2) i = h c (x1)c(x2) i = 2id (+)(x1  x2),

n d (+)(x1  x2),

where)

nonvanishing 3-point ones are

d (+)(x)  

1
4 

1

x  i0

.

h m (x1)b(x2)n (x3) i = 2m
h c(x1)b(x2)c (x3) i = 8id (+)(x1  x2)  

n d (+)(x1  x2)  d (+)(x2  x3),

2d (+)(x2  x3)
2d (+)(x1  x2)  d (+)(x2  x3)

4i

(3.11)
(3.12)

(3.13)

(3.14)

(3.15)

and their permutated ones, whose expressions are obtained from the above by changing some
of d (+)(x)s into [d (+)(x)] so as to become consistent with the energy-positivity condition
(and by changing the overall sign if the order of c and c  is reversed).

our system of wightman functions is, of course, consistent with the eld algebra dened

by (3.5)-(3.10).
it is also consistent with the brs invariance and the fp-ghost number
conservation. it should be noted that we need the use of the generalized normal-product

rule to check the brs invariance. our system of wightman functions is also consistent with
all linear eld equations (3.1), (3.3) and (3.4), but not with the nonlinear eld equation
(3.2). indeed, by using the generalized normal-product rule, we can show that

h b(x1)b(x2) i = 0,
h b(x1)et (x2) i = h et (x1)et (x2) i

= 2(d  26)[

2d (+)(x1  x2)]2

(3.16)

(3.17)

in contradiction with (3.2). thus the eld equation (3.2), modulo (3.3) for x  = b, is
violated at the level of the representation in terms of state vectors. we call this matter

eld-equation anomaly. this phenomenon is encountered also in several two-dimensional
quantum-gravity models. 4) - 7)

) d (+)(x) itself is infrared divergent and therefore requires the introduction of infrared cuto. 12)

8

the brs noether current (2.18) can be rewritten as

with

jb

j
b

 = j
b

 + (b  et )c,
  bc + ic cc.

(3.18)

(3.19)

 strictly equals jb

at the operator level, j
b
representation level because of the appearance of the eld-equation anomaly. indeed, jb
anomalous for d 6= 26, while j
hand, jc

. but this equality no longer holds at the
 is
 is free of anomaly for any value of d. 6), 7) on the other

 is free of anomaly without making any modication.

b

4. perturbative approach

the perturbative approach is so familiar to everybody that no explanation about it is

necessary. nevertheless, when compared with the operator-formalism approach, the pertur-
bative approach is seen to yield some surprising results.

the lagrangian density l is decomposed into the free one l0, which is quadratic with
respect to the elds adopted as the basic ones, and the remainder l i, called the interaction
lagrangian density.

the feynman propagators are obtained by taking the inverse of the dierential operator
sandwiched by the elds in l0. thus, from (2.13), we have the following nonvanishing
feynman propagators:)

h t m (x1)n (x2) i0 = m
h t b(x1)h(x2) i0 = 2i2(x1  x2),
h t c (x1)c(x2) i0 = 2id f(x1  x2),

n d f(x1  x2),

where

(4.1)
(4.2)
(4.3)

(4.4)

d f(x)  (x0)d (+)(x) + (x0)[d (+)(x)]

(x + x)
x  i0

+

(x  x)

x + i0

= 

1

4

.

it is quite remarkable that h t b h i0 is nonvanishing in spite of the fact that h is
a zero operator as is seen from (3.1). in contrast with the wightman functions, the t-
product does not respect the validity of the eld equations. as is seen from (4.3), it is
also inadmissible to set c = c  = 0 in the perturbative approach. hence we cannot

) the subscript 0 indicates that the propagators are free ones.

9

discard the terms involving  c  in l i, that is, we have to distinguish eet  from et . thus

the beautiful result of the operator formalism that c, c , b and m are irrelevant to x
is no longer valid in the perturbative approach. this fact makes the perturbative calculation
complicated and sometimes misleading, as we shall see later.

by using l i given by (2.14), we can easily calculate the n-point greens functions. for

example, we have

h t m (x1)b(x2)n (x3) i = 2m
h t c(x1)b(x2)c (x3) i = 8id f(x1  x2)  

n d f(x1  x2)  d f(x2  x3),

2d f(x2  x3)
2d f(x1  x2)  d f(x2  x3),

h t c(x1)b(x2)c (x3) i = 22(x1  x2)d f(x2  x3).

4i

(4.5)

(4.6)
(4.7)

evidently, (4.5) and (4.6) correspond to (3.14) and to (3.15), respectively. however, (4.7)
is a result peculiar to the t-product. this result is seen to be consistent with the ward-
takahashi identity

h t  (c(x1)c (x2)c (x3))i = 0,

(4.8)

because the second term of  c = cc  cc contributes.

now, we come to the crucial point.

in sharp contrast with the case of the operator-

formalism approach, the perturbative approach yields quite a nontrivial result for the n-point
greens function consisting of b-elds only. indeed, its connected part is given by a sum
over one-loop feynman diagrams. for example, we consider h t b(x1)b(x2) i. because of
the nonvanishing of (4.2), the second-order perturbation term yields

therefore, we have

h t b(x1)b(x2) i = h t eet (x1)eet (x2) i0.

h t b(x1)b(x2) i = 2(d  26)[
h t b(x1)b(x2) i = 

d  2

2

[2(x1  x2)]2.

2d f(x1  x2)]2,

(4.9)

(4.10)

(4.11)

they are divergent and therefore require the introduction of counter terms. note that the
use of the t-product is responsible for the appearance of these divergences.

the nonvanishing of the greens functions consisting of b-elds only implies the violation
of the brs invariance. in the de donder gauge case, takahashi 13) proposed to convert the
violation of the brs invariance for d 6= 26 in the two-point b-eld greens function into
the conformal anomaly.) we apply his line of thought to the present model. in addition

) he made no mention about how to remove the brs violation in the higher-point functions.

10

to (4.10) and (4.11), we must take it into account the following exact two-point greens
functions:

h t h(x1)h(x2) i = 0,
h t b(x1)h(x2) i = 2i

2(x1  x2).

(4.12)
(4.13)

the two-point functions of the eective action  is obtained by taking the matrix inverse of
(4.10)-(4.13). accordingly, we have

2(x1  x2)b(x1)h(x2)

([

2d f(x1  x2)]2) rh(x1)h(x2) +    ,

(4.14)

 =z d2x1z d2x2 
i x=

d  26

1
2

+

2

where a subscript r indicates regularization. the brs-violating term in (4.14) is converted
into the conformal-anomaly term by adding the conformal degree of freedom. we do not
work out this procedure in detail because it is not our aim to do so.

the important point is the violation of the brs invariance in the b-eld greens func-

tions. in the de donder gauge case, the brs violation has arisen by applying the dimensional
regularization only to internal lines but not to external lines. 9), 14) in the present model, ex-
ternal lines are absent because (4.2) is local. instead, as is seen from (4.9), perturbative
approach makes use of the eld-equation anomaly without being aware of this fact.

5. path-integral approach

the path integral directly gives us the generating function of the greens functions, that
is, it deals with the t-product quantities only. the path integral z is formally expressed
as

z(j) =z (cid:16)yi di(cid:17) exp iz dnx(l +xi

jii)

(5.1)

with z(0) = 1, where ji denotes the source function corresponding to the eld i.

it is possible to derive the path-integral formula [corrected by the lee-yang term propor-
tional to n (0)] from the canonical operator formalism. 15) in this sense, the path-integral
formalism can be regarded as the one equivalent to the operator formalism. but, one should

note that, in this derivation, one must use the eld equations at the representation level.
this fact implies that the path-integral formalism cannot take care of the existence of the

eld-equation anomaly.

11

from the successful experience of discussing the anomaly problem in gauge theories, it
has been customary to believe that any anomaly always arises from the non-invariance of

the path-integral measure under the symmetry which leaves the action s invariant. but we
point out that anomalies can arise also from the eld-equation anomaly which is beyond the

scope of the path-integral formalism.

let f () be an arbitrary function of is. the path-integral measure is supposed to be
invariant under the functional translation i  i + i. hence, by considering a variation
of a eld i in f (i1/j)z|j=0, we obtain

ih t f ()

s

i i + h t f ()

i

i = 0.

(5.2)

this equation corresponds to the eld equation s/i = 0 of the operator formalism. the
second term of (5.2) is a eld-equation violating term due to the use of the t-product. one
should never confuse it with the eld-equation anomaly. for example, in the conformal-
gauge two-dimensional quantum gravity, (4.14) is reproduced from (5.2) by setting f = b
and i = b. likewise, if we set f = b and i = h in (5.2), we obtain

h t b(b  eet ) i = 0,

(5.3)

that is, we do not encounter the eld-equation anomaly. instead, as is shown in the per-
turbative approach, (5.3) induces the violation of the brs invariance in the path-integral
approach.

historically, the anomaly problem in the conformal-gauge two-dimensional quantum grav-
ity was discussed rst by fujikawa 16) in the path-integral formalism. his formulation is not,
however, understandable in the framework stated in 4.

first, he takes all three degrees of freedom of g as path-integration variables; never-
theless, each of his ghost elds has only two degrees of freedom. the extra one degree of
freedom is the conformal one, denoted by , is not allowed ) to be integrated (until the
liouville action is derived) in spite of the fact that it is an independent path-integration
variable.

second, by introducing tilde elds i = nii, ni being a certain fractional number, he
claims that the path-integral measure becomes brs invariant if it is expressed in terms

of the tilde elds. he then derives the liouville action expressed in terms of  alone by
calculating the variation of the path-integral measure under the conformal transformation.

that is, according to his theory, the conformal anomaly is directly obtained without passing
through the brs anomaly in contradiction to the consideration presented in 4.

) if one carries out the integration over  after introducing the conformal ghosts, then it becomes

impossible to work out his analysis.

12

we are thus unable to reproduce his analysis in terms of the explicit solution.

6. fp-ghost number current anomaly

as we emphasized previously, 6) there is no fp-ghost number anomaly in the conformal-
gauge two-dimensional quantum gravity: the exact solution is completely consistent with
 is
the fp-ghost number conservation. the conservation of the fp-ghost number current jc
a simple consequence of the fact that c(x) and c (x) are independent of x. this property
is never violated at the representation level. nevertheless, many authors have claimed that
the fp-ghost number current has anomaly. the reasons for the occurrence of this belief are
its correspondence to the riemann-roch theorem and the eld-equation-violating property
of the t-product.

fujikawa 16) was the rst to claim the existence of the fp-ghost number current anomaly.
he derived it by making the fp-ghost number transformation) in his path-integral formalism
described at the end of 5. his result is written as

hh jc

 ii =

3
4hh 2 log ii,

(6.1)

where we denote the path integration by hh    ii. if the degrees of the reparametrization
freedom is suppressed, one may write 2 log  = gr (euclidean metric is used). here we

must note that fujikawas theory is formulated in the at background metric and that  is

the path-integration variable.

shortly later, friedan, martinec and shenker, 17) who formulated conformal eld theory,
quoted (6.1) in the disguised form. they consider a completely curved background metric
g. the right-hand side of their equation is const.g r, a function of g, which is noth-
ing but the quantity required by the riemann-roch theorem under the prerequisite of the
conformal covariance. it may be certainly analogous to (6.1), but we cannot nd any logical
connection between them.)

in the perturbative approach, the friedan-martinec-shenker version of (6.1) is inter-

preted, through the consideration based on the eective action, as the matter that 18), 19)

j 

  h t jc

 s
g i|g =

(6.2)

) this must be done in the original tilde-variable expression. no anomaly is derived by the naive
calculation if this transformation is made in the equivalent expression having the liouville action explicitly.
) according to fujikawa (private communication), the possible existence of the zero points of  can

take care of the eect of the topological numberr d2xg r. we do not see how this idea can be formulated.

13

has a nonvanishing nonlocal term, where g is a background metric introduced in such a way
that the gauge-xing plus fp-ghost lagrangian density becomes background covariant. note
in (6.2) that the background metric is taken to be at in the feynman-diagram calculation.

in the conformal-gauge case, j 

 is essentially equal to

h t jc

(x1)et (x2) i = 12d f(x1  x2)  

2d f(x1  x2).

(6.3)

it is in this sense that the fp-ghost number current anomaly is claimed to be obtained in
the perturbative approach. it should be noted, however, that if the t-product is not taken,
that is, if d f is replaced by d (+), (6.3) becomes consistent with jc

 = 0.

dusedau 18) found that j 

 has no nonlocal term in the de donder-gauge case. kraem-
mer and rebhan 19) discussed the gauge dependence of j 
 and claimed that the gauge
independence can be recovered if one adds a contribution from the lagrange-multiplier (or
b-eld) current.) but the relation between this fact and the riemann-roch theorem was
not discussed.

recently, takahashi 13) has reconsidered dusedaus analysis from his perturbative ap-
, he regards the quantum gravitational eld as the
proach described in 4. in discussing jc
background metric, just as fujikawa did. rederiving dusedaus result, he asserts that the
vanishing of the fp-ghost number current anomaly can be explained by the existence of the

fp-ghost conjugation invariance of the de donder gauge two-dimensional quantum gravity.
one should note, however, that, as pointed out in 2, the fp-ghost conjugation invariance
exists also in the conformal-gauge case. therefore, his standpoint would imply the absence
of the fp-ghost number current anomaly also in the conformal-gauge case.

finally, we note that the nonexistence of the fp-ghost number current anomaly can be
shown even if the gauge-xing background metric is a nonat one given by (x), where
1 is assumed to exist. in this case, (2.6) is replaced by

g = ( + 1h)(1  2 det h )1/2.

(6.4)

the lagrangian density of this case is obtained from (2.8) by simply replacing h by 1h.
since  (1h) = 1 (h), we can absorb the factor 1 into b and c  by redening
them. thus the ghost part of the lagrangian density of the nonat case becomes completely
the same as that of the at case. thus nothing new can happen about the fp-ghost number

current.

) although we cannot regard their proof as adequate, their claim itself can be veried by explicit

calculation. 20)

14

7. discussion

nowadays, the path-integral approach and the counter-term business have become so

fashionable that many physicists preclude the consideration based on other approaches from
the outset. certainly, the path-integral approach is convenient and successful in gauge
theories, but we wish to emphasize that the same is not necessarily true in quantum gravity.

the path-integral formalism directly deals with the solution at the representation level.
accordingly, if one adopts the path-integral approach, one can no longer perceive what

happens in the transition from the operator level to the representation level. indeed, one
cannot describe the existence of the eld-equation anomaly in the path-integral approach.

the quantities describable by the path-integral formalism are those which can be written
in terms of the t-product. the t-product is certainly a very convenient notion because we
need not take care of the ordering problem even for the timelikely separated eld operators.
on the other hand, as emphasized in the present paper, the t-product has a demerit of
violating the eld equations explicitly. as demonstrated in the present paper, this fact
induces unpleasant complications and misleading expressions. furthermore, since the t-
product contains -functions, the greens function is more singular than the corresponding

wightman functions, that is, some singularities found in the perturbative or path-integral
approach may be supercial. when this fact is combined with the counter-term business,
one is led to introducing counter terms which are purely of the t-product origin. in the
present paper, we have demonstrated that anomalies also can be of the t-product origin.
we hope that more physicists reinvestigate the anomaly problem in quantum gravity

without adhering to the path-integral approach.

acknowledgements

one of the present authors (n. n.) would like to express his sincere thanks to professor

k. fujikawa and dr. h. kanno for the discussions concerning the fp-ghost number current
anomaly.

15

references

1) m. abe and n. nakanishi, prog. theor. phys. 85 (1991), 391; 88 (1992), 975; 89

(1993), 231; 89 (1993), 501; 90 (1993), 705.

2) r. f. streater and a. s. wightman, pct, spin and statistics, and all that, w. a.

benjamin, 1964.

3) h. lehmann, k. symanzik and w. zimmermann, nuovo cim. 1 (1955), 205.

4) m. abe and n. nakanishi, int. j. mod. phys. a6 (1991), 3955; prog. theor. phys.

86 (1991), 1087; 87 (1992), 757; 90 (1993), 1091; 92 (1994), 449.

5) m. abe and n. nakanishi, prog. theor. phys. 94 (1995), 621; 100 (1998), 1063.
6) m. abe and n. nakanishi, int. j. mod. phys. a14 (1999), 521.
7) m. abe and n. nakanishi, int. j. mod. phys. a, to be published.

8) n. ikeda, int. j. mod. phys. a13 (1998), 3245.
9) m. abe and n. nakanishi, int. j. mod. phys. a13 (1998), 3081.

10) m. abe and n. nakanishi, mod. phys. lett. a7 (1992), 1799.
11) z. yang, phys. lett. b243 (1990), 52.

12) n. nakanishi, prog. theor. phys. 57 (1977), 269.
13) t. takahashi, prog. theor. phys. 95 (1996), 995.

14) m. abe and n. nakanishi, prog. theor. phys. 96 (1996), 1281.
15) i. l. buchbinder, s. d. odintsov and i. l. shapiro, eective action in quantum

gravity, institute of physics publishing, 1992, chap. 2.

16) k. fujikawa, phys. rev. d25 (1982), 2584. see also, k. fujikawa, nuc. phys. b291
(1987), 583; k. fujikawa, t. inagaki and h. suzuki, phys. lett. b213 (1988), 279;

k. fujikawa, theory of gauge fields, iwanami, 1993 (in japanese), chaps. 6 & 7.

17) d. friedan, e. martinec and s. shenker, nuc. phys. b271 (1986), 93.

18) d. w. dusedau, phys. lett. b188 (1987), 51.
19) u. kraemmer and a. rebhan, nuc. phys. b315 (1989), 717.

20) m. abe and n. nakanishi, prog. theor. phys. 100 (1998), 411.

16

