9
9
9
1

 
r
p
a
3

 

 
 

1
v
1
2
0
4
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

tpi-minn-99/03-t
umn-th-1739/99
hep-ph/9904021

tilting the brane, or some cosmological

consequences of the brane universe

physics department, new york university, new york, ny 10003,

g. dvali

and

m. shifman

theoretical physics institute, university of minnesota, minneapolis, mn 55455

abstract

we discuss theories in which the standard-model particles are localized on a
brane embedded in space-time with large compact extra dimensions, whereas gravity
propagates in the bulk. in addition to the ground state corresponding to a straight
innite brane, such theories admit a (one parameter) family of stable congura-
tions corresponding to branes wrapping with certain periodicity around the extra
dimension(s) when one moves along a noncompact coordinate (tilted walls). in the
eective four- dimensional eld-theory picture, such walls are interpreted as one of
the (stable) solutions with the constant gradient energy, discussed earlier [1, 2]. in
the cosmological context their energy redshifts by the hubble expansion and dissi-
pates slower then the one in matter or radiation. the tilted wall eventually starts to
dominate the universe. the upper bound on the energy density coincides with the
present critical energy density. thus, this mechanism can become signicant any
time in the future. the solutions we discuss are characterized by a tiny spontaneous
breaking of both the lorentz and rotational invariances. small calculable lorentz
noninvariant terms in the standard model lagrangian are induced. thus, the tilted
walls provide a framework for the spontaneous breaking of the lorentz invariance.

to appear in l.b. okun festschrift, eds. v. telegdi and k. winter, to be published
by north holland

1 introduction

nonobservation of low-energy supersymmetry may be due to the fact that we live
on a non-bps topological defect, or brane, embedded in higher-dimensional space-
time [1]. while the external space may or may not be supersymmetric, the eective
low-energy theory on the non-bps brane is not supersymmetric.

the idea of the brane universe is especially motivated by the solution of the
hierarchy problem through lowering of the fundamental scale of quantum gravity
down to tev [3, 4] (see also [5, 6]). in the model suggested in ref. [3] the standard-
model particles are localized on a topological defect, or 3-brane, embedded in space
with large extra compact dimensions of size r, in which gravity can propagate freely.
in other words, the original (4 + n)-dimensional space-time is assumed to be split
n , where m4 is the four-dimensional minkowskian space while m
into m4  m
n
is a compact manifold. we will refer to it as to the external space. within the
scenario [3] one can lower the fundamental scale of gravity mpf down to tev, or so.
the observed weakness of gravity at large distances is then due to a large volume of
the extra space r  m 1
pf . the relation between the fundamental (mpf ) and four-
dimensional (mp) planck scales can be derived [3] by virtue of the gauss law,

m 2

p = m n +2

pf

vn ,

(1)

where vn is the volume of the external space with radius r. although this relation
is valid for any values of mpf and r, the case most interesting phenomenologically is
mpf  tev. (for r  1 mm, this implies that the extra space is two-dimensional.)
the most important technical question to be addressed is dynamical localiza-
tion of the standard-model particles on the brane. in the eld-theoretic context the
fermions can be localized due to an index theorem, as was suggested in [7], whereas
the localization of the gauge elds requires the outside medium to be conning [8].
in particular, this implies that free charges cannot exist in the bulk.

on the other hand, in the string-theoretic context, the most natural framework
for the brane-world picture is through the d-brane construction (for a review, see
e.g.
[9]). in this context the standard-model particles can be identied with the
open string modes stuck on the brane, whereas gravity comes from the closed string
sector propagating in the bulk [4, 10, 11]. for the purposes of the present paper
the precise nature of localization will be unimportant, since we will exploit the low-
energy eective eld-theory approach for which the high-energy nature of the brane
is beyond resolution.

in this paper we will present new theoretical observations regarding the branes
n is compact. then we discuss some pos-
on the manifolds m4  m
sible cosmological consequences of the brane universe with the low-scale quantum
gravity. we point out that these theories admit stable solutions which could mani-
fest themselves through a tiny spontaneous breaking of the lorentz and rotational
invariances.

n where m

1

in four-dimensional eld theory the solutions above can be interpreted as a re-
cently discovered new class of stable vacuum congurations in supersymmetric the-
ories, with the constant gradient energy, which may or may not break supersym-
metry [1, 2].
in the latter case these solutions generalize the notion of the bps
saturation to innite values 1 of the central charge [2]. below we will show how
these solutions can naturally emerge in the brane universe picture.

before proceeding, let us note that other possible cosmological implications of
branes can be due to brane ination driven by a displaced set of branes [12] or due
to nonconservation of global quantum numbers in the brane universe [13]. in a very
dierent context a class of time-dependent cosmological solutions was discussed [14]
within the horava-witten approach [15]. some aspects of thermal cosmology were
considered in [16]. these issues are not directly related, however, to the present
work.

for deniteness assume (4 + n)-dimensional space-time to be m4  tn , where
m4 is four-dimensional minkowskian space while tn is an n-torus with the radius
r. the standard-model particles are the modes living on a 3-brane embedded in
this space-time. let the brane tension (the energy per unit three-volume) be t .
throughout the paper we will assume that t  m 4
pf (the only fundamental mass
scale in the theory). obviously, t > 0 if the brane is to be regarded as a dynamical
object (the wall), since otherwise it will be unstable. then, in the absence of matter
and radiation, the eective four-dimensional energy density e has two contribu-
tions: a positive one from the brane tension, and a (must-be) negative one from the
bulk

e = t + bulk vn ,

(2)
as seen in experiments at distances  r. here bulk is the negative bulk cosmological
constant. in the lowest-energy state these two must conspire to cancel each other.
this is a usual ne-tuning of the cosmological constant, about which we have nothing
new to say. the lowest-energy state is achieved in the above picture when the brane
is straight, its surface area is minimal per unit three-volume of the space (fig. 1).
however, since the brane is a dynamical object it can bend or curve in the external
space and, in general, it will do so. it can be tilted with respect to m4  tn . note
that this curvature a priori has nothing to do with the gravitational curvature of the
whole (brane + bulk) eective four-dimensional space in the friedmann cosmological
equations emerging at distances  r. the latter will be assumed to vanish. bending
the brane in the external space, or tilting, it will produce an energy excess, or an
eective energy density of the universe, which can be estimated as

brane  m 4

pf (r/r)2 ,

r  r ,

(3)

where r is a typical curvature radius of the brane, not to be confused with the
friedmannian curvature radius, which we take innite. (in the case of the tilted

1by the innite central charges we do not mean trivial innities associated with the area of the

wall or the length of the string.

2

2

a

b

c

x

m4

1

t
n

figure 1: domain walls (branes) in m4  tn . a  the straight untilted brane, b
 tilted brane, c  curved brane. the length of the cylinder in the x direction is
l  h 1.
brane r is its longitudinal dimension, r  l. in this case eq. (3) can be obtained
as follows:
(4)
provided that the tilt angle   r/l  1, see below.) this energy provides an
eective force resisting to bending; the force tends to straighten out the brane.
what would be the cosmological signicance of this excess energy?

brane  m 4

pf ()2 ,

to estimate its impact we have to know r. it is natural to assume that in the scale
smaller than the hubble size the brane is straightened out (no excessive crumpling).
whatever mechanism solves the horizon and isotropy problems, it would also help
to this straightening. so, it seems reasonable to assume that

r2

> h 2

> 1

c m 2
p ,

where c is the critical density of the universe today. this estimate obviously refers
also to the longitudinal dimension of the tilted brane, l > h 1. now, substituting
this in eq. (3) and using eq. (1) with n  2 we get

(5)

(6)

brane < c .

the upper bound which can only, but not necessarily, appear for n = 2 is intriguing
since it suggests that the brane can serve as some sort of dark matter in universe.
we will study the nature of its energy below.

the potential importance of the domain walls in the cosmological considerations
was recognized long ago [17]. in ref. [17] it was shown that were the domain walls
within our universe, serious (potentially terminal) cosmological problems might arise
in the theory. situation dramatically changes if our universe itself is a wall.

3

2 what is the tilted wall?

to illustrate the idea we will consider, for simplicity, the four-dimensional space m4
compactied in m3t . the situation is general and does not depend on particular
details.
let us start from m4 and assume that the dynamical theory under consideration
has multiple discrete degenerate vacua. the simplest example is the theory of the
real scalar eld with the potential of the double- well type. the simplest supersym-
metric example is the minimal wess-zumino model with the cubic superpotential.
the eld conguration depending only on one coordinate (call it z) that interpolates
between one vacuum at z   and another at z   is the domain wall. the
width of the wall  in the z direction is of order   m 1 where m is the mass scale
of the eld(s) of which the wall is made. it is assumed that  is much smaller than
any other relevant scale of dimension of length.

on m4 it is meaningless to speak of the tilted wall  the direction z can be
chosen arbitrarily. now, we compactify z and consider the theory on the cylinder
m3t . the underlying dynamical theory must be modied accordingly, in order to
allow for the existence of the walls. in the case at hand it is sucient to assume that
the wall-forming eld  lives on a circle, i.e. one can consider the model of the sine-
gordon type or its supergeneralizations. both, the superpotential and the kahler
potential must be periodic in , with commensurate periods. for simplicity we
assume these periods to be 2. following an old tradition, we rename the compact
coordinate, z  x. the non-compact coordinates (including time) will be denoted
by x. we look for the topologically nontrivial solutions of the soliton type on the
cylinder, depending on one coordinate only. the solution of the type 0(x), which
is independent of x, is the straight wall, see a in fig. 1. it satises the condition
0(x + 2r) = 0(x) + 2. this wall is aligned parallel to the cylinder. the
tilted wall (b in fig. 1) is a solution of the type (x cos  + x sin ) where  is the
tilt angle. note that the function  does not coincide with 0, generally speaking.
in the limit of small  the dierence between 0 and  is o(2). the condition
((x + 2r) cos  + x sin ) = (x cos  + x sin ) + 2 must be satised. it is
not dicult to see that the tilted wall solution exists, if so does the straight wall
solution. the tilted wall is stable provided the solution is nailed at the points
1 , 2 at the boundaries (see fig. 1). alternatively, one can glue the boundaries of
the cylinder converting it into a two-torus. the tilted wall solution is automatically
stable then if the wall winds around the two-torus.

it is not dicult to prove that the domain walls on the cylinder cannot be
bps-saturated, strictly speaking. however, if /r  1 the straight walls may
be very close to the bps saturation, achieving the bps saturation in the limit
/r  0, when the wall becomes the genuine brane. the tilted walls are never
bps-saturated, their tension being larger than that of the straight wall. this eect
 the increase of the internal tension t of the tilted wall compared to that of the
straight wall  is proportional both to  and to (/r)2. it can be made arbitrarily

4

small in the limit /r  0. we will neglect it in what follows, using one and
the same tension t for the tilted and straight walls. the tilting does produce an
impact on  since the area of the tilted wall per unit length of the cylinder in the
x direction is larger. this eect is most conveniently described by the eective
low-energy theory of the zero modes on the wall. the corresponding discussion is
presented in the next section.

3 calculating brane for non-vanishing tilt angles

to deal with the long wave-length (  ) deformations of the straight wall we will
use an eective four-dimensional eld theory emerging for the zero modes. the wall
solution spontaneously break the translational invariance in one direction. corre-
spondingly, in the simplest case there arises one zero mode which is the goldstone
boson of the spontaneously broken symmetry. in more complicated models (see be-
low) there may arise several zero modes a. in the absence of gravity the eective
lagrangian is

(7)

l = m 2

pf z d4x

a
x

b
x ab() ,

where ab is the external metrics depending on the structure of the manifold on
which the elds  live. for instance, in the case of the domain wall in minkowski
space ab = ab. all dimensional constants in the low- energy theory of the zero
modes are related to the order parameter, which is the brane tension t  m 4
pf .
the dynamics of the goldstone bosons on the brane is described [1] by (3 + 1)-
dimensional eld theory which may or may not be supersymmetric (in the latter
case the brane must be bps saturated). if we deal with the supersymmetric theory
ab is obtained from the kahler potential.

let us assume for the time being that we have only one goldstone boson and
ab = 1. then, the solution  = x goes through the equations of motion of the
theory (7). this is the constant energy density vacuum, discussed in refs.
[1, 2].
to make contact with the discussion above, we note that the vacuum  = x
represents the tilted wall described by the solution  in the full theory. the
additional contribution to  compared to the straight brane is obviously

brane =

t 2

2

.

(8)

this result has a very transparent interpretation in the full theory. it exactly re-
produces the increase of the brane surface per unit length of the cylinder for a
non-vanishing tilt angle , see fig. 2. given this interpretation, one might ask why
one needs to consider the eective low-energy theory at all. the point is that at the
next step we want to switch on gravity in the bulk. having the low-energy theory of
the zero modes, describing matter on the brane, helps analyze the impact of gravity.

5



a

b

l

x

r

figure 2: the map of the cylinder of fig. 1. the ratio of the surfaces of the branes
b to a per unit length in the x direction is 1 + 2/2.

in the language of the eective eld theory (7), the bending of the brane is
equivalent to a acquiring some x dependence in the vacuum. the generic a(x)
conguration is unstable and will decay producing  waves (the sound waves on the
brane). this is the mechanism of eliminating foldings on the brane. since these
waves travel with the speed of light, the brane will iron itself out in the horizon
scale. eventually it will evolve to a tilted brane.

in the state with an arbitrarily bent brane we will distinguish two components.
one can be viewed as a collection of all possible goldstone waves traveling with the
speed of light, which redshift away like ordinary matter. another component is
the vacuum solution (more precisely, a family of solutions) that would be stable if
it were not for the expansion of the universe. this conguration redshifts away
slower than matter and can be called the tilted brane conguration (or wrapped, if
there are several windings on the length of the cylinder l). it can only redshift
through the stretching triggered by the universe expansion.

in the case of the generic massless elds a with the at ab, the solution  = x
is stable under any localized deformations. if as are the goldstone bosons arising
due to the spontaneous breaking of some compact symmetry, as are periodic (in
fact, they are phases dened modulo shifts). this is exactly what happens in our
case since the extra dimensions are assumed to be compact. then the solution
 = x must be modied appropriately, see sec. 2. here we will add a comment
regarding the issue of stability.

to explain the point we will use a simple example 2 of the goldstone eld pro-

2the analogy is much more precise than one might naively think, since the translation in the
external space can be regarded as an internal u(1) rotation. in the presence of gravity, this is
a gauge rotation gauged by the external components of the graviton (graviphoton(s)). we can

6

duced as a result of breaking of some global u(1) symmetry (a similar model was
treated in sec. 6 of [1]). start from the lagrangian

l = ||2 
the equations of motion have a solution

2

2 (cid:16)||2  v2(cid:17)2

.

 = c eix ,

c = sv2 

2
2 ,

(9)

(10)

which corresponds to winding of the phase with the period 2/ as one moves along
x. this solution has both the gradient and potential energies (cf. the solutions
discussed in [2]). the potential term scales as  4/2. it is seen that at   
the solution (10) becomes pure gradient energy (v must scale accordingly, of course,
i.e. v  1). this is because in this limit, the x-dependence can not aect the
order parameter and, thus, the potential energy. in the case of the tilted brane this
would mean that the brane with a constant tilt carries purely gradient energy in the
limit when bending can not aect its tension. this is true for any brane in the limit
when one can ignore its thickness. the corresponding conguration can not decay
into the  waves. its energy is reduced only through the friedmann expansion of the
universe and, thus, scales as  a2, the scale factor in the friedmann universe. this
means, in turn, that the state at hand will sooner or later dominate over both, the
radiation and the matter densities. we will discuss the observational implications of
this fact in section 5. before, however, let us discuss the eect of higher dimensional
bulk gravity.

4 switching on gravity in the bulk

the eective lagrangian for the zero modes localized on the brane becomes

lbrane = m 2

pf g (ab) ab + fermions ,

(11)

where ab and g are the external and induced metrics, respectively. the fermion
terms are relevant in the supersymmetric case.

so far, we have discussed the brane dynamics on the cylinder neglecting gravity.
now we want to take it into account. in the scenario under consideration gravity
is not conned to the wall, but, rather, propagates in the bulk. the components
of the graviton belonging to m4 and t n require separate treatment. the eect
which is most important for us is due to the higher-dimensional components of the
graviton (the so-called graviphotons). for simplicity we will consider only a single
extra dimension compactied on a circle parametrized by the coordinate x. the
zero mode component of g5 is the graviphoton a(x). viewed as a four-dimensional

neglect the coupling to gravity for the time being, due to the large sizes of extra dimension(s).

7

gauge eld, a(x) gauges the translation in x, i.e. x  x + f (x), which, from
the four-dimensional standpoint, is an internal u(1) gauge symmetry. since the
brane spontaneously breaks the translational invariance, the corresponding gauge
symmetry is realized nonlinearly. the goldstone mode  is eaten up by the gauge
eld a (which gets a mass of order (1 mm)1 [18]). as a result, the tilted wall
solution  = x we have considered previously is pure gauge. it can be compensated
by the gauge eld ax =  and presents no physically observable eect. thus, if we
have only one zero mode on the wall, the tilted wall is indistinguishable from the
straight one in the presence of gravity. to make the idea work we must have two
or more zero boson modes on the wall. then the tilted wall (the constant gradient
energy solution) will lead to a physically observable excess in .

let us explain this in more detail. our solution can be made physical by pro-
jecting out the graviphoton, provided the compact manifold breaks translational
invariance in the extra space. the simplest dynamical realization is as follows.
consider topologically stable winding congurations [1]. (such congurations may
anyway be needed for supersymmetry breaking [1] or for stabilizing radii at large
distances [19]). consider a ve-dimensional scalar eld (x, x) transforming un-
der an internal u(1)i symmetry as   ei. assume that a potential forces the
condensate hi 6= 0 to develop. the simplest choice can be v = (||2  v)2/m, or
any other similar function. then the vacuum manifold is a circle, and there are
topologically stable winding congurations

 = w einx/r ,

w = qv  n2m/r2 ,

(12)

with integer n. they correspond to giving a vacuum expectation value to dierent
kaluza-klein modes and, therefore, are topologically stable due to the mapping of the
vacuum circle on the external compact space. thus we are free to choose any of these
states as the ground state. 3 congurations with nonzero n break spontaneously
the x translations and, thus, give mass to the graviphoton a. as a result, the
graviphoton eld can be integrated out in the low-energy eective theory. then the
brane goldstone  remains a physical eld.

more precisely, the picture is as follows. the theory at hand has two u(1)
symmetries from the very beginning: the internal u(1)i and external u(1)e gauge
symmetry under translations in the extra dimension. however, from the point of
view of a four-dimensional observer living on the brane, both of them are internal
symmetries, one global and another gauged by a. the condensate hi 6= 0, with
n 6= 0, breaks both u(1)s down to a global u(1) describing the change of a relative
position of the brane in the extra space. the brane breaks the latter down to nothing,
but since there is no gauge degree of freedom left, the corresponding goldstone is
physical.

3strictly speaking, we have to restrict ourselves to n2 < vr2/m since larger winding numbers
force the eld to vanish, and the solution will unwind. for our purposes, however, it is sucient
to consider small enough n.

8

a related mechanism of projecting out the graviphoton while still keeping at
least one goldstone mode may be provided by multicomponent walls suggested in
ref. [20]. it was noted that in supersymmetric theories with multiple degenerate
vacua, under certain conditions there exists a variety of the bps-saturated walls.
some of them may coexist together; then, the tension of such multilayer congura-
tion is exactly equal to the sum of the tensions of the individual walls, independently
of the distance between the layers (individual walls). a similar eect takes place
for the d-branes which are the bps-states in the limit of unbroken supersymmetry,
and the net force between two straight parallel branes vanishes (see [9] for a review).
this means that, apart from the zero mode corresponding to the overall translation,
there are extra zero modes corresponding to shifting the layers with respect to each
other, without changing the position of the center of mass. as was mentioned, on
the cylinder the exact bps saturation can be achieved only in the limit /r  0.
hence, only the rst zero mode  the one related to the overall translations  is
exactly zero, others become quasi-zero. the zero mode is eaten up by the gravipho-
ton, eliminating it from the game. the quasi-zero modes remain physical, their
dynamics is described by a low-energy lagrangian. the supersymmetry breaking in
general will give mass to this pseudo-goldstones since the net force between branes
(or walls) is non-zero.

if there are no other massless states in the bulk, at large distances the only force
between the branes is due to gravity which gives a small rn -suppressed mass to
the goldstones (r is the interbrane separation). this mass can be made arbitrarily
small if the separation is large and, practically, it can be neglected. all dynamical
consequences are the same as discussed in sec. 3.

5 implications for cosmology

now let us discuss cosmology in more detail. we will treat the problem from the
standpoint of the eective four-dimensional eld theory at scales  r. as was
said above, in this picture the uctuations of the brane in the external space a(x)
can be described by the goldstone modes which, at energies  t (almost at brane),
behave as free particles. canonically normalized elds are a  (t )1/4a.
for simplicity, consider a uctuation in one transverse direction only. then,
very roughly, the issue is reduced to the behavior of a free eld  in an expanding
universe. the question is what are the initial conditions for such a eld? the
general solution of its equation of motion (the comoving coordinates are assumed)

has the form

2 = 0

 = t cx + peipx

(13)

(14)

(modulo the lorentz transformations), where c is a constant and the second term is
some collection of massless plane waves. the energy stored in the second term will

9

just redshift away, like massless matter. however, the rst term produces a rather
dierent contribution. in the present context this term describes the tilted brane
with the tilt angle given by c  r/r. in other words, when we move along x, the
brane is wrapping around the extra dimension with the period  r. in the absence
of gravity, in the limit of an innitely thin brane, this is a stable conguration for
any c. in the presence of gravity, however, its energy redshifts away as  a2, due
to the friedmann expansion. therefore, eventually this energy will dominate over
matter. when this happens actually depends on the initial condition for r(c) and on
the subsequent evolution of the scale factor. assume that initially c  rhin, where
hin is the hubble parameter at that time. in other words, we assume that, when
the brane was formed, it wrapped around the extra dimension once ( on average)
per the causally connected region  h 1
in . now, at present time, this region must
have had evolved into a volume comparable to the present hubble size (or larger).
this is required by whatever mechanism solving the horizon problem. this means
that

atoday

rtoday 

hinain > h 1

today .

(15)

thus, the energy density of a tilted brane would be < c. in particular, it is sucient

to have a period of ination with the number of e-foldings

n  ln

hinmp
ttodaytr

,

(16)

and the subsequent reheating temperature tr, where ttoday  3k o. for instance, a
brief period of the brane ination [12] can do the job.4
in reality, however, we expect ination to have more e-foldings and, thus, brane <

c is rather natural.

6 the lorentz symmetry breaking

the important fact is that the solution at hand spontaneously breaks the lorentz and
rotational invariances in four dimensions. this would result in a global anisotropy
in the expansion if brane were to dominate the universe. thus, we must require
brane to be subdominant today, but it can become dominant at any time in the
future. in this respect any observational evidence of a global anisotropy would be
extremely important for constraining brane.

the tilted brane would induce rotational (or lorentz) noninvariant terms in
the eective four-dimensional standard-model lagrangian. the important fact is
that the brane goldstones (or pseudo-goldstones, which are similar in this respect)
necessarily couple to all particles living on the brane through an induced metric on

4the wrapped brane can provide an additional (time-dependent) force stabilizing r. this may

have implications for the early cosmology [21].

10

the brane. thus, the operators of the form


x


x x +


x


x ff  + ...

(17)

will appear (accompanied by the appropriate powers of t ). here,  are the matter
fermions and f stands for the matter gauge elds. in the background of a titled
brane  = x, these terms will induce eective lorentz-violating interactions among
the standard-model elds.

n

can one have tilted branes and still avoid the anisotropy and violations of the
rotational invariance? in principle, the answer is positive. to this end one must
deal with more complicated manifolds, such that the topology of the manifold m
is the same as that of our 3-dimensional space m3 (of course, in any case, locally
m3 must be minkowskian). in other words, m
n must include unshrinkable surfaces
c3 that are isomorphic to m3. in this case the brane that corresponds to a point
on c3 can move around when one moves along the brane in m3. the topologically
nontrivial conguration of interest emerges when this motion maps c3 onto m3. for
such a conguration, one can nd a preferred reference frame for which rotations on
m3 will not be broken, but the lorentz invariance will be broken in the arbitrary
imagine that we
reference frame. to be more specic, let us give an example.
have an external space, with three extra dimensions, which forms a manifold k of
radius r (say, one can think of k as of a three-sphere). assume that our three-
dimensional space is also a very large manifold k, its radius is much larger than
h 1. let us call these two manifolds small and big, respectively. clearly, at
human scales the large manifold (plus time) is identical to m4, but not globally.
now, our brane corresponds to a point on the small k. imagine a conguration
such that when one moves in large k, the point in small k also moves in the
same way. thus, we get a mapping k  k, which is certainly topologically stable.
roughly speaking, the brane wraps isotropically in all directions. such a wrapping
is isotropic and stable.

what is the low-energy picture corresponding to this construction? since k has
tree dimensions, the brane breaks three translational invariances. thus, there are
three massless goldstone modes in the eective low-energy theory, a , a = 1, 2, 3.
let xa be three coordinates on our large s3 which locally look as the cartesian
coordinates in our minkowski space. then, the solution is a = xa. this solution
is isotropic because of the spherical symmetry of the problem. its energy density
will still scale  1/a2 because this is essentially the same gradient energy solution
we have discussed previously.

7 conclusions

the idea of conning our universe to a wall which ensures an appropriate super-
symmetry breaking [1] seems to be promising. at the very least, it deserves further

11

n where m

investigation. being combined with the idea of compactication of the extra di-
mensions and allowing gravity to propagate in the bulk [3] it leads to potentially
realistic and reach phenomenology.
in this paper we have shown that the walls
n is compact generate peculiar theoretical eects due to
on m4  m
tilting. the situation becomes especially interesting when gravity is switched on.
the appropriate theoretical framework for its analysis is provided by the eective
low-energy theories of the goldstone modes on the brane. after gravity is switched
on one of these modes is eaten up by the graviphoton (making it massive and elim-
inating it from the massless particle spectrum). we presented models where there
are residual physical goldstone (or pseudo-goldstone) modes.

these solutions produce a framework for the spontaneous breaking of the lorentz

and rotational invariance and may have observable consequences.

acknowledgments: we would like to thank a. dolgov, i. kogan, k. olive,
t. piran, and a. vilenkin for useful discussions and comments. this work was
supported in part by doe under the grant number de-fg02-94er40823.

references

[1] g. dvali and m. shifman, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 127.

[2] g. dvali and m. shifman, hep-th/9901111 (to appear in phys. lett. b).

[3] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, phys. lett. b516 (1998) 70.

[4] i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, phys. lett.

b436 (1998) 257.

[5] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 135; j. lykken, phys. rev. d54 (1996)

3693.

[6] lowering the gut scale was suggested in, k.r. dienes, e. dudas and t.

gherghetta, phys. lett. b436 (1998) 55; hep-ph/9806292.

[7] v.a. rubakov and m.e. shaposhnikov, phys. lett. b125 (1983) 136;

[8] g. dvali and m. shifman, phys. lett. b396 (1997) 64; erratum phys. lett.

b407 (1997) 452.

[9] j. polchinski, string theory, (cambridge university press, 1998).

[10] g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 106007, hep-th/9805147;

z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, hep-th/9809147.

[11] i. antoniadis and b. pioline, hep-th/9902055;

12

[12] g. dvali and h. tye, hep-ph/9812483.

[13] g. dvali and g. gabadadze, hep-ph/9904221.

[14] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, and d. waldram, hep-th/9806022; hep-th/9902071.

[15] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 94.

[16] m. maggiore and a. riotto, hep-th/9811089.

[17] ya.b. zeldovich, i.yu. kobzarev, and l.b. okun, zh. eksp. teor. fiz. 67 (1974)

3 [sov. phys. jetp 40 (1974) 1].

[18] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and g. dvali, hep-ph/9803315.

[19] r. sundrum, hep-ph/9807348; n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, and j. march-

russell, hep-th/9809124.

[20] m. shifman, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 1258; m. shifman and m. voloshin, phys.

rev. d57 (1998) 2590.

[21] n. kaloper and a. linde, hep-th/9811141; a. mazumdar, hep-ph/9902381;
n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, n. kaloper, and j. march-russell, hep-
hp/9903239; hep-ph/9903224.

13

