dynamics and integrability property

of the chiral string model

brandon carter and patrick peter

departement dastrophysique relativiste et de cosmologie,

observatoire de paris-meudon, umr 8629, cnrs, 92195 meudon, france.

(5 may 1999, preprint no darc/99-09)

the eect of fermionic string conductivity by purely right (or purely left) moving zero modes
is shown to be governed by a simple lagrangian characterising a certain chiral (null current
carrying) string model whose dynamical equations of motion turn out to be explicitly integrable in
a at spacetime background.

pacs numbers: 98.80.cq, 11.27+d

9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
5

 

 
 

1
v
5
2
0
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

i. introduction.

in his epoch making paper entitled superconduct-
ing strings, witten introduced two essentially dierent
processes that can produce conserved currents on cos-
mic strings. the rst, for which the term supercon-
ducting is most appropriate, is based on the formation
on the string of a bosonic condensate that is analogous
to the kind of condensate that is familiar in ordinary
laboratory superuids and superconductors. the second
process considered by witten involves a purely fermionic
mechanism (of a kind for which  since no cooper type
pairing is involved  the term superconducting is not
appropriate) based on zero modes.

in order to describe the macroscopic eect of the (clas-
sically conserved) currents arising from such processes,
whether of the bosonic superconducting kind or the
fermionic zero mode kind, witten [1] proposed the use
of a string model that is a simple  in a certain sense lin-
earised  generalisation of the nambu-goto model for an
ordinary non conducting string. with respect to inter-
nal coordinates i, in a background with coordinates x
and spacetime metric g , a generic conservative string
model will be characterised by an action of the form

i = z l d(2)s ,

d(2)s = kk1/2d0 d1 ,

(1)

where l is a function of the relevant internal variables,
if any, and where || is the determinant of the induced
metric given by

ij = gx

,ix
,j

(2)

using a comma for partial dierentiation.

in the nambu goto case there are no internal variables,
so the lagrangian will just be a constant, having the form

l = m2

(3)

for a xed parameter m which  with respect to units
such that the dirac-planck constant h and the speed of
light c are set equal to unity  will have the dimensions

of a mass.
(in the case of a ordinary cosmic string
model, representing a vortex defect of the vacuum, m
would be expected [2] to be of the order of magnitude of
the relevant higgs mass scale).

in the witten model, there is an internal scalar phase
eld variable  in terms of which the action takes the less
trivial form

l = m2  1
2

0ij|i|j ,

(4)

for some positive constant 0.
in the presence of a
maxwellian gauge covector eld a, if the internal eld
has charge coupling constant e, the relevant gauge co-
variant derivative will have the form |i =  ,i  eax
,i.
soon after its introduction, it was pointed out that
for the purpose of treating wittens bosonic supercon-
ductivity mechanism [1], his simple bosonic model (4)
would require generalisation [3] to allow for non-linearity.
more particularly, it was shown by one of us [4] that wit-
tens bosonic superconductivity mechanism entailed
supersonic wiggle propagation, whereas his own proposed
string model (4) was characterised by subsonic wiggle
propagation. this discrepancy, which is signicant even
for very weak currents, has recently been resolved by re-
placing wittens naive model (4) by a more appropriately
adapted model [5] whose action is non linearly dependent
on the current amplitude.

in so far as wittens fermionic zero-mode conductiv-
ity mechanism is concerned, the question of the adequacy
or otherwise of wittens naive model (4) has not yet been
given much attention. whereas it is evident that correc-
tions will be needed for cases involving strong currents,
what is not yet clear is whether wittens model (4) will
be invalidated (as in the bosonic case) by non-linear ef-
fects even for fermionic currents of very low amplitude.
there is however a special case  the subject of the
present article  for which it seems clear in advance that
there is no risk of invalidation by non linear eects, be-
cause the relevant current amplitude simply vanishes  a
condition that will be preserved by the eld equations of
the model (4) if e = 0. the condition of having zero am-
plitude does not of course mean that the current itself has

1

to vanish, but merely that it should be null in the sense
of being lightlike. individual fermionic zero mode ex-
citations are intrinsically characterised by the condition
of being null in this sense, but a generic superposition
of left and right moving excitations will provide a
total current that is timelike or spacelike. however, in
the special chiral case for which only left (or equiv-
alently only right) moving zero modes are excited,
the total current will be null, i.e. it will satisfy

ij,i,j = 0 .

(5)

the suggestion that such a chiral current might
arise naturally from the presence of massive neutrinos in
grand unied theories was implicit in wittens original
article [1] [right-handed neutrino current in so(10) 
su (5)  u (1)  su (5) theory with the last symmetry
breaking realized by means of a higgs eld in the 126
of so(10)], and the question has recently been raised
more explicitly [6] by several authors:
in particular it
has been pointed out [7] that chiral (purely left or
purely right moving) zero modes are to be expected in
strings with half broken supersymmetry in the presence
of a fayet iliopoulos term. the technical requirements
for having lightlike currents owing along the strings due
to fermions are discussed in the appendix.

the likelihood that null currents can arise naturally
from chiral zero modes has potentially important cos-
mological implications, in view of the consequent possib-
lity of formation of chiral vortons which can be expected
to be more stable than vortons of other kinds  a per-
spective that has provided the main motivation for the
present investigation.

quite appart from the consideration that it will be ap-
plicable exactly in such cases, the chirality condition (5)
has also frequently been advocated for use as an approxi-
mation even for bosonic currents. the rst occasion this
was done was in the seminal article [8] in which the ques-
tion of vorton states was originally raised by davis and
shellard, and the approximation (5) has in fact been sys-
tematically employed in the more recent work [9]. in the
particular case of circular string loops the solution are
characterised [10] by a certain bernouilli ratio, b, that
would need to be close to unity for the chiral approxima-
tion to be tenable. however even when such a condition
is satised the use [9] of such an approximation is dan-
gerous, since it articially supresses potentially unstable
degrees of freedom that are present when the generic non
linear model [5] is used.

although its use as an approximation for the treatment
of string currents that are actually spacelike or timelike
is rather questionable, there can be no such doubts about
the validity of the chiral string model in cases when the
current is physically constrained to be null, as will be the
case when it arises from fermionic zero modes of the chiral
type discussed above. chiral solutions are obtainable
as solutions for string models of the generic non-linear
elastic type [3,5] including the witten [1] limit case (4) (in

the absence of electromagnetic coupling, i.e. for e = 0)
subject to the nullity constraint (5). one of the rst
points to be emphasised here is that the chiral string
model can also conveniently be characterised directly in
its own right by a lagrangian of its own, which can be
taken to have the form

l = m2  1
2

2ij,i,j .

(6)

this chiral string lagrangian is obtained by replacing the
positive constant 0 in the witten [1] model (4) by the
square of an auxiliary lagrange multiplier eld . for
the purpose of applying the variation principle, the auxil-
iary amplitude  and the phase scalar  are to be treated
on the same footing as independent internal eld vari-
ables on the string worldsheet, whose spacetime location
is of course also to be considered to be freely variable.

ii. dynamical equations of the chiral

string model.

it is evident that the requirement of invariance of the
integral (1) with respect to free variations of  in (6) leads
back immediately to the nullity condition (5). in partic-
ular, since the worldsheet is only 2-dimensional, this has
the well known corollary that the eld  will be harmonic,
i.e.

;i

;i = 0 ,

(7)

using a semicolon to indicate covariant dierentiation
with respect to the worldsheet metric ij . furthermore,
by dierentiation of (5), it can be seen the phase gradient
must satisfy the geodicity condition

;ij;j = 0 .

(8)

the only other internal eld equation on the world
sheet, namely the one obtained from the requirement of
invariance of the integral (1) with respect to free varia-
tions of  in (6), will evidently take the form

(cid:0)2;i(cid:1);i = 0 .

(9)

in view of (7), the latter reduces simply to the condition

;i,i = 0 ,

(10)

to the eect that  is constant along the world sheet null
lines on which  is constant, or in other words that  is
a function only of .

for the purpose of dealing with the extrinsic equations
of motion governing the evolution of the worldsheet it is
convenient to work in terms of tensors specied with re-
spect to the background spacetime coordinates x, start-
ing with the fundamental tensor  that is dened [3]
as the spacetime projection of the contravariant inverse
ij of the induced metric, i.e.

2

 = ijx

,ix

,j ,

(11)

(whose mixed form  
and the tangent vector

 is the tangential projection tensor)

 = ;ix

,i .

(12)

the latter will be equivalently expressible in terms of the
tangentially projected covariant dierentiation operator

 =  

  ,

(13)

(where  is the usual operator of covariant dierentia-
tion with respect to g) in the form

 =  .

(14)

in terms of this worldsheet tangential vector n, the
lagrangian (6) of the chiral string model can be rewritten
in the form

l = m2  1
2

 ,

(15)

as usual the tangential projection of (20) will be sat-
ised as a noether identity, i.e. we shall automatically
have



f  = 0 ,

(22)

when the relevant internal equations, in this case (16)
and (17), are satised. this means that the evolution
of the worldsheet will be given just by the orthogonal
projection of (17), i.e. its contraction



 f  = 0 ,

(23)

where the orthogonal projection tensor 
the complement of the fundamental tensor 

 is dened as

, i.e.



= g

  

 .

(24)

by the usual integration by parts operation this orthog-
onally projected force density on the worldsheet is ob-
tained in the standard form



 f  = t  k

 ,

(25)

and it can be seen that the ensuing internal eld equa-
tions as obtained above will be expressible as the nullity
condition

 is the second fundamental tensor as de-
where the k
ned [3] in terms of tangential dierentiation of the rst
fundamental tensor 

 by

 = 0 ,

and the worldsheet current conservation law

 = 0 .

(16)

(17)

the standard procedure [11] for obtaining the extrin-
sic equations of motion starts from the evaluation of the
relevant surface stress momentum energy density tensor
as dened by the general formula

t  = 2

l
g

+ l ,

which in the present application (15) simply gives

t  =   m2 ,

(18)

(19)

when the on-shell condition (16) is satised. in terms of
this tensor, the dynamical condition for the invariance
of the action (1) with respect to arbitrary innitesimal
displacements is equivalent to the condition of vanishing
external force

f  = 0 ,

(20)

where the force density is given by an expression of the
usual form

f  = t  .

(21)

as the condition for the invariance of the action (1) with
respect to arbitrary innitesimal displacements.

k

 = 

 

 .

(26)

it evidently follows that in the particular case of the chi-
ral model, as characterised by (19), the extrinsic dynam-
ical equation (23) will take the form

m2k  =  k

 ,

(27)

where the extrinsic curvature vector k  is the trace of
the second fundamental tensor, i.e.

k  = k 



,

(28)

(whose vanishing expresses the equation of motion for the
nambu goto model, as obtained in the limit for which
the null current vector  vanishes so that the right hand
side of (27) drops out).

iii. characteristic formulation of

the dynamical equations.

in order to proceed it is convenient to introduce a
conventionally normalised null tangent vector diad on
the worldsheet, taking one member to be the conserved
null current vector  that has already been introduced,
which can without loss of generallity (if necessary by ad-
justing the sign convention for  or ) be assumed to
be oriented towards the future. subject to the conven-
tion that it too should be oriented towards the future the
other null tangent vector, o say, will be characterised by

oo = 0

o = 1 ,

(29)

3

so that the fundamental tensor will take the form

 = 2(o) ,

(30)

using round brackets to denote index symmetrisation.
the worldsheet stress momentum energy density tensor
(19) can then be given an expression of the analogous
form

t  = () ,

(31)

in which  is a future directed timelike worldsheet tan-
gent vector given by

one obtains the extrinsic (orthogonally projected) part of
the force equation in the convenient form



 f  =

   .

(35)

in the particular case of the chiral model, the internal
dynamical equation (16) evidently implies  = 0,
from which by (30) it can be seen that the other internal
dynamical equation (17) will be expressible in either of
what, by (29), are the equivalent forms

o = 0

o = 0 .

(36)

 =  + 2m2o .

(32)

by further use of (16), (29) and (30), it can be seen that
the preceeding relations are equivalent to



 = 0 ,



 o = 0 ,

(37)

which by (32) will also be equivalently expressible as



  = 0 .

(38)

using the analogous formula(35) it can now be seen
that this internal dynamical equation (38) can be amal-
gamated with the extrinsic dynamical equation (23) to
give a combined dynamical equation of the simple char-
acteristic form

  = 0 ,

(39)

which eectively states that the timelike characteristic
vector  is subject to transport by the null characteristic
vector . this transport equation evidently preserves
the normalisation conditions

 = 2m2 ,

 = 4m2 ,

(40)

that follow from the dening relation (32).

as in the familiar example of the nambu goto case
(for which both of the extrinsic characteristic directions
are null) it is useful for many purposes to use coordinates
that are constant along the respective characteristic di-
rections. as far as the null characteristic direction is con-
cerned, the scalar  introduced above can evidently serve
for this purpose. with respect to worldsheet coordinates
consisting of  and another characteristic coordinate, 
say, chosen to be constant along the timelike character-
istic direction specied by , it can be seen from (12)
and (40) that, whatever the precise convention used to x
the normalisation of  and , the timelike characteristic
vector will be given by

 = 2

m2


x


.

(41)

in view of the general theorem [11] to the eect that
the characteristic covectors  (i.e. gradients of scalars
that are constant along admissible directions of propaga-
tion of innitesimal discontinuity) of the extrinsic motion
are specied as solutions of the quadratic characteristic
equation

t  = 0 ,

(33)

it is evident from (31) that the null vector  dened
by (12) and the timelike vector  dened by (32) lie
along the corresponding bicharacteristic directions (i.e.
admissible directions of propagation of innitesimal dis-
continuity) of the extrinsic motion. it is also evident that
as far as the internal dynamical equations (16) and (17)
are concerned there is only a single bicharacteristic direc-
tion, which coincides with the extrinsic bicharacteristic
direction specied by .

the preceeding conclusion means that the dynamical
behaviour of chiral string model will be much simpler
than that of a generic elastic string model [11] or that
of the witten model [1] in particular, for which there
are two independent internal (sonic type) bicharacteris-
tic directions, neither of which coincides with either of
the two extrinsic bicharacteristic directions. the case of
the chiral string model is intermediate between that of
the special transonic string model [12] for which there
are two independent internal bicharacteristic directions
which exactly coincide with the two extrinsic bicharac-
teristic directions, and that of the simple nambu goto
model, which has no internal degrees of freedom, so that
it has no internal bicharacteristic directions at all.

following the example of the transonic case [12], the
coincidence of the only internal bicharacteristic direction
of the chiral string model with one of its extrinsic bichar-
acteristic directions can be exploited for the purpose of
converting its dynamical equations to a particularly con-
venient characteristic form. to start with, as is possible
for any string model [11], the characteristic expression
(31) for the surface stress tensor can be substituted into
the generic force equation (21) from which, using the
worldsheet integrability condition

 (cid:0)    (cid:1) = 0 ,


(34)

4

iv. integrability in a flat

background.

the preceeding equations are applicable in an arbi-
trarily curved cosmological background spacetime. let
us now restrict our attention to the case of a at back-
ground, and more specically let us restrict the coordi-
nates to be of ordinary minkowski type, x  {x0, xa},
a = 1, 2, 3 so that the metric is given by

g dxdx = (dx0 )2  ab dxadxb

(42)

where ab is the kronecker unit matrix.
since the
christoel connection will vanish in such a reference sys-
tem, the characteristic dynamical equation (39) will re-
duce to the simple form

 =  0 ,

 =  0 ,

(48)

in which case (47) will be expressible as the condition
that the space vector a must lie on the kibble turok
unit sphere, while a must lie inside the unit sphere, i.e.

ab ab = 1 ,

ab a b < 1 .

(49)

whatever parametrisation convention is used, it can
be seen from (41) that the null and timelike generators
 and  will be respectively given by

 = (cid:0) 

(cid:1)1

 ,

 = 2

m2


 ,

(50)

in which, in order to satisfy the normalisation condition
(40), the auxiliary eld amplitude  will be given by




 = 0 .

(43)

2 = m2   .

(51)

since by (10) we know that  depends only on , it can
be seen from (41) that (43) is equivalent to

2x


= 0 ,

(44)

whose general solution is given as the sum of a pair of gen-
erating curves {}, {} parametrised by the char-
acteristic coordinates  and  respectively, i.e.

x{, } = {} + {} .

(45)

in order for such a solution to represent a physically
admissible conguration for the chiral string model, the
generating curves can not be chosen in an entirely ar-
bitrary manner:
in order to satisfy the condition (16)
that  should be null, the tangent to the rst generat-
ing curve {} must be null, while in order for  to
be timelike the same must apply to the tangent to the
second generating curve {}, i.e. using the notation

 =

d
d

,

 =

d
d

,

(46)

we must construct the generating curves so as to satisfy
the equality and inequality



 = 0 ,

  < 0 .

(47)

the chiral string worldsheet solution obtained in this way
can be seen to dier from its well known analogue for the
nambu goto case [13] only by the condition that in the
nambu goto case both generating curves are restricted to
be null, whereas in the chiral case this restriction applies
to only one of them. the transonic string model is also
solved by an ansatz of the form (45), but in this case [12]
neither of the generating curves is restricted to be null.
as in the well known goto nambu example, it will be
convenient for many purposes to use a background time
parametrisation for the generating curves, i.e. to take

the corresponding explicit expression for the surface
stress tensor of the chiral string can thus be seen from
(31) to be given by

t  = 2m2(cid:0)  

(cid:1)1

( ) .

(52)

v. conclusions.

having just one internal degree of freedom  corre-
sponding to longitudinal modes propagating at the speed
of light in just one (forward but not backward) direction
 the chiral string model can be described as being in-
termediate between the nambu goto string model which
has no internal degrees of freedom at all, and the generic
elastic models [5] (of which the witten [1] model (4) was
the original prototype) which have two internal degrees
of freedom corresponding to longitudinal propagating in
both left and right directions, with a sound speed that
is equal to that of light in the case of the naive witten
model [1] but that will be slower for more realistic mod-
els [5]. there is a general theorem [14] to the eect that
vorton equilibrium states will be classically stable when-
ever the relevant propagation speed of extrinsic wiggles
is subsonic or transonic. the condition of subsonicity is
always satised for the witten model (4), which is pre-
cisely the reason why this model is physically unnacept-
able for the representation of bosonic string supercon-
ductivity in which, at least for weak currents, the wig-
gle propagation speed has been predicted [4] to be super-
sonic, with the implication that the corresponding vorton
stability problem will be rather complicated [14,15]. it is
to be similarly remarked that the condition of transonic-
ity is automatically satised for the chiral string model
(6), with the implication that this model too is poten-
tially misleading, in that it can give a false impression
of stability, when used [9] as an approximation for the

5

representation of string currents of the bosonic super-
conducting type. this caveat needs to be particularly
emphasized in view of the very convenient integrability
property established in the preceeding section, which re-
inforces the temptation to use the chiral string model for
applications beyond its range of legitimate validity.

although potentially misleading when used as an ap-
proximation [9] in the bosonic case, the use of the chiral
model (6)  and the implication that the corresponding
vorton states will always be classically stable  is physi-
cally justiable as a valid description in cases for which
the current under consideration arises from fermionic
zero modes of chiral type such as are expected to arise
in some grand unied theories [1] or certain scenarios in-
volving incomplete supersymmetry breaking [7].

appendix: elimination of fermionic

current anomalies.

the purpose of this appendix is to show how the pos-
sibility of having conserved  anomaly free  chiral cur-
rents on the string depends on the requirement that they
consist of axial fermions that (as was assumed in the pre-
ceding work) are not coupled to any long range  electro-
magnetic or other  gauge eld. we start by using the
nielsen-olesen string solution [16] to check that in the
absence of long range eld coupling the two-dimensional
theory in the string background will be anomaly free even
though the background itself is nontrivial. we then go on
to consider a prototypical four-dimensional theory admit-
ting a nielsen-olesen string solution that contains also
fermionic carriers coupled to both the strings and some
extra long range  electromagnetic type  gauge elds.

cancellation would require the introduction of other
fermions, at the cost of spoiling the chiral nullity con-
dition (5), in the manner illustrated in gure 1.

l = la.h (h, b)+ ly (h, )+ p 

the four-dimensional model we shall have in mind
consists of a gauged abelian higgs model characterised
by a lagrangian containing a bosonic contribution la.h
that is coupled via a yukawa term ly
to a set of
fermionic elds denoted by  in a total of the form
d, in which
the nal gauge interaction term involves a sum run-
ning over all the fermions that couple to the strings
(i.e. all those having non trivial zero mode solutions
in a string background). for each individual fermion,
the couplings with the gauge elds have the form d
= (  ieqa  igrb) , in which q and r are the
(hyper)charges of the fermion in question, and in which e
and g the coupling constants, where a is the long range
electromagnetic type gauge vector, while b is the gauge
vector associated with the symmetry whose spontaneous
breaking is responsible for the existence of the strings.
in order for the string solutions of la.h. to admit zero
modes, the fermionic couplings with b must be dier-
ent for the left-handed and the right-handed ones [1],
thereby potentially generating the so-called qqr and
qrr anomalous terms.

the possibility of having purely chiral, let us say left-
wards moving, currents in the string depends on the
condition that the relevant fermionic elds should be of
the corresponding, let us say left handed, chiral type
in the four dimensional sense, since their yukawa cou-
pling to the string-forming higgs eld h will give rise
to zero modes propagating in only one direction, with
anti-particles propagating in the same direction [18], as
illustrated in gure 2.

m f

m f

left movers

right movers

left movers

no right movers

k

k

fig. 1. construction of timelike current from zero mode
solutions of the dirac equation in a cosmic string background
for the generic charge coupled case, in which there are zero
modes propagating in both left and right null directions.

the essential point is that unless they are entirely de-
coupled from the axial fermions constituting the string
current, such elds would give rise to anomalies whose

fig. 2. construction of null current from zero mode solu-
tions of the dirac equation in a cosmic string background for
the chiral case (requiring the absence of charge coupling) for
which there are zero modes propagating in a single (in this
illustration, left) null direction.

since a chirally opposite, i.e.

right handed, fermion
eld would similarly couple with the higgs eld conjugate

6

w
w
h (so that the vortex appears as an anti-vortex) the
corresponding modes would propagate in the opposite
direction, i.e. they would be rightwards movers. in the
generic case for which both kinds of mode are present,
their simultaneous occupation gives rise to currents that
need no longer be null but can be timelike, as illustrated
in gure 1.

acknowledgements.

the authors wish to thank anne davis, stephen davis,

and warren perkins for helpful conversations.

[1] e. witten, nucl. phys. b249, 557 (1985)
[2] t.w.b. kibble, phys. rep. 67, 183 (1980)
[3] b. carter, phys. lett. b228, 446 (1989).
[4] p. peter, phys. rev. d 45, 1091 (1992)
[5] b. carter, p. peter, phys. rev. d d52, 1744 (1995).
[6] w.b. perkins, a.c. davis, phys. lett. b393, 46 (1997).
[7] s.c. davis, a.c. davis, m. trodden, phys. lett. b405,

257 (1997).

[8] r.l. davis, e.p.s. shellard nucl. phys. b323, 209

(1989).

[9] c.j.a.p. martins, e.p.s. shellard phys. rev. d 57, 7155

(1998).

[10] b. carter, p. peter, a. gangui, phys. rev. d 55, 4647

(1997).

[11] b. carter,

in formation and interactions of topologi-
cal defects (nato asi b349), newton institute, cam-
bridge, 1994), ed. r. brandenberger & a-c. davis, pp
303-348 (plenum, new york, 1995). [hep-th/9611054]

[12] b. carter, phys. rev. lett. 74, 3098 (1995).
[13] t.w.b. kibble, n.turok, phys lett. b116, 141 (1982).
[14] b. carter, x. martin, ann. phys. 227, 151 (1993).
[15] x. martin, p. peter, phys. rev. d 51, 4092 (1995).
[16] h. b. nielsen, p. olesen, nucl. phys. b 61, 45 (1973).
[17] j. schwinger, phys. rev. 128, 2425 (1962); k. johnson,
phys. lett. 5, 253 (1963); n. manton, ann. phys. 159,
220 (1985).

[18] r. jackiw, p. rossi, nucl. phys. b 190, [fs3], 681 (1981).

provisionally setting aside the possibility of coupling
with an external eld a, by setting e = 0, let us con-
sider the possibility of anomalies in the string itself,
considered as a two-dimensional worldsheet admitting
zero modes of the relevant fermionic model in a given
gauge background. for such a model, anomalies might
arise at the one-loop level because of the coupling be-
tween the fermions and the string-forming gauge eld
b whose presence implies a nonvanishing background
g = b  b.
in such a theory one nds that
in general [17] the axial symmetry can be broken by
generic background gauge curvature eld b . more
particularly, the string worldsheet will contain an axial
current with internal components j5i = 
i that
would acquires a corresponding divergence of the form
;i  ij gij , where the pull back of the gauge curvature
j5i
onto the string worldsheet is dened by gij = g x
,ix
,j.
in practice however, in the particular case of a nielsen-
olesen background, there will be no such contribution
because in a conguration of this type the associated
gauge curvature will only have components in directions
orthogonal to the world sheet, i.e. it will have vanishing
tangentially projected components, gij = 0.



5

let us now consider what would happen if the fermions
were coupled to an independent long range gauge eld a
associated with an electromagnetic type curvature eld
f = a   a which can give rise to chiral anoma-
lies proportional to f f in the four dimensional
theory.

what one nds [1] for fermions having a denite hand-
edness [like right-handed neutrinos in the so(10) 
su (5) model] is that they contribute to the qqr and
qrr triangle anomalies with an amount that depends
on their qcharges in such a way that the theory is
anomaly-free if and only if

xl

q2 = xr

q2,

where the sums are taken over the left and right handed
particles respectively. it follows that a theory involving
only, let us say, left handed particles  so that the right
hand side of this equation automatically vanishes  can
be anomally free only if the left hand side of this equation
also vanishes, i.e. only if all the relevant coupling charges
are zero. the absence of charge coupling is therefore
essential for a theory of the kind providing purely chiral
fermionic string currents, as illustrated in gure 2.

7

