su-4240-698

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
6
2

 

 
 

4
v
6
3
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

quantum topology change in (2 + 1)d

a.p. balachandran1, e. batista2, i.p. costa e silva3 and p. teotonio-sobrinho3

1department of physics,syracuse university

syracuse, ny 13244-1130, usa

2universidade federal de santa catarina, centro de fisica e matematica,

dep. mtm, cep 88.010-970, florianopolis, sc, brazil

3universidade de sao paulo, instituto de fisica-dfma
caixa postal 66318, 05315-970, sao paulo, sp, brazil

abstract

the topology of orientable (2 + 1) spacetimes can be captured by certain lumps
of non-trivial topology called topological geons. they are the topological analogues
of conventional solitons. we give a description of topological geons where the de-
grees of freedom related to topology are separated from the complete theory that
contain metric (dynamical) degrees of freedom. the formalism also allows us to in-
vestigate processes of quantum topology change. they correspond to creation and
annihilation of quantum geons. selection rules for such processes are derived.

1 introduction

it is very common to make the reasonable assumption that the topology of space-time is
xed. we assume that space-time is a manifold of the form ir, and that for each time t,
we have a space-like surface that is always homeomorphic to a given . however, when
(quantum) gravity is taken into account, the very geometry of space becomes a degree of
freedom, and one can conceive the possibility that  changes in the course of time [1]. such
a process is called topology change. creation of baby universes, production of topological
defects (cosmic strings, domain walls), and changes in genus (production of wormholes
and topological geons) are examples of topology change. each of them have received some
attention in the literature. several authors have investigated topology change within the
context of both classical and quantum gravity [2]. it is interesting to notice that in the
usual canonical approach to gravity, only the metric of the spatial manifold  appears as
a degree of freedom and receives a quantum treatment. the topology of  in its turn is
implicitly treated as a classical entity. there are, of course, other approaches to quantum
gravity such as string theory [7] and euclidean quantum gravity [8] where topology may
appear as an entity of a quantum nature via a sum over topologies.

it would be desirable to have a formalism where topology can in a certain sense be
canonically quantized and if possible separated from degrees of freedom coming from
metric and other elds. in spite of the fact that topology change has been inspired by
quantum gravity, it has been demonstrated in [9] that it can happen in ordinary quantum
mechanics. in this approach, metric is not dynamical, but degrees of freedom related to
topology are quantized. the notion of a space with a well dened topology appears only
as a classical limit. (see also [10] for related ideas). the views we would like to present in
this paper are similar, to a certain extent, to the ones in [9]. in our approach, variables
related to topology are separated from other degrees of freedom and then quantized.

the topology of space is well captured by soliton-like excitations of  called topological
geons. they can be thought of as lumps of nontrivial topology. for example, in (2 + 1)d,
the topology of an orientable, closed surface  is determined by the number of connected
components of  and by the number of of handles on each connected component. each
handle corresponds to a topological geon, i.e., a localized lump of nontrivial topology. it
is well known that these solitons have particle like properties such as spin and statistics.
however unlike ordinary particles they can violate the spin-statistics relation [4, 11]. it
has been suggested [11, 13, 12] that the standard spin-statistics relation can be recovered
if one considers processes where geons are (possibly pairwise) created and annihilated,
but this necessarily implies a change of the topology of . in other words, one may have
to consider topology change in order to have a spin-statistics theorem for geons [13, 12].

the euclidean path integral approach can in some sense be carried out in low dimen-
sions [14], but it represents a formidable task in the case of a (3 + 1)d theory. it would be
nice to stay closer to a canonical quantization, even though topology change and the
canonical approach appear to be incompatible. one may search for alternative descrip-

1

tions of topological properties using algebraic tools, very much in the spirit of quantum
invariants of knot theory. the polynomial invariants of knots can be obtained by both
eld theoretic and algebraic methods. in the eld theoretical approach, it is well known
that jones polynomials are obtained by means of functional integrals of chern-simons
theory [15]. in the algebraic approach, one obtains invariants by representations of the
braid group [16, 17], or via hopf algebras [18, 19]. we will try in this paper to give an al-
gebraic description of quantum geons, rather than a eld theoretical one. we will present
a theory of quantized topological geons where topology change is a quantum transition.
we will only analyze the case of orientable geons in (2 + 1)d were handles are the only
possible particles. a generalization to include nonorientable geons will be presented
elsewhere.

let us consider a manifold m and some generic eld theory (possibly with gauge and
higgs elds) interacting with gravity. it is reasonable to expect that if we could quantize
such a complex theory, its observables would give us information on the geometry and
topology of m. the main point is that one does not need to consider the full theory to get
some topological information. it is possible that, in a certain low energy (large distance)
limit, there would be a certain set of observables encoding the topological data. we know
examples where this is precisely the case. in general, the low energy (large distance) limit
of a eld theory is not able to probe details of the short distance physics, but it can
isolate degrees of freedom related to topology. we may give as an example the low energy
limit of n = 2 super yang-mills, known as the seiberg-witten theory [20]. we also have
examples of more drastic reduction where a eld theory in the vacuum state becomes
purely topological [21]. inspired by these facts we will identify the degrees of freedom, or
the algebra a(n) of observables, capable of describing n topological geons in (2 + 1)d.
actually, we will argue later in this paper that the operators in this algebra are not really
observables in the strict sense. rather, it is what is called [6] a eld algebra. we say
that a(1) describes a single geon in the same way that the algebra of angular momentum
describes a single spinning particle. in this framework what we mean by quantizing the
system is nothing but nding irreducible representations of a(1). as in the case of the
algebra of angular momentum, dierent irreducible representations have to be thought of
as dierent particles. for the moment, we will not be concerned with dynamical aspects.
we would like to concentrate on the quantization itself and leave the dynamics to be xed
by the particular model one wants to consider.

an intuitive way of understanding the algebra a(1) for a topological geon comes from
considering a gauge theory with gauge group g in two space dimensions spontaneously
broken to a discrete group h. for simplicity we will assume that h is nite. as an
immediate consequence it follows that the gauge connection (at far distances) is locally
at.
in other words, homotopic loops  and   produce the same parallel transport
(holonomy). the set of independent holonomies are therefore parametrized by elements
[] in the fundamental group 1().
it is quite clear that such quantities are enough
to detect the presence of a handle. the phase space we are interested in contains only
topological degrees of freedom. therefore such holonomies can be thought of as playing

2

the role of position variables. we also have to take into account the dieomorphisms
that are able to change []. they will be somewhat the analogues of translations. it is
clear that the connected component of the group of dieomorphisms, the so-called small
dieos, cannot change the homotopy class of . to change the homotopy class of a curve
 one needs to act with the so-called large dieomorphisms. therefore the analogues of
translations have to be parametrized by the large dieos modulo the small dieos. this
is exactly the mapping class group m. also, we must take into account an action of
the group h, changing the holonomies by a conjugation. this action, as we will discuss
later, corresponds physically to encircling ux sources at innity. these three sets of
quantities will comprise our algebra a(1). contrary to what happens in eld theory or
even in quantum mechanics, we nd that a(1) is nite dimensional. this will be important
to avoid technical problems of various kinds. the algebra a(1) contains the analogue of
positions and translations and can be thought of as a discrete weyl algebra. there seems
to be no great obstacle to generalize our results also to the case where h is a lie group
[22].

our algebraic description of geons is analogous to what has been developed for 2d non-
abelian vortices by the amsterdam group [23]. these ideas have been further developed
by some of us and coworkers and applied to rings in (3 + 1)d. their results will not be
discussed here since a complete account will be reported in [24].

the algebra encountered by [23] was a special type of hopf algebra, namely the
drinfeld double of a discrete group [18]. in our case, however, the algebra a(1) is not
hopf, but it has a drinfeld double as a subalgebra. for a pair of geons we nd that
the corresponding algebra a(2) is closely related to the tensor product a(1)  a(1) of sin-
gle geon algebras. this fact allows us to determine the appropriate algebra a(n) for an
arbitrary number n of geons.

the main result of our analysis is that it gives us some information on topology change
at the quantum level. this is true for geons as well as for particles on the plane [24]. our
algebra a(1) has to do with large distance observations.
in other words, we can only
probe low energy aspects of the theory. we will argue in section 6 that geons, i.e, handles
in the plane, can be created and annihilated in a quantum fashion as a consequence of
the scale of observations. we would like to mention that other types of topology change,
like creation of baby universes, do not t naturally in our framework and will not be
considered here.

one advantage of the algebraic approach is that we can do this analysis without
going into the details of the complete underlying eld theory. we can determine the
spectrum a(1) of the geons, i.e., the set of possible irreducible representations of a(1), but a
particular eld theory may restrict the available possibilities in a(1). the determination
of these possibilities requires the study of particular examples of the underlying eld
theories. that may be a very dicult task.
in this paper our intention is to use the
simplied algebraic eld theory and see what it can teach us. it is remarkable that such
a simple framework can reveal important features of quantum geons such as a constraint

3

involving spin and statistics as well as rules for quantum topology change. the former
connection is investigated in another paper [3].

an approach similar to ours is explored in reference [25]. its author views the geon
as a vortex-antivortex pair, in which case the algebra describing it is a quantum double.
this description does not consider the internal dieomorphisms of the geon, as it aims
to describe vortices on a two-dimensional surface with handles. accordingly, in [25], the
setting is a two-dimensional surface g,n of genus g and n punctures, whereas in this work
we consider a 2-surface g,0 of genus g without punctures. our approach is also dierent
inasmuch as we are interested in considering large dieormorphisms, i.e., elements of
the mapping class group of g,0. more specically, in [25], the topology of this surface
is a passive background where a theory of pointlike vortices is dened, and its author
only deals with dieomorphisms moving particles (punctures) around or through handles.
to us, the geons (handles) themselves, including their internal structure, are the entities
of interest. the dieomorphisms moving these handles are the large dieomorphisms
we mentioned above. as an illustration of the above mentioned dierences, in a typical
process considered in [25], one can make a test vortex go through or around a handle,
whereas in our case one can conceive of test geons going through other handles. our
procedure allows a natural generalization towards quantum gravity, which is the issue of
another paper [3].

we recall the notion of topological geons in section 2. a special emphasis is given
to orientable geons in (2 + 1)d. the eld algebra is described in section 3. section
4 gives the eective description of a geon as seen from a large distance. the relevant
subalgebra d  a(1) is the same as for a point particle. the representations of d will
play an important role when we discuss topology. quantization of the system is given
in section 5. in this section we are able to classify the irreducible representations for a
class of algebras a that includes our algebra of interest as a particular example.
it is
worthwhile to point out that the eld algebras for vortices in (2 + 1)d and for rings in
(3 + 1)d considered in [24] are also examples of a. section 6 describes how topology can
change in this quantum theory, as a consequence of the scale of observation. we end with
some concluding remarks and prospects of future work.

2 topological geons

the term geon was used for the rst time by j.a. wheeler [26] to designate a lump
of electromagnetic energy held together by its own gravitational eld, forming a spatial
region of non-zero curvature, typically very small. in the context of this paper, however,
this term will have a wholly dierent meaning, namely it will signify a topological geon, a
soliton-like excitation in topology rst discussed by friedman and sorkin [5], and whose
properties were further elaborated by many authors [27, 28, 29, 30]. in this section, we

4

fig. 2.1: the connected sum of two tori t2. one rst removes a disc from each torus and then
glues them along the new boundaries.

review the denition and basic properties of topological geons, and refer the reader to the
literature for further details.

we start with some basic preliminary denitions. let m1,m2 be connected n-
dimensional topological manifolds, possibly with boundaries. we dene their connected
sum, m1#m2, as follows: take n-balls bn
i in the interiors of mi (i = 1, 2) and remove their
interiors. we thereby add spheres sn1 to the boundaries of m1 and m2. now identify
the points of these spheres via a homeomorphism. the resulting manifold is m1#m2.
if m1 and m2 are oriented, we further require that this homeomorphism be orientation
reversing so that m1#m2 is also oriented.
it follows trivially from the denition that
m#sn is homeomorphic to m itself. the connected sum of two tori is shown on fig. 2.1.

in this paper we shall be interested in a decomposition of spacetime by spacelike
in dealing with gravity, one is usually interested in
hypersurfaces (spatial manifolds).
spacetime metrics which induce an asymptotically at (or asymptotically conical, in the
(2 + 1)d case)riemannian metric on each hypersurface. for a certain frozen time t, the
hypersurface st should therefore be topologically a manifold with one asymptotic region,
i.e., there exists a compact region rt  st whose complement in st is homeomorphic to
irn\bn, where (n + 1) is the dimension of spacetime and bn is the standard n-ball in irn.
in fig. 2.2 one can see (2 + 1)d oriented geons (which are nothing but handles on a plane,
see below) on a 2-dimensional spatial slice. this motivates the following denition: an
n-manifold is said to have one asymptotic region i it is homeomorphic to rn#m, where
m is a closed (i.e., compact and boundaryless), connected n-manifold. typical cases of
interest are 2 and 3 manifolds with one asymptotic region , which are to be thought as
spatial slices of (2 + 1)- and (3 + 1)-dimensional spacetimes respectively.

in 2 and 3 dimensions it is known [31, 32] that there exists a class of closed connected

5

s

fig. 2.2: a plane with a nite number of geons (handles) is an example of a manifold with one
asymptotic region. note that all topological complexity can be localized within a circumference
s, and the geons can be isolated from each other. outside s, one has simply a at plane.

manifolds pi called prime manifolds. an n-manifold m is said to be prime i m =
m1#m2 implies that one of m1, m2 is an n-sphere. one can prove that given any
compact n-manifold (n = 2, 3) m, there exists a unique decomposition

m = p1#...#pn ,

(2.1)

where pi 6= sn. uniqueness means (apart from some technicalities - see ref.
given another decomposition p 
pi is homeomorphic to p 

[32]) that
n , we have n = n  and (after possible reordering)

1#...#p 

i. each prime component of m is called a topological geon.

in 2 dimensions, ignoring s2 from consideration,the only prime manifolds are t2, which
is orientable, and the cross cap rp2, which is non-orientable [31]. in this paper we will
consider only orientable geons, therefore we will have to deal only with t2. connected
sums with s2 are clearly immaterial.
in 3 dimensions there are innitely many prime
manifolds, only partially classied. as examples we can give the 3-torus t3 and the
handle s2  s1.

from the aforementioned prime decomposition it is clear that any n-manifold m

(n = 2, 3) with an asymptotic region can be decomposed as

m = irn#p1#...#pn .

(2.2)

now consider irn#pi. one can always nd an n  1 sphere in irn#pi whose interior
contains pi. by a suitable choice of the metric this region can be thought of to be as
small as one pleases, i.e., the topological complexity can be localized (for details see ref.
[28]).
in 2 spatial dimensions this means that one is allowed to put the handle inside
of a circle and suppose the radius of the circle to be very small. then one has a very
small handle surrounded by a vast at plane.
it is in this sense that we refer to the
geon as soliton like at the beginning of this section: just as a soliton corresponds to
a localized excitation of some eld, outside of which one has the vacuum, the geon is

6

s

fig. 2.3: a solitary geon can be seen as a localized excitation, or soliton, of topology.
from a distance it looks like a point particle.

a localized excitation of the topology itself, the vacuum in this case being the at
space (see fig. 2.3).
in general, since pi is prime, one may say that it represents an
elementary topological excitation. we therefore say that irn#pi is a space with one
geon. the manifold irn#p1#...#pn is therefore seen as a space with n geons. these
prime manifolds attached to irn can be isolated from one another in the same way as we
localized one single geon [28], and for many purposes one can think of geons as particles.
again, in 2 spatial dimensions one can have many isolated small handles.

the importance of geons to us lies in the fact that, as long as we preserve connectiv-
ity and consider a space manifold with one asymptotic region, topology change amounts
to creation and annihilation of geons. henceforth we restrain our attention to the case
when the space is 2 dimensional, connected and oriented, with one asymptotic region. we
assume, furthermore, that connectivity and orientability are preserved during topology
change. although somewhat restrictive, this case is still of much interest. our assump-
tions imply, on the other hand, that the geons of interest will be those associated to copies
of t2, i.e., topology changing processes will mean creation and annihilation of handles
on a plane. as we will see below, creation and annihilation will have for us a meaning
dierent from the usual geometrical one. instead they will be related to what a distant
observer will be able to measure from a quantum theoretical standpoint.

3 the field algebra for (2 + 1)d topological geons

our aim in this section is to dene some observables which describe the topological
character of a geon. however, the term algebra of observables to designate the al-
gebra describing geons would actually be a misnomer, for as we will see shortly, this

7

algebra includes operators which cannot be observables. to describe geons, we will use
the low-energy limit of a eld theory in their presence. in this limit, the theory becomes
topological, and therefore provides us with quantities capable of probing the topological
features of the background, and hence the geons. the kind of algebra which we will
encounter is composed by a part related to the elds, via their holonomies around non-
contractible paths, and to physical operations (some of them not observable locally) which
may change these holonomies. this algebra is what is known in the literature as a eld
algebra (for a detailed denition, see for instance [6]).

we will follow an approach inspired by the work of the amsterdam group, which is
reported in ref.
[23]. in this work, the group investigates the properties of topological
solutions of a (2 + 1)d gauge eld theory in minkowski spacetime where the gauge sym-
metry of a lie group g is spontaneously broken to a nite group h by a non-vanishing
expectation value of a higgs eld . we shall briey review their discussion, referring the
reader to [23] for details. the lagrangian is given by

l =

1
4

f a
f 

a + t r[(d)  (d)]  v () ,

(3.1)

where ,  = 0, 1, 2, and a is a lie algebra index. for simplicity, we assume that g is
connected and simply connected. the elds f a
 are the components of the eld strength
of the yang-mills potential aa
 and d denotes the covariant derivative determined by
this potential. the higgs eld  is in the adjoint representation and can be expanded in
terms of generators t a of the lie algebra of g, and v () is a g-invariant potential. in this
paper we shall be concerned with the low energy, or equivalently, the long range behavior
of this theory, in the temporal gauge aa
0 = 0. this is obtained by minimizing the three
terms in the energy density separately. minimizing the term corresponding to the energy
density of the yang-mills eld, we obtain the condition f a
 = 0, from which we conclude
that we are dealing only with at connections. the minimum of the potential restricts
the values of the higgs eld to the vacuum manifold, which is invariant by h. finally,
the condition d = 0, required for minimizing the energy density from the second term,
tells us that the holonomies

 () = p exp{z

aa

i tadsi} ; i  {1, 2} ,

(3.2)

take values in the nite group h.

here and in what follows we will x a base point p for loops, so that all loops will

begin and end at p .

this gauge theory may have topologically non-trivial, static solutions such as vortices.
it is very well known that the core radii of these vortices are inversely proportional to the
mass of the higgs boson, and therefore they may be viewed as point-like in the low-energy
regime of the theory. hence, according to a standard argument, to describe the n-vortex
solutions we may consider solutions for the vortex equations

f a

ij = 0;

8

di = 0;
v () = 0,

(3.3)

on a spacetime of the form   ir, where  is the plane with n punctures, playing the
role of the vortices. now, take a solution (a, ) for the vortex equations (3.3). by xing a
point p  , the holonomy of a around any closed path  based at p depends only on its
homotopy class, since a is at. it takes values into a subgroup h of g, which preserves
the vacuum manifold, in view of the equations for  [23]. therefore, any solution of the
vortex equations determines a homomorphism  ,

 : 1()  h,

(3.4)

between the fundamental group 1() and the group h. conversely, given such a homo-
morphism  we can dene a solution for eqs.(3.3) in the following way. take the universal
covering space  of .
it is the total space of a principal bundle over  with struc-
ture group 1(). via the homomorphism  we can construct an associated principal
h-bundle over , which is a subbundle of the original g-bundle. since h is nite, this
bundle has a unique at connection aa
i , which can be viewed as a reducible connection
on the g-bundle. we now nd a . by xing some 0 in the vacuum manifold, we have
that, since  must be covariantly constant, we dene (p ) = 0 and its value can be
obtained for each x   by parallel transporting 0 along some path from p to x in :

(x) = p exp{z x

p

aa

i tadsi}0.

(3.5)

the pair (aa
i , ) thus constructed is obviously a solution of the vortex equations. there-
fore the space of solutions for the vortex eqs. (3.3) is essentially parametrized by homo-
morphisms  : 1()  h. each such homomorphism is then a vortex conguration.

let us take the example of a single point-like vortex on the plane. the non-contractible
loop  that encircles the singularity has holonomy  () equal to the ux carried by the
vortex. in trying to capture only topological information, one is not concerned with the
position of the vortex, but only with its ux, characterized by some group element h  h.
in other words, the conguration space t for the vortex is labeled by elements of h.
hence, the algebra f (h) of complex-valued functions on h with pointwise multiplication
plays the role of position observables. let us denote by ph  f (h), the characteristic
function supported at h  h. then

ph ph = hhph.

(3.6)

in terms of homomorphisms, we have not yet exploited all the degrees of freedom the
system has. indeed, we have that h can act by conjugating all holonomies based at p by
an element of h. hence, a ux  transforms under h as

 7 hh1 ,

9

(3.7)

in other words, we have an action of h by conjugation of the uxes. we shall simply refer
to this action as the h-transformations. the group elements h  h can be regarded as
operators, also denoted by h, acting on the functions f  f (h) via (3.7). in other words,

hph1 = phh1.

(3.8)

the multiplication of two h-transformations is the same as the group multiplication.
therefore the algebra of such operators turns out to be the group algebra c(h).

as for the physical interpretation of the h-tranformations we note that the math-
ematical action depicted in (3.7) is entirely equivalent, from a physical standpoint, to
what occurs when one makes a vortex of ux  encircle a source of ux h at innity.
since such operation is non-local, one must conclude that the h-transformations cannot
be considered local in the theory, i.e., cannot be implemented by local operators.

the eld algebra is then the semi-direct product d(h) = c(h)  f (h), the so-
called drinfeld double. it has the structure of a quasi-triangular hopf algebra. the hopf
structure [18] means in particular the existence of a co-product, i.e, a map

 : d(h)  d(h)  d(h) ,

which is a homomorphism of algebras (and with further properties to be discussed in
section 4). in [23] the uxes are seen as particles in (2 + 1)d and are then rst quantized:
the (internal) hilbert space h is constructed, and the elements of the algebra d(h) act as
operators on this hilbert space. h decomposes into irreducible representations of d(h),
corresponding to the dierent particle sectors of the quantum theory. the existence of
a co-product allows one to understand fusing processes between particles. the quasi-
triangularity implies the existence of the r-matrix, r  d(h)  d(h), responsible for
all braiding processes between particles. for further details see [23].

how is the topology of  taken into account in this approach? first of all, we have seen
that the physically distinct vortex congurations are in one-to-one correspondence to the
space of conjugacy classes of homomorphisms of 1() into h. moreover, it is well known
that for a nite group h the latter space is in one-to-one correspondence with equivalence
classes of principal h-bundles over  [39]. therefore the only degree of freedom in this
theory is the topology of these bundles [37, 38]. second, a conguration for which the
holonomy is trivial around some puncture is indistinguishable, from the standpoint of the
low-energy theory, to another in which that particular puncture is absent. therefore the
low-energy theory somehow actually allows for topology uctuations of  as long as we
stay within its limits, and as far as creation and annihilation of punctures is concerned.

in order to determine the eld algebra for a topological geon, we will try to follow a
method similar to the one used for vortices in the plane, respecting carefully the dier-
ences between the two systems. we will rst try to nd the analogues of the position
observables for a geon. now,  is the plane with one or more handles, and for simplicity
we shall assume throughout the that there are no vortices, i.e., we work in the zero vortex
number sector of the low-energy limit of the theory given by the lagrangian in (3.1).

10

1

2

3


p

fig. 3.1: the gure shows the loops i (1  i  3). the homotopy classes [1] and [2] generate
the fundamental group. the class [3] is not independent of [1] and [2].

this is in constrast with [25], where vortices are the central interest. there, the vortices
determine the state of a handle, whereas in the present work all non-trivial congurations
will be related solely to holonomies around and through the handles. in other words, the
geons are our main concern, and the background eld theory merely denes their states.

let us start by taking  to be the plane with a handle. on all gures, a geon will be
thought of as a square hole on the plane, with the opposite sides identied. one can show
that 1() has two generators [1] and [2], shown by fig. 3.1. it can be shown that

[3] = [1][2][1]1[2]1.

actually, 1() is freely generated by [1] and [2]. let g = w ([1], [2])  1(), be a
word in [1], [2] and their inverses. then  maps g to w (a, b)  h where a =  (1) and
b =  (2). therefore the map  : 1()  h is completely characterized by the uxes
 (1) = a and  (2) = b. since there is no relation between a and b, the set t of all maps
is labeled by h  h.

denition: let h be a nite group and  the plane with one geon, i.e., a two

dimensional manifold given by

m = r2 # t2 .

let 1 and 2 denote representative loops whose classes generate 1(). we dene a
classical conguration (a,b)  t of a geon as the homomorphism dened by

(a,b)(1) = a, and (a,b)(2) = b.

(3.9)

it is important to bear in mind that t = h  h and therefore that it is a nite
discrete set. for simplicity of notation, a geon conguration will be denoted simply by a

11

pair (a, b) of uxes. note that we are not explicitly identing those congurations which
dier by an h-transformation. this is because wave functions need only be covariant
under the symmetries of the problem, and only its modulus squared and other observable
quantities, like aharonov-bohm phases, must be invariant.
in our approach, this will
happen naturally, just as in [23].

with t = h h being the conguration space for a geon, the corresponding algebra of
position observables is f (t ). instead of working with the abstract algebra, we specify
a representation. let v be the (nite-dimensional) complex vector space generated by
the vectors | a, bi, a, b  h. we will call the representation on v , to be dened below,
the dening representation. the algebra f (t ) is generated by projectors on v denoted
by q(a,b). they are dened by

q(a,b) | c, di = a,c b,d | c, di .

(3.10)

the operator q(a,b) represents a delta function supported at (a, b), i.e., it gives 1 when
evaluated on (a, b), and zero everywhere else. indeed, from (3.10) one nds that

q(a,b)q(c,d) = a,cb,dq(c,d) ,

(3.11)

besides the projectors q(a,b), which play the role of position operators in ordinary
quantum mechanics, we have also some operators capable of changing (a, b). they are
somewhat analogous to momentum operators. for example, like in the case of vortices,
h-transformations act on the congurations.
it turns out that for a geon there are
additional operators besides h-transformations. they correspond to the action of the
group dif f () of dieomorphisms of  that keeps innity invariant.

we will start by rst examining the h-transformations.

the group h acts on t simply by conjugating both uxes in (a, b). this will induce

an operator g for each g  h, acting on the dening representation v by

g | a, bi = | gag1, gbg1i.

from (3.12) one sees that the multiplication of operators g is given by

g h = gh .

(3.12)

(3.13)

the corresponding algebra generated by g is the group algebra c(h). the relation
between f (h h) and c(h) can be derived from (3.10) and (3.12). one sees immediately
that

(3.14)

gq(a,b)

1
g = q(gag1, gbg1) .

in other words, the algebra c(h) acts on f (h  h).

besides h-transformations, uxes (a, b) can change under the action of the group
0 (), the component

dif f (). it is clear that elements belonging to the subgroup dif f 

12

a

b

0

2

2 

0

c

2

2

0

fig. 3.2: dehn twists corresponding to dieomorphisms of the mapping class group. the
annuli enclose loops, which we have omitted in the gure. rotations are counterclockwise by
convention.

connected to identity, act trivially on 1() 1 and hence on (a, b). therefore what matters
is the action of the so-called mapping class group m [33, 34], dened as

m =

dif f ()
0 ()
dif f 

.

(3.15)

for the present case,  is the plane with a single geon and the mapping class group
is isomorphic to the central extension of the group sl(2, z), denoted by st(2, z) and
called the steinberg group. this is the same as the mapping class group of a torus minus
one point [28]. we denote generators of m = st(2, z) by a and b. they correspond
to (isotopy classes of) dieomorphisms 2 called dehn twists. a dehn twist is realized
as follows. take a loop in . then draw an annulus enclosing the loop and introduce
radial coordinates r  [0, 1], with r = 0 and r = 1 corresponding to the boundaries of
the annulus, see fig. 3.2. then rotate the points of the annulus in such a way that the
angle of rotation (r) is zero for r = 0 and gradually increases, becoming 2 at r = 1.
figure 3.2 shows how to produce dehn twists, and in fig. 3.3, we show how the dehn
twist b deforms the loop 1. there is also the dehn twist along a loop enclosing the geon,
which can be interpreted as the 2-rotation of the geon [4, 5, 28]. this dehn twist will be
important when we discuss the notion of spin of a topological geon. the corresponding

1for simplicity, we take p to be at innity. even if we do not, the holonomies will be invariant under

the action of dif f 

0 ().

2one can see from (3.14) that the mapping class group consists of isotopy classes of dieomorphisms.

throughout this paper we shall loosely use a representative in a class as the class itself.

13

fig. 3.3: dehn twist b and its action on 1.


p

annulus is denoted by c2 in fig. 3.2. however, c2 is not independent of a and b. one
can show that [28]

c2 = (ab1a)4.

(3.16)

the group m is generated by a and b, with the relation that c2 commutes with a
and b. it is useful to think of the elements of m as words w (a, b) in a, b and their
inverses.

the action of a and b on [i]  1() induces an action on (a, b)  t , and therefore
induces operators a and b in the dening representation acting on v . let us take as an
example the action of b on 1, as given by fig. 3.3. one sees that [1]  [1][2], and
therefore a  ab. on the other hand, b keeps [2] invariant. one can verify that a and
b induce the following operators:

a | a, bi = | a, bai ,
b | a, bi = | ab, bi .

(3.17)

for an arbitrary word w (a, b), the corresponding operator is w ( a, b), i.e., the same
word but with a and b replaced by a and b. for example, the dehn twist c2 of fig. 3.2
is written as (ab1a)4 and the corresponding operator c2 can be immediately computed
to be

c2 | a, bi = | c1ac, c1bci ,

(3.18)

where c = aba1b1.

it is also possible to perform rotations of the geon by integer multiples of the angle 
2

using c 

= ab1a. the corresponding operator is given by

2

c 

2

| a, bi = | b1, bab1i .

(3.19)

14

the group m generated by a and b dened by (3.17) is the one relevant for dening
the eld algebra. contrary to the mapping class group, m is a nite group. it turns out
that an innite number of words w ( a, b) is equal to the identity operator and that m
can be naturally identied with m divided by a certain normal subgroup.

let m0 be a subgroup of st(2, z) dened as

m0 = nh  st(2, z) | h | a, bi =| a, bi , a, b  ho .

it is easy to see that m0 is a normal subgroup. in fact, given any word w  st(2, z),
such that

w ( a, b) | a, bi = | a, bi ,

we have the relation

w 1( a, b) h w ( a, b) | a, bi = w 1( a, b) h | a, bi = w 1( a, b) | a, bi =

= | a, bi .

we dene the eective mapping class group m acting on the dening representation v
as the quotient

m = st(2, z)/m0 .

we now show that m is nite. let n be the order of h and ai, i = 1 . . . n its elements.

we construct a basis for v as

b = {| ai, aji ,

i, j = 1 . . . n} .

the group m acts as a subgroup of the permutation group of the elements in b, thus

the order of m is at most equal to n2!.

the algebra generated by the operators a and b is the group algebra c(m). together
with c(h) and f (h  h) it gives us the total eld algebra a(1) for a single topological
geon. from the denitions (3.10), (3.12) and (3.17) one sees that

g a = ag,

g b = bg,

gq(a,b)

1
g = q(gag1,gbg1),

c2 a = a c2,

c2 b = b c2,

aq(a,b) a1 = q(a,ba), bq(a,b) b1 = q(ab,b).

(3.20)

therefore, both algebras c(h) and c(m) act on f (h  h). the action of a generic word
w ( a, b) on q(a,b) will be denoted by

w ( a, b)q(a,b)w 1( a, b) = q(w(a),w(b)).

(3.21)

where (w(a), w(b)) is a pair of words in a and b and their inverses, representing the action
of w (a, b) on (a, b).

15



1



2



3



4

fig. 3.4: the homotopy classes [i] (1  i  4) relative to the loops shown in the gure
generate the fundamental group of plane with two geons.

there are two equivalent ways of presenting a(1). one is by using the dening rep-
resentation of (3.10), (3.12) and (3.17). another way is to dene a(1) as the algebra
generated by q(a,b), g, a and b with the relations (3.20). in any case, we have that

a(1) = c(h  m)  f (h  h).

(3.22)

we shall now introduce the eld algebra for two topological geons following exactly the
same ideas as for a single topological geon. we recall that for a single geon, a(1) consists
of three sub-algebras, namely the position observables f (t ), the h-transformations
c(h), and the translations , i.e., a realization m of the mapping class group m.
the algebra a(2) for two geons will consist of the same three distinct parts, with t =
h  h  h  h  h 4 and  replaced by a plane with two handles.

we shall start by examining the fundamental group

1() = 1(r2#t2#t2).

let i, i = 1, 2, 3, 4 be the loops shown by fig. 3.4. one can show that 1() is the
free group generated by [i]. a conguration  of two topological geons is given by a
homomorphism  : 1()  h. therefore  is completely characterized by the holonomies
 (i)  h along the loops i. since there are no relations among [i]s, the holonomies
 (1),  (2),  (3) and  (4) are four arbitrary elements of h. in other words, the set t (2)
of congurations  can be identied with t (1)  t (1) = (h  h)  (h  h), where t (1) is
the conguration space for a single geon. the corresponding algebra f (h 4) is thus the
direct product of the algebra of single geons,i.e.,

f (h 4) = f (h  h)  f (h  h).

16

it is natural to work with the dening representation on v  v spanned by vectors of

the form

| a1, b1i | a2, b2i ,

where the subscripts denote the respective geons. the position observables are gener-
ated by projectors q(a1,b1)  q(a2,b2) acting on v  v in the obvious way, i.e.,

q(a1,b1)  q(a2,b2) | a

1, b

1i | a

2, b

2i = a1,a

b1,b

1

a2,a

2

b2,b

2

| a1, b1i | a2, b2i .

(3.23)

1

therefore, the position operators belong to a(1)  a(1).

the action of h-transformation g  h on the uxes (a1, b1, a2, b2) is by a global

conjugation. this induces the action

| a1, b1i | a2, b2i  | ga1g1, gb1g1i | ga2g1, gb2g1i

(3.24)

on v  v . the corresponding operator is obviously identied with g  g  c(h) c(h),
since

g  g | a1, b1i | a2, b2i =| ga1g1, gb1g1i | ga2g1, gb2g1i.

(3.25)

hence, h-transformation operators also belong to a(1)  a(1).

we now start to consider the action of the mapping class group m. for two or more
geons, m is much more complicated than for a single geon [33]. the mapping class group
is generated by dehn twists of the type a and b (see fig. 3.2) for each individual geon
together with dieomorphisms involving pairs of geons.

let ai, bi, i = 1, 2 be the generators of the internal dieos for each individual geon.

the corresponding operators acting on v  v are clearly given by

a1 = a  ii,

a2 = ii  a

b1 = b  ii,

b2 = ii  b

(3.26)

where ii is the identity operator on v .

there are two additional classes of transformations besides the internal dieos. the
rst one, called exchange, is the analogue of the elementary braiding of two particles.
the second, called handle slide, has no analogue for particles, since it makes use of the
internal structure of the geon.

so far, all operators in the algebra for a(2) were of the form xy  a(1) a(1). it turns
out that this is not the case for exchanges and handle slides. they correspond somewhat
to interactions and cannot be written strictly in terms of operators in a(1) a(1). in order
to describe interactions between geons, we need to dene a pair of ip automorphisms of
v v . they are necessary in the construction of the exchange and handle slide operators.

denition: given a two geon state

| a1, b1i | a2, b2i  v  v ,

17

1

2

fig. 3.5 geon exchange.

the ip automorphisms  and  are dened by:

 | a1, b1i | a2, b2i
 | a1, b1i | a2, b2i

:= | a2, b2i | a1, b1i ,
:= | a1, b2i | a2, b1i .

both are not given geometrically as morphisms of the mapping class group, but unless
one introduces these operators, the algebra of two geons cannot be related directly to the
algebras for a single geon. we will show that the algebra a(2) can be obtained from the
tensor product a(1)  a(1) when we add  and .

in the exchange process, two geons permute their positions. in our convention, the
geon on the right (left) moves counterclockwise to the position of the left(right) (see fig.
3.5). the eect of a geon exchange on the states is of the form

r | a1, b1i | a2, b2i = | c1

1 a2c1, c1

1 b2c1i | a1, b1i ,

(3.27)

where c1 = a1b1a1
also satisfy the yang-baxter equation,

1 b1

1 . this operator is equivalent to braiding operators for particles and

(r  ii)(ii  r)(r  ii) = (ii  r)(r  ii)(ii  r) .

(3.28)

one can verify that the exchange operator (3.27) may be written as the product

where r  a(1)  a(1) is the analogue of the universal r-matrix for a quasi-triangular
hopf algebra. in our case r is given by

r =  r

(3.29)

r = xa,b

q(a,b)  1

aba1b1 .

(3.30)

the handle slide is shown in fig. 3.6. in (a), the geon is viewed as a rectangular
box on the plane. in (b), we have identied two edges of the rectangle and the geon is

18

0

2

0

2

2

0

(a)

0

2

(b)

fig. 3.6: the handle slide is interpreted geometrically as the full monodromy of two handles
followed by a rotation of 2 of each handle. the gure shows two equivalent representations for
the handle slide: in (a), the geon is viewed as a rectangular box on the plane. in (b), we have
identied two edges of the rectangle and the geon is represented as two circles on the plane.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

fig. 3.7: figure (a) shows the loop 1 dened on fig. 3.4. the transformed loop 1 is indicated
in (b). figures (c) and (d) are two steps in the deformation of 1.

19

represented as two circles on the plane connected by dotted lines. the handle slide is
dened as the operation that performs a double counterclockwise exchange of the 2nd
and 3rd circles followed by a clockwise 2-rotation of each one of them. as expected,
this dehn twist acts on the generators [i] of 1() given in fig. 3.4, and therefore on
the holonomies. under the action of the transformation indicated in fig. 3.6, the loops
[i] will be mapped into new loops [i]. as an example let us show how the handle slide
acts on 1. the loop 1 is shown in fig. 3.7 (a). after the action of the dieo, 1 is
mapped to 1, indicated in fig. 3.7 (b). we need to express 1 in terms of the generators
[1]. it is easy to see that 1 can be deformed to 14, where  is the loop enclosing
the second geon. the sequence of deformations is indicated by fig. 3.7 (b), (c) and
(d). as  measures the total ux a2b2a1
2 , it is easy to see that 1 will measure the
ux a1(a2b2a1
2 ). one can repeat the same procedure for the other loops and show that
the action on the loops induces an action on v  v given by the following handle slide
operator s:

2 b1

s | a1, b1i | a2, b2i =
=| a1(a2b2a1

2 ), (a2b2a1

2 )1b1(a2b2a1

2 )i  | (a2b2a1

2 )1b1(a2b2a1

2 )a2, b2i .(3.31)

this is a very complicated action on states, but there is a way to write s as a product
of elements of a(1)  a(1) with ip automorphisms in the same way as the operator r.
the result is

s =  

q(g,h)g

 (ii  b)  
q(h,g)g1

ii  xg,h
2(cid:17)  
(cid:16)ii  c 
ii  xg,h
  
 (cid:16)ii  c 
2(cid:17)  (cid:16)b1  ii(cid:17)  (ii  c) .





(3.32)

this completes the description of a(2). the algebra for two geons is generated by the

elements of a(1)  a(1), r and s.

these constructions can be easily generalized to write down the algebra a(n) for n

geons. it is clear that

a(1)      a(1)
}
|

{z

n

 a(n) .

the complete algebra a(n) can be obtained by adding the operators rij and sij of ex-
change and handle slide between the i-th and the j-th geons. they can be easily con-
structed by using operators analogous to (3.29) and (3.32), acting on the i-th and j-th
entries of v  ...  v .

it is clear that the elements ai, bi, rij and sij of a(n) generate, under multiplication,
a group mn that is homomorphic to the mapping class group m for n geons. besides

20

the relations proper to m, however, we will have extra relations so that mn becomes
eectively nite.

4 the geon as a single particle

we have seen up to now that a geon is a topological object with internal structure. in
quantum theory, it can be described by the algebra a(1). however, for a large distance
observation, we may disregard the operators that probe its internal structure and describe
it by a subalgebra a(1)
l . in this approximation, a topological geon seems to be no dierent
from a particle on the plane, or a vortex in (2 + 1)d. we may guess that the large distance
eld algebra a(1)
l is an algebra equivalent to d(h), the quantum double introduced in
section 3. actually this is not exactly true. we will see that a(1)
l for a single geon has
extra elements besides the ones corresponding to d(h).

long distance observables should not see the internal structure of the geon. for
instance, in performing aharonov-bohm-type experiments in this long-distance scale, one
should expect to see only the eects of the total ux, or the holonomy of the large loop
3. therefore, the only detectable projector in this scale is the one with support at the
total ux c of a single geon. it is naturally dened as

q(1)

c

:= xa,b

aba1b1,cq(a,b) .

(4.1)

the index (1) in q(1)
a(1), the algebra of a single geon.
the algebra of operators q(1)

c

c

in

is to remind us that this large distance projector is an element of

can easily be obtained from the algebra (3.11), resulting

hence, the algebra generated by q(1)

c2 = c1,c2q(1)
c1 .
is isomorphic to f (h).
the h-transformation operators g  c(h) act on q(1)

c1 q(1)

q(1)

c

c  f (h). from (3.20) and

(4.1), one can verify that

gq(1)

c

1
g = q(1)

gcg1.

(4.3)

therefore g has to be regarded as a large distance operation. to make the notation
uniform, we dene

(1)

g

:= g .

(4.2)

(4.4)

the operators q(1)

should commute with local operators in a(1), namely the dieos
a and b. this must be true since the action of the mapping class group cannot change

c

21

[3]. that is because one can make 3 very large, such that the dehn twists a and b do
not act on 3. see fig. 3.1 and fig. 3.2. in fact, one can verify that

aq(1)

c

a1 = bq(1)

c

b1 = q(1)

c

.

(4.5)

let us call d(1)  a(1) the algebra generated by q(1)

g . it is clear that d(1) is
isomorphic to the drinfeld quantum double d(h) = f (h)  c(h). as a consequence,
d(1) has the structure of a quasi-triangular hopf algebra [18].
in this paper we will
be interested mostly in two properties of a quasi-triangular hopf algebra, namely the
existence of a co-product and the universal r matrix.

c

and (1)

a co-product on d(1) is a linear map

which is co-associative,

and a morphism of algebras,

 : d(1)  d(1)  d(1) ,

(  id)   = (id  )   ,

(a  b) = (a)  (b) .

for the quantum double, the co-product has the expressions

(q(1)

c ) = xg

q(1)

g  q(1)

g1c .

and

((1)

g ) = (1)

g  (1)
g .

(4.6)

(4.7)

the quasi-triangularity of the quantum double implies the existence of an r-matrix,
which is responsible for the exchange processes. the r-matrix for the quantum double
can be written as

(4.8)

r(1) =  xgh

q(1)

g  (1)

g1 .

we recall that the full algebra a(1) also has an r-matrix given by (3.29). one should
ask whether the r-matrix (4.8) for the subalgebra d(1)  a(1) is compatible with (3.29).
it is a simple matter to show that they are actually identical.

we may think of the r-matrix for a(1) as a trivial extension of the r-matrix of d(1).
an important question is whether it is also possible to extend the co-product to the entire
algebra a(1). we have reasons to believe that  cannot be extended. one reason is that
the co-product is related to fusion of particles at the quantum level, which is physically
reasonable. however, it is harder to imagine that two handles put together could be seen
as a single handle.

22

another large distance element in a(1)

l is the operator c (1) responsible for the dehn
twist on a cycle that encloses the entire geon. in other words, c (1) is the 2-rotation of
the geon:

c (1)  c2.

(4.9)

note that c (1) commutes with all elements of d(1). since c n
a group algebra isomorphic to c(zzn ).

2 = ii for some n, it generates

summarizing, the long distance algebra a(1)

l is isomorphic to d(h) c(zzn ). in other

words, on a large distance scale, a geon is equivalent to a particle with a frame.

consider next the two-geon conguration and its corresponding algebra a(2). the
associated long distance algebra can be visualized as follows. let the two geons shrink
to localized objects and at the same time approach each other. at the end a point-like
object will remain and we should look for the operators that still make sense in the limit.
it is clear that such operators will be a) the total ux projector q(2)
c of the two geons; b)
the h-transformations and c) the dehn twist around a cycle enclosing both geons.

the projection operator for the total ux of the system is given by

q(2)

c

:= xa,b,a,b

aba1b1aba1b1,cq(a,b)  q(a,b) .

(4.10)

the index (2) indicates that q(2)
a more transparent way as follows:

c

is an element of a(2). one can write this expression in

c = xg
q(2)

q(1)

g  q(1)

g1c.

similarly, the h-transformation is given by

(2)

g

:= (1)

g  (1)
g .

if we compare the last two equations with the denition (4.6)-(4.7), we see that

c ),

q(2)

c = (q(1)
(2)
g = ((1)

g ).

(4.11)

(4.12)

(4.13)

(4.14)

let us denote by d(2) the algebra generated by q(2)

g . from (4.13) and (4.14)
it follows that d(2) is homomorphic to d(1). actually, it is a simple matter verify that
they are isomorphic.

c and (2)

as in the previous case, the long distance algebra a(2)

by the dehn twist c (2) on a cycle enclosing both geons, with

l has an extra generator given

as one would expect, the algebra a(2)
describes a particle with a frame.

l is isomorphic to d(h)  c(zzn ) and therefore also

c (2) = r2.

(4.15)

23

it is clear now what is the long distance algebra a(n)

l for n geons. it is generated by
the dehn twist c (n) on a cycle enclosing the n geons, together with elements q(n)
g 
a(1)  ...  a(1) given by the iterative application of the co-product. for example, for
n = 3,

, (n)

c

c = (id  )  (q(1)
q(3)
c ),
(3)
g = (id  )  ((1)
g ).

(4.16)
(4.17)

notice that because of the co-associativity property, we could have written (  id)  
instead of (id  )   in the last two formulae.

5 quantization

the algebra a(1) describes the topological degrees of freedom for a single geon on the
plane. to quantize the system we need to nd an irreducible representation of a(1) on a
hilbert space h. however, this hilbert space will branch into irreducible representations
of the eld algebra:

h = rhr,

(5.1)

where hr denotes a particular irreducible representation describing a certain geon type.
the algebra is nite dimensional, and therefore there will be a nite number of irreducible
representations of a(1). furthermore, the hilbert spaces h are all nite dimensional. each
representation gives us a possible one-geon sector of the theory.

in the case of quantum doubles, the irreducible representations are fully classied. see
for instance ref. [35]. for the case of geons, the algebra is more complicated because of the
existence of internal structure. nevertheless, the representations of a(1) are quite similar
to the ones of the quantum double of a nite group. this is not totally surprising, since in a
certain limit, as discussed in the previous section, we recover the quantum double d(1) =
d(h). actually, we can dene a class of algebras a that can have its representations
classied and that are generic enough to contain the quantum double and the algebra
a(1) as particular cases. in the spirit of [35], one can then get all representations of a.

denition: let x be a nite set and g a nite group acting on x. in other words,
there is a map g : x  x for each g  g. as usual, we denote by f (x) the algebra
of functions on x and by c(g) the group algebra of g. we dene the algebra a as the
vector space

a := f (x)  c(g)

with basis elements denoted by (qx, g), qx  f (x) and g  c(g), and the multiplication

(qx, g)  (qy, h) := (qxqg(y), gh) .

(5.2)

24

here, qx is the characteristic function supported at x  x. let x0 be an element of x.
we denote by kx0  g the stability subgroup with respect to x0, i.e.,

kx0 = {g  g | g(x0) = x0} .

(5.3)

the stability subgroup kx0 divides the group g into equivalence classes of left cosets.
let n be the number of equivalence classes and let us choose a representative i  g,
i = 1 . . . n for each class, with the convention that 1 = e. we can write the following
partition of g into left cosets:

g = 1kx0  2kx0  . . .  n kx0 .

(5.4)

let us point out that c(g) seen as a vector space carries a left representation of g, the
action of g being by left product. all irreducible representations of g can be obtained
by reducing this representation. in particular, any vector space carrying an irreducuble
representation (irr) of kx0 can be viewed as a subspace of c(g).

note that f (x) plays a dual role: it is an algebra, but it is itself a vector space which
is acted upon by the group g, according to gqx := qg(x). this can be extended to an
action of c(g) in the obvious way. also, it acts upon itself by left (pointwise) product.
in what follows we shall denote the elements qx by | xi whenever we want to view it as
a vector belonging to the representation of c(g) on f (x) just dened. in this passive
role it is acted upon, instead of acting on some representation of the algebra of functions.

we can now state the following result.

theorem let | ji, j = 1 . . . n be a basis of a subspace v of c(g) carrying an irr  of
kx0. then, for (a xed) x0  x, elements i  g, i = 1 . . . n and | ji  c(g), j = 1 . . . n
as stated above, the vectors

form a basis for an irr of the algebra a, given by

i | x0i | ji :=| i(x0)i | ji ,

(qx, g) | i(x0)i | ji := x,

i (x0) | i (x0)i  ()()kj | ki ,

where i and  are uniquely determined by the equation

and () is the matrix for the representation .

gi = i ,

this result follows from a standard construction in induced representation theory (cf.

discussion of the poincare group in [36]).

the quantum double d(h) and the algebra a(1) are particular cases of a. the
quantum double is obtained by taking x = h, g = h, with the action g(h) = ghg1.
as for the algebra of a single geon, one takes

x = h  h

25

and for the group g the product h  m. the actions of g  h and w  m commute
and are given by

and

g(a, b) = (gag1, gbg1),

g  h

w (a, b) = (w(a), w(b)), w  m,

where we have used the notation of (3.21). the irrs for the algebra (3.22) can be
constructed given an element (a, b)  h  h. the stability subgroup k(a,b)  h  h is
dened by

k(a,b) = n(g, w )  h  m | gw (a, b) := (gw(a)g1, gw(b)g1) = (a, b)o .

(5.5)

then, after choosing representatives 1, . . . , n for the cosets, the partition of h  m can
be written as

h  m = 1k(a,b)  2k(a,b)      n k(a,b) .

(5.6)

let | 1i, . . . , | ni  c(h  m) be a basis of an irr of k(a,b). then, according to the
theorem, the vectors

| i(a, b)i | ji ,

(5.7)

with i = 1 . . . n, j = 1 . . . n, form a basis of an irr of the algebra a(1).

let us express the representations of a(1) in a more compact notation. the action of
h  m on x = h  h divides x into orbits. we denote by [a, b] the orbit containing
the element (a, b)  h  h. we will collectivelly call  the quantum numbers labeling
the irrs of k(a,b). one can see from (5.7) that an irr r is characterized by a pair
r = ([a, b], ). a basis for an irr r of a(1) will therefore be written as vectors | i, ji(a,b)
,i = 1, ..., n; j = 1, ..., n dened by

r

| i, ji(a,b)

r

:= i | a, bi | ji

(5.8)

where | a, bi is a state in the dening representation, i are the same as in (5.6) and
| ji are base elements in the irreducible representations  of k(a,b). of course, the set
of vectors thus dened depend on the pair (a, b) we choose. we x an a and a b, and
henceforth omit the superscript.

the action of q(a,b) is given by

q(a,b)|i, j >r= q(a,b) i|a, b > |j >= q(a,b)|ai, bi > |j >= a,aib,bi|i, j >r . (5.9)

let gw be a generic element of h  m. the equation

denes uniquely a new class i, together with an element of the stability group   k(a,b).
the action of gw  a(1) on | i, jir is determined by (5.10) and it reads

gw i = i

(5.10)

gw | i, jir = i | a, bi   | ji =
()()kj | i, kir

= xk

26

(5.11)

where () is the matrix representation of k(a,b).

each irr r = ([a, b], ) describes a distinct quantum geon. the corresponding vector
spaces hr generated by states | i, jir, are all nite dimensional. therefore we can easily
make it into a hilbert space by introducing the scalar product

hi, j  | i, jir = iijj .

(5.12)

since the algebras a(1) are not the same for dierent choices of the discrete group h,
we cannot say in general what is the spectrum of a geon. first, we need to x a group h
and then compute the spectrum for the corresponding a(1).

consider now two geons described by representations r1 and r2. the associated hilbert

space of states is simply

h(12) := hr1  hr2.

(5.13)

as explained in section 3, the eld algebra consists of a(1)  a(1) together with r and
s. the elements of a(1)  a(1) act naturally on (5.13). it remains to be said what is the
action of r and s on states in hr1  hr2.

the action of r is completely determined by the formula (3.29):

r = xa,b

q(a,b)  1

aba1b1.

in other words

r | i, jir1 | k, lir2 = xa,b

1
aba1b1 | k, lir2  q(a,b) | i, jir1.

(5.14)

the generalization for n geons is straightforward.

we may think of r and s as scattering matrices for a pair of geons. the r-matrix
represents an elastic interaction in the sense that two incoming geons of quantum num-
bers r1 and r2 are scattered into two objects carrying the same quantum numbers r1 and
r2. the handle slide s on the contrary is a nontrivial scattering, each one of the two
outgoing geons being a superposition of many geons in the spectrum.

6 quantum topology change

in this paper we have considered (2 + 1)d manifolds such that any spatial slice consists
of a plane with a certain number n of handles. in other words, for each xed time, the
conguration consists of n geons. if the number of geons is not xed, we say that topology
can change. creation of baby universes is also a topology-changing process, but we will
not consider it here for reasons that should become clear in what follows.

27

our system is described by a certain eld algebra a(n), and its quantization is given
by a representation of a(n). a change in the number of geons means necessarily a change
in the eld algebra. let us see how that can be accomplished. let us suppose that a
geon, represented by a square with opposite sides identied, has a typical size l that can
vary with time. intuitively, a geon can disappear if l becomes too small. in this case, a
geon will resemble a point-like object. let us consider the limiting case l  0. it is clear
that the holonomies associated with loops 1 and 2 of fig. 3.1 do not make sense in this
limit. the only ux observable available in this limit is the holonomy of 3, responsible for
measuring the total ux. the algebra describing the limiting situation is the one-particle
approximation a(1)
l  a(1) introduced in section 4. actually, we do not need to consider
the limit l  0, since our description is supposed to be an eective theory that is not
valid beyond a certain scale of energy (distance). we may say that after the geon has
become very small, the operators associated with individual uxes no longer belong to
the low energy (large distance) description.

the structure of the eld algebra tells us that a geon can turn into a point-like object,

but it cannot disappear. however, this is only a semi-classical description.

the quantum theory is described by states belonging to an irr r of a(1). from the

inclusion

i(1) : a(1)

l  a(1),

(6.1)

it follows that r is also a (in general reducible) representation of a(1)
l . let hr be the
vector space carrying the representation r. in general, hr is decomposable as a direct
sum

n r

where v carries the irr  of a(1)
mixing dierent irrs.

v, n r

hr = m
l . the long distance observer does not see operators

  in

(6.2)

representation r can decay into dierent particles carrying representations .
happen that the trivial representation  = 0 of a(1)
observer working only with a(1)

therefore, a long distance observer interprets (6.2) as saying that a geon carrying a
it could
l occurs in (6.2). in this case, for an
l , there will be a non-zero probability of seeing the vacuum.
as an example, let us next characterize the vacuum representation and discuss vacuum

decay.

the irrs of a(1)

l are classied in a similar way as for a(1). the trivial irr on v0 in

the decomposition (6.2) is generated by any state | vaci  hr satisfying

c

q(1)
| vaci = e,c | vaci ,
(1)
| vaci = | vaci ,
c (1) | vaci = | vaci .

g

(6.3)

(6.4)

(6.5)

we will call such state vacuum.

it is not dicult to show that a representation

28

r = ([a, b], ) contains states satisfying (6.3) if and only if aba1b1 is the identity. fur-
thermore, under the condition

aba1b1 = e,

all states of hr, r = ([a, b], ), fulll equation (6.3). we are thus left with the conditions
(6.4) and (6.5) for dening the vacuum state. they simply mean that | v aci is an
identity representation of the group h  zzn , where zzn is generated by c (1) = c2.

note that vacuum decay occurs naturally, for example, in all irrs of a(1) of the form
r = ([a, b], ), where a and b are in the center of h and  is the trivial representation of
the stability subgroup of (a, b), which in this case is the whole of h  m. the vectors
in this representation clearly satisfy all conditions and therefore will decay into vacuum
states.

the vector space hr may contain more than one copy of the identity representation

of h  zzn . we will denote the set of corresponding orthonormal vectors by

| vac; li,

l = 1, 2, ..., n r
0 .

finding all | v ac; li in a given decomposition of each hr is a group theoretical problem
that can be solved for specic choices of the discrete group h. we shall not attempt this
here.

the probability p () of a normalized state | i  hr to decay into the vacuum is

then given by

p () = 


pl |hvac; l | i|2 6= 0

= 0

if n r

0 6= 0,

if n r

0 = 0.

(6.6)

if n r

0 = 0, a single geon described by r cannot decay into the vacuum. however, two
geons colored by r and r may annihilate each other. the two geons can shrink to localized
objects and at the same time approach each other. the process can also be interpreted
as a change in the scale of observations to long distances. at the end a point-like object
will remain and should be described by the algebra a(2)
l introduced in section 4. from
the inclusion

i(2) : a(2)

l  a(2)

(6.7)

follows that the space of states hr  hr of the two geons is a (reducible) representation
of a(2)
l , with corresponding vector spaces v.
then

l . let  denote as before the irrs of a(2)

hr  hr = m

n (r,r)



v, n (r,r)



 in.

(6.8)

therefore, the operators of a(2)
is not zero. the vacuum
representation and the vacuum probability decay are given by formulae analogous to
(6.3)-(6.6).

l can see the vacuum if n (r,r)

0

it is clear now how to describe the decay into the vacuum of an arbitrary number
of geons. consider n geons described by representations r1, ..., rn. the space of states

29

hr1  ...  hr2 is a representation of the long distance algebra a(n)
l  a(n) described
in section 4. the system may decay into the vacuum if this representation contains the
trivial representation of a(n)
l .

7 concluding remarks

in this work we have developed an algebraic model for topological geons which describes
topology change as a purely quantum phenomenon rather than the usual classical sense
of cobordisms between two non-homeomorphic spatial manifolds  and . instead, our
formalism revealed what an observer, probing the topology of space by using only quantum
operators and quantum states, would be able to see.

the key point was that in resorting to a eld theory to infer the underlying spatial
topology, one could only take into account those operators which were compatible with
the scale of observations, since no other operator would a have sensible physical meaning
in the theory. the passage from a larger scale of observations to a smaller one was
represented, on a more technical level, by selecting a subalgebra of the original algebra
describing the system in the quantum theory. the quantum states of the system, which
in the case of geons give a direct information on the spatial topology, could now decay
into the vacuum, leading the would-be observer to conclude that a topology change has
ocurred.

there is another, perhaps more intuitive view of the sort of topology change we have
envisaged in this paper. as pointed out in section 3 for the case of vortices, those classical
congurations for which holonomies are trivial around some topological blob, be it a
vortex or a geon, are indistinguishable from those in which this blob is absent, or
vacuum congurations. if we view quantum states as wave functions, it is clear that
their role is to assign a probability to each classical conguration. a quantum transition
to states which are very sharply peaked, or localized at the aforementioned vacuum
congurations will be interpreted by an observer as a quantum topology change. such
states correspond to the vacuum states of section 6.

we have restricted ourselves to a simple theory, where complications arising from local
degrees of freedom were absent (the theory we considered is topological in the limit of very
low energies), and we could concentrate on the topological aspects more unobstrusively.

of independent value is the algebra describing the topological geons. the nite group
h can be generalized to a lie group g. of special interest is the case g = so(2, 1),
which describes geons in the presence of gravity. a suitable generalization of our formal-
ism promptly discloses a whole spectrum of geon types in quantum gravity, and many
interesting properties of these entities can be explored, as for instance spin-statistics con-
nection. although this issue has been extensively studied in the literature, our formalism
may shed new light on some points. this subject will be investigated in a forthcoming

30

paper [3].

31

acknowledgments

we would like to thank j.c.a. barata, b.g.c. da cunha, a. momen and s. vaidya for
many helpful discussions. the work of a.p. balachandran was supported by the de-
partment of energy, u.s.a., under contract number de-fg02-85err40231. the work
of e. batista, i.p. costa e silva and p. teotonio-sobrinho was supported by fapesp,
capes and cnpq respectively. a.p.b. acknowledges the wonderful hospitality of den-
joe oconnor and support of cinvestav at mexico, d.f. while this work was being
completed.

references

[1] j. wheeler: ann. phys. 2 (1957) 604.

[2] see for example: r.p. geroch, j. math. phys. 8 (1967) 782;

f.j. tipler, ann. of phys. 108 (1977) 1;
s.w. hawking, nucl. phys. b144 (1978) 349;
r. sorkin, phys. rev. d33 (1986) 978;
a. anderson and b. dewitt, found. phys. 16 (1986) 91;
c.a. manogue, e. copeland and t. dray, parmana 30 (1988) 279;
g. horowitz, class. quant. grav. 8 (1991) 587.

[3] a.p. balachandran, e. batista, i.p. costa e silva and p. teotonio-sobrinho: the
spin-statistics connection in quantum gravity, hep-th/9906174 and nucl. phys.
(in press).

[4] r. sorkin: introduction to topological geons, in topological properties and global
structure of spacetime, edited by p.g. bergmann and v. de sabhata, plenum, new
york (1986).

[5] j.l. friedman and r.d. sorkin: phys. rev. lett. 44 (1980) 1100;

j.l. friedman and r.d. sorkin: gen. rel. grav. 14 (1982) 615.

[6] j.e. roberts: lectures on algebraic quantum field theory, in the algebraic the-
ory of superselection sectors. introduction and recent results, edited by d. kastler,
world scientic, singapore (1990).

[7] p.s. aspinwall, b.r. greene and d.r. morrison: j. math. phys. 35 (1994) 5321.

[8] g.w. gibbons and s.w. hawking: euclidean quantum gravity, world scientic

(1993).

[9] a.p. balachandran, g. bimonte, g. marmo, a. simoni: nucl. phys. b446 (1995)

299-314, gr-qc/9503046.

32

[10] d. marolf: phys.lett. b392(1997)287-290, gr-qc/960203.

[11] a.p. balachandran, a. daughton, z.c. gu, g. marmo, r.d. sorkin and a.m. sri-

vastava: int. j. mod. phys. a8 (1993) 2993.

[12] h.f. dowker and r.d. sorkin: class. quant. grav. 15 (1998) 1153, gr-qc/9609064.

[13] r.d. sorkin and s. surya: geon statistics and uirs of the mapping class group,

hep-th/9704081.

[14] m. kriele: class. and quantum grav. 9 (1992) 1863; s. carlip: class. quant. grav.
10 (1993) 207, hep-th/9206103, and lectures on (2+1) dimensional gravity, gr-
qc/9503024.

[15] e. witten: comm. math. phys. 121 (1989) 351.

[16] v.f.r. jones: bull. of amer. math. soc. 12 (1985) 103.

[17] l.h. kauman: knots and physics, world scientic (1991).

[18] c. kassel: quantum groups, springer-verlag (1995).

[19] n. reshetikhin and v.g. turaev: invent. math. 103 (1991) 547.

[20] n. seiberg and e. witten: nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 19.

[21] a.p. balachandran and p. teotonio-sobrinho: int. jour. mod. phys. a8(1993) 723-

752, hep-th/9205116.

[22] t.h. koornwinder and n.m. muller: j. lie theory 7 (1997), 33-52;

t.h. koornwinder, f.a. bais and n.m. muller: comun. math. phys. 198 (1998)
157, q-alg/9712042.

[23] m.d.f. de wild propitius and f.a. bais: discrete gauge theories proc. crm-
cap summer school particles and fields 94, ban, springer verlag (1996), hep-
th/9511201
m.d.f. de wild propitius: topological interactions in broken gauge theories, phd.
thesis university of amsterdam, 1995, hep-th/9511195.

[24] a.p. balachandran, a. momen, p. teotonio-sobrinho and s. vaidya: topological

quantization and quantum groups, to appear.

[25] k.m. lee: phys. rev. d49 (1994) 2030.

[26] j.a. wheeler: phys. rev. 97 (1955) 511-536, geometrodynamics, academic press,

new york and london, 1962.

[27] j.l. friedman and d.m. witt: phys. lett. b 120 (1983) 324;

d.m. witt: j. math. phys. 27 (1986) 573.

33

[28] c. aneziris, a.p. balachandran, m. bourdeau. s. jo, t.r. ramadas and r.d. sorkin:

mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 331;
c. aneziris, a.p. balachandran, m. boureau, s. jo, r.d. sorkin and t.r. ramadas:
int. jour. mod. phys. a4 (1989) 5459.

[29] r.d. sorkin and sumati surya: int. j. mod. phys. a13 (1998) 3749, gr-qc/9605050.

[30] j. samuel: phys. rev. lett. 71 (1993) 215.

[31] see for example j. stillwell: classical topology and combinatorial group theory,

springer-verlag, new york, 1980.

[32] j. hampel: 3-manifolds, princeton university press and university of tokyo press,

princeton, new jersey (1976).

[33] j.s. birman: braids, links and mapping class groups, princeton university press

(1972).

[34] a.p. balachandran,, g. marmo, b.s. skagerstam and a. stern: classical topology

and quantum states, world scientic (1991).

[35] k. szlachanyi and p. vecsernyes: quantum symmetry and braid group statistics

in g-spin models, comm. math. phys. 156 (1993) 127.

[36] a.p. balachandran and c.g. trahern: lectures on group theory for physicists,

monographs and textbooks in physical science 3, bibliopolis, napoli (1985).

[37] r. dijkgraaf and e. witten: commun. math. phys. 129 (1990) 393.

[38] d.s. freed and f. quinn: commun. math. phys. 156 (1993) 435.

[39] n. steenrod: the topology of fibre bundles, princeton university press, prince-

ton (1951).

34

