9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

1

 
 

2
v
9
7
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

algebraic holography

institut fur theoretische physik, universitat gottingen (germany)

k.-h. rehren

abstract: a rigorous (and simple) proof is given that there is a one-to-one correspondence
between causal anti-desitter covariant quantum eld theories on anti-desitter space and causal
conformally covariant quantum eld theories on its conformal boundary. the correspondence is
given by the explicit identication of observables localized in wedge regions in anti-desitter space
and observables localized in double-cone regions in its boundary.
it takes vacuum states into
vacuum states, and positive-energy representations into positive-energy representations.

1 introduction and results

the conjectured correspondence (so-called holography) [13, 17] between quantum eld
theories on 1+s-dimensional anti-desitter space-time ads1,s (the bulk space) and con-
formal quantum eld theories on its conformal boundary c1,s1 which is a compactication
of minkowski space r1,s1, has recently raised enthusiastic interest. if anti-desitter space
is considered as an approximation to the space-time geometry near certain gravitational
horizons (extremal black holes), then the correspondence lends support to the informal
idea of reduction of degrees of freedom due to the thermodynamic properties of black holes
[9, 16]. thus, holography is expected to give an important clue for the understanding of
quantum theory in strong gravitational elds and, ultimetely, of quantum gravity.

while the original conjecture [13] was based on stringy pictures, it was soon formulated
[17] in terms of (euclidean) conventional quantum eld theory, and a specic relation
between generating functionals was conjectured. these conjectures have since been exposed
with success to many structural and group theoretical tests, yet a rigorous proof has not
been given.

the problem is, of course, that the holographic transition from anti-desitter space to
its boundary and back, is by no means a point transformation, thus preventing a simple
(pointwise) operator identication between bulk elds and boundary elds. in the present
note, we show that in contrast, an identication between the algebras generated by the
respective local bulk and boundary elds is indeed possible in a very transparent manner.
these algebraic data are completely sucient to reconstruct the respective theories.

we want to remind the reader of the point of view due to haag and kastler (see [7] for a
standard textbook reference) which emphasizes that, while any choice of particular elds
in a quantum eld theory may be a matter of convenience without aecting the physical
content of the theory (comparable to the choice of coordinates in geometry), the algebras

1

1 introduction and results

2

they generate and their algebraic interrelations, notably causal commutativity, supply all
the relevant physical information in an invariant manner. the interested reader will nd
in [1] a review of the (far from obvious, indeed) equivalence between quantum eld theory
in terms of elds and quantum eld theory in terms of algebras, notably on the strategies
available to extract physically relevant information, such as the particle spectrum, supers-
election charges, and scattering amplitudes, from the net of algebras without knowing the
elds.

it is crucial in the algebraic approach, however, to keep track of the localization of the
observables. indeed, the physical interpretation of a theory is coded in the structure of a
causal net of algebras [7] which means the specication of the sets of observables b(x)
which are localized in any given space-time region x.1

the assignment x 7 b(x) is subject to the conditions of isotony (an observable localized
in a region x is localized in any larger region y  x, thus b(y )  b(x)), causal
commutativity (two observables localized at space-like distance commute with each other),
and covariance (the poincare transform of an observable localized in x is localized in the
transformed region gx; in the context at hand replace poincare by anti-desitter).
each b(x) should in fact be an algebra of operators (with the observables its selfadjoint
elements), and to have sucient control of limits and convergence in order to compute
physical quantities of interest, it is convenient to let b(x) be von neumann algebras.2

for most purposes it is convenient to consider as typical compact regions the double-
cones, that is, intersections of a future directed and a past directed light-cone, and to
think of point-like localization in terms of very small double-cones. on the other hand,
certain aspects of the theory are better captured by wedge regions which extend to
space-like innity. a space-like wedge (for short: wedge) in minkowski space is a region of
the form {x : x1 > |x0|}, or any poincare transform thereof. the corresponding regions in
anti-desitter space turn out to be intersections of ads1,s with suitable at space wedges
in the ambient space r2+s, see below.

it will become apparent in the sequel that to understand the issue of holography, the
algebraic framework proves to be most appropriate.

the basis for the holography conjectures is, of course, the coincidence between the anti-
desitter group so0(2, s) and the conformal group so0(2, s). (so0(n, m) is the identity
component of the group so(n, m), that is the proper orthochronous subgroup distinguished
by the invariant condition that the determinants of the time-like nn and of the space-like
m  m sub-matrices are both positive.) the former group acts on ads1,s (as a deforma-
tion from the at space poincare group in 1+s dimensions, so0(1, s)r1,s), and the latter

1the assignment x 7 b(x) is a net in the mathematical sense: a generalized sequence with a

partially ordered index set (namely the set of regions x).

2a von neumann algebra is an algebra of bounded operators on a hilbert space which is closed in the
weak topology of matrix elements. e.g., if  is a hermitean eld and (f ) a eld operator smeared over a
region x containing the support of f , then operators like exp i(f ) belong to b(x).

1 introduction and results

3

group acts on the conformal boundary c1,s1 of ads1,s (as an extension of the poincare
group in 1+(s  1) dimensions, so0(1, s  1)  r1,s1) by restriction of the former group
action on the bulk. the representation theoretical aspect of this coincidence has been
elaborated (in euclidean metric) in [5].

in terms of covariant nets of algebras of local observables (local algebras), it is thus suf-
cient to identify one suitable algebra in anti-desitter space with another suitable algebra
in the conformal boundary space, and then to let so0(2, s) act to provide the remaining
identications. as any double-cone region in conformal space determines a subgroup of
the conformal group so0(2, s) which preserves this double-cone, it is natural to identify its
algebra with the algebra of a region in anti-desitter space which is preserved by the same
subgroup of the anti-desitter group so0(2, s). it turns out that this region is a space-like
wedge region which intersects the boundary in the given double-cone.

for a typical bulk observable localized in a wedge region, the reader is invited to think of
a eld operator for a mandelstam string which stretches to space-like innity. we shall see
that its holographic localization on the boundary has nite size, but it becomes sharper
and sharper as the string is pulled to innity.

our main algebraic result rests on the following geometric lemma:3

lemma: between the set of space-like wedge regions in anti-desitter space, pw  ads1,s,
and the set of double-cones in its conformal boundary space, i  c1,s1, there is a canon-
ical bijection  : pw 7 i = (pw ) preserving inclusions and causal complements, and
intertwining the actions of the anti-desitter group so0(2, s) and of the conformal group
so0(2, s)

(g(pw )) = g((pw )),

1( g(i)) = g(1(i))

where g is the restriction of the action of g to the boundary. the double-cone i = (pw )
associated with a wedge pw is the intersection of pw with the boundary.

given the lemma, the main algebraic result states that bulk observables localized in wedge
regions are identied with boundary observables localized in double-cone regions:

corollary 1: the identication of local observables

b(pw ) := a((pw )),

a(i) := b(1(i))

gives rise to a 1:1 correspondence between isotonous causal conformally covariant nets of
algebras i 7 a(i) on c1,s1 and isotonous causal anti-desitter covariant nets of algebras
pw 7 b(pw ) on ads1,s.

3the symbol p stands for the projection from the hypersurface h1,s = {x  r2,s : x2 = r2} onto its
quotient ads1,s by the identication of points x and x. we denote double-cones in the boundary by the
symbol i, (i) because we prefer to reserve the standard symbol o for double-cones in the bulk space,
and (ii) because in 1+1 dimensions the double-cones on the boundary are in fact open intervals on the
circle s 1. for further details, see sect. 2.

1 introduction and results

4

an observable localized in a double-cone o in anti-desitter space is localized in any wedge
containing o, hence the local algebra b(o) should be contained in all b(pw ), pw  o.
we shall dene b(o) as the intersection of all these wedge algebras. these intersections
do no longer correspond to simple geometric regions in c1,s1 (so points in the bulk have
a complicated geometry in the boundary), as will be discussed in more detail in 1+1
dimensions below.
the following result also identies states and representations of the corresponding theories:

corollary 2: under the identication of corollary 1, a vacuum state on the net a cor-
responds to a vacuum state on the net b. positive-energy representations of the net a
correspond to positive-energy representations of the net b. the modular group (in the
sense of tomita-takesaki) of a wedge algebra b(pw ) in a vacuum state coincides with
the modular group of the corresponding double-cone algebra a(i) in the corresponding
vacuum state, which is a one-parameter subgroup of so0(2, s) preserving i. the modular
conjugation of a wedge algebra b(pw ) in a vacuum state is a cpt-type transformation
which maps pw onto its causal complement.

reference is here made to the modular theory of von neumann algebras which states
that every (normal and cyclic) state on a von neumann algebra is a thermal equilibrium
state with respect to a unique adapted time evolution (one-parameter group of automor-
phisms = modular group) of the algebra. in quantum eld theories in minkowski space,
the modular groups have been computed for wedge algebras in the vacuum state [4] and
were found to coincide with the boost subgroup of the lorentz group which preserves the
wedge. (in conformal theories, mapping wedges onto double-cones by suitable conformal
transformations, the same result also applies to double-cones [8].) this result is an alge-
braic explanation of the unruh eect according to which a uniformly accelerated observer
attributes a temperature to the vacuum state, and provides also an explanation of hawking
radiation if the wedge region is replaced by the space-time region outside the horizon of a
schwarzschild black hole.
the modular theory also provides a modular conjugation which maps the algebra onto
its commutant. in the quantum eld theoretical application as before, the modular con-
jugation turns out to be a cpt-type reection (cpt up to a rotation) along the ridge
of the wedge which maps the wedge onto its causal complement, hence the algebras asso-
ciated with complementary wedges not only commute, as required by causality, but either
algebra is the maximal algebra commuting with the other one. this symmetry is known
as essential haag duality, or wedge duality [7].
the statement in corollary 2 on the modular group thus implies that also in anti-desitter
space, a vacuum state of b in restriction to a wedge algebra b(pw ) is a thermal equilibrium
state with respect to the associated one-parameter boost subgroup of the anti-desitter
group which preserves pw , i.e., the unruh eect takes place for a uniformly accelerated
observer. furthermore, the cpt theorem holds for causal quantum eld theories on anti-
desitter space.

1 introduction and results

5

we emphasize that the hamiltonians on ads1,s and on c1,s1 are not identied under
the identication of the anti-desitter group and the conformal group. in fact, in suitable
coordinates the anti-desitter hamiltonian m0,d equals the combination 1
2 (p 0 + k 0) of
translations and special conformal transformations in the 0-direction. this is dierent
from the euclidean picture [17] where the anti-desitter hamiltonian is identied with
the dilatation subgroup of the conformal group.
in lorentzian metric, the dilatations
correspond to a space-like translation subgroup of the anti-desitter group. this must
have been expected since the generator of dilatations does not have a one-sided spectrum
as is required for the real-time hamiltonian. the subgroup generated by 1
2(p 0 + k 0) is
well-known to be periodic and to satisfy the spectrum condition in every positive-energy
representation. (periodicity in bulk time of course implies a mass gap for the underlying
bulk theory. this is not in conict with the boundary theory being massless since the
respective subgroups of time evolution cannot be identied.)

a crucial aspect of the present analysis is the identication of compact regions in the
boundary with wedge regions in the bulk. with a little hindsight, this aspect is indeed also
present in the proposal for the identication of generating functionals [17]. while the latter
is given in the euclidean approach, it should refer in real time to a hyperbolic dierential
equation with initial values given in a double-cone on the boundary which determine its
solution in a wedge region of bulk space.

we also show that (at least in 1+1 dimensions) there are suciently many observables
localized in arbitrarily small compact regions in the bulk space to ensure that compactly
localized observables generate the wedge algebras. this property is crucial if we want to
think of local algebras as being generated by local elds:

proposition: assume that the boundary theory a on s 1 is weakly additive (i.e., a(i)
is generated by a(jn) if the interval i is covered by a family of intervals jn). if a wedge
pw in ads1,1 is covered by a family of double-cones on  pw , then the algebra b(pw )
is generated by the observables localized in on:

b(pw ) = _

b(on).

n

in order to establish this result, we explicitly determine the observables localized in a
double-cone region on ads1,1. their algebra b(o) turns out to be non-trivial irrespective
of the size of the double-cone o. it is the intersection of two interval algebras a(ii) on
the boundary s 1 where the intersection of the two intervals ii is a union of two disjoint
intervals ji. b(o) contains therefore at least a(j1) and a(j2). in fact, it is even larger
than that, containing also observables corresponding to a charge transport [7], that is,
operators which annihilate a superselection charge in j1 and create the same charge in j2.
the inclusion a(i1)  a(j2)  b(o) therefore contains (complete) algebraic information
about the superselection structure of the chiral boundary theory [10].

2 identification of observables

6

shrinking the double-cone on ads1,1 shrinks the size of the intervals ji without shrinking
their distance, so points in 1+1-dimensional anti-desitter space are related to pairs of
points in conformal space. but we see that sharply localized bulk observables involve poorly
localized boundary observables: the above charge transporters. of course, things are more
complicated in higher dimensions, but the discussion provides an algebraic interpretation
of the obstruction against a point transformation between bulk and boundary.

let us point out that the conjectures in [13, 17] suggest a much more ambitious interpreta-
tion, namely that the correspondence pertains to bulk theories involving quantum gravity,
while the anti-desitter space and its boundary are understood in some asymptotic (semi-
classical) sense. indeed, the algebraic approach is no more able to describe proper quantum
gravity as any other mathematically unambiguous framework up to now. most arguments
given in the literature in favour of the conjectures refer to gravity as perturbative gravity
on a background space-time. likewise, our present results concern the semi-classical ver-
sion of the conjectures, treating gravity like any other quantum eld theory as a theory of
observables on a classical background geometry. in fact, the presence or absence of gravity
in the bulk theory plays no particular role. this is only apparently in conict with the
original arguments for a holographic reduction of degrees of freedom of a bulk theory in
the vicinity of a gravitational horizon [9, 16] in which gravity is essential. namely, our
statement can be interpreted in the sense that once the anti-desitter geometry is given for
whatever reason (e.g., the presence of a gravitational horizon), then it can support only
the degrees of freedom of a boundary theory.

2 identication of observables

we denote by h1,s the d=1+s-dimensional hypersurface dened through its embedding
into ambient r2+s,

with lorentzian metric induced from the 2+s-dimensional metric

x2
0  x2

1  . . .  x2

s + x2

d = r2

ds2 = dx2

s + dx2
d.

0  dx2

1  . . .  dx2

its group of isometries is the lorentz group o(2, s) of the ambient space in which the
reection x 7 x is central. it was observed [2] that this symmetry of h1,s cannot be
broken in any state of a quantum eld theory on h1,s, hence it is reasonable to pass to the
quotient manifold ads1,s = h1,s/z2 (with the same lorentzian metric locally). we denote
by p the projection h1,s  ads1,s.

two open regions in anti-desitter space are called causally disjoint if none of their points
can be connected by a time-like geodesic. the largest open region causally disjoint from
a given region is called the causal complement. in a causal quantum eld theory on the

2 identification of observables

7

quotient space ads1,s, observables and hence algebras associated with causally disjoint
regions commute with each other.

the reader should be worried about this denition, since causal independence of observables
should be linked to causal connectedness by time-like curves rather than geodesics. but on
anti-desitter space, any two points can be connected by a time-like curve, so they are indeed
causally connected, and the requirement that causally disconnected observables commute
is empty.
indeed, as our corollary 1 shows, if the boundary theory is causal, then the
associated bulk theory is causal in the present (geodesic) sense. we refer also to [3] where
it is shown that vacuum expectation values of commutators of observables with causally
disjoint localization have to vanish whenever the vacuum state has reasonable properties
(invariance and thermodynamic passivity), but without any a priori assumptions on causal
commutation relations (neither in bulk nor on the boundary).

thus in the theories on anti-desitter space we consider in this paper, observables localized
in causally disjoint but causally connected regions commute; see [3] for a discussion of the
ensuing physical constraints on the nature of interactions on anti-desitter space.

the causal structure of ads1,s is determined by its metric modulo conformal transforma-
tions which preserve angles and geodesics. as a causal manifold, ads1,s has a boundary
(the asymptotic directions of geodesics). the boundary inherits the causal structure of
the bulk space ads1,s, and the anti-desitter group so0(2, s) acts on this space. it is well
known that this boundary is a compactication c1,s1 = (s 1  ss1)/z2 of minkowski
space r1,s1, and so0(2, s) acts on it like the conformal group.

the notions of causal disjoint and causal complements on c1,s1 coincide, up to conformal
transformations, with those on minkowski space [11]. in d =1+1 dimensions, s = 1, the
conformal space is s 1, and the causal complement of an interval i is i c = s 1\i.

both anti-desitter space and its causal boundary have a global time-arrow, that is,
the distinction between the future and past light-cone in the tangent spaces (which are
ordinary minkowski spaces) at each point x can be globally chosen continuous in x (and
consistent with the reection x 7 x). the time orientation on the bulk space induces
the time orientation on the boundary. the time arrow is crucial in order to distinguish
representations of positive energy.

2.1 proof of the lemma

any ordered pair of light-like vectors (e, f ) in the ambient space r2,s such that ef < 0
denes an open subspace of the hypersurface h1,s given by

w (e, f ) = {x  r2,d : x2 = r2, ex > 0, f x > 0}.

this space has two connected components. namely, the tangent vector at each point
x  w (e, f ) under the boost in the e-f -plane, e,f x = (f  x)e  (e  x)f , is either a
future or a past directed time-like vector, since (e,f x)2 = 2(e f )(e x)(f  x) > 0. we

2 identification of observables

8

denote by w+(e, f ) and w(e, f ) the connected components of w (e, f ) in which e,f x
is future and past directed, respectively. by this denition, w+(f, e) = w(e, f ), and
w+(e, f ) = w+(e, f ).

the wedge regions in the hypersurface h1,s are the regions w(e, f ) as specied. the
wedge regions in anti-desitter space are pw(e, f ). one has pw+(e, f ) = pw(f, e) =
pw+(e, f ), and pw+(e, f ) and pw(e, f ) are each others causal complements. for an
illustration in 1+1 dimensions, cf. figure 1.

boundary

arrow of time

(

(

i+

i_

(

(

w+

x0

xd

x

x_

x
s

_

w_

arrow of time

w_

bulk

figure 1. wedge regions w+(e, f ) and w(e, f ) in 1+1 dimensions, and their intersections
with the boundary. the light-like vectors e and f are tangent to w in its apex x. in
anti-desitter space, w is identied with w, and pw+ and pw are causal complements
of each other.

we claim that the projected wedges pw(e, f ) intersect the boundary of ads1,s in regions
i(e, f ) which are double-cones of minkowski space r1,s1 or images thereof under some
conformal transformation. note that any two double-cones in r1,s1 are connected by a
conformal transformation, and among their conformal transforms are also the past and
future light-cones and space-like wedges in r1,s1.

we claim also that the causal complement pw(e, f ) of the wedge pw+(e, f ) intersects the
boundary in the causal complement i(e, f ) = i+(e, f )c of i+(e, f ).

it would be sucient to compute the intersections of any single pair of wedges w(e, f )
with the boundary and see that it is a pair of causally complementary conformal double-
cones in c1,s1, since the claim then follows for any other pair of wedges by covariance.
for illustrative reason we shall compute two such examples.

we x the arrow of time by declaring the tangent vector of the rotation in the 0-d-plane,
t x = (xd, 0, . . . , 0, x0), to be future directed.

2 identification of observables

9

in stereographic coordinates (y0, ~y, x) of the hypersurface x2 = r2, where x = xd  xs
and (y0, ~y) = (x0, ~x)/x, ~x = (x1, . . . , xs1), the boundary is given by |x| = . thus, in
the limit of innite x one obtains a chart y = (y0, ~y) of c1,s1. the induced conformal
structure is that of minkowski space, dy2 = f (y)2(dy2

0  d~y2).

our rst example is the one underlying figure 1: we choose e = (0, . . . , 0, 1, 1) and
f = (0, . . . , 0, 1, 1). the conditions for x  w (e, f ) read xd  xs > 0 and xd + xs < 0,
implying x2
0  ~x2 > r2. the tangent vector e,f x has d-component
e,f xd = 2xs > 0. hence, it is future directed if x0 > 0, and past directed if x0 < 0:

s < 0 and hence x2

d  x2

w+(e, f ) = {x : x2 = r2, xs < |xd|, x0 > 0}.

after dividing (x0, ~x) by x = xd  xs  , we obtain the boundary region

i+(e, f ) = {y = (y0, ~y) : y2

0  ~y2 > 0, y0 > 0},

that is, the future light-cone in minkowski space; similarly, i(e, f ) is the past light-cone,
and i(e, f ) are each others causal complements in c1,s1.
next, we choose e = (1, 1, 0, . . . , 0) and f = (1, 1, 0, . . . , 0). the conditions for x 
w (e, f ) read x1 < |x0|, implying x2
s > r2 > 0. the tangent
vector e,f x has 0-component e,f xd = 2x1 > 0. hence, it is future directed if xd < 0
hence xd  xs < 0, and past directed if xd > 0 hence xd  xs > 0:

0  ~x2 < 0 and hence x2

d  x2

w+(e, f ) = {x : x2 = r2, x1 < |x0|, x < 0}.

after dividing (x0, ~x) by x = xd  xs  , we obtain the boundary region

i+(e, f ) = {y = (y0, ~y) : y1 > |y0|},

that is, a space-like wedge region in minkowski space; similarly, i(e, f ) is the opposite
wedge y1 < |y0|, which is again the causal complement of i+(e, f ) in c1,s1.

both light-cones and wedge regions in minkowski space are well known to be conformal
transforms of double-cones, and hence they are double-cones on c1,s1. the pairs of regions
computed above are indeed causally complementary pairs.

we now consider the map  : pw+(e, f ) 7 i+(e, f ). since the action of the conformal
group on the boundary is induced by the action of the anti-desitter group on the bulk,
we see that w(ge, gf ) = g(w(e, f )) and i(ge, gf ) = g(i(e, f )), hence  intertwines
the actions of the anti-desitter and the conformal group.
it is clear that  preserves
inclusions, and we have seen that it preserves causal complements for one, and hence for
all wedges. since so0(2, s) acts transitively on the set of double-cones of c1,s1, the map
 is surjective. finally, since pw+(e, f ) and i+(e, f ) have the same stabilizer subgroup of
so0(2, s), it is also injective.

this completes the proof of the lemma.

2 identification of observables

10

2.2 proof of the corollaries

we identify wedge algebras on ads1,s and double-cone algebras on c1,s1 by

b(pw(e, f )) = a(i(e, f )),

that is, b(pw ) = a((pw )). the lemma implies that if a is given as an isotonous,
causal and conformally covariant net of algebras on c1,s1, then b(pw ) dened by this
identication constitute an isotonous, causal and anti-desitter covariant net of algebras on
ads1,s, and vice versa. namely, the identication is just a relabelling of the index set of
the net which preserves inclusions and causal complements and intertwines the action of
so0(2, s).

thus we have established corollary 1. note that as the ridge of a wedge is shifted into the
interior of the wedge, the double-cone on the boundary shrinks. thus, sharply localized
boundary observables correspond to bulk observables at space-like innity, while every
proper bulk observable is nitely delocalized on the boundary.

as for corollary 2, we note that, as the algebras are identied, states and representations
of the nets a and b are also identied.

since the identication intertwines the action of the anti-dsitter group and of the conformal
group, an anti-desitter invariant state on b corresponds to a conformally invariant state
on a. the generator of time translations in the anti-desitter group corresponds to the
generator 1
2 (p 0 + k 0) in the conformal group which is known to be positive if and only
if p 0 is positive (note that k 0 is conformally conjugate to p 0). hence the conditions for
positivity of the respective generators of time-translations are equivalent.

by the identication of states and algebras, also the modular groups are identied. the
modular group and modular conjugation for double-cone algebras in a vacuum state of
conformally covariant quantum eld theories are conformally conjugate to the modular
group and modular conjugation of a minkowski space wedge algebra, which in turn are
given by the lorentz boosts in the wedge direction and the reection along the ridge of
the wedge [4, 8]. it follows that the modular group for a wedge algebra on anti-desitter
space is given by the corresponding subgroup of the anti-desitter group which preserves
the wedge (for a wedge pw+(e, f ), this is the subgroup of boosts in the e-f -plane), and
the modular conjugation is a cpt transformation which maps pw+ onto pw.

these remarks suce to complete the proof of corollary 2.

let us mention that the correspondence given in corollary 1 holds also for weakly local
nets both on the bulk and on the boundary. in a weakly local net, the vacuum expectation
value of the commutator of two causally disjoint observables vanishes, but not necessarily
the commutator itself. weak locality for quantum eld theories on anti-desitter space fol-
lows [3] from very conservative assumptions on the vacuum state without any commutation
relations assumed. thus, also the boundary theory will always be weakly local.

2 identification of observables

11

2.3 double-cones algebras on anti-desitter space

given the wedge algebras on anti-desitter space ads1,s, the double-cone algebras b(o) are
dened as the intersections of all wedge algebras b(pw ) such that o  w . this denition
again ensures isotony, causal commutativity and covariance for the net of double-cone
algebras in an obvious manner.
double-cone algebras on anti-desitter space are thus delicate intersections of algebras of
double-cones and their conformal images on the boundary, and might turn out trivial.
while we refrain from computing these algebras explicitly in arbitrary dimensions, we
illustrate the situation in 1+1 dimensions. in this case, the geometry is particularly simple
since a double-cone is an intersection of only two wedges, and the algebras are non-trivial.
let us write (in 1+1 dimensions) the relation

b(o) = b(pw1)  b(pw2)  a(i1)  a(i2)

whenever

o = pw1  pw2,

where pwi are any pair of wedge regions in ads1,1 and ii = (pwi) their intersections with
the boundary, that is, open intervals on s 1.
the intersection pw1  pw2 might not be a double-cone. it might be empty, or it might be
another wedge region. before discussing the above relation as a denition for the double-
cone algebra b(o) if o = pw1  pw2 is a double-cone, we shall rst convince ourselves
that it is consistent also in these other cases.
if pw1 contains pw2, or vice versa, then o equals the larger wedge, and the relation holds
by isotony. if pw1 and pw2 are disjoint, then the intersections with the boundary are also
disjoint, and b() = a(i1)  a(i2) is trivial if the boundary net a on s 1 is irreducible
(that is, disjoint intervals have no nontrivial observables in common).
next, it might happen that pw1 and pw2 have a nontrivial intersection without the apex
of one wedge lying inside the other wedge. in this case, the intersection is again a wedge,
say pw3. namely, any wedge in ads1,1 is of the form pw+(e, f ) where e and f are a future
and a past directed light-like tangent vector in the apex x (the unique point in ads1,1
solving ex = f x = 0). the condition ef < 0 implies that both tangent vectors point
in the same (positive or negative) 1-direction. the wedge itself is the surface between the
two light-rays emanating from x in the directions e and f (cf. figure 1). the present
situation arises if the future directed light-ray of pw1 intersects the past directed light-
ray of pw2 (or vice versa) in a point x3 without the other pair of light-rays intersecting
each other. the intersection of the two wedges is the surface between the two intersecting
light-rays travelling on from the point x3, which is another wedge region pw3 with apex
x3. it follows that the intersection of the intersections ii of pwi with the boundary equals
the intersection i3 of pw3 with the boundary. hence consistency of the above relation
is guaranteed by a(i1)  a(i2) = a(i3) where i1 and i2 are two intervals on s 1 whose
intersection i3 is again an interval.
now we come to the case that pw1  pw2 is a double-cone o in the proper sense. this
is the case if the closure of the causal complement of pw1 is contained in pw2. it follows

3 speculations

12

that the closure of the causal complement of i1 is contained in i2, hence the intersection of
i1 and i2 is the union of two disjoint intervals j1 and j2. the latter are the two light-like
geodesic shadows, cast by o onto the boundary.

thus, the observables localized in a double-cone in anti-desitter space ads1,1 are given
by the intersection of two interval algebras a(ii) on the boundary for intervals ii with
disconnected intersections (or equivalently, by duality, the joint commutant of two interval
algebras for disjoint intervals). such algebras have received much attention in the literature
[15, 6, 10], notably within the context of superselection sectors. namely, if i1  i2 = j1  j2
consists of two disjoint intervals, then the intersection of algebras a(i1)a(i2) is larger than
the algebra a(j1)  a(j2). the excess can be attributed to the existence of superselection
sectors [10], the extra operators being intertwiners which transport a superselection charge
from one of the intervals ji to the other.

we conclude that compactly localized observables on anti-desitter space correspond to
strongly delocalized observables on the boundary. we also see how the notorious diculty
to compute the modular group for two-interval algebras [15] is related to the diculty
to compute the modular group of double-cone algebras in massive theories. (we discuss
below that, as the size of the double-cones shrinks and the massive anti-desitter theory
approaches a conformal at space theory, the modular group can again be computed.)

we shall now prove the proposition of sect. 1. it asserts that the algebras b(on) generate
b(pw ) whenever a family of double-cones on  pw covers the wedge pw  ads1,1.
each b(on) is of the form a(in)  a(kn) where in  i = (pw ) and in  kn = jn1  jn2
is a union of two disjoint intervals. by denition, the assertion is equivalent to

a(i) = _

a(in)  a(kn),

n

where the inclusion  holds since each a(in) is contained in a(i). on the other hand,
the algebras on the right hand side are larger than a(jn1)  a(jn2). if on cover the wedge
pw , then the intervals jn1 and jn2, as n runs, cover the interval i = (pw ). so the claim
follows from weak additivity of the boundary theory.

3 speculations

it is instructive to consider the at space limit in which the curvature radius r of anti-
desitter space tends to innity, or equivalently to consider a region of anti-desitter space
which is much smaller than the curvature radius. the regime |x| << r asymptotically
becomes at minkowski space, and the anti-desitter group contracts to the poincare group.
the double-cones algebras b(o) are certain extensions of the algebras a(j1)  a(j2), as
discussed before. now in the at regime the intervals ji become small of order |o|/r. thus
for a substantial portion of minkowski space, the relevant intervals ji are all contained in

references

13

a suitable but xed pair of non-overlapping intervals ki. let us now assume that the
conformal net has the split property, an algebraic property valid in any chiral quantum
eld theory for which tr exp  l0 exists, which ensures that states can be independently
prepared on causally disjoint regions with a nite distance [1]. then a(k1)  a(k2)
is unitarily isomorphic to a(k1)  a(k2), and the isomorphism is inherited by all its
subalgebras a(j1)  a(j2)  a(j1)  a(j2). under this isomorphism, the larger algebra
b(o) is identied [10] with the standard construction [12] of 1+1-dimensional conformal
minkowski space observables from a given chiral conformal net (sometimes quoted as the
longo-rehren net), which corresponds to the diagonal modular invariant.

thus, the at space limit of the anti-desitter space theory in 1+1 dimensions associated
with a given chiral conformal theory, is given by the lr net associated with that same chiral
theory. note that the lr net has 1+1-dimensional conformal symmetry, but of course the
anti-desitter net is not conformally invariant due to the presence of the curvature scale r.

it would be interesting to get an analogous understanding of the at space limit of the anti-
desitter space theory in higher dimensions in terms of the associated conformal theory.

one might speculate whether one can iterate holography, and use the at space limit of
the bulk theory on ads1,s as a boundary input for a new bulk theory on ads1,s+1. here,
however, a warning is in order. namely, the limiting at space theory on minkowski space
r1,s will, like the lr net, in general not be extendible to the conformal compactication
c1,s but rather to a covering thereof. one should therefore endeavour to extend the present
analysis to theories on covering spaces both of anti-desitter space and of its boundary.

considering covering spaces is advisable also for the physical reason that on the universal
covering of anti-desitter space, the clash between the notions of causally disjoint and
causally disconnected (see above) will disappear, and along with it the severe constraints
which it seems to impose on the possible interactions [3].

this anti-desitter causality paradox parallels very much the old conformal causality
paradox that causal commutativity on c1,s proper excludes most conformal theories of
interest; it was solved [14] by the recognition that conformal elds naturally live on a
covering space. holography tells us that both problems are the two sides of the same coin.

references

[1] d. buchholz: current trends in axiomatic quantum eld theory, gottingen preprint (1998),

hep-th/9811233.

[2] d. buchholz: private communication.

[3] d. buchholz, m. florig, s.j. summers: hawking-unruh temperature and einstein causality

in anti-de sitter space-time, gottingen-gainesville preprint (1999), hep-th/9905178.

[4] j.j. bisognano, e.h. wichmann: on the duality condition for a hermitean scalar eld, j.

math. phys. 16 (1975) 985.

references

14

[5] v. dobrev: intertwining operator realization of the ads/cft correspondence, clausthal

preprint (1998), hep-th/9812194, to appear in nucl. phys. b.

[6] feng xu: jones-wassermann subfactors for disconnected intervals, ucla preprint (1997),

q-alg/9704003.

[7] r. haag: local quantum physics, springer 1992.

[8] p.d. hislop, r. longo: modular structure of the local algebras associated with the free mass-

less scalar eld, commun. math. phys. 84 (1982) 71.

[9] g. t hooft: dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, in: salam-festschrift, a. ali et al.

eds., world scientic 1993, pp. 284-296.

[10] y. kawahigashi, r. longo, m. muger: multi-interval subfactors and modularity of represen-

tations in conformal eld theory, tokyo-rome preprint (1999), math.oa/9903104.

[11] m. luscher, g. mack: global conformal invariance in quantum eld theory, commun. math.

phys. 41 (1975) 203-234.

[12] r. longo, k.-h. rehren: nets of subfactors, rev. math. phys. 7 (1995) 567-597.

[13] j. maldacena: the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and supergravity, adv.

theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231-252.

[14] b. schroer, j.a. swieca: conformal transformations for quantized elds, phys. rev. d 10

(1974) 480-485.

[15] b. schroer, h.-w. wiesbrock: modular theory and geometry, fu berlin preprint (1998),

math-ph/9809003.

[16] l. susskind: the world as a hologram, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377-6396.

[17] e. witten: anti de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253-291.

