9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
4
2

 

 
 

2
v
2
5
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

gauge independent eective gauge elds

kirill a. kazakov and petr i. pronin

july 25, 2013

moscow state university, physics faculty,

department of theoretical physics.
117234, moscow, russian federation

abstract

the problem of gauge independent denition of the eective gauge eld is con-
sidered. the slavnov identities corresponding to a system of interacting quantum
gauge and classical matter elds, playing the role of a measuring device, are ob-
tained. with their help, in the case of power-counting renormalizable theories,
gauge independence of the eective device action is proved in the low-energy
limit, which allows to introduce the gauge independent notion of the eective
gauge eld.

pacs 03.70.+k, 11.15. q

1 introduction

description of quantized elds by means of the eective action (ea) is the most general
in quantum theory. being the sum of all one-particle-irreducible diagrams ea for a
given theory allows to calculate any green function in this theory. well known that it
also can be given a nonperturbative denition as the legendre transform of the green
functions generating functional logarithm. formal analogy between the classical equa-
tions of motion and quantum equations describing dynamics of the mean elds suggests
natural interpretation of ea as the quantum substitute for its classical counterpart.
however, explicit dependence of ea on the way the theory is quantized lacks direct
physical application of this remarkable analogy. the most important kind of such a
dependence, which attracts our attention in this paper, is the gauge dependence of ea
for gauge theories.

it is not our purpose to anew investigate various procedures formulated by many
authors in attempts to construct a gauge independent object from ea. instead, we
would like to pay attention to a possible physical reason for the gauge dependence of
ea, recently pointed out by dalvit and mazzitelli [1]. in the case of quantum gravity
they showed that the motion of a classical device measuring the eective gravitational
eld is independent of the choice of gauge conditions xing the general coordinate

email address: kirill@theor.phys.msu.su
email address: petr@theor.phys.msu.su

1

invariance. more precisely, the equations of motion (geodesic equation) of a test particle
in the eective static gravitational eld of a point mass, calculated in the one-loop
approximation up to leading logarithms was shown to be independent of the choice of
linear gauge.

the point is that while the graviton-test particle quantum interaction is negligible
in calculation of the total eective gravitational eld, it is not when the equations of
the test particle motion are to be determined. it turns out that in the latter case the
gauge dependent part of the contribution due to graviton-test particle interaction just
cancels that corresponding to the ordinary gauge dependence of the mean eld.

this fact oers a tempting possibility to change our plain view on the problem of
gauge independent denition of the eective gravitational eld, and look at it through
a prism of the measurement.
in other words, we can try to describe the eective
gravitational eld in terms corresponding to the measuring device. for example, in
the case considered in [1] it is the form of the equations of the test particle motion by
which the eective gravitational eld is implicitly described.

whether a proper denition of the eective eld can be given in this way, depends

on resolution of the following questions:

1. whether the special choices of the source for the gravitational eld and of the

measuring device made in [1] are essential for the aforementioned cancellation.

2. whether this cancellation holds at any order of the loop expansion and for all

energies (not only for the one-loop low-energy leading quantum corrections).

3. if the eective gravitational eld is described through characteristics of the mea-
suring device, is such a description actually independent of the choice of device,
for the concept of the eective action to be self-contained.

4. is all of this inherent to the gravitation, or represents a general property of gauge

interactions.

the purpose of this paper is to show that the answer to 1.,4., and to the rst
is really positive, i.e. the low-energy leading quantum corrections to the
part of 2.
equations of motion of any kind of classical matter (innitely weak) interacting with
the gravitational or any other gauge eld are gauge independent at any order of the
loop expansion. in sec.2 we introduce notations and display some basic tools used later
in investigation of ea properties.
in sec.3 the slavnov identities for the generating
functionals of the green functions corresponding to the system gauge eld plus device
are derived, on which basis the renormalization equations for divergent parts of these
functionals are obtained in sec.4. these equations allow to demonstrate the gauge
dependence cancellation most generally.
in sec.5 we briey discuss the rest of the
problems listed above, and make conclusions.

2 the quantum eective action

the reason for the cancellation of the gauge dependence found by dalvit and mazzitelli
may lie, of course, only in the residual symmetry of the faddev-popov quantum action
for the gauge eld, the becci-rouet-stora-tyutin (brst) symmetry [2]. having the
form of the ordinary gauge transformation for the gauge and matter elds, the latter

2

is indierent to the specic structure of the classical action for these elds. therefore,
following the standard procedure of derivation of the slavnov identities for the gener-
ating functionals of the green functions, we can try to obtain analogous identities for
the system of the gauge eld plus measuring device in the most general form.

we consider a general type gauge theory described by an action s(aa, i), where
aa, a = 1, ..., n denotes the gauge eld and i, i = 1, ..., m  matter elds of any kind.
if the pure gauge theory describes free elds aa, then a number of quantum matter
elds interacting with aa should be included in . however, for notation simplicity
we suppose that the gauge eld is self-interacting and  contains only classical matter
elds. furthermore, the part of  corresponding to the sources for aa can be omitted
since any desired a-eld conguration can be formally obtained by appropriate choice
of the standard source term jaaa which is normally introduced into the generating
functional of the green functions. thus, we suppose the elds i to describe the
measuring device only. the latter is a classical object in the ordinary sense that the
low-energy quantum corrections to its equations of motion due to propagation of the
-elds can be neglected, which usually means that the device should be suciently
heavy. following [1] we also require the device contribution to the total gauge eld to
be innitely small. one could suppose, for example, that the coupling constants of the
gauge eld-device interaction are suciently small. since, however, it is not always
possible to choose these constants arbitrary small1, we simply imagine that the device
action enters the full action with a small overall coecient.

it is problematical to satisfy the above requirements in the case of gravity, since
they contradict to each other. even more:
in this case we cannot satisfy the rst of
them alone because there is no such a thing as the classical source for gravity, as was
pointed out in [3]. therefore, in the case of measurement of the eective gravitational
eld we are forced to introduce the classical form for the device action by hands.

let the action s(a, ) be invariant under the following (innitesimal) gauge trans-

formations

aa = da(a), i = di(),

(1)

where da(a), di() are the generators, and ,  = 1, ..., n are arbitrary gauge
functions of the gauge transformations. we suppose that these generators form a
closed algebra

da,bdb  da,bdb = fda,
di,j dj  di,j dj = f di,

(2)

where the structure constants f are some linear dierential operators which we
assume to be eld-independent, for simplicity. commas followed by indices denote func-
tional dierentiation with respect to the corresponding elds, and dewitts summation-
integration on repeated indices is supposed.

to x this invariance we impose an arbitrary gauge condition f(a) = 0. for
simplicity, we suppose that it is linear in the eld a: f(a)  f,aaa, where f,a is
some (dierential) operator independent of the elds. weighted in the usual way this
gauge condition enters the faddeev-popov (fp) quantum action sf p in the form of the

1in the case of non-abelian gauge theories their value may be xed already by the form of gauge

eld self-interaction.

3

gauge-xing term

sgf = 

1
2

f 2
,

(3)

 being the weighting parameter. introducing fp ghost elds c, c we write the fp
quantum action

sf p = s(a, ) + sgf + cf,adac.

sf p is still invariant under the following brst transformations [2]

brstaa = da(a)c,
brsti = di()c,
brstc = fcc,
brst c = 

f,

1


(4)

(5)

 being a constant anticommuting parameter.

to be able to write down the slavnov identities for the generating functional of con-
nected green functions we introduce sources for the brst transformations following
zinn-justin [6], and obtain the quantum action  in the form

 = s(a, ) 

1
2

 + cf,adac + kadac + ki dic.
f 2

(6)

introduction of the source k is dispensable since dic is linear in quantum elds.
however, it allows to write the slavnov identities in the form containing no explicit
information on the structure of the gauge algebra, and in addition to that, to omit all
ghost sources from the very beginning (these sources should be restored, however, in
renormalization of the theory).

below we consider the most important kind of the gauge dependence of ea, namely
its dependence on the weighting parameter . the general case contains no principal
complications, and can be handled, for example, by extending the eld content of the
theory to include a number of auxiliary elds introducing the gauge, and employing the
method of anticanonical transformations ( see, e.g., [4]). a natural way of investigation
of the -dependence is to introduce the term

y f c,

(7)

y being a constant anticommuting parameter, into the quantum action [5]. thus we
write the generating functional of the green functions as2

z[j, , k, k, y ] = z dadcd cexp{i((a, , c, c, k, k) + y f c + jaaa)}. (8)

-elds are not integrated in eq. (8). following [1] we consider them as c-functions,
and the absence of these elds in the integral measure reects the fact that we neglect
all the quantum ]contributions due to their propagation.

2we suppose that all divergent quantities appearing below are invariantly regularized. for technical
simplicity we assume also that (0) = 0 in this regularization, to omit possible local factors in the
functional integral measure.

4

figure 1: a typical vertex representing local interaction of the measuring device
(straight lines) with the eective gauge eld (wavy lines) in the standard interpreta-
tion (a). the corresponding non local vertex (the shaded blob) given by the generating
functional (8) (b). the plus sign denotes higher-order contributions. the source j for
the gauge eld is pictured schematically as the local crossed vertex.

diagrammatically, this situation is illustrated in fig.1. fig.1(a) represents a typical
vertex of the gauge eld-device interaction according to the standard denition of the
eective eld as the quantum average of the corresponding eld operator. it is implied
by this denition that the mean eld is simply put into the classical equations of
device motion instead of its tree value. such vertices are local, unlike those given
by the generating functional (8) and represented in fig.1(b). to determine eective
equations of device motion we have to consider the sum of diagrams like that pictured
in fig.1(b), each having only one insertion of a -vertex, since the device action is
supposed to be innitely small.

now, introducing the generating functional of the connected green functions

w (j) = i ln z(j),

(9)

we dene the eective action  as the legendre transform of w with respect to the
mean gauge eld

aa =

w
ja

(denoted by the same symbol as the corresponding eld operator):

(a) = w (j)  jaaa|jj(a) ,

where the function j(a) is implicitly dened by eq. (10).

in the standard interpretation the reciprocal of eq. (10)


aa

= ja

(10)

(11)

(12)

are the eective equations of motion for the full quantum corrected eld a correspond-
ing to the given background eld conguration a0 satisfying

s
aa

(a0) = ja.

(13)

the use of j as the source for the eld a0 instead of realistic matter sources, though
formal, allows to simplify the derivation of the slavnov identities below. as always,
the source j satises the conservation law

da(a0)ja = 0,

5

where a0 is the solution of eq. (13), satisfying

f(a0) = 0.

(14)

3 the slavnov identities

3.1 preliminaries

being a classical object the measuring device is completely described by its action.
we can therefore investigate the gauge dependence of the latter rather than of the
corresponding equations of motion (as was done in [1]). the action for the measuring
device is the part of  containing the elds i. its gauge dependence is determined
by the slavnov identities for the generating functional of proper vertices corresponding
to (8). however, these identities are complicated because of the peculiar role of the
device action which is a kind of source for the gauge eld. it is the nonlinearity of this
source on the elds which complicates the usual derivation of the slavnov identities.

fortunately, in the present case we can limit ourselves by derivation of the slavnov
identities for the functional w only. indeed, the gauge dependent part of the device
action is a sum of two dierent contributions. the rst is the ordinary explicit gauge
dependence of the eective action. the second results from implicit gauge dependence
of the mean eld a. being a solution of the gauge dependent eective equations (12)
the latter is also gauge dependent. it is precisely this gauge dependence of a which
lacks its physical interpretation. thus, denoting by  the part of  containing -elds
we have for the full variation of the device action under a small change  of the gauge
parameter :

d =




 +


aa

 

d
d

.

(15)

aa

 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)j

in (15) the derivative aa/ is calculated keeping j xed in accordance with the
meaning of j as producing the given classical eld a0.

now note, that if we dene the quantity w by analogy with , i.e., as the part

of w containing , then

(a) = w(j)|jj(a) ,

since the device action is supposed to be innitely small.

comparing (15) and (16) we arrive at the following important relation

(16)

(17)

d(a, )

d

=

w(j, )



.

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)jj(a)

thus, perhaps needed in carrying out the renormalization program, the slavnov

identities for  turn out to be unnecessary in our consideration.

let us now go over to the successive derivation of the slavnov identities for w.

3.2 derivation

following the standard procedure (see, e.g., [6]) we perform a brst shift (5) of in-
tegration variables in (8). unlike the usual case, however, the quantum action (6) is

6

not invariant under this operation, since besides the quantum elds a, c, c it contains
the classical eld  which is not integrated in (8). therefore, we obtain the following
identity3

z dadcd c" s

aa

dac + jadac + y cf,adac  ki difcc 

exp{i((a, , c, c, k, k) + y f c + jaaa)} = 0,

y


f 2

# 

(18)

where s is the classical device action.

since s(a, ) is invariant under brst transformations (5), we may write

s
aa

da(a)c = 

s
i

di()c.

(19)

then the rst term in square brackets in the left hand side of (18) can be transformed
as

s
aa

da(a)cexp{...} = z dadcd c

z dadcd c
iz dadcd c di()cexp{...} +z dadcd c di()c kl
i ki

+z dadcd c ki di()fccexp{...},

2z

s
i

= 



1
i

=

di()cexp{...}

 dl()

i

cexp{...}

(20)

where locality of generators d(), and the property (0) = 0 were taken into account.
the latter also implies that the third term in square brackets in (18) is equal to zero.
indeed, performing a shift c  c +  c of integration variables in the functional
integral (8) we obtain the quantum ghost equation of motion

z dadcd c [f,ada(a)c  y f] exp{...} = 0,

from which follows that4

yz dadcd ch cf,ada(a)c  n(0)i exp{...} = 0.

thus, the identity (18) can be rewritten as

 ja



ka

+ i

2

i ki

 2y 



! z = 0.

(21)

(22)

(23)

it
this is the sought identity for the generating functional of the green functions.
can be called eective slavnov identity, since it is obtained under certain conditions
concerning the device motion. in terms of the functional w it looks like

ja

w
ka



w
i

w
 ki

+ i

2w
i ki

= 2y 

w


.

(24)

in the next section (24) will be used to prove the low-energy gauge independence of
the eective device action.

3the corresponding jacobian  exp{(0)...} = 1.
4we use the property y 2 = 0.

7

4 the gauge dependence cancellation

4.1 the renormalization equation

denition of the device as a classical object, reected in the way its action is intro-
duced into the generating functional z, implies certain conditions under which the
device motion can be considered in such a way, namely, it corresponds to the eective
description of the device motion at low energies. well known [3, 7], that in this case
the leading quantum contribution to ea is due to non-analytical terms in the ampli-
tudes, containing the logarithms of external momenta. on the other hand, the form
of the latter can be simply read o from divergent parts of the amplitudes, since it is
propagation of massless particles of the theory, which dominates at low energies (see,
e.g., [3, 8]). for example, in the case of dimensionally regularized feynman integrals
of the type

z d4qf (q, p1, ..., pn),

(25)

where   dimensional regulator,   mass scale, and f (q, p1, ..., pn)  the result of all
subintegrations, the low-energy leading contributions, corresponding to some powers
of the logarithms of the external momenta p1, ..., pn, are given by zero order terms in
the loran expansion for (25) in powers of , and unambiguously determined by the
poles of (25).

thus, to determine the full gauge dependence of the device eective action, it is
sucient, in view of the relation (17), to investigate that of the divergent parts (w div)
of the generating functional w .

to do this, we use the slavnov identity (24) to obtain the renormalization equation

for w div. namely, we rst separate the y -dependent part of w

w = w1 + y w2,

and substitute it in (24). comparing multiples of y from the left and right hand sides
of this identity then gives

2

w1


= ja

w2
ka

+

w1
i

w2
 ki

 i

2w2
i ki

,

(26)

where all the sources except ja are set equal to zero after dierentiation.

next, we extract the -dependent part of (26) and obtain the following identity

2

w1



= ja

w2
ka

+

w1
i

w2 
 ki

 i

2w2
i ki

,

(27)

where the symbol w2  denotes the part of w2 independent of the gauge eld-device
interaction. all of these identities are derived for invariantly regularized, but still un-
renormalized functionals. being connected with the high-energy behavior of the green
functions the renormalization of ea is immaterial in determination of the low-energy
quantum corrections to the device motion. on the other hand, since we use the formal
correspondence between divergences of ea and the form of logs in reconstruction of the
leading quantum contributions to , the eect of renormalization on the structure of
divergences might seem to be important for us. however, as we have mentioned above,

8

the use of the generating functional of the green functions in the form of eq. (8) is
justied only in the low-energy regime of the device motion. instead, the renormaliza-
tion of the theory must be carried out, of course, in terms of the ordinary generating
functional for which eq. (8) is just an eective expression, and in which all the elds,
including those corresponding to the measuring device, are considered as quantum.
thus, at each given order of the loop expansion it has to be supposed that all the
subdivergences of the green functions have been eliminated at lower orders according
to the standard procedure, so that the only supercially divergent diagrams are in rest.
it is the general result of the renormalization theory [4, 6] that this procedure can be
arranged in the way that preserves the symmetry properties of the generating func-
tionals of the green functions. thus, we suppose that the functional w renormalized,
say, up to (n  1) th-loop order, satises the identity (27)5 and has local divergences
of order n.

as follows from eq. (17) divergences of w1/ are to be determined after the
substitution j  j(a) has been made. as always, this means that the corresponding
one-particle-irreducible6 diagrams should be considered only. in the present case, how-
ever, one may substitute j  j(a0) directly, the function j(a0) being determined by
eq. (13). indeed, additional divergences associated with the reexpressing of the right
hand side of eq. (27) in terms of the mean eld a, can appear, by assumption, only
in the n th-loop order. however, they actually do not contribute at this order, since
the right hand side of eq. (27) vanishes at the zeroth order, as one can easily verify7.

thus, splitting w into the sum of divergent and convergent parts

w = w div(n)



+ w con
 ,

and noting that the corresponding parts of the identity (27) must cancel independently,
we obtain the renormalization equation for w div(n)

8:



2

w div(n)

1


= ja

w div(n)

2
ka

+

w div(n)

1
i

w (0)
2 
 ki

+

w (0)
1
i

w div(n)

2 
 ki

,

(28)

where the superscript (0) denotes the zeroth order approximation.

let us now turn to examination of the right hand side of eq. (28).

4.2 the power counting

we begin with denition of vertices and eld propagators in the loop expansion. ac-
cording to the standard procedure, one expands the exponent of the integrand in eq.

5strictly speaking, in derivation of the slavnov identities for renormalized generating functionals
z, w, w a possible implicit gauge dependence of the counterterms should be taken into account, which
results in additional divergent structures appearing in these identities [9]. however, we omit them
in the eective slavnov identities (23), (24) since these additional terms describe purely high-energy
properties of the underlying theory.

6irreducible with respect to a-lines.
7this corresponds to the fact that at the tree level the device action is obviously independent of

the gauge parameter  weighting the gauge condition.
/i ki is omitted in eq.

8the term i2w div(n)

2
locality of divergences.

(28), since it is proportional to (0) due to

9

figure 2: graphical representation of the third term in the right hand side of eq. (28).
dashed lines correspond to fp ghost propagator g.

(8) around the extremal a0

(a, , c, c, k, k) + y f c + jaaa = (a0, , c, c, k, k) + jaa0 + kada(a0)c
(s + sgf ),ab (a0, )aaab + y f(a) c + kada,b(a0)abc +    ,

+ ki di()c +

1
2

where the ellipsis denote terms of cubic and higher order in the quantum elds a 
a  a0, c, c. note that in view of eq. (14) the term y f(a0) c is absent in this
expansion. therefore, the second term in the right hand side of eq. (28) vanishes
identically.

for further examination of eq.

(28) it is necessary to employ the dimensional
analysis. at this point we have to limit our general consideration and require the
theory to be power-counting-renormalizable. although quantum consequences of the
original gauge symmetry of the classical action are normally expressed in the same
form (like that of eq. (28)) at all orders of the loop expansion even despite possible
deformations of the gauge algebra, the strength of divergences of feynman diagrams
varies from order to order, in general. however, it is a common feature of all power-
counting-renormalizable gauge theories that the degree of divergence d of an arbitrary
diagram with a set {nf } of external lines, where {f } = {a0, y, k, k}, is less than or
equals to

d  4  2nk  2n k  (2  )ny  na0,

(29)

 being the canonical dimension of the gauge eld a. the case d < d corresponds to
theories with superrenormalizable interactions.

it can be inferred from eq. (29) that in the case of  = 1 (e.g., yang-mills theories)
the third term in the right hand side of eq. (28) is zero. indeed, the only divergent
diagram with n k = ny = 1 in this case corresponds to na0 = 1, and turns into zero,
since the ghost vertex connected with the external k-line by the ghost propagator,
contains the gauge condition operator f,a which vanishes upon acting on the rest of
the diagram. this is illustrated in fig.2.

as far as the case  = 0 is concerned (e.g., r2-gravity), there is an innite number
of logarithmically divergent diagrams with n k = ny = 1 and arbitrary number of
external gauge elds. in this case the above argument goes if we conne ourselves by
calculation of the gauge invariant part of the device action only9.

finally, from (29) follows that if the -vertex were absent, then the remaining term
(28) would diverge, with d = . whether it does

in the right hand side of eq.

9which is sucient for determination of the low-energy eective device action.

10

depends on the form of the device-gauge eld interaction. obviously, insertion of a
vertex corresponding to this interaction makes a diagram with d =  convergent if
and only if

n + na < 4  ,

(30)

where na, n are numbers of the gauge elds entering the vertex, and acting on them
derivatives, respectively. this condition is obviously satised if the full underlying
quantum theory of interacting gauge and matter elds is also power-counting renor-
malizable.

summing up, the right hand side of eq. (28) turns out to be zero, thus proving

gauge independence of the low-energy eective action of the measuring device.

5 discussion and conclusion.

we have shown that in the case when the quantum propagation of the elds describ-
ing measuring device can be neglected, namely, in the low-energy classical limit, the
eective equations of device motion turn out to be gauge independent at any order of
the loop expansion10.

this allows to dene in the same limit the gauge independent eective gauge eld as
the eld that enters these equations and couples to the measuring device in the classical
fashion. we would like to emphasize that it is purely classical nature of the observables
(which are functionals of the -elds) due to which the well-known problem of their
unambiguous denition [10, 11] does not arise in our consideration. so, whether it is
possible to extend the denition to higher energies depends on eventual applicability
of the classical conceptions contained in the notion of measurement.

now, turning back to the item 3. of the introduction, it is natural to ask whether
the value of the eective gauge eld, dened in the manner described above, is one and
the same for all measuring devices. it denitely is in the case of innitesimal device
action, considered above. indeed, in this case account of any possible dependence of
the eective gauge eld on characteristics of the measuring device would exceed the
precision chosen in our discussion.
it is not clear, however, whether this is true in
the general case of nite disturbances produced in the eective eld by the process of
measurement.

acknowledgements

we would like to thank our colleagues at the department of theoretical physics,
moscow state university, for many useful discussions.

we are also grateful to v. v. asadov for substantial nancial support of our re-

search.

references

10although used in our proof, the requirement of power-counting renormalizability of the underlying
quantum theory does not seem essential for the validity of the main result, as shows the particular
example of [1].

11

[1] d. dalvit and f. mazzitelli, phys.rev. d56 n.12 (1997) 7779.

[2] c. becchi, a. rouet and r. stora, ann. of phys. 98 (1976) 287; commun. math.

phys. 42 (1975) 127; i. v. tyutin, report fian 39 (1975).

[3] j. f. donoghue, phys.rev. d50 n.6 (1994) 3874.

[4] p. m. lavrov,

i. v. tyutin and b. l. voronov, yad. fiz. v.36 (1982) 498 [sov.

journ. nucl. phys. v.36 (1982) 292].

[5] h. kluberg-stern and

j. b. zuber, phys. rev. d 12 (1975) 467, 3159;
n. k. nielsen, nucl. phys. b101 (1975) 173; d. johnston, nucl. phys. b293
(1987) 229; c. m. fraser and i. j. r. aitchison, ann. of phys. (n.y.) 156 (1984)
1; o. piguet and k. sibold, nucl. phys. b253 (1985) 517.

[6] j. zinn-justin, renormalization of gauge theories, in: trends in elementary particle

physics, edited by h. rollnik and k. dietz (springer-verlag, berlin, 1975) p. 2.

[7] s. weinberg, physica (amsterdam) 96a (1979) 327; j. f. donoghue, in: eective
field theories of the standard model, edited by u.-g. meissner (world scientic,
singapore, 1994); h. leutwyler and s. weinberg, in proceedings of the xxvith
international conference on high energy physics, edited by j. sanford (dallas,
texas, 1992), aip conf. proc. no. 272 (aip, ny, 1993) pp. 185, 346.

[8] g. a. vilkovisky, the gospel according to dewitt, in: quantum theory of gravity,

edited by s. m. christensen (hilger, bristol, 1984) p. 169.

[9] k. a. kazakov and p. i. pronin, phys. rev. d 59 (1999) 064012.

[10] b. s. dewitt, the quantization of geometry, in: gravitation: an introduction to

current research, edited by l. witten (wiley, new-york, 1962) p. 266.

[11] g. a. vilkovisky, nucl. phys. b234 (1984) 125; class. quantum grav. 9 (1992)

895.

12

