nyu-th/99/04/02, hutp-99/028, nub 3202, efi-99-19
november 4, 1999

zerobrane matrix mechanics, monopoles and membrane

approach in qcd

gregory gabadadze1 and zurab kakushadze2,3,4

1department of physics, new york university, new york, ny 10003

2jeerson laboratory of physics, harvard university, cambridge, ma 02138

3department of physics, northeastern university, boston, ma 02115

4enrico fermi institute, university of chicago, chicago, il 60637

abstract

we conjecture that a t-dual form of pure qcd describes dynamics of point-like
monopoles. t-duality transforms the qcd lagrangian into a matrix quantum mechanics
of zerobranes which we identify with monopoles. at generic points of the monopole moduli
space the su(n) gauge group is broken down to u(1)n 1 reproducing the key feature of t
hoofts abelian projection. there are certain points in the moduli space where monopole
positions coincide, gauge symmetry is enhanced and gluons emerge as massless excitations.
we show that there is a linearly rising potential between zerobranes. this indicates the
presence of a stretched ux tube between monopoles. the lowest energy state is achieved
when monopoles are sitting on top of each other and gauge symmetry is enhanced. in this
case they behave as free massive particles and can condense. in fact, we nd a constant
eigenfunction of the corresponding hamiltonian which describes condensation of monopoles.
using the monopole quantum mechanics, we argue that large n qcd in this t-dual picture
is a theory of a closed bosonic membrane propagating in ve dimensional space-time. qcd
point-like monopoles can be regarded in this approach as constituents of the membrane.

9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
9

 

 
 

3
v
8
9
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

e-mail: gabadadze@physics.nyu.edu

e-mail: zurab@string.harvard.edu

1. introduction and summary

the aim of this work is to study point-like monopoles in pure su(n) qcd (yang-mills
(ym) theory). there is a great amount of evidence, both theoretical and from the lattice,
that this theory connes colored charges. it is conjectured that connement is realized as a
dual meissner eect of superconductivity [13]. in superconductivity fundamental charges
are condensed in cooper pairs and monopoles can be conned by vortices [6]. therefore,
in the dual picture which is believed to be qcd, ux tubes should be connecting colored
charges and the corresponding magnetic monopoles must be condensed. thus, a crucial
step in studying connement is to understand monopole dynamics. great progress in this
direction was made by seiberg and witten within the framework of supersymmetric coun-
terparts of qcd [7,8], where monopole condensation and dual superconductivity picture
were explicitly shown to be realized. however, pure su(n) qcd, as opposed to its super-
symmetric counterparts, lacks any scalar elds. therefore, there are no t hooft-polyakov
type of monopoles in the model. moreover, the strong coupling dynamics makes it dicult
to nd some other type of solutions. nevertheless, it was t hooft [9] who argued that qcd
monopoles could be hidden behind the redundancy of the gauge invariant description of the
theory. thus, according to t hooft [9], one can choose a certain class of unitary gauges
in which there are no propagating spurious elds, and the non-abelian part of the gauge
freedom is completely xed. in these gauges the su(n) gauge symmetry is broken down
to its maximal abelian subgroup u(1)n 1. each abelian subgroup gives rise to monopoles.
thus, there should exist n  1 dierent types of point-like monopoles in qcd (for a recent
review, see [10]).
the way these monopoles can actually be seen in the theory is a bit peculiar. unlike
t hooft-polyakov monopoles, they emerge somewhat indirectly, in particular, as point-like
singularities occurring for certain gauge choices [9]. this makes it dicult to study their
dynamics. in this respect, the main questions arising in this approach are the following:

 can qcd monopoles and their interactions be studied within the conventional hamil-

tonian approach?

 can monopole condensation be analytically studied using dynamics of the qcd

monopoles?

 can the gauge group breaking pattern su(n)  u(1)n 1 be understood without
referring to any specic gauge conditions, but rather relying on underlying dynamics
of the theory?

in the following we will argue that, under certain assumptions, the answer to these

questions can be positive.

in order to discuss these issues, one needs the notion of s- and t-duality. under s-
duality, the roles of fundamental quanta and solitons are interchanged [11]. as we discussed

more precisely, one is talking about s-duality here. for recent discussions of these issues, see,
e.g., [4,5].

2

above, qcd might be s-dual to some model of superconductivity, and condensation of qcd
monopoles should indicate connement of qcd colored charges [1,2]. however, as we have
also emphasized above, it is very dicult to study monopoles within the strongly coupled
lagrangian of qcd. therefore, some other approach is called for. t-duality, which in general
interchanges momentum modes with winding modes, seems to be a promising approach in
this case. below we will argue that strongly coupled pure su(n) qcd in a large but
nite volume can be described in a t-dual form as a certain matrix quantum mechanics of
n  1 point-like zerobranes. we conjecture that the zerobranes in the t-dual picture can
be identied with qcd monopoles. we use the matrix quantum mechanics to study certain
properties of qcd zerobranes (monopoles). in fact, we show that the su(n) gauge group
is generically broken down to u(1)n 1 as a result of zerobrane dynamics. furthermore, we
show that in a certain approximation (the so called monopole moduli space approximation)
of heavy, slowly-moving, almost non-interacting monopoles matrix quantum mechanics has
the unique ground state with zero momentum. this describes monopole condensation.

in order to reveal the structure of the condensate and validity of the monopole moduli
space approximation we study monopole interactions.
in fact, we nd a linearly rising
potential between them. thus, there should be ux tubes stretched between monopoles.
as a result of this observation we conclude that the moduli space approximation mentioned
above turns out to be valid only when monopoles are placed on top of each other. in this
case there is no force between them and they will be condensing at these points of the moduli
space.

there is one more crucial feature associated with the points of the moduli space where
monopoles sit on top of each other. we argue that at these points the u(1)n 1 gauge group
is enhanced back to su(n), and, as a result, massless gluons emerge in the theory. to
summarize, the following attractive picture emerges. at a generic point of the zerobrane
moduli space monopoles are separated and the gauge group is broken down to u(1)n 1.
there are ux tubes stretched between zerobranes. they give rise to linearly rising potential
between these heavy point-like objects. when the monopoles come on top of each other,
they condense; moreover, in this case the broken gauge group is enhanced back to su(n)
and gluons emerge as massless states.

finally, using the t-dual description mentioned above, we show that in the large n limit
pure qcd can be described as a (4 + 1)-dimensional theory of a closed bosonic membrane.
it is tempting to conjecture that perhaps this theory in a certain approximation/limit could
be thought of as a non-critical closed bosonic string theory which is believed to describe
large n qcd [12].

the rest of this paper is organized as follows. in section 2 we discuss t-duality of pure
qcd. in section 3 we study quantum mechanics of zerobranes. we show that there is a
linearly rising potential between these point-like objects. in section 4 we discuss condensa-
tion of qcd monopoles. in section 5 we show that the large n limit of pure qcd can be
related via t-duality to a theory of a (4 + 1)-dimensional bosonic membrane. in section 6
we speculate on a possibility of an underlying ve dimensional theory which might provide
an adequate low energy description of strongly coupled qcd.

3

2. pure qcd on a torus

in this section we deduce the action describing pure qcd on a spatial torus. consider

pure su(n) qcd with the lagrangian density:

lym = 

1
4g2

ym

ga

ga .

(1)

to avoid complications with the gribov copies, we will be working in the a0 = 0 gauge.
the hamiltonian density of the model can be written as follows:

hym =

g2
ym
2

p 2

i +

1
4g2

ym

g2

ij ,

(2)

where i, j = 1, 2, 3, and the canonically conjugate momenta are dened as g2
the gausss law should be imposed on physical eigenstates of the hamiltonian:

ymp a

i = ga
0i.

(di pi)a |phys.i = 0 .

(3)

the theory is known to generate the mass scale ym. the corresponding eective correlation
length will be dened as follows:

 

1

ym

.

(4)

let us assume that the theory is placed in a nite volume v (we will specify this volume
and boundary conditions below).
it is useful to introduce the following two limits. one
can dene the value of the volume element v to be small if the correlation length  is
much larger than v 1/3, i.e.,  >> v 1/3 [13]. the large volume limit would then refer to
a volume element satisfying v 1/3 >> . the two limits dened above correspond to the
weak respectively strong coupling regimes of the theory [13]. in order to see this let us keep
the product of the renormalization scale  and the value of v 1/3 xed:
for simplicity we
choose v 3 = 1. thus, the scale  serves as an infrared cuto. then the expression for the
correlation length in the next-to-leading order approximation takes the form:


v 1/3  (s)

1
22

0 exp  2

s0! .

(5)

here s = s() is the running strong coupling constant, and 0 and 1 are the corresponding
one- respectively two-loop coecients of qcd beta function. using (5), one nds that
the small volume approximation, dened as v 1/3 << , corresponds to the weak coupling
regime, i.e., s << 1. let us now turn to the large volume limit dened as v 1/3 >> .
this limit is equivalent to the small  approximation. furthermore, for small values of 
the running coupling constant s is a large number. in fact, for  = ym the perturbative
strong coupling constant blows up. hence, the large volume limit corresponds to the strong
coupling regime of the theory. in this regime the approximation (5) breaks down.

 the exact expression for  can also be given (see, for instance, [14]), however, this expression
contains the exact form of the beta function (s) which is known only perturbatively.

4

2.1. t-dual description of pure qcd

as it was mentioned above, we assume that our system is placed in a nite volume v .
in fact we take this volume to be a cubic box of the size 2l  2l  2l. to preserve
lorentz invariance of the theory we impose periodic boundary conditions on gluon elds:

aj(xi + 2l, t)  aj(xi, t) .

(6)

(the equivalence here is up to gauge transformations.) this means that our theory is
actually compactied on a three-torus tl  s1  s1  s1 which has all the radii equal to l.
recently it has been established that the (super-)yang-mills model on a torus tl can
be rewritten in terms of a certain matrix quantum mechanics dened on a dual torus tr =

es1  es1  es1 with the radii r [1519]:

r =


l

,

(7)

where the parameter  is dened via the qcd scale

 =

1
2

ym

=  2 .

dynamical variables in the t-dual theory are time-dependent matrices i(t), i = 1, 2, 3,
which transform in the adjoint representation:

i(t)  u i(t) u + .

(8)

here u stands for an su(n) matrix independent of time and spatial coordinates. in addition
to the color indices, for a given value of the index i = 1, 2, 3, the matrix valued eld i
a,b,
a, b = 1, ..., n, carries a pair of new indices corresponding to winding modes (which, in the
original picture, that is, qcd compactied on tl, correspond to the kaluza-klein momenta),
i
ma,nb, m, n  z [19]. the periodicity condition for these variables on tr takes the form
[19]:

na,nb  i
i

(n1)a,(n1)b + 2rab , i

na,mb  i

na,mb , n 6= m .

(9)

in what follows we will be suppressing the winding indices assuming that all the traces in the
expressions below are taken with respect to these indices as well, and that an appropriate
nite normalization of the tr operation is preserved by dividing these expressions by the
corresponding innite factor. given these conventions, the t-dual lagrangian can be written
as follows [1719]:

the original proof is based on the string theory arguments [1518]. however, it is applicable
to the non-abelian eld theory case as well [19] if the following identications are made. in our
interpretation, one can think of qcd point-like monopoles as zerobranes of the original string
theory picture and the ux tubes stretched between monopoles (see below) as open strings. a
more detailed discussion of this analogy will be given in the next section.

5

l(t) =

1

2g(cid:16)tr 2

i +

1

2(2)2 tr hi ji2 (cid:17) ,

(10)

where i denotes the time derivative of i. the new coupling constant g is related to the
pure qcd coupling as follows:

g2
ym
4

= g (cid:16) l

r(cid:17)3/2

.

(11)

the t-duality transformation which recast the original yang-mills lagrangian density (1)
into the lagrangian (10) (and vise-versa) can be written as follows [19]:

i  (2) idi ,

2
i  (2)2 g2

0i , tr 

1

(2l)3 z d3x tr .

(12)

here tr goes over both color and winding indices, while tr goes over color indices only. our
convention for the covariant derivative is as follows: dj = j  iaj, and gij = i[di dj].
one can think of j as a matrix representation for the covariant derivative operator dj on
a torus. transformations for the radii and coupling constants are given in (7) and (11),
respectively. one can check that the t-duality transformation gives rise to a t-dual form
of the gausss law (3):

f abc b

i c

i |phys.i = 0 .

(13)

here i denote the momenta canonically conjugate to i, and f abc stand for the su(n)
structure constants. therefore, we see that pure qcd on a torus is described by a certain
quantum mechanics (10). the variables in this lagrangian are matrix-valued adjoint elds
i which carry the color as well as winding label. in the next section we discuss the relation
of (10) with the compactied form of the matrix quantum mechanics of zerobranes.

3. matrix model

let us consider the quantum mechanical system which is described by the following

lagrangian in (3 + 1)-dimensional minkowski space-time:

l(t) =

1

2gs(cid:16)tr x 2

i +

1

2(2)2 tr hxi xji2 (cid:17) ,

(14)

where xi denote time-dependent n  n matrices. the lagrangian (14) possesses a global
su(n) symmetry:

xi(t)  u xi(t) u + .

(15)

it will become evident below, that this lagrangian describes n  1 point-like massive states
in (3+1)-dimensional space-time with linearly rising potential between them. subsequently,
we will see that after compactication on the torus tr the lagrangian (14) coincides with
that in (10). this shows the relevance of this theory for pure qcd (in fact t-duality between
them). before making any contact with qcd, let us study properties of the theory dened
by (14). let us start with the ground state of the model. the potential

6

v = 

1

4gs(2)2

tr hxi xji2

(16)

is positive denite and has at directions. the state of zero energy is given by the elds for
which [xi xj] = 0. hence, for the vacuum congurations all the xis can be diagonalized
simultaneously and take values in the cartan subalgebra of su(n). these congurations
can be parametrized in a gauge invariant way in terms of invariant eigenvalues of the adjoint
matrix x . thus, the vacuum state can be described by the following order parameters:

x cl

i = 

r1
i 0 ... 0
0 r2
i ... 0
... ... ... ...
0 ... ... rn
i



,

(17)

i s are the real-valued constant eigenvalues of xi. dierent values of rm

where rm
i parametrize
dierent points of the vacuum manifold, that is, the moduli space. generically, the constants
rm
i are all dierent. when this is the case, the global symmetry of the theory is broken down
to u(1)n 1, much like what happens with the local symmetry in t hoofts construction [9].
on the other hand, if some k number of eigenvalues rm
i coincide, the unbroken symmetry
group becomes su(k)  u(1)n k1.
i s the symmetry group
is restored back to su(n). we will discuss physical implications of this fact in the next
section. note that the expression (17) is the static solution of the equation of motion of
(14):

in fact, for all coincident rm

x a

i =

2

(2)2 (cid:16)hxj xiixj(cid:17)a

.

(18)

i , r2

i , ..., rn

i = diag(r1

an important issue is to specify symmetries of the ground state dened by the solution
x cl
i = 0. thus, there are n  1 independent
values of rm
i s for each spatial component i = 1, 2, 3. since these constants can be arbitrary,
the solution (17) takes values in the space r3(n 1). moreover, the solution (17) is invariant
under permutations of rm
i s. these permutations form a group sn , which is the weyl
subgroup of su(n). thus, the space

i ). note that pn

k=1 rk

r3(n 1)

sn

(19)

can be identied with the moduli space of n  1 electrically neutral point-like objects. let
us tentatively call these objects qcd zerobranes and study their properties.

this invariance is up to the weyl subgroup of su (n ) - see below.

here we are a bit loose on the dierence between u (n ) and su (n ). in su (n ) all the eigenvalues
cannot coincide unless they are all equal to zero. otherwise, only n1 eigenvalues can be identical.
here we can consider u (n ) instead of su (n ). then we have n independent eigenvalues all of
which can be identical. one of these eigenvalues, however, is due to the extra u (1), and corresponds
to the overall center-of-mass motion of the zerobranes, which can be dropped - see below.

7

3.1. zerobrane interactions

in this subsection we study interactions between qcd zerobranes. for simplicity we will
concentrate on the u(2) gauge group. there should be two zerobranes in this case. below
we are going to show that the potential between them is linearly rising with distance. hence,
the only non-interacting conguration will be produced by the zerobranes which are placed
on top of each other. some physical implications of this fact will be discussed at the end of
this section. first, let us calculate the potential between the zerobranes.

let us make a standard decomposition of the xi eld into its classical and quantum

parts:

here,

x cl

1 =

xi = x cl

i + xi .

1

2  r 0
0 r! , x cl

2 = 0 , x cl

3 = 0 .

(20)

(21)

that is, the two zerobranes are at a distance r apart from each other along one spatial
direction. the eective potential between point-like objects described by (14) has been
calculated in the context of m-theory zerobrane quantum mechanics [17,18] (for a review,
see [19]). thus, we can use the matrix theory results [18] by keeping only the correspond-
ing non-supersymmetric (that is, bosonic) four-dimensional parts (see [17,1921]). in the
path integral representation, after the appropriate gauge xing, one integrates out quantum
uctuations xi. as a result, one nds the eective potential (see, for instance, [20,21]):

ve  ln det (  2

t + r2 ) ,

where we have temporarily set 2 = 1. the nite, r dependent part of this potential with
the appropriate dimensionality is given by:

ve 

1
 r .

(22)

hence, there is a linearly rising potential between qcd zerobranes.

3.2. compactication of the matrix model and the conjecture

next, we would like to discuss the relation between the matrix model (14) for zerobranes

and pure qcd. for this let us compactify the matrix model on a three-torus tr = es1 

later we would like to identify zerobranes with qcd monopoles. magnetic charges of monopoles
for u (n ) group take the values: (1,1, 0, ..., 0), (0, 1,1, 0, .., 0), . . .. these charges cannot be
manifestly seen in the matrix model lagrangian since there are no local u (1) gauge elds there,
and vector elds are expected to be conned in ux tubes. nevertheless, these charges can be under-
stood by assigning chan-paton type factors to the ux tubes stretched between n  1 zerobranes.

8

es1  es1. the detailed procedure for compactifying the matrix model on a torus is described
in [19], so our discussion here will be brief. instead of studying the motion of n zerobranes
on a torus tr  (r  r  r)/(z  z  z) one studies the motion of an innite family of
zerobranes on r3. then one imposes a set of constraints which guarantee that the system is
invariant under the discrete group z z z. the elds x i
ma,nb describing zerobranes (along
with the su(n) indices a, b = 1, . . . , n) now carry a pair of winding indices m, n  z (for
a given value of the index i = 1, 2, 3). thus, the compactied matrix quantum mechanics
(14) transforms explicitly into the form (10) upon the substitutions

x i
ma,nb  i

ma,nb ,

gs  g ,

and the duality relations dened in section 2. as we have already mentioned, the winding
modes in the matrix model transform into the kaluza-klein momentum modes in qcd.
the two theories compactied on dual tori are equivalent. that is, they are t-dual to each
other. does this mean that the degrees of freedom of one theory can be understood in
terms of the degrees of freedom of the other one and vise-versa? in the case of string theory
d0-branes such a relation exists. the low energy limit of the d0-brane matrix quantum
mechanics is described by pure super-ym. the analogous picture for gluons can be thought
of in the nonsupersymmetric case too. generically the symmetry of the dual theory (14)
is u(1)n 1. however, once some of the xi eigenvalues coincide, the symmetry group is
enhanced. for instance, if all the n  1 eigenvalues coincide the symmetry is restored back
to su(n). where are gluons in this picture? the condition that all the n  1 eigenvalues
coincide denes the so called an 1 singularity of the su(n) group [22]. in this respect,
su(n) massless gluons can be viewed as massless states emerging at the singular points in
the qcd zerobrane moduli space where the coordinates of all the dierent n  1 zerobranes
coincide. it is attractive to adopt the following illustrative picture of this phenomenon. since
there is a linearly rising potential between qcd zerobranes, one can imagine a stretched
ux tube, a sort of stretched string between these point-like objects. suppose this ux
tube has excitations with vector particle quantum numbers (albeit it is not clear how to see
this explicitly). when the qcd zerobranes are separated at some nite distance from one
another, the ux tube is stretched and its excitations are massive. masses of these gluons
will be proportional to the separation between the corresponding qcd zerobranes

mkl 

1
 | rk  rl | .

however, when zerobranes come closer to each other, the ux tube relaxes. in fact, when the
zerobranes coincide, some of the massive string excitations might become massless and ll
in the multiplet of massless gluons of su(n). what about zerobranes, could they be seen
in terms of pure qcd? in the t hoofts construction there are nonperturbative monopoles

this is exactly what happens in superstring theory when branes sit on top of each other [27].
moreover, the picture of the stretched string is precise in this case since a critical open string theory
indeed has a massless vector particle in its spectrum. nonetheless, in this case we are dealing with
the higgs mechanism, whereas in the case of qcd monopoles gluons are actually conned.

9

in pure qcd which emerge as singularities in the theory of gluons. that is to say, these
monopoles are not seen in pure qcd as solitons when the gauge group is unbroken. however,
they appear as certain singularities in the gauge xing condition when the su(n) gauge
theory is projected to a u(1)n 1 theory by a special choice of gauge. we would like to
conjecture that nonperturbative monopoles of qcd can be described in the t-dual form by
zerobranes of the matrix quantum mechanics (14). besides the symmetry breaking pattern,
which is the same for monopoles and zerobranes, this conjecture is supported by the results
of our work [23]. in this work we studied pure qcd with the theta-term. it is known that
monopoles acquire electric charges due to the witten eect [24] once non-zero theta-angle
is introduced [9].
if the identication of zerobranes with monopoles is correct, then the
witten eect should also be seen for zerobranes within the matrix model (14) amended by
the theta-term. in other words, if one calculates the interaction force between the point-
like objects of the matrix model with the theta-term, then this force should depend on the
theta angle. we found that this is indeed the case, i.e., the interaction potential between
pure qcd zerobranes of (14) depends on the theta angle [23]. this can be interpreted
as the fact that zerobranes (monopoles) acquire electric charges due to the witten eect,
and that these electric charges change the interaction force between them [23]. note that
in qcd monopoles emerge as singularities in the theory of gluons. on the other hand,
in the t-dual picture qcd monopoles are manifest but massless gluons emerge at certain
singularities in the monopole moduli space. adopting the conjecture formulated above, we
study condensation of qcd monopoles in the following section.

4. monopole condensation

in this section we intend to study the limit l >> , that is, r << . in this limit matrix
quantum mechanics (10,14) is placed in a small volume, and it should describe large volume
ym theory. according to (11), the coupling constant g in the matrix quantum mechanics
can be kept xed at a small value even if the ym coupling gym is large. thus, in what
follows we will study the regime where

l >>  , r <<  ,

g2
ym >> 1 ,

g << 1 .

however, in the matrix quantum mechanics we still have a large number of light winding
modes which complicate the dynamics.
indeed, pure qcd in a large volume limit is a
complicated theory containing not only the zero-modes of the compactication but also a
large number of light kaluza-klein modes whose masses scale as 1/l  ym. the matrix
quantum mechanics in a small volume is just as complicated as it contains light winding
modes (which map to the kaluza-klein modes in the t-dual ym description) whose masses
scale as r/ = 1/l. however, certain aspects of the ym theory in a large volume (which is
a strongly coupled theory) might be more transparent in the small volume matrix quantum
mechanics approach. we will consider below the limit when the monopoles are moving
very slowly. that is to say, their momenta are much smaller than the masses of light
winding modes. in this regime we expect that the winding modes are not yet excited and
certain properties can be simplied. in particular, this should be applicable for studying
condensation of slowly moving monopoles. in this approximation we can use the lagrangian
(10) where winding modes are neglected and derive condensation of qcd monopoles. the

10

rst thing to do is to write down the quantum mechanics of these massive objects in the
monopole moduli space approximation [25]. that is, let us suppose that there is a region
in the monopole moduli space where interactions between heavy, slowly-moving monopoles
are weak. this is the regime when monopoles are close to each other. then the eld (t)
in the moduli space approximation can be written as:

(23)

i(t) = u cl

i (t) u + = u diag(cid:16) r1

i (t), r2

i (t), ..., rn

i (t) (cid:17) u + ,

where the constant moduli have now become time dependent quantities rm
i (t) [25]. as
we stressed above, they dene positions of point-like qcd monopoles. notice that in the
moduli space approximation dened by (23) the commutator term in (10) vanishes. thus,
the model (10) reduces to a quantum mechanics of heavy, slowly-moving qcd monopoles
with the following simple hamiltonian:

h = g 

n 1xm=1

m

i (t)m

i (t) .

(24)

here m
monopole. the mass of a qcd monopole is therefore given by:

i stands for the conjugate momentum in the ith spatial direction of the mth qcd

m =

1

2g

=

ym
2g

.

(25)

as a result of (9) the monopole coordinates are periodic variables. therefore, the hamilto-
nian (24) has the unique normalizable eigenstate with zero momentum:

0 (r1

i , r2

i , .., rn

i ) =

1

(2r)3/2 .

(26)

this state satises the gausss law constraint (13). in fact, it describes monopole condensa-
tion in the moduli space approximation. thus, the qcd monopoles can condense. notice
that if r  0 the wavefunction (26) and the probability density for the condensate blow
up. however, the probability itself r 2r
|0|2d3x equals to 1. moreover, a state with zero
momentum is expected to have a constant wavefunction, like the one in (26), in accordance
with the uncertainty principle.

0

the above discussion is valid in the approximation of slowly-moving, almost non-
interacting monopoles (the moduli space approximation of (23)). for generic values of i(t)

recent discussions on the monopole moduli space approximation can be found in [26] and
references therein.

in this hamiltonian we have dropped the term describing the center-of-mass motion of the
system of n  1 monopoles.
the eigenvalue for this eigenstate is zero in the non-relativistic approximation we deal with. in
the relativistic case the non-zero eigenvalue would be given by the qcd monopole mass (25).

11

the commutator in the potential (14) is non-zero. hence, matrices xi cannot be diagonalized
simultaneously. nevertheless, monopole positions can still be dened as eigenvalues of xi
[27]. the o-diagonal elements then describe interactions between monopoles.

in the previous section we have seen that the potential between the monopoles is linearly
rising. therefore, the approximation adopted in this section is valid only if monopoles are
extremely close to each other, or, more precisely, when they sit on top of each other. this
means that they can condense only as some composites. moreover, in the state of lowest
energy the constituents in a condensate should sit on top each other. once the pair
is excited in the condensate, monopole-antimonopole constituents will start to move with
respect to each other with opposite momenta, keeping the total momentum equal to zero.
in this case there is a linearly rising potential between these objects (22). finite velocity
corrections can also be calculated to this potential using the results of [21].

5. large n qcd vs. bosonic membrane theory

in this section, using the results discussed above, we argue that in a certain regime large

n qcd can be described by a ve dimensional theory of a closed bosonic membrane.

thus, consider the regime l << . that is, pure qcd is compactied on a small three-
torus. as we discussed in section 2, in the t-dual picture this theory is described by the
large volume r >>  matrix quantum mechanics (10). thus, to calculate the spectrum of
pure ym in the small volume limit one can use the matrix quantum mechanics (10) and
study the corresponding schrodinger equation in the large volume limit [13]. furthermore,
a remarkable discovery was made in [28,29] where the matrix quantum mechanics (14) in
the large n limit was shown to be equivalent to a light-cone theory of a closed bosonic
membrane. as a consequence, the membrane theory was used in [30] to study the small
volume ym spectrum in the large n limit.

in this section we will briey discuss the relation between the membrane theory, large n
matrix quantum mechanics and ym model from the point of view of t-duality. in particular,
let us review how the membrane action reduces to the matrix model (10, 14). we start with
the theory of a closed bosonic membrane in ve dimensional space-time. we are going to
present the basic features of the membrane hamiltonian construction in the light-cone gauge.

 a condensed monopole-antimonopole pair in some sense resembles a condensed quark-antiquark
pair in qcd: there is a linearly rising potential between quarks, yet they can be considered as free
particles when they come close to each other, and, nally, they condense in quark-antiquark pairs
in the s-wave channel. all these properties seem to be shared by the qcd monopoles as well.

 the phenomenon of monopole-antimonopole condensation is s-dual to coopers phenomenon
of electric charge condensation. however, the potential between constituents in a condensed
monopole-antimonopole pair is linearly raising. this diers from coopers condensation which
gives rise to a weakly coupled pair. strongly coupled monopole-antimonopole condensation might
be suggestive of a possible relation to high-temperature superconductivity where we are dealing
with the strong coupling regime. that is, the qcd ground state might be electric-magnetic dual
to the ground state of a theory describing high-temperature superconductivity.

12

for details the reader is referred to the original papers [28,29].

the membrane action in at minkowski space-time can be written as follows:

sm = tz d3q|detg| ,

(27)

where t is the membrane tension with the dimensionality of mass cubed; ,  = 0, 1, 2, are
the coordinates on the membrane world-volume; g denote the components of the induced
metric in the membrane world-volume

g() 

x ()

x()





,

(28)

where x,  = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, are the target space-time coordinates.

the membrane action is reparametrization invariant. hence, not all of the variables
it is

in the action are independent. one should carry out the gauge xing procedure.
convenient to introduce the light-cone coordinates:

and choose the light-cone gauge

x  =

1
2

(x 4  x 0) ,

x +() = x +(0) + 0 .

the light-cone gauge does not completely x the gauge freedom of the membrane action.
as a result, there still is a residual local invariance left. hence, one expects to have the
hamiltonian of the theory accompanied by a constraint equation. the detailed discussion
and the construction of the hamiltonian is given in [28,29]. here we present the nal result.
the expressions for the mass squared operator and the constraint can be written as follows:

m 2
2

="1
2p a

i p a

i +

f abcx b

i = 0 ,

i p c

(f abcx b

i x c

j )2# ,

t 2
4

i, j = 1, 2, 3 .

(29)

(30)

here f abc stand for the corresponding structure constants which we will specify in a moment.
the canonical coordinates and conjugate momenta are the functions of the time variable 0
only. the coordinates x a
in this expression are the coecients of the harmonic expansion
i
of the space-time coordinates xi on the surface of the membrane. for instance, if the
membrane has the topology of a two-sphere or a two-torus, then the harmonic expansion
mentioned above is just an expansion of the space-time coordinates in the basis of the
harmonic functions on the corresponding surface:

xi() =

xa=1

x a

i (0)y a(1, 2) ,

 for discussions on the relation between large n gauge groups and toric surfaces, see [31].

13

where y a()s are the harmonic functions. here the harmonic functions y a() form a repre-
sentation of the lie algebra of the su() gauge group [28,29]. the structure constants f abc
are those of su(). thus, the su() gauge group appears due to the reparametrization
invariance of the membrane action.
the expression (29) coincides, up to some rescalings, with the hamiltonian which can
be derived from (10) in the n   limit. indeed, the hamiltonian corresponding to (10)
reads:

1

2g

h =

1
2

a

i a

i +

1

(2g)2

1

4(2)2 (cid:16) f abcb

i c

j (cid:17)2

.

(31)

the constraint equations in (13) and (30) (which correspond to the gausss law (3)) are also
identical. thus, the matrix quantum mechanics (10) in the large n limit is equivalent to the
theory of a closed bosonic membrane with the topology of a sphere or a torus [28,29]. on the
other hand, we have argued above that the matrix quantum mechanics (10, 14) compactied
on the three-torus tr describes qcd monopoles and pure qcd on a dual torus tl. thus, a
ve dimensional theory of a bosonic membrane is a t-dual description of pure qcd. qcd
point-like monopoles in this case can be regarded as constituents of the membrane. the
formal transition between the two systems is via the following substitutions:

m 2 

1
g

h ,

t 2 

1

(4g)2

.

(32)

thus, one can calculate the membrane spectrum in terms of m and t , and then nd the
corresponding ym spectrum (in the regime where ym is compactied on a small torus and
is weakly coupled) using (32) [30].

6. speculations

the discussions in the previous section lead us to speculate on a possibility of an un-
derlying ve dimensional theory which might provide an adequate low energy description of
strongly coupled pure qcd. in particular, one could notice an obvious analogy between the
discussions in the previous sections and what happens in the context of m-theory. thus, the
strong coupling limit of 10 dimensional type iia is believed to be described by 11 dimen-
sional m-theory whose low energy eective theory is 11 dimensional supergravity. on the
other hand, the large n quantum mechanics of type iia d0-branes is believed to describe
m-theory in the innite momentum frame [18]. the former also arises upon the light-cone
quantization of the m2-brane [29].

the analogy with qcd monopoles is then clear. the latter are analogous to d0-branes,
and type iia should be analogous to the qcd string theory, which is believed to be non-
critical (unlike type iia) [12]. because of this property it is likely that this string theory in
the strong coupling limit is intrinsically 5-dimensional, and, perhaps, the string expansion

the su () group (and its lie algebra) should be understood as the n   limit of the su (n )
group.

14

may not even be adequate so that some sort of membrane expansion (as in m-theory)
might be a more appropriate description. if so, it is tempting to conjecture that there is an
analog of m-theory, which is a 5-dimensional theory (let us tentatively call it q-theory),
whose low energy eective eld theory has solitonic membrane solutions. these membranes
are made of t hoofts qcd monopoles. the matrix quantum mechanics (once we also
include non-perturbative eects and take the large n limit) describing these monopoles then
might also describe some other properties of large n qcd. in particular, certain regimes
where we might not naively expect the matrix quantum mechanics to be applicable could
still be adequately described by the latter in analogy with the m-theory case. one possible
indication of this might be the fact that the glueball spectrum computed in [30] using the
membrane theory as the starting point is in a good agreement with the lattice data.
in
fact, in this case one can argue from the qcd viewpoint that such an agreement is not an
accident as the size of the corresponding glueballs is much smaller than the qcd correlation
length  = 1/ym.

if such a ve dimensional q-theory indeed exists, this would have interesting implications
for qcd. first, the matrix quantum mechanics would then provide a computational tool
for qcd. certain sectors of the glueball spectrum might also be computable by quantizing
the membrane. the magnetic dual of the letter (in 4+1 dimensions) is an instanton. it is
tempting to identify these instantons with the qcd instantons which would be consistent
with the expectation that the latter are also made of point-like qcd monopoles [32].

at present it is not completely clear whether the above conjectures, which are based
on the analogy with m-theory, will hold.
in particular, here we do not expect any non-
renormalization theorems as we have no supersymmetry. generalization to supersymmetric
qcd might therefore be desirable as in the latter case supersymmetry might yield some
simplications (albeit there might also be various possible complications). these and other
issues are currently under investigation.

acknowledgments

the authors are grateful to gia dvali for useful discussions. the work of g.g. was
supported by the grant nsf phy-94-23002. the work of z.k. was supported in part by
the grant nsf phy-96-02074, and the doe 1994 oji award. z.k. would also like to thank
albert and ribena yu for nancial support.

15

references

[1] g. t hooft, in high energy physics, ed. a. zichichi (editrice compositori, bologna,

1976).

[2] s. mandelstam, phys. rept. c23 (1976) 245.
[3] y. nambu, phys. rept. c23 (1976) 250.
[4] n. brambilla, a. vairo, hep-ph/9904330.
[5] m. baker, j.s. ball, f. zachariasen, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 4400.
[6] a. abrikosov, jetp 32 (1957) 1442.
[7] n. seiberg, e. witten, nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 19; erratum-ibid. b430 (1994) 485;

nucl. phys. b431 (1994) 484.

[8] n. seiberg, phys. rev. d49 (1994) 6857.
[9] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b190[fs3] (1981) 455.
[10] m.n. chernodub, m.i. polikarpov, hep-th/9710205.
[11] c. montonen, d. olive, phys. lett. 72b (1977) 117.
[12] a.m. polyakov, int. j. mod. phys. a14 (1999) 645.
[13] m. luscher, nucl. phys. b205[fs5] (1982) 483.
[14] j. collins, renormalization, cambridge university press, 1984.
[15] u. danielson, g. ferreti, b. sundborg, int. journ. mod. phys. a11 (1996) 5463; hep-

th/9603081.

[16] d. kabat, p. pouliot, phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 1004; hep-th/9603127.
[17] m. douglas, d. kabat, p. pouliot, s. shenker, nucl. phys. b485 (1997) 85.
[18] t. banks, w. fischler, s. shenker, l. susskind, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112.
[19] w. taylor, hep-th/9801182.
[20] n. ishibashi, h. kawai, y. kitazawa, a. tsuchiya, nucl. phys. b498 (1997) 467.
[21] o. tafjord, v. periwal, nucl. phys. b517 (1998) 227.
[22] v.i. arnold, a. gusein-zade, a. varchenko, singularities of dierentiable maps, i,

ii, birkhauser, 1985.

[23] g. gabadadze, z. kakushadze, hep-th/9908039; mod. phys. lett. a14 (1999) 2151.
[24] e. witten, phys. lett. 86b (1979) 283.
[25] n.s. manton, phys. lett. 110b (1982) 54.
[26] e.j. weinberg, hep-th/9610065.
[27] e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 335.
[28] j. hoppe, quantum theory of a relativistic surface, in proceedings of the workshop
constraints theory and relativistic dynamics (florence, 1986), eds. g. longhi, l.
lusanna (world scientic, singapore, 1987).

[29] b. de wit, j. hoppe, h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b305 (1988) 545.
[30] g. gabadadze, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 094015.
[31] d. fairlie, c. zachos, phys. lett. 224b (1989) 101; d. fairlie, p. fletcher, c. zachos,

j. math. phys. 31 (1990) 1088; phys. lett. 218b (1989) 203.

[32] k. lee, p. yi, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3711;

k. lee, phys. lett. b426 (1998) 323;
t.c. kraan, p. van baal, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 627; phys. lett. b435 (1998) 389.

16

