domain wall junctions are 1/4-bps states

sean m. carroll1, simeon hellerman2, and mark trodden3

1institute for theoretical physics

university of california

santa barbara, california 93106, usa.

carroll@itp.ucsb.edu

2department of physics
university of california

santa barbara, california 93106, usa.

sheller@physics.ucsb.edu

3department of physics

case western reserve university

10900 euclid avenue

cleveland, oh 44106-7079, usa.

trodden@theory1.physics.cwru.edu

abstract

we study n = 1 susy theories in four dimensions with multiple discrete
vacua, which admit solitonic solutions describing segments of domain walls
meeting at one-dimensional junctions. we show that there exist solutions
preserving one quarter of the underlying supersymmetry  a single hermitian
supercharge. we derive a bps bound for the masses of these solutions and
construct a solution explicitly in a special case. the relevance to the conning
phase of n = 1 susy yang-mills and the m-theory/sym relationship is
discussed.

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
9

 

 
 

3
v
7
1
2
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

cwru-p21-99

hep-th/9905217

address after 1 july 1999: enrico fermi institute, university of chicago, 5640 s. ellis avenue,
chicago, il 60637; carroll@theory.uchicago.edu

i. introduction

duality has played a fundamental role in recent progress in understanding quantum eld

theories at strong coupling. one of the most indispensable tools in formulating and providing

evidence for duality conjectures for supersymmetric theories has been the existence of states

preserving some but not all of the underlying supersymmetry of the hamiltonian. these

states, referred to as bps states, are useful because they lie in shortened multiplets of the

supersymmetry algebra, and therefore they cannot disappear or appear as parameters of the

theory, such as the coupling constant, are varied continuously. the spectrum of bps states

is thus one of the few characteristics of a quantum eld theory that can be predicted easily

at strong coupling.

a celebrated application of this tool has been to gauge theories in four dimensions with

extended (n = 2, 4) supersymmetry. these theories feature particle-like solitons  mag-

netic monopoles  that preserve half the supersymmetry of the hamiltonian, lie in short

multiplets, and therefore can be followed to strong coupling, where they become the funda-

mental excitations of a dual, weakly coupled theory.

in n = 1 theories in four dimensions, the situation is dierent. the susy algebra

forbids a rotationally invariant central charge and thus massive zero-dimensional objects,

such as magnetic monopoles, cannot lie in short representations of the algebra. however, it

has been noted that the n = 1 susy algebra in 4d can admit a central extension if the

central charges transform nontrivially under the rotation group [1,2]. consequently, in such

theories there can exist states which are extended objects preserving half the supersymmetry

 two hermitian supercharges. these objects are domain walls separating two of a set of

disconnected vacua.

in this paper, we show that, if an n = 1 theory has three or more mutually disconnected

vacua, there exist states preserving a quarter of the underlying supersymmetry  a single

hermitian supercharge. these states are junctions of bps domain walls. networks of

intersecting walls have been studied in a cosmological context [3], and theories supporting

topological defects ending on other defects of various dimensions (including models of walls

ending on walls) have also been constructed [4]. in addition, reference [5] contains a general

discussion of domain wall intersections in n = 1 theories.

the organization of the paper is as follows. in section ii, we give a brief review of bps

domain walls in n = 1 theories. in section iii, we nd the bps equations satised by a

soliton preserving a quarter of the underlying supersymmetry. in sections iv and v we use

1

the bps equations to derive some constraints on the kinematics of these solutions, and in

section vi we use what weve learned to construct solutions. in section vii we then apply

these considerations to the particular case of n = 1 supersymmetric yang-mills theory,

before concluding and discussing open questions in section viii.

as this work was being completed, we became aware of a related paper by gibbons and

townsend [6], in which they also argue on general grounds for the existence of bps wall

junctions preserving 1/4 of the n = 1 supersymmetry.

ii. supersymmetric domain walls

to understand the origin of central charges in n = 1 theories with only chiral superelds,

consider the theory with superpotential

w = 2  2n n+1

n + 1

,

(2.1)

where n is an integer  2. the anticommutator {q, q} of two supercharges in this theory
doesnt automatically vanish, but, for a static conguration, is proportional to the integral

of the total derivative

(0a)

aw () ,

where a runs over spacelike indices and  is the scalar component of the supereld .
the supersymmetry algebra therefore closes on a non-scalar central charge z a, which is

proportional to the change in the value of the superpotential between spatial innities in

dierent directions. this extension of the susy algebra [1,2] is relevant to the conning

phase of pure supersymmetric gluodynamics in 4 dimensions, where it has been shown [7]

that, for the gauge group su(n), the theory has n distinct vacua corresponding to distinct

values of the superpotential. it was shown in [2] that this central charge allowed the existence

of 1/2-supersymmetric domain walls, where the order parameter which changes across the

wall is essentially the expectation value of the gluino condensate.

more concretely, consider the full susy algebra

{q, q } = 2
{q, q} = 2z a(0a)
 ,

 p

(2.2)

(2.3)

where p is the energy-momentum vector of the system. we see that a state with energy
h = (z az a)1/2 preserves the supercharges

2

q   a 

z a

(z bz b)1/2

q 

(2.4)

and their hermitian conjugates. notice that, although this appears to give four hermi-

tian supercharges, there are really only two linearly independent hermitian supercharges

unbroken.

iii. bps bounds for junctions

we now turn to the general bps properties of the wall junctions we have just described,

and those we will introduce later. the n = 1 chiral theory of the previous section has

supercurrent

j = i2()

   + i2w () 

  ,

with associated supercharge

q = i2z d3xh(0)

(~x)  (~x) + w ((~x))0

 

 (~x)i .

(3.1)

(3.2)

a careful calculation of the anticommutator {q, q } recovers not only the usual momentum
term, but also a total derivative given by (a

   y a), where

y a  abcz d3x [b(~x)c(~x) + h.c.] .

(3.3)

a similar central term arises in theories which admit supersymmetric string solutions, in-

cluding many supergravity theories [8], and n = 1 susy gauge theories with abelian gauge

group factors and non-vanishing f-i parameters [9]. static string (or multi-string) solutions
have a tension determined by the value of the central charge y a, and preserve half the

supersymmetry of the hamiltonian.

if analogous partially supersymmetric states exist in the theory we are considering, then

they must look very dierent, since clearly the lagrangian cannot admit string solutions

with nite tension. we would like to know whether there are any bps states in chiral
n = 1 theories with a nonzero value of the central term y a.

as we shall see in the rest of this paper, the answer is yes. we nd that in theories with
only chiral superelds, the central term y a admits an interpretation not as string charge but

rather as junction charge. in any 4d eld theory with more than two disconnected vacua,

the domain walls may meet in one-dimensional junctions. if the theory is supersymmetric,

3

we demonstrate that junctions of the 1/2-supersymmetric domain walls may have stable

junction solutions preserving 1/4 of the supersymmetry of the hamiltonian.

from this point onwards, we will assume the junction state to be static and translationally
invariant in the direction x3. for such a conguration, the magnitude of the central term y a

plays the role of an additional contribution to the mass of a junction, above and beyond that

contributed by the half-walls themselves. that is, not only do the spokes of the junction

have a tension associated with them, but the hub has its own non-vanishing contribution

to the total energy, in contrast to the string junctions of [10].

as in the more familiar examples of central charges in susy algebras, the central term

here arises at the semiclassical level as a topological term entering a classical bps bound.

to see this, note that the hamiltonian for static congurations,

h = z d3x [(x1)(x1) + (x2)(x2) + (x3)(x3) + w ()w ()] ,

(3.4)

can be rewritten, for any phase , as the sum of positive denite terms and a total derivative

term:

h = r d3x [(x3)(x3) + (x1  ix2  w ())(x1 + ix2  w ())
+ (x1  ix2)(w ) + (x1 + ix2)(w ) + ix1x2  ix1x2]
= r d3x(cid:20)(x3)(x3) + 4(z 

+2 z(w ) + 2z(w ) + z(z  z) + z(z  z)]

w ())

1
2

w ())(z 

1
2

(3.5)

since the mass in any given region is equal to a positive denite term plus a surface term,

this imposes a classical bps lower bound on the mass in a region in terms of the values of

the elds on its boundary. if the positive denite terms are set to zero (which will turn out

precisely to impose the bps equations for a static conguration) then the total mass of the

state becomes a surface term. upon doing the integral we nd that the rst pair of surface

terms (involving the superpotential) gives the contribution to the mass corresponding to the
central charge z a, and the second pair gives the contribution corresponding to the central
charge y a.

for later convenience, note that this calculation is easily generalized to the case of a

nontrivial kahler metric k. in that case, the relevant surface terms in the energy are

2z(w ) + 2z(w ) + z(k,z  k,z) + z(k,z  k,z) .

(3.6)

4

therefore, the mass contributed by the junction charge y a is equal to a line integral of the
pullback of the one-form ik,d  ik,d, or, equivalently:

the junction mass is proportional to the area in eld space spanned by the elds of the

solution, as measured by the kahler metric.

although, unlike the masses of the domain walls themselves, the mass of the junction

is not protected by supersymmetry from perturbative quantum corrections, this is still a

compact and useful result, and we shall use it later to derive an interesting quantitative

prediction about the behavior of certain states in m-theory.

iv. domain wall junctions: the z3 case

in order understand the subtleties involved in constructing our 1/4-bps states, let us

specialize to the simplest nontrivial example, the case n = 3. the superpotential (2.1)

becomes

w = 2 

4
4

,

(4.1)

so that the theory has three supersymmetric vacua i, ii, and iii, in which the scalar

component takes on vacuum expectation values

i = , ii = e2i/3 , iii = e2i/3 .

(4.2)

we wish to consider an initial eld conguration in which  tends to each of these values in

three dierent directions, as in gure 1. if we allow the eld to radiate away energy, it will

settle down to a stable conguration whose topology is that of a junction of three half-walls
meeting at 120 angles.

we now analyze how much supersymmetry may be preserved by such a conguration.

first, consider the supercharges left unbroken by each individual half-wall. the changes

~w  r d3x ~w in the superpotential across the walls between vacua i and ii, between

vacua ii and iii, and between vacua iii and i, are

3
2

,

1
2

~wi,ii =  
~wii,iii = (0,1, 0) (cid:18)exp
~wiii,i =  

3
2

1
2

,

2i

, 0! (cid:18)exp

2i

3  1(cid:19) 
3 (cid:19) 
3 (cid:19) 

4i
3  exp
, 0! (cid:18)1  exp
4i

33
4
33
4

33
4

,

5

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

vacuum ii


exp(2   i/3)

 =



vacuum i


 =

vacuum iii

 =

exp(-2   i/3)





fig. 1. a eld conguration that interpolates among the three supersymmetric vacua. the energy

density is concentrated inside the contour.

6

respectively. therefore, the supercharges preserved by each half-wall alone are





q(1)
i,ii = q  q
q(2)
i,ii = q + q
q(1)
ii,iii = q  q
ii,iii = q + exp(cid:26)
q(2)
q(1)
iii,i = q  q
ii,iii = q + exp(cid:26)+
q(2)





(4.6)

(4.7)

(4.8)

(4.9)

(4.10)

(4.11)

2i

3 (cid:27) q



2i

3 (cid:27) q

 .

here we have written the conjugates of q in terms of q instead of q as we are dealing

with static states, and wish to emphasize hermiticity rather than lorentz covariance. the
subscripts , represent the supercharges with spin  1
the entire conguration can preserve at most the hermitian supercharge

2 in the z-direction, respectively. thus

qjunc = i(q  q
)

(4.12)

the equations satised by a semiclassical solitonic junction state |ji preserving this
supercharge can be found by taking the expectation value of the susy variations of the

fermions:

0 = ihj|{qjunc, }|ji
= hj|(x  iy)  w ()|ji
 (x  iy)hj||ji  w (hj||ji) ,

0 = hj|{qjunc, }|ji
= hj|(  + z)|ji ,

(4.13)

(4.14)

in the h  0 limit. notice that these are exactly the equations obtained by assuming
saturation of the classical bps bound (3.5). the existence of 1/4-bps domain wall junctions

depends on the existence of a solution to these equations. however, in general it is quite

dicult to solve the equations directly.

in order to address this, we pursue two dierent strategies. first, in section v we present

a picture of wall junctions and junction networks viewed on scales large compared to the

thickness of the walls, with emphasis on the z3 case. we derive a new form of the bps

7

c

1

3c

c

2

fig. 2. a long-distance view of a three-wall junction, and three elongated rectangular contours in

the z  z plane.

equations appropriate to this regime, and use it to show that the bps equations translate

into a condition on the kinematics of the junctions.

in section vi we take a dierent tack, and outline an explicit construction for junction and

network solutions to the bps equations. we apply this approach to a particular intersecting

domain wall solution, in which two bps walls intersect, rather than one terminating on the

other. while we do not resolve the existence question for domain wall junctions in general,

the construction demonstrates that 1/4-bps solutions do indeed exist in many cases.

v. long distance limit and integral bps equations

we will begin with the long-distance limit. our strategy is to derive an integral, global

form of the bps equations and use this to examine domain wall junctions on scales much

larger than the thickness of the walls. we will see that in this long-distance regime, the bps

condition is indeed satised for various congurations.

we consider eld congurations which tend to some vacuum everywhere at spatial in-

nity, except perhaps along codimension-one defects separating dierent vacua. such con-

gurations have approximately step-function behavior across domain walls, when viewed on

scales much larger than any length scale appearing in the lagrangian.

8

how do we check to see whether or not the bps equations are satised for a given

conguration in this limit? since we want to work in an approximation in which the elds

vary discontinuously, the dierential form of the bps equations is clearly unsatisfactory.

however we can write down an integral form of the equations, analogous to the integral

form of the rst-order maxwell equations.

we begin by noting that the bps equations

2kz = w ()

2kz = w ()

and

imply the relations

zw () = w ()z =


2

k 

w ()w () =


2

v (, )

and

zw () =


2

v (, ) ,

(5.1)

(5.2)

(5.3)

(5.4)

where v denotes the potential energy. we then integrate these equations over any large

region r in the z-z plane; in particular, integrate over an elongated rectangle containing a
segment of one of the walls, whose long side has length l >> 1.

using stokess theorem,

zr

dz  dz(zvz  zvz) = icr

(dzvz + dzvz) ,

(5.5)

and setting

we obtain

vz  iw
vz = iw  ,

 izr

dz  dzv = iic

(w dz  w dz) .

(5.6)

(5.7)

it is straightforward to check that for an isolated bps wall, the kinetic and potential

energies of the solution are equal, and so this must hold as well for the junction solution to
order l1. since dz  dz = 2idx  dy, the equation above then says that the total mass

9

enclosed by the contour c, for a 1/4-supersymmetric junction state, is given to order l1 by

the contour integral

menclosed = iic

(w dz  w dz) .

(5.8)

this reformulation of the bps equations immediately yields a useful set of restrictions

on the statics of wall junctions. assuming the walls themselves to saturate the bps bound

t = 2|w|,

(5.9)

taking l   and matching terms of order l1, we nd that each wall must be oriented
such that w  is real and positive, where  is the phase characterizing the orientation

of the wall in the complex plane.

thus, since wi,ii, wii,iii, and wiii,i dier from each other in phase by 1200,

this means that the orientations of the walls in the z-z plane must also dier by the same

amount. therefore, the integral forms of the bps equations conrm reasonable physical

expectations for the angles at which the walls must meet, based on the of forces on the

junction. although the z3 symmetry of this particular case makes the statics particularly

simple, it is straightforward to check that the integral form of the bps equations yields the

same consistent picture for an arbitrary superpotential with multiple vacua: the relative

angles of walls at a junction must be arranged so as to cancel the total force on the junction

point. therefore, for theories with four or more disconnected supersymmetric vacua, we

argue that unless there may to exist full moduli spaces of domain wall networks, as in gure

3. we caution, however, that the moduli space may not exist beyond this limit; the low-

frequency dynamics on this space are governed by a 1 + 1-dimensional eld theory with

only a single supercharge, which allows for the existence of potentials. the question of the

existence or nonexistence of such potentials lies beyond the scope of this paper.

it remains an open question whether there exists a topological index to count the number

of moduli directly, as has been done for moduli spaces of self-dual instantons, monopoles,

and other bps states in susy theories.

vi. geometric reverse-engineering: an explicit construction

despite the consistent picture we have presented of 1/4-bps domain wall junctions, a

skeptic might still suspect that there could be a subtle obstruction to the existence of such a

10

fig. 3. in the z4 theory, the long-distance limit suggests the existence of a one-dimensional moduli
space of bps wall junction networks with four external walls. the two branches of moduli space, which
meet at a z4-symmetric branch point, resemble t- and s-channel feynman diagrams, respectively.

state. in order to allay any such anxieties, we will demonstrate that it is straightforward to

construct 1/4-supersymmetric congurations describing wall junctions and networks thereof.

we begin with the observation that the statement zw = zw  for some phase 

always holds for 1/4-bps states, independent of the form of the kahler metric. in other

words, the condition for a function w (z, z) describing the behavior of the superpotential

as a function of space is simply the condition that (w , w ) be equal to (za, za) for

some real function a.

furthermore, if we know more or less what the energy density of the state should look

like, we can simply construct the function a by solving the linear poisson equation zza =
1
4v (z, z). having solved for the superpotential as a function of space, the value of the eld
 is then implicitly dened.

there are two catches to this procedure. the rst is that one cannot start with a given

kahler metric and use this procedure to solve the bps equations for that metric. once

one has a prole for the eld  one can, of course, reconstruct the corresponding metric,

if not necessarily in closed form, although one must then check that the resulting metric

is nonsingular and positive denite. we shall give an example below. the second catch

is that the process of solving for (z, z) in terms of the superpotential w (z, z) can break

down if the function w (z, z) ever attains a value for which w () vanishes. these caveats,

however, are really blessings in disguise. if not for such obstructions, one could clearly start

with energy density distributions with no reasonable interpretation as a junction state or a

network thereof, and use them to generate 1/4-bps states.

11

there is another, more subtle, property that the function w (z, z) must satisfy for a bps

junction or network. the bps equation for a single static wall,

k~n  ~ = w (),

(6.1)

where ~n is the direction normal to the wall and  is a phase, means that the imaginary

part of w  remains constant over a bps wall trajectory  that is, the trajectory in the

w -plane of a single domain wall solution is always a straight line segment connecting two

vacua [11]. this implies a restriction on w (z, z) for a bps junction or network state: that
the set of values assumed by w over the z  z plane must exactly ll out the convex hull in
the w -plane of the k vacua among which the junction interpolates. that is, the image in

the w -plane of the junction with k legs is simply a k-sided polygon, which we will refer to

henceforth as the bps polygon in the w -plane.

to make this less abstract, it would be nice to construct explicitly the functions w (z, z)

and a(z, z) for the basic three-wall junction in the z3 theory. however we have not been

able to nd an energy density prole which allowed us to solve the poisson equation in

closed form for such a conguration.

instead, we will turn to a case in which a simple

closed-form solution does exist, and veriably has the correct properties to describe a well-

behaved junction state: the z4-symmetric four-wall junction in the z4 theory which lies at

the intersection of the s-channel and t-channel branches of the moduli space of four-wall

networks in that theory [5].

given the superpotential

w () = 2 

5
52 ,

(6.2)

which has vacua at ,i, there is a natural guess at a prole function w (z, z) for a
z4-symmetric four-wall junction:
(2  2i)3

w =

(6.3)

5

(tanh{(z + z)}  i tanh{i(z  z)})

note that our initial prole does indeed map to itself under a combined discrete spatial

rotation and r-symmetry transformation, as we expect the actual solution to do. we now

verify that this function has the correct behavior to be a junction state.

first consider the behavior of w as x  +, and y = mx, with m > 0. in this limit

w 

(2  2i)3

5

(1 + i) =

43
5

,

12

(6.4)

im(w)

im(w)

re(w)

re(w)

fig. 4. bps polygons in the w -plane for the two examples discussed in this section. vertices
(vacua) preserve four supercharges, edges (half-walls) preserve two, and the interior (the junction)
preserves one.

which is the correct value of the superpotential in the vacuum at  = . since we know

how w transforms under the discrete z4 rotation subgroup, this then implies that w has
the correct limiting behavior in all four quadrants of the z  z plane.

second, it is clear that the set of values assumed by w is precisely the convex hull in

the w plane of the four vacuum values of the superpotential (see gure 4) so the solutions

w -prole does indeed ll out the bps polygon whose edges are the trajectories of the super-

potential along the four individual bps domain (half-) wall solutions. since w (z, z) stays

within the bps polygon for all z, z, the function (z, z) can be recovered from equation (6.2),
since w () is non-vanishing everywhere in this region.

until now we have let the kahler potential be an arbitrary function k(, ). then the

condition for a junction state to preserve the supercharge q  q

 is

2kz =  2 

4

2 ! .

therefore, the kahler metric can be expressed as

k(z, z) = " 2  4/2

2z

# .

(6.5)

(6.6)

for this to be a sensible metric, the function k must be real and non-degenerate. to check

this, we point out that the requirement that k be real is equivalent to the requirement

that

13

(z)w () = (z)w ()

(6.7)

however, the superpotential can be written as w = za(z, z) where  = exp( i
is the real function

4 ) and a

222

5

a =

[ln cosh((z + z)) + ln cosh(i(z  z))] ,

(6.8)

and we may therefore infer that k(z, z) is indeed everywhere real. moreover, as the

gradient of w is everywhere non-vanishing in the interior of the bps polygon, this means

that k is real and nonzero, and thus positive denite for all z, z. therefore, since our

theory contains only one chiral supereld, the metric dened in this way satises the kahler

condition trivially.

hence, we have demonstrated that, for some choice of reasonable metric and the su-

perpotential (6.2), there exists a domain wall junction preserving a single supercharge. it

remains to note that the map from the (z, z) plane to the bps polygon is nonsingular and

one-to-one. thus we could formally re-express the metric as a positive denite function of

 and , which could be derived from a kahler potential kinitial.

having developed this existence proof for nontrivial kahler metric, we may wonder again

about the case with trivial metric. at present we have a partial answer to this question. let

k(t; , )  (t  1)kinitial(, ) + t .

(6.9)

then the corresponding metric is positive denite  t  [0, 1]. we expect the number of
supersymmetric congurations in a given topological class to remain the same as we vary the

parameters of the lagrangian in a suciently smooth way. and so as we vary the metric, we

can vary the solution to the bps equations, knowing that a solution must exist for all values

of t, including t = 1. therefore it seems that a solution exists for trivial kahler metric, and

our argument is complete.

while it is still possible that there is some obstruction to continuing the solution to

t = 1, other than an ill-dened metric, at very least, we have shown that a metric can be

constructed which allows bps junctions.

14

vii. relevance to n = 1 sym

the models we wrote down were quite simple, based on a single chiral supereld and

a polynomial superpotential. however they are closely related to a particular physical sys-

tem of great interest. the simplest four-dimensional supersymmetric gauge theories, pure

super-yang-mills theories with no matter multiplets, are believed to have a nite number

of equivalent supersymmetric vacua (n of them for the gauge group su(n) [7]) related by a

spontaneously broken discrete r-symmetry, as does our model.

the picture is as follows. the su(n) theory has, at the classical level, a u(1) r-symmetry

under which the gauge elds transform trivially and the gluinos a

 have charge +1. the
dynkin index of the adjoint representation is equal to 2n, so the r-symmetry is broken by

anomalies down to a z2n subgroup. since bosonic operators transform under a zn subgroup,

strong coupling eects can at most spontaneously break z2n to z2, so the maximum number

of supersymmetric vacua the theory may have is n. an index calculation [7] shows that this

upper bound is attained.

the existence of disconnected vacua means that su(n) sym has domain walls interpo-

lating between them, and the anomaly term (2.2) makes it possible for the domain walls

to preserve half the supersymmetry.

indeed, this is the context in which bps-saturated

domain walls were originally discovered. can they form bps junctions? and if so, can we

calculate their tensions explicitly?

the description of the eective theory of sym is quite complicated, and at present still

poorly understood. but the considerations of sections (v) and (vi) suggest that within the

category of susy theories with multiple vacua related by a spontaneously broken cyclic

r-symmetry, domain wall junction and network states are a fairly robust feature whose

existence depends little on the details of the metric. indeed, the only essential input to our

calculation was that the theory contain a single chiral supereld.

the authors of [12], [13], building on earlier work [14], derive an eective action for

large-n susy gluodynamics in its conning phase. their model describes spontaneous zn

breaking and domain walls in terms of a single supereld x, which is closely related to the
gluino condensate hi. the superpotential for this model,

wef f = n2x 

cnx n+1

n + 1

,

(7.1)

(where c is a constant), clearly gives the correct global behavior for the system: the super-

potential transforms nontrivially under a spontaneously broken zn r-symmetry, and there

15

are bps domain walls interpolating between distinct vacua. indeed, this superpotential is

trivially related to ours: by rescaling x, one can make the two superpotentials the same.
the explicit dependence of wef f on c and n is then absorbed into the normalization of the
metric.

we therefore expect that:

su(n) sym contains in its hilbert space wall junction states preserving a single hermi-

tian supercharge, at least for suciently large n.

the tension of the walls was calculated in [1,2].

in order to calculate the additional

energy contributed by the junction itself, one would need to use the kahler metric for

this model, which, unfortunately, is not known. so we can at present make a qualitative

prediction about the existence of 1/4-supersymmetric junctions in n = 1 sym, but not yet

a qualitative one about their tensions.

viii. discussion

sym with gauge group su(n) is believed to have a dual formulation in terms of m-

theory.

in [15], witten describes a conguration of m-theory vebranes with a three-

dimensional intersection, the eective eld theory on which is argued to be in the same

universality class as pure n = 1 supersymmetric yang-mills theory. many of the strong-

coupling phenomena present in sym, such as color ux tubes and domain walls, then have

simple descriptions in terms of intersecting branes in m-theory. indeed, explicit m-theory

states have been written down which correspond to bps domain walls in this eective theory

[16], [17].

we expect that there ought to exist solutions of 11-dimensional supergravity preserving

1/32 of the supersymmetry of the theory, corresponding to the full spectrum of bps wall

junctions described in this paper. the question of the existence of such solutions therefore

may provide a stringent and quantitative test of the duality between m-theory and n = 1

sym.

acknowledgments

the authors would like to thank oren bergman, zurab kakushadze, andrew sornborger

and cyrus taylor for valuable discussions. this work was supported in part by the na-

tional science foundation under grants phy/94-07194 and phy/97-22022, and by the u.s.

department of energy (d.o.e.).

16

references

[1] e.r.c. abraham and p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b351, 313 (1991).

[2] g. dvali and m. shifman, phys. lett. b396, 64 (1997); hep-th/9612128.

[3] b.s. ryden, w.h. press and d.n. spergel, astrophys. journ. 357, 293 (1990).

[4] s.m. carroll and m. trodden, phys. rev. d 57, 5189 (1998); hep-th/9711099.

[5] s.v. troitsky and m.b. voloshin, phys. lett. b449, 17 (1999).

[6] g.w. gibbons and p.k. townsend, hep-th/9905196.

[7] e. witten, nucl. phys. b202, 253 (1982).

[8] j. a. de azcarrage, j. p. gauntlett, j. m. izquierdo and p. k. townsend, phys. rev.

lett. 63, 2443 (1989).

[9] s.c. davis, a.-c. davis, and m. trodden, phys. lett. b405, 257 (1997);

hep-ph/9702360.

[10] j. h. schwartz, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. b55, 1 (1997); hep-th/9607201.

[11] p. fendley, s.d. mathur, c. vafa and n.p. warner, phys. lett. b243, 257 (1990).

[12] g. dvali, g. gabadadze, and z. kakushadze, hep-th/9901032.

[13] g. dvali and z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b537, 297 (1999); hep-th/9807140.

[14] g. veneziano and s. yankielowicz, phys. lett. 113b, 231 (1982).

[15] e. witten, nucl. phys. b507, 658 (1997); hep-th/9706109.

[16] a. fayyazuddin and m. spalinski, hep-th/9711083.

[17] a. volovich, hep-th/9710120; a. volovich, phys. rev. d59, 065005 (1999);

hep-th/9801166.

17

