0
0
0
2

 
r
p
a
2
1

 

 
 

4
v
0
6
0
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

quantum gravitodynamics

ramchander r. sastry

(february 18, 2014)

the innite dimensional generalization of the quantum mechanics of extended
objects, namely, the quantum eld theory of extended objects is employed to ad-
dress the hitherto nonrenormalizable gravitational interaction following which
the cosmological constant problem is addressed. the response of an electron to
a weak gravitational eld (linear approximation) is studied and the order  cor-
rection to the magnetic gravitational moment is computed.

keywords: graviton, nonrenormalizability, magnetic gravitational moment, non-
locality

i. introduction

the quantum mechanics of extended objects [sastry 99a] and its innite dimensional gen-

eralization, namely, the quantum eld theory of extended objects, have been presented by the

author in connection with the scalar eld and quantum electrodynamics with the pauli term

[sastry 99b,sastry 99c]. it is evident that the quantum eld theory of extended objects ap-

pears to successfully address the issue of nonrenormalizability in these cases. in this paper

we focus our attention on one of the most important of the nonrenormalizable interactions,

namely, the quantum theory of gravity. we employ the extended object formalism to render

quantum gravity nite following which we present the solution to the cosmological constant

problem. it is found that the extended object formulation naturally aords small values for the

cosmological constant, indeed, much smaller than the observational bound. the response of an

electron to a weak gravitational eld (linear approximation) has hitherto not been amenable

to a solution because of the nonrenormalizable nature of quantum gravity. we examine this

problem using the quantum eld theory of extended objects and compute the order  correction

to the magnetic gravitational moment which arises due to the motion of masses in the eld

dept. of physics, univ. of texas at austin, austin, tx 78712

1

ii. the gravitational field

apart from string theory, recent approaches to quantum gravity have been surveyed by isham

et al. [isham 75,isham 81]. the traditional approach to gravity has been to start with the

einstein-hilbert action in geometrized units with g = c = h = 1

s = z d4xgr.

(2.1)

the process of quantization is begun by power expanding the metric tensor around some clas-

sical solution g(0)

 of the equations of motion:

g (x) = g(0)

 + h

(2.2)

where h is the graviton eld. the classical metric is usually taken to be the lorentz metric.
by means of the transformation t  it we can also choose g(0)
[hawking 78]. henceforth, in this section, g(0)

 will refer to the euclidean metric. given the

 to be the euclidean metric

expansion eq. (2.2) we can also expand the christopher symbols, and hence the entire action,

in a power series in h. each term of the series contains two derivatives and an increasing

number of h elds and powers of the negative dimensional coupling constant. the existence of

a negative dimensional coupling constant is the origin of the problem of the nonrenormalizability

of gravity. if we introduce a linear approximation then general relativity reduces to the theory

of a massless spin 2 eld. the lagrangian in this approximation reduces to:

l0 =

1

4 (cid:2)( h)2 + (h)2  2hh + 2hh(cid:3) .

by a suitable choice of gauge we obtain the euclidean graviton propagator as:

 +   

k2 + i

.

(2.3)

(2.4)

the full theory of general relativity may be viewed as that of a massless spin 2 eld which

undergoes a nonlinear self interaction. as is well known this propagator fails to renormalize

the theory.

2

apart from the tensor indices the propagator given in eq. (2.3) can be viewed as the massless

limit of the ordinary euclidean scalar eld propagator. starting from the quantum mechanics

of extended objects the author has derived a propagator for the scalar eld

d(p) =

ep2/m2
p2 + m2

(2.5)

which successfully renormalizes the hitherto nonrenormalizable 6 interaction [sastry 99b].

the derivation of this propagator involves the characterization of virtual particle intermediate

states as fuzzy particle states. the preservation of crucial properties such as causality, lorentz

invariance, and unitarity have been discussed by the author in the context of the scalar eld.

by taking the massless limit of eq. (2.5) and introducing tensor indices we propose a euclidean

graviton propagator (retarded) of the form:

( +   )

ek2/m2

k2

(2.6)

where 1

m is the graviton compton wavelength given by 6.7  104r where r = c/h is the
hubble radius of the universe and h is the hubble constant. the corresponding propagation

amplitude is given by

h0|h(x)h(y)|0i = ( +   )z

d4k
(2)4

ek2/m2

k2

eip(xy).

(2.7)

the right hand side of eq. (2.7) is symmetric under x  y (just change k  k) implying
that [h (x), h(y)] = 0. the vanishing of the commutator can be explained by observing that

h(x) is a eld which creates and destroys 4-momentum states (or mass states when on shell)

[sastry 99b]. since these states are relativistic invariants the measurement of a eld which

creates such states at one spacetime point cannot aect its measurement at another spacetime

point. in the limit of vanishing compton wavelength we obtain the usual propagator (retarded)

which is the greens function for the linearized equations of motion. a crucial feature of this

propagator is the gaussian damping term which eliminates the high frequency modes and ren-

ders scattering amplitudes and n-point functions nite. in this approach, h (x) admits an

expansion only as a sum over 4-momentum states and this fact is crucial in preserving causal-

ity. in the context of the scalar eld the author has shown that the absence of 3-momentum

3

characterizations for fuzzy particle states coupled with the fact that we are generalizing to

innite dimensions a causal formulation, namely, the quantum mechanics of extended objects,

preserves the statement of causality [sastry 99b]. since we are taking the massless limit of

the scalar eld, causality will also be preserved in this case. in this paper we do not prove

unitarity but appeal directly to experimental verication by calculating the magnetic gravita-

tional moments which arise due to the motion of masses in the eld. it is suggestive that the

euclidean scalar eld propagator given in eq. (2.5) has been shown to preserve unitarity in the

hitherto nonrenormalizable 6 theory [sastry 99b]. before we proceed to study the response of

an electron to a weak gravitational eld using the graviton propagator we have arrived at, we

focus our attention on another important problem, namely, the cosmological constant problem.

iii. the cosmological constant problem

a major crisis facing physics is the cosmological constant problem: theoretical expectations

for the cosmological constant exceed observational limits by about 120 orders of magnitude. a

good review of the problem and various attempts at its solution have been given by weinberg

[weinberg 89]. the observational limit on the cosmological constant  obtained by measure-

ment of cosmological red shifts as a function of distance is given by

 < 1047gev 4.

(3.1)

according to einstein, the energy-momentum tensor of matter  is the source of the gravi-

tational eld. a vacuum energy density h0|h|0i =  contributes to this source a term

 = n ( ) + g

(3.2)

where the rst term on the right is subtracted to have zero expectation value [peskin 95].

the vacuum energy term has the form of einsteins cosmological constant and this potentially

aects the expansion of the universe. consider the hamiltonian for the scalar eld of mass m

h = z

d3p

(2)3 p(cid:18)a

pap +

1

p(cid:3)(cid:19)
2 (cid:2)ap, a

(3.3)

4

if we compute the zero point energy employing the canonical commutation relations (cid:2)ap, a
(3)(p  q) we obtain the zero point energy and hence  as

q(cid:3) =

 = z 

0

4 p2 dp
(2)3

1

2pp2 + m2

(3.4)

where  is a high momentum cut o,   m. if we choose the cuto  at the planck mass
mp = 1019 gev we obtain the value of the cosmological constant as

 = 2  1071gev 4,

(3.5)

which exceeds the observational limit by 120 orders of magnitude! this is because the canonical

commutation relations arise from the quantum eld theory of point particles in which the nite

extent or delocalization of a particle is neglected. when we take the cut o at the planck mass

mp in eq. (3.4) we are eectively bounding the short distances by the planck length lp = 1033

cm. if we incorporate the nite extent of the eld particle of mass m into the physics we would

need to place an eective lower bound on the short distances given by the compton wavelength

1
m and not by the planck length. this lower bound can be large depending on the mass of the

eld particle. from the quantum eld theory of extended objects we have the noncanonical

commutation relations:

(cid:2)ap, a

q(cid:3) = ep

2/m2

(3)(p  q)

(3.6)

these commutation relations smear out the particles 3- position and by imposing them we

obtain the zero point energy and hence  as

 = z 

0

4 p2 dp
(2)3

1

2pp2 + m2ep2/m2

m4
82 .



(3.7)

we observe that a high momentum cut o is not required to make the integral convergent since

the integral has a natural cut o at the compton wavelength of the eld particle 1

m . the short

distances are now bounded by the compton wavelength and therefore the cosmological constant

becomes dependent on the mass of the eld particle. by making use of the observational limit

given in eq. (3.1) we obtain an upper bound for the particle mass as

5

m < 5  1012gev = 5  103ev

(3.8)

if we exclude the possibility of the existence of matter elds and for that matter the electromag-

netic eld in empty space and if we assume that the gravitational eld permeates all of empty

space we can always choose m to be the graviton mass which has an upper limit of 2 1029 ev
[goldhaber 74]. hence, the vacuum energy density of empty space which is proportional to the

cosmological constant is well below the observational limit (by about 70 orders of magnitude)

and the cosmological constant is pushed even closer to zero [hawking 84]. thus, the extended

object formulation is able to predict a small value for the cosmological constant in a natural

way. we now proceed to study the response of an electron to a weak gravitational eld.

iv. gravitodynamics

when gravity is weak the linear approximation to general relativity should be valid.

in

minkowski space with  = (1, 1, 1, 1) if we dene

and

h = h 

1
2

 h

a = 

1
4

h t

(4.1)

(4.2)

where t = (cid:0) 

x0(cid:1)

is the time direction of some global inertial coordinate system of  .

it follows that a satises precisely the maxwell equations in the lorentz gauge [wald 84].

this is because the linearized einstein equation predicts that the space-time and time-time

components of h satisfy

h0 = 16j

where j = tt is the mass-energy current density 4-vector and

t = 2t(j)  tt

(4.3)

(4.4)

is the stress-energy tensor approximated to linear order in velocity. if we assume that the time

derivatives of h are negligible, then the space-space components of h (which satisfy the

6

source free wave equation) vanish, and we nd that to linear order in the velocity of the test

body, the geodesic equation now yields

a = e  4v  b

(4.5)

where e and b are dened in terms of a by the same formulas as in electromagnetism [wald

84]. thus, linearized gravity predicts that the motion of masses produces very similar eects

to those of electromagnetism. it is our goal to give precise meaning to these statements. to

that end, let us write down the lagrangian for gravitodynamics in terms of a

lqgd = (i/d  m) 

1
4

f f 

where d is the gauge covariant derivative

d =  + ima(x),

(4.6)

(4.7)

f = a  a is the weak gravitational eld strength tensor. we note that it is the
mass in geometrized units (g = 1) rather than the charge which couples to the eld in this

case. due to the presence of the newton constant, the coupling has mass dimension of 1 and
the interaction is nonrenormalizable if we compute the gravitational moment we nd that it is

given by

 =

g
2

s

(4.8)

where g = 2 + 2f2(0) is the lande g-factor, s is the electron spin, and f2(0) is the order 

correction to the g-factor. to lowest order f2(0) = 0 ad we nd that the magnetic gravitational

moment is roughly 12 orders of magnitude smaller than corresponding electromagnetic moment.

in order to calculate the order  correction we need to compute the diagram shown in gure

1. we have expressed our graviton eld in terms of the vector eld a. hence, we make use

of a retarded, massless, vector boson propagator analogous to the photon propagator but with

the gaussian damping term given by:

 ig

ek2/m2

g

k2

7

(4.9)

where 1
mg

is the graviton compton wavelength. by making use of standard techniques [peskin

95] we obtain

f2(0) = 2m2z 1

0

dx dy dz (x + y + z  1)z

d4l
(2)4

2m2 z(1  z)
[l2 + (1  z)2m2]3 e(l+zp)2/m2

g

(4.10)

where the momenta are now euclidean. thus, we obtain the order  correction as

f2(0) =

m

2 z 1

0

dz z 1z

0

dyz l5dl

2m2 z(1  z)
[l2 + (1  z)2m2]3 e(l+zp)2/m2

g

(4.11)

where m = (gm)2/4 and we have increased the momentum power in the integrand by a

factor of two in order to maintain the dimensionality of the graph. this is due to the negative

dimensional (mass dimension = -1) coupling constant. in order to get an estimate of the value

of f2(0) we can numerically evaluate the integral at zeroth order in p and we obtain a bound

for f2(0) as

f2(0) <

(4.12)

this value represents the order  correction to the lande g-factor for the magnetic gravitational

moment. due to the weak nature of the gravitational interaction the correction is extremely

small and its experimental verication will require very high precision tests.

v. conclusion

by quantizing the gravitational eld using the quantum eld theory of extended objects

we are able to successfully explain why the cosmological constant should be close to zero. in

addition, we are able to compute the order  correction to the magnetic gravitational moment.

the calculated value of the order  correction must be subjected to experimental tests.

acknowledgements

i would like to thank rafal zgadzaj for performing the numerical computations in mathematica.

8

sastry99a r. r. sastry, quant-ph/9903025.
sastry99b r. r. sastry, hep-th/9903171.
sastry99c r. r. sastry, hep-th/9903179.
isham75

isham81

c.j. isham, quantum gravity, eds. c.j. isham, r. penrose, d.w. sciama, clarendon press,
1975.
c.j. isham, quantum gravity 2, eds. c.j. isham, r. penrose, d.w. sciama, clarendon
press, 1981.

hawking78 s.w. hawking, in recent developments in gravitation cargese lectures, eds. m. levy &

s. deser, plenum, 1978.

w einberg89 s. weinberg, rev. mod. phys. 61, 1 (1989).
goldhaber 74 a. goldhaber & m. nieto, phys. rev. d9, 119 (1974).
hawking84 s.w. hawking, phys. lett. 134b, 403-404 (1984).
w ald84

r.m. wald, general relativity, the university of chicago press, 1984.

p eskin95 m.e. peskin & d.v. schroeder, introductory quantum field theory, addison-wesley, 1995.

9

fig. 1. the electron vertex correction diagram. the wavy lines represent the massless vector boson

propagator for the eld a which is directly related to the graviton eld.

10

