higher loop eects on unication via kaluza-klein thresholds

hutp-99/a019, nub 3199, efi-99-11

zurab kakushadze1,2,3 and tomasz r. taylor2

1jeerson laboratory of physics, harvard university, cambridge, ma 02138

2department of physics, northeastern university, boston, ma 02115

3enrico fermi institute, university of chicago, chicago, il 60637

(may 18, 1999)

abstract

we discuss higher loop corrections to gauge coupling renormalization in the
context of gauge coupling unication via kaluza-klein thresholds. we show
that in the case of n = 1 supersymmetric compactications the one-loop
threshold contributions are dominant, while the higher loop correction are
subleading. this is due to the fact that at heavy kaluza-klein levels the
spectrum as well as the interactions are n = 2 supersymmetric. in particular,
we give two dierent arguments leading to this result - one is eld theoretic,
while the second one utilizes the power of string perturbation techniques. to
illustrate our discussions we perform explicit two-loop computations of various
corrections to gauge couplings within this framework. we also remark on
phenomenological applications of our discussions in the context of tev-scale
brane world.

9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
8

 

 
 

2
v
7
3
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

typeset using revtex

e-mail: zurab@string.harvard.edu

e-mail: taylor@neu.edu

1

i. introduction

d-branes [1] are likely to play an important role in describing nature.

in particular,
the standard model gauge and matter elds may live inside of p  9 spatial dimensional
p-branes, while gravity lives in a larger (10 or 11) dimensional bulk of the space-time. this
brane world picture1 a priori appears to be a viable scenario, and, based on considerations
of gauge and gravitational coupling unication, dilaton stabilization and weakness of the
standard model gauge couplings, in [11] it was actually argued to be a likely description
of nature. in particular, these phenomenological constraints seem to be embeddable in the
brane world scenario (with the standard model elds living on branes with 3 < p < 9),
which therefore might provide a coherent picture for describing our universe [11]2. this is
largely due to a much higher degree of exibility of the brane world scenario compared with,
say, the old perturbative heterotic framework.

s /vp3v9pm 8

as an example consider the gauge and gravitational couplings which in string theory
are expected to unify (up to an order one factor due to various thresholds [16,17]) at the
string scale ms = 1/.
in the brane world scenario a priori the string scale can be
anywhere between the electroweak scale mew and the planck scale mp = 1/gn (where
gn is the newtons constant).
if we assume that the bulk is ten dimensional, then the
four dimensional gauge and gravitational couplings scale as3   gs/vp3m p3
respectively
gn  g2
s , where gs is the string coupling, and vp3 and v9p are the compact-
ication volumes inside and transverse to the p-branes, respectively. for 3 < p < 9 there
are two a priori independent volume factors, and, for the xed gauge coupling  (at the
unication, that is, string scale) and four dimensional planck scale mp , the string scale is
not determined. this observation was used in [2] to argue that the gauge and gravitational
coupling unication problem4 can be ameliorated in this context by lowering the string scale
ms down to the gut scale mgu t  2  1016 gev [20]5. in [3] it was noticed that ms can
be further lowered all the way down to tev.
in fact, in the brane world picture a priori the string scale can be as low as desired as
long as it does not directly contradict current experimental data. in [4] it was proposed

s

1for recent developments, see, e.g., [212]. large radius compactications were originally dis-
cussed in [13].

2the brane world picture in the eective eld theory context was discussed in [14,15].

3for illustrative purposes here we are using the corresponding tree-level relations in type i (or
type i) theory.

4for a review of the gauge and gravitational coupling unication problem in the perturbative
heterotic string context, see, e.g., [18], and references therein. in the type i context the discussions
on this issue can be found in [19,11].

5by the gut scale here we mean the usual scale of gauge coupling unication in the mssm
obtained by extrapolating the lep data in the assumption of the standard desert scenario.

2

that ms as well as6 the fundamental (10 or 11 dimensional) planck scale can be around
tev. the observed weakness of the four dimensional gravitational coupling then requires
the presence of at least two large ( 1/ms) compact directions (which are transverse to the
branes on which the standard model elds are localized). a general discussion of possible
brane world embeddings of such a scenario was given in [7,8,11]. in [10] various non-trivial
phenomenological issues were discussed in the context of the tev-scale brane world scenario,
and it was argued that this possibility does not appear to be automatically ruled out7.

however, in such a scenario, as well as in any scenario where ms  mgu t , the gauge
coupling unication at ms would have to arise in a way drastically dierent from the usual
mssm unication which occurs with a remarkable precision [20].
it is then desirable to
have a mechanism in the tev-scale brane world scenario for lowering the unication scale.
moreover, it would also be necessary to nd a concrete extension of the mssm (where this
new mechanism is realized) such that the unication prediction is just as precise as in the
mssm (at least at one loop). in fact, one could also require that such an extension explain
why couplings unify in the mssm at all, that is, why the unication in the mssm is not
just an accident assuming that the tev-scale brane world scenario has the pretense of
replacing the old framework.

in the brane world picture there appears to exist a mechanism [5] for lowering the uni-
cation scale. thus, let the size r of the compact dimensions inside of the p-brane (where
p > 3) be somewhat large compared with 1/ms. then the evolution of the gauge couplings
above the kaluza-klein (kk) threshold 1/r is no longer logarithmic but power-like [22].
this observation was used in [5] to argue that the gauge coupling unication might occur
at a scale (which in the brane world context would be identied with the string scale) much
lower than mgu t .

in [12] a tev-scale supersymmetric standard model (tssm) was proposed. the gauge
coupling unication in the tssm indeed occurs via such a higher dimensional mechanism.
moreover, the unication in the tssm is as precise (at one loop) as in the mssm, and
occurs in the tev range8. the tssm also explains why the unication in the mssm is
not an accident - if the tssm is indeed (a part of) the correct description of nature above
the electroweak scale, then the gauge coupling unication in the mssm is explained by the
current lack of data which leads to the standard desert assumption. moreover, as was
pointed out in [12], after a rather systematic search the tssm is the only (simple) solution
for the constraints guaranteeing that the gauge couplings unify as precisely (at one loop) as
in the mssm.

6note that the string scale ms cannot be too much lower than the fundamental planck scale or
else the string coupling gs as well as all the gauge couplings would come out too small contradicting
the experimental data.

7tev-scale compactications were studied in [32] in the context of supersymmetry breaking.

8by the tev range we do not necessarily mean that ms  1 tev.
in fact, as was argued in
[12], the gauge coupling unication constraints seem to imply that ms cannot really be lower than
10  100 tev.

3

an important question that arises in the context of unication via kk thresholds as well
as its concrete realization via the tssm is the issue of higher loop corrections. the point
here is that even though the unied gauge coupling typically is small, the loop expansion
parameter is still of order 1 for it is amplied by a large number of heavy kk modes running
in the loops [12]. in the most general case it is therefore far from being obvious that the
higher loop corrections are subleading. in fact, if one considers a generic kk compactication
of a higher dimensional theory without supersymmetry, the higher loop corrections are as
large as the one-loop threshold contribution, and therefore the very idea of gauge coupling
unication via kaluza-klein thresholds in this context has no predictive power.

however, as was pointed out in [12], in the context of n = 1 supersymmetric kk com-
pactications the situation is drastically dierent. in this paper we elaborate the discussions
in [12] as well as [22] on the issue of higher loop corrections. in particular, we show that
the higher loop corrections are subleading compared with the leading one-loop threshold
contribution. here we give two dierent ways of arriving at this result. the rst argument
is purely eld theoretic and is along the lines of that given in [12], albeit the argument we
give in this paper is somewhat simpler. the key observation underlying this argument is
that the heavy kk modes (in certain orbifold compactications we consider in this paper)
have extended, namely, n = 2 supersymmetry. this statement does not only concern the
heavy kk spectrum, but also the interactions involving only heavy kk modes - the three-
and four-point couplings of heavy kk states are n = 2 supersymmetric. this then implies
that the leading (in powers of the relevant number of the kk modes) contribution at a
given higher loop order vanishes due to certain n = 2 supersymmetric cancellations (recall
that the gauge coupling is not renormalized beyond two loops in n = 2 supersymmetric
theories). the second argument we give in this paper is string theoretic and utilizes the
power of string perturbation techniques. in fact, the string theoretic discussion we give in
this paper allows one to arrive at a clear geometric interpretation of the above mentioned
cancellations at higher loops via the d-brane picture as well as string world-sheet expansion
in terms of riemann surfaces of various topologies. in this sense, this argument is very much
in the spirit of (but not exactly the same as) that employed in [26] to prove niteness of
certain large n gauge theories.

to illustrate the formal arguments mentioned above, we explicitly compute various two-
loop corrections to the gauge couplings within the above framework. in fact, the cancella-
tions of heavy kk contributions can be seen explicitly in these two-loop computations. we
also discuss the general setup for performing higher loop computations in the kk theories
of this type.

the rest of this paper is organized as follows. in section ii we describe the setup for dis-
cussing higher loop corrections to the gauge coupling unication via kaluza-klein thresholds.
in particular, we discuss certain orbifold compactications of higher dimensional theories
in this context. in section iii we discuss one-loop unication via kaluza-klein thresholds.
in particular, we give the general expression for the one-loop kk thresholds in the context
of the orbifold theories discussed in section ii. in section iv we give the eld and string
theoretic arguments which show that the underlying n = 2 supersymmetry (at the heavy
kk levels) indeed implies cancellation of the leading higher loop contributions. we also
discuss the general setup for computing the subleading higher loop corrections. in section
v we give explicit two loop computations in the above context. in section vi we remark on

4

various important issues in the context of unication via kaluza-klein thresholds.

ii. setup

in this section we describe the setup for discussing higher loop corrections to the gauge
coupling unication via kaluza-klein thresholds. in particular, we will discuss certain orb-
ifold compactications of higher dimensional theories in this context. for deniteness, we
will focus on compactications of six dimensional gauge theories. generalization to other
cases is completely straightforward.

thus, consider a six dimensional gauge theory living in the world-volume of some set of
coincident d5-branes9. let the space transverse to the d5-branes be a k3 surface. then we
have n = 1 supersymmetric gauge theory living in the world volume of the d5-branes. in
the following discussion, for the most part, the directions transverse to the branes are not
important. however, we will still keep track of them to have a clear geometric interpretation
of the four dimensional gauge theory. next, compactify two of the directions inside of the
d5-branes on a two-torus t 2. the low energy eective eld theory is then given by the
corresponding four dimensional n = 2 supersymmetric gauge theory. here by low energies
we mean energies below the compactication scale. thus, let t 2 = s1  s1, where both
circles have the same radius r. then the compactication scale is given by the mass scale of
the rst kaluza-klein threshold 1/r. below this scale we have an eective four dimensional
gauge theory.

we would now like to obtain an n = 1 supersymmetric gauge theory from this setup. to
do this, we will mod out the above theory by a discrete orbifold group . here  must act
on both t 2 and k3 such that (t 2  k3)/ is a calabi-yau three-fold with su(3) holonomy.
note that the action of  on t 2 must be crystallographic (or else it is not a symmetry of the
theory). this restricts the allowed choices of  to abelian cyclic groups z2, z3, z4, z6. in
the following we will generally refer to  as zm with the understanding that m is restricted
to the above values.

to discuss the spectrum of the above orbifold model, let us introduce some notations.
first, let g be the gauge group of the original six dimensional gauge theory. note that g
can be a product group. let the matter content of the six dimensional theory be given by
hypermultiplets in various representations of g. we will collectively denote these matter

a chiral multiplet (in the four dimensional sense) with left chirality, whereas  denotes the

hypermultiplets by e. each hypermultiplet can be written as e =   , where  denotes
corresponding anti-chiral multiplet with right chirality. similarly, let ev be the gauge vector
supermultiplet (of the four dimensional n = 2 gauge theory) transforming in the adjoint of
g. it can be written as ev = v  , where v denotes the corresponding n = 1 gauge vector
supermultiplet (which contains a weyl fermion with left chirality), whereas  denotes the
complement of v in ev , that is, the n = 1 anti-chiral supermultiplet (which contains a weyl

fermion with right chirality) transforming in the adjoint of g.

9here we concentrate on d-brane theories, albeit our discussion is unmodied if we have some
other type of branes.

5

next, let us discuss the action of the orbifold group   zm on various degrees of
freedom. first, we will assume that the action of  on the gauge quantum numbers is trivial
(that is we choose the corresponding gauge bundle to be trivial). thus, orbifolding does not
break the original gauge group g.

now, let us discuss the breaking of the n = 2 supersymmetry to n = 1 by the orbifold
group . let g be the generator of . then the action of g on the r-parity quantum
numbers of states in ev and e is the following: g|v i = |v i, g|i = |i, g|i = |i,
g|i = 1|i, where   exp(2i/m). geometrically this can be understood from the
fact that (up to an obvious choice of convention) g acts on the complex coordinate z1 on t 2
as gdz1 = dz1, while its action on the holomorphic two-form 2  dz2  dz3 on k3 is given
by g2 = 12. here z2, z3 are the complex coordinates on k3. note that the holomorphic
three-form 3  dz1  dz2  dz3 is invariant under the action of , which is nothing but the
condition that the quotient (t 2  k3)/ is a calabi-yau three-fold.
finally, we turn to the action of  on the kaluza-klein modes corresponding to the
compactication on t 2. let ij, i, j = 1, 2, be the inverse metric10 on t 2. then the masses
of the kk modes are given by:

m 2

m = ijmimj .

(1)

jmj. note that m is an identity matrix.

here m  (m1, m2), and m1, m2 are the integer kk momenta corresponding to the a-cycle
respectively b-cycle on t 2. the action of the generator g of  on the kk momenta is given
by the corresponding 2/m rotation: g|mi = |mi. here  is the corresponding rotation
matrix:  : mi  i
the zero kk modes with m = (0, 0) are invariant under the action of g. at heavy kk
levels with m 6= (0, 0) we can form linear combinations such that the action of g is diagonal.
these are given by ( = 0, 1, . . . , m  1):
1
m

|m; i 

m 1xk=0

k|kmi .

(2)

note that g|m; i = |m; i.
now we are ready to determine the spectrum of the orbifold theory. we must project
onto the states invariant under the action of , that is, onto the g-invariant states. these
are given by (m 6= (0, 0))

|(0, 0)i  |v i ,
|m; 0i  |v i ,
|m; 0i  |i ,

|(0, 0)i  |i ,
|m; m  1i  |i ,
|m; 1i  |i .

here, to avoid overcounting, independent choices of m are restricted to the appropriate con-
jugacy classes each containing m elements such that they are all related by the corresponding
 rotations.

10thus, in the case of a square torus t 2 = s1  s1 the inverse metric reads: 11 = 1/r2
1,
22 = 1/r2

2, and 12 = 21 = 0, where r1 and r2 are the radii of the two circles.

6

note that the massless modes are n = 1 supersymmetric. however, the massive kk
modes form n = 2 supermultiplets. thus, for each choice of m (in the corresponding
conjugacy class), (|m; 0i  |v i)  (|m; m  1i  |i) forms a (short) massive n = 2 super-
symmetric vector multiplet. similarly, (|m; 0i|i) (|m; 1i|i) forms a massive n = 2
hypermultiplet. in fact, this statement is not just about the massive kk spectrum, but also
holds for massive kk interactions as well. more concretely, it is not dicult to see that in
the orbifold theory the three- and four-point couplings involving only heavy kk modes are

n = 2 supersymmetric with strengths rescaled by 1/m respectively 1/m compared with
the corresponding couplings in the parent n = 2 theory. as we will see in the next sec-
tion, this fact has important implications for higher loop corrections to the gauge coupling
renormalization.
in particular, it implies that the higher loop diagrams with only heavy
kk modes running in the loops vanish due to n = 2 supersymmetry. thus, for a higher
loop correction to be non-vanishing, it is required that it involves at least one massless line
inside of the loops. as we have already mentioned, massless states do not have n = 2
supersymmetry but are only n = 1 supersymmetric so that the corresponding higher loop
contributions are (generically) non-vanishing. nonetheless, as we point out in the next sec-
tion, such higher loop diagrams are subleading compared with the one-loop gauge coupling
renormalization due to the kk thresholds. this is the key reason why the gauge coupling
unication via kk thresholds is meaningful in the present setup.

before we end this section, we would like to point out that we can introduce additional
massless matter elds in the above picture such that they do not have heavy kk counter-
parts. we will collectively denote these elds by . thus, the  elds can be localized at
the xed points of the orbifold. that is, they are truly 3 + 1 dimensional in contrast, say, to

the elds ev and e which can be viewed as propagating in 5 + 1 dimensions (two of which
are compact). the elds  then only have n = 1 supersymmetry, and their couplings to
other elds including heavy kk modes are also n = 1 supersymmetric. one of the reasons
for introducing such localized matter elds is that their presence is typically desirable in
concrete phenomenological model building.

iii. unification

in this section we discuss one-loop threshold corrections to gauge coupling renormaliza-
tion due to the heavy kk modes. in particular, we give the general expression for the kk
thresholds in the context of the orbifold theories discussed in the previous section. we then
apply these results to one-loop gauge coupling unication via kaluza-klein thresholds.

to begin with, let us clarify what we mean by gauge coupling unication. suppose g is

a product gauge group: g =na ga, where ga are simple subgroups (which can be abelian
or non-abelian). at the tree level the gauge couplings a for all subgroups are assumed to
be the same: a  . in string theory this is the case if the entire gauge group comes from
the same set of coincident branes. in fact, the tree-level unied gauge coupling  is given
by (here we are using the conventions of [23]):

here gs is the (ten dimensional) string coupling, and vp3 measures the size of the p  3
compact spatial directions inside of the dp-branes:

 = gs/2vp3 .

(3)

7

vp3  vp3(ms/2)p3  (rms)p3 ,

(4)

where vp3 is the actual volume of these p  3 compact directions, and ms = 1/ is the

string scale. note that here r is understood only as an eective size of compactication,
and in general it need not coincide with the actual linear dimension(s) of the compactication
space.

the above tree-level relations are subject to radiative corrections. here we focus on
one-loop corrections to the gauge couplings a. in particular, we are interested in gauge
couplings at low energies   1/r < ms. these gauge couplings a() depend upon the
energy scale . more concretely, the energy scale dependent one-loop corrections to the
gauge couplings come from the corresponding infra-red (ir) divergences due to the massless
modes propagating in the loop. then  plays the role of the ir cut-o. this gives precisely
the familiar eld theoretic logarithmic evolution of gauge couplings. there are also energy
scale independent corrections due to various thresholds corresponding to massive modes (with
masses  ) propagating in the loop. these thresholds come from the heavy kk modes as
well as string states such as string oscillator modes. at one loop we have:

1
a () = 1 +

ln ms

 ! + a ,

ba
2

(5)

where the one-loop -function coecients ba correspond to the massless n = 1 supersym-
metric modes: ba = ba(v ) + ba() + ba() (see section ii for notations). here we have chosen
the ultra-violet (uv) cut-o to be the string scale ms. this is equivalent to identifying the
gauge coupling unication scale with the string scale. in particular, if we start from the
low energy gauge couplings, we can run them up to the string scale by integrating in the
heavy kk modes as we go to higher and higher energies. then, with the above convention,
the gauge couplings unify at the string scale ms subject to the appropriate choice of the
subtraction scheme. in the above approach, as we will see in a moment, the choice of the
subtraction scheme aects the threshold corrections a.

in the following we are interested in the regime where (rms)p3  1.

in this case
the threshold corrections due to the kk modes are large and dominate the string thresh-
olds which generically are of order 1 (or smaller) [16]. we will therefore focus on the kk
thresholds.

as we will see in a moment, the kk threshold computation in the n = 1 supersymmetric
orbifold theory reduces to that in the parent n = 2 gauge theory. let us therefore rst
consider the n = 2 gauge theory with the superelds ev and e which arises upon compact-
ifying the corresponding six dimensional n = 1 supersymmetric gauge theory (living in the
world-volume of d5-branes) on t 2. in the following, for the sake of notational convenience,
we will be a bit more general and treat it as a compactication of a p + 1 dimensional theory
(living in the world-volume of dp-branes) on a (p  3)-torus t p3. note that p here can
take values p = 4, 5, and in the former case we have a compactication of a ve dimensional
gauge theory on a circle (here the corresponding orbifold group can only be z2). in these no-
m = ijmimj
tations the kk spectrum of the n = 2 theory consists of states with masses m 2
(m  (m1, . . . , mp3), mi  z) with quantum numbers ev and e. all of the states including
the massless ones are n = 2 supersymmetric, and only contribute to the renormalization
of the low energy gauge couplings at one loop - perturbatively there are no corrections to

8

the gauge couplings beyond one loop, which is due to n = 2 supersymmetry. moreover, in
the d-brane context no other states contribute to the gauge coupling renormalization. this
follows from the fact that in perturbative open string theory only bps states can renormal-
ize gauge couplings [24,17]. in six dimensional n = 1 open string theories the only bps
states are the massless modes, while all the other states are non-bps as they come in six
dimensional n = 2 (that is, four dimensional n = 4) supermultiplets. the latter, however,
do not renormalize gauge couplings (in the four dimensional gauge theory arising upon com-
pactication on t 2). therefore, we are left only with the kk threshold contributions, which
we are going to discuss next.

the computation of the gauge coupling renormalization in this n = 2 gauge theory can
in particular, we will treat this
be performed entirely within the eld theory approach.
theory as a gauge theory with a uv cut-o  containing massless modes plus massive kk
states. the role of the cut-o  is to restrict the heavy kk modes to a nite subset which
essentially amounts to discarding those with masses larger than . more precisely, one can
employ the standard coleman-weinberg prescription which gives the following simple result
[22]:

1
a () = 1

a () + eba

4z ()2

()2

dt

t xm

exp(tm 2

m) .

(6)

here  and  are the ir respectively uv cut-os, and we have parametrized the subtraction

scheme dependence by . the one-loop -function coecients eba are those of the n = 2
theory: eba = ba(ev ) + ba(e) (see section ii for notations). next, we will identify  with the

string scale ms, and the gauge couplings a() with the unied gauge coupling . note
that this is the only place where string theory becomes relevant - as we will discuss in the
next section, for the above prescription to be meaningful, we must assume that above the
cut-o the theory is nite, which is precisely what we expect above the string scale where
string theory description takes over. with these identications, we will obtain the expected
logarithmic evolution of the low energy (  1/r < ms) gauge couplings a(). this
logarithmic contribution comes from the massless modes with m = 0:

1

a () = 1 + eba

2

 ! + ea .
ln ms

(7)

the ir nite threshold corrections ea are due to the massive kk modes with m 6= (0, . . . , 0).
the leading contribution (in the regime (rms)p3  1) to ea can be readily evaluated using

the poisson resummation, and the result is given by [22]:

ea = eba

2

p3
p  3

(rms)p3  eba

2

ln (rms) + o(1) .

(8)

here for the sake of simplicity in the case of t 2 we assume that the metric ij on t 2 satises
11  22  det1/2(ij) = r2 (that is, the complex structure on t 2 is of order 1). note
that the subtraction scheme dependent parameter  cannot be determined within these
considerations alone11. however, in a given theory  aects the unication scale ms (for

11in [5] the choice of the subtraction scheme was such that p3 = (p3)/2/((p  1)/2).

9

given values of the low energy gauge couplings), and it could, therefore, be determined by
xing ms via some other low energy quantity (such as the newtons constant gn ).

now we are ready to determine the threshold corrections a in the n = 1 orbifold

theory. in fact, we simply have

a = ea/m .

(9)

this follows from the fact that the number of the massive kk modes in the n = 1 theory
is m times smaller than in the parent n = 2 theory, which is due to the zm orbifold
projection. note that, as we have already mentioned, in (9) we are ignoring other o(1)
threshold corrections, namely, those due to heavy string modes.

iv. higher loop corrections

in the previous section we discussed one-loop renormalization of gauge couplings due to
kk thresholds. in this section we address the issue of higher loop corrections. in particular,
a priori it might seem that higher loops would destroy the one-loop prediction for the low
energy gauge couplings obtained from the assumption that they unify at the string scale,
or, equivalently, one-loop unication of gauge couplings via kaluza-klein thresholds. if so,
then the entire framework would have no predictive power.

there are various ways of thinking about higher loop eects, some of them being more
precise than others. thus, one might naively argue that the theories discussed in section ii
are higher dimensional and therefore non-renormalizable. this would imply that one has no
control over higher loop corrections. fortunately, however, this naive argument is too naive.
the key observation here is that the regimes we are dealing with are such that the theories
under consideration never become higher dimensional. to make this statement more precise,
let us recall the tree-level relation between the four dimensional gauge coupling , the string
coupling gs, the string scale ms (which is nothing but the uv cut-o in this context), and
the compactication size r:

 = gs/2(rms)p3 .

(10)

note that we are working in the regime where the lowest kk threshold is below the string
scale. in fact, it is much below the string scale: (rms)p3  1. if we take r to be smaller
than 1/ms, then the description in terms of dp-branes becomes inadequate - we have to
t-dualize into a more adequate description in terms of lower dimensional branes. thus, if
all p  3 extra spatial dimensions become smaller than 1/ms, the adequate description is in
terms of d3-branes. now, if we take r to be large compared with 1/ms, naively this might
seem to be sucient to go into the decompactication regime where the theory essentially
becomes p + 1 dimensional. however, we wish to keep the four dimensional gauge coupling 
xed, so for xed gs we would have to decrease ms while increasing r such that rms( 1)
is xed. this implies that in the decompactication limit r   the uv cut-o  = ms
of the theory goes to zero. that is, the theory never becomes a higher dimensional theory
(which would be non-renormalizable) with a nite cut-o. another way of phrasing this
statement is that we are dealing with four dimensional gauge theories with a large but nite
number n of heavy kk modes. this number n is determined by the cut-o vs. the rst

10

kk threshold ratio. that is, we can dene n to be given by n = (rms)p3. note that here
we are implicitly making the assumption that above the uv cut-o scale ms the theory is
actually nite or else truncation of the kk modes to a nite subset could not be justied.
this assumption, however, holds in the string theory context, so as long as we bear in
mind that these theories are meaningful only if we embed them in a larger theory such as
string theory, the above naive arguments about these theories being higher dimensional and
non-renormalizable do not hold.

a priori there is, however, a more serious worry which can be made precise. thus,
consider a generic kk compactication (which, in particular, need not be supersymmetric).
naively it might seem that as long as the unied gauge coupling  is small the higher
loop corrections are negligible. this is, however, not the case - the true loop expansion
parameter is not /2 (which would be the case if the eective eld theory description in
terms of just the light modes were adequate all the way up to the string scale). rather,
the correct expansion parameter is related to the string coupling gs. this is due to the fact
that although each kk mode (including the light modes) couples with the strength of order
, there are many, namely, n kk modes propagating inside of the loops. the true loop
expansion parameter is therefore12

  n/2 .

(11)

this is analogous to considering the eective t hoofts coupling in large n gauge theories
[25]. as pointed out in [12], in concrete phenomenological applications the eective coupling
 can be of order 1. if so, then generically one would expect that higher loop threshold
corrections are just as large as one-loop thresholds, that is, that this framework lacks any
predictive power.

however, in [12] it was pointed out that supersymmetry saves the day. that is, in
the case of non-supersymmetric theories the above argument indeed shows that one has
no control over higher loop eects. in the supersymmetric case, however, there are subtle
cancellations at higher loops such that one loop thresholds are always dominant. here we
would like to reiterate the eld theoretic argument of [12], and give another way of arriving
at the same result using the power of string perturbation techniques. in the next section we
will give explicit two-loop computations which illustrate the general arguments presented in
the remainder of this section.

a. field theory argument

in this subsection we rst review (a simplied version of) the argument of [12] which
shows that higher loop corrections to the gauge coupling unication via kk thresholds are

12this denition is consistent with the fact that in the closed string sector the loop expansion
parameter is (gs/4)2 = 2, while in the open string sector it is nd(gs/4) = nd. here nd
is the number of dp-branes. in the gauge theory discussion it arises through the corresponding
-function coecients. in fact, the statement that nd is the loop expansion parameter in the
open string sector is essentially precise. a more precise statement is that the l-th loop is weighted
by bl1l just as is the case in the gauge theory language.

11

indeed subleading compared with the leading one-loop contribution. in the following for the
sake of simplicity we will omit the subscript a labelling the corresponding gauge subgroups
ga. on general grounds we expect that the renormalized gauge coupling at scales   1/r
is given by

1() = 1 + f () +  ,

(12)

where  is the (-independent) contribution due to heavy kk thresholds, whereas f ()
corresponds to the gauge coupling running. here we are interested in estimating the sizes
of both f () and . the l-loop order contribution 1
l () to 1() can be schematically
written as

l () = 1
1

cm,ln m(cid:18) 
2(cid:19)l

,

lxm=0

(13)

where m counts the number of the loop propagators corresponding to heavy kk modes
with independent kk momentum summations.
(note that the kk momentum must be
conserved inside of the loop diagram as the two external gauge boson lines carry zero kk
momentum.) the enhancement factor n m arises due to n heavy kk states propagating in
each of the m internal lines. the coecients cm,l generically depend on the energy scale 
via the appropriate ir cut-o. note that for n  1 the coecients cm,l  1 (or smaller)
for energy scales not too much smaller than 1/r. (thus, here and in the following we will
treat logarithms of the type ln(rms) as being of order 1.)

for   1, naively one might expect a large (that is, of order 1) contribution to 1()
coming from the term m = l in (13). (note that this term is -independent. more precisely,
it is nite in the limit   0. this is because all of the internal propagators in this case
correspond to heavy kk states.) however, for l  2 this contribution actually vanishes
due to n = 2 supersymmetry of heavy kk modes.
indeed, as we have already pointed
out in section ii, the spectrum of heavy kk modes is n = 2 supersymmetric. moreover,
their interactions (that is, those involving only heavy kk modes but no massless states) are
also n = 2 supersymmetric. this then implies that all diagrams with two external gauge
bosons involving only heavy kk modes inside of the loops vanish for gauge couplings are
not renormalized beyond one loop in n = 2 theories. thus, non-vanishing contributions can
only come from diagrams involving at least one massless internal propagator (with massless
modes corresponding to v, , ). these diagrams, however, are suppressed by additional
powers of n. thus, we have

1
0 = 1  n ,
1
1 ()  n ,
1
l>1()  l1  1 ,

(14)
(15)
(16)

where the estimates here should be understood symbolically (that is, we are suppressing
the  dependence in the corresponding contributions). this implies that higher loop contri-
butions to the gauge coupling renormalization are subleading compared with the one-loop
contribution, although they are of order 1 so we have to worry about the perturbative con-
vergence issues. however, as was argued in [12] using properties of the holomorphic gauge
coupling in n = 1 supersymmetric theories, we expect the perturbation series to converge

12

for  < c, where c  1 is a model dependent convergence radius (which, in particular, de-
pends on the superpotential). the resummed higher loop corrections are then still expected
to be of order 1 and therefore subleading compared with the one-loop contribution [12].

in the cases where  is somewhat smaller than 1 the perturbation theory can be trusted.
in particular, in various phenomenologically applications one might wish to compute higher
loop corrections to the gauge coupling unication. in section v we will setup the general
framework for computing two-loop corrections and present various explicit calculations at
the two-loop order. here, however, we would like to point out a set of simple rules which
seem to be useful in computing higher loop corrections in n = 1 orbifold theories using the
corresponding computations in the parent n = 2 theories.
it is convenient to normalize gauge couplings so that they are the same in both the n = 1
and n = 2 theories. at the same time we will take the t p3 in the case of the n = 2 theory
to be the same as that appearing in the orbifold t p3/ in the n = 1 theory. then we have
vol(t p3/zm ) = vp3/m, where vp3 is the volume of t p3. to have the low energy gauge
couplings the same in the two theories, we then must take egs = mgs, where egs and gs are
the string couplings in the n = 2 respectively n = 1 theories.
having xed the relative normalization for the gauge couplings in the two theories, let
us now discuss three- and four-point couplings involving various states. as we have already
pointed out in section ii, the three-point couplings involving only heavy kk states are 1/m
times weaker in the n = 1 theory compared with those in the parent n = 2 theory. (it
then follows that the corresponding factor for the four-point couplings involving only heavy
kk states is 1/m.) as to the three-point couplings involving some massless states with v, 
quantum numbers, they are not aected by the orbifold projection. that is, if there is at
least one massless state in a three-point coupling, then this coupling is the same as in the
parent n = 2 theory. on the other hand, the four-point couplings involving one massless
state are reduced by 1/m, while the four-point couplings involving two massless states
are unaected. using these rules we can obtain some useful information about the relation
between various diagrams in the two theories. thus, consider an l-loop diagram with m > 0
internal propagators corresponding to heavy kk modes with independent kk momentum
summations. for deniteness let us focus on diagrams involving only three-point functions.
(the discussion straightforwardly generalizes to diagrams involving four-point functions as
well.) it is not dicult to see that the value of this diagram in the orbifold theory is reduced
by the factor (1/m)2m1 compared with the same diagram in the parent n = 2 theory. this
suppression factor arises as follows. note that the heavy kk propagators contribute the
suppression factor (1/m)m compared with the corresponding diagram in the parent n = 2
theory for the number of the heavy kk modes in the orbifold theory is m times smaller than
in the n = 2 theory. on the other hand, there are 2(m  1) three-point functions involving
only heavy kk modes, and each of these three-point functions contributes the suppression
factor of 1/m. putting all of this together, we obtain the above total suppression factor
of (1/m)2m1. note that internal lines corresponding to massless states are not modied
compared with the parent n = 2 theory except for the fact that some of the original n = 2
massless states are absent in the n = 1 theory due to the orbifold projection. this implies
that to compute a given diagram with, say, m > 0, we can take the corresponding diagram in
the n = 2 theory, discard the terms involving massless states projected out by the orbifold
action, and divide the resulting expression by m 2m1. this will give us the answer for the

13

corresponding n = 1 computation. in the case of diagrams involving only massless internal
propagators (that is, for m = 0), there is no suppression factor (unlike in the m > 0 case),
and to obtain the answer starting from the corresponding n = 2 computation, we only need
to discard terms involving states projected out by the orbifold action.
the above observations are very useful for simplifying higher loop computations in the
orbifold theory once the corresponding computations have been done in the parent n = 2
theory. this will become clear in the next section where we present some explicit two-
loop computations. we will see that these simplications are quite substantial since certain
diagrams (or, more precisely, combinations thereof) vanish even if they contain massless
internal propagators. on the other hand, the diagrams involving twisted states cannot
be obtained by a simple orbifold reduction of the n = 2 theory, therefore they must be
computed on a model-to-model basis.

b. string theory argument

in this subsection we give a simple string theory argument which allows one to arrive
at the above result by utilizing the power of string perturbation techniques. let us start
from the parent n = 2 supersymmetric theory. in string theory language the perturbative
expansion is in terms of riemann surfaces with various topologies. for the sake of simplicity
let us focus on oriented riemann surfaces with b boundaries and g handles. in particular, for
the sake of simplicity we will ignore diagrams with cross-caps which are straightforward to
incorporate in the following discussion (see the next subsection for some relevant comments).
each boundary corresponds to d-branes, whereas handles correspond to closed string loops.
note that each diagram is weighted by g2g2+b

, where gs is the string coupling.

s

let us rst consider the one-loop open string diagram with two boundaries and no
handles. this is the annulus amplitude. in the open string loop channel it is weighted by
g0
s n. the enhancement by a factor of n is due to heavy kk modes propagating in the loop.
alternatively, we can view this diagram in the closed string tree channel where a closed

string is exchanged between two d-branes whose boundary states we will denote by |fdi0.
note that in the closed string tree channel there is no enhancement due to exchange of some
large number of states - all such states are at least as heavy as  ms (the winding modes are
even heavier with masses  rm 2
s  ms). this implies that the enhancement of the annulus
amplitude by a factor of n in the closed string tree channel is due to the normalization of
d-brane boundary states:

|fdi0  n 1/2|fdi0 .

(17)

here the boundary state |fdi0 is normalized so that 0hfd|fdi0  1. note that this nor-
malization factor can be derived directly by computing the annulus amplitude in the open
string loop channel, and then performing the open-closed duality transformation (that is,
the transformation t  1/t, with t the proper time on the annulus). indeed, in the open
string loop channel we have the kk momentum sum which in the closed string tree channel
produces the volume factor vp3 upon the appropriate poisson resummation (recall that
n  vp3m p3
let us now consider a diagram with b boundaries and no handles. note that this diagram
corresponds to l = b1 loops in the open string channel. in the closed string tree channel it

).

s

14

can be viewed as b d-branes connected by a closed string tree with b 2 three-point vertices
corresponding to closed string interactions. each of these vertices is weighted by the factor
gs/(m p3
s vp3)1/2  gs/n 1/2, where vp3 is the volume of the p3 compact directions inside
of dp-branes. here we are ignoring the volume of transverse directions (that is, of k3, or,
more precisely, of k3/, which we assume to be of order 1 in the string units). thus, such
a diagram is weighted by

n b/2(gs/n 1/2)b2  l1n l .

(18)

here on the l.h.s. the rst factor n b/2 corresponds to b d-branes (or, more precisely, their

boundary states |fdi0 scaling as  n 1/2), whereas the second factor (gs/n 1/2)b2 comes
from the closed string interaction vertices. on the r.h.s. we have taken into account that
gs/n  , and l = b  1. thus, this contribution corresponds to the term m = l in the
expression (13) applied to the n = 2 theory.
diagrams with handles correspond to subleading terms with m < l in the language of
(13). indeed, each handle is accompanied by two three-point interaction vertices leading to
the suppression by g2
s /n  2n. that is, diagrams with b boundaries and g handles are
weighted by

n b/2(gs/n 1/2)b2+2g  l1n lg ,

(19)

where we have taken into account that l = b + 2g  1. thus, we see that m = l  g in
the language of (13). note that the coecients cm,l in the n = 2 gauge theory vanish for
l > 1. that is, the only non-vanishing diagram in this case is that with b = 2, g = 0.
next, let us consider the orbifold theory with n = 1 supersymmetry. here we have m
dierent types of d-branes whose corresponding boundary states we will denote by |dik,
k = 0, 1, . . . , m  1. the untwisted boundary states |di0 are coherent states made of (left-
right symmetric) untwisted sector closed string states. they are related to the boundary
states in the parent n = 2 theory via

|di0 =

(20)

1

m |fdi0 .

this can be, for instance, seen by noting that the annulus amplitude in the orbifold theory
is obtained from that in the parent theory by inserting the projection operator (here g is
the generator of zm )

1
m

m 1xk=0

gk

(21)

into the trace over the hilbert space of open string states (in the loop channel). the con-
tribution with k = 0 then corresponds to the closed string exchange between the untwisted
boundary states in the closed string tree channel. this is, however, the same as in the parent
theory up to the overall factor of 1/m.

as to the contributions corresponding to k 6= 0, these in the closed string tree channel
map to closed string exchanges between the corresponding twisted boundary states |dik,
k 6= 0. the latter are coherent states made of twisted sector closed string states localized at

15

the xed points of the orbifold. note that unlike the untwisted boundary states, the twisted
boundary states are normalized so that there is no n 1/2 enhancement factor. that is,

while for the twisted boundary states (k 6= 0) we have

0hd|di0  n ,

khd|dik  1 .

(22)

(23)

this can be seen as follows. first, since the closed string states making up the twisted
boundary states are localized at xed points, these boundary states cannot possibly know
about the volume of the compact space - they are xed by the local properties of the orbifold
in the vicinity of the xed points. in particular, even if we take the volume of the orbifold
to innity (that is, if we take vp3  ), the twisted boundary states remain the same.
equivalently, we can arrive at the same conclusion by noticing that in the open string loop
channel a non-trivial twist gk leaves only the origin of the kk momentum lattice invariant.
this implies that the corresponding character does not contain a sum over the kk momen-
tum states. in particular, the open-closed duality transformation (which amounts to taking
t  1/t, where t is the proper time on the annulus) does not produce any volume factors
(upon the corresponding poisson resummation). note that the untwisted characters do con-
tain the kk momentum sum in the open string loop channel, so in the closed string tree
channel we get the volume factor vp3 (which eventually gives rise to the n 1/2 normalization
of the untwisted boundary states).

to summarize, we have untwisted boundary states with the enhanced normalization
factor, and also the twisted boundary states without such an enhancement factor. the

are those that carry the information about supersymmetry breaking.

former are the same as in the n = 2 theory (up to the overall factor of 1/m ). the latter
now we are ready to discuss higher loop corrections in the n = 1 theory. let us start with
diagrams without handles. out of b boundaries we can have bu untwisted boundaries plus
bt twisted boundaries. note that if bt = 0, then for b > 2 (that is, at two or higher loops)
the corresponding contribution to the gauge coupling renormalization vanishes. indeed, the
corresponding diagram is the same as in the parent n = 2 supersymmetric theory up to an
overall factor given by the appropriate power of m.
thus, non-vanishing diagrams for b > 2 are those with at least one twisted boundary
state. note that the closed string states propagating along the bt closed string tubes con-
necting these boundary states to the interior of the closed string tree are the corresponding
twisted closed string states. three-point couplings between twisted closed string states are
weighted by gs with no additional volume suppression factors13. three-point couplings of
two (gk and gm k) twisted sector states with untwisted sector states are weighted by gs/n 1/2
(just as in the case of three untwisted sector states). it is then not dicult to see that the
s  l1n l1.
diagrams involving twisted boundary states can at most be weighted by gb2

13more precisely, this is the case for twisted states localized at the same xed point. couplings
of states localized at dierent xed points are exponentially suppressed with the volume. such
couplings, however, are not relevant for our discussion here.

16

for instance, a diagram with bu = 0 with all (including those in the interior of the diagram)
closed string tubes corresponding to twisted sector states would have such a weight. other
diagrams either have the same weight or are more suppressed (by additional factors of 1/n).
here one must take into account that the total twist associated with a given diagram must
be trivial, that is, if ki, i = 1, . . . , b, label twists corresponding to the boundary states, we
must have

ki = 0 (mod m) .

(24)

bxi=1

thus, the diagrams that know about reduction of supersymmetry from n = 2 to n = 1
are all subleading (as they are weighted by l1n l1  l1 < 1) compared with the
leading one-loop diagram (with b = 2) weighted by n  1. the reader can easily verify
that adding handles does not change this conclusion. thus, we have arrived at the result
that the one-loop gauge coupling renormalization is dominant ( n) compared with the
higher loop corrections (which are at best of order 1).
here we would like to point out that the above argument is very much in the spirit of
(but not exactly the same as) that employed in [26] to prove niteness of certain large n
gauge theories.

c. comments

before we end this section, we would like to make a few clarifying remarks. first, the
string theory argument we gave in the previous subsection makes use of the by now well
appreciated fact that string perturbation theory is a very ecient way of organizing various
gauge theory diagrams. so string theory in this argument is only a tool - at the end of the
day we must take a limit ms   (more precisely, ms  1/r  ), and the heavy string
modes do not play any role except for providing a proper uv cut-o for the resulting gauge
theory computation.

next, in the argument of the previous subsection we only considered riemann surfaces
with boundaries and handles but no cross-caps. cross-caps are boundary states correspond-
ing to the orientifold planes. in the context of perturbative compactications of open plus
closed string theories the latter are required to cancel various tadpoles. tadpole cancella-
tion implies uv niteness of the theory which, in the eld theory language, would result
in cancellation of all power-like threshold corrections to the gauge couplings. this is due
to a cancellation between the annulus (a cylinder with two boundaries) and the mobius
strip (a cylinder with one boundary and one cross-cap) amplitudes [17,27]. in the closed
string tree-channel this corresponds to cancellation of the tadpoles due to massless states
corresponding to the zero winding modes that couple to d-branes wrapped on a torus.

thus, as was already pointed out in [12,28], unication via kaluza-klein thresholds
should be considered in the context of non-perturbative orientifolds where perturbative tad-
poles do not cancel. the niteness of the theory is then due additional non-perturbative
states (which can arise at both massless as well as massive levels) which provide an eective
cut-o in the theory just as in perturbative heterotic compactications where the modular
integration is restricted to the fundamental domain which excludes extreme uv momenta

17

(that is, those above a certain energy scale  ms). in fact, (some) non-perturbative ori-
entifolds, examples of which have been recently discussed in [29], can be viewed as hybrid
compactications sharing the features of both perturbative heterotic and orientifold com-
pactications albeit such compactications are non-perturbative from both heterotic and
orientifold viewpoints. as to the gauge theory computation, in this context it must be
regularized by introducing a uv cut-o which we identify with the string scale. such reg-
ulator (which does not arise in perturbative orientifolds [27]) is expected to arise in non-
perturbative orientifolds once we take into account non-perturbative (from the orientifold
viewpoint) string states which do not have a perturbative description in terms of, say, open
strings ending on d-branes. these states are expected from type i-heterotic duality - thus,
already in ten dimensions there are innitely many bps states (charged under spin(32)/z2)
on the heterotic side which cannot be seen perturbatively on the type i side.

thus, in the above setup, that is, in the context of non-perturbative orientifolds, gauge
coupling renormalization can be computed in the gauge theory context assuming the appro-
priate cut-o at the string scale ms (more precisely, at some scale of order ms - we have
to deal with the subtraction scheme ambiguities). the reason why this uv cut-o scale
should be around ms is clear - quantum gravity becomes important at energies of order of
the (fundamental) planck scale mp  ms/gs, which is of order of the string scale for gs  1.

v. explicit two-loop computations

in this section we present a computation of two-loop corrections to u(1) gauge couplings,
for the d5-brane orbifold models described in section ii. this abelian two-loop case is
completely sucient to illustrate some general features of higher loop corrections.

we will use the standard background eld method and evaluate the corresponding photon
vacuum polarization diagrams. our starting point are the diagrams of n = 1 supersym-
metric qed in d = 6 dimensions. the diagrams describing the compactied n = 2 parent
theory contain internal propagators with momenta of the form (p, m/r), where m/r is the
kk component, a two-dimensional lattice vector. the d4p momentum loop integrals are
uv divergent and require a cut-o. we will apply dimensional regularization and continue
the divergent integrals to d = 4   dimensions. the uv divergences appear then as 1/
poles; these are subtracted in the renormalization procedure, leaving a nite result which
depends on the dimensional regularization scale . the scale  is a uv cut-o which (in an
appropriate subtraction scheme) can be identied with the string scale [16,30]. however, we
are not interested here in the details of uv pole subtractions, therefore we consider bare
diagrams without the uv counterterms.

the n = 2 supersymmetric two-loop vacuum polarization diagrams (note that here

q2 = 2)

(q) = (qq  gq2)2(q2)

(25)

fall into 3 classes, f2, s2 and y2, involving respectively:
 hypermultiplet fermion loops;
 hypermultiplet scalar loops;
 susy yukawa couplings of gauginos to hypermultiplets.

18

these diagrams are depicted in fig.1. note that all traces of gamma matrices and contrac-
tions of lorentz indices are performed in d = 6 dimensions, ensuring the right counting
of fermionic degrees of freedom as well as incorporating the yukawa couplings of four-
dimensional scalar photons to hypermultiplet fermions on the same footing as other gauge
couplings. as a result of a straightforward computation14 we obtain the corresponding
contributions to 2(q2) as the integrals over 3 feynman parameters, x, y and z:

f2 = 0 ,

s2 = ()

y2 = s2 ,

(4n)

0z 1
0z 1
(2)3 xm,nz 1

0

dx dy dz

2z(1  2zy)(1  z)1+/2[x(1  x)]/2
[ (m+nx)2
x(1x) (1  z) + n2 + q2r2zy(1  zy)]

,

(26)

where n = (r)2. note that the diagrams f2 are the same as the diagrams describing
a version of d = 4 non-supersymmetric qed obtained by a toroidal compactication of
the minimal d = 6 qed with one charged electron. these diagrams cancel among
themselves hence there is no two-loop contribution to the -function in such a theory. fur-
thermore the electron mass is not renormalized at one loop.

the sum of all three contributions,

2(q2) = f2 + s2 + y2 = 0 .

(27)

in this way, we nd a complete cancellation of two-loop corrections to the gauge coupling.
of course, the cancellation of 1/ poles is a consequence of the known result, b2 = 0 in
n = 2 susy gauge theories. our two-loop computation provides further evidence for the
complete cancellation of higher loop corrections to gauge couplings.
we now proceed to the n = 1 supersymmetric orbifold theory. as argued in the previous
section, the leading large n contribution [m = l = 2 in the notation of (13)], which is due
to diagrams involving massive kk excitations propagating in all internal lines, is absent.
this is due to n = 2 supersymmetry of the massive spectrum which is responsible for
the cancellations encountered above. the subleading contribution, m = 1, arises from the
diagrams involving one massless propagator while the m = 0 contribution is due to purely
massless diagrams. however, here n = 2 cancellations also result in the vanishing of certain
contributions.
in the case under consideration, the two-loop diagrams involving one massless propagator
with the  quantum numbers add up to zero. this can be seen as follows. first consider the

numbers. if we ignore the external lines (corresponding to gauge bosons), then we have two

corresponding diagrams in the n = 2 theory where the massless states carry the e quantum
more internal lines (both of which correspond to heavy kk modes) - one with e quantum
numbers, and the other one with the ev quantum numbers. it is convenient to denote such
a diagram by a(e0,em, evm), where subscripts indicate the kk momenta. in the n = 1
language we have e =   , and ev = v   (see section ii), so that the above n = 2

diagram can be written as:

14we used the symbolic manipulation program form version 1.1 written by j. vermaseren.

19

a(e0,em, evm) = a(0, m, vm) + a(
0, 
m, m) + a(

a(0, 

m, vm) +
0, m, m) .

(28)

0, 

m, vm), and a(0, 

note that by the left-right symmetry (  ) of the theory, we have a(0, m, vm) =
a(
0, m, m). on the other hand, the above
n = 2 diagram vanishes: a(e0,em, evm) = 0. this implies that

m, m) = a(

a(0, m, vm) = a(0, 

m, m) .

(29)

next, let us see what happens to the above diagrams upon the zm orbifold projection
(that is, let us discuss the corresponding diagrams in the context of the n = 1 theory). we
must discard the diagrams involving 
0 as the latter states are projected out. we therefore
conclude that after orbifolding the diagram a(e0,em, evm) reduces to

b =

1
m

(a(0, m, vm) + a(0, 

m, m)) = 0 .

(30)

here the factor of 1/m arises due to the fact that in the n = 1 theory we must restrict the
summation over the kk modes with kk momenta in the corresponding conjugacy classes
(see section ii). 15 on the other hand, the n = 1 diagram b still vanishes due to (29). thus,
we have shown that the two-loop diagrams with only one massless internal line involving
the states with the  quantum numbers indeed add up to zero.

the above discussion implies that non-vanishing diagrams with only one massless internal
line must be such that the corresponding massless states carry the v quantum numbers. in
the following, we will evaluate these diagrams; they involve one massless internal line with the
v quantum numbers plus heavy kk lines with ,  quantum numbers. the computation
can actually be simplied by relating the corresponding diagrams in the n = 1 theory to
their n = 2 counterparts. let us therefore consider these n = 2 diagrams which we will
refer to as a(em,em, ev0). in the n = 1 language this n = 2 diagram can be written as:

a(em,em, ev0) = a(m, m, v0) + a(
m, 
m, 0) + a(

a(m, 

m, v0) +

m, m, 0) .

(31)

m, 0) = a(

m, v0), and
m, m, 0). on the other hand, the above n = 2 diagram vanishes:

note that by the    symmetry we have a(m, m, v0) = a(
a(m, 
a(em,em, ev0) = 0. this implies that
let us now extract the corresponding n = 1 diagrams, which we will refer to as c,

a(m, m, v0) = a(m, 

surviving the orbifold projection. since 0 is projected out by the zm orbifold, we have

m, 0) .

m, 

(32)

c =

1

m (cid:16)a(m, m, v0) + a(

m, 

m, v0)(cid:17) =

2
m a(m, m, v0) .

(33)

15this is precisely the factor (1/m )2m1 discussed in the previous section, specied to the case
of m = 1.

20

thus, we see that non-vanishing diagrams of this type are the same as those in n =
1 supersymmetric qed (with massive charged superelds). note that the corresponding
diagram with all massless internal lines is given by

c0 = a(0, 0, v0) .

(34)
also, in practice, we found it most convenient to start from the original n = 2 diagrams
and subtract the contributions involving 0 component of the vector multiplet, i.e., the scalar
photon and one of the two photinos. thus, in particular, we eliminated the contributions
of scalar photons in s2 and f2 by subtracting the corresponding polarization components
of the d = 6 gauge boson, and adjusted the overall factor in y2 to eliminate the redundant
photino propagator. first, we write down the nal result for purely massless diagrams, with
all internal lines corresponding to m = n = 0:

0(q2) = 

(2/q2)

2(2)3 (cid:20)1



+ ln(4)   +

7

2(cid:21) ,

(35)

where  is the eulers constant. it is easy to check that the coecient of the 1/ pole does
correctly reproduce the two-loop coecient of n = 1 supersymmetric qed. the diagrams
involving only one massless propagator are given by more complicated expressions involving
feynman parameter integrals such as in (26). however in the most interesting low energy,
large radius limit, 2/q2  n  1, these integrals simplify and the result can be written
as a momentum-independent correction:

m = 

+ ln(4)   +
in the above expression we have isolated the contribution

2

m xm

(n/m2)

2(2)3 (cid:20) 1



1

2(cid:21) + m .

m = 

4

m xm

(n/m2)

2(2)3 (cid:20)1



+ ln(4)   +

1

2(cid:21) ,

(36)

(37)

which arises from the diagrams involving self-energy corrections to internal lines, and con-
tains the uv divergence associated with the mass renormalization at the one-loop level. the
nite part of m should be combined with the one-loop threshold correction. it renormalizes
the mass scale of the kk excitations, i.e., the compactication radius r, or, equivalently,
the number n of the kk excitations below the uv cut-o scale. on the other hand, the rst
term in (36) represents a genuine two-loop threshold correction proportional to the two-loop
-function of n = 1 supersymmetric theory describing n = 2 kk excitations coupled to
the n = 1 massless gauge sector. note that in the above two-loop expression for the heavy
kk threshold contributions to the gauge coupling renormalization the summation over the
kk momenta m is cut-o from above by n = (r)2. after the summation the leading two-
loop threshold is of order n  1, which is subleading compared with the leading one-loop
threshold correction  n.

vi. discussions

in this section we would like to discuss various issues which, we believe, have important
implications in phenomenological applications of gauge coupling unication via kaluza-klein

21

thresholds. some of these points have been previously stressed in [12], while some others
are new and concern various developments subsequent to [12].

one of the key points we would like to emphasize is that supersymmetry is crucial for
the arguments of section iv to go through. in particular, without supersymmetry, namely,
without n = 2 supersymmetry at the heavy kk levels, the cancellations leading to the
fact that higher loop corrections to the gauge couplings are suppressed compared with the
leading one-loop threshold contribution would not be possible. that is, in the context of
kk compactications of higher dimensional theories without supersymmetry the very idea
of gauge coupling unication via kaluza-klein thresholds would have no predictive power -
higher loop corrections in such a setup would be as large as one-loop thresholds, hence no
control over the former.

even in the supersymmetric case the fact that higher loop corrections are subleading
compared with the one-loop thresholds is only specic to gauge coupling renormalization.
thus, the same does not hold for higher point couplings. in particular, the yukawa couplings
receive large higher loop corrections, and therefore one no longer has predictions for yukawa
coupling unication such as the b   unication.
since supersymmetry at the heavy kk levels is so crucial, one has to worry about the
eects of supersymmetry breaking which must eventually take place. thus, the supersym-
metry breaking scale (by which we mean the typical scale of soft scalar masses) must be low
enough compared with the kk threshold scale 1/r or else the corrections due to supersym-
metry breaking at the heavy kk levels would be too large and spoil the above mentioned
cancellations due to n = 2 supersymmetry. this implies that the the string scale ms  1/r
cannot really be brought down to a few tev in this context. (in the particular model of
[12] the relation between the string scale ms and the kk threshold 1/r is xed by the
unication constraint to be ms  40/r in the case of d4-branes, and ms  6/r in the case
of d5-branes.) in fact, these considerations suggest that the string scale cannot be lower
than 10  100 tev.
to implement gauge coupling unication via kaluza-klein thresholds in the phenomeno-
logical context a concrete model is required. such a model, which in [28] was called tssm
(tev-scale supersymmetric standard model), was proposed in [12]. in fact, it was stressed
in [12] that this model was the only solution to the unication constraints found in [12].
here we would like to discuss some issues concerning this point.
first, in the mssm the gauge coupling running is given by:

1

a () = gu t +

ln mgu t

 ! ,

b
a
2

(38)

a, a = 1, 2, 3, are the su(3)csu(2)wu(1)y -function coecients (b

where gu t  1/24 is the unied gauge coupling, mgu t  21016 gev [20] is the unication
scale, and b
1 = 33/5,
b
2 = 1, b
3 = 3, where we have used the standard normalization 1 = (5/3)y ). in order
for the (one-loop) unication via the kk thresholds to be just as precise as in the mssm,
it is required that the n = 2 -function coecientseba at the massive kk levels (see section

iii) satisfy the following relation:

ab is independent of a, b, where ab  eba ebb
a  b
b

b

for a 6= b.

(39)

22

this condition is satised in the tssm. in fact, in the tssm we have ab = 1 a 6= b. as was
explained in [12], the tssm was the only solution found there for the unication constraint
(39). here we point out that the key assumption here is that all three gauge subgroups of
su(3)c  su(2)w  u(1)y come from the same set of coincident branes. in this case in the
string theory context we expect all three gauge couplings to be the same at the string scale
(which is identied with the unication scale).

recently, in [31,32] a set of models dierent from the tssm was discussed. according
to [31,32], in these models the (one-loop) gauge coupling unication is as precise as in the
mssm (and, therefore, tssm). here, however, we would like to point out that there is no
unications in the models of [31,32]. the point here is that in [31,32] additional solutions
to the unication constraints were found by relaxing the requirement that all the gauge
subgroups come from the same set of coincident branes. for instance, a priori one could
imagine that su(3)cu(1)y subgroups are localized on the same set of coincident dp-branes
(with p = 4, 5), while su(2)w is localized on a xed point of the orbifold (such localization,
for instance, could be achieved by having other branes stuck at the orbifold xed points
in the corresponding compact directions). however, in such cases the gauge couplings of
su(3)cu(1)y on the one hand, and su(2)w on the other hand generically are not expected
to be the same at the string scale. in certain cases equality of these gauge couplings can be
achieved by some ne tuning, but there is no unication prediction here. in this sense such
a scenario is no dierent from that proposed in [8] where various subgroups of the standard
model gauge group come from dierent sets of branes (and then unication requires ne
tuning of the corresponding compactication volumes). thus, the tssm of [12] (along with
its straightforward variations) is indeed the only known solution that satised the unication
constraints.

here another remark is in order. note that the consistent orbifold reduction of a higher
dimensional gauge theory requires that the heavy kk spectrum is n = 2 supersymmetric.
moreover, suppose we have chiral multiplets  at the massless level. then at the massive
level we must have the corresponding hypermultiplet (we have been referring to these hy-

permultiplets as e) for each massless chiral multiplet (with certain degeneracy depending

on the order m of the orbifold group zm and the choice of t p3). this requirement, which
is necessary for the consistency (in particular, unitarity) of the theory at the heavy kk
levels is not met by the models of [5]. thus, these models are not completely consistent.
similarly, albeit the unication is not a property in models of [31,32], some care is needed
when considering such constructions. in particular, if, say, su(2)w is localized on a xed
point of the orbifold, so must be all the matter elds charged under su(2)w (which is not
the case in some of the models of [31]) - this is the consequence of the corresponding ux
conservation requirement.

finally, we would like to comment on the uv sensitivity issue in the context of gauge
coupling unication via kaluza-klein thresholds. thus, naively it might seem that a small
shift in the low energy gauge couplings would spoil the unication prediction (whose sensi-
tivity to such shifts is power-like), and therefore the gauge coupling unication is too uv
sensitive to be predictive. however, such a viewpoint might be a bit misleading. thus,
consider the tssm. if the unication occurs in the mssm, then it also occurs in the tssm,
and just as precisely (at one loop) as in the mssm. higher loop corrections, as we have
shown in this paper, are small. this implies that such a unication scenario is predictive in

23

the context of a concrete model, namely, the tssm. this is essentially due to the fact that
the tssm explains [12] why the usual logarithmic unication in the mssm is not an acci-
dent (assuming that the tssm is the correct description of physics above the electroweak
scale), but is rather related to the lack of experimental data which prompts one to assume
the standard desert scenario and extrapolate the gauge couplings all the way to the gut
scale mgu t .

acknowledgments

we would like to thank costas bachas, gia dvali and pran nath for valuable discussions.
this work was supported in part by the grant nsf phy-96-02074. the work of z.k. was
also partially supported by the doe 1994 oji award. z.k. would also like to thank albert
and ribena yu for nancial support.

24

figures

(cid:1) f (cid:2)

(cid:3) (cid:4) s(cid:5) (cid:6)

(cid:7) y(cid:8) (cid:9)

fig. 1. various two-loop gauge theory diagrams discussed in section v. solid lines are hyper-
multiplet scalars, dashed lines are hypermultiplet fermions, double-dashed lines are gauginos, and
wavy lines are gauge bosons. note that tadpole-like contributions to the scalar propagators are
not shown. also, one should weight the above diagrams with the appropriate symmetry factors.

25

references

[1] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724.
[2] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 135.
[3] j. lykken, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 3693.
[4] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263.
[5] k.r. dienes, e. dudas and t. gherghetta, phys. lett. b436 (1998) 55; nucl. phys.

b537 (1999) 47; hep-ph/9807522.

[6] z. kakushadze, phys. lett. b434 (1998) 269; nucl. phys. b535 (1998) 311; phys. rev.

d58 (1998) 101901.

[7] i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b436 (1998)

257.

[8] g. shiu and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 106007.
[9] z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 126001.
[10] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, hep-ph/9807344.
[11] z. kakushadze and s.-h.h. tye, nucl. phys. b548 (1999) 180.
[12] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b548 (1999) 205.
[13] i. antoniadis, phys. lett. b246 (1990) 377.
[14] v. rubakov and m. shaposhnikov, phys. lett. b125 (1983) 136;
a. barnaveli and o. kancheli, sov. j. nucl. phys. 52 (1990) 576.

[15] g. dvali and m. shifman, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 127; phys. lett. b396 (1997) 64.
[16] v. kaplunovsky, nucl. phys. b307 (1988) 145; (e) nucl. phys. b382 (1992) 436.
[17] c. bachas and c. fabre, nucl. phys. b476 (1996) 418.
[18] k.r. dienes, phys. rept. 287 (1997) 447.
[19] e. caceres, v.s. kaplunovsky and i.m. mandelberg, nucl. phys. b493 (1997) 73.
[20] s. dimopoulos and h. georgi, nucl. phys. b150 (1981) 193;

w.j. marciano and g. senjanovic, phys. rev. d25 (1982) 3092;
c. giunti, c.w. kim and u.w. lee, mod. phys. lett. a6 (1991) 1745;
j. ellis, s. kelley and d.v. nanopoulos, phys lett. b249 (1990) 441;
u. amaldi, w. de boer and h. furstenau, phys. lett. b260 (1991) 447;
p. langacker and m. luo, phys. rev. d44 (1991) 817.

[21] i. antoniadis, phys. lett. b246 (1990) 377;

i. antoniadis, c. munoz and m. quiros, nucl. phys. b397 (1993) 515;
i. antoniadis, k. benakli and m. quiros, phys. lett. b331 (1994) 313;
i. antoniadis, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, nucl. phys. b516 (1998) 70.

[22] t.r. taylor and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b212 (1988) 147.
[23] j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9611050.
[24] see, e.g.,

w. lerche, nucl. phys. b308 (1988) 102;
v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, nucl. phys. b444 (1995) 191;
m. bershadsky, s. cecotti, h. ooguri and c. vafa, commun. math. phys. 165 (1994)
311;
j.a. harvey and g. moore, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 215;
m.r. douglas and m. li, hep-th/9604041.
[25] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b72 (1974) 461.
[26] m. bershadsky, z. kakushadze and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b523 (1998) 59.

26

[27] c.p. bachas, jhep 9811 (1998) 023.
[28] z. kakushadze, nucl. phys. b552 (1999) 3; nucl. phys. b551 (1999) 549.
[29] z. kakushadze, phys. lett. b455 (1999) 120; hep-th/9904211; phys. lett. b459 (1999)

497.

[30] m.k. gaillard and t.r. taylor, nucl. phys. b381 (1992) 577.
[31] c.d. carone, hep-ph/9902407.
[32] a. delgado and m. quiros, hep-ph/9903400.

27

