9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
7

 

 
 

4
v
9
7
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

algebraic holography

institut fur theoretische physik, universitat gottingen (germany)

k.-h. rehren

abstract: a rigorous (and simple) proof is given that there is a one-to-one correspondence
between causal anti-desitter covariant quantum eld theories on anti-desitter space and causal
conformally covariant quantum eld theories on its conformal boundary. the correspondence is
given by the explicit identication of observables localized in wedge regions in anti-desitter space
and observables localized in double-cone regions in its boundary.
it takes vacuum states into
vacuum states, and positive-energy representations into positive-energy representations.

1 introduction and results

the conjectured correspondence (so-called holography) [14, 20] between quantum eld
theories on 1+s-dimensional anti-desitter space-time ads1,s (the bulk space) and confor-
mal quantum eld theories on its conformal boundary cm1,s1 which is a compactication
of minkowski space r1,s1, has recently raised enthusiastic interest. if anti-desitter space
is considered as an approximation to the space-time geometry near certain gravitational
horizons (extremal black holes), then the correspondence lends support to the informal
idea of reduction of degrees of freedom due to the thermodynamic properties of black holes
[10, 18]. thus, holography is expected to give an important clue for the understanding of
quantum theory in strong gravitational elds and, ultimately, of quantum gravity.

while the original conjecture [14] was based on stringy pictures, it was soon formulated
[20] in terms of (euclidean) conventional quantum eld theory, and a specic relation
between generating functionals was conjectured. these conjectures have since been exposed
with success to many structural and group theoretical tests, yet a rigorous proof has not
been given.

the problem is, of course, that the holographic transition from anti-desitter space to
its boundary and back, is by no means a point transformation, thus preventing a simple
(pointwise) operator identication between bulk elds and boundary elds. in the present
note, we show that in contrast, an identication between the algebras generated by the
respective local bulk and boundary elds is indeed possible in a very transparent manner.
these algebraic data are completely sucient to reconstruct the respective theories.

we want to remind the reader of the point of view due to haag and kastler (see [8] for a
standard textbook reference) which emphasizes that, while any choice of particular elds
in a quantum eld theory may be a matter of convenience without aecting the physical
content of the theory (comparable to the choice of coordinates in geometry), the algebras

1

1 introduction and results

2

they generate and their algebraic interrelations, notably causal commutativity, supply all
the relevant physical information in an invariant manner. the interested reader will nd
in [2] a review of the (far from obvious, indeed) equivalence between quantum eld theory
in terms of elds and quantum eld theory in terms of algebras, notably on the strategies
available to extract physically relevant information, such as the particle spectrum, supers-
election charges, and scattering amplitudes, from the net of algebras without knowing the
elds.

it is crucial in the algebraic approach, however, to keep track of the localization of the
observables. indeed, the physical interpretation of a theory is coded in the structure of a
causal net of algebras [8] which means the specication of the sets of observables b(x)
which are localized in any given space-time region x.1

the assignment x 7 b(x) is subject to the conditions of isotony (an observable localized
in a region x is localized in any larger region y  x, thus b(y )  b(x)), causal
commutativity (two observables localized at space-like distance commute with each other),
and covariance (the poincare transform of an observable localized in x is localized in the
transformed region gx; in the context at hand replace poincare by anti-desitter).
each b(x) should in fact be an algebra of operators (with the observables its selfadjoint
elements), and to have sucient control of limits and convergence in order to compute
physical quantities of interest, it is convenient to let b(x) be von neumann algebras.2

for most purposes it is convenient to consider as typical compact regions the double-
cones, that is, intersections of a future directed and a past directed light-cone, and to
think of point-like localization in terms of very small double-cones. on the other hand,
certain aspects of the theory are better captured by wedge regions which extend to
space-like innity. a space-like wedge (for short: wedge) in minkowski space is a region of
the form {x : x1 > |x0|}, or any poincare transform thereof. the corresponding regions in
anti-desitter space turn out to be intersections of ads1,s with suitable at space wedges in
the ambient space r2,s, see below. in conformally covariant theories there is no distinction
between double-cones and wedges since conformal transformations map the former onto
the latter.

it will become apparent in the sequel that to understand the issue of holography, the
algebraic framework proves to be most appropriate.

the basis for the holography conjectures is, of course, the coincidence between the anti-
desitter group so0(2, s) and the conformal group so0(2, s). (so0(n, m) is the identity
component of the group so(n, m), that is the proper orthochronous subgroup distinguished
by the invariant condition that the determinants of the time-like nn and of the space-like
m  m sub-matrices are both positive.) the former group acts on ads1,s (as a deforma-
tion from the at space poincare group in 1+s dimensions, so0(1, s)  r1,s), and the

1the assignment x 7 b(x) is a net in the mathematical sense: a generalized sequence with a

partially ordered index set (namely the set of regions x).

2a von neumann algebra is an algebra of bounded operators on a hilbert space which is closed in the
weak topology of matrix elements. e.g., if  is a hermitean eld and (f ) a eld operator smeared over a
region x containing the support of f , then operators like exp i(f ) belong to b(x).

1 introduction and results

3

latter group acts on the conformal boundary cm1,s1 of ads1,s (as an extension of the
poincare group in 1+(s  1) dimensions, so0(1, s  1)  r1,s1) by restriction of the former
group action on the bulk. the representation theoretical aspect of this coincidence has
been elaborated (in euclidean metric) in [6].

in terms of covariant nets of algebras of local observables (local algebras), it is thus suf-
cient to identify one suitable algebra in anti-desitter space with another suitable algebra
in the conformal boundary space, and then to let so0(2, s) act to provide the remaining
identications. as any double-cone region in conformal space determines a subgroup of
the conformal group so0(2, s) which preserves this double-cone, it is natural to identify its
algebra with the algebra of a region in anti-desitter space which is preserved by the same
subgroup of the anti-desitter group so0(2, s). it turns out that this region is a space-like
wedge region which intersects the boundary in the given double-cone.

for a typical bulk observable localized in a wedge region, the reader is invited to think of a
eld operator for a mandelstam string which stretches to space-like innity. its holographic
localization on the boundary has nite size, but it becomes sharper and sharper as the string
is pulled to innity. we shall see that one may be forced to take into consideration
theories which possess only wedge-localized, but no compactly localized observables.

our main algebraic result rests on the following geometric lemma:3

lemma: between the set of space-like wedge regions in anti-desitter space, w  ads1,s,
and the set of double-cones in its conformal boundary space, i  cm1,s1, there is a
canonical bijection  : w 7 i = (w ) preserving inclusions and causal complements, and
intertwining the actions of the anti-desitter group so0(2, s) and of the conformal group
so0(2, s)

(g(w )) = g((w )),

1( g(i)) = g(1(i))

where g is the restriction of the action of g to the boundary. the double-cone i = (w )
associated with a wedge w is the intersection of w with the boundary.

given the lemma, the main algebraic result states that bulk observables localized in wedge
regions are identied with boundary observables localized in double-cone regions:

corollary 1: the identication of local observables

b(w ) := a((w )),

a(i) := b(1(i))

gives rise to a 1:1 correspondence between isotonous causal conformally covariant nets of
algebras i 7 a(i) on cm1,s1 and isotonous causal anti-desitter covariant nets of algebras
w 7 b(w ) on ads1,s.

an observable localized in a double-cone o in anti-desitter space is localized in any wedge
containing o, hence the local algebra b(o) should be contained in all b(w ), w  o.

3for details, see sect. 2. we denote double-cones in the boundary by the symbol i, because (i) we
prefer to reserve the standard symbol o for double-cones in the bulk space, and because (ii) in 1+1
dimensions the double-cones on the boundary are in fact open intervals on the circle s 1.

1 introduction and results

4

we shall dene b(o) as the intersection of all these wedge algebras. these intersections
do no longer correspond to simple geometric regions in cm1,s1 (so points in the bulk
have a complicated geometry in the boundary), as will be discussed in more detail in 1+1
dimensions below.

the following result also identies states and representations of the corresponding theories:

corollary 2: under the identication of corollary 1, a vacuum state on the net a cor-
responds to a vacuum state on the net b. positive-energy representations of the net a
correspond to positive-energy representations of the net b. the net a satises essential
haag duality if and only if the net b does. the modular group and modular conjuga-
tion (in the sense of tomita-takesaki) of a wedge algebra b(w ) in a vacuum state act
geometrically (by a subgroup of so0(2, s) which preserves w and by a cpt reection,
respectively) if and only if the same holds for the double-cone algebras a(i).

essential haag duality means that the algebras associated with causally complementary
wedges not only commute as required by locality, but either algebra is in fact the maximal
algebra commuting with the other one.

the last statement in the corollary refers to the modular theory of von neumann algebras
which states that every (normal and cyclic) state on a von neumann algebra is a ther-
mal equilibrium state with respect to a unique adapted time evolution (one-parameter
group of automorphisms = modular group) of the algebra. in quantum eld theories in
minkowski space, whose local algebras are generated by smeared wightman elds, the
modular groups have been computed for wedge algebras in the vacuum state [5] and were
found to coincide with the boost subgroup of the lorentz group which preserves the wedge
(geometric action). in conformal theories, mapping wedges onto double-cones by suitable
conformal transformations, the same result also applies to double-cones [9]. this result is
an algebraic explanation of the unruh eect according to which a uniformly accelerated
observer attributes a temperature to the vacuum state, and provides also an explanation
of hawking radiation if the wedge region is replaced by the space-time region outside the
horizon of a schwarzschild black hole [17].

the modular theory also provides a modular conjugation which maps the algebra onto its
commutant. for minkowski space wightman eld theories in the vacuum state as before,
the modular conjugation of a wedge algebra turns out to act geometrically as a cpt-type
reection (cpt up to a rotation) along the ridge of the wedge which maps the wedge
onto its causal complement. this entails essential duality for minkowski space [5] as well
as conformally covariant [9] wightman theories.

the statement in corollary 2 on the modular group thus implies that, if the boundary
theory is a wightman theory, then the boundary and the bulk theory both satisfy essential
haag duality, and also in anti-desitter space a vacuum state of b in restriction to a wedge
algebra b(w ) is a thermal equilibrium state with respect to the associated one-parameter
boost subgroup of the anti-desitter group which preserves w , i.e., the unruh eect takes
place for a uniformly accelerated observer. furthermore, the cpt theorem holds for the
theory on anti-desitter space. on the other hand, essential haag duality and geometric

1 introduction and results

5

modular action for quantum eld theories on ads1,s were established under much more
general assumptions [3], implying the same properties for the associated boundary theory
even when it is not a wightman theory (see below).
we emphasize that the hamiltonians 1
r m0,d on ads1,s and p 0 on cm1,s1 are not identied
under the identication of the anti-desitter group and the conformal group. instead, m0,d
is (in suitable coordinates) identied with the combination 1
2 (p 0 + k 0) of translations and
special conformal transformations in the 0-direction of cm1,s1. this is dierent from the
euclidean picture [20] where the anti-desitter hamiltonian is identied with the dilatation
subgroup of the conformal group. in lorentzian metric, the dilatations correspond to a
space-like translation subgroup of the anti-desitter group. this must have been expected
since the generator of dilatations does not have a one-sided spectrum as is required for the
real-time hamiltonian. the subgroup generated by 1
2(p 0+k 0) is well-known to be periodic
and to satisfy the spectrum condition in every positive-energy representation. (periodicity
in bulk time of course implies a mass gap for the underlying bulk theory. this is not in
conict with the boundary theory being massless since the respective subgroups of time
evolution cannot be identied.)
dierent hamiltonians give rise to dierent counting of degrees of freedom, since entropy is
dened via the partition function. thus, the holographic reduction of degrees of freedom
[10, 18] can be viewed as a consequence of the choice of the hamiltonian: the anti-desitter
hamiltonian m0,d = 1
2(p 0 + k 0) has discrete spectrum and has a chance (at least in 1+1
dimensions) to yield a nite partition function. one the other hand, the partition function
with respect to the boundary hamiltonian p 0 exhibits the usual infrared divergence due
to innite volume and continuous spectrum.
a crucial aspect of the present analysis is the identication of compact regions in the
boundary with wedge regions in the bulk. with a little hindsight, this aspect is indeed also
present in the proposal for the identication of generating functionals [20]. while the latter
is given in the euclidean approach, it should refer in real time to a hyperbolic dierential
equation with initial values given in a double-cone on the boundary which determine its
solution in a wedge region of bulk space.
we also show that in 1+1 dimensions there are suciently many observables localized
in arbitrarily small compact regions in the bulk space to ensure that compactly localized
observables generate the wedge algebras. this property is crucial if we want to think of
local algebras as being generated by local elds:

proposition: assume that the boundary theory a on s 1 is weakly additive (i.e., a(i)
is generated by a(jn) whenever the interval i is covered by a family of intervals jn). if
a wedge w in ads1,1 is covered by a family of double-cones on  w , then the algebra
b(w ) is generated by the observables localized in on:

b(w ) = _

b(on).

in order to establish this result, we explicitly determine the observables localized in a
it is the
double-cone region on ads1,1. their algebra b(o) turns out to be non-trivial:

n

1 introduction and results

6

intersection of two interval algebras a(ii) on the boundary s 1 where the intersection of the
two intervals ii is a union of two disjoint intervals ji. b(o) contains therefore at least a(j1)
and a(j2). in fact, it is even larger than that, containing also observables corresponding
to a charge transport [8], that is, operators which annihilate a superselection charge in
j1 and create the same charge in j2. the inclusion a(i1)  a(j2)  b(o) therefore carries
(complete) algebraic information about the superselection structure of the chiral boundary
theory [11].

as the double-cone on ads1,1 shrinks, the size of the intervals ji also shrinks but not their
distance, so points in 1+1-dimensional anti-desitter space are related to pairs of points
in conformal space. but we see that sharply localized bulk observables involve boundary
observables localized in large intervals: the above charge transporters. this result provides
an algebraic interpretation of the obstruction against a point transformation between bulk
and boundary.

the issue of compactly localized observables in anti-desitter space is more complicated
in more than two dimensions, and deserves a separate careful analysis. some preliminary
results will be presented in section 2.3. they show that if the bulk theory possesses
observables localized in double-cones, then the corresponding boundary theory violates an
additivity property which is characteristic for wightman eld theories, while its violation
is expected for non-abelian gauge theories due to the presence of gauge-invariant wilson
loop operators. conversely, if the boundary theory satises this additivity property, then
the observables of the corresponding bulk theory are always attached to innity, as in
topological (chern-simons) theories.

let us point out that the conjectures in [14, 20] suggest a much more ambitious interpreta-
tion, namely that the correspondence pertains to bulk theories involving quantum gravity,
while the anti-desitter space and its boundary are understood in some asymptotic (semi-
classical) sense. indeed, the algebraic approach is no more able to describe proper quantum
gravity as any other mathematically unambiguous framework up to now. most arguments
given in the literature in favour of the conjectures refer to gravity as perturbative gravity
on a background space-time. likewise, our present results concern the semi-classical ver-
sion of the conjectures, treating gravity like any other quantum eld theory as a theory of
observables on a classical background geometry. in fact, the presence or absence of gravity
in the bulk theory plays no particular role. this is only apparently in conict with the
original arguments for a holographic reduction of degrees of freedom of a bulk theory in
the vicinity of a gravitational horizon [10, 18] in which gravity is essential. namely, our
statement can be interpreted in the sense that once the anti-desitter geometry is given for
whatever reason (e.g., the presence of a gravitational horizon), then it can support only
the degrees of freedom of a boundary theory.

2 identification of observables

7

2 identication of observables

we denote by h1,s the d=1+s-dimensional hypersurface dened through its embedding
into ambient r2,s,

with lorentzian metric induced from the 2+s-dimensional metric

x2
0  x2

1  . . .  x2

s + x2

d = r2

ds2 = dx2

s + dx2
d.

0  dx2

1  . . .  dx2

its group of isometries is the lorentz group o(2, s) of the ambient space in which the
reection x 7 x is central. anti-desitter space is the quotient manifold ads1,s = h1,s/z2
(with the same lorentzian metric locally). we denote by p the projection h1,s  ads1,s.

two open regions in anti-desitter space are called causally disjoint if none of their points
can be connected by a time-like geodesic. the largest open region causally disjoint from
a given region is called the causal complement. in a causal quantum eld theory on the
quotient space ads1,s, observables and hence algebras associated with causally disjoint
regions commute with each other.

the reader should be worried about this denition, since causal independence of observables
should be linked to causal connectedness by time-like curves rather than geodesics. but on
anti-desitter space, any two points can be connected by a time-like curve, so they are indeed
causally connected, and the requirement that causally disconnected observables commute is
empty. yet, as our corollary 1 shows, if the boundary theory is causal, then the associated
bulk theory is indeed causal in the present (geodesic) sense. we refer also to [3] where
it is shown that vacuum expectation values of commutators of observables with causally
disjoint localization have to vanish whenever the vacuum state has reasonable properties
(invariance and thermodynamic passivity), but without any a priori assumptions on causal
commutation relations (neither in bulk nor on the boundary).

thus in the theories on anti-desitter space we consider in this paper, observables localized
in causally disjoint but causally connected regions commute; see [3] for a discussion of the
ensuing physical constraints on the nature of interactions on anti-desitter space.

the causal structure of ads1,s is determined by its metric modulo conformal transforma-
tions which preserve angles and geodesics. as a causal manifold, ads1,s has a boundary
(the asymptotic directions of geodesics). the boundary inherits the causal structure of
the bulk space ads1,s, and the anti-desitter group so0(2, s) acts on this space. it is well
known that this boundary is a compactication cm1,s1 = (s 1  ss1)/z2 of minkowski
space r1,s1, and so0(2, s) acts on it like the conformal group.

the notions of causal disjoint and causal complements on cm1,s1 coincide, up to conformal
transformations, with those on minkowski space [12]. in d =1+1 dimensions, s = 1, the
conformal space is s 1, and the causal complement of an interval i is i c = s 1\i.

both anti-desitter space and its causal boundary have a global time-arrow, that is,
the distinction between the future and past light-cone in the tangent spaces (which are

2 identification of observables

8

ordinary minkowski spaces) at each point x can be globally chosen continuous in x (and
consistent with the reection x 7 x). the time orientation on the bulk space induces
the time orientation on the boundary. the time arrow is crucial in order to distinguish
representations of positive energy.

2.1 proof of the lemma
any ordered pair of light-like vectors (e, f ) in the ambient space r2,s such that ef < 0
denes an open subspace of the hypersurface h1,s given by

fw (e, f ) = {x  r2,s : x2 = r2, ex > 0, f x > 0}.

this space has two connected components. namely, the tangent vector at each point

x  fw (e, f ) under the boost in the e-f -plane, e,f x = (f  x)e  (e  x)f , is either a
future or a past directed time-like vector, since (e,f x)2 = 2(e f )(e x)(f  x) > 0. we
denote by fw+(e, f ) and fw(e, f ) the connected components of fw (e, f ) in which e,f x
is future and past directed, respectively. by this denition, fw+(f, e) = fw(e, f ), and
fw+(e, f ) = fw+(e, f ).
the wedge regions in the hypersurface h1,s are the regions fw(e, f ) as specied. the
wedge regions in anti-desitter space are their quotients w(e, f ) = pfw(e, f ). one has

w+(e, f ) = w(f, e) = w+(e, f ), and w+(e, f ) and w(e, f ) are each others causal
complements. for an illustration in 1+1 dimensions, cf. figure 1.
x0

boundary

arrow of time

(

(

i+

i_

(

(

xd

x

x_

~
w+

~
w_

x
s
~
w_

_

arrow of time

bulk

figure 1. wedge regions fw+(e, f ) and fw(e, f ) in 1+1 dimensions, and their intersections
with the boundary. the light-like vectors e and f are tangent to fw in its apex x. in
anti-desitter space, fw is identied with fw, and w = pfw are causal complements

of each other.

we claim that the projected wedges w(e, f ) intersect the boundary of ads1,s in regions
i(e, f ) which are double-cones of minkowski space r1,s1 or images thereof under some

2 identification of observables

9

conformal transformation. note that any two double-cones in r1,s1 are connected by a
conformal transformation, and among their conformal transforms are also the past and
future light-cones and space-like wedges in r1,s1.

we claim also that the causal complement w(e, f ) of the wedge w+(e, f ) intersects the
boundary in the causal complement i(e, f ) = i+(e, f )c of i+(e, f ).
it would be sucient to compute the intersections of any single pair of wedges fw(e, f )

with the boundary and see that it is a pair of causally complementary conformal double-
cones in cm1,s1, since the claim then follows for any other pair of wedges by covariance.
for illustrative reason we shall compute two such examples.

we x the arrow of time by declaring the tangent vector of the rotation in the 0-d-plane,
t x = (xd, 0, . . . , 0, x0), to be future directed.
in stereographic coordinates (y0, ~y, x) of the hypersurface x2 = r2, where x = xd  xs
and (y0, ~y) = (x0, ~x)/x, ~x = (x1, . . . , xs1), the boundary is given by |x| = . thus, in
the limit of innite x one obtains a chart y = (y0, ~y) of cm1,s1. the induced conformal
structure is that of minkowski space, dy2 = f (y)2(dy2

0  d~y2).

our rst example is the one underlying figure 1: we choose e = (0, . . . , 0, 1, 1) and

f = (0, . . . , 0, 1, 1). the conditions for x  fw (e, f ) read xd  xs > 0 and xd + xs < 0,
0  ~x2 > r2. the tangent vector e,f x has d-component

implying x2
e,f xd = 2xs > 0. hence, it is future directed if x0 > 0, and past directed if x0 < 0:

s < 0 and hence x2

d  x2

fw+(e, f ) = {x : x2 = r2, xs < |xd|, x0 > 0}.

after dividing (x0, ~x) by x = xd  xs  , we obtain the boundary region

i+(e, f ) = {y = (y0, ~y) : y2

0  ~y2 > 0, y0 > 0},

that is, the future light-cone in minkowski space; similarly, i(e, f ) is the past light-cone,
and i(e, f ) are each others causal complements in cm1,s1.

fw (e, f ) read x1 < |x0|, implying x2

next, we choose e = (1, 1, 0, . . . , 0) and f = (1, 1, 0, . . . , 0). the conditions for x 
s > r2 > 0. the tangent
vector e,f x has 0-component e,f xd = 2x1 > 0. hence, it is future directed if xd < 0
hence xd  xs < 0, and past directed if xd > 0 hence xd  xs > 0:

0  ~x2 < 0 and hence x2

d  x2

fw+(e, f ) = {x : x2 = r2, x1 < |x0|, x < 0}.

after dividing (x0, ~x) by x = xd  xs  , we obtain the boundary region

i+(e, f ) = {y = (y0, ~y) : y1 > |y0|},

that is, a space-like wedge region in minkowski space; similarly, i(e, f ) is the opposite
wedge y1 < |y0|, which is again the causal complement of i+(e, f ) in cm1,s1.

2 identification of observables

10

both light-cones and wedge regions in minkowski space are well known to be conformal
transforms of double-cones, and hence they are double-cones on cm1,s1. the pairs of
regions computed above are indeed causally complementary pairs.

we now consider the map  : w+(e, f ) 7 i+(e, f ). since the action of the conformal group
on the boundary is induced by the action of the anti-desitter group on the bulk, we see that

fw(ge, gf ) = g(fw(e, f )) and i(ge, gf ) = g(i(e, f )), hence  intertwines the actions of

the anti-desitter and the conformal group. it is clear that  preserves inclusions, and we
have seen that it preserves causal complements for one, and hence for all wedges. since
so0(2, s) acts transitively on the set of double-cones of cm1,s1, the map  is surjective.
finally, since w+(e, f ) and i+(e, f ) have the same stabilizer subgroup of so0(2, s), it is
also injective.

this completes the proof of the lemma.

(cid:3)

2.2 proof of the corollaries

we identify wedge algebras on ads1,s and double-cone algebras on cm1,s1 by

b(w(e, f )) = a(i(e, f )),

that is, b(w ) = a((w )). the lemma implies that if a is given as an isotonous, causal
and conformally covariant net of algebras on cm1,s1, then b(w ) dened by this identi-
cation constitute an isotonous, causal and anti-desitter covariant net of algebras on ads1,s,
and vice versa. namely, the identication is just a relabelling of the index set of the net
which preserves inclusions and causal complements and intertwines the action of so0(2, s).
thus we have established corollary 1.
(cid:3)

as for corollary 2, we note that, as the algebras are identied, states and representations
of the nets a and b are also identied.

since the identication intertwines the action of the anti-dsitter group and of the conformal
group, an anti-desitter invariant state on b corresponds to a conformally invariant state
on a. the generator of time translations in the anti-desitter group corresponds to the
generator 1
2 (p 0 + k 0) in the conformal group which is known to be positive if and only
if p 0 is positive (note that k 0 is conformally conjugate to p 0). hence the conditions for
positivity of the respective generators of time-translations are equivalent.

by the identication of states and algebras, also the modular groups are identied. the
modular group and modular conjugation for double-cone algebras in a vacuum state of
conformally covariant quantum eld theories are conformally conjugate to the modular
group and modular conjugation of a minkowski space wedge algebra, which in turn are
given by the lorentz boosts in the wedge direction and the reection along the ridge of
the wedge [5, 9]. it follows that the modular group for a wedge algebra on anti-desitter
space is given by the corresponding subgroup of the anti-desitter group which preserves
the wedge (for a wedge w+(e, f ), this is the subgroup of boosts in the e-f -plane), and the
modular conjugation is a cpt transformation which maps w+ onto w.

these remarks suce to complete the proof of corollary 2.

(cid:3)

2 identification of observables

11

let us mention that the correspondence given in corollary 1 holds also for weakly local
nets both on the bulk and on the boundary. in a weakly local net, the vacuum expectation
value of the commutator of two causally disjoint observables vanishes, but not necessarily
the commutator itself. weak locality for quantum eld theories on anti-desitter space fol-
lows [3] from very conservative assumptions on the vacuum state without any commutation
relations assumed. thus, also the boundary theory will always be weakly local.

2.3 compact localization in anti-desitter space

let us rst note that as the ridge of a wedge is shifted into the interior of the wedge,
the double-cone on the boundary shrinks. thus, sharply localized boundary observables
correspond to bulk observables at space-like innity [1]. we now show that sharply localized
bulk observables do not correspond to a simple geometry on the boundary, but must be
determined algebraically.

an observable localized in a double-cone o of anti-desitter space must be contained in
every wedge algebra b(w ) such that o  w . the algebra b(o) is thus at most the
intersection of all b(w ) such that o  w . we may dene it as this intersection, thereby
ensuring isotony, causal commutativity and covariance for the net of double-cone algebras
in an obvious manner.

double-cone algebras on anti-desitter space are thus delicate intersections of algebras of
double-cones and their conformal images on the boundary, and might turn out trivial. in
1+1 dimensions, the geometry is particularly simple since a double-cone is an intersection
of only two wedges. we show that the corresponding intersection of algebras is non-trivial,
and shall turn to d > 1 + 1 below.

let us write (in 1+1 dimensions) the relation

b(o) = b(w1)  b(w2)  a(i1)  a(i2)

whenever

o = w1  w2,

where wi are any pair of wedge regions in ads1,1 and ii = (wi) their intersections with
the boundary, that is, open intervals on s 1.

the intersection w1  w2 might not be a double-cone. it might be empty, or it might be
another wedge region. before discussing the above relation as a denition for the double-
cone algebra b(o) if o = w1  w2 is a double-cone, we shall rst convince ourselves that
it is consistent also in these other cases.

if w1 contains w2, or vice versa, then o equals the larger wedge, and the relation holds
by isotony. if w1 and w2 are disjoint, then the intersections with the boundary are also
disjoint, and b() = a(i1)  a(i2) is trivial if the boundary net a on s 1 is irreducible
(that is, disjoint intervals have no nontrivial observables in common).

next, it might happen that w1 and w2 have a nontrivial intersection without the apex of
one wedge lying inside the other wedge. in this case, the intersection is again a wedge,
say w3. namely, any wedge in ads1,1 is of the form w+(e, f ) where e and f are a future
and a past directed light-like tangent vector in the apex x (the unique point in ads1,1

2 identification of observables

12

solving ex = f x = 0). the condition ef < 0 implies that both tangent vectors point
in the same (positive or negative) 1-direction. the wedge itself is the surface between the
two light-rays emanating from x in the directions e and f (cf. figure 1). the present
situation arises if the future directed light-ray of w1 intersects the past directed light-ray of
w2 (or vice versa) in a point x3 without the other pair of light-rays intersecting each other.
the intersection of the two wedges is the surface between the two intersecting light-rays
travelling on from the point x3, which is another wedge region w3 with apex x3. it follows
that the intersection of the intersections ii of wi with the boundary equals the intersection
i3 of w3 with the boundary. hence consistency of the above relation is guaranteed by
a(i1)  a(i2) = a(i3) where i1 and i2 are two intervals on s 1 whose intersection i3 is
again an interval.

now we come to the case that w1  w2 is a double-cone o in the proper sense. this is
the case if the closure of the causal complement of w1 is contained in w2. it follows that
the closure of the causal complement of i1 is contained in i2, hence the intersection of i1
and i2 is the union of two disjoint intervals j1 and j2. the latter are the two light-like
geodesic shadows, cast by o onto the boundary.

thus, the observables localized in a double-cone in anti-desitter space ads1,1 are given
by the intersection of two interval algebras a(ii) on the boundary for intervals ii with
disconnected intersections (or equivalently, by essential duality, the joint commutant of
two interval algebras for disjoint intervals). such algebras have received much attention in
the literature [16, 21, 11], notably within the context of superselection sectors. namely,
if i1  i2 = j1  j2 consists of two disjoint intervals, then the intersection of algebras
a(i1)  a(i2) is larger than the algebra a(j1)  a(j2). the excess can be attributed to
the existence of superselection sectors [11], the extra operators being intertwiners which
transport a superselection charge from one of the intervals ji to the other.

we conclude that (certain) compactly localized observables on anti-desitter space are
strongly delocalized observables (charge transporters) of the boundary theory. yet there is
no obstruction against both theories being wightman theories generated by local wight-
man elds, as the following simple example shows.

in suitable coordinates x = r  (cos t, cos x, sin t)/ sin x, the bulk is the strip (t, x) 
r  (0, ) with points (t, x)  (t + ,   x) identied, while the boundary are the points
(0, u), u  r mod 2. the metric is a multiple of dt2  dx2, thus the light rays emanating
from the bulk point (t, x) hit the boundary at the points u = t  x mod 2. we see that,
as the double-cone o shrinks to a point (t, x) in bulk, the two intervals ji on the boundary
also shrink to points (namely u) while their distance remains nite.

now, we consider the abelian current eld j(u) on the boundary, and determine the associ-
ated elds on anti-desitter space. first, for (t, x) in the strip, both j(t  x) are localized at
(t, x) and give rise to a conserved vector current j with components j 0(t, x) = j(t + x) +
j(tx), j 1(t, x) = j(t+x)+j(tx). furthermore, the elds (t, x) = exp ir t+x
tx j(u)du
(suitably regularized, of course),   r, are also localized at (t, x). namely, since the charge
operator rs 1 j(u)du is a number q in each irreducible representation, (t, x) may as well

2 identification of observables

13

be represented as eiq exp ir tx

t+x2 j(u)du and hence is localized in both complementary
boundary intervals [t  x, t + x] and [t + x  2, t  x] which overlap in the points u+ and
u, as required.

indeed, the elds  can be obtained from bounded weyl operators with nite localization
as follows. a(i) is generated by boundary observables of the weyl form w (f ) = exp ij(f )
where f is a smearing function on s 1 which is constant outside the interval i. adding a
constant to f is immaterial for the localization since the commutation relations are given
by the symplectic form r f g du. a weyl operator w (f ) is localized in both intervals i1,

i2 (notation as before) if f has constant values on both gaps between j1, j2, but it is not
a product of weyl operators in j1 and in j2 whenever these values are dierent. as a bulk
observable, w (f ) is localized in the double-cone o = w1  w2, and operators of this form
generate b(o). suitably regularized limits of w (f ) yield the point-like local elds (t, x).

for the more expert reader, we mention that our identication of double-cone algebras in
bulk with two-interval algebras on the boundary also shows how the notorious diculty
to compute the modular group for two-interval algebras [16] is related to the diculty to
compute the modular group of double-cone algebras in massive theories. (we discuss below
that in a scaling limit the massive anti-desitter theory approaches a conformal at space
theory. in this limit, the modular group can again be computed.)

we now prove the proposition of sect. 1. it asserts that the algebras b(on) generate b(w )
whenever a family of double-cones on  w covers the wedge w  ads1,1.

each b(on) is of the form a(in1)  a(in2) where in1  i = (w ) and in1  in2 = jn1  jn2
is a union of two disjoint intervals. by denition, the assertion is equivalent to

a(i) = _

n

a(in1)  a(in2),

where the inclusion  holds since each a(in1) is contained in a(i). on the other hand,
the algebras on the right hand side are larger than a(jn1)  a(jn2). if on cover the wedge
w , then the intervals jn1 and jn2, as n runs, cover the interval i = (w ). so the claim
follows from weak additivity of the boundary theory.
(cid:3)

in d  2 + 1 dimensions, the situation is drastically dierent. namely, if a family of small
boundary double-cones ii covers the space-like basis of a large double-cone i, and wi and
w denote the associated anti-desitter wedge regions, then  unlike in 1+1 dimensions 
w will contain a bulk double-cone o which is space-like to all wi. consequently, b(o) 

b(w ) = a(i) must commute with the algebra wi a(ii) generated by all b(wi) = a(ii).
determined in terms of smearing functions), the latter algebra coincides with a(si ii). this

but in theories based on gauge-invariant wightman elds (with the localization of operators

algebra in turn coincides with a(i) whenever the dynamics is generated by a hamiltonian
which is an integral over a local density, because then the observables in a neighbourhood
of the space-like basis of i determine the observables in all of i. thus b(o) must belong to
the center of a(i) which is commutative (classical). hence, a wightman boundary theory
is associated with a bulk theory without compactly localized quantum observables.

3 speculations

14

if the bulk the-
conversely,
ory is itself described by a wightman eld [7]), then the nontriviality of b(o) requires

if there are double-cone localized bulk observables (e.g.,

a(si ii) = a(i) to be strictly larger than wi a(ii). this violation of additivity seems

to be characteristic of non-abelian gauge theories where wilson loop operators are not
generated by point-like gauge invariant elds (cf. also the discussion in [19]).

these issues certainly deserve a more detailed and careful analysis. for the moment,
we conclude that the holographic correspondence necessarily relates, in more than 1+1
dimensions, wightman type boundary theories to bulk theories without compactly localized
observables (topological theories), in agreement with a remark on chern-simons theories in
[20], and, conversely, bulk theories with point-like elds to boundary theories which share
properties of non-abelian gauge theories, in agreement with the occurrence of yang-mills
theory in [14].

3 speculations

it is an interesting side-aspect of the last remark in the previous section that the holographic
correspondence in both directions relates gauge theories to wightman theories. it might
therefore provide a new constructive scheme giving access to gauge theories.

if one is interested in quantum eld theories on minkowski rather than anti-desitter space,
one may consider the at space limit in which the curvature radius r of anti-desitter
space tends to innity, or equivalently consider a region of anti-desitter space which is
much smaller than the curvature radius. the regime |x| << r asymptotically becomes
at minkowski space, and the anti-desitter group contracts to the poincare group. thus,
one obtains a minkowski space theory on r1,s from a conformal theory on cm1,s1 through
a scaling limit [2, 4] of the associated theory on ads1,s.

for d = 1+1, this can be done quite explicitly. the double-cones algebras b(o) are certain
extensions of the algebras a(j1)a(j2), as discussed before. now in the at regime the in-
tervals ji become small of order |o|/r. thus for a substantial portion of minkowski space,
the relevant intervals ji are all contained in a suitable but xed pair of non-overlapping
intervals ki. let us now assume that the conformal net has the split property (an algebraic
property valid in any chiral quantum eld theory for which tr exp l0 exists), which
ensures that states can be independently prepared on causally disjoint regions with a nite
distance [2]. then a(k1)  a(k2) is unitarily isomorphic to a(k1)  a(k2), and the
isomorphism is inherited by all its subalgebras a(j1)  a(j2)  a(j1)  a(j2). under this
isomorphism, the larger algebra b(o) is identied [11] with the standard construction [13]
of 1+1-dimensional conformal minkowski space observables from a given chiral conformal
net (which corresponds to the diagonal modular invariant and is sometimes quoted as the
longo-rehren net): b(o)  blr(j1  j2) if o corresponds to i1  i2 = j1  j2  k1  k2.
the unitary isomorphism of algebras, however, does not take the vacuum state on b to
the vacuum state on the lr net.

references

15

thus, the at space limit of the anti-desitter space theory in 1+1 dimensions associated
with a given chiral conformal theory, is given by the lr net associated with that same chiral
theory. note that the lr net has 1+1-dimensional conformal symmetry, but of course the
anti-desitter net is not conformally invariant due to the presence of the curvature scale r.

it would be interesting to get an analogous understanding of the at space limit of the anti-
desitter space theory in higher dimensions in terms of the associated conformal theory.

one might speculate whether one can iterate holography, and use the at space limit of
the bulk theory on ads1,s as a boundary input for a new bulk theory on ads1,s+1. here,
however, a warning is in order. namely, the limiting at space theory on minkowski space
r1,s will, like the lr net, in general not be extendible to the conformal compactication
cm1,s but rather to a covering thereof. one might therefore endeavour to extend the present
analysis to theories on covering spaces both of anti-desitter space and of its boundary.

there is an independent and physically motivated reason to study quantum eld theories
on a covering of anti-desitter space. namely, it has been observed (see above, [3]) that the
local commutativity for causally disjoint but not causally disconnected observables leads
to severe constraints on the possible interactions on anti-desitter space proper. these
constraints will disappear on the universal covering space.

this anti-desitter causality paradox parallels very much the old conformal causality
paradox that causal commutativity on cm1,s proper excludes most conformal theories
of interest; it was solved [15] by the recognition that conformal elds naturally live on a
covering space. holography tells us that both problems are the two sides of the same coin.

extending the present analysis to covering spaces seems a dubious task for d = 1 + 1 since
the boundary of the covering of two-dimensional anti-desitter space has two connected
components. in higher dimensions, however, we do not expect serious obstacles.

acknowledgment
previous versions of this paper have been improved in several respects on the basis of
discussions with d. buchholz, r. verch (who also made the figure), b. schroer, r. helling
and many others, as well as questions raised by the referees. my thanks are due to all of
them.

references

[1] m. bertola, j. bros, u. moschella, r. schaeer: ads/cft correspondence for n-point func-

tions, hep-th/9908140.

[2] d. buchholz: current trends in axiomatic quantum eld theory, gottingen preprint (1998),

hep-th/9811233.

[3] d. buchholz, m. florig, s.j. summers: hawking-unruh temperature and einstein causality

in anti-de sitter space-time, gottingen-gainesville preprint (1999), hep-th/9905178.

[4] d. buchholz, r. verch: scaling algebras and renormalization group in algebraic quantum

eld theory, rev. math. phys. 7 (1995) 1195-1240.

references

16

[5] j.j. bisognano, e.h. wichmann: on the duality condition for a hermitean scalar eld, j.

math. phys. 16 (1975) 985-1007.

[6] v. dobrev: intertwining operator realization of the ads/cft correspondence, clausthal

preprint (1998), hep-th/9812194, to appear in nucl. phys. b.

[7] c. fronsdal: elementary particles in a curved space. ii, phys. rev. d 10 (1974) 589-598.

[8] r. haag: local quantum physics, springer 1992.

[9] p.d. hislop, r. longo: modular structure of the local algebras associated with the free mass-

less scalar eld theory, commun. math. phys. 84 (1982) 71-85.

[10] g. t hooft: dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, in: salam-festschrift, a. ali et al.

eds., world scientic 1993, pp. 284-296.

[11] y. kawahigashi, r. longo, m. muger: multi-interval subfactors and modularity of represen-

tations in conformal eld theory, tokyo-rome preprint (1999), math.oa/9903104.

[12] m. luscher, g. mack: global conformal invariance in quantum eld theory, commun. math.

phys. 41 (1975) 203-234.

[13] r. longo, k.-h. rehren: nets of subfactors, rev. math. phys. 7 (1995) 567-597.

[14] j. maldacena: the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and supergravity, adv.

theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231-252.

[15] b. schroer, j.a. swieca: conformal transformations for quantized elds, phys. rev. d 10

(1974) 480-485.

[16] b. schroer, h.-w. wiesbrock: modular theory and geometry, fu berlin preprint (1998),

math-ph/9809003.

[17] g.l. sewell: quantum elds on manifolds: pct and gravitationally induced thermal states,

ann. phys. (n.y.) 141 (1982) 201-224.

[18] l. susskind: the world as a hologram, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377-6396.

[19] l. susskind, n. toumbas: wilson loops as precursors, stanford u. preprint (1999), hep-

th/9909013.

[20] e. witten: anti de sitter space and holography, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253-291.

[21] xu feng: jones-wassermann subfactors for disconnected intervals, ucla preprint (1997),

q-alg/9704003.

