9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
6
2

 

 
 

2
v
6
0
0
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

neip-9909
may 1999

stable non-bps states in string theory:

a pedagogical review 

alberto lerda a and rodolfo russo b

a dipartimento di scienze e tecnologie avanzate
universit`a del piemonte orientale (alessandria)

and dipartimento di fisica teorica, universit`a di torino

and i.n.f.n., sezione di torino, via p. giuria 1, i-10125 torino, italy

lerda@to.infn.it

b institut de phisique, universite de neuchatel

rue a.-l. breguet 1, ch-2000 neuchatel, switzerland

rodolfo.russo@iph.unine.ch

abstract

we present a pedagogical review of the stable non-bps states in string
theory which have recently attracted some attention in the literature.
in
particular, following the analysis of a. sen, we discuss in detail the case of
the stable non-bps d-particle of type i theory whose existence is predicted
(and required) by the heterotic/type i duality. we show that this d-particle
originates from an unstable bound state formed by a d1/anti-d1 pair of type
iib in which the tachyon eld acquires a solitonic kink conguration. the
mechanism of tachyon condensation is discussed rst at a qualitative level
and then with an exact conformal eld theory analysis.

this work is partially supported by the european commission tmr programme erbfmrx-
ct96-0045 and by murst, and is based on the lectures given at the tmr school quantum
aspects of gauge theories, supersymmetry and unication in leuven (belgium) january 18-23
1999.

1 introduction

during the last few years our understanding of string theory has dramatically in-
creased. nowadays it is known that all ve consistent superstring models (i.e.
type iia, type iib, type i, so(32) heterotic and e8  e8 heterotic [1]) and the
eleven dimensional supergravity are dierent perturbative expansions of a unique
underlying theory, called m-theory. however, despite numerous attempts and re-
markable achievements, we are still far from a complete and satisfactory formulation
of m-theory. the best we can do at present time is to dene it by means of the non-
perturbative duality relations that connect the various corners of its moduli space
corresponding to the dierent string theories. establishing (and checking) these
relations precisely is therefore a necessary step towards a better understanding of
m-theory.

one way of testing a duality relation between theory a and theory b is to show
that their eective actions are equivalent up to a eld redenition.
in this way,
for example, it was discovered that type iib superstring is self-dual [2], or that
the so(32) heterotic string is dual to type i theory [3]. of course, by focusing on
the eective actions, one checks a duality only at a eld theory level, and not
in a really stringy way. however, a deeper understanding can be obtained by
looking at the so-called bps states. these are a special class of states, which
are characterized by the key property that their mass is completely determined by
their charge under some gauge eld. they form short (or ultra-short) multiplets of
the supersymmetry algebra of the theory, and because of this fact they are stable
and protected from quantum radiative corrections. therefore, their properties can
be studied and analyzed perturbatively at weak coupling in the theory a, and then
safely extrapolated at strong coupling where they can be reinterpreted in terms
of non-perturbative congurations of the dual theory b. a well-known example of
such bps states is given by the supersymmetric dp branes of type ii theories (with
p even in type iia and p odd in type iib) which are charged under the (p + 1)
gauge potentials of the r-r sector [4, 5]. since the bps congurations are protected
by non-renormalization theorems, one may legitimately pose the question whether
the non-perturbative tests based on them are really a strong evidence for a duality
conjecture or simply unavoidable results dictated by supersymmetry alone. thus,
it is of great conceptual importance to analyze a non-perturbative duality beyond
the bps level.

1

to this aim, it is useful to observe that quite often a string theory contains in
its spectrum states which are stable without being bps. these are in general the
lightest states which carry some conserved quantum numbers of the theory. for
these states there is no particular relation between their mass and their charge;
they receive quantum corrections and form long multiplets of the supersymmetry
algebra of the theory (i.e. they are non-bps). however, being the lightest states
with a given set of conserved quantum numbers, they are stable since they cannot
decay into anything else. in general it is not dicult to nd such stable states with
the standard perturbative methods of string theory and analyze their properties at
weak coupling; but then a very interesting question can be asked: what happens to
these stable states at strong coupling? since they cannot decay, these states should
be present also in the strong coupling regime, and thus, if the string duality relations
are correct, one should nd stable non-bps states with the right multiplicities and
quantum numbers also in the dual theory. to verify the existence of such states is
therefore a very strong (perhaps the strongest) check on a non-perturbative duality
relation between two string theories.

in these notes, following the analysis of a. sen [6, 7], we apply this idea to test
the heterotic/type i duality [3] at a non-bps level 1. in this way we get a more
complete understanding of this non-perturbative relation which, in some sense, has
a privileged status:
indeed, a study of the web of string dualities [12] shows that
all of them can be derived from it by combining it with t-duality.

at the rst massive level the so(32) heterotic string contains perturbative states
which are stable but not bps. their stability follows from the fact that they are
the lightest states carrying the quantum numbers of the spinor representation of
the gauge group. since they cannot decay, these states should be present also in
the strong coupling regime. then, if the heterotic/type i duality is correct, type
i theory should support non-perturbative stable congurations that are spinors of
so(32). it turns out [13] that a pair formed by a d1-brane and an anti d1-brane
of type i (wrapped on a circle and with a z2 wilson line) describes a conguration
with the quantum numbers of the spinor representation of so(32). thus this system
is the right candidate to describe in the non-perturbative regime the stable non-

1a rst check of this duality has been given in ref. [8] where it has been shown that the world-
volume theory on the d-string of type i is identical to the world-sheet theory of the heterotic
string. later, further tests involving bps saturated terms have been performed in ref. [9] for the
uncompactied case and, for the compactied case, in ref. [10] at level of bps spectra and in
ref. [11] at level of the eective actions.

2

bps states of the heterotic string mentioned above. however, a superposition of a
brane with an anti-brane is unstable due to the presence of tachyons in the open
strings stretching between the brane and the anti-brane [14]. then the problem
of dening properly this superposition and treating its tachyon instability arises.
this has been addressed by a. sen in a remarkable series of papers [15, 16, 17, 6,
7, 18]. in particular in ref. [6] he considered a d-string/anti-d-string pair of type
iib, and managed to prove that when the tachyon condenses to a kink along the
(compact) direction of the d-string, the pair becomes tightly bound and, as a whole,
behaves as a d-particle. he also computed its mass nding that it is a factor of 2
bigger than the one of the supersymmetric bps d-particle of type iia theory. the
presence of a d-particle in type iib spectrum looks surprising at rst sight since one
usually thinks that in type iib there are only dp branes with p odd. however, one
should keep in mind that such a d-particle is a non-supersymmetric and non-bps
conguration. furthermore it is unstable, due to the fact that there are tachyons in
the spectrum of the open strings living on its world-line. these tachyons turn out
to be odd under the world-sheet parity , and hence disappear if one performs the
 projection to get the type i string [19]. therefore, the d-particle found by sen
is a stable non-perturbative conguration of type i that transforms as a spinor of
so(32).

another interesting example of stable non-bps congurations that can be used
to check a non-perturbative duality relation is provided by the states that live on
the world-volume of a d5 brane of type iib on top of an orientifold o5 plane
[13, 16, 20]. the theory which supports these states is obtained by modding out
type iib theory in ten dimensions by i4 where  is the world-sheet parity (the
twist operator) and i4 is the space-time parity which changes the sign of four of
the space-like coordinates, i.e.

iib/i4 .

(1.1)

this theory contains 32 d5-branes which are pairwise located on top of 16 orientifold
5-planes. the open strings that start and end on the two mirror d5 branes of a given
orientifold plane are charged under an abelian gauge potential. it turns out that
the lightest states which carry this abelian charge are at mass-level one, and thus
are non-bps but stable. to describe these states at strong coupling, we perform
an s-duality transformation which maps the twist parity  to (1)fl where fl is
the left part of the space-time fermion number operator. thus, the s-dual theory
of (1.1) is the orbifold

iib/(1)fl i4 ,

3

(1.2)

which contains the usual untwisted sector together with a twisted sector localized on
the orbifold xed plane. in particular at the massless level there are, among other
elds, a 2-form ramond-ramond potential a(2) arising from the untwisted r-r
sector and a 1-form ramond-ramond potential a(1) arising from the twisted r-r
sector. it turns out (see ref. [16] for details) that the consistent bps states of this
orbifold theory must be charged both under a(2) and under a(1). therefore, they
are d1-branes which carry also the charge of an abelian vector potential. given this
fact, it is then natural to conjecture that the non-bps states which we are looking
for can be obtained as a superposition of one d1-brane and one anti-d1-brane of this
kind. indeed, by taking this combination we cancel the charge of a(2) and obtain a
solitonic conguration which carries only the charge of an abelian vector potential
and behaves as a d-particle. this construction has been performed in refs. [16, 20]
using the boundary state formalism [21] in which the d-branes are described by a
closed string state (the boundary state) that inserts a boundary on the string world-
sheet and enforces on it the appropriate boundary conditions 2. in particular, after
treating properly the tachyon instability on the brane/anti-brane pair in the orbifold
model (1.2), a stable d-particle state has been explicitly constructed and its mass
has been computed. of course a similar analysis can be done also in other orbifold
models [23, 15] which involve d-branes of dierent dimensionality (see for a review
ref. [24]).

like in the heterotic/type i case, also in the orbifold theory (1.2) one nds that
the stable non-bps states predicted by duality arise from an unstable system formed
by a d-string/anti-d-string pair of type iib in which the tachyon eld acquires
a solitonic kink conguration. thus, one may wonder whether this mechanism is
peculiar to the two cases we have mentioned, or can occur in more general situations.
this question has been considered recently by several authors [25, 26, 18] using
dierent methods, and new kinds of relation between bps and non-bps branes
have been discovered. it is natural to hope that they may provide new ideas and
clues to understand better the various d-branes and their fundamental role in string
(or m) theory.

for type ii theories these new relations are represented in fig. 1. let us start
from a pair formed by a dp brane and an anti-dp brane of type iib (i.e. p odd)
which, as mentioned above, is an unstable system due to the presence of an open-
string tachyon on its world-volume. if we condense this tachyon into a solitonic kink

2for a general discussion of the boundary state formalism and its application to the study of

d-branes and their interactions see for example ref. [22].

4

solution, then the resulting bound state describes a non-bps d(p1) brane of type
iib [6, 25, 18]. in these notes we will discuss in some detail only the case p = 1 which
is relevant of the heterotic/type i duality, but the same arguments can be used in all
other cases as well. the non-bps d(p1) brane of type iib constructed in this way
is unstable because its world volume theory contains again a tachyonic excitation
(which has nothing to do with the previous one). if we repeat the procedure and
make this second tachyon eld condense into a solitonic kink solution, we obtain
as a result a d(p  2) brane of type iib, which is supersymmetric and stable [18].
these descent relations, which of course can be established also with the d-branes
of type iia theory, are represented by the vertical arrows in fig. 1.

iib
  p

f
l

(-1)

t-duality

iia
p

n
o
y
h
c
a
t

n
o
i
t
a
s
n
e
d
n
o
c

iia
  p-1

f
l

(-1)

t-duality

f
l

(-1)

t-duality

iib
p p

n
o
y
h
c
a
t

n
o
i
t
a
s
n
e
d
n
o
c

iib
p-1

n
o
y
h
c
a
t

n
o
i
t
a
s
n
e
d
n
o
c

iib
  p-2

figure 1: this gure resumes the relations between dierent d-branes in type-ii su-
perstring theories. the squares represent the usual supersymmetric bps d-branes,
while the circles stay for the non-bps congurations (unstable in type ii theories).
starting from a pair formed by a dp and an anti-dp brane, a non-bps brane can
be constructed in two ways: one can mod out the system by (1)fl (horizontal
arrows) or condense the tachyon living on its world-volume (vertical arrows). by
repeating these operations twice, one nds a supersymmetric conguration. the
diagonal links represent the usual t-duality.

5

now let us consider another kind of relations between bps and non-bps branes.
again we start from the dp/anti-dp pair of type iib and see what happens when
we mod out the system by (1)fl 3. a detailed analysis of the open strings that
live on its world-volume shows that the conguration one obtains after modding
out (1)fl has the same features of a dp brane of type iia. since p is odd, this
must be a non-supersymmetric and non-bps brane. by modding out once more by
(1)fl one goes back to type iib theory and nds a stable and supersymmetric
dp brane [18, 27]. these relations are represented by the horizontal arrows in fig.1.
by exploiting all these relations (as well the usual t-duality) we can conclude that
actually all branes of type ii theories descend from a bound state of d9 and anti-d9
branes, a fact that has been used in refs. [25, 26] to show that the d-brane charges
take values in the k-theory of space time (see also refs. [28, 29, 30]).

these notes are organized as follows:

in section 2 we briey summarize the
essential perturbative features of the so(32) heterotic string and of the type i
theory; in section 3 we study in some detail the d1 brane of type i and the open
string excitations that live on its world-sheet and discuss their relations with the
heterotic theory. in section 4 we show how a stable d-particle conguration of type
i can be constructed from an unstable d1/anti-d1 pair and study the mechanism
of tachyon condensation from the eective eld theory point of view. in sections 5
and 6 we put these results on more solid ground by providing an exact conformal
description of the non-bps d-particle, and nally in appendix a we collect a few
technical details on the bosonization procedure which is used in the conformal eld
theory analysis. most of our presentation in the last sections is based in an essential
way on the series of papers by a. sen [15, 16, 17, 6, 7, 18].

3the operator (1)fl acts on the closed string states by simply changing the sign of every state
that has a left-moving part in the r sector. thus, it is an exact symmetry of type ii theories;
in particular (1)fl transforms a dp brane into an anti-dp brane and viceversa. therefore a
brane/anti-brane pair is invariant under this operator and so it is meaningful to ask what happens
when we mod it out.

6

2 the so(32) heterotic string and the type i

theory: a brief perturbative description

in this section we are going to summarize the essential perturbative features of the
so(32) heterotic string and of the type i theory that will be relevant for our later
discussions. in subsection 2.1 we briey analyze the spectrum of the heterotic string
and show that the states in the spinor representation of so(32) are non-bps but
stable. then, in subsection 2.2 we describe the content of the type i string viewed
as an orientifold of type iib theory.
in particular we focus on the open string
sector and also discuss the main properties of the so-called 1-1 strings that live on
the world-sheet of the d1 branes of the theory.

2.1 the so(32) heterotic string

the heterotic string is a theory of closed oriented strings with a local gauge invari-
ance in ten dimensions. roughly speaking, it can be considered as a combination of
the bosonic string and the superstring. the basic idea of the heterotic construction
is to exploit the holomorphic factorization between the left and the right moving
modes of closed strings and to treat them in two dierent ways. in particular, in the
right sector one introduces the usual eld content of the superstring, i.e. bosonic

and fermionic coordinates fx ( ) and e( ) with  = 0, 1, . . . , 9 (plus the

corresponding ghosts and superghosts), and performs the standard gso projection.
in the left sector, instead, one introduces only bosonic coordinates x ( +) with
 = 0, 1, . . . , 25 (plus the corresponding ghosts). since not all x s can be inter-
preted as spacetime coordinates, the left-moving sector is naturally divided in two

sets: when  = 0, . . . , 9, the elds x (+) are combined with fx () to build the

usual closed string coordinates x (, ), while for  = 10, . . . , 25, the left-moving
elds x ( +) are interpreted as internal degrees of freedom that can propagate
on the world-sheet. we will label these sixteen internal coordinates with an index
a = 1, . . . , 16.

given this eld content, it is easy to realize that a typical element of the fock
space of the heterotic theory is a tensor product of a left and a right state, and
looks like

(2.1)

(cid:16)1
n1    a

n   |k; pi(cid:17)  (cid:16)e1

m1    ep

rp   |eki(cid:17)

7

where, in an obvious notation, we have denoted by n and en the creation modes of
the bosonic elds and by er the creation modes of the fermionic coordinates. these

ones have half-integer indices in the ns sector and integer indices in the r sector.
notice that the left vacuum in eq. (2.1) depends on the spacetime momentum k
as well as on the internal momentum pa, whereas the right vacuum depends only
on k. if one considers states in the r sector, the right vacuum will carry also a
spinor label; in these notes however, we will not consider explicitly this case and
focus only on the ns sector.

the states of the form (2.1) are not all acceptable in the heterotic theory; indeed
a physical state |vi must satisfy the virasoro constraints. in particular the mass-
shell condition is

(cid:16)l0  1(cid:17)|vi =(cid:16)el0 

1

2(cid:17)|vi = 0 ,

where we have used the values of the intercept of the bosonic theory (a = 1) in the
left sector and of the ns superstring (a = 1/2) in the right sector. by expanding
el0 in modes, one easily nds from the second equality in eq. (2.2) that the mass

m of a state is given by

(2.2)

(2.3)

m 2 =

4

(cid:16)fn 

1

2(cid:17)

where fn is the total number of right moving oscillators. from the rst equality of
eq. (2.2) one can derive a generalized level matching condition which relates fn to

the total number of left moving oscillators n that are present in a given state. this
condition reads as follows

1
2

= n +

1

2xa

fn +

(pa)2 ,

(2.4)

where we have conveniently measured the internal momenta pa in units of 2.
further restrictions come from the gso projection that one has to perform in the
right sector to have a consistent model. in particular, the gso projection on ns

number n is always integer as in the bosonic theory, in order to be able to satisfy
eq. (2.4), the internal momenta pa have to be quantized. in particular, the quan-

states selects only half-integer occupation numbers fn . since the left occupation
tity pa(pa)2 has to be an even number. this condition implies that the internal

coordinates x a must be compactied on an even 16-dimensional lattice. the in-
trinsic consistency of the theory, and more specically the modular invariance of
the one-loop partition function, requires that this lattice be also self-dual. it can
be shown that there exist only two 16-dimensional lattices satisfying both these

8

properties: the root lattice of e8  e8, and a z2 sublattice of the weight lattice of
so(32). since we are interested in the heterotic theory with gauge group so(32),
for the rest of these notes, we will focus only on the second lattice which is denoted
by 16 and is dened by

(n1, . . . , n16)  16

and (cid:16)n1 +

1
2

, . . . , n16 +

1

2(cid:17)  16  xi

ni  2z (2.5)

it is interesting to observe that even if in the original formulation only a so(16)
symmetry is manifest, when the internal coordinates are compactied on 16, the
resulting gauge group is much bigger. this fact can be explicitly checked by counting
how many massless states involving the internal coordinates x a are present in the

theory. because of eq. (2.3), all such states must have fn = 1/2, so that their right-
moving part is simply ei
1/2|eki where i = 2, ..., 9 labels the directions transverse to

the light-cone. on the other hand, the level matching condition (2.4) requires that

n +

1

2xa (cid:16)pa(cid:17)2

= 1

(2.6)

this condition can be satised either by taking n = 1 and pa = 0, or by taking n =
0 and the momenta pa to be of the form p = (1,1, 0, . . . , 0) (or any permutation
thereof). with the rst choice, we construct 16 states a
1|k; 0i, while with the
second choice we construct 480 states |k; pi. altogether we have 496 massless
states that carry a spacetime vector index from the right-moving part and span the
adjoint representation 496 of so(32). thus, they can be legitimately identied with
the gauge elds of so(32). the fact that a system of bosonic elds compactied on
an appropriate space exhibits an enlarged symmetry can be understood also from a
dierent point of view through the bosonization procedure [31] (see also appendix
a for some details). in fact by exploiting the equivalence between a compact boson
and two fermions, one can substitute the original coordinates x a with 32 fermions
i (i = 1, . . . , 32) directly in the sigma model lagrangian of the heterotic theory,
thus making manifest the so(32) symmetry.

it is important to realize that there are 64 more bosonic massless states in the

theory which correspond to fn = 1/2, n = 1 and pa = 0, and are given by

i

(2.7)

where the indices i, j run along the transverse directions 2,   , 9. these states
are clearly singlets with respect to the gauge group but are space-time tensors.

1|k; 0i  ej

1/2|eki

9

decomposing them into irreducible components, we get a graviton, a dilaton and
an antisymmetric two-index tensor. in conclusion, the bosonic massless states of
the heterotic theory are in the following representations

(1; 1)  (35; 1)  (28; 1)  (8; 496)

(2.8)

where in each term the two labels refer to the lorentz and gauge groups respectively.
by analyzing the r sector, one nds an equal number of fermionic massless states
that complete the n = 1 supersymmetric multiplets.

let us now consider the rst excited level of the ns sector that consists of states

with fn = 3/2 and mass squared m 2 = 4/. there are 128 ways to realize fn = 3/2,

namely

ei
3/2|eki  8 states
1ej
ei
1/2ej
ei

1/2|eki  64 states
1/2e

1/2|eki  56 states

(2.9)

(2.10)

(2.11)

these massive states represent a symmetric two-index tensor and an antisymmetric
three-form under the lorentz group. in fact, the antisymmetric part of eq. (2.10)
together with the states (2.11) completes a massive three-form transforming in the
representation 84 of the lorentz group, while the remaining states transform to-
gether as a symmetric two-index tensor in the representation 44. the level matching
condition (2.4) requires to make a tensor product with left-moving congurations
such that

n +

= 2

(2.12)

1

2xa (cid:16)pa(cid:17)2

there are 73,764 ways to satisfy this requirement! the complete list of the cor-
responding states can be found for example on pag. 342 of ref.
[1] where it is
shown that they transform as scalars, spinors, second-rank antisymmetric tensors,
fourth-rank antisymmetric tensors and second-rank symmetric traceless tensors of
so(32). here we focus on the 215 states that are obtained by taking in eq. (2.12)
n = 0 and momenta pa of the form ( 1
2 ) with an even number of plus
signs. notice that these momenta dene a point in the lattice 16, since they satisfy
the second condition of eq. (2.5), and correspond to the spinor representation of
so(32). indeed, similarly to what happens with the usual spin elds, half-integer
valued momenta always produce states which are spinors of the symmetry group.
by combining these left modes with the right-moving ones of eqs. (2.9) - (2.11),

2, . . . , 1

2 , 1

10

we then obtain bosonic states transforming as

(44; 215)  (84; 215) .

(2.13)

analyzing the rst excited level of the r sector, one can nd 128 massive fermionic
states which transform in the spinor representation of so(32) and complete the
n = 1 supersymmetry multiplets. thus, altogether the spinors of so(32) appear
with 256 dierent polarizations, 128 bosonic and 128 fermionic, which correspond
to a long multiplet of the n = 1 supersymmetry algebra in ten dimensions. thus,
these states cannot satisfy the bps condition [32] but are, nevertheless, stable.
indeed, as we have seen, at the massless level there are no spinors of so(32) and
thus the states we have found are the lightest ones with these quantum numbers
and hence cannot decay. as it was observed on pag. 343 of ref. [1], this feature
makes these spinors absolutely stable, which might be an interesting prediction
for the so(32) heterotic theory. this expectation is going to be conrmed within
the non-perturbative duality between the so(32) heterotic string and the type i
theory.

2.2 the type i string

the type i string theory is a n = 1 supersymmetric model in ten dimensions that
consists of both open and closed unoriented strings with the usual gso projection 4.
it is by now well-known that the type i theory can be interpreted as an orientifold
of type iib theory, which is a chiral model consisting only of closed oriented strings
[19]. for a general discussion on the orientifold projection we refer for example to
ref. [13]. here it is sucient to recall that the orientifold projection is dened
by means of a discrete transformation  which in general can mix the world-sheet
parity with a space-time operation. then, a new consistent spectrum is obtained
by removing all states of the original theory that are not invariant under , and
by adding new states that are dened by a generalized periodicity condition on the
string coordinates (the so-called twisted sector).

for the type i theory, the operator  is simply the world-sheet parity, namely

4note that for closed unoriented strings the gso projector has to be chiral, like the one of

 :     

(2.14)

type iib string.

11

from this denition, it is easy to derive the action of  on the string modes; in
fact, by expanding the closed string coordinates in the usual manner

x (, ) = x + 2p + is 

2 xn6=0(cid:20) 

n
n

e2in( +) + e

n
n

e2in( )(cid:21) ,

(2.15)

one immediately sees that  interchanges the left and the right moving oscillators,
i.e.

n 1 = 
n

(2.16)

world-sheet supersymmetry requires that also the fermionic coordinates ( + )

 

n 1 = e

, e
and e(  ) transform in a similar way, i.e.
,  e

r 1 = e

 

n

r

r 1 = 
r

(2.17)

where the moding index r is half-integer in the ns sector and integer in the r sector.
to proceed further, we have to specify also the action of  on the ground states.
for simplicity, we choose the (1,1) superghost picture in the ns-ns sector and
the (1/2,1/2) superghost picture in the r-r sector [31]. since on the matter
elds  simply exchanges the left and the right sector, it is natural to assume that

(cid:16)|0i1  |e0i1(cid:17) = |e0i1  |0i1 = |0i1  |e0i1

for the ns-ns sector, and

(2.18)

(cid:16)|si1/2  |esi1/2(cid:17) = |esi1/2  |si1/2 = |si1/2  |esi1/2
for the r-r sector, with s and es being the left and right spin elds in the chiral
(2.18) and
spinor representation of so(1, 9). notice that the  signs in eqs.
(2.19) originate from the exchange of the left and right vacua which have fermionic
statistics.

(2.19)

using these rules, it is easy to see which states of type iib theory are even
under  and must be kept, and which states are odd and must be removed. let us
consider for example the massless states of the ns-ns sector which are represented
by

|i =  

1/2 e

1/2 |0i1  |e0i1

where the polarization tensor satises k = k = 0 with k2 = 0. then, using
eqs. (2.17) and (2.18) we can obtain

(2.20)

|i =  

1/2 e

1/2 |0i1  |e0i1

12

(2.21)

so that only the states with symmetric polarizations are invariant under . thus,
only the graviton and the dilaton survive the  projection while the antisymmetric
kalb-ramond eld is removed.

now, let us consider the massless states of the r-r sector which are represented

by

|i =

1

(p + 2)!

f0p+2 (c0p+2) |si1/2  |esi1/2

(2.22)

where c is the charge conjugation matrix. this state is physical if the antisymmetric
polarization tensor satises df = df = 0 which are precisely the bianchi identities
and the maxwell equations for a eld strength. then, using eqs. (2.17) and (2.19),
we easily nd

|i = 

1

(p + 2)!

f0p+2 (c0p+2) |si1/2  |esi1/2

so that only those states for which

(c0p+2)t =  (c0p+2)

(2.23)

(2.24)

are even under  and must be kept. a little algebra shows that eq. (2.24) is true
if p = 1, 5, 9, so that the only r-r potentials that survive the  projection are
a 2-form, its magnetic dual 6-form and a non-dynamical 10-form. consequently,
in the type i theory only d1, d5 and d9-branes can exist as (isolated) brane
congurations that carry r-r charges.

as we have mentioned before, the closed string states which are invariant un-
der  do not represent the whole content of the theory. in fact, in the orientifold
construction one can also impose twisted boundary conditions on the string coor-
dinates, that is one can require that they be periodic up to an  transformation.
in our case this amounts to impose that

x (, ) =  x (,   ) 1 = x (,) ,

(2.25)

where in the last step we have used the explicit denition (2.14). it is easy realize
that the twisted boundary condition (2.25) enforces an identication between the
left and the right-moving parts since it implies that 
n. thus, the string
coordinates which satisfy eq. (2.25) and which we denote by x 
n, have the same
mode expansion as the coordinates of the open string with neumann boundary
conditions, namely

n = 

x 

n(, ) = x + (2)p  + i2xn6=0


n
n

ein cos n .

(2.26)

13

then, from eq. (2.14) it is immediate to see that the action of the world-sheet
parity on the oscillators of x 

n is

 

n 1 = ein 
n

(2.27)

similarly, one nds that the fermionic oscillators of the open sector have the fol-
lowing transformation rule

 

r 1 = eir 
r

(2.28)

to complete our description, we have to specify also the action of  on the ground
states of the open sector. for simplicity and in analogy with what we have done
before, we choose the (1) superghost picture for the ns sector and the (1/2)
superghost picture for the r sector [31]. then, in an obvious notation, we posit
that

and

|0i1 = i|0i1

|si1/2 = |si1/2

(2.29)

(2.30)

with this choice the massless states of both the ns and r sectors are odd under 
and thus are removed from the spectrum. this is a standard result for unoriented
open strings without chan-paton factors. on the contrary, if at the endpoints
of the open strings we introduce chan-paton labels for the group so(n), then
the ns and r massless states can survive the  projection.
in this case, then,
the spectrum will contain also so(n) vector gauge elds and their superpartners.
however, this theory is consistent only for a particular choice of the gauge group. in
fact, the cancellation of gauge anomalies in the low-energy eective action requires
that n = 32 [33]. this condition can be understood also as a massless tadpole
cancellation condition in the type i string [34].

this construction can be also formulated in the modern language of d-branes
and orientifold planes. in this context, one starts again with type iib theory and,
in order to enforce the world-sheet parity projection, one puts in the background
the so-called crosscap state (or orientifold 9-plane, o9) [34, 35]. this is a space-time
lling object that is not dynamical, since no open strings can end on it, change its
shape or switch on a gauge eld. however, the crosscap state is a source of closed
strings because it can emit, for example, dilatons, gravitons or a r-r 10-form
potential 5.
in order to cancel the tadpoles associated to these massless states,
5in units where the r-r charge of a d9-brane is +1, the r-r charge of the o9-plane is 32.

14

one is forced to modify the denition of the background of the theory by adding
32 d9-branes. this is clearly equivalent to introduce a sector of open strings with
neumann boundary conditions. moreover, since there are 32 dierent d9 branes on
which the open strings can terminate, it is as if their end-points carry 32 dierent
charges, thus inducing the so(32) gauge group.

as we have mentioned before, also d1 and d5 branes are compatible with the
orientifold projection (or equivalently with the presence of the orientifold o9-plane).
therefore, besides the sectors previously considered, the type i theory contains
also other sectors corresponding to open strings dened on these d-branes. since
in particular the open strings living on the d1 branes of type i are relevant for our
later discussion, we now discuss their main properties.

let us consider a supersymmetric d1 brane of type i, and the open strings
that live on its two-dimensional world-sheet. these strings, called 1-1 strings since
they have both end-points on the d1 brane, are characterized by two longitudinal
coordinates x a
n(, ) with neumann boundary conditions (a = 0, 1) and by eight
transverse coordinates x i
d(, ) with dirichlet boundary conditions (i = 2,   , 9).
the longitudinal coordinates have the usual mode expansion as in eq. (2.26), while
for the transverse coordinates one has

x i

d(, ) = yi + 2xn6=0


n
n

ein sin n

(2.31)

where yi denotes the position of the d1 brane in the transverse space 6. conse-
quently, the action of  on the dirichlet oscillators is dierent from the one on the
neumann oscillators which we have discussed in the previous subsection. indeed,
using eqs. (2.14) and (2.31), it is easy to nd that

 i

n 1 = ein i

n

(2.32)

to be compared with eq. (2.27). world-sheet supersymmetry requires that the
action of  on the fermionic oscillators in the dirichlet directions be given by

 i

r 1 = eir i

r

(2.33)

for both the ns and r sectors. finally, on the ground states of the 1-1 strings one
has [3]

(2.34)

6more generally, if an open string is stretched between two d-branes located respectively at yi
1

and yi

2, the rst term in eq. (2.31) is replaced by yi

|0i1 = i|0i1
1 +(cid:16) y

i
2

i
1

y

 (cid:17) .

15

for the ns sector in the -1 superghost picture, and

|si1/2 = 2    9 |si1/2

(2.35)

for the r sector in the 1/2 superghost picture. eq. (2.34) is identical to the
corresponding one for the purely neumann strings since the ns vacuum, being a
lorentz scalar, is insensitive to the extra minus sign that  picks up in the dirichlet
directions. on the contrary, the r vacuum is a (chiral) spinor, and the extra minus
sign in the action of  on the transverse fermions 2, . . . , 9 is not irrelevant, and
indeed it translates into the particular structure of eq. (2.35).

using these rules, one can easily nd that the spectrum of the 1-1 open strings
of type i contains eight massless states both in the ns and in the r sector. the
massless modes of the ns sector correspond to a vector that accounts for the freedom
of translating the d1 brane along its eight transverse directions. the massless states
of the r sector, instead, correspond to a chiral spinor  such that 2    9 = ,
as it follows from eq. (2.35). upon quantization, the eight components of  account
for the 28/2 = 16 degeneracy of the d1 brane of type i, as it should be expected
for a bps conguration of the n = 1 supersymmetry algebra in ten dimensions.

we conclude by mentioning that in the type i theory there exist also open
strings with mixed boundary conditions: neumann at one end-point and dirichlet
at the other one. strings of this kind are for example the 1-9 open strings that
are suspended between a d1 brane and one of the d9-branes of the type i back-
ground, or the 9-1 strings which have the opposite orientation. these strings are
characterized by eight directions with mixed boundary conditions, and the states
in their spectrum can not be eigenvectors of  since this operator transforms a
neumann-dirichlet string into a dirichlet-neumann one. in this case, then, the ori-
entifold projection simply requires to keep all symmetric combinations of 1-9 and
9-1 congurations.

3 the type i theory and its d1 brane

the so(32) heterotic string and the type i theory discussed in the previous section
look so dierent from each other that they seem completely unrelated. the only
evident similarity between them is that they have the same massless eld content.

16

however, this fact could be interpreted simply as an accident due to supersymme-
try, because in ten dimensions the invariance under local supersymmetry completely
determines the form of the action for gauge elds coupled to gravity. this inter-
pretation seems to be further conrmed by the fact that any resemblance between
the spectra of the two theories disappears as soon as one goes to the rst excited
level. for instance, we have mentioned that in the heterotic theory the states of the
rst mass level do not always transform in the same way under the gauge group,
but can be scalars, spinors, second-rank symmetric traceless tensors, second-rank
or fourth-rank antisymmetric tensors of so(32) [1]. on the contrary, in the type i
theory the color degrees of freedom are encoded through the chan-paton factors (or
through the 32 d9-branes of the type i background in the modern language) and
thus all perturbative states of this model transform in the adjoint representation of
so(32). this is a standard result that occurs in any string theory where the gauge
group is introduced by means of the chan-paton procedure.

however, despite the appearance, we nowadays know that the so(32) heterotic
string and the type i theory describe the same physics [3, 36], and are actually the
two members of a dual pair of theories related to each other in a non-perturbative
way. the rst hint of this equivalence comes from the structure of their low-energy
eective actions. focusing for example on the kinetic term of the gauge elds, one
has

(3.1)

(3.2)

for the heterotic string, and

sh  z d10x(cid:20)q det(gh) e2h tr (f 2
si  z d10x(cid:20)q det(gi) ei tr (f 2

h) + . . .(cid:21)
i ) + . . .(cid:21)

for the type i theory. in these expressions, g denotes the (string frame) metric, 
the dilaton eld, and f the so(32) eld strength. the two actions (3.1) and (3.2)
can be mapped into each other by a eld redenition that involves a change of the
metric

and a change of the dilaton

  ei gi
gh



h   i

(3.3)

(3.4)

since e is the string coupling constant, eq. (3.4) implies that if there has to be
any relation between the heterotic and the type i strings, then the strong coupling
of one theory has to be connected to the weak coupling of the other. this fact also
explains why the two perturbative spectra are so dierent; indeed, by increasing

17

the value of the coupling constant, a generic perturbative heterotic state becomes
highly unstable and is not expected to appear in the type i theory, and viceversa.
however there are some string congurations that can not decay; for this rea-
son, they are expected to be present in both theories at all values of the coupling
constant, in particular in the strong coupling region of one theory or, equivalently,
in the weak coupling regime of the dual theory. finding such stable states and
checking their multiplicities is therefore a test of the duality conjecture that goes
well beyond the arguments based on the structure of the eective actions. a well
known class of such stable congurations consists of the bps states. the main fea-
ture of these states is that they are annihilated by some supersymmetry generators
so that they carry a charge under one of the gauge elds present in the theory and
possess a mass which is completely determined by this charge. furthermore, these
bps congurations are protected from quantum radiative corrections, and thus it is
particularly simple to follow their fate when the coupling constant is increased. for
instance, a heterotic string wrapped around a compact dimension breaks half the
original supersymmetries and is charged under the antisymmetric two-form present
in the gravitational multiplet, the charge being simply its winding number. this is
a bps conguration and hence it should appear in the type i theory as a super-
symmetric soliton. the natural candidate for this is the d1 brane of type i, since
one expects that the gravitational two-form gauge eld is mapped in the r-r one,
just like in the strong/weak duality of type iib string. since we are considering
bps congurations, we can immediately test this proposal. in fact, if it is correct,
the tension

h =

1

2

(3.5)

(3.6)

of the fundamental heterotic string should exactly match the tension

d1 =

1

2g

of the d1 brane of type i 7. this is indeed what happens if we use eq. (3.3) to set
the same scale in both theories.

the identication between the d1 brane of type i and the fundamental string
of the heterotic theory can be tested at a deeper level; in fact it is possible to show
that the world-sheet structure of a (wrapped) heterotic string is exactly reproduced
by the world-sheet dynamics on a (wrapped) d1 brane [3]. here we recall this
argument. in the presence of a d1 brane, the space-time is naturally divided into

7these tensions are written using the normalizations and units of type ii theories.

18

a two-dimensional minkowski part along the world-sheet of the d1 brane (spanned
by x0 and x1), and an eight-dimensional euclidean part transverse to it (spanned
by x2, . . . , x9). consequently, the lorentz group so(1, 9) is broken into so(1, 1)
so(8). the space transverse to the d1 brane is going to be identied with the
space where the heterotic string is embedded in the light-cone gauge, while the
world-sheet of the d1 brane is going to play the role of the world-sheet of the
heterotic string. to see this, we will rst consider the lightest states of the 1-1 open
strings attached to the d1 brane which are responsible for its dynamics, and then
identify the corresponding massless elds with the various string coordinates of the
heterotic theory. in the ns sector we can construct the following massless states


1/2|ki1

(3.7)

with k2 = 0. since the momentum k is only along the longitudinal directions, the
eld associated to this state will depend only on x0 and x1. when the index  is
either 0 or 1 (i.e. in a nn direction), the state (3.7) is odd under  (see eqs. (2.28)
and (2.29)), and thus it is not present in the type i theory. this means that on the
d1 brane of type i there are no massless vectors, and thus no local gauge symmetry.
on the contrary, when the index  is 2, . . . , 9 (i.e.
in a dd direction) the state
(3.7) is even under  (see eqs. (2.33) and (2.34)), and thus survives the orientifold
projection. the corresponding elds, i(x0, x1) with i = 2, . . . , 9, are therefore
scalars with respect to the world-sheet group so(1, 1) but are vectors with respect
to the transverse group so(8). these are the same features of the embedding
coordinates x i(, ) of the heterotic string, which therefore can be identied with
i(x0, x1) provided that we interpret x0 and x1 as  and  respectively. notice since
 varies between 0 and , we deduce that the d1 brane has to be wrapped on a
radius r so that x1/2r can play the role of .

let us now consider the massless states in the r sector of the 1-1 strings which

are given by the spinor vacua

|s; ki1/2

(3.8)

with k2 = 0. the eld associated to these states is a chiral spinor  obeying the
massless dirac equation

k/ = (k00 + k11) = 0

(3.9)

however not all chiral spinors are acceptable in the type i theory. in fact, as we
have seen in section 2.2, the orientifold projection acts on the fermionic zero-modes
of the 1-1 strings as  = 2    9, and thus, in order to be even under , the

19

spinor  has to satisfy the further constraint

2    9 = 

(3.10)

this condition tells us that in the decomposition of the chiral spinor representation
of so(1, 9) into (+ 1
2 , 8c), only the second term is selected by the 
projection. notice that since  is chiral, eq. (3.10) implies that

2, 8s)  ( 1

01 = 

(3.11)

hence, from the dirac equation (3.9) we deduce that k0 = k1, i.e.  is a right-
moving spinor in the 8c of so(8). these are precisely the same features of the
fermionic coordinates of the heterotic string in the green-schwarz formulation!

in order to complete our description, we still have to reproduce in the d1 brane
context the color degrees of freedom that in the heterotic theory are represented
by the 32 left-moving fermions resulting from the fermionization of the 16 internal
coordinates. on the type i side these degrees of freedom are provided by the 1-
9 and 9-1 open strings that stretch between the d1 brane and the 32 d9-branes
of the background. the ns sector of these open strings does not contain any
massless excitation, since any physical state in this sector has to satisfy the virasoro
constraint

notice that in this equation we have used the value a = +1/2 of the ns intercept
for open strings with eight directions with mixed boundary conditions 8. hence in
this ns sector even the ground state is massive. on the contrary, in the r sector
the world-sheet supersymmetry is preserved by the boundary conditions and the
intercept is always vanishing. therefore, the r ground states are always massless.
to see which are the other features of these states in the 1-9 and 9-1 sectors, let us
recall that the fermions 0 and 1 (which carry an index in a nn direction) have the
standard integral mode expansion and possess zero-modes. instead, the fermions
2, . . . , 9 (which carry an index in a direction with mixed boundary conditions)
have a half-integral mode expansion and do not possess zero-modes. thus, the r
ground states of these open strings are associated to a eld  which is a spinor of

8remember that the value of the intercept a can be easily obtained by summing the zero-point
energy of all the light-cone coordinates. for the usual (i.e. all nn directions) ns sector one
obtains a = 1/2, but when there are  directions with mixed boundary conditions one gets
a = 1/2 + /8.

20

(cid:16)l0 +

1

2(cid:17)|vi = 0 .

(3.12)

so(1, 1) and a scalar of so(8). furthermore, the gso projection requires that
such a spinor be chiral, i.e.

combining this condition with the massless dirac equation

01 = 

k/ = (k00 + k11) = 0

(3.13)

(3.14)

we deduce that k0 = k1, i.e.  is a left-moving world-sheet spinor! notice that
since x1 is compact, the momentum k1 in eq. (3.8) must be an integer n in units
of 1/r.

as a matter of fact, this is not enough because we have also to specify whether
we are considering the 1-9 or the 9-1 sector, and distinguish among the 32 dierent
d9-branes of the background. this information can be provided by attaching to
the state in eq. (3.8) appropriate chan-paton factors, which we denote by i
19
(i = 1, . . . , 32) for the 1-9 sector, and by i
91 (i = 1, . . . , 32) for the 9-1 sector.
since the twist operator  exchanges the string orientation, it converts a 1-9 string
into a 9-1 string and viceversa, i.e.

 : i

19  i

91

(3.15)

therefore, the ground state which is selected by the  projection is given by the
following symmetric combination

i
19 |s+; ni1/2 + i

91 |s+; ni1/2

(3.16)

by considering all possible values for the momentum (that is by summing over n),
we can construct a left-moving spinor with an index i in the vector representation
of so(32) and with the following mode expansion

i(, ) =xn

i

n ei2n( +)

(3.17)

this is precisely the expansion of the 32 heterotic fermions with periodic boundary
conditions. upon quantization, these periodic fermions give rise to the spinorial
representations of so(32) (i.e. those representations with half-integer pa in the
notation of section 2.1). in particular, using only the zero-modes i
0, we can con-
struct the two representations 215 and 215 of so(32) that correspond to pa = 1/2
for all a with an even or odd number of positive signs respectively. as we have
seen in section 2.1, the representation 215 appears at the rst massive level of the

21

heterotic string. to obtain the remaining representations of so(32), it is necessary
to construct 32 fermions with anti-periodic boundary conditions. to see how this is
possible, we need to understand better the fate of the gauge elds on the d1 brane
of type i.

we have already seen that the orientation projection forbids to put a local
gauge eld on a single d1 brane; however, it is still possible that a global gauge eld
a = 
2r be compatible with . this constant gauge eld a can always be set to
zero, at least locally, by means of the gauge transformation

a  a = a + i11

(3.18)

where  = ei x1
2r . however, even if a is a pure gauge, its presence is not completely
trivial since it aects the global properties of the charged objects. in fact, a eld 
which carries a charge q under a and makes a loop around the compact dimension
picks up a non-trivial phase due to the aharonov-bohm eect which is given by

w = exp(cid:26)iqi dx1a(cid:27) = eiq .

(3.19)

of course, by gauge invariance, this same result has to be obtained also in the gauge
where a = 0. this is indeed the case because under the gauge transformation (3.18),
the charged eld  changes as follows

   = ei qx1

2r 

(3.20)

thus, in the gauge a = 0, the eld of a charged object is no longer periodic and
acquires the non-trivial phase (3.19) when it is transported around the compact
dimension. this fact can be rephrased by saying that its momentum k1 is shifted
according to

k1  k1 +

q
2r

(3.21)

in our specic conguration the eld a is localized on the d1 brane, and thus
any string with at most one end-point on the d1 brane is charged under a. this is
precisely the case of the 1-9 and 9-1 strings that we are considering. by convention
we can take the charge to be q = 1 for the 1-9 strings and to be q = 1 for the 9-1
strings. as we mentioned before, the states in the r sector of these strings must
always appear in linear combinations of the type

19 (. . .) |s+; ni1/2  i
i

91 (. . .) |s+; mi1/2 ,

(3.22)

22

where we have explicitly written only the dependence on the momentum along
the compact dimension and understood all other information in the dots (the sign
between the two terms in eq. (3.22) depends on the -parity of the oscillator
content). in the absence of any gauge eld only those combinations with n = m
are kept. however, when there is the constant gauge eld a, things are slightly
dierent. first of all, we have to shift the momenta of the charged states according
to eq. (3.21), and thus, instead of eq. (3.22), we must consider the superposition

i
19 (. . .) |s+; n + /2i1/2  i

91 (. . .) |s+; m  /2i1/2

(3.23)

since n and m are integers, it is clear that this combination can be an eigenstate
of  only if  = 0 or . consequently, on the d1 brane of type i there exists a
z2 symmetry which is all what remains of the original u(1) gauge symmetry of the
d1 brane of type iib after performing the orientifold projection. when  = ,
the massless elds associated to eq. (3.23) are 32 world-sheet spinors i with the
following mode expansion

i(, ) =xn

i

n ei(2n+1)( +)

(3.24)

this is precisely the expansion of the 32 heterotic fermions with antiperiodic bound-
ary conditions. upon quantization, these fermions give rise to the integral repre-
sentations of so(32) (i.e. those representations with integer pa in the notation of
section 2.1). representations of this kind are for instance the singlet 1, the vector
32 and the adjoint 496.

to have the complete equivalence between the low-energy world-sheet dynamics
of the wrapped d1 brane of type i and the heterotic string, we still have to impose
the appropriate gso projection on the 32 heterotic fermions i of eqs. (3.17) and
(3.24) in order to remove, for example, the representations 215 and 32 which can
be constructed using the is but which do not appear in the heterotic theory at the
massless level. this reduction can be achieved by using the idea of the orientifold
projection presented in section 2.2.
in fact, on the d1 brane of type i we can
introduce a discrete transformation  that acts only on the chan-paton factors of
the open strings and is dened as follows:  multiplies by 1 each time there is
an open string ending on the d1 brane and acts trivially otherwise. then, it is
clear that gauge invariant states (i.e. states that are invariant under the z2 gauge
group which survives the  projection) are left unchanged by . in view of these
considerations, it appears natural to regard as physical excitations of the d-strings

23

only the ones which are obtained by gauge invariant superpositions of 1-9 and 9-1
strings; in other words, it appears natural to gauge the discrete symmetry . we
have already encountered an example of a gauged discrete symmetry in section 2.2
when we discussed the  projection and derived unoriented strings from the type
iib theory. here we can apply a similar procedure to gauge the discrete symmetry
. the rst step is to consider only those states of the 1-9 and 9-1 spectrum that are
invariant under  (the states in the 1-1 and 9-9 sectors are obviously all invariant
under ). for example, if we dene the spinor representation 215 to be even under
, then it is clear that the states in the other spinor representation 215 are odd,
since they contain one more fermionic zero-mode that brings a chan-paton factor
19 or 91, and hence an extra  sign under . thus, the states of 215 are gauged
away and the physical degrees of freedom correspond only to the representation
215, just as the heterotic gso projection requires. however, as we know very well,
this is not the whole story, since in gauging a discrete symmetry one has also to
consider the twisted sector.
in fact, one can impose on the elds living on the
d-string generalized periodicity conditions by exploiting the transformation , just
as we did in eq. (2.25) for .
in the present case, the only elds that can feel
 are those in the 1-9 and 9-1 sectors, i.e. the is. thus, the twisted sector is
characterized by

i(,  + ) =  i(, )1 = i(, ) .

(3.25)

these are precisely the antiperiodic boundary conditions satised by the expan-
sion (3.24) which was obtained by introducing the z2-wilson line on the d-string.
therefore, one can say that introducing this wilson line is equivalent to introducing
the twisted sector of i under . of course, also among the states of the twisted
sector we have to select only the -invariant ones, which have an even number of i
oscillators, since each one of them contributes with a  sign to the  parity. then,
one can check that, for example, the vector representation 32 is gauged away while
the representations 1 and 496 are kept, thus reproducing the condition p ni = 2z

of the heterotic side (see eq. (2.5)).

24

4 a non-bps d-particle in the type i theory

up to now, we have focused on bps objects and exploited their stability to make
a test of the non-perturbative duality between the so(32) heterotic string and
the type i theory. however, string theories often contain in their spectrum states
that are stable but non-bps, and thus one may wonder whether such states can
provide the basis for duality tests that are less dependent on supersymmetry. let
us consider for instance a dual pair of theories a and b, and take all perturbative
states of a that carry the same set of conserved quantum numbers {}. clearly,
the lightest ones among these states are absolutely stable, since any possible decay
is energetically unfavorable, and exist for all values of the coupling constant of
a. hence, if the duality between a and b is correct, there should exist stable
non-perturbative congurations of b with the quantum numbers {}. finding
such congurations and checking their multiplicities is therefore a signicant test
of the duality between a and b which does not rely on bps or supersymmetry
arguments.
in this section we are going to apply this strategy and conrm the
so(32) heterotic/type i duality by using stable non-bps objects. then, in the
following section we will put on more solid ground our results by providing an exact
conformal eld theory description of these non-bps congurations.

we have encountered absolutely stable states when we studied the rst excited
level of the perturbative spectrum of the heterotic string: in fact, the massive states
in the representation 215 of so(32) are the lightest ones transforming as spinors
of the gauge group, since the massless level contains only states in the singlet and
adjoint representations of so(32) (see eq. (2.8)). thus, if the heterotic/type i
duality is correct, we should nd in the weakly coupled type i theory some non-
perturbative objects that behave as massive particles in the spinor representation
of so(32). finding such congurations and providing their explicit description will
be our goals. as mentioned above, in the heterotic theory the lightest spinors of
so(32) appear at the rst massive level and their mass is m = 2/ at gh = 0. as
one increases the heterotic coupling constant, the mass m gets renormalized, since
there are no constraints on it coming from supersymmetry, and so, for a general
value of gh, we can write

m =

f (gh)

(4.1)

2


where the function f (gh) can in principle be computed in perturbation theory and
is such that f (0) = 1. by going to the type i theory and using the duality relations

25

(3.3) and (3.4), we can rewrite the mass m as follows

m =

2

gi ef (gi)

(4.2)

where ef(g)  f (1/g). thus, contrarily to what happened for the tension of the
d-string (3.6), the mass m of these stable non-bps states for gi  0 is not simply
the translation of the heterotic mass at gh = 0, but diers from it by a factor of
ef (gi  0). of course, such a factor is not accessible to perturbation theory and

must be determined using dierent methods.

let us then examine more carefully the structure of these non-bps congu-
rations. on the heterotic side they are simply excited states of the fundamental
string; thus, it is natural to expect that the d1 brane is involved on the type i side.
however a single d1 brane can not reproduce the features of our non-bps states
for several reasons. first of all, a d1 brane is a bps conguration; moreover, as we
have seen in the previous section, it is dual to a fundamental heterotic string with
winding number 1. on the contrary, our non-bps congurations correspond to un-
wrapped strings, i.e. to states that are not charged under the gravitational 2-form
of the heterotic theory, and therefore they should be dual to type i congurations
that are neutral under the r-r 2-form potential. the simplest system constructed
out of d1 branes but without any r-r charge, is clearly the superposition of a
d1 brane and an anti-d1 brane 9. however, this conguration is unstable due to
presence of a tachyonic mode arising from the open strings stretched between the
brane and the anti-brane [14]. to see this, let us study the brane/anti-brane pair
in more detail. when we put an anti-d1 brane on top of a d1 brane, we have four
types of open strings:

 the 1-1 strings with both end-points on the d1 brane;
 the 1-1 strings with both end-points on the anti-d1 brane;
 the 1-1 strings starting from the d1 brane and ending on the anti-d1 brane;
 the 1-1 strings starting from the anti-d1 brane and ending on the d1 brane.
as we have seen before, convenient way of encoding the information about the end-
points of the open strings is by means of chan-paton factors. in the present case

9an anti-dp brane is simply a dp brane carrying a negative charge under the r-r p + 1-form

potential.

26

we can introduce 2  2 chan-paton matrices  as follows
1 0

for a 1-1 string  11 =
for a 1-1 string  11 =
for a 1-1 string  11 =
for a 1-1 string  11 =

0 0

0 0 
0 1 
0 0 
1 0 

0 1

0 0

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

(4.6)

the 1-1 (and 1-1) strings dier in a crucial way from the 1-1 strings considered in
section 2.2 because they are characterized by a wrong gso projection, which, for
example, selects the tachyonic ground state and removes the massless vectors in the
ns sector. this fact can be understood more easily by studying this same system
from the closed string point of view, where the interactions are seen as a tree-level
exchange of closed string states along a cylinder between the brane and the anti-
brane. however, for the sake of clarity, we rst analyze what happens in the more
familiar case of a pair formed by two d-branes on top of each other. the interaction
between them is computed by summing the contributions to the exchange energy
of all closed string states and can be organized as a sum of the even closed string
spin structures: ns-ns, ns-ns(1)f and r-r 10. of course, this is completely
equivalent to compute the one-loop vacuum energy of open strings stretched be-
tween the two d-branes, which is organized as a sum of the even open string spin
structures: ns, ns(1)f and r. in fact, by means of a modular transformation
c  a = 1/c, it is possible to map the length c of the cylinder described by the
closed strings, into the modular parameter of the annulus a spanned by the open
strings. then, using the modular properties of the jacobi -functions that appear
in the amplitude, one can explicitly check that under the above modular transfor-
mation the contribution coming from the exchange of r-r states is exactly mapped
into the contribution of the ns(1)f sector of the 1-1 open strings; in other words,
the exchange of r-r states between two d1 branes gives the same result that one
nds by computing the one-loop vacuum energy of the ns sector of the 1-1 open
strings weighted with the gso operator (1)f . the correspondence between the
10in the cases we are studying in this paper, the odd spin structure r-r(1)f never gives a

contribution and thus will not be considered.

27

closed string channel and the open string one can be established also for the other
spin structures, and the results are summarized in the following table

closed string open string

ns-ns

ns-ns(1)f

r-r

ns
r

ns(1)f

(4.7)

in particular, we easily see that the sum of the ns-ns and r-r sectors of the
closed string is equivalent to the ns sector of the open string with the usual gso
projection. thus, the ns sector of the 1-1 and 1-1 strings contains only states that
are even under (1)f ; hence the tachyon ground state is not allowed 11.

let us now consider an anti-d brane on top of a d brane. in this case, from
the closed string point of view, the ns-ns and the ns-ns(1)f spin structures
give exactly the same contributions as before, but the contribution of the r-r spin-
structure changes sign, since it is proportional to the product of the r-r charges of
the two branes. according to table (4.7), this fact implies that the contribution of
the ns(1)f spin structure of the open channel changes sign, so that the ns sector
of the open strings stretched between a brane and an anti-brane has the wrong
gso projection. thus, the ns sector of the 1-1 and 1-1 strings contains only states
that are odd under (1)f ; in particular, the two tachyonic states

|ki1  11

and

|ki1  11

(4.8)

with k2 = 1/2 are permitted.
in conclusion, we can say that the requirement
that a cylinder diagram can be reinterpreted as an annulus diagram through a
modular transformation xes the type of gso projection that one has to perform
on the various kinds of open strings stretched between two branes 12. since these
are distinguished by the chan-paton factors (see eqs.
(4.3)-(4.6)), it is natural
to introduce a generalized gso projection to also take them into account. let us
then dene the operator (1)f that acts like the usual (1)f on the open string
oscillators and ground states, and that acts on the chan-paton factors according
to

(4.9)

11as usual, the ns fock vacuum is taken to be odd under (1)f .
12this is also what happens in the so called type 0 strings which have recently attracted some

(1)f :

  3 3 ,

attention in the literature [37].

28

where i are the pauli matrices. obviously, 11 and 11 are even under (1)f , while
11 and 11 are odd. thus, our previous ndings can be summarized by saying that
the spectrum of the open strings suspended between two d branes, or between a d
brane and an anti-d brane, contains only states that are even under the extended
gso operator (1)f .

the considerations presented so far apply to any system formed by a brane and
an anti-brane of type ii, and do not make any use of the twist operator . thus,
one may wonder whether the presence of the tachyons (4.8) in the d1/anti-d1 pair
can be avoided by going to the type i theory. we can easily see, however, that this
is not the case because the tachyon instability is not removed by the  projection.
in fact, the situation is similar to the one described in eq. (3.22) because also here
the orientation projection selects only a linear combination of the two tachyonic
states (4.8). in particular, since the oscillator content of the tachyons is even, the
combination (11 11) is projected out and only the symmetric combination of the
chan-paton matrices survives, so that the tachyon in the type i theory is given by

|ti = |ki1  (11 + 11) = |ki1  1 .

(4.10)

at this point, one has to understand whether the instability due to the existence
of a tachyonic state in the spectrum is an incurable problem of the system, or is just
a consequence of the fact that we are expanding the tachyon eld t around a false
vacuum. of course, only in this second case one may hope that the d1/anti-d1 pair
could form a bound state that has something to do with the perturbative heterotic
state we are looking for. to give an answer to this question one should compute the
tachyonic potential v(t ) and see whether or not it has a minimum. unfortunately,
our knowledge of this potential is very limited and thus only a qualitative analysis
can be performed along these lines. let us nevertheless examine what can be said
in this regard. first of all, from eq. (4.10) it is easy to realize that v(t ) is an
even function of t .
in fact, let us suppose for a moment that v(t ) contains a
term like c t 2n+1; then from it one can construct a non-vanishing amplitude with
an odd number of external tachyons which has to be reproduced by some non-
vanishing string diagram. however, all open string amplitudes are multiplied by
the trace of the chan-paton factors of the external states, which in our case is zero:
indeed tr [(1)2n+1] = 0. therefore, only even powers of t are allowed to appear
in the tachyonic potential 13. another thing that is known about v(t ) is that the
13this is to be contrasted with the tachyonic potential of the bosonic string where also odd

powers of t are allowed.

29

coecient of the t 4 term is positive [14, 38] so that it is conceivable to think that
there exist a minimum for v(t ). we now assume that all higher order terms in the
potential do not change the mexican-hat shape produced by the rst two terms,
and that v(t ) has an absolute minimum for t = t0 (since the potential is an
even function, the minima always come in pairs).

given these assumptions, we can pose the following question:

if we allow the
tachyon to roll down at the values t0 and stabilize the system, is it possible that
after tachyon condensation the d1/anti-d1 pair describes the type i d-particle
we are looking for? the answer to this question is no. in fact, as we have seen
in the previous section, both the d1 and the anti-d1 branes of type i carry the
quantum numbers of the spinorial representation of the gauge group, so that the
resulting bound state cannot be a spinor of so(32), which instead is the distinctive
feature of the particle we are searching. on the other hand, it is quite natural to
expect that a brane-antibrane pair annihilates into the vacuum just like a particle-
antiparticle pair may do. actually, this can happen only if the total energy of the
system is vanishing; in our particular case this condition means that the negative
energy density of the tachyonic condensate has to exactly cancel the positive energy
density of the two d-strings, i.e.

v(t0) + 21 = 0 ,

(4.11)

where 1 is the d1 brane tension given in eq. (3.6). we can rephrase the content
of eq. (4.11) by saying that when the tachyon condenses everywhere to t0 the
entire system stabilizes in a trivial way and reaches a conguration that is in-
distinguishable from the supersymmetric vacuum into which the d1 and anti-d1
branes have annihilated 14. while this scenario seems quite reasonable at rst sight,
at a deeper analysis it looks too radical and surprising since it implies that the only
stable conguration in which the tachyon can condense is the vacuum. luckily, as
we shall see, there are other possibilities for tachyon condensation which lead to
more interesting results.

the basic problems with the d1/anti-d1 pair we have considered so far are
that both branes are spinors of the gauge group and that the resulting system
after tachyon condensation can have the same quantum numbers of the vacuum.
however, we know from the previous section that there is a simple way to avoid
this situation. in fact, by compactifying on a circle of radius r the direction along

14in the literature there are other examples in which tachyon condensation restores space-time

supersymmetry; see for example ref. [39]

30

which the d-strings extend and by switching on a z2 wilson line, we can remove
the zero-modes of the 1-9 strings and make the d1 brane a scalar of so(32). hence,
a pair formed by a d1 brane and an anti-d1 brane with a z2 wilson line (e.g.  = 0
on the d1 brane and  =  on the anti-d1 brane) has the right quantum numbers to
transform in the spinor representation of so(32) and is a good candidate to describe
the type i particle. at rst sight, it seems unlikely that the presence of a wilson
line may change radically the fate of the d1/anti-d1 system; in fact, a constant
gauge eld usually does not modify the energy density of a conguration because
its eld strength is vanishing. however, in our case, the situation is quite dierent:
since our system as a whole transforms like a spinor of so(32), the condensation of
the tachyonic eld can not restore the vacuum and a new stable conguration with
non-zero energy can be realized. this is possible because the tachyonic state (4.10)
has only one endpoint on the anti-d1 brane where  =  so that the corresponding
eld t is charged under the wilson line and feels the presence of a non vanishing
. therefore, the tachyonic condensate is dierent from the one obtained for the
system without wilson line and its contribution to the energy is not longer that of
eq. (4.11). what is happening is that the constant gauge eld changes the energy
density of the system through the modications it induces on the charged eld
t which is present in the background. to see how this mechanism can work, it
is easier to perform the gauge transformation (3.18) in order to switch o the
wilson line and deal with a non-interacting system. we have already shown that
in this gauge the wavefunction of an object with charge q is no longer periodic, but
according to eq. (3.19) it acquires a phase eiq each time it is translated around
the wrapped anti-d1 brane. since in our case  =  and q = 1, this simply means
that the momentum k1 of the state (4.10) is quantized in half-integer multiples of
1/r so that the tachyonic eld t has the following mode expansion on the d-string
world-sheet

tn(x0) e i

r x1

(n+ 1
2

)

t (x0, x1) =

xn=

from this expression we immediately see that

t (x0, x1 + 2r) = t (x0, x1)

(4.12)

(4.13)

i.e. t satises antiperiodic boundary conditions. the fact that a bosonic eld is
not periodic may seem strange; however this should not come as a surprise since
this is the behavior of any charged eld in the presence of a wilson line, while
only the neutral (i.e. gauge invariant) quantities remain periodic. because of

31

eq. (4.13), a system where t is everywhere constant is no longer acceptable and
this shows clearly that the tachyonic condensate gets modied by the presence of
the z2 wilson line. in fact, what becomes allowed by the new boundary conditions
of t is a conguration that interpolates between the two minima t0; thus, in this
case, the tachyonic condensate corresponds to a kink solution tkink that passes from
t0 to t0 as one goes around the compact dimension, namely
x1  r
x1  +r

tkink(x1)  t0
tkink(x1)  +t0

(4.14)

for

for

of course, the energy of this conguration depends on the exact shape of the tachy-
onic kink tkink for all values of x1 and, according to our previous arguments, it
contributes to the mass m of the type i particle as follows

m =z dx1hv(tkink(x1)) + 2d1i

(4.15)

since the kink solution is not explicitly known, we cannot use this equation to
evaluate m; however we can easily extract from it the behavior of m for small
values of the type i coupling constant gi. in fact, both the classical potential v(t )
and the brane tension d1 scale with the usual factor of 1/gi since they originate
from a string calculation on a disk. thus the mass m of the non-bps particle
is proportional to the inverse of the coupling constant, exactly as it happens for
the supersymmetric d-particle of type iia theory. by using this information in

eq. (4.2), we can see that for gi  0 the function ef (gi) is given by

where c is a constant. in order to x its value, we have to leave the eld theory
analysis and systematically study the conformal eld theory of the open strings liv-
ing on the d1/anti-d1 system. this is what we are going to do in the next section.
however, before concluding this section, we would like to present one more consid-
eration at a qualitative level: if one insists that c be a nite constant for all values
of the radius r, then tkink(x1) has to be equal to t0 almost everywhere and the
core of the kink has to be concentrated in the x1 direction around a point, say x1.
these requirements ensure that the energy density in eq. (4.15) is vanishing every-
where because of eq. (4.11), except around the position of the tachyonic soliton.
thus one can interpret the energy of this system as the mass of a localized particle.
furthermore, the possibility to put the core of the kink in an arbitrary point x1

c
gi

ef (gi) =

(4.16)

32

corresponds to freedom that the particle has to move along the x1 direction. in
the following sections we will show that this stable non-bps particle of type i is
actually a d-particle.

5 conformal eld theory at the critical radius

so far we have not really exploited the presence of the compact direction around
which the d-strings are wrapped and, in some sense, we have implicitly taken the
in this section, on the other hand, we consider the d1/anti-d1
r   limit.
system at the particular radius

rc =s 

2

,

(5.1)

and study the conformal eld theory of the open strings living on its world-volume.
in particular, following ref. [6] we show that the non-bps conguration corre-
sponding to a d1/anti-d1 bound state is a stable d-particle of type i. then, in
the next section, we will consider the decompactication limit r   and show
that this d-particle is stable even for r > rc. the critical radius rc is special for
several reasons: rst of all, the eective (mass)2 of the scalar state (4.10), which is
tachyonic in the uncompactied space, is non-negative. in fact, from the constraint
(l0  1/2)|ti = 0, we nd that

t = (cid:16)n + 1
2(cid:17)2

r2
c

m 2

1
2  0 ,



(5.2)

where we have taken into account that the momentum along x1 is quantized in half-
integer units of rc because of the presence of the z2 wilson line (see also eq. (4.12)).
moreover, from eq. (5.2) it is easy to see that the lightest excitations of t are those
t is exactly zero 15. thus,
with n = 0 and n = 1 and that, for these two values, m 2
the conformal eld theory at rc possesses two marginal operators corresponding to
these two massless scalar states, which, as we will see, play a crucial role in our
discussion.

15from these observations we see that at the critical radius the eld t does not represent a true
tachyon any more; however, since it becomes tachyonic in the decompatication limit, t will be
still called tachyon.

33

a second peculiar feature of the critical radius (5.1) is that at rc the conformal
eld theory generated by the coordinates x 1 and 1 admits several dierent repre-
sentations. in fact, since a bosonic eld x compactied on a circle of radius rc and
with neumann boundary conditions is equivalent to a couple of real ns fermions,
the (x 1, 1) system is equally well described by three fermions ,  and 1 where
 and  are dened by 16

e i2

x1

1
2



(  i)

,

  

i
2 x 1

(5.3)

since the three fermions ,  and 1 are on equal footing, we can use again the
bosonization formulas in order to regroup the three elds in a dierent way and
form a new boson. for example, if we use  and 1, we can dene a new bosonic
eld  according to

e i2

 

1
2

(  i1)

,

1  

i
2  ,

(5.4)

whereas if we use  and 1, we can introduce yet another eld  by means of

e i2

 

1
2

(  i1)

,

1  

i
2 

.

(5.5)

in appendix a we give some further details of this equivalence and show that the
new elds  and  are bosons compactied on a circle of radius rc; however, in
most cases, eqs. (5.3)-(5.5) are sucient to translate the physical quantities in the
dierent pictures. since all these descriptions are equivalent, one may wonder what
is the advantage of using, for instance,  and  as independent elds, instead of the
more natural ones x 1 and 1. as we will show momentarily following ref. [6], it
turns out that if one describes the system using  and , it is possible to encode
the tachyonic background explicitly in the conformal eld theory. in order to see
why this simplication occurs, let us focus on the two massless excitations of the
tachyonic state (4.10), i.e.

|ti = e i2

x1

|0i1  1

(5.6)

and look at the explicit form of their vertex operators vt
tations. using the bosonization formulas (5.3)-(5.5) it is easy to see that
2(cid:18)e

(  i)  "

= e i2

i2

 + e i2

v (1)
t

1
2



1

 +

i
2

x1

in the various represen-

(cid:19)# ,

(5.7)

16in this and in the following formulas we understand the normal ordering.

34

where for simplicity we have understood the superghost part and the chan-paton
factor 1. from these relations we immediately realize that the states |ti of
eq. (5.6) can also be written either as

or as

|ti ="

i
2

 1

2|0i +

1
2i + |

1

2i(cid:19)#|0i1  1 ,

|ti =

1
2

( 1

)|0i1  1 ,

2

2  i  1
2(cid:18)|+

1

(5.8)

(5.9)

where we have denoted by |i the vacuum of  with momentum . in particular,
in the latter representation the combination

|t i 

1

2 i(cid:16)|t+i  |ti(cid:17) =  1

2|0i|0i1  1

(5.10)

exhibits a very simple form since it becomes formally identical to a massless vector
state at zero momentum in the 1 picture with the  oscillator substituted by .
this is a rst hint to the fact that the tachyonic eld associated to |t i can be
probably treated in the same manner of a gauge eld.

as we have seen in section 3, a constant gauge eld in the x direction can be
easily incorporated in a conformal eld theory:
indeed, one can use a free elds,
provided that the x-momentum of any charged state is shifted as indicated in
eq. (3.21). therefore, our working hypothesis is that, at the critical radius rc, the
tachyonic background tkink discussed in the previous section can be described by
in order to
a wilson line of the gauge eld t associated to the state (5.10).
identify which is the bosonic coordinate related to  and write the wilson line, it
is sucient to look at the vertex operator corresponding to |t i in the 0-superghost
picture. in the original (x 1, 1) description, we know [31] that the picture changing
operation transforms the tachyon vertex operators as follows

v (1)
t

= e i2

x1

 v (0)
t

= i 1e i2

x1

;

(5.11)

then, by using the bosonization formulas (5.3) and (5.4), we can easily obtain the
(, ) description of v (0)
t

, and nally get

v (0)
t =

i
2

  1 .

(5.12)

this is identical to the vertex of the usual gauge boson at zero momentum, where
 plays the role of the coordinate x. from this equation, it is clear that v (0)

t

35

represents a marginal operator which can be used to modify the theory. let us
recall that at the critical radius rc our original d1/anti-d1 pair is not unstable,
since there are no tachyonic excitations on its world-volume; however, it is always
possible to deform the conformal eld theory by inserting any number of operators
v (0)
t without paying any energy. this amounts to introduce a wilson line along 
which can be parametrized as follows

w (a) = ei a

22h d   1

(5.13)

in a qualitative sense, the constant a is equivalent to the tachyon vacuum expecta-
tion value since it multiplies the tachyon vertex operator v (0)
t . as we explained
in section 3, the states that are charged under a wilson line have a momentum
which is shifted according to eq. (3.21) in the gauge where the constant gauge eld
is zero. in our present case, since v (0)
is proportional to 1, the charged states of
the theory are those with chan-paton factors 2 and 3. if we denote their charge
by q, then the wilson line (5.13) induces the following shift in their -momentum
k:

t

aq
22

= k 

qa
4

1
rc

k  k 

(5.14)

which implies that the kaluza-klein index along  is n  qa/4 with n integer.
for later convenience, it is useful to dene the combinations   = 3  i2 that
correspond to states with charge q = 2 under 1:
[1,  ] =  2   .

(5.15)

the states with chan-paton factors 1l and 1 are instead neutral (q = 0) under
the wilson line (5.13) and thus are not aected by the presence of a non-trivial
tachyonic background.

for dierent values of a the conformal eld theory on the world-volume of the
d1/anti-d1 pair at the critical radius describes dierent physical systems which
are always characterized by the same mass m. in fact, since at rc there are no
tachyonic modes, the d1 and the anti-d1 branes with a z2 wilson line form a bound
state at threshold whose mass is the integral over the circle of the energy density
of the two constituents; thus

m = 2 (2rc) d1 =

2


1
g

=

1

 gi

.

(5.16)

the fact that m is proportional to 1/gi tells us that this bound state is a d-particle,
a result which was already anticipated in the previous section. notice that m is

36

a factor of 2 bigger than the mass of the supersymmetric (and bps) d0-brane
of type iia theory. from eq. (5.16) we can also x the value of the constant c
dened by eq. (4.16) nding c = 1. this is clearly a result which is not achievable
using perturbative methods! we remark, however, that it can be obtained using
the boundary state formalism as recently shown in ref. [40].

as long as one studies the system at the critical radius rc, all values of a are
equally acceptable and lead to a consistent theory; however in the following section
we will show that a = 1 is a preferred value because only for a = 1 it is meaningful
to take the decompactication limit r  . moreover, it turns out that at a = 1
the mass m of the system does not depend on the radius 17. this is precisely the
result that one would intuitively expect after tachyon condensation since in that
case the d1/anti-d1 system should really describe a particle. however, also in the
analysis at the critical radius it is clear that the case a = 1 is special and that only
for this value of a the system exhibits the properties required for describing the
stable non-bps particle we are looking for.

a rst peculiar feature of our system at a = 1 emerges from a detailed analysis
of the open strings that live on the world-volume of the d1/anti-d1 pair. in order
to see this, let us rst consider the vacuum energy of the open strings in the original
system (i.e. a = 0) which is dened as

a=0 = 2v z 

0

dt

2t"trns  1 + (1)f

2

q2l01!  trr  1 + (1)f

2

q2l0!#

(5.17)

where v is the (innite) length of the time direction and q = et. the traces in
eq. (5.17) are to be computed on the ns and r sectors by taking into account
the (extended) gso projection that acts both on the string oscillators and on the
chan-paton factors according to eq. (4.9). in our present case there is one more
thing to take into account, namely the existence of the z2 wilson line on the anti-d1
brane. this implies that the string states with the diagonal chan-paton factors 1l
and 3 (which have the standard gso projection on the fermionic oscillators) are
neutral under the z2 gauge eld and their momentum in the compact direction x 1 is
quantized in integer units of 1/rc. on the contrary, the states with the o-diagonal
chan-paton factors 1 and i2 (which have the wrong gso on the fermionic
oscillators) carry a z2 charge and thus their momentum along x 1 is quantized in
half-integer units of 1/rc. this information can be encoded automatically in the

17notice that this is the same behavior of the mass that we discussed at the end of the previous

section.

37

formalism by introducing an operator h which corresponds to a 2rc translation
along x 1. its explicit action on the string coordinates is

h : x 1  x 1 + 2rc

, x 6=1  x 6=1

,   

(5.18)

while it acts trivially as the identity on the ns and r ground states. if we dene
the action of h on the chan-paton factors  by means of

h :

  3  3

(5.19)

then it is not dicult to realize that only the states which are even under h belong to
the physical spectrum and contribute to the vacuum energy . thus, the presence
of the z2 wilson line on the anti-d1 brane can be taken into account by introducing
inside the traces of eq. (5.17) the projector

with this in mind, a standard calculation leads to

h =

1 + h

2

.

dt
2t

0

a=0 = 2v z 
xn=
" xn=

+

q4(n+ 1

q4n2

+

q4(n+ 1

f1(q)!8
 f4(q)

(8t)1/2
q4n2 f3(q)
f1(q)!8
xn=
2 )2 f3(q)
f1(q)!8
f1(q)!8
+ f4(q)
f1(q)!8
2 )2#  f2(q)
xn=
yn=1
yn=1
(1  q2n1) .

f2(q) = 2q

f4(q) = q 1

(1 + q2n1)

(1 + q2n)

,

1
12

24

,

,

yn=1
(1  q2n)
yn=1

where

f1(q) = q

1
12

f3(q) = q 1

24

(5.20)

(5.21)

(5.22)

the structure of eq. (5.21) is quite clear: apart from the factor of (8t)1/2 coming
from the integration over the continuum momentum k0 along the time direction,
the rst line is the ns sector contribution of the open strings with diagonal chan-
paton factors. the second line represents instead the contribution coming from the
open strings with o-diagonal chan-paton matrices. finally, the last line is the
contribution of the r sector.

38

to perform this same calculation if a 6= 0, it is necessary to use the elds  and
 instead of x 1 and 1, since only in this way we know how to give the tachyon a
non-vanishing vacuum expectation value in a conformal eld theory framework. to
obtain a it is convenient to start from the (, ) description of the system at a = 0
and select the physical states which are even both under (1)f and under h. in the
(, ) representation these discrete symmetries are realized explicitly as reported in
tables 1, 2 and 3 of appendix a. then one can switch on the tachyonic wilson line
and follow how the various states of the spectrum are modied. in particular, the
contributions coming from the ns open strings with chan-paton factors 1l and 1
are unchanged, since these two sectors are neutral under the wilson line (5.13) and
do not feel the presence of a non-trivial t background. also the contribution of the
r sector does not change when a 6= 0 because in this sector the eld  obeys mixed
neumann-dirichlet boundary conditions so that its momentum is forced always to
be zero (see appendix a for some details). thus, only the ns contribution of the
strings with chan-paton factors   depends on a. putting all these things together,
one nds that

f1(q)!8
  f4(q)

0

+

+

1
2

dt
2t

q4(n+ 1

a = 2v z 
xn=
xn="q4(n+ a
" xn=

q4n2

1
2

1
2

(8t)1/2
2 )2 f3(q)
f1(q)!8

q4n2 f3(q)
f1(q)!8
xn=
f1(q)!8
+  f4(q)
xn=
2 )2 (f3(q))8  (f4(q))8
f1(q)!8
2 )2# f2(q)
xn=

(f1(q))8

q4(n+ 1

+

.

+

(5.23)

q4(n+ 1

2 + a

2 )2 (f3(q))8 + (f4(q))8

(f1(q))8

#

the a dependence is only in the third line which represents the contribution of the
states with chan-paton factors   whose charge under w (a) is 2 (see eq. (5.15)).
in particular, the rst term with an exponent proportional to (n + a
2 )2, comes from
the states with an odd number of -oscillators, while the second term with an
exponent proportional to (n + 1
2 )2, is produced by the states with an even
number of -oscillators.

2 + a

at a = 1 a remarkable simplication occurs: all terms proportional to f4(q)
cancel. this means that, for this value of a there is no ns(1)f spin structure in
the open string channel and consequently, according to eq. (4.7), there is no r-r
contribution to the vacuum energy from the closed string point of view 18! thus,
18the cancellation of the r-r sector can also be seen directly in the closed string description

39

only for a = 1 the d1/anti-d1 pair really represents a neutral object under the r-r
eld and can be identied with the perturbative heterotic states with zero winding
number.

another important property of the system at a = 1 is that it becomes so tightly
bound that it is not possible to separate the two constituent d1-branes without
paying energy. to see this, let us consider the massless ns states

i

 1

2|0i1 with i = 2, . . . , 9 ,

(5.24)

which describe the shape of a d-string, and see the modication induced on them by
the tachyon background. notice that actually we can construct two dierent states
out of eq. (5.24) by tensoring it with the chan-paton factors 1l or 3 (the other
two chan-paton matrices 1 and i2 are removed by the gso projection). the
rst combination is neutral under the wilson line w (a) and thus remains massless
for all values of a; it corresponds to the marginal operators

v i,(1) = i  1l

(5.25)

for i = 2, ..., 9 which account for the freedom of rigidly moving the d1/anti-d1 pair
2  3
in the at transverse directions x i. on the other hand, the operator i
represents a translation of the two branes in opposite directions and thus is related
to the possibility of separating the two components of the system. however, being
proportional to 3, this type of state feels the eect of the tachyon background: if
one introduces the matrices  , it is easy to nd the modication induced by a,
namely

 1

i

 1

2|0i1 |0i  3 =


1
2
1
2

i

 1

i

 1

2|0i1 |0i  ( + +  )
2|0i1(cid:18)|
a
2 i   + + |

(5.26)

a

2 i   (cid:19) .

when a 6= 0 this state acquires a mass proportional to a2 thus showing that there
are no zero-modes permitting the separation of the d-string and the anti-d-string.
note that the r.h.s. of eq. (5.26) is not invariant under the discrete transformation
h corresponding to a 2rc translation along the compact direction. however, this
is not surprising because we know from section 4 that the periodicity of charged
states is modied by the presence of a wilson line: in our case, from eqs. (5.14) and
(3.19), we can see that a state of charge q picks up a phase equal to ei aq
2 when it

by using the boundary state approach [40].

40

is transported once around the circle. since in our normalizations all charged states
have |q| = 2, we see that also the value a = 2 is particular: indeed, at a = 2 all
states of the spectrum (even the charged ones!) have the same periodicity of the
original theory at a = 0. moreover, at a = 2 the vacuum energy (5.23) reduces
to that of eq. (5.21) conrming the fact that the conformal eld theories at a = 0
and at a = 2 describe the same physical situation.

this analysis shows that, at the critical radius rc, the presence of the tachy-
onic background can be nicely encoded in the conformal eld theory by introducing
a constant vacuum expectation value a for the eld t (see eqs. (5.10) and (5.12)).
moreover, a turns out to be an angular variable ranging from 0 to 2. the middle
point of this interval (a = 1) has two special properties:

 at a = 1 the system as a whole does not emit any r-r eld, so that it is
possible to identify it with a heterotic state not charged under b at strong
coupling;

 at a = 1 the d-string and the anti-d-string are most tightly bound, since
the lightest state describing the separation of the two has maximum mass. in
fact, when a > 1, one can consider a state similar to that of eq. (5.26), but

proportional to(cid:16)|1  a

2 i   + + |1 + a

to be present in the physical spectrum and is lighter than the one of eq. (5.26)
with a = 1.

2 i   (cid:17); it has the right periodicity

these observations suggest that the value a = 1 really represents the minimum
of the tachyonic potential which corresponds to the kink solution discussed in the
previous section. thus, one expects that this value of a should give rise to a stable
system also when we take the decompactication limit r   and recover the full
so(9) invariance. we note however, that even at the critical radius rc it is possible
to nd a ninth zero mode corresponding to the freedom of moving the t soliton
along the x1 direction. under a translation x1  x1 + , the vertex operators (5.7)
transform as

v (1)
t

= i  e i2

x1

 1 .

so that

v (1)

t

=

=

1



t (cid:17)
t+  v (1)
+ e i2

2i(cid:16)v (1)
2(cid:18)e+ i2

x1

x1(cid:19)  1     1

(5.27)

(5.28)

41

thus, the marginal vertex operator

v (1) =   1

(5.29)

represents the ninth zero mode we were looking for and can be combined with the
eight vertices (5.25) to generate the so(9) symmetry associated to the freedom of
moving the d-particle in space.

so far the twist operator  has not played any signicant role. however, we
conclude this section by stressing that the  projection is actually a crucial ingredi-
ent in the entire construction. in fact, even if it is possible to study the d1/anti-d1
pair in the context of type iib strings, one does not expect to nd in this case a
stable conguration corresponding to a d-particle. this is because type iib theory
is self-dual under s-duality and there is no place for a stable non-bps d-particle
conguration. on the other hand, the instability of the d1/anti-d1 pair (with a
constant gauge eld  = 1) in the type iib theory is clearly displayed also at the
level of the conformal eld theory. in fact, if the worldsheet parity projection is not
taken into account, one has to consider all open string states of the 1-1, 1-1, 1-1 and
1-1 sectors which are even under (1)f and h, without requiring that they be even
under . in our particular case, this implies that the tachyonic eld t becomes
complex, because besides the state in eq. (4.10), there is also the combination with
a chan-paton factor i2. moreover, the usual u(1)  u(1) gauge bosons of any
brane/anti-brane pair with chan-paton factors 1l and 3 are also present in the
spectrum of the oriented theory. at the critical radius rc and at a = 0, these four
massless states can be written in terms of  and  according to

e i2

x1

1
 1

1
 1

1

 1

|0i1  i2  "
i
2
2(cid:18)|
1
2i  |
2(cid:18)|
1
2i  |

2|0i1  3  "
2|0i1  1l  "

2(cid:18)|

1
2i + |
2|0i +
2i(cid:19)#|0i1  3 ,
2i(cid:19)#|0i1  1l .

i

i

1

1

1

2i(cid:19)#|0i1  i2 ,

(5.30)

we remark that these states are odd under  and thus do exist in the type i
theory 19. by taking a linear combination of the rst two lines in eq. (5.30) we
19it is worth pointing out that the action of the twist operator  on the ns vacuum of the 1-1

and 1-1 sectors is given by

i.e. there is an extra factor of i with respect to eq. (2.29) which refers to the 1-1 sector. this fact
can be understood using for example the arguments presented in ref. [41]; see also ref. [40].

|0i1 = |0i1

42

obtain the following state

|tia=0 =(cid:18)|

1
2i   +  |

1

2i   (cid:19)|0i1 .

(5.31)

the presence of the chan-paton factors   shows that this state is charged under
the tachyonic wilson line w (a). the other possible combinations that can be
constructed out of eq. (5.30) are instead neutral. in particular, if we set a = 1
which is the value corresponding to the tachyonic kink solution, the shift (5.14) of
the -momentum transforms eq. (5.31) into a very simple expression

|tia=1 = i|0i|0i1  2 .

(5.32)

it is not dicult to realize that this state has a negative mass2, i.e. it is tachyonic!
thus, even if we have condensed the original tachyon eld t , the type iib system
responds by creating a new tachyonic state. thus, in type iib theory, there is
an unavoidable tachyonic instability also at the critical radius whenever one gives
a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value to the eld t . this should not be
surprising because, as we have said before, the tachyon t of the type iib system
is a complex eld and the minimum of its potential does not consist any more
of two separate points (t0), but lies along a circle of radius |t0|. thus a kink
conguration can not be stable because there is not any topological constraint that
forbids its decay into the trivial solutions t = t0 or t = t0. the possibility of
this decay is precisely described by the tachyonic mode (5.32) that is present in the
type iib theory, but not in the type i model where it is projected out by .

in conclusion we have shown that a d1/anti-d1 pair with a z2 wilson line  = 
on the anti-brane and with a tachyonic wilson line a = 1 at the critical radius rc
describes a d-particle which is non-bps and unstable in type iib theory. however,
by performing the  projection the tachyon instability is removed and the non-bps
d-particle of type i is a stable conguration.

6 the type i d-particle in minkowski space

from the qualitative considerations of section 4, it emerged that a the d1/anti-d1
pair with a z2 gauge wilson line has the right quantum numbers to describe the
so(32) spinor states which are present at the rst massive level of the perturbative

43

heterotic spectrum. in the previous section we learned that at the critical radius

rc = q/2 it is possible to describe exactly the tachyonic background living on

the system and to study the conformal eld theory of the open strings ending on it.
now it is crucial to show that, once the tachyon has condensed, the stability and
the properties of the resulting bound state do not depend on the value of the radius
and that it is possible to smoothly take the decompactication limit r   to
describe a d-particle of type i in minkowski space. to show this, we will proceed in
the framework of perturbation theory: within the conformal eld theory at critical
radius r = rc, we describe a small variation of r by inserting in the various
amplitudes the operator vr associated to the radius deformation. for instance,
by calculating the one point function of the vertex operator (5.12), one can check
the stability of our vacuum conguration; in fact, if the background satises the
classical equations of motion all tadpoles are vanishing. the same amplitude with
a vr insertion describes the rst order correction to the stability of this background
arising from the rc  rc + r variation. we have claimed that the value a = 1
is special, since it should represent a stable conguration also beyond the critical
radius; if this is the case, it is clear that the tadpoles cancellation must not be
eected by the variation of r and thus the amplitude

should vanish for a = 1 20.

t = ht(cid:16)vt (x) vr(z)(cid:17)ia

(6.1)

the explicit form of the marginal operator vr is related to the graviton vertex

at zero-momentum which, for instance, in the bosonic theory is given by

vr = x(z) fx(z) .

v (1,1)

r

= (z) e(z) .

(6.2)

(6.3)

the same result holds also for superstrings when vr is written in the (0, 0) - su-
perghost picture (that is, when it does not carry either left or right superghost
charge), while, in the (1,1) - picture, the bosonic coordinate x is substituted
by  and the vertex reads

a second ingredient which is necessary for the computation of the amplitude (6.1)
is the denition of the expectation value h. . .ia in presence of the non trivial tachy-
onic background. from the analysis of the previous section we already know that in

20because of projective invariance, the correlation function in eq. (6.1) does not depend on the
positions of the vertex operators and it is convenient to exploit this fact by xing x = 1 and z = i.

44

terms of the (, ) variables the tachyonic background can be easily taken into ac-
count by shifting the -momentum of charged states according to eq. (5.14). how-
ever, this is not the only modication to disk amplitudes (like the one in eq. (6.1))
induced by the presence of a because there is one more subtlety. in fact, one has to
remember that in general, when closed string vertex operators are present, a gauge
eld y couples also to the total winding number carried by the closed external
states [42]. thus, in the presence of a y background, the expectation value on a
disk reads as follows

h. . .iy = h . . . ei yih d x i

i .

(6.4)

note that this modication is necessary to ensure the invariance of the disk ampli-
tude under a t-duality that transforms the constant gauge eld y in the position of
the d-brane. in our case, when the t background is written in the (, ) language,
it has exactly the form of a constant gauge eld and so, as eq. (5.13) suggests, the
expectation value h. . .ia should be dened as in eq. (6.4), namely
22h d   1(cid:19)i ,

h. . .ia = h . . . tr(cid:18)(. . .) ei a

(6.5)

where the chan-paton factors of the external open strings have to be inserted
inside the trace. a nal observation should be made about the time ordering t in
eq. (6.1): in order to avoid ambiguities among the open and closed vertex operators
it is useful to perform the change of variables [43]
z  i
z + i

z  z = 

(6.6)

.

this transformation maps the upper half z-plane into the circle of unit radius and
the lower part of the z-plane outside the same circle. thus the closed string ver-
tices are split and all the holomorphic parts are placed on the right, while all the
antiholomorphic ones are placed on the left; the open string vertices are inserted in
between, since they are forced to stay exactly on the unit circle.

now we are in the position of evaluating the correlation function in eq. (6.1); the
rst step is to translate the operator (6.3) in the (, ) language in order to be able
to use the denition (6.5) for the expectation value in presence of an non trivial a.
we have already performed this transformation at level of states (see eq. (5.30)).
then, by repeating the same steps and exploiting the freedom to x the punctures
at 0, 1 and , it is easy to see that eq. (6.1) can be explicitly rewritten as
t  h(cid:16)e

22h d   1(cid:19)i ,

tr(cid:18)1ei a

  e i2

i2

i2e  e i2e(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1(cid:16)e

(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0

(6.7)

45

where the left and the right elds  and e must be identied like in any disk am-

plitude. the structure of this equation is identical to that of a three-point function
among open strings. so it is easy to see that two of the four terms arising from
eq. (6.7) are trivially zero because of -momentum conservation; in fact, as stressed
in appendix a, the new boson  dened in eq. (5.4) satises neumann boundary
conditions so that its momentum can not ow away from the disk boundary. the
only two terms that give a non zero result are

so that eq. (6.7) reduces to

t   h e

e

i2

e i2

e i2

(cid:16)e

i2e(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0(cid:17) (cid:16)e i2e(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1
(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0(cid:17) ,
22h d   1(cid:19)i
tr(cid:18)1ei a
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0
i2e(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
22h d   1(cid:19)i .
tr(cid:18)1ei a
 h e i2e(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1
t  h(cid:20)e i2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0
(qeq)(cid:21) tr(cid:18)1ei a

22h d   1(cid:19)i ,

(qeq)  e

i2

i2

e

(6.8)

(6.9)

(6.10)

to proceed further, we rst notice that  basically reads the momentum carried by
the second exponential factor inside the correlators of eq. (6.9); hence t becomes

where q and eq are the zero modes of  and e. let us recall that in our conventions 21,

a vertex operator describing a closed string state with kaluza-klein index n and
winding number w, contains the term

eikl ekre  e

i2

(n+

w

2 )q e

i2

(n

(6.11)

w

2 )eq

according to this formula, we easily see that the two terms in the square brackets
of eq. (6.10) correspond respectively to (n = 0, w = 2) and (n = 0, w =
2). therefore, even if the left-right identication induced by the disk topology of
the amplitude implies that both terms are simply equal to one and give no direct
contribution, their presence is not trivial. in fact, since they carry dierent winding

numbers, they give a dierent contribution to the contour integral h  because

(6.12)

a

22i d = 

w
2

a

21our conventions on closed string elds are slightly dierent from the one of ref. [13]; in
particular the left and the right components of the coordinate x  are dened as x (z, z) =
1
2 [x (z) + x (z)], where z = e2( +i). this implies that kl and kr momenta are quantized as
follows

k
l =

1

2(cid:18) n

r

+

wr

 (cid:19) ,

k
r =

1

2(cid:18) n

r 

wr

 (cid:19) .

46

at this point the evaluation of eq. (6.10) simply reduces to that of the trace factor
and one gets

t "  tr(cid:16)1eia1(cid:17) + tr(cid:16)1eia1(cid:17)#  sin (a) ;

(6.13)

this result is zero for a = 1 showing that, for this particular background, the
tachyon tadpole is still vanishing, even if the radius has been deformed away
from the critical value.

this same approach can be used to study how the mass2 of the tachyonic state
(5.10) is modied by a radius deformation; in this case, the relevant amplitude is
the two-point function in presence of an operator vr, namely

m = ht(cid:16)vt (x) vt (y) vr(z)(cid:17)ia

(6.14)

exploiting the projective invariance to x y = 1 and z = i, performing the change
of variable of eq. (6.6) and using the form of the vertex operators in terms of  and

e, we obtain
m  h(cid:16)e

i2e  e i2e(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)1

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)x(cid:16)e

i2

  e i2

tr(cid:18)ei a

22h d   1(cid:19)i ,

(cid:17)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0

(6.15)
where the chan-paton factors of the two open strings cancel out, since (1)2 = 1.
as before, some terms in this equation are killed by -momentum conservation and
one is left with only two terms

m  h he i2

(qeq)i +he

i2

(qeq)i!tr(cid:18)ei a

22h d   1(cid:19)i .

(6.16)

note that the sign between the two exponential factors is dierent from that of
eq. (6.10), because now we have two  insertions. evaluating the trace over the
chan-paton factors, one nally obtains

m  cos (a) .

(6.17)

this simple result contains a crucial information: the mass behavior of our tachy-
onic state is very dierent if one deforms the compactication radius around the
trivial conguration a = 0 or around the kink solution a = 1; indeed

ht(cid:16)vt (x) vt (y) vr(z)(cid:17)ia=0 = ht(cid:16)vt (x) vt (y) vr(z)(cid:17)ia=1 .

(6.18)

we already know that in the absence of a t background, the d1/anti-d1 pair
develops a tachyonic instability when we take the decompactication limit r  ;

47

this fact can now be seen directly using the result we have just obtained. indeed,
from eq. (5.2), it is easy to realize that the mass2 of the two lightest modes (n = 0,
n = 1) considered in the previous section, decreases when the radius r is increased
and becomes negative above the critical value rc. on the other hand, eq. (6.18)
tells us that this behavior is reversed when a = 1 and that the system is stable
if r  rc. thus, for a = 1 one can take the decompactication limit without
encountering any tachyonic instability.

even if here we have considered only the eects of a rst order variation of the
radius (that is only one vr was inserted), the results we have obtained are quite
general and a similar pattern is found also when several vr insertions are taken
into account. in fact, as is clear from the two explicit examples just described, the
relevant part in the disk amplitudes describing the eect of a radius deformation
comes from the factor

ei a

22h d   1

= cos(cid:18)

w
2

a(cid:19) + 1 sin(cid:18)

w
2

a(cid:19) ,

(6.19)

which has to be inserted in the correlation functions according to eq. (6.5).
in
particular, vr can only give rise to combination with even winding number (just
like in eq. (6.16)), so that the sin(. . .) term always vanishes with our preferred
value a = 1. on the other hand, the cos(. . .) term simply changes the sign in
front of operators with odd w/2. it is very instructive to use this input directly in
the vertex describing the marginal deformation of the radius. to this aim, we can
focus on eq. (6.2), since, after the insertion of the rst vr in the (1,1) picture,
the superghost anomaly of the disk is compensated and for all other insertions one
should use vertex vr in the (0, 0). in the (, ) language this vertex reads

i2

vr = x(z) fx(z) = (2)ee
= 2ehe
ihe
= 2e(cid:18)e
(e) + e i2

 + e i2

i2

i2e + e i2ei
(e) + e

i2

(+e) + e i2

(+e)(cid:19) .

(6.20)

since the wilson line a = 1 simply changes the sign in front of the exponentials

with (e), we can forget the presence of the non-trivial background in the trace
factor, provided that we use the following modied vertex operator v 
(+e)  e i2

(+e)(cid:19)

i2

v 

r

(e)  e i2
ihe
  e i2

i2

(e) + e
i2e  e i2ei .

r = 2e(cid:18)e
= 2ehe

i2

(6.21)

48

if one uses as independent variables the elds  and  given in eq. (5.5), this
expression takes a very simple form

v 

r = (cid:16)i2  (cid:17)(cid:16)i2 e e(cid:17) =  e .

(6.22)

thus, the presence of the tachyon vacuum expectation value a = 1 eectively
substitutes x 1 with  in the denition of the marginal operator related to radius

deformations and transforms it into  e. the minus sign in this expression
has a crucial importance;
in fact, this means that increasing the radius of the
x 1 coordinate (rc  rc + r) is equivalent, at a = 1, to decrease the radius
of the  coordinate (rc  rc  r), so that the decompactication limit can
it is by now well known that the behavior of
be also seen as a r  0 limit.
open strings compactied on a small circle is more easily understood by making
a t-duality transformation. in our case, the eld  satises neumann boundary
conditions like , since both come from the bosonization procedure described in
appendix a; therefore after a t-duality,  becomes a dirichlet coordinate 
d
= /r and the decompactication limit
compactied on a circle of radius rd
of the original space-time translates into the rd   limit. thus in minkowski
space the bound state between a d1 brane and its anti-brane is described by one
neumann eld (x 0) and by nine dirichlet coordinates (
d, x 2, . . . x 9). this is an
indication that, even if the starting point of our analysis was a system with only a
so(8) symmetry manifest, the stable conguration in the at space has an enlarged
so(9) symmetry; in fact, even if we do not show it explicitly here, it is not dicult
to see that  stays on the same footing of other dirichlet coordinates: for instance,
the full spectrum of open strings living on the bound state is invariant under the
d, )  (x 2, 2). the so(9) symmetry of the nal conguration in the
exchange (
decompactied space corresponds to the little group of massive particle living in ten
dimensions, so that the resulting conguration can be interpreted as a d-particle
in type i theory.

since now we know the eect of radius deformation on the conformal theory
living on the d1/anti-d1 system after tachyon condensation, we can return to the
problem of the mass m of the new d-particle state and show that for a = 1 it does
not depend on the radius. this can be shown by means of the same approach used
by j. polchinski in ref. [4] to nd the mass of the d-branes in type ii theories.
one starts by computing the vacuum energy between two identical systems and
then extracts the part corresponding to the exchange of closed strings in the ns-
ns spin structure. in the limit of very large separation, only the massless states

49

contribute and this string result, which depends only on  and g, has to be equal
to the eld theory answer which instead is given in terms of the mass m and of
the newtons constant g. using this method, we now check that, in the absence
of a t background (a = 0), the interaction between two d1/anti-d1 pairs give the
expected answer. newtons law (in ten dimension) tells that the potential energy
between two masses m placed at a distance  from each other scales as

u  g

m 2
6

,

(6.23)

where the newtons constant is proportional to 1/r since one dimension (x 1) is
compactied. also the string result scales as 1/6; in fact, the vacuum energy
between two p-extended objects at a distance  from each other is

u a=0
string  vp+1

1

7p

(6.24)

where vp+1 is the world-volume of the p-brane. in our case p = 1 and v2 scales
as r. thus, by equating the r dependence of eqs. (6.23) and (6.24) for p = 1,
we nd, as expected, that the mass of the system is proportional to the radius:
m  r. in the presence of the kink solution (a = 1), the gravitational interaction
is still described by eq. (6.23), but the string computation is dierent. in fact, from
eq. (6.22) we know that the eective radius r
 one should use in the conformal
eld theory analysis is the inverse of the physical radius r along the x 1 direction.
thus, for p = 1 we get

(6.25)

u a=1
string  v 

2

1
6 

1
r

1
6

equating the r behavior of eqs. (6.23) and (6.25) we now nd that at a = 1 the
mass m of the d1/ant-d1 pair is independent of r. thus, the mass of the type i
d-particle described by this system in the at minkowski space is the same as the
one computed at the critical radius, i.e.

m =

1

 gi

(6.26)

as we have seen in eq. (5.16).

in these notes we have mainly concentrated on the construction of the stable
non-bps d-particle of type i which is predicted and required by the heterotic/type
i duality. however, the techniques we have used and the strategy we have discussed
can be generalized and applied to other systems and theories. even if the entire
construction seems quite complicated and technically involved, the emerging picture

50

is very satisfactory and appealing and makes manifest the fact that the presence
of a tachyonic eld in a string theory is not necessarily a sign of inconsistency. of
course there are many issues and developments that have not been covered in these
notes but which are very interesting, such as for example the construction of other
stable non-bps d-branes of type i [25, 40] or the relation between the d-brane
charge and k-theory [25, 26]. moreover, there are still some open problems which
remain to be solved: among them we can mention the problem of understanding the
mechanism of tachyon condensation directly at the level of the eective theory of the
branes which in turn requires also a better understanding of the fate of the various
gauge elds living on d-brane world volume [25, 44]. a progress in this direction
presumably could help to understand the mechanism of tachyon condensation also
in those cases where the tachyon appears in the closed string spectrum.

acknowledgements

it is a pleasure to thank p. di vecchia, m. frau, l. gallot, i. pesando. s.
sciuto and p. strigazzi for many useful discussions, and the organizers and the
participants of the school quantum aspects of gauge theories, supersymmetry
and unication in leuven (belgium) january 1999 for their stimulating questions
and observations. r. russo wishes also to thank a. bilal and d. matalliotakis for
many valuable suggestions and observations.

appendix a

in section 5 we have extensively used the well known equivalence between a compact
bosonic eld and two real fermions. this equivalence is exploited in string theory
in many contexts, but, even if the basic idea is always encoded by eq. (5.3), there
are some dierences among various cases. for instance, the bosonization procedure
relates the two formulations of heterotic theory mentioned in section 2; however, in
that case, the bosonic elds satised periodic boundary conditions and the critical
radius was . on the other hand, if neumann boundary conditions are imposed,
the equivalence holds for r = 2. in fact, by looking at eq. (5.3), it is clear that

51

the rst fermionic state one can construct by acting with (  i) on the vacuum
corresponds, in the bosonic description, to a scalar state of momentum 1/2.
since higher fermionic states are obtained by introducing other factors of (  i),
in the bosonic language one has to consider states whose momentum k is n/2
with n  zz. further evidence that the two formulations really describe the same
theory is provided by the computation of the partition function. in terms of the
eld x 1, the partition function factorizes in a sum over the allowed momenta and
in the oscillator contribution

tr(cid:16)q2l0(cid:17) =x q2k2

yn=1

1

(1  q2n)

.

(a.1)

however, because of the particular form of the momentum, the sum take a very
simple form and can be rewritten as a product

qn2

=

xnzz

yn=1(cid:16)1  q2n(cid:17)(cid:16)1 + q2n1(cid:17)2

,

and so eq. (a.1) can be recast in a dierent form

x q2k2

yn=1

1

(1  q2n)

=

yn=1(cid:16)1 + q2n1(cid:17)2

,

(a.2)

(a.3)

that directly matches the partition function of two real ns fermions. however,
this is not exactly the result we needed in section 5, where the bosonic eld was

compactied on a circle of radius rc =q/2 and could have integer or half-integer

values of the momentum according to various chan-paton factors (but, of course
not both together). if one looks at the states proportional to 1 or 2, it is easy
to realize that they simply are a subset of those that can be constructed when
r = 2; in particular their momentum is of the form (2n + 1)/2. this
consideration suggests that, at the critical radius we are interested in, the only
bosonic states that can be constructed correspond to fermionic states with an odd
number of  and  oscillators. on the other hand, the states proportional to 3 or 1l
are periodic: this implies that their momentum is integer in terms of rc and thus
it can take only even values in terms of r = 2. in this case the corresponding
fermionic states contain an even number of  and  oscillators. thus it turns out
that the states with half-integer momentum of the bosonic eld correspond to states
with the usual gso projection in the fermionic language; on the contrary, when the
momentum is quantized in integer multiples of 1/rc, one reproduces the sector with
the wrong gso projection of the two real fermions. this can be checked again

52

at the level of partition function. let us focus, for example, on the 1 2 sector.
here the sum over the allowed momenta in eq. (a.1) takes a slightly dierent form,
but nevertheless it can be transformed in the expected partition function by using
again the identity (a.2)

q(2n+1)2

=

xnzz

=

1

1
2

 (q)n2(cid:17)

2 xnzz(cid:16)qn2
yn=1(cid:16)1  q2n(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:16)1 + q2n1(cid:17)2

(a.4)

(cid:16)1  q2n1(cid:17)2(cid:21) .

it is possible to resume this result in a simple requirement, which also allows us to
treat the states with dierent chan-paton factors in the same way. in fact, we can
think that the momentum of the bosonic eld x 1 is always allowed to assume both
integer and half-integer values, but, then, we introduce a new discrete symmetry h
that selects physical states. from previous analysis, it is clear that h acts on  and
 as a gso projection; then from eqs. (5.4)-(5.5) one can derive how h translates
in terms of the rebosonized elds. for instance, by taking  and  as independent
 :).
elds, it is easy to see from eq. (5.4) that h transforms : e
the explicit form of h in the dierent languages is reported in table 1.

 : in ( : e i2

i2

h

2

x  x + 2q 
  
|0i1  |0i1
  3  3









  
  
  
|0i1  |0i1
  3  3







2

   + 2q 
  
6=1  6=1
|0i1  |0i1
  3  3



table 1: the discrete symmetry h that denes the physical states according to the
dierent chan-paton factors: physical states are invariant under these transforma-
tions.

in a similar way one can also write down the gso projection in terms of sets of
independent elds and derive the results of table 2.

of course, the boundary conditions of the new bosonic eld  depends on those
of  and . for instance, if both fermions are in the ns sector, it is sucient to read
eq. (a.3) backwards to see that  is an usual neumann eld. however, while  is

53



x  x
  
|0i1  |0i1
  3  3





(1)f

  
  
  
|0i1  |0i1
  3  3









  
  
6=1  6=1
|0i1  |0i1
  3  3



table 2: the generalized gso projection dened in eq. (4.9) written in terms of
dierent elds: physical states are invariant under these transformations.

always a ns eld,  can also be in the r sector: in this case the combination of the
two gives a bosonic eld with dirichlet boundary conditions on one endpoint and
neumann boundary conditions on the other. thus,  is half-integer moded and can

not carry momentum, thus its partition function is simply (q(1  q2m1))1. the

partition function in the fermionic description can be recast in this form showing
again that the two representations are equivalent

zr =

ym=1(cid:16)1 + q2m1(cid:17)(cid:16)1 + q2m(cid:17) =

yn=1

(1 + qn) =

ym=1

1

(1  q2m1)

.

(a.5)

finally a useful observation is that the two discrete symmetries (1)f and h can
be combined so that the resulting transformation is much simpler in the (, )
description.

(1)f h
   + 2q 
6=1  6=1
|0i1  |0i1

  

2

  

table 3: the (1)f h in terms of  and 

since the physical states have to be even under both (1)f and h separately, they
are also even under (1)f h and either (1)f or h, and indeed the two requirements
are equivalent.

54

references

[1] m. b. green, j. h. schwarz, and e. witten, superstring theory, cambridge

university press, 1987.

[2] j. h. schwarz, an sl(2,z) multiplet of type iib superstrings, phys. lett.

b360, 13 (1995), hep-th/9508143.

[3] j. polchinski and e. witten, evidence for heterotic-type i string duality, nucl.

phys. b460, 525 (1996), hep-th/9510169.

[4] j. polchinski, dirichlet branes and ramond-ramond charges, phys. rev. lett.

75, 184 (1995), hep-th/9510017.

[5] j. polchinski,  tasi lectures on d-branes, lectures given at the tasi summer

school (1996) hep-th/9611050.

[6] a. sen, so(32) spinors of type i and other solitons on brane-antibrane

pair, jhep 9809, 023 (1998), hep-th/9808141.

[7] a. sen, type i d-particle and its interactions, jhep 9810, 021 (1998),

hep-th/9809111.

[8] a. dabholkar, ten dimensional heterotic string as a soliton, phys. lett

b357, 307 (1995), hep-th/9506160.

[9] a. a. tseytlin, heterotic-type i superstring duality and low-energy eective

actions, nucl. phys. b467, 383 (1995), hep-th/9512081.

[10] d. matalliotakis, h. p. nilles, and s. theisen, matching the bps spectra of
heterotic - typei - type i, phys. lett. b421, 169 (1998), hep-th/9710247.

o. bergman, m.r. gaberdiel, and g. lifschytz, string creation and heterotic-
type i duality, nucl. phys. b524, 524 (1998), hep-th/9711098.

[11] c. bachas, c. fabre, e. kiritsis, n. obers, and p. vanhove, heterotic/type id-
uality and d-brane instantons, nucl. phys. b509, 33 (1998), hep-th/9707126.

c. bachas and e. kiritsis, f 4 terms in n=4 string vacua, nucl. phys. [proc.
suppl.] 55b, 194 (1997), hep-th/9611205.

e. kiritsis and n. obers,
sions, threshold corrections and d-instantons,
hep-th/9709058.

heterotic/type-i duality in d<10 dimen-
jhep 10, 004 (1997),

55

[12] a. sen, unication of string dualities, nucl. phys. [proc. suppl] 58, 5 (1997),

hep-th/9609176.

[13] j. polchinski, string theory, cambridge university press, 1998.

[14] l. susskind t. banks, brane - anti-brane forces, hep-th/9511194, 1995.

[15] a. sen, stable non-bps states in string theory, jhep 9808, 007 (1998),

hep-th/9803194.

[16] a. sen, tachyon condensation on the brane antibrane system, jhep 9808,

012 (1998), hep-th/9805170.

[17] a. sen, stable non-bps bound states of bps d-branes, jhep 9808, 010

(1998), hep-th/9805019.

[18] a. sen, bps d-branes on non-supersymmetric cycles, jhep 9812, 021

(1998), hep-th/9812031.

[19] a. sagnotti, non-perturbative quantum field theory, eds g. mack et al.

(pergamon press, 1988) 521.

n. ishibashi and t. onogi, conformal eld theories on surfaces with bound-
aries and crosscaps, mod. phys. lett. a4, 161 (1989).

g. pradisi and a. sagnotti, open string orbifolds phys. lett. b216, 59 (1989).

p. horava, strings on world sheet orbifolds nucl. phys. b327, 461 (1989).

[20] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, stable non-bps d-particles, phys. lett.

b441, 133 (1998), hep-th/9806155.

[21] c. g. callan, c. lovelace, c. r. nappi, and s. a. yost, loop corrections to

superstring equations of motion, nucl. phys. b308, 221 (1988).

[22] p. di vecchia, m. frau, i. pesando, s. sciuto, a. lerda, and r. russo, classical
p-branes from boundary state, nucl. phys. b507, 259 (1997), hep-th/9707068.

m. bill`o, p. di vecchia, m. frau, a. lerda, i. pesando, r. russo, and s. sciuto,
microscopic string analysis of the d0-d8 brane system and dual r-r states,
nucl. phys. b526, 1998 (1998), hep-th/9802088.

m. bill`o, p. di vecchia, m. frau, a. lerda, r. russo, and s. sciuto, the
lorentz force between d0 and d6 branes in string and m(atrix) theory, mod.
phys. lett. a13, 2977 (1998), hep-th/9805091.

56

[23] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, non-bps states in heterotic-type iia du-

ality, jhep 9903, 013 (1990), hep-th/9901014.

[24] a. sen, non-bps states and branes in string theory, hep-th/9904207, 1999.

[25] e. witten,

d-branes and k-theory,

jhep 9812,

019 (1998),

hep-th/9503124.

[26] p. horava,

type
hep-th/9812135, 1998.

iia d-branes, k-theory,

and matrix theory,

[27] k. dasgupta and j. park, brane mapping under (1)fl, hep-th/9903125,

1999.

[28] h. garcia-compean, d-branes in orbifold singularities and equivariant k-

theory, hep-th/9812226, 1998.

[29] s. gukov, k-theory, reality, and orientifolds, hep-th/9901042, 1999.

[30] k. olsen and r.j. szabo,

brane descent relations

in k-theory,

hep-th/9904153, 1999.

[31] d. friedan, d. martinec, and s. shenker, conformal invariance, supersymme-

try and string theory, nucl. phys. b271, 93 (1986).

[32] a. dabholkar and j. harvey, nonrenormalization of the superstring tension,

phys. rev. lett. 63, 478 (1989).

[33] m. b. green and j. h. schwarz, anomaly cancellation in supersymmetric

d = 10 gauge theory and superstring theory, phys. lett. 149b, 117 (1984).

[34] j. polchinski and y. cai, consistency of open superstring theories, nucl. phys.

b286, 91 (1988).

[35] c. g. callan, c. lovelace, c. r. nappi, and s. a. yost, adding holes and

crosscaps to the superstring, nucl. phys b293, 83 (1987).

[36] e. witten, string theory dynamics in various dimension, nucl. phys. b443,

85 (1995), hep-th/9503124.

[37] i. r. klebanov and a. a. tseytlin, d-branes and dual gauge theories in

type 0 string theory, nucl. phys b547, 143 (1999), hep-th/9811035.

57

[38] i. pesando, on the eective potential of the dp - anti-dp system in type ii

theories, hep-th/9902181, 1999.

[39] j. polchinski and a. strominger, new vacua for type ii string theory, phys.

lett. b388, 736 (1996), hep-th/9510227.

e. gava, k. narain and m. sarmadi on the bound states of p- and (p+2)-
branes, nucl. phys. b504, 214 (1997), hep-th/9704006.

[40] m. frau, l. gallot, a. lerda, and p. strigazzi, stable non-bps d-branes in

type i string theory, hep-th/9903123, 1999.

[41] e. g. gimon and j. polchinski, consistency conditions for orientifolds and

d-manifolds, phys. rev. d54, 1667 (1996), hep-th/9601038.

[42] m. b. green, space-time duality and dirichlet string theory, phys. lett. b266,

325 (1991).

[43] m. ademollo, a. dadda, r. dauria, e. napolitano, p. di vecchia, f. gliozzi,
and s. sciuto, unied dual model for interacting open and closed strings, nucl.
phys. b77, 189 (1974).

[44] p. yi, membranes from five-branes and fundamental strings from dp branes,

hep-th/9901159, 1999.

58

