9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
8

 

 
 

1
v
7
5
0
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

usc-ft-7/99
hep-th/9905057

chern-simons gauge theory:

ten years after1

j. m. f. labastida

departamento de fsica de partculas

universidade de santiago de compostela
e-15706 santiago de compostela, spain

e-mail: labasti@fpaxp1.usc.es

abstract

a brief review on the progress made in the study of chern-simons gauge
theory since its relation to knot theory was discovered ten years ago is presented.
emphasis is made on the analysis of the perturbative study of the theory and its
connection to the theory of vassiliev invariants. it is described how the study
of the quantum eld theory for three dierent gauge xings leads to three
dierent representations for vassiliev invariants. two of these gauge xings
lead to well known representations: the covariant landau gauge corresponds
to the conguration space integrals while the non-covariant light-cone gauge to
the kontsevich integral. the progress made in the analysis of the third gauge
xing, the non-covariant temporal gauge, is described in detail. in this case
one obtains combinatorial expressions, instead of integral ones, for vassiliev
invariants. the approach based on this last gauge xing seems very promising
to obtain a full combinatorial formula. we collect the combinatorial expressions
for all the vassiliev invariants up to order four which have been obtained in
this approach.

1invited lecture delivered at the workshop trends in theoretical physics ii, held at buenos

aires, argentina, november 29  december 5, 1998.

1 introduction

the connection between chern-simons gauge theory and the theory of knot and link
invariants was established by edward witten ten years ago [1]. since then the theory
has been studied from a variety of points of view. many of the standard methods
in eld theory have been applied, generating results which became important in the
development of knot theory. the interplay between quantum eld theory and knot
theory has been very rich in both directions. though the results have been more
spectacular in the knot theory direction, one must not forget that the developments
in chern-simons gauge theory have constituted a constant test of our knowledge in
quantum eld theory. in fact, it has been found that not always the quantum eld
theory methods have been able to provide the right answer. as it will be described
in detail, the work of the last few years reveals that there are some issues which are
not yet understood when dealing with non-covariant gauges.

the term chern-simons theory appears in dierent contexts of quantum eld
theory. in this conference these words have been heard at least in half of the talks.
it is therefore convenient to specify which type of chern-simons gauge theory i will
be dealing with in this paper. i will refer by the term chern-simons gauge theory to
a quantum eld theory in three-dimensions whose action is the integral on a smooth
compact boundaryless three-manifold of a chern-simons form associated to a semi-
simple non-abelian gauge group. this theory was originally considered by several
authors [2], but only after the work by witten its connection with the theory of knot
and link invariants was discovered. this occurred in the summer of 1988. some of
the other theories also named by the term chern-simons have been recently reviewed
in [3].

the presentation contained in this paper will not follow a chronological order.
the development of the theory of knot and link invariants from a mathematical point
of view in the last fteen years have been very impressive and at some stages it has
developed parallel to chern-simons gauge theory.
i will try to make a correspon-
dence from each side for each of the topics treated. though i have witnessed the
development of chern-simons gauge theory in detail during these ten years, i might
have missed some of the corresponding achievements from the mathematical side. i
apologize in advance if some omission in this respect takes place. the order in the
presentation is chosen in such a way that the progress made in these ten years can be
understood starting from the basics of both, knot and chern-simons gauge theory.
at each stage the results obtained in the context of chern-simons gauge theory are
interpreted in the context of knot theory from a mathematical point of view.

the study of chern-simons gauge theory is an unusual one because it was rst an-
alyzed from a non-perturbative point of view. the original paper by witten presents
a series of non-perturbative methods which led him to show that the vacuum expecta-

1

tion values (vevs) of the relevant operators of the theory are polynomial invariants like
the jones polynomial [4] and its generalization. other non-perturbative analysis were
made one year later and soon some of the rst perturbative studies started to appear.
however, only some years later, after the advent of vassiliev invariants [5, 6], the
importance of the study of the perturbative series expansion was recognized. from
a eld theory point of view this lack of interest was understandable. usually, eld
theorist can grasp only some of the perturbative aspects of their theories. since in
chern-simons gauge theory we had a good handle on its exact solution, why should
one care about its perturbative series? it turned out that the coecients of the per-
turbative series are important invariants. their study applying perturbation theory
led to interesting expressions for them. the invariance of these coecients was clear
from the beginning. what was not obvious is that they were invariants with a very
special feature, they were vassiliev invariants or invariants of nite type. though
this was known since the work by bar-natan [7] and birman and lin [8] in 1993, its
proof in a quantum eld theory context had to wait until 1997 [9].

once the importance of the perturbative series expansion was realized several
works addressed its study. again the richness inherent to quantum eld theory be-
come a powerful tool and the form of this series expansion was studied for dierent
gauge-xings. the pioneer perturbative calculations in the covariant landau gauge
[10, 11] were later extended and analyzed from a general point of view [12, 13]. all
these works constituted part of the inspiration for the formulation by bott and taubes
of their conguration space integral [14]. their integral corresponds precisely to the
perturbative series expansion of the vev of a wilson loop in chern-simons gauge
theory in the landau gauge. before the work by bott and taubes, kontsevich pre-
sented a dierent integral [15] for vassiliev invariants. this integral turned out to
correspond to the perturbative series expansion of the vev of a wilson loop in the
non-covariant light-cone gauge [16, 17, 18]. the interplay between physics and math-
ematics was very fruitful in these developments. this is rather clear in the case of
the covariant landau gauge. in the case of the light-cone gauge, the chern-simons
counterpart took place much later than the formulation of the kontsevich integral.
however, as stated in the paper by kontsevich, some of his insight to write down his
integral originated from chern-simons gauge theory. a very recent work [19] shows
from a mathematical point of view that both, the kontsevich integral and the bott
and taubes conguration space integral lead to the same invariants. from a eld
theory point of view this is just a consequence of the gauge invariance of the theory.

gauge invariance is a powerful tool:

it allows to study the theory for dierent
gauge xings.
in the last few years a new gauge xing has been considered: the
non-covariant temporal gauge [16, 20]. this gauge has the important feature that the
integrals which are present in the expressions for the coecients of the perturbative
series expansion can be carried out, leading to combinatorial expressions [20]. this
has been shown to be the case up to order four and it seems likely that the approach

2

can be generalized.
in this analysis a crucial role is played by the factorization
theorem for chern-simons gauge theory proved in [21]. the resulting expressions are
better presented when written in terms of gauss diagrams for knots [22]. some recent
results from the mathematical side seem to indicate the existence of a combinatorial
formula of this type [23]. at present chern-simons gauge theory is the only approach
which have provided combinatorial expressions for all the vassiliev invariants up to
order four. work is in progress from both sides to obtain a general combinatorial
expression. hopefully, a coherent interplay between them will provide the widely
searched general combinatorial expression for vassiliev invariants.

the paper is organized using the following table as a guide. i have listed on the
left hand side the mathematical counterparts of the topics of chern-simons gauge
theory listed on the right hand side.

knot theory
knots and links

chern-simons gauge theory

wilson loops

knot and link polynomial invariants

vevs of products of wilson loops

singular knots

invariants for singular knots

operators for singular knots
vevs of the new operators

finite type or vassiliev invariants

coes. of the perturbative series

chord diagram

{1t,4t} and {1t,as,ihx,stu}

conguration space integral

kontsevich integral

??

first coe. of the perturbative series
lie-algebra structure of group factors

landau gauge

light-cone gauge
temporal gauge

the sections of the paper will deal with the development of these topics from the
point of view of chern-simons gauge theory, indicating the basic details from its knot
theory counterpart. notice that the entry in the knot-theory column corresponding
to the temporal gauge has not been lled in yet.

the paper is organized as follows.

in sect. 2, chern-simons gauge theory is
introduced, as well as the basics of the theory of knots and links. a brief summary of
some of the results obtained in the context of non-perturbative chern-simons gauge
theory is also included in this section.
in sect. 3, singular knots are introduced
and their corresponding operators are dened. these operators are studied and their
connection to chord diagrams is discussed. in sect. 4, chern-simons gauge theory
is studied from a perturbative point of view. using the covariant landau gauge the
coecients of the perturbative series expansion are analyzed, obtaining conguration
space integrals. in sect. 5, the perturbative series expansion is reobtained in the non-
covariant light-cone gauge. the resulting series is the same as the kontsevich integral
for vassiliev invariants. in sect. 6, the perturbative series expansion is analyzed in a

3

dierent non-covariant gauge, the temporal gauge. the general procedure to obtain
combinatorial expressions for vassiliev invariants is presented and their explicit form
is given for all the primitive invariants up to order four. finally, in sect. 7, some
concluding remarks are presented. two tables list all the primitive vassiliev invariants
up to order four for all prime knots up to nine crossings.

4

2 knots, links and wilson loops

let us begin recalling the basic elements of chern-simons gauge theory. this theory is
a quantum eld theory whose action is based on the chern-simons form associated to
a non-abelian gauge group. the fundamental data in chern-simons gauge theory are
the following: a smooth three-manifold m which will be taken to be compact, a gauge
group g, which will be taken semi-simple and compact, and an integer parameter k.
the action of the theory is the integral of the chern-simons form associated to a
gauge connection a corresponding to a gauge group g:

scs(a) =

k

4 zm

tr(a  da +

2
3

a  a  a).

(2.1)

in this expression the trace is taken in the fundamental representation of the gauge
group. the action possesses the following behavior under gauge transformations,

a a + g1dg,

scs(a) scs(a)  4yk(g),
where g is a map g : m  g, (g) is its winding number,

(g) =

1

482y zm

tr(g1dg  g1dg  g1dg),

(2.2)
(2.3)

(2.4)

and y the dynkin index of the fundamental representation of g. since the winding
number (2.4) is an integer and y is a half-integer, it follows that, for integer k, the
exponential,

exp(iscs(a)),

(2.5)

which is the quantity that enters in the computation of vevs, is invariant under gauge
transformations.

a theory characterized by an action like (2.1), which is independent of the metric
on the three-manifold m, is a topological quantum eld theory. in this theory, appro-
priate observables lead to vevs which correspond to topological invariants. candidates
to be observables of this type have to satisfy two properties. on the one hand they
must be metric independent, on the other hand they must be gauge invariant. wilson
loops verify these two properties and they are therefore the paramount observables
to be considered in chern-simons gauge theory.

wilson loop operators correspond to the holonomy of the gauge connection a
along a loop. given a representation r of the gauge group g and a 1-cycle  on m,
it is dened as:

w r

 (a) = trr(hol(a)) = trrp expz

a.

(2.6)

5

figure 1: two regular projections of the trefoil knot.

products of these operators are the natural candidates to obtain topological invariants
after computing their vev. these vevs are formally written as:

1 w r2

hw r1

2    w rn

n i = z [da]w r1

1 (a)w r2

2 (a)   w rn

n (a)eiscs(a),

(2.7)

where 1, 2,. . .,n are 1-cycles on m and r1, r2 and rn are representations of g.
in (2.7), the quantity [da] denotes the functional integral measure and it is assumed
that an integration over connections modulo gauge transformations is carried out.
as usual in quantum eld theory this integration is not well dened. field theorists
have elaborated a variety of methods to go around this problem and provide some
meaning to the right hand side of (2.7). these methods fall into two categories,
perturbative and non-perturbative ones, and their degree of success mostly depends
on the quantum eld theory under consideration. fortunately, in chern-simons gauge
theory these methods have been very fruitful. indeed, in the pioneer work by witten
in 1988 he showed, using non-perturbative methods, that when one considers non-
intersecting cycles 1, 2,. . .,n without self-intersections, the vevs (2.7) lead to the
polynomial invariants discovered a few years before starting with the work by v. f.
jones [4]. but before making a precise statement on what was achieved by witten
in [1] let us go through our rst mathematical detour and collect some basic facts on
knot theory.

knot theory studies embeddings  : s1  m. two of these embeddings are
considered equivalent if the image of one of them can be deformed into the image of
the other by an homeomorphism on m. the main goal of the theory is to classify
the resulting equivalence classes. each of these classes is a knot. most of the study
in knot theory has been carried out for the simple case m = s3. this is the situation
which has been widely studied from a chern-simons theory point of view. chern-
simons gauge theory, however, being a formulation intrinsically three-dimensional,
provides a framework to study the case of more general three-manifolds m. in this
respect, chern-simons gauge theory seems more promising than other approaches
whose formulation possesses a two-dimensional avor.

a powerful approach to classify knots is based on the construction of knot invari-
ants. these are quantities which can be computed taking a representative of a class

6

i

ii

iiia

iiib

figure 2: reidemeister moves.

and are invariant within the class, i.e., are invariant under continuous deformations
of the representative chosen. at present, it is not known if there exist enough knot
invariants to classify knots. vassiliev invariants are the most promising candidates
but is already known that if they do classify, innitely many of them are needed.

the problem of the classication of knots in s3 can be reformulated in a two-
dimensional framework using regular knot projections. given a representative of a
knot in s3, deform it continuously in such a way that the projection on a plane has
simple crossings. draw the projection on the plane and at each crossing use the con-
vention that the line that goes under the crossing is erased in a neighborhood of the
crossing. the resulting diagram is a set of segments on the plane, containing the rel-
evant information at the crossings. two diagrams corresponding to two regular knot
projections of the trefoil knot are shown in g. 1. a given knot might have many reg-
ular projections. the rst question to ask is if one can dene an equivalence relation
among regular projections whose equivalence classes coincide with the equivalence
classes of knots. reidemeister answered this question in the armative many years
ago. he proved that the problem of classifying knots was equivalent to the problem of
classifying knot projections modulo a series of relations among them. these relations,
known as reidemeister moves, are the ones shown in g. 2. invariance of a quantity
under the three reidemeister moves is called invariance under ambient isotopy. if a
quantity is invariant under all but the rst is said to possess invariance under regular
isotopy.
it is instructive to nd out the way that the reidemeister moves can be
applied to the two diagrams shown in g. 1 to show that, indeed, they are equivalent.

the formalism described for knots generalizes to the case of links. for a link

7

l +

l 

l 0

figure 3: links which enter in the skein rule of the jones polynomial.

: s1  m, i = 1, . . . , n, with
of n components one considers n embeddings, i
no intersections among them. again, the main problem that link theory faces is
the problem of their classication modulo homeomorphisms on m. in this case one
can also dene regular projections and reformulate the problem in terms of their
classication modulo the reidemeister moves shown in g. 2. notice that n = 1 is
just the case which corresponds to knots.

the study of knot and link invariants experimented important progress in the
eighties. in 1984 v. f. jones [4] discovered a new invariant which strongly inuenced
the eld. he formulated the celebrated jones polynomial, an invariant which was able
to distinguish many more knots and links that previous knot invariants. to have a
avor of the type of quantities one is dealing with, let us describe it in some detail.

the jones polynomial can be dened very simply in terms of skein relations. these
are a set of rules that can be applied to the diagram of a regular knot projection to
construct the polynomial invariant. they establish a relation between the invariants
associated to three links which only dier in a region as shown in g. 3. notice
that arrows have been provided to each of the segments entering g. 3. indeed, the
jones polynomial as well as, in general, the rest of polynomial invariants which will
be discussed below are dened for oriented links. thus, an arrow must be introduced
for each of the components of a link. though polynomial knot invariants are invariant
under a reversal of its orientation, link polynomial invariants are not.

if one denotes by vl(t) the jones polynomial corresponding to a link l, being t

the argument of the polynomial, it must satisfy the skein relation:

1
t

vl+  tvl = (t 

1
t

)vl0,

(2.8)

where l+, l and l0 are the links pictured in g. 3. this relation plus a choice of
normalization for the unknot (u) are enough to compute the jones polynomial for
any link. the standard choice for the unknot is:

vu = 1,

8

(2.9)

though it is not the most natural one from the point of view of chern-simons gauge
theory. for the trefoil knot shown in g. 1 this polynomial is: vt = t + t3  t4.
notice that actually vl(t), in general, is not a polynomial. first, it might contain
negative powers of t. indeed, for the mirror image of the trefoil knot shown in g. 1,
t , one easily nds that v t = t1 + t3  t4. actually this is just an example of a
general feature of the jones polynomial that under a reversal of the orientation of the
ambient space s3 it behaves as v l(t) = vl(t1), a property which makes it stronger
than the alexander polynomial which was not able two discriminate among links l
and l which are mirror images of each other. second, vl(t) might contain a factor
of the form t. this is always the case if l has an even number of components.
for example, for the simplest two-component link, the hopf link, it takes the form:
vh = t(1 + t2).

after jones work in 1984, many other polynomial invariants where discovered.
two of the most celebrated ones are the homfly [24] and the kauman [25] poly-
nomial invariants. the rst one possesses a skein rule with three entries similar to
the one in g. 3 and can be computed in the same way. the novelty is that it is a
polynomial in two variables. the second one is also a polynomial in two variables but
its corresponding skein rule is not as simple as in the jones or homfly polynomials.
in general, the generalizations involve skein rules containing more than three terms
and the computation of invariants becomes more complicated. often other methods
have to be used. before entering in the discussion of the general framework which
accounts for all these developments let us turn back to chern-simons gauge theory.

the pioneer work by witten in 1988 showed that the vevs of products of wilson
loops (2.7) correspond to the jones polynomial when one considers su(2) as gauge
group and all the wilson loops entering in the vev are taken in the fundamental
representation f . for example, if one considers a knot k, witten showed that,

vk(t) = hw f
ki,
provided that one performs the identication:

t = exp(

2i
k + h

),

(2.10)

(2.11)

where h = 2 is the dual coxeter number of the gauge group su(2). witten also
showed that if instead of su(2) one considers su(n) and the wilson loop carries the
fundamental representation, the resulting invariant is the homfly polynomial. the
second variable of this polynomial originates in this context from the n dependence.
but these cases are just a sample of the general framework which chern-simons
gauge theory oers. taking other groups and other representations one possesses
an enormous set of knot and link invariants. for some other special cases the re-
sulting invariants correspond to specic polynomial invariants. for example, in one
considers so(n) as gauge group and wilson loops carrying the fundamental repre-
sentation one is led to the kauman polynomial. if instead one considers su(2) as

9

figure 4: regular projection of a singular knot with two double points.

gauge group and the wilson loops carry a representation of spin j/2 one rediscovers
the akutsu-wadati [26] polynomials. notice that the formalism allows to consider
dierent representations for each of the components of a link, leading to the so-called
colored polynomial invariants.

chern-simons gauge theory constitutes a framework where an enormous variety
of knot and link invariants can be considered. the theory can be studied for arbitrary
groups and arbitrary representations. but on top of this it also provides the basis to
study these invariants in more general three-manifolds. in addition, chern-simons
gauge theory also allows to consider a more general set of observables called graphs
[27] that certainly constitutes an important generalization which has not been much
exploited from the eld theory point of view.

the framework established from chern-simons gauge theory has been also for-
mulated from a mathematical point of view. in general, the invariants inherent to
chern-simons gauge theory have been reobtained and properly dened using con-
texts dierent than quantum eld theory. this has been a very fruitful arena in the
eld of algebraic topology in the last ten years. there exist now a quantum group
approach to polynomial invariants [28], and the general theory, including knots, links
and graphs has been formulated at a categorical level [29].

a particular invariant of three-manifolds which deserves special attention is the
partition function of chern-simons gauge theory. this quantity is hard to obtain
from a eld theory point of view. however, it has been properly dened from a
mathematical point of view using triangulations of the three-manifold. the resulting
invariant is known as the witten-reshetekhin-turaev invariant [30], and it corre-
sponds to the mentioned partition function. the partition function has been studied
for some three-manifolds in [31]. the witten-reshetekhin-turaev invariant can be
obtained from chern-simons gauge theory using lattice gauge theory methods and
placing the quantum eld theory on a triangulated three-manifold [32]. recently,
new developments based in chern-simons gauge theory has led to new formulae for
the partition function [33]. the approach seems very promising and it might lead to
simpler computational methods for these invariants.

10

many non-perturbative studies of chern-simons gauge theory were performed in
the years following wittens seminal work. the quantization of the theory was studied
from the point of view of the operator formalism [34, 35, 36] and from more geometri-
cal methods [37]. also, its connection to two-dimensional conformal eld theory was
further elucidated [38] .a powerful method for the general computation of knot and
link invariants was constructed by kaul and collaborators [39]. methods to compute
graph invariants were also built [40]. all these works provided good setups for calcu-
lation purposes that in some situations were able to provide the answer to some open
questions in knot theory. for example, general expressions for torus knots and torus
links were obtained for a variety of situations using the operator formalism [41]. the
problem of nding a polynomial invariant which discriminates between the two chi-
ralities of the knots 942 and 1071 was solved [42] using the methods developed by kaul
and collaborators. this approach was also used to show that polynomial invariants do
not distinguish isotopically inequivalent mutant knots and links [43]. the connection
between chern-simons gauge theory and rational conformal eld theory was used to
build knot and link invariants from any conformal eld theory [44, 45]. chern-simons
gauge theory has had also important applications in the loop-representation approach
to canonical quantum gravity [46, 47]. recently, graphs have also become very im-
portant in this context and it turns out that their associated vassiliev invariants are
related to physical states in the framework of canonical quantum gravity [48].

11

k j+1

+k j

j
k

figure 5: regular projections which enter in the vassiliev resolution of a double point.

3 singular knots and their operators

in this section the mathematical point of view will be discussed rst. this will
motivate the need to consider vevs of new operators associated to loops with self-
intersections. we will describe how chern-simons gauge theory leads, using quantum
eld theory techniques, to the same results as its mathematical counterpart.

in 1990, v. a. vassiliev [5] introduced a new point of view to study the problem of
the classication of knots. based on arnolds work on singularity theory he studied
the space of all smooth maps of s1 into s3. this includes maps with various types of
singularities which divide the space into chambers, each corresponding to a knot type.
using methods of spectral sequences to obtain combinatorial conditions, vassiliev
constructed families of new invariants to characterize these chambers.

vassiliev approach was later reformulated by birman and lin [8] from an axiomatic
point of view. as in the original formulation by vassiliev [5], the starting point is
based on the consideration of singular knots with j double points. a representative
of a singular knot with j double points consists of the image of a map from s1 into
s3 with j simple self-intersections. under homeomorphisms on s3 these images form
a class which constitute the singular knot itself. these singular knots can also be
regularly projected. fig. 4 shows one of these knots with two double points. the key
ingredient in the construction by birman and lin is the observation that any knot
invariant extends to generic singular knots by the vassiliev resolution:

(k j+1) = (k j

+)  (k j
),

(3.1)

+ and k j

where k j+1 is a singular knot with j + 1 double points which diers from the knots
k j
 only in the region shown in g. 5. using this extension birman and
lin characterized the invariants of nite type or vassiliev invariants introducing the
following denition:

a vassiliev or nite type invariant of order m is a knot invariant which is zero on
the unknot and that, after extending it to singular knots, it is zero on singular knots
k j with j > m singular points, and dierent from zero on some k m.

12

figure 6: a singular knot and its corresponding chord diagram.

vassiliev invariants form a vector space v. linear combinations of vassiliev in-
variants are also vassiliev invariants. actually, to a vassiliev invariant of order m
one can always add vassiliev invariants of lower order obtaining additional vassiliev
invariants of order m. it is convenient to consider a ltration in the vector space of
vassiliev invariants using the order as grading. if one denotes by vm the space of
vassiliev invariants of order m one has the ltration,

which leads to the graded vector space:

v0  v1      vm      v,

gr(v) = v0  v1/v0  v2/v1      vm+1/vm    

(3.2)

(3.3)

besides introducing an axiomatic approach to vassiliev invariants, birman and lin
proved an important theorem in 1993 [8]. let us consider any polynomial invariant
pk(t) for a knot k. this polynomial could be any of the ones obtained from chern-
simons gauge theory considering the vev of the corresponding wilson loop for some
group and some representation. consider now the power series expansion:

qk(x) = pk(ex) =

m(k)xm.



xm=0

(3.4)

birman and lin proved that if one extends the quantities m(k) to vassiliev invariants
for singular knots using vassiliev resolution (3.1), then m(k) are vassiliev invariants
of order m. an immediate consequence of this theorem is that the coecients of the
perturbative expansion associated to the vev of a wilson loop in chern-simons gauge
theory are vassiliev invariants. this property of the coecients of the perturbative
series expansion has been proved using standard quantum eld theory methods [9].
before describing how this has been achieved let us make some remarks on vassiliev
invariants and introduce one of them which is particularly important.

once vassiliev or nite type invariants have been introduced, there are two ba-
sic questions to ask. the rst one is whether or not all the known numerical knot
invariants are of nite type. the answer to this question is no. there are classical

13

 v (

) = 0

v (

)  v (

) + v (

)  v (

) = 0 

figure 7: 1t and 4t relations among chord diagrams.

numerical knot invariants like the unknotting number, the genus or the crossing num-
ber which are not vassiliev invariants. the second question is whether or not, in the
case that vassiliev invariants classify knots, one needs an innite sequence of vassiliev
invariants to separate knots. this question has been answer in the armative.

from a singular knot with m double points one can construct a particular object
which determines vassiliev invariants of order m:
its chord diagram [7]. given a
singular knot k m, its chord diagram, cd(k m), is built in the following way. take a
base point and draw the preimages of the map associated to a given representative of
k m on a circle. then join by straight lines the pairs of preimages which correspond
to each singular point.
in g. 6 the chord diagram corresponding to the singular
knot of g. 4 has been pictured. it is rather simple to observe that if (k m) is a
vassiliev invariant of order m then it is completely determined by cd(k m). indeed,
if one considers two singular knots with m double points, k m
2 , which dier
in one crossing change then cd(k m
2 ). on the other hand, by vassiliev
2 ) = (k m+1). but (k m+1) = 0 and therefore all singular
resolution (k m
knots with m double points leading to the same chord diagram have the same vassiliev
invariant of order m.

1 )  (k m

1 ) = cd(k m

1 and k m

chord diagrams play an important role in the theory of vassiliev invariants. since
vassiliev invariants of order m for singular knots with m double points are codied by
chord diagrams one could ask if there are as many independent invariants of this kind
as chord diagrams. the answer to this question is no. chord diagrams are associated
to knot diagrams and these diagrams must be considered modulo the equivalence
relation dictated by the reidemeister moves in g. 2. these relations indeed impose
some relations among chord diagrams, the so-called 1t and 4t relations [7]. they
have been depicted in g. 7.

of particular importance is the space of chord diagrams modulo the 1t and 4t

relations. this space is a graded space, graded by the number of chords:

a =nchord diagramso . (1t, 4t)
=a0  a1      am    

14

(3.5)

figure 8: diagram with one trivalent vertex.

notice that am labels all the vassiliev invariants of order m for all knots with m
double points. the dimensions of the vector spaces am are not known in general.
the space a possesses an algebraic structure that reduces the study of the spaces
am to its connected part am. if dm denotes the dimension of the connected part of
am, it is known that they take the following values up to order 12 [49]:

m 1
dm 0

2
1

3
1

4
2

5
3

6
5

7
8

8
12

9
18

10
27

11
39

12
55

the general expression for the dimensions of the spaces of chord diagrams am is an
open problem which has challenged many people. as it will be discussed below, these
dimensions correspond in fact to the dimensions of the spaces of primitive vassiliev
invariants.

the vector space of chord diagrams, a, can be characterized in an equivalent way
using trivalent diagrams an introducing a series of new relations. this characterization
is very important because, as it will be shown below, it corresponds to the one that
naturally arises from the point of view of chern-simons gauge theory. let us expand
the set of chord diagrams to a new set in which trivalent vertices are allowed. this
means that now the lines in the interior of the circle can join a point on the circle to
a point on one of the internal lines. fig. 8 shows one of the new allowed diagrams.
notice that the point that looks like a four-valent vertex does not have any particular
meaning. the new set of diagrams form a graded vector space whose grading is
half the total number of vertices (internal trivalent vertices plus the previous vertices
at the attachments of internal lines to the circle). bar-natan showed [7] that the
previous space a in (3.5) is equivalent to the new one after modding out by the so-
called 1t, as, ihx and stu relations. the relation 1t is the previous one shown
in g. 7. the relation as is the statement that the internal trivalent vertices are
totally antisymmetric. finally, the relations stu and ihx are the ones shown in g.
9. notice that in the relation stu the curved line corresponds to a piece of the circle
of the diagram. the result proved by bar-natan in [7] is simply:

a = ntrivalent diagramso . (1t, as, stu, ihx)

(3.6)

where a is the space (3.5).

15

stu

ihx

=

=

(cid:13)

(cid:13)

figure 9: stu and ihx relations among trivalent diagrams.

the relations as, stu and ihx are reminiscent of a lie-algebra structure.

if
one assigns totally antisymmetric structure constants fabc to the internal trivalent
vertices, and group generators ta to the vertices on the circle, the stu relation is
just the dening lie-algebra relation,

while the ihx relation corresponds to the jacobi identity,

fabctc = tatb  tbta,

fabdfdce + fcadfdbe + fbcdfdae = 0.

(3.7)

(3.8)

we will nd out below that the group factors associated to the perturbative series
expansion of the vev of a wilson loop in chern-simons gauge theory correspond
precisely to the space a in (3.5) or (3.6) in its representation in terms of trivalent
graphs. in that context, the 1t relation is related to framing. in order to identify
this group factors with the space a one must consider the perturbative series in a
formal sense in which group factors are not particularized to a denite group. the
group factors must be regarded as objects which simply satisfy relations (3.7) and
(3.8) being fabc totally antisymmetric.

as follows from our discussion, singular knots play a central role in the theory
of vassiliev invariants. we must now ask about their role in chern-simons gauge
theory. the rst question to be addressed is about the natural operators that should
be associated to them. wilson loops are related to ordinary knots. what should be
replacing the wilson loop in the case of singular knots while maintaining vassiliev
resolution (3.1)? this question was answered in 1997 [9]. we will review here how
these operators for singular knots are obtained using quantum eld theory technics.
the result will lead us to a proof of the theorem by birman and lin discussed above,
and to make direct contact with chord diagrams.

we will begin studying the behavior of a dierence of wilson loops as the one
that enters in vassiliev resolution (3.1). let us consider a family of smooth paths
u parametrized by the continuous parameter u, such that for u = 0 the path 0

16

figure 10: family of paths with a intersection at the point p .

p

possesses a self-intersection at some point p , i.e., for u = 0 it has a double point.
for u > 0 (u < 0) the path presents an overcrossing (undercrossing) near the point
p . a family of paths with these features has been pictured in g. 10. the path
0(v) has a double point at v = s1 and v = t1 with s1 < t1. paths u(v) with u 6= 0
are dierent from 0(v) only in the region in parameter space around v = s1. the
derivative of u(v) with respect to u is only non-zero in that region.
it vanishes
away from v = s1, in particular at v = t1. in the two resolutions of a double point
an overcrossing (undercrossing) corresponds to the one which leads to a crossing
with positive (negative) sign, as depicted in g. 11. our goal is to study the rst
derivative of the vev of the wilson loop w r
u with respect to the parameter u. due to
the topological character of chern-simons gauge theory, one expects a step-function
behaviour for hw r
ui as a function of u in the neighborhood of u = 0. this implies
the presence of a delta function in its derivative. as shown below, this is in fact what
one nds. our goal is therefore to express

hw r

+i  hw r

i = z 



du

d
duhw r
ui,

(3.9)

where  is some positive small real number, as the vev of some operator.

to compute the integrand on the right hand side of (3.9) we will use a series of
well known properties of the wilson loop and perform some formal manipulations in
the integral functional inherent to vevs. under a deformation of its path, the wilson
loop behaves as:

d
du

w r

u = i dv 


u (v) 

u(v)u r

u(s, v)f((v))u r

u(v, s),

(3.10)

where u r
u(s, v) denotes a wilson line which starts at s and ends at v, and f is the
curvature of the connection a. in (3.10) we have denoted derivatives with respect
to the path parameter by a dot and derivatives with respect to u by a prime. recall
that 
u(v) is only dierent from zero in the region in parameter space around v = s1.
another important property of the wilson line is its behavior under a functional
derivation with respect to the gauge connection:




aa
(x)

u r

u(s, t) = z t

s

dw 

u (w)(3)(x, u(w))u r

u(s, w)t au r

u(w, t).

(3.11)

17

 = 1
e 

e 
 = 1

figure 11: signatures of an overcrossing and an undercrossing.

relations (3.10) and (3.11) are common to any gauge theory. what makes chern-
simons gauge theory special is that, after performing a variation of the action respect
to the gauge connection one nds:


aa
(x)

s(a) =

k
8

f a

(x),

(3.12)

i.e., the eld equation involves just the eld strength f and not its derivative like
in yang-mills theory.

taking into account (3.10) and (3.12), and integrating by parts in connection

space, one can write the integrand on the right hand side of (3.9) as:

d
duhw r

ui =

4i

k z [da]eis(a)i dv 


u (v) 

u(v)



aa

(u(v))

u(s, v)t au r
u r

u(v, t).

(3.13)
using (3.11) and disregarding some subtle contributions related to framing [9] one
nds:

d
duhw r

ui =

4i
k

(u)z [da]eis(a)trht au r

u(s1, t1)t auu(t1, s1)i.

(3.14)

as expected this expression involves a delta function in u. this proves in turn that
for continuous deformations of the path which do not involve self-crossings the vev of
a wilson loop is invariant.

using (3.9) and the result (3.14) one can read the operator which one must as-
sociate to a singular knot while maintaining vassiliev resolution (3.1). indeed, from
(3.9) and (3.14) follows that

4i

k *trht au r
and therefore (4i/k)trht au r

 (s1, t1)t au r

 (s1, t1)t au r

+i  hw r
i,

 (t1, s1)i+ = hw r
 (t1, s1)i is the sought operator. notice

(3.15)

that in (3.15) the subindex u in the path has been suppressed. one can easily show

18

that this operator is gauge invariant [9]. its form is rather simple: split at the double
point the wilson loop into two wilson lines and insert two group generators.

the result obtained for a single double point generalizes easily to deal with the
general situation of n double points. let us consider a singular knot k n with n double
points, and let us assign to each double point i a triple i = {si, ti, t ai} where si and
ti, si < ti, are the values of the k n-parameter at the double point, and t ai is a group
generator. the gauge-invariant operator associated to the singular knot k n is:

(

4i
k

)ntrht (w1)u(w1, w2)t (w2)u(w2, w3)t (w3)   

   u(w2n1, w2n)t (w2n)u(w2n, w1)i,

(3.16)

where {wi; i = 1, . . . , 2n}, wi < wi+1, is the set that results from ordering the values
si and ti, for i = 1, . . . , n, and  is a map that assigns to each wi the group generator
in the triple to which it belongs.

the singular operators (3.16) lead to some immediate applications. first, it is
easily shown that they constitute a proof of the theorem by birman and lin discussed
above. this theorem was discussed at the beginning of this section. it states that if
in any polynomial knot invariant with variable t one substitutes t  ex, and expand
in powers of x, the coecient of the power xn is a vassiliev invariant of order n (see
eq. (3.4)). a vassiliev invariant of order n vanishes for all singular knots with n + 1
crossings.
in the language of chern-simons gauge theory the theorem by birman
and lin can be rephrased, simply stating that the nth-order term of the perturbative
series expansion of the vev of the wilson loop associated to a given knot is a vassiliev
invariant of order n. we will now prove that this is so with the help of the operators
(3.16).

the vevs of the operators (3.16) provide an invariant for a singular knot with
n double points. this singular-knot invariant can be expressed as a signed sum of
2n invariants for non-singular knots. these 2n invariants are the perturbative series
expansion of the vev of the corresponding wilson loops. to show that the coecient
of order n of these vevs is a vassiliev invariant or order n is equivalent to proving
that all the terms of order less than n vanish in the signed sum. but the signed sum
is precisely the vev of the operator (3.16). since the perturbative series expansion of
these operators starts at order n, the proof of the theorem by birman and lin follows.

with the help of the operators (3.16) one makes direct contact with chord dia-
grams. let us consider the vevs of the operators (3.16) at order zero. their expres-
sions are simply obtained by setting u = 1 in all the wilson lines. let us consider a
singular knot k n with n double points, si, ti, with si < ti, for i = 1, . . . , n, in param-
eter space. as usual, with these data one constructs the triples: i = {si, ti, t ai}. at

19

lowest order in perturbation theory the operators (3.16) become the group factors,

vn(k n) = (

4i
k

)ntrht (w1)t (w2)t (w3)    t (w2n)i,

(3.17)

where the set {w1, w2, . . . , wn}, with wj < wj+1, is obtained by ordering the set
{si, ti; i = 1, . . . , n}, and  is the induced map that assigns to each wj the index of
the group generator in the triple to which wj belongs. the indices entering (3.17) are
paired. this allows the association, to each operator (3.17), of a diagram in which
the 2n points are distributed on a circle and the ones that possess the same value of
 are joined by a line. the resulting diagrams are the chord diagrams for singular
knots (as the one shown in g. 6).

the quantities which result after the assignment of lie-algebra data to chord
diagrams are called weight systems [7]. for each system one chooses a group and a
representation. as it will become clear in the next section, they correspond to the
group theory factors in the context of chern-simons perturbation theory.

20

4 vassiliev invariants and chern-simons pertur-

bation theory

vassiliev invariants of order m for singular knots with m double points have been
studied in the previous section. from a mathematical point of view these are chord
diagrams and from a chern-simons gauge theory point of view they are group factors
or weight systems associated to chord diagrams. an important question that was
addressed from the mathematical side some years ago was whether or not a weight
system can be integrated to construct vassiliev invariants for non-singular knots.
the answer to this question turned to be armative. from the side of chern-simons
gauge theory the positive answer to the question follows simply from the existence
of the perturbative series expansion.
in this section we will describe some of the
basics of chern-simons perturbation theory. in the next section we will discuss the
appearance of vassiliev invariants from the integration of weight systems.

the perturbative study of chern-simons gauge theory started with the works by
guadagnini, martellini and mintchev [10] and by bar-natan [11]. these works dealt
basically with the lowest non-trivial order in perturbation theory. to construct the
perturbative series expansion of the vev of an operator when dealing with a gauge
theory one is forced to make a gauge xing. the rst analysis of the chern-simons
perturbation theory were made in the covariant landau gauge. subsequent studies
[12, 13] in this gauge led to a framework linked to the theory of vassiliev invariants,
which culminated with the conguration space integral approach [14, 50]. in the rest
of this section we will describe the structure of the perturbative series expansion of
the vev of a wilson loop in the covariant landau gauge. chern-simons perturbation
theory in this gauge for the case of more general three-manifolds has been considered
in [51].

for a perturbative analysis it is more convenient to rescale the eld entering the
chern-simons action (2.1) in such a way that the coupling constant appears in the
three-vertex of the theory. rescaling the gauge eld by

a  ga,

where g = q 4

k , the chern-simons action (2.1) becomes,

s (a) = z tr(a  da +

2
3

ga  a  a).

(4.1)

(4.2)

this form of the action has the standard 1
fundamental representation is normalized as: tr(t at b) = 1
rescaling (4.1) covariant derivatives contain the coupling constant g.

2 for the kinetic part since the trace of the
2ab. notice that after the

as stated above, to construct the perturbative series a gauge xing must be per-

21

formed. we begin choosing a lorentz gauge in which

a = 0.

(4.3)

the standard faddeev-popov construction leads us to consider the following gauge-
xed functional integral:

z [dadcdcd]eis (a)+isgf (a,c,c,),

where

sgf(b, c, c, ) = z d3xtr(2cdc  2a  2).

in this action  is a lagrange multiplier which imposes the gauge condition, c and
c are anticommuting faddeev-popov ghosts, and  is a gauge-xing parameter. the
derivative in dc is a covariant derivative. the functional integral in (4.4) must
be done over all a congurations and not only over gauge orbits. as a result of
the gauge xing, the exponent in (4.4) is invariant under the corresponding brst
transformations.

the eld  can be integrated out by performing a gaussian integration in (4.4).
one nds, up to an irrelevant multiplicative factor, that the functional integral (4.4)
becomes:

(4.4)

(4.5)

(4.6)

where

z [dadcdc]eii(a,c,c),

i(a, c, c) = z tr[(aa +

2
3

gaaa) 

1


aa + 2cdc].

(4.7)

in order to compute the vevs of operators involving wilson loops like in (2.7) one must
integrate these operators using (4.6). after expanding the path-ordered products in
the wilson loops one ends computing the functional integral over products of gauge
elds. these are basically the correlation functions of the theory and are computed
using standard quantum eld theory methods, which lead to a set of computational
rules called feynman rules. these rules provide terms which are organized in even
powers of g. they dictate that at order g2m two kinds of diagrams must be taken into
account. the rst group involves oriented trivalent graphs of the kind introduced in
the previous section with 2m vertices and with the following assignments: for each
internal line (gauge propagator),

for each internal vertex,

i
4

ab (x  y)
|x  y|3 ,

 igfabcz d3x,

22

(4.8)

(4.9)

and for each vertex on the circle,

g(t a)j
i .

(4.10)

the second set of diagrams involves propagators and vertices related to ghost
elds. contrary to gauge eld propagators, dashed lines are used for ghost eld
propagators. the diagrams of the second set are also trivalent diagrams but they
must contain at least one dashed line. dashed lines can not be attached to the circle.
they are always attached to internal lines via the ghost-gauge eld-ghost trivalent
vertex. we will not reproduce here the form of the ghost-related ingredients of the
feynman rules. we will describe, however, what is their eect.

in writing the quantities associated to the feynman rules (4.8), (4.9) and (4.10)
the limit   0 has been taken. this is known as the landau gauge. it simplies the
calculations since in this case there are not infrared divergences.

after applying the feynman rules one nds that the perturbative series contains
divergent terms. since the coupling constant g is dimensionless, the theory is, how-
ever, renormalizable. power counting analysis [53] shows that actually the theory is
superrenormalible. to deal with the divergent terms, the theory must be regularized.
one can use a variety of regularizations. for most of the regularizations which have
been studied it turns out that the theory is in fact nite, i.e., after removing the
cuto introduced in the regularization the resulting expressions are nite. of course,
one is free to choose an arbitrary scheme using a nite renormalization. the value of
k would be dierent in each scheme if its xed from some standard data. in other
words, the value of k in a given scheme should be determined stating, for example,
that the value of the vev of the wilson loop for the trefoil knot divided by the par-
tition function is a xed quantity. then, though working in dierent schemes, the
computations of vevs for any other knot would agree.

many regularizations have ben studied in the last ten years. there is a particular
subset of them [52, 53, 54, 55] that naturally leads to a scheme in which a shift in the
coupling constant k occurs. in these regularizations the higher-loop contributions to
the two- and three-point functions add up to a shift in k which is precisely the dual
of the coxeter number of the gauge group. this is rather remarkable because it is the
same shift that appears in non-perturbative studies of chern-simons gauge theory in
connection with its associated two-dimensional conformal eld theory [1]. why this
is so is not still well understood.

in our perturbative analysis we are going to assume that higher-loop corrections
to two- and three-point functions just account for the shift in k and therefore we will
not consider them in the expansion. we will deal with the rest of the diagrams. the
scheme is chosen so that we do not make any nite renormalization. this scheme is as
good as any other but is the best to compare perturbative results to non-perturbative
ones. as we will discuss in the next sections, in non-covariant gauges we will make a

23

choice in which there is no shift and then, to compare to non-perturbative calculations,
we must make a nite renormalization.

before writing the form of the full perturbative series we must deal with another
important subtlety. if one computes the rst order contribution to the perturbative
series expansion of the vev of a wilson loop one nds that the resulting quantity is
not a topological invariant. in the gauge xing of the theory we have introduced a
metric dependence that could lead to quantities which are not topological. this rst
order contribution is just a manifestation of it. fortunately, only in this term, and
in its propagation in higher order contributions, topological invariance is lost. the
rest of the perturbative series expansion is truly topological. thus, although vevs
are not topological invariant quantities they fail to be so in a controllable way. the
non-topological terms factorize and multiply a term which is topological.
in non-
perturbative studies one nds a related problem which is the need of the introduction
of a framing for the knot under consideration [1]. in other words, instead of knots
one must consider framed knots, or knots with a normal vector eld assigned which
denes a framing characterized by an integer. this integer is the number of times
that the normal vector eld winds around the knot. a framing can also be introduced
in the perturbative approach so that the perturbative result coincides with the non-
perturbative one. let us describe how this is done.

the rst order contribution to the vev of a wilson loop has the form:

g2tr(t at b)i dxz x
= g2 1
2

dy i
4
tr(t at b)i dxi dy i

ab (x  y)
|x  y|3
ab (x  y)
|x  y|3 .

4

(4.11)

this expression is nite but depends on the shape of the knot. let us introduce a
framing and, together with the original knot, a companion knot located at the end
point of the normal vector which denes the framing.
if one replaces one of the
original paths entering (4.11) by the path associated to the companion knot (which
will be denoted by a prime), one nds gauss formula for the linking number:

g2 1
2

tr(t at b)i dxi 

dy i
4

ab (x  y)

|x  y|3 = l.

(4.12)

in this expression l is an integer that counts the number of times that the vector
associated to the framing winds the knot. the kind of point splitting associated to the
framing leads to a perturbative result that agrees with the non-perturbative analysis.
either if we introduce the framing or we leave a non-topological term we obtain a
good perturbative series expansion. the corresponding term factorizes. thus, to deal
with one or the other is a matter of taste but, as in the case of the shift, agreement
with the non-perturbative analysis induces the approach based on the framing. we

24

will follow this choice. the term that factorizes has the form:

exp (2ilhr),

hr =

1

k + g trr(t at a).

(4.13)

the quantity hr can be identied with the conformal weight for the representation
r of the associated conformal eld theory. the feynman diagrams that lead to the
framing factor are those diagrams which contain isolated chords once a canonical
basis from group factors has been chosen. canonical basis play a prominent role in
our discussion but before dening them let us rst take a look at the general form of
the perturbative series.

once we have dealt with the issues regarding the shift and the framing we are in
the position to analyze the perturbative series expansion of the vev of a wilson loop.
the feynman rules (4.8), (4.9) and (4.10) allow to split the contributions to each
order in two factors: a geometrical factor which includes all the space dependence,
and a group factor which includes all the group theoretical dependence. the general
form is:



di

where,

hw r

ki = dim r

xi=0

xj=1

ij(k)rij(r)xi,

x =

2i
k

= ig2/2

(4.14)

(4.15)

is the expansion parameter, dim r is the dimension of the representation r, 0,1 =
r0,1 = 1, and d0 = 1. notice that higher-loop corrections to the two- and three-point
functions must not be included in (4.14) so this series should correspond to the non-
perturbative result without the shift. the factors ij(k) and rij(r) appearing at
each order i incorporate all the dependence dictated from the feynman rules apart
from the dependence on the coupling constant, which is contained in x. of these two
factors, in the rij(r) all the group-theoretical dependence is collected. these are the
group factors mentioned above. the rest is contained in the ij(k) or geometrical
factors. they have the form of integrals over the wilson loop corresponding to the
knot k of products of propagators, as dictated by the feynman rules. the rst
index in ij(k) denotes the order in the expansion and the second index labels the
dierent geometrical factors which can contribute at the given order. similarly, rij(r)
stands for the independent group structures which appear at order i, which are also
dictated by the feynman rules. the object di in (4.14) is the dimension of the space
of invariants at a given order. in our approach denotes the number of independent
group structures which appear at that order. notice that while the geometrical factors
ij(k) are knot dependent but group and representation independent, the group
factors are group and representation dependent but knot independent.

among the basis of group factors which can be chosen in the perturbative series
(4.14) there is a special class which turns out to be very useful. we will call it the

25

a

b

c

figure 12: examples of trivalent diagrams: a is connected while b and c are discon-
nected.

class of canonical basis. notice that to each group factor one can associate a trivalent
diagram of the kind entering (3.6) if one considers the space of all semi-simple lie
groups (as that is the most general case for which the structure constants can be
chosen totally antisymmetric). we will restrict to this case in what follows.

in order to introduce the concept of canonical basis we must rst deal with a sort
of classication of trivalent diagrams. a trivalent diagram will be called connected
diagram if it is possible to go from one propagator (or internal line) to another
without ever having to go through the external circle. the diagram will be called
disconnected diagram if that is not possible.
in this second case we say that the
diagram has subdiagrams, which are the connected components of the whole diagram.
two subdiagrams are non-overlapping if we can move along the external circle meeting
all the legs of one subdiagram rst, and all the legs of the other second. by legs we
mean internal lines attached to the external circle. if it is impossible to do that, the
subdiagrams are overlapping. in g. 12 the diagram a is connected while the diagrams
b and c are disconnected. of these last two, diagram b contains subdiagrams which
are overlapping while c does not.

in the expansion (4.14) there are many possible choices of independent groups fac-
tors rij(r). given all trivalent diagrams contributing to a given order in perturbation
theory some of the resulting group factors might be related due to the lie-algebra
relations as, stu and ihx as in (3.6). the group factors entering (4.14) are cho-
sen to be associated to diagrams that constitute a basis. its elements are the rij(r)
in (4.14). of course, many choices are possible. in order to introduce our preferred
choice let us rst notice that due the stu relations one can always choose a basis such
that the rij(r) come from connected diagrams, or products of connected diagrams.
that is, if there are subdiagrams, they can be chosen so that they do not overlap.
the value of such an rij(r) is the product of the values of its subdiagrams. this last
statement follows from the fact that the part of the group factor associated to one of
the subdiagrams is a diagonal matrix. thus one can choose a basis built of connected
trivalent diagrams and products of connected non-overlapping subdiagrams. a basis
with this feature will be called a canonical basis. in g. 13 a choice of canonical basis
up to order six is shown.

26

r2,1

r3,1

r4,1

r4,2

r5,3

r6,3

r6,7

r4,3

r5,1

r5,4

r6,4

r6,1

r6,5

r6,8

r5,2

r6,2

r6,6

r6,9

figure 13: choice of a canonical basis up to order 6.

27

we will denote by rc

ij(k) the corresponding geometrical factors.

c
perturbative series expansion (4.14) can be written as:

ij(r) the group factors associated to a canonical basis, and
it was shown in [21] that then the

ki = dim r exp
hw r




di

xi=1

xj=1

ij(r) xi


c
ij(k) rc

,

(4.16)

where di stands for the number of connected elements in the canonical basis at order i.
notice that c
ij(k) do not correspond uniquely to connected feynman diagrams. the
result (4.16) is known as the factorization theorem. actually, it holds for arbitrary
gauges, not only in the covariant landau gauge as one could conclude from our
discussion. the dimensions di are precisely the ones introduced for the connected
part of the space of chord diagrams (3.5). their values up to order 12 are the ones
contained in the table shown after (3.5). the geometrical factors c
ij(k) are a selected
set of vassiliev invariants. they are called primitive vassiliev invariants. if they are
known, the values of the whole set of vassiliev invariants follow. these primitive
vassiliev invariants have been computed for general classes of knots as torus knots
[41, 56] up to order six.

the contribution at rst order in (4.16) is precisely the framing factor (4.13).
thus, the factorization theorem (4.16) shows also its factorization. the rest of the
terms in the exponent of (4.16) are knot invariants. the series contained in that
exponent was analyzed by bott and taubes [14] in their work on the conguration
space for vassiliev invariants. they showed that the integral expression entering the
geometrical factors c
ij(k) are convergent [14, 50]. further work on the subject has
led to a proof of their invariance [13, 57].

the explicit expression for the integrals entering in the second order contribution
was rst presented in [10]. it was later analyzed in detail by bar-natan [11]. it takes
the form:

c

21(k) =



where,

and,

1

1

4 i dxz x
16 i dxz x

dyz y
dyz y

dw(x  z)(y  w)

dzz z
dzz d3 v(x, y, z; ),

(x  y) =

1




(x  y)
|x  y|3 ,

v(x, y, z; ) = 1(x  )2(y  )3(z  )123.

(4.17)

(4.18)

(4.19)

this invariant turns out to be the total twist of the knot and coincides mod 2 with
the arf invariant. the integral expression for the order three invariant, c
31(k),

28

associated to the group factor r31 shown in g. 13 was rst presented in [12]. we
reproduce it here for completeness:

c

31(k) =

1

1

+

1



dx2

dx4

dx5

dx2

dx3

dx4

dx3

dx6
6

5 z x5

3 z x3

2 z x2

1 z x1

4 z x4
8 i dx1
[ 14(x1  x4)26(x2  x6)35(x3  x5)
+13(x1  x3)25(x2  x5)46(x4  x6)
+15(x1  x5)24(x2  x4)36(x3  x6)]
5 z x5
4 i dx1
dx5
[ 14(x1  x4)25(x2  x5)36(x3  x6)]
5 z d3y
32 i dx1
dx5
[ 11(x1  y)25(x2  x5)33(x3  y)44(x4  y)134
+13(x1  x3)22(x2  y)44(x4  y)55(x5  y)245
+11(x1  y)24(x2  x4)33(x3  y)55(x5  y)135
+11(x1  y)22(x2  y)35(x3  x5)45(x4  y)124
+14(x1  x4)22(x2  y)33(x3  y)55(x5  y)235]

1 z x1
1 z x1

3 z x3
3 z x3

4 z x4
4 z x4

2 z x2
2 z x2

dx6
6

dx4

dx2

dx3

(4.20)

+

1

128 i dx1

1 z x1

dx2

2 z x2

dx3

3 z x3

dx4

4 z d3yz d3z

[ 11(x1  y)22(x2  z)33(x3  z)44(x4  y)(y  z)1432
+11(x1  y)22(x2  y)33(x3  z)44(x4  z)(y  z)2143]

properties of the primitive vassiliev invariants c

31(k) have been
studied in [58]. in these works the integral expressions for c
31(k) were
studied in the at-knot limit and combinatorial expressions of the kind that will be
presented below from the study in the temporal gauge were obtained.

21(k) and c

21(k) and c

29

5 light-cone gauge and the kontsevich integral

in the previous section, the perturbative series expansion of the vev of a wilson
loop in the covariant landau gauge has been analyzed. a similar analysis can be
carried out for the operators associated to singular knots which were introduced in
sect. 3. the lowest order contributions in such an expansion are the group factors
corresponding to chord diagrams. these group factors form a weight system. before
the development of operators for singular knots the following question was raised:
could weight systems on chord diagrams be integrated to obtain invariants for non-
singular knots? kontsevich answered this question armatively in 1993. he showed
that a weight system on chord diagrams of order m determines a unique vassiliev
invariant on non-singular knots.

kontsevich theorem is constructive in the sense that it provides an explicit ex-
pression for the vassiliev invariant for non-singular knots. this expression is known
as the kontsevich integral. we will provide its explicit form below, after deriving it
from the quantum eld theory side. in the context of chern-simons gauge theory
kontsevich theorem is contained in our construction of operators for singular knots.
one should think of the rst order contribution of the vev of a singular knot as the
weight system, and of the full perturbative series for vevs of wilson loops as the
integration of the weight system. thus, the perturbative series expansion of the vev
of a wilson loop should correspond to the kontsevich integral. this does not seem
to be the case as the conguration space integrals found in the previous section have
a dierent form than the integrals contained in kontsevich theorem. this fact poses
a puzzle which, however, is solved very simply.

gauge theories can be studied in dierent gauges. the analysis carried out in the
previous sections dealt with the covariant landau gauge but many others could have
been used. it turns out that the perturbative series which results in the non-covariant
light-cone gauge leads to the kontsevich integral. to show this is the main goal of
this section. vevs of gauge invariant operators are independent of the gauge chosen
and therefore the expressions obtained in the light-cone gauge should be equivalent
to the ones obtained in any other gauge. in this sense the analysis of operators for
singular knots in chern-simons gauge theory constituted a general proof, or gauge
independent proof, of kontsevich theorem. the conguration space integrals of the
previous section can equally be regarded as an integration of weight systems on chord
diagrams. actually, very recently, it has been shown from the mathematical side [19]
that both series of integrals are equivalent. a ratication of the gauge independence
of gauge invariant operators mentioned above.

in order to deal with non-covariant gauges let us introduce a unit constant vector
n. the gauge-xing conditions of axial type which we will discuss in this and in the

30

next section correspond to the choice:

na = 0.

(5.1)

in the case of the light-cone gauge the unit vector n satises the condition n2 = 0.
the gauge xed action of the theory is built following the standard faddeev-popov
construction which leads to a functional integral as in (4.4) where now:

sgf(b, c, c, ) = z d3xtr(na + bndc + 2).

(5.2)

again,  is a lagrange multiplier which imposes the gauge condition, c and c are
anticommuting faddeev-popov ghosts, and  is a gauge-xing parameter.

the higher-loop analysis in axial-type gauges is a very delicate issue. it requires
to take into consideration some specic prescription to regulate unphysical poles.
fortunately, this analysis has been done for the case of chern-simons gauge theory
in [59]. in these works it is shown that a regulator can be chosen so that the eect of
higher-loop contributions for two- and three-point functions is a shift of the parameter
k as the one discussed in the previous section in the covariant landau gauge. though
strictly speaking this has been proved at one loop, it is believed that, as in the case of
covariant gauges, it holds at any order in higher loops. we will assume that higher-
loop contributions to the two- and the three-point functions account for the shift of the
parameter k. notice that the gauge condition (5.1) does not x the gauge completely.
one still has gauge invariance under gauge transformations in the direction normal to
n. the presence of this residual gauge invariance is a source of problems which, as it
will be discussed below, are not yet solved. another study of light-cone perturbation
theory can be found in [60].

we will work in the limit   0. the theory greatly simplies in this case. the

propagator for the gauge eld in momentum space acquires the simple form:

ab


(np)2 (pp 

i


(np)n)  i

n
np

ab.

(5.3)

this propagator is orthogonal to the n-direction. this implies that there is no cou-
pling to the ghosts elds and, furthermore, that there is no gauge eld self-coupling.
thus there is only a feynman rule to be taken into account to compute the vevs
of operators: the one associated to the gauge eld propagator. the group factors
that remain in this case correspond just to chord diagrams. the fact that in this
gauge no group factors with trivalent vertices have to be taken into account is a
quantum eld theory ratication of bar-natan theorem among the equivalence of the
two representations, (3.5) and (3.6), of the space a.

non-covariant gauges share the problem of the presence of unphysical poles in
their propagators [61]. this is manifest in (5.3). several prescriptions have been

31

proposed to avoid these unphysical poles. usually, a prescription is chosen so that
some particular properties of the correlation functions are fullled. in the light-cone
gauge there is a natural prescription which is motivated by the simple form that (5.3)
takes in coordinate space after performing a wick rotation. as it will be shown below,
this prescription leads to kontsevich integral.

in the light-cone gauge it is convenient to introduce light-cone coordinates. let

us choose the unit vector n as (0, 1,1). the new coordinates are:

x+ = x1 + x2,

x = x1  x2,

and the new light-cone components for the gauge connection become:

a+ = a1 + a2, a = a1  a2.

(5.4)

(5.5)

the form of the propagator (5.3) in coordinate space is more conveniently expressed
after performing a wick rotation to euclidean space. a point in euclidean space
will be denoted as (t, z), where z = x1 + ix2. after introducing az = a1 + ia2 and
az = a1  ia2 one nds that there exist a prescription to deal with the unphysical
pole in (5.3) which leads to:

z(x)ab

m(x)ab

haa
haa

m(x)i = 0,
n(x)i = abmn

1
2i

(t  t)
z  z

,

(5.6)

with m, n = {0, z}, and mn is antisymmetric with 0z = 1. this is the gauge-eld
propagator that we will use in our analysis of the perturbative expansion of the vev
of a wilson loop.

before entering into the analysis of the perturbative series expansion correspond-
ing to the vev a wilson loop, we must discuss the potential problems that might be
encountered because of the particular form of the gauge-eld propagator (5.6). this
propagator is singular when its two end-points coincide. actually, it is particularly
singular in this situation because both the numerator and the denominator lead to
divergences. in the light-cone gauge we have two special kinds of singularities, there
may be situations in which only one, the numerator or the denominator, leads to a
divergence. in order to avoid singularities from the numerator one is forced to avoid
paths with sections in which t, the rst component of a generic point (t, z) is constant.
this constraint implies that one must consider morse knots. a morse knot is a knot
in which t is a morse function on it. a morse knot is characterized by 2n extrema,
half of them maxima, and the other half minima. an example of a morse knot is
depicted in g. 14.

another potential problem due to the structure of (5.6) comes from situations in
which the two end-points of the propagator are close to one of the extrema of a morse

32

t

 

t+
t3 = t4
t+

t+
t+
t1 = t2

s2

s1

 

 

t
t2 = t3
t
t
t1 = t4
t

b

k4

c

k2

d

k3

k1

z

a

figure 14: example of a morse knot.

knot since the denominator then vanishes. to solve this problem one introduces a
regularization procedure based on the introduction of a framing. the resulting in-
variants will correspond to invariants of framed knots. as in the case of the landau
gauge one nds [17] that a term like (4.13) factorizes. one is left then with a per-
turbative series expansion with group factors which correspond to chord diagrams
without isolated chords. the ones with isolated chords just contribute to the framing
factor.

in order to obtain the form of the perturbative series of the vev of a wilson loop
we begin by writing all the contributions at a given order m. to carry this out we
must consider all possible ways of connecting 2m points on the morse knot by m
propagators, taking into account the regularization described above, i.e., with one
point of the propagator attached to k and the other to its companion knot k, and
then path-order integrating. the path-order integration can be split into a sum such
that in each term enters a path-ordered integration along 2m curves among the set
ki, ki
, i = 1, . . . , 2n. this set of curves builds the morse knot under consideration. a
given term in this sum might contain propagators joining ki and ki
. in this case one
must introduce a factor 1/2. the contributions coming from propagators joining ki
and kj
, with i 6= j, have also a factor 1/2 since double counting occurs. accordingly,
propagators joining dierent curves must be replaced by 1/2 the sum of their two
possible choices of attaching their end-points.

to each rearrangement of the m propagators corresponds a group factor. these

33

figure 15: group factor at second order.

are easily obtained just using the rule (4.10). to x ideas we will present in detail
the second-order contribution, m = 2, for a particular group factor, the one shown in
g. 15. this contribution is of the form

(ig)2z 1

0

ds1z 1
ds2z 1
3(x(s3))ihaa2

s1

s2

1(x(s1))aa3

haa1

ds3z 1

s3

2(x(s2))aa4

ds4 x1(s1) x2(s2) x3(s3) x4(s4)
4(x(s4))itr(t a1t a2t a3t a4).

(5.7)

we will now write more explicitly one of the contributions to this multiple integral
taking into account the form of the propagator (5.6). the delta function in this
propagator imposes very strong restrictions on the possible contributions. its presence
implies that the only non-vanishing congurations are those in which the two end-
points of each propagator are at the same height. to be more concrete let us consider
the computation of (5.7) for the trefoil knot shown in g. 14. this knot is made out
of four curves, k1, k2, k3 and k4, whose end-points are the four critical points a, b, c
and d. the heights of these critical points are:
1 = t
4 ,
1 = t+
2 ,
2 = t
3 ,
3 = t+
4 .

(5.8)

a t
b t+
c t
d  t+

they are depicted in g. 14.

to obtain the contributions it is convenient to divide in four parts the circle
that represents the knot in g. 14 and join these parts by lines representing the
propagators, taking into account the ordering of the four points to which they are
attached. this ordering and the delta function in the height imply that no line can
have its two end-points attached to the same part. they also imply that there are
no contributions in which two end-points of dierent lines are attached to one part
and the other two to another part. the contributions are easily depicted on the knot
itself. one has been pictured in g. 14. for each contribution, one must compute
a sign, which takes into account the direction in which one travels along the knot in
the new parametrization. to be more explicit, let us write, for example, the integral
associated to the contribution shown in g. 14. it takes the form:

(ig)2

1

(2i)2

1

22 zt

2 <s1<s2<t+

1

ds1ds2

34

  z1(s1)  z
z1(s1)  z

2(s1)
2(s1)

+

z
1(s1)  z2(s1)!  z3(s2)  z
1(s1)  z2(s1)
z3(s2)  z
z

1(s2)
1(s2)

+

z
3(s2)  z1(s2)!,
3(s2)  z1(s2)
z

(5.9)

where the primes denote the companion knot. the data entering this integral (5.9) are
shown in g. 14. notice that this integral is not divergent if we take the limit   0
before performing the integration. this feature is common to all the contributions
corresponding to the group factor under consideration. only the contributions related
to framing are potentially divergent. one could therefore remove in (5.9) the terms
with primes and the factor 1/22. the integral to be computed takes the form:

(ig)2

1

(2i)2 zt

2 <s1<s2<t+

1

ds1ds2

z1(s1)  z2(s1)
z1(s1)  z2(s1)

z3(s2)  z1(s2)
z3(s2)  z1(s2)

.

(5.10)

one of the two integrations can easily be performed, leading to:

(ig)2

1

(2i)2 zt

2 <s2<t+

1

ds2 log  z1(s2)  z2(s2)
2 )  z2(t

2 )! z3(s2)  z1(s2)
z3(s2)  z1(s2)

z1(t

.

(5.11)

notice that, as argued before, this integral is nite. although z1 and z2 get close to
each other when s2  t+
1 , the singularity in the integrand, being logarithmic, is too
mild to lead to a divergent result.

we are now in a position to write the form of the general contribution. notice
that the most signicant fact of our previous discussion is the presence of the delta
function in the height of the propagator (5.6). it implies that the only non-vanishing
congurations of the propagators are those in which their two end-points have the
same height; in other words, only contributions in which the line representing the
propagator is horizontal do not vanish. this observation allows us to rearrange the
contributions to the perturbative series expansion in the following way. consider
all possible pairings {zi(s), z
, i, j = 1, . . . , 2n, where 2n is
the number of extrema of the morse knot under consideration. a contribution at
order m in perturbation theory will involve a path-ordered integral in the heights
s1 < . . . < sr < . . . < sm of a product of m propagators:

j(s)} of curves ki and kj

m

yr=1

dzir (sr)  dz
zir (sr)  z

jr (sr)
jr (sr)

.

(5.12)

this product is characterized by a set of m ordered pairings, each one labelled by a
pair of numbers (ir, jr) with r = 1, . . . , m. we will denote an ordered pairing of m
propagators generically by pm. one must take into account all possible ordered pair-
ings, i.e., one must sum over all the possible pm. the group factor that corresponds
to each ordered pairing pm is simply obtained by placing the group generators at the
end-points of the propagators and taking the trace of the product, which results after
traveling along the knot. the resulting group factor will be denoted by r(pm).

35

figure 16: unknot with four extrema.

another important fact that must be taken into account is the presence of a
product of signs. for each pairing pm = {(ir, jr), r = 1, . . . , m} there will be a
contribution from their product. certainly, the result will be a sign that will depend
on the ordered pairing pm. we will denote such a product by s(pm):

we are now in a position to write the full expression for the contribution to the

perturbative series expansion at order m. it takes the form:

(ig2)m(cid:16) 1

2i(cid:17)m 1

2m xpm zt

pm

<t1<...<tr<...<tm<t+

s(pm)
pm

m

yr=1

dzir (tr)  dz
zir (tr)  z

jr(tr)
jr (tr)

r(pm),

(5.13)

pm and t

where t+
pm are highest and lowest heights, which can be reached by the last
and rst propagators of a given ordered pairing pm. this expression corresponds to
the kontsevich integral for framed knots as presented in [62]. if one sets to zero all
the group factors associated to diagrams with isolated chords one can disregard the
primes in (5.13). we dene zm(k) as the resulting contribution at order m divided
by the dimension of the representation:

zm(k) =

(ig2)m

dim r(cid:16) 1

2i(cid:17)m 1

2m xpm zt

pm

<t1<...<tr<...<tm<t+

s(pm)
pm

m

yr=1

dzir (tr)  dzjr(tr)
zir (tr)  zjr (tr)

r(pm),

(5.14)

this is the expression originally obtained by kontsevich [15].

it is well known that the kontsevich integral is not a knot invariant. as rst
pointed out by kontsevich himself [15], it has to be corrected by a subtle factor to
have full invariance. indeed, if the shape of a morse knot is modied in such a way
that the number of extrema changes, the kontsevich integral (5.14) is not invariant.
kontsevich proposed the solution to this lack of invariance adding a factor now known
as the kontsevich factor. if we denote by u the unknot with the shape shown in g.
16, it turns out that the coecients of the power expansion of:

where n denotes the number of extrema of the knot k, are truly vassiliev invariants.
the denominator of this expression is the so-called kontsevich factor. it is not known

,

n
2

(5.15)

m=1 zm(k)
m=1 zm(u))

1 +p
(1 +p

36

how to obtain this factor using quantum eld theory arguments. this is one of the
open problems from the physical side. the study of gauge theories in non-covariant
gauges presents many problems and, as it is the case here, in many occasions they
lead to results which do not agree with their covariant-gauge counterparts. often the
cause for the discrepancy is linked to the ambiguity in the choice of a prescription to
avoid non-physical poles. most likely this is not the case at least for chern-simons
gauge theory. as it is described in the next section, one nds that the kontsevich
factor is needed even if no specic prescription is taken. it is likely that the problem
is related to the fact that there is a residual gauge invariance. as we discussed above,
if one does not consider morse knots, due to the residual gauge invariance, one gets
divergent contributions. one needs to reduce to a single point all horizontal directions
to avoid those divergences. precisely when the number of points on the horizontal
direction changes, i.e., when the knot is deformed so that the number of extrema
gets modied one encounters the non-invariance of the kontsevich integral (5.14).
it is believed that a proper treatment of the residual gauge invariance will lead to
understand the origin of the kontsevich factor from a eld theoretical point of view.

37

6 temporal gauge and combinatorial formulae

the perturbative studies of chern-simons gauge theory that we have presented have
led to two types of integral expressions for vassiliev invariants. these expressions are
not very useful from a computational point of view. formulae of combinatorial type
should be much preferred. there are some indications that a general combinatorial
formula for vassiliev invariants exists. on the one hand, the work on the study of the
conguration space integrals in the limit of at knots [58] originated a combinatorial
expression for the vassiliev invariant of order three. on the other hand, recent work
from the mathematical side [63, 23] supports this conjecture. the search for the
combinatorial formula led to the study of chern-simons gauge theory in the non-
covariant temporal gauge [20]. this turns out to be the more suitable gauge to carry
out all the intermediate integrals and obtain combinatorial expressions. no other
approach has provided a combinatorial expression for the two primitive vassiliev
invariants at order four. the temporal gauge has been also treated in [16, 64].

the starting point of the analysis in the temporal gauge is the same as in the light-
cone gauge. the gauge-xing condition (5.1) is the same but now n is a unit vector of
the form n = (1, 0, 0). the gauge-xed action and the gauge-eld propagator have
also the same general form (5.2) and (5.3). as before, the propagator presents a pole
at np = 0, and a prescription to regulate it is needed. as observed in the previous
sections, to construct the perturbative series expansion of the vev of a wilson loop, we
need the fourier transform of (5.3). we will work in the limit   0. in the temporal
gauge the momentum-space integral that has to be carried out has the form:

(x0, x1, x2) = zm

d3p
(2)3

ei(p0x0+p1x1+p2x2)

p0

.

(6.1)

this integral is ill-dened due to the pole at p0 = 0. to make sense of it a prescrip-
tion has to be given to circumvent the pole. we will not take a precise prescription.
instead, we will work in a rather general framework. let us rst analyze the depen-
dence of (x0, x1, x2) in (6.1) on x0. the pole in p0 is avoided if, instead of (6.1), one
analyses the derivative of (x0, x1, x2) with respect to x0. considering (x0, x1, x2)
as a distribution one obtains:


x0

= i(x0)(x1)(x2).

(6.2)

integrating this expression with respect to x0, one nds that any prescription would
lead to a result of the following form:

(x0, x1, x2) =

i
2

sign(x0)(x1)(x2) + f (x1, x2),

(6.3)

where f (x1, x2) is a prescription-dependent distribution. the important consequence
of the result (6.3) is that the dependence of (x0, x1, x2) on x0 has to be in the

38

form sign(x0)(x1)(x2). this observation will be crucial in our analysis. we will
actually work with the rather general formula (6.3) for (x0, x1, x2). this form of
the propagator will allow us to introduce the notion of kernels of a vassiliev invariants
and to design a procedure to compute combinatorial expressions for these invariants.

as for the issue of the framing and the shift, a similar analysis as the one in the
light-cone gauge holds in this case. in the situation under consideration, however, it
is more useful to consider a specic framing, the one in which the twist is zero or
vertical framing. the linking number of a framed knot can be expressed as the sum
of the writhe plus the twist associated to its regular projection. the writhe is the
sum of the signatures of the crossings and the twist is the number of times that the
framed knot, seen as a band, twists around its middle axis. choosing a framing so
that the twist is zero implies that the linking number coincides with the writhe. thus
a dependence on the writhe factorizes. this information turns out to be very useful
in the analysis of the perturbative series.

we will review the salient facts of the analysis of the perturbative series expansion
of the vev of a wilson loop in the temporal gauge. the complete analysis can be found
in [20]. given a knot k and one of its regular knot projections, k, on the x1, x2-plane
which is a morse knot in the x1 and x2 directions, the perturbative series expansion
for the vev of the corresponding wilson loop has the form:

being,

and,

hw r

ki = hw r

k itemp hw r

u ib(k),

1

dim rhw r

ki = 1 +

vi(k)xi,



xi=1

1

dim rhw r

k itemp = 1 +



xi=1

vi(k)xi.

(6.4)

(6.5)

(6.6)

in these expressions x denotes the coupling constant (4.15). the function b(k) is the
exponent of the kontsevich factor, which has been conjectured to be [20],

b(k) =

1
12

(nx1 + nx2),

(6.7)

where nx1 and nx2 are the critical points of the regular projection k in both, the x1
and the x2 directions. in (6.4) u denotes the unknot and hw r
k itemp is the vev of the
wilson loop corresponding to the regular projection k as computed perturbatively
in the temporal gauge with the standard feynman rules of the theory. notice that
though each of the factors on the right hand side of (6.4) depends on the regular
projection chosen, the left hand side does not. while the coecients vi(k) of the
series (6.5) are vassiliev invariants the coecients vi(k) of (6.6) are not. the latter
depend on the regular projection chosen.

39

an explicit combinatorial form (no integrals left) of the coecients vi(k) in (6.6)
would lead to a general combinatorial formula for vassiliev invariants. unfortunately,
this has not been obtained yet at all orders. only part of the contributions entering
vi(k) have been explicitly written at all orders. these are the kernels introduced
in [20]. the kernels are quantities which depend on the knot projection chosen and
therefore are not knot invariants. however, at a given order i a kernel diers from
an invariant of type i by terms that vanish in signed sums of order i. the kernel
contains the part of a vassiliev invariant which is the last in becoming zero when
performing signed sums, in other words, a kernel vanishes in signed sums of order
i + 1 but does not in signed sums of order i.
in some sense the kernel represents
the most fundamental part of a vassiliev invariant, i.e., the part that survives a
maximum number of signed sums. kernels plus the structure of the perturbative
series expansion seem to contain enough information to reconstruct the full vassiliev
invariants. this was shown in [20] up to order four. the results obtained there will be
presented below and rewritten in a more compact form. a summary of this approach
has been presented in [22].

the expression for the kernels results after considering only the part of the prop-
agator (6.3) which contains the sign function. this part involves a double delta
function and therefore all the integrals can be performed. the result is a combinato-
rial expression in terms of crossing signatures after distributing propagators among
all the crossings. of course, the contribution from this part does not depend on the
function f (x1, x2) entering (6.3). the general expression can be written in a universal
form much in the spirit of the universal form of the kontsevich integral [15]. let us
consider a knot k with a regular knot projection k containing n crossings. let us
choose a base point on k and let us label the n crossings by 1, 2, . . . , n as we pass for
rst time through each of them when traveling along k starting at the base point.
the universal expression for the kernel associated to k has the form:

n (k) =



xk=0  k
xm=1

k

n

xp1,...,pm=1

p1++pm=k

xi1,...,im=1

i1<<im

p1
i1    pm
(p1!   pm!)2 x1,...,m

im

1p1,...,mpm

t (i1, 1; . . . ; im, m)!.

(6.8)
in this equation pm denotes the permutation group of pm elements. the factors in
the inner sum, t (i1, 1; . . . ; im, m), are group factors which are computed in the fol-
lowing way: given a set of crossings, i1, . . . , im, and a set of permutations, 1, . . . , m,
with 1  p1, . . . , m  pm, the corresponding group factor t (i1, 1; . . . ; im, m) is
the result of taking a trace over the product of group generators which is obtained
after assigning p1, . . . , pm group generators to the crossings i1, . . . , im respectively, and
placing each set of group generators in the order which results after traveling along
the knot starting from the base point. the rst time that one encounters a crossing
ij a product of pj group generators is introduced; the second time the product is
similar, but with the indices rearranged according to the permutation j  pj.

40

+

+

(cid:13)
(cid:13)

(cid:13)

(cid:13)

figure 17: a regular knot projection and its corresponding gauss diagram.

the universal formula (6.8) for the kernels can be written in a more useful way
collecting all the coecients multiplying a given group factor. recall that the group
factors can be labeled by chord diagrams. at order k one has a term for each of the
inequivalent chord diagrams with k chords. denoting chord diagrams by d, equation
(6.8) can be written as:

n (k) = xd

nd(k)d,

(6.9)

where the sum extends to all inequivalent chord diagrams. our next task is to derive
from (6.8) the general form of the kernels nd(k). the concept of kernel can be ex-
tended to include singular knots by considering signed sums of (6.9), or, following [9],
introducing vevs of the operators for singular knots. if kj denotes a regular projec-
tion of a knot k j with j simple singular crossings or double points, the corresponding
universal form for the kernel possesses an expansion similar to (6.9):

n (kj) = xd

nd(kj)d.

(6.10)

the general results about singular knots proved in [9] lead to two important features
for (6.10). on the one hand, nite type implies that nd(kj) = 0 for chord diagrams
d with more than j chords. on the other hand, nd(kj) = 2jd,d(kj ), where d(kj)
is the chord diagram corresponding to the singular knot projection kj. as observed
above, kernels constitute the part of a vassiliev invariant which survives a maximum
number of signed sums.

to compute nd(k) we will introduce rst the notion of the set of labeled chord
subdiagrams of a given chord diagram. we will denote this set by sd. this set is
made out of a selected set of labeled chord diagrams that we now dene. a labeled
chord diagram of order p is a chord diagram with p chords and a set of positive
integers k1, k2, . . . , kp, which will be called labels, such that each chord has one of these
integers attached. the set sd is made out of labeled chord diagrams which satisfy two
conditions. these conditions are xed by the form of the series entering the kernels
(6.8). we will call the elements of sd labeled chord subdiagrams of the chord diagram
d. they are dened as follows. a labeled chord subdiagram of a chord diagram d with

41

k chords is a labeled chord diagram of order p with labels k1, k2, . . . , kp, p  k, such
that the following two conditions are satised: a) k1 + k2 +   + kp = k; b) there exist
elements 1  pk1, 2  pk2, . . . , p  pkp of the permutation groups pk1, pk2, . . . , pkp
such that, after replacing the j-th chord diagram by kj chords arranged according to
the permutation j, for j = 1, . . . , p, the resulting chord diagram is homeomorphic to
d. the number of ways that permutations 1  pk1, 2  pk2, . . . , p  pkp can be
chosen is called the multiplicity of the labeled chord subdiagram. we will denote the
multiplicity of a given labeled chord subdiagram, s  sd, by md(s).

the chord diagram d itself can be regarded as a labeled chord subdiagram such
that its labels, or positive integers attached to its chords, are 1. it has multiplicity 1.
all the elements of sd except d have a number of chords smaller than the number
of chords of d. not all labeled chord diagrams are subdiagrams of d. however,
given a labeled chord diagram with labels k1, k2, . . . , kp there can be dierent sets
of permutations leading to d. the number of these dierent sets is the multiplicity
introduced above. the elements of the sets sd for all chord diagrams d up to order
four which do not have disconnected subdiagrams are the following:

3


, 2 

, 
3
, 

3


, 2 

4

2






a

a




%%ee







a
a



  @@



, 
 

2
 
, 

2
a

 
, 
a

2
, 
 
%%ee , 2 

 
2

b

 
, 
b


2
 
, 



a2
a

 
, 
a
a




a2

  @@ , 
 
a


b

b


4

2

4

2

4

3
, 2 
2
, 2 
2
, 
2
, 


, 4 

, 
2
, 2 
3
, 

2


, 3 

4

3
, 2 

, 

4

(6.11)
the numbers accompanying each labeled chord subdiagram denote their multiplicity.
when no number is attached to a chord of a labeled chord diagram it should be
understood that the corresponding label is 1.

42

in order to write our nal expression for the kernels we need to recall the notion
of gauss diagram. given a regular projection k of a knot k we can associate to
it its gauss diagram g(k). the regular projection k can be regarded as a generic
immersion of a circle into the plane enhanced by information on the crossings. the
gauss diagram g(k) consists of a circle together with the preimages of each crossing
of the immersion connected by a chord. each chord is equipped with the sign of
the signature of the corresponding crossing. an example of gauss diagram has been
pictured in g. 17. gauss diagrams are useful because they allow to keep track of
the sums involving the crossings which enter in (6.8) in a very simple form. let us
consider a chord diagram d and one of its labeled chord subdiagrams s  sd. let us
assume that s has p chords and labels k1, k2,   , kp. we dene the product,

hs, g(k)i,

(6.12)

as the sum over all the embeddings of s into g(k), each one weighted by a factor,

1 k2
k1
2    kp
(k1!k2!   kp!)2 ,

p

(6.13)

where 1, 2, . . . , p are the signatures of the chords of g(k) involved in the embedding.
using (6.12) the kernels nd(k) entering (6.9) can be written as,

nd(k) = xssd

md(s)hs, g(k)i,

(6.14)

where md(s) denotes the multiplicity of the labeled subdiagram s  sd relative to
the chord diagram d.

the product (6.12) possesses important properties. first, it is independent of the
base point chosen for the regular projection k and, correspondingly, for the gauss
diagram g(k). second, it is of nite type. this means that if s has j chords, the result
of computing a signed sum of order higher than j is zero. recall that signed sums of
order k are used to dene quantities associated to singular knot projections with k
double points, as the ones entering (6.9). a signed sum of order k contains 2k terms
which correspond to the possible ways of resolving k double points into overcrossings
and undercrossings. each one has a sign which corresponds to the product of the
signatures of the crossings involved in the k double points. if s is a labeled chord
diagram with j chords and all its labels take value one, the order-j signed sum is 2j
if the conguration of the singular projection with j double points associated to such
a sum corresponds to the chord diagram s; otherwise its value is zero. this fact leads
to the result mentioned above stating that:

(6.15)
where d(kj) is the chord diagram corresponding to the singular knot projection
associated to the signed sum. of course, the product (6.12) vanishes if the number
of chords of s is bigger than the number of chords of the gauss diagram g(k).

nd(kj) = 2jd,d(kj),

43

the products (6.12) can be regarded as quantities of nite type associated to
gauss diagrams g whether or not these correspond to a regular projection of a knot.
gauss diagrams can be studied as abstract objects characterized by chord diagrams
with signs assigned to their chords.
it is clear that in such a general context the
quantities hs, gi, as dened in (6.12), are of nite type. in other words, if s has j
chords and g is an abstract gauss diagram, the product hs, gi vanishes under signed
sums of order higher than j. this observation leads to conjecture that the product
(6.12) might play an interesting role in the theory of virtual knots [65, 23].

the terms hs, g(k)i entering (6.14) are related to the quantities (k) dened in

[20]. it is straightforward to obtain the following relations:

1
(j!)2 1(k),

j odd,

2 (k),
1
16

c
2 (k),

j

2


, g(k)i =
h 
, g(k)i = a
h 
2
h 
, g(k)i =

h 
2
h 

  @@ , g(k)i = a
h 

, g(k)i = c
h 

, g(k)i = e
h 

, g(k)i =

b

b


3 (k),

, g(k)i = b
1
d
3 (k),
4

4 (k),

4 (k),

4 (k),

1
(j!)2 n(k),

j even,

b
2 (k),

3 (k),

, g(k)i = a
1
c
3 (k),
4

, g(k)i =

j

1
4

, g(k)i =

, g(k)i =


h 
2
h 

a

h 
a


a2

h 
a

2
h 


a
, g(k)i = b
h 
a

, g(k)i = d
h 
%%ee , g(k)i = f
h 

, g(k)i =

1
4

e
3 (k),

4 (k),

4 (k),

4 (k).

(6.16)
notice that in the second relation n(k) denotes the number of crossings of the regular
projection k. the rest of the quantities on the right hand side of (6.16) were dened
in [20].

in [20], vassiliev invariants up to order four were expressed in terms of these
quantities and the crossing signatures. the strategy to obtain them was to start with
the kernels (6.14) and exploit the properties of the perturbative series expansion of
chern-simons gauge theory. a special role in the construction was played by the
factorization theorem proved in [21]. in order to discuss some of the steps followed
in [20] we will describe in detail the computation of the combinatorial expression

44

r11
   ~   

r21
   ~   

r21

r31
   ~   

r32
   ~   

r43
   ~   

r31

r41

r41
   ~   

r42
   ~   

r42

r43

figure 18: choice of canonical basis up to order four which includes diagrams with
isolated chords.

for the vassiliev invariant of order two. let us begin considering a canonical basis
for the group factors where diagrams with isolated chords are included. in g. 18
this basis has been depicted up to order four. tildes have been used to denote the
diagrams with isolated chords. these diagrams are included because they provide
useful information when working in the vertical framing. instead of factorizing them
out as in the previous sections, we will keep them in our analysis. in the analysis
of the perturbative series it is important to know the expressions of all the chord
diagrams in terms of the elements of the canonical basis in g. 18. these expressions
has been collected in gs. 19 and 20.

the perturbative series expansions entering (6.5) and (6.6) get some modications

relative to their form in (4.14). we will write them in the form:

1

dim rhw r

k i = 1 +

1

dim rhw r

k itemp = 1 +



xi=1
xi=1



di

xj=1
xj=1

di

ij(k)rij(r)xi +

ij(k)rij(r)xi +



di

xi=1
xi=1



xj=1
xj=1

di

ij(k)rij(r)xi,

ij(k)rij(r)xi.

(6.17)

notice that we have split the perturbative series into two sums. in the rst sum the
group factors, and their corresponding coecients, are those appearing in (4.14), while
in the second sum they are all the non-primitive elements coming from diagrams with
isolated chords. the quantities rij(r) and rij(r) denote the respective group factors

45

=

=

=

=

+

+

+ 2

+

+ 3

+ 2

figure 19: expansion of chord diagrams in the canonical basis: orders two and three.

(whose corresponding chord diagrams up to order four are depicted in g. 18), while
di and di are the dimension of their basis at order i. as for the geometrical factors,
ij(k) and ij(k) denote the vassiliev invariants, primitive or not, we are looking
for, while ij(k) and ij(k) are just the geometrical coecients in the canonical basis
of the perturbative chern-simons theory in the temporal gauge.

the strategy is the following. first, the behavior of the unknown integrals entering
ij(k) and ij(k) is analyzed; then the whole invariant is built, taking into account
the corresponding global term as dictated by (6.4). since, as shown in [21], the
perturbative series expansion of the vev of the wilson loop exponentiates in terms of
the primitive basis elements, we have the following simple relation among primitives:

ij(k) = ij(k) + b(k) ij(u).

(6.18)

let us begin with the analysis of vi(k) in (6.6). at rst order we have no correction
term (recall we are using the vertical framing), and the temporal gauge series provides
the full regular invariant:

v1(k) = v1(k) = (cid:16)e

(6.19)

in this expression we have written the geometrical factor 11(k) as a sum of two parts.
the rst one e
11(k) is built from the part of the propagator (6.3) not containing

11(k) + d

11(k)(cid:17) r11(r)

46

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

+

+ 2

+

+ 3

+ 2

+ 2

+

+ 3

+ 3

+ 3

+ 2

+ 4

+ 4

+

+

+

+

+ 2

+ 4

+ 4

+ 2

+ 4

+ 5

+ 6

+ 2

+ 5

+ 6

+ 8

+ 3

+ 7

+

+

+

figure 20: expansion of chord diagrams in the canonical basis: order four.

47

the unknown distribution f . the second one, d
11(k), depends on f . this type of
decomposition can be done in general though at higher orders is more complicated.
the integrals made out of the f -dependent part of the propagator (6.3) will be denoted
by a superindex d and a subindex which will label the chord diagram it comes from.

the general calculation requires a more subtle labelling. given a chord diagram,
each chord in it represents the propagator of the theory. our propagator (6.3) contains
two pieces: the explicit one, which leads to the signatures of the crossings, and the
f -dependent one. the integrals arising from perturbation theory are a sum over all
the possible ways of identifying the chords with each of them. so for a given diagram
we will end up with dierent types of d integrals, depending on how many f -terms
they contain. when all the propagators in the integral are of this kind, it will be
denoted simply by dij. if only one chord stands for the signature-dependent part, its
evaluation will simply result in a crossing sign, m, plus a restriction of the original
integration domain. the chord standing for this factor is attached to the mth crossing,
which means that the ordered integration domain of the other chords of the d integral
is now limited by the position of that crossing. the resulting integral is written as:

m dm

ij

,

(6.20)

with the subindex of d denoting that one of the chords in the diagram is attached to
the mth crossing.

more involved cases arise when the integrand contains two signature-dependent
terms of the propagator (6.3). in this case one must distinguish three subcases: both
are attached to the same crossing, both are attached to dierent crossings and they
have the pattern of the second case in g. 21, and nally, both are attached to
dierent crossings but this time they have the pattern of the third case in g. 21.
the set of pairs of crossings corresponding to the second case will be denoted by ca.
the one corresponding to the third by cb. as only invariants up to order four will
be considered, there is no need to handle the case where three or more signature-
dependent terms of the propagator (but not all) are xed to crossings. when the
contribution does not contain f -dependent terms, the integral may be read from the
kernels (6.8). it will be denoted by e
ij.

from the expression (6.8) for the kernels one easily nds, extracting the k = 1

contribution:

n

e
11(k) =

xi=1

i,

(6.21)

where n is the number of crossings in k. this corresponds to the writhe, or linking
number in the vertical framing, which is known to be the correct answer for v1(k).
thus we must have

which agrees with our general arguments, showing that contributions with an odd
number of f -dependent terms vanish.

(6.22)

d
11(k) = 0,

48

at order two, the series expansion of (6.6) can be expressed as:

v2(k) = (cid:16)e

21(k) + d

21(k)(cid:17) r21(r) +(cid:16) e

21(k) + d

21(k)(cid:17) s21(r),

(6.23)

where s21(r) is the group factor corresponding to the diagram on the left-hand side
of the rst row in g. 19. we will denote by sij group diagrams which appear at
intermediate steps but do not belong to the chosen canonical basis of g. 18. their
associated geometric factors will be denoted by ij. notice that in (6.23) we have
not included terms of the form
, since they have an odd number of f -

mdm

n

ij

dependent terms, and should not contribute. terms of even order in the perturbative
series expansion are invariant under a space reection, while terms of odd order
change sign. this implies that at even (odd) orders there are only contributions with
an even (odd) number of f -dependent terms. in terms of the group factors of the
chosen canonical basis (see g. 18), the last expression, after using the rst equation
in g. 19, takes the form:

pm=1

v2(k) = 21(k) r21(r) + 21(k) r21(r)

21(k) + e

21(k) + d

21(k) + d

=(cid:16)e

21(k)(cid:17) r21(r) +(cid:16) e

21(k) + d

21(k)(cid:17) r21(r)

(6.24)

the computation of the two signature-dependent terms in (6.24), e

21 and e

21 is

easily obtained from the kernels (6.8). one nds:

, g(k)i
, g(k)i

2



e
21 = h 
+ 
+ 

e
21 = h 
i(cid:19)2

21 + e
e

2(cid:18) n
xi=1

21 =

1

2

.

(6.25)

(6.26)

(6.27)

adding them up one obtains:

according to the factorization theorem [21] this is the whole non-primitive regular
invariant of order two, 21 = 1
terms must satisfy:

2(p i)2. thus, we conclude that the order-two d-type

21 + d
d

21 = 0.

(6.28)

21 and d

21. a

one more relation is needed to get rid of the two known quantities d
new relation is obtained taking into account (6.18). one easily nds:

21(k) = h 

+ 


2

, g(k)i + d

21(k) + b(k) 21(u),

(6.29)

where 21(u) stands for the value of this invariant for the unknot. the function b(k)
is the unknown exponent in the global factor in (6.4). using the fact that d
21(k) and

49

b(k) are equal in k and (k), being (k) the ascending diagram of k, and that the
latter is equivalent under ambient isotopy to the unknot, one nds:


d
21(k) = 21(u) [1  b(k)]  h 

2


+ 

, g(k)i  h 

, g((k))i.

, g((k))i,

the nal expression for the invariant is:


21(k) = 21(u) + h 

(6.30)

(6.31)

where 21(u) stands for the value of 21 for the unknot. recall that the ascending di-
agram (k) of a knot projection k is dened as the diagram obtained by switching,
when traveling along the knot from a base point, all the undercrossings to over-
crossings. ascending diagrams enter often in the combinatorial expressions and it is
convenient introduce the following notation. a bar over a quantity l(k) indicates
that the same quantity for the ascending diagram has to be subtracted, i.e.:

l(k) = l(k)  l((k))

(6.32)

where (k) denotes the standard ascending diagram of k. using this notation, the
nal form for the only primitive vassiliev invariant at order two is:

21(k) = 21(u) + h 

, g(k)i.

(6.33)

the combinatorial expression (6.33) agrees with the formulae given in [58] and
[66]. notice that its dependence on b(k) has disappeared, so up to this order we
do not get any condition on this function. the analysis at higher orders, however,
imposes relations fro the function b(k). all the resulting relations are consistent with
the ansatz (6.7). it is important to remark that the derivation of (6.33) that we have
presented is much simpler than the one in the covariant gauge obtained in [58]. this
simplicity is rooted in the special features of the temporal gauge that permits to have
the compact expression (6.8) for the kernels, which are the essential building blocks
of the combinatorial expressions for vassiliev invariants.

the procedure followed at second order has been implemented in [20] for orders
three and four. we will reproduce here the resulting combinatorial expressions. at
order three there is only one primitive invariant. it takes the form:


31(k) = h 


2
a + 2 

+ 
a


, g(k)i 

n

xi=1

i(k)hh 

, g((k))iii

.

(6.34)

several comments are in order to explain the quantities entering this expression. the
sum is over all crossings i, i = 1, . . . , n, and i(k) denotes the corresponding signature.
the square brackets [ ]i enclosing a quantity l(k) denote:
= l(k)  l(ki+)  l(ki),

(6.35)

hl(k)ii

50

i

i

j

i

j

k i

i

k a1k ij
i

k i+

i

k a2k ij
j

j

i

j

j

k b1k ij

k b2k ij

k b3k ij

figure 21: splitting a knot into other knots.

where the regular projection diagrams ki+ and ki are the ones which result after
the splitting of k at the crossing point i as shown in the rst row of g. 21. it is clear
from the list (6.16) that these two invariants can be written in terms of the products
(6.12) and the crossing signatures.

combinatorial expressions for the two primitive invariants at order four have been
presented in [20]. their construction is based on the use of the kernels (6.14) and the
properties of the perturbative series expansion. as in the case of previous orders, these
invariants are expressed in terms of the products (6.12) and the crossing signatures.
their form is more complicated than the ones at lower orders. at order four there
are two primitive vassiliev invariants. we will make the same choice of basis as in
[20]. the diagrams associated to them are: r4,2 and r4,3 in g. 13. they turn out to
be:





a + 4 
  @@ + 5 
42(k) = 42(u) + h7 
a


a2

+ 8 
a

ij  2hh 
ij hh 

, g((k))iia
, g((k))iib

ij(k) hh 
ij(k) hh 

%%ee

+ 
b + 

+ 2 
b

2 + 8 
2 +
, g(k)i
1
+ 2 
6 
, g((k))iii  2hh 
, g((k))iij!
, g((k))iij!,
, g((k))iii hh 

i>j

+ xi,jca
+ xi,jcb

i>j

(6.36)

51

and,




a + 

  @@ + 
43(k) = 43(u) + h 
a

, g((k))iia
ij(k) hh 
+ xi,jca

2 
, g(k)i
1
+ 2 
6 
, g((k))iii hh 

ij hh 

i>j

, g((k))iij!.

(6.37)

in these expressions the explicit dependence on the signatures appears in the quanti-
ties ij(k) which are:

ij(k) = ij(k)  ij((k)) = i(k)j(k)  i((k))j((k)).

(6.38)

the sums in which these products are involved are over double splittings of the knot
projection k at the crossings i and j. there are two ways of carrying out these
double splittings, depending on the conguration associated to the crossings i and j.
these are shown in the second and third rows of g. 21. in the rst one the regular
projection k is split into two while in the second one it is split into three. splittings
of the rst type build the set ca. the ones of the second type build cb. while only
the rst one is involved in the invariant 43, both appear in 42. the new quantities
entering the sums are:

= l(k)  l(ka1
= l(k)  l(kb1

ij )  l(ka2
ij ),
ij )  l(kb2
ij )  l(kb3
ij ),

(6.39)

ij

hl(k)ia
hl(k)ib
ij ,kb2

ij

ij ,kb1

ij ,ka2

ij and kb3

where ka1
ij are the knot projections which originate after a
double splitting of k, as denoted in g. 21. as in previous orders, in the expressions
(6.36) and (6.37), the quantities 42(u) and 43(u) correspond to the value of these
invariants for the unknot. it has been proved in [20] that the combinatorial expressions
for 42(k) and 43(k) in (6.36) and (6.37) are invariant under reidemeister moves
of g. 2.

vassiliev invariants constitute vector spaces and their normalization can be chosen
in such a way that they are integer-valued. once their value for the unknot has been
subtracted o they can be presented in many basis in which they are integers. we
will chose here a particular basis in which the numerical values for the invariants up
to order four are rather simple:

2(k) =

3(k) =

1
4 (k) =

2
4 (k) =

1
4
1
8
1
8
1
4

21(k),

31(k),

( 42(k) + 43(k)),

(6.40)

( 42(k)  5 43(k)).

52

4(k) into 1

4 (k)  22

in these equations the tilde indicates that the value for the unknot has been sub-
tracted, i.e., ij(k) = ij(k) ij(u). in tables 1 and 2 we have collected the value
of the vassiliev invariants (6.41) for all prime knots up to nine crossings. notice that
we could have chosen a basis where all the values for the trefoil knot are 1 just reden-
ing 1
4 (k), as dened in
(6.41), has a simple shape when plotted versus 2(k). actually, the resulting shape
has features similar to the shape which results after plotting 3(k) versus 2(k) (see
[22] for more comments in this respect). the similar behavior observed for |3(k)|
and 2
4 (k) is expected from their general form for torus knots. as it was shown in
[67] and [56], for a torus knot characterized by two coprime integers p and q these
invariants are the following polynomials in p and q:

4 (k). we have no done so because 1

2(p, q) =

3(p, q) =

1
4 (p, q) =

2
4 (p, q) =

1
24
1
144
1
288
1
720

(p2  1)(q2  1),
(p2  1)(q2  1)pq,
(p2  1)(q2  1)p2q2,
(p2  1)(q2  1)(2p2q2  3p2  3q2  3).

(6.41)

the explicit expression of vassiliev invariants as polynomials in p and q is known
up to order six [67]. of course, up to order four their value agree with the ones
computed explicitly from equations (6.36) and (6.37), as it can be checked explicitly
from the tables collected below. the only torus knots up to nine crossings are 31,
51, 71, 819 and 91, whose associated coprime integers are (3,2), (5,2), (7,2), (4,3) and
(9,2), respectively.

it would be desirable to write the invariants in such a way that signatures and
split sums do not appear. even better would be to possess expressions where terms
involving ascending diagrams are not present. it is not known if this is possible even
for the few orders in which combinatorial expressions for the invariants exist. there
are indications however that in order to achieve such a goal arrow diagrams as the ones
used in [63] have to be introduced. the eect of the introduction of these diagrams
is to reduce the amount of embeddings entering the product (6.12) to a selected set.
both, the expressions and the amount of calculation could notably simplify if this is
possible. this issue is under investigation.

53

7 concluding remarks

in this paper i have presented a brief review of the developments in the context of
chern-simons gauge theory since the connection between this theory and the theory
of knots and links was discovered in 1988. my presentation has started from the
basics of both, the physical and mathematical theories, away from the chronological
order. i hope to have convinced the reader that the interplay between the physical
and mathematical approaches has been very fruitful.

chern-simons gauge theory has received the attention of many theoretical physi-
cist and it has been studied from many dierent points of view. the non-perturbative
study led to discover a close connection with the theory of knots and links, which was
later further analyzed in detail. perturbative studies led to new insights in the theory
of vassiliev invariants. these invariants appear in the context of chern-simons gauge
theory as the coecients of the perturbative series expansion. their structure have
been analyzed working out the perturbative series expansions for dierent gauge x-
ings. gauge theories are very rich in this respect since they can be studied in dierent
gauges, each providing a particular structure for the coecients of the perturbative
series expansion.

the perturbative analysis of the theory in the covariant landau gauge led to co-
variant integral expressions for vassiliev invariants. these expressions are also known
as conguration space integrals. though important, their from is rather complicated
for explicit computations. simpler expressions for the coecients appear in non-
covariant gauges. in the light-cone gauge one recovers the kontsevich integral. in the
temporal gauge one nds combinatorial expressions. in non-covariant gauges there
is an important issue that has not yet been solved. in both, the light-cone and the
temporal gauges, one must introduce a factor to nd agreement with results in the
covariant landau gauge or with results from a non-perturbative point of view. the
origin of this factor, called kontsevich factor, is not understood. there should exist
a eld theory argument to justify its presence. the analysis in the temporal gauge
indicates that the origin of the factor is not due to a bad choice of the prescription to
avoid unphysical poles, a standard problem when dealing with non-covariant gauges.
it seems it is related to the presence of a residual gauge invariance. further work in
this respect should be done. its solution might shed some light on general problems
related to non-covariant gauges.

the perturbative analysis in the temporal gauge leads to combinatorial expres-
sions for vassiliev invariants. we have constructed an approach that avoids integral
expressions making use of the factorization theorem. it works very successfully up
to order four and, indeed, up to now, this is the only framework which has provided
combinatorial expressions for the two primitive vassiliev invariants at order four. the
approach opens a variety of investigations. certainly, a generalization of the recon-

54

struction procedure from the kernels up to order four should be constructed. this
could lead to a general combinatorial formula for vassiliev invariants. the approach
is also well suited to obtain combinatorial expressions for vassiliev invariants for links,
a eld which has not been much explored up to now [68]. another context in which
our approach could be also very powerful is in the study of vevs of graphs, quantities
that plays an important role in recent developments in the canonical approach to
quantum gravity [48]. vassiliev invariants for graphs constitute a rather unexplored
eld which could lead to new sets of important invariants.

it is known that polynomial invariants, i.e., vevs of wilson loops, do not classify
knots. on the one hand, polynomial invariants do not distinguish knots that are
not invertible (knots which are not equivalent to the ones obtained after reversing
their orientation). on the other hand, polynomial invariants do not detect mutant
knots which are not equivalent [43]. the question that immediately arises is whether
or not vassiliev invariants, being the coecients of the power series expansion of
chern-simons gauge theory, have a chance to classify knots. fortunately, the answer
to this question is armative. the polynomial invariants, or vevs of wilson loops,
are associated to a group and a representation (weight system). on the other hand,
vassiliev invariants are the coecients of the perturbative power series expansion
of chern-simons gauge theory. only after making a particular choice of group and
representation one makes contact between this series and a polynomial invariant. but
one could consider the series as a formal one whose group factors are just the diagrams
of the space a in (3.5) or (3.6). this space might be bigger than the space of all
weight systems and therefore the possibility for vassiliev invariants to classify knots
could still be open. this seems to be the case as shown in [69]. thus, the set of
coecients of the formal perturbative power series expansion (vassiliev invariants) is
bigger than the set of vevs for any representation and any semi-simple gauge group
(polynomial invariants). this is a promising indication that vassiliev invariants might
classify knots. however, simple questions as whether vassiliev invariants ever detect
nonivertibility remains open.

let me just nish bringing to the attention of the reader the problem of the dimen-
sions of each of the elements of the graded vector space of vassiliev invariants (3.5)
or (3.6). this problem is a very important counting problem which can be addressed
from both, a diagrammatic and a group-theoretical point of view. the values of the
dimensions are known only up to order 12 [49]. no insight on the problem has been
obtained from chern-simons gauge theory. could some eld-theoretical method be
used to obtain the general solution to this challenging counting problem? this is
another important open question which certainly deserves further investigation.

55

acknowledgements

i would like to thank my collaborators in chern-simons gauge theory all along
these ten years, m. alvarez, l. alvarez-gaume, j. m. isidro, p. m. llatas, m. marino,
e. perez and a. v. ramallo. their insights have led to understand many of the issues
discussed in this paper. i would also like to thank the organizers of the workshop
trends in theoretical physics ii, for inviting me to deliver a lecture and for their
warm hospitality. i acknowledge funds provided by the european commission, which
supports the collaboration network cern-santiago de compostela-la plata under
contract c11-ct93-0315, for making possible the organization of the workshop. this
work is supported in part by dgicyt under grant pb96-0960.

56

knot

31
41
51
52
61
62
63
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
81
82
83
84

1
2
2
3
4
4
1
1
3
1
1
0
2
-3
3
5
25
11
2
3
13
4
2 1
7 12
1 1
3 13
1
0
7
0
14
6
98
46
3
6
13
32
11
5
25
73
4
8
50
8
8
4
24
46
-1
2
1
8
1
1 1
3
13 31
3 3
0 1
30
3
4
30 40
0
3
-39
21
1

knot

85
86
87
88
89
810
811
812
813
814
815
816
817
818
819
820
821

1
2
2
3
4
4
1 41
1 3
2 3
-36
7
2 2
22
4
2 1
5
12
2
-34
14
0
3 3
15
15
1 2
2
-27
14 17
3
0
1 1 1
17
4 16
0
4
18
37
1 1 1
17
6 19
1
9
4
1
5
60
35
2
6
8
0 1 1 14

0
0
10
2

0
7

table 1: primitive vassiliev invariants up to order four for all prime knots up to eight
crossings.

57

knot

91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
910
911
912
913
914
915
916
917
918
919
920
921
922
923
924
925

1
2
2
3
4
4
10
30
270
130
4
10
62
32
9
26
228
87
7
19
151
51
6
15
115
20
7
18
134
77
5
12
78
47
0
2
8
-8
8
22
180
80
8
22
188
48
4 9
57
10
1
3
15
1
18
7
142
45
1
2 6
5
2 5
25
4
94
14
6
62
2
2
6
0
6
15
107
52
2
3
1
4
20
2
4
6
3 6
36 3
1
7
1
1
41
69
11
5
5
6
2
1
11 14
0
1

knot
926
927
928
929
930
931
932
933
934
935
936
937
938
939
940
941
942
943
944
945
946
947
948
949

1
3
4
1 5
1
3
0 2
2
5
8

2
2
4
0
2
6
0
1
3
1 2
11
1 1
9
2
2
6
1
2 2 11
1 1
3
1
1
3
2
0
150
13
7
18
3 7
39
15
13 7
3
1
46
98
14
6
24 10
2 4
3 13
1 1
1 9
18
0
2
10 18
0
14 13
1
2
1 1
10
0
2 4
20
6
2 3
3 20
1 2 6
5
29 5
3 5
30
102
14
6

table 2: primitive vassiliev invariants up to order four for all prime knots with nine
crossings.

58

references

[1] e. witten, commun. math. phys. 121 (1989) 351.

[2] j. schonfeld, nucl. phys. b185 (1981) 157; r. jackiw ans s. templeton, phys.
rev. d23 (1981) 2291; s. deser, r. jackiw ans s. templeton, phys. rev. lett.
48 975 and ann. phys. 140 (1984) 372.

[3] g.v. dunne, aspects of chern-simons theory, les houches lectures 1998,

hep-th/9902115.

[4] v. f. r. jones, bull. ams 12 (1985) 103; ann. of math. 126 (1987) 335.

[5] v. a. vassiliev, cohomology of knot spaces, theory of singularities and its
applications, advances in soviet mathematics, vol. 1, americam math. soc.,
providence, ri, 1990, 23-69.

[6] j.s. birman, bull. ams 28 (1993) 253.

[7] d. bar-natan, topology 34 (1995) 423.

[8] j.s. birman and x.s. lin, invent. math. 111 (1993) 225.

[9] j.m.f. labastida and e. perez, nucl. phys. b527 (1998) 499, hep-th/9712139.

[10] e. guadagnini, m. martellini and m. mintchev, phys. lett. b227 (1989) 111

and b228 (1989) 489; nucl. phys. b330 (1990) 575.

[11] d. bar-natan, perturbative aspects of chern-simons topological quantum eld

theory, ph.d. thesis, princeton university, 1991.

[12] m. alvarez and j.m.f. labastida, nucl. phys. b395 (1993) 198, hep-th/9110069,

and b433 (1995) 555, hep-th/9407076; erratum, ibid. b441 (1995) 403.

[13] d. altschuler and l. friedel, commun. math. phys. 187 (1997) 261 and 170

(1995) 41.

[14] r. bott and c. taubes, jour. math. phys. 35 (1994) 5247.

[15] m. kontsevich, advances in soviet math. 16, part 2 (1993) 137.

[16] a.s. cattaneo, p. cotta-ramusino, j. frohlich and m. martellini, j. math. phys.

36 (1995) 6137.

[17] j.m.f. labastida and e. perez, j. math. phys. 39 (1998) 5183; hep-th/9710176.

[18] l. kauman, wittens integral and kontsevich integral, preprint.

59

[19] s. poirier, rationality results for the conguration space integral of knots,
preprint, math.gt/9901028 and the limit conguration space integral for
tangles and the kontsevich integral, preprint, math.gt/9902058.

[20] j.m.f. labastida and e. perez, combinatorial formulae for vassiliev invari-
ants from chern-simons gauge theory, cern and santiago de compostela
preprint, cern-th/98-193, us-ft-11/98, to appear in j. math. phys.; hep-
th/9807155.

[21] m. alvarez and j.m.f. labastida, commun. math. phys. 189 (1997) 641, q-

alg/9604010.

[22] j.m.f. labastida and e. perez, vassiliev invariants in the context of chern-
simons gauge theory, santiago de compostela preprint, us-ft-18/98; hep-
th/9812105.

[23] m. goussarov, m. polyak and o. viro, finite type invariants of classical and

virtual knots, preprint, 1998, math.gt/9810073.

[24] p. freyd, d. yetter, j. hoste, w.b.r. lickorish, k. millet and a. ocneanu, bull.

ams 12 (1985) 239.

[25] l.h. kauman, trans. am. math. soc. 318 (1990) 417.

[26] y. akutsu and m. wadati, j. phys. soc. jap. 56 (1987) 839 and 3039.

[27] e. witten, nucl. phys. b322 (1989) 629 and b330 (1990) 285.

[28] c. kassel, m. rosso and v. turaev, quantum groups and knot invariants,

panoramas et syntheses 5, societe mathematique de france, 1997.

[29] c. kassel and v. turaev, chord diagram invariants of tangles and graphs,

university of strasbourg preprint, 1995.

[30] n.y. reshetikhin and v. turaev, invent. math. 103 (1991) 547.

[31] d.s. freed and r.e. gompf , commun. math. phys. 141 (1991) 79.

[32] r. gambini, private communication.

[33] r.k. kaul, chern-simons theory, knot invariants, vertex models and three-

manifold invariants, hep-th/9804122.

[34] m. bos and v.p. nair, phys. lett. b223 (1989) 61 and int. j. mod. phys. a5

(1990) 959.

[35] j.m.f. labastida and a.v. ramallo, phys. lett. b227 (1989) 92 and b228

(1989) 214.

60

[36] s. elitzur, g. moore, a. schwimmer and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b326 (1989)

108.

[37] s. axelrod, s. della pietra and e. witten, j. di. geom. 33 (1991) 787.

[38] j. frohlich and c. king, commun. math. phys. 126 (1989) 167.

[39] r.k. kaul and t.r. govindarajan, nucl. phys. b380 (1992) 293 and b393
(1993) 392; p. ramadevi, t.r. govindarajan and r.k. kaul, nucl. phys. b402
(1993) 548; r.k. kaul, commun. math. phys. 162 (1994) 289.

[40] s. martin, nucl. phys. b338 (1990) 244.

[41] j.m.f. labastida, p.m. llatas and a.v. ramallo, nucl. phys. b348 (1991) 651;
j.m.f. labastida and m. marino, int. j. mod. phys. a10 (1995) 1045; j.m.f.
labastida and e. perez, j. math. phys. 37 (1996) 2013.

[42] p. ramadevi, t.r. govindarajan and r.k. kaul, mod. phys. lett. a9 (1994)

3205.

[43] p. ramadevi, t.r. govindarajan and r.k. kaul, mod. phys. lett. a10 (1995)

1635.

[44] j. m. isidro, j. m. f. labastida and a. v. ramallo, phys. lett. b282 (1992)
63; nucl. phys. b398 (1993) 187; i. p. ennes, p. ramadevi, a. v. ramallo and
j. m. sanchez de santos, int. j. mod. phys. a13 (1998) 2931.

[45] r.k. kaul, nucl. phys. b417 (1994) 267; p. ramadevi, t.r. govindarajan and

r.k. kaul, nucl. phys. b422 (1994) 291.

[46] carlo rovelli and lee smolin, phys. rev. lett. 68 (1992) 431; nucl. phys. b385

(1992) 587.

[47] b. bruegmann, r. gambini and j. pullin, phys. rev. lett. 61 (1988) 1155; nucl.

phys. b331 (1990) 80.

[48] r. gambini, j. griego and j. pullin, phys. lett. b425 (1998) 41 and nucl. phys.

b534 (1998) 675.

[49] j. a. kneissler, the number of primitive vassiliev invariants up to degree 12,

math. inst. bonn, 1997, q-alg/9706022.

[50] d. thurston, integral expressions for the vassiliev knot invariants, harvard

university senior thesis, april 1995; math/9901110.

[51] s. axelrod and i.m. singer, chern-simons perturbation theory, 1991, hep-

th/9110056 and j. di. geom. 39 (1994) 173.

61

[52] w. chen, g.w. semeno, and y.-s. wu, mod. phys. lett. a5 (1990) 1833.

[53] l. alvarez-gaume, j.m.f. labastida and a. v. ramallo, nucl. phys. b334

(1990) 103; g. p. korchemsky, mod. phys. lett. a6 (1991) 727.

[54] c.p. martin, phys. lett. b241 (1990) 513; g. giavarini, c.p. martin, f. ruiz
ruiz, nucl. phys. b381 (1992) 222, phys. lett. b314 (1993) 328, phys. rev.
d47 (1993) 5536 and phys. lett. b332 (1994) 345.

[55] m. asorey and f. falceto, phys. lett. b241 (1990) 31; m. asorey, f. falceto,
j.l. lopez and g. luzon, phys. rev. d49 (1994) 5377 and nucl. phys. b429
(1994) 344.

[56] s. willerton, on universal vassiliev invariants, cabling, and torus knots,

university of melbourne preprint (1998).

[57] s.-w. yang, feynman integral, knot invariant and degree theory of maps,

national taiwan university preprint, september 1997; q-alg/9709029.

[58] a.c. hirshfeld and u. sassenberg, journal of knot theory and its ramications

5 (1996) 489 and 5 (1996) 805.

[59] g. leibbrandt and c.p. martin, nucl. phys. b377 (1992) 593 and b416 (1994)

351.

[60] a. brandhuber, s. emery, m. langer, o. piguet, m. schweda and s.p. sorella,

helv. phys. acta 66 (1993) 551.

[61] g. leibbrandt, rev. mod. phys. 59 (1987) 1067.

[62] t.q.t. le and j. murakami, the universal vassiliev-kontsevich invariant for

framed oriented links, max-plank institut fur mathematik preprint, 1994.

[63] m. goussarov, m. polyak and o. viro, int. math. res. notices 11 (1994) 445.

[64] j.f.w.h. van de wetering, nucl. phys. b379 (1992) 172.

[65] l. h. kauman, virtual knot theory, preprint, 1998.

[66] p. lannes, lenseignement math. 39 (1993) 295.

[67] m. alvarez and j.m.f. labastida, journal of knot theory and its ramications

5 (1996) 779; q-alg/9506009.

[68] m. alvarez, j.m.f. labastida and e. perez, nucl. phys. b488 (1997) 677.

[69] pierre vogel, algebraic structures on modules of diagrams, universite paris vii

preprint, july 1995.

62

