9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

4
2

 
 

3
v
7
7
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

a covariant entropy conjecture

raphael bousso

department of physics, stanford university,

stanford, california 94305-4060

su-itp-99-23

24 may 1999

hep-th/9905177

abstract

we conjecture the following entropy bound to be valid in all space-
times admitted by einsteins equation: let a be the area of any two-
dimensional surface. let l be a hypersurface generated by surface-
orthogonal null geodesics with non-positive expansion. let s be the
entropy on l. then s  a/4.

we present evidence that the bound can be saturated, but not
exceeded, in cosmological solutions and in the interior of black holes.
for systems with limited self-gravity it reduces to bekensteins bound.
because the conjecture is manifestly time reversal invariant, its origin
cannot be thermodynamic, but must be statistical. it thus places a
fundamental limit on the number of degrees of freedom in nature.

bousso@stanford.edu

1

1 introduction

1.1 bekensteins bound

bekenstein [1] has proposed the existence of a universal bound on the entropy
s of any thermodynamic system of total energy m:

r is dened as the circumferential radius,

s  2rm.

r = s a

4

,

(1.1)

(1.2)

where a is the area of the smallest sphere circumscribing the system.

for a system contained in a spherical volume, gravitational stability re-

quires that m  r/2. thus eq. (1.1) implies

s 

a
4

.

(1.3)

the derivation of eq. (1.1) involves a gedankenexperiment in which the
thermodynamic system is dropped into a schwarzschild black hole of much
larger size. the generalized second law of thermodynamics [25] requires
that the entropy of the system should not exceed the entropy of the radiation
emitted by the black hole while relaxing to its original size; this radiation
entropy can be estimated [6,7]. independently of this fundamental derivation,
the bound has explicitly been shown to hold in wide classes of equilibrium
systems [8].

bekenstein specied conditions for the validity of these bounds. the
system must be of constant, nite size and must have limited self-gravity,
i.e., gravity must not be the dominant force in the system. this excludes,
for example, gravitationally collapsing objects, and suciently large regions
of cosmological space-times. another important condition is that no matter
components with negative energy density are available. this is because the
bound relies on the gravitational collapse of systems with excessive entropy,
and is intimately connected with the idea that information requires energy.
with matter of negative energy at hand, one could add entropy to a system
without increasing the mass, by adding enthropic matter with positive mass
as well as an appropriate amount of negative mass. a thermodynamic system

2

that satises the conditions for the application of bekensteins bounds will
be called a bekenstein system.

when the conditions set forth by bekenstein are not satised, the bounds
can easily be violated. the simplest example is a system undergoing grav-
itational collapse. before it is destroyed on the black hole singularity, its
surface area becomes arbitrarily small. since the entropy cannot decrease,
the bound is violated. or consider a homogeneous spacelike hypersurface in
a at friedmann-robertson-walker universe. the entropy of a suciently
large spherical volume will exceed the boundary area [9]. this is because
space is innite, the entropy density is constant, and volume grows faster
than area. from the point of view of semi-classical gravity and thermody-
namics, there is no reason to expect that any entropy bound applies to such
systems.

1.2 outline

motivated by the holographic conjecture [10, 11], fischler and susskind [9]
have suggested that some kind of entropy bound should hold even for large
regions of cosmological solutions, for which bekensteins conditions are not
satised. however, no fully general proposal has yet been formulated. the
fischler-susskind bound [9], for example, applies to universes which are not
closed or recollapsing, while other prescriptions [1216] can be used for suf-
ciently small surfaces in a wide class of cosmological solutions.

our attempt to present a general proposal as arising, in a sense, from
fundamental considerations, should not obscure the immense debt we owe to
the work of others. the importance of bekensteins seminal paper [1] will
be obvious. the proposal of fischler and susskind [9], whose inuence on
our prescription is pervasive, uses light-like hypersurfaces to relate entropy
and area. this idea can be traced to the use of light-rays for formulating
the holographic principle [10, 11, 17]. indeed, corley and jacobson [17] were
the rst to take a space-time (rather than a static) point of view in locating
the entropy related to an area. they introduced the concept of past and
future screen-maps and suggested to choose only one of the two in dierent
regions of cosmological solutions. moreover, they recognized the importance
of caustics of the light-rays leaving a surface. a number of authors have in-
vestigated the application of bekensteins bound to suciently small regions
of the universe [9,1216], and have carefully exposed the diculties that arise
when such rules are pushed beyond their range of validity [9, 12, 15]. these

3

insights are invaluable in the search for a general prescription.

we shall take the following approach. we shall make no assumptions
involving holography anywhere in this paper. instead, we shall work only
within the framework of general relativity. taking bekensteins bound as
a starting point, we are guided mainly by the requirement of covariance
to a completely general entropy bound, which we conjecture to be valid in
arbitrary space-times (sec. 2). like fischler and susskind [9], we consider
entropy not on spacelike regions, but on light-like hypersurfaces. there are
four such hypersurfaces for any given surface b. we select portions of at
least two of them for an entropy/area comparison, by a covariant rule that
requires non-positive expansion of the generating null geodesics.

in sec. 3, we provide a detailed discussion of the conjecture. we translate
the technical formulation into a set of rules (sec. 3.1). in sec. 3.2, we discuss
the criterion of non-positive expansion and nd it to be quite powerful. we
give some examples of its mechanism in sec. 3.3 and discover an eect that
protects the bound in gravitationally collapsing systems of high entropy.
in sec. 3.4 we establish a theorem that states the conditions under which
spacelike hypersurfaces may be used for entropy/area comparisons. through
this theorem, we recover bekensteins bound as a special case.

in sec. 4 we use cosmological solutions to test the conjecture. our pre-
scription naturally selects the apparent horizon as a special surface. in re-
gions outside the apparent horizon (sec. 4.1), our bound is satised for the
same reasons that justied the fischler-susskind proposal within its range of
validity. we also explain why reheating after ination does not endanger the
bound. for surfaces on or within the apparent horizon (sec. 4.2), we nd un-
der worst case assumptions that the covariant bound can be saturated, but
not exceeded. by requiring the consistency of bekensteins conditions, we
show that the apparent horizon is indeed the largest surface whose interior
one can hope to treat as as a bekenstein system. this conclusion is later
reached independently, from the point of view of the covariant conjecture, in
sec. 5.1.

in sec. 5 we discuss a number of recently proposed cosmological entropy
bounds. because of its symmetric treatment of the four light-like directions
orthogonal to any surface, which marks its only signicant dierence from
the fischler-susskind bound [9], our covariant prescription applies also to
closed and recollapsing universes (sec. 5.2). other useful bounds [1216]
refer to the entropy within a specied limited region. the covariant bound
can be used to understand the range of validity of such bounds (sec. 5.3).

4

as an example, we apply a corollary derived in sec. 5.1 to understand why
the bound of ref. [14] cannot be applied to a at universe with negative
cosmological constant [15].

in sec. 6 we argue that the conjecture is true for surfaces inside grav-
itationally collapsing objects. we identify a number of subtle mechanisms
protecting the bound in such situations (sec. 6.1), and perform a quantita-
tive test by collapsing an arbitrarily large shell into a small region. we nd
again that the bound can be saturated but not exceeded.

in sec. 7 we stress that the conjectured entropy law is invariant under
time reversal. on the other hand, the physical mechanisms responsible for
its validity do not appear to be t-invariant, and of course the very concept of
thermodynamic entropy has a built-in arrow of time. therefore the covariant
bound must be linked to the statistical origin of entropy. yet, it holds inde-
pendently of the microscopic properties of matter. thus the covariant bound
implies a fundamental limit on the total number of independent degrees of
freedom that are actually present in nature. the holographic principle thus
appears in this paper not as a presupposition, but as a conclusion.

notation and conventions we will ban formal denitions into footnotes,
whenever they refer to concepts which are intuitively clear. we work with
a manifold m of 3 + 1 space-time dimensions, since the generalization to d
dimensions is obvious. the terms light-like and null are used interchangeably.
any three-dimensional submanifold h  m is called a hypersurface of m [18].
if two of its dimensions are everywhere spacelike and the remaining dimension
is everywhere timelike (null, spacelike), h will be called a timelike (null,
spacelike) hypersurface. by a surface we always refer to a two-dimensional
spacelike submanifold b  m. by a light-ray we never mean an actual
electromagnetic wave or photon, but simply a null geodesic. we use the
terms congruence of null geodesics, null congruence, and family of light-rays
interchangeably. a light-sheet of a surface b will be dened in sec. 3.1 as
a null hypersurface bounded by b and generated by a null congruence with
non-increasing expansion. a number of denitions relating to bekensteins
bound are found on page 21. we set h = c = g = k = 1.

5

2 the conjecture

in constructing a covariant entropy bound, one rst has to decide whether to
aim at an entropy/mass bound, as in eq. (1.1), or an entropy/area bound,
as in eq. (1.3). local energy is not well-dened in general relativity, and
for global denitions of mass the space-time must possess an innity [19,20].
this eliminates any hope of obtaining a completely general bound involving
mass. area, on the other hand, can always be covariantly dened as the
proper area of a surface.

having decided to search for an entropy/area bound, our diculty lies
not in the quantitative formula, s  a/4; this will remain unchanged. the
problem we need to address is the following: given a two-dimensional surface
b of area a, on which hypersurface h should we evaluate the entropy s?
we shall retain the rule that b must be a boundary of h. in general space-
times, this leaves an innite choice of dierent hypersurfaces. below we will
construct the rule for the hypersurfaces, guided by a demand for symmetry
and consistency with general relativity.

as a starting point, we write down a slightly generalized version of beken-
steins entropy/area bound, eq. (1.3): let a be the area of any closed two-
dimensional surface b, and let s be the entropy on the spatial region v
enclosed by b. then s  a/4.

bekensteins bounds were derived for systems of limited self-gravity and
nite extent (nite spatial region v ). in order to be able to implement general
coordinate invariance, we shall now drop these conditions. of course this
could go hopelessly wrong. the generalized second law of thermodynamics
gives no indication of any useful entropy bound if bekensteins conditions are
not met. ignoring such worries, we move on to ask how the formulation of
the bound has to be modied in order to achieve covariance.

an obvious problem is the reference to the spatial region. if we de-
mand covariance, there cannot be a preferred spatial hypersurface. either
the bound has to be true for any spatial hypersurface enclosed by b, or we
have to insist on light-like hypersurfaces. but the possibility of using any
spatial hypersurface is already excluded by the counterexamples given at the
end of sec. 1.1; this was rst pointed out in ref. [9].

therefore we must use null hypersurfaces bounded by b. the natural way
to construct such hypersurfaces is to start at the surface b and to follow a
family of light-rays (technically, a congruence of null geodesics) projecting

6

out orthogonally1 from b. but we have four choices: the family of light-
rays can be future-directed outgoing, future-directed ingoing, past-directed
outgoing, and past-directed ingoing (see fig. 1). which should we select?

f2

time

f4

space

b

f1

f3

figure 1: there are four families of light-rays projecting orthogonally away from
a two-dimensional surface b, two future-directed families (one to each side of
b) and two past-directed families. at least two of them will have non-positive
expansion. the null hypersurfaces generated by non-expanding light-rays will be
called light-sheets. the covariant entropy conjecture states that the entropy on
any light-sheet cannot exceed a quarter of the area of b.

and how far may we follow the light-rays?

in order to construct a selection rule, let us briey return to the limit in
which bekensteins bound applies. for a spherical surface around a beken-
stein system, the enclosed entropy cannot be larger than the area. but the

1while it may be clear what we mean by light-rays which are orthogonal to a closed
surface b, we should also provide a formal denition. in a convex normal neighbourhood
of b, the boundary of the chronological future of b consists of two future-directed null
hypersurfaces, one on either side of b (see chapter 8 of wald [19] for details). similarly, the
boundary of the chronological past of b consists of two past-directed null hypersurfaces.
each of these four null hypersurfaces is generated by a congruence of null geodesics starting
at b. at each point on p  b, the four null directions orthogonal to b are dened by
the tangent vectors of the four congruences. this denition can be extended to smooth
surfaces b with a boundary b: for p  b, the four orthogonal null directions are the
same as for a nearby point q  b  b, in the limit of vanishing proper distance between
p and q. we will also allow b to be on the boundary of the space-time m , in which case
there will be fewer than four options. for example, if b lies on a boundary of space, only
the ingoing light-rays will exist. we will not make such exceptions explicit in the text, as
they are obvious.

7

same surface is also a boundary of the innite region on its outside. the
entropy outside could clearly be anything. from this we learn that it is im-
portant to consider the entropy only on hypersurfaces which are not outside
the boundary.

but what does outside mean in general situations? the side that in-
cludes innity? then what if space is closed? fortunately, there exists an
intuitive notion of inside and outside that is suitable to be generalized
to a covariant rule. think of ordinary euclidean geometry, and start from a
closed surface b. construct a second surface by moving every point on b an
innitesimal distance away to one side of b, along lines orthogonal to b. if
this increases the area, then we say that we have moved outside. if the area
decreases, we have moved inside.

this consideration yields the selection rule. we start at b, and follow
one of the four families of orthogonal light-rays, as long as the cross-sectional
area is decreasing or constant. when it becomes increasing, we must stop.
this can be formulated technically by demanding that the expansion2 of
the orthogonal null congruence must be non-positive, in the direction away
from the surface b. by continuity across b, the expansion of past-directed
light-rays going to one side is the negative of the expansion of future-directed
light-rays heading the other way. therefore we can be sure that at least two
of the four null directions will be allowed. if the expansion of one pair of
null congruences vanishes on b, there will be three allowed directions. if the
expansion of both pairs vanishes on b, all four null directions will be allowed.
this covariant denition of inside and outside does not require the
surface b to be closed. only the naive denition, by which inside was
understood to mean a nite region delimited by a surface, needed the surface
to be closed. therefore we shall now drop this condition and allow any
connected two-dimensional surface. this enables us to assume without loss
of generality that the expansion in each of the four null directions does not

2the expansion  of a congruence of null geodesics is dened, e.g., in refs. [18, 19] and
will be discussed further in sec. 3.2. it measures the local rate of change of the cross-
sectional area as one moves along the light-rays. let  be an ane parameter along a
family of light-rays orthogonal to b. let a() denote the area of the surfaces spanned by
the light-rays at the ane time . then a(0) = a, the area of b. a() is independent
of the choice of lorentz frame [20], so it is a covariant quantity. then  = da/d
a . we
choose the ane parameter to be increasing in the directions away from the surface b
(this implies that we are using a dierent ane parameter i for each of the four null-
congruences). non-positive expansion,   0, thus means that the cross-sectional area is
not increasing in the direction away from b.

8

change sign anywhere on the surface b. if it does, we simply split b into
suitable domains and apply the entropy law to each domain individually.

finally, in an attempt to protect our conjecture against pathologies such
as superluminal entropy ow, we will require the dominant energy condition
to hold: for all timelike va, t abvavb  0 and t abva is a non-spacelike vector.
this condition states that to any observer the local energy density appears
non-negative and the speed of energy ow of matter is less than the speed
of light.
it implies that a space-time must remain empty if it is empty
at one time and no matter is coming in from innity [18].
it is believed
that all physically reasonable forms of matter satisfy the dominant energy
condition [18, 19], so we are not imposing a signicant restriction. it may
well be possible, however, to weaken the assumption further; this is under
investigation3.

we should also require that the space-time is inextendible and contains
no null or timelike (naked) singularities. this is necessary if we wish to
exclude the possibility of destroying or creating arbitrary amounts of entropy
on such boundaries. these conditions are believed to hold in any physical
space-time, so we shall not spell them out below. (of course we are not ex-
cluding the spacelike singularities occuring in cosmology and in gravitational
collapse; indeed, much of this paper will be devoted to investigating the va-
lidity of the proposed bound in the vicinity of such singularities.) we thus
arrive at a conjecture for a covariant bound on the entropy in any space-time.

covariant entropy conjecture let m be a four-dimensional space-time
on which einsteins equation is satised with the dominant energy condition
holding for matter. let a be the area of a connected two-dimensional spatial
surface b contained in m. let l be a hypersurface bounded by b and gener-
ated by one of the four null congruences orthogonal to b. let s be the total

3we do not wish to permit matter with negative energy density, since that would
open the possibility of creating arbitrary amounts of positive energy matter, and thus
arbitrary entropy, by simultaneously creating negative energy matter. worse still, if such
a process can be reversed, one would be able to destroy entropy and violate the second
law. therefore, negative energy matter permitting such processes must not be allowed in
a physical theory. a negative cosmological constant is special in that it cannot be used for
such a process. indeed, we are currently unaware of any counterexamples to the covariant
bound in space-times with a negative cosmological constant (see secs. 3.4 and 5.3). this
suggests that it may be sucient to demand only causal energy ow (for all timelike va,
t abva is a non-spacelike vector), without requiring the positivity of energy.  we wish
to thank nemanja kaloper and andrei linde for a discussion of these issues.

9

entropy contained on l. if the expansion of the congruence is non-positive
(measured in the direction away from b) at every point on l, then s  a/4.

3 discussion

3.1 the recipe

in the previous paragraph, we formulated the conjecture with an eye on
formal accuracy and generality. for all practical purposes, however, it is
more useful to translate it into a set of rules like the following recipe (see
fig. 1):

1. pick any two-dimensional surface b in the space-time m.

2. there will be four families of light-rays projecting orthogonally away

from b (unless b is on a boundary of m): f1 . . . f4.

3. as shown in the previous section, we can assume without loss of gener-
ality that the expansion of f1 has the same sign everywhere on b. if the
expansion is positive (in the direction away from b), i.e., if the cross-
sectional area is increasing, f1 must not be used for an entropy/area
comparison. if the expansion is zero or negative, f1 will be allowed.
repeating this test for each family, one will be left with at least two
allowed families. if the expansion is zero in some directions, there may
be as many as three or four allowed families.

4. pick one of the allowed families, fi. construct a null hypersurface li,

by following each light-ray until one of the following happens:

(a) the light-ray reaches a boundary or a singularity of the space-

time.

(b) the expansion becomes positive, i.e., the cross-sectional area spanned

by the family begins to increase in a neighborhood of the light-ray.

the hypersurface li obtained by this procedure will be called a light-
sheet of the surface b. for every allowed family, there will be a dierent
light-sheet.

10

5. the conjecture states that the entropy si on the light-sheet li will not

exceed a quarter of the area of b:

si 

a
4

.

(3.1)

note that the bound applies to each light-sheet individually. since b
may possess up to four light-sheets, the total entropy on all light-sheets
could add up to as much as a.

we should add some remarks on points 2 and 3. in many situations it
will be natural to call f1 . . . f4 the future-directed ingoing, future-directed
outgoing, past-directed ingoing and past-directed outgoing family of surface-
orthogonal geodesics. but we stress that ingoing and outgoing are just
arbitrary labels distinguishing the two sides of b; only if b is closed, there
might be a preferred way to assign these names. our rule does not refer to
ingoing and outgoing explicitly.

in fact the covariant entropy bound does not even refer to future and
past. the conjecture is manifestly time reversal invariant. we regard this
as its most signicant property. after all, thermodynamic entropy is never
t-invariant, and neither is the generalized second law of thermodynamics,
which underlies bekensteins bound. this will be discussed further in sec. 3.4.
one can draw strong conclusions from these simple observations (sec. 7).

if b is a closed surface, we can characterize it as trapped, anti-trapped or
normal (see refs. [18,19] for denitions). this provides a simple criterion for
the allowed families. if b is trapped (anti-trapped), it has two future-directed
(past-directed) light-sheets. if b is normal, it has a future-directed and a
past-directed light-sheet on the same side, which is usually called the inside.
if b lies on an apparent horizon (the boundary between a trapped or anti-
trapped region and a normal region), it can have more than two light-sheets.
for example, if b is marginally outer trapped [18], i.e., if the future-directed
outgoing geodesics have zero convergence, then it has two future-directed
light-sheets and a past-directed ingoing light-sheet.

3.2 caustics as light-sheet endpoints

we have dened a light-sheet to be a certain subset of the null hypersurface
generated by an allowed family of light-rays. the rule is to start at the
surface b and to follow the light-rays only as long as the expansion is zero

11

or negative. in order to understand if and why the conjecture may be true,
we must understand perfectly well what it is that can cause the expansion to
become positive. after all, it is this condition alone which must prevent the
light-sheet from sampling too much entropy and violating the conjectured
bound. our conclusion will be that the expansion becomes positive only at
caustics. the simplest example of such a point is the center of a sphere in
minkowski space, at which all ingoing light-rays intersect.

raychauduris equation for a congruence of null geodesics with tangent

vector eld ka and ane parameter  is given by

d
d

= 

1
2

2  ab ab  8tabkakb + ab ab,

(3.2)

where tab is the stress-energy tensor of matter. the expansion  measures
the local rate of change of an element of cross-sectional area a spanned by
nearby geodesics:

 =

.

(3.3)

1
a

da
d

the vorticity ab and shear ab are dened in refs. [18, 19]. the vorticity
vanishes for surface-orthogonal null congruences. the rst and second term
on the right hand side are manifestly non-positive. the third term will be
non-positive if the null convergence condition [18] holds:

tabkakb  0 for all null ka.

(3.4)

the dominant energy condition, which we are assuming, implies that the
null convergence condition will hold. (it is also implied by the weak energy
condition, or by the strong energy condition.)

therefore the right hand side of eq. (3.2) is non-positive. it follows that 
cannot increase along any geodesic. (this statement is self-consistent, since
the sign of  changes if we follow the geodesic in the opposite direction.)
then how can the expansion ever become positive? by dropping two of the
non-positive terms in eq. (3.2), one obtains the inequality

d
d

 

1
2

2.

(3.5)

if the expansion takes the negative value 0 at any point on a geodesic in
the congruence, eq. (3.5) implies that the expansion will become negative
innite,   , along that geodesic within ane time   2/|0| [19].

12

this can be interpreted as a caustic. nearby geodesics are converging to
a single focal point, where the cross-sectional area a vanishes. when they
re-emerge, the cross-sectional area starts to increase. thus, the expansion 
jumps from  to + at a caustic. then the expansion is positive, and we
must stop following the light-ray. this is why caustics form the endpoints of
the light-sheet.

3.3 light-sheet examples and rst evidence

the considerations in sec. 3.2 allow us to rephrase the rule for constructing
light-sheets: follow each light-ray in an allowed family until a caustic is
reached. the eect of this prescription can be understood by thinking about
closed surfaces in minkowski space. the simplest example is a spherical
surface. the past-directed outgoing and future-directed outgoing families
are forbidden, because they have positive expansion. the past- and future-
directed ingoing families are allowed. both encounter caustics when they
reach the center of the sphere. thus they each sweep the interior of the
sphere exactly once. if we deform the surface into a more irregular shape,
such as an ellipsoid, there may be a line, or even a surface, of caustics at
which the light-sheet ends. in some cases (e.g.
if the surface is a box and
does not enclose much matter), non-neighbouring light-rays may cross. this
does not constitute a caustic,4 and the light-rays need not be terminated
there. they can go on until they are bent into caustics by the matter they
encounter. thus some of the entropy may be counted more than once. this
is merely a consequence of a desirable feature of our prescription: that it is
local and applies separately to every innitesimal part of any surface.

for a spherical surface surrounding a spherically symmetric body of mat-
ter, the ingoing light-rays will end on a caustic in the center, as for an empty
sphere. if the interior mass distribution is not spherically symmetric, how-
ever, some light-rays will be deected into angular directions, and will form
angular caustics (see fig. 2). this does not mean that the interior will not
be completely swept out by the light-sheet. between two light-rays that get
deected into dierent overdense regions, there are innitely many light-rays
that proceed further inward. it does mean, however, that we have to follow
some of the light-rays for a much longer ane time than we would in the
spherically symmetric case.

4we thank ted jacobson for pointing this out.

13

figure 2: light-rays from a spherical surface into a massive body. if the body is
spherically symmetric internally (left), the light-rays all meet at a radial caustic
in the center of the sphere.
if the internal mass distribution is not spherically
symmetric, most rays get deected into angular directions and end on angular
caustics. the picture on the right shows an example with four overdense regions.
the thick lines represent caustics.

this does not make a dierence for static systems: they will be com-
pletely penetrated by the light-sheet in any case. in a system undergoing
gravitational collapse, however, light-rays will hit the future singularity after
a nite ane time. consider a collapsing ball which is exactly spherically
symmetric, and a future-ingoing light-sheet starting at the outer surface of
the system, when it is already within its own schwarzschild horizon. we can
arrange things so that the light-sheet reaches the caustic at r = 0 exactly
when it also meets the singularity (see fig. 3). now consider a dierent
collapsing ball, of identical mass, and identical radius when the light-rays
commence. while this ball may be spherically symmetric on the large scale,
let us assume that it is highly disordered internally. the light-rays will thus
be deected into angular directions. as fig. 2 illustrates, this means that
they take intricate, long-winded paths through the interior: they perco-
late. this consumes more ane time than the direct path to the center
taken in the rst system. therefore the second system will not be swept out
completely before the singularity is reached (see fig. 3).

why did we spend so much time on this example? the rst ball is a
system with low entropy, while the second ball has high entropy. one might

14

singularity
singularity

singularity
singularity

0
0
=
=
r
r

  

b
  


horizon
horizon

0
0
=
=
r
r

  

b
  


horizon
horizon

figure 3: two penrose diagrams for collapsing spherical objects of identical mass.
each point represents a two-sphere. the thick lines are light-rays. in an object
which is spherically symmetric internally (left), the future-directed ingoing light-
rays originating from its surface b (at a suitable time) just make it to the center
of the object before reaching the singularity. in a highly disordered system, on
the other hand, light-rays will be deected into angular directions (right). we
are taking the surface b to have the same area as before. the light-ray path
looks timelike because the angular directions are suppressed in the diagram. we
see that the light-rays will not sweep the entire interior of the disordered system
before meeting the singularity.

think that no kind of entropy bound can apply when a highly enthropic sys-
tem collapses: the surface area goes to zero, but the entropy cannot decrease.
the above considerations have shown, however, that light-sheets percolate
rather slowly through highly enthropic systems, because the geodesics fol-
low a kind of random walk. since they end on the black hole singularity
within nite ane time, they sample a smaller portion of a highly enthropic
system than they would for a more regular system. (in fig. 2, the few light-
rays that go straight to the center of the inhomogeneous system also take
more ane time to do so than in a homogeneous system, because they pass
through an underdense region.
in a homogeneous system, they would en-
counter more mass; by raychauduris equation, this would accelerate their
collapse.) therefore it is in fact quite plausible, if counter-intuitive, that the
covariant entropy bound holds even during the gravitational collapse of a
system initially saturating bekensteins bound.

15

in sec. 6, we will discuss additional constraints on the penetration depth
of light-sheets in collapsing highly enthropic systems, and a quantitative test
will be performed.

3.4 recovering bekensteins bound

the covariant entropy conjecture can only be sensible if we can recover beken-
steins bound from it in an appropriate limit. for a bekenstein system (see
sec. 1.1: a thermodynamic system of constant, nite size and limited self-
gravity), the boundary area should bound the entropy in the spatial region
occupied by the system. the covariant bound, on the other hand, uses null
hypersurfaces to compare entropy and area. then how can bekensteins
bound be recovered?

while null hypersurfaces are certainly required in general, it turns out
that there is a wide class of situations in which an entropy bound on spacelike
hypersurfaces can be inferred from the covariant entropy conjecture. we will
now identify sucient conditions and derive a theorem on the entropy of
spatial regions. we will then show that bekensteins entropy/area bound
is indeed implied by the covariant bound, namely as a special case of the
theorem.

let a be the area of a closed surface b possessing at least one future-
directed light-sheet l. suppose that l has no boundary other than b. then
we shall call the direction of this light-sheet the inside of b. let the spatial
region v be the interior of b on some spacelike hypersurface through b. if
the region v is contained in the causal past of the light-sheet l, the dominant
energy condition implies that all matter in the region v must eventually pass
through the light-sheet l. then the second law of thermodynamics implies
that the entropy on v , sv , cannot exceed the entropy on l, sl. by the
covariant entropy bound, sl  a/4.
it follows that the entropy of the
spatial region v cannot exceed a quarter of its boundary area: sv  a/4.

the condition that the future-directed light-sheet l contain no boundaries
makes sure that none of the entropy of the spatial region v escapes through
holes in l. neither can any of the entropy escape into a black hole singularity,
because we have required that the spatial region must lie in the causal past
of l. since we are always assuming that the space-time is inextendible and
that no naked singularities are present, all entropy on v must go through l.
we summarize this argument in the following theorem.

16

spacelike projection theorem let a be the area of a closed surface b
possessing a future-directed light-sheet l with no boundary other than b. let
the spatial region v be contained in the intersection of the causal past of l
with any spacelike hypersurface containing b. let s be the entropy on v .
then s  a/4.

now consider, in asymptotically at space, a bekenstein system in a spa-
tial region v bounded by a closed surface b of area a. the future-directed
ingoing light-sheet l of b exists (otherwise b would not have limited self-
gravity), and can be taken to end whenever two (not necessarily neighbour-
ing) light-rays meet. thus it will have no other boundary than b. since the
gravitational binding of a bekenstein system is not strong enough to form
a black hole, v will be contained in the causal past of l. therefore the
conditions of the theorem are satised, and the entropy of the system must
be less than a/4. we have recovered bekensteins bound.

there are many other interesting applications of the theorem. in particu-
lar, it can be used to show that area bounds entropy on spacelike sections of
anti-de sitter space. this can be seen by taking b to be any sphere, at any
given time. the future-ingoing light-sheet of b exists, and unless the space
contains a black hole, has no other boundary. its causal past includes the
entire space enclosed by b. this remains true for arbitrarily large spheres,
and in the limit as b approaches the boundary at spatial innity.

the theorem is immensely useful, because it essentially tells us under
which conditions we can treat a region of space as a bekenstein system. in
general, however, the light-sheets prescribed by the covariant entropy bound
provide the only consistent way of comparing entropy and area.

we pointed out in sec. 3.1 that the covariant entropy bound is t-invariant.
the spacelike projection theorem is not t-invariant; it refers to past and fu-
ture explicitly. this is because the second law of thermodynamics enters
its derivation. the asymmetry is not surprising, since bekensteins bound,
which we recovered by the theorem, rests on the second law. we should
be surprised only when an entropy law is t-invariant.
it is this property
which forces us to conclude that the origin of the covariant bound is not
thermodynamic, but statistical (sec. 7).

17

4 cosmological tests

the simplest way to falsify the conjecture would be to show that it conicts
directly with observation. in this section, we will apply the covariant bound
to the cosmological models that our universe is believed to be described by
(and to many more by which it certainly is not described). since we claim
that the conjecture is a universal law valid for all space-times satisfying ein-
steins equations (with the dominant energy condition holding for matter),
it must be valid for cosmological solutions in particular. we will see that it
passes the test, and more signicantly, it just passes it.

we consider friedmann-robertson-walker (frw) cosmologies, which are

described by a metric of the form

ds2 = dt2 + a2(t)  dr2

1  kr2 + r2d2! .

an alternative form uses comoving coordinates:

ds2 = a2()hd2 + d2 + f 2()d2i .

(4.1)

(4.2)

here k = 1, 0, 1 and f () = sinh , , sin  correspond to open, at, and
closed universes respectively.

the hubble horizon is the inverse of the expansion rate h:

rhh = h 1 =

a

da/dt

.

(4.3)

the particle horizon is the distance travelled by light since the big bang:

ph = .

(4.4)

the apparent horizon is dened geometrically as a sphere at which at least
one pair of orthogonal null congruences have zero expansion.
it is given
by [14]

using friedmanns equation,

rah =

h 2 =

.

(4.5)

(4.6)

1

qh 2 + k

a2



k
a2 ,

8

3

18

one nds

rah = s 3

8

,

(4.7)

where  is the energy density of matter.

we consider matter described by tab = diag(, p, p, p), with pressure p =
. the dominant energy condition requires that   0 and 1    1.
the case  = 1 is special, because it leads to a dierent global structure
from the other solutions.
it corresponds to de sitter space, which has no
past or future singularity. this solution is signicant because it describes an
inationary universe. we will comment on ination at the end of sec. 4.1.

we will test the conjecture on spherical surfaces b characterized by some
value of r, or of (, ). as we found at the end of sec. 3.1, the directions of
the light-sheets of a surface depend on its classication as trapped, normal,
or anti-trapped. in the vicinity of  = 0 (and for closed universes, also on the
opposite pole, near  = ), the spherical surfaces will be normal. the larger
spheres beyond the apparent horizon(s) will be anti-trapped. some universes,
for example most closed universes, or a at universe with negative cosmo-
logical constant [15], recollapse. such universes necessarily contain trapped
surfaces. but trapped regions can occur in any case by gravitational collapse.
the surfaces in the interior of such regions provide a serious challenge for
the covariant entropy conjecture, because their area shrinks to zero while the
enclosed entropy cannot decrease. we address this problem in some general-
ity in sec. 6, where we argue that the conjecture holds even in such regions.
because of its importance, the special case of the adiabatic recollapse of a
closed universe will be treated explicitly in sec. 5.2. in the present section,
we shall therefore discuss only normal and anti-trapped surfaces.

4.1 anti-trapped surfaces

an anti-trapped surface b contains two past-directed light-sheets. unless b
lies within the particle horizon (of either pole in the closed case), both light-
sheets will be truncated at the planck era near the past singularity. the
truncation has the desirable eect that the volume swept by the light-sheets
grows not like a3/2, but roughly like the area. in fact, the ingoing light-
sheet coincides with the truncated lightcones used in the entropy conjecture
of fischler and susskind [9], and the other light-sheet can be treated similarly.
in open universes the bound will be satised more comfortably than in at
ones [9]. the validity of the bound was checked for at universes with 0 

19

  1 in ref. [9] and for 1 <  < 0 in ref. [15]. here we will give a
summary of these results, and we will explain why reheating after ination
does not violate the covariant bound. subtleties arising in closed universes
will be discussed separately in sec. 5.2.

the reason why the bound is satised near a past singularity is simple.
the rst moment of time that one can sensibly talk about is one planck time
after the singularity. at this time, there cannot have been more than one unit
of entropy per planck volume, up to a factor of order one. this argument does
not involve any assumptions about holography; we are merely applying the
usual planck scale cuto. we cannot continue light-sheets into regions where
we have no control over the physics. a backward light-sheet of an area a
specied at t = 2tpl will be truncated at t = tpl. it will sweep a volume of
order alpl and the entropy bound will at most be saturated.

let us dene  as the entropy/area ratio at the planck time. consider
a universe lled with any type of matter allowed by the dominant energy
condition, 1    1. we may exclude  = 1, since de sitter space
does not contain a singularity in the past. the scale factor will be given
by a(t) = t
3(+1) . if the evolution is adiabatic, the ratio of entropy to area
behaves as [15]

2

1
+1

 t

s
a

(4.8)

for any past-directed light-sheet of areas specied at a later time t. (equality
holds, e.g., for spherical areas at least as large as the particle horizon.) the
exponent is non-positive, so the entropy/area ratio does not increase. since
the bound is satised at the planck time, it will remain satised later.

another way to see this is to consider the particle horizon n (e.g. n = 10)
planck times after the big bang of a at frw universe.
its area will be
o(n2) and its past-directed light-sheet will sweep o(n3) planck volumes. let
us assume that each of these planck volumes contains one unit of entropy;
then the bound would be violated. but most of these volumes are met by the
light-sheet at a time later than tpl. therefore there must have been, at the
planck time, planck volumes containing more than a unit of entropy, which is
impossible. (note that this argument would break down if we allowed naked
singularities!)

if the evolution is non-adiabatic, the entropy bound nevertheless predicts
that s/a  1/4, implying that there is a limit on how rapidly the universe
can produce entropy. this will be further discussed in sec. 4.2.

20

ination of course the notion that the standard cosmology extends all the
way back to the planck era is not seriously tenable. in order to understand
essential properties of our universe, such as its homogeneity and atness, and
its perturbation spectrum, it is usually assumed that the radiation dominated
era was preceded by a vacuum dominated era.

ination ends on a spacelike hypersurface v at t = treheat. at this time,
all the entropy in the universe is produced through reheating. both before
and after reheating, all spheres will be anti-trapped except in a small neigh-
bourhood of r = 0 (or small neighbourhoods of the poles of the s 3 spacelike
slice in a closed universe), of the size of the apparent horizon. therefore
the spacelike projection theorem does not apply to any but the smallest of
the surfaces b  v . the other spheres may be exponentially large, but the
covariant conjecture does not relate their area to the enclosed entropy. the
size and total entropy of the reheating hypersurface v is thus irrelevant.

outside the apparent horizon, entropy/area comparisons can only be done
on the light-sheets specied in the conjecture. indeed, the past-directed light-
sheets of anti-trapped surfaces of the post-inationary universe do intersect
v . since there is virtually no entropy during ination, we can consider
the light-sheets to be truncated by the reheating surface. because ination
cannot produce more than one unit of entropy per planck volume, the bound
will be satised by the same arguments that were given above for universes
with a big bang.

4.2 normal surfaces

spatial regions enclosed by normal surfaces will turn out, in a sense speci-
ed below, to be analogues to bekenstein systems (see sec. 1.1). in order
to understand this, we must establish a few properties of bekenstein sys-
tems. for quick reference, we will call the rst bound, eq. (1.1), beken-
steins entropy/mass bound, and the second bound, eq. (1.3), bekensteins
entropy/area bound. for a spherical bekenstein system of a given radius and
mass, the entropy/mass bound is always at least as tight as the entropy/area
bound. this because a bekenstein system must be gravitationally stable
(m  r/2), which implies 2rm  r2 = a/4. a spherical system that
saturates bekensteins entropy/area bound will be called a saturated beken-
stein system. the considerations above imply that this system will also satu-
rate the entropy/mass bound. in semi-classical gravity, a black hole, viewed
from the outside, is an example of a saturated bekenstein system; but for

21

many purposes it is simpler to think of an ordinary, maximally enthropic,
spherical thermodynamic system just on the verge of gravitational collapse.
a system that saturates the entropy/mass bound but not the entropy/area
bound will be called a mass-saturated bekenstein system. if we nd a spheri-
cal thermodynamic system which saturates the entropy/area bound but does
not saturate the entropy/mass bound, we must conclude that it was not a
bekenstein system in the rst place.

the normal region contains a past- and a future-directed light-sheet. both
of them are ingoing, i.e. they are directed towards the center of the region
at  = 0 (or  =  for the normal region near the opposite pole in closed
universes). this is crucial. if outgoing light-sheets existed even as   0, the
area would become arbitrarily small while the entropy remained nite. this
is one of the reasons why the fischler-susskind proposal does not apply to
closed universes (see sec. 5.2). except for this constraint, the past-directed
light-sheet coincides with the light-cones used by fischler and susskind. the
entropy/area bound has been shown to hold on such surfaces [9, 14, 15]. we
will therefore consider only the future-directed light-sheet.

the future-directed light-sheet covers the same comoving volume as the
past light-sheet. therefore the covariant entropy bound will be satised on
it if the evolution is adiabatic. but we certainly must allow the possibility
that additional entropy is produced. consider, for example, the outermost
surface on which future-directed light-sheets are still allowed, a sphere b on
the apparent horizon. suppose that an overfunded group of experimental
cosmologists within the apparent horizon are bent on breaking the entropy
bound. they must try to produce as much entropy as possible before the
matter passes through the future-directed light-sheet l of b. what is their
best strategy?

note that they cannot collect any mass from outside b, because l is a
null hypersurface bounded by b and the dominant energy condition holds,
preventing spacelike energy ow. the most enthropic system is a saturated
bekenstein system, so they should convert all the matter into such systems.
(as discussed above, saturated bekenstein systems are just on the verge
of gravitational collapse and contain the same amount of entropy as a black
hole of the same mass and radius. by using ordinary thermodynamic systems
instead of black holes, one ensures that the light-sheet actually permeates the
systems completely and samples all the entropy, rather than being truncated
by the black hole singularity; see secs. 3.3 and 6 for a discussion of these
issues.)

22

if all matter is condensed into several small highly enthropic systems, they
will be widely separated, i.e. surrounded by empty regions of space which are
large, at, and static compared to the length scale of any individual system.
by the dominant energy condition, no negative energy is present. therefore
conditions given in sec. 1.1 are fullled. we are thus justied in applying
bekensteins bounds to the systems, and we should use the entropy/mass
bound, eq. (1.1), because it is tighter.
in order to create the maximum
amount of entropy, however, it is best to put the matter into a few large
saturated bekenstein systems, rather than many small ones. therefore we
should take the limit of a bekenstein system, as large as the apparent hori-
zon and containing the entire mass within it. of course the question arises
whether the calculation remains consistent in this limit, both in its treatment
of the interior as a bekenstein system, and in its evaluation of the mass. we
will show below, purely from the point of view of bekensteins bound, that
the interior of the apparent horizon is in fact the largest system for which
bekensteins conditions can be considered to hold; for larger systems, incon-
sistencies arise. in sec. 5.3, we will use the spacelike projection theorem to
arrive at the same conclusion within the framework of the covariant entropy
conjecture.

we have cautioned in sec. 2 against using an entropy/mass bound in
general space-times, because there is no concept of local energy density. in
this case, however, the mass is certainly well dened before we take the
limit of a single bekenstein system, because the many saturated systems will
be widely separated and can be treated as immersed in asymptotically at
space. in the limit of a single system, we can follow ref. [14] and treat the
interior of the apparent horizon as part of an oversized spherical star. (we
are thus pretending that somewhere beyond the apparent horizon, the space-
time may become asymptotically at and empty. this is not an inconsistent
assumption as long as bekensteins conditions are satised; we show below
that this is indeed the case. related ideas, not referring specically to the
apparent horizon, underly some proposals for cosmological entropy bounds
given in refs. [12, 13, 15].) then we can apply the usual mass denition for
spherically symmetric systems [20] to the interior region.

the circumferential radius of our system is the apparent horizon radius,

and is given by eq. (4.7):

rah = s 3

8

.

23

(4.9)

the mass inside the apparent horizon is given by [20]

m(rah) = z rah

0

4r2dr =

4
3

r3
ah.

(4.10)

this yields rah = 2m(rah). by bekensteins entropy/mass bound, eq. (1.1),
the entropy cannot exceed 2m(rah) rah. thus we nd

smax = r2

ah.

(4.11)

this is exactly a quarter of the area of the apparent horizon.

eq. (4.7) follows from the friedmann equation (which involves only the
density but not the pressure), and from eq. (4.5), which is a geometric prop-
erty of the frw metrics. thus the calculation holds independently of the
equation of state. we have not dropped any factors of order one, and at-
tained exactly the saturation of the bound. this would not be the case for
the hubble horizon or the particle horizon. we conclude that the entropy
on the future-directed light-sheet l will not exceed a quarter of the area of
the boundary b. the covariant entropy bound may be saturated on the
apparent horizon, but it will not be violated, no matter how hard we try to
produce entropy.

the property r = 2m(r) is special to the apparent horizon.

it sug-
gests that we should consider the interior of the apparent horizon to be the
largest region with non-dominant self-gravity, and thus the largest system
to which bekensteins bound can be applied. this statement can be made
more precise. the property rah = 2m(rah) means that if we treat the in-
terior as a bekenstein system, it can be saturated, not just mass-saturated
(see page 21 for denitions).
if we chose a smaller surface rx < rah, the
enclosed mass would be less than half of the radius, 2m < rx. in this case,
(area-)saturation would not be possible, but only mass-saturation. this is
because the entropy/mass bound yields 2mrx < r2
x = a/4. we conclude
that the covariant entropy bound, which uses area, cannot be saturated on
such surfaces. on the other hand, surfaces outside the apparent horizon,
rx > rah, possess no future-directed light-sheet to which we could apply the
covariant bound. we nd this reected in the property 2m > rx for such
surfaces. it implies that one could build a mass-saturated spherical system
which breaks bekensteins entropy/area bound: 2mrx > r2
x. as we dis-
cussed at the beginning of this subsection, this indicates a breakdown of the
treatment of the enclosed region as a bekenstein system. it follows that the

24

apparent horizon is the largest sphere whose interior may be treated as a
bekenstein system. for larger systems, bekensteins assumptions would not
be self-consistent.

from the point of view of the covariant entropy conjecture, there are
well-dened sucient conditions for the treatment of a spatial region as a
bekenstein system, namely those spelled out in the spacelike projection the-
orem (sec. 3.4). this will be applied to cosmology in the sec. 5.1. we
will show formally that the region inside the apparent horizon is indeed the
largest region for which bekensteins entropy/area bound may be guaranteed
to hold, if certain additional conditions are met.

5 cosmological entropy bounds

5.1 a cosmological corollary

in sec. 4.2, we tested the covariant entropy conjecture on future-directed
light-sheets in normal regions, by assuming maximal entropy production in
the interior spatial region. we found that the bound may be saturated,
but not violated. we will now switch viewpoints, assume that the covariant
entropy conjecture is a correct law, and derive an entropy bound for spatial
regions in cosmology.

normal regions oer an interesting application of the spacelike projection
theorem (sec. 3.4). it tells us under which conditions we can treat the interior
of the apparent horizon as a bekenstein system. let a be the area of a sphere
b, on or inside of the apparent horizon. (inside has a natural meaning in
normal regions.) then the future-directed ingoing light-sheet l exists. let
us assume that it is complete, i.e., b is its only boundary. (this condition
is fullled, e.g., for any radiation or dust dominated frw universe with no
cosmological constant.) let v be a region inside of and bounded by b, on
any spacelike hypersurface containing b. if no black holes are produced, v
will be in the causal past of l, and the conditions for the spacelike projection
theorem are satised. therefore, the entropy on v will not exceed a/4. in
particular, we may choose b to be on the apparent horizon, and v to be
on the spacelike slice preferred by the homogeneity of the frw cosmologies.
we summarize these considerations in the following corollary:

cosmological corollary let v be a spatial region within the apparent

25

horizon of an observer. if the future-directed ingoing light-sheet l of the ap-
parent horizon has no other boundaries, and if v is entirely contained in the
causal past of l, then the entropy on v cannot exceed a quarter of the area
of the apparent horizon.

by denition, the spheres beyond the apparent horizon are anti-trapped
and possess no future-directed light-sheets. therefore the spacelike projec-
tion theorem does not apply, and no statement about the entropy enclosed
in spatial volumes can be made. (of course, we can still use their area to
bound the entropy on their light-sheets.) thus the covariant entropy con-
jecture singles out the apparent horizon as a special surface. it marks the
largest surface to which the spacelike projection theorem can possibly apply,
and hence the region inside it is the largest region one can hope to treat as
a bekenstein system. this conclusion agrees with the result obtained in the
previous subsection from a consistency analysis of bekensteins assumptions
for regions larger than the apparent horizon.

as an example, the conditions of this corollary are satised by the ap-
parent horizon of de sitter space. it coincides with the cosmological horizon,
at r = (3/)1/2. thus the entropy within the cosmological horizon cannot
exceed 3/. the corollary will be further applied in sec. 5.3.

the corollary tells us if and how bekensteins bound can be applied to
spatial regions in cosmological solutions. it follows from, but is not equiva-
lent to, the covariant entropy bound. like the spacelike projection theorem,
the corollary is a statement of limited scope. it contains no information how
to relate entropy to the area of trapped or anti-trapped surfaces in the uni-
verse, and even for surfaces within the apparent horizon, a spacelike bound
applies only under certain conditions. thus, the role of the corollary is to de-
ne the range of validity of bekensteins entropy/area bound in cosmological
solutions. precisely for this reason, the corollary is far less general than the
covariant conjecture, which associates at least two hypersurfaces with any
surface in any space-time, and bounds the entropy on those hypersurfaces.

5.2 the fischler-susskind bound

among the recently proposed cosmological entropy bounds [9, 1216], the
prescription of fischler and susskind (fs) is distinct in that it attempts to
relate entropy to every spherical surface in the universe, namely the entropy
on the past-directed ingoing null hypersurface. the covariant entropy con-

26

jecture is very much in this spirit; but we have changed the prescription from
past-ingoing to a general selection rule determining at least two light-sheets
on which entropy can be compared to area. the fs hypersurface will often
be one of them, but not always. the limitations of the fs proposal can be
understood in terms of this selection rule.

consider the entropy on the null hypersurface formed by the particle hori-
zon, emanating from the south pole in a closed, adiabatic, dust-dominated
frw universe [9]. the solution is given by

a() =

amax

2

(1  cos ),

t() =

amax

2

(  sin ).

(5.1)

the entropy may not exceed one per planck volume at the planck time,
pl  a1/3
max . therefore the total entropy of the universe will not be larger
than smax  a(pl)3  amax.

the particle horizon has  = , while the apparent horizon is given by
 = 2 (see fig. 4). thus the particle horizon will initially be outside the
apparent horizon, in an anti-trapped region. any surfaces met by the particle
horizon in this region (such as b1) possess a past-directed light-sheet that
coincides with the particle horizon. therefore the fs bound and the covariant
bound should both be satised. before the time of maximum expansion
( = ), the particle horizon reaches the sphere b2 at  =  = 2/3. let
us verify explicitly that the bounds are still satised there. at this time,
the particle horizon covers two-thirds of the total entropy of the universe,
max, which is
which will be of order amax.
much larger.

its area, however, is 4(3/4)3a2

for  =  > 2/3 the particle horizon ends on normal, rather than anti-
trapped spheres. it has entered a normal region surrounding the north pole
and bounded by a dierent apparent horizon,  = 2(  ). the surfaces in
this region contain a future- and a past-directed light-sheet, both pointing
towards the north pole. the particle horizon, which goes to the south pole,
is now one of the forbidden families of light-rays (sec. 3.1). according to
the covariant bound, the entropy contained on it has nothing to do with the
surface that bounds it. indeed, its area approaches zero when it encompasses
nearly the entire entropy of the universe (b3). the fs bound cannot be
applied here. it would continue to compare entropy and area of the particle
horizon, and would be violated [9].

in sec. 2, the selection rule was motivated by the requirement that one
should compare the area of a surface only to the entropy that is, in some

27

future singularity:

=2

trapped region

b4

a

p

p

a

r

e

n

t
 

h

o

r
i

z

2
/

=

 
:
r
o
t
a
u
q
e

o

n

apparent horizon

0
=


 
,

0
=
r
 
:
e
l
o
p
h
t
u
o
s

 


=


 
,

0
=
r
 
:
e
l
o
p

 

h
t
r
o
n

normal

normal

time of maximum         expansion:   =

region

apparent horizon
particle horizon

b3

b2

region

a

p

p

a

r

e

n

t
 

h

o

r
i

z

o

n

b1

anti-trapped region

past singularity: =0

figure 4: penrose diagram for a closed frw universe dominated by dust. the
horizontal lines correspond to s 3 spacelike sections. every point represents a
two-sphere. the apparent horizons divide the space-time into four regions. the
directions of light-sheets in each region are indicated by small wedges.

28

sense, inside of it, not outside. this consideration is paying o here. the
spheres very close to the north pole, like any other s 2 on an s 3, enclose two
regions. because the region including the north pole is much smaller than the
region including the south pole, one would like to call the former the inside
and the latter the outside. the selection rule turns this intuitive notion
into a covariant denition, which takes into account not only the shape of
space but also its dynamics. trapped surfaces, for example, have light-sheets
on both sides, but only future-directed ones. this makes sense because in a
collapsing region, loosely speaking, the direction in which surfaces are getting
smaller is the future.

returning to the example of a closed, adiabatic, dust-dominated frw
universe, consider a surface b4 in the trapped region, near the equator of the
s 3 spacelike surfaces (see fig. 4). by choosing b4 to be very close to the fu-
ture singularity, its area can be made arbitrarily small. the fs hypersurface
would go to the past and would pick up nearly half of the total entropy, so
the fs bound cannot be used in this region. the covariant bound remains
valid, because it applies only to the future-directed null hypersurfaces, which
are soon truncated by the singularity.

5.3 other cosmological entropy bounds

other proposals for cosmological entropy bounds [1216] are based on the
idea of dening a limited spatial region to which bekensteins bound can
be applied.5 the denitions refer variously to the hubble horizon (or to a
region of size  h 1 = a/ a) [12, 13, 15, 16], a region of size  t [15], and,
remarkably, the apparent horizon [14]. in its simplied version, the fischler-
susskind proposal can be included in this class, as referring to the region
within the particle horizon [9].

the prescriptions do not aim to relate entropy to any surfaces larger than
the specied ken. also, most do not claim validity during the collapsing era
of a closed universe, and none can be applied in arbitrary gravitationally
collapsing systems. the covariant entropy bound diers from this approach
in that it attempts generality: it associates hypersurfaces with any surface
in any space-time and bounds the entropy contained on those hypersurfaces.
the proposed cosmological bounds are very useful for estimating the max-

5we should point out that the rst application of any entropy bound to cosmology was

by bekenstein, in ref. [21].

29

imal entropy in limited regions of cosmological solutions. even if a horizon
other than the apparent horizon is used, one may still obtain correct results
at least within factors of order one. in order to avoid pitfalls, however, they
must be used carefully (as many authors have stressed). the corollary de-
rived in sec. 5.1 contains precise conditions determining whether, and to
which regions of the universe, bekensteins bound can be applied.

consider, for example, the bound of bak and rey [14], which refers ex-
plicitly to the spatial region within the apparent horizon. one might be
tempted to consider this as a special case of the covariant entropy bound,
in the sense of the corollary derived in sec. 5.1. then it should always be
valid. but kaloper and linde [15] have shown that this bound is exceeded
in at, adiabatic frw universes with an arbitrarily small but non-vanishing
negative cosmological constant. so what has gone wrong?

as the penrose diagram for this space-time (fig. 5) shows, the universe
starts out much like an ordinary at frw universe. as the normal matter
is diluted, it eventually becomes dominated by the negative cosmological
constant. this slows down the expansion of the universe so much that it
starts to recollapse. the evolution is symmetric about the turn-around time.
eventually, matter dominates again and the universe ends in a big crunch.
as the turnaround time is approached, the apparent horizon moves out to
spatial innity [15], and the enclosed volume grows without bound. the
entropy density is constant, and the area grows more slowly than the volume.
thus the entropy eventually exceeds the bak-rey bound.

but the cosmological corollary (sec. 5.1) states that one can use the in-
terior of the apparent horizon for an entropy/area bound only if the future-
directed ingoing light-sheet is complete. as fig. 5 shows, this ceases to be the
case before the turnaround time. after the time t1, where t1 < tturnaround, the
future-directed light-sheet of the apparent horizon will have another bound-
ary, namely on the future singularity of the space-time. thus the conditions
for the spacelike projection theorem, and the corollary it implies, are no
longer met. the entropy in the spatial interior of the apparent horizon [14]
will not be bounded by its area in this region.

the covariant entropy conjecture states that the entropy on the future-
directed ingoing light-sheet, as well as the two past-directed light-sheets of
the apparent horizon will each be less than a/4. because the future-directed
light-sheet is truncated by the future singularity, and the past-directed light-
sheets are truncated by the past singularity, the comoving volume swept
out by any of these light-sheet grows only like the area as one moves further

30

l1

future singularity

a

p

p

are

l 2

b2

b1

spacelike
infinity

nt h

o

riz

o

n

0
=
r

time of maximal expansion

t = t1

v2

v1

apparent horizon

y

t

i

r

a

l

u

g

n

i

s

t  

s

a

p

3

figure 5: penrose diagram for a at universe with matter and a negative cosmolog-
ical constant. two apparent horizons divide the space-time into an anti-trapped,
a trapped, and a normal region. the wedges show the light-sheet directions. the
future-directed ingoing light-sheet l1 of the surface b1 is complete. by the space-
like projection theorem (sec. 3.4), the entropy on the spatial region v1 is bounded
by the area of b1. an apparent horizon surface b2 at a later time, however, does
not possess a complete future-directed ingoing light-sheet: l2 is truncated by the
future singularity. therefore the area of b2 bounds only the entropy on its three
light-sheets, not on its spatial interior v2.

along the apparent horizon. thus there is no contradiction with the covariant
bound.

neither is there any contradiction with the calculation performed in sec. 4.2,

which concluded that bekensteins bound can be applied to the region within
the apparent horizon. this calculation was done within the framework of
bekensteins conditions, and thus explicitly assumed the positivity of energy,
which is violated here. as we pointed out in sec. 1.1, bekensteins bound
cannot be applied to regions containing a negative energy component, such
as a negative cosmological constant. this indicates a striking dierence to
the covariant bound. while we have formally assumed the positivity of en-

31

ergy as a condition for the covariant entropy bound, we have argued in sec. 2
that the validity of the bound may well extend to space-times with a negative
cosmological constant. we nd ourselves encouraged by this example.

6 testing the conjecture in gravitational col-

lapse

in sec. 4 we tested the covariant entropy conjecture for anti-trapped and
normal surfaces in cosmological space-times. we found that even the most
non-adiabatic processes can only saturate, but not violate, the bound. we
now turn to trapped surfaces, which occur not only in collapsing universes,
but arise generally during gravitational collapse and inside black holes.

like anti-trapped regions, trapped regions are manifestly dominated by
self-gravity, and bekensteins bound will be of little help. the covariant
entropy bound must be justied by other considerations. this is a more
subtle problem for trapped, than for anti-trapped surfaces. it was reasonable
to require (sec. 4.1) that the entropy one planck time away from a past
singularity cannot exceed one per planck volume; this merely amounts to a
sensible specication of initial conditions. because of the rapid expansion,
the entropy/area ratio decreases at later times, and a situation in which
the covariant bound would be exceeded does not arise. but near future
singularities, one cannot use the time-reverse of this argument to retrodict
that some experimental setup was impossible to start with. initial conditions
are set in the past, not in the future.

at rst sight it seems obvious that the covariant entropy bound, like
any entropy/area bound, will be violated in trapped regions. consider a
saturated bekenstein system of area a0, in which gravitational collapse is
induced. the system will shrink, but by the second law, the entropy will not
decrease. a short time after the beginning of the collapse, the surface of the
system will have an area a1 < a0. because the surface is trapped, the past-
directed ingoing light-rays have positive expansion and cannot be considered.
but there will be a future-directed ingoing light-sheet.
if this light-sheet
penetrated the entire system, it would contain an entropy of s  a0/4 >
a1/4 and the bound would be exceeded. there are a number of eects,
however, which constrain the extent to which the light-sheet can sample
entropy. we will discuss them qualitatively, before turning to a quantitative

32

test in sec. 6.2.

6.1 light-sheet penetration into collapsing systems

when the boundary of the system is a suently small proper time away
from the future singularity, the light-sheet will not intersect the whole system,
because it will be truncated by the singularity (or a surface where the planck
density is reached), much like the past light-sheet of spheres larger than the
particle horizon in a at frw universe. truncation is a basic limitation [12],
but additional constraints will be needed.

consider the oppenheimer-snyder collapse of a dust ball [20], commenc-
ing from a momentarily static state with r = 2m, as shown in fig. 6. a

future singularity

0
=
r

b

event horizon: r=2 m

n

ull in

finity

figure 6: penrose diagram for the oppenheimer-snyder collapse of a dust star.
the interior of the star is described by a portion of the closed dust-dominated
frw solution. correspondingly, it is represented by the top left quarter of the
penrose diagram, fig. 4. the exterior is a portion of the schwarzschild solution.
light-rays emitted from the surface of the star when it is inside its gravitational
radius can traverse the interior entirely. this is not a violation of the covariant
entropy bound because a collapsing dust star does not have much entropy. for
highly enthopic collapsing objects, a number of eects must be taken into account
which protect the conjecture (see text).

future-directed ingoing light-sheet, starting at the surface b at a suciently
early time but inside the event horizon, can easily traverse the ball before
the singularity (or the planck density, at r  m 1/3) is reached. but this
light-sheet would endanger the bound only if the system collapsed from a
state in which it nearly saturated bekensteins bound. so how much en-
tropy does the dust star actually contain? strictly, the oppenheimer-snyder

33

solution describes a dust ball at zero temperature. since it also must be
exactly homogeneous, it contains not even the usual positional entropy equal
to the particle number. thus the entropy is zero. in order to introduce a
sizable amount of entropy, we have to violate the conditions under which the
solution is valid: homogeneity and zero temperature. this collapse will be
described by a dierent solution, for which a detailed calculation would have
to be done to determine the penetration depth of light-sheets.

by denition, highly enthropic systems undergoing gravitational collapse
are very irregular internally and contain strong small scale density perturba-
tions. this will make the collapse inhomogeneous, with some regions reach-
ing the singularity after a shorter proper time than other regions. one might
call this eect local gravitational collapse. a saturated bekenstein system
is globally just on the verge of gravitational collapse: r = 2m. but as it
contracts, individual parts of the system, of size r < r will become gravi-
tationally unstable: r  2m. particles in an overdense region will reach
a singularity after a proper time of order r2/m, which is shorter than the
remaining lifetime of average regions,  r2/m. this makes it more dicult
for a light-sheet to penetrate the system completely, unless it originates near
the beginning of the collapse, when the area is still large.

the internal irregularity of highly enthropic systems also enhances the
eect of percolation, discussed in sec. 3.3. inhomogeneities that break spher-
ical symmetry will deect the rays in the light-sheet and cause dents in their
spherical cross-sections. such dents will develop into angular caustics. at
any caustic, the light-sheet ends, because the expansion becomes positive
(sec. 3.2). any light-rays that do not end on caustics will follow an irregu-
lar path through the object similar to random walk. since they waste ane
time on covering angular directions, they may not proceed far into the object
before the singularity is reached. thus it may well be impossible for a light-
sheet to penetrate through a collapsing, highly entropic system far enough
to sample excessive entropy.

the quantitative investigation of the formation of angular caustics on
light-sheets penetrating collapsing, highly enthropic systems lies beyond the
scope of this paper. a strong, quantitative case for the validity of the bound
may still be made by eliminating the percolation eect. we will consider a
system containing only radial modes. this system is spherically symmetric
even microscopically, and cannot deect light-rays into angular directions.
with no constraints on mass and size, it can contain arbitrary amounts of
entropy, but cannot lead to angular caustics on the light-sheet.

34

6.2 a quantitative test

consider a schwarzschild black hole of horizon size r0 (see fig. 7). let b be

future singularity

l

b

l
2

0
=
r

l1

figure 7: penrose diagram for a black hole. b is a surface on the apparent horizon
and has three light-sheets: l1, l2, and l. in an attempt to violate the covariant
entropy conjecture, we collapse a massive shell around the black hole. we nd,
however, that one cannot squeeze more entropy through l than a quarter of the
area of b. otherwise, l reaches the singularity before passing through the infalling
shell entirely.

a sphere on the apparent horizon at some given time; thus b has area

a = 4r2
0.

(6.1)

the surface b is marginally outer trapped and possesses three light-sheets.
the past-directed ingoing light-sheet, l1 counts the entropy sin that went
into the black hole. the generalized second law of thermodynamics guaran-
tees that the entropy conjecture will hold on this light-sheet, since

a/4 = sbh  sin.

(6.2)

the future-directed ingoing light-sheet, l2, may intersect some or all of the
collapsing object that formed the black hole. the future-directed outgoing

35

light-sheet l intersects objects falling into the black hole at a later time. the
validity of the conjecture for the future-directed light-sheets was supported
by qualitative arguments in the previous subsection. for a quantitative test,
we shall now try to send excessive entropy through l.

l has zero expansion and denes the black hole horizon as long as no
additional matter falls in. when l does encounter matter, the expansion
becomes negative and l collapses to r = 0 within a nite ane time. our
strategy will be to use an infalling shell of matter to squeeze as much entropy
as possible across l before the light-sheet ends on a caustic or a singularity.
we shall not have any scruples about making the mass of the shell extremely
large compared to the mass of the black hole. by preparing the shell far
outside the black hole and letting it collapse, we can thus transport an ar-
bitrary amount of entropy to r0. this means, of course, that the shell may
be well inside its own schwarzschild radius by the time it reaches l; but by
the second law, this cannot reduce the entropy it carries. what we must
ensure, however, is that l actually penetrates the entire shell and samples
all of its entropy. we will now show that this requirement keeps the shell
entropy within the conjectured bound.

let  be the expansion of the null generators of l.

its rate of change
is given by raychauduris equation, eq. (3.2), from which we obtain the
inequality

d
d

1
2

 

2  8tabkakb.

(6.3)

the rst term on the right hand side is non-positive, and the dominant
energy condition is sucient to ensure that the second term is also non-
positive. initially,  = 0, since l is an apparent horizon. now consider a
shell of matter, of mass m, crossing the light-sheet l. we would like to make
the shell as wide as possible in order to store a lot of entropy. but we also
must keep it suciently thin, so that the light-sheet does not collapse due to
the rst term in eq. (6.3), before the shell has completely crossed it.

the maximum width of the shell can be easily estimated. consider an
innitely thin shell of mass m falling towards the black hole at r0. outside
the shell, the metric will be given by a schwarzschild black hole of mass

m = m +

r0
2

,

(6.4)

by birkhos theorem. once the shell has crossed the light-sheet l at r0, the
null generators of l will be moving in a schwarzschild interior of mass m .

36

therefore this meeting occurs at proper time

dead = r0 + 2 m ln(cid:18)1 

r0

2 m(cid:19) 

0

r2
4 m

(6.5)

before the generators reach a singularity. we may approximate a shell of
nite proper thickness w by an innitely thin shell of the same mass, located
w/2 from either side. we are thus pretending that the shell mass contributes
to the second term of the raychauduri equation all at once, at the moment
when half of the shell has already passed through l. since we require that
the light-sheet penetrates the shell entirely, we must be sure that the other
half of the shell passes through l before the light-sheet hits the singularity.
this requires w/2  dead, whence

wmax  r2

0/2 m.

(6.6)

the maximum width of the shell is thus inversely proportional to its mass,
and is always less than r0.

the next step will be to calculate the maximum entropy of a spherical
shell of mass m and width w. we will build the shell at r = r, far away
from the black hole and outside its own gravitational radius; i.e., r is much
greater than any of the quantities w, m, and r0. thus bekensteins bound
can be used to estimate the entropy. then we will let the shell collapse
into the black hole. since wmax < r0/2 by eq. (6.6), the width of the shell
will be smaller than the curvature of space during the entire time of the
collapse, and we can take it to remain constant. this enables us to neglect
eects of local gravitational collapse (which, if included, constrain the setup
further; see sec. 6.1). in order to exclude eects of angular caustics, which
are dicult to deal with quantitatively, we must specify that the shell contain
only spherically symmetric micro-states, i.e., micro-states living in the radial,
not the angular directions. we will now estimate the maximum entropy of
the shell.

the shell can be split into a large number n = r2/w2 of roughly cubic
boxes of volume w3 and mass m/n, separated by impenetrable radial walls.
by eq. (1.1), the maximum entropy of an isolated, single box is the largest
dimension times the mass:

sbox = 2w

m
n

.

37

(6.7)

since all states are restricted to be radial, no new states are added by remov-
ing the wall between two adjacent boxes. thus the entropy of two boxes will
simply be twice the entropy of one box. by repeating this argument, we can
remove all the separating walls. therefore the shell has a maximum entropy
of

(6.8)
the width w is restricted by eq. (6.6). one has m/ m  1 by eq. (6.4), even
if the limit m   is permitted. thus the shell entropy cannot exceed r2
0,
which by eq. (6.1) is a quarter of the area bounding the light-sheet:

sshell = 2wm.

sshell 

a
4

.

(6.9)

we conclude that a/4 is the maximum amount of entropy one can trans-
port through a future-directed outgoing light-sheet l bounded by a black
hole apparent horizon of area a, using an exactly spherically symmetric shell
of matter. we take this as strong evidence in favor of the entropy bound we
propose.

7 conclusions

bekenstein has shown that the entropy of a thermodynamic system with
limited self-gravity is bounded by its area. by demanding general coordinate
invariance and constructing a selection rule, we arrived at a bound on the
entropy present on null hypersurfaces in arbitrary space-times. we tested
the conjecture on cosmological solutions and inside gravitationally collapsing
regions. we found, under the most adverse assumptions, that the bound can
be saturated but not exceeded. this evidence suggests that the covariant
entropy conjecture may be a universal law of physics.

but can the conjecture be proven? the processes by which the bound is
protected appear to be rather subtle. they dier according to the physical
situation studied, and they can involve combinations of dierent eects more
reminiscent of a conspiracy than of an elegant mechanism (sec. 6.1). (this is
quite in contrast to bekensteins bound, which is protected by gravitational
collapse; see below.) we have veried the bound in a wide class of space-
times and space-time regions, but from the perspective of general relativity,
the processes protecting the bound appear eclectic, and its success remains
mysterious. this indicates that we may be looking at nature in an articial

38

and complicated way when we describe it as a 3 + 1-dimensional space-time
lled with matter. if the covariant bound is correct, we believe it must arise
from a more fundamental description of nature in an obvious way. but this
does not exclude the possibility that it can be proven (in a complicated way)
entirely within general relativity. the proof would have to combine the tools
used for establishing the laws of black hole mechanics [22] with the formalism
of the hawking-penrose singularity theorems [18].

in the nal paragraphs of secs. 3.1 and 3.4 we discussed the most im-
portant property of the conjecture: it is manifestly time reversal invariant.
therefore the second law of thermodynamics, which underlies bekensteins
bound, cannot be responsible for the covariant bound, and one is forced to
contemplate the possibility of a dierent origin.

as a thermodynamic concept, entropy has a built-in arrow of time. the
t-invariance of the covariant entropy conjecture can be understood only if
the bound is interpreted as a bound on the number of degrees of freedom of
the matter systems present on the light-sheets. this number is always at least
as large as the thermodynamic entropy. with this statistical interpretation,
t-invariance is natural. however, we never made any assumptions about the
microscopic properties of matter, which would limit the number of degrees
of freedom present. this leaves no choice but to conclude that the number
of degrees of freedom in nature is fundamentally limited, as proposed in
refs. [10, 11].

the idea that the world is eectively two-dimensional was put forth by
t hooft [10] and was further developed by susskind [11]. based on beken-
steins bound, the holographic hypothesis was a bold leap. one could argue,
after all, that bekensteins bound is not a fundamental limit on the number
of degrees of freedom, but a practical restriction on thermodynamic entropy.
there could be far more degrees of freedom in a system than its surface
area, but if too many of them were excited at the same time, a black hole
would form and the system would no longer satisfy bekensteins conditions.
one may view bekensteins bound as arising from this elegant gravitational
collapse mechanism. bekensteins law applies only to bekenstein systems; it
works because a bekenstein system exceeding the bound ceases to be one.

the covariant entropy bound, on the other hand, applies even to surfaces
in collapsing regions, or on cosmological scales. its generality, together with
its t-invariance, force us to the conclusion that a holographic principle un-
derlies the description of nature. moreover, the bound leads naturally to a
background-independent formulation of the principle. the number of inde-

39

pendent degrees of freedom on any light-sheet of a surface b cannot exceed a
quarter of the area of b.

acknowledgments

i thank gerard t hooft, nemanja kaloper, andrei linde, and lenny susskind
for many extensive discussions. this work has benetted in countless ways
from their criticism and encouragement. i am also indebted to jacob beken-
stein and werner israel for helpful correspondence, and to ted jacobson for
valuable comments on an earlier version of this paper.

references

[1] j. d. bekenstein: a universal upper bound on the entropy to energy ratio

for bounded systems. phys. rev. d 23, 287 (1981).

[2] j. d. bekenstein: black holes and the second law . nuovo cim. lett. 4,

737 (1972).

[3] j. d. bekenstein: black holes and entropy. phys. rev. d 7, 2333 (1973).

[4] j. d. bekenstein: generalized second law of thermodynamics in black

hole physics. phys. rev. d 9, 3292 (1974).

[5] s. w. hawking: particle creation by black holes. commun. math. phys.

43, 199 (1974).

[6] j. d. bekenstein: do we understand black hole entropy? gr-qc/9409015.

[7] d. n. page: particle emission rates from a black hole. ii. massless par-

ticles from a rotating hole. phys. rev. d 14, 3260 (1976).

[8] m. schier and j. d. bekenstein: proof of the quantum bound on specic

entropy for free elds. phys. rev. d 39, 1109 (1989).

[9] w. fischler and l. susskind: holography and cosmology, hep-

th/9806039.

[10] g. t hooft: dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, gr-qc/9310026.

40

[11] l. susskind: the world as a hologram. j. math. phys. 36, 6377 (1995),

hep-th/9409089.

[12] r. easther and d. a. lowe: holography, cosmology and the second law

of thermodynamics, hep-th/9902088.

[13] g. veneziano: pre-bangian origin of our entropy and time arrow , hep-

th/9902126.

[14] d. bak and s.-j. rey: cosmic holography, hep-th/9902173.

[15] n. kaloper and a. linde: cosmology vs. holography, hep-th/9904120.

[16] r. brustein: the generalized second law of thermodynamics in cosmol-

ogy, gr-qc/9904061.

[17] s. corley and t. jacobson: focusing and the holographic hypothesis.

phys. rev. d 53, 6720 (1996), gr-qc/9602043.

[18] s. w. hawking and g. f. r. ellis: the large scale stucture of space-time.

cambridge university press, cambridge, england (1973).

[19] r. m. wald: general relativity. the university of chicago press,

chicago (1984).

[20] c. w. misner, k. s. thorne and j. a. wheeler (eds.): gravitation.

freeman, new york (1973).

[21] j. d. bekenstein: is the cosmological singularity thermodynamically pos-

sible? int. j. theor. phys. 28, 967 (1989).

[22] j. m. bardeen, b. carter and s. w. hawking: the four laws of black

hole mechanics. commun. math. phys. 31, 161 (1973).

41

