nonrenormalizability of (last hope) d=11 supergravity,
with a terse survey of divergences in quantum gravities

brx th457

s. deser1

department of physics

brandeis university, waltham, ma 02454, usa

abstract: before turning to the new result that d=11 supergravity is 2-loop nonrenor-
malizable, we give a very brief history of the ultraviolet problems of ordinary quantum
gravity and of supergravities in general d.

1. introduction

the organizers have asked me to preface my presentation of the 2-loop nonrenormalizability
of d=11 supergravity [1] (sugra) with a historical survey of the ultraviolet problems in einstein
theory and in lower dimensional sugras. i am happy to comply, as this will help in understanding
why i called d=11 sugra the last hope: it was the only local quantum field theory that contains
general relativity whose non-renormalizability properties had not yet been established. then, as
an introduction to our results, i will motivate the analysis and its implications. naturally, i will
be brief both in my survey and references, given the space and time constraints of this conference;
by a happy coincidence, the new work with d. seminara appears in the synchronous issue of phys.
rev. lett. [2].

2. the ultraviolet problems of general relativity

this is a subject with little prehistory, aside from an old remark of heisenberg that theories with
(positive) dimensional coupling constants would be ill-behaved at high energies, one that will be
amply borne out by the following considerations.

9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
3

 

 
 

1
v
7
1
0
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

we will be working throughout in the standard perturbative formulation of gr about a at
space vacuum, expanding the metric in powers of h  g. this displays the d-dimensional
einstein action,

ie = 2z ddx g r

as an innitely self-coupled qft,

ie = z ddx (h)2



(h)n ,

xn=0

(2.1a)

(2.1b)

homogeneous in second derivatives. the quadratic (n = 0) terms describe the usual q2 propagator,
the cubic (n = 1) the 3-point vertex describing the lowest self-interaction of the h-eld with its own

1

deser@brandeis.edu

1

stress-(pseudo) tensor t (h)  (h)2, and so on. the dimensions of 2 are, by (2.1a),  ld2,
which will be important in what follows.

let us dispose of some special cases. the d=3 theory is well-known to have no propagating
modes [3] and correspondingly it is nite [4, 5] despite having a dimensional . for completeness,
we mention that at d=3 there is a third derivative order but unitary model with local excitations,
topologically massive gravity [6], for which the verdict is still not known [7]. for d=2, the la-
grangian is the euler density and no purely gravitational einstein theory exists. we will also not
deal with higher derivative order theories, with terms quadratic in curvatures; they are renormal-
izable but at the price of ghost modes, since they typically have propagator denominators  p4
or (m2p2 + p4)1. viewed as fundamental actions, they are thus really regulator terms; if, instead,
the r2 parts are themselves viewed as eective perturbative additions to the einstein action, they
cannot be used to improve the einstein propagator.

consider the simplest one-loop self-energy diagrams using dimensional regularization  which
organizes divergences most transparently. since the vertex and propagator are of reciprocal powers
(p2, p2) in momentum, and since each external line  (h) must acquire two ps to maintain
gauge invariance by becoming a curvature, we see that each loop order acquires potential divergent
contributions proportional to



x=1

(cid:20)i = z ddx rd/2(2rd/21)1(cid:21)

(2.2)

where  represents the loop order and r stands for generic curvatures or two covariant derivatives.
[in odd dimensions there can only be even loop divergences.] thus, in principle, unless there is a
reason for the vanishing of an innite number of coecients, the theory loses predictability at all
orders  it is non-renormalizable. the above result is for pure gravity. when the latter is coupled to
normal matter, there will be further counterterms: graviton loops will generate matter-dependent
ones, while matter loops also contribute curvature-dependent divergences.
[recall that (boson,
fermion) propagators go as (q2, q1) and their minimal coupling to gravity through their stress
tensors go as (q+2, q+1), expressing the universality of gravitational couplings.] this will lead to
an expansion analogous to (2.2), involving powers both of r and of 2t like terms.

 4r2

what are the concrete outcomes of this general framework? in the early seventies, a transparent
algorithm to calculate generic one-loop graphs was presented [8] and exploited to make several
important conclusions for d=4: in pure gravity, while the quadratic curvatures coecients in (2.2)
do not vanish, this is actually easily remedied by a (divergent) eld redenition because the gauss
 +r2] = 0, made these terms proportional to the eld equation,
bonnet identity, r d4x[r2
ie/g  r d4x g x  . the gravity-scalar eld system does contain innite and non-removable
terms, i.e., they are not proportional to the eld equations, i 6= r d4x (g  2t ())x  . in

the wake of these results, other relevant matter couplings, including fermions, yangmills and qed
were systematically explored [9]. in all cases, their gauge or fermionic character was of no help;
they all failed the one-loop test. beyond one loop, pure gr can exhibit invariant counterterms
proportional to cubic and higher powers of the weyl tensor that do not vanish on-shell. the much
harder job of explicitly calculating that pure gr failed at 2-loop order was successfully undertaken
in [10, 11]; the coecients of the r3

 counterterms were indeed non-zero.

because the above failures of gr were at the perturbative level, i should note for balance that

2

already in the late 50s it was suggested that gr might be a universal regulator for all qft in
some nonperturbative way, a development that was to materialize much later and in an unexpected
way through strings. indeed, that closed strings are both nite and contain s=2, m=0 excitations,
providing an acceptable quantum version of gr, is an essential part of their (and their successors)
central role.

3. d<11 supergravities

one of the hopes following the discovery of d=4 supergravity in 1976 was that, despite also
describing gravity plus matter, it would be more convergent than the systems described ear-
lier. the reason was of course the additional supersymmetry (susy), which combined spin 3/2
matter and gravitons into a single (super) multiplet. indeed, there was both one- and two-loop
improvement: the one-loop innities were precisely as in pure gravity (rather than as in gravity
coupled to ordinary matter), i.e., eld-redenable arrays proportional to the eld equations of

supergravity, e.g., i1 = r d4x(g  2t ())x  , where  is the vector-spinor companion of
the graviton, and the two-loop term was absent altogether due to supersymmetry, there being no
companion to 2r3
. far more important however, [12], three-loop invariants did exist for the
n=1 and higher models. since these will have their counterparts in d=11, let me sketch their form.
it is known in the simpler global susy case that the systems stress tensor t , supercurrent j
and chiral current c form a supermultiplet from which the susy invariant

i  z d4x[t 2

  i j 6 j  + 3

2 c2c ]

(3.1a)

is constructible. now as is well-understood, there is no invariant stress-tensor for the gravitational
eld itself, and the supercurrent is of higher derivative (and 3-index) order, j  (rf ) where
f = d  d is the eld strength of the potential . it is thus natural to seek a higher
derivative analog of t, and there is one, namely the well-known belrobinson tensor b
dened uniquely in d=4 according to

b = r 

 r + r 

 r  1

2 g r 

 r .

(3.2)

on-shell (r = 0) b is totally symmetric, (covariantly) conserved and traceless and there is again
an invariant like (3.1a) namely

i3 = 4z d4x[b2  i j 6 j + 3

2 c 2c]

(3.1b)

where i have omitted all indices (c is a chiral current bilinear in f) and added the 4 to show
eligibility of i3 as a 3-loop counterterm. the existence of similar invariants for n>1 was soon
conrmed as well [13] and their full nonlinear completions were found by superspace methods
that are, unfortunately, not available in our d=11 world. surprisingly, it was even possible to
learn something about the actual coecients of such counterterms: for the non-maximal 1n<8
models, where covariant superspace quantization is possible, it was concluded [14] that they are
uniformly non-vanishing. for the special maximal n=8 case, very beautiful recent work [15] (to
which we shall return for its impact on d=11) suggests that, while the three-loop coecient may
vanish, its 5-loop(!) coecient probably does not.

to summarize, then, the d=4 sugra situation is essentially that the one-loop counterterms
are accidentally protected by the supersymmetric extension of the gaussbonnet identity, i.e., they

3

vanish on shell and hence are safe, whatever their coecients. at two loops, whose bosonic part
must start as i2  2r d4x[r3
], there exists no susy completion; this is the improvement
over pure gravity, where this r3 term is both allowed and has nonzero coecient. on the other
hand, at 3 loops there is indeed the allowed n=1 term we have displayed in (3.1b) and no miracles
protect its coecient or that of its n<8 counterparts; even for the maximal n=8, ve loops prove
fatal.

i will not repeat this general sugra argument for rising dimensions, 4<d<11, (again even
and odd ones dier a bit) except to say that it is possible to construct susy counterterms explicitly
where a suitable superspace formulation exists and that the construction and negative conclusions
of [15] seem to apply. instead, i now move to my main topic, d=11 sugra.

4. d=11 sugra

this section represents the work in [2] to which i refer for details. in the period of rapid con-
struction of d>4 sugras following the initial d=4 theory, it became clear from the mathematics
of graded algebras [16] that if one wanted these models to obey the following four criteria: inclu-
sion of s=2, m=0 excitations, i.e., the graviton (of which einstein theory is the essentially unique
local model); only one such graviton; no massless excitations with spin exceeding 2, and only one
timelike dimension, then there is a highest dimension, d=11, for sugra. this theorem can be
understood in various ways, in particular from the requirements that the numbers of boson/fermion
excitations must match. the s < 5/2 requirement is connected with the fact that massless elds
with s  2 do not consistently interact with gravity itself [17]. the d=11 theory [1] is indeed a very
special one, even in the universe of sugras. some examples: it allows only n=1, so maximal =
minimal; there is no susy matter in d=10 to provide a source; while (negative) cosmological
constants can be included in lower-dimensional sugra, (unbroken) d=11 sugra is also unique
in forbidding a cosmological term [18].

before going into the description of our construction and its implications for the theorys
nonrenormalizability, let me turn to our motivations. they are actually twofold. the immediate
aim was to construct on-shell non-vanishing local invariants, as potential counterterms. now this
was already a very nontrivial task, because in this theory there is no technology to test the susy
of, let alone construct, candidate invariants. even assuming these would be likely to exist, this was
the last remaining sugra model and (with its mysterious other uniqueness properties) the only
one with a chance at staving o innities. besides, having been reenthroned (from its previous
anomalous position in the old d=10 string world) as a basic cornerstone/qft limit of m-theory, it
is not only there, but of prime interest! secondly, quite apart from renormalizability, any higher
invariant that could be constructed would automatically be a candidate (nite) correction term
in some m-theory expansion and as such be a window on that mysterious region, precisely in the
same way that d=10 string models yielded (also nite) corrections to the d=10 supergravities. so
much for why  now we need the how.

to know where to focus, let us rst re-count dimensions, which is best done by looking at
i will only write the purely bosonic part here, because that is all we will

the sugra action.
(fortunately!) need:

11 =z d11x(cid:20)
i b

g
42 r(g) 

g
48

f 2 +

2

1442 111f1f5a..11(cid:21) ,

(4.1)

4

this is not the place for a review; let me just recall that in addition to the graviton, there is a
3-form potential a with associated eld strength f  [a] and a cubic chernsimons
(cs) term in which the 11 indices of the epsilon symbol are saturated by two f s and one a. the
dimensions of 2 are here l+9; note the explicit  also in the cs part since a  l9/2. among
the fermionic terms, there are non-minimal ones  r, f  but we can avoid this whole sector
it is clear, because dimension is odd, that no 1-loop  0r d11x candidate i1 exist 
here.
one cannot make gravitational scalars with odd numbers of derivatives, except irrelevant (because
parity-violating)  rnrm terms. at 2-loop order,

i2  2z d11x l20

(4.2)

where l20 has dimension 20.

to construct the leading purely gravitational term here requires, at rst sight, r+10. while
such terms are undoubtedly possible and present, they are impracticable to obtain. related to this
is the question of regularization scheme. if we use some dimensional (energy) cuto, it alters the
allowed dimension of candidate ls. instead, the dimensional regularization we use here uniformly
has logarithmic cuto so all l are l20s. but all we have to do is to present one that exists
and show that its coecient fails to vanish; if we can accomplish that as we (essentially, see below)
will, other possible regularization schemes are irrelevant. coming back to nding a more tractable
l20, we recall that a curvature is dimensionally equivalent to two covariant derivatives d, which
means that candidate terms are schematically of the form l20  p10
n=4 rn d2(10n). we start at
n=4 because clearly the lower ns are either (like r3) not parts of super-invariants or are leading
order trivial (like r2 which obeys gaussbonnet to quadratic order in h ). thus, our lowest
possible choice is i2  2r d11x[r4d12 + . . .] where the ellipsis represents the susy completion,

if any. how to nd a suitable candidate in absence of any guiding super-calculus? our procedure
was the following. as was also recognized in [15], there is certainly one on-shell nonvanishing lowest
order susy invariant that starts out quartic in h , and that is the tree-level 4-point scattering
amplitude generated by the d=11 action (4.1) itself. it has the enormous advantage that, since
there are no loops, and susy transformations are linear at our level, the purely bosonic terms are
guaranteed to be part of the overall susy invariant that is the total 4-point amplitude. however,
it presents two a priori obstacles: first, we want a local invariant, whereas the amplitude has a
denominator, from virtual particle exchanges; can we extract a local but still susy residue? we
can, simply because each term in the amplitude is in fact proportional to the product (1/stu) of the
mandelstam variables. second, we want to have 12 explicit derivatives in the r4 and other terms;
can those be inserted without losing susy or having everything vanish on-shell? the answer is
again yes, e.g., by further multiplication with (stu)2 or (s6 + t6 + u6), after the initial stu one.

now we have cleared the decks for the actual computation. it consists of applying the feyn-
man rules in terms of the propagators and vertices needed up to 4-point level. lets review the
ingredients. expanding the action (4.1) about at space gives us rst the free particle propagator
terms, symbolically,

11  z d11x(hd1
i (2)

(4.3)

g h + ad1

f a) ,

where (df , dg are the respective free ( 21) propagators. the cubic terms are of three
types. first, the purely topological (metric-free) cs term furnishes the 3-form self-coupling ver-
tex f f a  cf  a where the three-index current cf  (f f ) is both gauge invariant and

5

identically conserved. the other relevant vertex involving f is its gravitational coupling h t 
f
where t 
f  f f is the forms stress-tensor. finally the purely gravitational contribution is of the
same h t (h) form, where t (h)  (hh) is the (gauge-variant) stress pseudo-tensor of the
gravitational eld itself. this term, upon contracting one of its graviton lines with that of another,
yields the graviton-graviton exchange  2t (h)dg
 t (h) just as self-contracting the a cf
term contributes cf df cf  2f 4 to form-form scattering, as does the htf  htf graviton con-
traction. however, the four-graviton term is not even abelian gauge invariant by itself but requires
inclusion of the local quartic 4-point vertex 2hhhh to restore it. besides the above pure h4
and f 4 amplitudes, there are mixed terms: if we contract the form eld in htf  htf , we get
 f 2r2, form-graviton compton scattering. finally we can get a form-graviton bremsstrahlung
term  rf 3 when contracting the acf and h tf vertices (only form exchange contributes here).
single-form creation  r3f , is of course forbidden.

it is a straightforward, if index-intensive, procedure to perform these calculations. the worst,
graviton-graviton scattering has fortunately been done earlier in arbitrary dimension [19] which is
a very useful check; the answer is as in d=10, namely it is proportional to the famous lowest string
correction to the einstein action in d=10:

lg = stu mg  t8t8 rrrr

(4.4)

where t8 is a constant 8-index tensor; it has a piece proportional to the d=8 levi-civita symbol 8
and hence the 88 part of lg, proportional to the d=8 gaussbonnet invariant, cannot be seen at
our lowest, o(h4), order (at its lowest order, the gb term of any dimension is a total divergence
in all d). remember that we are always on (linearized) shell, so that the letter r really means the
weyl tensor; also, we have emphasized that multiplication of m by stu yields the local scalar l.

let me now discuss more explicitly our bosonic component of the full susy invariant; as
mentioned earlier, it is interesting in its own right as the correction to the d=11 sugra action
from m-theory, of which we mostly know that it contains sugra as the local limit. below, i will
summarize the appearance of the various localized on-shell 4-point amplitudes. they are to be
multiplied by the required twelve derivatives, say with (stu)2 to make dimension 20. schematically
(see [2] for details), with b a belrobinson-like curvature quadratic and f always appearing with
a gradient,

i b

2 (g, f ) = 2z d11x[b2 + (f )4 + b(f )2 + r(f )3] .

(4.5)

although everything looks very coordinate invariant, these terms are only accurate to lowest, 4th,
order in the combined rs and f s, and of course are to be supplemented by fermion-dependent
terms that we do not write down. nevertheless linearized susy is guaranteed by our construction.

what about the coecient, is it non-zero? as i mentioned, a powerful tool for answering
this question was provided by the amazing correspondence between sugra and super-yangmills
models established and exploited in [15] to obtain otherwise impossible results. the only catch
is that sym is only dened for d10; however one can argue, quite convincingly, that the results
as provided really do not depend directly on d, and extend analytically also to d=11. at any
rate, once their d=11 extension has been made, it is of course independent of its origin and it may
not be all that dicult to verify intrinsically; thus, the strong odds are against even this maximal
theory, already at leading possible level.

6

5. summary

we have tried to outline in a very short space, the history of the ultraviolet problems of any
qft that contains general relativity, but (to preserve unitarity) no higher derivative kinetic terms.
these models include pure gravity in any d>3, where the problems arise uniformly at 2-loop level
because the 1-loop terms, while still innite are accidentally harmless [8]. for d=4 in particular the
coecient of the 2-loop counterterm has been explicitly and reliably shown not to vanish [10, 11].
for gravity plus lower spin (0  s  1) matter the one-loop terms are already known to be non-
zero, also explicitly [9]. all these problems are traceable to the positive dimensionality of the
gravitational coupling constant, 2  ld2.

the addition gravity-matter symmetry that is the hallmark of supergravity was shown early
on, for the d=4, n=1 model, to improve things but only marginally: there the danger comes from
3 loops onward [12]; things are not improved by higher n [14] although it may be [15] that the
maximal, n=8, model is only destroyed at 5-loop order. increasing dimension is no help either,
and indeed our main new result is that the most unique and extreme, d=11, sugra is also sick
already at minimal 2-loop order, despite its relation to the m-theory unication of string theories.
more specically, a local susy invariant counterterm was constructed from the 4-point tree-level
scattering amplitude generated by the d=11 action. together with the compelling argument of
[15] that its coecient is non-null, this conclusion is all but inevitable. hence heisenbergs curse
on every qft that includes gravity holds universally and forces us beyond locality, to strings and
their generalizations.

acknowledgements: this work was supported by the national science foundation under grant
phy93-15811.
i am grateful to my d=11 coauthor d. seminara, as well as to z. bern and l.
dixon, for useful comments.

7

references

[1] e. cremmer, b. julia, j. scherk, phys. lett. b79 (1978) 409.

[2] s. deser and d. seminara, hep-th/9812136, phys. rev. lett. 82 (1999) 2435; construction

and applications of local invariants in d=11 supergravity brx th-456.

[3] s. deser, g. t hooft, r. jackiw, ann. phys. 152 (1984) 220.

[4] e. witten, nucl. phys. b311 (1988) 46.

[5] s. deser, j. mccarthy, z. yang, phys. lett. b222 (1989) 61.

[6] s. deser, r. jackiw, s. templeton, ann. phys. 140 (1982) 372.

[7] s. deser and z. yang, class. quant. grav. 7 (1990) 1603.

[8] g. t hooft and m. veltman, ann.i.h.p. a20 (1974) 69.

[9] s. deser and p. van nieuwenhuizen, phys. rev. lett. 32 (1974) 245; phys. rev. d10 (1974)
401; ibid d10 (1974) 411; s. deser, h.-s. tsao, and p. van nieuwenhuizen, ibid d10 (1974)
3337.

[10] m.h. goro and a. sagnotti, nucl. phys. b266 (1986) 709.

[11] a.e.m. van de ven, nucl. phys. b378 (1992) 309.

[12] s. deser, j.h. kay, k.s. stelle, phys. rev. lett. 38 (1977) 527.

[13] s. deser and j.h. kay, phys. lett. 76b (1978) 400.

[14] p.s. howe, k.s. stelle, p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b236 (1984) 125.

[15] z. bern, l. dixon, d.c. dunbar, m. perelstein and j.s. rozowsky, nucl. phys. b530 (1998)

401.

[16] w. nahm nucl. phys. b135 (1978) 145.

[17] c. aragone and s. deser, phys. lett. 86b (1979) 161; nucl. phys. 170, [fs1] (1980) 329.

[18] k. bautier, s. deser, m. henneaux, and d. seminara, phys. lett. b406 (1997) 49.

[19] s. sannan, phys. rev. d34 (1986) 1749.

8

