9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
1
1

 

 
 

1
v
8
6
0
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

may 1999
spin-99/14
hep-th/9905068

u-duality in supersymmetric born-infeld theory

gysbert zwart

spinoza institute

university of utrecht

p.o. box 80 195
3508 td utrecht
the netherlands

and

institute for theoretical physics

university of utrecht

princetonplein 5
3584 cc utrecht
the netherlands

abstract

the born-infeld theory of a toroidal d3-brane has an sl(5, z) u-duality symme-
try. we investigate how this symmetry is reected in the supersymmetry algebra.
we propose an action of the group on the gauge theory elds in the bps sector
by introducing an extra eld together with an additional symmetry, and argue
for the u-invariance of the degeneracies of the bps spectrum.

e-mail address: zwart@phys.uu.nl

1. introduction

the bps-sector of toroidally compactied type ii string theories is well known
to be symmetric under a large discrete symmetry group, u-duality [1]. in fact,
the half bps particles (in the noncompact dimensions), arising from perturbative
as well as non-perturbative ten-dimensional states, transform in a single multiplet
of the u-duality group. thus one can relate states such as wrapped d-branes,
which are non-perturbative from the string point of view, to states that have a
perturbative string description. in particular, u-duality predicts the degeneracies
of string states and dual d-brane states to be equal. this prediction was checked
for particular congurations by vafa and sen [2], who used the gauge theory
description of d-branes [3].

the gauge theory on a d-brane provides a description of not only the free
brane itself, but also of bound states with lower dimensional branes and strings.
these 1/4 bps states, preserving 8 of the 32 supersymmetries, are identied with
congurations with non-zero electric and magnetic uxes [4]. for low enough
dimensions, (d  4 + 1) the ux quantum numbers of the gauge theories are
sucient to describe all bound states with lower dimensional objects than the
brane itself, so one may wonder how much of the u-duality remains valid in
the eld theory limit. this question was addressed in [5, 6], partly motivated
by the study of matrix theory [7]. although the yang-mills hamiltonian is not
u-invariant, it was found in [6] that, remarkably, the part of the bps-spectrum
containing single bps-states (as opposed to those consisting of multiple states)
exhibits u-invariant degeneracies.

the gauge theory on the brane arises as an eective theory describing the
dynamics of the open strings glued to the d-brane. to rst approximation this
theory is indeed a yang-mills theory. however, when one wants to incorporate
elds with large eld strength compared to the string scale, higher derivative
terms begin to play a role. it was shown by leigh [8] that the  expansion sums
to a born-infeld gauge theory. (the extension of this theory to non-abelian gauge
groups is still not fully understood; for proposals and discussion see [9, 10]). it
turns out that the u-symmetry that was not fully realised by the yang-mills
theory is more apparent in the born-infeld theory. in [11] the bps masses of
the compactied d4-brane bi-theory were computed, and shown to be consistent
with the full so(5, 5, z) symmetry.
in particular, the rank of the group, i.e.
the number of d4-branes, appears on an equal footing with the other quantum
numbers.

in this paper we will investigate the action of u-duality on the supersym-
metric version of the born-infeld theory (as presented in [12]), specialised to four

2

dimensions. the intention is to generalise the method and results of [6], where the
four-dimensional yang-mills theory was investigated, to the born-infeld theory.
the expectation is that, due to the more symmetric form of bi theory com-
pared to yang-mills theory, we may nd better agreement with the u-duality (in
this case sl(5, z)) predictions from string theory (in particular, we hope to also
incorporate multiple bps states in a u-dual degeneracy formula).

we derive the (u-invariant) superalgebra and the bps-equations (which of
course coincide with the result in the bosonic theory). we nd that we can express
the equations naturally in terms of a eld in the antisymmetric representation of
sl(5), whose zero modes are the quantum numbers. in identifying this eld with
the gauge elds we still have one extra local symmetry, which we may use to set
the rank to a constant. in the context of classical solutions to the bps equations,
this allows us to indeed use u-duality as a solution generating technique.

in order to study the degeneracies of the quantum system, we follow the
philosophy of [13, 6] in quantising the theory restricted to the space of supersym-
metric congurations. in a simple case the quantisation is very similar to that in
the yang-mills case, where the bps sector was shown to be related to a matrix
string theory. we propose an action of the u-duality on the quantum theory,
where we interpret the extra local symmetry just mentioned as a conformal sym-
metry, and the xing of the rank to a constant as an analogue of light cone gauge
xing. we discuss multiple bps states and present a u-duality invariant degen-
eracy formula for arbitrary states, depending only on two invariants constructed
from the quantum numbers.

finally we make some speculative comments on the similarity of the structure
of the four-dimensional born-infeld theory to the self-dual tensor theory living
on an m5-brane.

2. sl(5)-invariance of the hamiltonian and the bps masses

the type iib three brane compactied on a torus can be described by the
born-infeld gauge theory. congurations of this gauge theory on a three torus can
be labelled by various integer quantum numbers, namely electric and magnetic
uxes, and momenta around the torus. these gauge theory quantities reect
the various bound states that the three brane in the string theory can be in.
electric uxes correspond to bound states with strings, while magnetic uxes,
via electro-magnetic duality, represent d-strings. the world brane momenta are
of course just the momentum numbers of perturbative string theory on a torus.
finally, the rank of the gauge theory reects the number of three branes. the
born-infeld action is only known for the u(1) theory.

3

congurations in string theory on a three torus enjoy a u-duality symmetry
sl(5, z), which acts on the various quantum numbers. the aim of this paper is
to investigate the extent to which this symmetry is reected in the gauge theory
on the brane. in this section we will rst analyse the form of the hamiltonian of
the (abelian) born-infeld theory, and demonstrate that the associated bps mass,
the minimal mass for a state with given quantum numbers, is compatible with
the action of u-duality.

we begin with a derivation of the bosonic d3-brane hamiltonian along the
lines of [11], and write it in a form that suggests an action of sl(5) on the various
elds. for simplicity, we will set the various background tensor-elds to zero. the
action is then

sbi = z d3xdt 1

gs qdet(g  f ).

(2.1)

g is the metric on the toroidal three brane,
dimensional string coupling.

in string units; gs is the ten-

the sl(5, z) will act on the zero modes of the following ten elds,

electric elds

: ei =

l
f0i

,

magnetic elds

:

ijkbk = fij = [iaj],

momenta : pi = fijej,

rank : n = 1.

(2.2)

the zero-modes of these elds are the integer quantum numbers, and will be
denoted by lower-case letters.

the hamiltonian squared can be derived to be, in terms of these elds,

det g

h2 =

gs

2 (n 2 + gikgjlfijfkl)
0 g1 !  e

+ (e, p )  g 0

p ! .

(2.3)

from the string theory point of view, the rst line gives the contributions from
d3 and d1-branes, while the last line contains the string winding and momentum
modes.

to bring out the sl(5)-symmetry we organise the elds in an antisymmetric

tensor,

m =

p3
0
p1

p2 e1 f23
0
e2 f31
p3
p1
e3 f12
p2
0
e1 e2 e3
1
0
f23 f31 f12 1
0





.





4

(2.4)

we also dene the analogous matrix of zero-modes mij, with as entries the zero-
modes of the elds.

the hamiltonian squared can be expressed as

h2 = 

1
2

trgmgm,

with

gdet g

g = 

and g44 = det g, g55 = det g/gs

0
0

0
g44
0

0
0
g55




(2.5)

(2.6)

,

2. non-zero o-diagonal entries would corre-

spond to expectation values of the anti-symmetric tensor background elds.

sl(5) acts by conjugation on the elds m and the background g, leaving h
invariant. the sl(3) subgroup residing in the top-lefthand corner is of course
just the structure group of the three-torus, leaving the coupling gs xed and
acting on the momenta pi, electric elds ei and magnetic elds bi = 1
2 ijkfjk as
vectors. the sl(2) subgroup acting on the 4, 5-indices is the familiar s-duality
group, exchanging electric and magnetic elds and inverting the coupling. it also
acts on det g, when expressed in string units; as explained in [11], one should
express the moduli in seven-dimensional planck units to have a truly duality
invariant formula. these two subgroups both leave the rank n xed. the rest
of sl(5) mixes the rank with the elds, and strictly speaking we only derived
the hamiltonian for the case n = 1, for lack of knowledge of the non-abelian
version of the born-infeld theory. however, based on the information we have
from string theory, we should expect the sl(5) structure of the hamiltonian as
given above to be correct. in the gauge theory, the transformations involving the
rank should have an interpretation as nahm transformations [6].

the matrix mij contains combinations of born-infeld elds that are not all
independent. in particular, the momentum densities pi are the components of
the poynting vector, the exterior product of the electric and magnetic elds.
this seems to spoil the sl(5) symmetric structure. remarkably, we can remedy
this by viewing the entries of m as a priori independent elds, and in addition
expressing the relations between them by imposing an sl(5) covariant vector k i
of constraints. we dene this k using a ve-dimensional  symbol, dened via
the metric g, as

k i =

ijklmmjkmlm  (m  m)i,

1
8

(2.7)

so that in terms of the born-infeld elds

k = (npi  (e  b)i,p  b, p  e).

(2.8)

5

for the case that n = 1, the rst three components of the constraint k = 0 give
the denition of the momenta pi in terms of the electro-magnetic elds; the last
two components are then automatically zero as well.

using the constraint k = 0 we may derive the bps mass formula for a given
set of charges via the bogomolny argument developed in [11]. we may write, for
any unit ve-vector vi,

trgmgm =

1
2

(mij +

1
2

ijklmvkm lm)(m ji +

1
2

jiklm

vkmlm),

(2.9)

(where we use g to raise and lower indices), and split mij into one part containing
only the zero modes mij and another with the uctuations, mij. from this we
can, for any given vi, minimise the energy, and maximising this minimum over
vi we nd the bps bound

m 2

bp s = 

trgmgm + 2k  k

1
2

(2.10)

where k = (m  m) = (pi  (e  b)i,p  b, p  e) (recall that the lower case
quantities are the zero modes of the corresponding elds). note that the rst
term in (2.10) is precisely the expression for h2 with the zero modes of the elds
inserted; we see therefore that for congurations having non-zero ve-vector ki
(the 1/4 bps states, as opposed to the 1/2 bps states that have ki = 0), the
mass is strictly greater than the zero mode value. hence, for such congurations
the mass necessarily gets contributions from uctuations in the elds.

this lower bound on the mass is only attained when the elds satisfy the bps
equations. these follow from the arguments leading to the bps mass formula,
and in this case require an expression involving the uctuations in the elds to
be proportional to the same expression with the zero modes:

(|k|m + k  m)  (|k|m + k  m).

(2.11)

the proportionality factor is itself a function of space time. in the following we
will want to interpret this rather peculiar bps equation, and, in particular, since
the rank n is part of the matrix m, to understand how to deal with possible uc-
tuations in n. in order to address these questions we will rst rederive the above
results from the supersymmetric born-infeld action, where the bps equation
follows from the requirement of unbroken symmetry. then we will explore the
solutions to the equations, using u-duality as a solution generating transforma-
tion. here we will in particular demonstrate the consequences of transformations
that formally give the rank n uctuating contributions. finally we will propose
a method of quantisation of the theory restricted to its bps space, motivated by

6

the sl(5) symmetry, and demonstrate the u-invariance of the bps degeneracies.
first, however, we review the situation found by hacquebord and verlinde in
their investigation of the theory in the yang-mills limit.

3. review of the yang-mills case

the question of degeneracies of bps states of the three-brane was rst investi-
gated in the context of n = 4 super yang-mills theory on the torus [6]. we
will here rst review this analysis, and then try to apply a similar method to the
born-infeld case.

the u(n) super yang-mills theory is the reduction of ten-dimensional super
yang-mills theory to four dimensions. its bosonic elds are the vector potential,
a, and six scalar elds x i. the theory has eight four-dimensional supersymme-
tries, four of which (q1) are the generators of the supersymmetries that are bro-
ken by the introduction of a brane, and act as shifts on the associated goldstone
fermions . the other four generators (q2) are the unbroken supersymmetries,
acting linearly.

in ten-dimensional notation, the two charges are given by

q1 = z tr , q2 = z tr (ei0i + ijfij).

together they form a superalgebra

{qa, qb} =  

n0

2eii + 0ijfij

20p0 + 2ipi ! ,
2eii  0ijfij

(3.1)

(3.2)

(a, b = 1, 2) where lower case signies the zero modes.

m(atrix) theory is the proposal to describe m-theory in its innite momentum
frame by means of the dynamics of zero-branes [7]. from this perspective, yang-
mills theory on a three-torus is a description of m-theory on a three-torus. in
[16] it was demonstrated that the yang-mills theory superalgebra is indeed equal
to the m-theory algebra in the light cone limit, n  .

bps states are states that are annihilated by certain combinations of the su-
percharges, depending on the quantum numbers. this implies that the variation
of the fermions  should vanish under such symmetries, from which one can derive
equations that the bosonic elds should satisfy, the bps equations [14]. these
were determined in [6] to be

eii = 0, e[rs] = f rs.

(3.3)

the primes indicate that these equations only involve the non-zero modes of the
elds; the vector  is the three dimensional part of the sl(5) vector k (dened

7

below equation (2.10)), representing the momentum minus its contribution from
the zero modes of the elds:

.

(3.4)

 = p 

e  b
n

in a suitable gauge the bps equations become equivalent to the free eld equa-
tions of a chiral two-dimensional model, with no dependence on the directions
orthogonal to the vector . if we choose coordinates such that the momentum
points in the 1-direction,

0ai = 1ai,

0xi = 1xi,

(3.5)

with i = 2, 3, i = 1 . . . 6. furthermore, the u(n) valued elds are required
to mutually commute, but they are allowed to be identied periodically along
the spacelike circle modulo a permutation. from this it was argued in [6] that
in the case of all electric and magnetic uxes equal to zero, the solutions are
characterised by the sigma model on

(r6  t2)n

sn

,

(3.6)

where sn is the weyl group of u(n). the vector eld is responsible for the t2,
whereas the six scalars parametrise r6. the model therefore reduces to a matrix
string theory [15]; its hilbert space consists of all products of hilbert spaces of
strings of length ni, such that their total length is n. in particular, [6] considered
the sector involving one long string, where the sn twists on the a, x elds are
such that they are described by elds taking values on a circle whose length is
precisely n times that of the physical circle. quantising this system, it was found
that the number of states of quantum numbers n, p1 equaled d(np1), dened by

1  qn!8
x d(n)qn = 256y  1 + qn

.

(3.7)

the inclusion of electric or magnetic uxes in the 1-direction was argued to
eectively decrease the rank to n = gcd(n, e1, b1). the reason is that in a
u(n) gauge theory a magnetic ux b1 is realised by having twisted boundary
conditions for the su(n) part of the gauge elds along the 2 and 3 directions.
these twists should be two su(n) transformations which commute up to a zn
phase factor determined by the value of the magnetic ux modulo n. the point
is that the sn twists making the string in a long string should commute with
these magnetic twists, in order not to introduce an additional magnetic ux in
the 2 or 3 directions. this turns out to imply that the relevant permutation

8

group can be maximally sn , thus eectively reducing the length of the single
long string.

therefore in this case the oscillation number of the long string adds up to
n  (p1  (e  b)1/n), which is precisely the greatest common divisor of the
ve-vector k. the resulting degeneracy is then precisely that of (single particle)
string states, and in accordance with u-duality it only depends on the u-invariant
quantity |k| = gcd(k).

in the long string sector, hacquebord and verlinde therefore nd a degeneracy
of states in agreement with predictions by u-duality. sectors consisting of several
shorter strings, however, do not respect the symmetry; this is related to the fact
that the yang-mills hamiltonian is not invariant under sl(5). we will see below
that using the born-infeld theory, which does have a u-invariant hamiltonian,
improves this situation.

4. supersymmetric born-infeld theory

we now want to apply the same methods to study the bps spectrum of the
born-infeld theory. first we will use the supersymmetric generalisation of the
theory, described in [12], to obtain expressions for the supercharges and their
algebra. remarkably, this algebra will turn out to be isomorphic to the superal-
gebra of m-theory compactied on a four-torus. this establishes that there exists
an action of sl(5), which is the associated u-duality. then we derive, from the
requirement that the superalgebra should have eigenvalues equal to zero, the bps
mass found previously from the bosonic argument.

the supersymmetric born-infeld theory in ten dimensions was obtained in

[12] in the simple form

ssbi = z d10xq det( + f  2 + ).

(4.1)

(the background has been further simplied to gs = 1, g = .) this result was
derived from a green-schwarz type action with manifest target space covariance,
by xing the local -symmetry and going to static gauge. half of the 32 super-
symmetries of the target space are broken; these are realised non-linearly on the
action (4.1). the fermions  are the associated goldstone fermions. the other
sixteen supersymmetries act linearly. the transformations can be split into three
parts: the simple supertranslations of the covariant theory, plus the complicated
kappa-symmetry and coordinate transformations needed to restore the gauge.
these add up to the rules [12]

 = 1 + 2 + (2  1)
a = (2  1) + (2  1)a + (2  1)a.

(4.2)

9

 is a particular expression involving wedge products of the eld strength f
contracted with gamma-matrices; its specic form in the case d = 4, putting all
derivatives of the six scalars to zero, is given below. 1 corresponds to the broken
supersymmetry, the unbroken one is associated to a combination of 1 and 2.

these expressions are valid in ten dimensions. the four-dimensional born-
infeld theory we need can be easily obtained from this one by dimensional reduc-
tion.

unfortunately, the action (4.1) and the associated transformation rules are
those applying to a u(1) theory only. we will henceforth do computations in
this abelian theory, although at some points the rank n will be written to bring
out the symmetry more clearly. in the end we will make some remarks on the
alterations that should occur when non-abelian theories are considered.

the programme now is to compute the supersymmetry algebra, and nd
bosonic congurations which are annihilated by half of the supersymmetries. to
facilitate the computations, we will expand the action to quadratic order in the
fermions ; this is enough to nd the purely bosonic central charges.

from the variations given in (4.2) it is straightforward to compute the two

supercharge densities. we nd, to linear order in the fermions,

j1 = 2(p 00 + (ei + p i)i),

j2 = j1.

(4.3)

in d = 3 + 1, we can evaluate the gauge eld dependent quantity  to be

 =

1

1 + b2

i (cid:18)p 0 + (ei(1 + b2)  e  bbi)0i 

1
2

ijkbkij + e  b0123(cid:19) .

(4.4)

inserting this in the expression for j2 we nd

j2 = 2(0 

1
2

fij0ij).

(4.5)

we can then use the dirac brackets

1
{p 00 + (ei + p i)i, } =
2
{p 00 + (ei + p i)i, aj} =

,

1
2{p 00 + (ei + p i)i, aj} (4.6)

to calculate the superalgebra

{qa, qb} =   2(p00 + (p + e)ii)

20  fij0ij

20 + fij0ij

2(p00 + 2(p  e)ii) ! ,

(4.7)

(a, b take values 1, 2). recall that the lower case letters indicate the zero-modes of
the elds; here they appear, since the charges q are the integrals of the densities

10

j. if one takes the limit for innite rank, n  , one would recover the yang-
mills superalgebra (with a redenition of q1,2). in this sense, we can view the
born-infeld theory as the generalisation of yang-mills m(atrix) theory to nite
rank n, where the light cone direction is taken to be nite as well.

the superalgebra (4.7) is closely related to the algebra of 11-dimensional
supergravity compactied on a four-torus. concretely, if we dene the 32 com-
ponent supercharge

q =   0q1

q2 ! ,

and eleven-dimensional gamma-matrices

i = i  1,

11 = 1  3,

the algebra becomes

(4.8)

(4.9)

{q,q} = 2(p00 + eii + n11 + pii11 +

1
2

fijij),

(4.10)

which is precisely the eleven-dimensional supersymmetry algebra (compactied
on a four-torus), with ei and n the compact momenta, and pi, fij the components
of the central charge (in the compact directions). (the central charge associated
to the ve-brane cannot take a nite value on a four-torus). this algebra is
well known to enjoy the u-duality symmetry, sl(5) in the case of a four-torus
compactication. hence we can conclude that the bps-mass deduced from (4.7)
is invariant under sl(5). to compute it, we have to demand the matrix (4.7) to
have eigenvalues equal to zero; this gives an equation for p0. for a simple case,
say p1, n 6= 0 (and the rest of the quantum numbers zero), we nd

p2
0 = (n + p1)2.

(4.11)

by acting with sl(5, z) we can transform to the case of general quantum num-
bers, to nd

p2
0 = n2 + p2

i + e2

i + b2

i + 2q(npi  fijej)2 + (piei)2 + (pibi)2.

(4.12)

recall that strictly speaking we have only demonstrated this for congurations
having n = 1. this expression for the energy of a bps state coincides with the
one found via the bogomolny argument in the bosonic theory (equation 2.10),
where we put the moduli matrix g equal to the identity matrix.

11

5. bps-equations

so far we found the u-invariant bps mass spectrum from the supersymmetric
born-infeld action. in this section we will go on to compute the bps equations
that congurations saturating this bound have to satisfy. they will of course
ultimately turn out to be equivalent to those found in section 2. the strategy to
nd the equations is to demand a purely bosonic state to have the variations of
the fermions equal to zero, for supersymmetry parameter  satisfying

{q, q} = 0.

(5.1)

looking at equations (4.2) this gives (to linear order in the fermions) the equation
for :

or equivalently,

1 + 2 = 0,

z =   1 

 1 !  = 0

(5.2)

(5.3)

here  = 00, and there is a relation  =  = 1 [12].

we have to insert the general form of  satisfying (5.1) (given the central
charges) in this equation, and then solve for , i.e. determine the form of the
gauge elds. for general quantum numbers, this seems to be rather complicated,
until we notice that in the abelian case (n = 1) we may write

with the matrix m dened as

(n 2 + b2

i )z = m 2,

m =   2(p 00 + (p + e)ii)

2n0  fij0ij

2n0 + fij0ij

2(p 00 + (p  e)ii) ! .

(5.4)

(5.5)

remarkably, this matrix is identical to the supersymmetry algebra (4.7), except
that we have put in the complete elds for the zero-modes. we know how m
transforms under the u-duality group, namely similarly as the supersymmetry
algebra, which we will call m. (the transformation of m 2, and hence of , on
the other hand is rather complicated).

the bps-equation is therefore found by demanding m 2 = 0 for an  annihi-
lated by the zero mode m of m; one can easily verify that this may be simplied
to

m = 0.

(5.6)

12

to extract the precise bps condition, we write the condition m = 0 in a conve-
nient form as follows. note that

1
8

m3m3 = |k|1  1  (npi  fijej)0i  1  p  b0123  i2 + p  e1  3 (5.7)
where k is the ve-vector whose components are the coecients of the other
terms. this is precisely the same vector k that we encountered before. the
expression is a projection operator (times a constant), it can be written as

1
8

m3m3 = |k| + kii,

(5.8)

for suitable i satisfying a ve dimensional cliord algebra. from this we con-
clude that the condition m = 0 can be expressed as

for arbitrary spinor . hence the bps-equation becomes

 = 3m3(|k|  kii),

m3m3(|k|  kii) = 0.

if we work this out, for general charges, this yields the set of conditions

p0(|k|mij + ijklmmklkm)  p 0(|k|mij + ijklmmklkm) = 0
mij(|k|mij + ijklmmklkm)  p 0p0|k| = 0
ijklmmjk(|k|mlm + lmabcmabkc)  p 0p0ki = 0
kimij = 0.

(5.9)

(5.10)

(5.11)

(5.12)

(5.13)

(5.14)

we naturally identied the matrix m acting on spinors as (5.5) with the ve
by ve antisymmetric matrix mij, and likewise for the zero mode mij. apart
from the matrix m and its zero modes m, there also appears the hamiltonian,
(p 0)2 = 1
2mijmij + 2|k|. it can easily be
checked that the last three equations all follow from the rst one (one also has
to use that k  m  m = 0), so that ultimately the bps-equation just becomes
(5.15)

2 mijmij, and its zero mode (p0)2 = 1

p0(|k|mij + ijklmmklkm)  p 0(|k|mij + ijklmmklkm) = 0.

this is precisely the statement (2.11) obtained from the bosonic theory. here,
however, we immediately also get the factor of proportionality, (p 0  p0)/p0.

to recapitulate, we have reproduced the bps-bound and the bps-equation
from the supersymmetric theory. now we would like to study solutions to this
equation and interpret the meaning of space-dependent m45, the rank of the
gauge group. we will deal with this by noting that the denition of m from the

13

relevant quantity z leaves room for an extra rescaling by a uctuating factor,
which we will use to put m45 to a constant. then we can use sl(5) as a solution
generating transformation in the classical theory. after that we will study the
quantum properties, by imposing the bps equation on operators, and try to
determine degeneracies of states of given quantum numbers mij.

6. classical solutions of the bps equations

we will now study solutions to the born-infeld bps equations. ideally, one
would like to solve the bps equations for a simple conguration, and then invoke
the duality to generate the solutions at dierent quantum numbers. this will
be indeed the strategy we will follow. there are two questions that need to be
resolved for this to work, however. firstly, in fact we only know the born-infeld
theory for the abelian case. we will make the assumption that the non abelian
generalisation exists and shares the features of the yang-mills theory in its bps
space discussed in section (3), that the elds eectively diagonalise and can be
described as abelian elds on a longer circle. the second problem is that a duality
transformation acting on the matrix m will in general not keep the component
related to the rank a constant number. to solve this we will argue that m is
not quite the gauge theory quantity, but is only related to it up to a local scale
transformation, which may be used to gauge the rank to a constant.

to start with we will solve the bps equation (5.15) in the simplest possible
case, where the only non zero quantum numbers are n and p1; we will also rst
take n = 1 and postpone the discussion on the non abelian case.

we have, with p0 = n + p,

p 0 = n + p 1, e1 = b1 = 0, ei = f 1i, p i = 0,

(6.1)

where i = 2, 3. since, in this particular case, ei = f 0i, we recover the same
equations as those valid in the yang-mills situation. as was done there, we
choose the gauge a0 = a1 = 0, so that the gauge elds a2,3 satisfy

(0  1)ai = 0.

(6.2)

to obtain a genuine gauge theory we of course set n = n. the solutions to the
bps equations are then parametrised by two functions e2(t + x1) and e3(t + x1),
satisfying

note that in principle the bps equation does not rule out dependence on the
coordinates x2 and x3; this would, however, not be consistent with the maxwell

z e2,3 = 0,

z e2

2 + e2

3 = np1.

(6.3)

14

equations (although often bps equations imply equations of motion, this is not
in general the case).

now we will discuss the generalisation to the case that the rank n > 1. the
problem is that the form of the action of the non abelian born-infeld theory is
yet unknown, even in the bosonic case. tseytlin proposed a denition of the
theory using a symmetrised trace prescription [9], and it was argued in [10] that
this should be the only action allowing a supersymmetric extension. the precise
form of this extension has not been found. we will make some assumptions on
the alterations that arise, guided by the situation in the yang-mills theory, and
requiring that the duality group have some sensible action on the elds, at least
in the bps sector.

some of the formulas appearing in this paper seem to have a natural generali-
sation to arbitrary n; in particular, one would expect the superalgebra to remain
of the form presented in (4.7), with n as the coecient of the 0  1 part, so
that the relation to the eleven-dimensional algebra be preserved.

the introduction of a matrix m such as in the abelian case is now question-
able, however. merely inserting non-abelian matrices for the entries does not give
the desired squaring to something of the form of z. besides, it is not quite clear
what we would mean by this. though electric and magnetic elds are of course
easily converted to hermitian matrices, the prescription for the momenta p is
already more complicated. one might for instance dene it to be the anticommu-
tator of the appropriate es and f s. the matrix we would naturally introduce
for the rank n is the n  n identity matrix, the trace of which of course is n.
however, since duality mixes up the various components, these relations are no
longer preserved. what is more, since n may acquire a dierent value, the size
of the component matrices must change as well; it is hard to imagine a consistent
action of the duality group on general elds with this property.

to resolve these problems we make the following assumptions. we assume
that the bps congurations of the non abelian theory will behave like those
of the yang-mills theory, in the sense that the uctuations of the elds will
be simultaneously diagonalisable and that they will all depend again on only
one coordinate. again, there may be twists in the theory making the period
of this coordinate n times as long, where n = gcd(n, e1, b1). this makes the
theory eectively an abelian one. we further assume that this abelian bps
sector satises the generalisations to larger n of the equations presented in the
original case n = 1. in this way, the sl(5) duality does have a reasonable action
on the bps sector of the theory.

using these assumptions, the solution calculated above can be straightfor-
wardly generalised to higher rank n. the equations are the same, so we again

15

have elds that are left moving. the coordinate however now has periodicity n
(or n in the presence of the uxes as argued above). the integral of the elds
over this space then incorporates both the trace and the integration over the real
domain. we choose the function n to be one, so that its integral indeed equals
n. the other elds then again should have integrals as above.

so far we discussed only the bps equations in the case of simple uxes, with
only p1 and n unequal to zero. the equations were the same as those obtained
in the yang-mills theory. we now turn to more general uxes, where unlike the
yang-mills case the bps equations become more complicated. we will argue that
their solutions can be found using sl(5) transformations.

sl(5, z) acts on the zero mode matrix mij by conjugation. any conguration
with non-zero k = m  m can be mapped to one with only non-zero n and p1,
such that gcd(ki) = np1 and n = gcd(n, pi, ei, bi) (see e.g.
[17]). if the matrix
m transforms similarly the bps equations are also covariant under this group,
provided one also transforms the ve by ve moduli matrix g (2.6) (o diagonal
terms can also appear in this metric, and correspond to non-zero anti-symmetric
tensor elds). an mij (with zero modes mij) solving the equation, will therefore,
when transformed to m (with zero modes m) also solve the bps equation at the
transformed moduli (note that p 0 is invariant if we also transform the moduli).
the new solution, however, will only correspond to a possible gauge theory
solution if the new component m45 is a constant, to be identied with the rank.
this is certainly the case under transformations belonging to sl(2, z)sl(3, z),
which leave n invariant, but not in general.

the resolution is to recognise that the relation between the matrix m and
the gauge theory elds ei, bi, pi and n is not unambiguous. the original bps
equation was

z = 0,

(6.4)

and we reformulated this in terms of a matrix m dened in equations (5.4,5.5).
this reformulation is not unique however, as can be seen from the fact that ,
the top righthand block of z, is a function only of the quotients mij/n:

 =

=

ei
n

e  b
n

bi)0i

1
2

ijkp 0bkij + e  b0123#,

(n 2 + b2) 

n 2 + b2"np 0 + (

1 + (b/n)2"p 0/n + (ei/n(1 + (b/n)2)  (e  b)bi/n 3)0i


ijkp 0bk/n 2ij + e  b/n 20123#.

1

1

1
2

(6.5)

16

therefore, if we scale the matrix m, the physical elds present in  remain the
same, demonstrating that m only equals the various elds up to a factor which
may vary over spacetime. given a solution for m, we may therefore derive the
corresponding gauge elds by rescaling this m such that the entry in m45 becomes
the appropriate constant, and then reading o the values of the elds.

the strategy to solve the bps equations for general uxes is then to rst
transform the uxes by an element g  sl(5, z) to the simple case. then we
know the bps equations; where formerly we put n to a constant, now we demand
that the combination that under g1 will be mapped to the 45 component of m
is a constant. we further impose the equation

k = np1  e2b3 + e3b2 = 0;

(6.6)

this leaves us with two arbitrary functions. on these we impose the condition
that the zero modes of all elds are the correct ones. if we then transform back
using g1, the resulting conguration will satisfy the bps equation for these
uxes, will have the correct zero modes and will obey n = n. this guarantees
that we have an allowed bps conguration.

as mentioned earlier, elds satisfying the bps equations and also the condi-
tion m  m = 0 are not yet the complete story: we still have to demand them to
satisfy the equations of motion and bianchi identities. these will tell us how the
elds depend on the coordinates. to show that in general the uctuation parts
of the e and b elds again are left movers, depending on the coordinate in the
direction of the zero mode of the momentum of the uctuating elds, we need
the relation between f0i and fij in the general case. the general expression for
f0i in terms of the electric and magnetic elds is

f0i = (m 2)i5/p 0.

we can now use the bps equation (5.15) to derive

f0i =

1
p0 (mij + ijklmmklkm)mj5.

(6.7)

(6.8)

we will analyse two situations, k = k1 and k = k1 + k4. for other congurations
the discussion is similar.

for k having only a component in the one-direction, we have that m15 = 0.
since the matrix multiplying mj5 is anti-symmetric, we see that f02 is a linear
combination of b3 and n. if we restrict to uctuations, we therefore have

f 02 = const  f 12,

17

(6.9)

and similarly for f03.

for k having also a component in the four-direction, we do not anymore have
b1 = 0; however, in this case b1 is a constant, since from kimij = 0 we see that
it is proportional to n. for the uctuations, the relations therefore remain as
above.

this demonstrates that in general we still require (uctuating parts of) the
elds a2 and a3 to satisfy the equations of a chiral boson, be it that the speed
of light now deviates from one.

this ends the discussion of the classical gauge eld congurations in the bps
sector of the theory. in the next section we will again study the bps sector, but
there we will try to quantise the theory, with the bps requirements as constraints.

7. quantisation of the born-infeld bps states

we have seen that sl(5, z) is a symmetry of the bps equations, and can be
used to generate solutions. it is a dierent question whether the quantum theory
will enjoy the symmetry, so that the duality group will be a symmetry of the
space of states and the associated degeneracies.

the idea is not to quantise the complete born-infeld theory, but to consider
only the phase space corresponding to congurations that are supersymmetric.
this system is then to be quantised. the expectation is that, since supersymme-
try is so robust under quantum corrections, this gives an adequate description of
states and processes in the bps sector.

to investigate this question we have to represent the uctuating electric and
magnetic elds as operators on a fock space. the requirements will be that
e and b satisfy the appropriate commutation relations, and that all the elds
will have the prescribed integer expectation values when acting on states with
the associated quantum numbers. we will construct such operators using the
symmetry group and demonstrate that they have the desired properties.

in dealing with the rank n, we will use an analogue of the classical situation
described before. there we saw that scaling all elds was a symmetry, so that n
could be put to the appropriate constant value. here we will propose to identify
this symmetry with a gauge symmetry, generated by the constraint k = 0. in
the bps sector, the system eectively reduces to a string theory, where k takes
the role of the stress energy tensor. the choice n is constant is then simply the
familiar light cone gauge.

we will start by quantising the simplest case, where only n and p1 are unequal

to zero. the bps equations are

p0 = n + p1, e1 = b1 = 0, e2 = b3, e3 = b2,

(7.1)

18

which in this case implies f0i = f1i for i = 2, 3. the equations reduce the phase
space to eectively only two independent functions, e2 and e3, (plus the six
scalars), which can all be chosen to depend only on t+x. canonical commutation
relations imply:

[ei(x1), ei(x2)] = i

1
2

1(x1  x2) (for i = 2, 3).

(7.2)

as we saw, the elds ei are functions of a coordinate whose periodicity is n times
as long as that of x1. the two elds can then be quantised as

e2 = xk

1
2n

2

k

n

ei k
n ( +), e3 = xk

1
2n

3

k

n

ei k

n ( +),

(7.3)

, j

l

k

n

ni,j

n

] = k

(and similarly for the scalars) where [i
k,l, and  runs from 0 to n.
then p1 can be solved using the identity np1(eb)1 = 0 (with n the identity
matrix). imposing that r p = p gives that the number of states is d(np).

we propose to view the above computation as a string degeneracy computa-
tion in the light cone gauge in the following way. let us assume an underlying
theory where the components of m are all functions of space time (including
the m45 component which represented the rank), and which satisfy commutation
relations of the form

[mij(x), mkl(y)] = iijklmm(x  y).

(7.4)

formally the index on the derivative runs over two additional dimensions, 4, 5.
we will, however, always demand that the bps conguration only depends on
time and the spatial coordinate in the direction of p (or rather , the rst three
components of k as introduced in section 3); all other derivatives are put to
zero. furthermore m satises the constraint k = m  m = 0. the bps
conditions put various conditions on the components of m, and furthermore
in the present case restrict all elds to depend only on x1  t. we label the
remaining independent elds n = x +, p1 = x, e2,3 = 12x 2,3, and the
other six scalars 12
x i. in this form the commutation relations (7.4) are precisely
those of the left moving sector of a string, while the constraint k, which equals
k1 = x +x 1
2x ix i, takes the form of the associated stress energy tensor.
we now wish to interpret the choice n = x + = n as a gauge xing of the
symmetry generated by the local constraint k, analogous to the conventional light
cone gauge. after this xing, p1 = x is to be solved from the constraint, and
we end up with precisely the same representation of the various elds, with the
correct commutation relations, as above. we therefore can view this description in
terms of left moving bosons plus a gauge symmetry as eectively providing a way

19

of generating a representation of the elds ei, p1, with the correct commutation
relations and zero modes. furthermore, the identication of k 1 with the stress
energy tensor t explains the degeneracy formula, since we have a left moving
string theory at level l0 = p+p  1

2 (pi)2 = np1.

it turns out that the generalisation to a theory with more degrees of freedom
plus a gauge symmetry that we just introduced can be used also to quantise the
theory for general quantum numbers. the strategy is to start with the previous
case and, before xing the gauge, acting on the elds with sl(5, z). this will
transform m to a new m where all components are linear combinations of the
various x. in particular m45 is now changed from x + to a linear combination
involving other x i as well. using the fact that the theory with ten bosons and
supersymmetry is lorentz invariant, we may equivalently x the new n to be
equal to its zero mode n, and again solve for pi; if we identify the gauge theory
elds with the appropriate xs in the gauge where n is constant, these elds
will again satisfy the appropriate commutation relations, and have the right zero-
modes. furthermore, the degeneracy is again computed in the conformal eld
theory at level |k|.

to verify these assertions we will need to consider various subgroups of the
duality group. first of all, the groups sl(2, z) and sl(3, z), electro-magnetic
duality and the symmetries of the torus, are already evident symmetries in the
gauge theory description, without the introduction of the bosons, since they do
not aect the rank n.

we will rst consider the subgroup sl(4, z) that leaves k = k1 invariant.
inserting in the matrix m for the case of non zero n and p1 the various xs found
above, by acting with the transformation we obtain a new m which satises the
new bps equations. since solutions of the resulting bps equations still depend
only on t and x1 in some xed combination, acting with the transformation
leaves the commutation relations (7.4) invariant. after the transformation, the
zero modes of m are precisely the sl(4) transformed ones.
in the previous
case, we then picked a gauge where x + was proportional to the worldsheet time
coordinate, so that n = x + was a constant. using lorentz covariance, however,
we may alternatively gauge x any other combination of the x instead of x +,
without aecting the theory. obviously we now pick the gauge where n = n.
we may then again solve for p1 (p2,3 remain zero), and obtain a representation
for the elds e and b satisfying the commutation relations. since k 1 remains
invariant, the stress energy tensor remains the same, as well as the level np1, so
that we nd the same degeneracy.

the case where k is not left xed is slightly more complicated; we will consider
an sl(2) transformation on the simple case, changing k1 = np1 to k1 = rk1, k4 =

20

sk1, with r, s mutually prime. before application of this sl(2) transformation
we denote n = x +, p1 = x and e2,3 = x 2,3 as before, and furthermore
b2 = e3, b3 = e2. acting on these elds with the element of sl(2) results
in a new conguration where n, e2 and e3 are r times their former expression,
whereas p1, b2,3 remain unaected. furthermore, p2, p3 and b1 also get a value
dierent from zero.

if we would quantise the simple theory as before, and apply the transforma-
tion, we do of course get the desired degeneracy, d(np1). however, this is not
quite correct, since the new conguration does not satisfy the required commu-
tation relations: the new e and b commutator is r times too large. this can
also be understood from the transformation of the m-commutation relations, as
given in equation (7.4): formally, the only derivative that was non-zero, 1, is
transformed into r1 + s4. the new conguration can be taken to depend only
on x1, and we demand 4 to be zero. this leaves us with a commutation relation
that is r times its previous value.

to ensure the correct commutation relations after the sl(2) transformation,
we therefore have to scale the commutation relations of the x i down by a factor
r. however, if we then compute the degeneracy in the pre-transformation, simple
state with only p1 and n non-zero, with these rescaled relations we seem to get a
degeneracy which is d(rnp1) rather than d(np1).

the situation is saved by the observation of [6], that the allowed twists gener-
ating long strings take values only in sn , rather than sn , where n = gcd(n, b1).
the elds after the transformation have a period which is r times smaller than
naively expected. therefore, not all oscillators are allowed: the oscillator num-
bers are r times larger than without this requirement. in the end, this combina-
tion of rescaling the commutation relations, plus rescaling the allowed periodicity
of the elds, gives us again the correct result for the degeneracy: d(gcd(k)) =
d(p  gcd(n, b1)).

acting then on this conguration with sl(4) keeping the vector k invariant
works similarly as in the case where k was pointing only in the 1-direction, and
gives the same degeneracy. other congurations of k can be trivially obtained
using sl(2)  sl(3) transformations.

this concludes the demonstration of u-invariance of the degeneracies in the
long string sector. next we will investigate the contributions of multiple string
states.

7.1. multi-particle bps states

so far we considered the degeneracy associated to the sector involving long

21

strings, i.e. the congurations containing only one single bps bound state. it is
in principle also possible to construct multi-particle bps states, whose charges
add up to the total charge. in the symmetric product string sigma model these are
identied with the states in those twisted sectors in the conjugacy class where n is
partitioned in more than one piece. for these states to be bps, it is necessary that
all component states are annihilated by the same supersymmetry, or, equivalently,
that the total energy is precisely the sum of the constituent bps energies. in
m-theory, this implies that the charge matrices of the component states should
be proportional. in yang-mills theory this turned out not to be the case [6]; there
was a greater freedom in the distribution of the charges over the constituents, in
particular with respect to the value of the momentum zero mode. this was related
to the fact that the yang-mills bps mass was not symmetric under duality. in
the present case, for generic moduli it is clear that all charges should align for
the component masses to add up to precisely the composite bps mass. this
is of course also evident from the relation the supersymmetry parameters have
to obey, m = 0. we can therefore conclude that in the born-infeld case the
counting of degeneracies, including those related to composite bps states, gives
the result expected from m-theory.

note that, since every component charge matrix m

to give an explicit expression for the total u-invariant degeneracy, we rst
ij is proportional to the total
ij, the dierent compositions of mij in sets of m coincide with
charge mij = p m
all possible ways one can partition the number |m|  gcd(mij) in a collection of
n states of |m| = , so that p n = |m|. (the long string has n|m| = 1, the
other n = 0.) each short, component, string has its own vector k = m  m,
with |k|  gcd((k)i). the degeneracy associated to such a short string of length
 is therefore given by d(|k|). for the long string, we have |k| = r|m|2, since the
vector k is quadratic in the components of m. the number r is a xed integer
depending on the state. therefore, we have |k| = r2, so that a string of length
 can be in 1/2 d(r2) dierent bosonic states, and equally many fermionic ones.
the total bps-state is a symmetric combination of the partial ones, resulting in
a degeneracy formula

d(r,|m|)q|m| = y   1 + q
1  q!

x|m|

1

2 d(r2)

,

(7.5)

where as mentioned r = |k|/|m|2. the total degeneracy therefore depends on the
two u-invariants, |k| and |m|.

22

8. discussion

we analysed the born-infeld theory of a compactied d3-brane, and argued for
a realisation of sl(5, z) u-duality on the 1/4 bps sector of the theory (making
a number of assumptions on the structure of the non-abelian theory). the action
on the quantum numbers was well known already, the surprising fact was that
there seems to exist an action of the duality also at the level of elds. these local
degrees of freedom, assembled in the matrix mij(x), are not exactly the elds
of the gauge theory. rather, m contains one more degree of freedom, which is
compensated by a local symmetry acting on m. the born-infeld theory, in its
bps sector, was argued to be a gauge xed version of this extended model: the
gauge condition is that the rank is a constant. on the extended model sl(5) has
a natural action; however, this action does not in general preserve the gauge. the
action at the level of the born-infeld theory therefore has to be supplemented by
a compensating transformation restoring the gauge.

furthermore, by interpreting the model (reduced to the bps sector) as a string
theory in light cone gauge, we computed the degeneracies of the bps states, and
found them to be in agreement with the predictions of string/m theory.

we conclude by making some speculative remarks on some striking similarities
of the model presented here to the self-dual tensor theory, the low energy theory
living on the m theory ve-brane. we will consider this theory compactied on a
ve-torus. in a hamiltonian approach [18], one can describe the theory in terms
of a spatial two-form mij dened in terms of the self-dual eld strength f as

mij =

1
6

ijklmf klm.

(8.1)

mij of course depends on all six spacetime coordinates. the energy and momen-
tum densities of the theory are

p 0 = m 2

ij, p i = (m  m),

(8.2)

which we recognise as our hamiltonian and k-vector, respectively. the dirac
brackets were calculated in [18] to be

[mij(x), mkl(y)] = ijklmm(x  y).

(8.3)

this is of course the same as equation (7.4), but in this case all coordinates are
truly ve-dimensional. the sl(5) symmetry is evidently the purely geometrical
symmetry of the ve-torus.

a supersymmetric version of the m5 brane (in the pst formulation [20])
was studied in [19]. the supersymmetry algebra was calculated, and, like in

23

our born-infeld calculation, it was shown to be precisely the m theory algebra.
a compactied ve-brane (on a ve torus) of course has more charges; apart
from the ten uxes of mij, one generically also has the ve momenta p i, and the
number of ve-branes n. according to the correspondence between the momenta
and our vector k, it seems that to make the connection to the three-brane theory
one should demand all momenta to vanish. if we also set the ve-brane number
n to zero, the supersymmetry algebra becomes similar to the one of interest in
this paper; furthermore, one nds the same bps equation for 1/4 bps states!

it is tempting to interpret the condition that the momenta vanish as the
analogue of l0  l0 = 0 in string theory, and view the ve-brane theory as
an underlying theory for the gauge theory. interestingly, the rank of the gauge
theory would then be just one of the uxes of the compactied ve-brane.

acknowledgements

i want to thank david berman, feike hacquebord, christiaan hofman, erik
verlinde and herman verlinde for providing explanations, advice and discussion.
stichting fom is acknowledged for nancial support.

references

[1] c. hull, p. townsend, unity of superstring dualities, nucl. phys. b438

(1995) 109, hep-th/9410167.

[2] a. sen, a note on marginally stable bound states in type ii string theory,
phys. rev. d54 (1996) 2964, hep-th/9510229; a. sen, u duality and in-
tersecting dirichlet branes, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 2874, hep-th/9511026;
c. vafa, gas of d-branes and hagedorn density of bps states, nucl. phys.
b463 (1996) 415, hep-th/9511088.

[3] j. polchinski, dirichlet branes and ramond-ramond charges, phys. rev.
lett. 75 (1995) 4724, hep-th/9510017; e. witten, bound states of strings
and p-branes, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 335, hep-th/9510135.

[4] w. taylor iv, d-brane field theory on compact spaces, phys. lett. b394
(1997) 283, hep-th/9611042. o.j. ganor, s. ramgoolam and w. taylor iv,
branes, fluxes and duality in m(atrix) theory, nucl. phys. b492 (1997)
191, hep-th/9611202.

24

[5] n.a. obers, b. pioline, u duality and m theory, hep-th/9809039; s.
elitzur, a. giveon, d. kutasov, e. rabinovici, algebraic aspects of matrix
theory on t d, nucl. phys. b509 (1998) 122, hep-th/9707217; b. pioline,
e. kiritsis, u-duality and d-brane combinatorics, phys lett. b418 (1998)
61, hep-th/9710078; n.a. obers, b. pioline, e. rabinovici, m-theory and
u-duality on t d with gauge backgrounds, nucl. phys. b525 (1998) 163,
hep-th/9712084; m. blau, m. oloughlin, aspects of u-duality in matrix
theory, nucl. phys. b525 (1998) 182, hep-th/9712047.

[6] f. hacquebord, h. verlinde, duality symmetry of n = 4 yang-mills theory

on t 3, nucl.phys. b508 (1997), 609, hep-th/9707179.

[7] t. banks, w. fischler, s.h. shenker and l. susskind, m-theory as a matrix

model: a conjecture, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112, hep-th/9610043.

[8] r. leigh, dirac-born-infeld action from dirichlet sigma models,

mod.phys.lett. a4 (1989) 2767.

[9] a. tseytlin, on nonabelian generalisation of born-infeld action in string

theory, nucl. phys. b501 (1997) 41, hep-th/9701125.

[10] d. brecher, bps states of the non-abelian born-infeld action, phys. lett.

b442 (1998) 117, hep-th/9804180.

[11] c. hofman, e. verlinde, g. zwart, u-duality invariance of the four-

dimensional born-infeld theory, jhep 10 (1998) 020, hep-th/9808128.

[12] m. aganagic, c. popescu, j. schwarz, gauge-invariant and gauge-fixed

d-brane actions, nucl. phys. b495 (1997) 99, hep-th/9612080.

[13] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, bps quantization of the five-brane,

nucl.phys. b486 (1997) 89, hep-th/9604055.

[14] d. olive, e. witten, supersymmetry algebras that include topological

charges, phys. lett. b78 (1978) 97

[15] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde, h. verlinde, matrix string theory, nucl. phys.

b500 (1997) 43, hep-th/9703030.

[16] t. banks, n. seiberg, s. shenker, branes from matrices, nucl. phys. b490

(1997) 91, hep-th/9612157.

[17] j.-i. igusa, theta functions, springer, 1972, p 71; conforto, abelsche funk-

tionen und algebraische geometrie, springer, 1956, p76.

25

[18] x. bekaert, m. henneaux, comments on chiral p-forms, hep-th/9806062.

[19] d. sorokin, p. townsend, m-theory superalgebra from the m-5-brane, phys.

lett. b412 (1997) 265, hep-th/9708003.

[20] p.pasti, d. sorokin, m. tonin, covariant action for a d = 11 five-brane

with the chiral field, phys. lett. b398 (1997) 41, hep-th/9701037.

26

