9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
8
2

 

 
 

2
v
4
5
0
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

conformal field theory of the

integer quantum hall plateau transition

martin r. zirnbauer

may 28, 1999

abstract

a solution to the long-standing problem of identifying the conformal
eld theory governing the transition between quantized hall plateaus of
a disordered noninteracting 2d electron gas,
is proposed. the theory
is a nonlinear sigma model with a wess-zumino-novikov-witten term,
and elds taking values in a riemannian symmetric superspace based on
h3  s3. essentially the same conformal eld theory appeared in very
recent work on string propagation in ads3 backgrounds. we explain how
the proposed theory manages to obey a number of tight constraints, two
of which are constancy of the partition function and noncriticality of the
local density of states. an unexpected feature is the existence of a truly
marginal deformation, restricting the extent to which universality can
hold in critical quantum hall systems. the marginal coupling is xed by
matching the short-distance singularity of the conductance between two
interior contacts to the classical conductivity xx = 1/2 of the chalker-
coddington network model. for this value, perturbation theory predicts
a critical exponent xt = 2/ for the typical point-contact conductance, in
agreement with numerical simulations. the irrational exponent is toler-
ated by the fact that the symmetry algebra of the eld theory is virasoro
but not ane lie algebraic.

1 introduction

a two-dimensional electron gas subjected to strong magnetic elds exhibits the
striking phenomenon of the quantum hall eect [1, 2]: as the temperature is
lowered into the (sub-)kelvin range, the hall conductance evolves towards a

current address: department of mathematics, fine hall, princeton university, usa.
permanent address: institut fur theoretische physik, universitat zu koln, zulpicher str. 77,
50937 koln, germany. email: zirn@thp.uni-koeln.de

1

staircase function, with quantized plateau values e2/h occurring around cer-
tain magic landau level lling fractions .
it is fair to say that the physical
reasons for the quantization and its stability with respect to changing the mag-
netic eld, are by now well understood [3, 4]. what has proved more dicult to
clarify is the precise nature of the transitions between plateaus. for all we know,
these are associated with quantum critical points of the electron gas. extrapola-
tion to zero temperature and innite system size indicates a second-order phase
transition with a divergent correlation length. in the integer version of the eect,
which we will be concerned with in the present paper, interactions between the
electrons are thought to be irrelevant, and the critical behavior is attributed to
the interplay between the disorder, which tends to localize the electrons, and
the kinetic energy quenched by the strong magnetic eld, causing delocalization
for some isolated values of the fermi energy [5]. the major theoretical goal is
to identify the proper low-energy eective eld theory. on general grounds, this
theory is expected to be conformal at the transition, and should provide a sys-
tematic framework for the calculation of critical exponents and the formulation
of a complete scaling theory [6, 7]. needless to say, in spite of fteen years of
massive eort, that ambitious theoretical goal was never achieved.

the early development of the subject was guided by a eld theory of the type
of a g/h nonlinear sigma model, called pruiskens model [8]. its original formu-
lation relied on a fermionic version of the replica trick, leading to a symmetry
group g = u(2n) (with n = 0) gauged on the right by h = u(n)u(n). a math-
ematically satisfactory formulation avoiding replicas was introduced by wei-
denmuller [9], who employed the supersymmetric method of efetov [10]. in that
variant, g is a pseudo-unitary supergroup u(1, 1|2), and h = u(1|1)  u(1|1).
in either case, the eld theory has two dimensionless coupling constants, denoted
by xx and xy, which are identied with the longitudinal and hall conductivities
of the disordered electron gas. on the basis of pruiskens model, khmelnitskii
[11] conjectured a renormalization group ow diagram for xx and xy, where the
central feature is a xed point of the ow at some 
xy = 1/2. the xed
point was argued to have one relevant (xy  1/2) and one irrelevant (xx  
xx)
perturbation, giving a fair representation of experimental and numerical data
on the transition. unfortunately, the initial successes and guesses inspired by
pruiskens nonlinear sigma model were not backed up by a more complete so-
lution. the problem is that the postulated xed point  if it exists as a xed
point of pruiskens model, which is not really clear  lies at strong coupling,
or small xx, where it cannot be controlled by its representation through g/h
elds. (the one-instanton computations of pruisken and collaborators [12] can
only be trusted at weak coupling, and to learn something about the xed point, a
far extrapolation to strong coupling is required.) consequently, no quantitative
results beyond the rough, though instructive, picture of two-parameter scaling
have ever come out of that theory.

xx and 

2

the disillusionment about pruiskens model grew into a forceful complaint
[13] when a detailed understanding of a related 2d xed point became avail-
able, namely that governing the six-vertex model with isotropic vertex weights
or, equivalently, the sine-gordon model at 2 = 8, or, the xy-model at the
kosterlitz-thouless transition. another of its many incarnations is found in
isotropic 1d quantum antiferromagnets with half-integral spin, which following
haldane [14] map on the o(3) nonlinear sigma model with a topological term
and topological angle  = . in that paradigmatic system, it soon became clear
[15] that the good theory, where conformal invariance is manifest and crit-
ical properties can be computed in great detail, is not the o(3) model but a
wess-zumino-novikov-witten (wzw) model. characteristically, the elds of
the latter take values in a group (which is su(2) here), whereas the target space
of the o(3) model is a coset space su(2)/u(1). thus the eld is promoted
from being coset-valued to group-valued, at criticality. although antiferromag-
nets seem to be a far cry from disordered electrons, the lesson learned from this
example does have a bearing on the quantum hall critical point and ought to
be taken seriously: pruiskens replicated model at replica number n = 1 (and
critical xy = 1/2) is nothing else than the o(3) model at  = , which in turn
is also a basic constituent of the supersymmetric g/h model.

drawing on the insight gained from antiferromagnets, a natural idea for mak-
ing progress with the quantum hall plateau transition is to try and promote the
eld space g/h to a group or group-like manifold. (note that we are well advised
to avoid the mathematical ambiguities [16, 17] of the replica trick and work with
the supersymmetric formulation. aeck attempted to execute the program in
the replicated version, but failed [18].) although this idea has now been around
for more than a decade, progress was painfully slow. the reason was that there
existed a number of severe obstacles, a chronological personal account of which
is as follows.

given the symmetries of the supersymmetric version of pruiskens model, one
might take a wzw model with target u(1, 1)|2), or su(1, 1|2), or psu(1, 1|2),
for a rst candidate. here we stall immediately. in trying to solve the statistical
physics problem at hand, we have to be very discriminating about which func-
tional integral to accept as well-dened and which not. in concrete terms, we
are looking for a eld theory dened over euclidian two-space, and with a tar-
get space of euclidian signature. this constraint eliminates candidate theories
with an action functional that is bounded neither from below nor from above.
among these are the above supergroups, the natural supergeometry of which is
non-riemann, or of indenite signature. (the natural geometry is forced on us
by symmetry considerations.)

let us mention in passing that, to have a wzw model with denite metric,
one option is to start from g = u(1, 1|2) and gauge by h = u(1|1)  u(1|1).
what we have in mind here is the functional integral version [19] of the goddard-

3

kent-olive construction. unfortunately, in that construction the gauge group
acts by conjugation (so it acts simultaneously on the left and right), which ruins
conservation of some of the g currents. symmetries are not lost under renormal-
ization, and because g is the symmetry group of (the supersymmetric version
of) pruiskens model, it must be present in the xed-point theory. this kills the
idea of gauging the g-wzw model by h.

the next attempt is to modify u(1, 1|2), so as to arrive at a target manifold
with better metric properties, giving an action functional bounded from below
by the constant elds. curiously, it turns out that the proper modication does
not exist within the realm of standard supermanifold theory, but requires the
introduction of objects i call riemannian symmetric superspaces [20]. they
belong to the general category of cs-manifolds [21]. the denition of these
nonstandard notions, and their illustration at a well-chosen simple example, will
be given in section 6. the crucial feature of the good variant of u(1, 1|2) 
lets name it x for short  is that it is based on a symmetric space mb  mf,
mb = gl(2, c)/u(2) and mf = u(2), which has the desired property of being
riemann in the geometry inherited from the natural supergeometry of x. in
some sense, u(1, 1|2) is one real form of the complex supergroup gl(2|2),
and x is another. (in the notation of section 6, x is the symmetric superspace
(gl(2|2), str(g1dg)2, mb  mf).) while x is not a group, it does give rise to
an acceptable and well-dened functional integral, the x-wzw model. (by an
abuse of terminology, one might also call it the gl(2|2) wzw model [22].)

aside from its distinguished mathematical role, the x-wzw model also has
a noteworthy physical origin. several models have been proposed as a starting
point for the description of the quantum hall plateau transition, and among
them there is a model [23] of two-dimensional dirac fermions subject to various
types of disorder: random vector potential, random scalar potential, and random
mass. for the purpose of computing the disorder-averaged green functions and
other quenched correlation functions of the model, one adds a bosonic - ghost
system, which normalizes the partition function to unity [24]. by a superex-
tension of wittens nonabelian bosonization scheme [25], the weakly disordered
dirac- system then transforms into a weakly perturbed wzw model. actu-
ally, there exist two schemes [26], and the better one to use in the present context
leads to the target being gl(1|1) for a single green function, and gl(2|2) for
two green functions. these identications of the target space are naive, and
a careful analysis of the second case shows that proper use of the bosonization
scheme leads to the target x. thus the pure dirac- system is equivalent to
the x-wzw model (at level k = 1), and the disorder which is present translates
into perturbations of it.

the usefulness of such an approach now hinges on the nature of the pertur-
bations. from [23] it is known that the random scalar potential, the random
vector potential and the random mass are marginally relevant, truly marginal,

4

and marginally irrelevant, in that order. the dangerous perturbation by a ran-
dom scalar potential, which is generic to the quantum hall (qh) universality
class, grows under renormalization and drives the dirac- system to an un-
known xed point at strong coupling. unfortunately, nonabelian bosonization
does not give much of a clue as to how to handle that strong-coupling problem.
presumably, the xed point can somehow be described in terms of elds taking
values inside x, but exactly what happens remains mysterious. (the situation
is less favorable here than in aecks trick [26] for passing from the critical
heisenberg chain via dirac fermions to the su(2)1 wzw model. in that case,
the relevant perturbation simply reduces u(2) to su(2).) thus we are stuck
once again.

the next piece of confusing evidence came from a 1996 numerical study [27]
of point-contact conductances in the chalker-coddington network model of the
qh plateau transition. from the perspective of conformal eld theory, the point-
contact conductance is the most basic and clean observable, as pruiskens
model expresses it as a two-point function of local elds.
in a wzw model,
the scaling dimensions of local (primary) elds  transforming according to
a representation , are given [28] by the formula c/(k + h), where c is the
quadratic casimir invariant evaluated on , and the level k and the dual coxeter
number h are integers. in view of this fact, it has to be termed striking that
the critical exponent xt for the typical point-contact conductance was found be
xt = 0.640  0.009, which is numerically close to 2/  0.637. the latter value,
if exact, is hard to reconcile with the above formula, which predicts rational
numbers. it seemed, at that point, that the idea of promoting the eld space
g/h to a group (or group-like manifold), and passing from pruiskens model to
a wzw model, fails to work.

the present paper was triggered by the recent appearance of two articles
[29, 30] related to superstring propagation on ads3 backgrounds. there, a
prominent role is played by a nonlinear sigma model with target psu(1, 1|2),
the supergroup obtained from u(1, 1|2) by requiring unit superdeterminant and
gauging w.r.t. the multiples of the unit matrix. the intriguing message from
those articles is that the psu(1, 1|2) nonlinear sigma model is conformal at any
value of its coupling, f . the model also allows for the presence of a wess-zumino
term with topological coupling k, so we have a two-parameter family of confor-
mal eld theories at our disposal. (in the string-theory context, the two coupling
constants are related to the ramond-ramond and neveu-schwarz uxes that are
due to a number of vebranes wrapped around some calabi-yau manifold.) the
marginality of the coupling f looks very promising from our perspective, as it
suggests enough exibility to accommodate the peculiar critical exponent found
for the typical point-contact conductance. we are thus led to reconsider the
wzw model idea.

our tale does not converge to a quick conclusion, as there still exist a number

5

of diculties to overcome. first of all, psu(1, 1|2) is one of those target spaces
we discarded right at the outset, on the grounds that we insist on having a tar-
get metric with euclidian signature. second, the virasoro central charge of the
psu(1, 1|2) nonlinear sigma model (with and without wess-zumino term) has
the value c = 2, which is at variance with a basic constraint on the theory: its
partition function must be identically equal to unity, independent of all parame-
ters of the noninteracting electron gas. third, correlation functions that involve
only retarded or only advanced green functions of the disordered electron sys-
tem, are known to be noncritical (or even trivial). it is not a priori obvious how
one can arrange for the psu(1, 1|2) model to reproduce this feature. fourth, the
marginality of the coupling f , while needed to accommodate the exponent xt,
appears to be at odds with the observation of universal critical behavior in qh
systems.

in the present paper, these problems will be addressed and solved. in brief,
the rst one (indenite metric) is overcome by trading psu(1, 1|2) for a subman-
ifold of the riemannian symmetric superspace x, which is obtained by dividing
out r+  mb and u(1)  mf. the second one (central charge c 6= 0) is rectied
by postulating the existence of a bosonic ghost eld that can alternatively be
regarded as forming part of the functional integration measure. the third one
(noncriticality of all correlation functions that probe only the retarded or ad-
vanced sector) turns out to be resolved as a consequence of brst invariance of
the supersymmetric theory with properly dened target. concerning the fourth
point (marginal coupling f ), we shall argue that universality prevails to the ex-
tent that the conductivity governing the classical or incoherent transport near
absorbing boundaries is universal.

let us now summarize the plan of the paper. we start out by reviewing
in sections 24 three cornerstones of the theory of the qh plateau transition:
the network model of chalker and coddington, the supersymmetric version of
pruiskens nonlinear sigma model, and an antiferromagnetic superspin chain.
(along the way, we point out an exact mapping from the autocorrelation function
of spectral determinants of the network model, to a perturbed six-vertex model.)
the physical information drawn from them is condensed into a check list of
conditions the xed-point theory must satisfy, in section 5. we then change gears
and elucidate, in section 6, the notions of riemannian symmetric superspace
and cs-manifold, which are needed for the denition of the target space and its
invariant berezin integral in sections 7 and 8. a candidate for the xed point is
proposed in section 9. normalization of its partition function and triviality of
the brst invariant correlation functions is demonstrated in section 10. section
11 briey reviews the arguments for conformal invariance of the model, and
section 12 checks more items of our list. the marginal coupling f is xed
in section 13, by matching the short-distance singularity of the conductance
between two interior contacts to the classical expectation. with the value of f

6

thus determined, we argue in section 14 that the algebraic decay of the typical
point-contact conductance for the network model is governed by the irrational
exponent xt = 2/, in agreement with the numerics. an assessment of where
the theory now stands and where it will go, is given in the last section.

finally, a word of warning is in order. this paper addresses an audience in-
cluding disordered electron physicists, conformal eld theorists, and high-energy
physicists. therefore, an eort was made to explain some trivial things. on the
other hand, part of the material, particularly in the later sections, is too complex
to be treatable below a certain miminum of mathematical sophistication, and
some basic familiarity with the theory of symmetric spaces, supermanifolds, and
harmonic analysis had to be assumed.

2 network model

the purpose of the present paper is to propose a eld-theory lagrangian de-
scribing the critical behavior at the transition between two neighboring plateaus
of the integer quantum hall eect. although our proposal is not constructive
(in the sense of providing a complete sequence of steps leading from a micro-
scopic model to the eld theory), it will take a number of important clues and
constraints from the representation of the quantum hall universality class by
noninteracting disordered electrons in a strong magnetic eld. a particularly
neat and ecient representative of this universality class is the network model
of chalker and coddington [31, 32], which we are now going to review.

in its original formulation, the model was conceived as a device for com-
puting the transfer of electron wave amplitudes across a nite two-dimensional
quantum hall sample. a wave function of the model is dened to be a set of
complex amplitudes, one for each edge or link of a square network. a charac-
teristic feature, originating from the presence of a strong magnetic eld, is the
unidirectional motion specied by arrows, see figure 1. the elementary building
blocks of the model are 2  2 scattering matrices s assigned to the vertices or
nodes of the network. being elements of the unitary group u(2), these matrices
can be written as

s =(cid:18) ei(o1)

0

0

ei(o2)(cid:19)(cid:18) cos 

 sin  cos (cid:19)(cid:18) ei(i1)

sin 

0

0

ei(i2)(cid:19) .

each phase factor ei belongs to one link of the network. disorder is introduced
by taking the phase factors to be independent identically distributed random
variables drawn from u(1). averages over the disorder will be denoted by h...i.
the distribution of the phase factors is taken to be uniform on u(1), which
results in the model having a local u(1) lattice gauge invariance. the parameter
 is taken to be xed (as opposed to random) and homogeneous over the network,

7

 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 

 


 

 

 


 

 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


 

 


figure 1: unit cell of the network model.

and determines the probability for scattering to the left or right at each node to
be pl = | cos |2 or pr = | sin |2. the connection rules specied by the scattering
matrices on the nodes dene a transfer matrix for the total system. the network
model is critical when the probabilities for scattering to the left and right are
equal: pl = pr = 1/2. (we mention in passing that the approximations leading
to the model are readily justied for slowly varying random potentials.)

although the transfer matrix picture has its merits, it will be more useful
for our purposes to think about the network model in another way, namely as a
dynamical system with discrete time [33]. the evolution operator for one time
step is a unitary operator denoted by u, and the dynamics is generated by
iterating u. thus, if the state of the electron at time t = 0 is |0i, the state
after n elementary time steps is |t=ni = u n|0i. the time evolution operator
u is a product of two factors: u = u0u1. the rst of these (u1) encodes the
deterministic part of the scattering at the nodes. the other factor (u0) multiplies
the wave function on each link l by the corresponding random u(1) element ei(l).
when the network model is viewed as a quantum dynamical system, we can
dene for it an analog of the resolvent operator (e  i  h)1 of a hamiltonian
system with energy e and hamiltonian h. recalling the identity

(e + i  h)1 = iz 

0

eit(e+ih)dt

( > 0) ,

we do the following. we replace e + i by a complex quasi-energy i1 ln z with
|z| < 1, the time evolution operator eith by u n, and the integral over continuous
time t by a sum over discrete time n. the above identity then transcribes to



(1  zu)1 =

znu n .

thus the correct analog of the operator (e + i  h)1 is (1  zu)1, and the
analog of (e  i  h)1 is (1  z u )1. many observables of the network  as
an example we mention the point-contact conductance [27]  can be expressed
as products of matrix elements of these operators.

xn=0

8

although its primary realm of application is charge transport, the network
model has also been protably used for studying spectral correlations [34]. in
that case one takes the network to be closed, and views the eigenvalues of i ln u
as quasi-energy levels on the interval [0, 2]. one quantity of interest is the
so-called two-level correlation function r2(), which has a well-known expression
as the (discrete) fourier transform of the quantum return probability h|tr u n|2i:

r2() = (22)1



xn=1

cos(n)(cid:10)|tr u n|2(cid:11) .

another quantity that has been the focus of recent work [35] is the autocorrela-
tion function of spectral determinants,

more generally, we can consider the following correlation function:

c() =(cid:10)det(1  ei/2u) det(1  ei/2 u )(cid:11) .
(a0, a1; b0, b1) =(cid:28) det(1  a1u) det(1  b1 u )
det(1  a0u) det(1  b0 u )(cid:29) .

(1)

we recover c() from it by setting a0 = b0 = 0 and a1 = b1 = ei/2. we can also
extract r2(), by dierentiating with respect to a0 and b0 at a0 = a1 = b0 =
b1 = ei/2 and then taking the real part. a (perturbed) conformal eld theory
formulation of the correlator  at criticality will be proposed in section 9. here
we wish to point out the following two features. firstly, when a0 is set equal to
a1, or b0 equal to b1, the correlator becomes trivial:

(a, a; b0, b1) = 1 = (a0, a1; b, b) .

indeed, in the former case the rst determinants in the numerator and denom-
inator cancel, leaving hdet(1  b1 u)/det(1  b0 u )i. for |b0| < 1 this can be
expanded in a convergent power series in u. since heini = 0 for n > 0, only
the very rst term in the series survives disorder averaging, giving the trivial
result of unity. the same argument applies to the latter case (b0 = b1 = b).
for similar reasons, any correlation function or observable involving only re-
tarded information (u n) or only advanced information ( u n) is trivial. this puts
a strong constraint on any eld theory that is to be a serious candidate for the
qh plateau transition.

secondly, recall that setting a0 = b0 = 0 and a1 = b1 = ei/2 yields the
correlator c(). its critical behavior has recently been argued [35] to fall in a
much studied and well understood universality class that has an su(2) invari-
ance. this is the universality class of the six-vertex model with isotropic vertex
weights, or the one-dimensional isotropic spin-1/2 heisenberg antiferromagnet,
or the sine-gordon model at 2 = 8, or the xy-model at the kosterlitz-thouless

9

temperature. the conformal eld theory governing this class is known [26] to
be the wess-zumino-novikov-witten (wzw) model of the group su(2) at level
k = 1. thus another condition to impose on the theory we are looking for, is
that it has to ow to the su(2)1 wzw model on sending ln a0 and ln b0 to minus
innity.

while the derivation given in [35] took the thorny route of the o(3) nonlinear
sigma model, the critical nature of the correlator c() can be understood quite
directly and convincingly from the network model. let us take a break from the
general development and provide a few details here. we start o by representing
the product of spectral determinants as a gaussian integral over (retarded and
advanced) anticommuting elds (l) and (l) placed on the links l of the
network. the average over the random phase factors ei(l) is then carried out by
using at every link the identity

z 2

0

d exp(cid:0)ei  + ei (cid:1) = 2zc

dzdz

(1 + zz)3 exp(cid:0)z   z (cid:1) ,

which is a special case of the color-avor transformation [36] and is elementary
to verify by taylor expansion of the integrand on both sides. a beautiful feature
of the transformation is that it preserves the gaussian dependence on . we
can therefore integrate out  again, and arrive at another determinant, now with
matrix entries that depend on the complex eld z(l). by the structure of the
network model, the determinant factorizes as a product of terms, or weights, one
for each vertex of the network. at the critical point pl = pr = 1/2, and for a
vertex with incoming links i1 and i2, and outgoing links o1 and o2, the weight is
[37]

1 + 1

2 ei (z(o1) + z(o2)) (z(i1) + z(i2)) + e2i z(o1)z(o2)z(i1)z(i2)

.

p1 + z(o1)z(o1)p1 + z(o2)z(o2)p1 + z(i1)z(i1)p1 + z(i2)z(i2)

hence the transformed theory has the structure of a vertex model. to bring it
into a familiar form, one has to recognize the intrinsic meaning of the complex
number z(l) (for a xed link l) as a parameter for coherent spin-1/2 states:
| i + z| i. (this meaning is particularly evident from the general proof [38] of
the color-avor transformation.) by interpreting the vertex weights as matrix
elements between coherent states, and using the closure relation

1

 zc

dzdz

(1 + zz)3 (cid:16)| i + z| i(cid:17)(cid:16)h | + zh |(cid:17) = | ih | + | ih | ,

one can rewrite the correlator c(0) as the partition sum of a vertex model
for classical variables taking two values,  and . the vertex weights can be
extracted from the above expression by observing that z = 0 means spin up,
and z =  spin down. for  = 0 the vertex weights are isotropic, or su(2)-
symmetric, giving a model that belongs to a family known as the six-vertex model

10

in the area of integrable systems [39]. note that the calculation we have sketched
is free of approximations, so the autocorrelation function of spectral determinants
c(0) at the critical point is exactly equal to the partition sum of the six-vertex
model at its su(2)-symmetric point. the parameter  acts as a perturbation
breaking su(2) symmetry as well as criticality. (in the anisotropic limit of the
six-vertex model as an xxx quantum spin chain with hamiltonian h, the system
n.
for a real eld, this hamiltonian has been studied by oshikawa and aeck [40],
and by essler and tsvelik [41], using abelian bosonization.)

is perturbed by coupling to a staggered imaginary eld, h  h +ipn(1)nsz

while the equivalence between the network model correlator c() and a
(perturbed) six-vertex model is interesting in its own right and deserves further
study, we will not pursue it here, as it does not form the subject of the present
paper. we have pointed out the equivalence because it adds much support to
the claim [35] that one basic building block of the eld theory we are seeking
is the conformal eld theory limit of the six-vertex model, namely the su(2)1
wzw model.

3 pruiskens nonlinear sigma model

historically, the network model of chalker and coddington was preceded by
pruiskens nonlinear sigma model, which dominated the early eorts to under-
stand electron delocalization in the integer quantum hall eect. this important
cornerstone of the theory will be reviewed next.

the task of computing transport coecients for a disordered electron system
amounts to calculating disorder averages of products of retarded and advanced
electron green functions. a good way of going about it is to map the problem on
an eective eld theory. the initial development [42, 43, 44] of the subject relied
on the replica trick for computing disorder averages. for the case of systems in
a weak magnetic eld, this led to a nonlinear sigma model with target space
g/h, where g/h = u(n, n)/u(n)  u(n) or u(2n)/u(n)  u(n) with n = 0
for bosonic resp. fermionic replicas. a mathematically satisfactory variant based
on the supersymmetric formalism emerged from the pioneering work of efetov
[10].
in that formulation, g = u(1, 1|2), the group of pseudo-unitary 4  4
supermatrices g preserving an indenite hermitian form:

gg =  ,

 = diag(1, +1, +1, +1) ,

and h = u(1|1)  u(1|1). (for many purposes, it is preferable to work with
the complexied group gc = gl(2|2) but we will stick with g for now.) the
lagrangian of the theory is conventionally presented in terms of a eld denoted
by q:

q = g 3 g1 ,

3 = diag(+1, +1, 1, 1) .

11

the diagonal matrix 3 discriminates between the retarded (+) and advanced
() sector of the theory. a natural parametrization of the nonlinear eld q is

where

0

q =(cid:18) 1 z
z =(cid:18) zbb zbf

z 1(cid:19)(cid:18) 1
zfb zff(cid:19) ,

0 1(cid:19)(cid:18) 1 z
z =(cid:18) zbb

zfb

z 1(cid:19)1

,

zbf

zff(cid:19)

(2)

are complex 2  2 supermatrices, with zff =  zff and zbb = + zbb. (we do
not specify how complex conjugation relates zbf, zfb to zfb, zbf, as there is
no need for that.) the variable zff takes values in c with a point added at
innity, which is the same as a two-sphere s2  u(2)/u(1)  u(1). the range of
zbb is restricted by |zbb|2 < 1. this is poincares model of the two-hyperboloid
h2  u(1, 1)/u(1)  u(1). the lagrangian of the eld theory is

l0 = 

xx
8

str q q

= xx str (1  zz)1 z(1  z z)1z ,

where str means the supertrace. the coupling constant xx has an interpre-
tation as the dissipative conductivity of the electron gas (conductances being
measured in natural units e2/h). in two space dimensions, the coupling xx is
dimensionless, and from renormalization-group assisted perturbation theory one
expects the existence of a mass gap, implying that all electron states are localized
in that case.

pruiskens insightful contribution [8] was to add to the lagrangian a topo-
logical density, ltop. such a term exists, and is nontrivial, both for the fermionic
replica theory and for the supersymmetric theory. the latter version was rst
formulated by weidenmuller [9], and reads

ltop =

 str q q q

xy
8

= xy  str (1  zz)1 z(1  z z)1z .

the coupling constant xy is identied with the hall conductivity of the two-
dimensional electron gas. pruiskens key idea was that such a term is needed
to break parity (or reection of the plane of the electron gas), which is not
a symmetry in the presence of a strong magnetic eld, and will cause critical
behavior, or delocalization of the electrons, for xy  z + 1/2. the term is
called topological because it arises from pulling back a closed two-form (the
kahler form) on g/h.
its integral over two-cycles therefore takes quantized
values, 2nixy with n  z, and the hall conductivity acquires the meaning of
a topological angle  = 2xy.

12

to generate specic observables of the two-dimensional electron gas, one
includes sources in the lagrangian and takes derivatives as usual. for example,
the correlator of spectral determinants (a0, a1; b0, b1) is obtained by adding a
term

l = 2str (q  3) ,

where  = diag( ln a0,  ln a1, ln b0, ln b1) and  is an ultraviolet cuto. the
parameters a0 and b0 are subject to

re ln a0 < 0 , re ln b0 < 0 .

they act as regulators for the zero modes of the hyperbolic degrees of freedom
(zbb) (the bb-sector) of the matrix eld q.

for many years the disordered electron community has debated whether
pruiskens model is the correct or good theory of the integer quantum hall
plateau transition. the issue is not whether the model for xy = 1/2 is massless
(it certainly is), but whether on the critical line xy = 1/2 there exists a renor-
malization group xed point where the beta function for xx vanishes. from
the practical point of view, one also wants to know whether one can analyti-
cally solve [45] such a xed-point theory, if it exists. these questions have never
been answered conclusively. at weak coupling (xx  1), the beta function can
be computed by perturbation theory. the topological term ltop is perturba-
tively invisible, and hence the situation is the same as for xy = 0: the one-loop
beta function vanishes, as the geometry of the (symmetric) space g/h is ricci
at, but in two-loop order the quantum uctuations kick in and drive the the-
ory towards strong coupling. on the basis of dilute instanton gas calculations,
pruisken and collaborators [12] argued that nonperturbative eects due to the
topological term terminate the rg ow at some nite coupling 
xx. however,
close scrutiny shows that the argument is not really convincing, as the instanton
gas can only be controlled, if at all, at weak coupling and a far extrapolation to
strong coupling is required. thus the status of pruiskens model as a candidate
for the xed-point theory has remained unclear.

however, a certain bias against pruiskens model came from the following
observation. when the parameters ln a0 and ln b0 are moved to minus innity,
the elds zbb, zbf, and zfb become massive and drop out of the theory, leaving
behind a massless sector s2  u(2)/u(1)  u(1) governed by the lagrangian

l =

1
g2

 z z
(1 + zz)2 +

 
2

 z z
(1 + zz)2 + 2 ln(a1b1)

1  zz
1 + zz

,

where z  zff, 1/g2 = xx, and  = 2xy. this is the lagrangian of the
so-called o(3) nonlinear sigma model with a topological term. it has a global
su(2) [or o(3)] symmetry, perturbed by the symmetry-breaking eld ln(a1b1).
notice that on the critical line xy = 1/2, the topological angle  equals .

13

there exists a general consensus about the fate under renormalization of the
o(3) model at  = . perturbation theory shows that the coupling constant
of this eld theory, like pruiskens model, increases under renormalization. (it
already does in one-loop order.) in the strong-coupling limit g2  , the low-
energy hamiltonian of the lattice-regularized theory becomes [46] the hamilto-
nian of the 1d heisenberg model of an su(2)-invariant quantum antiferromagnet
with spin s = 1/2. recall that we arrived at the same theory already in section
2, by starting from the network model and pointing out that the critical corre-
lator (0, a1; 0, b1) maps on the partition function of a six-vertex model, which
in turn has the heisenberg antiferromagnet for its (spatially) anisotropic limit.
as was mentioned earlier, the low-energy physics of the latter is governed by the
su(2)1 wzw model, perturbed by a current-current interaction. the perturba-
tion is marginally irrelevant, and the theory in the infrared ows to a conformal
invariant xed point, where the global su(2) invariance of the nonlinear sigma
model is promoted to an su(2)l  su(2)r current algebra.

by analogy, one expects a similar scenario to take place for pruiskens model
at xy = 1/2 and  = 0: global invariance under the complexication g 
sl(2|2) of su(1, 1|2) should be promoted to a chiral symmetry gl  gr in
the xed-point theory. the argument for symmetry doubling will be reviewed
in the next section, after the introduction of its essential ingredient, namely a
superspin analog (for pruiskens model) of the spin-1/2 heisenberg chain.

4 superspin chain

we start out with a concise description of the superspin chain, and will indicate
the relation to the chalker-coddington network and pruiskens nonlinear sigma
model afterwards. the chain is a one-dimensional antiferromagnet with de-
grees of freedom that take values in an alternating sequence of gl(2, 2) modules
v and v . our rst task is to describe these modules. they were rst identied
in unpublished work by n. read [47].

to begin, let eij denote the matrix whose entries are zero everywhere except
at the intersection of the i-th row with the j-th column where the entry is unity.
by gl(2, 2) we mean the lie superalgebra spanned by {eij}i,j=0,...,3 over c, with
the bracket or supercommutator given by

[eij, ekl] = eijekl  (1)(i+j)(k+l)ekleij
= jkeil  li(1)(i+j)(k+i)ekj .

next put

c0 = b
+ ,
c0 = b+ ,

c1 = f 
+ ,
c1 = f+ ,

c2 = b ,
c2 = b

 ,

c3 = f ,
c3 = f 
 ,

14

, f 

where b
 and b, f are creation and annihilation operators for charged
() bosons and fermions. they obey the canonical commutation and anticom-
mutation relations, and act in a fock space f with vacuum |0i. the mapping

eij 7 sij  cicj

determines a representation of gl(2, 2) on f . according to general theory [48],
this representation nicely decomposes as a direct sum of irreducibles. the irre-
ducible representation spaces are labelled by an integer, which is the eigenvalue

of the operator c =pi cici generating the center of gl(2, 2). it is evident that c

counts the dierence between the number of positively and negatively charged
particles (or of retarded and advanced particles, using the terminology of
the disordered electron system). thus c is the total charge. we want the irre-
ducible space, v , on which c vanishes. note that v contains the vacuum |0i.
the latter actually is a lowest-weight state for the gl(2, 2) module v .

the denition of the conjugate module v  completely parallels that of v ,

except that the fundamental identications change to

c0 = b+ ,
c0 = b

+ ,

c1 = f+ ,
c1 = f 
+ ,

c2 = b
 ,
c2 = b ,

c3 = f 
 ,
c3 = f ,

and the vacuum state of v  is denoted by |0i for better distinction. (equivalently,
we could keep the operator identications, and alternate the denition of the
vacuum [37].) both modules v and v  are innite-dimensional, since we can
keep creating boson pairs b
 with no limit. they are naturally completed as
hilbert spaces with the usual hermitian scalar product that makes b the adjoint
of b, and f  the adjoint of f . adopting the spin terminology used in section 2,
we refer to the elements of v and v  as the state vectors of a superspin.

+b

for some purposes (as in section 14), one wants to interpret the conjugate
module v  as the linear space dual to v . this is done as follows. we temporarily
restrict the range of i, j to i  {0, 1} and j  {2, 3}. with this restriction,
the superspin generators sij  s+
ij are referred to as raising operators, and
sji  s
ji as lowering operators. the vectors of v (v ) are then created by
|0i). to identify v  as
acting with raising (lowering) operators on |0i (resp.
the dual space of v , we need to dene a nondegenerate pairing v   v  c,
|0i  v . we
(w, v) 7 hw, vi. let v = s+
apply w to v by taking all operators s to act in the same module, say v , and
evaluating

injn|0i  v , and w = s
j 
ni
n

i1j1...s+

...s
1i
j 
1

hw, vi = h0|s
j 
ni
n

...s
j 
1i
1

s+
i1j1...s+

injn|0i .

the value of this expression is completely determined by the bracket relations
of gl(2, 2), and by s
ji|0i = 0 and sii|0i = 0, sjj|0i = |0i(1)j+1. (note, in
particular, that no operation of taking an adjoint is involved.) for example,

h0|s

ij ]|0i = iih0|sj j|0i = (1)j+1iijj  .

j is+

ij |0i = h0|[s

j i, s+

15

by linear extension, we get a bilinear form v   v  c, which is readily shown
to be nondegenerate. thus, v  can be viewed as a space of linear functions on
v , and is therefore dual to v .

we now dene the superspin chain as an alternating sequence,

...  v  v   v  v   v  v   ... ,

of an even number n of superspins, with hamiltonian

3

h =xn

xi,j=0

sij(n)(1)j+1sji(n + 1)

at the critical point. the bilinear expression pij sij(1)jsji represents the

quadratic casimir invariant of gl(2, 2). to move the system o criticality, one
staggers the coupling between the sites n. the alternation of the space of states
between v and v  renders the chain antiferromagnetic in character. indeed,
the two-superspin system v  v  with hamiltonian h has been shown [49] to
have a gl(2, 2) invariant ground state with zero energy (separated by a gap from
a continuum of excited states) as bets the supersymmetric generalization of a
quantum antiferromagnet.

before carrying on, we insert the following technical remark. the lie su-
it has a

peralgebra gl(2, 2) suers from the disease of being non-semisimple.

one-dimensional center generated by the unit matrix i  pi eii, which obvi-

ously commutes with all matrices. at the same time, since str [x, y ] = 0 for
any pair x, y  gl(2, 2), there exists a one-dimensional subspace of elements
that never appear on the right-hand side of any supercommutation relation.
this is the subspace of multiples of the generator with nonvanishing supertrace,

f pi(1)ieii. removal of the latter denes the subalgebra sl(2, 2)  gl(2, 2).

one can also take the quotient by the center and pass to psl(2, 2) = sl(2, 2)/c  i,
which is still a lie superalgebra. the quadratic casimir decomposes as

cgl(2,2) = cpsl(2,2) + const  if .

since i is represented by charge c = 0 on v and v , it is possible to express the
hamiltonian h of the superspin chain completely in terms of the generators of
psl(2, 2). however, for the purposes of the present section we nd it convenient
not to project on psl(2, 2), but rather to tolerate the presence of a nontrivial
center and work with sl(2, 2). (the center will then give rise to unphysical gauge
degrees of freedom in the eld theory.)

given the lie superalgebra representation eij 7 cicj, we can exponentiate
to obtain a sl(2|2) group action on v (or v , it works the same way in both
cases) by

g 7 exp xij

ci (ln g)ij cj! .

16

for this action to make sense, we have to allow multiplication of the state vec-
tors of v and v , now viewed as sl(2, 2) modules, by the anticommuting pa-
rameters that are needed to form the supermatrix g  sl(2|2). because the
eigenvalues of cici are integers, the exponential is well-dened in spite of the
multi-valuednessof the logarithm. the complex group sl(2|2), of course, does
not act by isometries on the hilbert spaces v and v , but there exists a bosonic
subgroup su(1, 1)  su(2) which does. in other words, v and v  decompose
into unitary representations of su(1, 1)  su(2). the pseudo-unitary subgroup
su(1, 1|2)  sl(2|2) (the symmetry group of pruiskens nonlinear sigma model)
is less useful here, as some of its odd generators do not act unitarily (or create
states with negative norm). the sl(2|2) action on v and v  extends to an

action of sl(2|2)n on the superspin chain of length n. since pij sij(1)jsji is

the quadratic casimir invariant of gl(2, 2) represented on v or v , the diagonal
of sl(2|2)n (the global action) commutes with the superspin hamiltonian h.
this completes our denition of the superspin chain and its symmetries.

there exist several ways of arriving at the superspin chain and its hamilto-
nian. the rst published derivation [49] took pruiskens nonlinear sigma model
for its starting point. following the treatment by shankar and read [46] of the
o(3) nonlinear sigma model at  = , the two-dimensional supersymmetric eld
theory was discretized on a lattice of sites in the spatial direction and put in
one-dimensional quantum hamiltonian form. for strong coupling, the large
part of the hamiltonian is site-diagonal, with the single-site hamiltonian being
(p  a)2, where p2 is the laplacian on the target space u(1, 1|2)/u(1|1)  u(1|1)
of the nonlinear sigma model, and a is the gauge eld of a ctitious magnetic
monopole. the single-site hamiltonian has zero-energy states, which are natu-
rally described as holomorphic sections of an associated line bundle. for the case
of an even-numbered site, the vector space of these zero modes is precisely the
module v , and for odd sites it is v . the degeneracy between the zero-energy
states is lifted by the coupling between sites, and this interaction projects on
the superspin hamiltonian h written down above. thus we conclude that h
governs the low-energy physics of pruiskens model at strong coupling.

the superspin hamiltonian can be obtained more easily by starting from
the spatially anisotropic limit of the chalker-coddington model, which is a se-
quence of counterpropagating edges coupled by random complex tunneling
amplitudes. interpreting the functional integral representation of the disorder
averaged theory as a coherent-state path integral, and passing to a hamiltonian
description with the help of the transfer matrix, one arrives quite directly (and
without having to make approximations) at the spin chain. this was rst done
using replicas by d.-h. lee [50]. a supersymmetric version was given in [37, 51].
the important conclusion of all this is that pruiskens nonlinear sigma model
at strong coupling is equivalent to the chalker-coddington model, and both can
be represented as a superspin chain. thus there is a convergence of models and

17

formulations, and the focus now is on the antiferromagnetic superspin chain.
there exists some recent numerical work using the density-matrix renormaliza-
tion group, along with analytical ideas motivated by the lieb-schultz-mattis
theorem, which conrm the expectation that the superspin chain is quantum
critical [52]. there exist also attempts [53] to deform the superspin chain to an
integrable model that is solvable in the yang-baxter sense. unfortunately, the
technical diculties encountered there are enormous, and an analytical solution
does not seem to be within close reach.

although the antiferromagnetic superspin chain at low energies is not easy to
control, we can still make some useful qualitative predictions from it, as follows.
recall that the action of g = sl(2|2) on v and v  gives an action of gn on the
chain of length n. if g = g1  g2  ...  gn  gn (cartesian product), we write
g = g1  g2 ... gn for the element acting on the chain. the ground state of the
chain with hamiltonian h is some complicated object, |0i. we do not know
how to describe it analytically, but it certainly exists, and since the superspin
chain is antiferromagnetic, we can be sure that |0i is invariant with respect to
the global g action. (the ground state of a 1d isotropic antiferromagnet with an
even number of spins is always a spin singlet.) in formulas: g|0i = |0i for any
global g = g1  g1  ...  g1. the g symmetry of the hamiltonian is expressed
by the equation ghg1 = h, again for global g.

recall next that v and v  are irreducible sl(2, 2) modules. irreducibility of v
and v  means that all state vectors of the superspin chain are reached by acting
with gn = sl(2|2)n on some reference state. now, what we are after is the
low-energy physics of the chain. for a chain with a large correlation length, the
low-energy states are generated by acting with slowly varying g on the ground
state |0i. in other words, we expect the existence of a continuum limit where
the low-energy states form an irreducible module for a loop group, lg. (for this
we impose periodic boundary conditions on the chain). the elements of the loop
group lg are smooth maps s1  g, denoted by g(x). the action g 7 g of gn
on the discrete chain carries over to a representation g(x)h(x) 7 g(x)h(x) of the
loop group, in the continuum limit.

given the action of the loop group, we can form lg-coherent states g|0i.
let us now postulate the existence of a functional integral measure dg, such
that

z dg g|0ih0|g1 = id

is a resolution of unity for the low-energy sector of the superspin chain. using
it we can pass to a lg-coherent state path integral [54], with the functional
integrand being a product of matrix elements of the form

h0|g1

 + ehg |0i .

(3)

if we knew |0i and knew how to compute such matrix elements, we would
have a constructive way of deriving the low-energy eective eld theory of the

18

qh plateau transition, which will be a functional integral over continuous elds
g(x,  ). since we know neither, the present argument remains formal.

nevertheless, the lg-coherent state path integral exists in principle and leads
us to the following assertion: the functional integral for g(x,  ) has a chiral
symmetry gl  gr. indeed, since g(x) 7 g(x) is a representation, the matrix
element (3) does not change under global transformations g (x) 7 glg (x)gr
and g + (x) 7 glg + (x)gr. the left invariance is due to invariance of the
hamiltonian, the right invariance is a result of invariance of the ground state.

the argument given so far can be made regardless of whether the chain is
(the hamiltonian is always invariant, and so is the ground
critical or not.
state.) now comes an important distinction. away from criticality, where the
correlation length is nite, the system has a mass gap. therefore, the low-
energy phase space must be reduced in some manner. technically speaking, the
loop group does not act freely (i.e., not all states created by its generators are
linearly independent), and hence some its degrees of freedom need to be gauged
out in the functional integral. gauging happens on the right (where the loop
group acts on states) and thus interferes with the symmetry action on the right,
leaving only the left action as a good symmetry of the theory.
(this is the
situation in pruiskens nonlinear sigma model.) on the other, in the massless
theory we do expect the loop group to act freely, modulo the global invariance
g|0i = |0i leading to the phase space being lg/g. in that case the naive
gl  gr invariance of the coherent-state path integral should exist as a true
symmetry of the properly dened eld theory. this then is our main conclusion:
in the xed-point theory, the global g symmetry of pruiskens model is promoted
to a larger symmetry, namely an invariance under two copies of the symmetry
group, gl  gr.

to avoid confusion, let me emphasize that we are not arguing in favor of
a stronger statement due to aeck [26]. that argument says that for unitary
theories with continuous g symmetry the xed point acquires an ane lie al-
gebra symmetry, which is local and hence innite-dimensional. all we get from
the above argument is a chiral doubling of the global symmetry group. (in order
for the symmetry to become ane, the eld g(x,  ) would have to separate into
left-moving and right-moving waves. we will see later that this does not happen
in the present case.)

there exists a second piece of valuable information we can infer from the
lg-coherent state path integral of the superspin chain. recall that g  sl(2|2)

acts on v and v  by exppij ci (ln g)ij cj. evidently the multiples of unity,
g = es  14, couple to the total charge c = pi cici. by construction, c = 0
on every state vector of v and v , and therefore pi ci(n)ci(n) vanishes on all
parameter s (n) conjugate to the local charge pi ci(n)ci(n). in the continuum

states of the superspin chain. as a result, nothing depends on the coherent state

limit, this independence becomes an invariance of the lg-coherent state path

19

integral under local gauge transformations g(x,  ) 7 es(x, )g(x,  ) where es(x, ) 
gl(1) is any invertible multiple of the unit matrix. this symmetry can be seen
to be a direct consequence of the local u(1) gauge invariance of the chalker-
coddington model [gl(1) here is precisely the complexication of u(1)].

5 constraints on the xed-point theory

we have reviewed the argument why we are going to abandon pruiskens model
and look for another eld theory with manifest conformal invariance. ideally,
we would like to deduce the theory constructively, by starting from a model
of disordered electrons such as the network model of chalker and coddington,
and making controlled approximations. unfortunately, this looks like a rather
dicult if not impossible project, as the xed point always appears to be at
strong coupling, no matter what choice of starting point is made (the network
model, the nonlinear sigma model, or a model of disordered dirac fermions [23]).
in such a situation, we are forced to resort to indirect reasoning. the viable
procedure is to make an educated guess, and verify its correctness by comparing
the consequences to known results. in making such a guess, we are guided by the
fact that the theory we are looking for meets the following list of requirements.
1. the eld theory is dened by a stable functional integral with a tar-
get space of euclidian signature (as opposed to lorentzian or other signature).
this condition eliminates,
in particular, target spaces such as pslr(2|2) or
psu(1, 1|2), which have appeared in recent work motivated by string propa-
gation in ads3 backgrounds [29, 30].

2. conformal invariance of the xed-point theory is manifest. the energy-
momentum tensor splits into a holomorphic and an antiholomorphic piece, the
fourier components of which obey the commutation relations of a virasoro al-
gebra. (note that it is not obligatory for the theory have an ane lie algebra
symmetry.)

3. the partition function of the theory is normalized to unity: z = 1,
independent of the size or other parameters of the system. for a conformal eld
theory this implies that the virasoro central charge c vanishes. an immediate
consequence is that the theory cannot be unitary, as this would require c > 0.

4. the eld-theory representation of the correlation function (1) reduces to
unity on setting either a0 = a1 or b0 = b1. more generally, correlation functions
and other observables of the theory become trivial when only one causal sector
(retarded or advanced) is probed.

5. the hamiltonian of the antiferromagnetic superspin chain is invariant
under a global action of g = sl(2|2). in the xed-point lagrangian, this invari-
ance is promoted to a (global) chiral symmetry gl  gr. invariance under the
center of g, which is the subgroup generated by the unit matrix, is present as a
local gauge symmetry.

20

6. massive perturbation of the boson-boson sector (or equivalently, sending
the parameters ln a0 and ln b0 to minus innity) preserves criticality of the theory,
by leaving some of the bosonic elds massless. the reduced conformal eld
theory for the massless modes is the su(2)1 wzw model.

7. the theory contains an operator corresponding to the density of states of
the disordered electron system, the scaling dimension of which equals zero. this
requirement follows from the known fact [55] that the density of states at the
critical point under consideration is noncritical.

8. the xed-point theory reproduces the critical exponents for various cor-

relation functions that are known from numerical and real experiments.

in the sequel, we will describe a eld theory which demonstrably satises all
of the requirements 17. since the theory turns out to be of a novel kind, with
solutions not being readily available, requirement 8 can only be partially veried
at the present time and will need further work in the future.

6 symmetric superspaces and cs-manifolds

the correct denition of the target space of the eld theory relies on the two
notions of riemannian symmetric superspace and cs-manifold. they are not
entirely standard and are not commonly understood. it is therefore proper to
put the general development on hold, and motivate and explain these notions of
supermanifold theory in some detail, which is what we will do below.

the base of the supersymmetric target space g/h of pruiskens model is
h2  s2. as we recalled, the nonlinear sigma model with target space s2 (the
o(3) model) and topological angle  =  ows under renormalization to a theory
of elds taking values in su(2)  s3. thus quantum uctuations in this case
promote the two-sphere to the three-sphere. from that we take it that we
should try promoting the noncompact sector h2 of pruiskens model to a three-
hyperboloid h3.

the rst question to address then is whether there exist conformal eld theo-
ries of h3-valued elds. the answer is yes. h3 is dieomorphic to the noncompact
symmetric space sl(2, c)/su(2), which in turn can be identied with the posi-
tive hermitian unimodular 2  2 matrices m, by setting m = gg and letting g
run through sl(2, c). for the latter we can write down a wzw lagrangian,

l = (|k|/2) tr m m 1 + (ik/12) d1tr (m 1dm)3 .

the partial derivatives  and  are the usual ones, i.e., if z and z are complex
coordinates for two-dimensional space (or space-time), we require z =  z = 1
and  z = z = 0. the notation d1 means any potential of the 3-form .
in contrast with the compact version, where k is topologically quantized, the
coupling k here need not be an integer, as h3 is dieomorphic to r3, which

21

has trivial cohomology. another dierence is that the transformation group
su(2)l  su(2)r acts on su(2) independently on the left and right, whereas
g  sl(2, c) acts on m by m 7 gmg, with the right factor being the hermitian
conjugate of the left one. thus the left and right actions are tied to each other.
this distinction disappears at the level of innitesimal symmetries, since we can
always pass with impunity to the complexied tangent space, thereby making
the left and right actions independent.

noncompact wzw models of the above type play a role in the functional
integral version of the coset construction [19]. they and related models have been
studied by high-energy physicists [56, 57] to a certain extent, but are notoriously
hard to solve completely, because of the complications that come from having to
deal with the representation theory of a noncompact group. nevertheless, they
do exist as theories with a stable functional integral, and this is all we are require
for now. it is reasonable to expect the above lagrangian to be a building block
of the supersymmetric theory we wish construct.

the next question is: can we combine h3 and s3 into a supersymmetric
target space, giving rise to a wzw-type eld theory with the properties listed
in section 5? again, the answer will turn out be yes. the present paper was
triggered by the appearance [29, 30] of two superstring-related articles revolving
around ads3  s3, where ads3 denotes three-dimensional anti-desitter space.
for our purposes, ads3 is identied with the manifold of the group su(1, 1),
which preserves a quadratic form of lorentzian signature (+ + ), and has
one compact and two noncompact directions. thus the natural geometry of
su(1, 1) is non-riemann.
it is not hard to see that the product of su(1, 1)
with su(2)  s3 forms the bosonic subgroup of a lie supergroup psu(1, 1|2),
obtained from u(1, 1|2) by requiring unit superdeterminant and factoring out
the u(1) generated by the unit matrix. the important message from [29, 30]
is that the nonlinear sigma model with target space psu(1, 1|2) is conformal
for any value of the coupling. (in fact, this message already follows from the
work of gade and wegner [58].) the last feature looks very attractive from our
perspective, as it suggests enough exibility to accommodate the strange critical
exponents that surfaced in recent numerical work [27].

needless to say, the psu(1, 1|2) nonlinear sigma model is not the eld the-
ory we want. requirement 1 of our list says that target spaces with a non-
riemannian metric are not acceptable. coming from statistical physics, we in-
sist on having a eld theory with an action functional bounded from below. the
natural remedy, of course, is to trade psu(1, 1|2) for a related space with the
required euclidian, or denite, signature. such a variant, with base h3  s3, was
mentioned in [29], but was quickly dismissed with the statement that there is
apparently no change of variables that makes the resulting couplings to fermions
real.
i fully agree with the statement that there are problems with reality
concerning the fermions, and these are inevitable. indeed, the couplings would

22

be real if the target space arose as the stable set of some antilinear involutory
automorphism of the complexied group psl(2|2). for the case of psu(1, 1|2),
such an automorphism is easily constructed, by adaptation from the denition
of u(1, 1|2) (see section 3). however, if the stable set is to be based on the
manifold h3  s3, one can show that no such automorphism exists.1

the point to be stressed here is that the superspace we are after, namely
a variant of psu(1, 1|2) with euclidian signature, is not a supermanifold in
the usual sense:
it exists neither as a real-analytic nor as a complex-analytic
supermanifold. (a supermanifold is called k-analytic if the transition functions
between its coordinate charts are k-analytic.) rather, it belongs to a category
of objects called riemannian symmetric superspaces in [20]. the distinct nature
of these and more general objects has also been noted in recent lectures on
supersymmetry by j. bernstein [21]. he has drawn attention to a large category
of superspaces which he calls cs-manifolds (c for complex, and s for super).
since the notions of riemannian symmetric superspace and/or cs-manifold may
be unfamiliar, we will now elaborate somewhat, not digging into the foundations
of the subject, but reviewing the main idea and illustrating it with a well-chosen
example.

according to [20], a riemannian symmetric superspace is a highly structured
object consisting of the following data. first of all, we are given a lie super-
group gc and a subgroup hc. both gc and hc are complex, so their quotient
gc/hc is naturally a complex-analytic supermanifold. secondly, by xing a non-
degenerate invariant quadratic form on lie(gc) (we assume such a form exists),
the homogeneous space gc/hc is equipped with a gc-invariant supersymmetric
second-rank tensor, . we say that gc/hc carries a supergeometry. thirdly,
the supermanifold gc/hc is based on a complex manifold (gc/hc)0. from it we
select a real submanifold, m, with half the dimension of (gc/hc)0. m inherits
a geometry from the supergeometry of gc/hc by restriction. with these provi-
sions, we call the triple (gc/hc, , m) a riemannian symmetric superspace (or
symmetric superspace for short) if m is a riemannian symmetric space in the
classical sense [61].

the merit of the above construction is that it readily produces nice super-
spaces, while avoiding any operation of complex conjugation or adjoint for the
fermions. we mention in passing that there exist ten large families of symmetric
superspaces, and all of these arise in the study [20] of random matrix statistics

1let me digress and mention in passing that the eld of disordered electron systems began to
battle with non-reality of fermions in 1992, when gade [59] discovered new universality classes
in sublattice models with symmetries that are now called chiral. it was initially thought
that no supersymmetric eld-theory representation of such systems exists. the solution to the
puzzle was contained in a paper by andreev, simons, and taniguchi [60] who noted that reality
of the fermions, or of the couplings to fermions, was dispensible from a statistical physics point
of view. this idea was pursued in [20] where complex conjugation of fermions was abandoned
altogether, and the notion of riemannian symmetric superspace was formulated.

23

using efetovs method.

the simplest nontrivial example derives from gl(1|1), the lie supergroup of

invertible 2  2 supermatrices g,

g =(cid:18) a 

b(cid:19) .



(4)

we may regard gl(1|1) as a homogeneous space gc/hc constructed by quoti-
enting gc = gl(1|1)l  gl(1|1)r by its diagonal hc = gl(1|1). the natural
geometry on gl(1|1) is given by  = str (g1dg)2. for the real submanifold m
of the base gl(1, c)  gl(1, c) we take r+  s1, the abelian group of matrices

g =(cid:18) ex

0

0

eiy(cid:19) ,

where x  r, and y  [0, 2]. we will use the suggestive notation h1 for r+. the
restriction of  to h1  s1 is dx2 + dy2, which has the attractive feature of being
riemann (or, rather, euclidian). thus h1 s1 is a euclidian space in the geome-
try inherited from supergeometry, and the triple (gl(1|1), str (g1dg)2, h1  s1)
belongs to our general category of riemannian symmetric superspaces. this ex-
ample indicates a general feature, namely that the real manifold m of a symmet-
ric superspace is a product of spaces, m = mb  mf, with mf being compact
and mb noncompact. (one of the factors may of course be trivial.)

an important fact about riemannian symmetric superspaces is that they ad-
mit an invariant berezin integral (or superintegral) with nice properties. a brief
account is as follows. the good integrands are (super-)functions on gc/hc
that are holomorphic in a neighborhood of m. let f denote such a function.
by the principles of supergeometry, the complex-analytic supermanifold gc/hc
comes with a holomorphic berezin form, , which is a rule for converting f into
a holomorphic top-form [f ] on (gc/hc)0. the latter can be integrated over m

in the usual sense, to produce the number rm [f ]. thus, the berezin integral

is dened to be the two-step process

f 7 [f ] 7zm

[f ] .

the rst step, called the fermi integral or integration over the grassmann
variables, is benign and needs no notion of complex conjugation or reality of
the fermions. complex conjugation enters only in the second step (after the
fermions have been integrated out), in order to x the riemannian manifold m.
thus, reality of the fermions, or even reality of the couplings to fermions, is not
an issue here. put in stronger terms, reality of the fermions is an ill-conceived
and redundant concept which might as well be abolished, from our statistical
physics perspective.2

2for this reason, i have banned the use of real-form supergroups such as u(1, 1|2) from all

of my recent work; cf. the remark made in the second paragraph of section 3.

24

we turn again to our simple gl(1|1) example for illustration. if the elements
of gl(1|1) are written as in (4), the invariant holomorphic berezin form is easily
computed to be   dg = i1dadb 2/, from the invariant supergeometry
given by str (g1dg)2. the choice of normalization constant i1 is a matter of
convention. a quick check on the expression for dg is provided by invariance
under scale transformations: since d(sa) = s da and /(s) = s1/, the
factor s drops out as required. one might now think that the volume integral

r dg vanishes, as the fermionic derivatives 2/ have nothing to act on.

if this were really so, we would have a normalization problem to solve.
in
the eld-theoretic setting of a nonlinear sigma model with target space x 
(gl(1|1), , h1  s1), there would be a problem with the zero modes of the

theory. however, the conclusion r dg ?= 0 is premature and, in fact, untenable.

because the rst factor in h1  s1 is noncompact, we are well advised to insert
a regularization factor and dene the volume by

vol(x) = lim

0 zh1s1

dg exp(cid:0) str (g + g1)(cid:1) .

note that, since there are two roads to innity on h1 (a  + and a  0),
a factor e str g will not do for regularization and we really need e str(g+g1).
an easy calculation using dg = i1da  db 2/ shows that the limit   0
exists, and

vol(x) = 2 .

on the other hand, we could have considered the compact lie supergroup u(1|1)
or, more generally, u(m|n). in berezins book [62] one can nd a demonstration
that the berezin-haar integral over all these groups vanishes identically:

vol (u(m|n)) = zu(m|n)

dg = 0 .

this is true in particular for u(1|1), in which case the statement can be veried
by elementary means. furthermore, since u(m|n) is compact, regularization has
a negligible eect here. (incidentally, by employing the advanced machinery of
localization on supermanifolds [63], one can relate the vanishing of the berezin-
haar integral to the indenite metric of u(m|n).)

the point we are trying to score here is this: the nonzero normalization
integral (vol 6= 0), along with the riemannian geometry of its base, distinguishes
the symmetric superspace (gl(1|1), str (g1dg)2, h1  s1) in a subtle way from
its mundane counterpart u(1|1). the same subtle but signicant dierences
exist between the lorentzian space psu(1, 1|2) and its riemannian variant to
be constructed below.

25

for mathematical perspective we conclude the section with the following elab-
oration. it has to be admitted that there is much redundancy in our setup for
symmetric superspaces. our declared purpose is to integrate, and the integral
we want is over the real manifold m plus the fermionic fuzz surrounding it. a
concise mathematical formulation would therefore aim to eliminate the parent
space gc/hc and put the focus on m and a (sheaf of) algebra(s) of superfunc-
tions on m. this can be done. since no operation of complex conjugation of
the fermions is available (and yet the bosons, i.e., the coordinates of m, are
real), the object that arises does not exist as a real-analytic or complex-analytic
supermanifold. rather, what one obtains is a cs-manifold in the terminology of
bernstein [21]. the local model for such a manifold is a graded commutative
algebra of functions on u  rp with values in a complex grassmann algebra
cq. as usual, the manifold is assembled by gluing together the local charts by
means of transition functions.

to illustrate, we return to our simple example. we will give another de-
scription of the symmetric superspace x = (gl(1|1), str(g1dg)2, h1  s1), now
reduced to a cs-manifold. for that purpose, let us introduce a local coordinate
system (or superdomain) by the cayley map:

g =

1 + x
1  x

,

x =(cid:18) x





iy(cid:19) ,

where x > 1 parametrizes r+  h1, and y  r is a local coordinate for the
circle s1. since s1 is dieomorphic not to r, but to r with a point added at
innity, we need a second superdomain for an atlas of the cs-manifold. this is
constructed by setting

g = 3

1 + x 
1  x  ,

x  =(cid:18) x





iy(cid:19) ,

with 3 = diag(1, 1). the transition functions connecting the two superdo-
mains follow from the equations

1 + x
1  x

= g = 3

1 + x 
1  x  .

after a little algebra, one nds

x = x  /iy ,
 = /iy ,

 = /iy ,
y = 1/y .

simply put, the cs-manifold x can now be described as an algebra of nice
functions of x, y, ,  (and, on switching superdomains, of x, y, , ). note the
peculiar feature that the transition functions are complex-valued, in spite of
the fact that the even coordinates x, y and x, y are designed as real variables.

26

moreover, there exists no globally consistent way of imposing relations (such as
 = /i, say) to make them real (try it!). this is characteristic of a cs-manifold:
although its bosons are real, we have no choice but to leave the fermions complex
and work with an algebra of complex-valued functions.

the advantage of reducing the symmetric superspace to a cs-manifold is econ-
omy of the mathematical structures used. on the negative side, the dearth of
intrinsic structure to a (bare) cs-manifold make specifying a supergeometry, a
necessary prerequisite for our purposes, a more involved procedure. also, har-
monic analysis and some symmetry-related aspects of the eld-theoretic setting,
are more transparent in the riemannian symmetric superspace than in the cs-
manifold picture. we will therefore hold on to the symmetric superspace setup.
the best approach is to use both descriptions, the symmetric superspace and the
cs-manifold, and pass between them freely to adapt to the changing computa-
tional needs. this is the approach we adopt in the sequel.

7 the target manifold

after these preparations, we are ready to get to the point and dene the target
space of the conformal eld theory to be constructed. we will describe the target
space rst as a symmetric superspace and then as a cs-manifold.

our starting point is gl(2|2), the complex lie supergroup of invertible 4  4
supermatrices, denoted by g. this space is too large for our purposes. (the
nonlinear sigma model for it generically has a critical density of states, in vi-
olation of requirement 7 of our list.) imposing the condition of unit superde-
terminant, sdet(g) = 1, reduces the complex dimension by one. the resulting
supergroup, sl(2|2), is not semisimple, since its lie algebra still contains an
abelian ideal consisting of the multiples of the unit matrix. to gain semisim-
plicity, we pass to the factor group psl(2|2), obtained by identifying in sl(2|2)
the matrices that dier only by a scalar factor. the elements of psl(2|2),
which are no longer matrices but are equivalence classes of matrices, are still de-
noted by g. we may view psl(2|2) as a homogeneous space gc/hc, by setting
gc = psl(2|2)l psl(2|2)r. the projection gc  gc/hc is done via the map
(gl, gr) 7 glg1

r , which divides out the diagonal hc = psl(2|2) (gl = gr).

the lie algebra (not the lie superalgebra) of psl(2|2) is a complex super-
space, psl(2|2), of dimension (6, 8), which is to say there are 6 complex bosons
and 8 complex fermions.3 supergeometry is introduced by xing on psl(2|2) a

3the general theory [62] instructs us to distinguish between a lie superalgebra, and an
associated lie algebra with grassmann structure. the former is a z2-graded linear space
g = g0 + g1 with a superbracket or supercommutator dened on it. g will usually be realized
by real or complex matrices, and there are no grassmann variables involved. the latter, the lie
algebra with grassmann structure, is obtained by picking a large enough grassmann algebra
 = 0 + 1 and taking the even part of the tensor product: g() = 0  g0 + 1  g1. if

27

supersymmetric quadratic form which is both nondegenerate and invariant un-
der the adjoint action of the group. the killing form hx, y i = str ad(x)ad(y )
will not do for that purpose, as it is degenerate in the present case [64]. how-
ever, we can start from the lie algebra of sl(2|2) in the fundamental matrix
representation and take

hx, y i = str xy .

this descends to a well-dened quadratic form on psl(2|2), since

hx + s  14, y + t  14i = hx, y i

is independent of the scalars s and t. we denote the resulting quadratic form
still by hx, y i. this form enjoys the properties of nondegeneracy and invariance
under the adjoint action of psl(2|2).

by virtue of psl(2|2) being a homogeneous space, the quadratic form h, i
induces an invariant second-rank tensor (or metric)  on psl(2|2) by left
translation. given two tangent vectors at g, we simply move them to the lie
algebra psl(2|2) by parallel translation with g1, and then evaluate their inner
product using h, i. we denote the resulting tensor by

 = hg1dg, g1dgi .

by setting the fermionic degrees of freedom of psl(2|2) to zero, we obtain
if c denotes the group of

the six-dimensional complex manifold psl(2|2)0.
invertible complex numbers, psl(2|2)0 consists of equivalence classes,

c diag(a, b)  psl(2|2) ,

parametrized by complex 2  2 matrices a and b, which are chosen to satisfy

det(a) = det(b) = 1 ,

and hence lie in sl(2, c). the construction of the riemannian symmetric su-
perspace is completed by specifying a real submanifold m of psl(2|2)0.
in
keeping with the discussion of section 6, we choose m  mb  mf  h3  s3.
in precise terms, we take the elements of m to be of the form cdiag(a, b)
where a runs through the positive hermitian 2  2 matrices of unit determinant:
a = hh where h  sl(2, c), and b runs through su(2). the former set (mb)
is isomorphic to sl(2, c)/su(2)  h3, and the latter to s3.

g is realized by matrices, the elements of g() are supermatrices, with commuting entries on
the even blocks, and anticommuting entries on the odd blocks. depending on the context, the
generators of  are either viewed as parameters, or take the role of odd coordinates. for present
purposes, we denote the lie superalgebra by psl(2, 2), and the lie algebra with grassmann
structure by psl(2|2).

28

the elements of the tangent space of m at the group identity are represented

by pairs diag(a, b) with a hermitian and b skew-hermitian. hence we have

hdiag(a, b), diag(a, b)i = tr a2  tr b2 = tr aa + tr bb  0 ,

and m  h3  s3 is riemann in the geometry inherited from the supergeom-
etry of psl(2|2). thus m is a riemannian symmetric space, and the triple
(psl(2|2), , m) is a riemannian symmetric superspace. adopting standard
terminology [64], we call it type a1|a1; in symbols: xa1|a1.

as was discussed in the closing paragraph of section 6, the denition of
a riemannian symmetric superspace carries some redundancy. if our purpose
is to dene a nonlinear sigma model, we only need the riemannian manifold
m  h3  s3 and the fermionic fuzz surrounding it, together with the invariant
supergeometry induced from psl(2|2). hence, a more concise description of the
object at hand exploits the notion of cs-manifold, which is our next topic. we can
describe the cs-manifold from the coordinate point of view, by constructing an
atlas of superdomains and their transition functions. since h3 is dieomorphic
to r3, and the second factor of m is a (three-)sphere, the minimal atlas consists
of two superdomains. we dene the rst of these by using the exponential map
centered around the group unit of psl(2|2). in detail, we proceed as follows.
we set

x =(cid:18) a 



b(cid:19) =


a3

a1  ia2

a1 + ia2

11
21

a3
12
22

11
21
ib3

12
22

ib1 + b2

ib1  b2

ib3

,




and take the even coordinates a1, a2, a3, b1, b2, b3 to be real. note a  isu(2),
and b  su(2). note also that no conditions of any kind are imposed on the odd
coordinates ij and ij (i, j = 1, 2). we then exponentiate and write

g = exp (x + s  14)  psl(2|2) .

(as before, s is an arbitrary scalar.) when the odd variables are set to zero, the
image of x + s  14 under exp lies in m  mb  mf, since the exponential of
a traceless hermitian matrix is a positive hermitian matrix of determinant one,
and the exponential of a traceless skew-hermitian matrix lies in su(2). when
the odd variables are included, exponentiation gives one superdomain of a cs-
manifold with base m. a second superdomain is dened by repeating the same
procedure with the group unit replaced by the equivalence class of diag(12, 12)
where 12 is the antipode of unity on su(2)  s3. the element playing the
role of x is now denoted by y . to compute the transition functions connecting
x with y , we solve the equation

exp (x + s  14) = diag(12, 12) exp (y + t  14) .

29

it is not hard to see that, given the matrix entries of x, this equation on overlap-
ping domains has a unique solution for the matrix entries of y , and vice versa.
the superdomains of x and y , together with the transition functions relat-
ing them, constitute a cs-manifold which is the backbone of the riemannian
symmetric superspace xa1|a1.

we now describe the supergeometry of xa1|a1 explicitly, in the superdomain
given by g = exp(x + s  14). a standard result of lie group theory says that
the exponential map pulls the cartan-maurer form g1dg back to

g1dg =

1  ead(x)

ad(x)

dx 

adn(x)
(n + 1)!

dx ,



xn=0

where ad(x) acts on dx by the commutator: ad(x)dx = [x, dx], as usual.
the supergeometry is then expressed by

 =(cid:28) 1  ead(x)

ad(x)

dx ,

1  ead(x)

ad(x)

dx(cid:29) .

the riemannian nature of this geometry can be exhibited more clearly by in-
troducing a cartan decomposition. let k  psu(2|2) be a compact real form
of the complex lie supergroup psl(2|2). its elements k act on x  psl(2|2) by
conjugation:

utilizing this action, we make a polar decomposition

x 7 kxk1  ad(k)x .

x = ad(k)h , h = diag(x, x, iy, iy) ,

where the radial variables x and y have real range when viewed as coordinates
of the cs-manifold xa1|a1. (the group k, too, is viewed as a cs-manifold, which
is to say we take its fermions to be complex.) the dierential dx decomposes
as dx = ad(k) (dh  ad(h)(k1dk)), and

g1dg = ad(k)(cid:0)dh + (ead(h)  1)(k1dk)(cid:1) .

further evaluation uses the roots (h) of the adjoint action ad(h) on psl(2, 2).
the roots are called bosonic or fermionic depending on whether the correspond-
ing eigenvector, or root vector, is an even or odd element of psl(2, 2). two of
the bosonic roots are zero, and the nonzero ones are  = 2x and  = 2iy,
each with multiplicity one. the fermionic roots are  = (x  iy), and they
have multiplicity two. (the latter is an exceptional feature possible only in the
superworld; the roots of semisimple lie algebras always have multiplicity one.)
we adopt the convention of giving the multiplicity a sign which is negative for
fermionic roots, and positive for the bosonic ones. to summarize, a system of
positive roots  (with signed multiplicities m) is as follows:

2x (+1),

2iy (+1),

x + iy (2),

x  iy (2) .

(5)

30

the metric tensor  is now expressed in terms of polar coordinates by de-

composing k1dk according to root spaces,

k1dk = (k1dk)0 +x6=0

(k1dk) .

insertion into the previous formula for  then gives

 = hdh, dhi  4x6=0

sinh2 1

2(h)(cid:10)(k1dk) , (k1dk)(cid:11) .

the radial term hdh, dhi = 2(dx2 + dy2) is obviously nonnegative. the numer-
ical part of the other term is nonnegative, too, since sinh2 x  0  sinh2(iy) =
 sin2 y and

(cid:10)(k1dk)2x , (k1dk)2x(cid:11)  0 (cid:10)(k1dk)2iy , (k1dk)2iy(cid:11) .

to verify the last inequalities, one needs to use the fact that (k1dk)2x and
(k1dk)2iy lie in sectors where the supertrace acts as +tr and tr, respectively.

8 invariant berezin integral

for our purposes, an important structure on the symmetric superspace xa1|a1
is its invariant berezin integral. using the cs-manifold picture, this is described
as follows.
it will be sucient to use just a single superdomain, say the one
centered around the group unit, which is given by g = exp (x + s  14). let dg
denote the invariant berezin form on xa1|a1, normalized so that it agrees with
the at berezin form

dx =

dai dbi

3

yi=1

2

jkjk

2

yj,k=1

at the group unit. from the theory of lie supergroups, we have a standard
formula [62] for the berezinian, or superjacobian, b(x) of the exponential map
x 7 g = exp (x + s  14). it reads

b(x) = sdet(cid:18)1  ead(x)

ad(x) (cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)psl(2,2)

.

we will shortly see that the exponential map has a domain of injectivity, d,
delineated by

1 + b2

2 + b2

3 <  ,

qb2

31

while a1, a2 and a3 are unconstrained. anticipating this fact, we express the
invariant berezin integral in the coordinates x by

zm

dg f (g) =zd

dx b(x) f (exp(x + s  14)) .

(6)

if f vanishes fast enough at innity on h3, this expression is correct as it stands,
and there is no need to add any boundary distributions (which often appear in
coordinate expressions for superintegrals) to the right-hand side.

to establish the last claim, we make the berezinian b(x) more explicit by
introducing polar coordinates x = ad(k)h, as before. the berezinian is a radial
function,

b(x) = b(ad(k)h) = sdet ad(k)|psl(2,2)  b(h) = b(h) ,

by the multiplicativity of sdet and the unimodularity of psl(2|2). recall our
convention of taking the multiplicity m to be negative (positive) for a fermionic
if + is a system of positive roots as specied in (5), the
(bosonic) root .
berezinian can be written in the form

b(h) = y+(cid:18)sinh 1

2 (h)

2(h) (cid:19)

1

2m

.

1 + b2

translates into the condition pb2

the existence of the bosonic roots 2iy makes b(h) vanish for y  z \ {0}.
hence the injectivity domain of the exponential map is given by |y| < . this
3 <  stated earlier. moreover, the
singularities of b(h) caused by the vanishing of the fermionic roots are located
at x = 0, y  2z \ {0}. therefore b(h) is analytic and regular for x  r
and  < y < . by extension, b(x) is analytic and regular on the injectivity
domain d, and by the vanishing of b(x) on the boundary d, no boundary
distributions can occur in the coordinate expression (6) of the invariant berezin
integral.

2 + b2

we now turn to a property of the berezin integral which is a prerequisite for
understanding the eld theory partition function. consider the normalization

integral rd dx b(x). as it stands, this makes no sense, for the presence of

the hyperbolic sector h3 renders the integration domain d innite. to x the
problem, we insert some convergence factor eh(exp(x+s14)), with  small, and
dene the normalization integral by

n() =zd

dx b(x) eh(exp(x+s14)) .

the question now is how to choose the function h. we want h to be eec-
tive as a regulator but, at the same time, it should preserve as many sym-
metries as possible. this leads us to choose h as a radial function: h(g) =

32

h (ad(k) exp(h + s  14)) = h (exp(h + s  14)). the rst guess is to take

str ad(g) = str ead(h)

= 1 + 1 + e2x + e2x + e2iy + e2iy

2 ex+iy  2 exiy  2 ex+iy  2 exiy

= 2 + 4(cosh x  cos y)2 .

near x = y = 0 this varies as a fourth power (x2 +y2)2, which has the undesirable
feature that the hessian degenerates to zero at that point. (this degeneracy
is an immediate consequence of the vanishing of the killing form on psl(2, 2):
str ad2(x) = 0.) a better choice is

h(g) =p2 + str ad(g) = 2(cosh x  cos y) .

the right-hand side of this equation shows that the square root exists as an
analytic function on all of the cs-manifold xa1|a1. for future use, note that the
taylor expansion of h around the identity coset reads

h (exp(x + s  14)) = 1

2 hx, xi + ... .

for the choice of regulator eh made, we now evaluate the normalization
integral n(). this can be done by a localization principle called the parisi-
sourlas-efetov-wegner theorem in disordered electron physics. its most recent
version has been stated and proved by schwarz and zaboronsky [63].

in the specic setting at hand, the localization principle is formulated as
follows. let x be a riemannian symmetric superspace with symmetry group
g and invariant berezin form dx. pick an odd generator f of g, and denote
by  the killing vector eld representing the action of f on x. then, if f is

a function invariant under  (i.e., f = 0), the integral r dx f localizes on

the zero locus of the vector eld  (viewed as a dierential operator). this
means that the integral is determined by the values of the integrand, and a nite
number of its derivatives, at the zero locus of . if  is expressed in even and
odd local coordinates x1, ..., xp and 1, ..., q by  = ai(x, )/i +i(x, )/xi,
the zero locus of  is dened as the set of solutions of the equations ai(x, 0) = 0
(i = 1, ..., q).

the mechanism behind this version of the localization principle can be stated
in a few sentences. let the zero locus of  be denoted by r and its complement
by c. on the latter, the supergroup generated by f acts freely, or without xed
points. this allows us to introduce local coordinates on c such that the killing
vector eld  takes the simple form  = /1. now, by -invariance neither
the function f nor the berezin form dx carries any dependence on 1. doing
the fermi integral over 1 therefore yields zero. this reasoning breaks down on
the set r, but it remains valid outside an arbitrarily small neighborhood of r.

33

the taylor expansion of f at r.

as a result, the integral r dx f can only depend on a nite number of terms in

this principle allows us to compute the normalization integral n() rather
easily. because the regulator eh is a function with a high degree of symmetry,
there exist several odd vector elds with the required properties in order for the
localization principle to take eect. it will be sucient to use just one of them.
fix i, j  {1, 2}, and let eij be the 22 matrix whose entries are zero everywhere
except on the intersection of the i-th row with the j-th column where the entry
is unity. put

and, with  an odd parameter, dene  by

f =(cid:18) 0 eij

0 (cid:19) ,

0

(f )(g) =




f(cid:0)ef g ef(cid:1) .

 is a killing vector eld since conjugation by ef preserves the supergeometry

of xa1|a1. moreover, any radial function f satises f(cid:0)ef g ef(cid:1) = f (g), and

is therefore invariant w.r.t. . in particular, the regulator eh is -invariant.
hence, by the principle stated, the normalization integral n() localizes on the
zero locus of . we claim that the latter consists of only a single point, namely
the origin x = 0 of xa1|a1. to see that this is so, we examine the innitesimal
action of ef on the radial space, or the cartan subalgebra. this action is
determined by the root corresponding to the root vector f , which is one of the
set (x  iy) and vanishes only for x = y = 0, or x = 0, as claimed. (note
that the riemannian nature of xa1|a1 is crucial for this argument. if we were
working on pslr(2|2) or psu(2|2), the roots would be (x  y) or i(x  y),
giving a much bigger set for the zero locus of .) the implication is that we
may taylor expand the integrand around x = 0 and reduce n() to a gaussian
integral:

n() =z dx exp 


2

hx, xi ,

which is readily calculated to be n() = 3. here we recognize the utility of
dening the regulator h by taking a square root, so as to have a nondegenerate
hessian at x = 0: a vanishing hessian would have forced us to expand to fourth
order in x.

we thus see that the normalization integral n() is completely determined
by gaussian uctuations around the point x = 0. the same is true for a large
class of integrals on xa1|a1. note that the symmetry group of xa1|a1 provides
us with a total of 8 fermionic killing vectors.
in order for localization onto
x = 0 to occur, it is sucient for the integrand to be invariant under a single
one of these vector elds. (recall that this is a consequence of the fermionic
root system being (x  iy).) the quantum numbers i, j = 1, 2 counting these

34

symmetries originate from the distinction between retarded and advanced green
functions of the disordered electron system. let us put

f +

ij =(cid:18) 0 eij

0 (cid:19) , f 

0

ij =(cid:18) 0

eji

0

0(cid:19)

(7)

and call the sector i = 1 retarded and i = 2 advanced. the correlation
functions or observables which involve only retarded green functions will be in-
variant under the killing vector elds of f 
22, and those involving only advanced
information will be invariant under the killing vector elds of f 
11. as a conse-
quence of the localization principle, such observables are trivial. we will return
to this point later, in the eld-theoretic setting.

we can get a more complete perspective on the berezin integral for xa1|a1

by making the polar decomposition

x = ad(k)h .

under this substitution, the at berezin form dx transforms as

dx  j(h)dh dk .

here dk is an invariant berezin form on k/t , where t  u(1)  u(1) is
a maximal torus, dh = dx dy is a euclidian radial measure, and j(h) =
sdet ad(h)|to(k/t ) is the superdeterminant of ad(h) acting on the tangent space
of k/t at the origin o  t . the product of the berezinians of the two transfor-
mations (k, h) 7 x = ad(k)h and x 7 g = exp (x + s  14) is

j(h) = j(h)b(h) =

sinh2 x sin2 y
(cosh x  cos y)4 .

the invariant berezin integral for xa1|a1 now takes the form

zm

dg f (g) = r[f ] +z (cid:18)zk/t

dk f(cid:0)k exp(h + s  14)k1(cid:1)(cid:19) j(h)dh (8)

where the radial integal is restriced to run over a weyl chamber 0 < x <  and
0 < y < . the rst term on the right-hand side is a boundary distribution,
which shows up as a consequence of the singularity of the function j(h) at
the origin x = y = 0. the general theory of boundary distributions for polar
coordinate integrals on symmetric superspaces yields an explicit formula for r[f ].
we will skip the details here, as they form the subject of a separate paper [65].
in brief, the idea is to vary the bulk term (the second term on the right-hand
side of (8)) by an innitesimal isometry of the superspace. by partial integration
on k/t , this variation can be manipulated to become the radial integral of an
exact form, and application of stokes formula then converts it into an integral

35

over the boundary of the radial space. by invariance of the complete integral,
this boundary term must be exactly cancelled by the variation of r[f ]. in this
way, one obtains the result

r[f ] = (lf )(g0) ,

where l denotes the laplace-beltrami operator, and g0 the identity coset es  14.
the formula (8) holds for any integrable function f , radial or not. we now
in that case the second term on

apply it to the normalization integral n().

the right-hand side of (8) disappears, since f = eh is radial and r dk = 0.

the last statement follows from the fact that the volume of k = psu(2|2) is
zero, as is the volume of u(2|2). it can also be understood from the localization
principle, by noting that k acts on k/t without xed points. hence,

n() =zm

dg eh(g) = r[eh] =(cid:0)l eh(cid:1) (g0) ,

and by applying the laplacian to eh at the identity coset g0, we recover the
result n() = 3.

9 the a1|a1 nonlinear sigma model

after this spacious presentation of mathematical background, we are going to
discuss a nonlinear sigma model of maps from , the conguration space for a
single electron of the two-dimensional electron gas, into the riemannian sym-
metric space xa1|a1. although the latter is not a group, its complexication is.
to remind ourselves of this fact, we denote the eld by g. it is also important to
keep in mind that the target space does not have a representation in mat(2|2)
but consists of equivalence classes of supermatrices. this places a constraint on
the terms that may appear in the eld-theory lagrangian.

the principal term of the nonlinear sigma model action is given by

s0 =

1

2z

d2x (cid:10)g1g, g1 g(cid:11) .

to break parity of the eld theory (or parity of the disordered electron gas) we
need a term of the wess-zumino-novikov-witten type:

 =

1

24z

d1(cid:10)g1dg, [g1dg, g1dg](cid:11) ,

because of the presence of mf  s3 in the base m = mb  mf of xa1|a1,
single-valuedness of eik quantizes the coupling k to be an integer [66]. the

36

two functionals s0 and  have zero modes (the constant elds), so we include a
term proportional to

sreg =z

d2x h(g)

to regularize them. the complete action is then

s = f 2s0 + ik + sreg ,

(9)

where f is a coupling constant, and  is a positive innitesimal. we call this
two-parameter eld theory the a1|a1 nonlinear sigma model with wess-zumino
term. the theory does not have the invariance under g(z, z)  (z)g(z, z) (z)
characteristic of a wzw model, unless f 2 = 1/|k|.

note that the theory (for  = 0) is invariant under innitesimal chiral trans-
formations g(x) 7 xlg(x)g(x)xr with xl, xr  psl(2|2). this exponentiates
to an invariance under

g(x) 7 gl g(x) g1

r

as long as gl, gr  psl(2|2) are close enough to the group unit. it has to be
said that such a transformation is not an isometry of xa1|a1 for general gl, gr.
(in particular, recall that the left and right actions of sl(2, c) on h3  xa1|a1
are related to each other by a unitarity condition.) nevertheless, the functional
integral does remain invariant, by a functional generalization of what is called
cauchys theorem in complex analysis. the situation is the same as for the haar
integral of a compact lie group u:

zu

f (g)dg =zu

f (gl g g1

r )dg ,

the invariance of which is not restricted to gl, gr  u, but can hold (depending on
the analytic properties of f ) more generally for gl and gr in the complexication
of u.

the invariance under gl  gr is the chiral symmetry which we expect to
emerge for the disordered electron system at criticality, in view of our discussion
of the loop-group coherent state path integral for the superspin chain in section
4. away from the critical point, where chiral symmetry is broken to the diagonal
(gl = gr), the low-energy physics should be described by pruiskens nonlinear
sigma model. hence, pruiskens model has to sit inside the a1|a1 model, and the
eld q of the former is somehow related to the eld g of the latter. to describe
the relation, write g  psl(2|2), and let h  g be the subgroup of elements
h that stabilize 3 = diag(+1, 1, +1, 1) under conjugation: h3h1. (this
is the same 3 as in section 3, but we have found it convenient to rearrange
the basis, and thus the ordering of matrix entries, from retarded rst, advanced
last to bosons rst, fermions last.) the quotient g/h is naturally isomorphic
to gl(2|2)/gl(1|1)gl(1|1). we can implement the projection from g to g/h

37

by mapping g onto g3g1, and this descends to a projection from xa1|a1 onto
u(1, 1|2)/u(1|1)  u(1|1), which is pruiskens target space. we are thus led to
put

q = ad(g)3 = g 3 g1 .

(10)

there exists another strong motivation for making this identication. require-
ment 7 of our list says that the density of states of the disordered electron system
is noncritical at the critical point. it must therefore be represented in the eld
theory by an operator of vanishing scaling dimension. in pruiskens theory, the
density of states is known to be represented by the operator str3q. to arrange
for its scaling dimension to be zero, we should construct it from the adjoint repre-
sentation of psl(2|2), which has vanishing quadratic casimir. (from a one-loop
computation, the scaling dimension of a local operator transforming according
to a representation , is proportional to the quadratic casimir invariant eval-
uated on . it has been conjectured [30] that in the present case this relation
is not changed by higher-loop corrections.) this observation, together with the
necessity to project out h, strongly suggests q = ad(g)3.

for the purpose of calculating (a0, a1; b0, b1), the correlator of spectral de-

terminants of section 2, we perturb the eld theory by adding an extra term

s = 2z

d2x str (ad(g)3  3)

where, in the ordering chosen (bosons rst, fermions last),

 = diag(ln a0,  ln b0, ln a1,  ln b1) ,

and  is a uv cuto. this form of s follows from the frequency term l of
pruiskens model, on setting q = ad(g)3 and reordering the matrix entries.

let us then restate the basic proposition of the present paper: the a1|a1
nonlinear sigma model as dened above (with coupling constants f and k that
will be xed in due course) is the conformal eld theory describing the criti-
cal physics of electron delocalization at the transition between quantum hall
plateaus.

our job in the following is to check the list of requirements laid down in sec-
tion 5. the rst one was that the functional integral be well-dened and stable.
we have been careful to dene the target space as a symmetric superspace with
a riemannian metric on its base, so that the numerical part of s0 is nonnega-
tive and becomes zero only on the constant elds. in the absence of a wzw

term, this would already guarantee the stability of the functional integralr es.

however, with a wzw term present, the situation is less benign. although ik
takes imaginary values in the fermion-fermion (ff) sector (or when the target
is a compact group), it is real-valued in the boson-boson (bb) sector. indeed,
the 3-linear lie algebra form underlying the wzw term,

(x, y, z) = ihx, [y, z]i = itr x[y, z] ,

38

is imaginary for x, y, z  su(2) but is real when x, y , and z lie in isu(2), the
bb-part of the tangent space at the origin of xa1|a1. the wzw term can have
either sign, and therefore jeopardizes the existence of the functional integral,
unless it is bounded by |re(ik)|  s0/f 2. we are now going to show that this
bound is obeyed if and only if

1/f 2  |k| .

(11)

for that purpose, we denote the eld in the bb-sector by m = gbb, and
parametrize it by hyperbolic polar coordinates with range 0  , 0    ,
and 0    2:

m =(cid:18) cosh  + sinh  cos 

sinh  sin  ei

sinh  sin  ei

cosh   sinh  cos (cid:19) .

in these coordinates, the bb-part of s0 is given by

1

2z d2x tr(cid:0)m 1m(cid:1)2 =z d2x(cid:16)()2 + sinh2  (cid:0)()2 + sin2  ()2(cid:1)(cid:17) ,

and the wzw 3-form is expressed by

i
3

tr(cid:0)m 1dm(cid:1)3 = 4 sinh2  d  sin  d  d

= d (sinh(2)  2)  sin  d  d .

now, the following two inequalities,

and

 sin   (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

 1

2(cid:0)()2 + sin2  ()2(cid:1) ,

1

2 sinh(2)    sinh2  ,

are immediate from elementary considerations. using them, we estimate

re(ik)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
8 z

|k|



k

8 z

d2x (sinh(2)  2) sin   (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
=(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
d2x sinh2 (cid:0)()2 + sin2  ()2(cid:1)  |k|s0 .

the last expression is obviously bounded from above by s0/f 2 if |k|  1/f 2.
moreover, this bound is optimal as can be seen from taking  = 0 and sending
  . hence, the condition (11) is necessary for stability of the functional
integral.

we should mention that the same condition appeared in [29]. there, it arose
as a consequence of the reality of the ramond-ramond and neveu-schwarz uxes
of the vebranes that determine the ads3  s3 background (the target space of
the nonlinear sigma model) and the values of the couplings 1/f 2 and k.

39

10 brst invariance

the second requirement of our list is manifest conformal invariance of the eld
theory. this is not a pressing issue and is postponed until the next section.
the most urgent problem to address are requirements 3 and 4, concerning the
normalization of the partition function of the eld theory and the triviality of
some of its correlation functions. these two points are closely related (the former
is a consequence of the latter) and can be dealt with in a single shot.

consider the correlator of spectral determinants (a0, a1; b0, b1) dened in
(1). for elementary reasons that were spelled out in section 2, it reduces to
unity on setting either a0 = a1 or b0 = b1. how does the eld theory manage to
perform the trick of reproducing this feature? the short answer is that the theory
becomes topological and undergoes dimensional reduction, by one or several of
its many supersymmetries.
(the mechanism is nicely explained in [67].) to
see concretely how the reduction works, we consider the case a0 = a1. for these
parameter values, the action functional s +s acquires a global invariance under
supersymmetry transformations in the retarded sector (i = j = 1), since the rst
and third entry of the diagonal matrix  are now equal. the transformations
are given by

g(x) = [f 

11 , g(x)] ,

where  is an odd parameter, and f 
11 are two of the eight fermionic generators
f 
ij of psl(2, 2), see (7). viewing these generators as brst operators, we may
express the global invariance of s +s by saying that the theory is brst-closed.
the brst transformations can be recast in the form

g1g = (ad(g)  1) f 

11 .

to exploit the brst symmetry, we note that the only xed point of the brst
transformations is the constant eld conguration g(x)  g0  es 14. the reason
is the same as in the zero-dimensional case: ad(g) on any one of the fermionic
root vectors f 
ij equals unity if and only if g is the origin of xa1|a1. (once again,
the riemannian nature of xa1|a1 is crucial here, and the situation would be less
favorable if we were working on pslr(2|2) or psu(2|2).) being fermionic, the
generators f 
11 square to zero. as a result, if we exclude from the functional
integral an innitesimal ball b surrounding the brst xed point g(x) = g0,
the theory becomes brst-exact. in other words, on the complement of b the
functional integrand is a total derivative w.r.t. some odd collective coordinate
. doing the fermi integral over  yields zero.

the eld theory then collapses onto b, and we can compute the functional
integral by simply carrying out leading-order perturbation theory around the
conguration g(x) = g0. the rest is easy. expansion of s + s around that

40

conguration up to quadratic order in x gives

s(2) =z d2x(cid:18) 1

2f 2 hx, xi +


2

hx, xi +

2
2

h, ad2(x)3i(cid:19) ,

and by doing the gaussian integral over x we obtain the expression

const  det(k)

det (k + 2 ln(a1b0)) det (k + 2 ln(a0b1))
det (k + 2 ln(a0b0)) det (k + 2 ln(a1b1))

,

(12)

where k is the operator k = (f 2)1  + . the rst factor is a constant due
to the choice of normalization of the functional integral measure, which we are
still free to specify. it is understood that a0 = a1, as was assumed at the outset
of our calculation. then the determinants in the numerator and denominator
cancel pairwise, and we are left with

(a, a; b0, b1) = const  det(k) .

obviously, in order for this to be unity, we must choose the normalization to be

const = det1(k) .

we can make this choice explicit by shifting the action s  s + ln det(k).
alternatively, we can introduce a ghost eld, say a complex free boson  (or,
equivalently, two real free bosons) and pass to

s = s +z

d2x (x)(k)(x) .

what we did for a0 = a1 can be repeated mutandis verbis for b0 = b1. summa-
rizing the two cases we have

(a, a; b0, b1) = (a0, a1; b, b) = 1 .

in particular, it follows that the partition function is normalized to unity: z =
(1, 1; 1, 1) = 1.

one might now object that we are enforcing normalization by appealing to
a ghost eld , the origin of which we did not explain. this objection has to
be taken seriously. normalization of the partition function is a very basic and
robust feature of the supersymmetric eld-theory formalism for disordered elec-
tron systems. it holds independently of all the parameters of the system (such
as disorder strength, system size, lattice constant etc.) and in particular, applies
whether the system is critical or not. and, indeed, in pruiskens nonlinear sigma
model the normalization always is unity. this happens by the same brst mech-
anism that was utilized above, except that the bosonic and fermionic degrees of

41

freedom are now equal in number, so all determinants cancel exactly. thus,
normalization is automatic, and no ne-tuning of the parameters is needed.

one might therefore be worried by the dependence of the normalization fac-
tor det1(k) on the coupling f and the ultraviolet cuto . (the dependence
on  is not an issue. this parameter is a positive innitesimal whose only role
is to regularize the zero modes. alternatively, we could set  = 0 and modify
the eld conguration space by taking the quotient by the zero modes.) our
response is this. the theory we have written down is not claimed to be ap-
plicable to the whole range of parameters of the quantum hall system, but is
specically made for its critical point. the theory is imagined to be the end-
point of a renormalization group (rg) trajectory starting, say, from pruiskens
model at weak coupling (and xy = 1/2). our working hypothesis is that the
boson|fermion count, which is 4|4 in pruiskens model is promoted to 6|8 in the
a1|a1 model at the xed point. in pruiskens model the normalization is unity,
and we can be sure that supersymmetry acts to keep it there all the way along
the rg trajectory. therefore two real bosonic ghosts must appear to absorb the
change in normalization due to the mismatch 6 versus 8. from this perspective,
the quantities f and  entering det(k) are not parameters at our disposal, but
are numbers determined by the rg ow.

if the theory is to make sense as an rg xed point for the disordered elec-
tron system, what we must demand is that changing the cuto  preserves the
normalization. and, in fact, it does: the operator associated to the coupling
constant f is truly marginal in the bosonic ghost theory and also in the a1|a1
model (see the next section). therefore, once the normalization has been set to
unity, it stays there when a rg transformation is applied.

here we should mention that our way of introducing a bosonic ghost is not
unique. we have opted for the simplest choice, which is to take  to be a free
eld.
in contrast, in the string-motivated construction of [29], there appears
a similar ghost which couples to an expression quadratic in the left-invariant
fermionic currents of the eld g. this coupling is apparently required for the
consistency of the nonlinear sigma model as a string theory (where the ghost
not only serves to cancel the conformal anomaly, but is also needed for n =
2 worldsheet superconformal invariance). however, there apparently exists no
motivation for such a coupling from the perspective of the disordered electron
gas, so we will not consider it.

the above mechanism of dimensional reduction would not be convincing if it
were limited to the partition function and the spectral correlator . fortunately,
it applies more generally, and the same reduction occurs for any observable which
is already present in pruiskens theory and is invariant under supersymmetry (or
brst) transformations in the retarded or advanced sector. the argument goes

42

as follows. consider any correlation function

df1(q(x1))f2(q(x2)) . . . fp(q(xp))e ,

(13)

where the fi are local functionals of q. now assume brst invariance in the
retarded or advanced sector. then, by the same reasoning as before, the func-
tional integral will localize onto the brst xed point g(x)  g0. what remains
to be done is the (gaussian) integral over the small uctuations around g0. for
this purpose we decompose the lie algebra of g = psl(2|2) as

lie(g) = lie(h) + p ,

where h  g still is the stabilizer of 3  lie(g) under the adjoint action. we
then put

g(x) = ey (x)ex(x)g0 ,

where x(x)  lie(h) and y (x)  p. by design, q depends only on y :

q(x)3 = ey (x) 3 ey (x)3 = e2y (x) .

substituting these expressions into the functional integral and expanding around
g0, we nd that the integrand separates into two factors, one depending on x
and another depending on y :

hf1(q(x1)) . . . fp(q(xp))i = h1ix  hf1(3 + ...) . . . fp(3 + ...)iy .

(although lie(g) and p are vector spaces over c, it is understood from section
6 that the bosonic degrees of freedom in x and y are integrated only over
the real directions specied by the tangent spaces of xa1|a1 and its projection
u(1, 1|2)/u(1|1)  u(1|1).) because x does not appear in q, the integral over
x still gives det(k), which is cancelled by the inverse determinant from the
bosonic ghost. the remaining integral over y is more complicated, but will
work out to give the right answer. the reason is that the very same integral
is obtained when evaluating the brst-invariant correlator (13) in pruiskens
nonlinear sigma model. in the latter case, too, the brst mechanism reduces
the functional integral to small uctuations around q(x) = 3.
in gaussian
approximation, the action functionals of pruiskens model and the a1|a1 model
formally agree (on setting q = g3g1), and we can make them coincide by
putting xx = (8f 2)1. hence the dimensionally reduced theories are the same,
and we conclude

df1(q(x1)) . . . fp(q(xp))ea1|a1

=df1(q(x1)) . . . fp(q(xp))epruisken

.

thus the question whether brst-invariant correlators of the form (13) are trivial
and are correctly normalized in the a1|a1 model, reduces to the same question

43

in pruiskens theory. we may take it for granted that the answer to the latter
question is in the armative.

in summary, requirements 3 and 4 are satised if the a1|a1 model is aug-
mented by a bosonic ghost in the manner described above. moreover, the mech-
anism at work suggests that physical observables for the disordered electron gas
are those which can be expressed in terms of pruiskens eld q = g3g1.

11 conformal invariance

with the normalization issue taken care of, we now turn to requirement 2: con-
formal invariance. this point has already been argued convincingly in two recent
papers for the target spaces psu(2|2) and pslr(2|2), so we can aord to be brief.
in ref. [29] the action functional of the psu(n|n) nonlinear sigma model was
related to that for u(n|n). it was then shown that the term

s0 = (2f 2)1z d2x hg1g, g1 gi

does not renormalize in u(n|n), and hence not in psu(n|n), for any value of the
coupling constant f . the vanishing of the beta function for s0 had already been
pointed out by gade and wegner in their 1991 paper [58] on u(m) at m = 0,
which is perturbatively equivalent to u(n|n). the result can be understood
qualitatively from the fact that the beta function of s0 for u(n|n) is independent
of n, and for n = 1 the gauged theory psu(1|1) is free and nite. in ref. [30],
essentially the same nonlinear sigma model [with target space pslr(2|2)] was
considered. there, conformal invariance was attributed to the quadratic casimir
invariant being zero in the adjoint representation. the vanishing of the casimir
causes the vanishing of certain invariant current-current correlation functions,
which in turn protects the component tz z of the energy-momentum tensor (which
is zero in the classical theory) from becoming nonzero as a result of quantum
uctuations. these arguments are independent of the signature of the metric
of the manifold and apply equally to our case. they are also robust enough to
accommodate the presence of a wzw term. thus the important message is that
we have a family of conformal eld theories with two parameters f and k to play
with. the virasoro central charge of these theories is easily seen [29, 30] to be
c = 2.

by standard manipulations done on the lagrangian, the holomorphic part of

the energy-momentum tensor has the classical form

t (z) = 1

2f 2hg1g, g1gi + 1

2f 2    ,

which is independent of the topological coupling k and is not changed by quan-
tum uctuations. on general grounds [68], the singular part of the operator

44

product expansion of t (z) with itself must be of the standard form

t (z)t (w) =

c

2(z  w)4 +

2

(z  w)2 t (w) +

1

z  w

wt (w) + ... .

the virasoro central charge of a complex free boson (or of a pair of real free
bosons) is +2. together with the contribution from the sigma model eld g, this
gives a total central charge of c = 2 + 2 = 0 in our case. (the central charge
vanishes here for the trivial reason that the eld theory partition function always
equals unity, independent of the size of the system. a more informative quantity
can be introduced by following a recent proposal by gurarie [69].)

in [30] it was emphasized that the chiral symmetry algebra of the theory is
not just virasoro but is actually much larger. while only the case k = 0 was
discussed in that reference, the reasoning easily carries over to the general case,
as follows. by varying the action functional s = s0/f 2 + ik, we obtain the
equation of motion j = 0, where the conserved (left-invariant) current is

to keep the following equations simple, we introduce a current one-form j by

1

j =

4(cid:0)f 2 g1g + ik g1g(cid:1) .

(14)

j = 1  g1dg + i2 g1dg ,

where 1 = 1/4f 2, 2 = k/4, dg = g dz + g dz, and the star operator acts
by dz = idz, dz = idz. the equation of motion for j then translates into
the statement that j is closed: dj = 0. (note that j is the hodge dual of
what is usually understood to be the current.) inverting the expression for j ,
we have

g1dg = (2

1  2

2)1 (1  j + i2j ) ,

and dierentiation (together with dj = 0) gives the integrability condition

[g1 g, g1g] = 

i1
1  2
2

2 (cid:0)jz + jz(cid:1) ,

for the components dened by j = jzdz + jzdz. by combining this with the
equation of motion jz = jz, we arrive at

jz = i

2(cid:0)1  2

2/1(cid:1) [g1 g, g1g] .

we see that the current jz is holomorphic for 1 = 2 (or 1/f 2 = |k|), as
required for the current of a wzw model. away from that limit, the current is
not holomorphic. however, the discrepancy is a commutator, so if ta1a2...an is any
one of the large set of invariant symmetric tensors for psl(2|2), the corresponding
polynomial current

w[t] = ta1a2...anj a1

z j a2

z ...j an
z

is holomorphic: w[t] = 0, at least at the classical level. it is expected [30] that
w[t] remains holomorphic in the quantum theory.

45

12 more checks

we now check the next three points on our list. of these, numbers 5 and 7
have already been input in the course of our development, so we will be brief.
the former says that the xed-point theory must have a global chiral symme-
try sl(2|2)l  sl(2|2)r, and the central subgroup of sl(2|2) generated by the
unit matrix has to be represented as a gauge degree of freedom. both features
are automatic by the construction of the target space xa1|a1 and the choice of
lagrangian made. note also that, although gl(2|2) does not act on sl(2|2), it
does act on q = g 3 g1 (g  sl(2|2)) by conjugation, so the symmetries of
pruiskens nonlinear sigma model are fully present.

number 7 requires the density of states to be noncritical.

in pruiskens
model, this observable is represented by the operator str 3q. we have already
identied the eld q with ad(g)3 in the a1|a1 theory. the eld q, and the
density of states along with it, will be noncritical if its scaling dimension is
zero. the latter is in fact the case here. on general symmetry grounds the
scaling dimension of an operator must be expressed by the corresponding casimir
eigenvalues, and it can be shown [30] that all casimir invariants vanish in the
adjoint representation of psl(2, 2).

requirement 6 concerns the fate of the theory under a perturbation

str  (ad(g)  1) 3

with  = diag(a0, 1, b0, 1). as can be seen, for example from the result (12),
such a perturbation gives a mass  ln(a0b0) to some elds in the boson-boson
sector, and masses  ln(a0) or  ln(b0) to some of the fermionic elds. in the
infrared limit, these degrees of freedom disappear from the theory. what is left
behind is the fermion-fermion sector, which remains massless, being protected
by a residual su(2)l su(2)r symmetry. restriction of the theory to this sector
yields a lagrangian with wzw term and topological coupling k. requirement
6 then says that the integer k has to take its smallest nonzero value:

k = 1 .

(15)

this determines one of the two coupling constants of the theory. the correct
choice of the other coupling f is less obvious.

13 the marginal coupling f

renormalization group xed points in conventional chiral nonlinear sigma models
with wzw term, come as a discrete one-parameter family: once a value for the
level k has been chosen, the other coupling has to be f 2 = 1/|k| in order for the
theory to be conformally invariant. in the present case the situation is dierent.

46

given a value for k, conformal invariance does not determine f , which is a truly
marginal coupling parametrizing a line of xed points f 2  1/|k|.

while being an intriguing feature, the existence of a truly marginal pertur-
bation is a threat to universality and therefore problematic for our proposal.
unless there exists some hidden symmetry or other constraint, it stands to rea-
son that the marginal direction can be explored by the disordered electron gas:
since the renormalization group trajectories of dierent members of the qh fam-
ily originate from dierent initial conditions, we expect the critical trajectories
to terminate on dierent points on the xed line, leading to a variety of critical
behavior. in contradistinction, the critical properties seen in numerical and real
experiments on the qh transition appear to have a high degree of universality.
the latter seems to suggest that the critical behavior is governed by a single
xed point, not a one-parameter family of such points.

the question, then, is how the observed universality can be reconciled with
the marginality of f . what we need is some mechanism to ensure that the crit-
ical rg trajectories for dierent members of the qh universality class intersect
the xed line at the same point. the scenario we oer is this. the coupling
constant f determines the most singular terms (proportional to unity) of the
operator product expansion for the vertex operators of the eld theory. thus
the value of f controls the short-distance singularities. in particular, f controls
the uctuations of the eld g at short distances from a conducting (or absorb-
ing) boundary. at the same time, the short-distance physics of the disordered
electron gas near a conducting boundary is classical diusion of electrons. as
is well understood, the conductance and other observables can be expressed as
sums over electron paths.
in a typical path, loops are prevalent in the bulk
of the system, but rare in the vicinity of an absorbing boundary. thus, while
the dynamics in the bulk is strongly inuenced by quantum interference eects
(due to loops) and incipient localization, interference near a boundary is cut
o by absorption (or exiting probability ux) and the motion can be treated
as being classical there. (classical here means that the absolute square of a
coherent sum of path amplitudes is well approximated by an incoherent sum of
squares.) in the eld theory, classical diusion corresponds to small eld uctu-
ations around a vacuum selected by the absorbing boundary conditions. this
correspondence is, in fact, what leads to the identication, in pruiskens theory,
of the coupling xx with the classical longitudinal conductivity (which in turn
is proportional to the classical diusion constant by the einstein relation). the
same identication will be made for 1/8f 2 in the a1|a1 model. by this argu-
ment, the parameter f is completely determined by matching to the classical
dynamics near a conducting boundary. universality is therefore guaranteed to
the extent that the classical diusion constant has a universal value. evidence
in favor of the latter is provided by the semicircle relation

2
xx + (xy  1/2)2 = 1/4 ,

(16)

47

which has been argued to be universally valid for incoherent qh systems [70].
for recent developments related to this subject see [71, 72, 73].

our strategy in the sequel will be as follows. as was rst pointed out in [49],
charge transport in a critical conductor is probed least obtrusively by measuring
a conductance between interior contacts. the simplest theoretical setup is to
take an innite system with two interior contacts that are small. at criticality,
the conductance will then be some algebraically decaying two-point function of
conformal eld theory. the critical exponent determining the decay at large
distances between the two contacts is expected to be universal, but nontrivial to
compute. (if the contact in eld-theoretic representation is expanded in scaling
elds with scaling dimension , the exponent equals 2min.) on the other
hand, the form of the short-distance singularity of the conductance depends
on the size or strength of the contacts. if the contacts are strong, so that an
electron near a contact quickly exits and the time spent in the system is short, the
conductance becomes classical at small distances between the two contacts. (in
contrast, for contacts that are point-like or weak, the classical transport regime
does not exist, as the behavior of the conductance is controlled by quantum
interference even at the smallest distances.) what we will do is to extract from
the eld theory the short-distance singularity of the conductance between two
strong contacts. matching the result to the classically expected singularity will
then determine f .

13.1 classical point-contact conductance

the rst thing to describe is the classical expectation. we will work in the
innite plane r2  c with complex coordinate z = x1 + ix2. from linear
response theory, the conductance, g, is a current-current correlation function,

g = izc1 iz c2

hj(z)j(z)i ,

(17)

where, for a system with interior contacts at points with coordinates z1 and z2,
the integration contours c1 and c2 are two disjoint cycles enclosing the points
z1 resp. z2 (figure 2). for a classical conductor, the current one-form j can be
expressed in terms of a real boson eld  by

j =

1

i (cid:18)

z

dz 


 z

dz(cid:19) =  dx ,

and the expectation value hi is dened by a gaussian functional integral

h  i =

1

z z d  expz d2x   .

48

c
1

z

1

z2

c
2



figure 2: conductance is a current-current correlation function.

(we are working in scaled units here and will put back the proper units later.)
as usual, the partition function z normalizes the integral, so that h1i = 1.
the escape of probability ux through the contacts is modeled by imposing
absorbing boundary conditions at these points:

(z1) = (z2) = 0 .

by the equation of motion for  (  = 0), the current is conserved: dj = 0 on
c \ {z1  z2}, and the expression (17) does not change under small deformations
of c1 and c2.

we now wish to know how the conductance g depends on |z1  z2|, the
distance between the two contacts. one way of computing the dependence is to
use an analogy with classical 2d electrostatics, by reinterpreting  as an electric
potential, j as an electric ux etc. we can then view the functional integral
average h(z)(z)i as the green function of a poisson problem, which can be
solved by the technique of conformal mapping. alternatively we can compute
g directly, by manipulation of the functional integral in the way detailed in the
next subsection.

however, we will take the short cut of guessing the answer on dimensional
grounds. because the components of a conserved current have scaling dimension
one, and a coordinate dierential subtracts one dimension, the scaling dimension
of the current one-forms j(z) integrated in (17) is zero. by conformal invariance
of the free boson theory, the conductance g can therefore depend on |z1z2| only
through the logarithm. on physical grounds, g must decrease with increasing
distance between the contacts, so we expect g  (ln |z1  z2|)1. the constant
of proportionality can be determined by comparison with the quasi-1d limit.
according to ohms law, the conductance of a cylinder of circumference w ,
height |z1  z2|, and conductivity , is g = w/|z1  z2|. on replacing the
(quasi-)1d coulomb propagator |z1  z2|/2w by the 2d coulomb propagator
(2)1 ln |z1  z2|, we arrive at

g2d =



ln(|z1  z2|/r)

,

49

(18)

which is the correct result. a length scale r was inserted in the argument of the
logarithm to get the physical dimensions straight. (we may regard r as the size
of the contacts, which sets the scale and serves as a short-distance cuto.)

13.2 classical conductance from eld theory

our next task is to reproduce the classical result (18) from the short-distance
physics of the a1|a1 model. as before, we consider an innite system with
interior point contacts placed at two positions z1 and z2, and compute the con-
ductance as a current-current correlation function.

to begin, recall from the end of section 10 the parametrization g(x) =
ey (x)ex(x)g0, where x(x) takes values in lie(h), and y (x) in the complement
p of lie(h) in psl(2|2). the latter determines the eld of pruiskens model by
q = ey 3ey = e2y 3, while the former is post-pruisken. from the supersym-
metric nonlinear sigma model for disordered metals [10], the boundary condition
for q is known to be q = 3 on any well-conducting boundary. by transcription
to the present case, we require

y (z1) = y (z2) = 0 .

the linear eld x is not subject to any such boundary condition. however, in
the limit of vanishing regularization parameter   0, we can exploit the global
invariance of the eld theory to set x = 0 at one of the two contacts, say z1. at
that contact, we then have

g(z1) = g0 .

(we here ignore the subtle issue whether such a boundary condition is admissible
in the presence of a wess-zumino term.)

by the use of current conservation, we may shrink the contours c1 and c2
to innitesimal loops encircling the contacts z1 and z2. in the vicinity of the
rst contact z1, the eld g performs small uctuations around the identity coset
g0. therefore, if the second contact z2 is close enough to the rst one, we may
compute the current-current correlation function by expanding g in x and y ,
and truncating at quadratic order. (of course, the theory becomes nonlinear far
from z1, but the contributions from there cancel by supersymmetry and c = 0.)
thus the problem reduces to a free-eld calculation.

from the variation of the action functional (9), we obtain the expression (14)
for the conserved current of the a1|a1 model. that current is psl(2|2)-valued.
linear response theory, in its transcription to the eld-theoretic formalism for
disordered electron systems, instructs us to expand the current in psl(2, 2) gen-
erators: j = 1
 whose generator t a an-
ticommutes with the matrix 3. since the diagonal matrix 3 distinguishes
between the advanced and retarded sector, such a component of the conserved

t a, and pick any component j a

2pa j a

50

current mixes retarded and advanced degrees of freedom, and its correlation
function gives the conductance. to be denite, we take j a
 to be a bosonic com-
ponent of j , and the corresponding generator has the standard normalization
ht a, t ai = 2.

because it suces to do a free-eld calculation, we may approximate

1

j a
 

8(cid:0)f 2y a + ik y a(cid:1) ,

2pa y at a. on integration along one of the

where y a is determined by y = 1
cycles ci, the rst term yields the radial current ow emanating from or sinking
into a contact, whereas the second term is topological and measures the vorticity
of the ow around a contact. by the choice of boundary condition y (z1) =
y (z2) = 0, the topological current is exact, and the vorticity must therefore
vanish, so we may neglect the latter term. (note that the topological current
does have a nite eect in the presence of an insulating boundary [74].) hence,
if we simplify the notation by putting   y a, we have j a
 = (8f 2)1. to
obtain the total current through a contour ci, we need to integrate the (hodge
dual of the) current one-form,

j  j a

dx = (8f 2)1 dx .

with this identication, the conductance is again given by (17), the functional
integral now being

h  i =

1

z z d  exp

1

4f 2z d2x   .

the normalizing denominator arises from integrating over the components of
y other than y a (while integration over x cancels the determinant from the
bosonic ghost). hence we are back to the problem considered in the previous
subsection. instead of guessing the answer for g, let us now compute the con-
ductance explicitly, carrying along the necessary scale factors.

the rst step is to make the boundary conditions explicit in the functional
integral. for that we place dirac distributions on the eld  at z1 and z2. the
partition function z then takes the form

z =z d [(z1)] [(z2)] exp

1

4f 2 z d2x   ,

where [] = lim0()1/2e2/. a similar formula holds for the numerator
of the current-current correlation function.

the next step is to fuse the distribution [(z1)] with the operator
j(z), by contracting c1 to the point z1 (and similarly with c2
at z2) to produce a local operator. the dominant term of the operator product

o1[]  hzc1

51

expansion is extracted as follows. we put z z1 = e +i (,  are the coordinates
that are used for what is called radial quantization around the point z1), and
take c1 to be a circle c1 = {z  c : |z  z1| = }. then

o1[] =

1

8f 2 i =ln 




d .

to go further we use a simple analogy. consider a quantum particle in one
dimension with mass m and coordinate x. then we know that the velocity x =
dx/d in feynmans imaginary-time path integral translates into the operator
m1d/dx in schrodinger quantum mechanics. moreover, for a free particle,

x(t )=xf

zx(0)=xi

(m/2)

dx e

x2d

t

r0

x(0) =(cid:28)xf(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

exp(cid:18) t

2m

d2

dx2(cid:19) m1d/dx(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

xi(cid:29) ,

independent of the time 0 where the velocity is evaluated. similarly, if i()
and f () are prescribed functions s1  r, then in the present problem we have

(,tf )=f




d(cid:18)i =ln 
z(,ti)=i
= 8f 2i d(cid:28)f(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

d(cid:19) exp
()(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
e(tf ti)h 

1

4f 2 za
i(cid:29) .

d2x  

here a denotes the annulus ti <  < tf , 0   < 2, and h is the hamiltonian
of the radially quantized theory. thus, by shrinking c1 to the point z1 we obtain

o1[] [(z1)] 



(z1)

[(z1)]  [(z1)] .

doing the same at the other contact and returning from the radially quantized
theory to the functional integral, we arrive at the expression

g =

1

z z d [(z1)] [(z2)] exp

1

4f 2 z d2x   .

this is easy to compute by fourier expanding the distributions in terms of
vertex operators:

[] =zr

d
2

exp i .

52

in the case of the partition function z, a standard result for gaussian functional
integrals gives

d

z = zr

2zr
= const zr

d

2 z d exp(cid:18)(4f 2)1z d2x   + i(z1) + i(z2)(cid:19)

d
2

exp 2f 22 k(z1, z2) ,

where k is the coulomb propagator, k(z1, z2) = ( )1(z1, z2). doing the same
computation for the numerator of the current-current correlation function and
taking the ratio, we nd

g =(cid:0)4f 2k(z1, z2)(cid:1)1

=

1/8f 2

ln(|z1  z2|/r)

.

from the previous subsection, we know that the numerator of the last expression
equals xx, with xx the classical conductivity. hence, we have the result

f 2 = (8xx)1 .

(19)

if we appeal to the semicircle relation (16), which gives xx = 1/2 for the critical
value xy = 1/2, we get f 2 = 1/4. note that for this value of the coupling
the current (14) is not holomorphic, and the eld g does not separate into left-
moving and right-moving waves. this will make it harder to obtain analytical
solutions than in the conventional (ane lie algebra) case.

14 quantum point-contact conductance

with both couplings of the a1|a1 model now determined, we put the theory to
test on a nontrivial transport coecient: the conductance between two interior
contacts in the quantum limit of point-size contacts. this observable was the
object of a recent study [27] where heavy analytical machinery was combined
with numerical simulation. starting from the chalker-coddington model with
two point contacts separated by a distance r, the following expression for the
q-th moment of the point-contact conductance was derived:

hgqi =z 

0

d() cq() r2 ,

(20)

where

d() =


2

tanh(cid:18)

2 (cid:19) d ,

(cid:0)q  1+i
2 (cid:1)

(q)

cq() =(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

.

2

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

53

(note that the conductance of a phase-coherent quantum system uctuates as
a function of disorder [75, 76], and for a complete description we need to com-
pute the entire distribution function or, equivalently, all of the moments of the
conductance. note also that the use of the symbol  is not accidental: this
parameter plays the same role here as in the classical calculation of subsection
13.1.) the factors d() and cq() are purely kinematical, the rst one being a
plancherel measure and the second the square of a clebsch-gordan coecient,
both of which are determined by representation theory and harmonic analysis.
all dynamical information from the eld theory resides in the r-dependent factor
r2. the exponents  are the scaling dimensions of certain scaling elds .
to elucidate their origin, we now give a rough summary of how the formula for
hgqi is obtained (the details are found in [27]).

the rst step is to cast the chalker-coddington network model in the form
of a supersymmetric vertex model [37] with global gl(2|2) symmetry, by using
the color-avor transformation in the way indicated in section 2. the partition
function of the vertex model is a sum over (classical) degrees of freedom situated
on the links of the network. they take values in the gl(2|2) modules v and v 
that were dened in section 4. in the vertex-model representation, the point-
contact conductance assumes the form of a two-point correlation function,

hgqi = ho+

q (0) o

q (r)i ,

where o
terms of the vacuum |0i and the superspin generators sij of section 4 by

q are operators that are viewed as elements of v  v , and are given in

o+

q = (s02)q|0i  |0i ,

o

q = |0i  (s20)q|0i .

precisely speaking, to make sense of the expression for hgqi, one canonically
identies v  v  with end(v ) (using that v  is dual to v , see section 4), and
computes the vertex model sum with o
q  end(v ) acting on the superspin at
the corresponding link.

the second step is to fourier-analyze the elements o

q of the tensor prod-
uct v  v . because the vertex model has global sl(2|2) symmetry, one
wants to decompose v  v  into irreducibles w.r.t. this group or, with no loss,
w.r.t. psl(2|2). this decomposition was rst described in section 5.2 of [49].
it turns out that the only representations that appear are those of a continuous
series, labelled by   r+, which is essentially the same as the principal contin-
uous series of unitary representations of su(1, 1)  the textbook example for
harmonic analysis on a noncompact group. in a self-explanatory notation, the
fourier decomposition of the operators o

q is written

o+

q =z 

0

d() hv q, v 0|qi q ,

o

q = o+
q .

(21)

54

these decompositions are inserted into the correlation function ho+
q (r)i.
adopting the phase convention q = q, denoting the product of clebsch-
gordan coecients by

q (0) o

and postulating

cq() =(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

hv q, v 0|qi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(  )

2

,

hq(0) q(r)i =

r2 ,

(22)

m()

where m() is dened by d() = m()d, we then arrive at (20).

let us pause here for a moment to insert the following remark. in [30] the
representation theory of psl(2|2) was discussed in some detail, with the focus
being on highest-weight representations. the existence of representations with-
out highest weight was mentioned, but only parenthetically, as the authors of
[30] ... do not have the need for those.
in our case, the situation is quite
the opposite! highest-weight representations (or, for that matter, lowest-weight
representations) play no role for the conductance, and all the representations
labelled by  are of another type. this feature is forced by the fact that the
representations of psl(2|2) on the modules v and v  are unitary w.r.t. to a sub-
group su(1, 1)su(2), so the decomposition of v v  into psl(2|2) irreducibles
is exhausted by unitary representations of this subgroup. it is well known that
the unitary representations of the noncompact group su(1, 1) organize into dis-
crete and continuous series. all representations that occur in the tensor product
v  v  contain the vector |0i  |0i  v  v , which is stable under the action
of the compact u(1) subgroup of su(1, 1). thus, as far as su(1, 1) is concerned,
our problem amounts to doing harmonic analysis on su(1, 1)/u(1)  h2. this
eliminates the discrete unitary series of su(1, 1) representations (all of which are
given by holomorphic sections of associated line bundles su(1, 1) u(1) c with
nonzero u(1) charge ), leaving only the continuous series. the members of the
latter are non-algebraic and do not contain any highest-weight or lowest-weight
vector.

next, we indicate how to construct the functions q appearing in the fourier
decomposition of o+
q  v  v . for that we adopt the notation g = psu(1, 1|2)
and k = ps (u(1|1)  u(1|1)). by a supersymmetric version of the borel-
weil correspondence, the module v can be viewed as the space of holomorphic
sections of a line bundle g k cm, while v  is the space of antiholomorphic
sections of the conjugate bundle g k cm. (in fact, this is precisely how v
and v  rst arose in [49]. m is a one-dimensional representation of k by the
superdeterminant, and m = m1.) from this viewpoint, the tensor product
v  v  lies inside some space of square integrable functions on g/k, and the
fourier decomposition of v  v  becomes a sub-problem of the problem of
harmonic analysis on g/k.
(this is familiar from quantum mechanics: the
modules v and v  are hilbert spaces that arise by geometric quantization of

55

the classical phase space g/k, and by multiplying the wave functions of v
with the conjugate wave functions of v , we recover g/k in the form of wigner
functions with a fuzzy resolution. note also the following. to decompose the
tensor product v  v , we need to diagonalize the low-order casimir invariants
of g. in the present case, consideration of the quadratic casimir turns out to be
sucient. under the embedding of v  v  into a function space on g/k, the
quadratic casimir corresponds to a second-order dierential operator invariant
w.r.t. g, the laplace-beltrami operator.) the latter problem was solved by a
supersymmetric adaptation of harish-chandra theory in [77, 78, 79]. we now
give a quick taste of the basic idea.

let gc = ncackc be an iwasawa decomposition [80] of gc  psl(2|2).
(compact groups such as su(2)  g do not admit an iwasawa decomposition,
so we are forced to work on the complexication gc.) the radial factor ac is
a maximal abelian subgroup with lie algebra contained in p (where p is dened
by lie(gc) = lie(kc) + p). the iwasawa decomposition determines a radial
function a : gc  lie(ac) by

g = n(g) ea(g)k(g) .

this function is left-invariant under nc, right-invariant under kc, and restricts
to a (complex-valued) function on xa1|a1. because ac normalizes nc, the ra-
dial part la of the laplace-beltrami operator l on g is invariant under left
translations by elements of ac. as a result, la is a dierential operator with
constant coecients, and its eigenfunctions are simple exponentials. thus, any
weight  : lie(ac)  c gives rise to an eigenfunction (g) = exp (a(g)) of
la, and hence of l. (in general, such a function will be well-dened only locally,
and global consistency in the compact sector imposes an integrality condition on
.) with (g), every rotated function (kg) (k  g) also is an eigenfunction
of l. the question addressed by harmonic analysis is which of the  to use in
constructing the fourier transform and its inverse, and what is the measure in
fourier space (the plancherel measure).

for the case at hand, the answer is known from [79]. since dim(ac) = 2,
the weights are parametrized by two quantum numbers: a continuous number
  r+ reecting the su(1, 1) content, and a discrete number l  2n  1
labelling representations of su(2) with integer spin. on restriction from the
complete function space on g/k to the subspace v  v , the second quantum
number gets frozen at the minimal value l = 1 (this apparently is related to the
topological coupling of the a1|a1 model being minimal), and we are left with a
single parameter   r+. the corresponding eigenfunctions  of the laplace-
beltrami operator l can be constructed quite explicitly. in the parametrization

56

of g/k by the complex supermatrices z, z introduced in (2), they are

 = sdet  (1  z)(1  z)

(1  zz) !(1+i)/2

.

these are eigenfunctions of l with eigenvalue (2 + 1). other eigenfunctions
with the same eigenvalue can be constructed by acting with the symmetry group
g on . the set of functions so obtained form an eigenfunction representation
space, v, of g. we will not go into the details of its construction here. suce it
to say that the function q appearing in the fourier decomposition (21) is the
element of v with the same weights w.r.t. the diagonal generators sii 1+1sii
of g as o+

q  v  v .

the q extend to functions on xa1|a1 in the natural way. we can there-
fore consider the two-point correlator hq(0) q(r)i in the a1|a1 model. on
general grounds, such a correlation function is of the form (22) for a conformal
eld theory. taking that formula for granted, the remaining problem is to com-
pute the scaling dimension  of q. by g-invariance of the eld theory, 
is the same for every vector of the representation space v. in particular, 
agrees with the scaling dimension of the function  generating the eigenfunc-
tion representation. leaving aside the possibility of an exact determination, we
can compute  from the algebraic decay of the correlator h(0)(r)i. since
 is simply an exponential in iwasawa coordinates, perturbation theory is easy
to implement and gives

 = f 2(2 + 1)

(23)

in ref. [30] this result (for highest-weight representations,
to leading order.
but it doesnt make any dierence) was conjectured to be exact.
i have no
nonperturbative proof of that conjecture but also no evidence against it. (as
we are about to see, the numerics of [27] supports the conjecture.) we shall
therefore assume (23) to be true, leaving its verication as an open problem for
future work.

given the formulas (20) and (23), we have a complete description of the
quantum point-contact conductance. for the purpose of numerical computer
simulation, the best observable to consider is the typical conductance, exphln gi.
this statistic is determined by typical events (unlike the average point-contact
conductance, which is dominated by rare events), and can therefore be computed
with high statistical accuracy. by analytically continuing (20) from the positive
integers q to the vicinity of q = 0, and using hgqi = 1 + qhln gi + o(q2), one
obtains

h ln gi = 2i

or upon exponentiation,

d
d

r2|=i = 8f 2 ln r

exp h ln gi = rxt ,

xt = 8f 2 .

57

thus the typical point-contact conductance decays with distance as a pure power.
(note from (20) that this is a unique feature not shared by the average, the
variance, or any higher moment.) in ref. [27], numerical data for hln gi collected
from the chalker-coddington network model, were plotted as a function of ln r.
the data nicely fell on a straight line, and the best t (properly taking into
account the statistical errors) was obtained with xt = 0.640 0.009. this agrees
with the analytical prediction xt = 2/  0.637, following from xt = 8f 2 and
f 2 = (8xx)1 together with the value xx = 1/2 for the classical conductivity
of the network model.

15 discussion

the present proposal, if correct  i believe i have given substantial evidence in its
favor and submit it now to the community for judgment , opens a new chapter
in the theory of the plateau transition of the integer quantum hall eect. for the
rst time, we have related the transition to the lagrangian of a eld theory that
enjoys manifest conformal invariance, namely the a1|a1 nonlinear sigma model
with a wzw term. this link nally opens the possibility of administering some
of the nonperturbative tools of conformal eld theory. (although the model is
not wzw, it still has a large chiral symmetry algebra.) an intriguing aspect
of our proposal is that essentially the same theory appeared in recent work on
string propagation in ads3 backgrounds. hopefully, this coincidence will spur
communication between elds and enhance the unity of theoretical physics. it
also corroborates the status of the quantum hall eect as one of the most exciting
and profound phenomena brought forth by recent condensed matter physics.

a remarkable consequence of our proposal is that critical properties in the
qh class seem to be universal only in a restricted sense, as the true marginality of
the coupling f implies the existence of a line of xed points, not just an isolated
xed point. a priori, one expects that the critical rg trajectories for dierent
members of the qh class (the network model, for example, the gaussian white
noise random potential projected on the lowest landau level, or disordered dirac
fermions) terminate on dierent points of the xed line, leading to a variable set
of exponents. this seems to be at variance, at rst sight, with what has been
observed in numerical and real experiments. however, as we have argued, the
marginal coupling f is completely determined by the (renormalized) conduc-
tivity governing the classical motion of electrons near an absorbing boundary.
universality will therefore persist as long as the classical diusion over short dis-
tances is governed by a universal conductivity. it is encouraging that a number
of authors have argued the latter to be true for incoherent qh systems.

it has been my contention for a number of years that, from a theoretical per-
spective, the most naturable probe of critical transport at the plateau transition
is the conductance between two interior point contacts. such a conductance is

58

represented by a two-point function of primaries in the conformal eld theory.
moreover, the operators appearing in the eld-theoretic representation of a point
contact are operators that create normalizable states lying inside the physical
hilbert space. (in contrast, the operator for, say, the local density of states cre-
ates unnormalizable states lying outside the physical space.) the point-contact
conductance therefore is the basic object of the theory, and any theoretical de-
velopment is well advised to start from there.
in the present work, we used
the short-distance singularity (the classical limit) of the conductance between
two strong contacts to determine the marginal coupling f . by matching onto
the classical conductivity xx = 1/2 of the chalker-coddington network model
at criticality, we found an irrational coupling f 2 = 1/4. we then explained
why this value predicts for the typical point-contact conductance of the network
model an exponent xt = 2/, which is conrmed by recent numerical results.

the present work leaves a number of open questions, but provides a system-
atic framework for answering them. the most urgent need is a calculation of the
exponent for the localization length, . the answer for  is not immediate from
our results, as this requires the renormalization of an operator with two deriva-
tives. (in the su(2)1 wzw model, the most relevant perturbation is trg. such
an operator is not available here, as g fails to be gauge-invariant.) a great
many theoretical proposals for this number have been made in the literature,
the most widely cited one being  = 7/3 [81], and the most recent one  = 20/9
[82]. from the present theory it seems likely that  will be none of these, but
some irrational number.

acknowledgment. this paper was conceived and written during a stay at
princeton university. i thank p. sarnak and the department of mathematics for
their hospitality. i also acknowledge many useful discussions with d. bernard in
the early part of 1995, when most of the structures reported here rst became
visible.

references

[1] k. von klitzing, g. dorda, and m. pepper, phys. rev. lett. 45 (1980) 494

[2] d.c. tsui, h.l. stoermer, and a.c. gossard, phys. rev. lett. 48 (1982)

1559

[3] r.e. prange and s.m. girvin, eds., the quantum hall eect (springer-

verlag, berlin, 1987)

[4] m. janssen, o. viehweger, u. fastenrath, and j. hajdu, introduction to the

theory of the integer quantum hall eect (vch, weinheim, 1994)

[5] b. huckestein, rev. mod. phys. 67 (1995) 357

59

[6] h.p. wei, d.c. tsui, m.a. palaanen, and a.m.m. pruisken, phys. rev.

lett. 61 (1988) 1294

[7] a.m.m. pruisken, phys. rev. lett. 61 (1988) 1297

[8] a.m.m. pruisken, nucl. phys. b 235 (1984) 277

[9] h.a. weidenmuller, nucl. phys. b 290 (1987) 87

[10] k.b. efetov, adv. phys. 32 (1983) 53

[11] d.e. khmelnitskii, jetp lett. 38 (1983) 454

[12] h. levine, s.b. libby, and a.m.m. pruisken, nucl. phys. b 240 (1984) 30,

49, 71

[13] i. aeck, nucl. phys. b 265 (1986) 409

[14] f.d.m. haldane, phys. rev. lett. 50 (1983) 1153

[15] i. aeck and f.d.m. haldane, phys. rev. b 36 (1987) 5291

[16] j.j.m. verbaarschot and m.r. zirnbauer, j. phys. a 18 (1985) 1093

[17] m.r. zirnbauer, another critique of the replica trick, cond-mat/9903338

[18] i. aeck, nucl. phys. b 305 (1988) 582

[19] k. gawedzki and a. kupiainen, nucl. phys. b 320 (1989) 625

[20] m.r. zirnbauer, j. math. phys. 37 (1996) 4986

[21] j. bernstein, lectures on supersymmetry, given at the ias semester on quan-

tum eld theory (1996)

[22] l. rozansky and h. saleur, nucl. phys. b 376 (1992) 461

[23] a.w.w. ludwig, m.p.a. fisher, r. shankar, and g. grinstein, phys. rev.

b 50 (1994) 7526

[24] d. bernard, (perturbed) conformal eld theory applied to 2d disordered

systems: an introduction, hep-th/9509137

[25] e. witten, commun. math. phys. 92 (1984) 455

[26] i. aeck, phys. rev. lett. 55 (1985) 1355

[27] m. janssen, m. metzler, and m.r. zirnbauer, point-contact conductances

at the quantum hall transition, cond-mat/9810319

60

[28] v.g. knizhnik and a.b. zamolodchikov, nucl. phys. b 247 (1984) 83

[29] n. berkovits, c. vafa, and e. witten, conformal eld theory of ads back-

ground with ramond-ramond ux, hep-th/9902098

[30] m. bershadsky, s. zhukov, and a. vaintrob, psl(n|n) sigma model as a

conformal eld theory, hep-th/9902180

[31] j.t. chalker and p.d. coddington, j. phys. c 21 (1987) 2665

[32] d.-h. lee, z. wang, and s. kivelson, phys. rev. lett. 70 (1993) 4130

[33] r. klesse and m. metzler, europhys. lett. 32 (1995) 229

[34] r. klesse and m. metzler, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 721

[35] s. kettemann and a. tsvelik, information about the integer quantum hall
transition extracted from the autocorrelation function of spectral determi-
nants, cond-mat/9809012

[36] m.r. zirnbauer, the color-avor transformation and a new approach to

quantum chaotic maps, chao-dyn/9810016

[37] m.r. zirnbauer, j. math. phys. 38 (1997) 2007; ibid. 40 (1999) 2197(e)

[38] m.r. zirnbauer, j. phys. a 28 (1996) 7113

[39] r.j. baxter, exactly solved models in statistical mechanics (academic press,

london, 1982)

[40] m. oshikawa and i. aeck, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 2883; cond-

mat/9905002

[41] f.h.l. essler and a.m. tsvelik, phys. rev. b 57 (1998) 10592

[42] f. wegner, z. phys. b 35 (1979) 207

[43] l. schafer and f. wegner, z. phys. b 38 (1980) 113

[44] k.b. efetov, a.i. larkin, and d.e. khmelnitskii, sov. phys. jetp 52

(1980) 568

[45] a.b. zamolodchikov and al.b. zamolodchikov, nucl. phys. b 379 (1992)

602

[46] r. shankar and n. read, nucl. phys. b 336 (1990) 457

[47] n. read, private communication (aspen, 1993)

61

[48] r. howe, trans. amer. math. soc. 313 (1989) 539

[49] m.r. zirnbauer, annalen der physik 3 (1994) 513

[50] d.-h. lee, phys. rev. b 50 (1994) 10788

[51] j. kondev and j.b. marston, nucl. phys. b 497 (1997) 639

[52] j.b. marston and s.-w. tsai, the chalker-coddington network model is

quantum critical, cond-mat/9812261.

[53] r. gade, j. phys. a 31 (1998) 4909

[54] m. stone, nucl. phys. b 327 (1989) 399

[55] f. wegner, z. phys. b 44 (1981) 9

[56] r. dijkgraaf, h. verlinde, and e. verlinde, nucl. phys. b 371 (1992) 269

[57] kutasov and n. seiberg, more comments on string theory on ads3, hep-

th/9903219

[58] r. gade and f. wegner, nucl. phys. b 360 (1991) 213

[59] r. gade, nucl. phys. b 398 (1993) 499

[60] a.v. andreev, b.d. simons, and n. taniguchi, nucl. phys. b 432 (1994)

487

[61] s. helgason, dierential geometry, lie groups, and symmetric spaces (aca-

demic press, new york, 1978)

[62] f.a. berezin, introduction to superanalysis (reidel, dordrecht, 1987)

[63] a. schwarz and o. zaboronsky, comm. math. phys. 183 (1997) 463

[64] v.g. kac, adv. math. 26 (1979) 8

[65] r. bundschuh and m.r. zirnbauer, still in preparation

[66] s.p. novikov, uspekhi mat. nauk 37:5 (1982) 3

[67] e. witten, nucl. phys. b 371 (1992) 191

[68] a.a. belavin, a.m. polyakov, and a.b. zamolodchikov, nucl. phys. b 279

(1984) 333

[69] v. gurarie, c-theorem for disordered systems, cond-mat/9808063.

62

[70] i.m. ruzin and s. feng, phys. rev. lett. 74 (1995) 154

[71] d. shahar, d.c. tsui, m. shayegan, e. shimshoni, and s.l. sondhi, phys.

rev. lett. 79 (1997) 479

[72] e. shimshoni, s.l. sondhi, and d. shahar, phys. rev. b 55 (1997) 13730

[73] d.n. sheng and z.y. weng, reection symmetry and quantized hall re-

sistivity near quantum hall transition, cond-mat/9809079

[74] s. xiong, n. read, and a.d. stone, phys. rev. b 56 (1997) 3982

[75] m. janssen, phys. rep. 295 (1998) 1

[76] d.h. cobden and e. kogan, phys. rev. b 54 (1996) 17316

[77] m.r. zirnbauer, commun. math. phys. 141 (1991) 503

[78] m.r. zirnbauer, phys. rev. lett. 69 (1992) 1584

[79] a.d. mirlin, a. muller-groeling, and m.r. zirnbauer, ann. phys. 236

(1994) 325

[80] s. helgason, groups and geometric analysis (academic press, new york,

1984)

[81] g.v. milnikov and i.m. sokolov, jetp lett. 48 (1988) 536

[82] a. leclair, gauge invariance and the critical properties of quantum hall

plateau transitions, cond-mat/9904414

63

