nyu-th/99/04/02, hutp-99/028, nub 3202, efi-99-19
may 26, 1999

monopole condensation, matrix quantum mechanics and

membrane approach in qcd

gregory gabadadze1 and zurab kakushadze2,3,4

1department of physics, new york university, new york, ny 10003

2jeerson laboratory of physics, harvard university, cambridge, ma 02138

3department of physics, northeastern university, boston, ma 02115

4enrico fermi institute, university of chicago, chicago, il 60637

abstract

we conjecture that a t-dual form of pure qcd describes dynamics of t hoofts point-
like monopoles. in fact, t-duality transforms the qcd lagrangian into a matrix quantum
mechanics of these monopoles. su(n) gauge group is broken down to u(1)n 1 at generic
points of the monopole moduli space, thus, reproducing the key feature of t hoofts abelian
projection. there are certain points in the moduli space where monopole positions coincide,
gauge symmetry is enhanced and gluons emerge as massless excitations. we show that there
is a linearly rising potential between monopoles. this indicates the presence of a stretched
ux tube between monopoles. the lowest energy state is achieved when monopoles are
sitting on top of each other and gauge symmetry is enhanced. in this case they behave as
free massive particles and can condense. in fact, we nd a constant eigenfunction of the
corresponding hamiltonian which describes condensation of monopoles. using the monopole
quantum mechanics, we argue that large n qcd in this t-dual picture is a theory of a
closed bosonic membrane propagating in ve dimensional space-time.
t hoofts point-like
monopoles can be regarded in this approach as constituents of the membrane.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

2
1

 
 

2
v
8
9
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

e-mail: gabadadze@physics.nyu.edu

e-mail: zurab@string.harvard.edu

1. introduction and summary

the aim of this work is to study point-like monopoles in pure su(n) qcd (yang-mills
(ym) theory). there is a great amount of evidence, both theoretical and from the lattice,
that this theory connes colored charges. it is believed that connement is realized as a
dual meissner eect of superconductivity [13]. in superconductivity fundamental charges
are condensed in cooper pairs and monopoles can be conned by vortices [6]. therefore,
in the dual picture, which is believed to be qcd, ux tubes should be connecting colored
charges and the corresponding magnetic monopoles must be condensed. thus, a crucial
step in studying connement is to understand monopole dynamics. great progress in this
direction was made by seiberg and witten within the framework of supersymmetric coun-
terparts of qcd [7,8], where monopole condensation and dual superconductivity picture
were explicitly shown to be realized. however, pure su(n) qcd, as opposed to its super-
symmetric counterparts, lacks any scalar elds. therefore, there are no t hooft-polyakov
type of monopoles in the model. moreover, the strong coupling dynamics makes it dicult
to nd some other type of solutions. nevertheless, it was t hooft [9] who argued that qcd
monopoles could be hidden behind the redundancy of the gauge invariant description of the
theory. thus, according to t hooft [9], one can choose a certain class of unitary gauges
in which there are no propagating spurious elds, and the non-abelian part of the gauge
freedom is completely xed. in these gauges su(n) gauge symmetry is broken down to its
maximal abelian subgroup u(1)n 1. each abelian subgroup gives rise to diracs magnetic
monopoles. thus, there should exist n  1 dierent types of point-like monopoles in qcd
(for a recent review, see [10]).
the way these monopoles can actually be seen in the theory is a bit peculiar. they
emerge somewhat indirectly, in particular, as point-like singularities occurring for certain
gauge choices [9]. this makes it extremely dicult to study their dynamics. in this respect,
the main questions arising in this approach are the following:

 can qcd monopoles and their interactions be studied within the conventional hamil-

tonian approach?

 can monopole condensation and, thus, connement of colored charges be analytically

studied using dynamics of qcd monopoles?

 can the gauge group breaking pattern su(n)  u(1)n 1 be understood without
referring to any specic gauge conditions, but rather relying on underlying dynamics
of the theory?

in the following we will argue that, under certain assumptions, the answer to these

questions is yes.

in order to discuss these issues, one needs the notion of s- and t-duality. under s-
duality, the roles of fundamental quanta and solitons are interchanged [11]. as we discussed

more precisely, one is talking about s-duality here. for recent discussions of these issues, see,
e.g., [4,5].

2

above, qcd should be s-dual to some model of superconductivity, and condensation of qcd
monopoles should indicate connement of qcd colored charges [1,2]. however, as we have
also emphasized above, it is very dicult to study monopoles within the strongly coupled
lagrangian of qcd. therefore, some other approach is called for. t-duality, which in general
interchanges momentum modes with winding modes, seems to be a promising approach in
this case. below we will argue that strongly coupled pure su(n) qcd in a large but nite
volume can be described in a t-dual form as a certain matrix quantum mechanics of n  1
t hoofts point-like monopoles. we use this matrix quantum mechanics to study certain
properties of qcd monopoles. in fact, we show that the su(n) gauge group is generically
broken down to u(1)n 1 as a result of monopole dynamics. furthermore, we show that
in a certain approximation (the so called monopole moduli space approximation) of heavy,
slowly-moving, almost non-interacting monopoles matrix quantum mechanics has the unique
ground state with zero momentum. this describes monopole condensation.

in order to reveal the structure of the condensate and validity of the monopole moduli
space approximation we study monopole interactions.
in fact, we nd a linearly rising
potential between them. thus, there should be ux tubes stretched between monopoles.
as a result of this observation we conclude that the moduli space approximation mentioned
above turns out to be valid only when monopoles are placed on top of each other. in this
case there is no force between them and they will be condensing at these points of the moduli
space as monopole-antimonopole pairs or some more complicated objects.

there is one more crucial feature associated with the points of the moduli space where
monopoles sit on top of each other. thus, we argue that at these points the u(1)n 1
gauge group is enhanced back to su(n), and, as a result, massless gluons emerge in the
theory. to summarize, the following attractive picture emerges. at a generic point of the
monopole moduli space monopoles are separated and the gauge group is broken down to
u(1)n 1. there are ux tubes stretched between monopoles. they give rise to linearly
rising potential between these heavy point-like objects. when the monopoles come on top
of each other, they condense; moreover, in this case the broken gauge group is enhanced
back to su(n) and gluons emerge as massless states. the monopole condensation, however,
indicates that colored charges are conned.

finally, using the t-dual description mentioned above, we show that in the large n limit
pure qcd can be described as a (4 + 1)-dimensional theory of a closed bosonic membrane.
it is tempting to conjecture that perhaps this theory in a certain approximation/limit could
be thought of as a non-critical closed bosonic string theory which is believed to describe
large n qcd [12].

the rest of this paper is organized as follows.

in section 2 we discuss t-duality of
pure qcd and the action of t hoofts qcd monopoles. we show that qcd monopoles
condense in the moduli space approximation. in section 3 we study quantum mechanics of
qcd monopoles. we show that there is a linearly rising potential between these point-like
objects. in section 4 we show that the large n limit of pure qcd can be related via t-
duality to a theory of a (4 + 1)-dimensional bosonic membrane. in section 5 we speculate
on a possibility of an underlying ve dimensional theory which might provide an adequate
low energy description of qcd.

3

2. a theory of t hoofts qcd monopoles

in this section we deduce the action describing certain properties of t hoofts qcd

monopoles. consider pure su(n) qcd with the lagrangian density:

lym = 

1
4g2

ym

ga

ga .

(1)

to avoid complications with the gribov copies, we will be working in the a0 = 0 gauge.
the hamiltonian density of the model can be written as follows:

hym =

g2
ym
2

p 2

i +

1
4g2

ym

g2

ij ,

(2)

where i, j = 1, 2, 3, and the canonically conjugate momenta are dened as g2
the gausss law should be imposed on physical eigenstates of the hamiltonian:

ymp a

i = ga
0i.

(di pi)a |phys.i = 0 .

(3)

the theory is known to generate the mass scale ym. the corresponding eective correlation
length will be dened as follows:

 

1

ym

.

(4)

let us assume that the theory is placed in a nite volume v (we will specify this volume
and boundary conditions below).
it is useful to introduce the following two limits. one
can dene the value of the volume element v to be small if the correlation length  is
much larger than v 1/3, i.e.,  >> v 1/3 [13]. the large volume limit would then refer to
a volume element satisfying v 1/3 >> . the two limits dened above correspond to the
weak respectively strong coupling regimes of the theory [13]. in order to see this let us keep
the product of the renormalization scale  and the value of v 1/3 xed:
for simplicity we
choose v 3 = 1. thus, the scale  serves as an infrared cuto. then the expression for the
correlation length in the next-to-leading order approximation takes the form:


v 1/3  (s)

1
22

0 exp  2

s0! .

(5)

here s = s() is the running strong coupling constant, and 0 and 1 are the corresponding
one- respectively two-loop coecients of qcd beta function. using (5), one nds that
the small volume approximation, dened as v 1/3 << , corresponds to the weak coupling
regime, i.e., s << 1. let us now turn to the large volume limit dened as v 1/3 >> .
this limit is equivalent to the small  approximation. furthermore, for small values of 
the running coupling constant s is a large number. in fact, for  = ym the perturbative
strong coupling constant blows up. hence, the large volume limit corresponds to the strong
coupling regime of the theory. in this regime the approximation (5) breaks down.

 the exact expression for  can also be given (see, for instance, [14]), however, this expression
contains the exact form of the beta function (s) which is known only perturbatively.

4

2.1. t-dual description of pure qcd

as it was mentioned above, we assume that our system is placed in a nite volume v .
in fact we take this volume to be a cubic box of the size 2l  2l  2l. to preserve
lorentz invariance of the theory we impose periodic (up to gauge transformations) boundary
conditions on gluon elds:

aj(xi + 2l, t) = aj(xi, t) .

(6)

this means that our theory is actually compactied on a three-torus tl  s1  s1  s1
which has all the radii equal to l.
recently it has been established that the (super) yang-mills model on a torus tl can
be rewritten in terms of a certain matrix quantum mechanics dened on a dual torus tr =

es1  es1  es1 with the radii r [1519]:

r =


l

,

(7)

where the parameter  is dened via the qcd scale

 =

1
2

ym

=  2 .

dynamical variables in the t-dual theory are time-dependent matrices i(t), i = 1, 2, 3,
which transform in the adjoint representation:

i(t)  u i(t) u + .

(8)

here u stands for an su(n) matrix independent of time and spatial coordinates. in addition
to the color indices, for a given value of the index i = 1, 2, 3, the matrix valued eld i
a,b,
a, b = 1, ..., n, carries a pair of new indices corresponding to winding modes of the gauge
elds, i
ma,nb, m, n  z [19]. the periodicity condition for these variables on tr takes the
form [19]:

i
na,nb  i

(n1)a,(n1)b + 2rab , i

na,mb  i

na,mb , n 6= m .

(9)

in what follows we will be suppressing the winding indices assuming that all the traces in the
expressions below are taken with respect to these indices as well, and that an appropriate
nite normalization of the tr operation is preserved by dividing these expressions by the
corresponding innite factor. given these conventions, the t-dual lagrangian can be written
as follows [1720]:

the original proof is based on the string theory arguments [1518]. however, it is applicable
to the non-abelian eld theory case as well [19] if the following identications are made. in our
interpretation, one can think of t hoofts qcd point-like monopoles as zerobranes of the original
string theory picture and the ux tubes stretched between monopoles (see below) as open strings.
a more detailed discussion of this analogy will be given elsewhere [21]. here, we simply adopt the
t-duality idea.

5

l =

1

2g(cid:16)tr 2

i +

1

2(2)2 tr hi ji2 (cid:17) ,

(10)

where i denotes the time derivative of i. the new coupling constant g is related to the
pure qcd coupling as follows:

g2
ym
4

= g (cid:16) l

r(cid:17)3/2

.

(11)

the t-duality transformation which recast the original yang-mills lagrangian density (1)
into the lagrangian (10) (and vise-versa) can be written as follows [19]:

i  (2) idi ,

2
i  (2)2 g2

0i , tr 

1

(2l)3 z d3x tr .

(12)

here tr goes over both color and winding indices, while tr goes over color indices only. our
convention for the covariant derivative is as follows: dj = j  iaj, and gij = i[di dj].
transformations for the radii and coupling constants are given in (7) and (11), respectively.
one can check that the t-duality transformation gives rise to a t-dual form of the gausss
law (3):

f abc b

i c

i |phys.i = 0 .

(13)

here i denote the momenta canonically conjugate to i, and f abc stand for the su(n)
structure constants.

in this paper we intend to study the limit l >> , that is, r << . in this limit matrix
quantum mechanics (10) is placed in a small volume, and it should describe large volume
ym theory. the latter is a complicated theory containing not only the zero-modes of the
compactication but also a large number of light kaluza-klein modes whose masses scale
as 1/l  ym. the matrix quantum mechanics in a small volume is just as complicated
as it contains light winding modes (which map to the kaluza-klein modes in the t-dual
ym description) whose masses scale as r/ = 1/l. however, certain aspects of the ym
theory in a large volume (which is a strongly coupled theory) might be more transparent
in the small volume matrix quantum mechanics approach. in particular, according to (11),
the coupling constant g in the matrix quantum mechanics can be kept xed at a small value
even if the ym coupling gym is large. thus, in what follows we will study the regime where

l >>  , r <<  ,

g2
ym >> 1 ,

g << 1 .

however, in the matrix quantum mechanics we still have a large number of light winding
modes which complicate the dynamics.
in the following we will argue that in a certain
regime, which appears to be relevant for understanding monopole condensation in qcd,
these winding modes can be neglected, and the dynamics substantially simplies. the key
observation here is the nature of the physical objects described by the lagrangian (10).
in particular, we will argue below that this lagrangian describes quantum mechanics of t
hoofts point-like qcd monopoles.

6

2.2. condensation of t hoofts qcd monopoles

let us study the ground state of the model (10). the potential

v = 

1

4g(2)2

tr hi ji2

(14)

is positive denite and has at directions. the state of zero energy is given by the elds for
which [i j] = 0. hence, for the vacuum congurations all the is can be diagonalized
simultaneously and take values in the cartan subalgebra of su(n). these congurations
can be parametrized in a gauge invariant way in terms of invariant eigenvalues of the adjoint
matrix . thus, the vacuum state can be described by the following order parameters:

cl

i = 

r1
i 0 ... 0
0 r2
i ... 0
... ... ... ...
0 ... ... rn
i

,



(15)

i s are the real-valued constant eigenvalues of i. dierent values of rm

where rm
i parametrize
dierent points of the vacuum manifold, that is, the moduli space. generically, the constants
rm
i are all dierent. when this is the case, the global symmetry of the theory is broken down
to u(1)n 1, much like what happens with the local symmetry in t hoofts construction [9].
on the other hand, if some k number of eigenvalues rm
i coincide, unbroken symmetry group
becomes su(k) u(1)n k1. in fact, for all coincident rm
i s the symmetry group is restored
back to su(n). we will discuss physical implications of this fact in the next section. note
that the expression (15) is the static solution of the equation of motion of (10):

a

i =

2

(2)2 (cid:16)hj iij(cid:17)a

.

(16)

i , r2

i , ..., rn

k=1 rk

i = diag(r1

an important issue is to specify symmetries of the ground state dened by the solution
cl
i = 0. thus, there are n  1 independent
values of rm
i s for each spatial component i = 1, 2, 3. since these constants can be arbitrary,
the solution (15) takes values in the space r3(n 1). moreover, the solution (15) is invariant
under permutations of rm
i s. these permutations form a group sn , which is the weyl
subgroup of su(n). thus, the space

i ). note that pn

r3(n 1)

sn

(17)

this invariance is up to the weyl subgroup of su (n ) - see below.

here we are a bit loose on the dierence between u (n ) and su (n ). in su (n ) all the eigenvalues
cannot coincide unless they are all equal to zero. otherwise, only n1 eigenvalues can be identical.
here we can consider u (n ) instead of su (n ). then we have n independent eigenvalues all of
which can be identical. one of these eigenvalues, however, is due to the extra u (1), and corresponds
to the overall center-of-mass motion of the monopoles, which can be dropped - see below.

7

can be identied with the moduli space of n 1 electrically neutral point-like objects. based
on the symmetry breaking patterns discussed above, we conjecture that these objects are t
hoofts point-like monopoles, which can be thought of as the qcd analogs of string theory
zerobranes. thus, in this case, rm
i would denote three spatial coordinates of n1 monopoles.
having made this identication, we can use the lagrangian (10) to study properties of qcd
monopoles. the rst thing to do is to write down the quantum mechanics of these massive
objects in the monopole moduli space approximation [22]. that is, let us suppose that
there is a region in the monopole moduli space where interactions between heavy, slowly-
moving monopoles are weak. we will explicitly specify this region of the moduli space in
the next section. here, however, we will simply assume that such a region exists. then the
eld (t) in the moduli space approximation can be written as:

i(t) = u cl

i (t) u + = u diag(cid:16) r1

i (t), r2

i (t), ..., rn

i (t) (cid:17) u + ,

(18)

where the constant moduli have now become time dependent quantities rm
i (t) [22]. they
dene positions of point-like qcd monopoles. notice that in the moduli space approxima-
tion dened by (18) the commutator term in (10) vanishes. thus, the model (10) reduces
to a quantum mechanics of heavy, slowly-moving qcd monopoles with the following simple
hamiltonian:

h = g 

n 1xm=1

m

i (t)m

i (t) .

(19)

here m
monopole. the mass of a qcd monopole is therefore given by:

i stands for the conjugate momentum in the ith spatial direction of the mth qcd

m =

1

2g

=

ym
2g

.

(20)

as a result of (9) the monopole coordinates are periodic variables. therefore, the hamilto-
nian (19) has the unique normalizable eigenstate with zero momentum:

0 (r1

i , r2

i , .., rn

i ) =

1

(2r)3/2 .

(21)

this state satises the gausss law constraint (13). in fact, it describes monopole condensa-
tion in the moduli space approximation. thus, the qcd monopoles can condense and, as

recent discussions on the monopole moduli space approximation can be found in [23] and
references therein.

in this hamiltonian we have dropped the term describing the center-of-mass motion of the
system of n  1 monopoles.
the eigenvalue for this eigenstate is zero in the non-relativistic approximation we deal with. in
the relativistic case the non-zero eigenvalue would be given by the qcd monopole mass (20).

8

a result, colored charges should be conned in accordance with the dual superconductivity
picture of [1,2]. notice that if r  0 the wavefunction (21) and the probability density for
the condensate blow up. however, the probability itselfr 2r
|0|2d3x equals to 1. moreover,
a state with zero momentum is expected to have a constant wavefunction, like the one in
(21), in accordance with the uncertainty principle.

0

the above discussion is valid in the approximation of slowly-moving, almost non-
interacting monopoles (the moduli space approximation of (18)).
it is known, however,
that interactions, albeit very weak, could actually destroy the condensate [24]. therefore,
we should nd the region of the monopole moduli space where these point-like massive ob-
jects stay non-interacting. this would justify the approximation used above. in particular,
in this approximation we have neglected all the winding modes. this is expected to be valid
for slowly-moving, weakly interacting monopoles. to identify the region of the moduli space
where monopole interactions are weak, in the next section we will use the following stan-
dard approach. for generic values of i(t) the commutator in the potential (10) is non-zero.
hence, matrices i cannot be diagonalized simultaneously. nevertheless, monopole posi-
tions can still be dened as eigenvalues of i [25]. the o-diagonal elements then describe
interactions between monopoles.

3. structure of the monopole condensate

in this section we study interactions between t hoofts qcd monopoles. for simplicity
we will concentrate on the u(2) gauge group. there should be two dierent monopoles with
opposite magnetic charges in this model [9]. below we are going to show that the potential
between these monopoles is linearly rising with distance. hence, the only non-interacting
conguration will be produced by the monopoles which are placed on top of each other.
some physical implications of this fact will be discussed at the end of this section. first, let
us calculate the potential between the monopole and antimonopole.

let us make a standard decomposition of the  eld into its classical and quantum parts:

i = cl

i + i .

here,

cl

1 =

1

2  r 0
0 r! , cl

2 = 0 , cl

3 = 0 .

(22)

(23)

that is, these two monopoles are at a distance r apart from each other along one spatial
direction. the eective potential between point-like objects described by (10) has been
calculated in the context of m-theory zerobrane quantum mechanics [17,18] (for a review, see
[19]). thus, we can use the matrix theory results [18] by keeping only the corresponding non-
supersymmetric four-dimensional parts and temporarily setting 2 = 1 (see [17,19,26,27]).

magnetic charges of t hoofts monopoles cannot be manifestly seen in the matrix model la-
grangian since there are no local u (1) gauge elds there, and vector elds are expected to be
conned in ux tubes. nevertheless, these charges can be viewed in the corresponding string
theory as chan-paton type factors for the ux tubes stretched between t hoofts monopoles.

9

in the path integral representation, after the appropriate gauge xing, one integrates out
quantum uctuations i. as a result, one nds the eective potential (see, for instance,
[26,27]):

the nite, r dependent part of this potential with the appropriate dimensionality is given
by:

ve  ln det (  2

t + r2 ) .

ve 

1
 r .

(24)

hence, there is a linearly rising potential between qcd monopoles.

here we would like to comment on the implications of the above result. in the previ-
ous section we have shown that slowly-moving, non-interacting qcd monopoles condense.
in this section we have seen that the potential between the monopoles is linearly rising.
therefore, the approximation adopted in the previous section is valid only if monopoles are
extremely close to each other, or, more precisely, when they sit on top of each other. this
means that they can condense only as monopole-antimonopole, or even more complicated
composites. moreover, in the state of lowest energy the constituents in a condensate should
sit on top each other. once the pair is excited in the condensate, monopole-antimonopole
constituents will start to move with respect to each other with opposite momenta, keeping
the total momentum equal to zero. in this case there is a linearly rising potential between
these objects (24). finite velocity corrections can also be calculated to this potential using
the results of [27].

the next question we would like to address is how gluons emerge in the t-dual formula-
tion of the theory. generically the symmetry of the dual theory (10) is u(1)n 1. however,
once some of the i eigenvalues coincide, the symmetry group is enhanced. for instance,
if all the n  1 eigenvalues coincide the symmetry is restored back to su(n). where are
gluons in this picture? the condition that all the n  1 eigenvalues coincide denes the so
called an 1 singularity of the su(n) group [28]. in this respect, su(n) massless gluons
can be viewed as massless states emerging at the singular points in the qcd monopole
moduli space where the coordinates of all the dierent n  1 monopoles coincide. it is at-
tractive and convenient to adopt the following illustrative picture of this phenomenon. since

 a condensed monopole-antimonopole pair in some sense resembles a condensed quark-antiquark
pair in qcd: there is a linearly rising potential between quarks, yet they can be considered as free
particles when they come close to each other, and, nally, they condense in quark-antiquark pairs
in the s-wave channel. all these properties seem to be shared by the qcd monopoles as well.

 the phenomenon of monopole-antimonopole condensation is s-dual to coopers phenomenon
of electric charge condensation. however, the potential between constituents in a condensed
monopole-antimonopole pair is linearly raising. this diers from coopers condensation which
gives rise to a weakly coupled pair. strongly coupled monopole-antimonopole condensation might
be suggestive of a possible relation to high-temperature superconductivity where we are dealing
with the strong coupling regime. that is, the qcd ground state might be electric-magnetic dual
to the ground state of a theory describing high-temperature superconductivity.

10

there is a linearly rising potential between qcd monopoles, there should be a stretched ux
tube, a sort of stretched string between these point-like objects. suppose this ux tube has
excitations with vector particle quantum numbers (albeit it is not clear how to see this ex-
plicitly). when the qcd monopoles are separated at some nite distance from one another,
the ux tube is stretched and its excitations are massive. masses of these gluons will be
proportional to the separation between the corresponding qcd monopoles

mkl 

1
 | rk  rl | .

however, when monopoles come closer to each other, the ux tube between these monopoles
relaxes. in fact, when the monopoles coincide, some of the massive string excitations might
become massless and ll in the multiplet of massless gluons of su(n). here we should note
that the appearance of massless gluons does not imply that they are the correct low energy
degrees of freedom. thus, the monopole condensation signals connement of colored charges,
so that the adequate low energy description is actually in terms of colorless glueballs.

note that in the original t hoofts construction qcd monopoles emerge as singularities
in the theory of gluons. on the other hand, in the t-dual picture qcd monopoles are
manifest but massless gluons emerge at certain singularities in the monopole moduli space.

4. large n qcd vs. bosonic membrane theory

in this section, using the results discussed above, we argue that in a certain regime large

n qcd can be described by a ve dimensional theory of a closed bosonic membrane.

thus, consider the regime l << . that is, pure qcd is compactied on a small three-
torus and is expected to be in a weak coupling regime. as we discussed in section 2, in
the t-dual picture this theory is described by the large volume r >>  matrix quantum
mechanics (10). thus, to calculate the spectrum of pure ym in the small volume limit
one can use the matrix quantum mechanics (10) and study the corresponding schrodinger
equation in the large volume limit [13]. furthermore, a remarkable discovery was made
in [29,30] where the matrix quantum mechanics (10) in the large n limit was shown to
be equivalent to a light-cone theory of a closed bosonic membrane. as a consequence, the
membrane theory was used in [31] to study the small volume ym spectrum in the large n
limit.

in this section we will briey discuss the relation between the membrane theory, large n
matrix quantum mechanics and ym model from the point of view of t-duality. in particular,
let us review how the membrane action reduces to the matrix model (10). we start with the
theory of a closed bosonic membrane in ve dimensional space-time. we are going to present

this is exactly what happens in superstring theory when branes sit on top of each other [25].
moreover, the picture of the stretched string is precise in this case since a critical open string theory
indeed has a massless vector particle in its spectrum. nonetheless, in this case we are dealing with
the higgs mechanism, whereas in the case of qcd monopoles gluons are actually conned.

11

the basic features of the membrane hamiltonian construction in the light-cone gauge. for
details the reader is referred to the original papers [29,30].

the membrane action in at minkowski space-time can be written as follows:

sm = tz d3q|detg| ,

(25)

where t is the membrane tension with the dimensionality of mass cubed; ,  = 0, 1, 2, are
the coordinates on the membrane world-volume; g denote the components of the induced
metric in the membrane world-volume

g() 

x ()

x()





,

(26)

where x,  = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, are the target space-time coordinates.

the membrane action is reparametrization invariant. hence, not all of the variables
it is

in the action are independent. one should carry out the gauge xing procedure.
convenient to introduce the light-cone coordinates:

and choose the light-cone gauge

x  =

1
2

(x 4  x 0) ,

x +() = x +(0) + 0 .

the light-cone gauge does not completely x the gauge freedom of the membrane action.
as a result, there still is a residual local invariance left. hence, one expects to have the
hamiltonian of the theory accompanied by a constraint equation. the detailed discussion
and the construction of the hamiltonian is given in [29,30]. here we present the nal result.
the expressions for the mass squared operator and the constraint can be written as follows:

m 2
2

="1
2p a

i p a

i +

f abcx b

i = 0 ,

i p c

(f abcx b

i x c

j )2# ,

t 2
4

i, j = 1, 2, 3 .

(27)

(28)

here f abc stand for the corresponding structure constants which we will specify in a moment.
the canonical coordinates and conjugate momenta are the functions of the time variable 0
only. the coordinates x a
in this expression are the coecients of the harmonic expansion
i
of the space-time coordinates xi on the surface of the membrane. for instance, if the
membrane has the topology of a two-sphere or a two-torus, then the harmonic expansion
mentioned above is just an expansion of the space-time coordinates in the basis of the
harmonic functions on the corresponding surface:

xi() =

xa=1

x a

i (0)y a(1, 2) ,

 for discussions on the relation between large n gauge groups and toric surfaces, see [32].

12

where y a()s are the harmonic functions. here the harmonic functions y a() form a repre-
sentation of the lie algebra of the su() gauge group [29,30]. the structure constants f abc
are those of su(). thus, the su() gauge group appears due to the reparametrization
invariance of the membrane action.
the expression (27) coincides, up to some rescalings, with the hamiltonian which can
be derived from (10) in the n   limit. indeed, the hamiltonian corresponding to (10)
reads:

1

2g

h =

1
2

a

i a

i +

1

(2g)2

1

4(2)2 (cid:16) f abcb

i c

j (cid:17)2

.

(29)

the constraint equations in (13) and (28) (which correspond to the gausss law (3)) are also
identical. thus, the matrix quantum mechanics (10) in the large n limit is equivalent to the
theory of a closed bosonic membrane with the topology of a sphere or a torus [29,30]. on the
other hand, we have argued above that the matrix quantum mechanics (10) compactied on
the three-torus tr describes qcd monopoles and pure qcd on a dual torus tl. thus, a
ve dimensional theory of a bosonic membrane is a t-dual description of pure qcd. qcd
point-like monopoles in this case can be regarded as constituents of the membrane. the
formal transition between the two systems is via the following substitutions:

m 2 

1
g

h ,

t 2 

1

(4g)2

.

(30)

thus, one can calculate the membrane spectrum in terms of m and t , and then nd the
corresponding ym spectrum (in the regime where ym is compactied on a small torus and
is weakly coupled) using (30) [31].

5. speculations

the discussions in the previous section lead us to speculate on a possibility of an un-
derlying ve dimensional theory which might provide an adequate low energy description of
(large n) pure qcd. in particular, we cannot help noticing an obvious analogy between the
discussions in the previous sections and what happens in the context of m-theory. thus, the
strong coupling limit of 10 dimensional type iia is believed to be described by 11 dimen-
sional m-theory whose low energy eective theory is 11 dimensional supergravity. on the
other hand, the large n quantum mechanics of type iia d0-branes is believed to describe
m-theory in the innite momentum frame [18]. the former also arises upon the light-cone
quantization of the m2-brane [30].

the analogy with t hoofts qcd monopoles is then clear. the latter are analogous to
d0-branes, and type iia should be analogous to the qcd string theory, which is believed
to be non-critical (unlike type iia) [12]. because of this property it is likely that this string
theory in the strong coupling limit is intrinsically 5 dimensional, and, perhaps, the string

the su () group (and its lie algebra) should be understood as the n   limit of the su (n )
group.

13

expansion may not even be adequate so that some sort of membrane expansion (as in
m-theory) might be a more appropriate description. if so, it is tempting to conjecture that
there is an analog of m-theory, which is a 5 dimensional q-theory, whose low energy eec-
tive eld theory has solitonic membrane solutions. these membranes are made of t hoofts
qcd monopoles. the matrix quantum mechanics (once we also include non-perturbative
eects and take the large n limit) describing these monopoles then might also describe some
other properties of large n qcd. in particular, certain regimes where we might not naively
expect the matrix quantum mechanics to be applicable could still be adequately described
by the latter in analogy with the m-theory case. one possible indication of this might be
the fact that the glueball spectrum computed in [31] using the membrane theory as the
starting point is in a good agreement with the lattice data. in fact, in this case one can
argue from the qcd viewpoint that such an agreement is not an accident as the size of the
corresponding glueballs is much smaller than the qcd correlation length  = 1/ym.

if such a ve dimensional q-theory indeed exists, this would have interesting implications
for qcd. first, the matrix quantum mechanics would then provide a computational tool
for qcd. certain sectors of the glueball spectrum might also be computable by quantizing
the membrane. the magnetic dual of the letter (in 4+1 dimensions) is an instanton. it is
tempting to identify these instantons with the qcd instantons which would be consistent
with the expectation that the latter are also made of point-like qcd monopoles [33].

at present it is not completely clear whether the above discussions, which are based
on the analogy with m-theory, will hold.
in particular, here we do not expect any non-
renormalization theorems as we have no supersymmetry. generalization to supersymmetric
qcd might therefore be desirable as in the latter case supersymmetry might yield some
simplications (albeit there might also be various possible complications). these and other
issues are currently under investigation, and will be reported elsewhere [21].

acknowledgments

the work of g.g. was supported by the grant nsf phy-94-23002. the work of z.k.
was supported in part by the grant nsf phy-96-02074, and the doe 1994 oji award. z.k.
would also like to thank albert and ribena yu for nancial support.

perhaps a way to make the connection between the qcd string and membrane theory in ve
dimensions is to start with a toroidal membrane with one of the cycles shrinking to zero. in this
limit we would obtain a ve dimensional string theory.

14

references

[1] g. t hooft, in high energy physics, ed. a. zichichi (editrice compositori, bologna,

1976).

[2] s. mandelstam, phys. rept. c23 (1976) 245.
[3] y. nambu, phys. rept. c23 (1976) 250.
[4] n. brambilla, a. vairo, hep-ph/9904330.
[5] m. baker, j.s. ball, f. zachariasen, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 4400.
[6] a. abrikosov, jetp 32 (1957) 1442.
[7] n. seiberg, e. witten, nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 19; erratum-ibid. b430 (1994) 485;

nucl. phys. b431 (1994) 484.

[8] n. seiberg, phys. rev. d49 (1994) 6857.
[9] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b190[fs3] (1981) 455.
[10] m.n. chernodub, m.i. polikarpov, hep-th/9710205.
[11] c. montonen, d. olive, phys. lett. 72b (1977) 117.
[12] a.m. polyakov, int. j. mod. phys. a14 (1999) 645.
[13] m. luscher, nucl. phys. b205[fs5] (1982) 483.
[14] j. collins, renormalization, cambridge university press, 1984.
[15] u. danielson, g. ferreti, b. sundborg, int. j. mod. phys. a11 (1996) 5463.
[16] d. kabat, p. pouliot, phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 1004.
[17] m. douglas, d. kabat, p. pouliot, s. shenker, nucl. phys. b485 (1997) 85.
[18] t. banks, w. fischler, s. shenker, l. susskind, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 5112.
[19] w. taylor, hep-th/9801182.
[20] m. claudson and m.b. halpern, nucl. phys. b250 (1985) 689.
[21] g. gabadadze and z. kakushadze, work in progress.
[22] n.s. manton, phys. lett. 110b (1982) 54.
[23] e.j. weinberg, hep-th/9610065.
[24] n. bogoliubov, j. phys. 11 (1947) 23.
[25] e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 335.
[26] n. ishibashi, h. kawai, y. kitazawa, a. tsuchiya, nucl. phys. b498 (1997) 467.
[27] o. tafjord, v. periwal, nucl. phys. b517 (1998) 227.
[28] v.i. arnold, a. gusein-zade, a. varchenko, singularities of dierentiable maps, i,

ii, birkhauser, 1985.

[29] j. hoppe, quantum theory of a relativistic surface, in proceedings of the workshop
constraints theory and relativistic dynamics (florence, 1986), eds. g. longhi, l.
lusanna (world scientic, singapore, 1987).

[30] b. de wit, j. hoppe, h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b305 (1988) 545.
[31] g. gabadadze, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 094015.
[32] d. fairlie, p. fletcher, c. zachos, phys. lett. 218b (1989) 203; j. math. phys. 31

(1990) 1088;
d. fairlie, c. zachos, phys. lett. 224b (1989) 101.

[33] k. lee, p. yi, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3711;

k. lee, phys. lett. b426 (1998) 323;
t.c. kraan, p. van baal, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 627; phys. lett. b435 (1998) 389.

15

