preprint typeset in jhep style. - hyper version

kul-tf-99/17
dftt 28/99

ramond-ramond couplings of non-bps
d-branes

marco billoa, ben craps and frederik roose

instituut voor theoretische fysica
katholieke universiteit leuven, b-3001 leuven, belgium
a dipartimento di fisica teorica, universit`a di torino and
i.n.f.n., sezione di torino, via p. giuria 1, i-10125, torino, italy
e-mail: billo@to.infn.it, ben.craps@fys.kuleuven.ac.be,
frederik.roose@fys.kuleuven.ac.be

abstract: we study how non-bps type ii d-branes couple to r-r potentials. upon
tachyon condensation the couplings we nd give rise to the wess-zumino action of
bps d-branes.

keywords: strings, d-branes.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

0
3

 
 

2
v
7
5
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

work supported by the european commission tmr programme erbfmrx-ct96-0045.
aspirant fwo, belgium

in a seminal series of papers, sen has shown how to obtain an exact conformal
eld theory description of non-bps d-branes (see [1] for two of the main papers and
two recent reviews). in this setup, a non-bps d(p  1)-brane remains after tachyon
condensation on a dpanti-dp-brane pair. in type ii theories the resulting object
still has a tachyonic mode on its worldvolume, but performing the orientifold to type
i stabilizes the non-bps brane. in a related development, d-brane charges have been
shown to take values in appropriate k-theory groups of space-time. a major result is
that all lower-dimensional d-branes can be considered in a unifying manner as non-
trivial excitations on the appropriate conguration of higher-dimensional branes.
for type iib this was demonstrated by witten in [2], where all branes are built from
suciently many d9anti-d9 pairs. as to type iia, horava outlined the construction
of lower branes from non-bps d9-branes [3].

as is well-known, type ii bps d-branes couple to ramond-ramond gauge elds
through the wess-zumino action [4] (see [5] for string computations checking the
form of this action):

swz =

tp

 zp+1

c  tr e2 f +b  q a(rt )/ a(rn ) .

(1)

here tp/ denotes the dp-brane tension, c a formal sum of r-r potentials, f
the gauge eld on the brane and b the ns-ns two-form. the trace is over the
chan-paton indices. further, rt and rn are the curvatures of the tangent and
normal bundles of the d-brane world-volume, and a denotes the a-roof genus. in the
setup of ref. [2], where one starts with an unstable conguration of supersymmetric
branes and anti-branes, the coupling on the bps-brane that remains after tachyon
condensation is inherited from the similar coupling of the parent branes.
in the
scenario of ref. [3], one starts from non-bps branes, which can decay into a lower
bps brane via tachyon condensation. in this case, it has not been clear how the
resulting objects acquire the desired couplings in eq. (1). in this note we argue that
all type ii non-bps branes couple universally to ramond-ramond elds as given by

wz = azp+1
s

c  d tr t e2 f +b  q a(rt )/ a(rn ) ,

(2)

where t is the real, adjoint tachyon eld living on the non-bps brane and a is a
constant.1 one term of this action (the one describing the coupling of a non-bps
dp-brane to cp) was discussed in refs. [1, 3]. below we will show how, upon tachyon
condensation, these non-bps wess-zumino couplings induce the appropriate wess-
zumino action for the resulting bps-branes. the cases dp  d(p  1) and dp 
d(p  3) will be treated in detail.
it will turn out, for instance, that the r-r

1this constant will be xed in the next paragraph by imposing that the bps d(p  1)-brane we
nd there have the expected r-r charge. then this action predicts the r-r charges of the lower
bps d-branes that can be constructed from the non-bps dp-brane.

1

charges of the d8-branes and d6-branes one constructs from unstable d9-branes [3]
have the expected ratio. moreover, we check the presence of these r-r couplings
by performing various disc amplitudes with an open string tachyon inserted at the
boundary.

relation to wess-zumino action in ref. [3] horava described how to construct
bps d(p  2k  1)-branes as bound states of (suciently many) unstable dp-branes.
the lower-dimensional bps branes arise as the result of the condensation of a tachyon
eld into a vortex conguration, accompanied by non-trivial gauge elds. we indicate
now how the r-r couplings that we propose in eq. (2) account for the r-r couplings
(1) that the stable lower-dimensional brane emerging from the condensation must
possess.

consider rst a single non-bps dp-brane. there is a real tachyon eld living
on its worldvolume. the tachyon potential is assumed to be such that the vacuum
manifold consists of the two points {t0, t0}.2 the tachyon can condense to a non-
trivial (anti)-kink conguration t (x) depending on a single coordinate. the r-r
coupling (2) on the dp-brane reads in this case

azp+1

c  dt  e2f +b  q a(rt )/ a(rn ) ,

(3)

the rst term of which was suggested in ref. [3] and shown to be present by a disc
computation (in an alternative formalism) in ref. [1].
it involves the topological
density xt (x), which is localized at the core of the kink and is such that r dt (x) =
2t0.
in the limit of zero size we would have dt (x) = 2t0(x  x0)dx, and the
above action would take the form3 of the usual wess-zumino eective action for a
bps d(p  1)-brane, localized in the x-direction at x0:

2t0azp

c  e2f +b  q a(rt )/ a(rn ) .

(4)

in reality, the d(p  1)-brane will have a certain thickness in the direction of the
kink.

note that the constant a can be xed in terms of t0 by equating 2t0a with the
tension tp1/ of a bps d(p  1)-brane. this being done, the remainder of this
paragraph provides a non-trivial check on our couplings in eq. (2).

2the symbol t0 should not be confused with the tension of a d0-brane, which will never explicitly

appear in this paper.

3actually, trying to follow the reduction of a dp-brane to a lower-dimensional one, there is a

puzzle concerning the gravitational part q a(rt )/ a(rn ). the directions along the parent brane
transverse to the smaller brane contribute originally to a(rt ). it is not clear to us how they are
reassigned to the normal bundle in the reduced action.
in fact, this problem seems also to be
present for the reduction of brane-antibrane pairs to lower-dimensional bps branes as in ref. [2],
where only the standard wz actions (1) are involved.

2

as a less trivial example, let us start from two unstable dp-branes. the tachyon
eld t , transforming in the adjoint of the u(2) gauge group, can form a non-trivial
vortex conguration in co-dimension three. the tachyon potential is assumed to
be such that the minima of t have the eigenvalues (t0, t0), so that the vacuum
manifold is v = u(2)/(u(1)  u(1)) = s2. the possible stable vortex congurations
t (x), depending on 3 coordinates xi transverse to the (p  2)-dimensional core of
the vortex, are classied by the non-trivial embeddings of the sphere at innity
s2

 into the vacuum manifold, namely by 2(v) = z.

apart from the center of mass u(1) subgroup we are in the situation of the
georgi-glashow model, where the tachyon eld t (x) = t a(x)a (a being the pauli
matrices) sits in the adjoint of su(2), and the vacuum manifold is described by
t at a = t 2
0 . the vortex conguration of winding number one, which is the t hooft-
polyakov monopole, is of the form

t (x) = f (r)axa ,

(5)

where r is the radial distance in the three transverse directions, and the prefactor
f (r) goes to a constant for r  0 and approaches t0/r for r  .

the nite energy requirement implies that dit a vanishes suciently fast at
innity, from which it follows that a vortex is accompanied by a non-trivial gauge
eld; for the case (5) above, the non-trivial part of the su(2) gauge eld has the
form

aa

i (x) = h(r)a

ijxj ,

(6)

with h(r) approaching a constant for r  0, while h(r)  1/r2 at innity. the
eld-strength in the unbroken u(1) direction,

gij =

t a
t0

f a
ij

,

(7)



corresponds to a non-trivial u(1) bundle on the sphere at innity, i.e. the magnetic
charge g = rs2
g is non-zero (and in fact equals the winding number of the vortex
in appropriate units). thus there is a magnetic charge density in the transverse
directions, dened by dg = (x)d3x, which is concentrated at the core of the vortex
solution. in the zero size limit, there would be a point-like magnetic charge at the
location of the core: (x) = g 3(x  x0).

the wz action (2) for the dp-brane can be rewritten as

azp+1

c  d tr{t e2f }  e2 f +b  q a(rt )/ a(rn ) ,

(8)

where we have split the u(2) eld-strength into its su(2) part f and its u(1) part f .
inserting the t hooft-polyakov conguration for the tachyon and the su(2) gauge

3

eld, we see that eq. (7) involves precisely the magnetic monopole eld g = t af a;
we get indeed

2azp+1
= 2at0 zp+1

c  dtr{t f }  e2 f +b  q a(rt )/ a(rn )
c  (x)d3x  e2 f +b  q a(rt )/ a(rn ) .

(9)

thus we have a distribution of d(p  3)-brane charge localized at the core of the
vortex; in particular, in the limit of zero-size core we recover the r-r couplings (2)
of a bps d(p  3)-brane that supports the u(1) gauge eld f .

since the minimal magnetic charge g is 4 in our units, eq. (9) and the remark
after eq. (4) lead to the expected ratio 42 for the r-r charges of d(p  3)- and
d(p  1)-branes.

the mechanism described above generalizes to the reduction of a non-bps dp-
brane to a d(p2k1)-brane via tachyon condensation, described in [3]. in this case,
it is convenient to start with 2k unstable dp-branes. the conguration of vorticity
one for the tachyon eld, which sits in the adjoint of u(2k), is of the form

t (x) = f (r) ixi ,

(10)

where r is the radius in the 2k + 1 transverse dimensions xi, and the -matrices in
these dimensions are viewed as u(2k) elements. eq. (10) is a direct generalization of
the t hooft-polyakov case, eq. (5). again, the nite energy requirement should im-
ply a non-trivial gauge eld conguration, leading to a non-zero generalized magnetic
tr{t (f )k}. in such a background, the wz action (2) contains the factor
charge rs2k
d tr{t f k} = (x)d2k+1x; the (generalized) magnetic charge density  is concentrated
at the core of the vortex, and in the zero-size limit reduces to a delta-function in the
transverse space. thus we are left with the wz action for a d(p  2k  1)-brane.



x (z), where s

string computation to compute the disc scattering amplitudes necessary to
check eq. (2), it is convenient to conformally map the disc to the upper half plane
and use the doubling trick as described, for instance, in ref. [6]. this trick con-
sists in replacing, e.g., x (z) by s
 is diagonal, with entries 1 in
the worldvolume and 1 in the transverse directions, and then treating the elds
depending on z as if z were a holomorphic variable living on the lower half plane.
the fermionic  elds are treated in the same way. as to the spin elds in the
r-r sector, for bps dp-branes in type iia s (z) is replaced by (01    p) 
 s(z)
(where the chirality ips because p is even). for type iib s(z) is replaced by
(01    p)
 s(z), where now p is odd. for the non-bps dp-branes we are study-
ing here, p is odd in iia and even in iib, so that there is a chirality ip in iib and
not in iia. the explicit computations below will be done for iia, but the story is,
of course, completely analogous for iib.

4

the rst amplitude we are going to compute is the two point function of one
open string tachyon and a r-r potential in the presence of a single non-bps dp-
brane in iia.4 this will establish the rst term in the expansion of eq. (2). we take
the r-r vertex operator in the (1/2, 1/2) picture (which exhibits the r-r eld
strengths rather than the potentials):

vrr = h  s(z) s (z) eikx(z,z)  h  s(z) (01    p) 

 s (z) eikx(z) eiksx(z) ,
(11)
where h  is the bispinor containing the r-r eld strengths and k the momentum
of the r-r potential. we have omitted the superghost part and do not keep track of
the overall normalization, since we are not able to directly determine the constant a
in eq. (2) anyway.5 the tachyon vertex operator is put in the 1 picture:

vt = t (k) eikx(y)

,

(12)

where t and k are the tachyon polarization and momentum and y is a point on the
real axis. again, the superghost part is not displayed. the three insertion points
z, z and y can be xed by introducing ghost elds. then the contributions of the
ghost, superghost and x sectors combine into (z  z)5/4. the contraction of the two
spin elds in the fermionic sector gives

< s(z) s (z) >= (z  z)5/4 c  

,

with c the charge conjugation matrix. the amplitude becomes

t h (01    p) 

 c    k ,

(13)

(14)

where k is a global factor. tracing over the spinor indices, only the part of h 
proportional to h1...p+1(c1...p+1)  contributes, making the amplitude propor-
tional to t h1...p+11...p+1. upon integration by parts, this conrms the rst term
of eq. (2).

there is a kinematical subtlety in this computation. string scattering amplitudes
can only be computed for on-shell external particles. it is easy to convince oneself
that, since the tachyon carries only momentum along the brane and the momentum
along the brane is conserved, the tachyon and the r-r potential cannot be both on-
shell. as a way out, one could consider branes with euclidean signature, for which
this kinematical problem does not occur, and then extrapolate the couplings one
nds there to their minkowski cousins.

4this has been done before in a formalism in which non-bps d-branes are constructed in an

alternative way [1].

5however, we will be interested in the relative normalization of this amplitude with respect to

the ones with photons inserted. the constant a itself was xed in the previous paragraph.

5

to check the second term of eq. (2), depending linearly on f , we add to the
previous amplitude a vertex operator for a gauge eld. this vertex operator is in the
0 picture:

va = a(i x (w) + 2 p  (w)) eipx(w)

,

(15)

where this time we have kept track of all normalization factors. here a is the
polarization of the gauge eld, p is its momentum and w is on the real axis. only
the fermionic part of the photon vertex operator can lead to terms of the type we are
looking for (the photon should provide two gamma-matrices), so we ignore possible
contributions from the bosonic part. we will compute the amplitude to lowest order
in the photon momentum. this means that we will put p equal to zero in the bosonic
sector, thus keeping only the explicit p dotted with a  in eq. (15). we follow the
previous computation as closely as possible by xing again z, z and y, such that only
w needs to be integrated over. in the limit of small photon momentum the ghost,
superghost and x sector contributions are unchanged (they multiply to (z  z)5/4).
the fermionic correlator is

2pa < s(z) (w) s (z) >= i pa ()  (w z)1(w  z)1(z  z)1/4.
(16)

the resulting integral can be done by a contour integration:

leading to

(z  z)z +



dw (w  z)1(w  z)1 = 2i

,

2 p a t h  () (01    p)



  k

(17)

(18)

for the amplitude. this corresponds indeed to the term in eq. (2) linear in f . note
that the factor 2 multiplying f in eq. (2) comes out correctly.

the generalization to multiple (low momentum) photon insertions is straight-
forward. the dependence on the photon insertion points of the relevant part of
the fermionic correlator factorizes, such that each integration reduces to the one-
dimensional integral described in the previous paragraph. it is also easy to include
chan-paton factors in the above computations, leading to the trace in eq. (2). fi-
nally, one could check the presence of the gravitational terms in eq. (2) explicitly.
since all graviton vertex operators can be inserted in the (0, 0) picture, the various
contractions will be identical to the ones used in ref. [5].

note that, from a technical point of view, the only role of the tachyon in the
above computations is to provide its superghost part, allowing one to insert the r-r
vertex operator in the (1/2, 1/2) picture, instead of the (3/2, 1/2) one. thus
the inclusion of the tachyon proves wrong ones rst impression that non-bps d-
branes cannot couple to the closed string r-r sector because of the gso-projection.
apart from this, the above computations perfectly parallel their counterparts for
bps d-branes.

6

acknowledgement we would like to thank pieter-jan de smet and walter troost
for discussions.

references

[1] a. sen, j. high energy phys. 09 (1998) 023, hep-th/9808141; j. high energy
phys. 12 (1998) 021, hep-th/9812031; non-bps states and branes in string the-
ory, hep-th/9904207. a. lerda and r. russo, stable non-bps states in string theory:
a pedagogical review, hep-th/9905006.

[2] e. witten, j. high energy phys. 12 (1998) 019, hep-th/9810188.

[3] p. horava, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 1373-1404, hep-th/9812135.

[4] m. green, j. harvey and g. moore, class. and quant. grav. 14 (1997) 47,
hep-th/9605033; y.-k. cheung and z. yin, nucl. phys. b 517 (1998) 69,
hep-th/9710206; r. minasian and g. moore, j. high energy phys. 11 (1997) 002,
hep-th/9710230.

[5] b. craps and f. roose, phys. lett. b 445 (1998) 150, hep-th/9808074; phys. lett. b
450 (1999) 358, hep-th/9812149; j. morales, c. scrucca and m. serone, anomalous
couplings for d-branes and o-planes, hep-th/9812071; b. stefanski, nucl. phys. b
548 (1999) 275, hep-th/9812088.

[6] a. hashimoto and i. klebanov, nucl. phys. 55b (proc. suppl.) (1997) 118,

hep-th/9611214.

7

