on conformally compactied phase space

p. budinich

december 29, 2013

abstract

conformally compactied phase space is conceived as an automor-
phism space for the global action of the extended conformal group.
space time and momentum space appear then as conformally dual,
that is conjugate with respect to conformal reections. if now the for-
mer, as generally agreed, is appropriate for the description of classical
mechanics in euclidean geometrical form, then the latter results appro-
priate for the description of quantum mechanics in spinor geometrical
form. in such description, fermion multiplets will naturally appear as
consequence of higher symmetries and furthermore, the euclidean ge-
ometry, bilinearly resulting from that of spinors, will a priori guarantee
the absence of ultraviolet divergences when dealing with quantum eld
theories. some further possible consequences of conformal reections
of interest for physics, are briey outlined.

1 introduction

9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
6

 

 
 

1
v
5
4
0
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the discovery of maxwells equations covariance with respect to the confor-
mal group c = {l, d, p4, s4} (where l,d,p4,s4 mean lorentz-, dilatation-,
poincar`e-, and special conformal transformations respectively building up
c) [1] have induced several authors [2] to conjecture that minkowski space-
time m = r3,1 may be densely contained in conformally compactied1 space-
time mc:

s3  s1

z2

mc =

(1)

1from which robertson-walker space-time mrw = s 3  r1 is obtained, familiar to
cosmologists (being at the origin of the cosmological principle [3]), where r1 is conceived
as the innite covering of s 1.

1

often conceived as the homogeneous space of the conformal group:

mc =

c
c1

where c1 = {l, d, s4} is the stability group of the origin x = 0.

as well known c may be linearly represented by so(4, 2), acting in r4,2,
containing the lorentz group so(3, 1) as a subgroup which, because of the
relevance of space-time reections for natural phenomena, should be extended
to o(3, 1). but then so(4, 2) should be also extended to o(4, 2) including
conformal reections i ( with respect to hyperplanes orthogonal to the 5th
and 6th axis ), whose relevance for physics should then be expected as well.
to start with, in fact, in this case mc = c/c1 seems not to be the only
automorphism space of o(4, 2), since:

imci 1 = i

c
c1

i 1 =

c
c2

= pc =

s3  s1

z2

(2)

where c2 = {l, d, p4} is the stability group of innity. therefore, being c1
and c2 conjugate, mc and pc are two copies of the same homogeneous space
h of the conformal group including reections, and, as we will see, both are
needed to represent the group linearly . because of eq. (2) we will call mc
and pc conformally dual.

there are good arguments [4] (see also footnote 4) in favor of the hy-
pothesis that pc may represent conformally compactied momentum space
p = r3,1. in this case mc and pc build up conformally compactied phase
space, which then is a space of automorphism of the conformal group c
including reections.

2 conformally compactied phase space

for simultaneous compactication of m and p in mc and pc no exact fourier
transform is known. it can be only approximated by a nite lattice phase
space [5].

an exact fourier transform may be dened instead in the 2-dimensional

space time when m = r1,1 = p and for which

mc =

= pc

s1  s1

z2

2

(3)

then inscribing in each s1, of radius r, of mc and in each s1 of radius k of
pc a regular polygon with

2n = 2rk

(4)

vertices any function f (xmn) dened in the resulting lattice ml  mc is
correlated to the fourier-transformed f (k ) on the pl  pc lattice by the
nite fourier series:

f (xnm) =

1

2r2

n 1

x, =n

(nm )f (k )

f (k ) =

1

2k 2

n 1

xn,m=n

(nm )f (xnm)

(5)

where  = ei 
n is the 2n-root of unit. they may be called fourier trans-
forms since either for r   or k  , (or both) they coincide with the
standard ones. this further conrms the identication of pc with momen-
tum space which is here on purpose characterized geometrically rather then
algebraically (poisson bracket). on this model the action of the conformal
group o(2, 2) may be easily operated and tested.

3 conformal duality

the non linear, local action of i on m is well known; for x  m we have:

i : x  i (x) = 

x
x2

(6)

for x2 6= 0 and x space-like, if x indicates the distance of a point from the
origin, we have 2 :

i : x  i (x) =

.

(7)

1
x

2i maps every point, at a distance x from the center, in the sphere s 2, to a point outside
of it at a distance x1. for m = r2,1 the sphere s 2 reduces to a circle s 1 and then (7)
reminds target space duality in string theory [6], which then might be the consequence of
conformal inversion. for m = r1,1, that is for the two dimensional model i may be locally
represented through quotient rational transformation by means of i = i2 and the result
is (7), which in turn represents the action of i for the conformal group g = {d, p1, t1}
on a straight line r1.

3

since m is densely contained in mc, x denes a point of the homogeneous
space h, of automorphisms for c; as such x must then be conceived as
dimensionless in (6), as usually done in mathematics. therefore for physical
applications, to represent space-time we must substitute x with x/l, where
l represents an (arbitrary) unit of lengths, then from (6) and (7) we obtain:
proposition p1: conformal reections determine a map in space of the

microworld to the macroworld ( with respect to l) and vice-versa.

the conformal group may be well represented in momentum space p =
r3,1, densely contained in pc, where the action of i induces non linear trans-
formation like (6) and (7), where x and x are substituted by k  p and k.
if we then take (7) and the corresponding for p we obtain (see also footnote
2):

1
xk

i : xk  i (xk) =

(8)

now physical momentum p is obtained after multiplying the wave-number k
by an (arbitrary) unit of action h by which (8) becomes:

i :

xp
h

 i (cid:16)xp

h (cid:17) =

h
xp

(9)

from which we obtain:

proposition p2: conformal reections determine a map, in phase space
of the world of micro actions to the one of macro actions (with respect to
h), and vice-versa.

now if we choose for the arbitrary unit h the plancks constant  then

from propositions p1 and p2 we have:

corollary c2: conformal reections determine a map between classical

and quantum mechanics.

let us now remind the identications mc  c/c1 and pc  c/c2 to be
conceived as two copies of the homogeneous space h, representing confor-
mally compactied space-time and momentum space respectively, and that
imci 1 = pc and then i represents a map3 of every point x of m to a point
k of p : i  i(x) = p and we have:

proposition p3: conformal reections determine a map between space-

time and momentum space.

3 the action of i may be rigorously tested in the two dimensional model where i(xnm) =
knm and the action of i is linear in the compactied phase space at dierence with its
local non linear action in m and p, as will be further discussed elsewhere.

4

let us now assume, as the history of celestial mechanics suggests, that
space-time m is the most appropriate for the description of classical mechan-
ics then, as a consequence of propositions p1, p3 and of corollary c2, momen-
tum space should be the most appropriate for the description of quantum
mechanics. the legitimacy of this conjecture seems in fact to be supported
by spinor geometry as we will see.

4 quantum mechanics in momentum space

notoriously the most elementary constituents of matter are fermions, repre-
sented by spinors, whose geometry, as formulated by its discoverer e. car-
tan [7] has already the form of equations of motions for fermions in momen-
tum space.

in fact given a pseudo euclidean, 2n-dimensional vector space v with
signature (k, l); k + l = 2n and the associated cliord algebra c (k, l) with
generators a a dirac spinor  is an element of the endomorphism space of
c(k, l) and is dened by cartans equation

apa = 0

(10)

where pa are the components of a vector p  v .

now it may be shown that for the signatures (k, l) = (3, 1), (4, 1), the
weyl, (maxwell), majorana, dirac equations, respectively may be natural-
ly obtained [8], from (10), precisely in momentum space. for the signature
(4, 2) eq. (10) contains twistors equations and, for  6= 0, the vector p is null:
papa = 0 and the directions of p form the projective quadric4 (s3  s1)/z2
identical to conformally compactied momentum space pc given in (2).

for the signature (5, 3) instead one may easily obtain [8] from (10) the

equation

(p + ~  ~  5 + m) n = 0

(11)

where ~ = h n , ~  5ni and n = (cid:20) 1

2(cid:21) ; m = (cid:20) m 0

0 m(cid:21) ; n = h 1, 2i ;

4since weyl equation in p = r3,1, out of which maxwells equation for the elec-
tromagnetic tensor f (expressed bilinearly in term of weyl spinors) may be ob-
tained, is contained in twistor equation in p = r4,2, dening the projective quadric:

pc = (cid:0)s 3  s 1(cid:1) /z2. this is a further argument why momentum space p should be

densely contained in pc.

5

j = 
matrices.

j 0, with 1,2 - space-time dirac spinors, and ~ = (1, 2, 3) pauli

eq.

(11) represents the equation, in momentum space, of the proton-

neutron doublet interacting with the pseudoscalar pion triplet~.

also the equation for the electroweak model may be easily obtained [9]

in the frame of c(5, 3).

all this may further justify the conjecture that spinor geometry in con-
formally compactied momentum space is the appropriate arena for the de-
scription of quantum mechanics of fermions.

it is remarkable that for signatures (3, 1), (4, 1) and (5, 3), (7, 1) ( while
not for (4, 2) ) the real components pa of p may be bilinearly expressed in
terms of spinors [8].

if spinor geometry in momentum space is at the origin of quantum me-
chanics of fermions, then their multiplicity, observed in natural phenomena,
could be a natural consequence of the fact that a dirac spinor associated with
c(2n) has 2n components, which naturally splits in multiplets of space-time
spinors (as it already appears in eq. (11)). since in this approach vectors
appear as bilinearly composed by spinors, some of the problematic aspects
of dimensional reduction could be avoided dealing merely with spinors [10].
also rotations naturally arise, in spinor spaces as products of reections
operated by the generators a of the cliord algebras. these could then be
at the origin of the so called internal symmetry. this appears in eq. (11)
where the isospin symmetry of nuclear forces arises from conformal reections
which appear there as the units of the quaternion eld of numbers of which,
proton-neutron equivalence, for strong interactions, could be a realization in
nature. for c(8) and higher cliord algebras, and the associated spinors,
octonions could be expected to play a role as recently advocated [10].

5 some further consequences of conformal du-

ality

compact phase space implies, for eld theories, the absence of the concept of
innity in both space-time and momentum and, provided we may rigorously
dene fourier dual manifolds, where elds may be dened, it would imply
also the absence of both infrared and ultraviolet divergences in perturbation
expansions. this is, for the moment, possible only in the four-dimensional

6

phase space-model, where such manifold restricts to the lattice ml and pl
on a double torus, where fourier transforms (5) hold. one could call ml and
pl the physical spaces which are compact and discrete, to distinguish them
from the mathematical spaces mc and pc which are compact and continuous,
the latter are only conformally dual while the former are both conformally
and fourier dual.

in the realistic eight dimensional phase space one would also expect to
nd physical spaces represented by lattices [5] as non commutative geometry
seems also to suggest [11].

let us now consider as a canonical example of a quantum system: the
hydrogen atom in stationary states. according to our hypothesis it should
be appropriated to deal with it in momentum space (as a non relativistic
limit of the dirac equation for an electron subject to an external e.m. eld).
this is possible as shown by v. fock [12] through the integral equation:

 (p) =



22 zs 3

 (q)
(p  q)2 d3q

(12)

where s3 is the one point compactication of momentum space p = r3, and
 = e2
2me , where p0 is a unit of momentum and e the (negative) energy
of the h-atom.

cq p2

0

for  = n + 1, (p) = ynlm() which are the harmonics on s3, and for

p0 = mc, we obtain:

22 (n + 1)2
which are the energy eigenvalues of the h-atom.

en = 

me4

it is interesting to observe that eq. (12) is a purely geometrical equa-
tion, where the only quantum parameter5 is the dimensionless ne structure
constant

e2
c

=

1

137, ...

according to this equation the stationary states of the h-atom may be
represented as eigenvibrations of the s3 sphere (of radius p0 ) in conformally
compactied momentum space and out of which the quanum numbers n,l,m

5the geometrical determination of this parameter in eq. (12) (through harmonic anal-
ysis, say) could furnish a clue to understanding the geometrical origin of quantum me-
chanics. this was a persistent hope of the late wolfgang pauli.

7

result. if conformal duality is realized in nature then there should exist a
classical system represented by eigenvibration of s3 in mc or mrw .

in fact this system could be the universe since recent observations on
distant galaxies (in the direction of n-s galactic poles) have revealed that
their distribution may be represented [13] by the s3 eigenfunction

yn,0,0 = kn

sin (n + 1) 

sin 

(13)

with kn a constant,  the geodetic distance from the center of the corre-
sponding eigenvibration on the s3 sphere of the mrw universe. now yn,0,0
is exactly equal to the eigenfunction of the h-atom however in momentum
space. if the astronomical observations will conrm eq. (13) then the uni-
verse and the h-atom would represent a realization in nature of conformal
duality. here we have in fact that yn,0,0 on pc represents the (most symmet-
ric) eigenfunction of the (quantum) h-atom and the same yn,0,0 on mc may
represent the (visible) mass distribution of the (classical) universe. they
could then be an example6 of conformally dual systems: one classical and
one quantum mechanical.

there could be another important consequence of conformal duality.

in
fact suppose that mc and pc are also fourier dual7. then to the eigenfunc-
tions: ynlm() on pc of the h-atom there will correspond on m = r3,1
(densely contained in mc) their fourier transforms; that is the known eigen-
functions nlm (x1, x2, x3) in m = r3,1 of the h-atom stationary states.

now according to propositions p1, p3 and corollary c2 for high values
of the action of the system; that is for high values of n in ynlm, the system
should be identied with the corresponding classical one, and in space-time
m where it is represented by nlm (x1, x2, x3).

6there could be other examples of conformal duality represented by our planetary
system. in fact observe that in order to compare with the density of matter the square of
the s 3 harmonic ynlm has to be taken. now y 2
and it has been shown by y.k. gulak [14] that the values of the large semi axes of the
10 major solar planets satisfy this rule, which could then suggest that they arise from
a planetary cloud presenting the structure of a s 3 eigenvibrations, as will be discussed
elsewhere.

n00 presents maxima for rn = (cid:0)n + 1

2(cid:1) r0,

7 even if, for dening rigorously fourier duality for mc and pc one may have to abandon
standard dierential calculus, locally it may be assumed to be approximately true, with
reasonable condence since the spacing of the possible lattice will be extremely small. in
fact taking for k the plancks radius one could have of the order of 1030 points of the
lattice per centimeter.

8

in fact this is what postulated by the correspondence principle: for high
values of the quantum numbers the wavefunction nlm (x1, x2, x3) identies
with the kepler orbits; that is the same system (with potential proportional
to 1/r) dealt in the frame of classical mechanics. in this way, at least in this
particular example, the correspondence principle appears as a consequence
of conformal duality8 and precisely of propositions p1, p3 and corollary c2.
obviously at dierence with the previous case of duality, in this case it is
the same system (the two body problem) dealt once quantum mechanically
in pc and once classically in mc. what they keep in common is the so(4)
group of symmetry, named accidental symmetry when discovered by w. pauli
for the kepler orbits, while here it derives from the properties of conformal
reections, which preserve s3, as seen from (2).

references

[1] e. cunningham, proc. london math. soc. 8, 77, (1909);

h. bateman, proc. london math. soc. 8, 223, (1909).

[2] r. penrose, m.a.h. mac callum, phys. rep. 6c, 242 (1973);

m. flato et al., ann phys. 61, 78 (1970);
i.e. segal, nuovo cimento 79b, 187 (1984).

[3] s. weinberg, gravitation and cosmology (wiley, new york, n.y.) 1972,

p. 412.

[4] p. budinich, r. raczka, found. phys. 23, 599 (1993).

[5] p. budinich, l. dabrowski, f. heidenreich, nuovo cimento 110b, 1035

(1995).

[6] a. giveon, m. poratti and e. rabinovici, phys. rep. 244, 77 (1994).

[7] e. cartan, lecons sur la theorie des spineurs, hermann, paris (1937).

[8] p. budinich, nuovo cimento 53a, 31 (1979) ;

p. budinich, found phys. 23, 949 (1993).

8also the property of fourier transforms play a role. consider in fact a classical sys-
tem with xed orbits: a massive point particle on s 1, say. its quantization appears in the
fourier dual momentum space z : (m = 0, 1, 2, . . .) and for the large m the eigenfunc-
tions identies with s 1.

9

[9] p. budinich, on conformal reections in compactied phase space,

hep-th/9809120.

[10] c.a. manogue, t. dray , oregon st. univ. preprint, hep-th/9807044.

[11] j. wess, non-commutative space-time and quantum groups, preprint

(1998).

[12] v. fock, z. phys. 98, 145 (1935).

[13] a.o. barut, p. budinich, j. niederle, r. raczka , found. phys. 24,

1461 (1994);
p. budinich, p. nurowski, r. razcka, m, ramella, astrophys. journ.
451, 10 (1995).

[14] yu. k. gulak, astron. zhurn. 57, 142, (1980), in russian.

10

