itp-sb-98-42

9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
7
2

 

 
 

1
v
8
0
2
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

dual connement of

grand unied monopoles?

alfred schar goldhaber

institute for theoretical physics

state university of new york
stony brook, ny 11794-3840

abstract

a simple formal computation, and a variation on an old thought ex-
periment, both indicate that qcd with light quarks may conne funda-
mental color magnetic charges, giving an explicit as well as elegant res-
olution to the global color paradox, strengthening vachaspatis su(5)
electric-magnetic duality, opening new lines of inquiry for monopoles in
cosmology, and suggesting a class of geometrically large qcd excitations
 loops of z(3) color magnetic ux entwined with light-quark current.
the proposal may be directly testable in lattice gauge theory or super-
symmetric yang-mills theory. recent results in deeply-inelastic electron
scattering, and future experiments both there and in high-energy colli-
sions of nuclei, could give evidence on the existence of z(3) loops.
if
conrmed, they would represent a consistent realization of the bold con-
cept underlying the slansky-goldman-shaw glow model  phenomena
besides standard meson-baryon physics manifest at long distance scales
 but without that models isolable fractional electric charges.

i. introduction

a quarter century ago, the simultaneous and independent discoveries by gross and

wilczek [1] and by politzer [2] that quantum chromodynamics [qcd] is asymptotically

free made this theory instantly what it still is  the unique candidate theory for describing

the structure and interactions of baryons, as well as the mesons produced when baryons

collide. for length scales below 0.1 fm and energy scales above 1 gev, phenomena may be

described accurately by perturbative techniques in terms of elementary quarks and gluons.

at longer distances and lower energies, the most useful degrees of freedom become the

baryons and mesons themselves, while the connection between these two regimes is less

well determined because of the calculational diculty associated with nonperturbative

qcd. nevertheless, a variety of experimental and theoretical approaches have produced

so many successes that it would seem natural to assume there is little or no room for sur-

prising new phenomena in qcd. that is especially plausible for the perturbative regime,

so if there are surprises lurking they most likely will be found at long distance scales.

a rare if not unique proposal in this direction, which constitutes perhaps the boldest

enterprise with richard slanskys name on it, is the paper of slansky, goldman, and shaw

[sgs] [3] suggesting explicit departures from naive qcd expectations at long distance

scales. their work was stimulated by experimental indications of isolated electric charge

with value 1/3 or 2/3 that of an electron charge. as gordon shaw explains [4], assuming

that the manifest su(3) gauge symmetry of qcd is reduced by a higgs mechanism at

very long distance scales to so(3), one may envision isolated so(3) singlets made of two

quarks, and therefore carrying fractional electric charge. while seeking such objects in the

laboratory remains a worthwhile challenge, there are serious grounds to be hesitant about

the explicit sgs proposal. the reason is that a higgs mechanism is easy to formulate

in a regime where the gauge coupling of the theory is weak, as in the standard model

of electroweak interactions, but becomes very hard to interpret if the coupling is strong,

which inevitably would be true for qcd on the scale they had in mind. there was little

choice about this for sgs, because any shorter distance scale or higher energy scale with

such phenomena would have been prohibited by existing theoretical and experimental

knowledge.

even now there is no experimental conrmation of fractional electric charge, though

searches continue [4], nor of any other long-range qcd eect. this paper presents a

proposal which has signicant features in common with sgs, namely, new long-range

2

phenomena beyond ordinary hadron dynamics (including connement of fundamental

magnetic monopoles), but does not imply fractional electric charge. if the proposal turns

out to have merit, then it could well be viewed as a vindication of the essence of sgs. cer-

tainly the intellectual structure they developed was an important inuence on my think-

ing. the presentation involves both push and pull heuristic arguments, i.e., reasons to

suspect the existence of new phenomena as well as appealing consequences which would

follow if they occurred, but does not include a proof that they are inevitable. because of

the wide range of application, there likely will be a number of ways to test the proposal,

including several outlined later. the focus begins with particles dual to quarks, namely,

fundamental magnetic monopoles carrying both ordinary and color magnetic charge.

before plunging into the proposal, we should review some long-range eects which

already are expected, resulting from hybridization between dierent scales. if a region of

space is suciently hot, then the temperature t sets a scale which invokes asymptotic

freedom, and thus allows one to describe the properties as if dealing with a gas of free

quarks and gluons, commonly known as the quark-gluon plasma. clearly long-distance

correlations in this regime should look quite dierent from those at t = 0. thus, long-

distance phenomena are altered in a predictable way, but in a high-energy rather than

low-energy regime. something similar should happen if, for example, compression of cold

nuclear matter, as in the interior of a neutron star, were to produce baryon density much

greater than that in normal nuclei. this time the high density gives a short-distance

and therefore high-energy scale which implies asymptotic freedom and a change in long-

distance correlations.

neither of these eects would be a surprise. something a bit closer was the proposal

of jae [5] that a six-quark system of strangeness s = 2 might be stable against decay to

two  particles. this in turn raises a possibility discussed by witten [6] that electrically

neutral strange matter might be stable or metastable. however, even this eect if it

occurred would be a consequence of relatively short-range interactions. something still

closer to what follows is the suggestion [7] that nuclei might have stable or metastable

toroidal forms, where a quark-containing tube of color-magnetic ux is bent into a closed

curve, a structure which might exhibit rigidity and incompressibility as well as tension.

3

ii. heuristic arguments for monopole connement

gauge invariance

though the existence of a magnetic monopole has yet to be conrmed by experimental

observation, even as a concept this object repeatedly has played the role of an intellectual

aqua regia, exposing profound aspects of structure in physical systems. the most noted

example is diracs realization [8] that the existence of isolable monopoles would require the

quantization of electric charge q and magnetic charge g, through the quantum condition

that the product of q with g is proportional to an integer.

dirac monopoles inserted into qed give a model for connement, because emanating

from an elementary pole inside a type ii superconductor with its electron-pair condensate

must be two strings of superconductor-quantized magnetic ux, each terminating only on

an antipole. if one pair of pole and antipole were slowly separated, clearly the two strings

coming out of the pole would terminate on the antipole, implying a conning string

tension holding the two together. by analogy, if the vacuum of qcd without light quarks

comprised a monopole condensate [9, 10], this then would conne heavy quarks. however,

if there are elementary quarks light on the scale of qcd, then there is no connement of

heavy quarks: instead pair creation of light quarks allows heavy-quark-containing mesons

to be separated with no further energy cost.

a general argument of t hooft [11] for qcd without light quarks shows that either

heavy elementary quarks or heavy fundamental monopoles should be conned, but not

both. if this argument still applied in the presence of light quarks, then monopole con-

nement would be a triviality. in any case this makes it clear that there would be nothing

obviously inconsistent about such connement. to understand why it might be expected,

let us examine in the more familiar superconductor case the issue of screening, and what

charges can or cannot be screened. in electrodynamics it is useful to distinguish two dif-

ferent kinds of conserved charge, local or gauss-law charge and aharonov-bohm [ab] or

lorentz-force charge [12]. although the local charge of an electron-quasiparticle is com-

pletely screened inside a superconductor, the ab charge cannot be screened [13], because

of the reciprocity requirement that an ab phase of  must occur whether a quasiparti-

cle is diracted around a uxon (i.e., a superconductor quantum of ux) or a uxon is

diracted around a quasiparticle. if the eect on the uxon is to be described by a local

interaction, evidently the ab charge is not screened.

now let us look at the same issue for a fundamental monopole in qcd. the monopole

4

may be characterized as the source of a dirac string carrying color magnetic ux which

would produce an ab phase 2/3 for a fundamental quark diracted around it of course,

in addition to this color ux there must be an ordinary magnetic ux in the string yielding

a phase 4/3 mod(2). the fractional color ux in the string implies that there must

be a net nonzero color magnetic ux coming out of the pole. a monopole whose dirac

string would carry full 2 color ux has no such consequence, because that could be

exactly compensated by an adjoint monopole made from a classical conguration of

purely su(3) gauge elds. thus, in the sense just dened, adjoint monopoles can be

screened but fundamental monopoles cannot (a suggestive analogue to what happens

with adjoint gluons and fundamental quarks).

in the absence of dynamical quarks, this lack of screening may not matter, because

vacuum uctuations in the form of loops carrying ux 2/3 occur easily on arbitrarily

large length scales, so that the magnetic charge is not denable as an eigenvalue. in this

sense, it may be screened just like electric charge in a normal metal, i.e., with mean value

zero but such large uctuations that it is not dened as a sharp quantum observable. thus

the monopole charge, rather than being screened or compensated, may be hidden in much

the same way a needle becomes invisible inside a haystack. here is another perspective:

in the theory with only adjoint elds, such as those of the gluons, the gauge symmetry

is su(3)/z(3), so that an arbitrarily thin tube of z(3) magnetic ux would be invisible

even by the ab eect to all elementary excitations, hence could not excite the vacuum,

and therefore need not carry an observable energy per unit length, as would have to be

true for an observable string.

on the other hand, once quarks are present, there could be a nonvanishing string

tension for loops of z(3) color magnetic ux, so that geometrically large quantum uctu-

ations of these loops should be suppressed. a reason for suspecting this is that now the

ab eect would make even the thinnest tube visible for those quark trajectories which

surround the tube. thus, the fractional color magnetic charge could become sharp, mean-

ing that an observable color magnetic eld, conned to a tube of xed radius, emanates

from the monopole out to innity. more formally, because now there are particles in the

fundamental representation of su(3), the full gauge symmetry applies, and so a nonzero

z(3) color magnetic ux out of a fundamental monopole is at least potentially observable.

ideal experiment

here is a thought experiment suggesting the same conclusion. imagine a hadron such

5

as a proton at rest near an su(5) monopole, with its ordinary as well as color magnetic

charge.

if a deeply-inelastic electron scattering sends a quark out of the proton with

very high momentum parallel to that of the incident electron, then the quarks evolution

in the beam direction can be described perturbatively for a time proportional to that

momentum, which means the ordinary magnetic eld of the monopole will deect it in

such a way that only a fraction of a quantum of angular momentum will be transferred to

the quark. this is inconsistent with conservation and quantization of angular momentum

[14]. the analysis also can be carried out in the rest frame of the fastest nal hadron.

in this frame a perturbative computation is accurate for a xed time of order 1 fm/c.

however, the magnetic eld of the monopole ashes by the quark in a much shorter time

because of the lorentz contraction of the eld conguration, and therefore again there is

a denite, but fractional transfer to the quark of angular momentum projected along the

beam direction.

one way to restore consistency is to assume that there is also a spherically symmetric

color magnetic eld, so that the combined elds always transfer an integer number of

angular momentum units to the quark. however, that assumption directly contradicts

the most basic understanding of qcd, which requires a mass gap for color-carrying ex-

citations, so that a long-range, classsical, isotropic, color-magnetic eld is impossible.

how can these two requirements, of nonscreening and yet no isotropic long-range eld,

be reconciled? an obvious if not unique way to avoid the dilemma is by escape into

asymptotic freedom: color elds make sense in the high-energy, short-distance, pertur-
bative regime, so if the magnetic ux comes out in a tube with radius of scale  1

qcd

it is consistent with knowledge about the low-energy behavior of the theory, and at the

same time satises the requirement of nonscreening. evidently such a tube must have a

nite tension, so that the energy of a pole-antipole pair connected by the tube must rise

linearly with separation, and this implies connement of fundamental monopoles.

from the viewpoint of the deeply-inelastic thought experiment, why shouldnt the

monopole connement argument apply even if there are no dynamical quarks? in that

case heavy external quark sources certainly are conned, and the failure of angular

momentum quantization for a single pole-quark pair is acceptable, as there is never a

single isolated quark moving in the eld of the monopole.

while the above arguments might be appealing, they surely do not constitute a proof

of monopole connement. the reason is that even with light quarks it may be that large

6

loops of magnetic ux, at least of a certain cross sectional radius, still have arbitrarily low

energy, in which case they would be part of the vacuum structure rather than physical

excitations. then the net ux out of a monopole again would be hidden by vacuum

uctuations. however, because the quarks would be sensitive to arbitrarily thin tubes

even with z(3) ux, there is now a much stronger constraint, from below as well as above,

on the acceptable radii for ux tubes with very low energy.

both because the thought experiment was the germinating element in my own thinking

on this subject, and because more careful examination could tend either to strengthen or

to weaken the argument, it seems worthwhile to focus more explicitly on the wave function

evolution entailed by this process. in the presence of gauge elds, the conventional (non-

gauge-invariant) momentum of an object whose charges couple to these elds becomes

undened. thus, in the directions transverse to the very high momentum of the struck

quark, it makes no sense to think about the momentum of the quark by itself. however,

the correlated wavefunction of the quark and the associated slower remnants might have

a well-dened wave function in transverse momentum pt , a wave function which initially

would be strongly peaked at pt  0 and azimuthal angular momentum about the beam

direction also zero. then the essential idea is that, absent any contribution from color

magnetic elds, the only eect feeding some change in this azimuthal angular momentum

would be coming from the scattering of the fast quark on the ordinary magnetic eld of the

monopole. a fractional value for this angular momentum transfer gives the conclusion that

something is inconsistent about this picture, and leads by elimination of alternatives to

the inference that an observable string of color magnetic ux emanates from the monopole.

if we accept that inference, how do we nd consistency restored? as an example,

imagine that the observable string comes out of the monopole in the direction parallel to

the fast quark momentum. we still may use gauge invariance to place the dirac string of

ordinary plus color ux anywhere we like, and thus may choose it along the observable

color string. in this case, for all except those trajectories which penetrate the observable,

nite-thickness string, the eective eld is just that of a pole which is one end of a solenoid

with ordinary magnetic ux such that a quark going around it acquires a fractional phase

2/3 mod 2. evidently mesons or baryons generated by fragmentation of the fast quark

will always have integer azimuthal angular momentum, but nevertheless the initial eect

of fast passage of the quark by the monopole will be to generate a fractional change in

the net angular momentum of the entire system interacting with the pole, something now

7

allowed because an observable string with fractional magnetic ux is present.

iii. consequences and applications

now let us look at how fundamental monopole connement would reorient perspectives

on a variety of issues.

1. paradox of global color

a number of authors addressed the problem of generalizing a collective-coordinate

quantization technique, accepted as describing the electric or dyon charge of an su(2)

monopole, to the case of the su(5) monopole [15, 16, 17, 18]. they found that for the

unbroken su(3) of color the dyon charge of an isolated pole is not dened  an eect rem-

iniscent of spontaneous symmetry breaking as in ferromagnetism. evidently if monopoles

with fundamental color charge are conned, this problem simply disappears. a more

general and straightforward comment is that, with or without monopole connement, the

paradox is ill-posed, because the collective-coordinate method has been used to quantize

zero modes of the monopole placed in a perturbative qcd vacuum, which denitely is

an incorrect description of the lowest-energy degrees of freedom on length scales large
compared to 1

qcd. thus, while monopole connement eliminates the problem at the
very beginning, the signicance of that resolution perhaps is diminished because there

might well not be such a problem if the right vacuum were understood well enough to be

implemented for the analysis.

2. electric-magnetic duality in a grand unied model

recently vachaspati [19] has described a remarkable duality of su(5), clearly relevant

for any grand unied theory. the fundamental monopole is part of a family of tightly

bound states, with magnetic charges 1,2,3,4, and 6 times the fundamental charge. these

ve states can be identied as dual partners of the ve fundamental fermions in su(5),

three quarks, a lepton, and a neutrino. there is a possibly deep or possibly just technical

issue, that the charge-2 state should be identied with an antiquark. there are two other

diculties. first, the monopoles appear to be spinless, while the fermions of course have

spin-1/2. this problem arose already with the original montonen-olive proposal of duality

between monopoles and gauge bosons [20], and eventually found two resolutions. one is to

introduce supersymmetry, so that both monopoles and the dual elementary particles come

in families with the same range of spins [21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. the other, acknowledging

the possibility in principle of making a perfect correspondence through supersymmetry,

8

is to be satised with what might be called virtual duality  a symmetry applied to

all properties except spin. whichever approach one prefers, with respect to this issue

vachaspatis system is in the same category as the older examples.

the other diculty [19] is that the eective long-range couplings of the monopoles

and their dual partners are identical, except that quarks are conned, whereas previous

discussions suggested that the colored monopoles are not. for this reason vachaspati con-

sidered introducing the connement essentially by hand. the argument above that the

monopoles which nominally carry nontrivial z(3) color magnetic charge are automatically

conned gives a way to perfect vachaspatis duality, lending additional interest to pur-

suing it further. one side note: connement could lead to loosely bound baryons, but

these then could collapse to the tightly bound leptons already identied in vachaspatis

scheme. clearly this is dierent from the separate baryon and lepton conservation laws

which apply at low energy scales, but as one expects those laws not to hold for particles

on energy scales approaching the monopole masses this may well be a consistent result.

monopole evolution in cosmology

monopoles formed on a mass scale signicantly higher than the mass scale for ination

would have disappeared during ination [26]; indeed, that is one of the attractive features

of inationary models. however, lighter monopoles would need some other mechanism

to explain why we dont see abundant evidence of their existence today. many such

mechanisms have been proposed, up to quite recent times. one possibility is that the

dynamics at some intermediate era between monopole formation and the present would

make the poles unstable, allowing them to disappear, even though any remnant which did

survive would be stable now [27, 28].

if monopoles were created at some early epoch and not swept away meanwhile, then

the only way to explain their scarcity today would be by connement, exactly the phe-

nomenon discussed here. how would that work? if monopoles were formed above the

qcd phase transition expected at a temperature of order qcd, then connement below

that transition would result in attachment of z(3) strings to each pole, either a single

outgoing 2/3 string, or two outgoing 2/3 strings, with the opposite arrangement for

antipoles. a pair connected by a single string likely would have disappeared by now,

thanks to dissipative forces leading to gradual collapse and annihilation. on the other

hand, a large loop with alternating negative and positive ux connecting alternating pole

and antipole could be much more durable. this kind of cosmic necklace, with the poles

9

as beads, was suggested by berezinskii and vilenkin [29] as a possible source of the

highest-energy component of the cosmic ray spectrum, through occasional annihilations

of poles and antipoles, which might for example slowly drift together by sliding along

the string. the evolution of networks of such strings is an interesting and nontrivial

problem, which could be studied once the basic couplings associated with string crossings

were determined. in particular, in principle a fusion of three strings converging together

should be possible, which would allow three monopoles to be connected to each other in

a dual version of a baryon. however, if this could happen easily then the problem of too

many monopoles would be restored, so a crucial question is whether there is a substantial

inhibition of such fusion.

iv. new phenomena in qcd at accessible scales

theoretical aspects

even though it is consideration of heavy, fundamental monopoles and their interactions

which has led here to the suggestion that they would be held together by z(3) color ux

strings, that statement clearly has a consequence for phenomena at much lower scales

than the monopole mass. it means that even in the absence of such poles qcd must

support excitations consisting of loops of color magnetic ux, with the mass of a loop

being proportional to its circumference. the loops would be unstable against shrinkage,

but would give an interesting and nontrivial structure of qcd excitations on a length scale

large compared to 1/qcd. this is reminiscent of the slansky-goldman-shaw proposal

to explain experimental reports of fractional electric charge [3]. as mentioned earlier,

they noted that if a higgs mechanism at energy scales below, or length scales above,

the scale associated with qcd could operate to reduce su(3) of color to so(3) of glow,

then diquarks could exist in isolation, and of course would carry fractional electric charge.

shortly after, lazarides, sha, and trower [lst] [30] observed that such a higgs eect

automatically would imply connement of fundamental monopoles exactly like that argued

above.

as was also mentioned earlier, there is no natural starting point from which the phe-

nomena of this particular higgs mechanism could be deduced in a perturbative framework,

the only recognized way to do it. this criticism applies equally to the deduction by lst.

of course, the fact that a conceivable route to a particular result turns out to be rocky

and uncertain does not mean the result itself is necessarily wrong, only one still lacks

10

evidence that it is right. here the issue has been approached from the other end, and

fundamental monopole connement derived. this does not necessarily imply the isola-

bility of fractional electric charge or the screening of some qcd color-electric elds, but

it certainly does say there must be a new feature of qcd at large length scales, namely,

loops of color-magnetic ux, just as indicated by lst. without light quarks, heavy quark

connement implies loops of color-electric ux, so familiar pictures would not be changed

so enormously, just dualized. this means that the change in structure of qcd as the

mass of light quarks passes from above to below qcd would be quite subtle: above there

would be at least metastable color-electric but substantial suppression of color-magnetic

strings (more accurately, very low magnetic string tension), and below something more

like the opposite would be true.

the meaning of connement or non-connement needs a bit more attention. in terms

of a four-dimensional euclidean path integral, connement is associated with exponential

suppression, with the area of an appropriate loop appearing in the exponent, as opposed

to eects associated with widely separated nite-mass excitations, in which case only the

length (perimeter) of the loop appears. for qcd with dynamical quarks, suciently

large loops must exhibit a perimeter law, but the coecient of the perimeter term itself

falls exponentially with quark mass because the tunneling leading to quark pair creation

is exponentially suppressed. thus a visible transition on a nite lattice from area to

perimeter law occurs at some nite mass, presumably of order qcd, and should be

rather smooth. for the proposed monopole connement, with monopoles expected to

be extraordinarily massive, the breaking of strings by monopole pair creation should be

impossibly rare for observation on any nite lattice. if the magnetic strings only exist for

nite quark mass, it becomes a delicate question exactly how the string tension depends

on that mass. however, again one would expect a smooth transition, with the maximum

tension approached for quark mass below qcd. this leads to the amusing conclusion

that fundamental dyons carrying both monopole and quark charges might exhibit an

eective connement with very weak dependence on quark mass.

if all this were conrmed, it would be a vindication of the essential claim of sgs for

nontrivial manifestations of fundamental qcd degrees of freedom at large length scales.

these color-magnetic-ux-loop excitations presumably should be an important class of

what have been called glueballs, which likely would be drastically dierent in character

from what one would nd in qcd without light quarks, and would not be pure glue,

11

as the light quarks must be an essential part of their structure.

as already stated, the fact that connement of fundamental monopoles would be

equivalent to the existence of z(3) magnetic ux strings means that there is a way to

test this proposal in familiar energy regimes of qcd. in particular, as lattice calculations

grow steadily better at taking account of light quark degrees of freedom, it should become

possible to study this issue on the lattice and obtain credible results. the best way to

formulate the problem might be to insist `a la wu and yang [31] that along a straight line

between monopole and antimonopole there is a gauge-matching between vector potentials

outside and inside the smallest plaquettes surrounding that line, involving one unit of

z(3) color ux, and one aharonov-bohm unit of ordinary magnetic ux. this means a

phase of 2 associated with those plaquettes for u quarks encircling them, but 0 for d

quarks. of course in all other respects there is a standard dirac electromagnetic monopole

vector potential for the pole-antipole system. all this implies, as stated earlier, that there

must be a net z(3) color magnetic ux between monopole and antimonopole. if that ux

were observable and not hidden, then monopole connement would follow, and would

be signaled by an area law for exponential suppression of monopole loops in the path

integral, associated with the product of the separation between pole and antipole and the

euclidean time duration of that separation.

there might be an analytic approach to determining whether or not connement

occurs, aorded by recent progress in studying supersymmetric nonabelian gauge the-

ories [24, 25, 32, 33]. in these theories it is often possible to make precise conjectures

about the particle spectrum, and to verify the conjectures not by a direct proof but

rather by subjecting the proposed forms to many dierent consistency checks, and nding

that all are passed. to do this for our problem would require starting with at least an

su(5) theory (including a hypermultiplet containing quarks and leptons), and following

an elaborate sequence of higgs mechanisms to break the manifest symmetry down to

su(3)color  u(1)electromagnetic. this is surely much more complicated than anything which

has been done so far with such systems, but might nevertheless be manageable.

experimental aspects

as physics is an experimental science, it surely is worth considering how the new

kind of structure proposed here might be accessible to experimental observation. up

to this point in the paper, the main speculation has been the unproved proposal that

z(3) ux loops may exist. to connect that with experiment entails more speculation.

12

conventional hadron collisions are not promising. first of all, any frequently occurring

peculiar phenomena in such processes would have been noted already. secondly, because

z(3) strings cannot break by creation of light-quark pairs, their coupling to conventional

hadrons should be weak. this implies that they would not be generated easily in typical

collisions. what couplings would be possible? because u and d quark vacuum currents

would circulate oppositely around the string, there should be a 0-meson magnetic cou-

pling contact term  i.e., only acting on sources which themselves overlap geometrically

with the string. thus a contracting string could release energy through emission of 0

mesons, but as these are rather massive there would be a poor match, between the likely

small energy release in the contraction from one loop energy eigenstate to a lower one

and the large mass of the emitted particle. all this implies a quite substantial lifetime

for a large loop before collapse. slow decay almost invariably goes together with low

production rates, and helps to explain why even if they can exist z(3) loops would not

have leapt to our attention.

recently, experiments on deeply-inelastic electron-proton scattering [34] have been

interpreted as indicating a hard-pomeron contribution to the reaction [35, 36, 37]. by

familiar reasoning of regge duality, such an eect should be associated with a new class

of glueball excitations [35]. could these new glueballs be the magnetic loops proposed

here? if so, then it would not be strange if processes described by the hard pomeron also

produced the loops. perhaps detailed exclusive or semi-inclusive studies of such events

would reveal structure related to the loops, formed as geometrically large and therefore

high-energy excitations.

it then becomes interesting to consider what kind of signal such an object would

generate, but that is not easy to determine. all features of closed-string dynamics, many

still obscure despite all the years of string studies, would appear to be relevant for the

behavior of these z(3) loops. thus some caution is needed in guessing what should happen

in these scattering processes. this time of course the coupling leading to production would

be electromagnetic, but again would involve a contact interaction which at lowest order

in momentum transfer would be to the anapole or toroidal moment of the ux loop. this

suggests that at the moment of appearance the loop would be quite small in size, but then

could expand. if such primitive thinking covers the main features, then it becomes possible

to suppose that in a suitable frame boosted along the beam direction there would be a

fairly large isotropic ensemble of pions. because of the decay energy mismatch mentioned

13

earlier, the pions might be quite limited in their range of momenta. such an eect could

be quite striking, and very dierent from typical results of deeply-inelastic scattering.

a dierent picture, analogous to bremsstrahlung of photons, would be that with small

probability virtual z(3) loops exist in the neighborhood of the incident proton, and these

are made real by the absorption of the highly virtual photon. to avoid enormous form-

factor suppression, in a suitable breit frame the initial and nal momenta of the loop

would both have to be large, implying lorentz contraction which compensates for spatial

oscillation of the phase factor in position space, an eect discussed some time ago for

elastic scattering on deuterons [38].

if deeply-inelastic electron-proton scattering gives an indirect hint of new long-distance

dynamics in qcd, plus the potential to provide more direct evidence, then very high-

energy nucleus-nucleus collisions at least have the possibility of generating such evidence

in processes with large rate. by heating substantial volumes above the qcd phase-

transition temperature, such collisions could permit formation of z(3) loops, and if so

their slow decay during the cooling process would give a characteristic signal, providing

important evidence that quark-gluon plasma had formed.

if the idea of slow decay is

right, this would allow a loop to escape from the dense, highly excited formation region,

and then to populate a small volume in pion momentum space with a large number of

particles.

while these thoughts about experimental signals are vague and sketchy, it may well

be possible with further study to make more precise statements. what seems likely to be

unchanged is the fact that a geometrically large object of high coherence, which decays

slowly in small energy steps, will produce a signal dierent from any more familiar system,

including a large nucleus. [of course, if the objects turned out to be at least stable against

small perturbations, the signal would be even more striking.]

v. conclusions

in the title the phenomenon proposed here is referred to as dual connement. of

course this makes sense because familiar color-electric connement of heavy quarks is re-

placed by color-magnetic connement of heavy monopoles, but if the proposal is correct

as stated then something deeper is at work. usual discussions posit a duality between

superconducting screening of one kind of charge and connement of the other. here,

however, the screening of color-electric charge is more powerful even than that by a su-

14

perconductor, because for every heavy quark there is an attached light antiquark, exactly

screening not only the local charge but also the aharonov-bohm charge. total screening

of the color electric charge carried by heavy quarks is the remnant of the heavy-quark

connement which exists without light quarks. thus the duality would be one between

connement of fundamental color-magnetic monopoles and total screening of heavy quark

color charge, not inconsistent with the familiar version but nevertheless clearly dierent.

if found, such a duality therefore would be something new.

it is enticing to think that physics research is now at a stage where within a short time

there might be direct evidence from a variety of directions on whether z(3) strings occur

in nature. lattice gauge theory or supersymmetric gauge theory could give information,

as could deeply-inelastic electron scattering or high-energy nucleus-nucleus scattering.

a positive answer would provide a rm foundation for the theoretical and cosmological

applications explored above. perhaps even more satisfying if this happened would be the

realization of a remarkable new consequence of qcd. this suggests a further challenge:

are there any other possible ways in which qcd could really give us a surprise? not easy

or obvious, but surely worth looking!

this study was supported in part by the national science foundation. i have bene-

ted over a period of time from conversations with martin bucher, georgi dvali, edward

shuryak, mikhail stephanov, and tanmay vachaspati. richard slansky was a valued

friend and colleague from student days on  about forty years. although we never col-

laborated on a paper, it was always a pleasure to discuss with him, and to experience

his intelligent and discriminating enthusiasm for physics. his courage in facing physical

challenges (in all senses!) was inspiring. truly the word glow was as descriptive of his

luminous personality as of the beautiful sgs idea.

references

[1] d.j. gross and f. wilczek phys rev lett 30 1343 (1983).

[2] h.d. politzer phys rev lett 30 1346 (1983).

[3] r. slansky, t. goldman, and g.l. shaw phys rev lett 47 887 (1981).

[4] g.l. shaw, these proceedings.

15

[5] r. jae phys rev lett 38 195 (1977), erratum-ibid. 38 617 (1977).

[6] e. witten phys rev d 30 272 (1984).

[7] l. castillejo, a.s. goldhaber, a.d. jackson, and m.b. johnson ann

phys 172 371 (1986).

[8] p.a.m. dirac proc r soc london, ser a 133 60 (1931).

[9] s. mandelstam phys rep c 23 245 (1976).

[10] g. t hooft, nucl phys b138 1 (1978).

[11] g. t hooft, nucl phys b138 1 (1978).

[12] a.s. goldhaber and s.a. kivelson phys lett 255b 445 (1991).

[13] b. reznik and y. aharonov, phys rev d 40 4178 (1989); a.s. gold-

haber, r. mackenzie, and f. wilczek mod phys lett a4 21 (1989).

[14] a.s. goldhaber phys rev b 140 1407 (1965).

[15] a. abouelsaood nucl phys b226 309 (1983).

[16] a.p. balachandran, g. marmo, n. mukunda, j.s. nilsson, e.c.g. su-

darshan, and f. zaccaria phys rev lett 50 1553 (1983).

[17] p. nelson and a. manohar phys rev lett 50 943 (1983).

[18] p. nelson and s. coleman nucl phys b237 1 1984.

[19] t. vachaspati phys rev lett 76 188 (1996); h. liu, g.d. starkman, and

t. vachaspati phys rev lett 78 1223 (1997).

[20] c. montonen and d. olive phys lett 72b 117 (1977); p. goddard, j.

nuyts, and d. olive nucl phys b125 1 (1977).

[21] e. witten and d. olive phys lett 78b 97 (1978).

[22] h. osborn phys lett 83b 321 (1979).

[23] a. sen int j mod phys a9 3707 (1994).

16

[24] n. seiberg and e. witten nucl phys b426 19 (1994); (erratum) ibid

b430 485 (1994).

[25] n. seiberg and e. witten nucl phys b431 484 (1994).

[26] a.h. guth phys rev d 23 347 (1981).

[27] p. langacker and s.-y. pi phys rev lett 45 1 1980.

[28] g. dvali, h. liu, and t. vachaspati phys rev lett 80 2281 (1998).

[29] v. berezinskii and a. vilenkin phys rev lett 79 5202 (1997).

[30] g. lazarides, q. sha, and w.p. trower phys rev lett 49 1756 (1982).

[31] t.t. wu and c.n. yang phys rev d 12 3845 (1975).

[32] k. intriligator and n. seiberg nucl phys proc suppl 45bc 1 (1996).

[33] m. shifman prog part nucl phys 39 1 (1997).

[34] h1: c adlo et al. nucl phys b497 3 (1997); zeus: j breitweg et al.

phys lett b407 432 (1997).

[35] a. donnachie and p.v. landsho e-print archive hep-ph/9806344.

[36] d. haidt proceedings of the workshop on dis chicago, april 1997, aip

(1997).

[37] n.n. nikolaev, b.g. zakharov, and v.r. zoller jetp lett 66 138

(1997).

[38] h. cheng and t.t. wu phys rev d 6 2637 (1972).

17

