upr-848t

9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
6
1

 

 
 

1
v
5
1
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

n = 1 supersymmetric vacua in heterotic mtheory

burt a. ovrut 

department of physics, university of pennsylvania

philadelphia, pa 191046396, usa

abstract

in the rst lecture, we derive the vedimensional eective action of strongly coupled het-

erotic string theory for the complete (1, 1) sector of the theory by performing a reduction, on a
calabiyau threefold, of mtheory on s 1/z2. the correct eective theory is a gauged version
of vedimensional n = 1 supergravity coupled to abelian vector multiplets, the universal hy-
permultiplet and fourdimensional boundary theories with gauge and gauge matter elds. the

supersymmetric ground state of the theory is a multicharged bps threebrane domain wall,

which we construct in general. in this rst lecture, we assume the standard embedding of the

spin connection into the e8 gauge connection on one orbiold xed plane. in the second lecture,
we generalize these results to nonstandard embeddings. that is, we allow for general e8e8
gauge bundles and for the presence of ve-branes. the ve-branes span the four-dimensional

uncompactied space and are wrapped on holomorphic curves in the calabiyau manifold.

properties of these nonperturbativevacua, as well as of the resulting low-energy theories, are

discussed. characteristic features of the low-energy theory, such as the threshold corrections to

the gauge kinetic functions, are signicantly modied due to the presence of the ve-branes, as

compared to the case of standard or non-standard embeddings without ve-branes. in the last

lecture, we review the spectral cover formalism for constructing both u (n) and su (n) holo-

morphic vector bundles on elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds which admit a section.

we discuss the allowed bases of these threefolds and show that physical constraints eliminate

enriques surfaces from consideration. restricting the structure group to su (n), we derive,

in detail, a set of rules for the construction of three-family particle physics theories with phe-

nomenologically relevant gauge groups. we illustrate these ideas by constructing several explicit

three-family non-perturbative vacua.

lectures presented at the asia pacic center for theoretical physics third winter school on duality in fields

and strings from january 21-february 5, 1999, cheju island, korea.

introduction:

heterotic mtheory, rst discussed by horava and witten [1, 2, 3], holds great promise as the

starting point for phenomenological investigations of low energy particle physics and cosmology.

in several papers [4, 5], the vedimensional eective action of horavawitten theory has been
constructed by dimensional reduction of d = 11, n = 1 supergravity on calabiyau threefolds.
the resulting theory was shown to admit a pair of bps threebranes located at the orbifold xed

planes as its minimal static vacuum state. in subsequent work [6], we explored non-perturbative

vacua, which consist of an arbitrary number of bps threebranes in addition to the orbifold xed

planes. within the context of both the minimal and non-perturbative vacua, we discussed the need

for, and analyzed, non-standard embedding; that is, we do not require that the calabiyau spin

connection be embedded in one of the e8 gauge groups. finally, in a series of papers [7, 8, 9], the
generic mathematical structure of non-standard embeddings were presented within the context of

holomorphic vector bundles. in these papers, we gave rules for the construction of three family

particle physics models with realistic unication groups.

in the present lectures we review this

work, discussing the vedimensional eective theory and its threebrane bps solutions in lecture

1, non-perturbative vacua and non-standard embedding in lecture 2 and, nally, in lecture 3 we

discuss the mathematics and physics of holomorphic vector bundles.

lecture 1: heterotic mtheory in five dimensions

one of the phenomenologically most promising corners of the mtheory moduli space, in addition

to the weakly coupled heterotic string, is the point described at low-energy by eleven-dimensional
supergravity on the orbifold s1/z2 due to horava and witten [1, 2]. this theory gives the strongly
coupled limit of the heterotic string with, in addition to the bulk supergravity, two sets of e8 gauge
elds residing one on each of the two tendimensional xed hyperplanes of the orbifold. it has

been shown [3] that this theory has phenomenologically interesting compactications on deformed

calabiyau threefolds times the orbifold to four dimensions. matching the 11dimensional newton

constant , the calabiyau volume and the orbifold radius to the known values of the newton

constant and the grand unication coupling and scale leads to an orbifold radius which is about

an order of magnitude or so larger than the two other scales [3, 10]. this suggests that, near

this physical point in moduli space, the theory appears eectively vedimensional in some

intermediate energy regime.

in previous papers [4, 5] we have derived this vedimensional eective theory for the rst

time by directly reducing horavawitten theory on a calabiyau threefold. this calculation

included all (1, 1) moduli as well as the universal hypermultiplet. we showed that a nonzero

mode of the antisymmetric tensor eld strength has to be included for a consistent reduction from

1

eleven to ve dimensions and that the correct vedimensional eective theory of strongly coupled

heterotic string is given by a gauged version of vedimensional supergravity. a reduction of pure

elevendimensional supergravity on a calabiyau threefold [11], on the other hand, leads to a

nongauged version of vedimensional supergravity. therefore, while this provides a consistent

lowenergy description of mtheory on a smooth manifold, it is not the correct eective theory for
mtheory on s1/z2. the necessary additions are chiral fourdimensional boundary theories with
potential terms for the bulk moduli and, most importantly, the aforementioned nonzero mode,

living solely in the calabi-yau threefold, which leads to the gauging of the bulk supergravity. as

pointed out in ref. [4, 5], this theory is the correct starting point for strongly coupled heterotic

particle phenomenology as well as early universe cosmology. moreover, we have shown that contact

with fourdimensional physics should not be made using at spacetime but rather via a domain

wall solution as the background conguration. this domain wall arises as a bps state of the

vedimensional theory [4, 5] and its existence is intimately tied to the gauging of the theory. a

reduction to four dimensions on this domain wall has been performed in [5, 12] to lowest nontrivial

order. the result agrees with ref. [13] where the complete fourdimensional eective action to that

order has been derived directly from eleven dimensions.

various other aspects of the horavawitten description of strongly coupled heterotic string

theory have been addressed in the literature such as the structure of the fourdimensional eective

action, its relation to 10dimensional weakly coupled heterotic string, gaugino condensation, and

anomaly cancelation [13  38]. aspects of vedimensional physics motivated by horavawitten

theory and related to particle phenomenology have been discussed in ref. [10, 32, 39, 40].

in

refs. [41, 42, 43, 44] vedimensional early universe mtheory cosmology have been investigated.

recently, aspects of vedimensional physics have also been discussed in ref. [45].

in this rst lecture, we review the work presented in ref. [4, 5]. our central result is to obtain

the vedimensional eective theory of strongly coupled heterotic string for all (1, 1) moduli elds

and the universal hypermultiplet, and construct its fundamental bps domain wall threebrane

solutions. we show that, in the bulk, this theory is indeed a form of gauged supergravity.

let us now summarize our conventions. we will consider eleven-dimensional spacetime compact-

ied on a calabi-yau space x, with the subsequent reduction down to four dimensions eectively
provided by a double-domain-wall background, corresponding to an s1/z2 orbifold. we use coordi-
nates xi with indices i, j, k, . . . = 0, . . . , 9, 11 to parameterize the full 11dimensional space m11.
throughout this paper, when we refer to orbifolds, we will work in the upstairs picture with the
orbifold s1/z2 in the x11direction. we choose the range x11  [, ] with the endpoints being
identied. the z2 orbifold symmetry acts as x11  x11. there then exist two tendimensional
hyperplanes xed under the z2 symmetry which we denote by m (n)
10 , n = 1, 2. locally, they are
specied by the conditions x11 = 0, . upon reduction on a calabiyau space to ve dimensions

2

they lead to fourdimensional xed hyperplanes m (n)
. barred indices i, j, k, . . . = 0, . . . , 9 are
used for the tendimensional space orthogonal to the orbifold. upon reduction on the calabi-yau

4

space we have a ve-dimensional spacetime m5 labeled by indices , , , . . . = 0, . . . , 3, 11. the
orbifold xed planes become four-dimensional with indices , , , . . . = 0, . . . , 3. we use indices

a, b, c, . . . = 4, . . . 9 for the calabiyau space. holomorphic and antiholomorphic indices on
the calabiyau space are denoted by a, b, c, . . . and a, b, c, . . . , respectively. the harmonic (1, 1)
forms of the calabiyau space on which we will concentrate throughout this paper are indexed by
i, j, k, . . . = 1, . . . , h1,1.

the 11-dimensional diracmatrices i with {i , j} = 2gij are decomposed as i = { 
, 1  a} where  and a are the ve and sixdimensional dirac matrices, respectively. here,
 is the chiral projection matrix in six dimensions with 2 = 1. spinors in eleven dimensions are

majorana with 32 real components throughout the paper. in ve dimensions we use symplecticreal

spinors [46]. fields will be required to have a denite behavior under the z2 orbifold symmetry
in d = 11. we demand a bosonic eld  to be even or odd; that is, (x11) = (x11). for
a spinor  the condition is 11(x11) = (x11) and, depending on the sign, we also call the
spinor even or odd. the projection to one of the orbifold planes leads then to a tendimensional

majoranaweyl spinor with denite chirality. similarly, in ve dimensions, bosonic elds will be

either even or odd, and there is a corresponding orbifold condition on spinors.

1 elevendimensional supergravity on an orbifold

in this section we briey review the formulation of the lowenergy eective action of strongly
coupled heterotic string theory as elevendimensional supergravity on the orbifold s1/z2 due to
horava and witten [1, 2].

the bosonic part of the action is given by

s = ssg + sym

(1.1)

where ssg is the familiar 11dimensional supergravity action

ssg = 

1

22 zm 11

g"r +

1
24

gijklgijkl +

2
1728

i1...i11ci1i2i3gi4...i7gi8...i11#

(1.2)

3

and sym describes the two e8 yangmills theories on the orbifold planes, explicitly given by 1

sym = 

1

82 (cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3zm (1)

10

1
2

g (cid:20)tr(f (1))2 
82 (cid:16) 

trr2(cid:21)
4(cid:17)2/3zm (2)



1

g (cid:20)tr(f (2))2 

1
2

trr2(cid:21) .

(1.3)

10

i j are the two e8 gauge eld strengths and cijk is the 3form with eld strength gijkl =

here f (n)
24 [i cjkl]. the above action has to be supplemented by the bianchi identity

(dg)11 i j k l = 

1

22 (cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3nj (1)(x11) + j (2)(x11  )o i j k l

where the sources are dened by

j (n) = trf (n)  f (n) 

1
2

trr  r .

(1.4)

(1.5)

note that, in analogy with the weakly coupled case, the boundary trr2 terms in eq. (1.3) are

required by supersymmetry as pointed out in ref. [13]. under the z2 orbifold symmetry, the eld
components g i j , g11,11, c i j11 are even, while g i11, c i j k are odd. the above action is complete to
order 2/3 relative to the bulk. corrections, however, will appear as higherdimension operators at
order 4/3.

the fermionic elds of the theory are the 11dimensional gravitino i and the two 10dimensional
majoranaweyl spinors (n), located on the boundaries, one for each e8 gauge group. the com-
ponents  i of the gravitino are even while 11 is odd. the gravitino supersymmetry variation is
given by

i = di  +

2
288

(ijklm  8gij klm ) gjklm  +  ,

(1.6)

where the dots indicate terms that involve fermion elds. the spinor  in this variation is z2 even.

the appearance of the boundary source terms in the bianchi identity has a simple interpretation

by analogy with the theory of d-branes. it is well known that the u (n ) gauge elds describing the

theory of n overlapping dp-branes encode the charges for lower-dimensional d-branes embedded
in the dp-branes. for instance, the magnetic ux trf couples to the p  1-form ramond-ramond
potential, so describes d(p  2)-brane charge. higher cohomology classes trf    f describe
the embedding of lower-dimensional branes. furthermore, if the dp-brane is curved, then the

1we note that there is a debate in the literature about the precise value of the yangmills coupling constant in

in the second case,
terms of . while we quote the original value [2, 47] the value found in ref. [19] is smaller.
the coecients in the yang-mills action (1.3) and the bianchi identity (1.4) should both be multiplied by 21/3.
this potential factor will not be essential in the following discussion as it will simply lead to a redenition of the

vedimensional coupling constants. in the following, we will give the necessary modications where appropriate.

4

cohomology classes of the tangent bundle also contribute. for instance trr  r induces d(p  4)-
brane charge. we recall that in eleven dimensions it is m ve-branes which are magnetic sources

for gijkl. thus we can interpret the magnetic sources in the bianchi identity (1.4) as ve-branes
embedded in the orbifold xed planes.

2 the fivedimensional eective theory

as mentioned above, matching of scales suggests that strongly coupled heterotic string theory

appears eectively vedimensional in some intermediate energy range. in this section we derive

the vedimensional eective theory in this regime obtained by a compactication on a calabi
yau threefold. we expect that this should lead to a theory with bulk n = 1 ve-dimensional
supersymmetry and four-dimensional n = 1 supersymmetry on the orbifold xed planes. as we will
see, doing this compactication consistently requires the inclusion of nonzero modes for the eld

strength of the antisymmetric tensor eld. these nonzero modes appear in the purely internal

calabiyau part of the antisymmetric tensor eld and correspond to harmonic (1, 1) forms on

the calabiyau threefold. consequently, to capture the complete structure of these nonzero

modes, we will have to consider the full (1, 1) sector of the theory. we will not, however, explicitly

include the (2, 1) sector as it is largely unaected by the specic structure of horavawitten theory.

instead, we comment on the additions necessary to incorporate this sector along the way.

to make contact with the compactications to four-dimensions discussed by witten [3], one

embeds the spin-connection of the calabiyau manifold in the gauge connection of one of the e8
groups breaking it to e6. this is the so-called standard embedding and, in this lecture, we will
restrict our discussion to it. in general, this implies that there is a non-zero instanton number on

one of the orbifold planes. from the discussion of the previous section, this can be interpreted

as including ve-branes living in the orbifold plane in the compactication. it is this additional

element to the compactication which introduces the nonzero mode and leads to much of the

interesting structure of the ve-dimensional theory. we note that the presence of ve-brane charge

is really unavoidable. even without exciting instanton number, the curvature of the calabi-yau

threefold leads to an induced magnetic charge in the bianchi identity (1.4), forcing us to include

non-zero modes.

we wish to emphasize that the standard embedding is not in any way required by heterotic

mtheory. in fact, unlike the case of weakly coupled heterotic string theory where the choice of

the standard embedding greatly simplies the vacuum, in mtheory this embedding is somewhat

unnatural and is not singled out in any way. we employ it in this lecture only because of its

familiarity and the fact that it was used in refs. [1, 2]. the following two lectures will be devoted

to generalizing heterotic mtheory to non-standard embeddings.

5

2.1 zero modes

let us now explain the structure of the zero mode elds used in the reduction to ve dimensions.
we begin with the bulk. the background spacetime manifold is m11 = x  s1/z2  m4, where
x is a calabiyau threefold and m4 is fourdimensional minkowski space. reduction on such a
background leads to eight preserved supercharges and, hence, to minimal n = 1 supergravity in
ve dimensions. due to the projection condition, this leads to four preserved supercharges on the
orbifold planes implying fourdimensional n = 1 supersymmetry on those planes. including the
zero modes, the metric is given by

ds2 = v 2/3gdxdx + gabdxadxb

(2.1)

where gab is the metric of the calabiyau space x. its kahler form is dened by 2 ab = igab and
can be expanded in terms of the harmonic (1, 1)forms iab, i = 1, , h1,1 as

ab = aiiab .

(2.2)

the coecients ai = ai(x) are the (1, 1) moduli of the calabiyau space. the calabiyau volume
modulus v = v (x) is dened by

v =

1

v zxp6g

(2.3)

where 6g is the determinant of the calabiyau metric gab. in order to make v dimensionless we
have introduced a coordinate volume v in this denition which can be chosen for convenience. the
modulus v then measures the calabiyau volume in units of v. the factor v 2/3 in eq. (2.1) has
been chosen such that the metric g is the vedimensional einstein frame metric. clearly v is
not independent of the (1, 1) moduli ai but it can be expressed as

v =

1
6k(a) , k(a) = dijkaiajak

(2.4)

where k(a) is the kahler potential and dijk are the calabiyau intersection numbers. their
denition, along with a more detailed account of calabiyau geometry, can be found in appendix

a of ref. [5].

let us now turn to the zero modes of the antisymmetric tensor eld. we have the potentials

and eld strengths,

c

,

cab =

1
6ai
iab ,
1
cabc =
6

abc

,

g
gab = f i
gabc = xabc .

iab

(2.5)

2note here that we choose the opposite sign convention as in ref. [3, 13] to conform with the literature on calabi

yau reduction of 11dimensional supergravity and type ii theories [11, 48].

6

the vedimensional elds are therefore an antisymmetric tensor eld c with eld strength
g, h1,1 vector elds ai
 and a complex scalar  with eld strength x
that arises from the harmonic (3, 0) form denoted by abc. in the bulk the relations between those
elds and their eld strengths are simply

 with eld strengths f i

g = 24 [c]
 = ai
f i
x =  .

  ai



(2.6)

these relations, however, will receive corrections from the boundary controlled by the 11dimensional

bianchi identity (1.4). we will derive the associated vedimensional bianchi identities later.

next, we should set up the structure of the boundary elds. the starting point is the standard

embedding of the spin connection in the rst e8 gauge group such that

trf (1)  f (1) = trr  r .

(2.7)

as a result, we have an e6 gauge eld a(1)
e8 gauge eld a(2)
 with eld strength f (2)
gauge matter elds from the (1, 1) sector on the rst plane. they are specied by

 with eld strength f (1)
 on the rst hyperplane and an
 on the second hyperplane. in addition, there are h1,1

a(1)
b = ab + ib

ctcpc ip

(2.8)

where ab is the (embedded) spin connection. furthermore, p, q, r, . . . = 1, . . . , 27 are indices in
the fundamental 27 representation of e6 and tap are the (3, 27) generators of e8 that arise in
the decomposition under the subgroup su (3)  e6. their complex conjugate is denoted by t ap.
the c ip are h1,1 complex scalars in the 27 representation of e6. useful traces for these generators
are tr(tapt bq) = b
p and tr(taptbqtcr) = abcfpqr where fpqr is the totally symmetric tensor that
projects out the singlet in 273.

aq

2.2 the nonzero mode

so far, what we have considered is similar to a reduction of pure 11dimensional supergravity on

a calabiyau space, as for example performed in ref. [11], with the addition of gauge and gauge

matter elds on the boundaries. an important dierence arises, however, because the standard

embedding (2.7), unlike in the case of the weakly coupled heterotic string, no longer leads to

vanishing sources in the bianchi identity (1.4).
instead, there is a net ve-brane charge, with
opposite sources on each xed plane, proportional to trr  r. the nontrivial components of the
bianchi identity (1.4) are given by

(dg)11abcd = 

1

42 (cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3

(cid:8)(x11)  (x11  )(cid:9) (trr  r)abcd .

(2.9)

7

as a result, the components gabcd and gabc11 of the antisymmetric tensor eld are nonvanishing.
more precisely, the above equation has to be solved along with the equation of motion.

di gijkl = 0 .

(2.10)

(note that the chernsimons contribution to the antisymmetric tensor eld equation of motion

vanishes if gabcd and gabc11 are the only nonzero components of gijkl.) the general solution
of these equations is quite complicated and has been given in ref. [13] as an expansion in calabi

yau harmonic functions. for the present purpose of deriving a vedimensional eective action, we

are only interested in the zero mode terms in this expansion because the heavy calabiyau modes

decouple as a result of the consistent kaluza-klein truncation to d = 5. to work out the zero
mode part of the solution, we note that trr  r is a (2, 2) form on the calabiyau space (since
the only nonvanishing components of a calabiyau curvature tensor are rabc d). let us, therefore,
introduce a basis i, i = 1, , h2,2 = h1,1 of harmonic (2, 2) forms and corresponding fourcycles
ci such that

zx

i  j = j
i ,

j = j

i .

zci

the zero mode part trr  r|0 of the source can then be expanded as

trr  r|0 = 82(cid:18) 4

 (cid:19)2/3

v i i

(2.11)

(2.12)

where the numerical factor has been included for convenience. the expansion coecients i are

i = 



2(cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3 1

i ,

i = 

1

82 zci

trr  r .

(2.13)

v2/3

note that i are integers, characterizing the rst pontrjagin class of the calabi-yau. it is then
straightforward to see that the zero mode part of the bianchi identity (2.9) and the equation of

motion (2.10) are solved by

gabcd|0 = i i
gabc11|0 = 0 .

abcd (x11) =

1
4v

i abcd

ef ief (x11)

(2.14)

(2.15)

here (x11) is the step function which is +1 for positive x11 and 1 otherwise. the index of the
coecient i in the second part of the rst equation has been raised using the metric

gij(a) =

1

2v zx

i  (j)

(2.16)

on the (1, 1) moduli space. note that, while the coecients i with lowered index are truly
constants, as is apparent from eq. (2.13), the coecients i depend on the (1, 1) moduli ai since

the metric (2.16) does. from the expansion (2.12) we can derive an expression for the boundary

8

trf 2 and trr2 terms in the action (1.3) which will be essential for the reduction of the boundary

theories. we have

trrabrab(cid:12)(cid:12)0 = trf (1)

abf (1)ab(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)0

= 42(cid:18) 4

 (cid:19)2/3

while, of course

v 1iabiab

(2.17)

trf (2)

abf (2)ab = 0 .

(2.18)

the expression (2.14) for gabcd with i as dened in (2.13) is the new and somewhat uncon-
ventional ingredient in our reduction. using the terminology of ref. [49] we call this conguration

for the antisymmetric tensor eld strength a nonzero mode. generally, a nonzero mode is dened

as a nonzero internal antisymmetric tensor eld strength g that solves the equation of motion.

in contrast, conventional zero modes of an antisymmetric tensor eld, like those in eq. (2.6), have
vanishing eld strength once the moduli elds are set to constants. since the kinetic term g2 is

positive for a nonzero mode it corresponds to a nonzero energy conguration. given that nonzero

modes, for a pform eld strength, satisfy

dg = dg = 0

(2.19)

they correspond to harmonic forms of degree p. hence, they can be identied with the pth co-
homology group h p(x) of the internal manifold x. in the present case, we are dealing with a

fourform eld strength on a calabiyau threefold x so that the relevant cohomology group is
h 4(x). the expression (2.14) is just an expansion of the nonzero mode in terms of the basis {i}
of h 4(x). the appearance of all harmonic (2, 2) forms shows that it is necessary to include the

complete (1, 1) sector into the low energy eective action in order to fully describe the nonzero

mode, as argued in the beginning of this section. on the other hand, harmonic (2, 1) forms do not

appear here and are hence less important in our context. we stress that the nonzero mode (2.14),
for a given calabiyau space, species a xed element in h 4(x) since the coecients i are xed
in terms of calabiyau properties. in fact, they are related to the integers i characterizing the
rst pontrjagin class of the tangent bundle. thus we see that, correctly normalized, g is in the

integer cohomology of the calabi-yau. this quantization condition has been described in [50]

in a dimensional reduction of pure 11dimensional supergravity, nonzero modes can be con-

sidered as well but are usually dismissed as nonzero energy conguration. compactications of

11dimensional supergravity on various manifolds including calabiyau three-folds with nonzero

modes have been considered in the literature [51]. the dierence in our case is that we are not

free to turn o the nonzero mode. its presence is simply dictated by the nonvanishing boundary

sources.

9

2.3 the fivedimensional eective action

let us now summarize the eld content which we have obtained above and discuss how it ts
into the multiplets of vedimensional n = 1 supergravity. the form of these multiplets and in
particular the conditions on the fermions is discussed in more detail in appendix b of ref. [5]. we

know that the gravitational multiplet should contain one vector eld, the graviphoton. thus since
the reduction leads to h1,1 vectors, we must have h1,1  1 vector multiplets. this leaves us with
the h1,1 scalars ai, the complex scalar  and the three-form c. since there is one scalar in each
vector multiplet, we are left with three unaccounted for real scalars (one from the set of ai, and )

and the three-form. together, these elds form the universal hypermultiplet; universal because

it is present independently of the particular form of the calabi-yau manifold. from this, it is clear
that it must be the overall volume breathing mode v = 1
6 dijkaiajak that is the additional scalar
from the set of the ai which enters the universal multiplet. the three-form may appear a little

unusual, but one should recall that in ve dimensions a three-form is dual to a scalar . thus, the
bosonic sector of the universal hypermultiplet consists of the four scalars (v, , , ).

the h1,1  1 vector multiplet scalars are the remaining ai. more properly, since the breathing
mode v is already part of a hypermultiplet it should be rst scaled out when dening the shape

moduli

bi = v 1/3ai .

(2.20)

note that the h1,1 moduli bi represent only h1,1  1 independent degrees of freedom as they satisfy
the constraint

k(b)  dijkbibjbk = 6 .

(2.21)

alternatively, as described in appendix b of ref. [5], we can introduce h1,1  1 independent elds
) (bx
x with bi = bi(x). the bosonic elds in the vector multiplets are then given by (x, bx
i
represents a projection onto the x subspace). meanwhile the graviton and graviphoton of the
gravity multiplet are given by (g, 2

i ai

therefore, in total, the ve dimensional bulk theory contains a gravity multiplet, the universal
hypermultiplet and h1,1  1 vector multiplets. the inclusion of the (2, 1) sector of the calabiyau
space would lead to an additional h2,1 set of hypermultiplets in the theory. since they will not play

3 biai

).

a prominent role in our context they will not be explicitly included in the following.

on the boundary m (1)

4 we have an e6 gauge multiplet (a(1)

 , (1)) and h1,1 chiral multiplets
(c ip, ip) in the fundamental 27 representation of e6. here c ip denote the complex scalars and
ip the chiral fermions. the other boundary, m (2)
 , (2)) only.
inclusion of the (2, 1) sector would add h2,1 chiral multiplets in the 27 representation of e6 to the
eld content of the boundary m (1)
4 . any even bulk eld will also survive on the boundary. thus,

4 , carries an e8 gauge multiplet (a(2)

10

in addition to the fourdimensional part of the metric, the scalars bi together with ai
 survive on the boundaries. these pair into h1,1 chiral muliplets.

11, and v and

after this survey we are ready to derive the bosonic part of the vedimensional eective action

for the (1, 1) sector. inserting the expressions for the various elds from the previous subsection into

the action (1.1), using the formulae given in appendix a of ref. [5] and dropping higher derivative

terms we nd

with

s5 = sgrav,vec + shyper + sbound + smatter

(2.22)

sgrav,vec = 

1
22

5 zm5

g(cid:2)r + gijbibj+
2
f j +
12

gijf i

shyper = 

1
22

5 zm5

g(cid:20) 1

2

sbound =

2
5 zm (1)
2

4

g v 1ibi 
xn=1zm (n)

2

4

1

16gut

smatter = 



1

2gut zm (1)

4

g(cid:2)gij(dc)i(d c)j

dijkai

#
f k

f j
1
24

+

+

v 2gg

v 2v v + 2v 1x x  +
2
g(cid:0)i( x  x) + 2(x11)iai
(cid:1)
24
v 2gijij(cid:21)
1
2
2
5 zm (2)
2
g v trf (n)

g v 1ibi



2

4

(2.23a)

(2.23b)

(2.23c)

+v 1gij w
c ip

 w
 c j
p

+ d(u)d(u)# .

(2.23d)

all elds in this action that originate from the 11dimensional antisymmetric tensor eld are subject

to a nontrivial bianchi identity. specically, from eq. (1.4) we have

(dg)11 = 
(df i)11 = 

(dx)11 = 

2
5

2
5

42gut nj (1)(x11) + j (2)(x11  )o
42gut
42gut

j i


2
5

j

(2.24a)

(2.24b)

(2.24c)

11

with the currents dened by

1
2

trr  r(cid:19)

j (n)

 = (cid:18)trf (n)  f (n) 
j i
 = 2iv 1i
j = 

i
2

v 1dijkfpqr(dc)ipc jqc kr .

jk(cid:16)(dc)jp(d c)k

p  (d c)k

p(dc)jp(cid:17)

(2.25a)

(2.25b)

(2.25c)

the vedimensional newton constant 5 and the yangmills coupling gut are expressed in terms
of 11dimensional quantities as 3

2
5 =

2
v

,

gut =

2

2v (cid:18) 4

 (cid:19)2/3

.

(2.26)

we still need to dene various quantities in the above action. the metric gij is given in terms of
the kahler potential k as

gij = 

1
2


bi


bj lnk .

the corresponding connection i

jk is dened as

we recall that

i

jk =

1
2

gil gjk
bl

.

k = dijkbibjbk ,

(2.27)

(2.28)

(2.29)

where dijk are the calabiyau intersection numbers. all indices i, j, k, in the vedimensional
theory are raised and lowered with the metric gij. a more explicit form of this metric can be found
in appendix a of ref. [5]. we also recall that the elds bi are subject to the constraint

k = 6

(2.30)

which should be taken into account when equations of motion are derived from the above action.

most conveniently, it can be implemented by adding a lagrange multiplier term g(k(b)  6)

to the bulk action. furthermore, we need to dene the superpotential

w =

1
6

dijkfpqrc ipc jqc kr

(2.31)

3these relations are given for the normalization of the 11dimensional action as in eq. (1.1).

if instead the

normalization of [19] is used the expression for gut gets rescaled to agut = 21/3(cid:0)2/2v(cid:1) (4/)2/3 otherwise the

action and bianchi identities are unchanged, except that in the expression (2.13) for i the rhs is multiplied by
21/3.

12

and the dterm

d(u) = gij c jt (u)c i

(2.32)

where t (u), u = 1, . . . , 78 are the e6 generators in the fundamental representation. the consistency
of the above theory has been explicitly checked by a reduction of the 11dimensional equations of

motion.

the most notable features of this action, at rst sight, are the bulk and boundary potentials
for the (1, 1) moduli v and bi that appear in shyper and sbound. those potentials involve the ve
brane charges i, dened by eq. (2.13), that characterize the nonzero mode. the bulk potential in
the hypermultiplet part of the action arises directly from the kinetic term g2 of the antisymmetric

tensor eld with the expression (2.14) for the nonzero mode inserted. it can therefore be interpreted

as the energy contribution of the nonzero mode. the origin of the boundary potentials, on the

other hand, can be directly seen from eq. (2.17) and the boundary actions (1.3). essentially, they

arise because the standard embedding leads to nonvanishing internal boundary actions due to the
crucial factor 1/2 in front of the trr2 terms. this is in complete analogy with the appearance

of nonvanishing sources in the internal part of the bianchi identity which led us to introduce the

nonzero mode.

3 relation to five-dimensional supergravity theories

as we have argued in the previous section, the ve-dimensional eective action (2.22) should have
n = 1, d = 5 supersymmetry in the bulk and n = 1, d = 4 supersymmetry on the boundary. in
this section, we will rewrite the action in a supersymmetric form. this will allow us to complete the

action (2.23) to include fermionic terms and give the supersymmetry transformations. one thing

we will not do is complete the supersymmetry transformations to include the bulk and boundary

couplings, but we assume a consistent completion is possible, as in eleven dimensions.

of particular interest is the presence of potential terms in the bulk theory. such terms are

forbidden unless the theory is gauged; that is, unless some of the elds are charged under abelian
gauge elds a.
in order to identify the supersymmetry structure of the theory in hand, we
derived, in appendix b of ref. [5], the general form of gauged d = 5, n = 1 supergravity with
charged hypermultiplets, borrowing heavily from the work of gunaydin et al. [52, 53] and sierra [54],
and from the general theory of gauged d = 4, n = 2 supergravity as given, for instance, in [55].
let us start by giving the n = 1 structure of the four-dimensional boundary theory. as
discussed above, we have a set of chiral multiplets with scalar components c ip, together with
vector multiplets with gauge elds a(i)
 .
matter lives only on the e6 boundary.) in addition, the scalars from the bulk (a, ) and (bi,ai

(the vectors live on both boundaries, but the chiral

11)

13

also form chiral multiplets. from the form of the theory on the boundaries we can give explicitly
the functions determining the n = 1 theory. we have already given the form of the superpotential
and the d-term on the e6 boundary in equations (2.31) and (2.32). it is also easy to read o the
kahler potential on the e6 boundary and the gauge kinetic functions on either xed plane. we
nd, without care to correct normalizations,

k = gijc ip c i
p

f (n) = v + i

(3.1)

the appearance of  in the gauge kinetic function is not immediately apparent from the ac-

tion (2.22). however, it is easy to show that on making the dualization of c to , which is
described in more detail below, the magnetic source in the bianchi indentity (2.24) for c, be-
comes an electric source for . the result is that the gauge kinetic terms in the boundary action

are modied to

1

16gut



2

xn=1zm (n)

4

g hv trf (n)

 f (n) 


2

trf (n)

 trf (n)

 i

(3.2)

one notes that the expressions (3.1) include dependence on the bulk elds bi and v , evaluated on

the appropriate boundary. further, we are considering the bulk multiplets as parameters, as their

dynamics comes from bulk kinetic terms.

now let us turn to the bulk theory. our goal will be to identify the action (2.23) with the

bosonic part of the general gauged theory discussed in appendix b of ref. [5]. the gauged theory is
characterized by a special riemannian manifold mv describing the vector multiplet sigma-model, a
quaternionic manifold mh describing the hypermultiplet sigma-model, and a set of killing vectors
and prepotentials on mh . these are the structures we must identify in the action (2.23).

we start by concentrating on the hypermultiplet structure. we have argued that, after dualizing
the three-form potential c to a scalar , the elds (v, , , ) represent the scalar components
of a hypermultiplet. concentrating on the kinetic terms let us make the dualization explicit. we

nd

g =

1
2

v 2

(cid:8)  i(cid:0)   (cid:1)  2(x11)iai
(cid:9) .

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

the kinetic terms can then be written in the form

where qu = (v, , , )u and

huvdqudqv

and the metric is given by

dqu =(cid:0)v,   2(x11)iai

huvdqudqv =

1
4v 2 dv 2 +

, ,  (cid:1)u
4v 2 (cid:2)d + i(d  d)(cid:3)2 +

1

1
v

14

dd .

this reproduces the well-known result that the universal multiplet classically parameterizes the
quaternionic space mh = su (2, 1)/u (2) [56].

in what follows, we would like to have an explicit realization of the quaternionic structure of
mh. a review of quaternionic geometry is given in appendix b of ref. [5]. we will now give
expressions for the quantities dened there, following a discussion given in [57]. since we have
a single hypermultiplet, the holonomy of mh should be su (2)  sp(2) = su (2)  su (2). to
distinguish these, we will refer to the rst factor as su (2) and the second as sp(2). dening the
symplectic matrix ab such that 12 = 1, we have the vielbein

v aa =

where we have introduced the one-forms

u =

d
v

v =

aa

1

2  u

v

v u !

1

2v (cid:0)dv + id + d  d(cid:1)

and their complex conjugates u and v. we nd that the su (2) connection is given by

a

b =  1

4 (v  v)

u

while the sp(2) connection is

a

b =   3

4 (v  v)

0

the triplet of kahler forms is given by

k a

b =  1

2 (u  u  v  v)

v  u

u

4 (v  v) !
 1

a

b

0

4 (v  v) !a

3

.

b

a

u  v

2 (u  u  v  v) !
 1

.

b

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

(3.10)

(3.11)

with these denitions, one nds that the coset space su (2, 1)/u (2), satises the conditions for a

quaternionic manifold.

so far our discussion has ignored the most important aspect of the hypermultiplet sigma-

model. we note that the kinetic terms in (3.4) were in terms of a modied derivative (3.5), which
included the gauge elds ai
. it appears that the hypermultiplet is charged under a u (1) symmetry.
comparing with our discussion of gauged supergravity given in appendix b of ref. [5], we see that
this is indeed the case. the coset space mh admits an abelian isometry generated by the killing
vector

k =  = iv 1 (v  v) .

15

(3.12)

in general, we can write the modied derivative (3.5) in the covariant form

with

dqu = qu + gai

ku
i

(3.13)

(3.14)

gki = 2(x11)ik = 2i(x11)iv 1 (v  v) .
(note that the gauge coupling is absorbed in i.) for consistency, the ki
terms of a triplet of prepotentials. this is indeed the case and we nd the prepotentials

u should be writable in

a

gpi

b =   1

0

4 i(x11)iv 1

0

4 i(x11)iv 1 !

1

a

.

b

(3.15)

thus it appears that the -component of the hypermultiplet is charged under each abelian gauge
eld ai

, with a charge proportional to i. in particular, we can write the covariant derivative as

d =  +

1

42 (cid:18) 4

5(cid:19)2/3

gut (x11)iai



(3.16)

where i are integers characterizing the rst pontrjagin class of the calabi-yau.

if this interpretation is correct, the rest of the action should coincide with the general form for

gauged supergravity given in appendix b of ref. [5]. it is clear that the vector multiplets are already

in the correct form. comparing the bosonic action (2.23) with the general form given in (b.25) of

ref. [5], we see that the gravitational and vector kinetic terms exactly match. (in the appendix of
ref. [5], we have set the ve-dimensional gravitational coupling v/2 to unity.) the structure of the

metric gij is identical, as is the appearance of chern-simons couplings. the compactication gives
an interpretation of the numbers dijk in the kahler potential (b.7) of ref. [5] and (2.29). they are
the calabi-yau intersection numbers.

the nal check of this identication is to calculate the form of the potential. we have in general,

from (b.29) of ref. [5],

g2v = 2g2gij trp ip j + 4g2bibjtrp ip j +

=

v 2gijij ,

1
4

g2
2

bibjhuvku

i kv
j

(3.17)

exactly matching the derived potential.

thus, we can conclude that the bulk eective action is described by a set of abelian vector
multiplets coupled to a single charged hypermultiplet. the vector sigma-model manifold mv has
the general form described in appendix b of ref. [5], but now the dijk in the kahler potential have
the interpretation as calabi-yau intersection numbers. the hypermultiplet manifold mh is the
coset space su (2, 1)/u (2). a u (1) isometry, corresponding to the shift symmetry of the dualized

16

three-form, is gauged. the charge of the hypermultiplet scalar eld under each abelian vector eld
ai

 is given by i.

the appearance of gauged supergravity when non-zero modes are included has been seen before

in the context of type ii compactications on calabi-yau manifolds to four-dimensions [58, 59]. it is

natural to ask why this gauging arises. the appearance of a potential term is easy to interpret. we

have included a non-zero four-form eld strength gijkl on four-cycles of the calabi-yau. these
contribute an energy proportional to the square of the eld strength. for xed total charge i (the
integral of g over a cycle), the energy is reduced the larger the four-cycle. thus it is no longer true

that all points in calabi-yau moduli space have the same energy. as an example we see that the
potential naturally drives the calabi-yau to large volume, minimizing the g2 energy.

from the ve-dimensional point of view, once we have a potential term, the theory must be

gauged if it is to remain supersymmetric. we see that it is the dual of the ve-dimensional three-

form which is gauged. this arises because of the chern-simons term in eleven dimensions. turning

on non-zero modes, this term acts as an electric source for the ve-dimensional three-form, though
dependent on the gauge elds ai. dualizing, the invariance    + const is a reection of an
absence of local electric charge. thus it not surprising that the eect of the electric chern-simons

terms is to modify this to a local gauge symmetry. we note that from this argument it can only ever

be the ve-dimensional three-form which becomes gauged by non-zero modes, whatever particular
compactication to a n = 1 ve-dimensional theory is considered.

we end this section by giving the the specic form of the fermionic supersymmetry variations.

these are calculated using the general forms given in (b.30),(b.31) and (b.32) of appendix b in

ref. [5], together with the explicit expressions for the vielbein, connections, killing vectors and

a

prepotentials given above. we nd
2i
8 (cid:16)
 = a +
2

12
i (cid:18)
1
ibia 
2
i
 a = iq
bb 
2

xa = bx

a

  4

(cid:17) bif i

a  p

a

bb

v 1bii (x11)3

a

bb

f i

1
a 
22
biiv 1(x11)3

a

i
22
bb

v 1i(x11)3

a

bb(cid:19)

where i with i = 1, 2, 3 are the pauli spin matrices and we have the matrices

a

p

a

q

b =  2i
b =  2i

2i

96 v g
v 1/2 

48 v g  1
2 v 1v
v 1/2 

v 1/2

96 v g !a

b
v 1/2
2i
48 v g + 1

2 v 1v !a

b

17

(3.18a)

(3.18b)

(3.18c)

(3.19)

4 the domain wall solution

in this section, we would like to nd the simplest bps solutions of the vedimensional theory,

including the coupling to the potential terms induced by the nonzero mode. as we will see, these

solutions provide the appropriate background for a reduction to four dimensions and can therefore

be viewed as the vacua of the theory. after a general derivation of the solutions, we will discuss

several limiting cases of interest.

4.1 the general solution

let us rst simplify the discussion somewhat by concentrating on the elds which are essential.

since we would like to nd solutions that couple to the bulk potential terms we should certainly

keep the hypermultiplet scalar v (the calabiyau breathing mode) and the vector multiplet scalars
bi (the shape moduli). it turns out that those elds plus the vedimensional metric are already

sucient. the action (2.22) can be consistently truncated to this reduced eld content leading to

22

5s5 = zm5

g(cid:20)r + gijbibj +
+22zm (1)

4

g v 1ibi  22zm (2)

4

1
2

v 2v v +

1
2

v 2gijij + (k  6)(cid:21)

g v 1ibi .

(4.1)

note that we have explicitly added the lagrange multiplier term which ensures the constraint (2.30)
on bi. for a nite calabiyau volume v , that is, for an uncompactied internal space, the potential

terms in this action do not vanish and, hence, at space is not a solution of the theory. therefore,

the question arises of what the vacuum state of the theory is. a clue is provided by the fact
that cosmologicaltype potentials in d dimensions generally couple to d  2 branes. this is well
known from the eightbrane [60] which appears as a solution of the massive extension of type

iia supergravity [61] in ten dimensions. there, the eightbrane couples to a cosmologicaltype

potential which consists of a single cosmological constant multiplied by a certain power of the

dilaton. a way to understand to appearance of an eightbrane in this context is to dualize the

cosmological constant to a nineform antisymmetric tensor eld which, according to the usual
counting, should couple to an 8 + 1dimensional extended object. a systematic study of d  2
brane solutions in various dimensions using a generalized scherkschwarz reduction can be found
in ref. [62]. the present case is somewhat more complicated in that it involves h1,1 scalar elds
(as opposed to just the dilaton) and, correspondingly, h1,1 constants i (as opposed to just one
cosmological constant). still, we can take a lead from the massive iia example and dualize each

of the constants i to a fourform antisymmetric tensor eld. this would leave us with a theory
that contains h1,1 such antisymmetric tensor elds and, hence, a corresponding number of dierent

types of threebranes that couple to those. the constants i can then be identied as the charges
of these dierent types of threebranes. since those constants are xed in terms of the underlying

18

theory (and are generically nonzero) one cannot really look for a pure solution which carries only

one type of charge. instead, what we are looking for is a multicharged threebrane which is a

mixture of the various dierent types as specied by the charges i. clearly, the transverse space
for a threebrane in vedimensions is just onedimensional. given that the boundary source terms
necessarily introduce dependence on the x11 coordinate, this onedimensional space can only be in

the direction of the orbifold.

from the above remarks it is now clear that the proper ansatz for the type of solutions we are

looking for is given by

ds2

5 = a(y)2dxdx  + b(y)2dy2

v = v (y)

bi = bi(y) ,

(4.2)

where we use y = x11 from now on. the equations of motion derived from the action (4.1) still

contains the lagrange multiplier . it can be eliminated using eqs. (a.19)(a.21) from appendix

a of ref. [5]. a solution to the resulting equations of the form (4.2) is still somewhat hard to nd,

essentially due to the complication caused by the inclusion of all (1, 1) moduli and the associated
kahler structure. the trick is to express the solution in terms of certain functions f i = f i(y) which

are only implicitly dened rather than trying to nd fully explicit formulae. it turns out that those

functions are xed by the equations

dijkf jf k = hi , hi = 22ki|y| + ki

where k and ki are arbitrary constants. then the solution can be written as

v = (cid:18) 1

6

dijkf if jf k(cid:19)2

a = kv 1/6

b = kv 2/3

bi = v 1/6f i

(4.3)

(4.4)

where k is another arbitrary constant. we should check that this solution is indeed a bps state of
the theory; that is, that it preserves four of the eight supercharges. for the reduced eld content,

19

the supersymmetry transformations (3.18) lead to the following killing spinor equations

a

 = 0

a

11 = 0

xa = 0

 a = 0

:

:

:

:

 a
11a 
a
2b
a 
12v
bi11a +

b

v 
v

11a 

2b
6v

bii (y) 3

a

bb! = 0

bii11 (y) 3

a

bb = 0

2
3

bjjbi(cid:19) (y) 3

a

bb = 0

2v (cid:18)i 
2b
v

bii (y) 3

a

bb = 0 ,

(4.5a)

(4.5b)

(4.5c)

(4.5d)

where the prime denotes the derivative with respect to y. these equations are satised for the
solution (4.5) if the spinor a takes the form

a = a1/2a
0 ,

11a

0 = (3)a

bb
0 ,

(4.6)

where a

0 is a constant spinor. as a result, the solution preserves indeed four supercharges.

as can be seen from eq. (4.3) the solution is described in terms of h1,1 linear functions hi.
this follows the general pattern of pbrane solutions coupled to n dierent charges which can

be expressed in terms of n harmonic functions on the transverse space. in our case the number
of charges i is precisely h1,1 and the transverse space is just onedimensional leading to linear
functions. generally, elementary brane solutions have singularities at the location of the branes

which have to be supported by brane worldvolume theories. the pure bulk theory does not impose

any restrictions on the number and locations of these singularities. correspondingly, if we would

just consider the bulk part of the action (4.1) we could place an arbitrary number of parallel three

branes anywhere on the orbifold. however, the theory (4.1) involves two fourdimensional boundary

actions which provide source terms that should be matched. this is possible, in the present case,

because the height of the boundary potentials in (4.1) is set by the threebrane charges i. if we
decide that the solution should have no further singularities other than those matched by the two

boundaries we arrive at the specic form of the harmonic functions hi in eq. (4.3). in fact, we have

hi = 42ki((y)  (y  )) ,

(4.7)

indicating sources at the orbifold planes y = 0, . recall that we have restricted the range of y to
y  [, ] with the endpoints identied. this explains the second deltafunction at y =  in
the above equation.

in conclusion, the solution (4.5) represents a multicharged double domain wall (threebrane)

solution with the two walls located at the orbifold planes. it preserves fourdimensional poincare

invariance as well as four of the eight supercharges and has therefore the correct properties to make
contact with fourdimensional n = 1 supergravity. more precisely, those theories should arise as
a dimensional reduction of the vedimensional theory on the domain wall background. in this

20

sense, the solution (4.5) can be viewed as the vacuum state of the vedimensional theory. from

the perspective of the fourdimensional theory the domain wall solution plays an interesting role.

it is oriented precisely in the four uncompactied dimensions and carries the physical gauge and

gauge matter elds. therefore, at low energy fourdimensional spacetime gets identied with the

threebrane worldvolume. in this sense, our universe lives on the worldvolume of a threebrane.

finally, we would like to discuss some physically relevant limiting examples of the general solution.

4.2 universal solution

in ref. [4] we have presented a related threebrane solution which was less general in that it involved

the universal calabiyau modulus v only. clearly, we should be able to recover this solution from
eq. (4.5) if we consider the specic case h1,1 = 1. then we have d111 = 6 and it follows from
eq. (4.3) that

f 1 = 2

3

k1|y| + k1!1/2

.

(4.8)

inserting this into eq. (4.5) provides us with the explicit solution in this case which is given by

a = a0h 1/2

b = b0h 2
v = b0h 3 .

2
3

h =

|y| + c0 ,  = 1

the constant a0, b0 and c0 are related to the integration constants in eq. (4.5) by

a0 = kk1/2 ,

b0 = k3 ,

c0 =

k1
k

.

(4.9)

(4.10)

eq. (4.9) is indeed exactly the solution that was found in ref. [4].
it still represents a double
domain wall. however, in contrast to the general solution it couples to one charge  = 1 only.

geometrically, it describes a variation of the vedimensional metric and the calabiyau volume

across the orbifold. the form of the solution (4.9) is typical for brane solutions that couple to one

charge and, in fact, ts into the general scheme of domain walls in various dimensions [62].

one may ask if a structure as simple as the above universal solution is, in some way, also part
of the general solution (4.5) even if h1,1 > 1. to see that this is indeed the case, we dene constants
i and  by

dijk j k =

2
3

i ,

 = 9(cid:18) 1

6

dijk i j k(cid:19)2/3

.

(4.11)

in addition, we choose the following special values for the integration constants ki in eq. (4.3)

ki = 6kc0

i


21

(4.12)

where c0 is an arbitrary constant. thanks to this specic choice, we can easily solve (4.3) for f i.
inserting the result into eq. (4.5) gives the explicit solution

a = a0h 1/2

b = b0h 2 ,
v = b0h 3
bi = 31/2 i .

2
3

h =

|y| + c0

(4.13)

as before, a0 and b0 are constants expressed in terms of the integration constants in (4.5) as

a0 = kk1/2 ,

b0 = k3 .

(4.14)

hence, for arbitrary values of h1,1, we have identied a special case of the general solution (4.5)

where the elds a, b and v behave in exactly the same way as in the universal solution (4.9). the

charge  which appears in this special solution is now a complicated function of the various charges
i in the way dened by eq. (4.11). in addition, the shape moduli bi are constant. consequently,
for this special solution the metric and the calabiyau volume vary as in the universal solution

while the shape of the calabiyau space is xed.

4.3 another simple example

a nontrivial example where the domain wall solution can be obtained explicitly is provided by

and dijk = 0 otherwise. the kahler potential is then given by

h1,1 = 3 ,

d123 = 1 ,

k = 6 b1b2b3 .

(4.15)

(4.16)

in a fourdimensional eective theory the real elds bi are promoted to complex scalars. then the
kahler potential (4.16) is associated with the coset space [su (1, 1)/u (1)]3 [63] and describes the
stumodel. due to the simple structure of intersection numbers eq. (4.3) can be easily solved for

the functions fi resulting in

inserting into eq. (4.5) then gives the explicit solution

f i = (h1h2h3)1/2h1

i

.

v = (h1h2h3)1
a = k(h1h2h3)1/6
b = k(h1h2h3)2/3
bi = (h1h2h3)2/3h1

i

hi = 22ki|y| + ki

for i = 1, 2, 3. as before k, k and ki denote constants.

22

(4.17)

(4.18)

lecture 2: non-standard embedding and fivebranes

to make contact with low-energy physics, one of the central issues in string theory has been to
nd vacua leading to chiral four-dimensional theories with n = 1 supersymmetry. in recent years,
the new understanding of the non-perturbative behavior of string theory has broadened the scope

for approaching these issues. specically, the inclusion of brane states, that is, vacua with non-
trivial form-elds, increases the class of possible backgrounds giving a chiral n = 1 theory in four
dimensions, and has raised the possibility of gauge interactions arising from the brane world-volume

theory itself.

in this second lecture, we will consider a class of eleven-dimensional mtheory vacua based on
the strongly coupled limit of the e8  e8 heterotic string, as described by horava and witten [1,
2]. at low energy, these are compactications of eleven-dimensional supergravity on an s1/z2
orbifold, with e8 gauge elds at each of the two orbifold xed planes. following witten [3], we can
further compactify on a calabiyau three-fold to give a chiral n = 1 theory in four-dimensions.
essentially, all the early discussions of the low-energy properties of compactications [14][65]

were limited to the standard embedding, where the calabiyau spin connection is embedded in
in [6], we considered the general conguration leading to n = 1
one of the e8 gauge groups.
supersymmetry, where, rst, we allowed for general gauge bundles, and, second, included ve-

branes, states which are essentially non-perturbative in heterotic string theory. the possibility of

such generalizations was rst put forward by witten [3]. recently, nonstandard embedding gauge

threshold corrections of orbifold models have been computed in ref. [80] and have, in the large radius

limit, been compared to the expressions calculated from horavawitten theory. gauge thresholds

of non-standard embeddings in the strongly coupled limit have also been discussed in [43]. a toy

model of gauge elds coming from ve-branes close to the orbifold planes has been presented in [65].

in this lecture, we review the results of [6].

the n = 1 vacua we will discuss have the following structure. one starts with the spacetime
m11 = s1/z2  x  m4, where x is a calabiyau three-fold and m4 is at minkowski space. as
in the weakly coupled limit, to preserve the four supercharges, arbitrary holomorphic e8 gauge
bundles over x (satisfying the donaldsonuhlenbeckyau condition) are allowed on each plane. in

particular, there is no requirement that the spin-connection of the calabiyau space be embedded

in the gauge connection of one of the e8 bundles. this generalization is what is meant by non-
standard embedding, and has a long history in the phenomenology of weakly coupled strings (for

early discussions see refs. [66, 67, 49]).

in addition, one can add ve-branes, located at points

throughout the orbifold interval. the ve-branes will preserve some supersymmetry, provided the

branes are wrapped on holomorphic two-cycles within x and otherwise span the at minkowski

space m4 [3].

both the gauge elds and the ve-branes are magnetic sources for the four-form eld strength

23

g of the bulk supergravity, and so excite a non-zero g within the compact s1/z2  x space. this
has two eects. first, since the space is compact, there can be no net magnetic charge, for there

is nowhere for the ux to escape. thus, there is a cohomological condition that the sum of the

sources must be zero. secondly, the non-zero form eld enters the killing spinor equation and so,

to preserve supersymmetry, the background geometry must have a compensating distortion [3].

this leads to a perturbative expansion of the supersymmetric background. such an expansion is

familiar in non-standard embeddings in the weakly coupled heterotic string [66, 67, 49].

in the

strongly coupled limit, it appears even for the standard embedding. from this point of view, the

generalization to include non-standard embedding and ve-branes is very natural.

having found the vacuum as a perturbative solution, one is then interested in the form of the

low-energy theory of the massless excitations around this compactication. it is well known that, in

the standard embedding, to match the low-energy newton constant and grand unied parameters,

one needs to take a calabiyau manifold of size comparable to the eleven-dimensional planck

length, with the orbifold an order of magnitude or so larger. thus, it is natural to consider eective

actions both in ve dimensions, where only x is compactied, and four, which is appropriate to

momenta below the orbifold scale. for the standard embedding, the four-dimensional action has

been calculated to leading non-trivial order [24, 13]. although the expansion is completely non-

perturbative, it turns out that, to this order, the form of the eective action is identical to the

large radius calabiyau limit of the one-loop eective action calculated in the weak limit. there

are threshold corrections in the gauge couplings as well as in the matter eld kahler potential. in

ve dimensions, because of the non-zero mode of g, the theory is a form of gauged supergravity in

the bulk, coupled to gauge theories on the xed planes [4, 5]. there is no homogeneous background

solution but, rather, the correct vacuum is a bps domain wall solution, supported by sources on

the xed planes and a potential in the bulk.

calculating the modications to the low-energy eective actions due to non-standard embedding

and ve-branes will be the main point of this lecture. our results can be summarized as follows.

in section two, we discuss the expansion of the background solution, the cohomology condition on

the ve-brane and orbifold magnetic sources and the constraints on the zeroth-order background

to preserve supersymmetry. we then give the solution to rst order. expanding in terms of

eigenfunctions on the calabiyau three-fold, we show that the main contribution comes from the

massless modes. sections three and four discuss the low-energy actions in the case of non-standard

embedding and inclusion of ve-branes respectively. this requires an analysis of the theory on the

ve-brane world-volume, which is given in section 4.2. in summary, we nd

 for non-standard embeddings, in the absence of ve-branes, the ve-dimensional action has
the same form as in the standard embedding case both in the bulk and on the orbifold planes.

however, the values of the gauge coupling parameters, related to the gauging of the bulk

24

supergravity, depend on the form of the non-standard embedding.

 the non-standard embedding allows many dierent breaking patterns for the e8 groups. in
particular, it is no longer necessary that the visible sector be broken to e6. rather, more
general gauge groups g(1), g(2)  e8 and corresponding gauge matter can occur on the
respective orbifold planes.

 in the presence of ve branes, the form of the bulk ve-dimensional action between any pair
of neighboring branes is the same as in the case of standard embedding. the four-dimensional

xed-plane theories also have the same form and couplings to the bulk elds. however, there

are additional four-dimensional theories, arrayed throughout the orbifold and again coupling

to the bulk elds, which arise from the ve-brane world-volume degrees of freedom.

 in the conventional picture, the ve-brane worldvolume theories provide new hidden sectors.
generically, the theory for a single ve-brane is n = 1 supersymmetric with g u (1) vector
multiplets, together with a universal chiral multiplet and a set of chiral elds parameterizing

the moduli space of holomorphic genus g two-cycles in x. this gauge group can be enhanced

when ve-branes overlap or when the embedding of a single vebrane degenerates. in general,

the total rank of the gauge group remains unchanged.

 the presence of ve-branes also allows for new types of e8  e8 breaking patterns, beyond
those associated with non-standard embeddings alone. this is because the presence of ve-

brane sources leads to a wider range of solutions satisfying the zero cohomology condition.

 reducing to four dimensions, the eective action is modied with respect to the standard
embedding case. for pure non-standard embeddings, both the gauge and kahler threshold

corrections are identical in form to those of the standard embedding. however, the presence

of the ve-branes signicantly modies these corrections so that, for instance, both e8 sectors
can get threshold corrections of the same sign.

the new threshold corrections due to the ve-branes have no analog in the weakly coupled limit

since, rst, the branes are non-perturbative and, second, the corrections depend on the positions of

the ve-branes across the orbifold, moduli which simply do not exist in the weakly coupled limit.

similarly, the appearance of new gauge groups due to ve-branes is a non-perturbative eect.

finally, we note, it appears that there is a constraint on the total rank of the full gauge group

from orbifold xed planes and ve-branes, which arises from positivity constraints in the magnetic

charge cohomology condition.

25

5 vacua with non-standard embedding and five-branes

in this section, we are going to construct generalized heterotic mtheory vacua appropriate for
a reduction of the theory to n = 1 supergravity theories in both ve and four dimensions. to
lowest order (in the sense explained below), these vacua have the usual space-time structure m11 =
s1/z2  x  m4 where x is a calabiyau three-fold and m4 is four-dimensional minkowski space.
as compared to the vacua constructed to date, we will allow for two generalizations. first, we
will not restrict ourselves to embedding the calabiyau spin connection into a subgroup su (3) 
e8 but, rather, allow for general (supersymmetry preserving) gauge eld sources on the orbifold
hyperplanes. secondly, we will allow for the presence of ve-branes that stretch across m4 and wrap
around a holomorphic curve in x. as we will see, the inclusion of ve-branes makes it much easier

to satisfy the necessary constraints. therefore, their inclusion is essential for a complete discussion

non-standard embeddings, and leads to a considerable increase in the number of such vacua.

5.1 expansion parameters

before we proceed to the actual computation, let us explain the types of corrections to the lowest

order background that one expects. for the weakly coupled heterotic string, it is well known

that non-standard embeddings lead to corrections to the calabiyau background. they can be

computed perturbatively [66, 67, 49] as a series in

w =


v1/3
10

(5.1)

where v10 is the calabiyau volume measured in terms of the ten-dimensional einstein frame
metric. at larger string coupling, one also gets contributions from string loops. thus the full

solution is a double expansion involving both w and the string coupling constant.

on the other hand, in the strongly coupled heterotic string, it has been shown that, even in the

case of the standard embedding, there are corrections originating from the localization of the gauge

elds to the ten-dimensional orbifold planes [3, 13]. again, these corrections can be organized

in a double expansion. however, one now uses a parameterization appropriate to the strongly

coupled theory. the 11-dimensional horavawitten eective action has an expansion in , the 11-
dimensional newton constant. for the compactication on s1/z2  x, there are two other scales,
the size of the orbifold interval  and the volume v of the calabiyau threefold, each measured

in the 11-dimensional metric. solving the equations of motion and supersymmetry conditions for
the action to order 2/3, one nds the correction to the background is a double expansion, linear,

at this order, in the parameter

s =(cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3 

v2/3

26

(5.2)

but to all orders in

r =

v1/6


.

(5.3)

it is natural to use the same expansion for the background with non-standard embedding and the
inclusion of ve-branes. as we will show explicitly, the solution to the order 2/3 can be obtained as

an expansion in eigenfunctions of the calabiyau laplacian. it turns out that the zero-eigenvalue,

or massless, terms in this expansion are precisely of order s, while the massive terms are of
order rs. therefore, although one could expect corrections to arbitrary order in r, to leading
order in s only the zeroth-order and linear terms in r contribute.

clearly, for the above expansion to be valid both s and r should be small. let us briey
discuss the situation at the physical point, that is, at the values of , v and  that lead to the

appropriate values for the four-dimensional newton constant and the grand unication coupling
parameter and scale. there, both the 11dimensional planck length 2/9, as well as the calabiyau
radius v1/6, are of the order 1016 gev1 while the orbifold radius is an order of magnitude or so
larger. inserting this into eq. (5.2) and (5.3) shows that s is of order one [10] while r is an order
of magnitude or so smaller. at the physical point, therefore, we have

r  s = o(1) .

(5.4)

consequently, neglecting higher-order terms in s might not provide a good approximation at the
physical point. it is, however, the best one can do at the moment given that mtheory on s1/z2
is only known as an eective theory to order 2/3. on the other hand, in fact, higher-order terms

in r should be strongly suppressed and can be safely neglected.

it is interesting to note how this strong coupling expansion is related to the weak coupling

expansion with non-standard embedding. writing w in terms of 11-dimensional quantities, one
nds

and hence

w =(cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3

1

2v1/3

w =

1


2
rs .

(5.5)

(5.6)

let us try to make this relation plausible. in the weak coupling limit, the orbifold becomes small.

hence, one expects to extract the weak coupling part of the full background by performing an

orbifold average. we recall that the massive terms in the full background are of order rs. in
addition, we will nd that those massive modes decay exponentially as one moves away from the
orbifold planes, at a rate set by the calabiyau radius v1/6. therefore, when performing the
average, one picks up another factor of r leading to 2

rs as the order of the averaged massive

27

terms. this is in perfect agreement with the expectation, (5.6), from the weakly coupled heterotic
string4.

5.2 basic equations and zeroth-order background

the mtheory vacuum is given in the 11-dimensional limit by specifying the metric gij and the
three-form cijk with eld strength gijkl = 24 [i cjkl]. to the order 2/3, the set of equations
to be solved consists of the killing spinor equation

i = di  +

2
288

(ijklm  8gij klm ) gjklm  = 0 ,

for a majorana spinor , the equation of motion for g

di gijkl = 0

and the bianchi identity5

(dg)11 i j k l = 22(cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3hj (0)(x11) + j (n +1)(x11  )+

n

j (n)((x11  xn) + (x11 + xn))# i j k l

1
2

xn=1

here the sources j (0) and j (n +1) on the orbifold planes are as usual given by

(5.7)

(5.8)

.

(5.9)

j (0) = 
j (n +1) = 

1

82 (cid:18)trf (1)  f (1) 
82 (cid:18)trf (2)  f (2) 

1

1
2
1
2

,

trr  r(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)x11=0
trr  r(cid:19)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)x11=

(5.10)

.

we have also introduced n additional sources j (n), n = 1, . . . , n . they come from n ve-branes
located at x11 = x1, . . . , xn where 0  x1    xn   (see g. 1). note that each ve-brane
at x11 = xn has to be paired with a mirror ve-brane at x11 = xn with the same source since the
bianchi identity must be even under the z2 orbifold symmetry. our normalization is such that the
total source of each pair is j (n). the structure of these ve-brane sources will be discussed below.

we are interested in nding solutions of these equations that preserve 3 + 1-dimensional poincare

invariance and admit a killing spinor  corresponding to four preserved supercharges and, hence,
n = 1 supersymmetry in four dimensions.

4there is no such comparison for the massless modes as they correspond to trivial integration constants on the
weakly coupled side which can be absorbed into a redenition of the moduli. this will be explained in detail later

on.

5here we are using the normalization given in ref. [2]. conrad [19] has argued that the correct normalization is
smaller. in that case, the coecient of the right-hand side of the bianchi identity (5.9) and eqns. (5.20) and (5.26)
below are all multiplied by 21/3. furthermore, the denition of s in eqn. (5.2) should also be multiplied by 21/3.

28

11x

0

x
1

x
2

x
n



figure 1: orbifold interval with boundaries at 0,  and n ve-branes at x1, . . . , xn . the mirror
interval from 0 to  is suppressed in this diagram.

the usual procedure to nd such solutions is to solve the equations perturbatively. one starts
by choosing a space s1/z2  x  m4, where x is a calabiyau three-fold with a ricci-at metric
gab, admitting a killing spinor (cy). to lowest order, the solution, denoted in the following by
(0), is then given by

ds(0)2

 g(0)

ij dxi dxj = dxdx + gabdxadxb + (dx11)2

g(0)

ijkl = 0
(0) = (cy) .

(5.11)

note that it is consistent, to this order, to set the antisymmetric tensor eld to zero since the
sources in the bianchi identity are proportional to 2/3 and, hence, rst order in s.

one must also ensure that the theories on the orbifold planes preserve supersymmetry. this

leads to the familiar constraint, following from the vanishing of the supersymmetry variation of the

gauginos, that



i j f (1)

i j |x11=0 = 

i j f (2)

i j |x11= = 0 .

(5.12)

as discussed in [49], this implies that each e8 gauge eld is a holomorphic gauge bundle over the
calabiyau three-fold, satisfying the donaldsonuhlenbeckyau condition. the holomorphicity
implies that f (1)
ab are (1,1)-forms. it follows that, since rab for a calabiyau three-fold is
also a (1,1)-form, the orbifold sources j (0) and j (n +1), dened by eq. (5.10), are closed (2, 2)-forms.

ab and f (2)

for the ve-brane world-volume theory to be supersymmetric, the branes must be embedded

in the calabiyau space in a particular way [3]. to preserve lorentz invariance in m4, they must

29

span the 3 + 1-dimensional uncompactied space. the remaining spatial dimensions must then be

wrapped on a two-cycle in the calabiyau space. the condition of supersymmetry implies that

the cycle is a holomorphic curve [3, 68, 69]. as we will show in section 4.2, in such a situation, we
preserve four supercharges on the ve-brane worldvolume corresponding to n = 1 supersymmetry
in four dimensions. since the ve-branes are magnetic sources for g, they enter the right-hand

side of the bianchi identity (5.9) as source terms, which should be localized on the ve-brane
world-volumes. the delta function in x11 gives the localization in the orbifold direction, while the
four-forms j (n) must give the localization of the n-th ve-brane on the two-cycle c(n)
. explicitly,
for any two-cycle c2, one can introduce a delta-function four-form (c2), dened in the usual way,
such that for any two-form ,

2

zx

  (c2) =zc2

 ,

(5.13)

so that (c2) is localized on c2. in general, we would expect that j (n) is proportional to (c(n)

2

). in

fact, the correct normalization of the ve-brane magnetic charge [70, 50] implies that the two are

equal, that is

j (n) = (c(n)

2

) .

(5.14)

since the cycles are holomorphic, j (n), like the orbifold sources, are closed (2,2)-forms.

there is one further condition which the ve-branes and the elds on the orbifold planes must

satisfy. this is a cohomology condition on the bianchi identity [3]. consider integrating the

identity (5.9) over a ve-cycle which spans the orbifold interval together with an arbitrary four-
cycle c4 in the calabiyau three-fold. since dg is exact, this integral must vanish. physically this
is the statement that there can be no net charge in a compact space, since there is nowhere for the

ux to escape. performing the integral over the orbifold, we derive, using (5.9), the condition



1

82 zc4

trf (1)  f (1) 

1

82 zc4

trf (2)  f (2) +

1

82 zc4

trr  r +

n

xn=1zc4

j (n) = 0 .

(5.15)

hence, the net magnetic charge over c4 is zero. equivalently, this implies that the sum of the
sources must be cohomologically trivial, that is

"n +1
xn=0

j (n)# = 0 .

(5.16)

let us now return to the normalization of the ve-brane charges. we note that in equation (5.15)

the rst three terms are all integers. they are topological invariants, giving the instanton numbers

(second chern numbers) of the two e8 bundles and the instanton number (rst pontrjagin number)
of the tangent bundle of the calabiyau three-fold. hence, the above constraint shows that n5(c4) =

30

(n)
2c

+1

+1

4c

2

and a four-cycle c4.

figure 2: intersection of a ve-brane wrapped on the holomorphic cycle c(n)
in this example the ve-brane contributes two units of magnetic charge on c4.
pn
j (n) must also be an integer. in fact, with the normalization given in eqn. (5.14), each
n=1rc4
j (n) is an integer. it is also a topological invariant, giving the intersection number [71] of the
rc4
n-th brane, on the two-cycle c(n)
, with the four-cycle c4. this can be understood as follows (see
g. 2). the two cycles naturally intersect at points in the calabiyau manifold. thus in c4, the
ve-brane appears as a set of point-like magnetic charges located at each intersection. the net
contribution of the ve-brane to the magnetic charge on c4 is then the sum of the point charges,
which is precisely the intersection number. given the normalization of (5.14), each intersection
contributes one unit of magnetic charge. we also note that, for a holomorphic curve c4, since
c(n)
is holomorphic, it is a theorem [71] that the intersection number is always positive. this is

2

2

related to the fact that only ve-branes and not anti-ve-branes are allowed if we are to preserve

supersymmetry. in summary, the main point is that the normalization of the ve-brane charge is
such that each ve-brane intersection with c4 and each gauge instanton on the orbifold plane carry
the same amount of magnetic charge [70, 50].

we can then rewrite the cohomology condition (5.15) on a particular holomorphic four-cycle c4

as

n1(c4) + n2(c4) + n5(c4) = nr(c4)

(5.17)

which states that the sum of the number of instantons on the two e8 bundles and the sum of the
intersection numbers of each ve-brane with the four-cycle c4, must equal the instanton number for
the calabiyau tangent bundle, a number which is xed once the calabiyau geometry is chosen.

31

in summary, we see that to dene the zeroth-order background we must specify the following

data

 a calabiyau three-fold x,
 two holomorphic vector bundles over x, one for each xed plane, satisfying the donaldson
uhlenbeckyau condition. in general, there is no constraint that these bundles correspond

to the embedding of the spin-connection in the gauge connection,

 a set of ve-branes, each spanning the uncompactied 3 + 1 dimensional space and wrapping

a holomorphic two-cycle in the calabiyau space,

 the sum of the ve-branes magnetic charges and the instanton numbers from the gauge

bundles, must equal the tangent space instanton number of x, as in equation (5.17),

we can then proceed to calculate the rst-order corrections to the background.

5.3 first-order background

as an expansion in s, we write the bulk elds and the killing spinor as

ij

gij = g(0)
cijk = c (0)

ij + g(1)
ijk + c (1)
 = (0) + (1) .

ijk

(5.18)

where the index (0) refers to the uncorrected background, given in (5.11), and the index (1) to the

corrections to rst order in s.

expanding to this order in s, we get for the killing spinor equation (5.7)

i = d(0)

i (1) 

1

8(cid:16)d(0)

j g(1)

ki  d(0)

k g(1)

ji(cid:17) jk(0)

+

2
288(cid:16)ijklm  8g(0)

ij klm(cid:17) g(1)jklm (0) = 0 (5.19)

and for the equation of motion for g (5.8) and the bianchi identity (5.9)

d(0)

i g(1)ijkl = 0

(dg(1))11 i j k l = 22(cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3hj (0)(x11) + j (n +1)(x11  )

n

+

1
2

xn=1

j (n)((x11  xn) + (x11 + xn))# i j k l

(5.20)

.

first, we note that the only nonvanishing components of the antisymmetric tensor g(1) are g(1)
abc d
and g(1)
abc11. this follows from the bianchi identity for g(1) in eq. (5.20) and the fact that all sources

32

j (n) are (2, 2) forms. for g(1) of this form, the killing spinor equation has been analyzed in ref. [3].

it has been shown in that paper that the corrections rst order in s to the metric and killing
spinor should have the structure

g(1)
 = b ,

g(1)
ab = hab

g(1)
11,11 =  ,

(1) = (0)

(5.21)

with orbifold and calabiyau dependent functions b, hab,  and . furthermore, in [3] a consistent
set of dierential equations has been derived from eq. (5.19) which determines b, hab,  and  in
terms of g(1). an explicit solution for these dierential equations in terms of the dual antisymmetric
tensor b dened by

h = db = g(1)

(5.22)

was presented in ref. [13]. in the following, we adopt the harmonic gauge, db = 0. then, since
the sources in the bianchi identity (5.20) are (2, 2) forms, the only nonvanishing components of b
are

bab = bab

(5.23)

with bab a (1, 1) form on the calabiyau space. using the results of ref. [13], the killing spinor
equation (5.19) is solved by

hab = 2i(cid:18)bab 

1
3

abb(cid:19)

g(1)

abcd =

g(1)

abc11 =

b =

2
6 b
2
3 b
2
24 b
abcdef 11bef
abcdef dbef

 = 

 = 
1
2
1
2

(5.24)

where b = abbab and ab = igab is the kahler form. we have, therefore, explicitly expressed
the complete background in terms of the (1, 1) form bab. all that remains then is to determine
this (1, 1) form, which can be done following the methods given in ref. [13]. in the harmonic gauge,

which implies

d(0)
a bab = 0 ,

33

(5.25)

bab is determined from eq. (5.20) by solving
(cid:0)x + d2

11(cid:1)bab = 22(cid:16) 

4(cid:17)2/3hx j (0)(x11) + x j (n +1)(x11  )

n

+

1
2

x j (n)(cid:0)(x11  xn) + (x11 + xn)(cid:1)#ab

xn=1

.

(5.26)

where x is the laplacian and x the hodge star operator on the calabiyau space. essentially,
this is the equation for a potential between a set of charged plates positioned through the orbifold

interval at the xed planes and the ve-brane locations. the charge is not uniform over the calabi

yau space. to nd a solution, following ref. [13] we introduce eigenmodes i ab of this laplacian
with eigenvalues 2

i so that

generically, i is of order v1/6. the metric on the space of eigenmodes

xi ab = 2

i i ab .

gij =

1

2v zx

i  (j)

(5.27)

(5.28)

is used to raise and lower i-type indices. particularly relevant are the massless modes with i = 0,
which are precisely the h1,1 harmonic (1, 1) forms of the calabiyau space. we will also denote

these harmonic (1, 1) forms by iab. in the following, in order to distinguish between massless and
massive modes, we will use indices i0, j0, k0, = 1, . . . , h1,1 for the former and indices , , k, . . .
for the latter, while we continue to use i, j, k, . . . for all modes. let us now expand the sources in

terms of the eigenfunctions as

where

xj (n) =

1

2v2/3 xi

(n)
i i

(n)
i =

1

v1/3 zx

i  j (n) .

(5.29)

(5.30)

if we introduce four-cycles c4i0 dual to the harmonic (1, 1) forms i0, we can write for the massless
modes

(n)
i0

=zc4i0

j (n) .

(5.31)

specically, it follows from (5.10) that (0)
i0
elds on the orbifold planes minus half the instanton number of the tangent bundle and, hence, it

represent the instanton numbers of the gauge

and (n +1)

i0

would appear, are in general half-integer. however, since m11 must be a spin manifold (since it
must admit spinors), the tangent bundle instanton number must be divisible by two [50] and so

34

i0

and (n +1)

are, in fact, integer. furthermore, (n)
i0

(0)
, n = 1, . . . , n are the ve-brane charges,
i0
given by the intersection number of each ve-brane with the cycle c4i0, and are also integers. let
us also expand bab in terms of eigenfunctions as
bab =xi

(5.32)

bii

ab

then inserting this expansion, together with the expression (5.29) for the sources, into eq. (5.26),

it is straightforward to obtain

11  2
(cid:0)2

i(cid:1) bi =

2s


i

n

h(0)
i (x11) + (n +1)
xn=1

(n)
i

1
2

+

(x11  )

((x11  xn) + (x11 + xn))#

(5.33)

it is then easy to solve these equation to give an explicit solution for the massive and massless

modes. we note that the size of the sources is set by s/ which, from eq. (5.2), is independent
of the size of the orbifold. we rst solve eq. (5.33) for the massive modes, that is, for i 6= 0. in
terms of the normalized orbifold coordinates

z =

x11


,

zn =

xn


, n = 1, . . . , n ,

(5.34)

z0 = 0 and zn +1 = 1, we nd

b =

s2

"  n
xm=0

in the interval

c,mm

 ! sinh(1



|z|)
+  n +1
xm=n+1

s,m(m)

 

c,n +1
s,n +1

n +1

xm=0

c,m(m)

 ! cosh(1



|z|)# (5.35)

for xed n, where n = 0, . . . , n . here we have dened

zn  |z|  zn+1 ,

 =

1



,

c,n = cosh(1

 zn) ,

s,n = sinh(1

 zn) .

(5.36)

note that, since the eigenvalues  are of order v1/6, the quantities  dened above are of order
r. therefore, as already stated, the size of the massive modes is set by rs.

we now turn to the massless modes. first note that, in order to have a solution of (5.33), we

must have

(n)
i0

= 0 .

n +1

xn=0

35

(5.37)

however, from the denition (5.31), we see that this is, of course, none other than the cohomology

condition (5.16) described above, and so is indeed satised. integrating eq. (5.33) for i = 0 we
then nd [13]

bi0 =

s2 " n
xm=0

(m)
i0

(|z|  zm) 

1
2

in the interval

i0 #
m  2zm)(m)
(z2

n +1

xm=0

(5.38)

zn  |z|  zn+1 ,

for xed n, where n = 0, . . . , n . as already discussed, the massless modes are of order s and,
unlike for the massive modes, no additional factor of r appears.

it is important to note that there could have been an arbitrary constant in the zero-mode

solutions. however, such a constant can always be absorbed into a redenition of the calabiyau

zero modes or, correspondingly, the low energy elds. consequently, in the solution (5.38) we have

xed the constant by taking the orbifold average of the solution to be zero. this will be important

later in deriving low-energy eective actions.

before we discuss the implications of these equations in detail, let us summarize our results.

we have constructed heterotic mtheory backgrounds with non-standard embeddings including the

presence of bulk ve-branes. we started with a standard calabiyau background with gauge elds

and ve-branes to lowest order and showed that corrections to it can be computed in a double

expansion in s and r. explicitly, we have solved the problem to linear order in s and to all
orders in r. we found the massive modes to be of order rs while the massless modes are of order
s. therefore, although one could have expected corrections of arbitrary power in r, we only nd
zeroth- and rst-order contributions at the linear level in s. concentrating on the leading order
massless modes, in each interval between two ve-branes, zn  |z|  zn+1, the massless modes vary
linearly with a slope proportional to the total charge pn
to the left of the interval. (note

that the total charge to the right of the interval has the same magnitude but opposite sign due to

m=0 (m)
i0

eq. (5.37).) at the ve-brane locations, the linear pieces match continuously but with kinks which

lead to the delta-function sources when the second derivative is computed. (a specic example is

given in section 4.1, see g. 3.) similar kinks appear for the massive modes which, however, vary

in a more complicated way between each pair of ve-branes.

6 backgrounds without five-branes

in this section, we will restrict the previous general solutions to the case of pure non-standard

embedding without additional ve-branes and discuss some properties of such backgrounds and the

resulting low-energy eective actions in both four and ve dimensions.

36

6.1 properties of the background

to specialize to the case without ve-branes, we set n = 0 and recall that z0 = 0 and z1 = 1. also,
the vanishing cohomology condition (5.37) implies that we have only one independent charge

i0  (0)

i0

= (1)

i0

per mode. using this information to simplify eq. (5.38), we nd for the massless modes

bi0 =

s2

i0(cid:18)|z| 

1

2(cid:19) .

in the same way, we obtain from eq. (5.35) for the massive modes

(6.1)

(6.2)

b =

s2

"((0)

  (1)



)

sinh(1



(|z|  1/2))

2 cosh(1

 /2)

 ((0)

 + (1)



)

cosh(1



(|z|  1/2))

2 sinh(1

 /2)

# .

(6.3)

note that, unlike for the massless modes, here we have no relation between the coecients (0)
and (1)
. let us compare these results to the case of the standard embedding [13]. we see that the
massless modes solution is, in fact, completely unchanged in form from the the standard embedding





case, though the parameter i0 can be dierent. this is a direct consequence of the cohomology
condition (5.37) which, for the simple case without ve-branes, tells us that the instanton numbers

on the two orbifold planes always have to be equal and opposite. there is no similar condition for

the massive modes and we therefore expect a dierence from the standard embedding case. indeed,
the standard embedding case is obtained from eq. (6.3) by setting (0)
 = 0 so that the second
term vanishes. as was noticed in ref. [13], the rst term in eq. (6.3) vanishes at the middle of

 + (1)

the interval z = 1/2 for all modes. hence, for the standard embedding, at this point the space-

time background receives no correction and, in particular, the calabiyau space is undeformed.

we see that the second term in eq. (6.3) does not share this property. therefore, for non-standard

embeddings, there is generically no point on the orbifold where the space-time remains uncorrected.

furthermore, we see that the massive modes depend on the combination 1

 z only. therefore,
in terms of the normalized orbifold coordinate z (the orbifold coordinate x11), the massive modes
indeed fall o exponentially with a scale set by  (by v1/6). in fact, as might be expected, we see
that this part of the solution is essentially independent of the size of the orbifold. averaging the

above expression for the massive modes over the orbifold, one should pick up the corresponding weak

coupling correction. clearly, as a consequence of the exponential fall-o, the averaging procedure

leads to an additional suppression by r. given that the order of a heavy mode is rs, we conclude
that its average is of the order 2
rs. according to eq. (5.6), this is just w and, hence, the expected

weak coupling expansion parameter.

37

6.2 low-energy eective actions

what are the implications of the above results for the low-energy eective action? since the

orbifold is expected to be larger than the calabiyau radius, it is natural to rst reduce to a ve-

dimensional eective theory consisting of the usual 3 + 1 space-time dimensions and the orbifold

and, subsequently, reduce this theory further down to four dimensions. first, we should explain
how a background appropriate for a reduction to n = 1 supersymmetry in four dimensions can
be used to derive a sensible n = 1 theory in ve dimensions [13]6. the point is that, as we have
seen, the background can be split into massless and massive eigenmodes. reducing from eleven to

ve dimensions on an undeformed calabiyau background, these correspond to massless moduli

elds and heavy kaluzaklein modes. working to linear order in s, the heavy modes completely
decouple from the massless modes and so can essentially be dropped. the background then appears

as a particular solution to the ve-dimensional eective action, where the moduli depend non-

trivially on the orbifold direction. thus, in summary, to derive the correct ve-dimensional action,

we need only keep the massless modes in a reduction on an undeformed calabiyau space. however,
a similar procedure is not possible for the topologically non-trivial components g(1)
abcd of the
antisymmetric tensor eld strength. such a conguration of the internal eld strength is not a

modulus, but rather a non-zero mode. as a consequence, the proper ve-dimensional theory is

obtained as a reduction on an undeformed calabiyau background but including non-zero modes

for g.

it is these non-zero modes which introduce all the interesting structure into the theory,

notably, that in the bulk we have a gauged supergravity and that the theory admits no homogeneous

vacuum. in the case at hand, the precise structure of the non-zero mode can be directly read o

from the background as presented.

let us now briey review the results of such a reduction for the standard embedding as presented

in ref. [4, 5] and discussed in lecture 1. it was found that the ve-dimensional eective action
consists of a gauged n = 1 bulk supergravity theory with h1,1  1 vector multiplets and h2,1 + 1
hypermultiplets coupled to four-dimensional n = 1 boundary theories. the eld content of the
orbifold plane at x11 = 0 consists of an e6 gauge multiplet and h1,1 and h2,1 chiral multiplets, while
the plane at x11 =  carries e8 gauge multiplets only. the gauging of the bulk supergravity is
with respect to a u (1) isometry in the universal hypermultiplet coset space with the gauge eld

being a certain linear combination of the graviphoton and the vector elds in the vector multiplets.

the gauging also leads to a bulk potential for the (1, 1) moduli. in addition, there are potentials

for the (1, 1) moduli conned to the orbifold planes which have opposite strength. as we have

mentioned, the characteristic features of this theory, such as the gauging and the existence of the

potentials, can be traced back to the existence of the non-zero mode. furthermore, the vacuum

6by n = 1 in ve dimensions we mean a theory with eight supercharges. in four dimensions, n = 1 means a

theory with four supercharges.

38

solution of this ve-dimensional theory, appropriate for a reduction to four dimensions, was found

to be a double bps domain wall with the two worldvolumes stretched across the orbifold planes.

which of the above features generalize to non-standard embeddings? the spectrum of zero

mode elds in the bulk will, of course, be unchanged. due to the nonstandard embedding, we
can have more general gauge multiplets with groups g(1), g(2)  e8 on the orbifold planes and
also corresponding observable and hidden sector matter transforming under these groups. we are

interested in the eective action up to linear order in s. it is clear that, as above, to this order,
the massive part of the background completely decouples from the low-energy eective action since

the massless and massive eigenfunction on the calabiyau space are orthogonal [13]. hence, the

form of the eective action to linear order in s is completely determined by the massless part
of the background. on the other hand, due to the cohomology condition (5.37), the form of the

massless part of the background corrections is same as in the standard embedding case, as we have

just shown. hence, in deriving the ve-dimensional eective action for non-standard embedding,

we use the same non-zero mode in the reduction as for the standard embedding. this will lead to

gauging and bulk and boundary potentials exactly as in the standard embedding case.

let us explain these last facts in some more detail. first, we identify the non-zero mode of
g in the case of non-standard embedding. inserting the mode (6.2) into the expansion for bab,
eq. (5.32), we can use eq. (5.24) to compute the four-form eld strength g(1). while the massless
part of g(1)

abc11 vanishes, we nd for the massless part of g(1)

abcd

where v is the calabiyau volume modulus dened by

g(1) =

1
2v  i0i0(x11)

v =

and we have introduced the parameter

1

2v zxs1/z2p6g

2s


i0 .

i0 =

(6.4)

(6.5)

(6.6)

to conform with the notation of [4, 5]. furthermore, (x11) is the stepfunction which is +1 for
positive x11 and 1 otherwise. eq. (6.4) is precisely the non-zero mode we have mentioned above.
note that v measures the orbifold average of the calabiyau volume in units of v. in general, the

parameters i0 depend on the choice of both the tangent and the gauge bundles. explicitly, from
eqs. (5.10), (5.31) and the cohomology condition (5.37), we have, for general embeddings,

i0 = 

=

s

422zc4i0 (cid:18)trf (1)  f (1) 
422zc4i0 (cid:18)trf (2)  f (2) 

s

1
2

trr  r(cid:19)
trr  r(cid:19) .

(6.7)

1
2

39

in the case of the standard embedding, the tangent bundle and one of the e8 gauge bundles are
identied, while the other gauge bundle is taken to be trivial, so that this reduces to

i0 = 

s

822zc4i0

trr  r .

(6.8)

this is the relation given in ref. [5]. the point is that the expression for the non-zero mode (6.4)

has the same form for both standard and non-standard embeddings. all that changes are the values

of the parameters i0.

now let us demonstrate how the gauging of the bulk supergravity arises in the case of non-

standard embedding. consider the ve-dimensional three-form zeromode c5, with eld strength
g5, and the part of the 11dimensional three-form that leads to the h1,1 vector elds ai0, namely
c = ai0  i0. inserting these two elds, together with the non-zero mode (6.4), into the chern
simons term in the eleven-dimensional supergravity action [5] leads to

zm11

c  g  g zm5

(x11)i0ai0  g5 .

(6.9)

the three-form c5 can be dualized to a scalar in ve dimensions, which becomes one of the four
scalars qu in the universal hypermultiplet. then, the above term directly causes the gauging of

the isometry in the hypermultiplet coset space that corresponds to the axionic shift in the dual
scalar. the gauging is with respect to the linear combination i0ai0. explicitly, we nd [5] that
the universal hypermultiplet kinetic term is of the form

with the covariant derivative

ghuvdqudqv

zm5

dqu = qu + (x11)i0ai0

 ku

(6.10)

(6.11)

where ku is a killing vector in the hypermultiplet sigma-model manifold, pointing in the direction

of the axionic shift. we see that, since the non-zero mode (6.4) had the same form for both standard

and non-standard embeddings, the gauging of the supergravity also has the same form. the only

dierence is in the values of the charges i0.

similarly, the bulk potential should have the same form in the standard and non-standard
embedding cases. inserting the non-zero mode (6.4) into the kinetic term g  g of the four-form
eld strength in the eleven-dimensional supergravity action leads to a bulk potential for the volume

modulus v and the other (1, 1) moduli. more precisely, one nds

zm11

g(1)  g(1) zm5

gv 2i0j0

gi0j0

where

gi0j0 = v 2/3gi0j0

40

(6.12)

(6.13)

is a renormalized metric that depends on the calabiyau shape moduli (see ref. [5] for details).

note that it follows from supersymmetry that such a potential must arise when an isometry of the

universal hypermultiplet sigma-model manifold is gauged.

the potentials on the orbifold planes arise from the ten-dimensional actions on the planes, with

the internal gauge elds and curvature inserted. using identities of the form

we nd

zx

  trr  r zx

gtrr2

2

xn=1zm (n)

10

g(cid:18)tr(f (n))2 

1
2

trr2(cid:19) zm (1)

4

gv 1i0bi0 zm (2)

4

gv 1i0bi0

(6.14)

(6.15)

where bi0 are the kahler shape moduli dened by the expansion of the kahler form  = v 1/3bi0i0.
as for the standard embedding case, the potentials come out with opposite strength, again a
consequence of the cohomology condition (6.1), (0)
i0

i0

.

= (1)

in summary, we conclude that the ve-dimensional eective action derived in ref. [4, 5] for the

standard embedding is, in fact, much more general and applies, with appropriate adjustment of

the boundary eld content and the charges i0, to any calabiyau-based non-standard embedding
without additional ve-branes. furthermore, the double domain wall vacuum solution of the ve-

dimensional theory is unchanged, since it does not depend on the eld content on the orbifold

planes.

the four-dimensional theory is obtained as a reduction on this domain wall. hence, the four-

dimensional eective action will be unchanged in the case of non-standard embeddings without

ve-branes, except for the possibility of more general gauge groups and matter multiplets. one

further new feature, in the case of non-standard embedding, is the possibility of gauge matter on

the hidden orbifold plane.

in this case, the threshold-like correction to the matter part of the

kahler potential will be dierent for observable and hidden sectors in the same way the gauge

kinetic functions of the two sectors dier.

to be more concrete, let us consider the universal case with moduli s and t , gauge elds of
g(1)  g(2)  e8  e8 and corresponding gauge matter c (1) and c (2), transforming under g(1) and
g(2), respectively. then, we have for the kahler potential and the gauge kinetic functions

k =  log(s + s)  3 log(t + t ) + z1|c (1)|2 + z2|c (2)|2
z1 =

+

3

s
s + s
s
s + s

3

z2 =

t + t
t + t 
f (1) = s + st
f (2) = s  st .

(6.16)

41

where  is the single instanton charge, of the type dened in eqn. (6.1), corresponding to the

universal kahler deformation. for vacua based on the standard embedding, it was pointed out

in ref. [3] that, if  > 0 so that the smaller of the two couplings corresponds to the observable

sector, then, tting this to the grand unication coupling, the larger coupling is of order one at

the physical point. hence, gaugino condensation in the hidden sector appears to be a likely

scenario. we have just shown that, in fact, this statement continues to apply to all calabiyau

based non-standard embedding vacua without additional bulk ve-branes, provided  > 0, since

the gauge kinetic functions are completely unchanged. gaugino condensation, therefore, appears

to be a generic possibility for such vacua.

7 backgrounds with five-branes

let us now turn to the much more interesting case of non-standard embeddings with ve-branes in

the bulk. we will concentrate on the massless modes, since, as above, it is these modes which will

determine the low-energy action.

7.1 properties of the background

the general solution (5.38) for the massless modes shows a linear behaviour for each interval

between two ve-branes. the slope, however, varies from interval to interval in a way controlled by

the ve-brane charges. the same statement applies to the variation of geometrical quantities, like

the calabiyau volume, across the orbifold. let us consider an example for a certain massless mode
b. four ve-branes with charges ((1), (2), (3), (4)) = (1, 1, 1, 1) are positioned at (z1, z2, z3, z4) =
(0.2, 0.6, 0.8, 0.8). note that the third and fourth ve-brane are coincident. the instanton numbers
on the orbifold planes are chosen to be ((0), (4)) = (1,3). note that the total charge sums up
to zero as required by the cohomology constraint (5.37). the orbifold dependence of (2/s)b is
depicted in g. 3. it is clear that the additional ve-brane charges introduce much more freedom

as compared to the case without ve-branes. for example, while in the latter case one always has
b(0) = b(1) leading to equal, but opposite, gauge threshold corrections, the example in g. 3
shows that b(0), b(1) > 0 is possible. one, therefore, expects the thresholds in the low-energy gauge

kinetic functions to change. this will be analyzed in a moment. another interesting phenomenon

in the above example is that the mode is constant between the rst and second ve-brane. this

is a direct consequence of our choice of the charges which sum up to zero both to the left and the

right of this interval. if such a property is arranged for all massless modes, the calabiyau volume

remains exactly constant throughout this interval.

42

0.8

0.6

0.4

b

0.2

0

-0.2

0.2

0.4

0.6

z

0.8

1

figure 3: orbifold dependence of a massless mode (2/s)b for
four ve-branes at
(z1, z2, z3, z4) = (0.2, 0.6, 0.8, 0.8) with charges ((1), (2), (3), (4)) = (1, 1, 1, 1) and instanton
numbers ((0), (4)) = (1,3).

7.2 five-branes on calabiyau two-cycles

the inclusion of ve-branes not only generalizes the types of background one can consider, but also

introduces new degrees of freedom into the theory, namely, the dynamical elds on the ve-branes

themselves. in this section, we will consider what low-energy elds survive on one of the ve-branes

when it is wrapped around a two-cycle in the calabiyau three-fold.

in general, the elds on a single ve-brane are as follows [72, 73]. the simplest are the bosonic
coordinates x i describing the embedding of the brane into 11-dimensional spacetime. the addi-

tional bosonic eld is a world-volume two-form potential b with eld strength h = db satisfying

a generalized self-duality condition. for small uctuations, the duality condition simplies to the
conventional constraint h = h. these degrees of freedom are paired with spacetime fermions ,
leading to a greenschwarz type action, with manifest spacetime supersymmetry and local kappa-

symmetry [74, 75]. (as usual, including the self-dual eld in the action is dicult, but is possible

by either including an auxiliary eld or abandoning a covariant formulation.) for a ve-brane in

at space, one can choose a gauge such that the dynamical elds fall into a six-dimensional mass-

less tensor multiplet with (0, 2) supersymmetry on the brane world-volume [76, 77]. the multiplet

has ve scalars describing the motion in directions transverse to the ve-brane, together with the

self-dual tensor h.

for a ve-brane embedded in s1/z2  x  m4, to preserve lorentz invariance in m4, 3 + 1
dimensions of the ve-brane must be left uncompactied. the remaining two spatial dimensions are

43

then wrapped on a two-cycle of the calabiyau three-fold. to preserve supersymmetry, the two-

cycle must be a holomorphic curve [3, 68, 69]. thus, from the point of view of a ve-dimensional
eective theory on s1/z2m4, since two of the ve-brane directions are compactied, it appears as
a at three-brane (or equivalently domain wall) located at some point x11 = x on the orbifold. thus,

at low energy, the degrees of freedom on the brane must fall into four-dimensional supersymmetric

multiplets.

an important question is how much supersymmetry is preserved in the low-energy theory. one

way to address this problem is directly from the symmetries of the greenschwarz action, follow-

ing the discussion for similar brane congurations in [68]. locally, the 11-dimensional spacetime
s1/z2xm4 admits eight independent killing spinors , so should be described by a theory with
eight supercharges. (globally, only half of the spinors survive the non-local orbifold quotienting con-
dition 11(x11) = (x11), so that, for instance, the eleven-dimensional bulk elds lead to n = 1,
not n = 2, supergravity in four dimensions.) the greenschwarz form of the ve-brane action is
then invariant under supertranslations generated by , as well as local kappa-transformations. in

general the fermion elds  transform as (see for instance ref. [77])

 =  + p+

(7.1)

where p+ is a projection operator. if the brane conguration is purely bosonic then  = 0 and
the variation of the bosonic elds is identically zero. furthermore, if h = 0 then the projection

operator takes the simple form

p =

1

2(cid:18)1 

1
6!g

m1...m6m1 x i1 . . . m6x i6i1...i6(cid:19)

(7.2)

where m, m = 0, . . . , 5 label the coordinates on the ve-brane and g is the determinant of the

induced metric

gmn = mx i nx j gij .

(7.3)

if the brane conguration is invariant for some combination of supertranslation  and kappa-

transformation, then we say it is supersymmetric. now  is a local parameter which can be chosen
at will. since the projection operators satisfy p+ + p = 1, we see that for a solution of  = 0,
one is required to set  = , together with imposing the condition

for a brane wrapped on a two-cycle in the calabiyau space, spanning m4 and located at x11 = x
in the orbifold interval, we can choose the parameterization

p = 0

(7.4)

x  = 

x a = x a(, )

x 11 = x

(7.5)

44

where  = 4 + i5. the condition (7.4) then reads

 (i/g) x a x b(4)ab  = 

(7.6)

where we have introduced the four-dimensional chirality operator (4) = 0123. recalling that
on the calabiyau three-fold the killing spinor satises b = 0, it is easy to show that this
condition can only be satised if the embedding is holomorphic, that is x a = x a(), independent

of . the condition then further reduces to

(4) = i

(7.7)

which, given that the spinor has denite chirality in eleven dimensions as well as on the calabiyau
space, implies that 11 = , compatible with the global orbifold quotient condition. thus, nally,

we see that only half of the eight killing spinors, namely those satisfying (7.7), lead to preserved

supersymmetries on the ve-brane. consequently the low-energy four-dimensional theory describing
the ve-brane dynamics will have n = 1 supersymmetry.

the simplest excitations on the ve-brane surviving in the low-energy four-dimensional eective

theory are the moduli describing the position of the ve-brane in eleven dimensions. there is a
single modulus x 11 giving the position of the brane in the orbifold interval.
in addition, there
is the moduli space of holomorphic curves c2 in x describing the position of the brane in the
calabiyau space. this moduli space is generally complicated, and we will not address its detailed

structure here. (as an example, the moduli space of genus one curves in k3 is k3 itself [69].)

however, we note that these moduli are scalars in four dimensions, and we expect them to arrange

themselves as a set of chiral multiplets, with a complex structure presumably inherited from that

of the calabiyau manifold.

now let us consider the reduction of the self-dual three-form degrees of freedom. (here we are

essentially repeating a discussion given in [78, 79].) the holomorphic curve is a riemann surface

and, so, is characterized by its genus g. one recalls that the number of independent harmonic

one-forms on a riemann surface is given by 2g. in addition, there is the harmonic volume two-form
. thus, if we decompose the ve-brane world-volume as c2 m4, we can expand h in zero modes
as

h = da   + f u  u + h

(7.8)

where u are a basis u = 1, . . . , 2g of harmonic one-forms on c2, while the four-dimensional elds
are a scalar a, 2g u (1) vector elds f u = dau and a three-form eld strength h = db. however, not
all these elds are independent because of the self-duality condition h = h. rather, one easily
concludes that

h = da

45

(7.9)

and, hence, that the four-dimensional scalar a and two-form b describe the same degree of freedom.

to analyze the vector elds, we introduce the matrix tu

v dened by

u = tu

vv

(7.10)

if we choose the basis u such that the moduli space metric rc2
u  (v) is the unit matrix, t
is antisymmetric and, of course, t 2 = 1. the self-duality constraint implies for the vector elds
that

if we choose a basis for f u such that

f u = tv

u  f v .

t = diag   0

1

1 0 ! , . . . ,  0

1 0 !!

1

(7.11)

(7.12)

with g two by two blocks on the diagonal, one easily concludes that only g of the 2g vector elds
are independent. in conclusion, for a genus g curve c2, we have found one scalar and g u (1) vector
elds from the two-form on the ve-brane worldvolume. the scalar has to pair with another scalar
to form a chiral n = 1 multiplet. the only other universal scalar available is the zero mode of the
transverse coordinate x 11 in the orbifold direction.

thus, in general, the n = 1 low-energy theory of a single ve-brane wrapped on a genus g
holomorphic curve c2 has gauge group u (1)g with g u (1) vector multiplets and a universal chiral
multiplet with bosonic elds (a, x 11). furthermore, there is some number of additional chiral
multiplets describing the moduli space of the curve c2 in the calabiyau three-fold.

it is well known that when two regions of the ve-brane world-volume in mtheory come into

close proximity, new massless states appear [50, 57]. these are associated with membranes stretch-

ing between the two nearly overlapping ve-brane surfaces. in general, this can lead to enhancement

of the gauge symmetry. let us now consider this possibility, heretofore ignored in our discussion. in

general, one can consider two types of brane degeneracy where parts of the ve-brane world-volumes

are in close proximity. the rst, and simplest, is to have n distinct but coincident ve-branes,
all wrapping the same cycle c2 in the calabiyau space and all located at the same point in the
orbifold interval. here, the new massless states come from membranes stretching between the dis-

tinct ve-brane world-volumes. the second, and more complicated, situation is where there is a
degeneracy of the embedding of a single ve-brane, such that parts of the curve c2 become close
together in the calabiyau space. in this case, the new states come from membranes stretching

between dierent parts of the same ve-brane world-volume. these two situations were studied
in [6]. summarizing the two cases, we found that for n ve-branes wrapping the same curve c2 of
genus g, we expect that the symmetry is enhanced from n copies of u (1)g to u (n )g. alternatively

46

in the second case, even for a single brane, we can get enhancement if the embedding degenerates.
in general, u (1)g enhances to a product of unitary groups such that the total rank is equal to g.

the maximal enhancement is presumably to su (g + 1), and the other allowed groups correspond to

dierent higgsings of su (g + 1) by elds in the adjoint repesentation. for example, if g = 2, then
su (3) could be broken to either su (2)  u (1) or u (1)  u (1). in all cases, the total rank of the
symmetry group is conserved. finally, we note that in the case where the calabiyau space itself

degenerates to become a singular orbifold, and the ve-branes are wrapped at the singularity, we

could expect more exotic enhancement, in particular, to gauge groups other than unitary groups.

in this paper, however, we will restrict ourselves to the case of smooth calabiyau spaces.

7.3 low energy eective actions

next, we would like to discuss the ve-dimensional eective actions that result from the reduction

of horavawitten theory on a background that includes ve-branes. it has already been explained

in section 3.2 how the vacua without ve-branes found in this paper can be used to construct a

sensible ve-dimensional theory. essentially the same arguments apply here. we begin with the

ve-dimensional bulk theory. clearly, the zero-mode content is unchanged with respect to the case
without ve-branes. thus we have n = 1 supergravity coupled to h1,1  1 vector multiplets and
h2,1 + 1 hypermultiplets. what about the gauging of the hypermultiplet coset space? inserting the
massless modes (5.38) into eq. (5.32) and calculating g(1) via eq. (5.24) one nds

in the interval

g(1) =

1
2v

(i0)

n

xm=0

(m),i0 (z)

zn  |z|  zn+1

for xed n, where n = 0, . . . , n , and as in eqn. (6.6) we have introduced the parameters

(m)
i0

=

2s


(m)
i0

(7.13)

(7.14)

(7.15)

to conform with the notation of [4, 5]. hence, we still have a non-zero mode that must be taken into

account in the dimensional reduction. its form, however, depends on the interval one is considering.

consequently, the ve-dimensional action again contains a term of the form (6.9), but with i0 being
for the interval zn  |z|  zn+1. in other words, we have gauging in the
bulk between each two ve-branes but the gauge charge diers from interval to interval. since

replaced by pn

m=0 (m)
i0

the bulk potential (6.12) is directly related to the gauging, it is subject to a similar replacement of

charges. in summary, we conclude that the bulk theory between any pair of neighboring ve-branes

in the interval zn  |z|  zn+1 is as given in ref. [4, 5], but with i0 replaced by pn

47

m=0 (m)
i0

.

we now turn to the orbifold planes. they are described by four-dimensional n = 1 theories at
x11 = 0,  coupled to the bulk. the zero mode spectrum on these planes is, of course, unchanged

with respect to the situation without ve-branes. it consists of gauge multiplets corresponding to
the unbroken gauge groups g(1) and g(2), as dictated by the choice of the internal gauge bundle,

and corresponding gauge matter multiplets. the height of the boundary potentials (see eqn. (6.15))
is now set by the charges (0)
i0
are no longer necessarily equal and opposite.

which, due the presence of additional ve-brane charges,

and (n +1)

i0

finally, we should consider the worldvolume theories of the three-branes that originate from

wrapping the ve-branes around supersymmetric cycles. applying the results of the previous
subsection to each of the n ve-branes, we have n additional four-dimensional n = 1 theories at
x11 = x1, . . . , xn which couple to the ve-dimensional bulk. the eld content of such a theory at
x11 = xn for n = 1, . . . , n is generically given by u (1)gn gauge multiplets, where gn is the genus of
the holomorphic curve on which the n-th ve-brane is wrapped, a universal chiral multiplet and a

number of additional chiral multiplets describing the moduli space of the holomorphic curve within

the calabiyau manifold. by the mechanisms described at the end of the previous subsection,
the u (1)gn gauge groups can be enhanced to non-abelian groups. as the simplest example, two
ve-branes located at x11 = xn and x11 = xn+1 could be wrapped on the same calabiyau cycle
with genus gn. as long as two ve-branes are separated in the orbifold, that is, xn+1 6= xn, we have
two gauge groups u (1)gn, one group on each brane. however, when the two ve-branes coincide,
that is, for xn+1 = xn, these groups are enhanced to u (2)gn . the precise form of the three-brane
world-volume theories should be obtained by a reduction of the ve-brane world-volume theory on

the holomorphic curves, in a target space background of the undeformed calabiyau space together

with the non-zero mode for the four-form eld strength. we expect those three-brane theories to

have a potential depending on the moduli living on the three-brane and the projection of the bulk

moduli to the three-brane world-volume. this expectation is in analogy with the theories on the

orbifold planes which, as we have seen, possess such a potential. it has been shown in ref. [4, 5]

that those boundary potentials provide the source terms for a bps double-domain wall solution of

the ve-dimensional theory in the absence of additional ve-branes. this double domain wall is the

appropriate background for a further reduction to four dimensions. again, in analogy, we expect

the vacuum of the ve-dimensional theory in the presence of ve-branes to be a bps multi-domain

wall. more precisely, for n ve-branes, we expect n + 2 domain walls with two world-volumes

stretching across the orbifold planes and the remaining n stretching across the three-brane planes.

the role of the potentials on the three-brane world-volume theories is to provide the n additional

source terms needed to support such a solution.

let us nally discuss some consequences for the four-dimensional eective theory. clearly, there
is a sector of the theory which has just the conventional eld content of four-dimensional n = 1

48

low-energy supergravities derived from string theory. more precisely, this is h1,1 + h2,1 chiral matter
multiplets containing the moduli, gauge multiplets with gauge group g(1)  g(2)  e8  e8 and
corresponding gauge matter. in the presence of ve-branes, however, we have additional sectors of

the four-dimensional theory leading to additional chiral multiplets containing the ve-brane moduli

and, even more important, to gauge multiplets with generic gauge group

g =

n

yn=1

u (1)gn .

(7.16)

at specic points in the ve-brane moduli space, one expects enhancement to a non-abelian group
g = g1    gm . as explained above, in typical cases, the factors gm can be u (n) and su (n)
groups. we expect the enhancement to preserve the rank, that is, we have

rank(g) =

gn .

n

xn=1

(7.17)

we recall that gn is the genus of the curve on which the n-th ve-brane is wrapped. as it stands,
it appears that the rank could be made arbitrarily large. however, for a given calabiyau space,

we expect a constraint on the rank which originates from positivity constraints in the the zero-

cohomology condition (5.17). as is, the ve-brane sectors and the conventional sector of the theory

only interact via the bulk supergravity elds. therefore, at this point, they are most naturally

interpreted as hidden sectors.

we should, however, point out that the presence of ve-branes provides considerably more exi-
bility in the choice of g(1) g(2), the conventional gauge group that originates from the heterotic
e8  e8. this happens because it is much simpler to satisfy the zero cohomology condition (5.17)
in the presence of ve-branes. let us give an an example which is illuminating, although not neces-
sary physically relevant. consider a calabiyau space x with topologically nontrivial trr  r. in
addition, we set both e8 gauge eld backgrounds to zero, which implies that the unbroken gauge
group is simply e8  e8. without ve-branes, such a background is inconsistent since it is in
conict with the zero-cohomology condition (5.17). however, if for each independent four-cycle
c4i0, we can introduce ni0 ve-branes, each having unit intersection number with the cycle c4i0,
such that

ni0 = 

1

82 zc4i0

trr  r

(7.18)

then the zero-cohomology condition is satised. of course, the gauge group will then be enlarged
to e8  e8  g where the gauge group g originates from the ve-branes, as discussed above.

what about the form of the four-dimensional eective action? we have seen that non-standard

embedding without ve-branes does not change the form of the eective action with respect to the

standard embedding case. this could be understood as a direct consequence of the fact that the

49

ve-dimensional eective theory remains unchanged. above we have seen, however, that the ve-

dimensional eective theory does change in the presence of ve-branes. in particular, its vacuum

bps solution is now a multi-domain wall, as opposed to a double-domain wall in the case without

ve-branes. hence, we expect the four-dimensional theory obtained as a reduction on this multi-

domain wall to change as well. let us, as an example of this, calculate the gauge kinetic functions

in four dimensions to linear order in s. here, we will not do this using the ve-dimensional theory
but, equivalently, reduce directly from eleven to four dimensions. we dene the modulus r for the

(7.19)

orbifold radius by

r =

1

2v zs1/z2xp7g .

note that with this denition, r measures the averaged orbifold size in units of 2. let us also
introduce the (1, 1) moduli ai0 in the usual way as

ab = ai0i0ab .

then, the real parts of the low energy elds s and t i are given by

re(s) = v ,

re(t i0) = v r1ai0 .

(7.20)

(7.21)

we stress that with these denitions, s and t i0 have the standard kahler potential, that is, the

order s corrections to the kahler potential vanish [13]. the gauge kinetic functions can be directly
read o from the 10dimensional yangmills actions (6.15). using the metric from eq. (5.24) with

(5.38), (5.32) inserted and the above denition of the moduli, we nd

f (1) = s + st i0

f (2) = s + st i0

(1  zn)2(n)

i0

zn

2(n)
i0

,

(7.22)

(7.23)

n +1

n +1

xn=0
xn=1

where, in addition, we have the cohomology constraint (5.37). recall from eq. (6.16) that in the case

without ve-branes, the threshold correction on the two orbifold planes are identical but opposite in

sign. note that here the expressions for these two thresholds are, in fact, dierent. the possiblity

of such an asymmetry due to vebranes has also been suggested in ref. [80]. if, for example, there
is only one ve-brane with charges (1)
i0

at z = z1 on the orbifold, we have

f (1)  f (2) = 2s t i0h(0)

i0

i0 i .
+ (1  z1)(1)

(7.24)

we see that the gauge thresholds on the orbifold planes depend on both the position and the charges

of the additional ve-branes in the bulk. this gives considerably more freedom than in the case

without ve-branes. in particular, for special choices of the charges and the ve-brane position,

the dierence of the gauge kinetic functions can be small. thus, for instance, the hidden gauge

coupling at the physical point need not be as large as it was in the case without ve-branes.

50

lecture 3: holomorphic vector bundles and non-perturbative vacua

as discussed in lecture 2, the results of [6] indicated the importance of heterotic m -theories

with non-standard embeddings and non-perturbative vacua, but did not actually construct such

theories. this shortcoming was rectied in [7], where explicit constructions were carried out within

the context of holomorphic vector bundles on the orbifold planes of heterotic m -theory compactied

on elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds which admit a section. the results of [7] rely upon

recent mathematical work by friedman, morgan and witten [81], donagi [82] and bershadsky,

johansen, pantev and sadov [83] who show how to explicitly construct such vector bundles, and

on results of [84, 85] who computed the family generation index in this context. extending these

results, we were able to formulate rules for constructing three-family particle physics theories with

phenomenologically interesting gauge groups. as expected, the appearance of gauge groups other

than the e6 group of the standard embedding, as well as the three-family condition, necessitate the
existence of m 5-branes and, hence, non-perturbative vacua. in [7], we showed how to compute the

topological class of these ve-branes and, given this class, how to construct the moduli spaces of

the associated holomorphic curves. our results were presented as a set of rules in [7]. in addition,

we gave one concrete example of a three-family model with gauge group su (5), along with its

ve-brane class and a discussion of the moduli space of that class.

in [8], we greatly enlarged the discussion of the results in [7], deriving in detail the rules

presented there. in order to make this work more accessible to physicists, as well as to lay the

foundation for the necessary derivations and proofs, we presented brief discussions of 1. elliptically

bered calabiyau threefolds, 2. spectral cover constructions of both u (n) and su (n) bundles,

3. chern classes and 4. complex surfaces, specically del pezzo, hirzebruch and enriques surfaces.

using this background, we explicitly derived the rules for the construction of three-family models

based on semi-stable holomorphic vector bundles with structure group su (n). specically, we

constructed the form of the ve-brane class [w ], as well as the constraints imposed on this class

by the three-family condition, the restriction that the vector bundle have structure group su (n)

and the requirement that [w ] be an eective class. from these considerations, we derived a set of

rules. as discussed in that paper, elliptically bered calabiyau threefolds that admit a section

can only have del pezzo, hirzebruch, enriques and blown-up hirzebruch surfaces as a base. we

showed, however, that enriques surfaces can never lead to eective ve-brane curves in vacua with

three generations. therefore, the base b of the elliptic bration is restricted to be a del pezzo,

hirzebruch or a blow-up of a hirzebruch surface. in appendix b of [8], we presented the generators

of all eective classes in h2(b, z), as well as the rst and second chern classes c1(b) and c2(b), for
these allowed bases. combining the rules with the generators and chern classes given in appendix

b, we presented a general algorithm for the construction of non-perturbative vacua corresponding

to three-family particle physics theories with phenomenologically relevant gauge groups. in this

51

lecture, we review the results of [8], referring the reader frequently to appendix b of that paper

for the necessary details.

8 holomorphic gauge bundles, five-branes and

non-perturbative vacua

in this section, we will briey review the generic properties of heterotic m theory vacua appropriate
for a reduction of the theory to n = 1 supersymmetric theories in both ve and four dimensions.
as discussed in lecture 1, the m theory vacuum is given in eleven dimensions by specifying the

metric gij and the three-form cijk with eld strength gijkl = 24[i cjkl] of the supergravity
multiplet. following horava and witten [1, 2] and witten [3], the space-time structure of these
vacua, to lowest order in the expansion parameter 2/3, will be taken to be

m11 = m4  s1/z2  x

(8.1)

where m4 is four-dimensional minkowski space, s1/z2 is a one-dimensional orbifold and x is a
smooth calabiyau three-fold. the vacuum space-time structure becomes more complicated at
the next order in 2/3, but, as discussed in the previous two lectures, this metric deformation,

which has been the subject of a number of papers [3, 10, 13], can be viewed as arising as the static

vacuum of the ve-dimensional eective theory [4, 5] and, hence, need not concern us here.

the z2 orbifold projection necessitates the introduction, on each of the two ten-dimensional
orbifold xed planes, of an n = 1, e8 yang-mills supermultiplet which is required for anomaly
cancellation. on each plane, the gauge eld structure of these vacua, called the gauge bundle,

must be a solution of the hermitian yangmills equations for an e8-valued connection in order
to be compatible with four preserved supercharges in four dimensions. equivalently, as shown by

donaldson, uhlenbeck and yau [86, 87], each gauge bundle must be a semi-stable, holomorphic

bundle with the structure group being the complexication e8c of e8. in the following, we will
denote both groups by e8, letting context dictate which group is being referred to. (in general, we
will denote any group g and its complexication gc simply as g). these semi-stable, holomorphic

gauge bundles are, a priori, allowed to be arbitrary in all other respects. in particular, there is

no requirement that the spin-connection of the calabiyau three-fold be embedded into an su (3)

subgroup of the gauge connection of one of the e8 bundles, the so-called standard embedding.
this generalization to arbitrary semi-stable holomorphic gauge bundles is what is referred to as

non-standard embedding. the terms standard and non-standard embedding are historical and

somewhat irrelevant in the context of m -theory, where no choice of embedding can ever set the

entire three-form to zero. for this reason, we will avoid those terms and simply refer to arbitrary

semi-stable holomorphic e8 gauge bundles. since these bundles can be chosen arbitrarily, it is

52

clear that we can restrict the transition functions to be elements of any subgroup g of e8, such as
g = u (n), su (n) or sp(n). we will refer to the restricted bundle as a semi-stable, holomorphic

g bundle, or simply as a g bundle. it is clear that the g1 bundle on one orbifold plane and the
g2 bundle on the other plane need not, generically, have the same subgroups g1 and g2 of e8.
we will denote the semi-stable holomorphic gauge bundle on the i-th orbifold plane by vi and the
associated structure group by gi.

in addition, as discussed in [6, 7], we will allow for the presence of ve-branes located at points
throughout the orbifold interval. the ve-branes will preserve n = 1 supersymmetry provided they
are wrapped on holomorphic two-cycles within x and otherwise span the at minkowski space m4.
the inclusion of ve-branes is essential for a complete discussion of m theory vacua. the reason

for this is that, given a calabiyau three-fold background, the presence of ve-branes allows one

to construct large numbers of gauge bundles that would otherwise be disallowed [6, 7].

the requirements of gauge and gravitational anomaly cancellation on the two orbifold xed

planes, as well as anomaly cancellation on each ve-brane worldvolume, places a further very

strong constraint on, and relationship between, the space-time manifold, the gauge bundles and

the ve-brane structure of the vacuum. specically, anomaly cancellation necessitates the addition

of four-forms sources to the four-form eld strength bianchi identity. as discussed in lecture 2,

the modied bianchi identity is given by

(dg)11 i j k l = 22(


4

2

3 [j (0)(x11) +

)

j (n +1)(x11  ) + n

n=1j (n)((x11  xn) + (x11 + xn))] i j k l

the sources j (0) and j (n +1) on the orbifold planes are

and

j (0) = 

1
8

(trf (1)  f (1) 

1
2

trr  r)|x11=0

j (n +1) = 

1
82 (trf (2)  f (2) 

1
2

trr  r)|x11=

(8.2)

(8.3)

(8.4)

respectively. by tr we mean 1
30 -th of the trace over the generators in the 248 representation of
e8. the two-form f (i) is the eld strength of a connection on the gauge bundle vi of the i-
th orbifold plane and r is the curvature two-form on the calabi-yau three-fold. we have also
introduced n additional sources j (n), where n = 1, ..., n . these arise from n ve-branes located
at x11 = x1, ..., xn where 0  x1    xn  . note that each ve-brane at x = xn has to be
paired with a mirror ve-brane at x = xn with the same source since the bianchi identity must
be even under the z2 orbifold symmetry. our normalization is chosen so that the total source of
each pair is j (n).

53

non-zero source terms on the right hand side of the bianchi identity (8.2) preclude the simulta-

neous vanishing of all components of the three-form cijk. the result of this is that, to next order
in the horavawitten expansion parameter 2/3, the space-time of the supersymmetry preserving

vacua gets deformed away from that given in expression (8.1). as discussed above, this deforma-

tion of the vacuum need not concern us here. in this lecture, we will focus on yet another aspect of

bianchi identity (8.2), a topological condition that constrains the cohomology of the vacuum. this

constraint is found as follows. consider integrating the bianchi identity (8.2) over any ve-cycle
which spans the orbifold interval together with an arbitrary four-cycle c4 in the calabi-yau three-
fold. since dg is exact, this integral must vanish. physically, this is the statement that there can

be no net charge in a compact space, since there is nowhere for the ux to escape. performing

the integral over the orbifold interval, we derive, using (8.2), that

n +1

n=0 zc4

j (n) = 0

(8.5)

hence, the total magnetic charge over c4 vanishes. since this is true for an arbitrary four-cycle c4
in the calabi-yau three-fold, it follows that the sum of the sources must be cohomologically trivial.

that is

[n +1

n=0 j (n)] = 0

(8.6)

the physical meaning of this expression becomes more transparent if we rewrite it using equations

(8.3) and (8.4). using these expressions, equation (8.6) becomes

1
82 trf (1)  f (1)]  [

1
82 trf (2)  f (2)] + [

[

1
82 trr  r] + n

n=1[j (n)] = 0

(8.7)

it is useful to recall that the second chern class of an arbitrary g bundle v , thought of as an e8
sub-bundle, is dened to be

c2(v ) = [

1

2  82 trf f  f ]

(8.8)

similarly, the second chern class of the tangent bundle of the calabi-yau manifold x is given by

c2(t x) = [

1

2  82 tr6r  r]

(8.9)

where tr6 implies that the trace is taken over the vector representation of so(6)  su (3), that is,
the usual tangent space representation. it follows that expression (8.7) can be written as

where

c2(v1) + c2(v2) + [w ] = c2(t x)

[w ] = n

n=1[j (n)]

54

(8.10)

(8.11)

is the four-form cohomology class associated with the ve-branes. this is a fundamental constraint

imposed on the vacuum structure. we will explore this cohomology condition in great detail in this
lecture. note that integrating this constraint over an arbitrary four-cycle c4 yields the expression

n1(c4) + n2(c4) + n5(c4) = nr(c4)

(8.12)

which states that the sum of the number of gauge instantons on the two orbifold planes, plus

the sum of the ve-brane magnetic charges, must equal the instanton number for the calabi-yau

tangent bundle, a number which is xed once the calabi-yau three-fold is chosen.

to summarize, we are considering vacuum states of m theory with the following structure.

 space-time is taken to have the form

m11 = m4  s1/z2  x

(8.13)

where x is a calabi-yau three-fold.

 there is a semi-stable holomorphic gauge bundle vi with ber group gi  e8 over the calabi-
yau three-fold on the i-th orbifold xed plane for i = 1, 2. the structure groups g1 and g2
of the two bundles can be any subgroups of e8 and need not be the same.

 we allow for the presence of ve-branes in the vacuum, which are wrapped on holomorphic

two-cycles within x.

 the calabi-yau three-fold, the gauge bundles and the ve-branes are subject to the cohomo-

logical constraint

c2(v1) + c2(v2) + [w ] = c2(t x)

(8.14)

where c2(vi) and c2(t x) are the second chern classes of the gauge bundle vi and the tangent
bundle t x respectively and [w ] is the class associated with the ve-branes .

vacua of this type will be referred to as non-perturbative heterotic m-theory vacua.

the discussion given in this section is completely generic, in that it applies to any calabi-yau

three-fold and any gauge bundles that can be constructed over it. however, realistic particle physics

theories require the explicit construction of these gauge bundles. in the following, we will review

the formalism for the construction of semi-stable holomorphic gauge bundles with ber groups g1
and g2 over the two orbifold xed planes. for specicity, we will restrict the structure groups to
be

gi = u (ni) or su (ni)

(8.15)

55

for i = 1, 2. our explicit bundle constructions will be achieved over the restricted, but rich, set

of elliptically bered calabi-yau three-folds which admit a section. such three-folds have been

extensively discussed within the context of duality between m - and f -theory. independently of

this usage, however, elliptically bered calabi-yau three-folds with a section are known to be the

simplest calabi-yau spaces on which one can explicitly construct bundles, compute chern classes,

moduli spaces and so on. this latter property makes them a compelling choice for the construction

of concrete particle physics theories. having constructed the bundles, one can explicitly calculate

the gauge bundle chern classes c2(vi) for i = 1, 2, as well as the tangent bundle chern class c2(t x).
having done so, one can then nd the class [w ] of the ve-branes using the cohomology condition

(8.10). that is, we will present a formalism in which the entire structure of non-perturbative

m theory vacua can be calculated.

as will be discussed in detail below, having constructed a non-perturbative vacuum, we can

compute the number of low energy families and the yang-mills gauge group associated with that

vacuum. we will show that, because of the exibility introduced by the presence of ve-branes,

we will easily construct non-perturbative vacua with three-families. similarly, one easily nds

phenomenologically interesting gauge groups, such as e6, su (5) and so(10), as the e8 subgroups
commutant with the g-bundle structure groups, such as su (3), su (4) and su (5) respectively, on

the observable orbifold xed plane. in addition, using the cohomology constraint (8.10), one can

explicitly determine the cohomology class [w ] of the ve-branes for a specic vacuum. hence, one

can compute the holomorphic curve associated with the ve-branes exactly and determine all of

its geometrical attributes. these include its the number of its irreducible components, which in

turn tells us how many independent ve-branes appear in ve-dimensions, and its genus, which

will tell us the minimal gauge group on the ve-brane worldvolume when dimensionally reduced

on the holomorphic curve. furthermore, we are, in general, able to compute the entire moduli

space of the holomorphic curve. this can tell us about gauge group enhancement on the ve-brane

worldvolume, for example. in [7], we discussed the generic properties of the holomorphic curves

associated with ve-branes. we presented a more detailed discussion in [9].

9 elliptically fibered calabiyau three-folds

as discussed previously, we will consider non-perturbative vacua where the calabiyau threefold

is an elliptic bration which admits a section. in this section, we give an introduction to these

spaces, summarizing the properties we will need in order to explicitly compute important aspects

of the vacua.

an elliptically bered calabiyau threefold x consists of a base b, which is a complex two

56

surface, and an analytic map

 : x  b

with the property that for a generic point b  b, the ber

eb = 1(b)

(9.1)

(9.2)

is an elliptic curve. that is, eb is a riemann surface of genus one. in addition, we will require that
there exist a global section, denoted , dened to be an analytic map

 : b  x

(9.3)

that assigns to every point b  b the zero element (b) = p  eb discussed below. the requirement
that the elliptic bration have a section is crucial for duality to f -theory and to make contact with

the chern class formulas in [81]. however, this assumption does not seem fundamentally essential

and we will explore bundles without sections in future work [88]. the calabiyau three-fold must

be a complex kahler manifold. this implies that the base is itself a complex manifold, while we have

already assumed that the ber is a riemann surface and so has a complex structure. furthermore,

the bration must be holomorphic, that is, it must have holomorphic transition functions. finally,

the condition that the calabiyau three-fold has vanishing rst chern class puts a further constraint

on the types of bration allowed.

let us start by briey summarizing the properties of an elliptic curve e.

it is a genus one
riemann surface and so can be embedded in the two-dimensional complex projective space cp2.

a simple way to do this is by using the homogeneous weierstrass equation

zy2 = 4x3  g2xz2  g3z3

(9.4)

where x, y and z are complex homogeneous coordinates on cp2.

it follows that we identify

(x, y, z) with (x, y, z) for any non-zero complex number . the parameters g2 and g3 encode
the dierent complex structures one can put on the torus. provided z 6= 0, we can rescale to ane
coordinates where z = 1. we then see, viewed as a map from x to y, that there are two branch
cuts in the x-plane, linking x =  and the three roots of the cubic equation 4x3  g2x  g3 = 0.
when any two of these points coincide, the elliptic curve becomes singular. this corresponds to

one of the cycles in the torus shrinking to zero. such singular behaviour is characterized by the

discriminant

 = g3

2  27g2

3

(9.5)

vanishing. finally, we note that the complex structure provides a natural notion of addition of

points on the elliptic curve. the torus can also be considered as the complex plane modulo a

57

discrete group of translations. addition of points in the complex plane then induces a natural

notion of addition of points on the torus. translated to the weierstrass equation, the identity

element corresponds to the point where x/z and y/z become innite. thus, in ane coordinates,
the element p  e is the point x = y = . this can be scaled elsewhere in non-ane coordinates,
such as to x = z = 0, y = 1.

the elliptic bration is dened by giving the elliptic curve e over each point in the base b. if

we assume the bration has a global section, and in this lecture we do, then on each coordinate

patch this requires giving the parameters g2 and g3 in the weierstrass equation as functions on the
base. globally, g2 and g3 will be sections of appropriate line bundles on b. in fact, specifying the
type of an elliptic bration over b is equivalent to specifying a line bundle on b. given the elliptic
bration  : x  b, we dene l as the line bundle on b whose ber at b  b is the cotangent
line tp(eb) to the elliptic curve at the origin. that is, l is the conormal bundle to the section (b)
in x. conversely, given l, we take x and y to scale as sections of l2 and l3 respectively, which
means that g2 and g3 should be sections of l4 and l6. by li we mean the tensor product of the
line bundle l with itself i times. in conclusion, we see that the elliptic bration is characterized
by a line bundle l over the base b together with a choice of sections g2 and g3 of l4 and l6.

note that the set of points in the base over which the bration becomes singular is given by

the vanishing of the discriminant  = g3
3. it follows from the above discussion that  is a
section of the line bundle l12. the zeros of  then naturally dene a divisor, which in this case is
a complex curve, in the base. since  is a section of l12, the cohomology class of the discriminant
curve is 12 times the cohomology class of the divisors dened by sections of l.

2  27g2

finally, we come to the important condition that on a calabiyau threefold x the rst chern

class of the tangent bundle tx must vanish. the canonical bundle kx is the line bundle constructed
as the determinant of the holomorphic cotangent bundle of x. the condition that

c1(tx ) = 0

(9.6)

implies that kx = o, where o is the trivial bundle. this, in turn, puts a constraint on l. to see
this, note that the adjunction formula tells us that, since b is a divisor of x, the canonical bundle

kb of b is given by

kb = kx|b  nb/x

where nb/x is the normal bundle of b in x. from the above discussion, we know that

inserting this into (9.7) and switching to additive notation tells us that

n1
b/x = l,

kx|b = o

l = k1

b

58

(9.7)

(9.8)

(9.9)

b and k6

this condition means that k4
b must have sections g2 and g3 respectively. furthermore,
the calabiyau property imposes restrictions on how the curves where these sections vanish are
allowed to intersect. it is possible to classify the surfaces on which k4
b have such sections.
these are found to be [89] the del pezzo, hirzebruch and enriques surfaces, as well as blow-ups of

b and k6

hirzebruch surfaces. in this lecture, we will discuss the rst three possibilities in detail.

as noted previously, in order to discuss the anomaly cancellation condition, we will need the

second chern class of the holomorphic tangent bundle of x. friedman, morgan and witten [81]

show that it can be written in terms of the chern classes of the holomorphic tangent bundle of b

as

c2(t x) = c2(b) + 11c1(b)2 + 12c1(b)

(9.10)

where the wedge product is understood, c1(b) and c2(b) are the rst and second chern classes of
b respectively and  is the two-form poincare dual to the global section. we have used the fact

that

in writing (9.10).

c1(l) = c1(k1

b ) = c1(b)

(9.11)

10 spectral cover constructions

in this section, we follow the construction of holomorphic bundles on elliptically bered calabiyau

manifolds presented in [81, 82, 83]. the idea is to understand the bundle structure on a given

elliptic ber and then to patch these bundles together over the base. the authors in [81, 82, 83]

discuss a number of techniques for constructing bundles with dierent gauge groups. here we

will restrict ourselves to u (n) and su (n) sub-bundles of e8. these are sucient to give suitable
phenomenological gauge groups. this restriction allows us to consider only the simplest of the

dierent constructions, namely that via spectral covers.

in this section, we will summarize the

spectral cover construction, concentrating on the properties necessary for an explicit discussion of
non-perturbative vacua. we note that for structure groups g 6= u (n) or su (n), the construction
of bundles is more complicated than the construction of rank n vector bundles presented here.

as we have already mentioned, the condition of supersymmetry requires that the e8 gauge
bundles admit a eld strength satisfying the hermitian yangmills equations. donaldson, uhlen-

beck and yau [86, 87] have shown that this is equivalent to the topological requirement that the

associated bundle be semi-stable, with transition functions in the complexication of the gauge

group. since we are considering u (n) and su (n) sub-bundles, this means u (n)c = gl(n, c) and

su (n)c = sl(n, c) respectively. the spectral cover construction is given in terms of this latter

59

formulation of the supersymmetry condition. note that the distinction between semi-stable and

stable bundles corresponds to whether the hermitian yang-mills eld strength is reducible or not.

this refers to whether, globally, it can be diagonalized into parts coming from dierent subgroups

of the full gauge group. more precisely, it refers to whether or not the holonomy commutes with

more that just the center of the group. usually, a generic solution of the hermitian yangmills

equations corresponds to a stable bundle. however, on some spaces, for instance on an elliptic

curve, the generic case is semi-stable.

u(n) and su(n) bundles over an elliptic curve

we begin by considering semi-stable bundles on a single elliptic curve e. a theorem of looijenga [90]

states that the moduli space of such bundles for any simply-connected group of rank r is an

r-dimensional complex weighted projective space. for the simply-connected group su (n), this
moduli space is the projective space cpn1. u (n) is not simply-connected. u (n) bundles have a
discrete integer invariant, their degree or rst chern class, which we denote by d. let k be the

greatest common divisor of d and n. it can be shown that the moduli space of a u (n) bundle of
degree d over a single elliptic curve e is the k-th symmetric product of e, denoted by e[k]. in

this lecture, we will restrict our discussion to u (n) bundles of degree zero. for these bundles, the
moduli space is e[n].

a holomorphic u (n)c = gl(n, c) bundle v over an elliptic curve e is a rank n complex vector

bundle. as discussed earlier, we will denote u (n)c simply as u (n), letting context dictate which

group is being referred to. to dene the bundle, we need to specify the holonomy; that is, how

the bundle twists as one moves around in the elliptic curve. the holonomy is a map from the

fundamental group 1 of the elliptic curve into the gauge group. since the fundamental group of
the torus is abelian, the holonomy must map into the maximal torus of the gauge group. this

means we can diagonalize all the transition functions, so that v becomes the direct sum of line

bundles

v = n1    nn

(10.1)

furthermore, the weyl group permutes the diagonal elements, so that v only determines the
ordering of the ni up to permutations. to reduce from a u (n) bundle to an su (n) bundle, one
imposes the additional condition that the determinant of the transition functions be taken to be

unity. this implies that the product

n1    nn = o

(10.2)

where o is the trivial bundle on e.

the semi-stable condition implies that the line bundles ni are of the same degree, which can be
taken to be zero. we can understand this from the hermitian yangmills equations. on a riemann

60

surface, these equations imply that the eld strength is actually zero. thus, the rst chern class
of each of the bundles ni must vanish, or equivalently be of degree zero. on an elliptic curve, this
condition means that there is a unique point qi on e such that there is a meromorphic section of
ni which vanishes only at qi and has a simple pole only at the origin p. we can write this as

ni = o(qi)  o(p)1

(10.3)

if one further restricts the structure group to be su (n), then condition (10.2) translates into the

requirement that

n

xi=1

(qi  p) = 0

(10.4)

where one uses the natural addition of points on e discussed above.

thus, on a given elliptic curve, giving a semi-stable u (n) bundle is equivalent to giving an

unordered (because of the weyl symmetry) n-tuple of points on the curve. an su (n) bundle has

the further restriction that pi(qi  p) = 0. for an su (n) bundle, these points can be represented

very explicitly as roots of an equation in the weierstrass coordinates describing the elliptic curve.

in ane coordinates, where z = 1, we write

s = a0 + a2x + a3y + a4x2 + a5x2y +  + anxn/2

(10.5)

(if n is odd the last term is anx(n3)/2y.) solving the equation s = 0, together with the weierstrass
equation (hence the appearance of only linear terms in y in s), gives n roots corresponding to the

n points qi, where one can show that pi(qi  p) = 0 as required. one notes that the roots are

determined by the coecients ai only up to an overall scale factor. thus the moduli space of roots
qi is the projective space cpn1 as anticipated, with the coecients ai acting as homogeneous
coordinates.

in summary, semi-stable u (n) bundles on an elliptic curve are described by an unordered n-tuple

of points qi on the elliptic curve. su (n) bundles have the additional condition thatpi(qip) = 0.

in the su (n) case, these points can be realized as roots of the equation s = 0 and give a moduli
space of bundles which is simply cpn1, as mentioned above.

the spectral cover and the line bundle n
given that a bundle on an elliptic curve is described by the n-tuple qi, it seems reasonable that a
bundle on an elliptic bration determines how the n points vary as one moves around the base b.

the set of all the n points over the base is called the spectral cover c and is an n-fold cover of b
with c : c  b. the spectral cover alone does not contain enough information to allow us to
construct the bundle v . to do this, one must specify an additional line bundle, denoted by n , on

61

the spectral cover c. one obtains n , given the vector bundle v , as follows. consider the elliptic
ber eb at any point b  b. it follows from the previous section that

v |eb = n1b  ...  nnb

(10.6)

where nib for i = 1, .., n are line bundles on eb.
in particular, we get a decomposition of the
ber v(b) of v at p = (b). let v |b be the restriction of v to the base b embedded in x via
the section . we have just shown that the n-dimensional bers of v |b come equipped with a
decomposition into a sum of lines. as point b moves around the base b, these n lines move in one
to one correspondence with the n points qi above b. this data species a unique line bundle 7
n on c such that the direct image cn is v |b with its given decomposition. the direct image
cn is a vector bundle on b whose ber at a generic point b, where the inverse image 1
c (b)
consists of the n distinct points qi, is the direct sum of the n lines n|qi.

construction of bundles

we are now in a a position to construct the rank n vector bundle starting with the spectral data
[81, 82, 83]. the spectral data consists of the spectral cover c  x together with the line bundle
n on c. the spectral cover is a divisor (hypersurface) c  x which is of degree n over the base
b; that is, the restriction c : c  b of the elliptic bration is an n-sheeted branched cover.
equivalently, the cohomology class of c in h 2(x, z) must be of the form

[c] = n + 

(10.7)

where  is a class in h 2(b, z) and  is the section. this is equivalent to saying that the line bundle
ox (c) on x determined by c, whose sections are meromorphic functions on x with simple poles
along c, is given by

ox (c) = ox (n)  m

(10.8)

where m is some line bundle on x whose restriction to each ber eb is of degree zero. written in
this formulation

 = c1(m)

(10.9)

the line bundle n is, at this point, completely arbitrary.

given this data, one can construct a rank n vector bundle v on x. it is easy to describe the
restriction v |b of v to the base b. it is simply the direct image v |b = cn . it is also easy to
describe the restriction of v to a general elliptic ber eb. let c  eb = 1
c (b) = q1 + . . . + qn
7when c is singular, n may be more generally a rank-1 torsion free sheaf on c. for non-singular c this is the

same as a line bundle.

62

and   eb = p. then each qi determines a line bundle ni of degree zero on eb whose sections are
the meromorphic functions on eb with rst order poles at qi which vanish at p. the restriction
v |eb is then the sum of the ni. now the main point is that there is a unique vector bundle v on
x with these specied restrictions to the base and the bers.

to describe the entire vector bundle v , we use the poincare bundle p. this is a line bundle
on the ber product x b x. here x is the dual bration to x. in general, this is another
elliptic bration which is locally, but not globally, isomorphic to x. however, when x has a section
(which we assume), then x and x are globally isomorphic, so we can identify them if we wish.
(actually, the spectral cover c lives most naturally as a hypersurface in the dual x, not in x.
when we described it above as living in x, we were implicitly using the identication of x and
x.) the ber product x b x is four-dimensional. it is bered over b, the ber over b  b
being the ordinary product eb  eb of the two bers. now, the poincare bundle p is determined
by the following two properties: (1) its restriction p|ebx to a ber eb  x, for x  eb, is the line
bundle on eb determined by x while (2) its restriction to  b x is the trivial bundle. explicitly,
p can be given by the bundle whose sections are meromorphic functions on x b x with rst
order poles on d and which vanish on  b x and on x b . that is
p = oxb x (d   b x  x b )  kb

(10.10)

where d is the diagonal divisor representing the graph of the isomorphism x  x.

using this poincare bundle, we can nally describe the entire vector bundle v in terms of the

spectral data. it is given by

v = p1(p2n  p)

(10.11)

here p1, p2 are the two projections of the ber product x b c onto the two factors x and c. the
two properties of the poincare bundle guarantee that the restrictions of this v to the base and the
bers indeed agree with the intuitive versions of vb and v |eb given above.

in general, this procedure produces u (n) bundles. in order to get su (n) bundles, two additional
conditions must hold. first, the condition that the line bundle m in equation (10.8) has degree
zero on each ber eb must be strengthened to require that the restriction of m to eb is the trivial
bundle. hence, m is the pullback to x of a line bundle on b which, for simplicity, we also denote
by m. this guarantees that the restrictions to the bers v |eb are su (n) bundles. the second
condition is that v |b must be an su (n) bundle as well. that is, the line bundle n on c is such that
the rst chern class c1 of the resulting bundle v vanishes. this condition, and its ramications,
will be discussed in the next section.

u (n) vector bundles on the orbifold planes of heterotic m -theory are always sub-bundles of

an e8 vector bundle. as such, issues arise concerning their stability or semi-stability which are

63

important and require considerable analysis. furthermore, the associated chern classes require an

extended analysis to compute. for these reasons, we will limit our discussion to su (n) bundles,

which are easier to study.

chern classes and restrictions on the bundle

as discussed above, the global condition that the bundle be su (n) is that

c1(v ) = (1/2)trf = 0

(10.12)

this condition is clearly true since, for structure group su (n), the trace must vanish. a formula

for c1(v ) can be extracted from the discussion in friedman, morgan and witten [81]. one nds
that

c1(v ) = c(cid:18)c1(n ) +

1
2

c1(c) 

1
2

c1(b)(cid:19)

(10.13)

where c1(b) means the rst chern class of the tangent bundle of b considered as a complex vector
bundle, and similarly for c, while c is the projection from the spectral cover onto b; that is,
c : c  b. the operators c and c are the pull-back and push-forward of cohomology classes
between b and c. the condition that c1(v ) is zero then implies that

c1(n ) = 

1
2

c1(c) +

1
2

cc1(b) + 

where  is some cohomology class satisfying the equation

the general solution for  constructed from cohomology classes is

c = 0

 =  (n  c + ncc1(b))

(10.14)

(10.15)

(10.16)

where  is a rational number and  is the global section of the elliptic bration. appropriate values

for  will emerge shortly. from (10.7) we recall that c1(c), which is given by

combining the last three equations yields

c1(c) = n  c

c1(n ) = n(cid:18) 1

2

+ (cid:19)  +(cid:18)1

2  (cid:19) c +(cid:18)1

2

(10.17)

(10.18)

+ n(cid:19) cc1(b)

essentially, this means that the bundle n is completely determined in terms of the elliptic bra-
tion and m.
it is important to note, however, that there is not always a solution for n . the
reason for this is that c1(n ) must be integer, a condition that puts a substantial constraint on the

64

allowed bundles. to see this, note that the section is a horizontal divisor, having unit intersection
number with the elliptic ber. on the other hand, the quantities cc1(b) and c are vertical,
corresponding to curves in the base lifted to the ber and so have zero intersection number with

the ber. therefore, we cannot choose  to cancel  and, hence, the coecient of  must, by itself,
be an integer . this implies that a consistent bundle n will exist if either

(10.19)

(10.20)

or

n is odd,  = m +

1
2

n is even,  = m,

 = c1(b)mod2

where m is an integer. here, the  = c1(b)mod2 condition means that  and c1(b) dier by an
even element of h 2(b, z). note that when n is even, we cannot choose  arbitrarily. for n odd,

condition (10.19) is necessary and sucient. for n even, condition (10.20) is sucient for the
existence of a consistent line bundle n . it is also sucient for the examples we consider in this
lecture, and it is the only class of solutions which is easy to describe in general. however, other
solutions do exist. we could, for example, take n = 4,  = 1

4 and  = 2c1(b)mod4.

finally, we can give the explicit chern classes for the su (n) vector bundle v . friedman,

morgan and witten calculate c1(v ) and c2(v ), while curio and andreas [84, 85] have found c3(v ).
the results are

c1(v ) = 0

1
24

c2(v ) =  
c3(v ) = 2 (  nc1(b))

c1(b)2(cid:0)n3  n(cid:1) +

1

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19) n (  nc1(b))

(10.21)

(10.22)

(10.23)

where the wedge product is understood.

11 summary of elliptic fibrations and bundles

the previous two sections are somewhat abstract. for the sake of clarity, we will here summarize

those results which are directly relevant to constructing physically acceptable non-perturbative

vacua.

 an elliptically bered calabiyau three-fold is composed of a two-fold base b and elliptic
in this lecture, we consider only those elliptic

curves eb bered over each point b  b.
brations that admit a global section .

 the elliptic bration is characterized by a single line bundle l over b. the vanishing of the

rst chern class of the canonical bundle kx of the calabiyau three-fold x implies that

b

l = k1
65

(11.1)

where kb is the canonical bundle of the base b.

 from the previous condition, it follows that the base b is restricted to del pezzo, hirzebruch

and enriques surfaces, as well as blow-ups of hirzebruch surfaces.

 the second chern class of the holomorphic tangent bundle of x is given by

c2(t x) = c2(b) + 11c1(b)2 + 12c1(b)

(11.2)

where c1(b) and c2(b) are the rst and second chern classes of b.

 a general semi-stable su (n) gauge bundle v is determined by two line bundles, m and n .

the relevant quantities associated with m and n are their rst chern classes

 = c1(m)

(11.3)

and c1(n ) respectively. the class c1(n ), in addition to depending on n, , c1(b) and , also
contains a complex number .

 the condition that c1(n ) be an integer leads to the constraints on  and  given by

n is odd,

 = m +

1
2

n is even,  = m,

 = c1(b)mod2

where m is an integer.

 the relevant chern classes of an su (n) gauge bundle v are given by

c1(v ) = 0

1
24

c2(v ) =  
c3(v ) = 2 (  nc1(b))

c1(b)2(cid:0)n3  n(cid:1) +

1

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19) n (  nc1(b))

(11.4)

(11.5)

(11.6)

(11.7)

(11.8)

how can one use the this data to construct realistic particle physics theories? one proceeds as

follows.

 choose a base b from one of the allowed bases; namely, a del pezzo, hirzebruch or enriques
surface, or a blow-up of a hirzebruch surface. the associated chern classes c1(b) and c2(b)
can be computed for any of these surfaces.

this allows one to construct the second chern class of the calabi-yau tangent bundle and a

signicant part of the gauge bundle chern classes.

66

 specify  and  subject to the above constraints.

these constraints greatly reduce the number of physically relevant non-perturbative vacua. given

appropriate  and , one can completely determine the relevant gauge bundle chern classes. we

will carry this out explicitly in the next section.

12 eective curves and five-branes

consider a complex manifold x which is an elliptic bration over a base b. eective classes are

dened, and their physical meaning discussed, in appendix a of ref. [8]. let us suppose we have

found an eective class in h2(b, z). then, it naturally also lies in an eective homology class in
h2(x, z) of the elliptic bration. note that the bration structure guarantees that if two curves
are in dierent classes in the base, then they are in dierent classes in the full manifold x. this

implies, among other things, that if one nds the eective generating class of the mori cone of b,

these classes remain distinct classes of x. in addition, there is at least one other eective class that

is not associated with the base. this is the class f of the ber itself. there may also be other such

classes, for example, those related to points where the ber degenerates. however, we will ignore

these since they will not appear in the homology classes of the ve-branes, our main interest.

the algebraic classes that arise naturally are quadratic polynomials in classes of the line bundles.

the only line bundle classes on a general elliptically bered calabiyau three-fold x are the base
b and the divisors 1(c), where c is a curve in b. any quadratic polynomial in these classes can
be written as

w = wb + af f

(12.1)

where wb is an algebraic homology class in the base manifold b embedded in x and af is some
integer. under what conditions is w an eective class? it is clear that w is eective if wb is an
eective class in the base and af  0. one can also prove that the converse is true in almost all
cases. specically, we can prove the following. first, the converse is true for any del pezzo and

enriques surface. second, the converse is true for a hirzebruch surface fr, with the exception of
when wb happens to contain the negative section s and r  3. in this lecture, for simplicity, we
will consider only those cases for which the converse is true. thus, under this restriction, we have

that

w is eective  wb is eective in b and af  0

(12.2)

this reduces the question of nding the eective curves in x to knowing the generating set of

eective curves in the base b. for the set of base surfaces b we are considering, nding such

generators is always possible.

67

recall from equation (8.10) that the cohomology class associated with the ve-branes is given

by

[w ] = c2(t x)  c2(v1)  c2(v2)

(12.3)

for simplicity, in this lecture we will allow for arbitrary semi-stable gauge bundles v1, which we
henceforth call v , on the rst orbifold plane, but always take the gauge bundle v2 to be trivial.
physically, this corresponds to allowing observable sector gauge groups to be subgroups, such as

su (5), so(10) or e6, of e8 but leaving the hidden sector e8 gauge group unbroken. we do this
only for simplicity. our formalism also allows an analysis of the general case where the hidden

sector e8 gauge group is broken by a non-trivial bundle v2. with this restriction, equation (12.3)
simplies to

inserting the expressions (11.2) and (11.7) for the second chern classes, we nd that

[w ] = c2(t x)  c2(v )

where

[w ] = wb + af f

wb = (12c1(b)  )

is the part of the class associated with the base b and

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

n3  n
24 (cid:19) c1(b)2 

1
2

n(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19)  (  nc1(b))

(12.4)

(12.5)

(12.6)

(12.7)

is the part associated with the elliptic ber.

now, to make physical sense, ve-branes must be wrapped on a curve composed of holomorphic

submanifolds of x and, hence, [w ] must be an eective class. this physical requirement then

implies, using the above theorem, that necessarily

as we will see, this puts a strong constraint on the allowed non-perturbative vacua.

wb is eective in b,

af  0

(12.8)

13 number of families and model building rules

the rst obvious physical criterion for constructing realistic particle physics models is that we

should be able to nd theories with a small number of families, preferably three. we will see that

this is, in fact, easy to do via the bundle constructions on elliptically bered calabiyau three-folds

68

that we are discussing. we start by deriving the three family criterion as discussed, for instance,

in green, schwarz and witten [49].

the number of families is related to the number of zero-modes of the dirac operator in the

presence of the gauge bundle on the calabiyau three-fold, since we want to count the number of

massless fermions of dierent chiralities. the original gauginos are in the adjoint representation of

e8. in this lecture, we are considering only gauge bundles v with su (n) ber groups. to count
the number of families, we need to count the number of elds in the matter representations of the

low energy gauge group, that is, the subgroup of e8 commutant with su (n), and their complex
conjugates respectively. explicitly, in this lecture, we will be interested in the following breaking

patterns

e8  su (3)  e6 : 248 = (8, 1)  (1, 78)  (3, 27)  (3, 27)
e8  su (4)  so(10) : 248 = (15, 1)  (1, 45)  (4, 16)  (4, 16)
e8  su (5)  su (5) : 248 = (24, 1)  (1, 24)  (10, 5)  ( 10, 5)  (5, 10)  (5, 10)

(13.1)

note, however, that the methods presented here will apply to any breaking pattern with an su (n)

subgroup. we see that all the matter representations appear in the fundamental representation of

the bundle group su (n). by denition, the index of the dirac operator measures the dierence in

the number of positive and negative chirality spinors, in this case, on the calabiyau three-fold.

since six-dimensional chirality is correlated with four-dimensional chirality, the index gives the

number of families. from the fact that all the relevant elds are in the fundamental representation

of su (n), we have that the number of generations is

ngen = index (v,6d) =zx

td (x)ch (v ) =

1

2zx

c3(v )

(13.2)

where td (x) is the todd class of x. for the case of su (n) bundles on elliptically bered calabi

yau threefolds, one can show, using equation (11.8) above, that the number of families becomes

ngen = (  nc1(b))

(13.3)

where we have integrated over the ber. hence, to obtain three families the bundle must be

constrained so that

3 =  (  nc1(b))

(13.4)

it is useful to express this condition in terms of the class wb given in equation (12.6) and integrated
over the ber. we nd that

3 = (cid:0)w 2

b  (24  n)wbc1(b) + 12(12  n)c1(b)2(cid:1)

69

(13.5)

furthermore, inserting the three family constraint into (12.7) gives

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

1
24

(n3  n)(cid:19) c1(b)2 

3n

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19)

(13.6)

we are now in a position to summarize all the rules and constraints that are required to produce

particle physics theories with three families. the conditions obtained in this section are

 the homology class associated with the ve-branes is specically of the form

[w ] = wb + af f

where

wb = (12c1(b)  )
(n3  n)(cid:19) c1(b)2 

1
24

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

3n

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19)

(13.7)

(13.8)

(13.9)

and c1(b) and c2(b) are the rst and second chern classes of b.

 the requirement that the ve-brane curve be a true submanifold of x constrains [w ] to be

an eective class. therefore, we must guarantee that

wb is eective in b,

af  0 integer

(13.10)

 the condition that the theory have three families imposes the further constraint that

3 = (cid:0)w 2

b  (24  n)wbc1(b) + 12(12  n)c1(b)2(cid:1)

(13.11)

to these conditions, we can add the remaining relevant constraint from section 4. it is

 the condition that c1(n ) be an integer leads to the constraints on wb and  given by

n is odd,  = m +

1
2

n is even,  = m, wb = c1(b) mod 2

(13.12)

where m is an integer. the n even condition is sucient, but not necessary.

note that in this last condition, the class , which appeared in constraint (11.5), has been replaced

by wb. that this replacement is valid can be seen as follows. for n odd, there is no constraint on
 and, hence, using (13.8), no constraint on wb. when n is even, it is sucient for  to satisfy
 = c1(b) mod 2. since 12c1(b) is an even element of h 2(b, z), it follows that wb = c1(b)
mod 2.

70

it is important to note that all quantities and constraints have now been reduced to properties

of the base two-fold b. specically, if we know c1(b), c2(b), as well as a set of generators of
eective classes in b in which to expand wb, we will be able to exactly specify all appropriate non-
perturbative vacua. for the del pezzo, hirzebruch, enriques and blown-up hirzebruch surfaces, all

of these quantities are known.

finally, from the expressions in (13.1) we nd the following rule.

 if we denote by g the structure group of the gauge bundle and by h its commutant subgroup,

then

g = su (3) = h = e6

g = su (4) = h = so(10)

(13.13)

g = su (5) = h = su (5)
h corresponds to the low energy gauge group of the theory.

armed with the above rules, we now turn to the explicit construction of phenomenologically relevant

non-perturbative vacua.

14 three family models

in this section, we will construct two explicit solutions satisfying the above rules.

in general,

we will look for solutions where the class representing the curve on which the vebranes wrap

is comparatively simple. as discussed above, the allowed base surfaces b of elliptically bered

calabiyau threefolds which admit a section are restricted to be the del pezzo, hirzebruch and

enriques surfaces, as well as blow-ups of hirzebruch surfaces. relevant properties of del pezzo,

hirzebruch and enriques surfaces, including their generators of eective curves, are given in the

appendix b of ref. [8]. however, we now show that calabiyau threefolds of this type with an

enriques base never admit an eective ve-brane curve if one requires that there be three families.

recall that the cohomology class of the spectral cover must be of the form

[c] = n + 

(14.1)

and this necessarily is an eective class in x. we may assume that c does not contain (b).
otherwise, replace c in the following discussion with its subcover c obtained by discarding the
appropriate multiples of (b). this implies that the class

[c] = n2 + 

71

(14.2)

must be eective in the base b. let us restrict b to be an enriques surface. using the adjunction

formula, we nd that

2 = kb

(14.3)

where kb is the torsion class. since nkb vanishes for even n, it follows that when n is even

[c] = 

clearly,  is eective, since [c] is. for n odd, nkb = kb and, hence

[c] = kb + 

(14.4)

(14.5)

using the discussion in appendix b of [8], one can still conclude that  is either an eective class

or it equals kb. from the fact that

c1(b) = kb

(14.6)

it follows, using equation (13.8), that the ve-brane class restricted to the enriques base is given

by

since 12kb vanishes, this becomes

wb = 12kb  

wb = 

(14.7)

(14.8)

from which we can conclude that wb is never eective for non-vanishing class . since, as
explained above, wb must be eective for the ve-branes to be physical, such theories must be
discarded. the only possible loop-hole is when  vanishes or equals kb. however, in this case, it
follows from (13.3) that

ngen = 0

(14.9)

which is also physically unacceptable. we conclude that, on general grounds, calabiyau three

folds with an enriques base never admit eective vebrane curves if one requires that there be
three families 8. for this reason, we henceforth restrict our discussion to the remaining possibilities.

in this lecture, for specicity, the base b will always be chosen to be a del pezzo surface.

we rst give two su (5) examples, each on del pezzo surfaces; one where the base component,

wb, is simple and one where the ber component has a small coecient.

8we thank e. witten for pointing out to us the likelihood of this conclusion.

72

example 1: b = dp8, h = su(5)

we begin by choosing

h = su (5)

(14.10)

as the gauge group for our model. then it follows from (13.13) that we must choose the structure

group of the gauge bundle to be

g = su (5)

(14.11)

and, hence, n = 5. since n is odd, constraint (13.12) tells us that  = m + 1

2 for integer m. here

we will, for simplicity, choose m = 1 and, therefore

 =

3
2

at this point, it is necessary to explicitly choose the base surface, which we take to be

b = dp8

(14.12)

(14.13)

it follows from appendix b of ref. [8] that for the del pezzo surface dp8, a basis for h2(dp8, z)
composed entirely of eective classes is given by l and ei for i = 1, .., 8 where

l  l = 1

l  ei = 0

ei  ej = ij

(14.14)

there are other eective classes in dp8 not obtainable as a linear combination of l and ei with
non-negative integer coecients, but we will not need them in this example. to these we add the

ber class f . furthermore

and

c1(b) = 3l 

ei

8

xr=1

c2(b) = 11

(14.15)

(14.16)

we now must specify the component of the ve-brane class in the base. in this example, we choose

wb = 2e1 + e2 + e3

(14.17)

since e1, e2 and e3 are eective, it follows that wb is also eective, as it must be. using the
above intersection rules, one can easily show that

w 2

b = 6,

wbc1(b) = 4,

c1(b)2 = 1

(14.18)

73

using these results, as well as n = 5 and  = 3

2 , one can check that

(w 2

b  (24  n)wbc1(b) + 12(12  n)c1(b)2) = 3

(14.19)

and, therefore, the three family condition is satised. finally, let us compute the coecient af of
f . using the above information, we nd that
n3  n
24 (cid:19) c1(b)2 

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

4(cid:19) = 17

(14.20)

1

3n

2(cid:18)2 

since this is a positive integer, it follows from the above discussion that the full ve-brane curve [w ]

is eective in the calabiyau threefold x, as it must be. this completes our construction of this

explicit non-perturbative vacuum. it represents a model of particle physics with three families and

gauge group h = su (5), along with explicit ve-branes wrapped on a holomorphic curve specied

by

[w ] = 2e1 + e2 + e3 + 17f

(14.21)

the properties of the moduli spaces of ve-branes were discussed in [7, 9].

example 2: b = dp8, h = so(10)

as a second example, we choose the gauge group to be

and, hence, the structure group

h = so(10)

g = su (4)

(14.22)

(14.23)

then n = 4. since n is even, then from constraint (13.12) we must have  = m where m is an
integer and wb = c1(b) mod 2. here we will choose m = 1 so that

 = 1

(14.24)

we will return to the choice of wb momentarily. in this example, we will take as a base surface

b = dp8

(14.25)

some of the eective generators and the rst and second chern classes of dp8 were given in the
previous example. we now must specify the component of the ve-brane class in the base. in this

example, we choose

wb = 2e1 + 2e2 + (3l 

ei)

8

xi=1

74

(14.26)

since e1, e2 and 3l p8

furthermore, since

i=1 ei are eective, it follows that wb is also eective, as it must be.

it follows that

c1(b) = 3l 

ei

8

xr=1

wb = c1(b) mod 2

(14.27)

(14.28)

since 2e1 + 2e2 is an even element of h 2(dp9, z). using the above intersection rules, one can easily
show that

(14.29)

(14.30)

w 2

b = 1,

wbc1(b) = 5,

c1(b)2 = 1

using these results, as well as n = 4 and  = 1, one can check that

(cid:0)w 2

b  (24  n)wbc1(b) + 12(12  n)c1(b)2(cid:1) = 3

and, therefore, the three family condition is satised. finally, let us compute the coecient af of
f . using the above information, we nd that

af = c2(b) +(cid:18)11 +

n3  n
24 (cid:19) c1(b)2 

3n

2(cid:18)2 

1

4(cid:19) = 29

(14.31)

since this is a positive integer, it follows from the above discussion that the full ve-brane curve

[w ] is eective, as it must be. this completes our construction of this explicit non-perturbative

vacuum. it represents a model of particle physics with three families and gauge group h = so(10),

along with explicit ve-branes wrapped on a holomorphic curve specied by

[w ] = 2e1 + 2e2 + (3l 

8

xi=1

ei) + 29f

(14.32)

acknowledgments:

supported in part by the doe under contract no. de-ac02-76-er-03071.

references

[1] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 506.

[2] p. horava and e. witten, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 94.

75

[3] e. witten, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 135.

[4] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut, k.s. stelle and d. waldram, the universe as a domain wall, upr-

797t, hep-th/9803235.

[5] a. lukas, b.ovrut, k. stelle and d. waldram, heterotic m-theory in five dimensions, hep-

th/9806051.

[6] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, nonstandard embedding and fivebranes in het-

erotic mtheory, hep-th/9808101.

[7] r. donagi, a. lukas, b.a. ovrut and d. waldram, non-perturbative vacua and particle

physics in m-theory, hep-th/9811168.

[8] r. donagi, a. lukas, b.a. ovrut and d. waldram, holomorphic vector bundles and non-

perturbative vacua in m-theory, hep-th/9901009.

[9] r. donagi, b.a. ovrut and d. waldram,moduli spaces of fivebranes on elliptic calabi-yau

threefolds, hep-th/hep-th/9904054.

[10] t. banks and m. dine, nucl. phys. b479 (1996) 173.

[11] a. c. cadavid, a. ceresole, r. dauria and s. ferrara, phys. lett. b357 1995 76; i. antoniadis,

s. ferrara and t. r. taylor, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 489.

[12] b. a. ovrut, talk given at pascos-98.

[13] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, on the four-dimensional eective action of strongly

coupled heterotic string theory, upr-771t, hep-th/9710208.

[14] p. horava, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 7561.

[15] i. antoniadis and m. quiros, phys. lett. b392 (1997) 61.

[16] e. caceres, v. s. kaplunovsky and i. m. mandelberg, nucl. phys. b493 (1997) 73.

[17] h.-p. nilles and s. stieberger, nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 3.

[18] t. li, j. l. lopez and d. v. nanopoulos, mod. phys. lett. a12 (1997) 2647.

[19] j. o. conrad, brane tensions and coupling constants from within mtheory, tum-hep-

289-97, hep-th/9708031.

[20] e. dudas and c. grojean, nucl. phys. b507 (1997) 553.

[21] e. dudas and j. mourad, phys. lett. b400 (1997) 71.

76

[22] z. lalak, a. lukas and b. a. ovrut, soliton solutions of mtheory on an orbifold, upr-774t,

hep-th/9709214, to be published in phys. lett. b.

[23] k. choi, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 6588.

[24] h. p. nilles, m. olechowski and m. yamaguchi, phys. lett. b415 (1997) 24.

[25] i. antoniadis and m. quiros, phys. lett. b416 (1998) 327.

[26] z. lalak and s. thomas, gaugino condensation, moduli potential and supersymmetry break-

ing in mtheory models, qmw-ph-97-23, hep-th/9707223.

[27] e. dudas, supersymmetry breaking in mtheory and quantization rules, cern-th/97-236,

hep-th/9709043.

[28] j. ellis, a. e. faraggi and d. v. nanopoulos, mtheory model-building and proton stability,

cern-th-97-237, hep-th/9709049.

[29] d. v. nanopoulos, m phenomenology, ctp-tamu-42-97, hep-th/9711080.

[30] k. choi, h. b. kim and c. munoz, fourdimensional eective supergravity and soft terms

in mtheory, kaist-th 97/20, ftuam 97/16, hep-th/9711158.

[31] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, gaugino condensation in mtheory on s1/z2, upr-

785t, hep-th/9711197.

[32] h. p. nilles, m. olechowski and m. yamaguchi, supersymmetry breakdown at a hidden wall,

bonn-th-97-10, hep-th/9801030.

[33] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, the ten-dimensional eective action of strongly

coupled heterotic string theory, upr-789-t, hep-th/9801087.

[34] t. li, compactication and supersymmetry breaking in m theory, hep-th/9801123.

[35] m. faux, new consistent limits of m theory, hub-ep-98-9, hep-th/9801204.

[36] p. majumdar and s. sengupta, gaugino mass in the heterotic string with scherkschwarz

compactication, sinp-98-05, hep-th/9802111.

[37] n. wyllard, the heterotic prepotential from eleven dimensions, goteborg-itp-98-01,

hep-th/9802148.

[38] d. bailin, g.v. kraniotis and a. love, sparticle spectrum and dark matter in m theory,

susx-th-98-003, hep-ph/9803274.

77

[39] e. sharpe, boundary superpotentials, pupt-1660, hep-th/9611196.

[40] e. a. mirabelli and m. e. peskin, transmission of supersymmetry breaking from a four

dimensional boundary, slac-pub-7681, hep-th/9712214.

[41] a. lukas and b. a. ovrut, uduality invariant mtheory cosmology, upr-770-t, hep-

th/9709030, to be published in phys. lett. b.

[42] k. benakli, cosmological solutions in m-theory on s1/z2, hep-th/9804096.

[43] k. benakli, scales and cosmological applications of m theory, ctp-tamu-20-98, hep-

th/9805181.

[44] a. lukas, b. a. ovrut and d. waldram, cosmological solutions of horava-witten theory,

upr-805t, hep-th/9806022.

[45] j. ellis, z. lalak, s. pokorski and w. pokorski, fivedimensional aspects of mtheory and

supersymmetry breaking, cern-th-98-118, hep-ph/9805377.

[46] e. cremmer, in superspace and supergravity, ed. s. w. hawking and m. rocek, pp. 267282,

cambridge university press (1981).

[47] s. p. de alwis, phys. lett. b388 (1996) 291; phys. lett. b392 (1997) 332.

[48] m. bodner, a. c. cadavid and s. ferrara, class. quantum grav. 8 (1991) 789.

[49] m. b. green, j. h. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory, vol. 2, pp. 386, cambridge

university press (1987).

[50] e. witten, j. geom. phys. 22 (1997) 1.

[51] i. v. lavrinenko, h. lu and c. n. pope, nucl. phys. b492 (1996) 278.

[52] m. gunaydin, g. sierra and p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b242 (1084) 244.

[53] m. gunaydin, g. sierra and p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b253 (1985) 573.

[54] g. sierra, phys. lett. 157b (1985) 379.

[55] l. andrianopoli et al., nucl. phys. b476 (1996) 397.

[56] s. cecotti, s. ferrara and l. girardello, phys. lett. b213 (1988) 443; int. j. mod. phys. a4

(1989) 2475.

[57] a. strominger, loop corrections to the universal hypermultiplet, ucsbth-97-13, hep-

th/9706195.

78

[58] j. polchinski and a. strominger, phys. lett. b388 (1996) 736.

[59] j. michelson, nucl. phys. b495 (1997) 127.

[60] e. bergshoe, m. de roo, m. b. green, g. papadopoulos and p. k. townsend, nucl. phys.

b470 (1996) 113.

[61] l. j. romans, phys. lett. b169 (1986) 374.

[62] h. lu, c. n. pope, e. sezgin and k. s. stelle, phys. lett. b371 (1996) 46; p. m. cowdall, h.

lu, c. n. pope, k. s. stelle and p. k. townsend, nucl. phys. b486 (1997) 49.

[63] s. cecotti, s. ferrara and l. girardello, phys. lett b213 (1988) 443.

[64] j. march-russell, the fayet-iliopoulos term in type-i string theory and m-theory, iassns-

hep-97/128, hep-ph/9806426.

[65] p. binetruy, c. deayet, e. dudas and p. ramond, pseudo-anomalous u (1) symmetry in the

strong coupling limit of the heterotic string, lpthe-orsay 98/41, hep-th/9807079.

[66] e. witten, nucl. phys. b268 (1986) 79.

[67] l. witten and e. witten, nucl. phys. b281 (1987) 109.

[68] k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b456 (1995) 130.

[69] m. bershadsky, v. sadov and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 420.

[70] m. j. du, r. minasian and e. witten, nucl. phys. b465 (1996) 413.

[71] see for instance, p. griths and j. harris, principles of algebraic geometry, john wiley and

sons, new york (1978).

[72] g. w. gibbons and p. k. townsend, phys. rev. lett. 71 (1993) 3754.

[73] d. m. kaplan and j. michelson, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 3474.

[74] i. bandos et al., phys. rev. lett. 78 (1997) 4332.

[75] m. aganagic et al., nucl. phys. b496 (1997) 191.

[76] r. kallosh, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 3214.

[77] p. claus, r. kallosh and a. van proeyen, nucl. phys. b518 (1998) 117.

[78] e. witten, nucl. phys. b500 (1997) 3.

79

[79] a. klemm et al., nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 746.

[80] s. stieberger, (0,2) heterotic gauge couplings and their m theory origin, cern-th-98-228,

hep-th/9807124.

[81] r. friedman, j. morgan and e. witten, commun. math. phys. 187, 679 (1997).

[82] r. donagi, asian. j. math.1, (1997)214.

[83] m. bershadsky, a. johansen, t. pantev and v. sadov, nuc. phys. b505 (1997) 165.

[84] g. curio, phys. lett.b435, (1998)39.

[85] b. andreas, on vector bundles and chiral matter in n = 1 heterotic compactications,

hep-th/9802202.

[86] s. donaldson, proc. london math. soc.3 (1985)1.

[87] k. uhlenbeck and s.-t. yau, comm. pure app. math.39 (1986)257, 42 (1986)703.

[88] r. donagi, b. ovrut and d. waldram, manuscript in preparation.

[89] d. r. morrison and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b476 437 (1996).

[90] e. looijenga, invent. math.38 (1977)17, 61 (1980)1.

80

