9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
4
1

 

 
 

1
v
1
0
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

inequivalent quantizations of gauge theories

kenichi horie

institut fur physik der johannesgutenberguniversitat,

55099 mainz, germany

january 2, 2014

abstract

it is known that the quantization of a system dened on a topologically

non-trivial conguration space is ambiguous in that many inequivalent quan-

tum systems are possible. this is the case for multiply connected spaces as

well as for coset spaces. recently, a new framework for these inequivalent

quantizations approach has been proposed by mcmullan and tsutsui, which

is based on a generalized dirac approach. we employ this framework for the

quantization of the yang-mills theory in the simplest fashion. the resulting

inequivalent quantum systems are labelled by quantized non-dynamical topo-

logical charges.

number of pages: 24

present address: high energy accelerator research organization (kek), tanashi branch,

tokyo 188-8501, japan

1

2

1

introduction

in gauge theory, the highly non-trivial topology of the underlying gauge orbit space

directly leads to or is related to many physically interesting phenomena. some of

the major examples are the -vacua, topological terms like chern-simons term or

pontrjagin term, and also chiral anomaly, see e.g. refs. 1, 2, 3, and 4. the important

point to note is that these facets are not consequences of the non-trivial topology

alone but arise only upon quantization or, to be more distinct, upon reducing the

simple quantum system on the total gauge potential space, which is ane, to the

complicated gauge orbit space by dividing out the gauge group. thus, in view of the

prominent status of the gauge theories in physics, the quantization and reduction

procedures of these systems must be investigated with ever more eort.

in this short note we make rst steps in applying the framework of inequivalent

quantizations proposed recently5,6 to gauge theories and hint at further possible

extensions.

many papers have appeared dealing with the methods of quantization on a non-

trivial (nite dimensional) conguration space other than the well known case of

linear space, see e.g. refs. 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 and references therein as well as

numerous other contributions. these works are of physical interest in their own

rights, but the generalized dirac approach of mcmullan and tsutsui5 based on the

work of mackey7 is directly applicable to gauge theory. to understand the ideas

behind their approach, consider a classical system with rst class constraints

i = 0

(1)

which, by denition, build up a closed algebra under the poisson brackets. due to

dirac12 the quantization of such a constrained system may be performed by rst

3

quantizing the system on the entire phase space without the constraints and then

imposing the constraints (1) afterwards as operator conditions on quantum states,

i|i = 0 .

(2)

on the other hand, mackeys approach to quantization on coset spaces takes a dif-

ferent path. the classical system is quantized directly on the reduced space g/h

by generalizing the canonical commutation relations and using irreducible represen-

tations of what he called the imprimitivity relations.7 we will not go into details

of this somewhat abstract algebraic procedure, but remark that mackeys work was

one of the rst to show the existence of inequivalent quantum sectors on the coset

space. in ref. 5 this algebraic procedure was translated into the commonly used

framework of dirac formalism, thus, as we will see, making possible the application

of inequivalent quantizations also to yang-mills theory. the generalization capable

of incorporating the inequivalent quantizations within diracs approach consists in

replacing the constraints (1) by

i  ki = 0 .

(3)

the constraints (3) dene dierent classical systems which in case of coset space

g/h correspond to dierent foliations of the marsden-weinstein reduction.13 how-

ever, upon quantization the arbitrary numbers ki turn out to be discrete multiples

of h and label the inequivalent quantum superselection sectors.14 this implies the

important fact that in the classical limit h  0 all these inequivalent quantum
systems reduce to the unique classical system described by (1) and not to those

classically dierent systems described by (3). from standard viewpoint quantum

physical systems play a more fundamental role in nature than the corresponding

4

classical systems in that nature is described ultimatively by quantum rather than

classical physics. accordingly, regardless of actually how the quantum sectors have

been derived, solely due to the fact that all these quantum theories have a unique

classical limit, we may talk about inequivalent quantizations of this particular clas-

sical system, even though these quantum sectors have been obtained by quantizing

dierent classical systems. these inequivalent quantum sectors are all legitimate

physical systems, whereas among the classically inequivalent systems there is one

distinguished system (1) to which all quantum systems reduce to in the classical

limit. the constraints (3) are now partially second class (anomalous) and care

must be taken when quantizing. the resulting quantum theories are equipped with

an induced connection10 and a generalized spin, i.e. the equations of motion on the

coset space describe a particle with certain spin degrees of freedom depending on

ki and minimally coupled to an external yang-mills type connection.

one of the most prominent constrained physical system is gauge theory, where

the true conguration space is obtained as the quotient of the ane gauge potential

space by the gauge group. this structure is similar to the coset space structure

considered in refs. 5 and 14, and it is interesting to know something about the

possible inequivalent quantum systems which in the classical limit reduce to the

given classical gauge theory. one of the questions we address in this paper is the

physical role of the possible parameter which labels the quantum sectors.

when this method of inequivalent quantizations is applied to yang-mills theory,

the new constraints (3) turn out to correspond to modied gauss laws in general, see

in this context also refs. 15 and 16. however, contrary to the case of homogeneous

spaces, a number of legitimate modications are possible, which are in general eld

dependent as anticipated in ref. 5. among the possible modications we pick up

5

the most simple one. as a result, the modied gauss laws induce non-dynamical

charges. upon quantization of the yang-mills theory these charges become quantized

and describe topologically distinct eld congurations.

the organization of this paper is as follows. in order to apply these ideas to yang-

mills theory we must be aware that the relevant conguration space is no longer a

coset of the type g/h but the base space c/g of a principal bundle, where c is the
total space of connections, and the structure group is given by the gauge group g.
(more precisely, we must restrict c to the dense set of irreducible connections since
otherwise the group action is non-free.) thus, as briey mentioned in ref. 6, the

generalized dirac quantization must be set up for principal bundles, which is the

main task of the next section. in the third section, the geometric structures on the

gauge orbit space are claried and compared to the nite dimensional case, upon

which the actual quantization is carried out. the last section discusses the results

and hints at some further developments.

2 particle on a principal bundle

in this section we extract from refs. 5 and 6 the mathematical structures essential

for the inequivalent quantizations of yang-mills system and, in order to adapt the

geometrical setting, consider a classical point particle moving on a principal bundle.

although such a physical system is already known in literature,11,13,17,18 the fol-

lowing presentation diers from what have been appeared hitherto in that it is kept

as simple as possible and, furthermore, will allow a direct conversion to the yang-

mills system in the next section.

let g be a semisimple lie group, such that its lie algebra, denoted by l(g),

6

possesses a non-degenerate metric tr(rs), r, s  l(g), dened by some multiple
of the trace function in a certain irreducible matrix representation. let p be a

principal bundle with this structure group g over a basemanifold b and consider

the following g-invariant lagrangian

l =

1
2

g u u  v (u) =

1
2

g( u, u)  v (u) ,

(4)

where u  tup is the velocity of the particle, and v (u) and g are g-invariant
potential and metric, respectively. thus, v (u) = v (u) and r g = g, where

  g and r  denotes the pull-back dened by the right group action r(u) = u.
the hamiltonian corresponding to (4) reads

h =

1
2

g(p, p) + v (u) ,

(5)

where p is the particle momentum and g in this equation stands for the inverse

metric on the cotangent space t 

u p . in what follows we identify the cotangent space

with tangent space via the metric, and the mechanical system of the point particle

has as its phase space the tangent bundle t p . this technical issue is not really

essential but is introduced here to make the application of inequivalent quantizations

to yang-mills theory in the next section more transparent.

having xed the phase space and the hamiltonian we now dene the symplectic

structure on the tangent bundle t p . for this consider on the cotangent bundle the

canonical 1-form 0 = pdu and the canonical symplectic structure 0 := d0
derived from it. we pull back this symplectic 2-form 0 via the metric to the tangent

bundle. thus our symplectic 2-form reads  = d, where  is the pull-back of
0 given by

 = gpdu .

(6)

7

note that in this equation and in (5) the momentum is dened on the tangent space,

p = p.

the g-symmetry of the system under consideration is expressed by the momen-

tum maps j, see e.g. ref. 19. these are functions on the phase space t p dened

for each element r  l(g) of the lie algebra by

j(r)(p) := g(p, r+) ,

(7)

where r+ denotes the fundamental vector eld of r. these momenta are conserved

under the hamiltonian ow. furthermore, for the special symplectic structure 

at hand, j is a homomorphism of the lie algebra of g to that of functions on t p

under the poisson bracket,19

{j(r), j(s)} = j([r, s]) .

(8)

just as in the case of the symplectic structure , the momentum map j (7) is the

pull-back via the metric of a corresponding canonical momentum mapping19 on the

cotangent bundle. thus both  and j depend on the g-invariant metric g. now the

metric g also denes another geometric structure on t p , namely a g-connection.

let us note here the link between this derived connection and the momentum map.

the connection is given by the decomposition of the tangent space tup into the

vertical component vup along the bres and the orthogonal horizontal complement

hup . if {ta} denotes an orthonormal basis of l(g), then vup is spanned by ta
and the corresponding orthogonal projection of tup onto vup reads

+,

 : tup  vup

p 7 gu(p, ta

+)abtb

+ .

(9)

8

the matrix ab is the inverse of ab := gu(ta

+, tb

+) and is generally u-dependent. it

is easy to show that  is independent of the basis chosen. now it is not dicult to

conrm that the l(g)-valued connection 1-form  is obtained by simply replacing
the fundamental vector eld tb

+ in (9) by its generator tb,

(p) = g(p, ta

+)abtb .

thus we see that the momentum to each generator ta,

ra := j(ta) ,

is linked to the connection via

ra(p) = tr((p)tb)ba .

(10)

(11)

(12)

turning back to mechanics, to recover the dynamics of the particle on the base

b, we will employ the dirac constraints12 in accordance with ref. 5. if we introduce

constraints

then from (8) we have

ra = 0 ,

{ra, rb} = fab

c rc

(13)

(14)

with structure constants fab

c. thus the ra build up a system of rst class constraints

consistent with the hamiltonian, {ra, h} = 0, since momentum maps are conserved
quantities.

however, and this is the salient point recovered in ref. 5 from the analysis

of mackeys inequivalent quantizations procedure, there is no stringent reason to

restrict ourselves to the constraints (13) but we are free to introduce (at the rst

place) an arbitrary element k in the lie algebra and replace (13) by

ra  tr(tak) = ra  ka = 0 ,

9

(15)

which is formally the same as the modied constraints employed by mcmullan and

tsutsui for the homogeneous space. the details of the physical motivation which led

to this modied constraints may be found in ref. 5. note that the reductions of the

physical system via the modied constraints (15) corrospond to marsden-weinstein

reductions.13,11,17,18

let us remark that on a general principal bundle the modied constraints (15)

are not the only possibility. in fact any modication will do, provided it reduces

to the one considered in ref. 5 for the homogeneous space. this restriction applies

as long as we base our considerations on mackeys work. thus the full content of

the idea of inequivalent quantizations is, insofar as its classical reduction part is

considered, more general than the marsden-weinstein reduction considered above.

another natural modication of (13) matching this condition is (p  tup )

ra(p)  g(ta

+, k +) = j(ta)(p  k +) = 0 .

(16)

the reason why we disregard this possibility is that the k-term is base point de-

pendent in general and thus leads to a complication of the constraint algebra.

we shall now turn to the quantization of the so modied constrained system.

the following discussion of quantization has been presented in refs. 5 and 6 in great

detail and is therefore kept brief.

the new constraints (15) are no more all rst class, since the poisson bracket

of two of them can not be expressed with these constraints alone but acquires an

additional term tr [ta, tb]k. this term vanishes if one of both generators lies in the

kernel of the adjoint map adk. thus (15) contains a rst class subset given by

s = j(ts)  trtsk = rs  ks = 0 ,

10

(17)

where ts are chosen to span ker(adk) =: sk, which decomposes as sk = tc, where
t is the cartan subalgebra containing k and c a possible orthogonal complement if

k is not regular semisimple. let sk denote the lie subgroup of g generated by sk.

constraints other than (17) are second class, and for the constrained system

there remains a gauge symmetry with respect to sk-transformations. for these we

introduce gauge xing conditions by the functions

s = s(u, p) = 0 .

(18)

the new system will be quantized by the path-integral method. in order to path

integrate the hamiltonian (5) over the phase space, we have to take into account

both the rst class constraints (17), the other second class constraints from (15),

and also the above gauge xings. denoting all these dierent constraints by k we

obtain

z = z y 0

n (k) det

= z dpdu(y det g) (k) det

1

2|{k, k}|exp(cid:18) i

h

(z 0  hdt)(cid:19)

(19)

1

2|{k, k}|exp(cid:18) i

h

(z dt g(p, u)  h)(cid:19) (20)

the rst path-integral (19) has been written on the cotangent bundle t p using

n over time t and the canonical 1-
the product of the canonical liouville form 0
n is usually written more simply as dpdu,
form 0. note that the measure q 0
where p and u are canonical variables. the second expression (20) is dened on

the tangent bundle t p , where the determinant of the metric comes in owing to

the change of variable p = gp. note that  = gpdu = gp udt. as

11

explained in ref. 5, by a certain choice of the form of the gauge xing conditions

(18), it is possible to integrate out the momentum. in so doing one can actually

implement the constraints (15). concerning this calculation we note briey that it

is done by decomposing the momentum p and the velocity u via the projection (9)

into the corresponding vertical and horizontal components, whereupon the vertical

projection (p) (9) of the momentum p can be entirely replaced by an expression of

k. finally, the following path-integral over the conguration space is obtained

z = z du y detg (s)det|{s, s}| exp(cid:18) i

h z ltot dt(cid:19) ,

(21)

where the total lagrangian is a sum of the original lagrangian (4) projected onto

the base space b and additional terms linear and quadratic in k,

ltot =

1
2

g( v, v)  v (u) + tr(k( w)) 

1
2

kakbab .

(22)

in this expression v and w denote the horizontal resp. the vertical velocity com-

ponents. thus the original lagrangian part consisting of the rst two terms may

be projected down to the base space b yielding lb = 1

2 gb( x, x)  v (x), where the
metric gb on b is dened by the original metric g acting on some horizontal lift of

x on b. as for the last quadratic casimir-expression (cf. refs. 6 and 10 it also is a

function on the base b, since ab is g-invariant. the k-linear term depending on

the vertical bre velocity w via the connection 1-form  (10) is gauge-dependent.

let us calculate the change of this additional term under an sk-transformation.
let u 7 us be an sk-transformation, which can be written as s = ertr eptp with the
help of bases {tr} and {tp} of t and c in the orthogonal decomposition sk = t  c.
taking into account the dening properties of a connection, the gauge change in

ltot is calculated to be a total time derivative only,

ltot = lk =

d
dt

tr(k) ,

12

(23)

which implies the sk-symmetry at the classical level. the quantum sk-symmetry

of the theory on the other hand requires the path-integral (21) to be indepent of

the gauge xing. this is the case if and only if paths related to each other by a

gauge transformation contribute to the path-integral with the same amplitude. this

requirement is stronger than the classical one in (23) and leads to a quantization of

k: consider a path u(t), t  [0, t ], in (21). gauge related paths contributing to the
transition from u(0) to u(t ) are given by

us(t) = u(t)s(t) ,

s(t)  sk ,

s(0) = s(t ) = 1 .

(24)

the amplitude of us(t) diers from that of u(t) by an phase given by

 =

1

h z t

0

dt ltot =

1
h

tr (k ((t )  (0))) .

(25)

the sk-symmetry thus requires   2z. this together with the periodicity prop-
erty of sk, r(t )  r(0)  2z implies that each component k r of k must be
quantized in multiples of h, labelling the inequivalent quantizations.5

as mentioned already in the introduction, note that, since the components k r of

k are discrete multiples of h,14 they all become zero in the classical limit. thus, al-

though the inequivalent quantum systems have been obtained by quantizing dierent

classical systems, which correspond to dierent foliations of the marsden-weinstein

reduction,11 according to our philosophy explained in the introduction we view these

quantum systems as inequivalent quantizations of the same classical system to which

all these quantum sectors reduce in the classical limit.

13

inequivalent quantizations considered so far are of physical interest when quan-

tizing a classical system on a given topologically non-trivial conguration space b.

one seeks for a principal bundle structure p with a total space tractable for quan-

tization. for example if the base space is not simply connected, one can try rst a

quantization on its universal covering. if this works, then, besides the canonical

quantization on b, we automatically obtain a series of inequivalent quantum sys-

tems. these may be considered to be a result of the non-trivial topology of the base

space.

the quantization method discussed so far however suers from an arbitrariness

of the geometry chosen on p , especially the form of the metric employed. thus

in order the above procedure to be of real interest the geometric structure on p

must be such that it arises naturally from the mathematical or physical setting. for

example in case of a lie group g over the homogeneous space g/h as considered

in refs. 5 and 6 the metric on g is given by an adg-invariant one. in what follows

we shall consider gauge theories. in this case the base conguration space, which is

the quotient of the ane space of connection forms and the gauge transformation

group, has a complex topology in contrast to the ane total space, on which a

natural metric can be chosen.

3 yang-mills system

in this section we apply the inequivalent quantizations method to gauge theory. for

simplicity we take the structure group g to be su(n). as is well known the action

of the gauge group makes the space of connections a principal bundle.20,21 more

precisely, in this paper we consider gauge potentials a on r , where r denotes

14

the time coordinate and  is the 3-sphere. this topology of spacetime may arise e.g.

if gauge elds dened on the minkowski spacetime r4 fall o at space-like innity

fast enough so that they can be considered as elds on r . also, in the following
discussion more general cases where  is an arbitrary closed 3-manifold may be

treated analogously. let p be a principal g-bundle and c := {a = aidxi |i = 1, 2, 3}
the space of irreducible space-component connection 1-forms. let g denote the
gauge group of all time-independent gauge transformations, which are sections into

the adjoint group bundle dened by p ad g. then the action of g on c makes
it a principal g-bundle over the orbit space.21 the space c is an ane space and
has a natural metric determined by the space components of the spacetime metric

and the killing metric of the structure group: let adp be the adjoint vector bundle

dened by p ad l(g), where the structure group g acts on its lie algebra l(g)
by the adjoint representation. then the canonical non-degenerate positive metric is

dened on the space m of adp -valued m-forms, m = m()  adp , by

(, ) = z

tr(  ) = z

1
m!

a

1 m

1 m
a

g d3x ,

(26)

where  denotes the hodge operator and g stands for the determinant of the metric.
since the tangent space at any point in c is the space 1 of adp -valued 1-forms,
eq. (26) denes a canonical gauge-invariant metric on c and thus determines a well-
dened connection on c,20 see below. note that 0 of sections of adp is the lie
algebra of the gauge group g (see e.g. ref. 22), which we denote by l(g). it is
equipped with the ad-invariant metric (26).

the covariant derivative  : m  m+1 and its adjoint  : m  m1 with

respect to the metric (26) are given by

 = d + [a , ] ,

(, ) := (,) ,

(27)

15

where   m and   m1.

let us now turn to the standard formulation of yang-mills theory itself. the

curvature and the action are given by

f = a  a + [a, a]
i = z dtl := z dtz

(g d3x)

1
4

tr(ff ) .

(28)

(29)

in the framework of canonical formalism1,20 we make use of gauge invariance and

set a0 = 0. the coordinate variables are the space components of the potential.

denoting the partial time derivative by a dot, the electric and magnetic eld strength

components read

e = f 0

i dxi = a ,

b =

1
2

ijkf jkdxi ,

where a = aidxi. the canonical momenta are given by

and the hamiltonian by

 = a

i tadxi =

l
tai
a

ta dxi = a ,

h =

1
2

(, ) +

1
2

(b, b) .

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

as in the case of a point particle on a principal bundle discussed in the previous

section the momentum  is dened on the tangent space. the supplementary gauss

conditions

 = 0

(34)

express the gauge invariance of the yang-mills theory and constrain it from the whole

connection space c to the gauge orbit space. to show that the gauss laws exactly

16

correspond to the constraints (13)15,16 and moreover that the whole geometrical

settings match those of the previous section let us have a closer look at the dierential

geometric structure of the g-principal bundle c.20,23,22,24,25 consider an innitesimal
gauge transformation g = e of the potential

a 7 ag := g1ag + g1dg  a +  .

(35)

this can be interpreted as follows: the expression  is an element of 1 and is
the tangent vector in tac generating the gauge transformation on c. in fact it is
the fundamental vector eld related to , which is an element of 0 equivalent to

the lie algebra l(g). thus the image of the covariant derivative  in the tangent
space at a point a  c is given by the vertical tangent vectors along the gauge bres
of c considered as g-principal bundle, which we denote by vac. to construct its
orthogonal complement, let  :=  be the covariant laplacian acting on 1 and
let g = 1. to be precise, this inverse is dened if the connection is irreducible,

the set of which however is known to be dense in c.25 the vertical projection is then
dened by

 := g ,

(36)

and the horizontal component of tac is given by hac := (1  )tac. the corre-
sponding connection  of the orthogonal decomposition tac = hac  vac reads24

 : tac  l(g)
7 g .



it is easy to check that  so dened is indeed a connection.

by analogy with (7) the momentum functional reads (  l(g))

j()() = (,) = (, )

(37)

(38)

= ((), ) .

17

(39)

so the momentum is linked to the connection via , which plays the role of what

was called  in (12). the constraints corresponding to (13), when written without

components, are exactly the gauss laws (34).

in order to apply the method of

inequivalent quantizations, we refer to the modications of the constraints (15) in

the last section and thus modify the gauss laws as

  k = 0 ,

(40)

with eld-independent k  l(g). as has been indicated by (16) for the nite
dimensional case, also in yang-mills system there are more than one modication

procedure possible. as an example, the one paralleling with (16) would read

  k = 0 .

(41)

this constraint shift is eld-dependent, and its poisson algebra becomes rather

untractable, contrary to that of (40), which is straightforward. we therefore modify

the gauss constraints by means of (40). this form of modication can be obtained

also by simple guess, but we must hold in mind that it is a very special case among

possible other modications.

employing the standard canonical symplectic structure, we nd that the poisson

commutation relation for these modied constraints reads now

{(u,  k) , (v,  k)} = ([u, v],  k) + ([u, v], k) .

(42)

the last term in this equation spoiling the closedness of the algebra vanishes when-

ever u or v are sections in the kernel bundle ker(adk). for simplicity of the fol-

lowing discussions let us assume that k(x, t) is a regular semisimple element for

18

all x   (so that the kernel bundle is indeed well-dened) and, furthermore, that
the kernel bundle is trivial. we may then take normalized base vector elds s,

s = 1, ..., dim(sk), and obtain the components of the rst class constraints as

(, s)  (k, s) = 0  ()s  ks = 0 .

(43)

since k does not depend on elds a and , all components of the constraints (40),

the rst class as well as the second class ones, commute exactly with the hamiltonian

and thus, if k is assumed to be time-independent, 

t k = 0, all constraints are

preserved in time. since the extra term ([u, v], k) in (42) is eld-independent, there

are no additional second order constraints. due to the presence of second class

constraints in (40) the full gauge symmetry is lost and there is only a residual sk-

symmetry.

we now consider the quantization of the modied yang-mills system at hand by

means of path-integral method. as described in the previous section we introduce

gauge xings for the sk-symmetry and include all the constraints into the phase

space path-integral analogously to (20). the delta functionals for the rst class

constraints (43) are implemented in a standard way into the phase factor by using

the time component of the connection a0.1 the background of the calculational

steps in the path-integral based on the canonical theory of yang-mills system have

been explained in detail in the review by jackiw1 and will not be mentioned here.

performing the -integration one is nally led to a modied lagrangian

ltot = l + lk

= l + (a0, k) .

(44)

contrary to the nite-dimensional case (22) the casimir-term is missing in (44). this

is due to the fact that the delta functionals have not been evaluated completely as

19

in the previous section but only implemented into the lagrangian by employing the

time-component a0 as lagrange multiplier. thus the k-quadratic term is implic-

itly contained in the lagrangian, which becomes explicit when the eld equation

e = k is taken into account. the time-component is used to maintain lorentz
covariance, see also below.

under an innitesimal sk-gauge transformation g = e, where [, k] = 0, the

lagrangian changes by a total time derivative only, cf. eq. (23)

ltot = (  + [a0, ] , k) =

d
dt

(, k) .

(45)

the quantization conditions of the component elds ks may be obtained exactly

in the same way as described in (24) and (25) and yields

1
h

(s(t )  s(0) , k) =

2n

h z

ks  2z , n  z ,

(46)

where s(x, t), t  [0, t ], is a time-dependent sk-gauge transformation with the
boundary conditions es(0)  es(t )  1. in view of the equations of motion, e =
k, we conclude that the charges associated with the cartan subgroup of g are

quantized,

qs := z

(e)s  h  z ,

(47)

and, owing to the abelian nature of the residual cartan subgroup, these external

charges are covariantly conserved and static. as in the introduction and also in the

previous section we note that, since these external charges qs in (47) are multiples

of h, all the inequivalent quantum sectors of the yang-mills system reduce to the

distinguished classical system described by the usual gauss law (34) in the classical

limit h  0.

in (44) it is not apparent that lk induces a topological charge. this is so because

the lorentz covariance was lost in applying the canonical formalism. however, we

20

may recover the lorentz covariance in the following way. we rst look at the action

of the k-linear lagrangian part in the time interval [0, t ] under consideration,

ik = z t

0

lkdt = z[0,t ]

aa

0kadv ,

(48)

where dv := g d3xdt is the 4-volume form. since the entire expression in the
spacetime integral is lorentz invariant and aa

0 is the 0-component of a 4-form, ka

itself must be the 0-component of some k 

a , say. also, the requirement of time

the divergence (k 

independence of ka stated before has as its covariant counterpart the vanishing of
ag). using the language of dierential forms, we may express
the integrand in (48) as ika  dv , where ik denotes the interior product of forms
and vectors. this expression is equivalent to a  ikdv , and the 3-form k := ikdv
so introduced is exact. the phase dierence wk induced by the above mentioned

sk-gauge transformation may be derived, using  = , as

tr  k = z[0,t ]
tr  k

tr d  k

ik = z[0,t ]
= z([0,t ])
= z

tr((t )  (0)) k .

the quantum condition (46) now reads

qs = z

(e)s = z

ks  h  z ,

(49)

(50)

where the exact forms ks represent elements in the de rham cohomology group,
[ ks]  h3(; r).
subgroup are linked to the topology of the underlying space . if gauge-coupled

in this way the charges associated with the residual cartan

fermionic matter is included, the whole quantization procedure goes through with-

out changes, and on the lefthand side of (50) matter charge adds up. equation (50)

also states the absence of any superselection sector if the topology of the space is

trivial, i.e. h3(; r) = 0.

21

4 discussion and outlook

in the previous section we have employed the method of inequivalent quantizations

in the simplest fashion, where a eld-independent constraint shift was chosen. as

a result the yang-mills quantum system contains superselection sectors labelled by

quantized external charges arising from the non-trivial topology of the underlying

space.

these quantized charges have nothing to do with the topological charge (pontrya-

gin index) of instantons, since in our case the residual cartan symmetry is abelian.

contrary to those topological charges, which directly give insight into the topology

of the conguration space c/g in that they label the connected components, the
inequivalent quantizations induced by the simple modication (40) of the gauss

constraints could only detect the topology of the underlying space . however,

the idea of inequivalent quantizations as explained especially in ref. 5 can incorpo-

rate more general quantum constraints than those induced by the modied gauss

laws (40) corresponding to marsden-weinstein reductions.13 with a more systematic

analysis of other eld-dependent modications like (41) it may be possible to unveil

the quantum implications of the topology of conguration space itself. especially,

one should look for induced lagrangian parts which are explicitly topological, since

then we can be fairly sure that they are closely linked to the topology of the gauge

orbit space, as can be seen from the work of wu and zee.2

another remaining issue is the investigation of the induced connection10,5 on the

22

gauge orbit space. for example, the one induced by the above choice (40) is seen to

be non-exact in the functional sense, and one might wonder whether it is possible

to relate these induced connections to the chern classes of the orbit space, which is

known to be a classifying space for the gauge group g.

acknowledgements:

i would like to greatly thank prof. izumi tsutsui for not

only suggesting this line of research but also for his many helpful discussions; more-

over, i am very much indebted to prof. martin kretzschmar, who helped to resolve

an organizational problem during the preparation of this work.

references

23

1. r. jackiw, rev. mod. phys. 52, 661 (1980).

2. y.-s. wu, a. zee, nucl. phys. b258, 157 (1985).

3. l. alvarez-gaume, p. ginsparg, nucl. phys. b 243, 449 (1984).

4. a. heil, a. kersch, n. papadopoulos, b. reifenhauser, f. scheck, j. geom. phys.

7, 489 (1990).

5. d. mcmullan, i. tsutsui, ann. phys. (n.y.) 237, 269 (1995).

6. t. tanimura, i. tsutsui, ann. phys. (n.y.) 258, 137 (1997).

7. g. w. mackey, induced representation of groups and quantum mechanics (ben-

jamin, new york, 1969).

8. m. g. g. laidlaw, c. m. dewitt, phys. rev. d3, 1375 (1971).

9. c. j. isham, in relativity, groups and topology ii eds. b. s. dewitt and r.

stora (north-holland, amsterdam, 1984).

10. n. p. landsman, n. linden, nucl. phys. b 365, 121 (1991).

11. m. a. robson, j. geom. phys. 19, 207 (1996).

12. p. a. m. dirac, lectures on quantum mechanics (yeshiva, new york, 1964).

13. v. guillemin, s. sternberg, symplectic techniques in physics (cambridge uni-

versity press, cambridge, 1984).

14. d. mcmullan, i. tsutsui, phys. lett. b. 320, 287 (1994).

24

15. j. m. arms, math. proc. camb. phil. soc. 90, 361 (1981).

16. j. m. arms, acta phys. polon. b17, 499 (1986).

17. j. e. marsden, lectures on mechanics (cambridge univ. press, cambridge,

1992).

18. r. montgomery, lett. math. phys. 8, 59 (1984).

19. r. abraham, j. e. marsden, foundations of mechanics (addison-wesley, new

york, 1978), 2nd edition.

20. o. babelon, c. m. viallet, commun. math. phys. 81, 515 (1981).

21. m. s. narasimhan, t. r. ramadas, commun. math. phys. 67, 121 (1979).

22. p. k. mitter, c. m. viallet, commun. math. phys. 79, 457 (1981).

23. m. daniel, c. m. viallet, rev. mod. phys. 52, 175 (1980).

24. c.-m. viallet, in physics, geometry, and topology, eds. h. c. lee (plenum

press, new york, 1990).

25. i. m. singer, comm. math. phys. 60, 7 (1978).

