9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
8
2

 

 
 

1
v
7
1
2
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

domain wall junctions and 1/4-supersymmetric states

sean m. carroll1, simeon hellerman2, and mark trodden3

1institute for theoretical physics

university of california

santa barbara, california 93106, usa.

carroll@itp.ucsb.edu

2department of physics
university of california

santa barbara, california 93106, usa.

sheller@physics.ucsb.edu

3particle astrophysics theory group

department of physics

case western reserve university

10900 euclid avenue

cleveland, oh 44106-7079, usa.

trodden@theory1.physics.cwru.edu

abstract

we study n = 1 susy theories in four dimensions with multiple discrete
vacua, which admit solitonic solutions describing segments of domain walls
meeting at one-dimensional junctions. we show that there exist solutions
preserving one quarter of the underlying supersymmetry  a single hermitian
supercharge. we derive a bps bound for the masses of these solutions and
construct a solution explicitly in a special case. the relevance to the conning
phase of n = 1 susy yang-mills is discussed.

nsf-itp/99-xxx
cwru-p21-99

hep-th/9905217

i. introduction

duality has played a fundamental role in recent progress in understanding quantum eld

theories at strong coupling. one of the most indispensible tools in formulating and providing

evidence for duality conjectures for supersymmetric theories has been the existence of states

preserving some but not all of the underlying supersymmetry of the hamiltonian. these

states, referred to as bps states, are useful because they lie in shortened multiplets of the

supersymmetry algebra, and therefore they cannot disappear or appear as parameters of the

theory, such as the coupling constant, are varied continuously. the spectrum of bps states

is thus one of the few characteristics of a quantum eld theory that can be predicted easily

at strong coupling.

a celebrated application of this tool has been to gauge theories in four dimensions with

extended (n = 2, 4) sypersymmetry. these theories feature particle-like solitons  mag-

netic monopoles  that preserve half the supersymmetry of the hamiltonian, lie in short

multiplets, and therefore can be followed to strong coupling, where they become the funda-

mental excitations of a dual, weakly coupled theory.

in n = 1 theories in four dimensions, the situation is dierent. the susy algebra

forbids a rotationally invariant central charge and thus massive zero-dimensional objects,

such as magnetic monopoles, cannot lie in short representations of the algebra. however, it

has been noted that the n = 1 susy algebra in 4d can admit a central extension if the

central charges transform as nontrivially, under the rotation group [6]. consequently, in such

theories there can exist states which are extended objects preserving half the supersymmetry

 two hermitian supercharges. these objects are domain walls separating two of a set of

disconnected vacua.

in this paper, we show that, if an n = 1 theory has three or more mutually disconnected

vacua, there exist states preserving a quarter of the underlying supersymmetry  a single

hermitian supercharge. these states are junctions of bps domain walls.

the organization of the paper is as follows. in section ii, we give a brief review of bps

domain walls in n = 1 theories. in section iii, we nd the bps equations satised by a

soliton preserving a quarter of the underlying supersymmetry.

in sections iv and v we

use the bps equations to derive some constraints on the kinematics of these solutions, and

in secion vi we use what weve learned to construct a solution in a particular case.

in

section vii we then apply these constraints to the particular case of n = 1 supersymmetric

yang-mills theory, before concluding and discussing open questions in section viii.

as this work was being completed, we became aware of a related paper by gibbons and

townsend [2], in which they also argue on general grounds for the existence of bps wall

junctions preserving 1/4 of the n = 1 supersymmetry.

1

ii. supersymmetric domain walls

to understand the origin of central charges in n = 1 theories with only chiral superelds,

consider the theory with superpotential

w = 2  2n n+1

n + 1

,

(2.1)

where n is an integer  2. the anticommutator {q, q} of two supercharges in this theory
doesnt automatically vanish, but, for a static conguration, will be given by the integral of

the total derivative

(0a)

aw () ,

(2.2)

where a runs over spacelike indices and  is the scalar component of the supereld .
the supersymmetry algebra therefore closes on a non-scalar central charge z a, which is

proportional to the change in the value of the superpotential between spatial innities in

dierent directions. this extension of the susy algebra, rst written down in [6], is relevant

to the conning phase of pure supersymmetric gluodynamics in 4 dimensions, where it

has been shown [10] that, for the gauge group su(n), the theory has n distinct vacua

corresponding to distinct values of the superpotential. it was shown in [6] that this central

charge allowed the existence of 1/2-supersymmetric domain walls, where the order parameter

which changes across the wall is essentially the expectation value of the gluino condensate.

more concretely, consider the full susy algebra of [6]

{q, q } = 2
{q, q} = 2z a(0a)
 ,

 p

(2.3)

(2.4)

where p is the energy-momentum vector of the system. we see that a state with energy
h = (z aza)1/2 preserves the supercharges

q   a 

z a

(z aza)1/2

q 

(2.5)

and their hermitian conjugates. notice that, although this appears to give four hermi-

tian supercharges, there are really only two linearly independent hermitian supercharges

unbroken.

2

iii. bps bounds for junctions

we now turn to the general bps properties of the wall junctions we have just described,

and those we will introduce later. the n = 1 chiral theory of the previous section has

supercurrent

j = ()

   + w ()    ,

with associated supercharge

q = z d3x(0)

(~x)  (~x) + w ((~x))0   (~x) .

(3.1)

(3.2)

a careful calculation of the anticommutator {q, q } recovers not only the usual mo-

mentum term, but also a total derivative given by (a

   y a), where

y a  abcz d3xb(~x)c(~x) + h.c.

(3.3)

a similar central term arises in theories which admit supersymmetric string solutions, in-

cluding many supergravity theories [9], and n = 1 susy gauge theories with abelian gauge

group factors and nonvanishing f-i parameters [4]. static string (or multi-string) solutions
have a tension determined by the value of the central charge y a, and preserve half the

supersymmetry of the hamiltonian.

if analogous partially supersymmetric states exist in the theory we are considering, then

they must look very dierent, since clearly the lagrangian cannot admit string solutions

with nite tension. we would like to know whether there are any bps states in chiral
n = 1 theories with a nonzero value of the central term y a.

as we shall see in the rest of this paper, the answer is yes. we nd that in theories with
only chiral superelds, the central term y a admits an interpretation not as string charge but

rather as junction charge. in any 4d eld theory with more than two disconnected vacua,

the domain walls may meet in one-dimensional junctions. if the theory is supersymmetric,

we demonstrate that junctions of the 1/2-supersymmetric domain walls may have stable

junctions solutions preserving 1/4 of the supersymmetry of the hamiltonian.

from this point onwards, we will assume the junction state to be static and translation-

ally invariant in one direction, for deniteness the direction x3. for such a conguration,
the magnitude of the central term y a plays the role of an additional contribution to the

mass of a junction, above and beyond that contributed by the half-walls themselves. that

3

is, not only do the spokes of the junction have a tension associated with them, but the

hub has its own nonvanishing contribution to the total energy, in contrast to the string

junctions of [8].

as in the more familiar examples of central charges in susy algebras, the central term

here arises at the semiclassical level as a topological term entering a classical bps bound.

to see this, note that the hamiltonian for static congurations,

h = z dxdydz [(x1)(x1) + (x2)(x2) + (x3)(x3) + w ()w ()] ,

(3.4)

can be rewritten, for any phase , as the sum of positive denite terms and a total derivative

term:

h = r dxdydz [(x3)(x3) + (x1  ix2  w ())(x1 + ix2  w ())
+(x1  ix2)(w ) + (x1 + ix2)(w ) + ix1x2  ix1x2]
= r dxdydz [(x3)(x3) + 4(z 

+2z(w ) + 2z(w ) + z(z  z) + z(z  z)]

w ())

1
2

w ())(z 

1
2

(3.5)

since the mass in any given region is equal to a positive denite term plus a surface

term, this imposes a classical bps lower bound on the mass in a region in terms of the

values of the elds on its boundary. if the positive denite terms are set to zero (which

will turn out precisely to impose the bps equations for a static conguration) then the

total mass of the state becomes a surface term upon doing the integral we then nd that

the rst pair of surface terms (involving the superpotential), gives the contribution to the
mass corresponding to the central charge z a, and the second pair gives the contribution
corresponding to the central charge y a.

for later convenience, note that this calculation is easily generalized to the case of a

nontrivial kahler metric k. in that case, the relevant surface terms in the energy are

2z(w ) + 2z(w ) + z(k,z  k,z) + z(k,z  k,z)

(3.6)

therefore, the mass contributed by the junction charge y a is equal to a line integral of the
pullback of the one-form kd  k,d, or, equivalently:

the junction mass is proportional to the area in eld space spanned by the elds of the

solution, as measured by the kahler metric.

although, unlike the masses of the domain walls themselves, the mass of the junction

is not protected by supersymmetry from perturbative quantum corrections, this is still a

compact and useful result, and we shall use it later to derive an interesting quantitative

prediction about the behavior of certain states in m-theory.

4

vacuum  ii


(3/4)

exp(2   i / 3)

w =   

3

vacuum 

i
(3/4) 3

w =   

vacuum  iii


(3/4)

 exp(-2   i / 3)  

3

w =   

fig. 1. a eld conguration that interpolates among the three supersymmetric vacua.

iv. domain wall junctions: the z3 case

in order understand the subtleties involved in constructing our 1/4-bps states, let us

specialize to the simplest nontrivial example, the case n = 3. the superpotential (2.1)

becomes

w = 2 

4
4

,

(4.1)

so that the theory has three supersymmetric vacua i, ii, and iii, in which the scalar

component takes on vacuum expectation values

i = , ii = e2i/3 , iii = e2i/3 .

(4.2)

we wish to consider an initial eld conguration in which  tends to each of these values in

three dierent directions, as in gure 1. if we allow the eld to radiate away energy, it will

settle down to a stable conguration whose topology is that of a junction of three half-walls

meeting at 120 angles.

we now analyze how much supersymmetry may be preserved by such a conguration.

first, consider the supercharges left unbroken by each individual half-wall. the change w

5

in the superpotential across the walls between vacua i and ii; between vacua ii and iii;

and between vacua iii and i are

2i

1
2

~wi,ii =  
~wii,iii = (0,1, 0) (cid:18)exp
~wiii,i =  

3
2

1
2

, 0! (cid:18)exp

2i

3  1(cid:19) 
3 (cid:19) 
3 (cid:19) 

4i
3  exp
, 0! (cid:18)1  exp
4i

,

33
4
33
4

3
2

,

33
4

,

respectively. therefore, the supercharges preserved by each half-wall alone are

q(1)
i,ii = q  q

q(2)
i,ii = q + q

q(1)
ii,iii = q  q

ii,iii = q + exp(cid:26)
q(2)
q(1)
iii,i = q  q

ii,iii = q + exp(cid:26)+
q(2)

2i

3 (cid:27) q



2i

3 (cid:27) q



.

thus the entire conguration can preserve at most the hermitian supercharge

qjunc = i(q  q


)

(4.3)

(4.4)

(4.5)

(4.6)

(4.7)

(4.8)

(4.9)

(4.10)

(4.11)

(4.12)

the equations satised by a semiclassical solitonic junction state |ji preserving this
supercharge can be found by taking the expectation value of the susy variations of the

fermions:

0 = hj|{qjunc, }|ji
= hj|(x  iy)  w ()|ji
 (x  iy)hj||ji  w (hj||ji) ,

0 = hj|{qjunc, }|ji
= hj|(  + z)|ji ,

(4.13)

(4.14)

in the h  0 limit. notice that these are exactly the equations obtained by assuming
saturation of the classical bps bound (3.5). the existence of 1/4-bps domain wall junctions

6

depends on the existence of a solution to these equations. in general we have not thus far

been able to nd the solution, although we know of no reason why it should not exist.

in order to address this, we take a dierent tack in the next section, and construct a

particular intersecting domain wall solution, in which two bps walls intersect, rather than

one terminating on the other. while this does not resolve the existence question for domain

wall junctions in general, it lends evidence that 1/4-bps solutions do indeed exist.

for now, we present a general picture of a three-wall junction. the eld conguration

approaches each of the three vacua in three dierent directions, which correspond to the

vertices of the bps triangle in gure 1. the three half-walls, each of which preserve half the

supersymmetry of the vacuum, correspond to the edges of the triangle. and the junction,

which preserves a quarter of the underlying susy, corresponds to the region in the triangles

interior.

v. long distance limit and integral bps equations

we will begin in the long-distance limit. our strategy is to derive an integral, global

form of the bps equations and use this to examine domain wall junctions on scales much

larger than the thickness of the walls. we will see that in this long-distance regime, the bps

condition is indeed satised for various congurations.

we consider eld congurations which tend to some vacuum everywhere at spatial in-

nity, except perhaps along codimension-one defects separating dierent vacua. such con-

gurations have approximately step-function behavior across domain walls, when viewed on

scales much larger than any length scale appearing in the lagrangian.

how do we check to see whether or not the bps equations are or are not satised

for a given conguration in this limit? since we wamt to work in an approximation in

which the elds vary discontinuously, the dierential form of the bps equations is clearly

unsatisfactory. however we can write down an integral form of the equations, analogous

to the integral form of the rst-order maxwell equations.

first o, note that the bps equations

imply:

2kz = w ()

2kz = w ()

7

(5.1)

(5.2)

c

1

3c

c

2

fig. 2. a long-distance view of a three-wall junction, and three elongated rectangular contours in

the z  z plane.

and

zw () = w ()z =


2

k 

w ()w () =


2

v (, )

zw () =


2

v (, )

(5.3)

(5.4)

where v denotes the potential energy.

now we integrate this equation over any large region r in the z  z plane; in particular,
integrate over an elongated rectangle containing a segment of one of the walls, whose long
side has length l >> 1.

using stokess theorem,

zr

dz  dz(zvz  zvz) = icr

(dzvz + dzvz)

and setting

we obtain

vz  iw
vz = iw  ,

8

(5.5)

(5.6)

 izr

dz  dzv = iic

(w dz  w dz)

(5.7)

since dz  dz = i
for a 1/4-supersymmetric junction state, is given by the contour integral

2dx  dy, this equation says that the total mass enclosed by the contour c,

2iic

(w dz  w dz)

(5.8)

this reformulation of the bps equations immediately yields a useful set of restrictions

on the statics of wall junctions. assuming the walls themselves to saturate the bps bound

t = |w|,

(5.9)

taking l   and matching terms of order l1, we nd that each wall must be oriented
such that w  is real and positive, where  is the phase characterizing the orientation

of the wall in the complex plane.

thus, since wi,ii, wii,iii, and wiii,i dier from each other in phase by 1200, this
means that the orientations of the walls in the z  z plane must also dier by the same
amount. therefore, the integral form of the bps equations conrms reasonable physical

expectations for the angles at which the walls must meet, based on the cancellation of

forces on the junction. although the z3 symmetry of this particular case makes the statics

particularly simple, it is straightforward to check that the integral form of the bps equations

yields the same consistent picture for an arbitrary superpotential with multiple vacua: the

relative angles of walls at a junction must be arranged so as to cancel the total force on the

junction point.

one can also verify that the cancellation of forces is not only necessary, but a sucient

condition for the integral bps equations to be satised in the long-distance limit. therefore,

for theories with four or more disconnected supersymmetric vacua, we argue that unless there

is some exotic obstruction to the bps equations not visible in the long-distance limit, there

ought to exist full moduli spaces of domain wall networks, as in gure 3.

it remains an open question whether there exists a topological index to count the number

of moduli directly, as has been done for moduli spaces of selfdual instantons, monopoles,

and other bps states in susy theories.

9

fig. 3. in the z4 theory, the long-distance limit suggests the existence of a one-dimensional moduli
space of bps wall junction networks with four external walls. the two branches of moduli space, which
meet at a z4-symmetric branch point, resemble t- and s-channel feynman diagrams, respectively.

vi. geometric reverse-engineering: an explicit construction

despite the generally consilient picture we have presented of 1/4-bps domain wall junc-

tions, a skeptic might still suspect that there could be a subtle obstruction to the existence

of such a state.

in order to allay any such anxieties, we will demonstrate this existence

for a particular lagrangian  one where w is given by (4.1), but the kahler potential is

left, for now, undetermined. if a solution of the equations exists, it will correspond to a

three-wall junction preserving a single hermitian supercharge. in the following we argue for

the existence of such a solution.

we begin by writing down a prole w (x, y) for a superpotential with the correct gross

properties to be that of a three-wall junction. since we have chosen w to be a specic

function of , this in turn denes a prole for (x, y). let

w () = 2 

4
4

= f (x, y) + exp(cid:26)2i

3 (cid:27) f (x, y) + exp(cid:26)

where

and

f (x, y) =

33
8

tanh x,

y(cid:19) =   
(cid:18) x

1
2

3
2  1
2
3

2 !(cid:18) x

y(cid:19) ,

10

2i

3 (cid:27) f (x, y) ,

(6.1)

(6.2)

(6.3)

(6.4)

im(w)

re(w)

fig. 4. bps triangle in the w -plane. vertices (vacua) preserve four supercharges, edges

(half-walls) preserve two, and the interior (the junction) preserves one.

3
y(cid:19) =   
(cid:18) x
2
 1

2

1
2
3

2 !(cid:18) x

y(cid:19) ,

(6.5)

note in passing that our initial prole does indeed map to itself under a combined discrete

spatial rotation and r-symmetry transformation, as we expect the actual solution to do.

we now verify that this function has the correct behavior to be a junction state.

first consider the behavior of w as x  +, and y = mx, with |m| < 3. in this limit

w 

33

8 (cid:18)1  exp(cid:26)2i

3 (cid:27)  exp(cid:26)2i

3 (cid:27)(cid:19) =

33
4

.

(6.6)

since we know how w transforms under the discrete z3 rotation subgroup, this then implies

that w has the correct limiting behavior in all three regions.

second, it is clear that the set of values assumed by w is precisely the convex hull in

the w plane of the three vacuum values of the superpotential  see gure 4. we shall

refer to this region as the bps triangle, bps, the edges of which are the trajectories of the

superpotential along the three individual bps domain wall solutions.

since w (x, y) stays within the bps triangle for all x, y, the function (x, y) can be

recovered from equation (6.1), since w () is nonvanishing everywhere in this region.

now, for the time being, let the kahler potential be an arbitrary function k(, ).

then the condition for a junction state to preserve the supercharge q  q


is

k,(x  iy) = 2 

3


11

(6.7)

therefore, the kahler metric can be expressed as

k,(x, y) =

.

(6.8)

2  3
(x  iy)



for this to be a sensible metric, the function k must be real and nondegenerate. to check
this, we point out that the requirement that k be real is equivalent to the requirement
that

(x  iy)w () = (x + iy)w ()

(6.9)

however, the superpotential can be written as w = (x + iy)a(x, y) where a is the real

function

a =

32
8

ln cosh(x) +

32
8

ln cosh(x) +

32
8

ln cosh(x) ,

(6.10)

and we may therefore infer that k,(x, y) is indeed everywhere real. moreover, as the
gradient of w is everywhere nonvanishing in the interior of the bps triangle, this means

that k is real and nonzero, and thus positive denite for all x, y. therefore, since our
theory contains only one chiral supereld, the metric dened in this way satises the kahler

condition trivially.

hence, we have demonstrated that, for some choice of reasonable metric and the super-

potential (6.1), there exists a domain wall junction preserving a single supercharge.

it remains to note that the map from the (x, y) plane to the bps triangle bps is
nonsingular and one-to-one. thus we could formally re-express the metric as a positive
denite function of  and , which could be derived from a kahler potential kinitial.

having developed this existence proof for nontrivial kahler metric, we may wonder again

about the case with trivial metric. at present we have a partial answer to this question. let

k(t; , )  (t  1)kinitial(, ) + t .

(6.11)

then the corresponding metric is positive denite  t  [0, 1]. we expect the number
of supersymmetric states in a given topological class to remain the same as we vary the

parameters of the lagrangian in a suciently smooth way. and so as we vary the metric,

we can vary the solution to the bps equations, knowing that a solution must exist for all

values of t, including t = 1. therefore it seems that a solution exists for trivial kahler

metric, and our argument is complete.

while it is still possible that there is some obstruction to continuing the solution to

t = 1, other than an ill-dened metric, at very least, we have shown that a metric can be

constructed which allows bps junctions.

12

vii. relevance to n = 1 sym

the identication of states in short representations of the susy algebra has played an

indispensable role in the understanding of supersymmetric eld theories at strong coupling.

in fact, the simplest four-dimensional supersymmetric gauge theories, pure super-yang-

mills theories with no matter multiplets, are believed to have a nite number of equivalent

supersymmetric vacua (n of them for the gauge group su(n) [10]).

the picture is as follows. the su(n) theory has, at the classical level, a u(1) r-symmetry

under which the gauge elds transform trivially and the gluinos a

 have charge +1. the
dynkin index of the adjoint representation is equal to 2n, so the r-symmetry is broken by

anomalies down to a z2n subgroup. since bosonic operators transform under a zn subgroup,

strong coupling eects can at most spontaneously break z2n to z2, so the maximum number

of supersymmetric vacua the theory may have is n. an index calculation [10] shows that

this upper bound is attained.

the existence of disconnected vacua means that su(n) sym has domain walls interpo-

lating between them, and the anomaly term (2.3) makes it possible for the domain walls

to preserve half the supersymmetry.

indeed, this is the context in which bps-saturated

domain walls were originally discovered.

the discussion of section (iv) shows that domain wall junctions, at least when controlled

by a single order parameter, typically preserve a quarter of the supersymmetry of the under-

lying hamiltonian. reference [13] argues that for large n, the bps domain walls of su(n)
sym are indeed controlled by a single order parameter, the value hi of the gluino con-
densate. we therefore expect that su(n) sym contains in its hilbert space wall junction

states preserving a single hermitian supercharge, at least for suciently large n.

the tension of the walls was calculated in [6]. we now calculate the additional energy

contributed by the junction itself.

in [7], veneziano and yankielowicz computed the eective action for the gluino conden-

sate in the conning phase of n = 1 sym. while only valid for a large number of colors,

this lagrangian is useful to us, as it provides the leading large-n contribution to the kinetic
term for the eld   . the large-n superspace lagrangian for the supereld  built on
the condensate  is given by

()|d + (3 ln(n ))|f + h.c.

(7.1)

13

so for instance, if we consider a junction between three walls separating the 0th, 1st, and 2nd
vacua of the theory, we expect two of the walls to have tension 3|1 exp 2i
n | and the third
to have tension 3  |1  exp 4i
n |. and we expect the junction to have a tension given by
the area in -space spanned by the elds in the solution, as measured by the kahler metric.

for the metric (6.8), this is equal to

which, by herons formula, is equal to

1

9 zbps

dd

2
9  sin

2

n (cid:18)3

2  2 cos

2
n

+ 2 cos

1
2

4

n (cid:19)

(7.2)

(7.3)

viii. discussion

sym with gauge group su(n) is believed to have a dual formulation in terms of m-

theory.

in [5], witten describes a conguration of m-theory vebranes with a three-

dimensional intersection, the eective eld theory on which is argued to be in the same

universality class as pure n = 1 supersymmetric yang-mills theory. many of the strong-

coupling phenomena present in sym, such as color ux tubes and domain walls, then have

simple descriptions in terms of intersecting branes in m-theory. indeed, explicit m-theory

states have been written down [14], [12], which correspond to bps domain walls in this

eective theory.

we expect that there ought to exist solutions of 11-dimensional supergravity preserving

1/32 of the supersymmetry of the theory, corresponding to the full spectrum of bps wall

junctions described in this paper. the question of the existence of such solutions therefore

may provide a stringent and quantitative test of the duality between m-theory and n = 1

sym.

acknowledgments

the authors would like to thank oren bergman, david gross, and zurab kakushadze

for valuable discussions.

14

references

[1] g. dvali and m. shifman, phys. lett. b396, 64 (1997); hep-th/9612128.

[2] g.w. gibbons and p.k. townsend, hep-th/9905196.

[3] s.m. carroll and m. trodden, phys. rev. d 57, 5189 (1998); hep-th/9711099.

[4] s.c. davis, a.-c. davis, and m. trodden, phys. lett. b405, 257 (1997);

hep-ph/9702360.

[5] e. witten, nucl. phys. b507, 658 (1997); hep-th/9706109.

[6] g. dvali and m. shifman, phys. lett. b396, 64 (1997); hep-th/9612128.

[7] g. veneziano and s. yankielowicz, phys. lett. 113b, 231 (1982).

[8] j. h. schwartz, nuc. phys. proc. suppl. b55, 1 (1997); hep-th/9607201.

[9] j. a. de azcarrage, j. p. gauntlett, j. m. izquierdo and p. k. townsend, phys. rev.

lett. 63, 2443 (1989).

[10] e. witten, nucl. phys. b202, 253 (1982).

[11] s. v. troitskii and m. b. voloshin, hep-th/9812116.

[12] a. volovich, hep-th/9710120; a. volovich, phys. rev. d59, 065005 (1999);

hep-th/9801166.

[13] g. dvali, g. gabadadze, and z. kakushadze, hep-th/9901032.

[14] a. fayyazuddin and m. spalinski, hep-th/9711083.

15

