ukc/ims/99/13

to appear in phys. lett. b.

monopoles from rational maps

theodora ioannidou and paul m. sutclie

institute of mathematics, university of kent at canterbury,

canterbury, ct2 7nz, u.k.

email : t.ioannidou@ukc.ac.uk

email : p.m.sutclie@ukc.ac.uk

march 1999

abstract

the moduli space of charge k su (2) bps monopoles is dieomorphic to the moduli
space of degree k rational maps between riemann spheres. in this note we describe
a numerical algorithm to compute the monopole elds and energy density from the
rational map. the results for some symmetric examples are presented.

9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
1
1

 

 
 

1
v
6
6
0
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

1 introduction

the bps monopole elds, , ai, are su(2)-valued elds in ir3 satisfying the bogomolny

equation

1
di = 
2
and the boundary condition that kk2 =  1
2 tr2 = 1 at innity. the higgs eld, ,
denes a map from the two-sphere at innity to the two-sphere of vacua and the winding
number, k, of this map is a non-negative integer which equals the magnetic charge of the
monopole (in suitable units).

ijk fjk

(1.1)

the moduli space of charge k monopoles, mk, is a 4k-dimensional manifold and it has
been known for some time [1] that mk is dieomorphic to the space of degree k based
rational maps between riemann spheres. more recently, a new correspondence [8] between
mk and the space of degree k unbased rational maps of the riemann sphere has been
proved. in this new approach the rational map arises as the scattering data, along half-
lines from the origin, of a linear operator constructed from the monopole elds. in this
note we describe a numerical inverse scattering algorithm to compute the monopole elds
and energy density from the rational map. the results of the algorithm are displayed for
several symmetric examples.

the algorithm involves solving a nonlinear elliptic partial dierential equation which is
equivalent to the bogomolny equation, but for which the boundary conditions are given in
terms of the rational map. it is the ability to specify a unique solution through the rational
map boundary conditions which is the crucial feature here. it eliminates a problem which
would arise in attempting a numerical solution of the original bogomolny equation, in that
it is not at all clear how to specify the boundary conditions on the monopole elds so as
to select a unique monopole from the 4k-dimensional family of solutions.

an alternative numerical method for constructing monopoles, based on the nahm trans-
form, already exists [4] and it is perhaps useful to make a brief comparison of the two
approaches. the numerical nahm transform requires the solution of only ordinary dif-
ferential equations and not a partial dierential equation, so from that point of view it
requires less computational resources. however, the input required is nahm data, which
involves the analytic solution of a matrix ordinary dierential equation. the general so-
lution, for charge k, involves theta functions on a curve of genus (k  1)2 and this is too
dicult to obtain explicitly in practice. for certain symmetric examples [2, 5] the curve
has symmetries which allow the solution to be obtained on a quotient curve which is ellip-
tic, and it is such examples which can then be used as input for the numerical code. some
special non-elliptic examples have been studied numerically by using approximate nahm
data [12], but even these cases rely on very symmetric congurations and there is currently
no method available to deal with the general case for charge greater than two. in contrast
the input for the numerical algorithm presented in this note is a rational map and so the
data is free. any rational map can be chosen as the input data and hence the code can be
used to obtain the monopole elds for all points in mk and not merely some special cases.
let us briey review the main points of [8] to see how the rational map arises as scatter-

2

ing data. first introduce polar coordinates, r, , , and combine the angular coordinates
into the riemann sphere parameter z = ei tan(/2). the rational map is obtained by
considering hitchins equation

(dr  i)s = 0

(1.2)

for the complex vector s, along each radial half-line from the origin out to innity, with
the direction of the half-line determined by the value of z. the boundary condition on
 implies that there is a one-parameter family of solutions s(r) = (w1(r), w2(r))t that
are bounded as r  . dene r to be the ratio of these components at the origin ie.
r = w1(0)/w2(0). it can then be shown [8] that r is a holomorphic function of z with
degree equal to the monopole charge k. thus r : cip1 7 cip1 is the required degree k
rational map between riemann spheres. note that the rational map is unbased, since
a gauge transformation replaces r by an su(2) mobius transformation determined by
the gauge transformation evaluated at the origin. thus the correspondence is between a
monopole and an equivalence class of rational maps, where two maps are equivalent if they
can be mapped into each other by a reorientation of the target riemann sphere. since the
above construction does not break the so(3) rotational symmetry of ir3 then a monopole
which is invariant under a subgroup g  so(3) will have an associated rational map r
which is g-invariant (up to mobius transformations).

2 the algorithm

writing the bogomolny equation (1.1) in terms of the coordinates r, z, z and choosing

the (complex) gauge

 = iar = 

i
2

h 

1rh, az = h 

1zh, az = 0

(2.1)

where h  sl(2, c) is a hermitian matrix, results in the single equation [8]

r (cid:16)h 

1 rh(cid:17) +

(1 + |z|2)2

r2

z (cid:16)h 

1 zh(cid:17) = 0.

(2.2)

in [8] it is proved that solutions of this equation are uniquely determined by boundary
conditions at large r which are in one-to-one correspondence with rational maps between
riemann spheres. this result is presented more explicitly in [7] where it is shown that
the connection between the rational map r(z) and the matrix h(r, z, z) is the large r
asymptotic relation

h  exp(cid:26)

2r

1 + |r|2 (cid:18)|r|2  1
2r

2 r
1  |r|2 (cid:19)(cid:27).

(2.3)

the input to the algorithm is the rational map r, and the main task is to compute the
solution of equation (2.2) subject to the boundary condition that as r   the solution
has the asymptotic form (2.3).

3

to compute solutions of the elliptic equation (2.2) we use a standard heat ow approach

and study the parabolic equation

h 

1 th = r (cid:16)h 

1 rh(cid:17) +

(1 + |z|2)2

r2

z (cid:16)h 

1 zh(cid:17) .

(2.4)

as t   the solutions of this equation are static, that is t-independent, and hence solve
the original elliptic equation.
although the choice of coordinates, r, z, z, has played a crucial role in the analysis so
far, these are not good coordinates in which to implement a numerical solution. in ir3 the
most ecient coordinates to use for a numerical code are cartesian coordinates, in which
equation (2.4) becomes

ht = hii 

2
r2 xihi  hih 

1hi +

i
r

ijkxihjh 

1hk.

(2.5)

here an index i denotes partial dierentiation with respect to xi, and the summation
convention is used over the spatial indices.

although we are now using cartesian coordinates the method by which we have ob-
tained equation (2.5) is reected in the broken translational symmetry. equation (2.5) can
not be applied at r = 0, but this is not a problem since there is an additional constraint
[8] that at the origin h = i, the 2  2 identity matrix.
we solve equation (2.5) using a nite dierence approximation, with spatial derivatives
approximated by second order symmetric dierences and the time derivative approximated
by a rst order forward dierence. the discretization is performed on a regular grid,
typically using 703 grid points. on the boundary of the grid the matrix h is xed to be
the asymptotic expression (2.3). note that it is a subtle matter to enforce the boundary
condition numerically since the elements of the matrix h are unbounded as r  . thus
the size of the bounding box must be big enough to ensure that the monopole conguration
sits comfortably inside the box, but the bounding box must not be too big otherwise the
unbounded growth of the elements of h will lead to numerical diculties. in practice we
nd that a bounding box with |x| < 5 is satisfactory for all the examples we present.

the initial conditions are taken to be

h = exp(cid:26) 2g(r)

1 + |r|2 (cid:18)|r|2  1
2r

2 r
1  |r|2(cid:19)(cid:27)

(2.6)

where g(r) is a monotonically increasing function with g(0) = 0 and g(r)  r for large r.
note that from the relation (2.1) between h and  this initial condition gives a higgs eld
whose length, kk2, is spherically symmetric. there are no spherically symmetric su(2)
monopoles with k > 1, so it is clear that the initial condition is not a good approximation
to the nal solution for charges greater than one.

the elements of h are evolved directly in the time evolution and so the unit determinant

constraint is preserved by performing the rescaling transformation

h 7

h

deth

4

(2.7)

after each iteration. a typical example requires around 5000 iterations to converge to a
static solution.

from the solution h the monopole elds are computed from the relations (2.1), where
derivatives are again approximated by second order symmetric nite dierences. for ex-
ample, the length of the higgs eld, which is a gauge invariant quantity, is given by

kk2 = 

1
8

tr(rhrh 

1).

the energy density, e, is then obtained from the higgs eld via the formula

e = iikk2.

(2.8)

(2.9)

in figure 1 we display the results of our algorithm, in the form of energy density isosur-
face plots, for several examples. we have chosen some particularly symmetric examples,
with charges from two to seven, and the explicit rational maps for each example are listed
in table 1.

charge rational map

symmetry

figure

2

3

4

5

6

7

z2

axial

3iz2
z3

1

3iz



z4+23iz2+1
23iz2+1
z4



z5
5z

5z4
1


z4+ia
iaz6+z2

tetrahedral

cubic

octahedral

dihedral

z7
7z5
z7+7z5



7z2
1

7z2+1




dodecahedral

1a

1b

1c

1d

1e

1f

table 1 : rational maps for the monopoles shown in figure 1.

the details of these rational maps and a discussion of their symmetries can be found in
ref.[3]. a reason for choosing the examples with platonic symmetry is that these cases fall
into the special class which have been computed with the numerical nahm transform [4, 5]
and hence we can verify that the results obtained from the two very dierent numerical
approaches are in agreement. the charge six example has only a dihedral symmetry, d4d,
and the associated nahm data is not known, since it is not an elliptic example. this case
is therefore one in which the numerical nahm transform could not be used to construct the
monopole and hence this is the rst computation of this particular monopole. the degree
six rational map given in table 1 has d4d symmetry for all values of the real parameter

5

a, and the particular example shown here is for a = 0.16. the reason for this particular
choice is that there is an ansatz to obtain approximate skyrmions from rational maps
[3], and within this ansatz the rational map with a = 0.16 is the one which minimizes the
energy of the approximate skyrmion. of course, for monopoles all congurations of a given
charge have the same energy, but it is interesting to note that the monopole energy density
isosurface in figure 1e is remarkably similar to the skyrmion baryon density isosurface
shown in ref.[3]. it has already been observed that the known platonic monopoles resemble
the corresponding skyrmions but a deep understanding of this fact is not yet available.
within the rational map approximation for skyrmions there is an understanding of the
relationship between the skyrmion baryon density and the rational map [3] and it would be
interesting if a similar relationship could be found to connect the monopole energy density
to the rational map.

3 outlook

we have presented an algorithm which computes monopoles from rational maps and
in this section we comment on some possible

displayed the results for some examples.
applications of this code.

one of the surprising results obtained from the numerical computation of monopoles is
the discovery that a charge k monopole can have more than k zeros of the higgs eld [6, 13].
the total number of zeros counted with multiplicity is k, but some of the zeros can have
a negative multiplicity, which are known as anti-zeros. the current numerical evidence is
obtained using the numerical nahm transform and it is satisfying to conrm the existence
of anti-zeros with the algorithm presented in this note, since the two numerical approaches
are very dierent. anti-zeros are indeed detected in the new algorithm, as demonstrated
in figure 2 we plot the length of the higgs eld, kk2, along the x3-axis
in figure 2.
for the octahedral 5-monopole shown in figure 1d. the solid curve displays the initial
condition, where the only higgs zeros is at the origin, whereas the dashed curve represents
the solution at the end of the iteration. it can be seen that there are now three zeros along
this line, and hence by the octahedral symmetry there are seven in total. the zero at the
origin is an anti-zero giving a total multiplicity of ve as required. at present there is
little understanding of the anti-zeros phenomenon and no signature for their appearance
is known in terms of the associated rational map. however, now that an algorithm is
available to construct a monopole from its rational map it will be possible to make a more
extensive study and investigate any possible connections with the topology of the space of
rational maps.

in testing conjectures of electric-magnetic duality it has proved extremely useful to use
the correspondence between monopoles and rational maps [11]. some preliminary attempts
[3] have been made to use the rational map correspondence to determine which monopole
congurations play a key role in this context and perhaps the construction of the monopole
elds themselves may prove useful.

in the geodesic approximation [10] the dynamics of k slowly moving monopoles can be

6

approximated by geodesic motion in the k-monopole moduli space. it is possible to nd
geodesics as xed point sets of group actions on the space of rational maps. by constructing
the monopole elds for such families of rational maps it would be possible to study various
monopole scatterings in some detail.

finally, the method introduced here could be extended to construct su(n) monopoles

and this may be of use in understanding non-abelian clouds [9].

acknowledgements

pms acknowledges the epsrc for an advanced fellowship and the grant gr/l88320.

7

references

[1] s.k. donaldson, commun. math. phys. 96, 387 (1984).

[2] n.j. hitchin, n.s. manton and m.k. murray, nonlinearity, 8, 661 (1995).

[3] c.j. houghton, n.s. manton and p.m. sutclie, nucl. phys. b 510, 507 (1998).

[4] c.j. houghton and p.m. sutclie, commun. math. phys. 180, 343 (1996).

[5] c.j. houghton and p.m. sutclie, nonlinearity 9, 385 (1996).

[6] c.j. houghton and p.m. sutclie, nucl. phys. b 464, 59 (1996).

[7] t. ioannidou and p.m. sutclie, monopoles and harmonic maps, hep-th/9903183.

[8] s. jarvis, a rational map for euclidean monopoles via radial scattering, oxford

preprint (1996).

[9] k. lee, e.j. weinberg and p. yi, phys. rev. d 54, 6351 (1996).

[10] n.s. manton, phys. lett. b 110, 54 (1982).

[11] g. segal and a. selby, commun. math. phys. 177, 775 (1996).

[12] p.m. sutclie, nucl. phys. b 505, 517 (1997).

[13] p.m. sutclie, phys. lett. b 376, 103 (1996).

figure captions

figure 1: energy density isosurfaces for the monopoles listed in table 1.

figure 2: plots of kk2 along the x3-axis for the octahedral 5-monopole. initial condi-

tion (solid curve) and nal solution (dashed curve).

8

this figure "monratfig1.gif" is available in "gif"(cid:10) format from:

http://arxiv.org/ps/hep-th/9905066v1

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0

-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0
x3

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

