9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
1
1

 

 
 

1
v
2
7
0
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

derivation of the hadronic structure

functions from quantum

chromodynamics

lectures at the the feza gursey institute, istanbul

and the mittag-leer institute of the royal swedish academy of sciences,

stockholm in 1998.
s. g. rajeev1

department of physics and astronomy, university of rochester, rochester,

new york 14627

abstract

we solve a long-standing problem in particle physics: that of deriving the
deep inelastic structure functions of the proton from the fundamental theory
of strong interactions, quantum chromodynamics (qcd). in the bjorken
limit, the momenta of the constituents of the proton (the partons) can be
assumed to be in a two-dimensional plane in minkowski space: a dimensional
reduction of qcd to two space-time dimensions. two dimensional qcd is
then shown to be equivalent for all energies and values of number of colors n
to a new theory of hadrons, quantum hadrondynamics (qhd). the phase
space of qhd is the grassmannian (set of subspcaes) of the complex hilbert
space l2(r) . the natural symplectic form along with a hamiltonian dene a
classical dynamical system, which is equivalent to the large n limit of qcd.
t hoofts planar limit is the linear approximation to our theory: we recover
his integral equation for the meson spectrum but also all the interactions of
the mesons. the grassmannian is a union of connected components labelled
by an integer (the renormalized dimension of the subspace) which has the
physical meaning of baryon number. the proton is the topological soliton:
the minimum of the energy in the sector with baryon number one gives the
structure functions of the proton. we solve the resulting integral equations
numerically; the agreement with experimental data is quite good for values
of the bjorken variable xb > 0.2 .

1rajeev@pas.rochester.edu

i

ii

contents

1 introduction

1
4
1.1 deep inelastic scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2 quantum chromodynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
structure functions from qcd . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3
1.4 reduction of qcd to two dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.5 two dimensional qcd in null gauge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
1.6 constraint on the variable

2 two-dimensional quantum hadron dynamics

17
2.1 grassmannians
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2 the dirac theory of fermions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.3 renormalized dimension of a subspace . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.4 some submanifolds of the grassmannian . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.5
integral kernels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.6 the innite dimensional unitary group . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
2.7 poisson structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
2.8 momentum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.9 kinetic energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
2.10 hamiltonian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
2.11 singular integrals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
2.12 hamiltonian in momentum space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
2.13 the equations of motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
2.14 linear approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
2.15 quantization of hadrondynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

3 baryons as solitons and their structure functions

45
3.1 quark distribution functions from qhd . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.2 rank one ansatz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48

i

3.3 approximate analytic solution for  = 0 . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3.4 numerical solution with the rank one ansatz . . . . . . . . . 53
3.5 quantization of the rank one ansatz . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3.6 valence quark distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

4 the parton model

63
4.1 parton wavefunctions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
4.2 hamiltonian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.3 hartree ansatz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66

5 beyond the valence parton model

69
5.1 a co-ordinate system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.2 the method of steepest descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72

sea quarks and anti-quarks

a a null co-ordinate system

75
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
a.1 kinematics
a.2 dirac matrices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
a.3 free fermions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
a.4 gauge fields
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
a.5 the dirac vacuum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78

b operator ideals

81
b.1 compact and hilbert-schimdt operators . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
b.2 schatten ideals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
b.3 the restricted unitary group and its grassmannian . . . . . 83
b.4 fredholm index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84

c quadrature of singular integrals

87
c.1 quadrature formulas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
c.2 singular measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89

ii

list of figures

tions for  = 0 .

. . . . . . . . 53

3.1 the approximate analytic solution for  = 0 .
3.2 comparison of numerical and approximate analytic solu-
3.3 comparison of parton wavefunctions (x) . the mrst
distribution agrees with our prediction best when the fraction
f of the momentum carried by the valence quarks is about 0.6 . 60

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

iii

iv

chapter 1

introduction

the rst indication that the atom contains a pointlike nucleus came from
experiments of rutherford. he scattered alpha particles (which are positively
charged) from a gold foil. since the negative charges (electrons) were known
to be much lighter than the alpha particles,they would not scatter the alpha
particles very much. if the positive charges inside the atom were more or less
uniformly distributed, the alpha particles would not be scattered through
wide angles. rutherford found to the contrary that the alpha particles were
scattered by wide angles. in fact the probability of scattering through an
2 , exactly what would happen if all the
angle
positive charge of the atom were concentrated at a point: he had discovered
the atomic nucleus. soon after, it was realized that the nucleus is of nite
size, although small compared to the atom. it is composed of protons and
neutrons bound together by the strong interaction.

 is proportional to

sin4 

many years later, another celebrated series of experiments studied the
structure of the proton itself. it was found that it was not an elementary
particle either, in fact that it was made of point-like constituents. in such
a deep inelastic scattering experiment an electron (or neutrino) beam is
scattered by a proton (or a nucleus containing both protons and neutrons).
the idea is to learn about the still mysterious strong interactions using the
electroweak interactions as a probe.

a particle that can take part in the strong interactions is called a hadron.
there are two kinds of hadrons: those of half-integer angular momentum are
called baryons and those of integer angular momentum are the mesons.
the proton is the lightest baryon and the
 -meson (pion) the lightest
meson. there are an innite number of baryons and mesons but the more

1

energetic ones are unstable against decay into the lighter hadrons. (we con-
sider an idealized world in which the electromagnetic, weak and gravitational
interactions of the hadrons with each other are ignored. thus a particle is
considered stable if its decays are purely electromagnetic or weak. this is
the sense in which the pion is stable. )

the hadrons are composed of more elementary constituents: the quarks,
anti-quarks and gluons. these constituents are collectively called partons[1,
2]. however, it has been found experimentaly that it is impossible to create
the partons in isolation: they only exist inside hadrons, and thus, are not
true particles. this is the phenomenon of connement. more precisely,
only combinations of quarks and gluons invariant under the action of the
color group su(n)
(see below) exist as isolation. thus hadrons can be
dened to be states that are invariant under color. some authors use the word
hadron to include the quarks and gluons. we will use the term hadron to
refer to a bound state of quarks and gluons which can exist as an isolated
particle. of course such a particle may be unstable against decay into other
hadrons.

around the same time of these developments an entirely dierent picture
of a baryon was proposed by skyrme [3]: that it is a topological soliton
made of an innite number of mesons. unfortunately, this idea did not t
with the dominant view of the time and was largely ignored. in the mid-
eighties skyrmes idea was nally revived by a group at syracuse university
(including the author) [4, 5, 6] and integrated into the modern theory of
strong interactions, i.e., quantum chromodynamics. witten [7] claried
why the baryons are fermions (when n is odd) even though the underlying
theory has only bosonic elds. ( witten had already arrived at the idea that
baryons are solitons in the large n limit of t hooft [8] by independent
arguments [9]. )

but then the problem remains how to reconcile it with the picture of a
baryon as a bound state of point-like constituents. we will show in these
lectures how the parton model can be derived from the soliton model. it fact
it had never been possible to derive the distribution functions of the partons
inside the hadron from fundamental principles. our picture will solve this
problem, providing for the rst time a quantitative theory of the structure
of a proton.

the basic idea of our approach is to nd a new description of strong in-
teractions directly in terms of hadrons rather than in terms of quarks and
gluons. it should be equivalent to the color singlet sector of qcd at all ener-

2

gies and all values of the number of colors. we will call this theory quantum
hadrondynamics. in four dimensions this is still just an idea; we havent been
able to show yet that such a new paradigm for strong interactions exists.
however in the two dimensional case, i constructed such an equivalent alter-
native formalism some years ago. part of the motivation for studying the two
dimensional case was that it would provide a solution to the problem of de-
riving the structure functions of four dimensional qcd. (it has been known
since the early work of feynman and bjorken that deep inelastic scattering
can be explained by a two dimensional theory of strong interactions.) the
rst report of the idea of such an equivalent theory was in ref.
[10]. the
solutions of the integral equations for the baryon wavefunction was rst stud-
ied in ref. [11]. a more detailed description of the theory appeared in ref.
[12]. in another direction, these ideas were applied to spherically symmetric
situations in ref.
[13]. the methods of geometrical quantization were ap-
plied to the problem in ref. [14]. there a version with bosonic quarks was
also studied. we returned to the study of the baryon wavefunctions in ref.
[15] where the derivation of the parton model, already mentioned in [12] was
given in more detail. in papers which will soon appear [16] we will extend
these results to include the anti-quark and sea quark distributions. some of
the ideas that go into this work are outlined in the last chapter. the basic
mathematical ideas necessary to derive the gluon structure functions have
also been developed [17]. we hope to solve that problem as well in the near
future.

the collinear approximation to qcd has alos been studied by other pa-
pers [18] however the combination of these ideas with the picture of a baryon
as a soliton as well as the idea of a quantum hadrondynamics seem unique
to our approach.

the ideas we introduce range from innite dimensional geometry to the
phenemenology of particle physics. indeed a whole new set of tools had to
be developed in order to implement the new paradigm we propose. some
of the methods are currently not associated with particle physics: they are
more closely related to classical mechanics and are perhaps more familiar to
mathematicians. but the new ideas of one generation become the standard
lore of the next. i hope these lecture notes will prepare a new generation of
theoretical physicists to pursue these ideas. prior knowledge of quantum eld
theory is not essential, but will provide perspective. in general, a higher de-
gree of mathematical maturity than specialized knowledge of particle physics
is assumed.

3

in the next few sections of this introduction we give a quick summary of
the physics background necessary. the reader who nds this boring should
skip to the next chapter, after a glance at sections 1.4 and 1.5 which are
essential to the argument.

1.1 deep inelastic scattering

let us consider in more detail the scattering of an electron by a proton. the
electron emits a virtual photon of momentum q = kf  ki where ki and
kf are the initial and nal electron momenta. this photon then interacts
|x > which could contain many
with the hadron producing some state
particles: several mesons and some excited baryons and anti-baryons. this
is an inelastic scattering process. if we sum over all the states
|x > so
produced, we will get the inclusive cross-section for the scattering of the
electron. upto wellknown electromagnetic eects, the cross-section for this
scattering is given by the matrix element[19]

1

w(p, q) =

=

< p |j(0)|x >< x|j(0)|p  > (2)44(p + q  px)

8x xx
8x z dxeiqx < p |j(x)j(0)|p  > .

1

here,

j(x)

is the electromagnetic current operator which is the one
appropriate for electron scattering: the weak interactions of the electron are
much smaller in comparison. for neutrino scattering it would instead be the
charged weak current (correponding to w  ) if the neutrino is converted into
an electron; and the neutral current (corresponding to z 0 ) otherwise. also,
p is the momentum of the hadron and we assume that we have averaged
over the spin
 of the hadron. (the target is usually not polarized, so
that we must average over the values of the spin variables. more detailed
measurements with polarized targets have been made more recently; we will
not consider these for now.)

the tensor w is symmetric and transverse: conservation of the electric

current gives

qw(p, q) = 0

(1.1)

lorentz invariance and parity (which is a symmetry of the electromagnetic

4

interactions) imply that the tensor w(p, q) has the form

w(p, q) = (cid:20) 

1

m2(cid:18)p  q

qq

q2 (cid:21)w1(xb, q2) +
q2 (cid:19)(cid:18)p  q
p  q

(1.2)

q2 (cid:19)w2(xb, q2).
p  q

q2 and p  q ( p 2

being lorentz scalars, the structure functions w1,2 can depend only
on the lorentz scalars
is xed to have the value
m2 , where m is the mass of the proton). when an electron is scattered
against a target, the momentum q of the photon it emits is space-like.it is
conventional to use the positive number q2 = q2 to describe the energy
of the photon. the higher the value of q2
the better the resolution of
our measurement of the structure of the hadron. as the other independent
variable we can take the dimensionless ratio (bjorken variable)

xb =

q2
2p  q

.

(1.3)

if the hadron we are studying is stable against strong decays (which is always
the case for experimental reasons ) it will be the lightest particle with its
quantum numbers. then, the mass of the intermediate state will be greater
than or equal to the mass of the target:

(p + q)2  m2;  [

1
xb  1]  0.

this shows that the bjorken variable takes values in the range

1  xb  0.

(1.4)

(1.5)

it is often more convenient to use another equivalent pair of structure

functions

f1(xb, q2) = w1(x, q2), f2(xb, q2) =

p  q
m2 w2(xb, q2).

(1.6)

in its rest frame the hadron has a certain size

a : it is of the order of
a1  100mev . if we take the limit
the the charge radius of the proton,
q2 >> a2 keeping xb xed we are looking deep inside the hadron: this is
the region of deep inelastic scattering. the basic idea is much like that of a

5

microscope: to see inside an object of size a we need light of a wavelength
that is small compared to a ; or equivalently an energy for the photon that
is large compared to a1 .

when the states are normalized by the usual convention

< p|p  >= 2ep (2)33(p  p ),

(1.7)

the functions f1,2(xb, q2) are dimensionless. it is found experimentally
that these functions are approximately independent of q2 : they depend
essentially only on the dimensionless ratio xb . the simplest explanation of
this phenomenon is that the proton is made of pointlike massless constituents:
the structure function would then depend only on the dimensionless ratio xb
.

if we multiply

p  q and q2 by the same number, the structure
functions are approximately invariant: this is the approximate symmetry
of scale invariance.
in the rst versions of this model, the partons were
concieved of as free particles. of course they must interact to bind into a
hadron, but the idea was that at high enough q2
the interaction would
for some reason be small. this was the germ of the idea of asymptotic
freedom: that the constituents of the hadrons behaved like free particles at
short distances, or high energies.

this parton model was subsequently derived [20, 21, 22], [23] from a
much deeper fundamental theory of strong interactions, quantum chromo-
dynamics (qcd). this is a nonabelian gauge theory which has the un-
usual property that at high q2 the coupling constant (which measures the
strength of the interaction) vanishes like
. here  is a parame-

1

log q2
2

ter with the dimensions of momentum which is a fundamental parameter of
qcd. hence at high energies (compared to  ) qcd tends to a free theory,
yielding asymptotic freedom and the parton model. in the limit of large q2
, the structure functions are predicted to be independent of q2 . at nite
values of q2 , the structure functions have a slow dependence on q2 ; as a
polynomial in the coupling constant, or equivalently,
. moreover, we

1

log q2
2

can calculate this dependence on

using perturbation theory: scale

invariance is broken in a way that is calculable. perturbation theory allows
us to calculate the q2 dependence of the structure functions: given the
value of f1,2(xb, q2) at one (large) value of q2 , we can calculate it for
any other large value of q2 . ( we mean that q should be large compared

1

log q2
2

6

to  , which is of the order of 100 mev . if q
theory can no longer be used.)

 is not large, perturbatiion

it is one of the triumphs of modern particle physics that perturbative

qcd accurately describes these scale violations.

however, the xb dependence of the structure functions are not as well-
understood. perturbation theory is not sucient to calculate it: f2(xb, q2)
is in a certain sense the probability distribution (in momentum space) of a
parton inside a hadron. thus it describes how partons bind together to form
a hadron. perturbation theory around a free eld theory can never describe
such bound states. due to the lack of any fundamental understanding of the
xb dependence of the structure functions, physicists have been forced to ex-
tract them directly from experiment. a whole generation of experimentalists
and phenemenologists have worked to produce a quite reliable extraction of
the xb dependence of structure functions from data. it will be our goal to
explain this from the fundamental theory of strong interactions, qcd.

in the next section we will summarize the denition of qcd as a quantum

eld theory.

1.2 quantum chromodynamics

quantum chromodynamics is the fundamental theory of strong interactions.
it is a non-abelian gauge theory with gauge group su(n) with matter elds
(quarks ) which are spin half fermions transforming under ( nf copies of
) the fundamental representation of
su(n) . the natural number n
is called the number of colors.
3 in nature; but it
will be convenient to leave it unspecied until the very end when we make
comparisons with data. the number of avors nf is 2 for most purposes
although it can be as high as
6 in principle: the heavier avors of quarks
can be ignored for most purposes. again, it is best to leave nf as an
arbitrary parameter for now.

it has the value

the action principle that denes qcd is

s =

n

4z trff d4x +

nfxa=1z qa[i   + ma]qad4x

the yangmills eld strength is

f = a  a + [a, a]

7

(1.8)

(1.9)

adx
where a are a set of four n  n anti-hermitean matrices:
is a one-form taking values in the lie algebra of the unitary group u(n)
. in perturbation theory, this gauge eld  describes gluons: massless spin
one particles analogous to the photon.
qa is a fermionic eld (describing
quarks) which is a dirac spinor transforming in the fundamental represen-
tation of the color group u(n) , for each
a . the index takes values
a = 1    nf , where nf is the number of copies of such quarks: the number
of avors.
the parameters of the theory are (in addition to n and nf ), the quark
masses ma
a = 1,   nf and the dimensionless coupling constant
 . in fact the quantum theory is dened by an additional set of rules for
renormalization which replace the constant  by a new parameter 
which has the dimensions of mass as well. these issues are well-known and
have been reviewed in several articles [23], so we will avoid them here. t he
basic point is that the the coupling constant acquires a dependence on the
energy scale   1
log q2
2

these nf + 1 parameters should in principle determine the masses and
decay rates as well as the structure functions of all the hadrons. it has turned
out to be quite dicult to predict hadronic properties from this fundamental
theory. we need to develop approximation methods which make the problem
tractable. for the most part this problem is still not solved. in these talks
we will describe how we solved a part of this puzzle: that of calculating the
hadronic structure functions from qcd.

for

.

1.3

structure functions from qcd

we noted earlier that since the electromagnetic interactions are well-understood,
it is sucient to concentrate on the unknown part of the problem, which
is encoded in the structure functions w1,2(xb, q2) . these were dened in
terms of the expectation values of the product of current operators. now,
part of qcd is tractable by perturbation theory; this allows us to reduce the
unknown part of the problem further to the expectation values of simpler
operators: the structure functions can be expressed in terms of parton dis-
tribution functions. the problem we will solve is that of calculating these
distribution functions.

the basic result that makes this reduction possible is called the factor-
ization theorem: the structure function can be written as a convolution of

8

xb and q2 dependence can be calculated in
two factors: one whose
perturbation theory (the hard factor); and another (the soft factor) which
has an unknown xb dependence but which is independent of q2 . this is
a result of quantum eld theory that can be proved to all orders of perturba-
tion theory; so it is comparable in depth to the proof of renormalizability of
gauge theories. we will just give an intuitive argument, pointing the reader
to the literature on perturbative qcd for details [19, 24].

the photon is scattered by a quark of charge

ea inside the hadron. to
leading order, the probability of the photon being scattered by the proton
can be written as the product of two pieces: the probablity that a quark
of some momentum k will scatter the photon and the probability that
there is such a quark inside the proton. (then we of course sum over the
intermediate momentum k .) this is the simplest version of the factorization
theorem. in the next order of perturbation theory, we will have to include the
possibility that quark might emit a gluon before absorbing the photon and
then re-emit it. we can imagine the scattering of the photon by the quark as
a subprocess with its own structure function, except that it can be calculated
within perturbation theory. the probability that a hadron contains a quark
of a given momentum is of course not calculable in perturbation theory: that
is the distribution function which we will attempt to understand.

in other words, the structure function of the proton can be written as
the convolution of two pieces: the structure function of a parton (which is
computable perturbatively) and the distribution function of the parton inside
the hadron (which is non-perturbative).

in more detail,

f2(xb, q2) = xi=a,a,gz 1

0

d


c i
2(

x


, q2)i().

(1.10)

here a(xb) is the probability of nding a quark of avor and momentum
fraction
is the probability for an anti-quark of
g for gluons. note that all the q2 dependence is
avor
in the rst factor; it can be calculated as a power series in
using

xb inside a proton;

a , and

a

1

log q2
2

the standard rules of perturbation theory. to leading order in perturbation
theory, even the rst factor is independent of q2 :

c a

2 (xb, q2) = c a

2 (xb, q2) = e2

2 (xb, q2) = 0.

(1.11)

a(xb  1), c g
9

bi(k), b

i (k) are the creation-annihilation operators for the parton, we

if
have

i(xb) =x z d2kt

(2)2 < p |b

i (xbp, kt )bi(xbp, kt )|p  > .

(1.12)

here, we are averaging over all possible values of the part of the momentum
orthogonal to the plane spanned by p and
q , (called the transverse
momentum kt ).

in terms of the eld operators, we get the quark distribution functions

a(xb) =

1

2x z dyeixbp y < p |qa(y, 0t )qa(0)|p  >

and the anti-quark distribution functions

a(xb) = 

1

2x z dyeixbp y < p |qa

(y, 0t )[] qa

(0)|p  > .

(1.13)

(1.14)

the position arguments of the eld operators are separated by a null line in
the plane spanned by p and q . the averaging over transverse momenta
implies that in position space, these eld operators have the same transverse
co-ordinates.

since the gluons do not carry electric charge, to the leading order of
perturbative qcd, the gluon distribution functions are not necessary in order
to understand the structure of the proton. we will ignore them for now.

these formulae are not gauge-invariant and are to be understood in the
null gauge a = 0 . in a general gauge we should insert a parallel transport

operator p er a(y,0t )dy along the null line connecting two eld operators.

1.4 reduction of qcd to two dimensions

we are probing the hadron (whose momentum is a time-like vector
p )
by a photon (or w, z -boson) with a spacelike momentum q . these
two vectors dene a two-dimensional subspace of minkowski space. there
is also a spacelike vector
a which characterizes the size of the hadron:
a is the charge radius of the hadron. in the deep inelastic
the length of
limit, q2 = q2 >> |a|1 keeping
2p q xed. this means
that the hadron is of very large size in the directions transverse to the two

xb = q2

10

dimensional subspace spanned by p and q . by the uncertainty principle,
|a|1 , which is thus
the transverse momentum of its constituents is of order
small compared to q . a reasonable rst approximation would be to let
the hadron have innite extent in the transverse directions; and to require
the momenta of the constituents to lie entirely in the plane spanned by p, q
. in other words the approximation is that the elds are independent of the
transverse spatial co-ordinates.

this is analogous to the procedure of dimensional reduction popular in
unied eld theories of gravity. the main dierence is that the dimensions
that are ignored do not form a subpace of small volume:
instead they are
innite in extent. the point is that the momenta in these directions are
small which is the same as requiring that the elds are independent of those
spatial directions: a dimensional reduction.

thus deep inelastic scattering is described by the dimensional reduction
of qcd to two dimensions. that is what makes this phenomenon accessi-
ble: two dimensional gauge theories have been understood by the large n
method. with some further (less drastic) approximations we will be able to
determine the spectrum and structure of hadrons in two dimensions. these
should then be veriable experimentally.

the dimensional reduction of qcd to two dimensions is given by the

action principle

s =

41z trff d2x +
21z tr(a)2d2x +

nfxa=1z qa[i   + ma]qad4x
21z tr[3, 4]2d2x +z qa(i)a

n

n

n

+

 aqad2x.

0, 1 . the gauge
here we allow the indices ,  to take only the values
eld now splits into a 1-form in the two dimensional space with components
a and a pair of scalar elds
corresponding to the
transverse polarization states of the gluon.

3 = a3, 4 = a4

the four dimensional dirac spinor q splits into a pair of twodimensional
q , corresponding the two eigenvalues of 34 . moreover 1 is
spinors
the coupling constant of the two-dimensional theory which has dimensions of
(mass)2. it is a combination of  and the size of the hadron:
1  a2
. thus the reduction of qcd to two dimensions gives a gauge theory with
scalar elds in the adjoint representation, and twice as many avors of quarks
as the original theory.

11

we will study for the most part two dimensional qcd, dened by the

action

s =

n

41z trff d2x +

nfxa=1z qa[i   + ma]qad4x.

this is not quite the same as the dimensional reduction of four dimensional
qcd to two dimensions: there are no scalar elds. this truncated theory will
be sucient to to determine the quark and anti-quark structure functions to
the accuracy we need. the essential techniques required to solve the theory
including the scalar elds have been developed as well. we will return to
them in a later publication.

1.5 two dimensional qcd in null gauge

the essential simplication of two dimensional qcd is that the gauge elds
can be removed completely from the problem, leaving just the quark elds
q and q and the scalar gluons a . this should not be too surprising: in
d dimensional space-time, a gauge eld has d  2 polarization states.(
of course, we still have the scalar elds  which are the remnants in two
dimensions of the two polarization states of the gluon in four dimensional
gauge theory. but we will ignore them, as they are mostly relevant to the
determination of the gluon structure functions: a problem we will postpone
to a later publication.)

we will change notation slightly from the last section:the indices

a, b
etc. will denote the pairs
1, 2,   2nf
.this simply reects the fact that the two dimensional theory has twice as
many avors as the four dimensional theory: the transverse polarization label
looks just just like a avor index to the two-dimensional theory.

a ,

b , so they will range over

in the null gauge, the action of the theory becomes (see appendix a)

l = a(it)a  a(cid:26) 1

2

[p +

m2
p

]  iat(cid:27)a +

n
21

tr[xat]2.

(1.15)

the eld at carries no dynamical degrees of freedom: it can be elimi-

nated in terms of  by solving its equations of motion:

ai

tj(x) =

i
n

1z 1

2|x  y| : ai(y)aj(y) : dy.

(1.16)

12

(the coulomb potential in one-dimensional space is given by
(x  y) .) the hamiltonian of the resulting theory is

2
x2

1

2|x y| =

h = z dxai 1
1z 1

1
2n



[p +

2

m2
p

]ai

2|x  y| : ai(x)aj(x) :: bj(y)bi(y) : dxdy

now dene the operator

m a

b (x, y) = 

2
n

: ai(x)bi(y) :

(1.17)

x and
which is gauge invariant. it describes the creation of a quark at
an anti-quark at
y , but in a color invariant combination: in other words
it describes a meson. the hamiltonian above can be expressed entirely in
terms of this operator after some reordering of factors of  .

we can rearrange the quartic operator in the  s as a quadratic operator

in m . first,

: ai(x)aj(x) :: bj(y)bi(y) : = : ai(x)aj(x)bj(y)bi(y) :

+ : ai(x)bi(y) :< 0|aj(x)bj(y)|0 >
+ < 0|ai(x)bi(y)|0 >: aj(x)bj(y) :

now,(see appendix a)

b z 0
< 0|ai(x)bi(y)|0 >= na



dp
2

eipx+ipy = na
b

1
2

[(x  y) + (x  y)]

where,

thus,

(x  y) = pz sgn (p)eip(xy) dp

2

.

: ai(x)aj(x) :: bj(y)bi(y) : = : ai(x)aj(x)bj(y)bi(y) :

+ : ai(x)ai(y) ::

[(x  y) + (x  y)]
[(x  y) + (x  y)] : ai(x)ai(y) :

n
2

+

n
2

13

on the other hand,

m a

b (x, y) m b

n(cid:19)2
a(y, x) = (cid:18) 2
n(cid:19)2
= (cid:18) 2

: ai(x)bi(y) :: bj(y)aj(x) :

: ai(x)bi(y)bj(y)aj(x) :

the terms corresponding to other orderings of  will involve (y, y) which
should be interpreted as zero. so,

2(cid:19)2
: ai(x)aj(x) :: bj(y)bi(y) : = (cid:18) n
2(cid:19) m a
+(cid:18) 
[(x  y) + (x  y)](cid:18) 

b (x, y) m b
a(y, x)
n
2

a (x, y)

n
2

m a

n

+

[(x  y) + (x  y)]
a (y, x)

2(cid:19) m a

n

thus,

[p +

] m

a
a(p, p)

2
p

2

n

h = (cid:18) 

+(cid:18) 

1
2n

2(cid:19)z 1
1z 1
2 (cid:19) m a

n 2

+

dp
2
m a

2(cid:19)2
2|x  y|(cid:26) (cid:18)n
a (x, y)(x  y)(cid:27)dxdy

b (x, y) m b

a(y, x)

we have dropped terms involving (x  y)|x y| since this product is just
zero; moreover the two terms involving
(x  y) are equal and have been
combined.

now we use the identity

z 1
2|x  y|(x  y)f (x  y)dxdy = 

1

pz 1

p

f (p, p)

dp
2

.

(1.18)

thus

where

h
n

= 
1
8

1

2z 1
1z 1

] m

2
p

[p +

2
2|x  y| m a

+

a
a(p, p)

dp
2
b (x, y) m b

a(y, x)dxdy

2 = m2 

1


.

14

(1.19)

the commutation relations can also be expressed entirely in terms of the
variables
m

m :

m

m

a
b (p, q),

a
d(p, s)]

c

{

d(r, s)} =

1

n(cid:18)c
b2(q  r)[a
d2(s  p)[c
a

d sgn (p  s) +
m
b sgn (r  q) +

c

d(r, q)](cid:19).

we notice that in the limit of large n , these commutators become small:
it is a sort of classical limit.

1.6 constraint on the variable

m

we have all the essential ingredients of a reformulation of two dimensional
qcd in terms of the color singlet variable m , eliminating quarks and
gluons from the picture. the commutation relations and the hamiltonian
m . however there is one
together inply the time evolution equations for
m
more ingredient which we can miss at rst: the set of allowed values of
m behaves much like bosonic
. being bilinear in the fermionic variables,
variables: they satisfy commutation relations (rather than anti-commutation
relations). also, they have a classical limit; in our case this is the large n
limit when there commutators become small. but their origin as fermion
bilinears have a residual eect: they satisfy a quadratic constraint. this
constraint is ultimately an expression of the pauli exclusion principle; even
in the large n limit the fact the underlying degrees of freedom are fermions
cannot be ignored.

regard the classical variable

1
n i(x)i(y) as a matrix in the variables

(x, y) obtained by taking the large n
limit of
y . it is in
fact the density matrix of quarks. its eigenvalues have to be between zero
and one: zero when the state is completely empty and one when it is lled.
for the color singlet states (hadrons), each state is either completely lled
with quarks or completely empty. hence the eigenvalue is either 0 or one,
and this density matrix is a projection operator:

2 =  or,

x and

z (x, y)(y, z)dz = (x, z).

(1.20)

this is a quadratic constraint on the classical variable.

another (oversimplied) way to understand this constraint is that (x, y)
corresponds to a meson state where a quark is created at x and an anti-

15

quark at
y . if we now create two mesons, with the position of the anti-
quark of the rst coinciding with the quark of the second, they will annihilate
eachother leaving us with one meson!.

we will usually use the normal ordered variable m(x, y) = 1

n : i(x)j(y) :

, which has the advanatage that m = 0 on the vacuum. in terms of it the
constraint becomes, in matrix notation

[, m]+ + m 2 = 0.

(1.21)

m has to satisfy some technical conditions as well, but we will talk about
them later.

it is possible to prove these constraints by a straightforward calculation
on the operators, even when n is held nite. ] (see the appendix of ref.
[13].) it is important to note that they only hold in the color singlet subspace
of the fermionic operators.

this means that it is possible to understand two dimensional qcd with-
m is gauge
out ever mentioning quarks, antiquarks or gluons. the operator
invariant and can be the eld variable of a theory that directly describes
hadrons. from this point of of view quarks and gluons are just mathematical
artifacts. this gives us a whole new paradigm for the theory of strong inter-
actions. instead of a quantum chromodynamics in terms of unobservable
quarks and gluons but a new quantum hadrondynamics in terms of the
directly observable particles, the hadrons.

in the next chapter we will develop just such a point of view. we will
rst present a classical theory which is equivalent to the large n limit of
the above theory. upon quantization we will recover two-dimensional qcd.

16

chapter 2

two-dimensional quantum
hadron dynamics

in this chapter we will present rst the classical hadron theory and then its
quantization. we will see that the quantum hadron theory is equivalent to
qcd in two dimensions.

2.1 grassmannians

let h = l2(r)  c n2f be the complex hilbert space of complex-valued
functions on the real line1. dene the subspace of functions whose fourier
transforms vanish for negative momenta:

h+ =(cid:26)|(x) =z 

0

2(cid:27)
(p)eipx dp

and its orthogonal complement

h =(cid:26)|(x) =z 0



2(cid:27).
(p)eipx dp

(2.1)

(2.2)

the functions in h+ are boundary values of analytic functions on the upper
half of the complex plane in the variable x . (of course h is related to
the lower half of the complex plane in the same way.) dene the operator

1the number n2f is the number of avors of the two dimensional theory; it is twice

the number of avors of the four-dimensional theory.

17

 (the sign of the momentum) to be 1 on h and +1 on h+ .
clearly

 = ,

2 = 1.

(2.3)

the grassmannian of h is the set of all its subspaces. to each subspace
w , there is an operator  which is 1 on w and +1 on w  .
again,

 = , 2 = 1.

(2.4)

conversely any such operator corresponds to an orthogonal splitting of h
: it will have eigenvalues 1 and w can be identied as the subspace
with negative eigenvalue. thus the set of such  s is the same as the set
of subspaces of h .the set of subspaces of h is the grassmannian, which
we can thus also regard as the set of operators  satisfying the above
condition.

but we dont want to allow all such subspaces: since h is innite
dimensional, that would give a grassmannian that is too big. for example,
its tangent space will not be a hilbert space, and it wouldnt admit a riemann
metric. we should only allow subspaces w that are at a nite distance
from h . it is convenient to introduce the variable

m =   

(2.5)

which measures the deviation from the standard point  , which corresponds
to the subspace h . we will require that m be hilbert-schmidt. that
is, the sum of the absolute magnitudes squared of all its matrix elements is
nite. (see appendix b for a rapid summary of some functional analysis we
will need.) this sum is a measure of the distance of w from h .

thus we dene the restricted grassmannian to be,

gr(h, ) = {m  = m,

[, m]+ + m 2 = 0, trm 2 < }.

(2.6)

the set of all such m s forms an innite dimensional hilbert manifold.
this manifold is dened by a quadratic equation in the (real) hilbert space
of self-adjoint hilbert-schmidt operators.

if we split the operator into

2  2 blocks (as in  =(cid:18)1

0

0

1(cid:19) ),

m =(cid:18) a

b

b

d(cid:19)

18

(2.7)

we get (using the constraint on m ),

a =

1
2

(bb + a2),

d = 

1
2

(bb + d2),

ab + bd = 0.

(2.8)

since m as a whole is hilbert-schmidt,
b : h+  h is hilbert-schmidt
as well. the above constraints then imply that a and d are trace-class.
this means roughly speaking that the sum of their eigenvalues is absolutely
convergent (see the appendix b for precise denition).

note that

a is a positive operator and

d a negative operator. in

particular,

tra  0 and

trd  0 .

the tangent space at the origin is given by the special case where a, b, c, d
are all innitesimally small. the constraints then show that a and d are
second order innitesimals while b are rst order. in the rst order the only
constraint on b is that it has to be a hilbert-schmidt operator. thus, the
tangent space at the origin is a complex hilbert space, consisting of operators

of the form m =(cid:18) 0

b

b

0(cid:19) . in other words we have the identication,

t0 gr(h, ) = i 2(h+  h).

(2.9)

2.2 the dirac theory of fermions

we have introduced the grassmannian from a purely geometric point of view
above. but it has a natural physical interpretation in terms of the dirac
theory of fermions.

in diracs theory, the complex hilbert space h represents the set of
states of a single fermion. there is a self-adjoint operator h representing
energy. in the null co-ordinates we are using, energy is

p0 =

1
2

[p +

m2
p

].

(2.10)

thus it has the same sign as the null component of momentum p . the main
physical obstacle to this interpretation is that the energy is not positive: all
states are thus unstable with respect to decay into the negative energy states
of lower and lower energy.

diracs main idea was that in any physical state all except a nite number
of the negative energy states are occupied. since fermions obey the pauli

19

exclusion principle, only one particle can occupy a given state: decay into
states of very low energy is forbidden because those states are occupied. in
particular the vacuum is not the state containing no particles. instead the
vacuum is the state where all the negative energy states are occupied and
the positive energy states are empty. the lled negative energy states in
the vacuum is called the dirac sea. all physical quantities such as energy
or charge are to be measured in terms of their departure from the vacuum
value: even though the vacuum contains an innite number of particles, it is
still assiged zero energy, charge etc.

an excitation from the vacuum could be a state where a nite number
of positive energy states are occupied and a nite number of negative energy
states are empty. such a state will have positive energy compared to the
vacuum. the empty negative energy states (also called holes) have positive
energy. the holes themselves behave just like the particles except that they
have the opposite value for some observables such as electric charge. they
are the anti-particles. the number of particles minus the anti-particles is a
conserved quantity which can take any integer value. an arbitrary physical
state is a linear combination of such states containing a nite number of
particles and anti-particles.

a mathematical interpretation of this situation can be given in terms of
a modied exterior product of h . in familiar non-relativistic theories, the
space of states of a multi-particle system of fermions would be the exterior
r=0 rh . instead
power of order
in diracs theory we split the one particle hilbert space into two subspaces
h  h+ of negative and positive energy. the space of states of the multi-
particle system is

r , where is the number of fermions: p

f =

xr,s=0

sh

  rh+.

(2.11)

this space of multi-particle states is called the fock space.

there is a subset of states in this fock space cosnisting of wedge products
of single particle states. ( a general state is a linear combination of such
wedge products.) suppose, w is a subspace which doesnt dier too much
from h . that is, the intersection of w with h+ and the intersection
of w  with h are both nite dimensional. then we can form a state in
f in which all states of w are occupied and all those in w  are empty.
is a basis in w  h+ and and fj a basis in w   h .
suppose

ei

20

then the state in f corresponding to occupying w will contain particles
in w  h+ and holes in w   h :

f 1

 f 2

     e1  e2  e3     .

(2.12)

is the dual basis in [w  h] ). moreover this is independent
(here, f j 
(upto multiplication by a complex number) of the choice of basis. thus to
each such subspace w  h there is a state (upto scalar multiple) in the
fock space f . in other words we have an embedding of the grassmannian
into the projective space pf ) . this is the innite dimensionl version of
the plucker embedding familiar from algebraic geometry. [25, 26].
the grassmannian describes this subset of states in diracs theory. the
condition that the operator m =    corresponding to a subspace w
be hilbert-schmidt is precisely what is required for the above construction
to go through. (it is not necessary to require that the projection operator
+ : w  h+ be nite dimensional as we did above: the precise condtion
for the construction to work is that it be hilbert-schmidt.) what is special
about this family of states is that they are coherent states: they minimize the
uncertainty in the physical observables. hence they are the states that have
a sensible classical limit. the set of such coherent states is the classical phase
space of the theory. that is why it is sensible to choose the grassmannian
as the classical phase space of our theory of hadrons.

diracs theory was originally meant to describe electrons. we should
think of it now as applied to quarks. since the quarks are also fermions, this
is reasonable. but there is one impotant twist: each quark comes in n
colors: thus each state in h can be occupied by n quarks, not just
one. moreover, only states that are invariant under the action of the group
su(n) are allowed: these are the states that describe the hadrons. the
classical limit referred to above is the large n limit.

the operator  has eigenvalue 1 on states that are completely
lled and +1 on states that are empty. the variable m measures the
deviation from the vacuum state, in which all the negative energy states are
completely lled. a baryon is essentially a color invariant bound state of n
quarks. thus the dirac sea of quarks can also be thought as a sea of baryons:
each state is lled either by n quarks or by a baryon. an innitesimal
disturbance from this can be thought of either as the creation of a meson (
a quarkanti-quark pair) or as the promotion of a quark from the negative
energy sea to a positive energy state. this is an innitesimal change if the

21

number of colors n is large. the operator m thus has to be determined
by a map b : h  h+ . the block-diagonal elements of m are zero in
this innitesimal limit.
in addition to such small deviations from the vacuum, the theory also
allows for topological solitons which are not connected to the vacuum by any
continuos path. these are very important, as they describe the baryons. to
see how they arise we need to understand the topological properties of the
grassmannian. this is the subject of the next section.

2.3 renormalized dimension of a subspace

recall that  = +m has eigenvalues 1 . hence in some formal sense the
trace of  is an even integer: the dierence between the number of positive
eigenvalues and the number of negative eigenvalues. but of course this trace
is not convergent. even if we subtract the contribution of the vacuum, it
is divergent: the
trm can diverge, only the trace of its square needs to
be convergent in general, since we only required it to be hilbert-schmidt.
however the trace of m is conditionally convergent: we can dene it to be
the trace with respect to the above splitting into submatrices:

trm = tra + trd.

(2.13)

this trace exists since a and d are trace-class matrices. it can be shown
to be an even integer, which is invariant under the continuous deformations
of the operator m .

the interpretation of  in terms of subspaces will help us understand
the meaning of this integer. imagine that we take a state from h+ and add
it to h to get a subspace w : then w has dimension one more than
h . this should change the trace of  by 2 : one of the eigenvalues of
trm is essentially the dierence
 has changed from +1 to 1 . since
between the traces of  and  , we have
trm = 2 . thus

b = 

1
2

trm

(2.14)

is the renormalized dimension of the subspace it describes: the dierence
between its dimension and the dimension of the standard subspace h .
in fact this is the only topological invariant of m : any two oper-
ators with the same conditional trace can be connected to each other by

22

a continuous path. thus the restricted grassmannian is a union of con-
nected components labelled by an integer, which is called the virtual rank
or renormalized dimension of that component. since it is invariant under
all continuous deformations, in particular it will be invariant under time
evolution. this is true for any reasonable denition of time evolution, inde-
pendent of the choice of hamiltonian. thus the renormalized dimension is a
topologically conserved quantity.

each connected component of the grassmannian by itself is an innite
dimensional manifold. although the dierent components are the same (dif-
feomorphic) as manifolds, the component of rank zero has a special role as it
contains the vacuum m = 0 . an example with renormalized dimension
one is a factorizable operator,

m = 2  .

(2.15)

the constraints on m are satised if  is a positive energy state of length
one:

 = ,

||||2 = 1.

(2.16)

in the interpretation in terms of the dirac theory, we have lled a positive
energy state  in addition to all the negative energy states. hence this
state contains an additional fermion occupying the state  .

more generally, let a be an orthonormal system of states satisfying

(2.17)

(2.18)

 = a, < a, b >= a
b .

then

m = 2xa

aa  

a

is a solution of the constraints with renormalized dimension pa a . in this

conguration, we have lled a certain number if positive energy states ( a
with positive a ) while creating holes in some others, a , with negative
a . the renormalized dimension is just the dierence between the number
of occupied positive energy states and the number of holes in the negative
energy states.

thus we see that the renormalized dimension is just the fermion number
if we interpret the grassmannian in terms of the dirac sea. we will see

23

that the separable conguration is related to the valence quark model of the
baryon.

as noted earlier,

a  0 and d  0 ; thus

a contributes negatively
to the baryon number and d positively. the only congurations that have
b = 0 implies
b = 0 are the separable ones above. to see this note that,
that
in order to
be trace class, these have to be nite rank projections: corresponding to a
certain number of baryons and anti-baryons.

d are proportional to projection operators.

a and

the valence parton approximation of the parton model corresponds to
the separable ansatz in our soliton model. in that approximation, a(p) is
zero: there are no antiquarks in the proton within the valence approximation.

2.4 some submanifolds of the grassmannian

in principle a baryon can be in any of the congurations of renormalized di-
mension one: the ground state (proton) will be the one of least energy. once
we have determined the energy function (see below), the proton structure
functions are determined by minimizing this energy over all possible cong-
urations. later on, we will describe a method to do just that numerically:
the steepest descent method. however this is a computationally intensive
and slow method. a much faster method will be to minimize the energy
over some submanifold of the grassmannian, which is chosen so that the
minimum in this submanifold is close to the true minimum, yet is easier to
nd.

physical intuition plays an important role in the choice of the ansatz
of congurations explored this way. such restricted phase spaces play an
important role in our conceptual understanding as well: we will see that the
theory restricted to rank one congurations of the type
||||2 = 1

m = 2  ,

 = ,

(2.19)

is just the valence parton model: we will be able to derive the parton model
from qhd this way.

note that a change of phase   ei does not aect m . indeed
the set of rank one congurations is a submanifold of the grassmannian
dieomorphic to p(h+) . if we restrict the dynamics of our theory to this
submanifold, we get an approximate theory which we will show is equivalent
to the valence parton model.

24

allowing for a slightly larger set of congurations will give us the parton
model with sea quarks and anti-quarks. we will describe here the subman-
ifold of the grassmannian that descibes this approximation to our theory.
we generalize the above rank one ansatz to a nite rank ansatz

m = 
.

(2.20)

here, the
orthonormal:

 are a nite number

r of eigenstates of

 which are

 = , 

 = 
 .

the constraints

m = m ,

( + m)2 = 1, 

1
2

trm = 1,

trm 2 < 

become the constraints on the

r  r matrix  :

 = ,

[ + ]2 = 1, 

1
2

tr = 1.

(2.21)

(2.22)

(2.23)

 =

1
0

0

0
2

  

  
  
  
r



here,

is a diagonal

r  r matrix, the restriction of

 to the nite dimensional subspace spanned by the  . the condition
trm 2 <  is of course automatic since m is now an operator of nite
rank.
thus, given a set of vectors  satisfying the above conditions, we get a
point in the grassmannian of renormalized dimension one if  itself belongs
to a nite dimensional grassmannian. if there are
r+ vectors  with
positive momentum and r with negative momentum, we have

tr[ + ] = r+  r  2.

(2.24)

the simplest solution is,
r+ = 1, r = 0, so that  is just a number: it
then has to be 2 . this is the rank one solution desribed earlier, which
leads to the valence parton model.
r = r+ + r is two, there is no solution to the above requirements
(more precisely all solutions reduce to the rank one solution). the next

if

25

simplest possibility is of rank three, with
r+ = 2, r = 1 . then each
solution to the constraints on  determines a one dimensional subspace of
c 3 ; i.e., a point in cp 2 . in other words, for each such  , there is a unit

vector

 =


0
+

  c 3 such that

 +  = 1 + 2   ,

||||2 = 1.

(2.25)

now, there is a u(1)  u(2) gauge symmetry in the problem: we can
rotate the two positive energy vectors 0 and + into each other and
change the phase of the negative energy vector  without changing m ,
provided we make the corresponding changes in  as well. this u(1)u(2)
action changes the phase of  and rotates the other two components among
each other. this freedom can be used to choose

 =


0

[1   2

]

 ,

 > 0.

(2.26)

in summary the submanifold of rank three congurations of renormalized
dimension one is given by

m = 20  
+[1   2

0 + 2{[  
][  

+ + +  
]}
where , 0, + are three vectors in h satisfying
+ = +,

0 = 0,

 = ,

  +  
+]

||||2 = ||0||2 = ||+||2 = 1, 

0+ = 0.

also,

0    1.

(2.27)

(2.28)

(2.29)

the special case

 = 0 reduces to the rank one ansatz.

the physical meaning is clear if we consider the negative momentum

components of m . the anti-quark distribution function is

a(p) = maa(p,p) =  2



|a(p)|2.

(2.30)

26

 2
 is the probability of nding an anti-quark inside the baryon.
thus
 2
|a(p)|2
is the distribution function of the anti-quark of avor
also,
| 0a(p)|2 +  2
is the distribution function
a . in the same way
| 0a(p)|2
for quarks. in a loose sense
is the valence quark wavefunction
and | +a(p)|2 is the sea quark wavefunction. but the splitting of the quark
distribution into a valence and a sea distribution is rather arbitrary and has
no real physical meaning.

| +a(p)|2

by using the ansatz above with a larger and larger rank we can get better
and better approximations to the grassmannians. but the expressions get
quite complicated beyond the rank three ansatz. we will nd that this
rank three ansatz holds the key to understanding the anti-quark and sea
quark disributions in the quark model. a variational ansatz based on these
congurations will provide a derivation of the parton model with sea quarks
and anti-quarks from quantum hadrondynamics.

2.5 integral kernels

we can express the operator m in terms of its integral kernel in position
space2:

m(x) =z m(x, y)(y)dy.

(2.31)

alternately we can think in terms of its action on the momentum space
wavefunctions:

(p) =z (x)eipxdx, (x) =z (p)eipx dp

2

and

(2.32)

(2.33)

(2.34)

the two points of view are of course related by fourier transformation:

.

dq
2

g[m](p) =z m(p, q) (q)
m(x, y) =z m(p, q)eipxiqy dpdq
(2)2 .

2 we will often suppress the indices a, b etc. labelling the basis in c n2f

27

the operator

 is diagonal in momentum space:

it can also be described in position space as a distribution:

f(p) = sgn (p) (p).
pz

i

(x) =z (x  y)(y)dy =

(2.35)

1

x  y

(y)dy

(2.36)

in fact this is a well-known object in complex function theory: the hilbert
transform (except for a factor of
i ). it relates the real and imaginary parts
of analytic functions.

the constraints on m become then,

m(p, q) = m (q, p)

[ sgn (p) + sgn (q)] m(p, q) + z m (p, r) m(r, q)

dr
2

= 0

z |m(p, q)|2 dpdq

2

< 

or equivalently, position space,

m(x, y) = m (y, x)

z [(x, y)m(y, z) + m(x, y)(y, z) + m(x, y)m(y, z)]dy = 0
z |m(x, y)|2dxdy < .

it is useful to see what the tangent space at the origin is like. since m

is innitesimally small, the constraint can be linearized:

[ sgn (p) + sgn (q)] m (p, q) = 0.

(2.37)

m (p, q) is only non-zero if p and q are of opposite signs. in fact,
thus
the case where
p > 0, q < 0 determines the opposite one because of the
hermiticity condition on m . thus the tangent space is just the space of
square integrable functions of one positive variable and one negative variable
m (p, q) .

2.6 the innite dimensional unitary group

given any self-adjoint operator  ,
transformation

g is unitary,

if the
gg = gg = 1 , it preserves the condition

is also self-adjoint.

gg

28

2 = 1 . indeed the action of the unitary group on such operators is tran-
sitive: any operator satisfying  =  and 2 = 1 can be taken to any
other by a unitary transformation. in terms of the variable m , the unitary
transformation is

m 7 gmg + g[, g].

(2.38)

in the innite dimensional case, we have required that m be hilbert-
schmidt (h-s). this means that there is a corresponding condition on the
family of allowed unitary transformations: we dene the restricted unitary
group,

u(h, ) = {g|gg = 1, [, g]  i 2}.

(2.39)

it is straightforward to verify that the h-s condition on the commutator is
preserved under the multiplication and inverse operations, since
is an
ideal in the algebra of bounded operators.

i 2

indeed the restricted grassmannian is a homogenous space of this re-

stricted unitary group:

gr(h, ) = u(h, )/u(h+)  u(h).

the lie algebra of the restricted unitary group is

u(h, ) = {u|u = u, [, u]  i 2}.

the innitesimal action on the variable m is:

m 7 [u,  + m].

2.7 poisson structure

(2.40)

(2.41)

(2.42)

we will regard the grassmannian as the phase space of our dynamical sys-
tem. the matrix elements of the operator m are then a complete set of
observables. we will seek a set of poisson brackets among these variables.
fortunately there is a natural choice: there is a unique choice that is invariant
under the action of the restricted unitary group. in fact the grassmannian
can be viewed as the co-adjoint orbit of the (central extension of the ) unitary
group. we can regard the poisson structure as induced by the kirillov sym-
plectic form on this orbit. however, the physical arguments use the poisson

29

brackets rather than the symplectic form so in thsi paper we will not say
much aboutthe sympletic form. (see refs. [12, 14] for an elaboration of this
more geometric point of view.)

if the poisson brackets are invariant under the action of the group, the

innitesimal action,

would be a canonical transformation for any u satisfying

m  [u,  + m]

u = u, [, u]  i 2.

(2.43)

(2.44)

the natural choice of a function that generates this canonical transformation
is of the form

fu = k tr um

(2.45)

k . there is a technical problem: the trace may not

for some constant
exist. now remember that under the splitting h = h  h+ ,
i 2 i 1(cid:19)
d(cid:19) (cid:18)i 1 i 2

i 2 b (cid:19) , m =(cid:18) a

u =(cid:18) 




(cid:19) (cid:18) b i 2

b

b

(2.46)

(2.47)

so that the conditional trace

trum = tra + trb  trb + trd

exists. moreover its value is some imaginary number, so that the constant
k should also be purely imaginary in order that

fu = k trum

be a real-valued function.

thus we postulate the poisson brackets

these imply, of course that

{fu, m} = [u,  + m].

{fu, fv} = k trv[u,  + m] = f[u,v] + k trv[u, ].

(2.48)

(2.49)

(2.50)

the commutation relations of the restricted unitary group are satised only
upto a constant term: it is the central extension of the unitary group that

30

acts on the grassmannian, not the group itself. this has been studied at
great length in the book by pressley and segal [27] so we wont go too far in
that direction.

we can write the poisson brackets also in terms of the integral kernel of

the operator m in position space:

k{m a

b (x, y), m c

d(z, u)} = c
b(y  z)[a
d(x  u)[c
a

d(x, u) + m a

d (x, u)]

b(z, y) + m c

d(z, y)],

or momentum space:

k{ m a

b (p, q), m c

b2(q  r)[a
d(r, s)} = c
a
d2(s  p)[c

d sgn (p  s) + m a
b sgn (r  q) + m c

d (p, s)]

d(r, q)].

the principle of invariance under the unitary group cannot determine the
constant k in the poisson brackets. in a sense it doesnt matter what value
we choose for it, as long as the values of all the observables are also multiplied
by k . however it will be convenient to choose the value k = i
2 as we will
see in the next subsection.

soon we will have to calculate the poisson bracket of functions

f (m)
which is not linear in m . the derivative of such a function can be thought
of as an operator valued function f (m) of m :

df = trf (m)dm =z f b

a (m)d m a

b (p, q)

dpdq
(2)2

(2.51)

then we can use the above poisson brackets to get

k{f, m} = [f (m),  + m]

where the l.h.s.
 + m . we leave the proof as an exercise to the reader.

involves the commutator, as operators, of

(2.52)

f (m) and

2.8 momentum

the above poisson brackets are invariant under translations. there must be
a canonical transformation that implements this symmetry. formally, this is
given by chosing u to be the derivative operator with respect to position;
or,
i times the multiplication by momentum. (strictly speaking this is not

31

in the lie algebra of the unitary group since it is not bounded, but let us
ignore this technicality for the moment.) thus, momentum is

p = ikz p m (p, p)

dp
2

.

(2.53)

now, imagine calculating this quantity for the separable conguration of

renormalized dimension one:

m = 2  ,

||||2 = 1,

 = .

with the choice k = i

2 we would have,

p =z 

0

p| (p)|2 dp

2

.

(2.54)

(2.55)

this has a simple physical interpretation:
of momentum is a state with wavefunction

p is just the expectation value
(p) .

note that

p is always a positive function: the quadratic constraint

becomes, for p = q ,

2 sgn (p) m (p, p) = z |m(p, r)|2 dr

2

so that momentum can be written as

p =

1

4z |p| | m(p, r)|2 dp

2

dr
2  0.

(2.56)

(2.57)

this makes physical sense if we regard this as the null component of the
momentum vector.

2.9 kinetic energy

for a free particle of mass
(energy), p0 is related to the spatial component

 , the time-like component of momentum

if we introduce the variables

p2
0  p2

1 = 2.

p = p0 + p1,

p = p0  p1
32

p1 by the condition

(2.58)

(2.59)

this becomes

(2p0  p)p = 2,

pp = 2.

(2.60)

thus the kinetic energy is related to the null component of momentum
through the dispersion relation:

p0 =

1
2

(p +

2
p

),

p =

2
p

.

(2.61)

notice that in this point of view the sign of energy
p0 and of momentum
p are the same: this will prove to be convenient when studying the structure
of the ground state of relativistic fermion theories. (see the appendix a for
more details.)

thus we will postulate the kinetic energy of our dynamical system on the

grassmannian to be

k = 

1

2z 1

2

[p +

2
p

] m (p, p)

dp
2

.

by the same argument as for momentum we can see that

k =

1

8z [|p| +

2
|p|

] | m(p, r)|2 dp

2

dr
2  0

(2.62)

(2.63)

if we add to this an appropriate potential energy u we will get the hamil-
tonian of the system. this potential energy must transform like
p , in
(p, p + u) transform like the null components of momentum.
order that

under lorentz tranformations,

p  p,

p  1p.

the poisson bracket be invariant under lorentz transformations,

m (p, q) 7 m(p, q) =  m(p, q).

in position space, x  1x so that

m(x, y) 7 m(x, y) = 1m(1x, 1y).

(2.64)

(2.65)

(2.66)

lorentz invariance will constrain the form of the potential energy as well.

33

2.10 hamiltonian

the total hamiltonian will be a sum of kinetic energy k and a potential
energy u . while the kinetic energy is best understood in momentum space,
potential energy is best written in position space. the simplest choice of u
will be a quadratic function of m(x, y) . (anything simpler will lead to
linear equations of motion.) thus we postulate

u[m] =

b (x, y)m b

a(y, x)v(x, y)dxdy

(2.67)

1

4z m a
4z m a

1

+

a (x, x)m b

b (y, y)v1(x, y)dxdy.

this will have the requisite invariance under the internal symmetry u(f ) .
lorentz invariance requires that u transform like p or, equivalently,

like

1
p or x . thus,

(2.68)
moreover, they can only depend on the dierence x  y due to translation
invariance. thus

v(1x, 1y) = 1v(x, y).

1|x  y|,
for some pair of constants 1, 2 .

v1(x, y) =

1
2

v2(x, y) =

1
2

2|x  y|

(2.69)

thus the hamiltonian of our theory is

e[m] = 
+

+

1

1

4z [p +
8 z m a
8 z m a

2
2

2
p

] m (p, p)

dp
2

b (x, y)m b

a (x, x)m b

a(y, x)|x  y|dxdy
b (y, y)|x  y|dxdy.

the constants m, 1, 2 have to xed later based on experimental data.
they are the coupling constants of our theory.

we have already shown that the kinetic energy is positive. the potential
energy is manifestly positive when 1, 2  0 the way we have written
it in position space. thus the minimum value of e is zero and it is
attained at the point m = 0 .( this is in fact why we choose to parametrize
our system by the variable m and not
 .) this of course lies in
the connected component with renormalized dimension zero. in the other
components,energy will have a minimum again, but it is not zero. in fact we
will spend much time estimating this ground state energy.

34

2.11 singular integrals

it will be convenient for later purposes to express the hamiltonian in mo-
mentum space variables. this will require the use of some singular integrals.

the basic singular integral is the cauchy principal value [28]

pz b

a

f (p)
p  q

dp
2

= lim

0+(cid:20)z q

a

q+(cid:21) f (p)
+z b
p  q

dp
2

(2.70)

this exists whenever f is holder continuous 3 of order greater than zero at
the point p = q . ( of course we are assuming that a < q < b ). the basic
idea of the principal value integral is to cut-o the integral by removing a
small interval of width 2 located symmetrically about the singular point
and then take the limit as
  0 . (if the function vanishes at the point
p = q the limit might exist even if not taken symmetrically: then we have
an improper integral rather than a singular integral.)

if we had cut-o the integral asymmetrically, the contribution of the

region close to the singularity would have been

f (q)(cid:20)z q1

a

q+1(cid:21) 1
+z b
p  q

dp
2 
1 and

1
2

f (q) log

1
1

.

(2.71)

1

1 = 2

to go to zero. requiring
this can take any value as we let
that
removes this ambiguity. indeed there are many other rules
that could have been chosen: the particular one we choose must be justied
by physical considerations: rather like the choice of boundary conditions in
the solution of dierential equations. in problems of interest to us there is
a symmetry
p  p (ultimately due to charge conjugation invariance)
which selects out the principal value (or the finite part we will dene soon)
as the correct prescription.

we already saw a use of the cauchy principal value in the denition of

the operator

 :

(x) =

i

pz (y)
x  y

dy.

(2.72)

the symmetric choice of regularization implicit in the principal value is re-
quired by the condition that

 is hermitean.

3 a function f is holder continuous of order  (or f  c  ) if

exists for all

q .

limpq

|f (p)f (q)|

|pq|

35

we will often have to deal with integrals that have a worse singularity:

z b

a

f (p)
(p  q)2

dp
2

.

(2.73)

the hadamard finite part (part nie) of such an integral is dened in
terms of the cauchy principal value:

f (p)
(p  q)2

fpz
f  c 1 , this will make sense: the vanishing of the numerator
although we wont need this yet, we note for completenes the denition

as long as
on the r.h.s. makes the integral exist as a cauchy principal value.

= pz f (p)  f (q)
(p  q)2

dp
2

(2.74)

dp
2

.

of the nite part integral for a nite range of integration:

fpz b

a

f (p)
(p  q)2

dp
2

= pz b

a

f (p)  f (q)
(p  q)2

dp
2

+

f (q)

2 " 1

a  q 

we need the notion of a nite part integral because

fpz 1

p2 eipx dp

2

1
2|x  y|.

= 

1

b  q# . (2.75)

(2.76)

the quantity on the right hand side is a greens function of the laplace
operator on the real line:

d2
dx2

1
2|x  y| = (x  y).

(2.77)

the choice of boundary conditions in this greens function corresponds to
the choice of the denition of the singular integral above.

as an aside we note that

fpz g(p)

p2

dp
2

if

= lim

0+(cid:20)z 



+z 



(cid:21) g(p)  g(0)

p2

dp
2  0

for all p . this is useful in checking that the hamiltonian is positive.

g(p)  g(0)

36

(2.78)

(2.79)

2.12 hamiltonian in momentum space

now,

similarly,

1

2z m a

b (x, y)m b

b (p, q) m b

a(y, x)|x  y|dxdy =
m a
a(p, q)

fpz 1
z eir(xy)+ipxiqy+ipyiqxdxdy
= fpz 1

b (p, q) m b

m a

r2

r2

dpdpdqdqdr

(2)5

a(q + r, p + r)

dpdqdr
(2)3

1

2z m a

a (x, x)m b

b (p, q) m b

b (y, y)|x  y|dxdy
m a
a(p, q)

fpz 1
z eir(xy)+ipxiqx+ipyiqydxdy
= fpz 1

a (p, p + r) m b

m a

r2

r2

dpdpdqdqdr

(2)5

b (p, p  r)

dpdpdr
(2)3

thus the hamiltonian becomes

(2.80)

(2.81)

e[m] = 



1

1

2
p

4z [p +
4 fpz 1
4 fpz 1

2

r2

r2

] m (p, p)

dp
2
b (p, q) m b

m a

a(q + r, p + r)

m a

a (p, p + r) m b

b (p, p  r)

dpdqdr
(2)3
dpdpdr
(2)3

in spite of the minus signs on the r.h.s., this is in fact a positive function
m . we already saw that the kinetic energy is positive whenever the
of
constraint is satised.

we can rewrite the second term in a more symmetric form,

e[m] = 


1

2
p

4z [p +
4 fpz 1

1

r2

] m (p, p)

m a

b (p 

dp
2
r
, q 
2

r
2

) m b

a(q +

r
2

, p +

r
2

)

dpdqdr
(2)3

37

2

4 fpz 1

r2



m a

a (p, p + r) m b

b (p, p  r)

dpdpdr
(2)3

now,

satises

f (r) = z m a

b (p 

r
2

, q 

r
2

) m b

a(q +

r
2

, p +

r
2

)

dpdq
(2)2

so that the second term in the hamiltonian can be written as

f (r) = f (r)

1

4 fpz 1

r2 re f (r)

dr
2

.



moreover, by a simple use of the schwarz inequality, we see that

ref (r)  f (0).

(2.82)

(2.83)

(2.84)

thus this term in the hamiltonian is positive. in the same way the last term
can also be proved to be positive.

2.13 the equations of motion

from our poisson brackets and the above hamiltonian we can derive the
equations of motion. we can regard the derivative e(m) = e
m of the
energy with respect to m as an operator valued function of m :

de = tre(m)dm =z eb

a (m; q, p)d m a

b (p, q)

dpdq
(2)2 .

(2.85)

explicitly,

de = 



1

1

2
p

4z [p +
2 fpz 1
2 fpz

2

r2

dr
(2)

d m a

dpdq
(2)2

a (p, q)

b (p, q)
dp
2

d m a

dpdq
(2)2 .

]d m a

a (p, p)

dp
2

m b

a(q + r, p + r)

1

(q  p)2

m b

b (p, p + p  q)

38

thus

eb
a (m; q, p) = 



[p +

1
4
1

2 fpz 1
b
afp

2
2

r2

2
p

]2(p  q)b

a

m b

a(q + r, p + r)

dr
(2)

1

(q  p)2z m c

c (p, p + p  q)

dp
2

.

now the equations of motion implied by our poisson brackets are, in

operator notation,

k

dm
dt

= k{e(m), m} = [e(m),  + m].

(2.86)

k is the constant we xed earlier to be

(here,
2 .) substituting the
above formula for e(m) will give a rather complicated system of integral
equations as our equations of motion.

i

in particular, static solutions are given by

[e(m),  + m] = 0

the obvious solution to this equation is the vacuum,

m = 0.

(2.87)

(2.88)

this is just the point where the hamiltonian is a minimum. actually each
connected component will have a minimum for the hamiltonian; the absolute
minimum is the one with renormalized dimension zero. we will return to the
study of the minimum in the components of non-zero renormalized dimension.

2.14 linear approximation

if m is innitesimally close to the vacuum value m = 0 we can linearize
the equations of motion:

d m a
b (p, q)
dt

i
2

= 


1
[ k(p)  k(q)] m a
2
2 fpz 1
1

s2 [ m a

b (p, q)

b (p + s, r + s)2(r  q) sgn (q)

39

b (r + s, q + s)]

drds
(2)2

1

a

2(p  r) sgn (p)m a
2

2


bfpz h
(r  q)2 2(p  r) sgn (p) m c

1

(p  r)2 2(r  q) sgn (q) m c

c (p, p + r  p)

c (p, p + q  r)idp

2

dr
(2)

simplifying,

i
2

=

b (p, q)

d m a
b (p, q)
dt
1
[ k(p)  k(q)] m a

2
2 fpz 1
1
s2 [ m a
b (p + s, q + s) sgn (q)  sgn (p)m a

bfpz h
1
(p  q)2 sgn (q) m c

(p  q)2 sgn (p) m c


c (p, p + q  p)idp

c (p, p + q  p)

2
2

2

a

1

b (p + s, q + s)]

ds
2

here,

k(p) =

1
2

[p +

2
p

].

(2.89)

recall that the constraint on m becomes, in this linear approximation,

[ sgn (p) + sgn (q)] m (p, q) = 0;

(2.90)

i.e., that p and q have opposite signs. we can assume that p > 0, q < 0
since the opposite case is determined by the hermiticity condition

m(p, q) = m (q, p).

(2.91)

thus,

d m a
b (p, q)
dt

i
2

= 

1
2

[ k(p)  k(q)] m a
+1fpz 1

m a

s2

b (p, q)

b (p + s, q + s)

ds
2

40

+2a

bfpz

1

(p  q)2

m c

c (p, p + q  p)

dp
2

m(p, q) 7
now, under translation, m(x, y)  m(x + a, y + a) and
ei(pq)a m (p, q) . thus the total momentum, which is a conserved quantity,
is p = p  q . we can use as independent variables

xb = p/p , p = p  q.

clearly 0  xb  1 and p  0 . for a stationary solution,

m (p, q; t) = eit(xb).

(2.92)

(2.93)

2
p xb

+

2

p (1  xb)

](xb) 

1

2p fpz 1

0

(y)

(x  y)2 dy (2.94)

1
4

+

[2p +

2

2p z 1

0

(y)dy

we get thus

1
2

(xb) =

nents by,

we get

2(xb) =

recalling that the mass  of the meson is given in light cone coompo-

2p  p 2 = 2

(2.95)

[

2
xb

+

2

(1  xb)

](xb) 

21

 fpz 1

0

(y)

(xb  y)2 dy 

2

 z 1

0

(y)dy

if we set 2 = 0 this is exactly the equation that t hooft obtained for

the meson spectrum of two dimensional qcd.

t hooft obtained this result by summing over an innite class of feynman
diagrams. he showed that in the usual perturbaton series of two dimensional
qcd, the diagrams of planar topology dominate in the large n limit. he
then found a set of integral equations that describe the sum over these planar
diagrams.

41

t hoofts approach is limited by its origins in perturbations theory. it
does not in fact reproduce the full large n limit of two dimensional qcd;
only the linear approximation to the large n limit is obtained this way.
the complete large n limit that we have constructed, by very dierent
methods, is a nonlinear theory, reproduces the earlier theory of t hooft as
just the linear approximation.

our theory of course contains much more information:

it describes all
the interactions among the mesons, since the hamiltonian is a non-linear
function of the co-ordinates on the grassmannian. indeed it is not even a
polynomial which means that there are interaction vertices at every order in
perturbation theory. some of these have been determined, but our analysis
gives all the innite number of vertices in terms of a single constant: the
geometry of the grassmannian xes all these uniquely in terms of 1 . the
rst such vertex was obtained by a summation of planar diagrams as well; but
this approach will quickly get bogged dpwn by combinatorial complications.
before our work there was no indication that it was even possible to get a
closed formula for all the interactions among the mesons in the large n
limit of two dimensional qcd.

the solution of this linear integral equation will give the structure func-
tions of mesons. experimental data exists on the structure functiosn of
mesons as well.
it is not from deep inelastic scattering, but from drell-
yan scattering. preliminary results on the comparison of these structure
functions with data are encouraging. however the focus of these lectures is
the much more conceptually deep problem of obtaining the structure function
of the proton.

in fact our quantum hadrondynamics is not only a theory of mesons but
also of baryons. we will show in the next chapter that there are topological
solitons in our theory that describe baryons.

2.15 quantization of hadrondynamics

we have so far described a classical theory, whose phase space is the grass-
mannian. the poisson bracket relations for the m(x, y) play a role anal-
ogous to the canonical commutation relations. there are two distinct ap-
proaches to quatization of this theory:
(i) find a representation of the lie algebra in terms of operators ona com-
plex hilbert space ( canonical quantization, pursued in ref. [12]; and, (ii)

42

realize the wavefunctions as holomorphic sections of a line bundle on the
grassmannians (geometrical quantization pursued in ref. [14].

in the rst approach, we can use the complete classication of highest
weight unitary representation of the (central extension of the ) innite-
dimensional unitary lie algebra, due to kac and peterson [29]. these turn
out to be described by young tableaux just as in the nite dimensional case,
except they may have innite depth. the question arises which irreducible
representation to choose. the quadratic constraint selects out one class of
representations, whose young tableaux are rectangular, of width n and
innite depth. such a representation can be realized as

m (x, y) =

1
n

: qi(x)qi(y) :

(2.96)

where q, q satisfy the canonical anti-commutation relations. the represen-
tation is carried by the vector space of color invariant states in the fermionic
fock space. thus we recover exactly the light-cone gauged xed version of
two dimensional qcd with n colors as the quantum theory of hadron-
dynamics. we have shown that two dimensional qcd and two dimensional
hadrondynamics are exactly equivalent at all energies and for all values of
the number of colors. we have already given the details of this argument in
ref.[12].

in the geometric approach, we construct a line bundle of chern number
n on the grassmannian. there is a connection on this line budle whose
curvature is the natural symplectic form of the grassmannian. the innite
dimensional grassmannian is a complex manifold, just like the nite dimen-
sional ones. holomorphic sections of the line bundle exist when the chern
number is a positive integer. an inner product can be established on the
vector space of these holomorphic sections by using ideas of segal [30] or the
measure of pickrell [31]. the observables m(x, y) can be represented as
operators on this hilbert space. again the formulae we get are just the same
as that of light-cone gauge xed qcd. see [14] for details.

in addition it is sometimes convenient to quantize a restricted version
of the theory where the phase space is some symplectic submanifold of the
grassmannian. this will give us some insight into the connection between
our theory and the parton model. we will return to this in the next chapter.
to summarize,we have a theory that doesnt just describe mesons to all
orders in perturbation theory; we even have a theory of baryons. the topo-
logically non-trivial solutions of the theory- the solitons- describe baryons.

43

in the next chapter we will study these solitons in more detail and obtain a
theory of the structure functions of the baryon.

44

chapter 3

baryons as solitons and their
structure functions

we saw that our phase space is a disconnected manifold, each connected
component being labelled by an integer

b = 

1
2

trm.

(3.1)

thus each connected component will have a minimum for the energy. these
will describe stable static solutions of the equations of motion. they are
called topological solitons.

the minimum of the energy in each connected component with a given
value of b desribes a stable particle, as the only particles with lower energy
would be in a sector with a dierent value of b . it cannot decay into those
states since b is a conserved quantity.

we saw that hadron dynamics describes, in the linearized approximation,
the spectrum of mesons of two dimensional qcd. what does a topological
soliton describe? it is an old idea of skyrme that the topological solitons of
a theory of hadrons are baryons. this idea was revived in the mid eighties
[4, 5] and shown to be consistent with qcd in four dimensions.

with this in mind, we should expect that the topological solitons of our
two-dimensional theory describe baryons in the deep inelastic region.
in
the center of mass frame, a baryon will (due to lorentz contraction) have a
thin at shape: one that can be described within a two dimensional theory.
this oers us the possibility of solving one of the long-standing problems of
particle physics: to explain the structure functions of hadrons as measured

45

in deep inelastic scattering. by solving the static equations of motion, we
will be able to determine the shape of the soliton, which will then give us
the dependence of the hadronic structure function on the bjorken xb vari-
able. the equations we need to solve are certain singular nonlinear integral
equations. they are exactly solvable, so we will have to resort to numerical
techniques. indeed some ingenuity is needed even in the numerical part of
this project: o the shelf methods do not work due to the singularities in
the integrals. these singularities do not pose any new conceptual problems
however: we are dealing with a nite quantum eld theory. the basic def-
initions of these singular integrals ( as dealt with an earlir section) go back
to the nineteenth century work of cauchy and hadamard.

the static equations of motion are

[e(m),  + m] = 0

(3.2)

where e(m) is the derivative of the energy, computed above. it will be
m (p.q) , the integral
most convenient to view them as integral equations for
kernel in momentum space. of course we must solve these equations subject
to the constraints

[, m]+ + m 2 = 0;

trm = 2.

(3.3)

the last condition picks out the sector with baryon number one.

3.1 quark distribution functions from qhd

if we split the operator m into submatrices according to the splitting
h = h  h+ ,

(3.4)

d : h+  h+ is negative.
2 trm is the sum of two terms: one from

b

m =(cid:18) a

d(cid:19) ,
a : h  h is positive while

b

the operator
the baryon number b =  1
positive momenta and one from negative momenta:
2xa z 

[aaa(p,p) + daa(p, p)]

b = 

1

0

46

dp
2

.

(3.5)

the rst term is always negative and the second always positive. thus,
a(p) = 1
2 aaa(p,p) can be thought of as the distribution function of anti-
quarks in a hadron while a(p) =  1
2 daa(p, p) is the distribution function
for quarks. the quantity

a (p) = a(p)  a(p)
v

(3.6)

corresponds to what is usually called the valence parton distribution.
integral over

p and sum over a is equal to the baryon number.

its

so the quark distribution function can be thought of as the sum of the

valence and sea contributions:

a(p) = v

a (p) + s

a (p).

(3.7)

the sea quark distribution function is thus just the same as the anti-quark
distribution function:

s

a (p) = a(p).

(3.8)

we nd this terminology a bit confusing and mention it only for purposes
of comparison. the point is that there is no physical meaning to the splitting
of the quark distribution function into a valence and a sea quark contribu-
tion: only the sum has a measurable, physical signicance. the anti-quark
distribution does in fact have a physical signicance. the above denition of
a sea quark distribution is thsu completely arbitrary and is not imposed on
us by any symmetry such as charge conjugation invariance. in fact we will
nd later that there is another splitting which is more natural, where the
sea quarks have a wavefunctions are orthogonal to the valence quark wave-
function. this at least respects the pauli principle for quarks. even that
spliting is merely a matter of convenience of interpretation: all comparisons
with experiment should be in terms of the measurable quantities a(p) and
a(p) .

actually the distribution functions are usually thought of as functions of
a dimensionless variable
xb . if p is the total momentun (in the null
direction) of the hadron, the momentum of the quark can be measured as a
fraction of p . so we should actually write

a(xb) = 

1

2xa

daa(xbp ), a(xb) =

1

2xa

aaa(xbp ).

(3.9)

47

these identications of the parton distribution functions in terms of the
mab(p, p) can also be seen in terms of the
diagional matrix elements of
formula we derived in terms of qcd.

3

the structure functions are supposed to vanish for xb > 1 . why should
the r.h.s. of the above equation vanish for such xb ? for large n , the
structure functions will be of order ecn
2 at xb = 1 . so even though the
wavefunction doesnt vanish at xb = 1 , it is exponentially small. a more
proper analysis of the large n limit, taking into account semi-classical
corrections will in fact reproduce wavefunctions that vanish at
xb = 1 .
the dierence between these two versions of the large n limit is like the
dierence between the microcanonical ensemble and the canonical ensemble
in statistical mechanics.

3.2 rank one ansatz

before we set out to solve the above integral equations, it is useful to con-
sider a simpler, variational approximation to them. a solution to the above
constraints on m is the rank one (or separable) ansatz,

m = 2  .

(3.10)

we showed earlier that this is a solution to the constraints with baryon
number one if  is a positive energy wavefunction of length one:

 = , xa z | a(p)|2 dp

2

= 1.

(3.11)

we are not claiming that the exact solution of the static equations of motion
are of this form: only that this is a reasonable variational ansatz for it. the
physical meaning of this ansatz will be made clear in the next section: it is
equivalent to the valence quark model of the baryon in the large n limit.
the technical advantage of this ansatz is that it solves the constraint;
more precisely it reduces it to the much simpler constraint that
 is
of length one. geometrically, the set of states we are considering forms a
projective space: changing  by a complex number of modulus one does
not change m . the separable ansatz is an embedding of the complex
projective space cp (h+) of the positive energy states into the component
of the grassmannian with renormalized dimension one. instead of minimizing

48

the energy on the whole grassmannian, in this approximation, we minimize
it on this submanifold.

the parton structure functions have a simple meaning within this approxi-
mation: the structure function a(xb) is just the square of the wavefunction
(p) in momentum space:

a(xb) = | a(xbp )|2.

(3.12)

the anti-quark structure function is just zero in this separable approxima-
tion.

the energy on this submanifold can be easily calculated:

e1() = xa z 

1
2
1 + 2

0

[p +

+

where as usual,

2
p

]| a(p)|2 dp

2

2 xab z |a(x)|2|b(y)|2|x  y|dxdy

a(x) =z 

0

a(p)eipx dp
2

.

(3.13)

(3.14)

(3.15)

1 such a positive momentum function has an analytic continuation into the
upper half plane in the x variable. a simple choice would be

a(x) =

ca

(x + ib)2

(3.17)

with the location of the double pole serving as a variational parameter. ca
is constrained by the normalization condition that the length of  is one.
(a simple pole would have innite kinetic energy, so we consider the next
simplest possibility.) it is easy to see that there is a term in energy that
(coming from p| (p)|2 ) and the remaining terms scale
scales like
like
b . thus there is a minimum. this encourages us to proceed to a more
accurate determination of the wavefunction  that minimizes the energy.

b1

1we will nd it convenient to denote

1 + 2 = g2

(3.16)

to agree with previous papers.

49

the integral equations we have to solve are

1
2

[p +

2
p
v (p) = 

] a(p) + fp g2z v (p  q) a(q)
p2z 

a(p + q) a(q)

dq
2

1

.

0

dq
2

=  a(p)

2 = 1 . the
subject of course to
second of the above integral equations is just the momentum space version
of poissons equation of electrostatics:

p  0 and

| (p)|2 dp

(p) = 0 for

0

r 

from gauss law,

v (x) = a(x)a(x).

v (x) 

1
2|x|

(3.18)

(3.19)

as
near the origin. thus

|x|   : it is just the electrostatic potential of a unit charge located

v (q)  

1
q2

(3.20)

as |q|  0 . this is why the integrals are singular: the nite part prescription
is just a way of imposing the boundary condition that
2|x| at
innity in position space. we also note that for a solution centered at the
origin,

v (x)  1

(x) = (x)

(3.21)

and v (x) = v (x) . the boundary condition at the origin we impose is
(3.22)

v (0) = 0

which translates to

fpz v (q)

dq
2

= 0.

50

(3.23)

3.3 approximate analytic solution for  = 0

it will be useful to have an approximate analytical solution; even if it only
works for a physically uninteresting region it will help us to validate our
numerical method.

consider the singular integral (setting

w (q) = q2 v (q) ):

fpz v (q) a(p + q)

dq
2

= pz w (q)a(p + q)  w (0)a(p)

q2

dq
2

=

=

1

1

2pz w (q)[ a(p + q) + a(p  q)]  2 w (0) a(p)
2pz w (q)
2(cid:20)pz 2[ w (p)  w (0)]

[ a(p + q) + a(p  q)  2 a(p)]

2(cid:21) a(p)

q2
dq

dq
2

1

+

q2

q2

dq
2

the rst integral is not singular any more. the integral in the square brackets
in the last term is in fact zero by our boundary condition:

pz 2[ w (p)  w (0)]

q2

dq
2

= fpz v (q)

dq
2

= v (0) = 0.

(3.24)

thus

fpz v (q) a(p + q)

dq
2

=

1

2z w (q)

[ a(p + q) + a(p  q)  2 a(p)]

q2

dq
2

.(3.25)

so far we havent made any approximations on this integral: just rewritten
the singular integral in a better way. the main contribution to this integral
ought to come from the neighbourhood of the point q = 0 . so we should be
able to approximate the quatity in the square brackes by its leading taylor
series approximation

fpz v (q) a(p + q)

dq

2 (cid:20)z q2 v (q)

dq

2(cid:21) 

a(p).

(3.26)

then our nonlinear singular integral equation reduces to an ordinary dier-
ential equation:

 b 

a(p) +

1
2

[p +

2
p

51

] a(p) =  a(p)

(3.27)

where

b is determined by the self-consistency constraint

b = z q2 v (q)

dq
2

a(q)

2

.

(3.28)

= xa (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)z 

0

dq

2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

b1

this equation can be thought of as the nonrelativistic schrdinger equa-
in a linear plus coloumb potential. the
tion for a particle of mass
b is determined by the above self-
only additional complications are that
consistency relation and also, we have the boundary condition (p) = 0 for
p  0 .the only non-linearity in the problem is in the equation determining
b .
such non-relativistic models with linear plus coloumb potentials have
been used to describe mesons made of heavy quarks [34]. but the physical
origin of this schrodinger equation is completely dierent in our case: we get
this equation in momentum space and not position space. the eigenvalue
 does not have the physical meaning of energy for us: energy is to be
determined by substituting the solution into the formula for the hamiltonian.
moreover, we are studying the fully relativistic bound state problem. and of
course we are studying baryons not mesons. still it is encouraging that it is
possible to reduce a fully relativistic bound state problem to a mathematical
problem that is no more complicated than the non-relativistic case.

the special case  = 0 is particularly simple. in this extreme relativistic

case, the solution is an airy function:

(p) = cai(cid:18)

3(cid:19)

1

(3.29)

[2b(1 + 2)]

p  2
r | (p)|2 dp

c is xed by normalization:
by the continuity of the wavefunction: since it must vanish for
require it to vanish at p = 0 as well by continuity. then

2 = 1 . the eigenvalue is xed
p  0 we

 = 

1
2

1[2b(1 + 2)]

1
3

(3.30)

 = 2.33811 is the zero of the airy function closest to the origin.
b by putting this back into the nonlinear self-

where
now we x the constant
consistency condition. we get

2b = g

1

(2)

3
2

|r 
1 ai ()d|3
[r 
1 ai 2()d]

3
2

52

the analytic approximation to the wave function with m=0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1

2

3

4

p(cid:144)g

figure 3.1: the approximate analytic solution for  = 0 .

 =

|1|

2(2)

1 ai ()d
1 ai 2()d]

r 
[r 

g  0.847589g.

1
2

moreover

(p) = c ai (1(

p
g  1)).

(3.31)

we plot the solution so obtained below.

3.4 numerical solution with the rank one

ansatz

we now describe how to solve our integral equation numerically. first we
replace the nonlinear integral into a recursion relation.

1
2

[p +

and

2

p  2s] s+1(p) + 1pz 

0

vs(p  q) s+1(q)

dq
2

= 0

(3.32)

vs(p) = 

1

p2 z 

0


s (p + q) (q)

dq
2

.

(3.33)

we start with an initial guess v0(p) , solve the linear integral equation to get
1(p) . among all the solutions of this linear integral equation
a solution

53

numerical and analytic wave functions

<-- -numerical

<-- -analytic

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

1

2

3

4

figure 3.2: comparison of numerical and approximate analytic solutions
for  = 0 .

we pick the one without a node; this happens to be the one with the smallest
v1(p) as above and then again solve the
eigenvalue  . then we calculate
integral equation to get

2 and so on till our iteration converges.

we pick the nodeless eigenfunction at each stage since we expect our nal
answer for the ground state eigenfunction to have this property. it is just a
coincidence that this happens to have the smallest eiganvalue
in any
case  does not have the meaning of energy.

 :

of course to carry out this algorithm, we need to convert the above inte-
gral equations into matrix equations. that is done by the quadrature method
(described in the appendix c ) for singular integrals. the whole procedure
can be implemented in mathamatica quite well.

we plot the numerical solution so obtained against the approximate an-

alytical solution we got earlier for the special case  = 0 .

the curves are qualitatively the same: the dierence has to do with the
approximations we had to make in order to get an analytic solution. the
physicaly interesting case in fact does not have  = 0 : indeed we will see
that the value of 2
is in fact negative. for example when m = 0 , we
have,
 . it is of much interest to see if there is a variant of the
analytic approximatin method above that applies to this more realistic case.

2 =  g2

54

3.5 quantization of the rank one ansatz

we have considered elesewhere [12, 14] the quantization of our hadron dy-
namics, to recover qcd. it is also instructive to study the quantization of
a simpler version of our theory, corresponding to the rank one ansatz. the
quantization of this truncated theory gives a sort of approximation to qhd
(hence qcd) which is of some interest in itself. we will see in the next
chapter that this is just the valence parton model with interactions between
the partons as predicted by qcd.

given a vector satisfying

we have an element of the grassmannian of renormalized dimension one:

 = ,

||||2 = 1

(3.34)

m = 2  .

(3.35)

but this element remains the same if we change  by a complex number
  ei . thus we have an embedding of the projective
of modulus one:
space p(h+) into the grassmannian. this is a sympletic embedding: the
symplectic form on the projective space induced by this embedding is the
same as the natural sympletic form on the projective space. thus we can
regard the separable operators as forming a reduced phase space describing
part of the degrees of freedom of our theory.
a way to understand this is to consider

(p) as a complex-valued
observable on the eective phase space. in order to reproduce the poisson
brackets of m , these must satisfy

{ a(p), b(p)} = 0 = { a(p), b(p)},
{ a(p), b(p)} = i2(p  q)b
a.

they satisfy the constraints,

(p) = 0; for p < 0,

z 

0

|(p)|2 dp

2

= 1.

(3.36)

(3.37)

(3.38)

we should regard the function
dametal variable from which other observables such as

(p) on momentum space to be the fun-

(x) =z 

0

(p)eipx dp
2

55

(3.39)

can be obtained.

both the poisson brackets and the constraint are simpler than the full

theory, which is why we consider this case rst.

the hamiltonian of our reduced dynamical system is obtained by putting

the ansatz into e(m) :

e1() = xa z 

1
2
1 + 2

0

[p +

2
p

]| a(p)|2 dp

2

+

2 xab z |a(x)|2|b(y)|2|x  y|dxdy.

(3.40)

these poisson brackets and hamiltonian form a perfectly welldened dy-
namical system on its own right. we will now consider how to quantize this
theory, and obtain the rules for the semi-classical approximation.

we can quantize the theory by looking for operators satisfying canonical

commutation relations:
b(p)] = 0 = [
a(p),

[

a

b



(p)],

(p),

a(p),
[

b



(p)] =

1
n

2(p  p)b

a.(3.41)

as usual classical poisson brackets go over to quantum commutation rela-
tions:

{a, b}  ih[ a, b].

(3.42)

in our case we will denote the parameter that measures the quantum correc-
1
n . in a minute we will see that this number n
tion, analogous to h , by
must actually be an integer. th elimit n   is the classical limit. the
constraint on the observables can be implemented by restricting attention to
those states satisfying

z 

0

a



(p)

a(p)

dp
2| >= 1.

(3.43)

now it is obvious that a representation for our commutation relations is

provided by bosonic creation annihilation operators:

[aa(p), ab(p)] = 0 = [a

a

b
(p), a

(p)],

[aa(p), a

b

(p)] = 2(p  q)b

a.(3.44)

with

a(x) =

1
n

aa(x), a(x) =

1
n

aa(x).

(3.45)

56

then the constraint becomes just the condition that we restrict to states
containing n particles:

z 

0

aa(p)ap(x)

dp
2

= n.

(3.46)

this is why n must be an integer!.

now we know that we are dealing with a system of n bosons interacting

with each other under the hamiltonian

1
n

e1() = xa z 

1
2
1 + 2

0

[p +

]aa(p)aa(p)

2
p

dp
2

+

2

nz aa(x)ab(y)ab(y)aa(x)|x  y|dxdy.

(3.47)

the classical (or large n ) limit we have been discussing so far is just the
mean eld approximation to this many-body problem. the semi-classical
approximation will give us the leading corrections in the case of nite n .
this basic insight is due to witten, in a by now classic paper [9].

what are these bosons? we will see in the next chapter that these bosons
are just the valence quarks of the parton model, sripped of their color!.
quarks are of course fermions. however the wavefunction of the system
must be totally anti-symmetric in the color indices beacuse of the condition
that the state be invariant under su(n) . thus in the remaining indices
the wavefunction must be symmetric: if we ignore color the valence quarks
behave like bosons.

note that the momentum of the particles created by

a(p)

is always

positive. thus the total momentum

p =z 

0

p aa(p)aa(p)

dp
2

is a positive operator. indeed on a state containing n particles,
|a1, p1; a2, p2;   an , pn >= aa1(p1)aa2(p2)    aan (pn )|0 >

(3.48)

(3.49)

p is just the sum of individual momenta, each of which is positive:
p|a1, p1; a2, p2;   an , pn >= [p1 + p2 +    pn ]|a1, p1; a2, p2;   an , pn > .(3.50)
a general state will be, in this basis described a wavefunction
| >= xa1,anz 

(a1, p1;   an , pn )|a1, p1;   an , pn > .(3.51)

dp1
2   

dpn
2



0

57

an eigenstate of

p with eigenvalue p will satisfy

[p1 +    pn ] (a1, p1;   an , pn ) = p (a1, p1;   an , pn ).

(3.52)

pi are positive, it follows that they must each

since each of the momenta
be less than the total momentum p :

0  pi  p, for i = 1,   n.

(3.53)

we will see in the next chapter that the

pi are the momenta of the
p .
valence partons: the proton is a simultaneous eignstate of
we have just seen a very important point: our theory at nite n (but
within the approximation of the valence parton model) predicts that the
wavefunction must vanish unless each of the parton momenta
pi are less
than p . but there is no n in this inequality; so it must hold even in the
large n limit!.

h and

we will be nding an approximate eigenstate of

h , by a variational
principle: a sort of mean eld theory, the large n limit.the naive choice
is a wavefunction which is a product of single particle wavefunctions. but
such a naive version of mean eld theory will violate the exact inequality
we just established on momentum eigenstates. we should nd our varia-
tional approximation to the eigenstate of the hamiltonian, within the space
of momentum eigenfunctions.

thus we assume that the wavefunction is approximated by a wavefunction
that is just a product except for the constraint that the momenta add up to
p :

(a1, p1; a2, p2;   an , pn ) = 2(xi

pi  p ) (a1, p1) (a2, p2)    (an , pn ).(3.54)

thus the fraction of the momentum carried by each particle is less than one:

(p) = 0,

unless 0 

p
p  1.

(3.55)

that is how we recover the fact that the quark distribution function must
vanish when the bjorken variable is greater than one. this is a sort of semi-
1
classical correction in the
n approximation. we must solve the classical
subject to the boundary condition that it
equations of motion for
vanish outside of the interval
0  p  p . this requires a modication of
the variational ansatz but it it is possible to do that.
this variant of mean eld theory is rather like the micro-canonical en-
semble. the naive mean eld theory where only the expectation value of
momentum is required to be p is like the canonical ensemble.

(p)

58

3.6 valence quark distributions

now we come to the point of comparison of the calculated valence parton
distribuion function againt the data. it is not in fact necessary to make a
direct comparison with the data on deep inelastic scattering. a generation
of phenemenologists have extracted the valance parton structure functions
from the data. more precisely they have assumed a parametric form such as

(xb) = ax1

b (1  xb)2[1 + a1xb + a2x2
b]

(3.56)

for the parton distribution functions and t to all known data points. since
the data consists of measurement of the dis (deep inelastic scattering)
cross-section at dierent values of q2 this t uses the convolution of this
distribution function with the structure functions of the quarks calculated in
perturbation theory. there are about 6 structure functions (corresponding
to u, u, d, d, s quarks and the and gluons ) so altogether there are about 30
parameters in addition to the fundamental parameters of perturbative qcd.
altogether there are about a thousand data points, coming from measure-
  p or   n scattering
ment of the cross-section for
at various energies. thus the mere extraction of these distribution functions
has itself become a subeld of particle physics [32, 19, 33]. the major groups
seem to be in general agreement with each other, although a detailed ana-
lyzis of the errors in their parameters is not yet available. there are recent
attempts to estimate the systematic and statistical errors, but they seem
incomplete.

e  n ,

e  p ,

the comparison should be made with the weighted average over the u
and d quark distributions,weighted so as to get an isospin invariant com-
bination. this is because we have not yet done a collective variable variable
quantization of the isospin degrees of freedom of the proton, so the distribu-
tion function we are computing is the isospin invariant one.

another complication in the comparison is that not all the momentum in
the baryon is carried by the valence quarks: it is known that only about half
of the momentum is in the valence quarks, the rest being in the anti-quarks
(or sea quarks) or gluons. this aects our momentum sum rule. essentially
what it does is that the n in the sumrule gets replaced by ne = n
f
where
f is the fraction of the momentum carried by the valence quarks.
until we do a complete calculation allowing for the contributions of the sea
quarks and the gluons (i.e., without assuming the factorizable ansatz for m
and without ignoring the scalar elds a ) we must treat f as a parameter

59

wave functions versus xb

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5

<---data

<---f=.6

<---f=.7

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

1

<---f=1
xb

figure 3.3: comparison of parton wavefunctions (x) . the mrst
f of the
distribution agrees with our prediction best when the fraction
momentum carried by the valence quarks is about 0.6 .

and choose the value that gives the best t. the good news is that it is the
only parameter: m2 is xed to be zero2, since the up and down quarks are
known to have masses that are smal compared to the qcd scale 1 . (
mu  5 mev and md  10 mev while 1  100 mev .)
; but since the distri-
bution functions are dimensionless function of a dimensionless variable, the
dependence on 1 cancels out.

the only other parameter of the theory is

g2

in comparison with experimental data we should keep in mind that we are
in fact ignoring some of the constituents of the baryon: the valence quarks
are knwon to carry only about half of the momentum of the baryon. the rest
is in the sea quarks and the gluons. thus we introduce a parameter f , the
fraction of the momentum carried by the valence quarks. we nd that for a
value of
f = 0.6 the wavenfunction predicted by us agrees quite well with
experiment. (the value of being about a half is consistent with other ways
of looking at the situation.) thus we have solved the problem of deriving
the quark structure functions of the baryon from qcd.

it still remains to calculate the anti-quark and gluon structure functions.

2this by the way means that 2 = m2  g2

is negative. there is no contradiction
here, since the quark is not a true particle: the mass of the baryon is still predicted to be
real.



60

we will turn to that in later publications. in a later chapter we will give
some ideas that help in solving this problem.

in the next chapter we will see how to reconcile the soliton model with

the parton model.

61

62

chapter 4

the parton model

this chapter is based on the paper [15] which in turn was an expansion of
some short statements made in ref. [12].

we have been describing the idea that the baryon is a soliton, essentially
made up of an innite number of mesons. but this seems to contradict the
simple and successful picture of the baryon as a bound state of quarks. at
the time the skyrme model was revived, it was shown that the static (low
energy properties) of the baryon that are so well explained by the quark
model (magnetic moments, mass dierences, avor multiplet structure) can
all be rederived in the soliton model[6]. but the only explanation for the
structure of the proton in deep inelastic scattering still appeared to be the
quark-parton model. in these lectures, we are describing how to explain the
structure functions within the soliton model as well. in fact we will be able
to go beyond the simple minded parton model.

it is an old idea in the study of the structure of the proton that the
constituents-the partons- can be thought of as free particles. this then raises
the question of how they bind to form the proton in the rst place. it is the
binding mechanism that determines the wavefunction of the partons and
hence the structure functions of the hadron. in this section we will present
a model of interacting partons. perhaps surprsingly, it will turn out to be
equivalent to the soliton model in the factorizable ansatz (and in the large
n limit). thus the parton model is merely an approximation to the soliton
model. later, by a deeper analysis of the soliton model, we will derive the
sea quark and gluon distributions as well.

it is at the moment impossible to derive the particle spectrum of four
dimensional qcd directly. there are many attempts to do compute the

63

spectrum by direct numerical simulation of qcd, but they have to yet to
surmount many obstructions. for example, the asymptotic freedom of qcd
implies that the energy of all physical states are exponentially small compared
to the cut-o. thus extra-ordinary accuracy is required of all direct numerical
computations of the energy, a problem that is only exacerbated by the large
( in principle innite) number of degrees of freedom in the system. however,
it may be possible to understand the spectrum of two dimensional qcd
by diagonalizing its hamiltonian numerically. being a nite (rather than
asymptotically free) theory numerical calculations are much more reliable.

4.1 parton wavefunctions

we will follow largely the discussion in [15] the valence parton model as-
sumes that the proton is made of n partons (quarks) which are fermions
transforming under the fundamental representation of color. the idea of
color of course was not present in the original version of this model, due to
bjorken and feynman. also it was not known then that the partons were
spin half particles and hence fermions. but these were straightened out soon
with the identication of the valence partons with the quarks.
footnoteit is
known that only about half of the momentum of the baryon is accounted for
by these valence partons: the rest must be carried by the sea quarks and
by the gluons.

we will work think of the parton wavefunctions as functions of the null
in addition, the partons carries the quantum
a ) and color  . thus
(a, , p) . since p  0 for the
 vanish for negative p

momentum p = p0 + p1 .
numbers of avor and spin (together denoted by
the wavefunction of a single parton will be
null component of momomentum, we require that
.

a baryon is made of n such partons so its wavefunction is a completely
(a1, 1, p1; a2, 2, p2;   ; an , n , pn ) . however,
antisymmetric function
the baryon must be invariant under color: transform under the trivial repre-
sentation of color su(n) . this means that the wavefunction is completely
antisymmetric in color alone:
(a1, 1, p1; a2, 2, p2;   , an , n , pn ) = 1,2,n
in other words, the wavefunction is completely symmetric in spin, avor and
momentum quantum numbers. if we factor out color from the wavefunction,

(1, p1; 2, p2;   n , pn )(4.1)

64

the partons behave as if they are bosons.

4.2 hamiltonian

the kinetic energy of a single parton is

1
2

[p +

2
p

].

(4.2)

hence the kinetic energy of the partons making up a baryon is

xa1anz 

0

nxi=1

1
2

[pi +

m2
ai
pi

]| (a1, p1;   ; an , pn )|2 dp1    dpn

(2)n

.

(4.3)

in the early versions of the quark-parton model, they were treated as if
they are free particles. that cannot be quite correct, since they must after
all bind to form the baryon. the simplest idea would be to let them interact
through a pairwise potential 1v(x) :

1
2

1 xa1anz 
0 xi6=j

v(xi  xj)|(a1, x1;   ; an , xn )|2dx1    dxn .

(4.4)

now we must allow for a self-energy term as well in the hamiltonian. the
point is that the eective mass of the partons may not be the same as their
bare mass. just as the electrons in a metal have a dierent eective mass
from the free electron, the eective mass of the parton inside a baryon may
be dierent from that of a bare parton: there can be a nite renormalization
of the mass. we can allow for this by replacing the 2 in the kinetic energy
by an eective mass 2 .

since the partons (quarks) cannot be separated out to innity, one could
wonder what the bare parton mass m means: it has no meaning as the
mass of any particle that can exist in an asymptotic state. however, it is
possible to give the bare parton mass a meaning in terms of high energy
processes that do not involve asymptotic states. for example the weak in-
teraction can be used as a probe of the quark masses: the weak decay rates
of the quarks are sensitive to the bare masses. this gives a way to make
sense of the bare parameter m . but for our purposes, what matters is the
eective mass  .

65

thus the hamiltonian of the valence quark model is

en ( ) = xa1anz 

0

[pi +

1
2

nxi=1
1 xa1anz 
0 xi6=j

+

1
2

]| (a1, p1;   an , pn )|2 dp1    dpn

2
ai
pi
v(xi  xj)|(a1, x1;   an , xn )|2dx1    dxn .

(2)n

the ground state of this hamiltonian is the baryon of the valence quark
model.

we havent yet decided what potential

to use. there is ample
evidence that the quark-quark potential is linear [34]. in any case as in qhd,
lorentz invariance will lead to this choice n our lightcone co-ordinates. so
we choose

v(x) = 1

v(x)

with this choice we get exactly the same hamiltonian we had in the last
1
n playing the
h . thus the rank one approximation to the topological soliton

chapter, from the quantization of the rank one ansatz with
role of
model is equivalent to this interacting valence parton model.

2|x| .

4.3 hartree ansatz

the ground state of a many boson system can often be described by mean
eld theory: each boson moves in the eld created by all the others. more-
over, all the bosons can be assumed to occupy the same single particle state
in this ground state. after the color is factored out, the partons in our model
behave just like bosons. hence we should be able to simplify the problem by
making this mean eld approximation. more specically,

(a1, p1;   an , pn ) = 2(xi

pi  p )

nyi=1

(ai, pi).

(4.5)

here p is the total momentum of the system. since
impose

p  0 we must

(p) = 0

(4.6)

the wavefunction satises the normalization condition

p is less than the total momentum p .

for p  0 . it then follows that
z p

0

| (p)|2 dp

2

66

= 1

(4.7)

and the momentum sum rule:

nz p

0

p| (p)|2 dp

2

= p.

(4.8)

the energy is calculated by putting this ansatz into the earlier formula:

1
2

[p +

2
a
p

]| (a, p)|2 dp

2

+

e = xa z 
g2z 

1
2

0



v(x  y)xa |(a, x)|2xb

|(b, y)|2dxdy.

at this point we notice that we have exactly the same problem as in the
m (p, q) is exactly the
last chapter. the energy of the rank one ansatz for
same as that of the parton model in the hartree approximation. thus the
mean eld theory of the valence parton model is our classical theory on the
projective space cp (h+) .. this interpretation of the rank one ansatz in
terms of the parton model was already noted in ref. [12].
what would be the leading deviation away from the large n or classical
limit? we argued in the last chapter in exactly the same theory (but viewed
as the quantization of the rank one ansatz) that it amounts to the ansatz

(p1,   pn ) = 2(p1 + p2    pn  p )yi

(pi).

(4.9)

there are now some correlations between the quarks: each momentum is less
than p and also pn can be eliminated in terms of the others. the latter
is a small eect; but the inequalities on the momenta,
0  pi  p cannot
be ignored.

67

68

chapter 5

beyond the valence parton
model

we saw that the separable ansatz in the soliton theory corresponds to the
valence parton approximation. now we see how to go beyond that and get
the true minimum of the energy. we can improve on the valence parton
model by adding sea quarks and anti-quarks; this requires us to invent an
improved variational ansatz. in another direction we can minimize the energy
in the grassmannian by numerical methods. we will describe ideas in both
directions.

5.1 a co-ordinate system

recall that the equations to be solved are

[e(m),  + m] = 0,

along with the constraints:

dene

[ + m]2 = 1,

trm = 2.

1 =   2  ,

(5.1)

(5.2)

(5.3)

where  is the minimum in the subset of separable kernels; or at least
a good approximation to it. rather than parametrize the soliton by the

69

deviation from the vacuum  it makes more sense to use the deviation from
our approximate solution
1 which is in the same connected component.
so we dene a new variable m1 by

 + m = 1 + m1.

then the constraints on m1 are

[1, m1]+ + m 2

1 = 0,

trm1 = 0.

(5.4)

(5.5)

the trace of m1 is zero since the baryon number is now already carried by
1 :

1
2



tr[1  ] = 1.

let w be the subspace where

1 takes eigenvalue 1 :

w = h <  >

(5.6)

(5.7)

where <  > denotes the linear span of  . we have an orthogonal
splitting of h according to this splitting. we can now represent m1
in
terms of a co-ordinate system centered at the point

1 :

[1 + zz ]1z

(5.8)

z [1 + zz ]1 z [1 + zz ]1z(cid:19)

m1 = 2(cid:18) [1 + zz ]1  1
z : w   w is an arbitrary hilbert-schmidt operator.

it is
here,
straighforward to check that this is a solution to the constraint equations.
moreover, in some nite neighborhood of 1 , all points of the grassmannian
can be represented this way. of course this co-ordinate system will break
down if we go too far away from 1 : we are assuming that the true minimum
lies close enough to the approximate solution to be in this co-ordinate chart.
given a xed  , the operator z above provides a co-ordinate system
on an neighborhood of the grassmannian. this co-ordinate system only
covers a part of the connected component with baryon number one. it takes
a countably innite number of such charts (corresponding to dierent choices
of  ) to cover the whole space of baryon number one congurations.

70

5.2 the method of steepest descent

we need to minimize the function e(m) subject to the constraints

[, m]+ + m 2 = 0, 

1
2

trm = 1,

trm 2 < .

(5.9)

a simple method for minimizing functions of several variables is steepest
descent: we start at some initial point and move along the straight line
opposite to the gradient of the function at that point a small distance. then
we recompute the gradient at the new point and repeat the procedure. if the
topography of the constant energy surfaces is not too complicated we will
eventualy arrive at the minimum.

the main complication in our case is of course the constraint: the gradient
vector e(m) is not tangential to the grassmannian so if we move opposite
to it we will leave the constraint surface. even if we project out the tangential
component of the vector, we will still leave the surface if we move along the
straightline in that direction. the proper geometric solution to this problem
is to move a small distance along the geodesic at m tangential to the
gradient vector. then we will recompute the gradient and nd the geodesic
at the new point. this is feasible beacuse the grassmannian is a homogenous
manifold and we can nd the geodesic on it easily using its high degree of
symmetry.

more explicitly, recall that the tangential projection of the gradient vector

is

the vector

t =

1
4

[ + m, [ + m, e(m)]].

(5.10)

y =

1
2

[ + m, e(m)]

(5.11)

is at right angles to the tangential part of the gradient: it is in fact obtained
by multplying
t by the complex structure of the grassmannian. just
as in the case of the sphere, the geodesic is obtained by rotating the point
about an axis orthogonal to the tangent vector. more explicitly, the geodesic
starting at m tangential to t is

( ) = e y [ + m]e y  .

(5.12)

71

2[ + mk, e(mk)] .

thus the steepest descent algorithm is
1. choose an initial conguration m0 and small parameter
2. given the kth conguration mk , calculate the gradient e(mk) and
yk = 1
3. set mk+1 = e yk [ + mk]e yk   and repeat the previous step.
 has to be chosen by some trial and error. too small
a value will produce changes in the conguration within the noise due to
numerical errors. too large a choice will not give a convergent sequence:
we will bounce around all over the grassmannian. but we found that in
practice, a proper value of

 can be found quickly.

the value of

 .

how do we choose the initial conguration m0 ? since we believe
that the valence approximation is good, we could use as the starting point a
separable conguration, minimizing the energy within that subspace.

5.3

sea quarks and anti-quarks

we saw that if we restrict the dynamics of our theory to the rank one ansatz,
m = 2   , we get the valence parton model. to get a more general
picture that includes sea quarks and anti-quarks (but is still not the total
picture) we must use the ansatz with rank three. in fact by going to ansatzes
of larger and larger rank we can get better and better approximations to the
baryon structure functions.
the rank three ansatz is

1
2



m = 0  

0 + {[+  

+    
]

[1   2

][  

+ + +  

]}

where , 0, + are three vectors in h satisfying
+ = +,

0 = 0,

 = ,

||||2 = ||0||2 = ||+||2 = 1, 

0+ = 0.

moreover,

0   2

  1.

(5.13)

(5.14)

(5.15)

we saw that  2

 is the probability of nding an anti-quark inside the baryon.

72

as noted earlier, the anti-quark distribution function is just  2

| a(p)|2

. the baryon number is

b =xa z 

0 {| 0a(p)|2 +  2
the total momentum is, similarly,

[| +a(p)|2  a(p)|2]}

dp
2

.

(5.16)

p =xa z 

0

p{| 0a(p)|2| +  2

[| a(p)|2 + | +a(p)|2]}

dp
2

(5.17)

these conrm the interpretation of 0 as the valence quark wavefunction
and +(p) as the sea quark wavefunction.

also, the kinetic energy is

k =xa z 

0

1
2

[p +

2
p

]{| 0a(p)|2| +  2

[| a(p)|2 + | +a(p)|2]}

dp
2

(5.18)

the potential energy is more complicated. recall that the potential en-
ergy is simpler in position space while the kinetic energy is simpler in mo-
mentum space. our wavefunctions now depend on a discrete variable in
addition to momentum, and there is a unitary transformation in these dis-
crete variables that is the counterpart to fourier transformation. this is the
transformation to a basis in which  is diagonal; the wavefunctions will no
longer be eigenstates of

 .

1
2



where

m = 0  

0 + {1  

1  2  
2}

1 =

2 =

1

2(cid:26)[1  ]  [1 + ]+(cid:27)
2(cid:26)[1 + ] + [1  ]+(cid:27)

1

the potential energy is then,

u =

1

2 xa z (cid:26)|0a(x)|2v00(x)+

73

(5.19)

(5.20)

(5.21)

|2a(x)|2v22(x)(cid:27)dx
1a(x)v10(x)

|1a(x)|2v11(x) +  2
 2
2 re xa z (cid:26)0a(x)
1
+
2
2a(x)v20(x)   2

0a(x)

1a(x)

2a(x)v21(x)(cid:27)dx.

the mean elds are determined by solving the dierential equations

v 
(x) = a(x)

a(x).

with the boundary conditions

v(x)  

1
2|x|, for |x|  .

equivalently,

v(0) = v 

(0) = 0

for the diagonal components, and,

v() = v 
for the o diagonal components.

() = 0 for  6= 

(5.22)

(5.23)

(5.24)

(5.25)

by choosing appropriate variational ansatzes we can estimate the anti-
quark content of the proton. or we can derive integral equations for the func-
tions ,0 and solve them numerically. both methods are being pursued.
initial results are encouraging. detailed results will appear in a separate
publication.

acknowledgement

i thank the students and postdoctoral fellows at rochester who have
worked withme at various stages in implementing this research program: p.
bedaque, k. s. gupta, s. guruswamy, i. horvath,v. john, g. krishnaswami,
c-w. h. lee, o. t. turgut. i have also benetted from discussions with a.
p. balachandran, a. bodek, j. mickelsson, s. okubo, d. pickrell and j.
schechter. i am especially grateful to o. t. turgut and v. john for proof-
reading an early version of these notes. also i thank c. saclioglu and j.
mickelsson for invitations to istanbul and stockholm and making my visits
there so enjoyable. this work is supported by the department of energy.

74

appendix a

a null co-ordinate system

a.1 kinematics

it will be convenient to use a co-ordinate system that combines the advan-
tages of the null and cartesian co-ordinate systems.

if x0 and x1 are the usual cartesian co-ordinates in minkowski space,

the metric is

we dene now

so that

the minkowski metric is,

ds2 = [dx0]2  [dx1]2.

t = x0  x1,

x = x1

ds2 = dt[dt + 2dx].

 =(cid:18) 1 1
1 0(cid:19)

(a.1)

(a.2)

(a.3)

(a.4)

thus the vector
elds will be given on a surface of constant

is time-like while


t


x

is null. the initial values of

t , which is a null line.

momentum p = pdx = p0dt + pdx is a

1 -form (co-vector); we
will use the same letter to denote the momentum 1-form as well as its null

75

componenet, but it should be clear from the context which one we mean. to
nd its magnitude we must use the inverse of the above metric tensor:

 =(cid:18) 0

1

1 1(cid:19) ,

p2 = pp = 2p0p  p2.

thus the mass shell condition becomes

p0 =

1

2(cid:20)p +

2

p (cid:21).

(a.5)

(a.6)

here,  is the rest mass of the particle.

we see now one of the main technical advantages of using the null-time
co-ordinate system: energy and momentum have the same sign. in the usual
1 + 2] and therefore no such simple
space-time co-ordinates,
in the dirac theory of fermions the states of negative
relationship exists.
energy are occupied; this becomes merely the condtition that the negative
momentum states be occupied.

po = [p2

a.2 dirac matrices

the dirac matrices are best thought of as matrix-valued vectors, since they
appear in the form  in the action. thus the dirac algebra
 +
 = 2 becomes

[t]2 = 0,

t + t = 2,

2 = 1.

we will choose the explicit representation

t =(cid:18) 0 2
0 0(cid:19) ,

 =(cid:18) 0 1
0 (cid:19) .

1

(a.7)

(a.8)

in any representation of dirac matrices there is a charge-conjugation matrix
c satisfying

cc 1 = ()t .

(a.9)

in the usual space-time formalism this matrix is often 0 itself, but that is
a representation-dependent fact. in our representation,

c =(cid:18) 0

1

1

0(cid:19) .

76

(a.10)

given the dirac spinor

q =(cid:18) q1

q2(cid:19) , the conjugate spinor is

q = qc = ( q
2

q
1 ) .

(a.11)

a.3 free fermions

the lagrangian of a free dirac fermion becomes

ld = q[i]q + mqq
2[it]q2 + q

+2q

1(ix)q1  q

2(ix)q2 + m[q

2q1 + q

1q2].

we see that the eld
q1 has no dynamical degrees of freedom: it has no
time derivative in the action. hence it can be eliminated by its equation of
motion:

q1 = 

m
p

q2

(a.12)

where

p = ix . putting this back into the action and changing variables
(a.13)

 = 2 q2

gives us the eective action for the propagating eld:

l = (it)   1

2

[p +

m2
p

].

(a.14)

a.4 gauge fields

the lagrangian of two dimensional qcd is

l =

n

41z trff  +

nfxa=1z qa[i   + ma]qa.

we have added in the avor indices a, b and the color indices

i, j .

the freedom of gauge transformations can be utilized partially to impose
the null gauge condition ax = 0 . then, the fermionic part of the lagrangian
becomes

ld = qai[i(j

i + aj

i)]qaj + mqaiqai

77

+ ai[i(t + aj

ti)]j
1
1 (ix)q1ai 
2

+qai

ai(ix)ai +

m
2

[aiq1ai + qai

1 ai].

which becomes

l = a(it)a  a(cid:26)1

2

[p +

m2
p

]  iat(cid:27)a

(a.15)

upon eliminating

q1 .

to this we must add the action of the yangmills eld itself, which looks

quite simple in this co-ordinate system and gauge:

ly m =

n
41

trff =

n
21

tr[xat]2.

(a.16)

the eld at does not propagate and can be eliminated. thus the action
of two-dimensional qcd can be written entirely in terms of the eld  .

a.5 the dirac vacuum

let us return to the free fermion theory with lagrangian

l = (it)  

1
2

[p +

m2
p

]

(a.17)

upon quantization, the eld  becomes an operator satisfying the fermionic
anti-commutation relations

[(x), (y)]+ = (x  y),

[(x), (y)]+ = 0.

(a.18)

if there were only a nite number of operators, such canonical anti-
commutation relations would have a unique representation. in the innite
dimensional case physical ideas have to be brought in to choose the right
representation. dirac showed that the correct choice is to assume that all
the negative energy states are lled even in the vacuum. since energy and
momentum have the same sign in our co-ordinate system, this condition is
easy to implement. we dene the vacuum by

(p)|0 >= 0 for p < 0,

(p)|0 >= 0 for p > 0.
78

(a.19)

we have dened the fourier transforms

(x) =z (p)eipx dp

2

(a.20)

etc. then the normal ordered product of a pair of operators is dened as

: (p)(p) : = (p)(p)

unless both p and p are negative, in which case it is

: (p)(p) : = (p)(p).

(a.21)

(a.22)

the point is that then the expectation value of normal ordered current op-
erators are zero in the dirac vacuum. indeed,

< 0|(x)(y)|0 > = z dp
= z 0

2



dq
2
dp
2

eipx+iqy < 0| (p) (q)|0 >
eip(yx) =

[(x  y) + (x  y)].

1
2

here,

(x  y) =z sgn (p)eip(xy) dp

x  y
is to be thought of as a distribution. it is (upto a factor of
a well-known integral transform, the hilbert transform.

2

1

=

1
ip

(a.23)

i ) the kernel of

thus we should regard the current operators of the fermionic theory as
dened with the normal ordering. for example, the equation of motion of
the at will be, in the quantum theory,

xai

 2

tj(x) =

1
n

1 : ai(x)aj(x) : .

(a.24)

we can use this to eliminate the gauge eld from the theory completely. thus
two dimensional qcd can be written as a theory of fermions interacting with
each other through a coulomb-like potential. the further analysis of this
theory is carried out in the text, towards the end of the rst chapter.

79

80

appendix b

operator ideals

here we give the basic denitions of the operator ideals we use in the text.
a deeper discussion may be found in ref. [27, 35, 36]; we give only a rough
outline of the theory. it is the authors fervent hope that experts in functional
analysis will not read this appendix.

b.1 compact and hilbert-schimdt operators

the rank of an operator a : h  h on a complex hilbert space is the
dimension of its range; i.e., the dimension of the subspace of all vectors that
can be written as au for some u  h . when the rank of a is nite, it
can be thought of as a sort of rectangular matrix with (possibly) an innite
number of columns but only a nite number of rows; at least there is a basis
in which it has this form.

for such an operator, we can dene several measures of its size (norm).

for example (the operator norm),

|a| = sup

u

||au||
||u||

.

another (the hilber-schmidt or h-s norm) is

|a|2 = tr[aa]

1

2 .

(b.1)

(b.2)

is also the sum of the absolute squares of all the matrix elements in

|a|2
any basis.

2

81

the completion of the space of nite rank operators in the operator norm
is the space of compact operators. in other words, a compact operator is one
that can be approximated arbitrarily closely by nite rank operators, distance
between operators being measured with the operator norm.
if we instead
complete in the h-s norm, we get the space of hilbert-schimdt operators.

a bounded operator is one which has nite operator norm; i.e.,

|a| = sup

uh

||au||
|u|

(b.3)

exists. the set of bounded operators on h is an algebra b(h) . not all
bounded operators are compact; for example the identity is bounded yet not
compact.

a compact operator has the expansion, with n > 0 ,

a = xn=1

n|n >< n|

(b.4)

the sum being either nite (when a is of nite rank ) or innite (more
generally). the numbers n are called singular values; if a is positive
a and its adjoint a have the same singular
they are its eigenvalues.
values.

roughly speaking, the operator norm of a is the largest of its singular
values, while the hilbert-schmidt norm is the sum of the squares of the
singular values. the singular values of a compact operator form a sequence
that converges to zero; in fact zero is the only limit point of the sequence.
thus, if the h-s norm is nite, the eigenvalues must be tend to zero. in fact
all h-s operators are compact.

b.2 schatten ideals

many other norms can be dened in terms of the singular values. for example
the trace class operators are those for which the sum of singular values is
convergent. this is stronger than the requirement that the diagonal elements
in some basis form a summable sequence: being trace-class reqires a sort
of absolute convergence. the product of two hilbert-schimdt operators in
trace-class.

p  1 , we have the class ip(h) of operators for
n converges. of course i2 is the space of h-s operators

more generally, for

which the sum p p

82

and i1 that of trace class operators. the space of compact operators can
be thought of as the limiting case i and that of nite rank rank operators
as the opposite limit, i0 . we have the inclusions

i0  i1  i2   i  b.

(b.5)

it is very important for us that the ip are two-sided ideals in the algebra
of bounded operators; i.e., that a  b and b  ip
implies that both
ab  ip and ba  ip . these are called the schatten ideals. we are
p = 1, 2 .
especially interested, of course, in the cases

b.3 the restricted unitary group and its

grassmannian

in the text we are interested in the case of a hilbert space h with a
given orthogonal splitting into two innite dimensional orthogonal subspaces:
h = h  h+ . recall that the operator
 is dened to have eigenvalues
1 on h . the restricted unitary group is the subset of all unitaries
satisfying a convergence condition:

u1(h, ) = {g|gg = gg = 1; [, g]  i2}.

(b.6)

it is vital for this denition to make sense that i2 is an ideal; that is why
the product of two elements still satises the convergence conditon. (any
into submatrices
unitary operator is bounded). if we split
a : h  h etc., the
a, d may not be invertible in

d(cid:19) where

according to the splitting

g  u1(h, )

submatrices
general, but they are fredholm (see below) since

b, c are h-s. the matrices

g = (cid:18) a

c

b

g1 exists.

the restricted grassmannian is the set of all self-adjoint operators of

square one whose distance ( in the h-s sense) from  is nite.

gr1(h, ) = {| = ; 2 = 1,     i2}.

(b.7)

in the text we often use m =    as the variable that describes a point
in the grassmannian. we showed that each such operator corresponds to a
subspace of h ( the negative eigenspace of  ) which is at a nite distance
from the standard subspace h .

83

the fact that

is an ideal ensures that the action of the restricted

unitary group on this grassmannian well-dened:

i2

 7 gg, m  gmg + g[, g].

(b.8)

b.4 fredholm index

the material in this section is contained in ref.
[27] to which we refer for
proofs and more precise statements. a bounded operator a is fredholm if it
is invertible modulo a compact operator; i.e., if there is a compact operator
k such that a + k has an inverse. the set of fredhom operators is
a toplogical space, with the toplogy induced by the operator norm.
it is
disconnected, each connected component being labelled by an integer called
the fredholm index.

to understand the fredholm index, consider the kernel of an operator;
i.e., the subspace of all u such that au = 0 . even in the nite dimensional
case the kernel can change change discontinuosly under a small change in a
.; for example we may cross an eigenvalue. in the nite dimensional case,
the dimensions of the kernels of a and a are the same. in the case of
fredholm operators on innite dimensional hilbert spaces, the dierence

index (a) = dim ker a  dim kera

(b.9)

it however does not change under
is always nite but need not vanish.
it is constant in each connected component of
continuos changes in a :
the space of freholm operators. in fact it is the only such function: any two
fredholm operators of the same index are connected by a continuos curve.
now g  u1(h, ) is of course fredholm of index zero: it is invertible
as is its adjoint. but the submatrices
a : h  h etc.)
dened above are not invertible in general. yet they are invertible modulo
bb ), so they are fredholm.
some compact operators ( products such as
g as a whole invertible, they must have opposite fredholm indexes.
since
the index of a (for example) is a topological invariant of
g . the group
u1
is the union of connected components labelled by this index, which can
take any integer value. the connected component of the identity, of course,
has index zero.

a, d ( where

we can understand the renormalized dimension of a subspace (called vir-
tual rank in [27]) in terms of the fredhom index. every self-adjoint operator

84

can be diagonalized; an operator   gr1 can be brought to the standard
form  by an element in u1 :
a(g) is then
the topological invariant associated to  .

 = gg . the index of

another point of view is in terms of the subspace w of h correspond-
ing to  . if  is at a nite distance from  , w will not dier too
much from h . more precisely, the projection operator + : w  h+
will be compact and  : w  h will be fredholm. the index of 
measures the dierence in dimensions between w and h ; this is the
renormalized dimension of w . we saw in the text that this has the physical
meaning of baryon number.

it si crucial for all this that we allow only subspaces at a nite distance
from the standard one in gr1 . if we had allowed for all subspaces, the
grassmannian would have been contractible!. the convergence condition
we must impose is required for the poisson brackets to make sense: the
symplectic form of the grassmannian would not make sense otherwise. it is
gratifying that as a consequence, we get a topological invariant which has
the physical meaning of baryon number.

although the symplectic form makes sense on all of the phase space gr1 ,
we should not expect the hamiltonian to make sense on all of it. there should
be some dense domain in which the hamiltonian does make sense however.
we leave such questions as challenges for the analyst who is interested in
solving problems of relevance to physics.

85

86

appendix c

quadrature of singular
integrals

in this appendix we summarize some ideas on the numerical methods that
are used in the chapter on solitons. some originality is needed even in this
part of the problem.

c.1 quadrature formulas

the equations we have are just too hard to be solved analytically. we have
to resort to numerical methods. the basic idea is to convert the integral
equation into a matrix equation by allowing
p to take just a nite set of
values: we must nd a way to approximate the integral by a nite sum. then
we will solve the resulting nonlinear matrix equations by iteration.

quadrature is the approximation of integrals by nite sums. there are
standard methods for quadrature, (method of moments) going back to the
days of gauss. but we have to modify these methods since our integrals
are singular. the basic idea is well-known in the literature on quadrature at
least for the case of the cauchy principal value[37]. our integrals are one
step harder (hadamard finite part) but the idea is the same. see s. chan-
drashekhar,s classic book [38] for a clear discussion of numerical integration.
[a, b]

(x) be a continuous positive function on the close interval

let

. we are interested in evaluating integrals such as

z b

a

f (x)(x)dx

87

(c.1)

by numerical approximations. here

f (x) is some continuous function.

let xj, j = 1,    be a set of points in the interval

a weighted sum such as

[a, b] . we expect

wjf (xj)

xj

(c.2)

to be good approximation for the integral, provided that (i) the number
points
 is large enough and (ii) the points xj are distributed roughly
uniformly.

every function can be approximated by a polynomial within the interval;
as the order   1 of the polynomials grows the approximation gets better.
f (x) by that of its polynomial
we can thus approximate the integral of
approximation of order   1 . the weights wj are determined (once the
xj are chosen) by this requirement: the above formula should in
points
particular be exact for polynomials of order

this is the same as the condition

  1 .

z b

a

xk(x)dx =xj

wjxk

j , for k = 0, 1,   k  1.

(c.3)

the left hand side are the moments of the distribution
(x)dx , and are
assumed to be known. then the above set of linear equations determine the
weights in terms of xj .

 points

xj



xj = a + (b  a) j1

if the function (x)dx is not too rapidly varying, a simple choice such
as equally spaced points
should give reasonable
approximation to the integral: certainly for polynomials upto order
  1
we will get the exact answer anyway. but it is possible to do better by
cleverly, as pointed out by gauss: we can
choosing the
ensure that the answer is exact for polynomials of order
2  1 . but we
wont be using this idea: we will just use equal spacing for the points, which
turns out to be more convenient. this because our integrands involveterms
(p + r) , so it is convenient if the sum two points xj + xk is also a
such
point at which we evaluate the integrand. the loss of precision in quadrature
can be made up because the simplicity of equal spacing allows us to choose
a larger number of points.

88

c.2 singular measures

0 f (x) dx

now consider integral[37] fpr b

x2 . the symbol fp indicates as
before the hadamard nite part of the integral. for such singular integrals
we can also nd a numerical approximation as above. but the system of
moments is no longer positive. this is because the integation measure is
no longer positive:
is
positive. the moments of the measure are given by

can be negative even when

0 f (x) dx
x2

fpr b
fpz b

0

xk dx

x2 =

bk1
k  1

for k 6= 1

f (x)

(c.4)

(c.5)

and

fpz b

0

xk dx

x2 = log b for k = 1.

note that the zeroth moment is negative. also the second moment violates
scale invariance and is negative if

b < 1 .

given a system of points xj we can approximate the singular integral

by a sum

fpz b

0

f (x)

dx
x2 =

xj=1

wjf (xj)

where the weights are determined as above by solving the system

k =

xj=1

wjxk

j for k = 0,     1.

(c.6)

(c.7)

the choice of equally spaced points gives good answers in many cases.

these methods are used in the text (towards the end of the second chap-

ter) to solve the integrals equations for the wavefunction of the baryon.

89

90

bibliography

[1] j.d. bjorken, partons,

invited talk presented at the int. conf. on

duality and symmetry in hadron physics, tel-aviv, 1971

[2] r. p. feynman, photon-hadron interacions benjamin, reading (1972).

[3] t. h. r. skyrme,proc. royal. soc. lond. a260,127(1961);nucl. phys.

31, 556(1961); j. math. phys. 12, 556(1962).

[4] a. p. balachandran, v. p. nair, s. g. rajeev and a. stern, phys. rev.
lett., 49,1124 (1982); phys. rev. d27,1153 (1983); s. g. rajeev, phys.
rev. d29, 2844 (1984).

[5] s. g. rajeev, baryons as solitons ph. d. thesis syracuse university

(1984).

[6] a. p. balachandran, in proceedings of the yale theoretical advanced
study institute, high energy physics 1985 ed. m. j. bowick and f.
gursey, world scientic, singapore (1986).

[7] e. witten, nucl. phys. b223, 422 (1983); b223, 433 (1983); g. s. ad-

kins, c. r. nappi and e. witten, nucl. phys. b228, 552 (1983).

[8] g. t hooft nucl. phys. b72, 461 (1974);b75 461 (1974).

[9] e. witten, nucl. phys. b160, 57 (1979).

[10] s.g. rajeev, in 1991 summer school on high energy physics and cos-

mology, ed. e. gava, et. al. world scientic, singapore, (1992)

[11] p.f. bedaque,

i. horvath, s.g. rajeev, mod.phys.lett.a7:3347-

3356,1992;hep-th/9209027.

91

[12] s.g. rajeev, int.j.mod.phys.a9:5583,1994;hep-th/9401115.

[13] k. s. gupta and s. guruswamy and s. g. rajeev,phys. rev. d48, 3354

(1993);hep-ph/9301208.

[14] s.g. rajeev and o.t. turgut, comm. math. phys. 192, 493-517, (1998);

hep-th/9705103.

[15] g. krishnaswami and s. g. rajeev, phys. lett. 441, 429 (1998).

[16] v. john, g. krishnaswami and s. g. rajeev derivation of the anti-
quark distribution function of the proton from quantum chromody-
namics, in preparation.

[17] c. w. h. lee and s. g. rajeev, phys. rev. lett. 80, 2285-2288(1998);
nucl. phys. b 529, 656,(1998); j. math. phys. 39, 5199 (1998); j. math.
phys 40, 1870 (1999); phys. lett. b 436, 91(1998).

[18] s. j.brodsky, hep-ph/9807212.

[19] r. brock et al. [cteq collaboration], handbook of perturbative qcd:

version 1.0, rev. mod. phys. 67, 157 (1995).

[20] g.  hooft, unpublished lectures at the les houches summer school

(1973)

[21] d. gross and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 30, 1343 (1973).

[22] d. politzer, phys. rev. lett. 30, 1346 (1973).

[23] d. politzer, phys. rep. 14,129 (1974).

[24] a. h. mueller, phys. rep. 73,237-368 (1981); j. c. collins and d. e.

soper nucl. phys. b194 445 (1982)

[25] s. s. chern, complex manifolds without potential theory, springer-

verlag, new york (1979).

[26] j. mickelsson, current algebras and groups, plenum (1989).

[27] a. pressley and g. segal, loop groups clarendon press, oxford (1986).

92

[28] w. hackbush, integral equations: theory and numerical treatment

birkhauser, boston 1995. verlag

[29] v. kac and d. h. peterson, proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 78, 3308 (1981).

[30] g. segal, comm. math. phys. 80, 301 9(1981).

[31] d. pickrell, journ. funct. anal. 70 (1987) 323.

[32] a. d. martin, r. g. roberts, w. j. stirling and r. s. thorne,

hepph/9803445.

[33] m. gluck, e. reya, vogt, z. phys. c67(1995) 433.

[34] w. kwong, j. l. rosner and c. quigg, ann. rev. nucl. part. sci. 37,

325 (1987).

[35] i. c. gohberg and m. g. krein, introduction to the theory of linear
non-self adjoint operators, translations of the amer. math. soc., 18
(1969).

[36] b. simon, trace ideals and their applications, cambridge university

press, cambridge, (1979).

[37] p. j. davis and p. rabinowitz methods of numerical integration, aca-

demic press, orlando florida (1984).

[38] s. chandrashekhar, radiative transfer dover, (1960).

93

