0
0
0
2

 
r
a

m
2

 

 
 

2
v
4
1
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ufift-hep-99-04
hep-th/9905114

a generalized shannon sampling theorem,

fields at the planck scale as bandlimited signals

achim kempf

institute for fundamental theory, department of physics

university of florida, gainesville, fl 32611, usa

email: kempf@phys.u.edu

abstract

it has been shown that space-time coordinates can exhibit only very few
types of short-distance structures, if described by linear operators: they can be
continuous, discrete or unsharp in one of two ways. in the literature, various
quantum gravity models of space-time at short distances point towards one of
these two types of unsharpness. here, we investigate the properties of elds over
such unsharp coordinates. we nd that these elds are continuous - but possess
only a nite density of degrees of freedom, similar to elds on lattices. we observe
that this type of unsharpness is technically the same as the aperture induced
unsharpness of optical images. it is also of the same type as the unsharpness of
the time-resolution of bandlimited electronic signals. indeed, as a special case
we recover the shannon sampling theorem of information theory.

at the heart of every candidate theory of quantum gravity is an attempt to un-
derstand the structure of space-time at very short distances. the reason is a simple
gedanken experiment: the latest when trying to resolve distances as small as the planck
scale the accompanying energy-momentum uctuations due to the uncertainty relation
should cause curvature uctuations large enough to signicantly disturb the very space-
time distance which one attempts to resolve. speculations about the resulting behavior
of space-time at small distances have ranged from the idea that space-time is discrete,
to that it is foam-like, to that space-time may be a derived concept with a highly
dynamical short-distance structure, as e.g. string theory would suggest. at least at
present, however, there is no experimental access to suciently small scales, and there-
fore, a priori, the short-distance structure of space-time could still be any one out of
innitely many possibilities.

in this context, it has recently been pointed out, in [1], that the range of possible
short-distance structures can be reduced to only very few basic possibilities, under
a certain assumption. the assumption is that the fundamental theory of quantum

1

gravity possesses for each dimension of space-time an operator x i which is linear and
whose expectation values are real. the dynamics of these x i may be complicated and
the x i may or may not commute. nevertheless, one can prove on functional analytic
grounds that any such operator x i, considered separately, describes a coordinate which
is necessarily either continuous or discrete, or it is unsharp in one of two well-dened
ways. all other cases are mixtures of these.

since continua and lattices are familiar, we will here study one of the two types
of unsharp short-distance structures. the second type of unsharpness will be dealt
with elsewhere. the type of unsharp coordinate which we will here investigate can
be characterized by an uncertainty relation [1]: such a coordinate is described by an
operator x i for which the formal standard deviation x i = h(x i  hx ii)2i1/2 obeys
some positive lower bound:

x i()  x i

min(h|x i|i)

here,  is any vector on which the operator can act, and the function x i
min(x)
describes how the lower bound depends on the x i- expectation value.
if this were
nonrelativistic quantum mechanics, the interpretation would be that the x i- coordinate
is unsharp in the sense that particles cannot be localized to arbitrary precision on the
xi- axis and that the lower bound on the position resolution depends in general on the
xi- expectation value, i.e. on where on the xi- axis one tries to localize the particle.
the function x i
min(x) may in general also take the value zero, but we will here focus
on the case where it is strictly positive.

this type of unsharp short-distance structure has indeed frequently appeared in
quantum gravity and in particular in string theory. for example, several studies, see
e.g. [2], suggest that the heisenberg uncertainty relation may eectively pick up planck
scale or string scale correction terms of the form:

xp 

h

2 (cid:16)1 + (p)2 + ...(cid:17)

(1)

for  positive, the lowest order correction in eq.1 implies that there is a constant
lower bound for x, namely xmin = h. of course, it is not necessarily surprising
if even quite dierent candidate quantum gravity theories arrive in this way or another
at some positive lower bound x i
min(x) on the formal uncertainty in coordinates x i,
because, as we mentioned, for real entities which are described by linear operators this
is one out very few possibilities.

our aim here is to investigate what this general type of unsharp short-distance
is it possible to dene elds (xi, y) over such
structure means in eld theory:
an unsharp coordinate x i? the operator x i should act simply as x i : (xi, y) 
xi(xi, y) while we let y stand collectively for all other coordinates (if commutative)
or any other quantum numbers. the main question is, how do the elds depend on xi,
given that an unsharp coordinate xi is neither continuous nor discrete? how does one

2

calculate the hilbert space scalar product of elds - does it involve an integral over xi,
a sum over discrete points on the xi-axis, or something else?

as we will show here, the answer is that elds (xi, y) over such unsharp coordinates
are indeed well-dened: these elds are continuous functions (xi, y) over a continuous
variable xi. crucially, however, these elds are automatically ultraviolet cut o in the
sense that they possess only nitely many degrees of freedom per unit length along the
xi coordinate, similar to elds on lattices!

before we begin describing the details, let us agree to from now on suppress the
index i and the other variables y. we should also mention that some of the operators
which describe unsharp coordinates of this type can only be represented on elds which
possess isospinor indices, but this phenomenon will be discussed elsewhere.

let us begin with two denitions: by a discretization of the x-axis we mean a dis-
crete set of real numbers, {xn}, where xn+1 > xn and where n runs through all integers.
by a partitioning of the x-axis we mean a smoothly parametrized family of discretiza-
tions {xn()} which together make up the entire x-axis, namely such that every point
on the x-axis, i.e. every real number, occurs in exactly one of the discretizations.
now our claim is that to each unsharp coordinate x, as characterized by a curve
xmin(x), there corresponds a partitioning {xn()} of the x-axis such that if a eld
(x) is known only on one of the partitionings discretizations then the eld can already
be reconstructed everywhere on the x-axis. namely, if for some arbitrary xed  the
amplitudes (xn()) are known for all n then (x) can be recovered for all x through
a reconstruction formula of the form:

(x) = xn

g(x, xn()) (xn())

(2)

thus, the knowledge of a elds amplitudes at nitely many points per unit length
along the x-axis indeed suces to describe the eld entirely. thereby, the operation of
reconstructing a eld is interchangeable with the operation of multiplying it by x:

x(x) = xn

g(x, xn()) xn() (xn())

the scalar product of two elds (as far as the x- dependence is concerned) is a sum:

h1|2i = xn



1(xn())2(xn())

this scalar product formula gives in fact the same result independently of , i.e.
dependently of the choice of discretization on which the sum is being calculated.

in-

similarly, also the x- expectation value and the second moment of elds can be
calculated on any one of the discretizations {xn()} and the result does not depend
on . correspondingly, x() = (h|x 2|i  h|x|i2)1/2 is the standard deviation
of the elds discrete samples on any one of the discretizations {xn()} of the x-axis.
we remark that, more generally, if a eld is not only in the domain of x but also in

3

the domain of higher powers of x, say x r, i.e. if the eld decays at innity with the
corresponding inverse power, then the higher moments up to the 2rth are nite, and
they too are independent of the discretization in which they are calculated:

h|x r|i = xn

(xn())r (xn())(xn())

we now still need to address the question exactly how the minimum position uncer-
tainty curve xmin(x) corresponds to a partitioning of the x- axis. one expects of
course that in regions of the x-axis where xmin(x) is small the spacing needs to be
tighter and vice versa.

to see the precise relationship, let us rst recall the minimum position uncertainty
curve for particles which live on a one-dimensional lattice {xn}. clearly, these particles
can be localized to absolute precision x = 0 at each of the lattice sites, say xn0,
namely with the wave-function (xn) = n,n0.
if, however, a particles expectation
value lies in between two lattice sites then its standard deviation cannot be lower
than some nite value. as is straightforward to verify, the curve xmin(x) for a
one-dimensional lattice consists of half-circles which arc from lattice site to lattice site.
the elds over an unsharp coordinate do not live on only one discretization of the x-
axis, but simultaneously on a whole family of discretizations which together constitute
a partitioning of the x-axis. in contrast to ordinary elds over a lattice, elds over
unsharp coordinates therefore obey an equation of the form (for arbitrary xed ):

fn()(xn()) = 0

xn

(3)

eq.3 expresses that on each one of the discretizations the elds cannot be too peaked:
we will nd that fn() 6= 0 for all n, which implies, for example, that elds (xn) =
n,n0 do not occur. more precisely, eq.3 implies that the variable lower bound xmin(x)
is the joint lower bound of all the minimum x-uncertainty curves of the individual
discretizations in the partitioning. namely, if we denote the minimum x-uncertainty
curve of the discretization to the parameter  by xmin(x, ) (composed of half-circles
which arc from point xn() to point xn+1() for all n) then:

xmin(x) = max



xmin(x, )

in this way, every partitioning {xn()} of the x-axis determines a minimum position
uncertainty curve xmin(x) and vice versa. we can describe partitionings conveniently
by how their lattice spacings vary over the x- axis. indeed, for each partitioning there
is a unique lattice spacing function s(x) which obeys for all n and :

s((xn+1() + xn())/2) = xn+1()  xn()

its inverse, (x) := 1/s(x), the density of degrees of freedom function, of course also
describes an unsharp coordinate entirely.

4

interestingly, s(x), (x) and, correspondingly, the minimum position uncertainty
curve xmin(x) cannot vary arbitrarily abruptly. intuitively, the reason is clear: if a
particle can be localized only to very little precision around one point on the x-axis,
then it is plausible that the particle cannot be localized to very high precision around
a closely neighboring point.

in fact, we nd that the possible spatial variability of the unsharpness of a coor-
dinate is constrained to the extent that one discretization, say {xn(0)}, together with
the set of data { d
dxn(0)}, i.e. together with the discretizations derivative with respect
to , already determines an entire partitioning {xn()}. (technically, the discrete am-
plitudes v(xn(0)) := (1)n(xn(0) i)1(dxn/d(0))1/2 belong to a eld v(x) which can
be reconstructed through eq.2, thereby yielding dxn()/d and therefore {xn()} for
all values of .)
any unsharp coordinate can therefore be specied entirely by specifying one of its
d xn(0)}. let us abbreviate these
we still need to give explicit expressions for the coecients fn() of eq.3 and of
course also for the reconstruction kernel g of eq.2. expressed in terms of the data
{xn} and {x

discretizations {xn(0)} together with its derivative { d
data as xn := xn(0) and x

n := dxn()/d|=0.

and

n}, we obtain (after lengthy calculation):
fn(0) = (1)n qx
x  xn  xm

g(x, xn) = (1)z(x,xn) x

n

n

x
m

(x  xm)2!1/2

(4)

(5)

here, (1)z(x,xn) provides a sign factor such that g(x, xn) is continuous in x. the sign
factor arises naturally in a product representation:

g(x, xn) = lim
n

q|m|<n,m6=n(x  xm)

x
x

r

n q|s|<n,s6=r(x  xs)2

rp|r|<n

the proof of these results is rather technical. it is contained in a previous version, see
[7], and will be presented in detail in a follow-up paper. let us here only sketch the
proof: the self-adjoint operator x(0) with purely discrete spectrum {xn} possesses
simple symmetric restrictions x, each with a u(1)-family of self-adjoint extensions
it can be shown that their spectra, {xn()}, yield partitionings of the real
x().
line and that the data {x
n} suce to specify the restriction and consequently the
partitioning. the main part of the proof then consists in calculating the unitaries which
interpolate the eigenbases of the extensions. the matrix elements of those unitaries
constitute the reconstruction kernel.

we eventually arrive at one-parameter resolutions of the hilbert space identity in
terms of an overcomplete and continuously parametrized set of normalizable vectors:

1 =

1

2 z 2

0

dxn |xn()ihxn()| =

5

1

2 z +



dx

d
dx |xihx|

note that coherent states and continuous wavelets, see e.g.
parameter resolutions of the identity.

[8], yield analogous two-

let us now consider the instructive special case of unsharp coordinates whose min-
imum position uncertainty curve xmin(x) is constant. in this case, also the density
of degrees of freedom (x) is constant,  = (2xmin)1, and the corresponding parti-
tioning {xn()} of the x-axis reads:

xn() = 2nxmin + 

we read o that xn = xn(0) = 2nxmin and x
d (0) = 1. applying these
parameters in eq.5 yields the reconstruction kernel. in this special case here we can
use the fact that

n = dxn

1

xn

(z  n)2 = (cid:18) 

sin z(cid:19)2

to obtain a particularly simple expression for the kernel:

2xmin !
g(x, xn) = sinc (x  xn)

we observe that the kernel, being a sinc-function, is the fourier transform of the
function which is 1 in the frequency interval [1/4xmin, +1/4xmin] and which
vanishes everywhere else. this means that the set of elds over a coordinate with
constant unsharpness xmin has a particularly simple characterization: it is the set
of elds whose frequency range is limited to the interval [max, max], where max =
1/4xmin. also eq.3 acquires a simple interpretation: eq.4 yields fn(0) = (1)n so
that, as is readily veried, eq.3 expresses that the elds fourier transforms vanish at
max, i.e. eq.3 is now a boundary condition in fourier space.
the fact that functions whose frequency range is within the interval [max, max]
can be reconstructed everywhere, via the sinc-function kernel g(x, xn) = sinc(2(x 
xn)max), from their values on discrete points {xn} with spacing 1/2max, is indeed
well-known, namely as the shannon sampling theorem. the sampling spacing xn+1 
xn = 1/2max is called the nyquist sampling rate. the basic idea of the theorem was
actually already known to borel (1897) and, according to [3], perhaps even to cauchy
(1841).

shannon is credited for introducing the theorem into information theory in the
1940s, see [4]: shannon showed that, due to noise and other limitations, in eect only
nitely many amplitude levels of electronic signals can be resolved, say n. conse-
quently, for any given ensemble of signals, the measurement of a signals amplitude at
some xed time t can yield at most log2 n bits of information. crucially now, shan-
nons ansatz is to idealize electronic signals (t) as bandlimited, i.e. as frequency-limited
functions. the sampling theorem then shows that 2max amplitude measurements per
unit time suce to capture such signals entirely - and this implies that these signals

6

can carry information at most at the rate b = 2max log2 n in bits/sec or, in terms of
the density of degrees of freedom: b =  log2 n.

the ability provided by the sampling theorem to reconstruct continuous signals
from discrete samples and the analysis of their information content have indeed proven
very useful in ubiquitous applications from scientic data taking and data analysis to
digital audio and video engineering. this of course motivated several generalizations
of the sampling theorem, see e.g. [5]. for example, there are methods to improve the
convergence of the reconstruction through oversampling, see e.g. [3].

one may ask, therefore, why it should have been dicult to generalize the theorem
for time-varying information densities. the main reason is that what would seem to
be the obvious approach, namely to try to use fourier theory to dene a notion of
time-varying bandwidth, max(t), faces major diculties: firstly, the resolution of a
signals frequency content in time is of course limited by the time-frequency uncertainty
relation. secondly, even low bandwidth signals can actually oscillate arbitrarily fast in
any interval of nite size (on these so-called superoscillations, see e.g. [6]).

we here avoid those problems by not even trying to dene variable bandwidths
max(t) in any fourier sense.
instead, we obtain a handle on variable information
densities through variable densities of degrees of freedom (t), which are well-dened
directly in the time-domain. possible practical applications are currently being ex-
plored.

we note that, as a by-product of considering the special case of constant density
of degrees of freedom we have found that the unsharpness of space-time according to
the quantum gravity and string theory motivated uncertainty relation, eq.1, is indeed
of the same type as the unsharpness in the time-resolution of bandlimited electronic
signals.
in fact, it is also the same type as the fundamental unsharpness of optical
images since, as is well-known, the aperture induces a bandlimit on the measurement
of angles. of course, to nd this type of unsharpness in such dierent contexts is again
not necessarily surprising, given that unsharp real entities described by linear operators
- within any arbitrary theory - can exhibit only two types of unsharpness.

our nding that elds over unsharp coordinates possess nite densities of degrees
of freedom can serve, as we saw, as the starting point for an information theoretic
analysis of ensembles of elds. this should be interesting to pursue. indeed, in studies
in quantum gravity and in particular in string theory the counting of degrees of freedom
and an information theoretical perspective have recently found renewed interest, in
particular in the contexts of the black hole information loss problem and the holographic
principle, see e.g. [9].

our observation that elds over unsharp coordinates are continuous but behave in
many ways like elds over lattices also raises questions such as, how do anomalies man-
ifest themselves with this type of ultraviolet cut-o: perhaps through fermion doubling
as on lattices, or else? eventually, it should be possible to work out model indepen-
dent phenomenological signatures of this type of unsharp space-time. these might be
testable if, as recent models of large extra dimensions suggest possible, the onset of

7

strong gravity eects is not too far above the currently experimentally accessible scale
of about 1018m, rather than at the planck scale of 1035m, see e.g.[10].
acknowledgement: the author is grateful to john klauder for very valuable criti-
cisms.

references

[1] a. kempf, preprint ufift-hep-98-30, hep-th/9810215, to appear in proc. 36th
course: from the planck length to the hubble radius, erice, italy, 29 aug - 7
sep 1998

[2] d.j. gross, p.f. mende, nucl. phys. b303, 407 (1988); d. amati, m. ciafaloni,
g. veneziano, phys. lett. b216 41, (1989); a. kempf, j. math. phys. 35, 4483
(1994); l.j. garay, int. j. mod. phys.a10 145 (1995), gr-qc/9403008; e. witten,
phys. today, 49, (4), 24 (1996); a. kempf , g. mangano, phys. rev. d55, 7909
(1997), hep-th/9612084; g. amelino-camelia, j. ellis, n.e. mavromatos, d.v.
nanopoulos, mod. phys. lett. a12 2029 (1997); s. de haro, jhep 9810 023
(1998), gr-qc/9806028; d.v. ahluwalia, preprint isgbg-02, gr-qc/0002005

[3] r. j. marks, introduction to shannon sampling and interpolation theory, springer

(1991)

[4] c. e. shannon, the mathematical theory of communication, univ. of illinois

press, urbana (1949), republished (1998)

[5] a. j. jerri, proc. ieee, 65 , (11) 1565 (1977); a. i. zayed, j. math. anal. and
appl., 158, 269 (1991); a. i. zayed, j. math. anal. and appl. 175, 222 (1993); y.
i. lyubarskii, k. seip, j. fourier analysis and appl. 3, (5) 597 (1997); m. h.
annaby, math. meth. appl. sc. 21, 361 (1998)

[6] y. aharonov, j. anandan, s. popescu, l. vaidman, phys. rev. lett. 64, 2965

(1990); a. kempf, gr-qc/9907084, in press in j. math. phys.

[7] a. kempf, hep-th/9905114 (v1)

[8] j. r. klauder, wavelet applications vi, proc. spie, 3723, 44 (1999)

[9] gerard t hooft, class. quant. grav. 16 3263 (1999), gr-qc/9903084, d. bigatti,

l. susskind, hep-th/0002044

[10] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos, g. dvali, phys. lett. b429 263 (1998); l.

randall, r. sundrum, phys. rev. lett. 83 3370 (1999)

8

