1

9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
6
2

 

 
 

2
v
8
8
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

instanton eects and chiral symmetry breaking in qcd2

hugo r. christiansen a

acentro brasileiro de pesquisas fsicas, cbpf, department of fields and particle physics, dcp
rua dr. xavier sigaud 150, 22290-180 rio de janeiro, brazil

in this paper we discuss the spontaneous breakdown of chiral symmetry in quantum chromodynamics by con-
sidering gluonic instanton congurations in the partition function. it is shown that in order to obtain nontrivial
fermionic correlators in a two dimensional gauge theory for the strong interactions among quarks, a regular instan-
ton background has to be taken into account. we work over massless quarks in the fundamental representation
of su(nc). for large nc, massive quarks are also considered.

1. introduction

in the massless limit, quantum chromody-
namics is not only invariant under right (r) and
left (l) chiral symmetry transformations but also
under two independent abelian symmetry groups
u(1). the massless theory is thus symmetric un-
der a large unitary group u(nf )u(nf ). the
vector subgroup is realized in the normal mode,
i.e.
the qcd vacuum is also invariant under
ul+r(nf ) transformations. the hadrons form
degenerate su(nf ) multiplets for small nf and
baryon number is conserved. the remaining
symmetries -axial su(nf ) and axial u(1)- cor-
responding to ulr(nf ), are not manifest in
particle degeneracies as we do not observe par-
ity doubling of baryon states. this phenomenom
is ascribed to the vacuum of the theory which is
said to spontaneously breakdown the axial sym-
metry (ssb). in a three avor world it has been
experimentally veried that ssb is true for the
special part of the axial group. actually, eight
approximately massles pseudoscalar mesons are
observed in the hadronic spectra. however, there
is one missing particle which would be associated
with ua(1) according to the goldstone theorem,
since the transformation f  ei5f is neither
realized as a symmetry of the vacuum nor `a la
goldstone. although we do not exactly know
the essential physical mechanism underlying chi-
ral symmetry breaking, the answer to this famous
problem lays on the so-called adler-bell-jackiw

e-address: hugo@cat.cbpf.br

anomaly. this explicit symmetry breaking at
the quantum level has a close connection to a,
seemingly, topological nature of the qcd ground
state.

in two dimensions, it turns out that there is
no possible goldstone mode associated with any
continuous (global) symmetry of the lagrangian
[1]. if chiral symmetry cannot be broken by the
vacuum state and parity is a good symmetry of
the lagrangian, the 2d spectrum should contain
parity doublets. however, they do not appear, in
direct correspondence with the 4d situation. the
mechanism which eliminates the pairing among
meson states will be claried in a path-integral
calculation. we will see that a non-abelian chi-
ral anomaly takes place provided a topological
structure is taken into account. in this way, not
only the abelian part of the axial symmetry but
also the non-abelian counterpart are dynamically
broken due to quantum uctuations. it shall be
made manifest by performing a fermion chiral de-
coupling.

the non-perturbative vacuum structure of
qcd can be expressed in terms of nonzero v.e.v.
of various composite operators. these conden-
sates have been introduced as phenomenological
parameters in a non-perturbative generalization
of the operator product expansion, which can
be related to observable hadronic properties by
the sum rule method. the lowest dimensional
condensates are well-known phenomenologically,
but considerable uncertainty prevails about the
value of higher dimensional correlators. conden-

2

sates can be understood as being generated by
certain nonperturbative uctuations of the elds.
in particular, instantons would be responsible for
the ssb of chiral symmetry. a quark conden-
sate arise due to the delocalization of fermion
zero modes associated with the instantons in the
medium [2].

therefore, the study of fermionic correlation
functions is a key issue of quantum chromo-
dynamics as these are suitable quantities to
shed light on qcd non-perturbative aspects and
hadron physics. actually, the correlation among
quark elds can be written in terms of dispersion
relations involving matrix elements among the
vacuum and physical hadronic fock states. con-
sequently, fermionic correlators of fundamental
degrees of freedom are directly connected to the
normalized cross sections of hadronic reactions
[3]. in this way, using hadronic phenomenological
data, valuable information about the fundamen-
tal structure of matter can be obtained from the
anlysis of multipoint fermionic correlators. the
qcd vacuum has non-perturbative condensation
of quarks and gluons. this fact is extracted from
the studies of current algebra, sum rules and lat-
tice qcd. for instance, a non-perturbative struc-
ture of the qcd vacuum comes about from the
gell mann-oakes-renner relation,
huu + ddi = 2f 2

/(mu + md),

m2

since such a nonzero result indicates the exis-
tence of a dynamical mass in the massless quark
propagator which would vanish in the perturba-
tive calculation. the strong attractive force in
the j p = 0+ channel induces the instability of
the fock vacuum of massless quarks to realize
the nonperturbative ground state with quark an-
tiquark condensation. this is quite similar to
the bcs mechanism of superconductivity. the
pair condensation breaks the full symmetry down
to the vector subgroup and the dynamical quark
mass is generated.

therefore, the study of fermionic condensates
is especially useful in connection with chiral sym-
metry breaking coming from non-perturbative ef-
fects, seemingly arising due to an underlying
topological structure.

2. model

these highly complicated problems can be
faced only by assuming sensible simplications in
the theory itself, or for instance, on the number of
space-time dimensions. quantum chromodynam-
ics in two dimensions is a convenient framework
for several reasons: the use of fundamental de-
grees of freedom, its non-abelian character, the
chirality properties of the theory, the existence of
analytical results, etc. we will then work with
the following lagrangian of su(nc) gauge elds
coupled to dirac fermions in an euclidean space:

l = q(iqq

+ a,atqq

a )q

+

1
4g2 f a

 f a



where q runs from 1 to nc and a, the label of
the generators, goes from 1 to n 2
c  1. for short,
we will discuss in detail the issues for only one
avor, but the procedure can be readily extended
to arbitrary nf . from now on we drop the c
subindex from nc.

(n) + aa

(x) = aa


in order to compute fermionic correlators, a
path-integral approach is very appropriate, espe-
cially to handle dierent topological sectors. a
necessary rst point in the procedure is to sep-
arate the gauge eld as a sum of a xed classi-
cal background carrying a topological charge n,
and a quantum uctuation belonging to the triv-
ial sector: aa
. in this way one is
able to decouple gauge elds from fermionic elds
within the n=0 sector, yielding a non-abelian ja-
cobian of the fujikawa type [4]. in order to do
this in a gauge independent way we have to use a
group valued representation for all the elds and
then perform a chiral rotation of the spinors. it
is worthwhile to show the jacobian resulting from
the decoupling, since it rst makes apparent the
axial anomaly, responsible for the full chiral sym-
metry breaking in 2d. in terms of group elds
u, v and d which represent a+, a and a(n)
+ re-
spectively (a(n)
 = 0), the fermion determinat can
be suitably factorized, in an arbitrary gauge, by
repeated use of the polyakov-wiegmann identity,
resulting in the following formal identity for the
jacobian

j =

det 6d[a(n) + a]

det 6d[a(n)]

= n exp sef f (a, a(n))

where

sef f (a, a(n)) = w [u] + w [v]

+

+

+

1
4
1
4
1
4

trcz d2x(u1+u)(dd1)
trcz d2x (d1+d)(vv1)
trcz d2x (u1+u) d (vv1) d1,

w [u] being the usual wess-zuminowitten ac-
tion. a lengthy calculation leads to the exact ex-
pressions for the correlation functions of an arbi-
trary number of fermionic bilinears in the su(n )
2d gauge theory [5]. as it is a very large expres-
sion we shall not quote it in this note but we can
state here that our results show that the simple
product of fermionic and bosonic path-integrals
one nds in the abelian case [6] becomes here
an involved sum due to color couplings, bringing
about the extended wess-zumino-witten action
coming from the decoupling. nevertheless, we
can say that expressions show in a clear way both
sectors completely decoupled. the fermionic
path-integral can be easily performed, amounting
to a sum of products of zero modes of the dirac
operator in the multinstanton background. in the
bosonic sector, the presence of the maxwell term
crucially changes the eective dynamics with re-
spect to that of a pure wess-zumino model. one
then has to perform approximate calculations to
compute the bosonic factor, for example, by lin-
earizing the group transformations; nevertheless,
the point relevant to our discussion of obtaining
an nonzero fermionic correlators is manifest in our
result.

we should note however that an immediate by-
product of our approach gives a null elementary
(lowest dimensional) condensate, h i = 0, for
any number of colors. for nite n , it is con-
sistent with alternative approaches, but, on the
other hand, independent analytical calculations
coming from dispersion relations and canonical
quantization [7] have found that it is possible to
obtain a nonzero condensate when the large n
limit is considered in massive qcd2. these al-
ternative approaches, which consider just trivial
topology, would in principle be in constrast with

3

colemans theorem as we have discussed in the
introduction. however, it has been shown that in
the weak coupling regime, or t hooft phase, there
is in fact a berezinskii-kosterlitz-thoules (bkt)
[8] realization of the chiral symmetry, dening a
phase transition between a chiral symmetric and
a chirally broken phase. what we want to point
out now is that by considering the massive ver-
sion of our model for large n , we may also obtain
a nonzero outcome for h i in the chiral limit.

regarding the topological aspects of our ap-
proach, here we are considering fundamental
quarks in a background given by the gluonic com-
ponent of zn vortices [9] which give a realization
in an euclidean 2d theory of regular instanton
congurations. this picture allows an interest-
ing connection between an underlying topologi-
cal structure in the theory and the existence of
nonzero fermion condensates. this is a very suit-
able feature for a model approach to the strong
interactions among quarks. the relevance of in-
stantons has been amply demonstrated by phe-
nomenology as well as by lattice calculations. in
particular, instantons allow a good description
of chiral symmetry breaking and shed light on
the nonperturbative phenomena determining the
structure of hadrons. an instanton vacuum cer-
tainly provides a convenient tool for computing
correlation functions and a microscopic picture of
the nonperturbative congurations of the gluon
eld.

the minimal correlation function, for the mas-
sive partition function, can be readily written as

(cid:18) h ()i(n)

h ()im = xn
m z d2xh () (x)i(n)
z d2x d2y h () (x) (y)i(n)

m=0 +

1
2

m 2

m=0 +

(1)

m=0 + . . .(cid:19)

written in this fashion, it is apparent that for
m 6= 0 the elementary condensate receives contri-
butions from every higher order correlator coming
from the massless theory. as we have mentioned,
these have precisely been calculated in a general
way [5]. it follows from the discussion above that

4

these correlators are given by the fermion zero
modes determined by the topological background.
since the fermionic sector is completely decou-
pled, the counting of the nonzero terms simply
follows from that of the abelian case because the
topological structure here can be red out from the
torus of the gauge group. to be more specic, in
a compactied space, there exist nn normaliz-
able zero modes in topological sector n [10]; this
implies the vanishing of the rst summatory in
eq.(1) in every topological sector. however, for
higher powers of m it is clear that certain nonzero
contributions come into play. the zero modes,
with a denite chirality, set the integration rules
for computing v.e.vs. by using the chiral decom-
position h (x)i = h rr(x)i + h ll(x)i one
can see that the rst n powers of m (j = 1 . . . n )
receive an input from the trivial topological sector
alone. for j  n , the n = 1 sector starts con-
tributing together with n = 0. for higher pow-
ers, j  2n , the contribution of topological sector
n = 2 starts on, etc. now, it can be easily seen
that the number of contributions grows together
with the number of colors. as we let n go to
innity the elementary condensate in the massive
theory does so. on the other hand, since within
each nontrivial topological sector the number of
zero modes grows also to innity, one has diver-
gent v.e.v. everywhere in the series expansion of
eq.(1). accordingly, high order terms can also
produce a nonzero outcome in the chiral limit.
this is a pleasant result of our model, in order to
mimic real four dimensional qcd where an in-
stanton vacuum seems to be closely connected to
this phenomenum.

therefore, it is clear that the limit m  0 be-
comes matter of a careful analysis; namely, com-
bined with a large number of colors, eq.(1) leaves
place enough for a nontrivial elementary conden-
sate even in the chiral limit. this result is of
phenomenological interest as it puts forward pos-
sible roots to the bkt phenomenom, arising from
topological considerations in a path-integral ap-
proach.

3. conclusion

we have discussed chiral symmetry breaking
in a two dimensional model for the gluon interac-
tions among quarks. our approach allows a sys-
tematic procedure for computing arbitrary corre-
lation functions of fermionic operators. we have
shown that a topological background is crucial for
obtaining a whole class of nonzero condensates of
the fundamental elds which signal the dynami-
cal breakdown of the full chiral symmetry group.

acknowledgements

i would like to thank f.a. schaposnik for en-
lightening discussions. this work was supported
by dcp-cbpf and faperj, brazil. thanks are
also due to s. narison, chairman of the confer-
ence.

references

1. s. coleman, comm. math. phys. 31 (1973)

259.

2. d. diakonov and v. petrov, nucl. phys. b272

(1985) 457.

3. e. shuryak, rev. mod. phys. 65 (1993) 1.
4. k. fujikawa, phys. rev. lett. 42 (1979) 1195.
5. h. christiansen,
int. j. mod. phys. a14

(1999) 1379.

6. h. christiansen and f.a. schaposnik, phys.

rev. d53 (1996) 3260, and ref.s therein

7. a.r. zhitnitsky, sov.j. nucl.phys. 43 (1986)

999.

8. v.l. berezinskii, sov.phys. jetp 32 (1970)
493; ibid 34 (1971) 610; j.m. kosterlitz and
d.j. thoules, j. phys. c6 (1973) 1181.

9. h. de vega and f.a. schaposnik, phys. rev.

d34 (1986) 3206.

10. l. cugliandolo and g. lozano, phys. rev.
d39 (1989) 3093. d. cabra, m. manas,
f. schaposnik and m. trobo, phys. rev. d43
(1991) 3508. h. christiansen and f.a. scha-
posnik, phys. rev. d55, (1997) 4920.

