9
9
9
1

 

y
a
m
1
2

 

 
 

1
v
4
5
1
5
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

two loop and all loop nite 4-metrics

g w gibbons
d.a.m.t.p.,

cambridge university,

silver street,

cambridge cb3 9ew,

u.k.

july 24, 2013

abstract

in pure einstein theory, ricci at lorentzian 4-metrics of petrov types
iii or n have vanishing counter terms up to and including two loops.
moreover for pp-waves and type-n spacetimes of kundts class which ad-
mit a non-twisting, non expanding, null congruence all possible invariants
formed from the weyl tensor and its covariant derivatives vanish. thus
these lorentzian metrics suer no quantum corrections to all loop orders.
by contrast for complete non-singular riemannian metrics the two loop
counter term vanishes only if the metric is at.

solutions of classical eld equations for which the counter terms required
to regularize quantum uctuations vanish are of particular importance because
they oer insights into the behaviour of the full quantum theory. conversely,
classical solutions for which quantum corrections do not vanish aord little or no
insight into the strongly quantum regime since quantum corrections are expected
to be large. thus in gravity theories, in plane wave spacetimes, which are of
petrov type n, all counter terms vanish on shell and so they suer no quantum
corrections [1, 2], this corresponds to the fact that the graviton remains massless
in the quantum theory and presumably remains a physically valid concept no
matter how large quantum eects are.

another important class of examples occur in supersymmetric theories when
one has a supersymmetric, so-called bps, solution of the classical equations. in
four-dimensional supergravity theories, examples of bps solutions are provided
by positive denite metrics whose curvature is self-dual or anti-self dual, or
equivalently su (2)  sp(1) holonomy. an interesting question is whether there
are non-trivial positive denite metrics which are not supersymmetric and for
which quantum corrections nevertheless vanish in pure gravity. one purpose of
the present note is to show that, subject to regularity, there are none.

1

the coecients of quantum corrections to ricci at solutions of einsteins
theory of gravity in four dimensions have been calculated up to two loops.
however it is widely believed that there are non-vanishing terms to arbitrarily
high loop order. the one loop term counter term is proportional to quadratic
invariant of the curvature tensor i2 = rabcdrabcd the integrand of the gauss-
bonnet theorem. if the metric is lorentzian and of petrov types iii or n, then
this invariant vanishes [10]. however, if the background has a positive denite
metric, then the counter term i2 is positive denite and can only vanish if the
background is at. however because it is a total derivative, one might think
that this fact may not be important, and could perhaps be ignored. even if
this point is conceded one still has two consider higher looops. let us therefore
turn to the two loop term which is proportional to the cubic invariant of the
ab [7, 8]. if the background is lorentzian
curvature tensor i3 = rab
and of petrov types iii or n then this invariant also vanishes [10]. indeed in
a ricci at spacetime of petrov types iii or n all invariants formed solely by
contracting products of the riemann tensor using the metric must necessarily
vanish. this property, which holds only for these petrov types, is clear from
the expression for the weyl spinor cabcd in terms of the principle spinors a
and a. for type n

ef ref

cdrcd

and for type iii

cabcd = ab c d.

cabcd = ab(c d),

(1)

(2)

and no non-vanishing contractions are possible.

even if the background metric is positive denite, a cubic invariant cannot
be positive denite and so it makes sense to ask: are there non-singular back-
grounds {m, g} for which it vanishes? note that there is no analogue of petrov
type iii or n for positive denite metrics [9]. however it is possible to give a
similar algebraic characterization of the vanishing of the cubic invariant. the
self-dual and anti-self-dual parts of the weyl tensor determines two symmetric
trace-free symmetric matrices d

ij say. the invariant i3 is proportional to

tr(d+)3 + tr(d)3.

(3)

a short calculation reveals that i3 will vanish if and only if both d+ and d
have a zero eigen-value.

remarkably, the answer to the question asked above is provided, almost word
for word, by a rather old result of lichnerowicz [3, 4] (see also [6, 5]). lich-
nerowicz derives an identity, valid in all dimensions if the ricci tensor vanishes,
which reads

2i2 = 2erabcderabcd + k.

(4)

where the scalar (as opposed to pseudo-scalar) k is a cubic invariant of the
curvature tensor. in four dimensions k must obviously be a multiple of i3 since
if the ricci tensor vanishes that is the only non-vanishing scalar cubic invariant.

2

one may now integrate (4) over the manifold m . the left hand side gives
a boundary term, which obviously vanishes if m is closed and which one may
check will certainly vanish if m is ale or alf. we deduce that if i3 = 0 then

erabcd = 0.

(5)

in fact (5) says that m is locally at least a symmetric space. however it is clear
that one may deduce more. since

ei2 = 0,

(6)

it follows in the alf or ale case that i2 = 0 everywhere, since it vanishes at
innity. but if i2 = 0 the metric must be locally at. if m is closed, then we
need a more complicated argument. however the conclusion is the same: the
metric must be locally at [3].

thus even self-dual metrics, are not exact and would receive quantum cor-
rections in pure einstein theory at two loops. by contrast, non-trivial vacuum
lorentzian metrics of petrov type iii and n, which are not plane waves or
pp-waves certainly exist [11]. in the case of type n vacuum spacetimes, it is
known [12] that provided they admit a non-expanding, non-twisting geodesic
null congruence, then all invariants formed from the weyl tensor and its co-
variant derivatives vanish. it seems that this class of solutions, which belong to
kundts class [11], do not correspond to our conventional idea of a graviton since
gravitons are usually taken to be described by pp-waves. in view of the van-
ishing of all quantum corrections it would seem worthwhile investigating these
metrics further. since pp-waves admit a covariantly constant spinor, they have
a holonomy group which is not the full lorentz group. an interesting question
is whether the other all loop nite metrics in kundts class also have a reduced
holonomy group.

if one drops the non-expanding condition but retains the non-twisting condi-
tion then there are non-vanishing invariants. for example, in [12] the invariant

c abcd;ef camcn;ef c lmrn;stclbrd;st

(7)

is shown not to vanish. the situation with respect to type iii spacetimes is not
known to the author.

we close with the remark that it would be interesting to extend these results
when a cosmological term is present, or to higher dimensions. in the latter case
lichnerowiczs identity holds in all dimensions. however the structure of the
counter terms and possible invariants will be dierent.

references

[1] g w gibbons, quantized waves propagating on plane wave spacetimes

comm math phys 45 (1975) 191-202

3

[2] s deser, plane waves do not polarize the vacuum j phys a8 (1975) 1972-4

[3] a lichnerowizc, courbure, nombres de betti, et espace symetriques pro-

ceedings of the international congress of mathematicians (1950) 216-223

[4] a lichnerowicz, geometry of groups of transformations, noordho inter-

national publishing, leyden (1977)

[5] m berger, riemannian geometry during the second half of the twentieth

century jahresber. deutsch math-verein 100 (1998) 45-208

[6] f tricerri and l vanhecke, varietes riemanniennes dont le tenseur de cour-
bure est celui dun espace riemannien irreductible, c r acad sci paris 302
(1986) 233-235

[7] m h goro and a sagnotti, the ultraviolet behaviour of einstein gravity

nucl phys b266 (1986) 709-736

[8] a e m van de ven, two-loop quantum gravity nucl phys b378 (1992)

309-366

[9] a karlhede, classication of euclidean metrics class quant grav 3 (1986)

l1-l4

[10] v d zakharov, gravitational waves in einsteins theory , isreal pro-

gramme for scientic translations, halsted press (1973)

[11] d kramer, h stephani, m maccullum and e herlt, exact solutions of ein-
steins field equations , veb deutscher verlag der wissenschaften,berlin
(1980)

[12] j bicak and v pravda, curvature invariants in type n spacetimes, class

quant grav 15 (1998) 1539-1555, gr-qc/9804005

4

