9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

3
2

 
 

1
v
9
7
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

kul-tf-99/24
june 1999

ns fivebranes in type 0 string theory

ben craps and frederik roose

instituut voor theoretische fysica

katholieke universiteit leuven, b-3001 leuven, belgium

abstract

the massless degrees of freedom of type 0 ns5-branes are derived. a
non-chiral, purely bosonic spectrum is found in both type 0a and 0b. this
non-chirality is conrmed by a one-loop computation in the bulk. an in-
terpretation of the spectra in terms of type 0 little strings is proposed.
the type 0b ns5-brane is conjectured to be dual to a bound state of certain
d5-branes, which is argued to have the same massless spectrum at strong
coupling.

1 introduction

type 0 string theories [1] have recently attracted a lot of attention. they have
been used to study the non-supersymmetric eld theories living on their d-branes
[2]. moreover, bergman and gaberdiel [3] have conjectured that they are super-
symmetry breaking orbifolds of m-theory, thus including them in the web of string
dualities. for instance, certain circle compactications of type 0 and type ii are
t-dual. other predictions of the conjectured duality are that type 0b string theory
exhibits s-duality and that the type 0 theories contain non-perturbative fermionic
states. in ref. [4] it has been studied how branes transform under type 0/type ii
t-duality.

d-branes in type 0 theories have been extensively studied [2]. since their dy-
namics is governed by open strings ending on them, d-branes can be studied in
perturbative string theory. this is not the case for solitonic (ns) vebranes, which
can be studied by examining the zero-modes of the corresponding classical super-
gravity solutions [5]. each such zero-mode corresponds to a massless eld on the
vebrane worldvolume.

in this paper we derive the massless eld content of type 0 ns5-branes. rather
than doing the zero-mode analysis directly for type 0a/b ns5-branes, we t-dualize

work supported by the european commission tmr programme erbfmrx-ct96-0045.
aspirant fwo, belgium; e-mail: ben.craps@fys.kuleuven.ac.be
e-mail: frederik.roose@fys.kuleuven.ac.be

1

them to kaluza-klein monopoles of type 0b/a, where the zero-modes can be read
o from the ten-dimensional bulk elds and the cohomology of the euclidean taub-
nut space. for both ns5-branes we nd a non-chiral spectrum: an unrestricted
antisymmetric tensor and six scalars in 0a and two gauge elds and four scalars in
0b.

in type iia the spectrum of the ns5 is chiral and anomalous. the gravitational
anomaly on the ns5 must be cancelled by anomaly inow [6] from the bulk. the
anomaly-cancelling bulk term [7] can be shown to be a string one-loop eect [8].
the fact that we nd a non-anomalous spectrum on type 0a ns5-branes predicts
that such an anomalous bulk term is not present in type 0a. indeed, we will see
that the type 0a gso projection does not allow a cp-odd one-loop term.

having identied the rather unusual ns5-brane spectrum in type 0b, one natu-
rally wonders what the ns5 transforms into under type 0b s-duality. we propose
that it transforms into a bound state of an electric and a magnetic d5-brane, along
the lines of the suggested duality [3] of the fundamental 0b string with a bound
state of d1-branes. assuming the existence of these bound states, we argue that
the massless spectra of the conjecturally s-dual objects agree. the doubling of
the gauge elds on both vebranes (compared to the type ii vebranes) provides a
non-trivial check of 0b s-duality.

finally, we propose an interpretation of the ns5-brane spectra in terms of type
0 little strings. this interpretation is suggested by the doubling of the gauge
degrees of freedom on the ns-branes, which is reminiscent of (and, in fact, closely
related to) the doubling of the ramond-ramond spectrum in going from type ii to
type 0.

2 type 0 strings and d-branes

in the neveu-schwarz-ramond formulation, type ii string theories are obtained by
imposing independent gso projections on the left and right moving parts. this
amounts to keeping the following (left,right) sectors:

iib :
iia :

(ns+, ns+) ,
(ns+, ns+) ,

(r+, r+) ,
(r+, r) ,

(r+, ns+) ,
(r+, ns+) ,

(ns+, r+) ;
(ns+, r) ,

(2.1)

where for instance r is the ramond sector projected with pgso = (1  ()f )/2,
f being the world-sheet fermion number.

the type 0 string theories contain instead the following sectors:

0b :
0a :

(ns+, ns+) ,
(ns+, ns+) ,

(ns, ns) ,
(ns, ns) ,

(r+, r+) ,
(r+, r) ,

(r, r) ;
(r, r+) .

(2.2)

these theories do not contain bulk spacetime fermions, which would have to come
from mixed (r,ns) sectors. the inclusion of the ns-ns sector with odd fermion

2

numbers means that the closed string tachyon is not projected out. the third
dierence with type ii theories is that the r-r spectrum is doubled.

as discussed in the introduction, the spectrum of type 0 theories contains two
(p + 1)-form r-r potentials for each even (0a) or odd (0b) p. we will denote these
by cp+1 and c 
p+1, where the unprimed potentials are the ones present in type ii.
for our purposes, more convenient combinations are

(cp+1) =

1
2

(cp+1  c 

p+1) .

(2.3)

for p = 3 these are the electric (+) and magnetic () potentials [9]. we will adopt
this terminology also for other values of p.
there are four types of elementary d-branes [10, 9] for each p: an electric and
a magnetic one (i.e. charged under (cp+1)), and the corresponding antibranes. in
ref. [9] the interaction energy of two identical parallel (p + 1)-branes was derived
by computing the relevant cylinder diagram in the open string channel, analogously
to the polchinski computation [11] in type ii. isolating, via modular transforma-
tion, the contributions due to the exchange of long-range elds in the closed string
channel, it is found on the one hand that the tension of these branes is a factor
2 smaller than for type ii branes. on the other hand, the r-r repulsive force
between two like branes has the double strength of the graviton-dilaton attraction
[9]; thus the type 0 branes couple to the corresponding r-r potentials (cp+1) with
the same charge as the branes in type ii couple to the potential cp+1.

the open strings stretching between two like branes are bosons, just like the
bulk elds of type 0. however, fermions appear from strings between an electric
and a magnetic brane [10, 12].

3 ns vebrane spectra

in type ii string theories the massless spectrum on ns5-branes can be derived via
an analysis of the zero-modes of the classical supergravity ns5-brane solutions [5].
we will nd it convenient to do the analysis for the t-dual objects, since there the
geometrical interpretation is manifest.

under t-duality the type iia/b ns5-branes are mapped to type iib/a kaluza-
klein (kk) monopoles. a kk monopole is described by a supergravity solution
with six worldvolume directions and a euclidean taub-nut (etn) metric in the
transverse space. the massless elds on the kk monopole correspond to the zero
modes of the bulk supergravity elds on etn. the normalizable harmonic forms
on etn consist of one selfdual two-form. in the ns-ns sector there are three zero
modes from broken translation invariance and one scalar from the ns two-form.
these four scalars correspond to the translation zero modes on the corresponding
ns5-branes. the r-r elds give additional bosonic zero-modes: on the iib kk

3

monopole the r-r two-form gives rise to a scalar and the selfdual1 r-r four-form
potential leads to a selfdual two-form; the iia kk monopole has a vector coming
from the r-r three-form. in addition there are fermionic zero modes from broken
supersymmetry: two fermions with opposite chirality for the iia kk monopole and
of the same chirality for iib.

all in all, this leads to an n = (2, 0) tensor multiplet on the iia ns5 and an
n = (1, 1) vector multiplet on the iib ns5.
repeating this analysis for type 0 ns5-branes, it is clear that the fermionic zero
modes disappear (there are no fermions in the bulk). nothing changes as far as the
ns-ns zero modes are concerned, but from the r-r elds we nd extra zero modes
from the doubled r-r spectrum in the bulk. on the 0b ns5 there is an extra
vector (compared to the iib ns5), whereas the 0a ns5 gets an extra scalar and an
anti-selfdual tensor. in particular the spectrum is non-chiral on both branes.

4 absence of anomalies

at one string loop the type iia tree level supergravity action is supplemented with
the wess-zumino type term r b  x8(r) coupling the ns-ns two-form b to four
gravitons. x8 is a quartic polynomial in the spacetime curvature. the original
derivation of this one-loop term [8] provided a non-trivial consistency check for
six-dimensional heterotic-type ii duality. apart from that, this specic piece of
the action is also responsible for gravitational anomaly cancellation on iia ns
vebranes [7].

let us rst highlight some aspects of the direct calculation in type ii, which will
enable us to draw conclusions on the analogous type 0 amplitude almost eortlessly.
first, as the interaction contains the ten-dimensional  symbol, only odd spin struc-
tures on the torus can contribute, i.e. either the left-moving or the right-moving
fermions but not both, have to be in the odd spin structure. furthermore, the even
spin structures are summed over to achieve modular invariance. from a dierent
perspective this may also be seen as performing the gso projection on the closed
string states in the loop [13]. in a hamiltonian framework the torus vacuum dia-
gram is written as a trace over the closed string hilbert space, which decomposes
in four dierent sectors as in eq. (2.1). chiral traces over these sectors can be
expressed in terms of traces over fermion sectors with periodic (p) or antiperiodic
(a) boundary conditions in the (, ) worldsheet directions:

tr(n s,) =

tr(n s,+) =

1
2
1
2

((a, a)  (a, p )) ;
((a, a) + (a, p )) ;

1 by abuse of

language we term the potential
(anti-)selfdual nature of their respective eld strengths.

forms (anti-)selfdual, according to the

4

tr(r,) =

tr(r,+) =

1
2
1
2

((p, a)  (p, p )) ;
((p, a) + (p, p )) .

notice that the odd (p, p ) spin structure only occurs in the ramond sector. from
the gso-projected spectrum in eq. (2.1) only (r,ns) and (r,r) sectors contain
(odd,even) pieces, yielding

1
4

((p, p ), (a, a) + (a, p ) + (p, a)) .

(4.4)

the right-moving combination is modular invariant, and in fact vanishes as a con-
sequence of the abstruse identity. if one were to calculate the amplitude for one
b-eld and four gravitons, one would insert vertex operators in the appropriate pic-
tures. still, the right-moving even structures would be summed over as in eq. (4.4).
in contrast with the partition function however, in this case a non-vanishing result
would be found so as not to contradict the alternative calculation in ref. [8]. it is
also argued there that in type iib the (odd,even) and (even,odd) contributions can-
cel out whereas they add in type iia. so only in the latter is the probed interaction
present.

this dierence between type iia and iib could have been inferred from their
respective ns vebrane worldvolume spectra, a chiral one in type iia and a non-
chiral one in type iib. the chiral spectrum suers from a gravitational anomaly in
six dimensions, which is neatly cancelled by the standard anomaly inow [6] from
the bulk through the above derived coupling [7].

let us repeat the argument for the one-loop correlator in type 0 string theories.
now it is only (r,r) sectors that contribute to the (odd,even) piece in the one-loop
partition function, yielding

1
4

((p, p )  (p, p ), (p, a))

(4.5)

both for 0a and 0b. as in type ii one may now wish to insert vertex operators.
however, it is obvious that the obligatory sum over spin structures as in eq. (4.5)
now yields a vanishing result for the (odd,even) part by itself. analogously, the
(even,odd) part will vanish by itself. whence the absence of the anomaly-canceling
term in both type 0a and 0b.

reversing the anomaly inow argument in type 0a the selfdual two-form must
be supplemented with an anti-selfdual two-form, in order not to give rise to gravita-
tional anomalies. this nicely agrees with the above derived unconstrained two-form
on the ns vebrane. from t-duality an additional vector (compared to the iib
ns5-brane) has to be expected on the type 0b ns5-brane.

5

5 s-duality

in type iib string theory the fundamental string is mapped to the d-
strings
string under s-duality. a necessary condition for this is that the massless spectrum
on both branes agrees. indeed, in both cases one nds eight translation zero modes
and eight on-shell fermionic zero modes from broken supersymmetry. (for the d-
string these degrees of freedom can also be obtained by quantizing the open strings
beginning and ending on it.) the iib fundamental and d-strings are bps objects,
so one of them can be followed to strong coupling and compared to the other at
weak coupling.

by analogy, one would guess that in type 0b the fundamental string is mapped
to a superposition of an electric and a magnetic d1-brane. at rst sight, however,
this system seems to have too many degrees of freedom. one has to quantize four
dierent open string sectors (depending upon which brane each end of the string
ends on), leading to 16 bosonic degrees of freedom (corresponding to the positions
of both branes in transverse space) and 16 on-shell fermionic ones (from the strings
connecting the magnetic with the electric d1). on the other hand, we expect
that a zero mode analysis of a fundamental type 0 string would lead to only eight
translation zero modes and no fermionic zero modes (since there are no fermions
and thus no supersymmetry in the bulk).

the resolution of this puzzle is that the pair of d-strings will probably form a
bound state, as suggested in ref. [3]. there it was argued that an electric and a
magnetic d-particle in 0a can form a bound state. one of the arguments was that,
as the closed string tachyon is conjectured to become massive at strong coupling,
the interaction between the two particles at separations large compared to the string
scale will be dominated by the attractive gravitational force. this argument also
applies to the case of an electric-magnetic d-string pair in type 0b. we will not try
to nd more evidence for this scenario here, but just assume that the strings will
form a bound state at strong coupling with the characteristic distance between the
branes of the order of the string length.

with this assumption, it is clear that the fermions (created by the strings con-
necting the two branes) get a mass of the order of the string scale (namely the
separation of the branes times the fundamental string tension). moreover, the
bound system will have only eight translation zero modes. this massless spectrum
is precisely what we would expect for an object that is dual to a weakly coupled
fundamental type 0 string. there is one slight complication. one may fear that, in
addition to the translational zero modes, there may be rotational zero modes if the
branes are not right on top of each other. therefore, we should expect that, if the
bound state is not spherically symmetric, the moment of inertia associated to it is
so small that the rotation modes cannot be excited at low energies. this seems to
be the case for compact d-strings (an innite one would, of course, have innite
mass) at strong enough string coupling (as the tension of a d-string is inversely
proportional to the string coupling).

6

fivebranes type iib ns5-branes are s-dual to d5-branes. as in the case of
strings, the spectra of these objects are protected by supersymmetry, so it is easy
to match the strong coupling spectrum of one to the weak coupling spectrum of the
other.

in type 0b one would guess that the ns5-brane is s-dual to a bound state of
an electric-magnetic d5-brane pair. as we saw above for the d-string pair, half of
the (in this case eight) translation modes of the d5-brane pair are lost, and so are
the massless fermions. on the other hand, there is no reason why any of the two
vectors should become massive. their masses are protected by gauge invariance,
and since the elds one could imagine to condense (like the closed string tachyon
or the open string scalars parametrizing the separation of the branes) are neutral
under both gauge elds, there is no reason why gauge invariance should be broken
at strong coupling. the situation is dierent for the scalars: for type ii d-branes
supersymmetry forbids a scalar potential to develop.
in type 0, supersymmetry
being absent, there is nothing that forbids (half of) the scalars to develop a potential
and to condense.2

all in all, the spectrum we end up with for the bound state of the electric-
magnetic d5-brane pair precisely matches the one we found for the ns5-brane,
including the doubling of the gauge eld.

6 a little string interpretation

in type ii string theories the vebrane worldvolume theories have been conjectured
to be properly described by little strings[14]. these non-critical closed string
theories have hitherto remained mysterious, although some qualitative features may
be understood. we briey recall some of these, focusing on the type iib case.
however, we prefer rst to treat the more familiar example of a fundamental string,
providing a guiding reference when dealing with the little strings.

a fundamental string solution in supergravity breaks half of the 32 bulk su-
persymmetries. these broken symmetries give rise to fermion zero modes on the
string, of which 8 are left-moving and 8 right-moving. they are identied with the
green-schwarz space-time fermion elds on the worldvolume. upon quantization
of these fermions 128 bosons and 128 fermions are found, together building the
on-shell n = 2 supergravity multiplet. this multiplet is also found from the rns
superstring, so the picture is consistent. in the latter formulation it is not hard to
see that the ns-ns sector elds together with, say, the r-ns sector build an n = 1
supergravity multiplet. likewise, the ns-r and r-r sector are combined into one
multiplet of n = 1.
let us move on now to little strings. one way to derive properties of little
strings in type iib is to consider a gauge instanton on a d5 brane. the bulk su-
persymmetries that are unbroken by the d-brane give rise to fermion zero modes

2we thank walter troost for very helpful discussions on various of these points.

7

on the vebrane. sixteen real supercharges are thus found, obeying a n =(1,1) su-
peralgebra. of these, half are broken by the instanton. on the macroscopic string
there are thus eight fermionic modes, four left-moving and four right-moving ones.
upon quantization of these zero modes one nds 8 bosonic and 8 fermionic states.
they correspond to the on-shell degrees of freedom of one n =(1,1) vectormulti-
plet. upon decomposition with respect to n = 1 six-dimensional supersymmetry
one hypermultiplet and one vectormultiplet result. it is conceivable that a simi-
lar analysis in type iia, if possible at all, would give a n =(2,0) tensormultiplet,
decomposing into one hypermultiplet and one tensormultiplet of n =1 supersym-
metry. we remark that the tensormultiplet has a bosonic content that consists of
one scalar and one two-form potential with self-dual eld strength. all in all, one
may wish to draw the following analogies between little strings and type ii strings.
in both cases there is one universal sector, the hypermultiplet resp. the (ns-ns +
r-ns) sector. the other sector depends on whether or not the supersymmetry in
the bulk is chiral, where bulk means the vebrane worldvolume for the little
string and ten-dimensional spacetime for the type ii string. for the non-chiral type
iia and little type iia the remaining bosonic elds are odd q-form potentials, cou-
pling to even p dp- resp. dp-branes. as to chiral type iib/iib the r-r sector has
only even q-form potentials, of which one has a self-dual eld strength. in these
theories only odd p dp or dp-branes occur. so this analogy, however formal, is at
least remarkable.

as to the various vebranes, the type iia ns vebrane theory is conjectured to
be described by chiral iib little strings, whereas iia little strings would do the job
for type iib vebranes.

if one is willing to take the above for granted, one may then proceed and con-
struct little type 0a/b strings by mimicking the procedure for the bulk strings:
spacetime fermions are removed and the (ns-,ns-) sector is added. moreover, there
is a doubled r-r spectrum as compared to the superstring. concretely this would
imply that the massless spectrum of little type 0a strings consists of the bosonic
contents of one hypermultiplet and two vectormultiplets, in n =1 language. this
precisely matches with the spectrum on the type 0b ns vebrane. little type 0b
strings would then generate the bosonic content of one hypermultiplet, one selfdual
tensormultiplet and one anti-selfdual tensormultiplet. also here this seems to be
consistent with the spectrum of the type 0a ns vebrane.

7 conclusions

from a zero mode analysis of type 0 kaluza-klein monopoles, we have derived
the massless degrees of freedom of ns5-branes in type 0a and 0b. the massless
spectrum is purely bosonic and non-chiral in both cases. the 0a ns5-brane contains
an unrestricted tensor (rather than a selfdual one) whereas two gauge elds live on
the 0b ns5-brane.

8

since the spectrum of a 0a ns5-brane is non-chiral, the anomaly-cancelling one
loop bulk term present in type iia should be absent in type 0a. this is indeed the
case.

we have conjectured that the type 0b ns5-brane is s-dual to a bound state
of an electric-magnetic d5-brane pair. assuming the existence of such a bound
state, we argue that its strong coupling spectrum is likely to match the one of the
ns5-brane.

it is tempting to interpret the spectrum we nd in terms of type 0 little strings.
their relation to the usual type ii little strings is very similar of the relation
between the bulk type 0 and type ii strings: fermions are projected out and the
ramond-ramond spectrum is doubled.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank marco billo and walter troost for interesting discussions
and comments.

references

[1] l.j. dixon and j.a. harvey, string theories in ten dimensions without space-

time supersymmetry, nucl. phys. b274 (1986) 93.

[2] i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, d-branes and dual gauge theories in type 0
strings, nucl.phys. b546 (1999) 155, hep-th/9811035; j. minahan, glueball
mass spectra and other issues for supergravity duals of qcd models, jhep
9901 (1999) 020, hep-th/9811156; i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, asymp-
totic freedom and infrared behavior in the type 0 string approach to gauge the-
ory, nucl.phys. b547 (1999) 143, hep-th/9812089; i.r. klebanov and a.a.
tseytlin, a non-supersymmetric large n cft from type 0 string theory, jhep
9903 (1999) 015, hep-th/9901101; a.a. tseytlin and k. zarembo, eective
potential in non-supersymmetric su(n)  su(n) gauge theory and interac-
tions of type 0 d3-branes, hep-th/9902095; n. nekrasov and s.l. shatashvili,
on non-supersymmetric cft in four dimensions, hep-th/9902110; m. billo,
b. craps and f. roose, on d-branes in type 0 string theory, hep-th/9902196,
to be published in phys. lett. b; j. minahan, asymptotic freedom and con-
nement from type 0 string theory, jhep 9904 (1999) 007, hep-th/9902074;
m. alishahiha, a. brandhuber, y. oz, branes at singularities in type 0
string theory, jhep 9905 (1999) 024, hep-th/9903186; a. armoni, b. kol,
non-supersymmetric large n gauge theories from type 0 brane congurations,
hep-th/9906081; r. blumenhagen, a. font, d. lust, non-supersymmetric
gauge theories from d-branes in type 0 string theory, hep-th/9906101.

9

[3] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, dualities of type 0 strings, hep-th/9906055.

[4] y. imamura, branes in type 0/type ii duality, hep-th/9906090.

[5] c.g. callan, j.a. harvey and a. strominger, worldbrane actions for string

solitons, nucl. phys. b367 (1991) 60.

[6] c.g. callan and j.a. harvey, anomalies and fermion zero modes on strings

and domain walls, nucl. phys. b250 (1985) 427.

[7] m.j. du, j.t. liu and r. minasian, eleven-dimensional origin of string/string
duality: a one loop test, nucl. phys. b452 (1995) 261, hep-th/9506126;
e. witten, five-branes and m-theory on an orbifold, nucl. phys. b463 (1996)
383, hep-th/9512219.

[8] c. vafa and e. witten, a one-loop test of string duality, nucl.phys. b447

(1995) 261, hep-th/9505053.

[9] i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, d-branes and dual gauge theories in type 0

strings, nucl.phys. b546 (1999) 155, hep-th/9811035.

[10] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, a non-supersymmetric open string theory

and s-duality, nucl.phys. b499 (1997) 183-204, hep-th/9701137.

[11] j. polchinski, dirichlet branes and ramond-ramond charges, phys. rev. lett.

75 (1995) 4724, hep-th/9510017.

[12] m. billo, b. craps and f. roose, on d-branes in type 0 string theory,

hep-th/9902196, to be published in phys. lett. b.

[13] n. seiberg and e. witten, spin structures in string theory, nucl. phys. b276

(1986) 272.

[14] n. seiberg, new theories in six-dimensions and matrix description of m-theory
on t 5 and t 5/z2 ,phys. lett. b408 (1997) 98, hep-th/9705221; r. argurio
and l. houart, little theories in six and seven dimensions, nucl. phys. b517
(1998) 205, hep-th/9710027; n. seiberg and s. sethi, comments on neveu-
schwarz ve-branes, adv. theor. math. phys. 1 (1998) 259, hep-th/9708085.

10

