9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

9
2

 
 

4
v
0
9
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

yitp-99-37
hep-th/9906090
june 1999

branes in type 0/type ii duality

yosuke imamura

yukawa institute for theoretical physics,
kyoto university, kyoto 606-8502, japan

abstract

we give relations between type 0 and type ii d-brane congurations under
t-duality suggested by bergman and gaberdiel and conrm that massless elds
on d-branes are identical to ones on the dual d-brane congurations. further-
more, we discuss dualities of type 0 and type ii ns5-branes and we nd that the
dual of an unwrapped type 0 ns5-brane is a kaluza-klein monopole with non-
supersymmetric blow up modes.

imamura@yukawa.kyoto-u.ac.jp

1 introduction

during the last about one year, type 0 string theories[1, 2], which are superstring theories

without spacetime supersymmetry, have attracted much attention. they give us possibility to
analyze the non-supersymmetric qcd by means of brane techniques developed for supersym-
metric theories[3]. however, the properties of type 0 theories are less known compared with

other supersymmetric string theories because bps conditions, which give us a lot of informa-
tion of supersymmetric theories, are not available. recently, bergman and gaberdiel found

a duality between type 0 and type ii theories[4]. by this duality, it may become possible to
obtain new properties of type 0 theories from knowledge of type ii theories. therefore, it is
important to investigate this duality. the purpose of this paper is to nd duality relations

between brane congurations in type 0 theories and ones in type ii theories.

2 type 0/type ii duality

as is mentioned in [4], type ii theory compactied on s1 with monodromy (1)fs is t-dual of
type 0 on s1 with monodromy (1)fr, where fs and fr are operators which count spacetime
fermions and right-moving worldsheet fermions respectively.1 (precisely, duals of type iia and
type iib are type 0b and type 0a respectively. we omit the letters a and b in what follows.)
instead of explicitly showing the equivalence of these two theories in terms of world sheet

cft, we only give the spectra of these theories in table 1 and table 2. in these tables, n and
p9 represent the wrapping number and the kaluza-klein momentum along the compactied
indeed, according to these tables, we nd that two spectra are identical if we swap
direction.

table 1: spectrum of type ii theory on s1 with monodromy ()fs. variables n and p9 represent
the wrapping number and the kaluza-klein momentum along the compactied direction.

n  2z

n  2z + 1

p9  z/r
(ns+,ns+)
(r,r+)
(ns,ns)
(r,r)

p9  (z + 1/2)/r

(ns+,r+)
(r,ns+)
(ns,r)
(r,ns)

the wrapping number and the kaluza-klein momentum. especially, a type ii (type 0) closed

1i would like to thank s. sugimoto for reminding me of my misunderstanding about the denition of these

operators.

1

table 2: spectrum of type 0 theory on s1 with monodromy ()fr. variables n and p9 represent
the wrapping number and the kaluza-klein momentum along the compactied direction.

n  2z

n  2z + 1

p9  z/r
(ns+,ns+)
(r,r+)
(ns+,r+)
(r,ns+)

p9  (z + 1/2)/r

(ns,ns)
(r,r)
(ns,r)
(r,ns)

string with wrapping number one corresponds to a type 0 (type ii) kaluza-klein mode with
momentum p = 1/(2r). this implies that the following relations hold.

2r(ii)t (ii) =

1

2r(0) ,

2r(0)t (0) =

1

2r(ii) ,

(1)

where t (ii) (t (0)) and r(ii) (r(0)) are the string tension and the compactication radius in
type ii (type 0) theory. using these two equations, we obtain t (ii) = t (0) and

r(ii)r(0) =

l2
s
2

,

(2)

where ls is the string length scale dened with the common string tension by t (ii) = t (0) =
1/(2l2
s). the relation (2) is dierent from the one in usual type ii/type ii t-duality by factor
1/2 in the right hand side. this is the same with hetero/hetero t-duality where, for example,
an e8  e8 heterotic string with wrapping number one is dual to a kaluza-klein mode with
momentum p = 1/(2r) in the (16, 16) representation of unbroken so(16)so(16)  so(32).
concerning the string coupling constants g(ii) and g(0), we can get the following relation

by requiring nine dimensional newtons constants of the two theories to agree.

r(ii)
(g(ii))2 =

r(0)
(g(0))2 .

(3)

3 dualities of d-branes

similarly to the type ii/type ii t-duality, under the type 0/type ii t-duality, wrapped d-
branes and unwrapped d-branes are transformed into unwrapped d-branes and wrapped d-

branes respectively. however, the situation is more complicated and interesting.

it is known that the tensions of type 0 d-branes are 1/2 times as the ones of type ii d-
branes[5]. namely, with the string coupling constant and the string length scale, the tensions

2

of d-branes are represented as follows.

t (ii)
dp =

1

(2)plp+1

s

g(ii)

, t (0)

dp =

1
2

1

(2)plp+1

s

g(0)

.

using (2), (3) and (4), we can obtain

t (ii)
dp = 2  2r(0)t (0)

d(p+1).

(4)

(5)

this equation implies that an unwrapped type ii d-brane is transformed into wrapped d-
brane with wrapping number two by the duality. at rst sight, this seems strange because it
seems that we can decompose the type 0 d-brane into two wrapped d-branes with wrapping

number one. this is, however, impossible on the type ii side.

this is interpreted as follows. in the type 0 theory, by the monodromy ()fr around the
s1, two r-r elds c and c are transformed into c and c respectively. (the elds c and
c are massless elds in (r,r+) and (r,r) sectors respectively.) in terms of d-brane
charge, this implies that when a electric (magnetic) d-brane goes around the s1, it is changed
to a magnetic (electric) one. (we call d-branes electric when the signs of two r-r charges are
the same and magnetic when they are opposite to each other although except for d3-branes

these are not electric nor magnetic in the usual meanings.) therefore, if the wrapping number
of a d-brane is one, it cannot be closed. to connect two endpoints of a wrapped d-brane,

the wrapping number should be even. this is the reason why type 0 d-brane with wrapping
number two, which is dual of single type ii d-brane, cannot be decomposed. (figure 1)

electric

magnetic

dual

type ii

type 0

figure 1: t-dual of an unwrapped type ii dp-brane is type 0 d(p + 1)-brane with wrapping
number 2. due to the monodromy ()fr, electric (magnetic) type 0 d-brane changes to
magnetic (electric) d-brane when it goes around the s1.

on a stack of n type ii d-branes, there exist u(n) gauge bosons and adjoint fermions
and they make a vector multiplet of ten dimensional n = 1 supersymmetry. following
the argument above, the type 0 dual of this brane conguration is a stack of n electric

3

and n magnetic type 0 d-branes. the eld theory on the type 0 brane conguration is
known to be u(n)  u(n) yang-mills theory with fermions belonging to the bi-fundamental
representation[6]. however, now, because the electric d-branes and the magnetic ones are
connected, the gauge group is broken to the diagonal u(n). as a result, all massless elds on
d-branes belong to the adjoint representation of this u(n) and the massless spectrum agrees
with one on type ii d-branes.

next, let us consider the duality between wrapped type ii d-branes and unwrapped type

0 d-branes. using (2), (3) and (4), we can obtain

2r(ii)t (ii)

d(p+1) = t (0)
dp .

(6)

this equation implies that the dual of a wrapped type ii d(p + 1)-brane is an unwrapped
type 0 dp-brane. is it electric or magnetic? we should remember the fact that because of
the existence of the monodromy ()fr, we cannot globally dene electric and magnetic
d-branes. therefore, we can call a certain d-brane electric or magnetic freely. however, it
makes sense to say two d-branes are the same type or not. if two type 0 d-branes are dierent
types from each other, where does the dierence come from on the type ii side? to obtain
an answer of this question, let us consider an electric type 0 unwrapped d-brane. it is dual
of a type ii wrapped d-brane. on the type 0 side, we can change the d-brane to a magnetic
one by moving it round the s1. on the type ii side, this corresponds to change of wilson

line g = exp ih a9dx9. in the case of type ii/type ii duality, to move an unwrapped d-brane
round s1 corresponds to a change of the wilson line g  e2ig. now, however, the size of s1
of type 0 theory is r(0) = 1/(2r(ii)) unlike 1/r(ii) of type ii/type ii duality, and this implies
that the change of wilson line should also be halved. namely, the change should be g  eig.
therefore, we can conclude that electric and magnetic unwrapped type 0 d-branes correspond
to wrapped type ii d-branes with wilson lines g and g, respectively. (figure 2)

electric

dual

g

-g

type ii

magnetic

type 0

figure 2: the charge of dual type 0 d-branes depend on the wilson line on the original
wrapped type ii d-branes.

we can show that massless spectra on these type 0 and type ii d-branes agree with each
other. let us consider a stack of n1 electric and n2 magnetic unwrapped type 0 d-branes. the

4

massless elds on it are u(n1)  u(n2) gauge elds and fermions in (n1, n2) and (n1, n2)
representations. the dual brane conguration is a stack of n1 + n2 type ii d-branes with
wilson line diag(g1n1,g1n2) where g is a phase factor which does not aect the spectrum.
by the wilson line, gauge group u(n1 + n2) is broken to u(n1)  u(n2). fermions in the
adjoint representation are decomposed into (adj1, 1), (1, adj2), (n1, n2) and (n1, n2).
in
addition to the wilson line acting on these four representations as +1, +1, 1 and 1, we
should take account of the monodromy (1)fs, which reverse the sign of wave functions of all
the fermion elds. as a result, fermions in (n1, n2) and (n1, n2) remain massless. this is
consistent with the type 0 spectrum.

4 dualities of ns5-branes

similar to d-branes, ns5-branes play important roles in brane constructions of yang-mills

theories[7] and it is important to establish duality relations of ns5-branes. in this section, we
give the duals of type 0 and type ii ns5-branes.

regardless of the type of string theories, we can obtain the tensions of ns5-branes by using

the diracs quantization condition as follows.

t (0)
n s5 =

1
s(g(0))2 ,
(2)5l6

t (ii)
n s5 =

1
s(g(ii))2 .
(2)5l6

from (3) and (7), the following relation is obtained.

2r(0)t (0)

n s5 = 2r(ii)t (ii)
n s5.

(7)

(8)

this relation strongly suggests that the dual of a wrapped type ii ns5-brane is a wrapped
type 0 ns5-brane.

in type ii/type ii t-duality, an unwrapped ns5-brane is transformed into a kaluza-klein

monopole with nut charge one. on the other hand, in the case of type 0/type ii duality, the
dual of an unwrapped ns5-brane should be a kaluza-klein monopole with nut charge two.

the reason is as follows. because the momentum of kaluza klein modes along compactied
direction is quantized as n/(2r), the minimum electric charge coupled with u(1) gauge eld
g9 is 1/2. therefore, due to the diracs quantization condition, the minimum nut charge is
two.

the kaluza-klein monopoles with nut charge two can be made by dividing the taub-
nut manifold by z2, generated by half shift of s1 cycle. because there exists the monodromy

5

(1)fs ((1)fr) in type ii (type 0) theory, the shift should be accompanied by the operator
(1)fs ((1)fr). the central region of this kaluza-klein monopole is r4/z2. the z2 is
generated by p(1)fs (type ii) or p(1)fr (type 0) where p is a parity operator which
changes the coordinates x on the r4 to x. therefore, the origin of the manifold is a1
singularity.

next, let us consider massless spectra on ns5-branes. on every ns5-branes, there exist

four massless scalar elds representing the position of the brane. in the dual picture, they
appear as zero modes of ns-ns elds on the kaluza-klein monopole. besides them, on type

ii ns5-branes, one-form u(1) gauge eld (type iib) or self-dual two-form and zero-form gauge
elds (type iia) live.2 (here, we will focus only on bosonic elds.) these gauge elds are
represented as zero modes of r-r elds on the kaluza-klein monopoles. indeed, there is one

zero mode of self-dual two-form eld on the taub-nut manifold. therefore, in type 0a theory,
a zero mode of r-r three-form eld ci (the indices  and  label directions contained in the
taub-nut manifold and i labels the at directions parallel to the kaluza-klein monopole.)
gives a u(1) gauge eld while a zero mode of the other r-r three-form eld c i is projected
out by the z2. in the same way, on the kaluza-klein monopole in type 0b theory, there are
zero modes of four-form eld c +
ij and two-form eld c and they correspond to the self-dual
two form eld and zero-form gauge eld on type iia ns5-branes. zero modes of c 
ij and
c are projected out by the z2 again.

conversely, by analyzing the type ii kaluza-klein monopoles, we can nd gauge elds on

type 0 ns5-branes. on the type iia kaluza-klein monopole, there is a zero mode of r-r
three-form eld ci, and on the type iib kaluza-klein monopole, zero modes of c +
ij and
c exist. because the monodromy (1)fs acts on bosonic elds trivially, none of these zero
modes are projected out.

furthermore, to obtain complete spectra, we should consider the twisted sector at the
orbifold singularities. from the (r,r) sectors of twisted closed strings at the singularities,
we obtain a one-form gauge eld (type iia) or a zero-form gauge eld and an anti-self-dual

two-form eld (type iib). therefore, we can conclude that gauge elds on type 0 ns5-branes
are doubled and non-chiral like the r-r elds in the bulk. namely, in addition to four scalar
elds corresponding to uctuations of branes, there exist two zero-form gauge elds and an

unconstrained two-form eld on a type 0a ns5-brane and two one-form elds on a type 0b
ns5-brane.3 these elds are necessary so that electric and magnetic d-branes can be attached

2we refer to scalar elds which do not correspond to the uctuation of branes as zero-form gauge elds

because they are magnetic duals of four-form gauge elds on ve-branes.

3in the previous version of this paper, the argument on the twisted sector was missing. the massless spectra

6

independently on ns5-branes.[9]

in the supersymmetric r4/z2 orbifold case, four massless scalar elds appear in the
(ns+,ns+) sector of twisted closed strings. they belong to the (1, 3) + (1, 1) of the so(4) =
su(2)l  su(2)r rotation group and correspond to the (geometric and non-geometric) blow
in the present case, from the twisted (ns,ns) sector, we
up modes of the singularity.
have four massless scalar elds belonging to the (3, 1) + (1, 1) representation. because they

have opposite chirality to the ones in the supersymmetric case, they correspond to non-
supersymmetric blow up modes. namely, they express a blow up respecting the dierent

hyper-kahler structure from the one of the kaluza-klein monopole before the blow up.
if
these modes are switched on, all the supersymmetries are broken. due to this property, they
can get mass and, perhaps, they come o the massless spectrum. after the blow up, the

manifold become smooth and simply connected. therefore the wrapping number of a string
is not conserved and, at rst sight, it seems that the gso projection, which depends on the

wrapping number, is ill-dened. however, this is not a problem as explained below. because
the worldsheet fermions  (we will use ns-r formalism.) take values in the tangent bundle
of the target space at x , the boundary conditions of  depend on the target space holon-
omy along closed strings. using complex coordinates 1 = 6 + i7, 2 = 8 + i9 and their
hermitian conjugates (i) (i = 1, 2), the action of su(2)l  su(2)r rotation is expressed as
follows.

u  glugr, u   1 (2)

(1) ! ,

2

gl  su(2)l,

gr  su(2)r.

(9)

approximately, the kaluza-klein monopole with non-supersymmetric blow up is divided into
two parts: the central region, which is almost a1 ale, and the outer region, which is hardly
aected by the blow up modes. these two regions respect dierent hyper-kahler structures,
and holonomies of cycles in the outer and central regions are elements of su(2)l and su(2)r
respectively. let us consider a process in which a wrapped string in the outer region moves
adiabatically into the central region and the wrapping gets loose. in the initial and nal string
congurations, the holonomy along the string is 12 (the rank two unit matrix), and the border
between the two regions the target space is approximately r4/z2 and the holonomy is 12.
connecting them with su(2)l and su(2)r, we obtain the change of the holonomy during the
adiabatic process as follows.

the outer region

the border

the central region

12  gl  su(2)l  12  gr  su(2)r  12

on type 0 ns5-branes were rst obtained in [8] by using type 0a/type 0b duality.

(10)

7

more explicitly, for example, we can choose the path of the string so that gl = exp(i1z)
and gr = exp(i2z), where 1 (2) is a parameter in the outer (central) region changing
from 0 to  (from  to 0). in this case, phases i in the boundary conditions of fermions
i( + 2) =  exp(ii)i() are changes as

the border

the central region

the outer region
1
2

: 0  1    2
 0
: 0  1    2  2  2

(11)

n+1/2  2

(now, we are considering the ns-ns sector. for r-r sector, we should use boundary conditions
i( + 2) = + exp(ii)i().) therefore, this process causes the shift of the oscillators of
2 (2
n+1/2 for the right mover) while the
oscillators of 1 do not change (1
n+1/2). this shift implies
that even if we started from a string in the ground state |0i  |0i, we have an excited state
1/2|0i  (e2
2
finally, i would like to note that this story does not work for the type 0 kaluza-klein
monopoles, which are dual of type ii ns5-branes, because the ()fr twist cannot be explained
by holonomies of target space. this is consistent with the fact that no bosonic elds appear

n1/2 for the left mover and e2
n+1/2  1
1/2)|0i after the adiabatic process, and the gso projection are changed.

n1/2  e2
n+1/2 and e1

n+1/2  e1

in the twisted sector of type 0 strings.

5 conclusions

we gave the following duality relations between type ii and type 0 brane congurations.

 the dual of an unwrapped type ii dp-brane is a stack of a wrapped type 0 electric

d(p + 1) brane and a wrapped type 0 magnetic d(p + 1) brane.

 the dual of a wrapped type ii d(p + 1)-brane is an unwrapped type 0 d-brane. the

charge of the type 0 d-brane depends on the wilson line on the type ii d-brane.

 the dual of a type 0 (type ii) wrapped ns5-brane is a type ii (type 0) wrapped ns5-

brane.

 the dual of a type 0 (type ii) unwrapped ns5-brane is a kaluza-klein monopole with
nut charge two (a1-singularity) in type ii (type 0) theory. at the singularity in type
ii theory, there exist non-supersymmetric blow up modes, which are probably get mass

and come o the massless spectrum.

8

acknowledgment

this work is supported in part by a grant-in-aid for scientic research from the ministry of

education, science, sports and culture (#9110).

references

[1] l. dixon and j. harvey,

string theories in ten dimensions without space-time supersymmetry,

nucl. phys. b274 (1986) 93.

[2] n. seiberg and e. witten,

spin structures in string theory,
nucl. phys. b276 (1986) 272.

[3] a. polyakov,

the wall of the cave,
int.j.mod.phys.a14(1999)645, hep-th/9809057.

[4] o. bergman and m. r. gaberdiel,

dualities of type 0 strings,

hep-th/9906055.

[5] i. r. klebanov and a. a. tseytlin,

d-branes and dual gauge theories in type 0 strings,
nucl.phys. b546 (1999) 155, hep-th/9811035.

[6] i. r. klebanov and a. a. tseytlin,

a non-supersymmetric large n cft from type 0 string theory,
jhep 9903 (1999) 015, hep-th/9901101.

[7] a. armoni, b. kol,

non-supersymmetric large n gauge theories from type 0 brane congurations,

hep-th/9906081.

[8] b. craps and f. roose,

ns vebranes in type 0 string theory,
hep-th/9906179.

9

[9] a. strominger,

open p-branes,
phys.lett. b383 (1996) 44, hep-th/9512059.

10

