9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

0
1

 
 

1
v
9
7
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

preprint dfpd 99/th/22
june 1999

dualityinvariant quantum field theories

of charges and monopoles

k. lechner1 and p.a. marchetti2

dipartimento di fisica, universit`a degli studi di padova,

and

istituto nazionale di fisica nucleare, sezione di padova,

via f. marzolo, 8, 35131 padova, italia

abstract

we present a manifestly lorentz and so(2)dualityinvariant local quantum
field theory of electric charges, dirac magnetic monopoles and dyons. the man-
ifest invariances are achieved by means of the pstmechanism. the dynamics for
classical point particles is described by an action functional living on a circle, if the
diracschwinger quantization condition for electric and magnetic charges holds.
the inconsistent classical field theory depends on an arbitrary, but xed, external
vector eld, a generalization of the diracstring. nevertheless, the quantum field
theory, obtained from this classical action via a functional integral approach, turns
out to be independent of the particular vector eld chosen, and thus consistent, if
the diracschwinger quantization condition holds. we provide explicit expressions
for the generating functionals of observables, proving that they are diracstring
independent. since lorentzinvariance is manifest at each step, the quantum the-
ory admits also a manifestly dieomorphism invariant coupling to external gravity.
relations with previous formulations, and with so(2)non invariant theories are
claried.

pacs: 11.15.-q, 14.80.hv, 11.30.cp; keywords: quantum eld theory, monopoles, duality.

1kurt.lechner@pd.infn.it
2pieralberto.marchetti@pd.infn.it

1 introduction

the construction of relativistic quantum eld theories for electric charges and dirac mag-
netic monopoles encountered in the past two main diculties: the implementation of
lorentzinvariance and the realization of the global so(2)duality group as a manifest
symmetry of the theory. while the rst symmetry is a consistency requirement for the
theory itself, the second appears as a supplementary property which is inherent to the
classical generalized maxwell equations, including magnetic charges. the problem of
lorentzinvariance is usually entangled with the dependence of the quantum theory on
the unphysical diracstring. more precisely, in this paper we call diracstring of a par-
ticle the twodimensional hypersurface swept out by the string during its time evolution;
its boundary is the spacetime particle trajectory.

the fundamental starting point for any theory of charges and monopoles are the

classical generalized maxwell equations:

f = je

  f = jg
 ,

(1.1)

(1.2)

where je and jg are the electric and magnetic currents, and f = 1
2f  is the dual
eld strength. these equations imply current conservation but need to be accompanied
by the equations of motion for the charged matter. for n classical pointparticles, dyons,
with electric and magnetic charges (er, gr) and masses mr, r = 1,   , n, they involve the
generalized lorentzforce and read

mr

du
r
dr

= (erf (yr) + gr  f (yr)) ur,

(1.3)

where y

r are the particles trajectories, u

r = dy

r
dr

, and r is the proper time.

for a classical eld theory (1.3) has to be replaced by the dirac or kleingordon

equations, and this requires also the introduction of vector potentials.

in spite of the manifest lorentzinvariance of (1.1)(1.3), the construction of a classical
invariant action, from which they can be deduced, involves already some problem: one
has to renounce either to locality [1, 2] or to manifest lorentzinvariance [3]. these
problematic aspects which one encounters at the very beginning  specially the missing
manifest lorentzinvariance  prevented for long time also the construction of a consistent
quantum theory. that for the classical pointparticle theory these features can eventually
be saved [2], relies heavily on the pointparticle nature itself of the charged matter.

at the quantum level the implementation of lorentzinvariance has been achieved
rst by brandt, neri and zwanziger [4], using a functional integral approach based on
a classical local and manifestly so(2)invariant action which breaks, however, lorentz
invariance, depending on a xed constant fourvector n. despite of the explicit breaking
of the lorentz group in this approach, the classical action for point particles turns out to

1

be lorentzinvariant if it is dened on a circle, and if the diracschwinger quantization
condition holds. on the other hand, the classical eld theory is always inconsistent in that
it breaks the lorentz group, while, strikingly enough, the quantum eld theory based on
this inconsistent classical eld theory action turns again out to be lorentzinvariant, if
the diracschwinger quantization condition holds. the reason for this is essentially that
the quantum theory can be traced back, through a multipath feynman expansion of
the functional integral, to classical pointlike trajectories (a realization of wave/particle
quantum duality), and that the classical point particle theory is consistent and admits an
invariant exponentiated action.

in short, there exists a consistent quantum eld theory of charges and monopoles, if
the diracschwinger quantization condition holds. there exist, actually, two inequivalent
classes of consistent theories: the theories of the rst class are so(2)invariant, manifestly
or not, while the theories of the second class are only invariant under the discrete duality
group z4, despite of the so(2)invariance of the underlying classical equations of motion,
which are for both classes (1.1)(1.3). with z4 we mean here the discrete electromagnetic
duality group generated by (er, gr)  (gr,er). the dierence between the two types of
theories lies in the mixed quantum interactions between charges and monopoles.

for the so(2) and z4theories we have respectively the two distinct diracschwinger

quantization conditions

1

2 (ergs  esgr) = 2 nrs
ergs = 2 nrs,

(1.4)

(1.5)

for each r and s, where the nrs are integer. the rst is invariant under so(2) and the
second only under z4. none of the two conditions implies the other. only if the stronger
condition

1

2 ergs = 2 nrs

(1.6)

is satised, then the two theories coincide, as we will see in detail in the text.

which kind of theory describes the monopoles depends on the model one considers. for
example, for the fourdimensional eective heterotic string action [5] (1.4) is appropriate,
while for the original dirac monopole [6] one has to use diracs original condition (1.5).
in this paper we concentrate mainly on the so(2)theory (elaborating only those
details of the z4theory through which it diers from the so(2)theory), formulated
according to the pastisorokintonin (pst) method [7]. in addition to an so(2)doublet
of vector potentials, this method requires a single non propagating scalar auxiliary eld,
in the following called a. the method appears particularly suitable for a formulation of a
quantum eld theory of dyons, in that it allows a clear distinction between the problems
of lorentzinvariance and of diracstring dependence. the principal advantage of the
pstaction is, in fact, its manifest so(2) and lorentzinvariance in the case of free
maxwell equations, i.e. (1.1) and (1.2) with je = 0 = jg. the free pstaction admits

2

also a natural coupling to non vanishing currents, if they are kinematically conserved [8],
as in the case of classical point particles.
in this situation the action s maintains its
manifest so(2) and lorentzinvariance, for arbitrary values of the charges, but depends
on generalized diracstrings. nevertheless, if (1.4) holds the functional exp(is) is string
independent and gives rise to the equations of motion (1.1)(1.3).

on the other hand, for the construction of a quantum eld theory through a functional
integral approach, one needs as starting point a classical eld theory action which includes
also the coupling to matter elds, charged spinors or scalars. such an action, however, is
always inconsistent. on a more fundamental level the reason for this is that there is no
consistent set of equations of motion which describe the coupling of gauge elds to dyonic
matter elds, irrespective of the existence of an action which gives rise to them. the
corresponding classical currents are not pointlike, but spread out continuously and the
local electric and magnetic uxes are noninteger. as a consequence no diracschwinger
condition can save the theory.

the necessarily resulting inconsistency of the eld theory action can be traded in
several ways, e.g. zwanziger [3] and brandt et. al [4] sacriced lorentzinvariance keeping
locality, while the authors of [9] keep lorentzinvariance but renounce to the description
of the matter eld dynamics through a local action.

in this paper, relying on to the pstmechanism, we present a classical eld theory
action which keeps formally lorentzinvariance and locality, but depends on an arbitrary,
nowhere lightlike, external xed vector eld u (x) (see (5.7)). the interpretation of this
vector eld is rather simple: its unique integral curve through a given spacetime point
determines the diracstring attached to that point. this will allow us to dene dirac
strings not only for pointlike particles but also for continuous current distributions. all
correlators of observables in the corresponding quantum eld theory will be shown to be
independent of the choice of the vector eld u, if (1.4) holds, guaranteeing in this way
the consistency of the quantum theory. (a completely analogous statement can be made
also for the z4theory.) this can be regarded as the main result of the paper.

at the quantum level the particular choice u (x) = n relates our formulation to the

one in [3, 4].

the pstmethod appears rather powerful in combining manifest duality and lorentz
invariance at the classical level, and a variant of it allows also to write manifestly lorentz
invariant classical actions for selfdual tensor elds (chiral bosons) in 4k + 2 dimensions
[10]. it turns also out to be compatible with all relevant symmetries, in particular with
dieomorphisms as a direct consequence of its manifest lorentzinvariance. the reliability
of the method at the quantum level has been examplied in [11], where the gravitational
anomalies for chiral bosons have been derived performing a perturbative oneloop analysis
of the pstaction. the results of the present paper underline, once more, that the method
is perfectly well suited also at the quantum level, and that it allows a direct control of
lorentzinvariance in quantized theories.

3

for the reasons just explained, in the pstapproach the coupling of the classical
eld theory of dyons to external gravity, represented by a classical metric g(x), can
be achieved simply through the minimal prescription, at least in a topologically trivial
manifold. in the presence of gravity the classical action depends again on a given vector
eld u (x).
in the corresponding quantum theory, where g and u  remain classical
elds, under a change of u  u the correlators of the observables change, as in the at
case, by a phase factor, the diracanomaly; but, since this phase factor is a topological
term it is metric independent, and since for the at theory it equals unity under (1.4), it
equals unity also for the theory in a curved background.

the analysis of the quantum eld theory in the present paper is made at a non
perturbative (although formal) level, using a functional integral approach, but ignores
ultraviolet divergences; some regulator is always implicitly assumed. for a discussion of
the renormalizability of the quantum theory of dyons, in dierent approaches, in particular
of the stability under renormalization of (1.4) and (1.5), we refer the reader to [12, 13].

in the next section we give a selfcontained account of the classical pstapproach for
the so(2)theory, using the concise formalism of dierential forms, which we will keep
throughout this paper. section three is devoted to the classical point particle theory and
establishes the diracschwinger condition as a necessary and sucient condition for a
consistent classical action principle. in section four, which is a kind of intermezzo, we
give a short account of the z4theory; the formulation of this theory does not necessitate
the psttechniques and requires only the introduction of a single vector potential. in
section ve we return to the so(2)theory and present its unconsistent classical eld
theory version, while in section six we prove the consistency of its quantum eld theory
version, paying particular attention to the correlation functions of observables. section
seven is devoted to a discussion of duality symmetries, angles, and the relation between
the pstapproach and previous approaches to the theory of interacting dyons. section
eight contains some concluding remarks. some basic identities for dierential forms and
a technical proof are relegated to the appendix.

2 the pstapproach

in this section we give a selfcontained account of the pstmethod, applied to maxwells
equations. first we introduce our basic notations concerning dierential forms and present
an equivalent form for (1.1) and (1.2), suitable for the pst approach.

the components of a pform p are dened by

p =

1
p!

dx1    dxp p1.

the hodge dual of p, a (4  p)form, has components

(p)1p4 =

1
p!

1p41p 1p,

4

and the dierential d acts from the right, d2 = 0. on pforms the hodge duality operator
squares to 2 = (1)p+1. forms in the image of d are called exact and forms in the kernel
of d are called closed. since we work in r4 all closed forms are also exact. the product
between forms will always be an exterior (wedge) product and the wedge symbol  will
be omitted.

in the language of forms maxwells equations are written in terms of the eld strength
twoform f and of the threeforms (j e, j g), which are the hodge duals of the currents
(je, jg), as

d  f = j e  j 1

df = j g  j 2.

(2.1)

these equations imply current conservation, which reads now

dj 1 = 0 = dj 2,

and these, in turn, allow the introduction of a doublet of twoforms c i, the strings,
satisfying

j i = dc i, i = 1, 2.

(2.2)

in the sequel with the capital indices i, j, k, . . . we will indicate so(2)doublets. the
twoforms c i are dened only modulo exact 2forms, i.e. we have invariance under

c i  c i + dh i.

(2.3)

for the time being we make an arbitrary but xed choice of c i and we anticipate only
that this ambiguity will correspond precisely to a diracstring change, as it will become
clear in the next section.

introducing a doublet of oneform gauge potentials, ai = dxai

, maxwells equa-
tions for conserved external currents can be put in the equivalent manifestly so(2) and
so(1, 3)invariant form

f i = dai + c i
f i = ij f j.

(2.4)

(2.5)

ij is the so(2)invariant antisymmetric tensor, with 12 = +1, and in the following we
will suppress the so(2)indices, e.g. (2.5) will be written simply as f =  f . in par-
ticular, in bilinears a contraction of those indices is always understood. the equivalence
of (2.4), (2.5) with (2.1) is established via (2.2) and through the identication f = f 2.
the eq. (2.4) has to be viewed as a denition of f i while the pseudo selfduality relation
(2.5) produces really the dynamics.

the invariance of the curvature doublet f under string changes, requires that (2.3)

has to be accompanied by

ai  ai  h i.

5

(2.6)

the pstapproach allows now to write a manifestly invariant action [7, 8] for the
pseudo selfduality equation of motion (2.5). one introduces a single auxiliary scalar
eld a(x) and the corresponding oneform

v =

da

qa a  dxv,

whose components satisfy v2 = vv = 1. it is also convenient to introduce the asso-
ciated vectoreld, which we indicate with the same symbol, v = v, and to indicate
with iv its interior product with a pform.

the pstaction can then be written as the integral of a fourform,

s0[a, c, a] =

1

2z f p(v) f + da  c.

(2.7)

p(v) is a symmetric operator which acts in the space of twoforms and on the so(2)
indices as

p ij (v) = viv  ij +(cid:18)viv 

1

2(cid:19) ij .

the operators viv and viv map pforms in pforms and project a form respectively
on its components along v and orthogonal to v; their basic properties are given in the
appendix.

in the compact notation used in (2.7) the usual maxwell action with a single f,

4r d4xf f, reads 1
 1

the second term in (2.7) can also be written as

2r f  f .
2z da  c = 

1

1

2z a  j =

1

2z d4x a  j .

(2.8)

it is a kind of wesszumino term and represents the standard electrical couplings
of both currents. notice, however, that the couplings carry a factor of onehalf w.r.t.
ordinary q.e.d. this discrepancy is balanced by the fact that both currents carry also a
magnetic interaction, appearing in the rst term in the form da + c. in this so(2)
symmetric formulation there is, actually, no way to distinguish between magnetic and
electric currents, both are electrically and magnetically coupled.

what determines, ultimately, the form of the pstaction are its particular local sym-

metries. under generic variations of the elds a and a one has, in fact

s0 =z 1

2

d

1

q(a)2

v f  f a  d (vf )  a,

(2.9)

where we dened the doublet of oneforms

f = iv(f  f ).

6

from (2.9) one sees that the action is invariant under the following transformations:

a = d

a =  da
a = 



q(a)2

f,

a = .

(2.10)

(2.11)

(2.12)

the transformation parameters are the doublets of scalars  and , and the single scalar
. the transformations in (2.10) are just ordinary u(1) gauge transformations for the
vector potentials a, and (2.12) states that the eld a is a non propagating auxiliary eld
which can be shifted to any value. the transformations (2.11) allow to reduce the second
order equation of motion for the gauge elds to the rst order pseudo selfduality relation
(2.5). to see this we write the equations of motion for a and a, which can be read directly
from (2.9),

d

v

q(a)2

d (vf ) = 0

f  f = 0.

(2.13)

(2.14)

the equation of motion for a (2.14) is a consequence of the aequation (2.13) and the gen-

eral solution of the latter is vf = da de, for some scalar doublet e; through a transforma-
tion (2.11), with  = e, one can set this doublet to zero and obtains f = 0  f =  f ,

which is the desired result.

in the sequel an important role will be plaid by the diracanomaly of the pst
action. it is dened as the (nite) variation of the action under string changes (2.3),(2.6).
the rst term in (2.7) is invariant by construction while the wesszumino term con-
tributes with

ad[h]  s0 =

1

2z c  dh =

1

2z j  h.

(2.15)

despite of this anomaly the equations of motion for the gaugeelds are invariant under
string changes, as we saw, but this anomaly will be no longer harmless when we couple
the pstaction to dynamical matter, as we will see in the next section.

2.1 the electromagnetic eld strength

an issue left open by the pstapproach is the correct identication of the electromagnetic
eldstrength tensor. if the equations of motion (2.13) are satised and the symmetries
in (2.11) have been xed as above, then the eld strength is clearly say f = f 2, and
f 1 = f . but these tensors can not be identied with the electromagnetic eld strength
oshell, since they are not invariant under (2.11) and (2.12), even if (2.13) holds. the
correct oshell electromagnetic tensor is represented by the twoform doublet

k i  f i  vf i,

7

(2.16)

which is uniquely characterized by the following symmetry properties:

1) k = 0 under (2.10) and (2.11) and under string changes.
2) k is invariant under (2.12) onshell (in fact, k =
3) k =  k.
4) k reduces onshell to f , if the symmetry (2.11) is xed as above.

(a)2 (1 + ) iv d(vf )).

in particular, the ks are invariant under all symmetries onshell and this is just what
is required for an observable. for example, the quantum correlators of the eld strength
tensors in a path integral representation are obtained by insertion of the elds k. the
pseudo selfduality property 3) ensures then the uniqueness of these correlators as they
involve only a single eld strength, say k 1, and its dual; if one had used the f s instead
of the ks then the correlators for f 1 would dier from the ones of f 2.

notice also that the equations of motion for a (2.13) can be written alternatively as

2.2 the eective action

dk = dc.

we conclude this section with the derivation of the eective currentcurrent action asso-
ciated to the pstaction, which is obtained upon performing the functional integration
over the gauge elds a and over the auxiliary eld a in (2.7). these integrations require
an appropriate gauge xing of the local symmetries (2.10)(2.12). since a is a pure
gauge eld, the integration over a becomes trivial since the insertion of a function
(a(x)  a(0)(x)) just works. notice that, due to the appearance of a in the denom-
inators of the classical action, the choice a(0) = const. is not allowed. minimal choices
are a(0) = xn, for some constant vector n, which lead to v(0)
n2 . we make here a
generic choice for a(0) which leads to a nowhere singular v(0).

 = n

to integrate over a one has to x the symmetries (2.10) and (2.11). to avoid explicit
gauge xings, which make the derivation rather cumbersome for a generic a(0), we proceed
in the following alternative way. we rewrite (2.7) as

s0[a, c, a] = 0[c] +

1

2z (g + d) (v)(g + d),

where g and d are single twoforms dened by

g = da1  da2
d = c 1  c 2.

(2.17)

(2.18)

(2.19)

(v) is an operator, mapping twoforms in twoforms, given by

(v) =

d  d

 v  v,

where =  is the dalambertian. we recall the standard hodge decomposition on
pforms:

= d  +  d,

8

where  is the codierential,

 = d  .

0 is dened by

0[c] = 

1

2z (cid:18)dc  dc  dc



c(cid:19) ,

(2.20)

where contraction of the so(2)indices of the c i is understood. the eective action is
dened by

ei[c] = r{da}gf {da} (a  a(0)) eis0[a,c,a]
r{da}gf {da} (a  a(0)) eis0[a,0,a]
2r (g+d) (v(0))(g+d)
2r g (v(0))g

= ei0[c]  r{da}gf e

r{da}gf e

i

i

(2.21)

(2.22)

.

since there exist linear gauge xings for the symmetries (2.10) and (2.11), as shown below,
in the numerator one can now perform the shift of integration variables



a1  a1 
a2  a2 + 

d

d

d,

(2.23)

(2.24)

proving that the numerator is cindependent and equals the denominator, so that [c] =
0[c].

for gaugexings of the kind a(0) = xn the functional integral over a can be per-
formed also with more conventional techniques, since in this case the kinetic term for the
gauge elds in the pstaction becomes local. we have now v = n
n2 =const., and the
symmetries (2.10) and (2.11) can be xed imposing

iva = 0 = d  a.

(2.25)

these gauge xings are suitable also for a generic a(0). the kinetic term for the gauge
elds in (2.7) reduces with these gauge xings to

1

2z a  k(v) a = 

1

2z a   + 2
t v

v

v ! a,

t v
+ 2

(2.26)

where t =  v d is an operator which sends oneforms into oneforms and v = v.
the functional integral over a in (2.7) is gaussian and one needs only to compute the
propagatormatrix for the gauge elds. using the algebraic identity

which holds for constant v, this matrix can be evaluated as

t 3 = ( + 2

v ) t,

k1(v) = 

1

( + 2

v )    t 22

t v

v
+2
v

! .

t v
 t 22

v
+2
v

(2.27)

9

the gaussian integral results then in

[c] =

1

2z (cid:18)d (cid:18)p(v) +

1
2

(cid:19) c(cid:19)k1(v)  d (cid:18)p(v) +

1
2

(cid:19) c + c p(v) c.

it is a mere exercise to show that the vdependence drops out from this expression and
that the latter coincides with (2.20). the independence of the eective action of the
particular choice one makes for a(0) is clearly a consequence of the symmetry (2.12) of the
pstaction.

the rst term of the eective action corresponds to the usual diagonal currentcurrent
interaction (remember that j = dc), while the second term, corresponding to a mixed
electricmagnetic interaction, involves not only j but exhibits also an explicit dependence
on the strings c. it is this mixed interaction which is responsible for the diracanomaly
associated to 0[c]. the eective action carries, indeed, the same diracanomaly as the
pstaction itself: under c  c + dh one has

this simple result will play a fundamental role in establishing the consistency of the
quantum eld theory.

0  0 + ad[h].

3 pointlike particles

classical pointlike dyons are characterized by their mass mr and by their electric and
magnetic charges, ei
r = (er,gr), and sweep out a spacetime trajectory r, parametrized
by arbitrary parameters sr, {y
r (sr),  sr  }. the extension of the pstaction to
r=1 mrrr dr,
dynamical classical particles requires the addition of the standard term pn

but needs also an appropriate denition of the twoforms c in terms of the particles
trajectories. for this purpose we make now a short digression on poincar`eduality and
de rhamcurrents.

3.1 poincar`eduality and diracstrings

until now we did not specify the regularity properties of the dierential pforms intro-
duced, and we assumed implicitly that their components are smooth functions. for our
purposes it is, however, more convenient to consider them as (de rham) pcurrents, i.e.
linear functionals on the space of smooth (4  p)forms with compact support, which are
continuous in the sense of distributions [14]. in other words, pcurrents are pforms with
distributionvalued components; we will call them still forms.

in this space we can extend poincar`e duality to a map pd which associates to every

pdimensional hypersurface p a (4  p)form p according to

pd :

p =

zp

p  p
zr4
pp,

10

(3.1)

for any pform p. this map respects in particular the exactforms  boundary
hypersurfaces correspondence, i.e.

pd : p  p
pd : p  dp,

implies

(3.2)

(3.3)

where  indicates the boundary operator 3.

a basic consequence of pdduality is that the integral of p over a generic (4  p)
dimensional surface s4p is an integer, counting the intersections with sign of p with
s4p. this implies, in particular, that the integral over r4 of a product of two such forms
is also an integer,

p4p = n,

(3.4)

zr4

which counts the number of intersections with sign of p with 4p.

linear combinations of such pforms with integer coecients are called integer forms
(they are pddual to integer (4p)chains [14]). the property (3.4) holds also for generic
integer forms: the integral of a product of two integer forms is an integer, whenever the
integral is well dened.

in this language the closed threeforms j are a weighted sum of closed integer forms,

the weights being given by the charges

j i =xr

ei
r jr,

(3.5)

where the closed integer threeforms jr are the poincar`e duals of the boundaryless curves
r,

jr =

1
3!

dxdxdxzr

dy
r
dsr

4(x  yr) dsr.

(3.6)

in this case the wesszumino term of the pstaction can be written also in the standard
form

1

2z a  j = 



1

2xr

er zr

a.

(3.7)

once the currents have been determined as in (3.5), for the strings c subject to dc = j

we choose a class of solutions given by

c i =xr

ei
r cr,

(3.8)

where the cr are integer twoforms, being poincar`e duals of twodimensional hypersur-
faces, extending to innity, whose boundaries are r. this implies in particular that

3for a mathematically precise formulation, involving chains, see [14].

jr = dcr.

11

if the surfaces are parametrized for example by y 
has the explicit expressions

r (s, u) with y 

r (s, 0) = y

r (s), then one

cr =

1
2

dxdxz 

0

duz +



ds

dy 
r
du

dy 
r
ds

4(x  yr).

(3.9)

the way of formalizing the diracstring problem presented above unies, actually, a
variety of treatments made in the literature, which dier through the particular classes of
chosen surfaces. in [9, 12], where only closed curves are considered, the surfaces have been
chosen as bounded ones; in [3, 4] they have been chosen to be in every point parallel to a
given constant fourvector n: y (s, u) = y(s)+nu. schwingers method [1, 2] amounts
to picking a single spacetime curve (u) which extends from the origin to innity, chosen
once for ever, and to attaching this same curve to every point of the particle trajectory:
y (s, u) = y(s) + (u). schwinger considered, indeed, also doublesheeted but half
weighted surfaces. these are obtained from the singlesheeted surfaces in (3.9) with the
replacement

z +

0

du 

1

2(cid:18)z +

0

du z 0



du(cid:19) ,

and upon dening (u) = (u). in his formulation singlesheeted surfaces gave rise
to the z4theory and doublesheeted ones to the so(2)theory. since our theory is
manifestly so(2)invariant one could equally well use one or the other type of surfaces;
for deniteness from now on we use the type (3.9).

among all possible surfaces of this type there are special classes which will become
relevant at the eld theory level later on. each of these classes is characterized by a
nowhere lightlike vector eld u (x)

u (x)u(x) 6= 0.

this condition is necessary to ensure the validity of the associated decomposition of the
identity on pforms

1 =

1

u 2(cid:16)()p+1uiu +  uiu (cid:17) , u  dxu,

(3.10)

relation which allows to decompose a pform uniquely in a pform parallel to u and one
orthogonal to u.

the strings associated to u are determined requiring that they are made out of the
integral curves of u which end on the particles trajectories. the related celds are
uniquely determined through the equations

dc = j

iu c = 0,

and through the boundary condition

c  0

for

xu  ,

12

(3.11)

(3.12)

meaning that we require that c(x) goes to zero if x goes to  along the integral curves
of the vector eld u.

to prove the uniqueness, and existence, of the solution of this system we observe
that there exists always a dieomorphism which maps the vector eld u (x) to a con-
stant vector n . since the system (3.11), (3.12) is dieomorphism invariant and metric
independent, in the new coordinate system it becomes

dc = j

in c = 0
c  0

for

xn  ,

(3.13)

where x
system has now the solution

n = un  is the coordinate along n and the limit above means u  . this

as can be seen observing that

c =

1
n

in j,

in d + din = n .

(3.14)

(3.15)

to satisfy the boundary condition in (3.13) the inverse operator 1
n
the kernel

has to be dened by

g(x) = (xn )3 (~xn ),

n g(x) = 4(x),

(3.16)

where ~xn are the three coordinates orthogonal to xn and  is the stepfunction. the
uniqueness of the solution can be inferred considering the associated homogeneous equa-
tions, which lead, thanks to (3.15), to n c = 0 and this, due to the boundary condition,
implies c = 0. the solution of the original system can be obtained from (3.14) upon
performing the inverse dieomorphism.

this proof of the uniqueness of the solution for c applies equally well to integer and

smooth j.

if the currents are given as in (3.5) and (3.6), one can also exhibit an explicit expression
for the unique solution. for each curve r one determines the integral curves of u ending
on r,

d
du

r (s, u) = u (yr(s, u)),
y 
y 
r (s, 0) = y

r (s),

0  u  

and one uses the associated surfaces in the general formula (3.9), to obtain

cr =

1
2

dxdx u (x)z 

0

duz +



ds

dy 
r
ds

4(x  yr).

(3.17)

(3.18)

the total cs are given by a weighted sum according to (3.8); one recognizes in particular
that iu c = 0. it is worthwhile to notice that the representations for j and c given above

13

apply equally well when the curves are closed; closed curves will indeed play a central role
in the quantum eld theory.

once the celds are weighted integer twoforms, what we called previously string

changes amounts now just to a change of the surface whose boundary is a given curve:

cr  cr + dhr,

(3.19)

where hr is the integer oneform associated, via pd, to the threedimensional hyper-
surface which is bounded by the old and the new surfaces. for the twoforms c the
transformations (3.19) lead to

c i  c i + dh i, with
h i = xr

ei
r hr.

(3.20)

3.2 action principle for classical dyons

now we can present an action principle for classical dyons. the action which describes the
interaction of dyons with the electromagnetic eld would be given in the pstapproach
by

s[a, cr, a] = s0[a, c, a] 

dr,

(3.21)

mrzr

nxr=1

where the crelds are dened as above in terms of arbitrary surfaces; thus the dynamical
variables of this action are formally the strings cr and not the curves r. but the string
dependence of s is measured by the diracanomaly. under (3.20), together with ai 
ai  h i, one has

where now

ad[h] =

1

s  s + ad[h],
2z j  h =
2xr,s

1

(er  es)z jrhs.

(3.22)

2(e1

re1
re2
se2

the last integral is integer, because the integrand is a product of integer forms, and
2(er  es) = 1
1
2) is an integer multiple of 2 due to the diracschwinger condition
(1.4). in conclusion, for the point particle theory, the diracanomaly is an integer multiple
of 2. this suggests to consider as action functional the exponentiated action eis, which
is stringindependent 4.

this would be the right answer were it not for the presence of exceptional cong-
urations where a string cs intersects the boundary of another string cr, i.e. the curve
5. for such congurations the diracanomaly becomes indeed ill-dened since in the
r

integral r jrhs the intersection of r with the threevolume associated to hs occurs at

4the classical theory could be based also on the exponential of a scaled action, eis, which would
2 (er  es) is an integer multiple of 2 modulo an overall constant;

imply a quantization condition where 1
it is quantum mechanics which eventually forces  = h = 1.

5for regular curves the dimension of the set of these intersection points is 1.

14

the boundary of this threevolume. these are precisely the congurations which were
forbidden by diracs veto [15], and which were counted by schwinger [2] with weight
1/2 (instead of 0 or 1), leading him to postulate momentarily the stronger quantization
condition 1

2(er  es) = 4n, a request which he eventually abandoned.

to cope also with these congurations we modify the action (3.21) as follows. for
each conguration {r}, in addition to the arbitrary strings cr, we introduce a set of
regular strings ecr, decr = jr, which never intersect a curve s (this is always possible
if the curves themselves do not intersect) and dene ec i =pr ei
r ecr. then we modify the

action according to

es[a, cr, ecr, a] = s[a, cr, a] +

1

1

2z c  ec

(3.23)

=

dr,

(3.24)

since the integrand is a product of integer forms, upon exponentiation it contributes only
if the cr are in exceptional congurations, i.e. if they intersect a curve s which is, indeed,

2z f p(v) f + f  ec xr
mrzr
2pr,s(eres)r crecs and,
and treat cr and ecr as dynamical variables. the added term is 1
the boundary of ecs. notice in particular that, since the added term is aindependent,
es possesses still the pstsymmetries (2.10)(2.12) and leads to the same aequations of
since c appears in es only in the combination f = da + c, the modied action is now
dependence has now been shifted to the regular strings ec. under ec  ec + dfh one

strictly invariant under a cstring change, even if (1.4) does not hold. all the string

motion.

has

es  es + ad[fh],

and ad[fh] is always an integer multiple of 2.
the action principle can be based on the functional exp(ies) in a canonical manner.
one introduces a real parameter  and deformed strings c, ec such that c  c,
ec  ec for   0, and one evaluates the corresponding action es. these deformations

include in particular deformations of the curves. the equations of motion for the particles
(lorentzforce law) are then obtained as

  d

d

eies!(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0

= 0.

(3.25)

as exp(ies) is invariant under string changes and under the pstsymmetries so are the

equations of motion; this implies already that the lorentzforce can depend on c, a and
a only through the tensors k, dened in the preceding section, and on u
. apart
from a term proportional to the aequations,

r = dy

r
dr

dk i = j i ,

15

(3.26)

an explicit evaluation of (3.25) leads indeed to

mr

du
r
dr

= (er  k ) (yr) ur.

remembering that one has also

k i = ij k j ,

(3.27)

(3.28)

and that k is an onshell completely invariant tensor, the system (3.26)(3.28) becomes
a closed system for all observables in that it determines uniquely k i and yr, once the
initial conditions have been xed. from this point of view k is truly identied with
the electromagnetic eld strength and, a posteriori, there is no need to introduce vector
potentials or strings. alternatively, one can use the gaugexing of the pstsymmetry
(2.11) presented in the preceding section, which leads to k i = f i and f 1 = f 2, and
the system given above reduces to the system (1.1)(1.3), with f = da + c.

this concludes the presentation of the extension of the pstmethod to a system of

classical dynamical dyons. summarizing we can say that the functional exp(ies), which

is manifestly so(1, 3) and so(2)invariant, gives rise to the correct equations of motion
(1.1)(1.3) if the diracschwinger quantization condition (1.4) holds.

the next issue would be the classical eld theory, but before addressing this point we

present now the essential features of the z4theory.

4 the z4theory

let us rst of all stress that this theory is equivalent to the so(2)theory for what
concerns the classical equations of motion, which are again (1.1)(1.3). it diers from the
latter only through the classical action, on which these equations are based, and through
the quantization condition, now (1.5), which ensures the consistency of the corresponding
action principle. another important dierence lies in the fact that the classical pst
action is manifestly so(2)invariant, whether (1.4) holds or not, while for the z4theory
z4 becomes a symmetry group of the action only at the quantum level, and requires (1.5).

4.1 the classical and eective actions

since the z4 theory is not so(2)-invariant we abandon in this section the doublet notation
and introduce a single vector potential a = a2 and the single curvature twoform f =
f 2 = da + c 2. the twoforms c 1 and c 2 maintain the meaning of the preceding section.
j 1 = dc 1 represents now the electric current and j 2 = dc 2 the magnetic one. the action,
analogous to s0, is

i0[a, j 1, c 2] =z 1

2

f  f  da c 1 =z 1

2

f  f + a j 1,

(4.1)

16

where the electric current carries now only an electric coupling, with weight 1, and the
magnetic current only a magnetic one. the equation of motion for a and the bianchi
identity for f reproduce the generalized maxwell equations (2.1).

the action (4.1) is invariant under ordinary u(1) gauge transformations, a  a + d,

while under string changes

it varies as

c 1  c 1 + dh 1
c 2  c 2 + dh 2
a  a  h 2,

ad[h 2]  i0 =z j 1h 2.

(4.2)

(4.3)

notice that under c 1  c 1 + dh 1, a  a the action is invariant.

the quantum eld theory associated to (4.1) can be constructed according to the
recipe reported in section six. the resulting theory, based on a functional integral, can be
considered as a formal continuum limit of the compact q.e.d. with scalar matter elds,
formulated on a lattice. in fact, due to the invariance (4.2) we can view a mod h 2 as a
continuum analogue of the compactu(1) gauge eld on the lattice.

the currentcurrent eective action associated to i0 is obtained upon performing the

functional integration over the vector potential a

ei

z4

0 [c] = r{da}gf eii0[a,j 1,c2]
r{da}gf eii0[a,0,0]

,

(4.4)

where one needs only to x the ordinary u(1) gauge invariance. the integral is gaussian
and gives

z4

0 [c] =z 

1

2(cid:18)dc 1  dc 1 + dc 2  dc 2(cid:19) + dc 1 1

c 2,

which depends on c 1 only through j 1, as does i0, and carries the same diracanomaly
(4.3) as the classical action.

the action principle for classical pointlike particles can be formulated according to
the strategy adopted for the so(2)theory. one introduces general strings cr and reg-

ular strings ecr and constructs the total cs and ecs as in the preceding section. the

appropriate action for dynamical dyons is then

and transforms under string changes, see (4.3), as

ei[a, ec 1, c 2] =z 1

2

mrzr
f  f  f ec 1 xr
sz jrfhs.

e1
r e2

ei =z j 1fh 2 =xr,s

dr,

(4.5)

(4.6)

the last integral is integer and the diracanomaly becomes an integer multiple of 2,

tributes in the exponential again only for exceptional congurations, thanks to (1.5). the

if diracs original quantization condition (1.5) holds. the added term, r c 2ec 1, con-
action principle is based on exp(iei) and the lorentzforce equation is again (1.3).

17

4.2 comparison with the so(2)theory

to compare the two theories, which at the classical level are equivalent, we compare the
eective currentcurrent interactions, which trigger the quantum dynamics, and assume,
for consistency, that (1.4) and (1.5) are satised.

the diagonal interactions are identical, but the dierence in the mixed interactions

leads to

0  z4

0  0 =

1

2z c 1c 2.

(4.7)

for arbitrary celds 0 is non vanishing. if the strings are weighted integer forms, as
in the point particle theory, we have

0 =

1

2xr,s

e1
re2

sz cr cs =

1

2xr,s

e1
re2

s nrs,

where nrs is a symmetric matrix of integers6. what matters in the quantum eld theory
is eventually the exponential of the eective action, therefore a necessary and sucient
condition for the identication of the two theories is

this is equivalent to

ei0 = 1.

1

2(cid:16)e1

re2

s + e1

se2

r(cid:17) = 2 nrs

for

r 6= s,

1
2

e1
re2

r = 2 nrr.

(4.8)

taking (1.4) and (1.5) into account, these conditions are satised only if eq. (1.6), i.e.

1
2

ergs = 2 nrs,

holds for each r and s.

in conclusion we can say that the consistency conditions for the so(2) and z4theories
are respectively (1.4) and (1.5), while (1.6) are the supplementary conditions for the
identication of z4 as a duality subgroup of so(2) 7.

4.3 z4symmetry

we address now the realization of the discrete duality group z4. its generator acts on the
celds as

c 1  c 2
c 2  c 1.

(4.9)

(4.10)

6for the selfinteraction of the rth particle a regularization is understood, which keeps nrr integer.
7while (1.6) implies (1.4) and (1.5), there are solutions to this last system of equations which do not

satisfy (1.6).

18

the action i0 is not invariant while the transformation of the eective action can be read
from (4.7). since 0 is manifestly invariant, we deduce

z4
0  z4

0 z c 1c 2.

(4.11)

for integer currents, due to (1.5), we have that exp(iz4

0 ) is indeed z4invariant.

to display the quantum implementation of this symmetry on the action i0 one has to
combine the z4 transformation with an sduality transformation of the vector potential in
the functional integral (for a discussion of sduality in the functional integral formalism,
see e.g. [30]). for this purpose one introduces an auxiliary twoform h and a oneform
a1, the new vector potential, and considers the action

ih =z 1

2(cid:16)h + c 2(cid:17) (cid:16)h + c 2(cid:17)  h(cid:16)da1 + c 1(cid:17) .

functional integration over a1 leads to dh = 0  h = da2 and one recovers i0. on the
other hand, integrating over h

z {dh} eiih  eiei0,

ei0  i0 z c 1c 2,

one obtains

ei0 =z 1

2(cid:16)da1 + c 1(cid:17) (cid:16)da1 + c 1(cid:17) + da1c 2 + c 1c 2.

performing now the z4transformation on the cs, accompanied by a1  a2, one obtains
(4.12)

in agreement with the transformation of the eective action, (4.11).

on the other hand it may be interesting to notice that the transformation law (4.11)
can also be deduced directly for the classical action i0, but using a nonlocal transforma-
tion for the vector potential. under

c 1  c 2
c 2  c 1
a  a +  d(cid:16)(1 + )c 2  (1  )c 1(cid:17)

(4.13)

(4.14)

(4.15)

one has i0  i0 r c 1c 2.

at this point an interesting question is whether the action i0 can be amended for a
symmetry enhancement from z4 to so(2) to occur. this modied action would thus
represent a nonmanifestly invariant alternative for the pstaction s0. the suggestion
for such a modication comes from (4.7). it suces indeed to put

i0 = i0 

1
2

c 1c 2,

19

which has as eective action the so(2)invariant one 0. but i0 possesses now also a non
local so(2)invariance, the corresponding innitesimal transformations, with parameter
, being given by

c 1 =  c 2
c 2 =  c 1
a =   d(cid:16)c 2 + c 1(cid:17) .

(4.16)

under these transformations i0 is invariant irrespectively of the validity of any quanti-
zation condition on the charges, as is 0. this action possesses the same dirac anomaly
as the pstaction and upon adding the same regularizing term, 1
the correct lorentzforcelaw, if the so(2)invariant quantization condition (1.4) holds.
due to its manifest invariance, however, the pstaction is preferable in many respects.
the action i0 represents a generalization to arbitrary strings of the action used by
schwinger [2] to deduce the quantization conditions (1.4) and (1.5) considering respec-
tively doublesheeted and singlesheeted strings. for singlesheeted strings, which were
always implicitly assumed by us, i0 is not so(2)invariant, as we saw above. keeping
singlesheeted strings it becomes so(2)invariant upon adding the term  1

2r c  ec, produces also

on the other hand, if one uses the particular doublesheeted strings introduced by

2r c 1c 2.

schwinger [2], this added term can be seen to vanish identically.

4.4 the angle

the last issue of this section concerns the introduction of angles in the z4theory. in
the present context this is a question about more general consistent couplings between the
currents and the electromagnetic eld, then those contained in i0. taking the quantization
condition (1.5) into account, at present the theory depends only on a single coupling
constant (apart from the masses). in fact, the general solution of (1.5) is

er = e0 nr

gr =

2
e0

mr,

(4.17)

with nr, mr integers, where e0 is the fundamental electric charge and represents the unique
coupling constant.

for additional couplings we have to require u(1) gauge invariance and string indepen-
dence. for dimensional reasons the unique new term which satises these requirements

is r f f . therefore, a term can be introduced consistently in the theory according to

(4.18)

i = i0 +

e2
0

82z f f.

notice that, contrary to what happens for terms in yangmills theories, in the present
case it is not a topological term and hence not invariant under    + 2; we will come
back to this feature in sections seven and eight.

20

to analyze the eect of this additional coupling we compute the new maxwell equations

d  f = j 1 
df = j 2,

e2
0 
42 j 2

(4.19)

(4.20)

which show that the electric current has been shifted by an amount proportional to the
magnetic current, which is indeed the expected eect of a term, while the magnetic
current has not been touched. the new lorentzforce law is again of the form (1.3) but
the individual charges are now given by

er = er +

gr = gr,

e2
0 
42 gr

(4.21)

reecting the shift of the total currents in the maxwell equations.

the diracanomaly, instead, does not change since the term is stringindependent.

the eective action associated to i reects just the shifts noted above and is given by

z4

 =z 

1

2  dc 1 

e2
0

42 dc 2!   dc 1 

e2
0

42 dc 2! + dc 2  dc 2!+ dc 1 1

c 2. (4.22)

notice, however, that the mixed term is unaected by the angle as is the dirac anomaly.
consequently the consistency condition remains (1.5), with solution (4.17), and the total
individual charges become

er = e0 nr +

mr!


2

gr =

2
e0

mr.

(4.23)

these charges satisfy, in turn, the relation ergs  esgr = 2 nrs, but one should keep in
mind that the fundamental equations are (1.5) and (4.21). there are, in fact, solutions of
the former relation, depending on one more parameter, which are not taken into account
by (4.23).

one might wonder whether terms can be introduced also in the so(2)theory.
the answer, which is encoded in the dierent quantization condition (1.4), is that these
couplings are already present because that quantization condition allows for solutions
with non vanishing angles (see section seven).

5 classical so(2)eld theory

the starting point for a quantum eld theory in a functional integral approach is a classical
eld theory action. since for a theory of charges and diracmonopoles there is no natural
stringindependent choice for such an action, we begin by searching for a convenient set

21

of equations of motion, over which we have a more direct control. our guiding principles
will be u(1) gauge invariance, current conservation, and manifest so(2)invariance. for
simplicity we consider here dyonic matter elds which are only minimally coupled to gauge
elds, without additional mutual interactions.

5.1 a set of equations of motion

the eld content is a doublet of vector potentials ai and a nite number of bosonic or
fermionic complex matter elds r, which are characterized by their electric and magnetic
charges ei
r and by their masses mr. the u(1)covariant derivative on the rth matter
eld is given by8

d(a)r =(cid:16) + iei

r ijaj

(cid:17) r.

(5.1)

the equations of motion for the matter elds should already imply current conservation
by themselves; this constrains them to be the standard ones,

r(cid:17) r = 0
(cid:16)dd + m2
(id  mr) r = 0,

(5.2)

(5.3)

for bosons and fermions respectively. the individual numbercurrents are dened as usual
by

j

r () =

i rdr + c.c.

for bosons

rr

for fermions,

and the total electric and magnetic currents are represented by the doublet of oneforms

ji() =xr

r dxjr().
ei

with j i() we indicate the smooth threeforms which are hodge dual to ji(); in the
bosonic case they depend, actually, also on a. current conservation is again expressed by

and we impose further the generalized maxwell equations

dj() = 0,

df = j(), f =  f.

what is missing at this point is the link between the elds f and a, which can not be
independent variables. to construct this link we follow the strategy adopted for the point
particle theory. current conservation allows to introduce a doublet of cforms satisfying
j() = dc and maxwells equations lead then to f = da + c. but the problem arising
now is that the celds are not uniquely determined, they are determined only modulo
exact forms, corresponding to string changes. moreover, under c  c+dh, a  ah

8actually, the gauge group is u (1)  u (1).

22

the matter equations are not invariant meaning that, contrary to what happens in the
point particle theory, in the classical eld theory the equations of motion are necessarily
stringdependent. this dierence between the two theories is due to the fact that in
the point particle theory the introduction of vector potentials is optional while in the eld
theory it is unavoidable.

to make a specic string choice we have to impose one more condition on c. for
this purpose we introduce a xed external vector eld u (x), with properties specied
in section three, and impose iu c = 0. the set of equations of motion which govern the
classical eld theory (taking e.g. the matter elds to be bosons) are given by

(cid:16)dd + m2

r(cid:17) r = 0
f = da + c
f =  f
dc = j()

iu c = 0,

c  0

for

xu  .

with the boundary condition

(5.4)

(5.5)

as we showed in section three the last two equations, together with the boundary condi-
tion, determine c uniquely as a function of j, and the remaining equations become then
a closed system for the vector potentials and the matter elds.

this set of equations is so(2)invariant and formally lorentzinvariant, but depends
on an external vector eld.
in this sense it is inconsistent. we observed already the
classical eld theory is necessarily inconsistent, but the way the inconsistency shows up
depends clearly on the formulation of the theory. in the set (5.4), once the auxiliary elds
c have been eliminated, what remains is a system of non local equations for the remaining
physical elds, due to the presence of u. on the other hand, in [3] zwanziger used a local
action, amended by suitable boundary conditions, where only the physical elds show
up; but, due to the presence of a constant vector n , lorentzinvariance is explicitly
broken. if the boundary conditions are imposed, zwanzigers equations of motion become
nonlocal and coincide with the system (5.4), for u (x) = n . in the next subsection we
will write an action which gives rise to (5.4); but even for u (x) = n  this action will
not coincide with the one given in [3]. the relation between zwanzigers framework and
ours will be explained in section seven.

one can exhibit a formal solution to the last two equations in (5.4) as

c = 

1

u 2 uiu (cid:18) 1

u 2 uiu +

1

d(cid:19)1 1

d  j,

(5.6)

where the inverse operator in the brackets sends twoforms into twoforms and has to be
dened according to the boundary condition (5.5). for the particular case u (x) = n 
(5.6) can be seen to reduce to (3.14).

23

5.2 field theory action

we present now an action which gives rise to the set of equations of motion given above,
and which will be the basis for the quantum eld theory. its basic building block will be
the pstaction, but the twoforms c are now treated as independent variables. the last
two equations in (5.4) can be entailed by a convenient set of lagrange multiplier elds.
the consistency of this method requires to show that these new elds do not propagate
and become algebraic functions of the physical elds. this will be the main consistency
check for the action we propose.

we introduce as lagrange multipliers a doublet of twoforms i and a doublet of
oneforms i, which are viewed as u(1) vector potentials. denoting collectively the elds
as  = (a, c, a, , , r), the proposed action, for bosons, is given by

su [] = s0 +z (cid:18)  dc 

1
2

 uiu  c(cid:19) xr z d4x r(cid:16)d()d() + m2

r(cid:17) r.

(5.7)

here s0[a, c, a] is the pstaction and the covariant derivatives on the scalars are dened
as in (5.1), but with the vector potentials  replacing a. it is understood that u (x) is
regarded as a xed external eld and that the boundary conditions (5.5) are imposed.

the formula (5.7) for su can be regarded, in a sense, as the key equation of the paper.
the action (5.7) possesses, in addition to the pstsymmetries for a and a, the fol-

lowing invariances

 =  + d,

( r = eier   r


c = c + dh
 =   dh for
a = a  h
 =  + uiu ,

iu dh = 0,

(5.8)

(5.9)

(5.10)

where  is a twoform doublet. the transformations (5.8) are ordinary u(1)invariances
for the vector elds ; the transformations in (5.9) appear as a kind of constrained string
changes and are quasilocal, in the sense that the parameter doublet h is constrained by
iu dh = 0. the last transformations imply that the elds  are dened modulo forms
parallel to u, as is obvious from the manner they appear in the action.

the equations of motion for a and a amount, as in the pure pstcase, to

dk = dc,

(5.11)

where k i are the oshell electromagnetic tensors dened previously. variation of su
with respect to  and  gives respectively

iu c = 0,

dc = j(, ),

(5.12)

24

where j(, ) are the matter current threeforms dened above but with a replaced by
. the equations of motion for r are the kleingordon equations, again with a  .
the equation of motion for c becomes

k  c  d = 

1
2

(c + uiu  ) ,

(5.13)

and it should determine the auxiliary elds  and . to show that this, actually, happens
we make the natural gauge choice for (5.10) iu  = 0, which is equivalent to  = uiu.
then, dening g = 1

2 (c  ) (5.11), (5.12) and (5.13) imply that

dg = 0 = iu g.

but since under (5.9) g transforms as g  g + dh, with iu dh = 0, these equations
mean precisely that g is pure gauge under this symmetry and one can set g = 0. the
left hand side of (5.13) must then also vanish, and if one xes the pstsymmetries in
the standard way such as to give k = f = da + c, one determines nally the lagrange
multipliers as

 = c

 = a,

(5.14)

(5.15)

apart from a u(1) transformation (5.8).

since now  = a, the equations of motion for all the other elds amount indeed to
the set (5.4), q.e.d. in particular, the physical propagating elds are made out only of one
photon and of the matter elds. but, since the identication (5.15) occurs only onshell,
for a correct identication of the observables e.g. wilson loops, the electromagnetic eld
tensor etc. some caution is required in picking up one vector potential or the other. as
we shall see in the next section symmetry reasons will always lead one to a unique choice.

6 quantum eld theory

our formulation of a quantum eld theory for dyons interacting with an electromagnetic
eld will be based on the classical action su , with the boundary condition (5.5), in the
framework of a functional integral approach. since the correlation functions of the gauge
invariant operators encode all physical information, it suces to construct only these
correlation functions. the classical action depends on u and, as a consequence, also these
correlation functions depend a priori on this external eld. the main goal of this section
is to show that, if (1.4) holds, the udependence disappears in the correlation functions
of physical elds. manifest so(2) and lorentzinvariance then follows automatically.

to prove uindependence we use a standard technique: path integral representations
in terms of classical particle trajectories [16] of determinants and green functions. for
deniteness we consider bosonic matter elds and comment eventually about the fermionic
case which presents, however, no additional diculties. for more details on path integral
representations for particles with arbitrary spin we refer the reader to [17].

25

6.1 path integral representations

we begin by writing the representation for the determinant associated to the scalar eld
r in (5.7)

r +m2

z {drd r} eir r(d2
where the covariant derivative on r is dr = (cid:16) + i ei

r)r = det1(cid:16)i(cid:16)d2

r(cid:17)(cid:17) = exp(cid:16)tr ln(cid:16)i(cid:16)d2

r(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17) ,
(cid:17). apart from a normal-

ization, the basic path representation is given formally by (see e.g.
denition):

[23] for a rigorous

r + m2

r + m2

r ijj

(6.1)

tr ln(cid:16)i(cid:16)d2

r + m2

r(cid:17)(cid:17) = z 

0

dt

+m2

ds )2

4( dyr

0 (cid:16) 1
t z {dyr} eir t
r(cid:17)(cid:17) = z {dr} eir   erejr,

tr ln(cid:16)i(cid:16)d2

r + m2

r+er  

dy


r

ds (cid:17)ds

,

(6.2)

where the integration is over all closed path, yr(t ) = yr(0). we rewrite (6.2) in a more
concise form as

where the integrand in the exponent is written as a fourform and the classical current

threeform ej r is dened as the pddual of the closed curve r, parametrized by yr(s).
we absorbed in the path integral measure {dr} the exponential prefactors in (6.2) and
included formally also the integral over t . expanding eventually the exponential in (6.1)
we arrive to the identity

det1(cid:16)i(cid:16)d2

r + m2

r(cid:17)(cid:17) =

1

xl=0

l!  lyk=1z {d(k)
 z {dr} eir   erjr,

r }! eir   erpl

r

k=1ej (k)

(6.3)

(6.4)

where the integer threeform jr represents now a sum of l classical point particle currents,
each one being of the form (3.6), and the measure {dr} includes now also a sum over
the number of loops.

the functional integration over all n matter elds leads then to

nyr=1

det1(cid:16)i(cid:16)d2

r + m2

r(cid:17)(cid:17) =  nyr=1{dr}! eir  pn

r=1

erjr z {d} eir   j ,

(6.5)

where the threeforms j i correspond now to a weighted sum of closed integer forms, as
in (3.5) and (3.6).

an analogous representation can be given for the matter twopoint function in an

external gauge eld :

r +m2

r)r r(x) r(y)

ht r(x)r(y)i  z {drd r} eir r(d2
r(cid:17)(cid:17) (cid:16)i(cid:16)d2
r(cid:17)(cid:17)z 
r(cid:17)(cid:17) z {d(x,y)

= det1(cid:16)i(cid:16)d2
= det1(cid:16)i(cid:16)d2
 det1(cid:16)i(cid:16)d2

r(cid:17)(cid:17)1
0 (cid:16) 1
dtz {dyr}eir t
} eir   erj (x,y)

r + m2

r + m2

r + m2

r + m2

(x, y)

0

r

r

4( dyr

ds )2

+m2

r+er  

dy


r

ds (cid:17)ds

.

(6.6)

26

here the path integration is over open curves yr(s) with endpoints yr(0) = x, yr(t ) = y,
and the integer threeforms j (x,y)

are pddual to those curves.

r

6.2 correlators of observables and u independence

we begin by establishing the uindependence of the partition function. this is the
simplest case and it encodes already the two basic ingredients which allow to establish
it for all observable correlation functions. the rst ingredient is the technical advice
of path integral representations for the matter elds and the second is represented by
the vanishing of the diracanomaly for classical point particles, a result which we have
already established.

6.2.1 partition function

the partition function is represented by

zu =z {d} eisu [],

where the boundary condition (5.5) is imposed on the functional integration over c, and
appropriate gauge xings for the local symmetries are understood.

the integration over a and a has already been performed explicitly in section two and
gives rise to what we called the eective currentcurrent action 0[c]. the integration
over  gives the function (iu c) while for the integration over the matter elds we
can use the pathintegral representations given above. putting everything together one
obtains

zu = z {d}{dc}{d} (iuc) ei0[c]+ir   (dcj)

= z {d}{dc}  (iu c)  (dc  j) ei0[c].

the functions restrict the variable c to dc = j, iu c = 0 (remember that j satises
dj = 0 identically) which, taken together with the boundary condition (5.5), admit a
unique solution for c; since j is now a classical current this solution is given by (3.17)
and (3.18) and we call it c i(j, u). therefore

zu =z {d} ei0[c(j,u )],

(6.7)

which is our nal expression.

an arbitrary change in the external eld from u  u corresponds now, for xed j,
just to a stringchange c(j, u) = c(j, u) + dhu,u , where the hu,u  are weighted integer
oneforms which correspond to the threevolumes bounded by the surfaces associated
respectively to u and u according to (3.17). but under a stringchange 0 changes by
the diracanomaly

zu  =z {d} ei(0[c(j,u )]+ 1

2r j  hu,u ),

27

and if (1.4) holds exp(cid:16) i

2r j  hu,u (cid:17) = 1. thus zu = zu .

as long as one considers observable correlation functions, i.e. correlation functions
of invariant operators the strategy presented here will always lead to the desired result.
below we work out the most signicant cases.

6.2.2 current correlation functions

in this subsection we consider the correlation functions of the individual matter currents
(r = 1, . . . , n),

jr = i rd()r + c.c.

(6.8)

in writing this expression we solved already the ambiguity regarding the choice between
a and . here one has to choose  because the corresponding expressions with a would
violate the pstsymmetries.

the current correlators are conveniently encoded by a generating functional which can
be constructed in a standard way. one introduces n external currents lr, oneforms,
and performs in the kleingordon term in su the replacement

er    er   + lr,

(6.9)

without aecting the termr   dc and the other terms of the action. we call the action

obtained in this way su [, l]. the terms in su [, l] which are linear in lr multiply
simply the currents (6.8), while the terms which are quadratic in lr  contact terms  are
needed to ensure the global invariances [u(1)]n , i.e. the individual current conservations.
the correlation functions are now obtained, via dierentiation w.r.t. the lr, from the

generating functional

eiw [l] =z {d} eisu [,l].

this functional integral can be analyzed in the same manner as the partition function.
the kleingordon determinants can be obtained from (6.5) with the substitution (6.9)
and their product can be written as

z {d} eir (  jpr

lrjr).

the integration over the other elds can be handled as above and one obtains

eiw [l] = = z {d}{dc}{d} (iuc) ei(0[c]+r   (dcj)+prr lrjr)

= z {d}{dc}  (iu c)  (dc  j) ei(0[c]+prr lrjr)
= z {d} ei(0[c(j,u )]+prr lrjr).

since the integrals r lrjr are uindependent the diracanomaly is the same as in the

case of the partition function. the uindependence of w [l] then also follows.

28

6.2.3 electromagnetic eld correlation functions

we noticed already that the oshell electromagnetic tensor is represented by the two
form doublet k i which is given as a function of a, c and a in (2.16).
it satises in
particular the pseudo selfduality relation

k =   k,

(6.10)

which is necessary to avoid a doubling of the electromagnetic degrees of freedom. the
alternative for k, in terms of , would in this case be given by d + c because onshell
we have k = da + c and a = . but the expression d + c violates the quasilocal
invariances (5.9) and, moreover, it does not satisfy (6.10).

therefore, if we introduce as external currents a doublet of twoforms, li, the gener-

ating functional for the electromagnetic eld correlators could be based on the action

su +z k  l,

(6.11)

where the tensor has been introduced only for notational convenience. the resulting
generating functional would then automatically satisfy the pseudo selfduality invariance

w [   l] = w [l],

(6.12)

i.e. generate correlation functions only for a single eld strength tensor.

the expression (6.11) represents already the correct starting point, apart from contact
terms. as in the case of current correlators these terms, quadratic in l, have to be xed in
order to respect the symmetries of the underlying theory. the problem related with (6.11)
is that the ks are invariant under the pstsymmetry (2.12) only onshell. therefore,
the direct use of (6.11) would introduce in the kcorrelators a spurious dependence on
the unphysical auxiliary eld a.

the problem can be solved by basing the generating functional on the following action

su [, l] = su +z (cid:18)k  l +
 sl +z (cid:18)  dc 

1
lp(v) l 
2
1
2

1
4

l  l(cid:19)

 uiu  c(cid:19) xr z d4x r(cid:16)d()d() + m2

r(cid:17) r,

where sl represents a deformation of the pstaction

sl = s0[a, c + l, a] +

1

2z (cid:18)c  l 

1
2

l  l(cid:19) .

the quadratic terms we have added depend only on l and a, therefore they inuence only
the pstsymmetry (2.12), which sends a  a + . from the form of sl one sees that
it is invariant under the transformations (2.12) if one replaces in the atransformations
c with c + l. this ensures again the decoupling of the auxiliary eld a. to achieve

29

this decoupling only the adependent term 1
alone is not invariant under pseudoduality, i.e. under

2r lp(v) l would be required, but this term

l     l.

2r (cid:16)lp(v) l  1

2l  l(cid:17) which is invariant.

it is only the combination 1

the generating functional for the eld strength correlators, dened as

eiw [l] =z {d} eisu [,l]

with su [, l] specied above, entails, therefore, all the required symmetry properties, in
particular (6.12). it remains to show that it is uindependent. to this order we perform
rst the functional integration over the elds a and a, which appear only in sl,

eil[c] z {da}{da} eisl.

the result for l[c] can be easily read from the analogous functional integration over the
pstaction, which gave the eective action 0[c],

l[c] = 0[c + l] +

1

2z (cid:18)c  l 

1
2

l  l(cid:19) .

what matters eventually is how this expression transforms under a generic string change
c  c + dh. by direct inspection one nds that it transforms precisely as 0[c],

l[c]  l[c] + ad[h],

(6.13)

where ad[h] is the usual diracanomaly. this is a consequence of the fact that also sl
carries the same diracanomaly as s0.

the integration over the remaining elds is carried out as in the case of the partition
function and the result for the generating functional is obtained from the expression for
zu through the replacement 0  l,

eiw [l] =z {d} eil[c(j,u )].

uindependence then follows from (6.13).

6.2.4 wilson loops

wilson loops are associated to a set of n closed spacetime curves r, one for each dyon,
and represent the interaction between the vector potential and the particles circulating
in the loops. the correlator of the corresponding observables is dened as

w[] =*t

eier hr

nyr=1

+ =dt eir   j()e .

(6.14)

30

here we dened the closed threeform doublet j i = pr ei

jr() are the pdduals of the loops r.

rjr(), where the threeforms

in the denition of the correlators we have to use again  instead of a since wilson
loops constructed with the latter would violate the pstsymmetries. on the other hand,
since the loops r are closed, the classical u(1)invariances of  would allow also for
arbitrary real weights of the n individual terms in the exponentials in (6.14). but the
corresponding quantum correlators would be stringdependent, that is udependent, as
one expects also on the basis of diracs original argument for charge quantization. thus
these weights have to take on integer values.

the functional integral representation for (6.14) is

w[] =z {d} eisu eir   j().

once one represents the matter determinants as in (6.5), one sees that the presence of the
wilson loops amounts merely to a replacement of the closed currents j with the closed
currents j + j(). thus

w[] =z {d} ei0[c(j+j(),u )].

but since j +j() is also a weighted integer current the diracanomaly is again a multiple
of 2 and the correlators are uindependent.

6.2.5 mandelstamstring observables

we consider here correlation functions corresponding to a particular type of neutral com-
posite elds, formed by a certain number of particles and antiparticles, with support on a
bounded string. due to the global [u(1)]n invariances only correlation functions in which
each particle appears together with its own antiparticle are nonvanishing.

here we work out only the onepoint green function for a meson eld, involving
say the r-th species, generalizations to multiple states being straightforward. the green
function we consider is specied by the positions x and y of the two particles and by
an open curve x,y, the mandelstamstring [18], which connects the two points. the
corresponding correlator is given by

gr[x,y] = (cid:28)t r(x) e

ier rx,y

= z {d} ei(su +r   erjr(x,y)) r(x) r(y).



r(y)(cid:29) =dt r(x) eir   erjr(x,y) r(y)e

the insertion of the mandelstam lineintegral along x,y, with vector potentials , is
needed to realize the local electromagnetic invariances (5.8).

the evaluation of the correlator can be based on the expansion (6.6). the determinant
in that formula combines with the determinants of the other n  1 charged elds and

31

leads again to (6.5). one obtains

gr[x,y] = z {d(x,y)

r

}z {d}{dc}{d}(iuc)e

i0[c]+ir (cid:16)dc(cid:16)j+er(cid:16)j

(x,y)
r

jr(x,y)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)

(6.15)

since j (x,y)

r

and jr(x,y) are pddual to the open curves (x,y)

total currents j + er(cid:16)j (x,y)

r  jr(x,y)(cid:17) are again closed and weighted integer forms. this

is sucient to guarantee uindependence once more.

r

and x,y respectively, the

generalizations to npoint green functions are straightforward since the second row
in formula (6.6) admits immediate extensions to arbitrary polynomials in {r}, in terms
of multiple contractions.

6.2.6 charged elds

we wish here to outline the construction of green functions for charged elds, following
the strategy developed in [21] (for all technical details we refer the reader to this reference).
the elds we consider are required to be invariant under local u(1) gauge transformations
which vanish at innity, but to transform nontrivially, i.e. to be charged, with respect
to the global u(1) transformations.
in agreement with strocchis theorem [24], these
requirements imply that the elds are nonlocal, more precisely that their support is
noncompact and extends to innity.

there are two natural candidates for such elds. the rst is obtained multiplying

(dressing) a charged matter eld r(x) by a mandelstamstring phase factor

exp(cid:18)izx

er  (cid:19) .

x is here a curve starting from x and reaching innity along some xed spacedirection
at xed time, where it meets a compensating charge.

the second candidate eld is obtained, according to diracs original proposal [19],

dressing r(x) by a coulomb phase factor

exp(cid:18)ier z d4y (y)e

x (y)(cid:19) .

ex is a classical coulomb electric eld, generated by a unit charge located at x, with
x (y) = 4(x  y) 9. more precisely
support in a xedtime threespace and satisfying e

~ex(y) =

1
4
x(y) = 0.

e0

(y0)

~y  ~x
|~y  ~x|3

(6.16)

(6.17)

9in lattice abelian gauge theories without dynamical monopoles, it has been shown rigorously [26]
that charged states and charged quantum elds can be reconstructed out of euclidean green functions,
derived as expectation values of globally neutral products of charged elds dened according to diracs
proposal.

32

(cid:28) r(x)ei er rx

r(y)ei er ry

(cid:29) .

from a physical point of view diracs recipe describes a charged particle dressed with
its coulomb photon cloud. the latter appears energetically more favorable then the
mandelstamstring proposal in q.e.d.like theories, as we know that in such theories the
electromagnetic eld associated classically to a charged particle is indeed coulomblike.
however, neither of these candidates appears to be suitable in a theory where electric
and magnetic dynamical charges coexist. the problem arising with mandelstamstrings
is related with infrared divergences (they are unbounded) and it can be understood as
follows. consider e.g. the ansatz twopoint function for a charged particle created at x
and annihilated at y

it involves two strings of innite length, one starting from x and the other from y.
loosely speaking the strings would have innite positive selfenergies and innite neg-
ative interactionenergy as a consequence of the interaction mediated by the photons.
more concretely, the eective action 0[c(j, u)] diverges if the currents j correspond
to unbounded curves, like the above mandelstamstrings. the selfenergies could be in
principle removed by a suitable multiplicative pointindependent renormalization. but
the interaction energy can not be removed as it depends on the distance between x
and y, and thus the ansatz green function would be infrared divergent.
(more pre-
cisely, in the euclidean formulation renormalizing away the interaction energy would spoil
osterwalderschrader positivity of the correlation function, a property which is crucial
for the reconstruction of the quantum eld, see e.g. [23].)

on the other hand, diracs construction can not be used in a theory of dyons because
the eld ex would give rise to a smooth non integer current j and the diracanomaly
would no longer be an integer multiple of 2. this would then imply an unphysical
dependence of the green functions on diracstrings.

the recipe presented in [21], which overcomes these diculties, consists in replacing

a single mandelstamstring exp(ier rx ) by a sum over mandelstamstrings weighted
by a suitable measure d{x}. this measure is supported on strings x which uctuate
so strongly that with probability one the corresponding interactionenergy is nite, and
it entails the additional feature that on average it reproduces just the coulomb eld ex.
therefore, although on small scales the photon cloud associated to the charged eld

r(x)z d{x} eier rx



respects the dirac quantization condition, at large distances on average it scales to the
classical coulomb eld ex.

the green functions for charged elds are eventually given by

*tyi

ri(xi)z d{xi} e

i eri rxi

+ ,

where  denotes  or  and total charge neutrality is understood.

33

the strategy developed above can now be used in the same fashion to prove dirac

string independence of these correlation functions too.

6.3 comments

the procedure adopted above to prove the stringindependence of the invariant correlation
functions works equally well for fermions. the corresponding classical action is obtained
from (5.7) upon replacing the kleingordon action with the dirac action, and the relevant
pathintegral representations are available also for fermions. for example, the fermionic
determinants admit expansions of precisely the same type as (6.5), what changes is only
the functional measure over the paths [4]. appropriate expansions for the fermionic
propagators in an external gauge eld are also available [17].

our formulation for the quantum eld theory of dyons, based on the action (5.7),
furnishes stringindependent correlators for all gaugeinvariant operators.
it may be
worthwhile to notice that correlators of operators which are not invariant under local gauge
transformations, instead, turn out to vanish. consider, for example, the scalar twopoint
function ht r(x)r(y)i. this is obtained from (6.15) upon dropping the current jr(x,y).
the integration over  leads then to the function  (dc  (j + erjr(x,y))) which has
no solution since the current is now no longer closed. this would then give a vanishing
correlator, in agreement with elitzurs [25] theorem10. the point is that in the case of
currents which are not closed, occurring in the presence of non invariant operators, it
is necessary to x the local u(1)symmetries (5.8). but this leads then to smooth non
integer currents and the correlators become udependent.

a word is in order for what concerns the congurations which we called in the clas-
sical point particle theory exceptional. these congurations appear indeed also in the
quantum eld theory; taking, for example, the expansion of the partition function in
(6.7), they occur when some curve r intersects the string cs(js, u) associated to another
curve s.
in this case 0[c(j, u)] would be illdened. however, every regularization
which preserves the integrality of the currents gives the same result for exp(i0[c(j, u)]).
more concretely, the problem can be solved by performing in the expansion (6.7) a string

change from cs(js, u) to an arbitrary regular string ecs(js) (see section three). since
exp(i0[c(j, u)]) is stringindependent, the regularized expression exp(i0[ec(j)]) equals

the original one for regular congurations and is, moreover, independent of the regular-
ization. this regularization procedure fails only if the curves themselves intersect each
other; but, in the models considered here, these congurations form a set of measure zero
in the path integral.

a classical eld theory action of the kind (5.7) can be given also for the z4 theory.
in this case one has only one vector potential a2, and only one lagrange multiplier eld,
1 = c 1, is needed to impose dc 2 = j 2. the elds are now  = (a2, 1, c i, r) and the

10the same happens formally in ordinary q.e.d. if one does not x the u (1)symmetry.

34

counterpart of (5.7) is

sz4

2

u [] =z 1

f 2  f 2 + 1dc 2  c 1uiu c 2 xr z d4x r(cid:16)dd + m2
where f 2 = da2 + c 2, and the covariant derivative is here d =  + i(cid:16)e1

for the c i we assume the usual boundary conditions (5.5). the symmetries of this action
are analogous to the ones given in (5.8)(5.10) for the so(2)theory and, together with
the equations of motion, they determine the auxiliary elds as follows

r(cid:17) r,
  e2

ra2

r1

(cid:17).

d1 + c 1 = f 2

dc i = j i(a2, 1, r),

iu c = 0.

(6.18)

(6.19)

taking the matter eld equations into account and setting 1  a1, one recovers precisely
the system of equations of motion of the so(2)theory, (5.4).

the corresponding quantum eld theory can be analyzed in the same way as the

so(2)theory and it turns out to be consistent if (1.5) holds.

it is worthwhile to notice a puzzle which arises in comparing the inequivalent quantum
u respectively. as we noted in section 4.2. the dierence

eld theories based on su and sz4
arises in the eective actions

0 = z4

0  0 =

1

2z c 1c 2.

(6.20)

since in both quantum eld theories the strings are chosen to satisfy iu c = 0 and one
has the identity decomposition 1 = 1

u 2 (iu u  uiu ), one would conclude
1
u 2 c 1 (iu u  uiu ) c 2 = 0.

c 1c 2 =

the point is that in deriving (6.20) we performed integrations by parts and ignored
boundary terms at innity; non vanishing boundary terms arise, in general, if the strings
extend to innity, as does c[j, u]. strings extending to innity are unavoidable if the
curves themselves extend to innity, as in the classical point particle theory. but in
the partition function or in the correlation functions of local observables in the quantum
eld theory the curves are closed and one can also choose compact surfaces as strings.
on the other hand, since exp(i0) is stringindependent, one can switch from c[j, u] to
arbitrary compact strings ccom[j]. since now curves and strings are compact no boundary
terms arise and one gets indeed (6.20). but then c 1
com is dierent from zero and one
concludes that the two quantum eld theories coincide only if the charges satisfy the
stronger relations (1.6), as anticipated in section 4.2.

comc 2

the extension of our formulation to include a coupling with an external classical
gravitational eld, represented by a metric g(x), does not meet additional diculties.
since the classical eld theory action is formally so(1, 3)invariant, the metric can be
introduced in a standard fashion, via the minimal coupling, and the resulting action is

35

formally dieomorphism invariant; the specication formally is referred to the presence
of the external eld u. the quantum correlators are dened again by the functional
integral and one has only to worry about the dependence of the correlators on u. with
respect to this issue the rst key observation is that the pathintegral representations for
determinants and correlators, of the type (6.5) and (6.6), hold true. since the exponentials
involving  are written as integrals of products of forms, they do not acquire any metric
dependence; it is only the pathintegral measure which involves now also the metric.
this leads then to expansions which are of the same form as (6.7), but clearly 0 depends
now also on g. the second key observation is that, nevertheless, the diracanomaly
is metricindependent. this is due to the fact that the concept of pdduality is metric
independent and that the diracanomaly is written as the integral of a product of forms.
its exponential equals, therefore, again unity and the correlators are uindependent.

7 duality symmetries and equivalences

the aim of this section is to establish which theories of a xed number n of species
of interacting dyons are physically equivalent to each other. dierent actions can be
connected by eld redenitions, upon elimination of auxiliary elds or through an s
duality transformation of a pform potential (or by a combination of these operations).
these operations suce to establish the equivalences between the actions considered in
this section. theories based on classical actions which can be connected in one of these
ways are physically equivalent also at the quantum level.

7.1 sduality for the vector potentials ai

we saw in section 4.3 that, by applying an sduality transformation of the vector potential
a2 in the z4theory, one can obtain a theory in which the electric and magnetic charges
are interchanged. the electric charges are now magnetically coupled and the magnetic
charges electrically. this means that z4theories with charges respectively (er, gr) and
(gr,er), satisfying (1.5), are equivalent.

in the so(2)theory both types of charges are electrically and magnetically coupled.
this indicates that under an sduality of the vector potentials ai, the pstaction should
turn into itself. this is indeed what happens. in fact, consider instead of the pstaction
(2.7) the action

sh =

1

2z (h + c) p(v) (h + c) + h  (d + c),

where h i is a doublet of twoforms and i a doublet of oneforms, dual to ai. functional
integration over  leads to dh = 0  h = da and one is back to the pstaction. on
the other hand, one can now perform the integration over h

z {dh} eish  eibs0[,c,a].

36

the integral is gaussian, and to perform it one has only to know the inverse of the
adependent operator p(v) on twoform doublets
1
4 p(v).

p1(v) = 

the result is indeed

i.e. the pstaction for the dual vector potentials . this generalizes the result of [20],
for the case of non vanishing currents.

bs0[, c, a] = s0[, c, a],

therefore, an sduality transformation on a, contrary to what happens in the z4
theory, sends the pstaction into itself, and does not lead to a new formulation. more-
over, this statement does not require any quantization condition on the charges. clearly,
the same result holds also for the total classical eld theory action su .

7.2 sduality for the scalar a

a new formulation can be obtained if one performs an sduality on the scalar auxiliary
eld a. this transformation has been performed in [20], and we report here only the result.
due to the complicated dependence on a of the pstaction, it seems hard to implement
this duality transformation at the level of the functional integral; one has to proceed
through the equations of motion. this will lead in the dual action to the appearance
of a quasilocal symmetry, needed to obtain the duality relation f = f . apart from
this dierence, the dual action shares the same good properties with the pstaction, i.e.
manifest so(1, 3) and so(2)invariance.

the eld dual to a is a twoform potential b = 1

2 dxdxb, the relation being given

by

da =  db.

to construct the dual pstaction one denes the oneforms h =  db and u = h

h2 ,
such that u2 = 1; u is the counterpart of the oneform v. the dual action is (f = da+c)

es0[a, c, b] =

1

2z f q(u) f + da  c,

(7.1)

where q(u) is a symmetric operator which acts in the space of twoforms and on the
so(2)indices as

qij (u) = u iu ij (cid:18)u iu 

1

2(cid:19) ij .

apart from the formal analogies between (2.7) and (7.1) one should note, however, that
the latter is not obtained from the former with the simple substitution v  u. one has
rather

q(u) + p(u) = .

37

the symmetries of this action are

a = d

b = dc

a = , with iud = 0
a = iv iuu (f  f ) ,

b = iv db.

(7.2)

(7.3)

(7.4)

(7.5)

c is a oneform,  a doublet of scalars, v a vector eld, and  a constrained doublet of one
forms which entail now quasilocal transformations, as anticipated above. the symmetries
(7.3) and (7.5) allow to x b completely, which becomes again a nonpropagating auxiliary
eld. the symmetries (7.4) allow to obtain the pseudo selfduality relation f = f .
this implies that the dual action describes the same classical dynamics as the pstaction.
even if (7.1) has not been obtained from the pstaction via functional integration,
on can construct a quantum eld theory, and a point particle theory, based on the dual
action, in precisely the same way as we did for the pstaction: the resulting quantum
eld theories are, indeed, identical. the principal common features are that the two
classical actions carry the same diracanomaly, and entail the same eective action 0,
as shown in the appendix11.

the oshell electromagnetic elds, the counterparts to (2.16), are now given by

fk = f +  u iu (f   f ) ,

and have the same properties as the twoforms k, but now referred to the symmetries
(7.2)(7.5).

under an sduality of the vector potentials a, also the dual pstaction goes into

itself, in particular one has q1(u) =  1

4 q(u).

the advantages of the original pstaction w.r.t.

the dual action are represented
essentially by its simpler symmetry structure, in particular by the absence of quasilocal
symmetries. the most signicant dierence between the two actions relies in the formulae
(2.11) and (7.4). the symmetry (2.11) eliminates one transverse degree of freedom from
each ai, such that each ai carries one transverse physical photon degree of freedom. on
the other hand, the quasilocal symmetry (7.4) for the dual action does not eliminate
degrees of freedom; it allows, rather, to choose boundary conditions for the equations of
motion, which reduce the secondorder equations for the vector potentials, to the pseudo
selfduality relation f =  f .

as shown below, the dual action plays a signicant role in establishing the relation
between formulations with a single vector potential and formulations with a doublet of
vector potentials.

11in the calculation of 0 from the dual action, which can be carried out using an identity similar to

(2.17), the symmetries (7.4), being quasilocal, do not need a gaugexing.

38

7.3 equivalence between the zwanziger and pstactions

the classical eld theory action introduced by zwanziger [3] depends only on a doublet
of vector potential oneforms i, and on the matter elds r. it is local and manifestly
so(2)invariant, but breaks explicitly lorentzinvariance, due to the appearance of a
constant vector n, n2 = 1. it reads

szw [, ] =

1

2z d q(n) d xr z d4x r(cid:16)d()d() + m2

r(cid:17) r,

(7.6)

where the contribution of the matter elds is written as in (5.7). the operator q(n) is
the one appearing in the dual pstaction, but evaluated at u = n.

the equivalence between this action and the classical original pst eld theory action
su (5.7) can be understood as follows. since in the pstapproach the elds a(x) and
u(x) can be chosen arbitrarily, the rst because it is an auxiliary eld and the second
because the quantum theory is uindependent, we choose
a(x) = nx  v = n
u (x) = n.

the action su becomes then a functional of a, , c, , and r, which we call sn. since
the elds  and r have the same symmetry properties, i.e. u(1)invariances, in szw
and sn, it is natural to try a functional integration over c, a and  of sn:

eis[,] z {dc}{da}{d} eisn[a,,c,,].

it is understood that the integrations have to be carried out performing appropriate gauge
xings.

since in the action su we have now to set u = v = n, due to the presence of the

term  1
(shifting ). this leads to

2r  nin  c we can eliminate from the pstaction all terms proportional to inc

sn = z 1

2

dap(n) da +

1
2

c  c +(cid:18) da  d 

xr z d4x r(cid:16)d()d() + m2

r(cid:17) r.

1
2

 nin(cid:19)  c

(7.7)

(7.8)

we perform rst the gaussian integration over c, which leads to an action which is
quadratic in . the integration over  is again gaussian, and to perform it one has only
to take the gaugexing in = 0 into account. after these integrations one obtains as
intermediate result

z {dc}{d} eisn = ei(szw [,]+ 1

2r (dad) nin(dad)).

since there exist linear gaugexing conditions for the symmetries (2.10) and (2.11), one
can perform the shift a  a + , and the integral over a gives a constant. therefore,
the result is

s[, ] = szw [, ],

39

similarly one can ask if there exists an analogous relation between the zwanziger

which shows the equivalence between the zwanziger action and the original pstaction.
notice, in particular, that the operator p(n) of the original pstaction has turned in the
operator q(n).
action and the dual pst eld theory action esu . the latter is obtained from su in (5.7)
upon substituting the pstaction s0[a, c, a] with the dual pstaction es0[a, c, b]. to
see that this is the case one has to choose in esu

(7.9)

b(0)
 (x) = nx  u = n
u (x) = n,

obtaining an action esn[a, , c, , ]. modulo a suitable redenition of , one has

as above we integrate over a, c and 

esn = z 1

2

1
2

daq(n) da +(cid:18)da  d 
 nin(cid:19)  c
xr z d4x r(cid:16)d()d() + m2
r(cid:17) r.
eies[,] z {dc}{da}{d} eiesn[a,,c,,].

(7.10)

(7.11)

the integration over c leads to the function (da  d  1
d(inn ) = 0.

da = d +

inn ,

1
2

2 inn), which implies

substituting these relations above and taking into account that q(n)inn  = 1
the integration over a and  becomes trivial. the result is

2 inn ,

i.e. again the zwanziger action.

es[, ] = szw [, ],

the connections presented above and in the preceding subsection ensure that the quan-

tum eld theories based on su , esu and szw are equivalent. the pst approach introduces

additional non propagating auxiliary elds, but avoids some unpleasant features of the
zwanziger approach. due to the presence of the vector n in the last one, the consistency
check of the quantum theory requires the proof of lorentzinvariance of the correlators of
observables. therefore, the vector n acquires only a posteriori the meaning of the direc-
tion of the diracstring. the entanglement of these two issues  lorentzinvariance and
diracstring dependence  in the zwanziger theory, leads, already at the level of point
particles, to a rather complicated realization of lorentzinvariance. for point particles
zwanzigers action becomes

spp
zw =

1

2z d q(n) d xr

er zr

 

mrzr

nxr=1

dr.

(7.12)

40

it can be obtained from the corresponding dual pstaction for dynamical dyons, setting
u = n and choosing cs satisfying inc = 0. a lorentz transformation in (7.12) amounts
then to make the replacement n  n = 
n. from the equivalence with the dual
pstaction it is clear that, to recover lorentzinvariance, one has to modify the standard
lorentztransformation law of a as follows. first one has to add a transformation of
the type (7.5), which re-rotates the vector n (the transformation of b allows, indeed, to
reach an arbitrary n). second, since zwanzigers action corresponds to a choice for the
cs restricted to inc = 0, a change of n has to be compensated by a string shift, i.e.
by a = hn,n; therefore, under these modied lorentztransformations zwanzigers
action changes by an integer multiple of 2, if (1.4) holds.

these rather complicated arrangements are avoided in the classical pstapproach,
due to its manifest so(1, 3)invariance. moreover, once the classical (exponentiated)
pstaction is checked to be diracstring independent, the quantum stringindependence
follows almost immediately.

the relation between the pstapproach and [9] is less clear, since the authors of that

paper renounce to construct a classical eld theory action.

7.4 equivalence of formulations with one and two vector poten-

tials

in the subsection 4.1 we gave an action for the z4theory, in terms of a single vector
potential, see the expression for i0[a2, j 1, c 2] in eq. (4.1). there we observed also that
the action i0  1
the so(2)theory in terms of a single vector potential.

2r c 1c 2 could be used, instead of the pstaction, for a formulation of
2r c 1c 2) could be used for a formulation

of the z4theory in terms of a doublet of vector potentials.

vice versa, the action s0 + 1

2r c 1c 2 (or es0 + 1

the question, which arises naturally, is if the formulations with one and two vector
potentials are directly related: the functional integration over one of the two vector po-
tentials could give the corresponding formulation in terms of a single vector potential.
actually, we have two formulations in terms of vector potential doublets, based on s0 and

es0 respectively, and it turns out that, in this respect, the two formulations behave indeed

dierently. the reason has been anticipated above. in the pstaction s0 each vector po-
tential carries one of the two transverse photon degrees of freedom. therefore, integrating
out one of the two vector potentials leads to a nonlocal action for the remaining vector
potential, even in the absence of currents, as can be checked also directly. on the other
hand, in the dual pstapproach each vector potential carries two transverse degrees of
freedom, which become identied at the level of the equations of motion.

therefore, integrating the dual pstaction, augmented by the term 1

a1 and b, one can expect to obtain the action i0[a2, j 1, c 2] for the z4theory (while the

2r c 1c 2, over

41

eibi0[a2,c1,c2] =z {da1}{db} ei(es0[a,c,b]+ 1

analogous calculation with the pstaction can surely not lead to i0). we dene bi0 by
the integration over b needs the insertion of a gaugexing function (b(x)b(0)(x)), and
the integration over a1 requires only to x its u(1)invariance. the gaussian integral over
a1, for a xed b(0), can be conveniently evaluated through an sduality transformation
and turns out to be independent of b(0). for the details of this calculation we refer the
reader to the appendix.
the result is, indeed,

2r c1c2).

bi0 = i0.

(7.13)

the disappearance of b(0), and the result itself, are somewhat surprising since there is no

symmetry which, a priori, protects bi0 from a b(0)dependence or from nonlocal terms.

clearly, the result is in agreement with the fact that a further functional integration over
a2 leads to the eective action z4
0 ; but this would have happened also if one had started
with the pstaction.

7.5 angles and so(2)symmetry

we anticipated that in the so(2)theory angles are already present, while in the z4

theory they are introduced adding to the action a term proportional tor f f . in the case

of the so(2)theory such terms are forbidden by the pstsymmetries.

to see how angles arise, it suces to search for the general solution of the so(2)

invariant diraczwanziger quantization condition for the charge vectors (er, gr),

ergs  esgr = 4nrs.

(7.14)

since this relation is invariant under sl(2, r)  a three parameter group  and not only
under so(2), one expects that the general solution is characterized by three continuous
parameters. to see that this is indeed the case we observe that, with an so(2) rotation,
one can eliminate the magnetic charge of say the rst charge vector, g1 = 0. this leads
to

gr =

mr,

(7.15)

4
e1

with mr integer for all magnetic charges. substituting this back in (7.14) one gets

er =

nrs
ms

e1 +

es
ms

mr

for each r and s. choosing a particular s such that l  ms 6= 0, and dening e0 = e1/l,
one can write the general solution as

er = e0 nr +

mr!


2

gr =

4
e0

mr
l

,

42

(7.16)

where mr, nr and l are integers restricted to

nrms  nsmr = l  krs;

(7.17)

this means that the left hand side has to be an integer multiple of l. apart from an
so(2)rotation, the relations (7.16) and (7.17) specify the general solution of (7.14).
they represent the counterpart to the relations (4.23) in the z4theory, modied by a
term.

the integer l can, in general, not be eliminated by rescaling e0 or . (for example,
the solution corresponding to nr = mr = m for any r and l arbitrary, can not be traced
back to the case l = 1.) nevertheless, the physically relevant solutions correspond to
l = 1. in fact, it is sucient to assume that there exists a particle, say the electron,
with the minimal electric charge e0 and with vanishing magnetic charge: ns = 1, ms = 0.
equation (7.17) implies then that all mr are integer multiples of l, and this amounts to
set in (7.16) l = 1, upon rescaling mr and . henceforth we will restrict to this case.

taking the initial so(2)rotation into account, these relevant solutions can then be

expressed as

gr! = t ()(cid:18) e0
 er

0

here t () is an so(2)matrix, and



2 e0
4

e0 (cid:19)  nr

mr!  (, e0, )  nr

4 mr!.

(7.18)

(, e0, ) = t ()(cid:18) e0

0


2

e0
4

e0 (cid:19)

1

parametrizes a generic element of sl(2, r), as anticipated above.

two theories whose charge vectors dier only by the matrix t () are equivalent,
because this dierence can be eliminated by an so(2)redenition of the vector potential
doublets (a consequence of the so(2)duality invariance of the theory). this implies
also that the angle  is a ctitious coupling constant, and that the matrix t () can be
set equal to unity. thus the geometric meaning of (7.18) is that the space of coupling
constants is represented by the coset sl(2,r)

so(2) , parametrized by  and e0.

apart from  and e0, the charge vectors are characterized also by the vectors of
integers (nr, mr), which until now have been kept xed.
if we consider also sl(2, z)
transformations of these integer vectors, we can nd more equivalence relations between
dierent theories. it is sucient to concentrate on the two generators t and s of sl(2, z).
they act as

t :

e0 = e0
 =  + 2
nr = nr  mr
mr = mr

43

s :

0

0

0

e0 =

4
e0

vuut1 +  e2
82!2
4(cid:17)2
 =  (cid:16) e2
82(cid:17)2 
1 +(cid:16) e2

nr = mr
mr = nr.

under a t -transformation we have simply (er, gr) = (er, gr) and the corresponding theories
are trivially equivalent. under s we have instead
 er
gr!,
gr! = t () er

where t () is an so(2)matrix, with rotation angle given by

tg  = 

82
e2
0

.

due to so(2)invariance the corresponding theories are then again equivalent.

notice, however, that the theory is not invariant under the shift    + 2 alone,
because this shift amounts to nr  nr + mr, and this changes the electric charges of the
charge vectors.

8 concluding remarks

in this concluding section we mention briey some other possible applications and natural
extensions of the methods developed in this paper.

the monopoles considered in this paper are diracmonopoles  exhibiting a singularity
at the monopole location  and are typical for abelian gauge theories. a priori, the
formalism developed in the paper does not apply to the nonsingular t hooftpolyakov
monopoles [27]. they appear in the semiclassical analysis of nonabelian gauge theories
whose gauge group is spontaneously broken to an abelian subgroup, containing at least
one u(1)factor; a prototype is given by the georgiglashow model. a way to exhibit
explicitly t hooftpolyakov monopoles in correlation functions of observables of the full
quantum theory has been suggested by t hooft [28], and, following ideas similar to those
outlined in sect 6.2.6, a recipe to construct monopole correlation functions has been
proposed in [21].

although in the semiclassical analysis these monopoles are nonsingular, it is well
known [29] that they are mapped to diraclike monopoles in suitable unitary gauges and,
therefore, in these gauges, the formalism developed in the present paper applies also to
them.

44

by adding to the action of e.g. the georgiglashow model the topological term

e2

162z tr (ff ),

(8.1)

where f is the nonabelian eld strength twoform, the t hooftpolyakov monopoles are
turned into dyons. the integral appearing in (8.1) is a topological invariant, the second
chern class, and it takes values in the integers. therefore, the quantum eld theory with
term is invariant under the shift    + 2, in contrast with the remarks made at the
end of the previous section for the abelian models considered in this paper. the dierent
behaviour is related to the appearance of an innite number of species of dyons in the
georgiglashow model, as discussed in [28].

in abelian models invariance under 2shifts of  can be achieved in the limiting case,

where the integral e2
model [31].

0/82r f f is forced to be an integer, as in the cardyrabinovici

one of the principal advantages of the formalism presented in this paper is the imple-
mentation of lorentzinvariance as a manifest symmetry, at each step, while the quan-
tum consistency of the theory relies on the diracstring independence. from the latter
point of view we saw that the classical pointparticle theory contains already the relevant
informations, like the quantization conditions for the charges, the distinction between
so(2)theories and z4theories, the eect of -angles, and the currentcurrent eective
actions.

at this semiclassical level the formalism allows immediate extensions from point
particles (0branes) to arbitrary pbranes, coupled to (p + 1)form gauge potentials, and
to arbitrary dimensions. it can be applied not only to pbrane dyons, living in d = 2p + 4
dimensions, but also to a system of dual branes, for example strings and vebranes in
ten dimensions. results in this direction will be reported elsewhere [32].

9 appendix

9.1 useful identities

we collect here the basic identities, involving dierential pforms, the operator and the
interior product iu with a vector eld u , used in the paper. the oneform u is given
by u = dxu.

d (pq) = pdq + ()q(dp)q
iu (pq) = piu q + ()q(iu p)q

d2 = 0 = (iu )2

iu = ()p  u 
u = ()p+1  iu 
 iu = u 

45

iu =   u
 = d 
2 = ()p+1
1 =

1

u 2(cid:16)()p+1uiu + uiu(cid:17)
()p+1
(uiu + uiu)
u 2
= d + d.

 =

for constant vector elds n we have also

din + ind = n = n.

9.2 proof of (7.13)

we begin by writing for es0[a, c, b] an expression analogous to (2.17), keeping the notation

used for that formula.

es0[a, c, b] = 0[c] +

1

2z (g + d)e(u)(g + d).

the unique dierence w.r.t. (2.17) lies in the operator e(u) which is here

(9.1)

d  d

 iu  iu.

e(u) =

we remember that g = da1  da2 and d = c 1  c 2. the above identity shows, by
the way, that the eective action associated to es0 is 0[c].

since we want now to integrate only over a1 (and b) it is convenient to dene

d

d

d,

(9.2)

ba2 = a2  
ba1 = a1 +



such that g + d = dba1  dba2. in terms of bai one can then write

es0[a, c, b] = es0[ba, 0, b] + 0[c],

where es0[a, 0, b] is the free dual pstaction, i.e. with vanishing currents, as can be seen

by setting in (9.1) c = 0. this means that

this reduces the problem to the integration over a1 and b in the free dual pstaction,

1

2z dbaq(u) dba + 0[c].
2r da q(u) da(b  b(0)).

i

es0[a, c, b] =

eis[a2] z {da1}{db} e

46

(9.3)

to perform this integration it is convenient to perform an sduality of a1,

eis[a2] = e

i

2r da2uiuda2z {dh}{d}{db} (b  b(0)) eir 1

2 huiuh+(da2uiud)h .

integration over  gives, indeed, dh = 0  h = da1. the quasilocal symmetry of a2,
a2 = 2, iud2 = 0 has now to be accompanied by

 = 2.

(9.4)

we perform now the shift of integration variable h  h + uiu  (da2  d) which gives
(9.5)

eis[a2] = e

i

2r da2da2z {dh}{d}{db} (b  b(0)) 
eir 1

2 duiudduiuda2uhiud.

2 huiuh+ 1

(9.6)

since the two orthogonal components of h, uiuh and uiu  h, are now decoupled, the
integration over these components factorizes and gives

eis[a2] = e

i

2r da2da2z {d}{db} (b  b(0)) (iud) eir 1

2 duiudduiuda2

.

but the function for  means now that d is a pure gauge under (9.4) and amounts,
therefore, to (d). this implies that the integral over  gives a constant, as does the
nal integration over b. thus, the result is b(0)independent and reads simply

s[a2] =

1

2z da2  da2.

the functional integration over a1 and b of exp(cid:16)i(cid:16)es0[a, c, b] + 1
2z c 1c 2.

2z dba2  dba2 + 0[c] +

1

1

2r c 1c 2(cid:17)(cid:17) gives therefore

upon substituting (9.2) and the explicit expression of 0[c], one obtains then easily

(da2 + c 2)  (da2 + c 2)  da2 c 1 = i0,

q.e.d.

bi0 =
bi0 =z 1

2

acknowledgements. this work was supported by the european commission tmr
programme erbfmpx-ct96-0045.

references

[1] j. schwinger, phys. rev. 144 4 (1966) 1087.

47

[2] j. schwinger, phys. rev. d12 10 (1975) 3105.

[3] d. zwanziger, phys. rev. d3 4 (1971) 880.

[4] r.a. brandt, f. neri and d. zwanziger, phys. rev. d19 4 (1979) 1153.

[5] j.h. schwarz and a. sen, phys. lett. b312 (1993) 105; nucl. phys. b411 (1994)

35.

[6] p.a.m. dirac, proc. r. soc. london a133 (1931) 60.

[7] p. pasti, d. sorokin and m. tonin, phys. lett. b352 (1995) 59; p. pasti, d. sorokin

and m. tonin, phys. rev. d52r (1995) 4277.

[8] n. berkovits and r. medina, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 6388.

[9] g. calucci, r. iengo and m.t. vallon, nucl. phys. b197 (1982) 93; b211 (1983)

77.

[10] p. pasti, d. sorokin and m. tonin, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 6292; leuven notes in
mathematical and theoretical physics (leuven university press), series bv6 (1996)
167, hepth/9509053.

[11] k. lechner, nucl. phys. b537 (1999) 361.

[12] g. calucci, r. iengo and m.t. vallon, nucl. phys. b223 (1983) 501.

[13] r.a. brandt and f. neri, phys. rev. d18 (1978) 2080.

[14] g. de rham, dierentiable manifolds. forms, currents, harmonic forms, springer-

verlag (1984).

[15] p.a.m. dirac, phys. rev. 74 (1948) 817.

[16] r.p. feynman, rev. mod. phys. 20 (1948) 267; phys. rev. 80 (1950) 440.

[17] t. jaroszewicz and p.s. kurzepa, ann. phys. 210 (1991) 255.

[18] s. mandelstam, ann. phys. 19 (1962) 1.

[19] p.a.m. dirac, can. j. phys. 33 (1955) 650.

[20] a. maznytsia, c.r. preitschopf and d. sorokin, nucl. phys. b539 (1999) 438.

[21] j. froehlich and p.a. marchetti, gauge invariant charged monopole and dyon elds

in gauge theories, hep-th/9812004, to appear in nucl. phys. b.

[22] e. witten, phys. lett. b86 (1979) 283.

48

[23] j. glimm and a. jae, quantum physics. a functional integral point of view,

springer-verlag (1981).

[24] f. strocchi, commun. math. phys. 56 (1977) 57.

[25] s. elitzur, phys. rev. d12 (1975) 3978; g.f. de angelis, d. de falco and f. guerra,

phys. rev. d17 (1978) 1624.

[26] j. froehlich and p.a. marchetti in the algebraic theory of superselection sectors.
introduction and recent results, d. kastler ed., world scientic 1990; europhys.
lett. 2 (1986) 933.

[27] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b79 (1974) 276; a.m. polyakov, jetp lett. 20 (1974) 194.

[28] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b190 (1981) 455; see also a.s. kronfeld, m. l. laursen, g.

schierholz and u.j. wiese, phys. lett. b198 (1987) 516.

[29] j. arafune, p.g.o. freund and c.j. goebel, j. math. phys. 16 (1975) 433.

[30] p.a. marchetti, bosonization in condensed matter systems, chia, italy, 1995, hep-

th/9511100.

[31] j.l. cardy and e. rabinovici, nucl. phys. b205 (1982) 1.

[32] k. lechner and p.a. marchetti, in preparation.

49

