preprint typeset in jhep style. - hyper version

kul-tf-99/24

ns fivebranes in type 0 string theory

ben craps and frederik roose

instituut voor theoretische fysica
katholieke universiteit leuven, b-3001 leuven, belgium
e-mail: ben.craps,frederik.roose@fys.kuleuven.ac.be

abstract: the massless degrees of freedom of type 0 ns5-branes are derived.
a non-chiral, purely bosonic spectrum is found in both type 0a and 0b. this
non-chirality is conrmed by a one-loop computation in the bulk. some puzzles
concerning type 0b s-duality are pointed out in this context. an interpretation of
the spectra in terms of type 0 little strings is proposed.

keywords: d-branes, string duality.

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
8

 

 
 

3
v
9
7
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

work supported by the european commission tmr programme erbfmrx-ct96-0045.
aspirant fwo, belgium

contents

1.

introduction

2. type 0 strings and d-branes

3. ns vebrane spectra

4. absence of anomalies

5. s-duality

6. a little string interpretation

7. conclusions

1

2

3

4

5

8

9

1. introduction

type 0 string theories [1] have recently attracted a lot of attention. they have been
used to study the non-supersymmetric eld theories living on their d-branes [2].
moreover, bergman and gaberdiel [3] have conjectured that they are supersymmetry
breaking orbifolds of m-theory, thus including them in the web of string dualities.
for instance, certain circle compactications of type 0 and type ii are proposed to be
t-dual. other predictions of the conjectured duality are that type 0b string theory
exhibits s-duality and that the type 0 theories contain non-perturbative fermionic
states. in ref. [4] it has been studied how branes transform under type 0/type ii
t-duality.

d-branes in type 0 theories have been extensively studied [2]. since their dy-
namics is governed by open strings ending on them, d-branes can be studied in
perturbative string theory. this is not the case for solitonic (ns) vebranes, which
can be studied by examining the zero modes of the corresponding classical super-
gravity solutions [5]. each such zero mode corresponds to a massless eld on the
vebrane worldvolume.

in this paper we derive the massless eld content of type 0 ns5-branes. rather
than doing the zero mode analysis directly for type 0a/b ns5-branes, we t-dualize
them to kaluza-klein monopoles of type 0b/a, where the zero modes can be read

1

o from the ten-dimensional bulk elds and the cohomology of the euclidean taub-
nut space. for both ns5-branes we nd a non-chiral spectrum: an unrestricted
antisymmetric tensor and six scalars in 0a and two gauge elds and four scalars in
0b.

in type iia the spectrum of the ns5 is chiral and anomalous. the gravitational
anomaly on the ns5 must be cancelled by anomaly inow [6] from the bulk. the
anomaly-cancelling bulk term [7] can be shown to be a string one-loop eect [8]. the
fact that we nd a non-anomalous spectrum on type 0a ns5-branes predicts that
such an anomalous bulk term is not present in type 0a. indeed, we will see that the
type 0a gso projection does not allow a cp-odd one-loop term.

having identied the rather unusual ns5-brane spectrum in type 0b, one natu-
rally wonders what the ns5 transforms into under the conjectured type 0b s-duality.
following ref. [3] it seems natural to propose that the dual object is a bound state of
an electric and a magnetic d5-brane. however, we will point out that this proposal
gives rise to some puzzles.

finally, we propose an interpretation of the ns5-brane spectra in terms of type
0 little strings. this interpretation is suggested by the doubling of the gauge degrees
of freedom on the ns-branes, which is reminiscent of (and, in fact, closely related
to) the doubling of the ramond-ramond spectrum in going from type ii to type 0.

2. type 0 strings and d-branes

in the neveu-schwarz-ramond formulation, type ii string theories are obtained by
imposing independent gso projections on the left- and right-moving parts. this
amounts to keeping the following (left,right) sectors:

iib : (ns+, ns+) ,

iia : (ns+, ns+) ,

(r+, r+) ,
(r+, r) ,

(r+, ns+) ,

(r+, ns+) ,

(ns+, r+) ;
(ns+, r) ,

(2.1)

where for instance r is the ramond sector projected with pgso = (1  ()f )/2,
f being the world-sheet fermion number.

the type 0 string theories contain instead the following sectors:

0b : (ns+, ns+) ,

0a : (ns+, ns+) ,

(ns, ns) ,
(ns, ns) ,

(r+, r+) ,
(r+, r) ,

(r, r) ;
(r, r+) .

(2.2)

these theories do not contain bulk spacetime fermions, which would have to come
from mixed (r,ns) sectors. the inclusion of the ns-ns sector with odd fermion
numbers means that the closed string tachyon is not projected out. the third dier-
ence with type ii theories is that the r-r spectrum is doubled.

as discussed in the introduction, the spectrum of type 0 theories contains two
(p + 1)-form r-r potentials for each even (0a) or odd (0b) p. we will denote these

2

by cp+1 and c 
for our purposes, more convenient combinations are

p+1, where the unprimed potentials are the ones present in type ii.

(cp+1) =

1
2

(cp+1  c 

p+1) .

(2.3)

for p = 3 these are the electric (+) and magnetic () potentials [9]. we will adopt
this terminology also for other values of p.

there are four types of elementary d-branes [10, 9] for each p: an electric and
a magnetic one (i.e. charged under (cp+1)), and the corresponding antibranes. in
ref. [9] the interaction energy of two identical parallel (p + 1)-branes was derived by
computing the relevant cylinder diagram in the open string channel, analogously to
the polchinski computation [11] in type ii. isolating, via modular transformation, the
contributions due to the exchange of long-range elds in the closed string channel,
it is found on the one hand that the tension of these branes is a factor 2 smaller
than for type ii branes. on the other hand, the r-r repulsive force between two like
branes has the double strength of the graviton-dilaton attraction [9]; thus the type
0 branes couple to the corresponding r-r potentials (cp+1) with the same charge
as the branes in type ii couple to the potential cp+1.

the open strings stretching between two like branes are bosons, just like the
bulk elds of type 0. however, fermions appear from strings between an electric and
a magnetic brane [10, 12].

3. ns vebrane spectra

in type ii string theories the massless spectrum on ns5-branes can be derived via
an analysis of the zero modes of the classical supergravity ns5-brane solutions [5].
we will nd it convenient to do the analysis for the t-dual objects, since there the
geometrical interpretation is manifest.

under t-duality the type iia/b ns5-branes are mapped to type iib/a kaluza-
klein (kk) monopoles. a kk monopole is described by a supergravity solution
with six worldvolume directions and a euclidean taub-nut (etn) metric in the
transverse space. the massless elds on the kk monopole correspond to the zero
modes of the bulk supergravity elds on etn. the normalizable harmonic forms on
etn consist of one selfdual two-form. in the ns-ns sector there are three zero modes
from broken translation invariance and one scalar from the ns two-form. these four
scalars correspond to the translation zero modes on the corresponding ns5-branes.
the r-r elds give additional bosonic zero modes: on the iib kk monopole the r-r
two-form gives rise to a scalar and the selfdual1 r-r four-form potential leads to a

1by abuse of language we term the potential forms (anti-)selfdual, according to the (anti-)selfdual

nature of their respective eld strengths.

3

selfdual two-form; the iia kk monopole has a vector coming from the r-r three-
form. in addition there are fermionic zero modes from broken supersymmetry: two
fermions with opposite chirality for the iia kk monopole and of the same chirality
for iib.

all in all, this leads to an n = (2, 0) tensor multiplet on the iia ns5 and an

n = (1, 1) vector multiplet on the iib ns5.

repeating this analysis for type 0 ns5-branes, it is clear that the fermionic zero
modes disappear (there are no fermions in the bulk). nothing changes as far as
the ns-ns zero modes are concerned, but from the r-r elds we nd extra zero
modes from the doubled r-r spectrum in the bulk. on the 0b ns5 there is an extra
vector (compared to the iib ns5), whereas the 0a ns5 gets an extra scalar and an
anti-selfdual tensor. in particular the spectrum is non-chiral on both branes.

4. absence of anomalies

at one string loop the type iia tree level supergravity action is supplemented with
the wess-zumino type term r b  x8(r) coupling the ns-ns two-form b to four
gravitons. x8 is a quartic polynomial in the spacetime curvature. the original
derivation of this one-loop term [8] provided a non-trivial consistency check for six-
dimensional heterotic-type ii duality. apart from that, this specic piece of the
action is also responsible for gravitational anomaly cancellation on iia ns vebranes
[7].

let us rst highlight some aspects of the direct calculation in type ii, which will
enable us to draw conclusions on the analogous type 0 amplitude almost eortlessly.
first, as the interaction contains the ten-dimensional  symbol, only odd spin struc-
tures on the torus can contribute, i.e. either the left-moving or the right-moving
fermions but not both, have to be in the odd spin structure. furthermore, the even
spin structures are summed over to achieve modular invariance. from a dierent
perspective this may also be seen as performing the gso projection on the closed
string states in the loop [13]. in a hamiltonian framework the torus vacuum diagram
is written as a trace over the closed string hilbert space, which decomposes in four
dierent sectors as in eq. (2.1). chiral traces over these sectors can be expressed in
terms of traces over fermion sectors with periodic (p) or antiperiodic (a) boundary
conditions in the (, ) worldsheet directions:

tr(n s,) =

tr(n s,+) =

tr(r,) =

tr(r,+) =

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

((a, a)  (a, p )) ;
((a, a) + (a, p )) ;

((p, a)  (p, p )) ;
((p, a) + (p, p )) .

4

notice that the odd (p, p ) spin structure only occurs in the ramond sector. from
the gso-projected spectrum in eq. (2.1) only (r,ns) and (r,r) sectors contain
(odd,even) pieces, yielding

1
4

((p, p ), (a, a) + (a, p ) + (p, a)) .

(4.1)

the right-moving combination is modular invariant, and in fact vanishes as a con-
sequence of the abstruse identity. if one were to calculate the amplitude for one
b-eld and four gravitons, one would insert vertex operators in the appropriate pic-
tures. still, the right-moving even structures would be summed over as in eq. (4.1).
in contrast with the partition function however, in this case a non-vanishing result
would be found so as not to contradict the alternative calculation in ref. [8]. it is
also argued there that in type iib the (odd,even) and (even,odd) contributions can-
cel out whereas they add in type iia. so only in the latter is the probed interaction
present.

this dierence between type iia and iib could have been inferred from their
respective ns vebrane worldvolume spectra, a chiral one in type iia and a non-
chiral one in type iib. the chiral spectrum suers from a gravitational anomaly in
six dimensions, which is neatly cancelled by the standard anomaly inow [6] from
the bulk through the above derived coupling [7].

let us repeat the argument for the one-loop correlator in type 0 string theories.
now it is only (r,r) sectors that contribute to the (odd,even) piece in the one-loop
partition function, yielding

1
4

((p, p )  (p, p ), (p, a))

(4.2)

both for 0a and 0b. as in type ii one may now wish to insert vertex operators.
however, it is obvious that the obligatory sum over spin structures as in eq. (4.2)
now yields a vanishing result for the (odd,even) part by itself. analogously, the
(even,odd) part will vanish by itself. whence the absence of the anomaly-cancelling
term in both type 0a and 0b.

reversing the anomaly inow argument in type 0a the selfdual two-form must be
supplemented with an anti-selfdual two-form, in order not to give rise to gravitational
anomalies. this nicely agrees with the above derived unconstrained two-form on the
ns vebrane. from t-duality an additional vector (compared to the iib ns5-brane)
has to be expected on the type 0b ns5-brane.

5. s-duality

in type iib string theory the fundamental string is mapped to the d-string
strings
under s-duality. the green-schwarz light-cone formulation of the fundamental type

5

iib string involves eight spacetime bosonic elds and sixteen spacetime fermionic
ones. all fermions transform in the 8s representation of the transverse so(8) rota-
tion group. upon quantization, their zero modes generate the 256-fold degenerate
groundstate, transforming in the (8v + 8c)  (8v + 8c) of so(8).

the excitations of a d1-brane can be described in string perturbation theory by
quantizing the open strings beginning and ending on it. doing so, the ns sector
gives eight massless bosons and the r sector sixteen massless fermions.

note that these massless excitations of both the fundamental string and the d-
string can be interpreted as goldstone modes for broken translation invariance and
broken supersymmetry.

it is believed that the iib d-string at strong (fundamental) string coupling is
the same object as a fundamental iib string at weak coupling. the evidence for this
conjecture is largely based on supersymmetry. for one thing, the ground state of the
d-string is bps, so that it can safely be followed to strong coupling and compared
to the ground state of the weakly coupled fundamental string.

type 0b string theory is not supersymmetric, which complicates the analysis of

its strong coupling limit enormously. let us nevertheless try to proceed.

the fundamental type 0b string can be obtained from the fundamental type iib
string by performing a (1)fs orbifold, where fs is the spacetime fermion number. in
the untwisted sector of this orbifold the massless states in the (8v  8v) + (8c 8c)
survive. the light modes in the twisted sector are a singlet tachyon and the extra
massless r-r states in the 8s  8s.

bergman and gaberdiel have conjectured [3] that the fundamental type 0b string
should be s-dual to a bound state an electric and a magnetic d1-brane. this pro-
posal immediately raises two questions. first, when one quantizes the open strings
on a coincident electric-magnetic d-string pair, one nds twice as many massless
excitations as on a fundamental string: sixteen bosons and thirty-two fermions. this
would lead to way too many states of the d-string pair compared to the fundamental
string. how could the extra degrees of freedom disappear? second, assuming that
we have found a way to get rid of the superuous degrees of freedom, how does the
(1)fs projection appear on the d-string pair?

concerning the rst question, let us just note that this naive mismatch is no
immediate contradiction: to compare the d-string pair to the weakly coupled funda-
mental string, one should take the former to strong (fundamental string) coupling.
along the way, the excitation spectrum may well change. as to the second question,
the (1)fs projection might be related to a gauging of a
2 subgroup of the gauge
symmetry on the d-string pair. however, it looks hard to make these ideas more
precise.

fivebranes type iib ns5-branes are s-dual to d5-branes. these objects have
the same light excitations (the reduction of an n = 1, d=10, u(1) vector multi-

6

plet to d=6). as in the case of iib strings, part of the spectrum is protected by
supersymmetry.

given the story for strings, it looks reasonable to propose that the type 0b
ns5-brane is s-dual to an electric-magnetic d5-brane pair. this raises two puzzles.
first, how do the spectra match? is the doubled gauge spectrum of type 0b
ns5-branes at weak coupling related to the two gauge elds on the d5-brane pair?
this is not clear, since to compare the two objects one has to take one of them to
strong coupling, where it is unclear what happens. for one thing, the doubling of the
gauge eld on the type 0b ns5 (compared to the iib ns5) is related to the doubled
r-r spectrum of the bulk of type 0a, as shown in section 3. the latter doubling
is not expected to persist at strong coupling [3]. are there fermionic zero modes on
ns5-branes? we have not found any from a zero mode analysis of the bulk gravity
theory, but this does not exclude that they could appear in a non-perturbative way.
this would be analogous to the (not completely understood) case of the fundamental
type 0 string, where it looks impossible to interpret the fermion zero modes as zero
modes of bulk elds.

second, do type 0b ns5-branes carry anomalous gravitational couplings, which
are known to be carried by type 0b d-branes [12]? since these couplings are related
to anomalies and thus to topology, we hope that their presence or absence could be
invariant under continuously changing the coupling from zero to innity. if this is
the case, answering this question could provide a test of type 0b s-duality. the rest
of this section will be devoted to analysing this question.

we rst remind the reader of the familiar story in type iib. consider, for instance,
the intersection of two d5-branes on a string. the open strings from one brane to
the other give rise to chiral fermions living on the intersection. these chiral fermions
lead to gauge and gravitational anomalies, which are cancelled by anomaly inow
from the branes into the intersection [14]. for this to happen, the d5-branes need,
amongst others, a

c2  p1

(5.1)

term in their wess-zumino action, where c2 is the r-r two-form potential and p1
the rst pontrjagin class of the tangent bundle of the d5-brane worldvolume. the
presence of this term has been checked by an explicit string computation [15]. now,
type iib s-duality implies the presence of chiral fermions on the intersection of two
ns5-branes on a string, and thus a

b  p1

(5.2)

term on the worldvolumes of each ns5-brane (b is the ns-ns two-form). indeed,
the following argument2 for the presence of this term was given in ref. [16]. un-
der t-duality in a transverse direction the ns5-brane is mapped to a kaluza-klein

2in fact, this is how the c2  p1 coupling on d5-branes was rst discovered.

7

monopole in type iia. this object is described by a euclidean taub-nut metric
in the transverse space. since p1(etn) 6= 0 and the b  x8 term discussed in the
previous section contains a piece proportional to b  (p1)2, reducing this term gives
rise to the required b  p1 term on the iia kaluza-klein monopole and thus on the
iib ns5-brane.

what about type 0b? it has been argued [12] that chiral fermions and thus
anomalies are present on the intersection of electric and magnetic d5-branes. hence,
type 0 d5-branes have the p1 couplings in their wess-zumino actions (this has also
been checked via a string computation [12]). we expect that the number of chiral
fermion zero modes on these intersections cannot change under a continuous increase
of the string coupling. on the other hand, in this paper we have argued that there
is no b  x8 term in type 0a, so we expect no b  p1 coupling of type 0b ns5-
branes, and thus no chiral fermions on intersections of ns5-branes. if this argument
is correct, it could be a problem for type 0b s-duality.

6. a little string interpretation

in type ii string theories the vebrane worldvolume theories have been conjectured
to be properly described by little strings[17]. these non-critical closed string the-
ories have hitherto remained mysterious, although some qualitative features may be
understood. we briey recall some of these, focusing on the type iib case. however,
we prefer rst to treat the more familiar example of a fundamental string, providing
a guiding reference when dealing with the little strings.

a fundamental string solution in supergravity breaks half of the 32 bulk super-
symmetries. these broken symmetries give rise to fermion zero modes on the string,
of which 8 are left-moving and 8 right-moving. they are identied with the green-
schwarz space-time fermion elds on the worldvolume. upon quantization of these
fermions 128 bosons and 128 fermions are found, together building the on-shell n
= 2 supergravity multiplet. this multiplet is also found from the rns superstring,
so the picture is consistent. in the latter formulation it is not hard to see that the
ns-ns sector elds together with, say, the r-ns sector build an n = 1 supergravity
multiplet. likewise, the ns-r and r-r sector are combined into one multiplet of n
= 1.

let us move on now to little strings. one way to derive properties of little
strings in type iib is to consider a gauge instanton on a d5 brane. half of the bulk
supersymmetries are unbroken by the d5-brane. sixteen real supercharges are thus
found, obeying a n =(1,1) superalgebra. of these, half are broken by the instanton.
on the macroscopic string there are thus eight fermionic modes, four left-moving
and four right-moving ones. upon quantization of these zero modes one nds 8
bosonic and 8 fermionic states. they correspond to the on-shell degrees of freedom

8

of one n =(1,1) vectormultiplet.3 upon decomposition with respect to n = 1 six-
dimensional supersymmetry one hypermultiplet and one vectormultiplet result. it is
conceivable that a similar analysis in type iia, if possible at all, would give a n =(2,0)
tensormultiplet, decomposing into one hypermultiplet and one tensormultiplet of
n =1 supersymmetry. we remark that the tensormultiplet has a bosonic content that
consists of one scalar and one two-form potential with self-dual eld strength. all in
all, one may wish to draw the following analogies between little strings and type ii
strings. in both cases there is one universal sector, the hypermultiplet resp. the (ns-
ns + r-ns) sector. the other sector depends on whether or not the supersymmetry
in the bulk is chiral, where bulk means the vebrane worldvolume for the little
string and ten-dimensional spacetime for the type ii string. for the non-chiral type
iia and little type iia the remaining bosonic elds are odd q-form potentials, coupling
to even p dp- resp. dp-branes. as to chiral type iib/iib the r-r sector has only even
q-form potentials, of which one has a self-dual eld strength. in these theories only
odd p dp or dp-branes occur. so this analogy, however formal, is at least remarkable.
as to the various vebranes, the type iia ns vebrane theory is conjectured to
be described by chiral iib little strings, whereas iia little strings would do the job for
type iib vebranes.

if one is willing to take the above for granted, one may then proceed and con-
struct little type 0a/b strings by mimicking the procedure for the bulk strings:
spacetime fermions are removed and there is a doubled r-r spectrum compared to
the superstring. concretely this would imply that the massless spectrum of little
type 0a strings consists of the bosonic contents of one hypermultiplet and two vec-
tormultiplets, in n =1 language. this precisely matches with the spectrum on the
type 0b ns vebrane. little type 0b strings would then generate the bosonic content
of one hypermultiplet, one selfdual tensormultiplet and one anti-selfdual tensormul-
tiplet. also here this seems to be consistent with the spectrum of the type 0a ns
vebrane.

7. conclusions

from a zero mode analysis of type 0 kaluza-klein monopoles, we have derived the
massless degrees of freedom of ns5-branes in type 0a and 0b. the massless spectrum
is purely bosonic and non-chiral in both cases. the 0a ns5-brane contains an
unrestricted tensor (rather than a selfdual one) whereas two gauge elds live on
the 0b ns5-brane.

since the spectrum of a 0a ns5-brane is non-chiral, the anomaly-cancelling one
loop bulk term present in type iia should be absent in type 0a. this is indeed the
case.

3since the little strings of type iib are non-chiral, we will name them type iia little strings.

9

we have pointed out some puzzles concerning type 0b s-duality. in particular,
the question is raised whether the absence of a b  x8 term in the bulk of type 0a
makes the duality of ns5-branes with d5-brane pairs impossible.

it is tempting to interpret the spectrum we nd in terms of type 0 little strings.
their relation to the usual type ii little strings is very similar of the relation
between the bulk type 0 and type ii strings:
fermions are projected out and the
ramond-ramond spectrum is doubled.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank m. billo, m. costa, m. gaberdiel, r. gopakumar, i. kle-
banov, a. sen, j. troost and w. troost for interesting discussions, comments and
suggestions.

references

[1] l.j. dixon and j.a. harvey, nucl. phys. b 274 (1986) 93.

[2] a. polyakov, int. j. mod. phys. a14 (1999) 645, hep-th/9809057;

i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b 546 (1999) 155, hep-th/9811035;
j. minahan, j. high energy phys. 01 (1999) 020, hep-th/9811156;
g. ferretti and d. martelli, on the construction of gauge theories from non critical
type 0 strings, hep-th/9811208;
i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b 547 (1999) 143, hep-th/9812089;
m.r. garousi, nucl. phys. b 550 (1999) 225, hep-th/9901085;
i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, j. high energy phys. 03 (1999) 015,
hep-th/9901101;
k. zarembo, coleman-weinberg mechanism and interaction of d3-branes in type 0
string theory, hep-th/9901106;
j. minahan, j. high energy phys. 04 (1999) 007, hep-th/9902074;
i.i. kogan and g. luzon, scale invariance of dirac condition gegm = 1 in type 0 string
approach to gauge theory, hep-th/9902086;
a.a. tseytlin and k. zarembo, eective potential in non-supersymmetric su (n ) 
su (n ) gauge theory and interactions of type 0 d3-branes, hep-th/9902095;
n. nekrasov and s.l. shatashvili, on non-supersymmetric cft in four dimensions,
hep-th/9902110;
m. billo, b. craps and f. roose, phys. lett. b 457 (1999) 61, hep-th/9902196;
m.s. costa,
hep-th/9903128;
m. alishahiha, a. brandhuber and y. oz, j. high energy phys. 05 (1999) 024,
hep-th/9903186;
g. ferretti, j. kalkkinen and d. martelli, non-critical type 0 string theories and their
eld theory duals, hep-th/9904013;

intersecting d-branes and black holes in type 0 string theory,

10

a. armoni and b. kol, non-supersymmetric large n gauge theories from type 0 brane
congurations, hep-th/9906081;
r. blumenhagen, a. font and d. lust, non-supersymmetric gauge theories from d-
branes in type 0 string theory, hep-th/9906101.

[3] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, dualities of type 0 strings, hep-th/9906055.

[4] y. imamura, branes in type 0/type ii duality, hep-th/9906090.

[5] c.g. callan, j.a. harvey and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b 367 (1991) 60.

[6] c.g. callan and j.a. harvey, nucl. phys. b 250 (1985) 427.

[7] m.j. du, j.t. liu and r. minasian, nucl. phys. b 452 (1995) 261, hep-th/9506126;

e. witten, nucl. phys. b 463 (1996) 383, hep-th/9512219.

[8] c. vafa and e. witten, nucl. phys. b 447 (1995) 261, hep-th/9505053.

[9] i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b 546 (1999) 155, hep-th/9811035.

[10] o. bergman and m.r. gaberdiel, nucl. phys. b 499 (1997) 183, hep-th/9701137.

[11] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724, hep-th/9510017.

[12] m. billo, b. craps and f. roose, phys. lett. b 457 (1999) 61, hep-th/9902196.

[13] n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b 276 (1986) 272.

[14] m. green, j. harvey and g. moore, class. quant. grav. 14 (1997) 47,

hep-th/9605033.

[15] b. craps and f. roose, phys. lett. b 445 (1998) 150, hep-th/9808074.

[16] m. bershadsky, v. sadov and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b 463 (1996) 420,

hep-th/9511222.

[17] n. seiberg, phys. lett. b 408 (1997) 98, hep-th/9705221;

r. argurio and l. houart, nucl. phys. b 517 (1998) 205, hep-th/9710027;
n. seiberg and s. sethi, adv. theor. math. phys. 1 (1998) 259, hep-th/9708085.

11

