preprint typeset in jhep style. - paper version

hep-th/9906038
ru-99-23, uttg-03-99

a model for high energy scattering in
quantum gravity

tom banks

department of physics and astronomy
rutgers university, piscataway, nj 08855-0849
e-mail: banks@physics.rutgers.edu

willy fischler

department of physics
university of texas, austin, tx 78712
e-mail: fischler@mail1.ph.utexas.edu

abstract: we present a model for high energy two body scattering in the quantum
theory of gravity. the model is applicable for center of mass energies higher than
the relevant planck scale. at impact parameters smaller than the schwarzchild radius
appropriate to the center of mass energy and total charge of the initial state, the
cross section is dominated by an inelastic process in which a single large black hole is
formed. the black hole then decays by hawking radiation. the elastic cross section
is highly suppressed at these impact parameters because of the small phase space for
thermal decay into a high energy two body state. for very large impact parameter
the amplitude is dominated by eikonalized single graviton exchange. at intermediate
impact parameters the scattering is more complicated, but since the schwarzchild radius
grows with energy, we speculate that a more sophisticated eikonal calculation which uses
the nonlinear classical solutions of the eld equations may provide a good approximation
at all larger impact parameters. we discuss the extent to which black hole production
will be observable in theories with low scale quantum gravity and large dimensions.

keywords: m theory, black holes, .

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

4

 
 

1
v
8
3
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

contents

1.

introduction

2. high energy scattering in weakly coupled string regimes

3. black hole cross sections

1

4

7

1. introduction

the problem of very high energy scattering is deeply intertwined with the history of
string theory and the quantum theory of gravity. indeed, string theory was originally
invented as a model of the regge behavior expected for high energy scattering in hadron
physics. more recently, there has been a great deal of eort devoted to elucidating the
behavior of high energy scattering in string theory [3]-[4] . in parallel to this activity, t
hooft and followers [5], have initiated a study of high energy scattering in the  quantum
theory of gravity , which is to say that their considerations are supposed to be valid
in any theory which obeys the principles of quantum theory and reduces to general
relativity at long distances. the aim of this latter program was, at least in part, to
address the question of information loss in black hole formation. not coincidentally,
the work cited in [3]-[4] restricts attention to impact parameters larger than those at
which general relativity would predict that black holes are formed.

the claim of the present note is that the gross features of high energy scattering
far above the planck scale can be extracted from semiclassical considerations in gen-
eral relativity. we will always consider situations with four or more asymptotically
minkowski dimensions. for simplicity, we will restrict our attention to initial scatter-
ing states consisting of two particles of mass far below the planck scale, but it should
be possible to extend it to more complicated initial states. the basis of this claim is
the following simple observation. the classical picture of this initial state, insofar as
gravitational interactions are concerned, consists of two aichelburg-sexl shock wave
metrics. general relativity predicts that when the impact parameter of the two shock
waves is smaller than a critical value rs, a black hole is formed. the no-hair theorem
tells us that the classical nal state is then uniquely specied by its representation

1

under the asymptotic symmetry group. rs is of order the schwarzchild radius of the
corresponding black hole and we will, by abuse of language, call it the schwarzchild
radius. the mass of the black hole is of order the center of mass energy of the collision.
thus, rs grows with the center of mass energy.

on the other hand, for asymptotically large impact parameters, scattering is also
described by classical general relativity. indeed, all existant calculations are consistent
with the claim that high energy large impact parameter scattering is dominated by
eikonalized single graviton exchange. thus, since rs grows with energy, we may expect
that all aspects of the scattering up to the point of formation of the black hole are well
described by the classical theory. unfortunately, except in the case of 2 + 1 dimensions
with anti-desitter boundary conditions [2] the exact classical solution for black hole
formation in the collision of aichelburg-sexl shock waves is unknown. the state of the
art calculations for shock wave initiated processes in four dimensional at space may
be found in [6]. this fact will make it impossible for us to exhibit a complete formula
for scattering cross sections at all energies and impact parameters.

for impact parameters below rs an exact description of scattering amplitudes
would require us to enter into all of the mysteries of the black hole information problem.
however, since for large energy the mass of the black hole is large, one needs only the
familiar hawking formulae to extract the gross features of inclusive cross sections.
furthermore, the thermal nature of these cross sections suggests that any more precise
description of the scattering will be hopelessly complicated. we want to emphasize
that, although we believe recent progress in m theory suggests that the scattering
matrix is unitary even in the presence of black hole production, our results do not
depend heavily on this assumption since we only describe inclusive cross sections.

to summarize then, our proposed model for high energy scattering is the following:
at impact parameters greater than rs elastic and inelastic processes (gravitational
radiation, photon bremstrahlung for charged particles and the like) will in principle
be described by solving the classical equations of the low energy theory with initial
conditions described by a pair of shock waves with appropriate quantum numbers1 .
note that since r2
s grows much faster with energy than strong interaction cross sections
are allowed to (by the froissart bound), this behavior will be completely determined
by the classical physics of the degrees of freedom with energies below the planck scale
(see however the discussion of weakly coupled string theory below).

at smaller impact parameters, scattering will be dominated by resonant produc-
tion of a single black hole with mass equal to the center of mass energy. we put the

1note that we only attempt to describe the leading high energy behavior. the full series of correc-

tions to this behavior would require more knowledge of m theory than we possess.

2

word resonant in quotes because, despite their long lifetimes, black holes do not t
the prole of a classic breit-wigner resonance. indeed they are most peculiar from the
breit-wigner point of view. the breit-wigner formula for the contribution of a par-
ticular resonance to the elastic cross section for two body scattering is proportional to
the square of the partial width for the resonance to decay into this particular channel.
this is because, for a single narrow resonance, unitarity implies that the amplitude to
produce the resonant state is the same as that for the resonance to decay back into
the initial state. for black hole production, we expect the initial amplitude to be of
order one whenever the impact parameter is smaller than rs. on the other hand, the
decay of the black hole is thermal; there will be a very small probability for it to decay
back into the initial high energy two particle state. thus, we expect the elastic cross
section to be linear rather than quadratic in the partial width of the two body nal
state. thus, the elastic cross section is larger than might have been expected.

more striking is the inelastic resonant cross section, (a+ b  bh  anything).
this will be large even though the partial width to decay into the initial state is small.
the cross section resembles that for a high energy collision of two bodies with an already
existing, highly degenerate, macroscopic object. in such a situation, the energy of the
initial particles is thermalized among the large number of degrees of freedom of the
macroscopic body, the decay is thermal, and the probability of recreating the initial
state much smaller than that of the initial collision.

a. rajaraman has suggested to us that a fact from classical gr may help to explain
this behavior. when a black hole is formed by the collapse of a thin spherical shell of
matter, the horizon forms long before the shell has fallen past the schwarzchild radius.
similarly, in the collision of two shock waves, we might expect the horizon to form long
before the waves reach the distance rs. in this sense we can view the scattering as
being caused by the impact of the colliding particles with an already existing horizon,
an object which has a macroscopic number of degrees of freedom.

the other important dierence between black hole and resonance production is
that resonances occur at discrete energies. by contrast, for every center of mass energy
e above some threshold of order the planck mass, and every impact parameter below
rs(e) we expect the high energy cross section to be dominated by the production of a
single object, almost stationary in the center of mass frame. the object will have a long
lifetime and will decay thermally (and thus isotropically in the center of mass frame)
. the elastic cross section will be small. note in addition that two body nal states
with large momentum transfer will be even more highly suppressed than the generic
two body state. this is in marked contrast with the behavior of the system below the
black hole production threshold, where the proliferation of hadronic jets in the nal
state increases with energy. once black holes with large enough radii can be formed,

3

the colliding particles never get close enough to perform a hard qcd scattering.

the dramatic nature of these processes suggests that they will be easy to see if we
ever build a planck energy accelerator. this is particularly exciting in view of recent
suggestions that the world may have large extra dimensions and a true planck scale of
order a tev [7]2 . however, we argue that most of the hawking radiation of the higher
dimensional black hole will, for phase space reasons, consist of kaluza-klein modes of
gravitons, and thus be undetectable. in the absence of experimental information about
the nal state, it is hard to distinguish these missing energy signals from those which
come from production of a few kk gravitons [10]. at suciently high energies the
hawking temperature of the black hole is small compared to the kk energy scale and
the hawking radiation will be dominated by observable particles. we show this occurs
at about the point where the schwarzchild radius is equal to the kk radius, which is
at energies above the four dimensional planck mass.

we suggest that the suppression of hard qcd processes is a possible signal for
identifying this sort of invisible black hole production. complete suppression of qcd
jet phenomena requires that the schwarzchild radius be larger than an inverse gev,
and this only occurs at unreachably high energies. however, the suppression of jets
with transverse momenta higher than the inverse schwarzchild radius should become
apparent before this. the detailed investigation of this phenomenon is beyond the
scope of the present paper.

the plan of the rest of this paper is as follows. in the following section we outline
the regime of parameters within m theory in which we might expect our discussion
to be valid. we point out in particular that physics in the regimes corresponding
to weakly coupled string theories is considerably more complex than what we have
discussed. there can be a plethora of scales and a variety of dierent high energy
regimes. readers of a more phenomenological bent are advised to skip this section,
which will be of interest mostly to string theorists.
in section 3, we present some
remarks relevant to the regime discussed in this introduction, and assess the likelihood
of observing black hole production experimentally if theories with large dimensions are
correct.

2. high energy scattering in weakly coupled string regimes

consider the moduli space of m theory compactications with four minkowski dimen-
sions. much of this moduli space can be well approximated by compactications of

2we note that the authors of [1] have investigated the properties of and astrophysical constraints

on, black holes in theories with large extra dimensions.

4

11 dimensional supergravity (11d sugra) on manifolds with dimensions large com-
pared to the planck scale. the discussion in the introduction applies primarily to such
regions of moduli space. an example of regions not covered by this description are
weakly coupled string compactications. these can be viewed as the proper limits of
compactications of 11d sugra on manifolds with some dimensions much smaller
than the planck scale. the same is true for f theory compactications. we will begin
by discussing the simple case in which all dimensions are of order or much larger than
the eleven dimensional planck length. then by examining the case of weakly coupled
string theory, we will establish that other regimes have a much more complicated set
of high energy behaviors.

imagine rst that some dimensions are of order the planck scale, while n others are
much larger. let m4+n denote the planck mass in the eective theory below the eleven
dimensional planck scale. given our assumptions, it is of order the eleven dimensional
planck scale and we will not bother to distinguish between them. the four dimensional
planck scale is given by

m 2

p  vnm 2+n
4+n ,

(2.1)

where vn is the volume of the large dimensions. note that mp > m4+n.

as the energy is raised, we will approach two thresholds, the rst, the kaluza
klein (kk) scale of the large dimensions, and the second, m4+n. the observation
of [7] is that if vn is large in eleven dimensional planck units, if the standard model
lives on a brane embedded in the large dimensions, and if gravitons and other elds
with only nonrenormalizable couplings to the elds on the brane are the only bulk
elds, then the rst threshold may show up only in very high precision experiments.
the couplings of ordinary matter to the new states will be suppressed by powers of
the energy divided by mp until we reach the threshold m4+n. most analyses of what
happens above this threshold have concentrated on the production of kk modes. we
will argue that somewhere around this energy regime, the (in principle) much more
dramatic phenomenon of black hole production sets in. we will reserve a more detailed
description of these processes for the next section. here we merely observe that the
appropriate form of gr to use in these estimates is 4 + n dimensional gravity.

we turn now to regimes described by weakly coupled string theory. here there is
generically a hierarchy of scales, starting with the string scale and proceeding to energy
scales which are larger than the string scale by inverse powers of the coupling. among
these is the planck scale associated with the 4 + n dimensional space 3.

3we now assume that 6 n dimensions are compactied at about the string scale. in string theory,
t dualities and mirror symmetries usually make this a lower bound on compactication dimensions
in the weak coupling regime.

5

since we are interested in scattering above the string energy the eective theory
in the regime of interest will always be ten dimensional (see the previous footnote).
there have been many attempts to study high energy scattering in string perturbation
theory. we will argue that these are reliable only in a certain energy regime4.

let us turn rst to the xed angle regime studied in [3]. a cartoon version of the
analysis of this papers follows: all lorentz invariants of the scattering process have the
same order of magnitude, call it s, in this regime. k loop amplitudes have the form

ak  z dmesfk(m)/k

(2.2)

where the integral is over the moduli space of genus k riemann surfaces with 4 punc-
tures and fk depends only weakly on k. for large s one does the integral by steepest
descents, obtaining an amplitude which falls o like esfk(m0)/k. the gaussian uc-
tuations around the stationary point in moduli space give a coecient of order 6k.

the facts that the exponential becomes atter for large k and that the coecient
far exceeds the 2k growth expected for the large order behavior of string perturbation
theory [8] (facts which are mathematically related) lead us to be suspicious of this
5. indeed, the large k behavior
result at energies which scale like inverse powers of gs
of the amplitude at xed s is constant in s and is of order 2k (the estimate of the
coecient comes from the volume of moduli space). this suggests an s independent,
nonperturbative contribution to the amplitude of magnitude e
gs such as that pre-
dicted by d-instantons in type iib string theory. one may expect similar pointlike
contributions in other weakly coupled string theories (with the notable exception of the
heterotic theory where these contributions may have something to do with the throats
of ns 5 branes) from components of the wave functions of scattering states which con-
tain d-object anti d-object pairs separated by distances of order the string length. at
small impact parameter we should see a contribution from the pointlike scattering of
individual d-branes [9].

c

the nonperturbative amplitude competes with the perturbative one when s  1
.
gs
s )1, which is
note that the ten dimensional planck energy squared is m 2
much smaller than this crossover energy. the semiclassical analysis of the introduction
and the following section are valid only when the energy is much larger than mp and
the schwarzchild radius larger than the impact parameter as well as the string length.

10  (g1/2

4the analysis of the next few paragraphs summarizes unpublished work done several years ago by

one of the authors (tb) and s. shenker. we thank s. shenker for permission to include it here.

5physically, the reason for this attening was explained in [3]: the lowest order amplitude gives an
exponentially falling amplitude for large momentum transfer. at higher orders, the most ecient way
to distribute the momentum transfer is to form a k string intermediate state, with each subprocess
transferring momentum squared of order s/k.

6

1

2
7

14 g

s in string units, so the
in ten dimensions the schwarzchild radius is of order s
semiclassical regime would apparently only set in for s  g4
s . this would seem to
be a valid estimate in iib string theory, but in iia this energy is above the inverse
compactication radius of the m theory circle, so we should really make an eleven
dimensional estimate. the eleven dimensional schwarzchild radius only exceeds the
string scale when s  g6
in string units. thus in all cases it seems that the crossover
between perturbative string and d-instanton behavior sets in in a regime in which
gravitational corrections are negligible.

s

if the interpretation of the pointlike nonperturbative cross section in terms of d-
brane sea partons in the string wave function is correct, we may expect that the
description we have given of the crossover is not complete. indeed, the authors of [9]
showed that d0 brane scattering in weakly coupled type iia string theory became soft
at scales of order the eleven dimensional planck mass, or g1/3
in string units. this is
lower than the crossover scale.

s

to conclude, in the weakly coupled string regime, the semiclassical analysis of the
introduction is expected to be valid only at energies which are parametrically (in gs)
higher than any relevant planck scale.
in the iia theory it is only 11 dimensional
sugra which eventually becomes relevant, and only at an energy scale parametrically
larger than the inverse compactication radius of the m theory circle. at energies
below this true asymptopia we expect to see a rich structure of high energy ampli-
tudes, dominated successively by perturbative strings, and nonrelativistic followed by
relativistic scattering of  dirichlet sea  constituents of the incoming states.

3. black hole cross sections

we write the elastic amplitude for 2  2 scattering in eikonal form

a(s, q2)  z dbei(b,s)

(3.1)

where b is the impact parameter and s the square of the center of mass energy. for
n relatively large compact dimensions, the schwarzchild radius of a 4 + n dimensional
black hole of mass s is approximately , rs  m1
2(n+1) . in order to use
at space black hole formulae, we must have rs  l , the radius of the compact
n . for
dimensions.
applications to theories with low scale quantum gravity, this bound is never exceeded,
so we will not discuss larger values of s. we note however that when rs exceeds the
compactication radius, the most likely outcome is that the system is described as a
four dimensional black hole (a black brane wrapped on the compact dimensions).

in terms of the energy, this bound is s  mp (mp /m4+n)

4+n(s/m 2

4+n)

n+2

1

7

for impact parameters smaller than rs the cross section will be completely dom-
inated by black hole production. as outlined in the introduction, this will have the
following consequences:

1

n+1 .

 the elastic cross section will be suppressed by a boltzmann factor es/th , where
the hawking temperature th  m4+n(m4+n/s)
 due to initial state bremstrahlung the black hole will not be exactly at rest in
the center of mass frame. the average energy emitted in bremstrahlung should
be calculable by the methods of [6]. the nal state will be a black hole at rest in
the frame determined by this bremstrahlung calculation. it will decay thermally,
and therefore isotropically in this frame. this prescription only allows one to
calculate inclusive cross sections, but the thermal nature of these indicates that
any more precise calculation of the amplitudes for various nal states is beyond
the range of our abilities.

 in the standard model, we expect high energy collisions to be characterized by
a larger and larger multiplicity of qcd jets with higher and higher transverse
momenta. one of the most striking features of black hole production is that
processes with transverse momenta larger than r1
s should be completely absent.
the incoming particles never get close enough together to perform a hard qcd
scattering. this characteristic shuto of hadronic jets may be one of the most
striking signals of black hole production processes.

 although a long lived black hole will be produced at every suciently high energy
and small impact parameter, the signature of these events does not look like a
conventional breit-wigner resonance.

when the impact parameter is larger than rs, we do not expect black hole formation
to occur. when the impact parameter is very large, the elastic scattering is given
by the eikonal formula coming from single graviton exchange. note that here it is
four dimensional gravitational physics which is relevant since we are talking about
asymptotically large impact parameter. at energies relevant for discussing theories of
low scale quantum gravity , these amplitudes are completely negligible.

since, at suciently high energy, the schwarzchild radius is larger than all mi-
croscopic scales beside the radius of the compact dimensions, we conjecture that the
behavior of the elastic amplitude and at least gross features of multiparticle production
cross sections, can be extracted from the solution of the equations of classical gen-
eral relativity. it is possible that there is a small region in impact parameter near to

8

but larger than the schwarzchild radius where a more detailed quantum mechanical
treatment is necessary.

thus, in summary we conjecture that most gross features of scattering at energies
much higher than the planck scale can in fact be determined by solving classical equa-
tions. this is still a very involved task. even the problem of colliding aichelburg-sexl
waves in four at dimensions is not solved. for scenarios of low scale quantum gravity
one would have to solve an analogous problem in a partially compactied space. also,
one would have to learn how to extract information about multiparticle amplitudes
from the classical solutions. despite the complication, we would imagine that these
problems are amenable at least to numerical solution.

an important issue which might be claried by this analysis is a more precise
estimate of the threshold above which our description of high energy scattering would
be expected to hold. at the moment we can only say that it should hold suciently far
above the planck scale. a better estimate of the threshold is crucial to any attempt to
use the properties of black hole production to constrain theories of low scale gravity. we
would guess that it is about an order of magnitude higher than the 4 + n dimensional
planck mass.

however, even when we reach this threshold, it is not clear that black hole produc-
tion will have striking experimental signatures 6. the most striking feature of black
hole production is of course the hawking decay of the nal state, which will be nearly
at rest in the center of mass frame. unfortunately, for phase space reasons, this decay
will be primarily into kk graviton modes, which are invisible to all detectors. thus,
although the nal state of black hole decay is very dierent from that produced in the
perturbative processes discussed in [10], it may not be dierent in a way that can be
easily measured. one might hope that at suciently high energies, the hawking tem-
perature would be so low that kk modes could not be produced, and we would get a
thermal distribution of standard model particles. this happens at temperatures where
rkkt < 1, since the hawking temperature is just the inverse of the schwarzchild
radius, this is the point at which the schwarzchild and kk radii cross. as noted above,
this occurs only at energies larger than the four dimensional planck mass.

a more promising signal is the suppression of hard qcd processes. complete
suppression requires a schwarzchild radius of order an inverse gev. this occurs at
energies of order (e/m4+n)  (m4+n/1gev)(n+1). even for a six dimensional scenario
with m4+n = 1 tev, this is 1012 gev. however, suppression of jets with transverse
momenta larger than m4+n will occur as soon as the threshold for production of black
holes is passed. furthermore, the suppression will become more marked with increasing

6the following paragraphs were a response to questions raised by e.witten.

9

energy, i.e. the average transverse momenta of jets should go down with the energy,
precisely the opposite of the qcd expectation. this question deserves more detailed
study, but we feel condent that a relatively clean experimental signature will emerge
from such a study. note that the rate of increase of the schwarzchild radius with energy
may be measurable in this way, thus providing a direct measurement of the number of
large compact dimensions.

clearly, all of these studies require the ability to probe a range of energies up to
a few orders of magnitude above m4+n, and it is unclear if anything can be seen in
presently planned accelerators. if however, evidence for large extra dimensions is found
at lhc, then one would be highly motivated to build a larger machine, which could
study black hole production.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank g.horowitz, a.rajaraman, and e.witten for useful discussions.
the work of tb was supported in part by the doe under grant number de-fg02-
96er40559. the work of wf was supported in part by the robert welch foundation
and the nsf under grant number phy-9219345

10

references

[1] p.c. argyres, s. dimopoulos,

j. march-russell, phys. lett. b441,

96,

(1998),

hep-th/9808138

[2] h.j. matschull, gr-qc/9809087.

[3] d.j.gross and p.f.mende, phys.lett.b197(1987)129, nucl.phys.b303(1988)407

[4] d.amati,m.ciafaloni and g.veneziano, int.j.ofmod.phys.3(1988)1615,phys.lett.b216(1989)47

[5] g.t hooft,phys.lett.b198(1987)61,nucl.phys.b304(1988)867,nucl.phys.b335(1990)138

e.verlinde and h.verlinde,nucl.phys.b371(1992)246, hep-th/910017

[6] p.d.death and p.n.payne,phys.revd46(1992)658

[7] n.arkani-hamed,s.dimopoulos and g.dvali,phys.lett.b429(1988)263,hep-ph/9803815

[8] s.h.shenker, hep-th/9509132

[9] m.r.douglas,d.kabat,p.pouliot

and

s.h.shenker,nucl.phys.b485(1997)85,

hep-

th/9609024

[10] e.mirabelli,m.perelstein and m.e.peskin, phys.rev.lett.82(1999)2236, hep-ph/9811337

g.f.giudice,r.ratazzi and g.d. wells,nucl.phys.b544(1999)3, hep-ph/9811291

t.han,j.d.lykken and r-j.zhang,phys.rev.d59(1999)105, hep-ph/9811350

j.l.hewett, hep-ph/9811356

p.matthews,s.raychaudhuri and k.sridhar, hep-ph/9812486

t.rizzo,phys.rev.d59(1999)115, hep-ph/9901209

11

