9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

2

 
 

1
v
1
2
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

topological symmetry breaking and connement of anyons

p.w. irwin and m.b. paranjape

groupe de physique des particules, departement de physique, universite de montreal,

c.p. 6128 succ. centre-ville, montreal, quebec, h3c 3j7, canada

irwin@lps.umontreal.ca, paranj@lps.umontreal.ca

(may 1999)

we study the behaviour of wilson and t hooft loop operators for the 2+1 dim. abelian-higgs
model with chern-simons term. the phase of topological symmetry breaking where the vortex eld
condenses, found by samuel for the model in the absence of the chern-simons term, persists in
its presence. in this phase, the topological linking of instantons, which are congurations of closed
vortex loops, with the wilson loop on one hand and with the t hooft loop on the other hand
gives rise to a long-range, logarithmic, conning potential between electric charges and magnetic
ux tubes. this is surprising since the gauge eld is short range due to the chern-simons term.
gauss law forces the concomitance of charge and magnetic ux, hence the connement is actually
of anyons.

i. introduction

the abelian-higgs model has long been a model of wide interest from condensed matter to particle physics.
it is the eective theory for the description of superconductivity with a charged condensate. it also provides the
simplest example of the higgs mechanism where spontaneous breaking of a gauged symmetry evades the goldstone
theorem and provides for a purely massive spectrum. the theory is expected to have two phases, the higgs (or
superconducting) symmetry broken phase and the coulomb phase. the expectation value of the wilson loop operator
which measures the potential between external electrically charged particles, distinguishes between the two phases.
in lower dimensions it is possible that non-perturbative phenomena disturb this straightforward conclusion. in 1+1
dimensions instanton eects actually conspire to restore the symmetry in the putative higgs phase, and indeed there
reappears only a coulomb phase with however a distinctly dierent strength for the linear conning potential [1].
the result is essentially topological, the wilson loop divides space-time into two disjoint parts, the wilson loop
integral measures whether the instanton is (topologically) inside the loop or outside the loop. in 2+1 dimensions [2],
nonperturbative instanton contributions to the expectation value of the wilson loop were computed. in the higgs
region topological solitons exist in the spatial plane as vortices, their continuation to three dimensional euclidean
space are vortex loops which serve as the instantons. their contribution to the path integral requires summing over
all congurations of vortex loops. again the contribution is essentially topological, the wilson loop integral measures
the topological linking number of the vortex loop with the wilson loop.

on a lattice of xed spacing one nds the contribution of loops of length l to be approximately emll, where
m is the vortex mass per unit length, and  is an intrinsic parameter such that l counts the degeneracy of loops
of length l. a phase transition occurs when m  ln   0 where vortex loops of all lengths become important,
which has been seen to occur in lattice simulations of the model, see e.g. [3]. a partition function of a gas of loops
can be converted to a eective eld theory of a scalar eld called the vortex eld. condensation of the vortex eld
corresponds to the spaghetti vacuum and is called topological symmetry breakdown. the vacuum is populated
of vortex/anti-vortex pairs restoring the u (1) symmetry giving back the coulomb phase. in the region where the
vortex eld condenses the vortex loops induce a nonperturbative logarithmic conning force between external charged
particles [2]. if the external particles have charge q, the strength of the logarithmic potential is periodic in q with
period e, the charge of the elementary scalar particles in the theory, since they can screen the external particles when
q is a multiple of e.

in 2+1 dimensions or more, one can also look at the behaviour of the t hooft loop operator [4]. it is dened by
the action of a singular gauge transform on the elds, and at each time slice it creates a vortex/anti-vortex pair. the
behaviour of the t hooft loop expectation value describes the inter-vortex potential. the perturbative and vortex
loop congurations give a perimeter law dependence to the t hooft loop for both phases of the theory.

if the chern-simons term (cs), with coecient  is included we ask what is its eect on the wilson and t hooft

1

loop expectation values? the immediate problem that arises is that the cs term becomes imaginary in euclidean
space. since the action is complex, the euler-lagrange equations over determine the system and there is in general
no solution to the eld equations (in terms of real elds). there do exist complex solutions however, for small  we
expect that the real vortex loop congurations found at  = 0 will continue to be the most relevant congurations.
our approach is thus the same as [5], who considered the eect of the cs term to the monopole contribution in the
georgi-glashow model. in fact we can show complex vortex solutions exist in the present case but we do not use
them here.

we nd that for the 2+1 dimensional abelian-higgs model the addition of the cs term does not signicantly alter
the vortex loop contribution to the wilson loop expectation value for small . the behaviour of the t hooft loop
is however signicantly altered. in a manner similar to the case without the cs term, there is a phase transition
at the point where the entropy factor of the vortex loops overcomes the boltzmann factor. when the vortex eld
condenses, vortex loops give a logarithmic potential between both the external electric charges and vortices. this
result is very surprising given that the photon is now massive and perturbatively no long range forces exist. it is
unclear to us whether this behaviour persists throughout the unbroken symmetry phase. for the vortex entropy factor
to overcome the boltzmann factor the classical mass of the vortex must be smaller than some critical value where the
phase transition occurs. but topological vortex congurations exist classically only for a certain range of parameters.
the mass of the vortex can be continuously reduced to zero, in this limit the topological stability of the vortex is
lost. this corresponds to the region where the gauge symmetry is unbroken classically. since we cannot construct
topological vortex congurations here, our methods do not extend to this region. we speculate that the conning
logarithmic potential continues throughout the symmetry unbroken phase.

in section 2 we describe the model and its vortex solutions. we then describe the contributions of the vortex
loops to the path integral and discuss how to treat the path integral with the inclusion of the complex cs term in
euclidean space. in section 3 we compute the instanton contribution to the wilson and t hooft loop expectation
values and conclude with comments.

ii. the abelian-higgs model with cs term

the abelian-higgs model with cs term in (2+1) dimensions has lagrangian density given by

l = (cid:26)

1
4

f f  +

1
2

d (d) 


4

(||2  2)2 +


4

af(cid:27) ,

(2.1)

here  is a complex scalar eld, a is a u (1) gauge potential, d =   iea, f  = a  a (,  = 0, 1, 2)
with , e,  and 2 coupling constants. , , 2 and e2 each have the dimension of mass. we are considering
noncompact u (1) gauge theory, there is no quantization condition on . when  = 0, if 2  0 the gauge symmetry
is unbroken and the perturbative spectrum consists of a massless photon and a massive charged scalar particle of
charge e. if 2 > 0 the gauge symmetry is spontaneously broken and the particle content is given by a massive vector
particle and a massive neutral scalar particle. in addition classical time independent solitons exist in the form of
nielson-olesen vortices. the vortices carry a topologically conserved integer valued charge usually called the vortex
number. the vortex mass m is approximately equal to 2. for 2  0 the topological vortex solution no longer exists.

if the cs term is now included,  6= 0, the theory is altered in that the photon is massive even when 2  0.
the cs term automatically gives the photon a mass proportional to , this is called topologically massive qed. in
the unbroken phase when 2  0 the perturbative particle spectrum consists of a massive charged scalar eld and a
massive gauge particle. when the u (1) symmetry breaking occurs, for 2 > 0, the particle content now consists of a
massive neutral scalar particle and two massive gauge particles. in this case vortex solutions are also present. gauss
law implies that any vortex solution must have electric charge q (and vice versa):

z d2x j 0 = q =  ,

(2.2)

where  = r d2xf12 is the ux and j  is the conserved electro-magnetic current. both vortices and charged particles

are anyons. the rst solutions were proposed by paul and khare, [6], a radially symmetric charge one vortex is of
the form

2

 = f (r)ei , a(r) = 

a(r)

r

e , a0(r, ) = a0(r) .

(2.3)

f (r) and a(r) satisfy boundary conditions required by nite energy and a0(r) satises a0(0) = 0 and a() = 0.
f (r), a(r) and a0(r) can be solved for numerically.

the wilson loop operator is dened by

w (c) = exp(iqic

aidxi) ,

(2.4)

where c is a closed oriented loop in euclidean three-space, xi(s), and q a real number. the wilson loop measures the
potential between external electric charges of charge q. the t hooft loop operator [4], b(c), is the dual object to the
wilson loop operator. its expectation value measures the potential between external ux tube solitons, and especially
the vortices. its action on a eld eigenstate |ai(x), (x) > transforms this state by a singular gauge transformation
into |ac

(x), c (x) >. the gauge transform c(x) with

i

c (x) = exp(ic (x)) ,

(2.5)

the curve c, as measured by rc  ac

it is dened by the following. if another closed curve c  links with c n times in a certain direction and c  corresponds
to xi(), 0    2, then c(x(2)) = c (x(0)) + 2n. the singular gauge transform creates a ux tube along
(x)dxi. thus b(c) creates an innitely thin bare ux tube along the curve
c. to calculate its expectation value it is necessary sum over all eld congurations which include this innitely
thin ux tube, and each conguration of action a is weighted with ea. is it not possible to vary the ux of the
vortex/anti-vortex pair (except in integer multiples) that is created by the t hooft loop, unlike the wilson loop where
the charge of the external particle q can be arbitrary. the ux of the bare vortices is always topologically quantized
in integer multiples of 2/e.

i

perturbatively the expectation values of both w (c) and b(c) have perimeter law behaviour for large curves c.
we take c to be rectangular of lengths t, and r, with t  r then their expectation values have the following behaviour,

< w (c) > ev (r)t , < b(c) > ev (r)t

.

(2.6)

v (r) and v (r) measure respectively the potential between external charges and uxes. the zero order approximation
for v (r) can be shown to reproduce the classical electrostatic potential in two dimensions, which for large r behaves
as ln r for a massless gauge theory and emar/(mar)1/2 for a massive gauge theory where ma is the gauge mass.
this remains a good approximation for weak coupling, dened by e2  m , where m is the smallest mass in the
theory. for the t hooft loop, v (r)  e where e is the energy of the created object, in this case e  2m where m
is the mass of the vortex. this implies the t hooft loop has perimeter law behaviour perturbatively recovering the
fact that classically there are no long range inter-vortex forces.

to go beyond the perturbative approximation for the wilson and t hooft loops, rst we ask which congurations
are likely to give an important contribution to the path integral. the obvious guess to this are the vortex loop
congurations. as mentioned in the introduction, with  = 0 these loops are just nielson-olesen vortex loops, but
including the cs term the form of the vortex solutions in euclidean space is somewhat unclear. the cs term becomes
imaginary in euclidean space while the remaining action is real. classical solutions will typically involve complex
valued elds, the theory however is dened by the functional integral over real-valued elds. our choice of path integral
excludes any solutions to the eld equations and thus any true instanton solutions. to exploit complex critical eld
congurations in the path integral requires analytic continuation of the contour in the innite dimensional space of
eld congurations. here we avoid this approach and restrict the path integral to real elds. if we take  to be small
then it is reasonable to assume that the same congurations that are important for the path integral in the absence
of  will again be important here. this amounts to evaluating the action for  6= 0 with the vortex loops which were
the instanton congurations solutions when  = 0.

a similar approach was taken in [5], concerning 2+1 dimensional compact qed with a cs term. the authors
assume weak coupling and treat the cs term as a perturbation. this model without the cs term was rst considered
by polyakov, [7], who showed that the theory is linearly conning because of instantons. in this case the instantons
which are monopoles, change the logarithmic perturbative potential between electric charges into a linear conning
potential. using the assumption that one may treat the cs term as a perturbation the authors of [5] showed that linear

3

connement no longer holds. in the instanton calculation, when the cs term is evaluated for the monopole the result
turns out to depend on the u (1) phase of the monopole. when integrating over all possible monopole congurations
in the path integral, one integrates over the u (1) phases of the monopoles and these interfere destructively, cancelling
in addition, since the photon is massive the perturbative contribution to
their contribution to the path integral.
the potential between external charges falls o exponentially with their separation.
it is thus argued in that the
connement of electric charges does not hold when the cs term is included. in [8], the above approach of inserting
instanton solutions from the  = 0 case into the action for  6= 0 is questioned. the authors of [8] nd complex
monopole solutions with nite action and argue that that these are the relevant congurations which dominate the
path integral, and are not cancelled by integrating over their phase variables. we feel that the treatment of the
complex solutions in the path integral is as yet unclear since a prescription is required on how to analytically continue
the eld conguration space, and the question of gauge xing remains problematic. nevertheless this approach clearly
deserves more attention.

complex vortex solutions are easily seen to exist in the present case, although the above controversy notwithstand-
ing, we will not use them. we expect the situation to be less complicated than that of monopoles in the compact u (1)
case . this is because the vortex eld strength vanishes exponentially quickly outside the vortex core so we do not
have troublesome boundary terms which could result in gauge dependence. we take the same ansatz for the vortex in
euclidean space as for that in minkowski space considered by paul and khare, (2.3). with the obvious replacement
a0  a
0 = ia0 the ansatz satises the euclidean equations. this is just a consequence of the fact that the vortex is
time independent. a straight vortex line results by assuming independence on x3. the solution has nite real action
per unit length. however the action per unit length is less than the energy of the minkowski vortex because a
0 is
imaginary. the action density is given by,

(1 + ea)2

f 2 +

2

(cid:26) 1
(cid:26) 

2

(

df
dr

)2 +

(a

da0
dr

2r2
da
dr

 a0

1
2r2 (
da0
dr

da
dr

)2 +

)2 +

a2

e2
2


4

(f 2  2)2(cid:27)
0f 2(cid:27) ,

) +

1
2

(

(2.7)

where a, a0, f are the same as in (2.3). this diers from the energy of the paul and khare vortex in that the terms
in the second line are negative, and that the cs term contributes to the euclidean action, but not to the energy of
the minkowski vortex. the action per unit length is less than the energy of the paul and khare vortex by terms of
o(2). for large  the action per unit length becomes negative. we expect here that the approximation of treating
the cs term as a perturbation fails badly, but for small  we expect it to work well.

iii. evaluation of the wilson and t hooft loops

we now outline the calculation of the vortex loop contribution to the expectation values of the wilson and t
hooft loops for  6= 0. the path integral is split into a integral over all vortex loops and the perturbative uctuations
from each loop. it is not possible to evaluate the exact contribution of the perturbative uctuations, they give a
determinant factor, which we presume is not important to our analysis. the contribution of the vortex loops to the
path integral can be evaluated by approximating each loop as closed string whose location is given by the position
of the zeros of the higgs eld along the vortex loop. the dominant contribution to the action of a vortex loop is its
length times its mass per unit length. the loop may have an arbitrary shape, however if the loop twists in an unruly
fashion or intersects itself there will be additional potential energy. this suggests in addition to the basic term of the
mass, terms involving the curvature of the loop and a term which describes the potential energy of an intersecting loop
could be taken into consideration. it is in principle possible to determine the detailed form of the interaction terms by
referring back to the eld theory model and examining how the equations for the nielson-olesen vortex change if the
shape of the straight vortex is deformed [9]. it is also necessary to include terms describing the interactions between
dierent loops. since for a vortex loop the elds approach their vacuum expectation values exponentially quickly in
the transverse directions, the only long range forces are those mediated by the cs term.

it is well known that the functional integral over a gas of loops corresponds to a eld theoretic path integral, [10],
[11], [2]. this equivalence is demonstrated and well studied in the above papers, we will not review it here, but just
adapt it for our present needs, where, especially,  6= 0. for the contribution of the vortex loops to the partition
function ese , one gets the following eld theoretic path integral,

4

l = n z d d exp{z [ii + m2

0  + v()]d3x} ,

(3.1)

with n an normalisation factor and  is the charged vortex eld. this corresponds to an eective lagrangian for
the vortex eld  which can be treated semi-classically. the mass term for the vortex eld, m2
0, has two contributing
factors, one from the mass of the nielson-olesen vortex and an opposing factor due to the entropy factor of all possible
vortex loops. working on a xed cubic lattice, for example [11], the combination m  ln  naturally emerges as being
proportional to the mass m2
0, where m is the vortex mass per unit length and,   5, comes from the number of
available directions the vortex path can take. a phase transition will occur at m = ln , where loops of all lengths
become important. a similar transition will occur here for some value of the parameters. once the vortex mass
becomes small enough loops of all lengths are important and the vacuum becomes full of vortex/anti-vortex pairs.
this is the spaghetti vacuum scenario discussed in [12].

the exact form of the potential v() depends on the vortex interactions. for example, repulsive delta functions
interactions between the vortex loops which prohibit the loops from intersecting, yields a ()2 potential. to
take into account all the correct interaction terms it is necessary to consider the vortex equations. vector forces
between dierent part of the vortex loop, and dierent loops, necessitates the introduction of auxiliary vector elds
which couple in a gauge invariant manner to the vortex scalar eld, . the form of the eld strength depends on
the interaction, for example qed3 arises from biot-savart forces between dierent elements of the vortex loop. the
vector elds, and other possible scalar elds, are then integrated out to yield the vortex potential v() which is in
general nonlocal.

for non-zero  most of the above discussion goes through unaltered. we saw previously that the vortex solutions
still exist when  6= 0 in minkowski space, in euclidean space any solutions are necessarily complex. we insert
the euclidean vortex congurations found at  = 0 into the action when  6= 0, which should be a reasonable
approximation for  small. we can assume that all vortex loops arise from vortex/anti-vortex pairs with ux 2/e,
since loops containing a multiple of this ux are exponentially suppressed. it is not dicult to see that evaluating the
cs term for vortex loop congurations measures the linking numbers between dierent loops. for two non-intersecting

vortex loops evaluating i/4r d3xijkaifjk, gives to leading order i2n/e2 where n is their linking number. so the

eect of inserting nielson-olesen vortex loops into the complex action is to multiply their action by a phase which
measures how the vortex loops are inter-linked. a local expression for n(c, c ) is given by

n(c, c ) = 

1

4 zc

dx zc 

(x  y)  dy

|x  y|3

.

(3.2)

the linking number is thus manifested as a vector interaction between the vortex loops. combined with the previous
vector interactions from above, this will yield a vector eld gi coupling in a gauge invariant manner to the vortex eld
. the eld strength will now have a complex part, due to the fact that the linking number interaction is imaginary.
for example, combining the linking number interaction with the biot-savart interaction yields a complicated nonlocal
eld strength whose lowest order terms in  are,

1

2 (cid:26)h2 + i



4(ee)2

h    h(cid:27) + . . .

,

(3.3)

where h =   g, and e is a parameter which measures the strength of the biot-savart interaction. again the
correct procedure is to integrate out the vector eld gi, yielding (3.1). it is important that v() depends only on
, and not on  or  separately. this is due to the global symmetry   ei which corresponds to conserved
vortex number. the results below are not sensitive to the exact form of v(). the mechanism of how the spaghetti
vacuum occurs is unchanged relative to the  = 0 case. when the parameter m2
0 in (3.1) becomes negative the vortex
eld will acquire a nonzero vev. the vortex loops are stabilised by terms of the form ()2 in v() arising from
the repulsive forces. we denote the critical value of 2 ( m, the vortex mass), where the phase transition occurs as
2
crit.

to evaluate < w (c) >=< exp(iqhc aidxi) >, (here ai is the gauge eld of the original theory), note that
hc aidxi measures 2/e times the linking number of a vortex loop conguration, n(c), with the curve c and has the

integral expression,

n(c) = ic

dxipi(x) ,

5

(3.4)

where

pi(x) = 

1

4 xc  zc 

ijk(x  y)jdyk

|x  y|3

.

(3.5)

the sum over c  represents the sum over the vortex loops in a particular eld conguration. we emphasise that this
linking number does not come from the cs term. thus to calculate the expectation value we do the same sum as
before but now include the linking number factor. this essentially gives the complex scalar eld theory in the external
gauge eld pi which the wilson loop generates, [2], [11]. we get

n z d dexp{z [didi + m2

0  + v()]d3x} ,

(3.6)

where di =   2iq/epi.

note that there is no eld strength for pi, it is just an external eld. (3.6) is to be evaluated semi-classically.
when m2
0 > 0, <  >= 0 is expected for the vacuum and the topological symmetry is unbroken.  = 0 is a solution
to the equations of motion even for non-zero pi and the wilson loop is of order 1. vortex loops do not contribute
appreciably to the wilson loop. when m2
0 < 0 however,  will have a non-zero vacuum expectation value, which is
called topological symmetry breaking <  >= 0. inserting this as a trial solution into the path integral gives

< w (c) >=< exp[iqic

a  dx] > exp[(

2q

e

)22

0 ln(

r
r0

)] ,

(3.7)

where again c is rectangular with lengths r and t, t  r, with r representing the separation of the electric charges,
and r0 is a cut o of the order of the vortex width. for q > e non-constant screening solutions provide a better
minimisation of the action [2]. the upshot is that q/e in (3.7) is replaced by q = q/e  n where n is the nearest
integer to q/e. the wilson loop has logarithmic dependence on the charge separation and is periodic in the external
charge q with period e, which evinces the fact that when the spaghetti vacuum forms we are back in the region of
unbroken u (1) or symmetry unbroken phase: there exist elementary charged particles of charge e which can screen
external particles of charge e or an integer multiple thereof. this is not a conclusion that one would have expected.
with a massive photon one would not expect any form of connement, as is the case for compact u (1) with a cs term
[5], [13]. the essential dierence between the two cases is that is that when evaluating the cs term for the monopole,
it explicitly depends on the monopole phase, and integrating over these phase variables the monopole contribution
cancels. in the present case, the eect of evaluating the cs term for a conguration of vortex loops gives a phase
proportional to the linking numbers of the dierent loops. given a gas of such vortex loops there is no reason to
expect these phases cancel. this is manifested by the fact that v() depends only on .

for large values of 2 the vortex loops only give a small contribution to the path integral due to their large mass. as
2 is decreased vortex loops become more important until there is a phase transition at 2
crit where loops of all length
become important and the u (1) symmetry is restored. for 2 > 2
crit the wilson loop has perimeter law behaviour.
the perturbative contributions give a potential that falls o exponentially quickly between external charges. the
nonperturbative vortex loop congurations may alter this potential, arising from short vortex loops which link or
intersect the wilson loop. but their exact contribution to the potential is undetermined from this approach since
when the vortex loop intersects the wilson loop there is no simple answer for the contribution to the expectation
value.

for 2 < 0 the nielson-olesen vortex loop congurations do not exist. the question is whether ux tube congu-
rations can be important when 2 < 0. we believe that vortex congurations continue to be relevant to the vacuum
structure throughout the unbroken symmety phase even though they are absent classically. in [14] for the abelian-
higgs model it is shown that the vortex operator possesses a non-zero expectation value throughout the coulomb
phase. numerical evidence presented in [3] indicates that the vortex condensate persists throughout the coulomb
regime. this suggests that the conning behaviour will persist throughout the unbroken symmetry phase.

next we turn to the evaluation of the t hooft loop dened along a curve c as before. now the complex part
of the euclidean action plays a crucial role. to calculate the t hooft loop expectation value we must sum over all
eld congurations which contain an innitely thin ux tube along c. this is equivalent to calculating the partition
function, ese , where the functional integral is over all gauge congurations a
i = ai + ic with
c as in (2.5) and ai is non-singular. in the absence of the cs term, because the vortex loops have no long range

i, such that, a

6

interactions, the t hooft loop will have perimeter law dependence. inclusion of the cs term however implies that for
each vortex loop c  that links n(c, c ) times with c we get a term,

exp {i(

2
e

)2n(c, c )} ,

(3.8)

where 2/e is the ux carried by the t hooft loop c. this in turn means that the t hooft loop calculation is identical
to the wilson loop calculation with the replacement q  2/e, which due to the gauss law, is nothing else than
the electric charge of a vortex that has ux 2/e. hence in the region 2 < 2
crit, vortex loops give a logarithmic
contribution to the t hooft loop expectation value and one expects logarithmic connement of external vortices.
such connement of vortices has already been seen to occur in a related model [15]. the previous remarks in the last
paragraph about the validity of this calculation when 2 < 0 also apply here. if the external vortices have electric
charge equal to a multiple of e then the logarithmic potential disappears, however we understand this in terms of
screening by the elementary charged scalar particles of the theory. thus it is actually the electric charge of the vortices
that is behind the connement. it is again clear that we are in the region of unbroken symmetry here, since for long
range forces to exist among the external vortices, the dynamical vortices must have disappeared from the theory.

electrically charged particles of charge q mod e 6= 0 are logarithmically conned in the topological symmetry break-
ing phase (or spagetti vacuum) as discovered by samuel [2]. our new result is that this remains true with the addition
of the cs term, at least for small cs coecient. additionally, this includes the logarithmic connement of vortices
since they also carry electric charge due to the gauss law. this result is surprising in view of the fact that all gauge
elds are massive and interactions short ranged and demonstrates the importance of vortex congurations for the
phase structure of the theory. as a note of caution, we stress that the methods employed here are far from rigorous.
the procedure of obtaining an eective vortex lagrangian is more problematic than when considering, for example,
monopoles or other point-like instanton congurations, with a well dened set of zero modes. obtaining the vortex
action here, by summing over all string congurations has intrinsic ambiguities. finally the question of complex eld
congurations and their relevance in the path integral needs to be examined in more detail.

acknowledgement we thank nserc of canada and fcar of quebec for nancial support. we thank r. b.
mackenzie and v. rubakov for useful discussions.

[1] c.g. callan, r.f. dashen and d.j. gross, phys. lett. b 63 (1976) 334.
[2] s. samuel, nucl. phys. b 154 (1979) 62.
[3] a. rajantie, physica b255 (1998) 108; m. chavel, phys. lett. b 378 (1996) 227; m.g. amaral and m.e. pol, z. phys. c 44

(1989) 515.

[4] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 138 (1978) 1.
[5] i. aeck, j. harvey, l. palla and g. semeno, nucl. phys. b 328 (1989) 575.
[6] s.k. paul and a. khare, phys. lett. b 174 (1986) 420.
[7] a.m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b 120 (1977) 429.
[8] b. tekin, k. saririan and y. hosotani, nucl. phys. b 539, (1999) 720.
[9] r. gregory, phys. lett. b 206 (1988) 199; k. maeda and n. turok, phys. lett. b 202 (1988) 376.

[10] k. bardakci and s. samuel, phys. rev. d 18 (1978) 2849.
[11] m. stone and p.r. thomas, nucl. phys. b 144 (1978) 513, d. foerster, phys. lett. b 77 (1978) 211.
[12] t. banks, r. myerson and j. kogut, nucl. phys. b 129 (1977) 493
[13] i.i. kogan and a. kovner, phys. rev. d 53 (1996) 4510.
[14] a. kovner and b. rosenstein, int. j. mod. phys. a 7 (1992) 7419.
[15] m.c. diamantini, p. sodano and c.a. trugenberger, nucl. phys. b 474 (1996) 641.

7

