9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

4

 
 

1
v
5
4
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

gelfand-fuchs cohomology and m-theory as a

topological quantum field theory

ioannis p. zois1

mathematical institute, 24-29 st. giles, oxford ox1 3lb

1izois @ maths.ox.ac.uk and izois @ cc.uoa.gr

abstract

we propose a lagrangian density for m-theory which is purely topological us-
ing gelfand-fuchs cohomology which characterises up to homotopy q-structures
and hence foliations in particular. then, using a physical principle and s-duality,
we conjecture on the existence of certain plane elds on s11.

pacs classication: 11.10.-z; 11.15.-q; 11.30.-ly

keywords: gelfand-fuchs cohomology; m-theory; haeiger structures

to my brother demetrios

0.1 short review of current status in m-theory

we shall start with a brief overview of old superstring theory, namely the
picture arround the end of 80s before advances in dualities and p-branes.

what we actually had was not one but ve consisten superstring theories in
d=10, namely types i, iia, iib, heterotic so(32) and heterotic e8  e8 which
was an embarrassment of richness. these theories were related via a pertutbative
symmetry called t-duality when compactied in d=9 (this duality is a symmetry
of theories with compactied spatial dimmensions where in the case of calabi-
yau 3-folds t-duality takes the form of mirror symmetry). moreover we believed
that d=10 n=1 supergravity (various versions of it) was the low energy limit (or
innite string tension limit) of these superstring theories in d=10.

there was however another piece of knowledge available which was some-
how forgotten, and that was d=11 n=1 supergravity. this theory emerged
as folows: assuming that spacetime carries a metric with minkowski signature,
namely that there is only one timelike coordinate and assuming also that there
are zero modes with no grater than 2 spin, then supersymmetry puts restrictions
on dimensionality of spacetime, hence dmax = 11. this made phenomenologists
over the years to study all possible representations of super-poincare in various
dimensions up to d=11. one of the possibilities then was this maximal d=11
n=1 supergravity. however this theory was rather unpopular because it was
overshadowed by superstring theory in d=10 (with which no apparent relation
was known) but also perhaps for a more important reason: it was proved to be
non-renormalisable. at this point we make a prothysteron: this defect is not pos-
sible to be overcome and one reminicent of it is the fact that the supermembrane
in d=11 has continoum spectrum; there is however an attempt to encorporate
this feature in the framework of matrix models.

situation changed rapidly around mid 90s (or perhaps earlier), the most

important advances being:

1.)

it was proved that various versions of d=10 n=1 supergravity admit
strings as solutions, a fact that now puts the two theories on a rather equal
footing.

2.) new evidence for a type of non-perturbative symmetry called s-duality
was found. this symmetry interchanges the strong/weak coupling regions of a
theory as well as elementary/soliton solutions (and hence topology and dynamics;
it is essentially a hodge star duality between eld strengths). this s-duality
emerged as a generalisation of electric/magnetic duality in maxwell theory and as
furter evidence of montonen-olive duality in supersymmetric yang-mills theories.
now eventually s-duality has lead to string/5-brane duality in d=10 and to
membrane/5-brane duality in d=11 (let us restrict ourselves to the old brane-
scan for the moment and forget d-branes also).

3.) the observation that the ve dierent superstring theories in d=10 was
an artifact of perturbation theory; these theories should emerge from one non-

1

perturbative theory in d=11 which was called m-theory.

4.) the relation between supermembranes in d=11 with d=11 n=1 super-
gravity as well as with d=10 superstring theories; the later is done by a process
which now comes under the name dimensional reduction process. this is a
general scheme which has been generalised to incorporate arbitrary dimension d
and arbitrary p-branes.

5.) applying s-duality in d=11 supermembranes we get the membrane/5-

brane duality in d=11, something which we mentioned earlier.

(see references [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7] and referencees therein).

0.2 a topological lagrangian for m-theory

hence we have something called m-theory consisting of membranes and 5-branes
living on an 11-manifold which is non perturbative. this theory has a very
intriguing feature: we can only extract information about it from its limiting
theories, namely either from d=11 n=1 supergravity or from superstrings in
d=10. this is so because this theory is genuinly non perturbative for a reason
which lies in the heart of manifold topology:

let us recall that in string theory, the path integral involves summation over
all topologically distinct diagrams (same for point particles of course). strings
are 1-branes hence in time they swep out a 2-manifold. at the tree level then
we need all topologically distinct simply connected 2-manifolds (actually there is
only one, as topology tells us) and for loop corrections, topology again says that
topologically distinct non simply connected 2-manifolds are classied by their
genus, so we sum up over all riemann surfaces with dierent genus.

it is clear then that for a perturbative quantum eld theory involving p-branes
we have to sum upon all topologically distinct (p+1)-dim manifolds: simply con-
nected ones for tree level and non simply connected ones for loop corrections.
thus we must know before hand the topological classication of manifolds in the
dimension of interest. that is the main problem of manifold topology in mathe-
matics.

but now we face a deep and intractable problem: geometry tells us, essentially
via a no-go theorem which is due to whitehead from late 40s, that: we cannot
classify non simply connected manifolds with dimension greater or equal to 4!
hence for p-branes with p greater or equal to 3, all we can do via perturbative
methods is up to tree level!

what happens for 3-manifolds then (hence for membranes)? the answer from
mathematics is that we do not know if all 3-manifolds can be classied! so even
for 2-branes it is still unclear whether perturbative methods work (up to all levels
of perturbation theory)!

the outlet from this situation that we propose here is not merely to look

2

only at non perturbative aspects of these theories, as was done up to now, but
to abandon perturbative methods completely from the very beginning. there is
only one way known up to now which can achieve this radical solution to our
problem: formulate the theory as a topological quantum field theory and hence
get rid of all perturbations once and for all.

let us explain how this can be acieved.

our approach is based on one physical principle:

a theory containing p-branes should be formulated on a manifold which ad-

mits (p+1)-dim foliations.

(for d-branes we need a variant of the above principle, namely we need what

are called plane foliations but we shall not elaborate on this point here).

one way of thinking about this principle is that it is analogous to the past
histories approach of quantum mechanics. clearly in quantum level one should
integrate over all foliations of a given codim.

a piece of warning here: this principle does not imply that all physical pro-
cess between branes are described by foliations. although the group of foliations
is huge, in fact comparable in size with the group of local dieomorphisms [11],
and foliations can be really very nasty, we would not like to make such a
strong statement. what is denitely true though is that some physical process
are indeed described by foliations, hence at least this condition must be satised
because of them.

note:
before going on furter, we would like to make one crucial remark: this prin-
ciple puts severe restrictions on the topology that the underlying manifold may
have, in case of m-theory this is an 11-manifold. it is also very important if
the manifold is open or closed. this may be of some help, as we hope, for the
compactication problem of string theory or even m-theory, namely how we go
from d=10 (or d=11) to d=4 which is our intuitive dimension of spacetime.
we shall address this question in the next section. the nal comment is this:
this principle puts absolutely no restriction to the usual quantum eld theory
for point particles in d=4, e.g. electroweak theory. this is so because in this
case spacetime is just r4 which is non compact and we have 0-branes (point
particles) and consequently 1-dim foliations for which the integrability condition
is trivially satised (essentially this is due to a deep result of gromov for foli-
ations on open manifolds, which states that all open manifolds admit codim 1
foliations; in striking contrast, closed manifolds admit codim 1 foliations i their

3

euler characteristic is zero, see for example in [10], [13] or references therein).

if we believe this principle, then the story goes on as follows: we are on an
11-manifold, call it m for brevity and we want to describe a theory containing
5-branes for example (and get membranes from s-duality). then m should ad-
mit 6-dim foliations or equivalently codim 5 foliations. we know from haeiger
that the q-functor, namely the functor of codim q haeiger structures and in
particular codim q foliations, is representable. practically this means that we can
have an analogue of chern-weil theory which characterises foliations of m up to
homotopy using cohomology classes of m. (one brief comment for foliations: one
way of describing haeiger structures more generally is to say that they gener-
alise bre bundles in exactly the same way that bre bundles generalise cartesian
product. this observation is also important when mentioning gerbes later on).

in fact it is proved that the correct cohomology to classify haeiger structures
up to homotopy (and hence foliations which constitute a particular example of
haeiger structures) is the gelfand-fuchs cohomology. this is a result of bott
and haeiger, essentially generalising an earlier result due to godbillon and vey
which was dealing only with codim 1 foliations, [14].

now we have a happy coincidence: the bott-haeiger class for a codim 5
foliation (which, recall, is what we want for 5-branes on an 11-manifold) is exactly
an 11-form, something that ts well with using it as a lagrangian density!

the construction for arbitrary codim q foliations goes as follows: let f be a
codim q foliation on an m-manifold m and suppose its normal bundle (f ) is ori-
entable. then f is dened by a global decomposable q-form . let {(ui, xi)}ii
be a locally nite cover of distinguished coordinate charts on m with a smooth
partition of unity {i}. then set

 = xii

idxmq+1

i

 ...  dxm
i

since  is integrable,

where  some 1-form on m. the (2q+1)-form

d =   ,

 =   (d)q,

(1)

(2)

is closed and its de rham cohomology class is independent of all choices
involved in dening it, depending only on homotopy type of f . thats the class
we want.

clearly for our case we are on an 11-manifold dealing with 5-branes, hence

6-dim foliations, hence codim 5 and thus the class  is an 11-form.

4

r is the classifying space for q

this construction can be generalised to arbitrary q

r-structures as a mixed de
rham-cech cohomology class and thus gives an element in h 2q+1(bq
r; r), where
bq
r-structures. note that in fact the bhgv class
is a cobordism invariant of codim q foliations of compact (2q+1)-dim manifolds.
this construction gives one computable characteristic class for foliations. op-
timally we would like a generalisation of the chern-weil construction for glq.
that is we would like an abstract gda with the property that for any codim q
foliation f on a manifold m there is a gda homomorphism into the de rham
algebra on m, dened in terms of f such that the induced map on cohomology
factors through a universal map into h (br
q; r). this algebra is nothing more
than the gelfand-fuchs lie coalgebra of formal vector elds in one variable.

more concretely, let  be a transitive lie-pseudogroup acting on rn and let
a() denote the lie algebra of formal  vector elds associated to . here a vector
eld dened on on u  rn is called a  vector eld if the local 1-parameter group
which it engenders is  and a() is dened as the inverse limit

a() = limak()

of the k-jets at 0 of  vector elds. in the pseudogroup  let 0 be the set of
elements of  keeping 0 xed and set k

0 equal to the k-jets of elements in 0.

then the k

0 whose projection on every k

0 form an inverse system of lie groups and we can nd a subgroup
k  limk
0 is a maximal compact subgroup for
k > 0. this follows from the fact that the kernel of the projection k+1
0 is
a vector space for k > 0. the subgroup k is unique up to conjugation and its
lie algebra k can be identied with a subalgebra of a().

0  k

for our purposes we need the cohomology of basic elements rel k in a(),
namely h(a(); k) which is dened as follows: let a{ak()} denote the algebra
of multilinear alternating forms on ak() and let a{a()} be the direct limit of the
a{ak()}. the bracket in a() induces a dierential on a{a()} and we write
h{a()} for the resulting cohomology group. the relative group h (a(); k)
is now dened as the cohomology of the subcomplex of a{a()} consisting of
elements which are invariant under the natural action of k and annihilated by
all inner products with elements of k. then the result is:

let f be a -foliation on m. there is an algebra homomorphism

 : h{a(); k}  h(m; r)

which is a natural transformation on the category c().
the construction of  is as follows:
let p k() be the dierential bundle of k-jets at the origin of elements of .
it is a principal k
0-bundle. on the other hand  acts transitively on the left
on p k(). denote by a(p ()) the direct limit of the algebras a(p k()) of
dierential forms on p k(). the invariant forms wrt the action of  constitute

5

a dierential subalgebra denoted a. one can then prove that it is actually
isomorphic to a(a()).

now let f be a foliation on m and let p k(f ) be the dierentiable bundle over
m whose bre at every point say x  m is the space of k-jets at this point of
local projections that vanish on x. this is a k
0-principal bundle. its restriction is
isomorphic to the inverse image of the bundle p k(), hence the dierential algebra
of -invariant forms on p k() is mapped in the algebra a(p k(f )) of dierential
forms on p k(f ).
if we denote by a(p (f )) the direct limit of a(p k(f )) we
get an injective homomorphism  of a(a()) in a(p (f )) commuting with the
dierential.

this homomorphism is compatible with the action of k, hence induces a homo-
morphism on the subalgebra of k-basic elements. but the algebra a(p k(f ); k)
of k-basic elements in a(p k(f )) is isomorphic to the algebra of dierential
forms on p k(f )/k which is a bundle over m with contractible bre k
0/k.hence
h(a(p k(f ); k)) is isomorphic via the de rham theorem to h(m; r). the ho-
momorphism  is therefore obtained as the composition

h(a(); k)  h(a(p (f ); k)) = h(m; r)

but we think that is enough with abstract nonsense formalism. let us make

our discussion more down to earth:

consider the gda (over r)

w oq = (u1, u3, ..., u2(q/2)1)  pq(c1, ..., cq)

with dui = ci for odd i and dci = 0 for all i and

wq = (u1, u2, ..., uq)  pq(c1, ..., cq)

with dui = ci and dci = 0 for i=1,...,q where degui = 2i  1, degci = 2i and
 denotes exterior algebra, pq denotes the polynomial algebra in the cis mod
elements of total degree greater than 2q. the cohomology of wq is the gelfand
fuchs cohomology of the lie algebra of formal vector elds in q variables. we
note that the ring structure at the cohomology level is trivial, that is all cup
products are zero. then the main result is that there are homomorphisms

 : h (w oq)  h (br

q; r)

 : h (wq)  h ( br

q; r)

for r  2 with the following property ( br

q denotes the classifying space for
framed foliations): if f is a codim q c r foliation of a manifold m, there is a gda
homomorphism

f : w oq  (m)

6

into the de rham algebra on m, dened in terms of the dierential geometry of f
and unique up to chain homotopy, such that on cohomology we have f = f   ,
where f : m  br
q classies f . if the normal bundle of f is trivial, there is a
homomorphism

f : wq  (m)

with analogous properties.

combining this result with the fact that b 0

q is contractible, we deduce that
a foliation is essentially determined by the structure of its normal bundle; the
chern classes of the normal bundle are contained in the image of the map 
above but we have additional non trivial classes in the case of foliations, one of
which is this bhgv class which we constructed explicitly and it is the class we
use as a lagrangian density which is purely topological since its degree ts nicely
for describing 5-branes.

there is an alternative approach due to simons [18] which avoids passing to
the normal bundle using circle coecients. this approach is related to gerbes.
a gerbe over a manifold is a construction which locally looks like the cartesian
product of the manifold with a line bundle. clearly it is a special case of foli-
ations (remember our previous comment on foliations). however this approach
actually suggests that they might be equivalent, if the approach of bott-haeiger
is equivalent to that of simons, something which is not known.

now the conjecture is that the partition function of this lagrangian is related

to the invariant introduced in [9].

in order to establish relation with physics, we must make some identications.
the 1-form  appearing in the lagrangian has no direct physical meaning. in
physics it is assumed that a 5-brane gives rise to a 6-form gauge eld denoted a6
whose eld strength is simply

da6 = f7

(3)

the only way we can explain geometrically this is that this 6-form is the poincare
dual of the 6-chain that the 5-brane sweps out as it moves in time.

we know that since we have s-duality between membranes and 5-branes, in

an obvious notation one has

f7 = f4

which is the s-duality relation, where

f4 = da3

(4)

(5)

observe now that the starting point for 5-brane theory is a6 where the starting

point to construct the bhgv class was the 5-form . how are they related?

there are three obvious possibilities:

7

i. d = a6 that would imply that a6 is pure gauge.
ii.df4 =  this is trivial because it implies d = 0, hence d =    = 0.
iii. the only remaining possibility is

 a6 = 

(6)

we call this reality condition. so now in principle we can substitute equa-
tions (6) and (1) into (2) and get an expression for the lagrangian which involves
the gauge eld a6.

the euler-lagrange equations which are actually analogous to d=11 n=1

supergravity euler-lagrange equations (see equation 8 below) read:

d  d +

1
5

(d)5 = 0

(7)

the on-shell relation with d=11 n=1 supergravity is established as follows:

recall that the bosonic sector of this supergravity theory is

z f4  f4  a3

where f4 = da3 with euler-lagrange equations

d  f4 +

1
2

f4  f4 = 0

(8)

constraining a3 via (8), by (5), (4), (6) and (1) we get a constraint for 

which can be added to the class  as a lagrange multiplier.

in order to calculate the partition function, some additional diculties may
arise because we do not know what notion of equivallence between foliations
is the appropriate one for physics in order to x the gauge and add faddeev-
popov terms as constraints to kill-o the gauge freedom. there are actually four
dierent notions of equivalence for foliations: conjugation, homotopy, integrable
homotopy and foliated cobordism.

in principle, one must end up with an equivallent theory starting with mem-
branes (thats due to s-duality), provided of course a suitable class was found.
clearly the bhgv class for a membrane would be a 17-form.

0.3 plane elds

we now pass on to the second question raised in this work, namely the restrictions
on the topology of the underlying manifold of a theory containing p-branes via
our physical principle.

it is clear from the denition that the existence of a foliation of certain dim,

say d (or equivalently codim q=n-d) on an n-manifold (closed) depends:

8

a.) on the existence of a dim d subbundle of the tangent bundle
b.) on this d-dim subbundle being integrable.
the second question has been answered almost completely by bott and in a
more general framework by thurston. botts result dictates that for a codim q
subbundle of the tangent bundle to be integrable, the ring of pontrjagin classes
of the subbundle with degree > 2q must be zero. there is a secondary obstruc-
tion due to shulman involving certain massey triple products but we shall not
elaborate on this. however botts result suggests nothing for question a.) above.
let us also mention that this result of bott can be deduced by another theorem
due to thurston which states that the classifying space b 
q of smooth codim q
framed foliations is (q+1)-connected.

on the contrary, thurstons result reduces the existence of codim q > 1
foliations (at least up to homotopy) to the existence of q-plane elds. this is a
deep question in dierential topology, related to the problem of classication of
closed manifolds according to their rank.

now the problem of existence of q-plane elds has been answered only for
some cases for spheres sn for various values of n,q [15]. in particular we know
everything for spheres of dimension 10 and less. we should however mention a
theorem due to winkelnkemper [16] which is quite general in nature and talks
about simply connected compact manifolds of dim n greater than 5. if n is not 0
mod 4 then it admits a so-called alexander decomposition which is a very special
example of foliations. if n is 0 mod 4 then the manifold admits an alexander
decomposition i its signature is zero.

let us return to string theory now: string theory works in d=10 and in this
case we have the old brane-scan suggesting the string/5-brane duality. the new
brane-scan contains all p-branes for p  6 and some d-7 and 8-branes are thought
to exist. however topology says that for a sphere in dim 10 we can have only
dim 0 and dim 10 plane elds (in fact this is true for all even dim spheres), hence
by thurston only dim 0 and dim 10 foliations and then our physical principle
suggests that s10 is ruled out as a possible underlying topological space for string
theory.

what about m-theory in d=11 then?

it is known that s11 admits a 3-plane eld, hence by our physical principle
a theory containing membranes can be formulated on s11. for s11 nothing is
known for the existence of q-plane elds for q greater than 3. but now we apply
s-duality between membranes/5-branes and conjecture that:

s11 should admit 5-plane elds.

let us close with two nal remarks:
1. there is extensive work in foliations with numerous results which actu-

9

ally insert many extra parameters into their study, for example metric aspects,
existence of foliations with compact leaves (all or at least one or exactly one),
with leaves dieomorphic to rn for some n etc. we do not have a clear picture
for the moment concerning imposing these in physics. let us only mention one
particularly strong result due to wall generalising a result of reeb [17]: if a closed
n-manifold admits a codim 1 foliation whose leaves are homeomorphic to rn1,
then by thurston we know that its euler characteristic must vanish, but in fact
we have more: it has to be the n-torus!

the interesting point however is that although all these extended objects the-
ories in physics are expressed as  models [9], hence they involve metrics on the
manifold and on the worldvolumes ie on the leaves, in our approach the metric is
only used in the reality condition (6) which makes connection with physical elds
(that is some metric on the target space) where at the same time we do not use
any metric on the source space (worldvolumes-leaves of the foliation).

2. in [9] another lagrangian density was proposed. it is dierent from the
one described here but they are related in an analogous way to the relation
between the polyakov and nambu-goto (in fact dirac [20]) actions for the free
bosonic string: extended objects basically immitate string theory and we have
two formalisms: the  model one which is the lagrangian exhibited in [9] using
polyakovs picture of  models as at principal bundles with structure group the
isometries of the metric on the target space [19]; yet we also have the embedded
surface picture which is the dirac (nambu-goto) action and whose analogue is
described in this work.

10

bibliography

[1] m. j. du et all: string solitons, phys. rep. 259 (1995) 213

[2] m. j. du: supermembranes, hep-th 9611203

[3] p. k. townsend: four lectures on m-theory, hep-th 9612121

p. k. townsend: the d=11 supermembrane revisited, phys. lett. b350
(1995)

[4] b. de wit and j. louis: supersymmetry and dualities in various dimen-

sions, hep-th 9801132

[5] p. c. west: supergravity, brane dynamics and string dualities, hep-th

9811101

[6] e. witten: string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys.

b443 (1995)
n. seiberg and e. witten: nucl. phys. b426 (1994)

[7] c. montonen and d. olive: magnetic monopoles as gauge particles, phys.

lett. b72 (1977), 117

[8] r. bott: lectures on characteristic classes and foliations, springer lnm

279, 1972
r. bott and a. haeiger: characteristic classes of -foliations, bull. am.
math. soc. 78.6, (1972)

[9] i. p. zois: a new invariant for  models, hep-th 9904001

11

i.p. zois: on search for the m-theory lagrangian, phys. lett. b402 (1997)

[10] h. b. lawson: foliations, bull. am. math. soc. 80.3, 1974

[11] w. thurston: foliations and groups of dieomorphisms, bull. am. math.

soc. 80.2 (1974)

[12] w. thurston: theory of foliations of codim greater than 1, comment.

math. helvetici 49 (1974), 214-231

[13] m. l. gromov: stable mappings of foliations into manifolds, izv. akad.

nauk. ussr ser. mat. 33 (1969)

[14] c. godbillon and j. vey: un invariant des feuilletages de codim 1, c r

acad. sci. paris ser ab 273 (1971)

[15] n. steenrod: the topology of bre bundles, princeton 1951

[16] h. e. winkelnkemper: manifolds as open books, bull. am. math. soc. 79

(1973)

[17] g. reeb: feuillages, resultats anciens et nouveaux, montreal 1982

[18] j. simons: characteristic forms and transgression, preprint suny stony

brook

[19] a.m. polyakov: gauge particles as rings of glue, nucl. phys. b164 (1979)

[20] p.a.m. dirac: proc. roy. soc. london a166 (1969)

12

