pupt-1862
mit-ctp-2867
hep-th/9906020

mirror symmetry for n = 1 qed in three dimensions

martin gremm

joseph henry laboratories, princeton university, princeton, nj 08544

emanuel katz

center for theoretical physics,

massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma 02139

abstract

we construct three-dimensional n = 1 qed with nf avors using branes of

type iib string theory. this theory has a mirror, which can be realized using

the s-dual brane conguration. as in examples with more supersymmetry,

the higgs branch of the original theory gets mapped into the coulomb branch

of the mirror. we use parity invariance to argue that these branches cannot

be lifted by quantum corrections.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

6
1

 
 

2
v
0
2
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

email: gremm@feynman.princeton.edu

on leave of absence from mit, cambridge, ma 02139

amikatz@mit.edu

1

i. introduction

mirror symmetry provides a relation between the infrared descriptions of dierent super-

symmetric gauge theories in three dimensions. the rst example of this kind was discovered

in ref. [1]. n = 4 supersymmetric qed with nf avors has a dual description in terms

of another three dimensional gauge theory. the coulomb branch of one theory is mapped

into the higgs branch of the other and vice versa, which implies that the ir descriptions

of these theories agree after suitable identications. the exact change of variables relating

these theories in the infrared is not known, but recently some progress in that direction has

been made [2].

while mirror symmetry was rst discovered in a purely eld theoretic context, it proved

very useful to rederive and generalize the results of ref. [1] using brane congurations in type

iib string theory [3] (see also [4,5] for dierent approaches and [6] for a list of such brane

congurations). the three-dimensional eld theory is realized on d3-branes that terminate

on ns5-branes and intersect d5-branes. the s-dual of this conguration gives rise to the

mirror theory.

mirror symmetry can be generalized to include theories with n = 2 supersymmetry in

three dimensions [79]. these theories can also be realized on d3-branes in the presence of

d5- and ns5-branes, and s-duality relates brane constructions that give rise to theories that

are mirror pairs. a dierent kind of ir duality between such n = 2 theories was discussed

in [10,11].

n = 4, 2 theories in three dimensions can be obtained by dimensional reduction of four-

dimensional n = 2, 1 theories. just like in the four-dimensional case, there are strong

constraints from r-symmetries, holomorphy, and non-renormalization theorems that sim-

plify the analysis of the vacuum structure. for theories with eight supercharges (n = 4 in

three dimensions) it is possible to show that the exact metric on the coulomb branch of

the original theory agrees with the metric on the higgs branch of the mirror. in the n = 2

case (four supercharges) one can show that the complex structure of corresponding branches

2

agrees.

in three dimensions one can also study n = 1 theories with two real supercharges. these

theories cannot be obtained by dimensional reduction of higher dimensional supersymmetric

eld theories. the n = 1 superconformal algebra does not contain any r-symmetries, there

are no constraints from holomorphy, and there are no know non-renormalization theorems.

nonetheless one can learn something about the infrared behavior of some of these theories

(see e.g. [1214]).

in this note we analyze three-dimensional n = 1 qed with nf avors and its mirror

using 3-branes and 5-branes of type iib string theory. this theory does not have a coulomb

branch, since the n = 1 vector multiplet does not contain any scalars. we argue that parity

invariance prevents the higgs branch from being lifted by quantum corrections1. the s-dual

brane conguration gives rise to the mirror theory with a coulomb branch that also cannot

be lifted by quantum corrections. we suggest that these two theories are equivalent in the

infrared. unfortunately it is hard to assemble additional evidence for this duality, since the

metric on higgs branch receives perturbative corrections at all orders and it does not have a

complex structure we could compare to that of the mirror branch. however, it seems highly

plausible that a pair of s-dual brane congurations should give rise to the same infrared

physics on the 3-branes.

ii. n = 1 mirror symmetry

a brane conguration consisting of ns-branes in (012345), ns-branes in (012389), nf

d5-branes in (012348), and d3-branes in (0126) preserves two supercharges and gives rise

to a n = 1 theory in three dimensions. the brane conguration is shown in fig. 1.

it

is straightforward to determine the matter content of this theory. each d5-brane provides

one n = 4 hypermultiplet consisting of two complex scalars, q, q, and fermions. we can

1this argument is due to m. berkooz, a. kapustin, and m. strassler [14].

3

4

ns

8

6

d5

ns

fig. 1.

iib brane conguration for n = 1 qed. the horizontal line is the d3-brane and the

. . . . . . .

other branes are labeled in the gure.

combine these elds into a complex su(2) doublet q = (q, q). this su(2) is a remnant of

the su(2)r symmetry of the n = 4 theory, but here it acts as an ordinary global symmetry

of the theory. without the d5-brane, this conguration is n = 2 supersymmetric, so the

theory contains an n = 2 vector multiplet which contains an n = 1 vector supereld and

a real scalar supereld. the expectation value of the real scalar, , corresponds to the x3

position of the three brane. in an n = 2 theory the scalar in the gauge multiplet couples to

the matter elds via terms of the form |q|2 + | q|2 in the potential. in our conguration

moving the 3-branes in the x3 direction does not give a mass to the fundamentals, so our

eld theory diers from the n = 2 case by turning o this coupling. since we are considering

a u(1) theory, this scalar is uncharged under the gauge group and we expect it to decouple

from the low energy dynamics of the gauge theory.

the brane conguration has no rotational symmetries, reecting the fact that the n = 1

superconformal algebra in three dimensions does not include an r-symmetry. the higgs

branch of the theory can be seen geometrically by breaking the 3-branes on the d5-branes

and separating the pieces. for example, if there is only one d5-brane, we can separate

the two halfs of the 3-brane in the x3,4,8 directions. the x3 position of the center of

mass corresponds to the expectation value of the decoupled scalar. we expect a three-

dimensional higgs branch in this case, because it can be parametrized by expectation value

of the fundamentals modulo gauge transformations, which eliminate one of the four real

4

parameters in q.

the theory has three real mass parameters for each avor. in the brane picture they

correspond to motions of the d5-branes in x5,7,9. these mass terms appear in the lagrangian

in the same way as in a n = 2 theory, i.e., they provide a complex and a real mass. unlike

in the n = 2 case, the real mass cannot be absorbed into a shift of the real scalar in the

gauge multiplet, because there is no coupling of this eld to the fundamentals in the theory

we discuss here.

this exhausts the list of possible brane motions. in particular there is no brane motion

that corresponds to turning on fi parameters in the eld theory. this is consistent with our

expectations, because the n = 1 vector multiplet does not contain any scalars.

to summarize, the classical 3-brane theory is a n = 1 supersymmetric u(1) gauge

theory with nf complex fundamentals, qi, qi, a decoupled real scalar, , and no potential.

the classical higgs branch has 4nf  1 real dimensions. there are no non-renormalization

theorems that protect the higgs branch in theories with two supercharges, so the classical

higgs branch could be lifted by quantum corrections. however, discrete symmetries of the

eld theory provide some constraints [12,14].

using the notation in ref. [12], we can dene a parity transformation, p , that acts on

the coordinates as p (x0, x1, x2)  (x0, x1, x2) and on the spinors as p   3. the

lagrangian of the theory we described above is invariant under this transformation if all

elds are parity even. there is no parity anomaly, since the number of charged elds is

even. this ensures that parity is preserved in the full quantum theory. the superpotential

in a parity invariant theory must be parity odd, because the the measure d2 is odd [12].

since the theory we consider here does not contain any parity odd elds, we conclude that

no superpotential can be generated. this in turn implies that the higgs branch cannot be

lifted by quantum corrections. of course this does not mean that there are no quantum

corrections to the metric on the higgs branch.

in order to nd a candidate mirror theory of three-dimensional qed with nf avors, we

perform an s-duality on the brane conguration above. this turns the ns-branes into d5-

5

branes and vice versa. the eld theory on the 3-brane is now a u(1)nf 1 gauge theory. each

u(1) factor contains an n = 4 vector multiplet, which decomposes into three real scalar

superelds and one vector supereld in n = 1 language. there is a n = 4 hypermultiplet

in the bifundamental representation at every intersection of the 3-brane with an ns brane.

these elds couple in the n = 4 supersymmetric way to the vector multiplets except at the

rst and last ns brane. we discuss the nf = 1, 2 cases is some detail. the generalization

to higher nf is straightforward.

for nf = 2 the mirror is a u(1) gauge theory with two n = 4 hypermultiplets ql, ql and

qr, qr from strings stretched across the left and right ns-branes respectively. the theory

also contains two uncharged complex scalars, ml,r. we identify their expectation values

with the position of the left and right sections of the 3-brane in x3 + ix4 and x3 + ix8

relative to the middle section.

expectation values for the three scalars in the n = 4 gauge multiplet correspond the the

position of the middle section of the 3-brane in x3,4,8. giving an expectation value to either

the neutral scalar elds or the scalars in the gauge multiplet makes the hypermultiplets

massive. this implies a superpotential of the form

w = (ml + 3 + i4)ql ql + 8(q

lql  ql q
l)

(2.1)

+(mr + 3 + i8)qr qr + 4(q

rqr  qr q

r),

where the subscripts on the i denote the directions they correspond to in the brane con-

struction. 3 can be absorbed into a redenition of ml,r, so it is again a free decoupled

eld. the coulomb branch of this theory can be parametrized by ml,r, 4,8 and the dual

photon, which provides seven real parameters in agreement with the count in the original

theory. to ensure parity invariance of this theory, we take the fundamentals to be parity

even and the other elds to be parity odd.

the superpotential can be recast in a manifestly su(2) invariant way. the hypermulti-

plets combine into su(2) doublets pl,r = (ql,r, q

l,r), and the components of ml,r and 4,8

can be rearranged into two triplets i

l,r. in terms of these elds the superpotential reads

6

w = i

lp 

lipl + i

rp 

ripr.

(2.2)

the coulomb branch can be parametrized by the expectation values of l,r. since the

fundamentals are massive on this branch, any dynamically generated superpotential can

be expressed in terms of l,r. however, there are no parity odd and su(2) invariant

combinations of these elds. thus we conclude that the coulomb branch cannot be lifted

by quantum corrections and corresponds to the higgs branch of the original theory.

moving the ns branes in x5,7,9 corresponds to adding terms of the form

w = l  l + r  r

(2.3)

to the superpotential. the l,r are similar to fi parameters in the n = 4 theory, because

they force the matter elds to develope an expectation value. however, since the n = 1

vector multiplet does not contain any scalars, they are not fi parameters in the original

sense. nonetheless we will abuse notation and refer to the elds l,r as fi parameters.

the fi parameters correspond to the three real mass terms in the original theory. as a

consistency check on our superpotential we turn on l while keeping r = 0. this breaks

the u(1) gauge symmetry and the resulting theory is a wz model with a real triplet r, a

complex doublet pr, and a superpotential

w = i

rp 

ripr.

(2.4)

this agrees with the superpotential we read o from the s-dual of the nf = 1 brane

conguration,

up to eld redenitions.

w = mlq q + im[mr](qq  q q),

(2.5)

we can readily construct non-abelian theories using our brane conguration. if we put

nc 3-branes between the ns-branes, we get a su(nc) gauge theory in three dimensions.

however, the analysis of the eld theory in this case is much more involved. the scalar in

the n = 2 vector multiplet no longer decouples, since it is now charged under the gauge

7

group. since it does not couple to the fundamentals, they do not become massive if we give

an expectation value to this eld. this implies that we can move onto the higgs branch

(parametrized by the expectation value of the fundamentals) at any point on the coulomb

branch (parametrized by the expectation value of the adjoint scalar). thus classically we

nd an interacting conformal eld theory at every point of the moduli space, which is very

dicult to analyze. we will not discuss the non-abelian case any further in this paper.

iii. discussion

in this note we discussed a type iib brane conguration that gives rise to n = 1 qed

with nf avors in three dimensions. we argued that the higgs branch of this theory cannot

be lifted by quantum corrections, using the parity invariance of the theory. since there are

no non-renormalization theorems for theories with two supercharges, the metric on the higgs

branch receives quantum corrections but our argument indicates that this does not change

its dimension.

for n = 2, 4 theories, s-dual pairs of brane congurations give rise to three dimensional

theories that are mirror pairs. we suggest that this is true also for the n = 1 theory we

consider here. to support this claim we showed that the s-dual brane conguration gives

rise to another n = 1 theory that has a coulomb branch of the same dimension as the higgs

branch of original theory. parity invariance ensures that neither of these branches can be

lifted by quantum corrections. the mass parameters of the original theory are mapped into

fi parameters of the mirror. to the best of our knowledge, this is the rst proposed duality

between theories with two supercharges.

unfortunately the low degree of supersymmetry makes it hard to check our proposal

any further. the metric on the moduli spaces on both sides have quantum corrections and

to establish their equivalence, these would have to be computed. since these branches are

real manifolds, there are no complex structures we can compare. on the other hand, some

support for our claim comes from the fact that the version of three dimensional qed we

8

discuss here is very similar to the theory one obtains by giving a mass to all scalars in the

vector multiplet of n = 4 qed. the only dierence between this theory and the theory

we discussed here is the presence of the decoupled scalar in our case. since it does not

participate in the dynamics we expect these two theories to be closely related.

in fact,

adding a term w = mii, where mi are uncharged scalars and i are the three scalars in

the n = 4 vector multiplet to the superpotential of n = 4 qed and perturbing the mirror

by the corresponding fi terms, generates the mirror pairs we discussed above [14]. while

this lends some support to our claims, it is not a very strong argument. theories with two

supercharges can undergo phase transitions as we vary the mass of the three scalars in the

n = 4 vector multiplet, so it is not clear that perturbing a pair of mirror theories with

n = 4 supersymmetry causes them to ow to mirror pairs of n = 1 theories. the analysis

in this paper suggests that this does happen in the specic case we study here.

acknowledgments

it is a pleasure to thank anton kapustin for several very helpful discussions. this work

was supported in part by doe grants #df-fc02-94er40818 and #de-fc-02-91er40671.

9

references

[1] k. intriligator and n. seiberg, mirror symmetry in three-dimensional gauge theories,

phys. lett. b387, 513 (1996) hep-th/9607207.

[2] a. kapustin and m.j. strassler, on mirror symmetry in three-dimensional abelian

gauge theories, jhep 04, 021 (1999) hep-th/9902033.

[3] a. hanany and e. witten, type iib superstrings, bps monopoles, and three-

dimensional gauge dynamics, nucl. phys. b492, 152 (1997) hep-th/9611230.

[4] j. de boer, k. hori, h. ooguri and y. oz, mirror symmetry in three-dimensional gauge

theories, quivers and d-branes, nucl. phys. b493, 101 (1997) hep-th/9611063.

[5] m. porrati and a. zaaroni, m theory origin of mirror symmetry in three-dimensional

gauge theories, nucl. phys. b490, 107 (1997) hep-th/9611201.

[6] t. kitao, k. ohta and n. ohta, three-dimensional gauge dynamics from brane con-

gurations with (p,q) - ve-brane, nucl. phys. b539, 79 (1999) hep-th/9808111.

[7] j. de boer, k. hori, y. oz and z. yin, branes and mirror symmetry in n=2 super-
symmetric gauge theories in three- dimensions, nucl. phys. b502, 107 (1997) hep-
th/9702154.

[8] j. de boer, k. hori and y. oz, dynamics of n=2 supersymmetric gauge theories in

three-dimensions, nucl. phys. b500, 163 (1997) hep-th/9703100.

[9] o. aharony, a. hanany, k. intriligator, n. seiberg and m.j. strassler, aspects of
n=2 supersymmetric gauge theories in three-dimensions, nucl. phys. b499, 67 (1997)
hep-th/9703110.

[10] o. aharony, ir duality in d = 3 n=2 supersymmetric usp(2n(c)) and u(n(c)) gauge

theories, phys. lett. b404, 71 (1997) hep-th/9703215.

[11] a. karch, seiberg duality in three-dimensions, phys. lett. b405, 79 (1997) hep-

th/9703172.

[12] i. aeck, j.a. harvey and e. witten, instantons and (super)symmetry breaking in

(2+1)-dimensions, nucl. phys. b206, 413 (1982).

[13] e. witten, supersymmetric index of three-dimensional gauge theory, hep-th/9903005.
[14] m. berkooz, a. kapustin, and m.j. strassler, unpublished.

10

