targetsuperspace in 2d dilatonic supergravity

institut fur theoretische physik, rwth aachen, d-52056 aachen, germany

thomas strobl

(april 1999)

the n = 1 supersymmetric version of generalized 2d dilaton gravity can be cast into the form
of a poisson model, where the target space and its poisson bracket are graded. the target space
consists of a 1+1 superspace and the dilaton, which is the generator of lorentz boosts therein. the
poisson bracket on the target space induces the invariance of the worldsheet theory against both
dieomorphisms and local supersymmetry transformations (superdieomorphisms). the machinery
of poisson models is then used to nd the general local solution to the eld equations. as a
byproduct, classical equivalence between the bosonic theory and its supersymmetric extension is
found.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

9
2

 
 

1
v
0
3
2
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the most general 2d gravity action for a metric g and a
dilaton eld  yielding second order dierential equations
is of the form [1]:

l =zm

d2xg [u ()r + v ()()2 + w ()] ,

(1)

where r denotes the ricci scalar and u , v , and w are
some arbitrary (reasonable) functions of the dilaton. its
supersymmetrization, considered rst in [2], may be ob-
tained in a most straightforward manner by using the
supereld formalism of [3]. in this framework the action
takes the same form as above, where, however, each term
is replaced by an appropriately constrained supersym-
metric extension and, simultaneously, the volume form
d2x is replaced by its (worldsheet) superspace analog
d2x d2. a term such as u (), e.g., is replaced by u (),
where  is the supereld  =  + i + if with 
being the bosonic dilaton eld,  a majorana spinorial
superpartner, and f an auxiliary bosonic scalar. (for fur-
ther details the reader is referred to the literature cited
above).

for many practical calculations it is necessary to re-
express the supersymmetric extension of l in terms of
its component elds (, , f etc.). the resulting action
and all the more its eld equations become lengthy and
their analysis involved. in the present letter we propose
a dierent formulation, which greatly simplies not only
the notation but also the analysis of the supersymmetric
theory.

this latter formulation is provided by a poisson 
model [4], the denition of which we will briey recapit-
ulate now, generalizing it to the case of graded poisson
manifolds, before we then come to its relation to (1) (for
an introduction to bosonic poisson models cf. [5]). the
action is a functional of n scalar elds x i, i = 1, . . . , n,
on the one hand, which may be viewed as coordinates in
an ndimensional (not necessarily linear) manifold n , as
well as of n oneforms ai  aidx, on the other hand,
which may be regarded as oneforms on the worldsheet
(coordinates x,  = 0, 1) taking values in t n (more
precisely, (ai) is a oneform on the world sheet which is
simultaneously the pullback of a section of t n by the
map x(x)). in the present context we allow n to carry

also a z2grading, i.e. some of the elds x i and ai may
be grassmann valued, i denoting their respective parity
(so x ix j = (1)ij x jx i etc.).
a (graded) poisson bracket

to dene an action we require n to be equipped with

{x i, x j}  p ij .

(2)

note that the poisson bracket is antisymmetric only
for the case that at least one of
its entries is an
even (commuting) quantity; in general one has p ij =
(1)ij +1p ji (while p ij itself has grading i + j). in
terms of the twotensor p ij the standard, graded jacobi
identity (cf, e.g., [6]) may be brought into the form

(1)ik p ij 

x s!p sk + cycl(ijk) = 0 ,

(3)

where a sum over the index s is understood (but not over
i or k in the rst of the three cyclic terms). using left
derivatives  =  (in contrast to the above right deriva-
tives  ), this equation may be written equivalently as
(1)ikp issp jk + cycl(ijk) = 0.

the action of the 2d theory is

s =z ai  dx i 

1
2

ai  aj p ji ,

(4)

where the order of the terms and indices has been chosen
so as to avoid unnecessary signs in the considerations to
follow while simultaneously s coincides with its purely
bosonic counterpart in the previous literature.

before further investigating the general model (4), we
now discuss its relation to n = 1 supersymmetric dila-
ton gravity. for this purpose we rst restrict our atten-
tion to the case where u   and v  0 in (1). this
is not a serious restriction since the general action can
be brought into this form always (at least locally) by
a dilatondependent conformal rescaling of the metric g
and a simultaneous change of the dilaton eld   f ()
[1]; the information about u and v is then stored in
the relation to the original variables.
(in this process
global information may be lost, as happens, e.g., if u has
critical points. in the following we thus restrict our at-
tention to such choices of the potentials u, v, w where

1

the above transformation is suciently global; otherwise
the considerations to follow are of local nature and the
global information has to be restored in a subsequent
step, cf. also [7] for details.) following a recent paper by

izquierdo [8], the explicit component form of the super-
symmetric extension of (1), rewritten in einstein-cartan
variables, takes the form1

l = d + xa(dea + a

beb + 2i a)  (2uu 

iu
16

)abeaeb + 4iu  3 + iu eaa + i (d +

1
2

3) .

(5)

p obtained above indeed satises the (graded) jacobi
identity (3), which, however, is at the heart of poisson
models.

in [8] it was shown that the eld equations of (5) form
a free dierential algebra (fda) [10]. in the present for-
mulation (4) the eld equations take the compact form

dx i  ajp ji = 0 , dai 

1
2

akal(p lk i) = 0 .

(8)

applying an exterior derivative to the rst set of these

equations, we obtain daj p ji  aj (p ji k) dx k = 0.

eliminating daj and dx k by means of (8), we end up
with an expression bilinear in the as. by denition of
an fda, the resulting equations have to be fullled iden-
tically, without any restriction to the oneforms ai. it is a
simple exercise to show that this requirement is fullled
if and only if p ij satises eqs. (3). thus, using the re-
sult of [8], the validity of the graded jacobi identities is
proven.

certainly the jacobi identities may be veried also by
a direct calculation using the specic form (7) of the
bracket. this is in fact simpler than proving the fda
property of the eld equations of the specic action (5)
(cf. also rst sentence of the following paragraph). seek-
ing brackets fullling the graded jacobi identities with
restrictions specied below will automatically provide 2d
supergravity theories and to us this route seems to be the
technically simplest for the construction of such models.
this idea will be made clearer in what follows.

applying an exterior derivative to the second set of
equations, the requirement for an fda does not lead to
any further relations beside (3). thus we may conclude
that the eld equations of a general graded poisson 
model (4) form an fda, i the tensor p is a poisson
tensor (i.e., by denition, i p satises (3)). alterna-
tively, the jacobi identity may be veried to be the nec-
essary and sucient condition for the constraints in a

here ea is the zweibein of the metric g (or the con-
formally rescaled metric, respectively), a
b  is the spin
connection, and  is a oneformvalued majorana spinor.
 is a (zeroformvalued) majorana fermion, which, such
as , is of odd grassmann parity, and x a denotes a pair
of scalar functions (the lorentz index a running over two
values in two spacetime dimensions). the elds x a are
introduced in the bosonic theory as lagrange multipli-
ers so as to determine  through the vanishing torsion
constraint; as the eld equations for  determine x a
uniquely in terms of the remaining variables, the elds
x a may be eliminated from (or introduced to) the ac-
tion without changing the theory (at least on the classical
level). u is a function of the dilaton , which relates to w
in (1) through w = 4(u2), the prime denoting dieren-
tiation with respect to the argument . for the conven-
tions we conform to [8]: the lorentz metric has signature
(, +), lorentz indices are underlined, 01 = +1, and the
gamma matrices are related to the usual pauli matrices i
according to:  0 = i2,  1 = 1, and  3   0 1 = 3.
we now collect the one and zeroforms into two mul-
tiplets:

(x i) := (x a, , ) ,

(ai) := (ea, i , ) .

(6)

after a simple partial integration, the action (5) is seen
to take the form (4) and the coecient matrix p ij may
be read o by straightforward comparison:
p ab = ab(4uu + 1

8i u) , p a = u(a) ,

(7)

bx b ,

2 ( 3)

p  = 8iu( 3)  4ixa(a) ,

{x a, } = a

{, } =  1
, spinor indices have been
where (a)  (a)
raised and lowered by means of  ( =  with
01 := 1), and, in the last line, the identication (2) was
used.

up to now it may seem that we have not gained much
and in particular it is by no means clear that the matrix

1after completion of this letter, i became aware that the ac-
tion below was found already in [9] (which was not noticed in
[8], where the latter of the two works was cited in a dierent
context only). [9] contains also parts of the considerations to
follow, but, such as in the case of bosonic poisson models,
the hidden structure of a (graded) poisson manifold is not
noted (and, consequently, no statement about, e.g., the clas-
sical solutions could be obtained there).

2

theories including the supersymmetrization of theories
with nontrivial torsion, such as the katanaevvolovich
(kv) model [12], for which a supersymmetrization has
not been provided in the literature yet. using the same
elds (6) as before, such theories may be found by search-
ing for other solutions to the jacobi identity (3). how-
ever, the then yet unknown poisson tensor should be re-
stricted to agree with the last line in (7). this is due
to the relation of the poisson bracket on the target space
and the local symmetries (9) and thus implicitly required
by local lorentz invariance, present in any gravity theory
when formulated in einsteincartan variables.

1

it is worth noting that restricting the poisson ten-
sor only by the last line of (7), the jacobi identities (3)
with one of the indices corresponding to  requires the
poisson tensor components p ab, p a, and p  to trans-
form covariantly under lorentz transformations! e.g. for
bp b 
p a the jacobi identities require {p a, } = a
p a. thus to obtain the most general super-
2 ( 3)
gravity theory that ts into the present framework, we
can proceed as follows:
it must be possible to build
the unknown tensor components of p by means of the
lorentz covariant quantities x a, , ab, (a), and
( 3) ( is incorporated automatically by raising and
lowering spinor indices) with coecients that are lorentz
invariant functions, i.e. functions of xax a, , and .
thus, e.g., the antisymmetric tensor p ab must be of the
form p ab = ab(f1+f2), where f1,2 are functions of
the two arguments xax a and . the remaining jacobi
identities then reduce to a (comparatively simple) set of
dierential equations for these coecient functions.

proceeding in this way, e.g., by replacing all (ve) co-
ecients in its rst two lines of the bracket (7) by yet
undetermined coecient functions of x axa and , one
can show that the remaining jacobi identities (3) force
the coecients to agree with those provided already in
(7) (except for a simultaneous global prefactor). more
general theories can thus be obtained only by using fur-
ther covariant entities to build p a and (possibly also)
p . indeed, lagrangians quadratic in torsion require an
extra additive term f (x axa, )x a( 3)
 in p a [13],
also perfectly compatible with lorentz covariance. in [14]
more general supergravity theories will be constructed by
the above method. by construction, the resulting the-
ories will be invariant against superdieomorphisms in-
corporated within (9), thus allowing for an interpretation
as supergravity theory. the supersymmetrization of the
kvmodel will be contained as a particular example in
the class of models constructed in this way.

hamiltonian formulation of (4) to be of rst class. this
is tantamount to requiring the model to have maximal
local symmetries.

it is a nice and simple exercise to show that due to (3)

the variations

x i = jp ji ,

ai = di  ajk(p kj i)

(9)

change the action only by a total divergence: s =

r d(idx i). thus there is a local symmetry for any pair

of elds (x i, ai). since the action is of rst order in these
elds, this implies that there are at most a nite number
of physical (gauge invariant) degrees of freedom. (more
precisely, being a oneform, ai has two components for
each value of i; however, the time component a0i of
the oneform ai enters a hamiltonian formulation as la-
grange multiplier for the constraints only and therefore
it must not be included in the above naive counting).

in the context of (5) resp. (7) there are ve indepen-
dent local symmetries contained in (9):  generates local
lorentz symmetries (cf. last line in eq. (7)). the grass-
mann spinor , on the other hand, generates precisely
the local supersymmetry transformations of [8]. the re-
maining two symmetries correspond to the obvious dif-
feomorphism invariance of the action. indeed, a simple
calculation shows that the lie derivative of x i and ai
along a spacetime vector eld v diers from (9) with the
specic choice (i) := (vai) only by an additive term
proportional to the eld equations (8). for invertible
zweibein aa the rst two entries establish a bijection be-
tween any possible choice of v and a, moreover. as this
will be of some importance later on, we note, however,
that while dieomorphisms cannot change an invertible
matrix aa into a noninvertible one and vice versa, the
symmetries (9) can.2

we return to the structure found in the target space n
of the theory. the target space is spanned by a lorentz
vector x a, a majorana spinor , and the dilaton . x a
and  may be combined into a (1 + 1)dimensional su-
perspace. , on the other hand, generates lorentz boosts
in this superspace by means of the poisson brackets (7),
last line. indeed, a
b is the lie algebra element of the
(onedimensional) lorentz group in the fundamental rep-
resentation and  3 is easily identied with the genera-
tor of lorentz boosts in a twodimensional spinor space:
 3   0 1 = 1
2 [ 0,  1] (irrespective of the choice of pre-
sentation for the generators  0 and  1 in the cliord
algebra).

this structure in the target space will remain also
within generalizations to more general 2d supergravity

2since the dierence in the symmetries occurs only for non-
degenerate metrics, which, however, in a gravitational theory
are usually excluded, this dierence is mostly irrelevant for
what concerns the relevant factor spaces; cf., however, [11]
for counterexamples to this somewhat naive picture.

3

we nally turn to the solution of the eld equations.
beside its notational compactness the main advantage of
the formulation (4) as opposed to (5) is its inherent tar-
get space covariance. thus we may change coordinates
in the target space of the theory so as to simplify the ten-
sor p, while the eld equations in the new variables still
will take the form (8) (but then with the transformed,
simplied poisson matrix). we will rst use this method
to show that locally the space of solutions to the eld
equations of (5) modulo gauge symmetries is just one
dimensional. thereafter we will provide a representa-
tive of this oneparameter family in terms of the original
variables used in (5). as a byproduct we will nd that
locally the space of solutions is identical to the one of
the bosonic theory; all the fermionic elds may be put to
zero by gauge transformations. since any global solution
can be obtained by patching together local solutions, we
conclude that the local equivalence between the bosonic
theory (1) and its supersymmetrization holds also on a
global level. it would be interesting, however, to conrm
this result in a more direct way.

locally (more precisely,

in the neighborhood of a
generic point) any (bosonic) poisson manifold allows for
casimirdarboux (cd) coordinates (c a, qi , pj ) [15];
constant values of the casimir functions c a label sym-
plectic leaves in n , on which the remaining coordinates
are standard darboux coordinates: {qi, pj} = i
j (all
other brackets vanishing). according to [6], darboux co-
ordinates exist also for supersymplectic manifolds (mani-
folds with a graded, nondegenerate poisson bracket). we
thus assume that cd coordinates exist in the case of gen-
eral, graded poisson manifolds. however, at least in the
case of the bracket (7), they denitely do: although we
did not succeed to nd such coordinates explicitly in the
present paper, we will provide a casimir function below.
on its level surfaces (dened by the appropriate quotient
algebra of superfunctions) the poisson bracket is (almost
everywhere) nondegenerate and the result on supersym-
plectic manifolds may be applied.

we now are in the position to show that locally there
is only a oneparameter family of gauge inequivalent so-
lutions to the eld equations of (5). for this purpose we
only need to know about the local existence of cd coor-

dinates ex i. in these coordinates3 the second set of eld
equations (8) reduce to deai = 0. thus locally eai = dfi

3to be sure: these are coordinates on the target space, not
on the worldsheet spacetime. from the point of view of the



eld theory a change of coordinates x i  ex i, which induces
the change ai  eai  aj(
 x j /ex i), corresponds to a (lo-

cal) change of eld variables.
4to determine the rank of the matrix p ij , we may concen-
trate on the rank of the the two by two matrix p  and the
three by three matrix in the purely bosonic sector; p a, being
linear in grassmann variables, cannot contribute to the rank
of the matrix, cf. [6].

for some functions fi(x). however, the local symmetries
(9) also simplify dramatically in these new eld variables:

easily showing that all the functions fi may be put to zero
identically. but then we learn from the rst set of the

eai = dei. this innitesimal formula may be integrated
eld equations (8) that all the functions ex i are constant.

all of the constant values of qi and pi may be put to an
arbitrary value by means of the residual gauge freedom
in (9) (constant i). what remains as gauge invariant
information is only the constant values of the casimir
functions c a. since the poisson tensor (7) has rank four
(almost everywhere),4 the model dened by eq. (5) has
just one casimir function and its space of local solutions
is thus indeed onedimensional only.

the local solution obtained above in terms of cd-
coordinates may be transformed back easily to any choice
of target space coordinates. we nd that also in the orig-
inal variables: ai  0 and x i = consti, where the latter
constants may be chosen at will as long as they are com-
patible with the constant values of the casimir(s) c a,
which characterize the (local) solution. as it stands,
this solution corresponds to a solution with vanishing
zweibein and metric. in a gravitational theory, the metric
(and zweibein) is required to be a nondegenerate matrix,
however. the vanishing zweibein is a result of using the
symmetries (9), which, in contrast to dieomorphisms,
connect the degenerate with the nondegenerate sector
of the theory. a similar phenomenon occurs, e.g., also
within the chernsimons formulation of (2 + 1)gravity.
the problem may be cured by applying a gauge trans-
formation (9) to the local solution ai  0 so as to ob-
tain a solution with nondegenerate zweibein. however,
in contrast to chernsimons theory, where the behavior
of a under nite (nonabelian) gauge transformations is
known, the innitesimal gauge symmetries (9) cannot be
integrated in general (except for the case where the pois-
son tensor is (at most) linear in the elds x i and the
theory reduces to a (non)abelian gauge theory). we thus
need to introduce one further step.

for the poisson brackets (7) a possible choice for a

casimir function c, {c,}  0, is

c =

1
2

xax a + 2u2 

i
8

u .

(10)

4

this expression basically coincides with the casimir
found in the bosonic theory: as there the last two terms
are the integral of p 01 with respect to ,  poisson
commuting with all bosonic variables. we now choose
new coordinates on (patches of) n (where x a 6= 0) ac-
cording to

x i := (c, ln |x +|, , ) ,

(11)

with the null coordinates x  := (x 1  x 0)/2. (an ar-
gumentation similar to the following one may be applied
also if ln|x +| is replaced by x + in (11)). (c, ln |x +|, )
provides a cd coordinate system in the purely bosonic
sector (cf. also [7]); however, in the vedimensional tar-
get space n , these coordinates are far from being cd,
several brackets still containing the potential u().
it
thus seems rather dicult to solve the eld equations for
eld variables (11). however, from our considerations
above, we know that up to poisson gauge transforma-
tions the local solution always takes the from ai  0,
c = const, ln|x +| =  =  = 0. in these eld vari-
ables, induced by the coordinates (11), it is now possible
to gauge transform this explicitly to a solution with non-
degenerate zweibein and, simultaneously, the resulting
solution may be transformed back to the original vari-
ables used in (5)  this is possible since in contrast to

are known explicitly in terms of the original variables.

the cd coordinates ex i used above, the coordinates x i

it is straightforward to verify that on the above so-
lutions the innitesimal gauge transformations (9) with
(i) := (c, +, 0, 0, 0) are simply:

ac = c ,  a+ = d+ ,  = + ,

(12)

with all other variations vanishing. note that, e.g., in
the second relation we dropped terms proportional to
a, since a can be kept zero consistently by the above
transformations due to  a = 0. it is thus possible to
integrate the gauge symmetries (12): ac  ac + df1,
   + f2, a+  a+ + df2 (all other elds remaining
unaltered) where f1,2 is an arbitrary pair of functions
on the 2d spacetime. the degenerate solution is then
transformed into ac = df1, a+ = df2, a = a = 0,
c = const, ln|x +| =  = 0, and  = f2. using f1
and f2 as coordinates x1 and x0 on the worldsheet, re-
spectively, and transforming these solutions back to the
original variables (6) (using ai = aj( x j/x i)), we
obtain:

(e+, e, ) = (dx1, dx0 + 1

2 h(x0)dx1,h(x0)dx1) ,

(x +, x , ) = (1, 1

2 h(x0), x0) ,

(13)

where h(x0)  c  2u2(x0), c being the constant value
of the casimir (10). all the fermionic variables vanish
identically.

thus, up to gauge transformations, the local solu-
tion agrees completely with the one found in the purely
bosonic dilaton theory (1). this applies at least to those

5

patches where the above coordinate systems are applica-
ble. since, e.g., all the xed points of the supersym-
metric bracket (7) lie entirely within the bosonic sec-
tor of the target space, we expect that there are also
no exceptional solutions, containing (necessarily) nonva-
nishing fermionic elds. moreover, the subsequent global
analysis of [7] may be applied to the solutions (13) with-
out change.

so the characterization of the dynamics of the general
supersymmetric extension of (1) turns out to be less dif-
cult than it appeared at the time when [2] was written
(cf the remarks following equation (50) of that paper).
rather, it appears that the supersymmetric extension of
(1) is trivial (onshell), at least at the classical level.

it would be interesting to check this result by some
other method and to possibly establish it in a less indi-
rect way. it is to be expected, moreover, that a similar
result holds also on the quantum level.

let us nally remark that the supersymmetric exten-
sion may still be of some value even on the purely classical
level: in [2] it was used, e.g., to establish the positivity
of (some notion of) the mass (presumably closely re-
lated to the casimir c above, cf. [16]) in a large class of
(nonsupersymmetric) models (1) coupled to matter elds.
further investigations of 2d dilatonic supergravity theo-
ries, including generalizations to theories with nontrivial
torsion and a comparison to the existing literature [17] is
in preparation [14].

acknowledgments

the author gratefully acknowledges discussions with
m. ertl, c. gutsfeld, w. kummer, d. roytenberg and
p. schaller.

[1] t. banks and m. oloughlin, nucl. phys. b362 (1991),
649; s.d. odintsov, i.l. shapiro, phys. lett. b263
(1991), 183; d. louis-martinez, j. gegenberger, g. kun-
statter, phys. lett. b321 (1994), 193.

[2] y. park and a. strominger, phys. rev. d47, 1569 (1993).
[3] p.s. howe, j. phys. a12, 393 (1997).
[4] p. schaller and t. strobl, mod. phys. lett. a9 (1994),
3129; t. strobl, poisson structure induced field theo-
ries and models of 1+1 dimensional gravity, phd thesis,
vienna 1994; p. schaller and t. strobl, hep-th/9411163;
a. alekseev, p. schaller and t. strobl phys. rev. d 52
(1995) 7146. for older related work cf. n. ikeda, ann.
phys. 235, 435 (1994) and p. schaller and t. strobl,
lecture notes in physics 436 (1994) 98, eds. a. alek-
seev et al, springer. for some recent progress cf. a.s.
cattaneo and g. felder, a path integral approach to the
kontsevich quantization formula math/9902090.

[5] p. schaller and t. strobl, lecture notes in physics 469, p.
321-333, low-dimensional models in statistical physics
and quantum field theory, eds. h. grosse and l. pit-
tner, springer 1996 (hep-th/9507020).

[6] m. henneaux and c. teitelboim, quantization of gauge

systems, princeton university press 1992.

[7] t. klosch and t. strobl, class. quantum grav. 13 (1996)
965, corr. 14 (1997), 825; ibid. 13 (1996) 2395; ibid. 14
(1997), 1689.

[8] j.m. izquierdo, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 084017.
[9] n. ikeda, int. j. mod. phys. a9 (1994) 1137; ann. phys.

235 (1994) 435.

[10] d. sullivan, inst. des haut etud. sci. pub. math. 47, 269

(1977).

[11] p. schaller and t. strobl, phys. letts. b337, 266 (1994);
h.j. matschull, on the relation between 2+1 einstein
gravity and chern simons theory, gr-qc/9903040.

[12] m.o. katanaev and i.v. volovich, phys. lett. b175
(1986) 413; m.o. katanaev, em j. math. phys. 31, 882
(1990); w. kummer and d.j. schwarz, phys. rev. d45,
3628 (1992); p. schaller and t. strobl, class. quant.
grav. 11 (1994) 331.

[13] w. kummer, private communication.
[14] m. ertl, w. kummer and t. strobl, in preparation.
[15] a. weinstein, j. di. geom. 18, 523 (1983).
[16] w. kummer and s. lau, annals phys. 258 (1997) 37-
80; j. gegenberg, g. kunstatter and d. louismartinez,
phys. rev. d57, 3537 (1998).

[17] s. nojiri and i. oda, mod. phys. lett. a8 (1993) 53.
a. bilal, phys. rev. d48 (1993) 1665. a.h. chamsed-
dine, phys. lett. b258, 97 (1991). d. cangemi and m.
leblanc, nucl. phys. b420, 363 (1994). v.o. rivelles,
phys. lett. b321 (1994) 189. m. ertl, m.o. katanaev
and w. kummer, nucl. phys. b530, 457 (1998).

6

