june 1999
uw/pt 99-10
hep-th/9906011

an elliptic superpotential for softly broken
n = 4 supersymmetric yang-mills theory

n. dorey

department of physics, university of washington, box 351560

seattle, washington 98195-1560, usa

and

department of physics, university of wales swansea

singleton park, swansea, sa2 8pp, uk

abstract

an exact superpotential is derived for the n = 1 theories which arise as massive de-
formations of n = 4 supersymmetric yang-mills (sym) theory. the superpotential
of the su(n) theory formulated on r3s1 is shown to coincide with the complexied
potential of the n-body elliptic calogero-moser hamiltonian. this superpotential re-
produces the vacuum structure predicted by donagi and witten for the corresponding
four-dimensional theory and also transforms covariantly under the s-duality group of
n = 4 sym. the analysis yields exact formulae with interesting modular properties
for the condensates of gauge-invariant chiral operators in the four-dimensional theory.

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

7

 
 

2
v
1
1
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1 introduction and review

four-dimensional gauge theories with n = 4 supersymmetry are believed to provide
an exact realization of the duality between electric and magnetic charges originally
proposed by montonen and olive [1]. the extent to which this duality is preserved
in theories with less supersymmetry, obtained as massive deformations of the n = 4
theory, is an important and interesting question. for deformations which preserve
n = 2 supersymmetry, the exact solution of the corresponding low-energy theory is
determined by a complex curve which is manifestly invariant under sl(2, z) trans-
formations. the relevant curve was given by seiberg and witten for gauge group
su(2) [2], and subsequently generalized to the su(n) case by donagi and witten
[3]. the singularities of these curves also determine the vacuum structure of the the-
ories obtained by breaking n = 4 supersymmetry down to an n = 1 subalgebra. in
terms of n = 1 supersymmetry, these theories contain a vector multiplet and three
massive adjoint chiral multiplets. donagi and witten used this correspondence to
show that the n = 1 theory with gauge group su(n) has a total of pd|n d massive

vacua which are permuted by s-duality transformations. for n > 2, the theory also
has massless vacua.

in this paper, i will present an alternative analysis of the n = 1 theories de-
scribed above. the approach followed, based on that of [5], is to compactify the
four-dimensional theory on a circle of radius r. as we review below, the su(n)
theory then has a coulomb branch parametrized by n chiral superelds1, x a, which
take values on a torus whose complex structure parameter  is the complexied gauge
coupling. the main result is that the exact superpotential of the theory is,

w = m1m2m3 xa>b p(xa  xb)

(1)

where mi, i = 1, 2, 3 are the masses of the adjoint chiral multiplets and p is the
weierstrass function [6]. note that w does not depend on r. in the limit r  ,
comparison with the four-dimensional results of [3] provides a detailed test of this
proposal. in particular, we will see that w has a set of critical points which match
the singular points of the donagi-witten curves. the superpotential (1) transforms
with weight two under sl(2, z) modular transformations and the action of s-duality
on the massive vacua predicted in [3] is manifest in this approach.

1some conventions used throughout this paper: cartan algebra valued elds for su (n ) such as
x = x ah a have n components x a, a = 1, . . . , n , which are subject to the constraintpn
a=1 x a = 0.
the only exception is for gauge group su (2) where we work with a single unconstrained eld
x = x 2  x 1. supersymmetries are counted with four-dimensional conventions throughout. thus
n = 1 always denotes a theory with four supercharges.

1

for massive theories with n = 1 supersymmetry we typically expect to obtain
exact results for the condensates of gauge-invariant chiral operators [7, 8]. where a
description in terms of soft breaking of n = 2 supersymmetry exists, such results can
be obtained directly from the corresponding complex curve. for example consider
the condensates un = htrni, n = 2, . . . , n, where  is one of the adjoint scalar
in principle, the values of the un in each vacuum be
elds of the su(n) theory.
infered from the location of the corresponding singular point in the moduli space of
the donagi-witten curve. in practice, this is approach is not straightforward because
there is no explicit formula for the su(n) curve. as a simple application of the
superpotential described above, i calculate the exact value of the condensate u2 in
each massive vacuum of the su(n) theory when n is prime. the resulting set of
vacuum values transforms with weight two under sl(2, z), modulo the expected per-
mutations of the vacua. for a related approach to calculating the gluino condensate
in n = 1 supersymmetric yang-mills theory see [9]. additional recent discussion
of the superpotential of n = 1 sym in four dimensions is given in [10]. another
interesting aspect of these results is that the superpotential (1) coincides with the
(complexied) potential of the elliptic calogero-moser hamiltonian. the latter is the
integrable system associated with the donagi-witten solution of the four-dimensional
n = 2 theory mentioned above [11]. this reveals an interesting connection between
n = 1 theories and integrability which is sketched in the nal section of the paper.

1.1 the four-dimensional theory

we begin by considering n = 4 supersymmetric yang-mills (sym) theory with
gauge group su(n) in four dimensions. in terms of n = 1 superelds this theory
contains a gauge multiplet v as well as three chiral multiplets i, i = 1, 2, 3 in the
adjoint representation of su(n). the superspace lagrangian includes a superpoten-
tial w = tr(1[2, 3]) which preserves an su(4) r-symmetry but explicitly breaks
the potentially anomalous global u(1) under which the i each transform with charge
+1. soft breaking to n = 1 is accomplished by introducing masses mi for each chiral
supereld i. including these terms the superpotential becomes,

w = tr(cid:16)1[2, 3] + m12

1 + m22

3(cid:17)
2 + m32

(2)

for generic values of the masses mi, the su(4) r-symmetry is completely broken. it
is convenient to rescale the chiral superelds as 1 = 2m2m3x, 2 = 2m3m1y ,
3 = 2m1m2z. up to an overall factor, the superpotential becomes,

w = tr(cid:18)1

2

(x 2 + y 2 + z 2)  x[y, z](cid:19)

(3)

2

following [12, 3], we will now determine vacuum structure of the classical theory
with superpotential (2). to do this we must impose the f-term equations which come
from varying w with respect to x, y and z. the rst equation is x = [y, z] and
the other two are generated by cyclic permutation of the three superelds. a super-
symmetric vacuum is therefore described by three n  n matrices which obey the
commutation relations of an su(2) lie algebra. however, we still have to impose the
corresponding d-term equations and mod out by su(n) gauge transformations. as
usual these two steps can be combined by dividing out the action of the complexied
gauge group sl(n, c) on x, y and z. in fact, up to an sl(n, c) gauge transfor-
mation, there is exactly one solution of the su(2) commutation relations in terms
of n  n matrices for each n-dimensional representation of su(2). except for the
unique irreducible representation of dimension n, each representation can be decom-
posed as the sum of irreducible pieces of dimensions n1, n2, . . . nr with pl nl = n.

in general, unless the representation is trivial, the corresponding non-zero values of
the adjoint scalar elds break the gauge group su(n) down to a subgroup h. the
vacuum structure for each representation  is essentially determined by h and may
be analysed as follows:

1 if  is the irreducible representation, the gauge group is completely broken. in
this case the theory is in a higgs phase with a mass gap. as the theory remains
weakly coupled at all energy scales, the semiclassical analysis can be taken at face
value and we nd exactly one vacuum.

2 if  is trivial, the gauge group is completely unbroken and the theory is in a
conning phase. at low energies, the adjoint matter multiplets decouple and the
theory ows to n = 1 sym. the eective theory therefore becomes strongly-coupled
in particular n = 1 sym has an z2n global
in the ir and generates mass gap.
symmetry which is spontaneously broken to z2 by gluino condensation giving n
supersymmetric vacua [7, 8]. cases where  is the sum of d irreducible representations
each of the same dimension also lead to connement. in these cases h = su(d) and
the theory ows to n = 1 sym with this gauge group. by similar reasoning this
gives d massive supersymmetric vacua.

3 in the remaining cases  includes irreducible pieces of dierent dimensions and
the unbroken gauge group includes abelian factors. this means that the theory is
realized in a coulomb phase with at least one massless photon.

combining case 1 and 2 we nd that the total number of massive vacua of the
su(n) theory is the sum of the divisors of n. the case where n is prime is particu-
larly straightforward as only the irreducible and the trivial representations contribute

3

and hence there are exactly n + 1 massive vacua. in particular, the above analy-
sis reveals that the su(2) theory has three massive vacua, one in the higgs phase
and two in the connement phase. the possibility of massless vacua rst arises for
gauge group su(3) where  can be chosen as a sum of one copy of the trivial rep-
resentation and one of the fundamental. in this conguration the unbroken gauge
group is u(1)  su(2). donagi and witten showed that choice leads to a single
supersymmetric vacuum in the coulomb phase.

1.2 compactication to three dimensions

we now consider what happens if one compacties the four-dimensional theory
introduced above to three dimensions on a circle of radius r. the most obvious
modication is that the theory acquires new scalar degrees of freedom which come
from the wilson lines of the four-dimensional gauge eld around the compact dimen-
sion. non-zero values for these scalars generically break the gauge group down to
its maximal abelian subalgebra; su(n)  u(1)n 1. hence, at the classical level,
the compactied theory has a coulomb branch. by a gauge rotation, the wilson
line can be chosen to lie in the cartan subalgebra,  = ah a. each scalar a is re-
lated to the corresponding cartan component of the four-dimensional gauge eld as

a = rs1 aa  dx. as a consequence, a can be shifted by an integer multiple of 2 by

performing a topologically non-trivial gauge transformation which is single-valued in
su(n)/zn . as there are no elds in the theory which are charged under the center
of the gauge group, it is consistent to divide out by all such gauge transformations.
thus we learn that each a is a periodic variable with period 2.

i , with pn

a=1 aa

i , in favour of n scalars a subject to pn

in addition to the n periodic scalars a, the low energy theory on the coulomb
branch also includes n massless photons aa
i = 0, where i = 1, 2, 3 is a
three-dimensional lorentz index. in three dimensions, a massless abelian gauge eld
can be eliminated in favour of a scalar by a duality transformation. thus we can
i=1 a = 0. in
eliminate the gauge elds aa
particular, the elds a appear in the eective action as lagrange multipliers for the
bianchi identity: l  ijkifjk. after integrating by parts, we obtain a term which
only depends on ia not on a itself. however, integrating by parts also gives rise to
a surface term in the action which is proportional to the magnetic charge. specically,
the normalization of a is chosen so that the resulting term in the action is precisely
iaka where ka is the magnetic charge in the u(1) subgroup corresponding to the
cartan generator h a. the dirac quantization condition implies that each magnetic
charge is quantized in integer units: ka  z, and so the path integral is invariant
under shifts of the form a  a + 2na with na  z. thus, like a, each a is a
periodic variable with period 2.

4

in the simplest case of gauge group su(2), we have two periodic scalars  = 12
and  = 1  2. after dividing out by the weyl group of su(2), the classical
coulomb branch is t 2/z2 where t 2 is the two dimensional torus parametrized by 
and . the z2 gauge symmetry has four xed points at (, ) = (0, 0), (, 0), (0, )
and (, ). the xed point at the origin (, ) = (0, 0) is special because, at least in
the classical theory, the non-abelian gauge symmetry is restored at this point. this
means, in particular, that there are additional massless degrees of freedom and a
naive description in terms of the elds  and  should break down. in fact, the three-
dimensional duality transformation by which  was introduced is only possible when
the low-energy theory is abelian and hence cannot be implemented at this point. we
will nd below that the origin continues to have a distinguished role in the quantum
theory. in contrast, the other three xed points can be taken at face value as orbifold
points of the z2 gauge symmetry: no additional massless degrees of freedom appear
at these points.

the low-eective energy eective action on the classical coulomb branch of the
su(2) theory is obtained by compactication of a four-dimensional u(1) gauge theory
with gauge coupling g2 and vacuum angle  [5]. the resulting three-dimensional
theory is a non-linear -model with target space t 2/z2. the bosonic terms in the
action are,

se =

1

16r z d3x  4

g2 !2

+  +


2

!2

(4)

(6)

this lagrangian has a unique extension with n = 1 supersymmetry. to make this
explicit we combine the real scalars  and  to form a complex scalar x = i( +  )
where  = 4i/g2 + /2 is the usual complexied coupling. the action becomes,

se =

1

16r z d3x

1
im

x x

(5)

this is the standard action for a non-linear -model with a complex torus e as
target. e has periods 21 = 2i and 22 = 2i , and area a = 1/16r. the
n = 1 supersymmetric extension of the action is obtained by promoting x to a
chiral supereld. the resulting lagrangian can be written as a d-term in n = 1
superspace,

with the kahler potential kcl = x x/(16rim ).

le = z d2d2  kcl[x, x]

the above discussion generalizes easily to gauge group su(n) with n  2. in this
case we have n chiral superelds x a = i(a +  a). for a generic point on the
classical coulomb branch the unbroken gauge group is u(1)n 1. on submanifolds

5

where one or more of the x a coincide, a non-abelian gauge symmetry is restored. as
for su(2), the scalar elds naturally take values on a complex torus e with complex
structure parameter  . we must also divide by weyl gauge transformations which
permute the n cartan generators. thus the u(n) coulomb branch is the symmetric
product symn (e) = en /sn where sn is the permutation group of n objects. as
above, we restrict to gauge group su(n) by imposing pn
a=1 x a = 0. the low-energy
eective action on the coulomb branch is therefore n = 1 supersymmetric -model
with target en 1/sn . the kahler metric on the target manifold is obtained from
the kahler potential kcl = pn

a=1 x a x a/(16rim  ).

at a generic point on the classical coulomb branch the chiral superelds x a are
the only massless degrees of freedom. as discussed above, the only exceptional points
are those at which a non-abelian subgroup of the gauge group is restored. away from
these points all other elds in the theory acquire masses via the higgs mechanism.
in this case we expect to be able integrate out the massive degrees of freedom and
derive an eective action for the x a. as we must preserve n = 1 supersymmetry,
the most general possible action, including terms with at most two derivatives or four
fermions is,

le = z d2d2  k[x a, x a] + z d2 w(x a) + z d2  w( x a)

(7)

where w(x a) is a holomorphic superpotential which lifts all or part of the vacuum
degeneracy. the supersymmetric vacua of the theory are then determined by the
stationary points of the superpotential. in general, this description of the low-energy
physics is self-consistent only if the resulting vacua are located away from the point
x = 0.

in the classical theory the kahler potential is given by kcl dened above and the
superpotential vanishes identically. quantum corrections will modify both the d-
term and the f-term in the superspace action. in general the exact eective action
will depend in a complicated way on the parameters of the theory, including  , r
and mi, with i = 1, 2, 3. as usual, corrections to the kahler potential are relatively
unconstrained and therefore hard to determine.
in contrast, the superpotential is
constrained by holomorphy in the elds x a. by standard arguments [13], the su-
perpotential is also holomorphic in the complexied coupling  and the masses mi.
in many similar situations in three and four dimensions, global symmetries provide
further constraints on w. the present case is somewhat dierent as, for generic val-
ues of the masses mi, the theory has no unbroken global symmetries. however, as
we discuss below, we have instead a dierent constraint which is special to theories
with compact dimensions: each chiral supereld x a is a complex variable with two
periods. in section 3, the consequences of double-periodicity and holomorphy will be

6

exploited to to determine the exact superpotential. however, as a preliminary, we
will rst discuss the quantum corrections to the superpotential in the weak-coupling
limit   i.

2 semiclassical analysis

in the weak coupling limit, the path integral is dominated by eld congurations of
minimum action in each topological sector. in the following discussion we will restrict
our attention to the euclidean theory with gauge group su(2). gauge eld congura-
tions in the compactied theory are labelled by two distinct kinds of topological charge
[14]. the rst is the pontryagin number carried by instantons in four-dimensions,

p =

1

82 zr3s1

tr [f  f ]

(8)

the 4d instanton number appears in the microscopic action as the term ip. for
each value of p, the action is minimized by congurations which solve the (anti-)self-
dual yang-mills equation. an important feature of the compactied theory which
diers from the theory on r4 is that p is not quantized in integer units. however, for
each integer value of p, the theory has solutions with action scl = 82|p|/g2  ip.
thus we have scl = 2ip for p > 0 and scl = 2ip for p < 0. when the instanton
scale size is much less than the compactication radius, these solutions are close to
their counterparts on r4, thus we will call them four-dimensional (4d) instantons.

in addition to the usual four-dimensional instantons, the compactied theory also

has nite action congurations which carry three-dimensional magnetic charge,

k =

1

8 zr3

~  ~b  z

(9)

where bi = ijkf jk/2 is the abelian magnetic eld of the low-energy theory. a useful
way to think about these congurations is to introduce a ctitious fth dimension.
as our starting point is a euclidean theory with four space-like dimensions, we will
interpret the new coordinate as time. with this interpretation, the wilson lines
play the role of the adjoint higgs elds in the bogomolnyi equation and the theory
has static bps monopole solutions. as usual, quantization of magnetic charge can
be understood either from diracs argument or by identifying k with an element
of the non-trivial homotopy group 2[su(2)/u(1)] = z. as these congurations
do not depend either on the time or on the coordinate of the compactied spatial
dimension, we will refer to them as three-dimensional (3d) instantons. in addition
to the integer-valued magnetic charge k, these 3d instantons also carry fractional
pontryagin number p = /2 [15]. the magnetic charge appears in the action as the

7

term ik while, as above, 4d instanton number appears as the term ip. including
these term the action of a 3d instanton can be written as s3d = i |k| + ik. thus
we have s3d = kx for k > 0, and s3d = k x for k < 0.

as discussed in the previous section, n = 1 supersymmetry permits a non-zero
holomorphic superpotential w(x). although the superpotential is absent in the
classical theory it can be generated by quantum eects [16]. the leading semiclassical
contribution of a 4d instanton (for p > 0) is exp(s4d) = exp(2ip ) = qp while that
of a 3d instanton (for k > 0) is exp(s3d) = exp(kx). as these contributions are
holomorphic in  and x respectively, both kinds of instantons potentially contribute
to the superpotential at leading semiclassical order. in order to decide whether these
contributions are non-zero, we need to examine the fermion zero modes of each type
of instanton. in particular, the superpotential contains couplings which are bilinear
in weyl fermions of one four-dimensional chirality. to contribute, an instanton must
therefore have exactly two zero modes of the same chirality.

before discussing each type of instanton individualy, it is possible to make some
comments which apply equally to 3d instantons, 4d instantons and also to some
more exotic solutions which we will meet below. as both 3d and 4d instantons
satisfy the self-dual yang-mills equation, both are invariant under supercharges of
one four-dimensional chirality. however, the action of the remaining supercharges on
the instanton is non-trivial and, by goldstones theorem, each generates a fermion
zero mode. thus in a theory with n = 1 supersymmetry (ie four supercharges),
the existence of the required zero modes is guarenteed for both types of instanton.
however, for any self-dual conguration, index theorems suggest the existence a much
larger number of zero modes. specically, they suggest a number of zero modes which
grows linearly with the topological charge. if these zero modes were really present,
instanton contributions to the superpotential would vanish except, perhaps, in the
sector of lowest topological charge. in fact, in a wide range of cases [17, 18, 19], we
know that almost all of these zero modes are lifted by quantum eects. typically
this is possible because the relevant index theorems do not take into account yukawa
couplings between fermions and the scalar elds of the theory. the only exceptions
are zero modes whose existence is guarenteed by an unbroken symmetry of the theory.
in particular, this is the case for the two zero modes corresponding to the action of
the supercharges on the instanton.

the 3d instantons which carry magnetic charge k provide a concrete illustration
of the general discussion given above. as these congurations are essentially bps
monopoles, the callias index theorem predicts the existence of 2k zero modes for
each species of massless adjoint weyl fermion. it is convenient to start by considering

8

the case when the three masses mi are set to zero. in this case, we have an n = 4
supersymmetric theory with four massless species of weyl fermion and we nd a total
of 8k zero modes. as we now have sixteen supercharges, eight of these modes are
goldstone modes for the half of the supersymmetry algebra which acts non-trivially
on self-dual congurations. these modes are protected from quantum corrections
by supersymmetry and therfore remain as exact zero modes in the n = 4 quantum
theory. the remaining modes are not protected by any symmetry and can thus be
lifted in the quantum eects.
in fact, at least in the three-dimensional limit, this
lifting was demonstrated explicitly in [19]. the lifting occurs in a by now familiar
way: the classical instanton action acquires a four-fermion term which couples to the
riemann tensor on the monopole moduli space. because of this eect, 3d instantons
have eight exact zero modes and therefore contribute to an eight fermion vertex in
the eective action for each value of k. if we break n = 4 supersymmetry down to
n = 1 by reintroducing non-zero masses for the three adjoint chiral multiplets, six
of the eight zero modes are lifted and the instantons can contribute directly to the
superpotential. the leading semiclassical contribution of 3d instantons of positive
magnetic charge k, therefore has the form m1m2m3 exp(kx).

the form of the contribution of 3d instantons to the superpotential immediately
presents us with a puzzle. in the classical theory,  and  are both periodic variables
with period 2. at weak coupling, we might expect the action to respect both these
classical periodicities. this point will be discussed further below. for the moment it
suces to note that, as we have x = i( +  ), the instanton-generated term in the
superpotential is manifestly periodic in . however it is certainly not periodic in :
if we shift the wilson line  by 2, exp(x) picks up a factor of q = exp(2i ), the
factor associated with a 4d instanton! in fact this reects a phenomenon which has
recently been studied in detail by lee and yi [15]. recall that a single bps monopole
can be thought of as a radial kink in three-dimensional space which interpolates
between a coulomb phase vacuum at spatial innity and the symmetric vacuum at
the origin. similarly the 3d instanton described above interpolates between a vacuum
with non-zero wilson line (r = ) =  at radial innity and the symmetric vacuum
with (r = 0) = 0 at the origin. however as  is periodic, we could equally well
choose a solution of the bogomolnyi equations which has (r = ) =  + 2n for
any integer n  1. the new conguration is just the standard prasad-sommerfeld
solution appropriately rescaled to match the shifted value of the asymptotic wilson
line. these solutions have pontryagin number n + /2 and euclidean action,

s(n)
+ =

4
g2 ( + 2n)  i  i ( + 2n) = x  2i n

(10)

for each integer n  1.

9

so far we have an innite tower of 3d instantons, each with magnetic charge k = 1,
labelled by a positive integer n. the action of each member of the tower is related
to that of the ordinary 3d instanton by the replacement    + 2n. the idea now
is that we can potentially obtain a superpotential which is periodic in  by summing
over sectors of dierent n. however, for this to have any chance of working, we also
need to nd a solution corresponding to the replacement     2n for each n.
in fact the necessary solutions are also discussed in [15] and the surprise is that they
have negative magnetic charge k = 1. importantly these are solutions of the same
bogomolnyi equation bi = +di as the ordinary k = +1 monopole, and thus are
not related to the anti-monopole which satises bi = di. this possiblity arises
because of the periodicity of the wilson line which allows us to consider higgs elds
which have a positive value at the origin and decrease in the radial direction. by
changing the sign of the radial derivative of  we then change the sign on the right-
hand side of the bogomolnyi equation. in this way we obtain an innite tower of
k = 1 solutions with action,

s(n)
 =

4
g2 (2n  )  i  i (2n  ) = x  2i n

(11)

for each integer n  1. the fact that these congurations have negative magnetic
charge yet satisfy the bogomolnyi equation with positive sign is reected in the fact
that the action is holomorphic in x rather than anti-holomorphic as would be the
case for the action of an anti-monopole.

the above discussion should generalize in a straightforward way to higher magnetic
charge: in addition to the usual charge-k 3d instanton with action kx we nd two
innite towers of solutions with action ks(n)
 respectively, n  1, with
magnetic charges +k and k. also, the analysis of the fermion zero modes given
above for the ordinary charge-k 3d instanton solution applies equaly to each member
in the tower: all zero modes not protected by supersymmetry should be lifted by
quantum eects. including the eects of non-zero masses, we nd that congurations
in each sector have only two exact zero modes and can therefore contribute to the
superpotential.

+ and ks(n)

finally, we still have to discuss the contribution of ordinary 4d instantons. as
discussed in [15], 4d instantons have a very natural description in terms of the con-
gurations described above. consider for example a conguration corresponding to
an ordinary 3d instanton with k = +1 together with the lowest member (n = 1) of
the k = 1 tower at large spatial separation. a priori this is only an approximate
solution of the eld equations. however, because of the sign ip in the bogomolnyi
equation, the forces between the two constituent objects cancel and it is plausible
that a corresponding exact solution of the self-dual yang-mills equations exists. as

10

the action of this conguration is 2i , this solution is naturally identied with a sin-
gle yang-mills instanton on r3  s1. according to the atiyah-singer index theorem
a single su(2) instanton has four fermion zero modes per species of massless weyl
fermion. in the presence of non-zero masses mi, we have a single massless gluino and
thus four zero modes. this counting agrees with the fact that the two constituent 3d
instantons have two zero modes each. however, as above, only two zero modes are
protected by supersymmetry and we expect the two remaining modes to be lifted. in
the four-dimensional theory, the extra modes are generated by superconformal trans-
formations in the instanton background and are protected if this symmetry remains
unbroken. in the present case, even when the masses mi are zero, superconformal
invariance is broken by compactication on r3  s1.

similar considerations indicate that 4d instantons can contribute to the superpo-
tential for each topological charge p > 0. these congurations have magnetic charge
zero and so they simply contribute a constant term proportional to m1m2m3qp. as
only the derivatives of the superpotential with respect to the chiral eld x appear
in the low energy eective action, one might wonder whether such a term has any
signicance. in fact these terms contribute directly to the greens functions of chi-
ral operators. for example, the gluino condensate is given by the standard relation,
hi = w, which is obtained by promoting  to a background chiral supereld [20].

putting everything together we can write out the most general possible superpo-

tential which can generated at leading semiclassical order,

w = m1m2m3



xp=1

apqp + m1m2m3







xk=1
bk exp(kx)
xn=1

xk=1

+ m1m2m3

ck,nqkn exp(kx) + dk,nqkn exp(+kx)

(12)

in fact, we can immediately rule out any perturbative corrections to this result by
noting that dependence on the vacuum angle  cannot arise in perturbation theory.
by holomorphy in  , any powers g2 appearing in the superpotential are necessarily
accompanied by -dependence and are thus forbidden. this argument applies equally
to perturbation theory in the vacuum sector or in an instanton background. the ex-
act superpotential is therefore completely determined at leading semiclassical order.
this means in particular that the dimensionless coecients ap, bk, ck,n and dk,n do
not depend on x or on  . however, at this point it appears that they can be arbi-
trary functions of the three dimensionless parameters mir. in the rest of the paper
we present arguments which determine the exact superpotential and, therefore, the

11

corresponding coecients. in particular we will discover that the superpotential is
actually independent of r.

the discussion given above implicitly assumes that the quantum theory has a
regime in which the degrees of freedom corresponding to the chiral supereld x
are weakly-coupled and a semiclassical analysis makes sense. in such a regime the
instanton corrections appearing on the rhs of (12) should be exponentially small.
apart from requiring g2 << 1, this condition also constrains x. in similar situations
in three or four dimensions, we could ensure weak coupling by going to an asymptotic
region of the moduli space where the scalar elds have large expectation values. the
present case is more subtle because the coulomb branch is a compact torus. in par-
ticular, this is reected by the presence of terms of order qk exp(+kx) in (12) which
grow exponentially as g2  0 if  > 2. similarly the terms of order exp(kx)
grow at weak coupling for  < 0. however, provided we choose a wilson line in the
range 0 <  < 2, then every term in (12) vanishes exponentially as g2  0. in this
region of eld space, the weak coupling analysis given in this section is reliable. at
rst sight this restriction on , seems to contradict the fact that the classical theory
is periodic in this variable. as anticipated above, the resolution of this puzzle must
be that the periodicity of w in  is only visible after summing over lee-yi copies
and multi-instantons. a semiclassical expansion of the superpotential can then be
performed for any value of  6= 2n after an appropriate change of variables. in the
next section, this idea will be implemented explicitly.

3 the exact superpotential

the superpotential of the su(2) theory is a holomorphic function on the chiral
supereld x = i( +  ). the weak coupling arguments given in the previous sec-
tion indicate that this function should respect the classical periodicity of the variables
 and . thus, w(x) is a holomorphic function dened on the complex torus e.
the superpotential should also be invariant under the weyl group of su(2) which
acts as x  x. as w(x) is a non-constant holomorphic function on a compact
domain it must have a singularity somewhere. as usual such a singularity should
correspond to a point at which our low-energy description of the theory breaks down
due to the presence of extra light degrees of freedom. there is only one such point
on the classical moduli space: the origin x = 0 where non-abelian gauge symmetry
is restored. thus we will assume that w has an isolated singularity at this point
and no other singularities. in fact we will limit ourselves further by concentrating
on the minimal case where the singuarity is a pole, providing numerous checks that
the resulting solution is correct. at rst sight, the presence of a singularity at the
origin in the quantum theory might seem to be in conict with our understanding of

12

n = 2 theories in four dimensions [4, 2]. in such theories, the classical singularity
at the origin of the coulomb branch is split by strong-coupling eects into two or
more singularities where bps monopoles or dyons become massless. however, in the
present context, four-dimensional monopoles correspond to instantons and do not ap-
pear as states in the hilbert space. thus candidates for the massless states required
to explain multiple singularities are absent.

it follows from the above discussion that we are looking for a meromorphic function
on the torus e which is even under the action of the weyl group. it is convenient to
introduce an explicit realization of the torus e as the quotient c/ where  is the
lattice,

 = {z = 2m1 + 2n2 : (m, n)  z 2}

(13)

with 2/1 =  . comparing with the results of section 1.2 we have 1 = i. a
period parallelogram is any set of the form,

d(z0) = {z = z0 + 21 + 22 : ,   [0, 1)}

(14)

complex z0  c. a meromorphic function on e is the same as a meromorphic doubly-
periodic function on the complex plane with periods 21 and 22. these are known
as elliptic functions and they are very highly constrained objects (see for example
[6]). some relevant facts are:

1 elliptic functions are classied by their order, , which is equal to the total
number of poles in any period parallelogram d counting by multiplicity (ie a double
pole contributes +2 to ).

2 an elliptic function attains an arbitrary complex value  times in a period paral-
lelogram counting by multiplicity. thus the total number of zeros in d is also equal
to .

3 only the constant function has  = 0 and there are no functions with  = 1.

the basic example of a function with  = 2 is the weierstrass function,

p(x : ) =

=

1

x 2 + xw {0}"
x 2 + xm,n6=(0,0)"

1

1

1

w 2#

(x  w )2 
(x  2m1  2n2)2 

1

1

(2m1 + 2n2)2#

(15)

p(x) has a double pole at x = 0. at  = 2 there are also the jacobian elliptic
functions which have two single poles in d.

13

4 the derivative of an elliptic function is an elliptic function with the same periods.

in fact p (x) is related to p(x) by the dierential equation,

dx!2
  dp

= 4p 3  g2( )p  g3( )
= (p  e1( ))(p  e2( ))(p  e3( ))

(16)

(17)

where

g2 = 60 x(m,n)6=(0,0)

1

(2m1 + 2n2)4

g3 = 140 x(m,n)6=(0,0)

1

(2m1 + 2n2)6

5 the weierstrass function is even: p(x) = p(x). any even elliptic function
can be expressed as a rational function of p(x). correspondingly any odd elliptic
function can be expressed as p (x) times a rational function of p(x).

as the weyl group action is x  x, w(x) must be an even elliptic function
and thus, from 5, a rational function of p(x). in fact, because the only singularity
of the superpotential is at the origin, w must be a polynomial in p(x). the order,
w, of w(x) is then twice the degree of this polynomial. from 4, we also learn that
the derivative of w is an odd elliptic function of order w + 1. to pin down the
exact function we seek, we must provide one more piece of physics input. recall that
the supersymmetric vacua of the theory correspond to the zeros of w/x. simple
zeros correspond to massive vacua while a higher order zero yields a vacuum with
massless particles. following [5], we will assume that the physics varies smoothly
with r and correspondingly we expect the number and type of vacua to be the same
as in the four-dimensional theory. according to the arguments in section 1.1, the
four-dimensional theory with gauge group su(2) and three massive chiral multiplets
has three vacua: two coming from the conning phase where the low energy theory
is n = 1 sym and an extra vacuum in which the gauge group is completely broken.
in each of these vacua, the theory has a mass gap. three massive vacua means that
w + 1 = 3. finally, as there is only one elliptic function of order two with a double
pole at the origin we have the result2,

w(x) = m1m2m3 (p(x) + c( ))

(18)

importantly, we have obtained a superpotential which is independent of r. strictly
speaking we have not determined the overall normalization of (18). this will ulti-
mately be determined (and shown to be independent of r) in the next section. note
also that, so far, we have only determined the superpotential up to the addititive
constant c( ). this ambiguity will be discussed further below.

2two dimensional landau-ginzburg theories with this superpotential have been considered be-

fore. see [21] and references therein.

14

from the dierential equation (16) we see that, as required, w/x has three
simple zeros and that the corresponding critical values w are e1( ), e2( ) and e3( ).
in fact these values are attained at the half-lattice points x = 1 = i x = 1 + 2 =
i( + 1) and x = 2 = i respectively. these are three of the four xed points of
the weyl group discussed in section 1.2 above. in the remainder of this section we
highlight several interesting features of this result:

modular properties: the lattice  is invariant under modular transformations
acting on the half-periods as 2  a2 + b1 and 1  c2 + d1 with a, b, c, d  z
and ad  bc = 1. as the function p(x) only depends on the choice of the lattice  it
is invariant under these transformations. recalling that  = 4i/g2 + /2 = 2/1
we see that these transformations correspond to the familiar action of s-duality on
the complexied coupling of the n = 4 theory, namely   (a + b)/(c + d). in
fact this is not quite the same as the action on the periods dened above because
we have 1 = i and 2 = i so only 2 transforms. s-duality corresponds to
a modular transformation of the lattice accompanied by a rescaling by a factor of
(c2 + d1) in order to preserve 1 = i. taking this into account we discover that
the superpotential w transforms with modular weight two under s-duality. this
means that the f-term eective lagrangian of the theory is invariant under s-duality
if we assign the superspace measure d2 modular weight 2.

it is also worth noting that any non-zero c( ) would spoil these modular properties,
or at least introduce unphysical poles for some values of  . the reason for this is as
follows: while w, as function of x and  , is free to transform with modular weight
two, a holomorphic function of  alone, with no poles in the fundamental domain
of sl(2, z), cannot. if it were to do so it would be a modular form of weight two
of which there are none [22]. thus modularity of the superpotential uniquely picks
c( ) = 0. the action of s-duality on the critical points of the potential is also
interesting. as above, w transforms with modular weight two, but its critical values
ei( ), as functions of  alone, cannot. the modular properties of the ei were described
in [2]. each is modular only with respect to a certain subgroup of the modular group.
under the rest of the modular transformations, the ei transform into each other. this
means that s-duality transformations permute the three vacua. this is very natural
in the light of the interpretation of these vacua given in [2]. in particular the three
vacua are associated with the condensation of elementary quanta, monopoles and
dyons respectively. as the s-duality of the n = 4 theory permutes these bps states
it is reasonable that it should do the same to the corresponding vacua of the n = 1
theory.

semiclassical expansion: in section 2, we argued that the exact superpotential
should have a very specic form at weak coupling with semiclassical contributions

15

from 4d instantons, 3d instantons together with two innite towers of lee-yi copies.
we can now expand our proposal for the exact superpotential in the semiclassical
limit and compare it with these expectations. expanding the weierstrass function
for   i we obtain,
w = m1m2m3

xk=1



(cid:17)
kqkn [exp(kx) + exp(+kx)  2]
(19)

k exp(kx) + m1m2m3

= m1m2m3

xn=

e2( ) +

2

sinh2(cid:16) x+2in
xn=1

xk=1





1
12



+

1
4

1

where e2( ) is the regulated eisenstein series of modular weight two [22]. comparing

with (12) we deduce that ap = pd|p d and bk = ck,n = dk,n = k. in hindsight, we could
have deduced the n-independence of the coecients ck,n and dk,n simply by requiring
2-periodicity of w in the wilson line . these predictions could be tested against
rst-principles eld theory calculations.

two limiting cases: we will now consider the limit in which we obtain a three
dimensional gauge theory. this corresponds to taking the limit r  0,   i
while keeping the three dimensional gauge coupling e2 = g2/r xed. in this limit,
the period of the torus associated with the wilson line goes to innity while the period
corresponding to the dual photon  stays xed. hence, both the 4d instantons and
the towers of lee-yi copies have innite action in this limit and the corresponding
contributions to w vanish giving,

w = m1m2m3

1

sinh2(cid:16) x
2(cid:17)

(20)

this is a prediction for the superpotential of a theory with n = 1 supersymme-
try which can be obtained as a massive deformation of the three-dimensional so(8)
invariant conformal eld theory with sixteen supercharges. note that the superpo-
tential has a double pole at the so(8) invariant point x = 0 where the coulomb
branch description breaks down. the theory has a single supersymmetric vacuum
at x = i which corresponds to an orbifold xed points at which the corresponding
theory with sixteen supercharges is believed to be free [24].
in the weak coupling
limit we can re-expand the superpotential and see that it includes an innite series
of 3d instanton corrections closely related to the 3d instanton series summed in [19]
for the theory with sixteen supercharges.

another interesting limit is obtained by keeping r nite but decoupling the three
chiral multiplets. this gives four-dimensional n = 1 sym theory with gauge group

16

1

su(2) compactied on a circle of radius r. thus we take the limit mi   and
  i with  = (m1m2m3)
6 held xed. naively, the superpotential appears to
be divergent in this case. in fact to obtain the correct answer we need to redene
our elds according to x = y  i . in terms of y , we see that precisely two terms
in (19) survive in this limit: the contribution from the 3d instanton with magnetic
2 exp(y ), and the n = 1 term in the tower of states
charge k = 1, which goes like q
with magnetic charge 1 which goes like q

2 exp(+y ). thus we nd,

1

1

3 q

1

w = 3 [exp(y ) + exp(+y )]

(21)

this agrees with the result obtained in [5, 23], which has also recently been derived
from rst principles in [9]. the fact that only two topological sectors contribute in
this limit is due to a global symmetry of the minimal n = 1 theory which is broken
explicitly in the full theory by couplings of the adjoint matter multiplets. the theory
has two supersymmetric vacua, located at y = i, which agrees with the witten
index of n = 1 susy yang-mills with gauge group su(2).

note that the two limits considered above are complimentary in a certain sense.
specically, we started from a coulomb branch t 2/z2 with four z2 xed points of
which three correspond to massive vacua. two of these vacua correspond to the
conning phase of the four-dimensional theory while one vacuum corresponds to the
higgs phase. the remaining xed point is a singular point of the superpotential. in
the weak coupling limit,   , one period of the torus diverges and the coulomb
branch becomes an innite cylinder. however, which points on the torus are sent to
innity depends on how x, mi and r scale in this limit. the three-dimensional limit
considered above corresponds to blowing up the region which contains the higgs
vacuum and the singularity. this sends the two connement vacua to innity.
in
contrast, the limit which yields n = 1 sym on r3  s1 corresponds to blowing up
the neighbourhood of the two conning vacua which sends the higgs vacuum and the
singular point to innity.

generalisation to gauge group su(n): the results described above have a
fairly obvious generalization to gauge group su(n).
in this section, rather than
giving detailed arguments, i will motivate an educated guess for the exact superpo-
tential. in subsequent sections i will present a detailed check that the answer is the
correct one.

for gauge group su(n), we have n chiral superelds x a a = 1, 2, . . . , n with
pn
a=1 x a = 0 and the classical coulomb branch is en 1/sn . the low energy gauge
group is u(1)n and thus we have n  1 species of 3d instantons which correspond to
magnetic monopoles associated with each simple root of su(n). for a = 1, . . . n  1

17

these contribute terms of order m1m2m3 exp(x ax a+1) to the superpotential [25, 23].
each of the fundamental monopoles will have a towers of lee-yi copies as well as a
series of multi-monopole corrections which must be summed over. applying the
arguments of the previous sections to constrain the the holomorphic dependence on
each of the complex variables x a  x a+1, we can argue that the summation must
convert each exponential to the corresponding doubly periodic function p(x ax a+1).
however there is also a new feature which enters for n > 2. in particular we must
also consider the contribution of monoples embedded in su(2) subgroups which cor-
respond to non-simple roots of su(n). the relevant congurations are ones which
include fundamental monopoles charged under two dierent magnetic u(1)s. index
theorems indicate that these congurations have more fermion zero modes than a
fundamental monopole.
if this were true these topological sectors would not con-
tribute to the superpotential. however, once again, the additional zero modes are
not protected by any symmetries and therefore will generically be lifted by quantum
eects. this eect has been explicity demonstrated in the three-dimensional theory
with sixteen supercharges by fraser and tong [26]. this suggests that we should nd
contributions to the superpotential which go like m1m2m3 exp(x a x b) for all a 6= b.
as above, summation over magnetic charges and the towers of copies should promote
each exponential to the doubly periodic function p(x a  x b). finally the results
of [26] suggest that, after taking into account the additional sectors, we should nd
complete democracy among the roots of su(n) with no set of simple roots playing
a prefered role. thus the 3d instanton corresponding to each root should contribute
to w with the same overall coecent. the proposal for the exact superpotential is
therefore,
(22)

w(x) = m1m2m3xa>bp(xa  xb)

where, taking the action of the weyl group into account, we have restricted the range
of the sum to a > b to avoid double-counting.

a detailed test of this proposal for arbitrary n will be given in section 5. however,
we can immediately provide a check on the result in the simplest non-trivial case
of gauge group su(3). recall that the vacua of the corresponding four dimensional
theory are in one to one correspondence with the three-dimensional representations
of su(2). according to the discussion in section 1.1, the su(3) theory has one
higgs phase vacuum corresponding to the irreducible representation, three conning
vacua corresponding to the trivial representation and a single coulomb phase vacuum
corresponding to the three-dimensional representation of su(2) obtained by adding
the trivial and fundamental representations. as our analysis holds for all r, each
of these vacua should show up as a stationary point of the proposed superpotential.

18

thus,

w = m1m2m3 (p(x1  x2) + p(x2  x3) + p(x3  x1))

(23)

should have ve stationary points, one of them massless. this means that the coupled
equations w/xa, a = 1, 2, 3 must therefore have ve solutions modulo lattice
translations and the action of the weyl group. note that the hessian matrix h =
2w/xaxb, will always have one zero eigenvalue corresponding to shifts in x1 +
x2 + x3 which is projected out the condition x1 + x2 + x3 = 0 for gauge group
su(n). in the four predicted massive vacua there must be no other zero modes. in
contrast, in the predicted massless vacuum, h should have at least one additional
zero eigenvalue.

to check this we must solve the equations,

p (x1  x2)  p (x3  x1) = 0
p (x2  x3)  p (x1  x2) = 0
p (x3  x1)  p (x2  x3) = 0

(24)

or simply p (x1  x2) = p (x2  x3) = p (x3  x1). solutions should be counted
modulo lattice translations and permutations of x1, x2 and x3. we must also impose
the constraint that x1 + x2 + x3 should vanish up to a lattice translation. direct
calcuation shows that the required zeros of w are located at,

21
3
22
3

,

,

41

3 (cid:19)
3 (cid:19)

42

(1 + 2),

(x1, x2, x3) = (cid:18)0,
(cid:18)0,
(cid:18)0,
(cid:18)0,

2
3
2
3

4
3

(1 + 2)(cid:19)
(21 + 2)(cid:19)

2
3

(25)

(1 + 22),

(1, 2, 1 + 2)

we nd that, for generic values of  , the hessian matrix has only one zero eigenvalue
at the rst four solutions in (25).
it is easily checked that h has one extra zero
eigenvalue at the fth solution listed above. thus we nd exact agreement with the
vacuum structure of the four-dimensional theory. it is worth noting that this test
would be failed by a superpotential which included only the contributions from 3d
instantons corresponding to simple roots of su(3). specically the four massive vacua
would be absent in this case.

19

4 soft breaking of n = 2 susy
in the previous sections we analysed the vacuum structure of n = 1 theories with
with non-zero masses m1, m2 and m3 in terms of softly-broken n = 4 supersymmetry.
in this section, based on the ideas of [5], we study the same theories from a dierent,
and much more powerful, perspective.
if we set m1 = 0 and m2 = m3 = m, the
su(n) gauge theory studied above reduces to n = 2 supersymmetric yang-mills
theory with a single adjoint hypermultiplet of mass m. in four dimensions, the exact
coulomb branch of the su(2) theory is governed by an elliptic curve as described by
seiberg and witten [2] for gauge group su(2). the corresponding curve for gauge
group su(n), with n  2, was given subsequently by donagi and witten [3]. the
four-dimensional versions of the n = 1 theories studied above can then be realized
by re-introducing a non-zero mass m1 =  for the remaining massless chiral multiplet.
in this approach, there is an elegant correspondence between the massive vacua of
the n = 1 theory and the singular points on the coulomb branch of the underlying
n = 2 theory. in fact, in the next section, we will show that the stationary points of
our proposed superpotential reproduce this correspondence exactly.

in a parallel development, seiberg and witten have also described how this anal-
ysis can be extended to apply to n = 2 theories on r3  s1. we will begin this
section by reviewing the key points of their analysis in the simplest case of n = 2
supersymmetric yang-mills theory with gauge group su(2). the discussion will be
very brief and we refer the reader to [5] for further details. after this review, we will
extend this analysis to the mass deformed n = 4 theories discussed in the previous
sections. we will nd that this yields an extremely simple derivation of the main
results of this paper.

after compactication to d = 3 on a circle of radius r, n = 2 susy yang-mills
with gauge group su(2) has a coulomb branch m of complex dimension two. one
complex dimension corresponds to the adjoint scalar, u = htr2i, which parametrizes
the coulomb branch of the four-dimensional theory. the other dimension is essentially
the complex supereld x introduced above, whose real and imaginary parts (for
 = 0) are the wilson line and dual photon respectively. as the gauge elds have been
eliminated in favour of scalars, the low-energy eective action is a three-dimensional
non-linear -model with target m. in order to preserve n = 2 susy (in the four-
dimensional convention), m must be hyper-kahler.
in general the hyper-kahler
metric will depend on r in a complicated way. however, the key result of [5] is that
m has a distinguished complex structure which is independent of r. in particular, in
terms of coordinates which are holomorphic with respect to the distinguished complex

20

structure, m is dened by the complex equation,

y2 = x3  x2u + 4x

(26)

where  is the dynamical scale of the four-dimensional theory. this is exactly the
same equation as that of the elliptic curve which governs the coulomb branch of the
four-dimensional theory. indeed, near four-dimensions, this can be interepreted as an
elliptic bration of the u-plane, with the seiberg-witten curve of the d = 4 theory
as the bre.

the distinguished complex structure picks out an n = 1 subalgebra of the n = 2
in simple terms this just corresponds to taking the holo-
supersymmetry algebra.
morphic coordinates of (26) and promoting them to n = 1 chiral superelds. as
we will eventually break n = 2 supersymmetry down to this n = 1 subalgebra it
is useful to determine the low-energy eective lagrangian in a manifestly n = 1
supersymmetric form. fortunately, to determine the vacuum structure we will not
need to know the whole eective action, only the f-term part. of course, if we knew
the kahler potential for the hyper-kahler metric in terms of two unconstrained chiral
superelds we could, in principle, write down the n = 2 -model action as a d-term
in n = 1 superspace. in this case there would be no f-term. in fact, we have instead
a description of the target space involving three chiral superelds, x, y and u, subject
to the holomorphic constraint (26). the constraint can be imposed by introducing a
fourth chiral supereld  as a lagrange multipler and considering superpotential

w = (cid:16)y2  x3 + x2u  4x(cid:17)

(27)

in order to break n = 2 susy down to the n = 1 subalgebra which is manifest
in (27), we now introduce a superspace mass term, w = u, for the adjoint chiral
multiplet. making the convenient change of variables, xu = v, x = 4x and y = 4y
the superpotential becomes,

w + w = 8(cid:16)y2  x3 + x2u  4x(cid:17) + (cid:16)4x  v(cid:17)

we can now solve the f-term equations,

w


=

w
 y

=

w
v

= 0

(28)

(29)

with y = 0,  = /8 x2 and v = 1/x. on integrating out y,  and v we obtain,

w = (cid:18)4x +

1

x(cid:19) = 2 (exp(y ) + exp(+y ))

(30)

21

where we have mapped the complex x-plane to the cylinder parameterized by the
dimensionless variable y with x2 = exp(y ). thus we have reproduced the super-
potential given in [5, 23] for n = 1 sym theory compactied to three dimensions.
importantly the resulting superpotential is independent of r. this is an immediate
consequence of seiberg and wittens proposal that distinguished complex structure
is independent of r.

now we will follow precisely the same steps starting from the complex curve which
describes mass-deformed n = 4 supersymmetric yang-mills theory with gauge group
su(2). in terms of n = 2 supermultiplets, this model diers from the one considered
above by the presence of an additional adjoint hypermultiplet of mass m. although
the coulomb branch of this theory can be described in terms of a single elliptic curve,
we will choose an alternative representation which generalizes more readily to su(n)
with n > 2. according to donagi and witten [3], the coulomb branch of the su(2)
theory is determined by the pair of equations which can be written as,

y2 = f (x) = 4x3  xg2( )  g3( )

= 4(x  e1( ))(x  e2( ))(x  e3( ))

and

u =

p 2
2

+ m 2x

(31)

(32)

the rst equation describes a complex torus e with complex structure parameter 
and a single puncture corresponding to the point x = y =  on the curve. this is
known as the bare spectral curve and, on its own, it describes an n = 4 theory with
gauge group u(1). the second equation, which is particularly simple for gauge group
su(2), encodes the extra dependence of the su(2) theory on mass-parameters and
vevs. to be more precise we should identify points which are related by the action
of 

 : y  y

 : p  p

(33)

imitating the logic applied above for the theory without matter we expect the
coulomb branch of the four-dimensional theory compactied on a circle down to
three dimensions to be a hyper-kahler manifold m of complex dimension two with
a distinguished complex structure specied by equations (31) and (32). the low
energy eective action should be a three-dimensional non-linear -model with target
m. the -model lagrangian can be written in n = 1 superspace in terms of chiral
elds corresponding to the holomorphic coordinates x, y, u and t together with two
lagrange multipliers 1 and 2. thus, including the n = 2 breaking mass term, we

22

start from the superpotential,

w = 1(y2  f (x)) + 2(

p 2
2

+ m 2x  u) + u

(34)

the equations of motion for 1 and 2 are equations (31) and (32) respectively. sta-
tionarizing the superpotential with respect to x and u gives the additional equations,
1f (x) = m 22, 2 = . together with eqn (32), these two relations can be
used to eliminate 1 2 and u in favour of x and p . substituting for these variables,
the superpotential reduces to w = u = (p 2/2 + m 2x). however we still have to
impose equation (31) which constrains x in terms of y. as mentioned above, eqn (31)
describes a complex torus in terms of two complex variables x and y. we can now
change variables to a single unconstrained complex variable x, which parametrizes
the same torus, by setting x = p(x) and y = p (x). equation (31) is obeyed by
virtue of the dierential equation (16) of section 4. in terms of x the superpotential
now reads,

w =  p 2

2

+ m 2p(x)!

(35)

and thus, setting p to zero by it equation of motion, we recover the result of the
previous section. as in the previous example, the superpotential is independent
of r simply because of the r-independence of the distinguished complex structure.
this analysis also resolves the puzzle raised in the previous section concerning the
singularity at the origin of the coulomb branch of the n = 1 theory. the origin of
the n = 1 coulomb branch at x = 0, corresponds to the point x = y =  on the
bare spectral curve. thus the singularity is projected to innity and does not appear
on the coulomb branch of the corresponding n = 2 theory.

we now turn to the more challenging case of gauge group su(n). the donagi-
witten solution of the d = 4 theory is given in terms of two complex equations. the
rst is the bare spectral curve which appeared above in the su(2) case.

y2 = 4x3  xg2( )  g3( )

(36)

and the second is an nth order polynomial equation in t with coecients which are
polynomial in x and y and which also encode the dependence on the hypermultiplet
mass m and the n  1 moduli un = htrni, n = 2, . . . , n, of the four-dimensional
coulomb branch:
(37)
fn also depends on n  1 additional parameters that we can think of as the coor-
dinates on the bres of a torus bundle over the four-dimensional coulomb branch.
as in the n = 2 case the total space of this bration is a hyper-kahler manifold
m of complex dimension 2(n  1) which we identify as the coulomb branch of the
compactied theory [28].

fn (t, x, y : m, un) = 0

23

equation (37) generalizes equation (32) of the su(2) case. part of the problem here
is that the fn grow rapidly in complexity with n and there is no explicit formula
in the general case. however let us review how much information we require to
determine the exact superpotential. in the n = 2 case we solved equations (31) and
(32) eliminating x, y in favour of x and then u in favour of x and p . in particular,
x and p provide an unconstrained parametrization of the target space. after solving
the two constraint equations in this way, the corresponding f-terms vanish and only
the mass term in the superpotential survives: w = u(x, p ). hence the task of
nding the superpotential is simply that of expressing the modulus u = htr2i in
terms of a set of unconstrained holomorphic coordinates on m.

fortunately, the information we need to accomplish this is provided by correspon-
dence between n = 2 theories and integrable systems [27]. the particular version of
this correspondence is the one given in [28], where the coulomb branch of a compact-
ied n = 2 theory is identied as the complexied phase space of a certain integrable
hamiltonian system. for a theory with gauge group su(n), the dynamical system
consists of n particles on the line interacting via two-body forces. the positions and
momenta of the n particles in the centre of mass frame are xa and pa a = 1, 2, . . . , n.
after implimenting the trivial centre of mass contraint pn
a=1 p a = 0, the
n  1 independent positions and momenta provide the unconstrained holomorphic
parametrization of the coulomb branch which we seek.

a=1 x a = pn

the specic integrable system relevant for the n = 2 theory with an adjoint hyper-
multiplet considered above, is the elliptic calogero-moser hamiltonian [11] dened
by the two-body interaction potential v (x) = m 2p(x). the only fact we need here
is that the n  1 coulomb branch moduli ui are identied with the n  1 constants
of motion of the system (where we are not counting the total linear momentum which
we set to zero above). in particular the adjoint mass operator u2 is identied with
the rst non-trivial constant of motion which is the calogero-moser hamiltonian, h
itself3,

u2 = h =

n

xa=1

integrating out the momenta pa, the superpotential becomes,

p 2
a
2

+ m 2xa>bp(xa  xb)

w = m 2xa>bp(xa  xb)

(38)

(39)

which agrees with the proposal given in section 3.

3 the quickest way to obtain this identication is from the equality demonstrated in [29] between
h and f / , where f (an, mi,  ) is the n = 2 prepotential written in terms of the electric
periods an. we then invoke the matone relation [30, 31, 32, 33] which, for uv nite theories, reads
u2 = f / .

24

5 a test for gauge group su (n )

in this section we will perform a simple test of the proposed superpotential for the
su(n) theory. in particular, we will compare the critical points of the superpotential
with the vacua of the corresponding four dimensional theory. in the present case, the
vacuum structure of the n = 1 theory which is obtained by soft breaking of n = 2
supersymmetry has been discussed in detail by donagi and witten [3]. as above
the four-dimensional coulomb branch is described by the two complex equations (36)
and (37). the rst equation describes the bare spectral curve which is a torus e
with complex structure parameter  . as in section 3, this can be represented as the
quotient c/ where  is a lattice in the complex plane:  = z   z. as the second
equation is an nth order polynomial equation in t with coecients which depend on
x and y it denes an n-fold cover, c  e. the four-dimensional coulomb branch
is then (part of) the jacobian manifold of c. away from the singular points in its
moduli space, c corresponds to a riemann surface of genus n.

as usual for n = 2 theories in four dimensions, the points on the coulomb branch
which survive as massive vacua after breaking to n = 1, correspond to points in
moduli space where c develops nodes and reduces to a surface of lower genus [4]. in
this case, the relevant singular points are those at which the maximal degeneration
occurs and the genus of c is reduced to one. according to donagi and witten, these
points are in one to one correspondence with sublattices    of index n. for the
present purposes the index just means the number of points of  contained in each
period parallelogram of . a particularly attractive aspect of this correspondence, is
that the action of s-duality on the set, s, of massive vacua is manifest. specically, the
s-duality group is identied with the sl(2, z) automorphism group of . in general,
sl(2, z) tranformations on  will preserve the index of a sublattice  but not the
sublattice itself. it follows that s-duality permutes the massive vacua. this is very
natural, as each massive vacuum of the theory is associated with the condensation
of a particular bps state of the n = 2 theory. an action of sl(2, z) on the set of
massive vacua is then inherited from the action of s-duality on the bps spectrum.

it is useful to note for each sublattice  of index n in , the lattice /n itself
contains  as a sublattice of index n. in fact    with index n if and only if
if we now dene  = /n we can give an equivalent
  /n with index n.
formulation of the correspondence. namely, given the lattice , the massive vacua
are in one to one correspondence with lattices  such that  is a sublattice of  with
index n.

in the previous section we discovered that the bare spectral curve e = c/ is
naturally identied with the torus on which the weierstrass function is dened in the

25

superpotential (39). in the following, we will demonstrate that w has a stationary
point corresponding to each  which contains  as a sublattice of index n. an
intuitive way of understanding this result is suggested by the correspondence with
the elliptic calogero-moser system described above. in particular, we can think of
the complex scalars x a as the locations of n particles on the torus e. the particles
interact via a two-body potential  p(x), albeit a complex one. the condition for
a supersymmetric vacuum is just a kind of holomorphic version of the equilibrium
condition for this n-body system. as the particles interact via complex repulsive
forces4  p (x), the natural equilibrium positions are when the particles form a
uniform lattice on e so that the forces cancel pairwise. as there are n particles,
this denes a lattice  which has  as a sublattice of index n.

we will begin by considering the weierstrass function, p(x : ), dened by the

lattice  = {z = 2m1 + 2n2 : (m, n)  z 2}. two points which we will need are:

1: the derivative of the weierstrass function can be represented as,

p (x : ) = 2 xz

1

(x  z)3

1

= 2 x(m,n)z 2

(x  2m1  2n2)3

(40)

the resulting double series is uniformly convergent for all x / . in particular, this
means that the sum does not depend on which order the individual sums over m and
n are performed [6].

2: for any lattice , we know that a point z = w is in  if and only the point

z = w is. as the series in question converges, we then have

1
z 3 = 0

xz{0}

(41)

to demonstrate the required stationary points of w, must solve the n equations5

w
xb

= xa6=bp (xa  xb) = 0

(42)

4of course the analogy is a loose one because the force between two particles is not directed

along the line in the complex plane joining their positions.

5in this section we set all masses to unity.

26

for b = 1, . . . , n modulo lattice translations and the action of the weyl group. using
(40), we have,

w
xb

= 2xa6=b xz

n

1

(xa  xb  z)3

= 2

xa=1 xz{0}

(xa  xb  z)3 + 2xa6=b

1

(xa  xb)3

1

1
y 3

1

= xy s(b)

y 3 + xy t (b)

with the sets s(b) and t (b) dened as,

s(b) = {y = xa  xb  z : z    {0} : a = 1, 2 . . . , n}
t (b) = {y = xa  xb : a = 1, 2 . . . , b, . . . , n}

(43)

(44)
(45)

for each b = 1, 2, . . . , n. the notation b appearing in the denition t (b) indicates
that the a = b term is omitted. as each of the double sums considered is absolutely
convergent, it suces to specify the set of points in c over which each sum is to be
performed. in particular, we do not need to specify the order in which the component
summations implicit in each term of (43) are to be taken. note also that, in the second
line of (43), we have used the fact that the a = b term in the rst series on the rhs
vanishes because of (41).

as above we will consider a second lattice  such that    with index n. by
denition this means that there are n points of  in each period parallelogram d
of : | d(z0)| = n for all z0  c. now we will consider a conguration such that
(46)

{xa : a = 1, 2, . . . n} =   d(0)

taking into account the action of the weyl group, this choice corresponds to a single
point on the coulomb branch.

the idea now is that, for this conguration, summing over a and over points in 

is equivalent to summing over points in . to see this note that we have,

 = {y = xa  z : z  , a = 1, 2, . . . , n}

(47)

the lattice is invariant under translations by any lattice vector. hence, as xb  ,
we also have,

 = {y = xa  xb  z : z  , a = 1, 2, . . . , n}

(48)

27

for each b. from the denitions of s(b) and t (b) we now see that

for each b = 1, 2, . . . n. finally, using this relation and (41), we have

s(b)  t (b) =   {0}

w
xb

1
y 3

1

= xy s1
= xy {0}

y 3 + xy s2
1
y 3 = 0

(49)

(50)

this shows that w has a critical point corresponding to each lattice  which has
 as a sublattice of index n. hence the superpotential reproduces the set of vacua
predicted by the donagi-witten curve. there are several loose ends here: we have not
shown that the critical points found above are non-degenerate and thus correspond
to massive vacua. nor have we shown that they are unique. finally, apart for the
explicit calculation for gauge group su(3) reported in section 3, we have not checked
the existence of the massless vacua predicted by the classical analysis of section 2.
these issues are under investigation.

a with periods (21/n, 22) and 

in the next section we will need to know the explicit form for the vacuum congu-
rations in the case where n is prime. in this case, by the analysis of section 1.1, we
should nd n vacua in the conning phase and a single vacuum in the higgs phase.
as above these each of these vacua should correspond to lattices  such that   
with index n. if  has periods (21, 22) then two obvious solutions of this condi-
tion are the lattices 
b with periods (21, 22/n).
from section 1.1, the torus e = c/ has periods 21 = 2i and 22 = 2i . thus,
the two vacuum congurations corresponding to 
a = 2ia/n and
x (b)
a = 2i a/n respectively, with a = 1, 2 . . . n in both cases. the coupling inde-
pendence of conguration a identies it as the vacuum of higgs sector: this is the
only vacuum which is visible in the semiclassical limit   . the second vacuum
must therefore be one of the n conning vacua. from the point of view of the four-
dimensional n = 2 theory, vacua a and b are associated with the condensation of
elementary quanta and magnetic monopoles respectively. the remaining n1 conn-
ing vacua are generated by the modular transformation    + p for p = 1, 2, . . . , n.
in the n = 4 theory, this transformation turns a magnetic monopole into a dyon
which carries electric charge p. correspondingly, for soft breaking of n = 2 susy
these vacua are associated with the condensation of massless bps dyons.

b are, x (a)

a and 

28

6 an application

a simple application of the superpotential derived above is to calculate the con-
densates of gauge invariant chiral operators. an obvious candidate is the value of
the modulus u2 = htr2i in each vacuum. according to the results of section 4, we
have u2 = w/, thus the vacuum values of u2 are given by the critical values of the
superpotential. there is a subtlety with this identication which is best illustrated
in the su(2) case. recall that the three critical values of the superpotential were
found in section 3 to be e1( ), e2( ) and e3( ). these three functions of  transform
under the modular group with weight two modulo permutations. however this result
depended on setting the additive constant c( ) appearing in (1) to zero. in particular
we noted that any non-zero value for c( ) would spoil the modular property of the
superpotential. in fact this precisely matches a similar ambiguity in the parameter
u discussed in [32]. if we retain the notation u for the classical modulus htr2i, the
seiberg-witten curve can be parameterized by a coordinate u which transforms with
modular weight two. on general grounds the two coordinates are related as6,

u = u  m 2


1
12

+



xp=1

pqp


(51)

where the coecients p are unknown for p > 1. if we choose c( ) = 0, the corre-
sponding superpotential of modular weight two is therefore w = u. in view of (51),
predictions for htr2i in dierent vacua are only determined up to an overall additive
function of  . thus, only predictions for dierences between the values of u in distinct
vacua are unamibguous. a similar additive ambiguity arises in the denition of u2
for n > 2 but we will suppress it in the following. note that the critical values of w
also determine the gluino condensate via htri = w. as the superpotential is
independent of r, the results will apply equally in the four-dimensional limit.

in the following we will restrict our attention to the massive vacua and then to the
simplest case of prime n. to compute the critical value of the superpotential in the
higgs vacuum given in the previous section, we must compute the sum,

u(a)
2 /m 2 = w|x=x(a) =

1
2

=

n
2

n

n

n

xa6=bp  2(a  b)
xb=1
n !
xd=1 p 2id

n 1

i!

(52)

6i would like to thank matt strassler for pointing out the incorrect discussion of this point given

in a previous version of this paper.

29

as we have 1 = i and 2 = i , the weierstrass function can be written as,

p(2iz) = 

1

42 


1

z2 + x(m.n)6=(0,0)"

1

(z  m  n )2 

1

(m + n )2#


(53)

the double series on the rhs is absolutely convergent and therefore independent
of the order of summation over m and n. however, some care is required because,
when taken in isolation, either of the two terms in the summand leads to a double
series which is only conditionally convergent and, in particular, depends the order of
summation. to illustrate this we consider the second term which, for one choice of
ordering, is proportional the regulated second eisenstein series [22],

e2( ) =

3
2



+

+

xn=

xm=

1

(m + n )2

(54)

the prime on the m summation means omit the m = 0 term when n = 0. if we
naively interchange the order of summation and multiply both sides by  2 we would
obtain the relation e2(1/ ) =  2e2( ). as e2 is also invariant under    + 1,
this would lead us to conclude incorrectly that e2 is a modular form of weight two.
in fact the summations over m and n fail to commute and instead give an anomalous
transformation law for e2 under the modular transformation   1/ ,

e2( ) =

1

 2 e2(cid:18)

1

(cid:19) 

6
i

paying attention to the order of summation we obtain,

u(a)
2 /m 2 = 

n

n

+

n 1

+

n 2
d2 +

82 
xn=
xd=1

82 
xn=
xl=

(e2( )  ne2(n ))

n 2
l2 +

+

+

xm=
xl=

+

= 
n 2
24

=

 " n
xd=1

n 2

(mn  d + nn )2# 
e2( )


n2

3

n 2

(l + nn )2 

(55)

n

(m + n )2!


(56)

where the term where the summation variable equals zero is omitted in each of the
hatted sums. a similar calculation yields the expectation value of u2 in the conning
vacuum corresponding to the lattice 

b as,

u(b)
2 /m 2 = w|x=x(b)

=

n 2

24 (cid:18)e2( ) 

1
n

e2(cid:18) 

n(cid:19)(cid:19)

(57)

30

2

the value of u2 in the remaining n  1 conning vacua is obtained by replacing
 with  + p in (57) for p = 1, 2, . . . , n  1. using equation (55) we nd that
u(a)
2 (1/ ) =  2u(b)
( ). notice that the anomalous term in the transformation law
for e2 cancels between the two terms contributing to u(a)
. hence we nd that the
vacuum values of u2 tranform with weight two under, and are also interchanged by,
an electric-magnetic duality transformation. this generalizes the su(2) result for u
described above. the gluino condensate s = htri in each vacuum is obtained
by a dierentiating the corresponding expression for u2 with respect to  . as this
dierentiation does not commute with a general sl(2, z) tranformation, the resulting
functions of  do not have any special modular properties. finally, we note that this
calculation can easily be generalized to the condensates un with n > 2 [34].

2

7 conclusion

the main result of this paper is that the exact superpotential of the n = 1 theory
obtained by introducing chiral multiplet masses in n = 4 supersymmetric su(n)
yang-mills theory on r3  s1 is,

w = m1m2m3 xa>b p(xa  xb)

(58)

an interesting feature of this result is that the superpotential coincides with the
complexied potential of the elliptic calogero-moser system. the same integrable
system is associated with n = 2 supersymmetric yang-mills theory with one ad-
joint hypermultiplet of mass m. specically the spectral curve which encodes the
conserved quantities of the calogero-moser system is the same complex curve which
governs the coulomb branch of the four-dimensional n = 2 theory. this suggests a
new connection between n = 1 theories and integrable systems which extends the
correspondence between n = 2 theories and integrable systems introduced in [3, 27].
starting from an n = 2 theory in four dimensions, the superpotential of the n = 1
theory on r3  s1 obtained by introducing a mass for the adjoint scalar in the n = 2
vector multiplet should coincide with the complexied potential of the correspond-
ing integrable system. this connection should be a general one which applies to all
n = 1 theories obtained by soft breaking of n = 2 supersymmetry. following the
arguments given in section 4, the correspondence can be explained by combining
two previous observations:

1: the coulomb branch of an n = 2 theory on r3  s1 coincides with the
complexied phase space of the integrable hamiltonian system associated with the
corresponding theory on r4 [28]. the dynamical variables of the integrable system,
{x a, p a} yield holomorphic coordinates on the coulomb branch of the compactied
theory.

31

2: the complex moduli un, n = 2 . . . n, which parametrize the four dimensional
coulomb branch correspond to the conserved quantities of the integrable system [3].
in particular, we may identify u2 with the hamiltonian, h(x a, p a), of the integrable
system (see footnote 3 above). introducing a superspace mass term w = u2 for
the adjoint scalar in the n = 2 vector multiplet, we obtain an n = 1 theory on
r3  s1 with superpotential w = h(x a, p a). as the momenta appear via the non-
relativistic kinetic terms 7,p p 2
a /2, they can be trivially eliminated via their equations
of motion and the resulting superpotential is just the complexied potential of the
integrable system.

one case where we can immediately make contact with known results is for the
n = 2 theory without adjoint hypermultiplets. for gauge group su(n), the relevant
integrable system is the ane toda lattice [27]. the exact superpotential of the
corresponding n = 1 theory on r3  s1 is known to coincide with the ane toda
potential [36]. in fact, this superpotential can also be obtained directly from (58)
by decoupling the three adjoint chiral multiplets. the appropriate limit, which is
well known on the integrable system side of the correspondence [37], generalizes the
limit discussed in section 3 for the su(2) case. it would be interesting to test this
correspondence for other n = 2 theories for which the corresponding integrable
system is known. the correspondence may also suggest new results in cases where
the relevant integrable system is unknown.

i would like to thank david e. kaplan and prem kumar for useful discussions as
well as kimyeong lee and dave tong for reading a preliminary draft of this paper. i
am gratefull to the particle theory group at sissa for hospitality during the comple-
tion of this work. the author also acknowledges the support of tmr network grant
fmrx-ct96-0012.

references

[1] c. montonen and d. olive, phys. lett. 72b (1977) 117.

[2] n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b431 (1994) 484, hep-th/9408099.

[3] r. donagi and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 299, hep-th/9510101.

[4] n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 19, hep-th/9407087.
7this point would need to be modied if the correspondence is to apply also to n = 2 theories
obtained by compactication on a circle from ve dimensions [35], where the corresponding integrable
systems are relativistic.

32

[5] n. seiberg and e. witten, in  the mathematical beauty of physics, p.333, eds.

j. m. droue and j.-b. zuber (world scientic, 1997), hep-th/9607163.

[6] k. chandrasekharan, elliptic functions (springer-verlag, 1984).

[7] d. amati, k. konishi, y. meurice, g. rossi and g. veneziano, phys. rep. 162

(1988) 169.

[8] v.a. novikov, m.a. shifman, a.i. vainshtein and v.i. zakharov, nucl. phys.

b260 (1985) 157.

[9] n. davies, t. j. hollowood, v. v. khoze and m. p. mattis, gluino condensate

and magnetic monopoles in supersymmetric gluodynamics, hep-th/9905015.

[10] g. gabadadze, nucl. phys. b544 (1999) 650, hep-th/9808005.

g. dvali, g. gabadadze and z. kakushadze, hep-th/9901032.

[11] e. martinec, phys. lett. b367 (1996) 91, hep-th/9510204.

[12] c. vafa and e. witten, nucl. phys. b432 (1994) 3, hep-th/9408074.

[13] n. seiberg, phys. lett. 318b (1993) 469, hep-ph/9309335.

[14] d. j. gross, r. d. pisarski and l.g. yae, rev. mod. phys. 53 (1981) 43.

[15] k. lee and p. yi, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3711, hep-th/9702107.

[16] i. aeck, j. harvey and e. witten, nucl. phys. b206 (1982) 413.

[17] n. dorey, v.v. khoze and m.p. mattis, phys.rev. d54 (1996) 2921, hep-

th/9603136; phys. rev. d54 (1996) 7832, hep-th/9607202.

[18] n. dorey, t.j. hollowood, v.v. khoze, m.p. mattis and s. vandoren, multi-
instantons and maldacenas conjecture, hep-th/9810243; multi-instanton cal-
culus and the ads/cft correspondence in n = 4 superconformal field the-
ory, hep-th/9901128.

[19] n. dorey, v. v. khoze and m. p. mattis, nucl. phys. b502 (1997) 94, hep-

th/9704197.

[20] m. peskin, tasi 96 lectures, hep-th/9702094.

[21] s. cecotti and c. vafa, comm. math. phys. 157 (1993) 139, hep-th/9209085.

[22] n. koblitz,

introduction to elliptic curves and modular forms (springer-

verlag, 1984).

33

[23] o. aharony, a. hanany, k. intrilligator, n. seiberg and m. j. strassler, nucl.

phys. b499 (1997) 67, hep-th/9703110.

[24] n. seiberg, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 67 (1998) 158, hep-th/9705117.

[25] j. de boer, k. hori, y. oz and z. yin, nucl. phys. b502 (1997) 107, hep-

th/9702154.
j. de boer, k. hori and y. oz, nucl. phys. b500 (1997) 163, hep-th/9703100.

[26] c. fraser and d. tong, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 085001, hep-th/9710098.

[27] a. gorsky, i. krichever, a. marshakov, a. mironov and a. morozov, phys. lett.

b355 (1995) 466, hep-th/9505035.

e. martinec and n. warner, nucl. phys. b459 (1996) 97, hep-th/9509161.

[28] a. kapustin, nucl. phys. b534 (1998) 531, hep-th/9804069.

[29] e. dhoker and d. h. phong, nucl. phys. b513 (1998) 405, hep-th/9709053.

[30] m. matone, phys. lett. b357 (1995) 342, hep-th/9506102.

[31] n. dorey, v. v. khoze and m. p. mattis, phys. lett. b390 (1997) 205, hep-

th/9606199.

[32] n. dorey, v. v. khoze and m. p. mattis, phys. lett. b396 (1997) 141, hep-

th/9612231.

[33] v. v. khoze, m. p. mattis and m. j. slater, nucl. phys. b536 (1998) 69, hep-

th/9804009.

[34] n. dorey, d. e. kaplan and p. kumar, work in progress.

[35] n. nekrasov, nucl. phys. b531 (1998) 323, hep-th/9609219.

[36] s. katz and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b497 (1997) 196, hep-th/9611090.

[37] v. inosemtsev, comm. math. phys. 121 (1989) 629.

34

