9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

9

 
 

1
v
1
7
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

modular theory and eyvind wichmanns

contributions to modern particle physics theory

bert schroer

institut fur theoretische physik der fu-berlin
presently: cbpf, rua dr. xavier sigaud, 150

22290-180 rio de janeiro, rj, brazil
email: schroer@cbpfsu1.cat.cbpf.br

to be published in a special festschrift volume, dedicated to prof.

e. wichmann on the occasion of his seventieth birthday

june 1, 1999

abstract

some of the consequences of eyvind wichmanns contributions to

modular theory and the qft phase-space structure are presented.

in order to show the power of those ideas in contemporary problems,
i selected the issue of algebraic holography as well as a recent nonpertur-
bative constructive approach (based on the modular structur of wedge-
localized algebras and modular inclusions) and show that these ideas are
recent consequences of the pathbreaking work which wichmann together
with his collaborator bisognano initiated in the mid 70ies

.

1 wichmanns inuence on ideas in local quan-

tum physics

looking at the various contributions to post perturbative quantum eld theory,
one could try to group ideas, which shaped the form of our present understand-
ing, into three classes. there are rst those ideas on nonperturbative frameworks
whoses usefulness was immediately obvious. the prime example would be the
time dependent scattering theory of lehmann, symanzik and zimmermann[5]1
which together with the resulting stationary scattering formulas and combined
with the dispersion theoretical framework, marked the beginning of at least the
(kinematical) setting of nonperturbative model-independent thinking. this the-
ory (or rather this framework) used the formalism of (interpolating) local elds
and their correlations. fortunately there already existed at the time of start

1since i did not intend this essay to become a review article, i will use texbook references
whereever possible (from which the reader may nd an exposition of the content of the referred
articles as well the reference to the original paper(s)).

1

of lsz a mathematically as well as conceptually very concise setting for doing
quantum eld theory, namely the characterization (of what used to be from the
outset an operator theory) in terms of wightman functions which gave an ex-
cellent understanding of the general singular function nature of the correlation
functions, as well as of their analytic continuation aspects [4]. the conceptu-
ally important aspect of that framework was of course the reconstructability
of operators, states and hilbert spaces from those functions, since physicists
traditionally, since the times of feynmans great contributions, prefer to deal
with functions and could not have been completely sure that their description
is complete. the addition of the lsz formalism also bridged the gap between
wightmans pure eld theory setting and the 1939 theory of one-particle spaces
as irreducible representation spaces of the poincare-group. this connection of
eld theory with particle theory was later amplied in work by weinberg [5]
which linked wigners particle theory with feynmans perturbation theory (in
fact the exposition of the wigner theory, the historical remarks as well as the
presentation of the qed calculations constitute the high points of weinbergs
textbook). from there on it was clear that qft, in contrast to classical eld
theory (viz. the particle models of the electron of poincare and lorentz), did
already contain in principle all particle (including multi-particle scattering) as-
pects, and even more, that there were methods and beautiful formulas which
explicitly allowed to extract those particle properties of elds.

in a way the wigner theory on relativistic free particles was the rst success-
ful attempt to present relativistic particles without referring to quantization (in
this case of relativistic classical mechanics) and in this way it was doing justice
to the more fundamental nature of quantum over classical theory. because of
this, wigners theory became exemplifying for all attempts to formulate and
execute problems of local quantum physics (lqp) without relying on the quan-
tization of classical expressions as lagrangians. one of its immediate successes
was the classication of the plethora of physically equivalent eld equations,
which physicist found in the aftermath of diracs discovery for the description
of relativistic electrons/positrons.

this trend of nding more intrinsic descriptions for local quantum physics
was one of the motives behind the algebraic approach initiated by haag which
reached its rst stage of mathematical maturity (the framework of algebraic
qft) in a often cited paper of haag and kastler. the guiding principle there
was a vast generalization of the idea of wick, wightman and wigner on su-
perselection sectors from their univalence rule in the direction of superselected
generalized charges. the emerging paradigm of algebraic qft was to view all
of qft i.e. including the issue of spin and statistics and scattering theory, as
the synthesis of the superselected representation theory of an (model depen-
dent) underlying observable algebra with the localization structure imposed by
einstein causality [1][2][3]

this program required a formulation which was independent on eld co-
ordinatizations from the very beginning. wightmans approach [4] on the
other hand was more conservative in that it used eld operators which in con-
tradistinction to the neutral observables were allowed to carry charge and to

2

appear in multiplets acted upon by internal symmetry groups with the eect
that for most of the time it stayed closer to the very successful perturbative
lagrangian qft. the conceptual relation between these two approaches was
claried by doplicher, haag and roberts as well as borchers [1]; their detailed
mathematical connection oers some challenges up to date. but even in the rst
comprehensive account of the wightman theory [4] these authors already went
some distance to counteract the tendency of overemphasizing the role of elds
by pointing out that what is really relevant are equivalence classes (borchers
classes) of relatively local elds.

while touching the issue of scattering theory, one should not leave unmen-
tioned another well-embraced idea of those early times: the s-matrix bootstrap
approach. this was mainly chews idea (with some prior attempts in this di-
rection by heisenberg). in its extreme form of cleansing quantum elds and the
locality principle altogether from the arena of quantum physics, it eventually
failed. but, even apart from the useful pictures about eective interactions (as
they were later obtained by qualitatively reading back certain on-shell proper-
ties into qft by weinberg), it left some interesting structural elements behind
(see later), which is really a lot one can say as far as failed theories are con-
cerned. in fact one may call it the most successful among all failed theories of
this century, a statement whose content will only become comprehensible in the
light of its relation to modular theory sketched at the end of this essay.

the reason i mention these trends and achievements of the 50-70ies is that,
unlike most of his contemporaries in general qft, eyvind wichmann, in whose
honor i wrote the present essay, did not enter general qft directly but rather
started his carrier with very detailed qed radiative correction calculations and
came, after passing actively through other particle physics problems, perma-
nently to berkeley as a result of his active interest in s-matrix theory and the
dispersion relation approach.

but now it is time to get to the idea which is inexorably linked with the
name of the jubilar2, namely the observation that qft localization is related
in a very deep way with the a the fundamental mathematical modular theory
for von neumann algebras.

the rst achievement in this direction culminates in a 1975 some seminal
paper by wichmann and (his at that time ph.d. student) bisognano [1]. it re-
lates tomitas 1967 modular theory, dealing with basic structural properties in
von neumann algebras, with fundamental structures of nonperturbative qft3.
already at the time of tomitas presentation of his theory at the 1967 baton
rouge conference in the us, there was a physics discovery which preempted cer-
tain aspects of tomitas theory. this was the analysis by haag, hugenholtz and

2in trying to translate the german jubilar into short and precise english, my dictionary
said: the person whose anniversary is being celebrated. this is precisely the meaning, but
not the type of short expression i was looking for.

3nowadays mostly referred to as the tomita-takesaki modular theory because it was m.
takesaki, who by his penetrating analysis and improvements of tomitas result, contributed
to its widespread acceptance within the community of operator algebraist (and nally led a.
connes among other things to his classication of type iii von neumann factors).

3

winnink of thermal quantum physics directly done in the so called thermody-
namic limit of an innite extended qft4. their crucial observation consisted in
noticing that a calculational trick, which appeared in previous works of martin,
kubo and schwinger (refereed to as the kms condition) takes on fundamental
conceptual role in the physics of translational invariant local statistical quantum
systems [1]. whereas winnink immediately after the baton rouge conference,
where both results were presented independently, began to elaborate the deep
connections in his thesis with hugenholtz, haag and his collaborators succeeded
to derive the kms condition from the stability properties of statistical mechan-
ics equilibrium states [1]. this line of thinking culminated in the work of pusz
and woronowicz [1] by which the abstract tomita modular theory, if enriched
by the physical idea of locality, got directly linked with the second fundamental
law in thermodynamics, i.e. the impossibility to construct perpetuum mobiles
and all that. as a corollary, also the tcp symmetry of local qft develops
another modular relation (in addition to the detailed balance relation) to
equilibrium statistical mechanics and in particular to the second fundamental
law.

so at the time when wichmann with his collaborator bisognano discovered
the connection between wedge localization of quantum elds and the modular
objects of tomita for this situation5, some of the thermal (heat-bath) aspects
were already well understood. it is very natural that this situation called for
an analysis of the hawking-unruh eect in those modular terms. but the rst
paper in this direction was a contribution by g. sewell [1].

another line of research of wichmann was his collaboration with d. buchholz
who, being familiar with prior work by haag and swieca, brought wichmanns
attention to this problem; the fruits of the joint discussions nally led to further
signicant contributions to the clarication of the degrees of freedom or phase
space structure problems in qft [1]. as many analogies of qm with lqp did
not persist under closer conceptual scrutiny, the clarication of the nature of
lqp phase space was an important issue. already noted in the seminal work of
haag and swieca [1], the counting with a relativistic box, i.e. for a minkowski
space double cone region together with a sharp energy cuto, could not give a
nite number of degrees of freedom per phase space cell as in the case of the
box in qm. their rather rough methods and estimates were improved in the
buchholz-wichmann work and it became clear that the correct counting could
not be better than nuclear[1], not even in the interaction free case. it also

4when the standard box-quantization produces a conceptual clash with other ideas, as it
is the case for e.g. (time-dependent) scattering theory or phase transition properties in statis-
tical mechanics, it is clearly preferable to understand the innitely extended translationally
invariant systems directly and to view nite systems as open subsystems.

5in mathematical terms the problem was to compute the modular objects (modular group
and modular involution) for the algebra generated by quantum elds smeared with functions
which have their supports in a wedge within the vacuum representation. the modular group
turned out to be the wedge associated lorentz boost and the modular involution was the
tcp-like antiunitary reection along the ridge of the wedge which maps the wedge into its
einstein-causal complement. certain very special free eld modular localization aspects where
already noticed before[12].

4

gave a deeper inside into a prior conjecture that quantum eld theory should
exhibit the split property which is the statement that by allowing a collar
region between the inside and the outside world of a double cone (which is
the qft counterpart of the quantum mechanical space box), the total algebra
allows a tensor factorization of the inside and outside algebras which is not
possible without that collar. later it turned out that this structure also had
a deep relations with modular theory. a third line of research of the jubilar,
which probably brought him to berkeley, was on s-matrix theory. here i am in
the comfortable position of being able to refer to weinbergs book where justice
is done to wichmanns s-matrix articles [5].

wichmanns contributions denitely belong to those ideas which, unlike e.g.
lsz, did not have a visible connection to the immediate problems of particle
physics nor could one draw upon them as a framework in qft as with the
aforementioned contributions of wightman as well as those of haag, kastler,
jost and others. like most of borchers contributions, they were less of a sys-
tematic encyclopedic but rather more of an enigmatic nature. their power only
unfolded slowly with time, and even up to date we are still witnessing an accel-
erating unfolding process of the physical consequences of modular structures; a
fact which probably even wichmann did not expect when he investigated this
subject in the mid 70ies.

the enigmatic power of wichmanns modular ideas has been brought to
light in many articles ranging from thermal qft to superselection structure i.e.
the reconstruction of charge-carrying elds including their statistics, symmetry
properties and tcp structure which especially in low dimensions (left out in
wightmans framework) gives rise to very new and nontrivial problems related
to modular theory [6][7][9]6.

rather than continuing the ow of history, i would like to try in the next
section to exemplify the power of modular ideas in the context of two very re-
cent (and still unfolding) ideas: holography and a new nonperturbative method
(which still lacks a known catchy name) based on the structure of those bisognano-
wichmann wedge algebras.

since holography, in the sense of encoding the content of a qft into a lower
dimensional one has, especially in the context of qft in ads (anti-desitter
spacetime) attracted a lot of attention, this may be a good vehicle for demon-
strating the power of modular ideas to a broader qft knowledgable public.
this is particularly the case in view of the perplexing aspects which holography
and in particular quantum matter in ads presents to the standard quantiza-
tion (lagrangian or functional interaction) approach. most of these paradoxical
aspects are naturally solved by algebraic qft with the modular enrichment
originating from the bisognano and wichmann work being the essential link
between local quantum physics and geometry of ads [10] [11]. these are meth-
ods and concepts which are not yet known outside a small circle of specialists,

6here the interested reader may also consult my recently 62 page review article (also
containing additional more recent references) which i dedicated to eyvind wichmann and
submitted to jpa, but which i could not reproduce in the special festschrift volume because
of copyright laws.

5

although the latter paper makes a great eorts to use rigorous physical argu-
ments and avoids the explicit evocation of modular theory (but rather derives
it, because all the arguments are of a general qft nature). and even if, after
all, the conceptual barriers for many particle physicists will remain high (please
dear reader, remember that you did not learn the sophisticated dierential ge-
ometry and topology many of you are using these days in less than a year!),
their enthusiasm for the ads-conformal qft connection may be of help here.
the constructive approach via the modular properties of wedge algebras
which is taken as our second illustration (which i initiated and pursued over
the last years, partially with my collaborator h-w wiesbrock) [12][13][14], is
best thought of as the inverse of the bisognano-wichmann theorem, namely
using the modular theory for the actual construction of quantum eld theories.
it shares with holography issue the fact that a real understanding inside any
framework based on eld-coordinatizations, in particular in any quantization
approach, is impossible7 (or only possible with a mind which has the power
of artistic imagination). here one is really hitting the limits of capabilities
of what the quantization access to qft can do, and although analogies are
always dangerous, i feel tempted to make a historical comparison with bohr-
sommerfeld rules (please dont look down on them, they where quite successful
for many problems, but they demanded some artistry) versus full quantum
mechanics.

indeed everything you learned in text books (and which proved so useful
in the pursuit of perturbation theory) about standard quantum eld theory, as
interaction picture, time ordered correlations, canonical quantization or quan-
tization through euclidean functional integrals, all that is of no avail here. of
course non of these well-known standard tools is typical for lqp8, all of them
can (and have been) applied to qm, either in its schrodinger or its so-called
second quantized form. but the modular structure in qft on the other hand
is totally characteristic and not shared by any other kind of quantum theory.
anybody who is familiar with the conceptual framework of lqp knows that this
is deeply related to einstein causality and the polarization structure of the vac-
uum resulting from that causality in the presence of interactions, the denseness
of localized states generated by acting with operators associated with nonva-
nishing region9 whose causal complement is nontrivial, or the total dierent
nature of local algebras as compared to algebras of qm with consequences for
quantum measurement theory [14]. especially these last structural dierences
may be somewhat surprising (in the of low credibility) to somebody who has
always thought about qft just as a relativistic continuation of qm. hypernite

7at least if one does not solve the lagrangian theory nonperturbatively and explicitly, and

then reprocesses the resulting dynamical variables; an altogether impossible task.

8the reader may have noticed that whenever we want to emphasize the concepts of qft
but not necessarily their present textbook implementations, we prefer the termonology lqp
(local quantum physics). this diminishes the unwarranted (almost subconscious) tendency of
the reader to equate qft with euclidean funcional representations and all that.

9this property has been colloquially termed the particle behind the moon paradoxon,
better known as the reeh-schlieder property or in mathematical language of von neumann
algebras as the cyclic and separating property of the vacuum with respect to local algebras.

6

type iii1 von neumann factors, as the wedge localized algebras of qft have
indeed very dierent properties from the type i algebras of qm. they do not
permit pure states at all10, and they also, together with their commutants, do
not admit the notion of tensor product factorization of the total algebra b(h),
disentanglement and all that [15]. in order to recover the usual quantum me-
chanical structure of the inside/outside factorization of a schrodinger box, one
has to work quite hard and use the buchholz-wichmann nuclearity property
for the control of local degrees of freedom [1]. the resulting relativistic box
consists of a the inner region of a smaller double cone and the outer (innite)
spacetime of a larger double cone, but note that the inside and the outside needs
to be separated by a collar region in order to attenuate the uncontrolled vac-
uum uctuation caused by sharp boundaries (the latter trouble already having
been known to heisenberg in his study of vacuum polarizations). as mentioned
before, this is known under the name of split situation or split inclusions.

there are many recent results from modular theory which all point into the
same direction and contain the same general message, namely one is dealing
here with structures which, if at all, only with a superhuman hindsight and
extraordinary stretch of imagination are visible from a quantization framework.
a convincing illustration not presented here, are the recently found hidden
symmetries [16][17], where the word hidden is used in the sense of hidden
to the lagrangian-noether framework (and of course not in the sense of the
modular framework within which they were discovered). we also refrain from
presenting some very surprising results about the possibility of creating a local
net in lqp together with the full poincare symmetry from just a few (for chiral
conformal theory 2, for d=1+2 theory 3 and for d=1+3 theory 6 ) algebras in a
certain modular position to each other [18][19]. although algebraic qft unlike
string theory is not designed to be quantum gravity, these ndings about totally
unexpected relations between raw (highly noncommutative) algebraic data and
spacetime geometry, although not being directly related to quantum gravity,
should be taken serious in any attempt towards quantum gravity.

another very important consequence of modular theory is the allayed men-
tioned thermal aspect which it attributes to localization. in the case of natural
localizations related to classical bifurcated killing horizons as they occur in
black hole physics, this thermal aspect can, and as everybody knows, has been
discovered before modular theory. but for the general localization in qft,
which cannot be describe in such classical metric properties, one really needs
it. the modular localized subspaces are dense in the hilbert space of the full
theory, but there is a natural thermal scalar product (the graph metric de-
ned by the unbounded tomita operator s of that region) in terms of which
it is closed. this thermal inner product changes with the localization region
of the local algebras, and it turns out to be related to the domain problems
of wightmans theory11 and possibly also to the construction of pointlike co-

10we follow here the by now standard terminology to omit the prex normal for states,
and add the prex singular for the rare case of nonnormal states on von neumann algebras.
11actually the wightman domain is related to the intersections of all (thermal) modular
domains. this is quite interesting, since many particle physicist in my generation were told not

7

variant elds from the net of local algebras. there is a speculative remark of
fredenhagen (privat communication) which ts in very nicely with these physi-
cal aspects of eld domains and ranges of actions of algebras on the vacuum. it
is the idea that a pointlike eld or rather the one-eld subspace obtained by its
application to the vacuum can be characterized as the carrier of an irreducible
representation of some (innite dimensional) universal modular group. the
latter is generated by all the one parametric modular groups for all spacetime
regions12. this, if true (it is true for those qft which have been by the wedge
localization method sketched in the next section), would make a rather spec-
tacular addition (if not revolution) in qft as it has been hitherto understood
since it attributes to pointlike elds the an analogous intrinsic physical role as
the wigner positive energy representation theory of the poincare group. in this
way the elds would recover some of their lost ground (at least in the form
of the mentioned eld spaces), when from the viewpoint of aqft they became
relegated to mere coordinates. and much more: since the modular groups
and their unitary implementers are expected to contain the crucial information
on interaction, they would gain in addition to the geometric properties they
already had in the quantization approach, the status of an intrinsic modular
based concept of interaction. to put it into the context of the more concrete
constructive nonperturbatve modular setting of the next section, the incoming
particle content of the interacting eld in terms of its formfactor spaces.

2 holography and the constructive approach

to wedge algebras

holography is the conjectured correspondence between higher and (conformal)
lower dimensional qft (or a family of lower dimensional ones). the attrac-
tive aspect of such a correspondence is that a lot more is known about low-
dimensional qft, in particular conformal qft, which could be of use for the
construction of higher dimensional qfts. historically the idea can be traced
back to the thermal and geometric behavior of black hole (classical) entropies
(bekenstein, hawking). since the temperature aspects were understood in the
setting of (free) qft in cst, it was only natural to look for an explanation of
the surface proportionality of entropy in terms of quantum degrees of freedom
at or near the horizon. in contrast to the understanding of the hawking-unruh
temperature as originating from the causal localization behind a (killing) hori-
zon, the entropy problem was less susceptible to explicit calculation involving
(free) quantum matter in black hole background. but it is clear that if one
could understand the surface nature of the degrees of freedom, then the en-
tropy should follow suit.
in the lagrangian formulation of qft the elusive
light-cone physics preempted some aspects of this idea, and is not surpris-

to worry to much about these domain problems and accept them as a technical mathematical
assumption void of any direct physical interpretation.

12the dynamics would then be carried by the representations of the local modular groups

instead of the global time-frame dependent hamiltonian.

8

ing that t hooft [21], who on various occasions used light-cone quantization,
in more recent times suggested to interpret bekenstein classical observation on
black hole entropy in terms of quantum holography.

a problem like the present one, where eld coordinates are not transformed
into each other, but rather degrees of freedom become transmuted in a way
which is hard to describe in terms of pointlike eld concepts, is bound to cause
trouble within the usual quantization formalism. to be sure, problems with the
use of one set of eld coordinates versus another one already appeared before
in qft, although in the early 60ies they were sometimes the source of some
prejudices about lagrangian elds being in some sense better than any other
composites (carrying the same charges). this was part of a bigger confusion
about particles versus elds; the elementary versus bound state hierarchy of
qm tacitly entered qft where it should have been replaces by the hierarchy of
superselected generalized charges (including those nonabelian casimir charges
which underlie nonabelian internal symmetries. for example in connection with
the pcac, physicists in lagrangian eld theory had to take notice of the fact
that one is not slavishly bound to those eld coordinates in terms one has written
a particular lagrangian. from the time in illinois, as a collaborator of rudolf
haag, i remember a conversation between murray gell-mann and rudolf haag
which ended with some astonishment on the side of gell-mann. nowadays
the understanding of the extreme insensitivity of onshell objects like the s-
matrix against changes of eld coordinatizations has become a commonplace
even in lagrangian qft, especially after weinberg tought physicists how to
formally handle this problem in perturbation theory. however the morphisms
and isomorphisms needed in order to understand holography are of a dierent
caliber.

mature physicists are of course aware that progress in physics is to a large
part the liberation from prejudices (including ones owns). algebraic qft the-
ory had the big advantage that there was no place for prejudices about elds,
because there were no elds in its formulation. as a result, the problem with
this eld coordinate free formulation was shifted somewhere else. it was not
entirely clear that, although one did not want to invent a new theory but just im-
plement the same physical principles which underlie the quantization approach
in a dierent conceptually and mathematically more controllable way, that one
had not in fact actually lost the connection to the same particle physics. but it
became soon clear that the gains of understanding by working with nets of op-
erator algebras instead of elds (as e.g. the independence of the s-matrix from
the choice of particular interpolating operators taken from the local algebras)
were not oset by an undesired vagueness or unintended invention of new phys-
ical content. this was established beyond reasonable doubt, and in the case of
chiral conformal qft there is even a rigorous proof for the equivalence of the
wightman description with the algebraic framework [20]. as mentioned before
algebraic qft based on modular methods wants to stay laboratory physics, and
not like string theory aim at quantum gravity.

already in the early stages of the theory there were concepts, questions,
and techniques which transcended the lagrangian framework and even that

9

of wightman. one could e.g. ask about the possibilities of particle statistics
compatible with the einstein causality of observables. this goes certainly be-
yond the wightman theory which is a theory which includes the charge carrying
elds which ab inicio are assumed to have  commutations relations for space-
like separation and the spin-statistics theorem just selecting one of these two
possibilities. in algebraic quantum eld theory one succeeds to compute the eld
statistics without such restrictive assumptions on nonobservable quantities (on
which in d<1+3 one has anyhow no a priori control). in the intermediate steps
of the conceptually and mathematically rich dhr and dr constructions [1],
there appear parastatistics elds which belong to nonabelian young tableaux
of the permutation group. they do not permit quasiclassical limits and la-
grangians, but are reasonable objects in algebraic qft (in the sense that the
charge carrying parastatistics elds have enough locality in order to admit a rea-
sonable physical interpretation, albeit one which is much more noncommutative.
only after enlarging the hilbert space by the introduction of multiplicities i.e.
indices on which (symmetry) groups can act does one make contact with quasi-
classics. on the other hand, writing down a lagrangian has already preempted
the answer without having been able to ask the question. of course an ardent
philosophical empiricist will point to the fact that there was never any episte-
mological need for asking such a question since the usual formulation with built
in multiplicities and bose/fermi statistics works nicely. but he would have a
hard time in say d=1+2 theories with braid group statistics, where it can be
mathematically demonstrated that those plektonic objects will never t into a
lagrangian quantization approach with eld multiplicities.

of course he may point out that d=1+2 models is not particle physics. in
that case one could, assuming that he does not also declare the present ads
discussion in connection with holography for irrelevant in particle physics, point
out to him that although there is no satisfactory solution of the paradoxical sit-
uation of holography in any quantization approach13, the solution which was
given in algebraic qft by rehren [10] is conceptually clear and mathemati-
cally rigorous. the main point in rehrens presentation is that the adapted
bisognano-wichmann theorem allows to understand an isomorphism between
adsn+1 and conformal minkowski spacetime mn which is not a pointwise ge-
ometric mapping (dieomorphism) but rather a set mapping between modular
localization regions of algebras. in fact the notion of weak locality[4] used in
his paper is completely equivalent to the spatial part (the thermal subspaces of
the total hilbert space which are closed in the modular graph norm) in my con-
structive approach built on modular wedge localization [3]. if the reader nds
the small amount of modular concepts inaccessible because he lacks mathemat-
ical understanding of lqp concepts, he may have another chance by looking at

13quantization diculties have been mentioned in wittens papers [22]. actually ads only
exposes the general limitation of quantization which always exists in any interacting qft,
once one leaves the realm of perturbation and quasiclassical approximations. the entrance into
qft from the noncommutative side of modular theory i.e. without the classical parallelism
(called quantization) may be more dicult and unusual, but does certainly not suer from
those limitations.

10

the closely related paper of buchholz, florig and summers [11]. these authors
explain the lqp in an ads space-time together with a rigorous physical account
of what is necessary to know about modular theory without assuming a prior
knowledge. we will not try to reproduce these results here, since the clarity of
the papers makes this a sacrilege.

as far as i could see, the only open problem in the bfs work is the question
whether there can be any genuine interaction at all in such a ads world with
that causality paradox mentioned in their paper. this question is reminiscent
of a problem which i encountered in my collaboration with swieca at the be-
ginning of the 70ies. at that time there existed the challenge to understand
the (global) causality paradox of conformal qft [24], i.e. the apparent con-
tradiction between being able to conformally transform oneself globally from
space-like separations via the light-like innity into the time-like region and the
fact that certain interacting would-be conformal models, as e.g. the massless
thirring model, did not comply with the huygens principle calling for vanishing
time-like (anti)commutators which was required in order to avoid contradictions
with that global transformation property. in fact the only known d=1+1 mod-
els which did not generate this paradox were free elds with fouriertransforms
on the light cone, as conformal currents or energy-momentum tensors. the res-
olution [25][26] of this paradox turned out to consist in realizing the important
role of the conformal covering space in that those paradoxical looking elds as
the thirring eld were not (as everybody believed up to that time) globally
irreducible, but rather had a rich decomposition with respect to the center of
the conformal covering group. the irreducible components in this decompo-
sition (simply called nonlocal components) became known 10 years later as
the conformal blocks in the famous belavin-polyakov-zamolodchikov paper as
everybody knows. one reason why we only looked at the thirring-like expo-
nential boson elds was (besides the fact that they already were available), that
these new irreducible component objects were outside the range of euclideaniza-
tion and even outside the wightman framework since their algebra admits local
annihilators. my impression after having read [11]is that the ads situation
has analogous causality problems. in fact, using the rehren isomorphism for
ads(1,1), one would expect to be able to lift the solution of the old conformal
paradox directly into the new ads(1,1) realm.

i now would like to explain some of the modular ideas which i used recently
in a constructive program for interacting lqp models which is based on the use
of algebras and is completely free of eld coordinates (although i will think of
the reader, and use a eld notation whereever possible). of course one must
rst test these ideas in the interaction free case. this i did by showing that
the wigner representation theory can be directly used for the construction of
the local nets without e.g. using weinbergs formalism of rst constructing
free elds which then would generate these local algebras. in this way one ob-
tains an intrinsic description of noninteracting theories which restores (or rather
maintains) the uniqueness14 (or rather maintains of the (m,s) wigner represen-

14the uniqueness on the eld level was lost because there are innitely many u- and v- inter-

11

tations and avoids the plethora of covariant associated eld coordinatizations
[12][13][14].

this rst step may be viewed as analogous to the intrinsic coordinate-free
description of geometry. it uses a kind of inverse of the bisognano-wichmann
theorem, i.e. the known modular theory for the wedge, in order to obtain the
operator algebra localized in the wedge. it may be viewed as a renement of
weinbergs exposition of the wigner theory mentioned in the rst section, by
implementing the idea of modular localized subspaces directly in the wigner mo-
mentum space description without the use of covariant x-space wave functions
or the noncovariant newton-wigner localization. this baby-version of modular
theory can be understood without knowing anything about the tomita modular
theory and as such furnishes an excellent pedagogical example of the power of
modular localization and the bisognano-wichmann theorem.

the next step namely to construct interacting nets in this intrinsic manner
is more dicult. of course one could follow weinberg for the construction
of free elds from wigner particles, select some free elds corresponding to
(m,s), couple them to a scalar wick-ordered interaction density w(x) (which
one may call lint, but the existence of an l0 is not necessary, see previous
footnote) which is then plugged into the causal perturbative machine whose
heartpiece is the perturbative transition operator s(g). from there one obtains
the retarded representations of interacting elds in terms of free eld in fock
space which in turn (or by direct use of the s(g)) generate the localized algebras
after suitable test function smearing. but this way of constructing local algebras
would amount to just an exercise in semantics and go against the spirit of lqp.
let me explain the gist of the correct idea with the help of a two-dimensional
representation and using standard eld theoretical language wherever it is pos-
sible.

let a(x) be a d=1+1 massive free scalar elds with the following notation.

a(x) =

=

=

1

1

1

dp
2

2 z (eipxa(p) + h.a.)
2 z (eimsh()a() + h.a.)d, x2 < 0
2 zc

eimsh()a()d, c = r{i + r}

(1)

where in the second line we have introduced the x- and momentum- space rapidi-
ties and specialized to the case of spacelike x, and in the third line we used the
analytic properties of the exponential factors in order to arrive at a compact and
(as it will turn out) useful contour representation. note that the analytic con-
tinuation refers to the c-number function, whereas the formula a( i)  a()

winers from the unique wigner representation to the plethora of covariant l-representations.
weinberg prefers the one (those) for which there is a free lagrangians, since he wants to use
elds for a euclidean functional integral representation. real time causal perturbation theory
on the other hand can be done in any eld coordinatization. the best way would be do use
none at all.

12

is a denition and has nothing to do with analytic continuations of operators15.
with this notational matter out of the way, we now write down our ansatz
for nonlocal but (as it turns out) still wedge localized elds using the same
notation

f (x) =

1

2 zc

eimsh()z()d, z() = 0

z(1)z(2) = sz,z (1  2)z(2)z(1)
z(1)z (2) = (1  2)1 + sz,z  (1  2)z (2)z(1)

(2)

(3)



for the moment the s
s are simply lorentz-covariant (only rapidity dierences
appear) functions which for algebraic consistency full unitarity s() = s().
we assume (for simplicity) that the state space contains only one type of par-
ticle.

before continuing with the special situation we introduce a useful general

denitions.

denition 1 a eld operator f(x) is called one-particle polarization free
if f(x) and f(x) have only one-particle components (for any one of the
irreducible particle spaces in the theory)

for polarization free f (x)s the vector f #(x) is on mass-shell i.e. has a
fourier transform in terms of z (), with z() = 0. note that the denition
does not yet require that f (x) itself to be on-shell. we are however interested
in f (x)s which upon smearing with test functions restricted to a subspace l
generate algebras

a = alg(cid:26)f ( f ) = z f (x) f (x)ddx | f  l(cid:27)

(4)

which on the one hand are big enough in order to create a dense set of states if
applied to , but on the other hand allow for an equally big commutant algebra
a, in short the pfs should generate an a which is cyclic and separating with
respect to the vacuum. as a result of f ( f )a = af ( f ) for a  a, the
formula (2)
on-shell aspect of the vectors is transferred to the operators, i.e.
for f (x) is valid. the ls we have in mind are subspaces of localized test
functions l = n f | supp f  oo. but as a consequence of an old theorem by jost

and the present author [4], this immediately limits the admissable localization
properties. if the eld is pointlike local, this theorem forces the f to be a free
eld, and by a slight massaging of the proof this would continue to hold for

15operators in qft never possess analytic properties in x- or p-space. the notation and
terminology in conformal eld theory is a bit confusing, because although it is used for oper-
ators it really should refer to vector states and expectation values in certain representations
of the abstract operators. the use of modular methods require more conceptual conciseness
than standard methods.

13

f s which have a compact minkowski space localization. even for noncompact
localizations which are properly contained in a wedge (i.e. a lorentz transformed
of the standard wedge x1 > |x0|) this clash with interactions continues16 and the
only consistent value of the s-functions in the above ansatz are s = 1 i.e. free
bosons/fermions. the smallest region for which these arguments break down
are full wedges. the following theorem shows that indeed wedge localization in
d=1+1 is consistent with nontrivial interactions and the result emerging from
the above ansatz in formula (3) is quite surprising.

one nds that the coecients are related to each other and full the complete
zamolodchikov-faddeev algebra if and only if the f ( f )s with supp f  w
generate wedge localized algebra, thus unraveling the physical signicance of this
formally introduced algebraic structure in terms of wedge localization [12][13].
this is not the rst time in physics that wedges play a prominent role. in
unruhs minkowski space illustration of the origin of thermal aspects of quan-
tum matter encapsulated behind a horizon, in the rst application of tomitas
modular theory by bisognano and wichmann and now in the inverse use of the
bisognano-wichmann theorem for the direct construction of local algebras, in
all cases one encounters the fundamental role of wedge localization and wedge
algebras. in the present case we nd [3] [13][14]

proposition 2 the requirement of wedge localization of a pf operator f (f ) =

r f (x) f (x)d2x, suppf  w with f fullling formula 3 is equivalent to the

zamolodchikov-faddeev structure of the z-algebra.
in particular the thermal
(hawking-unruh) kms condition on their wightman correlation functions cor-
respond to the crossing symmetry of the s-coecient functions. the correspond-
ing fs cannot be localized in smaller regions i.e. the localization of f(f) with
suppf o  w is not in o but still uses all of w.

the reader can nd the proof which amounts to a simple computation in
[13][14]. of cause the fs are not ordinary (lagrangian or wightman-) elds,
since there localization does not follow the decreasing support properties of fs
inside the wedge and therefore f(f) is the better notation than f(x). since
polarization f ree generators f will only play a role as wedge generators, we
will simply use the abbreviation pfg standing for polarization-free-wedge-
generators.

a moments thinking about the special situation reveals that the modular
structure, i.e. the existence of the antilinear unbounded tomita involution st
(the subscript serves to distinguish this time-honored modular notation from
the equally time-honored notation for the scattering operator) is the general
cause underlying the above observation. in fact the modular basic law for the
physical wedge algebra are:

16i owe this general model independent insight to d. buchholz, private remark, unpublished.

st a = a, a  a(w )

(5)

14

which denes the antilinear, unbounded, closable, involutive (on its domain)
tomita operator st . its polar decomposition

st = j

1
2

(6)

1

denes a positive unbounded 
2 and an antiunitary involutive j and the
nontrivial part of tomitas theorem (with improvements by takesaki) is that
the unitaty it implements an automorphism of the algebra i.e. t(a) 
itait = a and the j maps into antiunitarily into its commutant j(a) 
jaj = a. for the case at hand (the bisognano-wichmann situation) these
operators have their following physical aliases:

it = u ((2t)) = uin((2t))
j = sjin

(7)

where uin() is the unitary representation of the poincare-group in the incoming
fock space and j(jin) is the tcp operator (its free eld incoming version).
the wedge situation is a special illustration for the tomita theory covered
by the bisognano-wichmann theorem [1]. in that case both operators have well
known physical aliases; the modular group is the one-parametric wedge ali-
ated lorentz boost group it = u ((2t), and the j in d = 1 + 1 lqps
is the fundamental tcp-operator as derived from rst principles by r. jost
[1]; in higher dimensions it is only dierent from tcp by a -rotation around
the spatial wedge axis. the formula for the modular operator in terms of the
scattering matrix (which contains the information about the interaction) is not
part of that theorem and as such is new. however it turns out to be just a
modular adapted transcription of the tcp transformation law of the textbooks
[4]. the prerequisite for the general tomita situation is that the vector in the
pair (algebra, reference vector) is cyclic and separating i.e. there is no annihi-
lation operators in the von neumann algebra or equivalently: its commutant is
cyclic relative to the reference vector. in lqp these properties are guarantied
for localization regions o with nontrivial causal complement o thanks to the
reeh-schlieder theorem. in terms of the correlation functions of the generators
the wedge localization aliation of the generated algebra is nothing but the
kms condition (which is checked in the above mentioned proof [19]).

the construction of the local qft behind the s-matrix of the above model
is of course not nished with that of its wedge algebra. the essential next step
is the construction of its double cone algebras17 via the demonstration of the
nontriviality (6= c  1) of the intersection of the right wedge algebra with its
translated opposite left wedge. it is precisely here where the idea of holography
enters the game. it is much easier to show the nontriviality of the holographic
image of this situation.

17the sharpening of localization via algebraic intersections is the essential dierence to
usual qft even including wightmans approach. i was quite surprized when in this way i
obtained the same recursion formula [12] which in smirnovs axiomatic approach [23] (not
the usual qft axioms but rather some calculational recipes designed for factorizing models).

15

the crucial idea is to look at the relative commutant for light-like transla-

tions for say a+ = (1, 1)

a(w+)  a(w )

(8)

where a(w+) is the a+-shifted wedge algebra. a(w+)  a(w ) is almost a
modular inclusion, i.e. the modular group of a(w ) i.e. the lorentz-boost in
one direction acts on a(w+) as a compression into itself. the only missing
property is the standardness of the relative commutant in h with respect to .
but this is easily achieved by projection onto the cyclicity space m+

h+ = p+h  h = a(w )

(9)

using a theorem of takesaki, the reduced inclusion denes again a modular
inclusion in its own right from which one may reconstruct a positive energy
translation u (a) which then can be used to dene a reduced net indexed by
intervals

a(ia,e2t+a) = u(a)ite+(cid:0)a(wa+ )  a(w )(cid:1) it u 1(a, a)
m+  ta(i0,e2 t ), e+(a(w )) = m+ = p+a(w )p+

(10)

the reduced net can be shown to be standard and the set of standard modular
inclusion is known to be isomorphic to the set of all chiral conformal eld theories
(s-w). therefore each d=1+1 net comes associated with it a satellite chiral
conformal net. this is the rigorous modular version of holography and again,
as in the ads case treated by rehren, this association is outside the range of
lagrangian quantization since there is no lagrangian or euclidean functional
integral process which can describe properly this transmutation of degrees of
freedom. at the time of writing of this essay, the computations for the existence
proof of the factorizing models (double cone algebra nontriviality) have not
been nished.
the use of the holography idea for higher dimensional qfts is more in-
volved.
if one carries out the previous modular inclusion construction, one
realizes that, because of the transversal indeterminacy of the chiral conformal
theory attached by modular inclusion (which is localization-wise really attached
to a whole light front rather than alight ray), the chiral theory is, contrary to
rehrens ads treatment, not yet sucient for a reconstruction of the original
theory from the holographic image. it turns out that by tilting the lorentz-
boost of the original wedge around one of its light rays one generates a stalk
of conformal theories which, more analogous to a scanning process than holog-
raphy, allows the reconstruction [16] (called blow-up in the paper) of the full
net theory. it uses an enrichment of modular inclusion,called modular inter-
sections, which in its geometrical interpretation corresponds to the interaction
of two dierent wedges which have one light ray in common. modular inclu-
sions and modular intersections constitute presently the most powerful concep-
tual/mathematical instruments which lqp has to oer.

16

it should be clear to those who know a bit about the two-dimensional
bootstrap-formfactor constructive program, that the two-dimensional modu-
lar method for factorizing models (i.e. those which are dened by a matrix-
generalization of the ansatz at the beginning of this section) is what lies behind
the formfactor program initiated by karowski-weisz and smirnov. it does how-
ever more than only justify those very successful collection of non-lagrangian
cooking recipes, in that it promises to solve the dicult and not fully under-
stood problem of the correlation functions of pointlike quantum elds (using
again standard qft concepts) in those models. in fact this diculty, known
to every expert of the bootstrap-formfactor program in the conventional setting
results from the fact that there is no natural basis in interacting eld space as
the wick composites for free elds. therefore it is better to avoid elds alto-
gether and characterize the physical content of a theory in terms of its basis
independent double cone algebras. in their nontriviality demonstration as well
as in their actual construction, the holography, as we have argued, plays an
essential role.

since chews s-matrix bootstrap program (i.e. the formulation of the nonlin-
ear s-matrix axioms as well as the actual construction of interesting examples)
only works for the d=1+1 factorizing models, there is no hope to do higher di-
mensional qft with modular methods in a two-step process of calculating rst
s and then the associated wedge algebra. rather one has to understand the
structure of correlation functions of wedge generators f (f ) in terms of s and s
itself simultaneous. this is presently only imaginable in a perturbative spirit.
but note that this would be a perturbative approach for wedge algebras and not
for individual elds, i.e. technically speaking for the whole space of formfactors
generated from the pfgs sandwiched between incoming particle ket vectors
and outgoing bra vectors without any natural way of distinguishing individ-
ual elements [14]. renements and distinctions have to go via improvements
of localizations, which in modular theory can only happen through algebraic
intersections.

in order to return at the end of my essay to the wichmanns s-matrix
research18 carried out at the beginning of his research carrier at berkeley, i
would like to use some recent personal experience of my own as a vehicle to
recapture some avor of those times.

shortly after string theorist picked the big latin letter m for one of their
recent inventions, but before the much clearer ads proposal (note the small
d there!) attracted the attention, i was struck by the wealth of coincidences
of some of the string theoretic statements, especially in connection with trans-
mutations and counting of degrees of freedom, light cone physics (in particular
their galilean group aliated with the light cone) and ideas on holography,
with recent results about consequences of modular theory. although i admit-
tedly do not understand string theory from a physical point of view, i do think
(most of my colleagues from algebraic qft do not share such optimistic ideas)

18i do not know whether wichmann, while working on wedge localization and modular
theory, was aware about these strong connections with his previous s-matrix research. it may
have been another instance of the role the subconcious on scientic research.

17

that the used dierential-geometric quantization formalism, together with the
relics of physical locality and spectral properties which such a formalism inex-
orably contains and which are hard to loose (despite its considerable distance
from its quantum eld theoretical origins), constitutes a powerful mathemat-
ical machinery for the discovery of new structures; even though physical in-
terpretations which could reconcile string theory with the physically (but not
mathematically!) more conservative local quantum physics a very scarce (and
probably not always correct). apparently the string formalism uses (to me hid-
den) ideas which carries string physicists beyond the connes of the reservoir of
possibilities allowed by lagrangian quantization and in this way achieves sim-
ilar miracles as modular theory (which originated by faithfulness to all the
principles underlying standard qft, but not its formalism).

but my proposal to include modular (in the sense of d=1+3 lqp without
curling up unwanted dimensions (by semiclassical klein-kaluza ideas) also in
the list of possible interpretations of the letter m did not nd the approval
of the referee who claimed that all this is accidental and spurious (whereupon i
withdrew my admittedly rather speculative notes from the hep-th server).

fortunately the arrival of the clearer ads structures has made it possible to
have at least some realistic comparisons[11][10] if not directly of string theory,
then at least of some of what are believed to be consequences of its underlying
philosophy.

my attitude towards the issue string/modular theory19 did not change, in
part due to the fact that i have much deeper, almost archaic reasons, which
probably also the jubilar from his early berkeley s-matrix days can share with
me. i am referring to the mysterious role of crossing symmetry which at the
same time was (apart from unitarity) by far the physically most important input
into the berkeley (primarily chews) s-matrix bootstrap program; the analyt-
icity, to the extend that it was not needed in the formulation of crossing, was
more of a technical nature. now, with all the hindsight of the distance in time
and signicant advances about the consequences of the jubilars modular con-
tributions, it is becoming gradually clear that those two topics belong together,
and that there could not have been conceptual progress on crossing symmetry
without a comprehensive modular understanding of the wedge situation.

let us follow the ow of history on crossing symmetry a bit more.
in order to lift some of its mystery, as everybody of that generation remem-
bers, veneziano invented the dual model and virasoro observed subsequently
that the (onshell) s-matrix (still without its unitarity corrections) permitted the

19i still believe that both string theory and lqp leave the rather narrow connes of standard
lagrangian qft, but for dierent reasons and with dierent aims. whereas for the followers
of string theory, qft was identied with the standard text book lagrangian or functional
quantization, and therefore the (revolutionary) departure happened on the physical side by
keeping as much as possible of the standard formalism, lqp is totally conservative with
respect to the underlying physical principles, but revolutionary on their mathematical and
conceptual implementations. string theory, after its second revolution, wanted to be (or at
least to incorporate) quantum gravity, whereas lqp denitely wants to stay with laboratory
physics. a very instructive illustration of this dierence is supplied by comparing wittens
approach [22] to ads versus that in [10] [11].

18

mathematical trick of a representation in terms of a lower dimensional (oshell)
qft. this was the birth of string theory, never mind its several revolutions and
semantic changes which happened in the course of its conversion of an original
nonperturbative proposal for a strong interacting s-matrix (with presumably
an tower of unstable particles as poles in the second riemann sheet by higher
unitarity corrections; a possibility of stringyness not excluded by any known
theorem of local qft) into a toe including quantum gravity.

unfortunately the full understanding of the notoriously dicult crossing
symmetry (which most people thought of as an onshell imprint of the oshell
einstein causality), and whose unraveling was worth any eort, was not ob-
tained. regrettably the birth of string theory was for many especially young
theoreticians, also the point of departure into the physical blue yonder with
little chance to return.

now with the patient and precise early work of the jubilar on modular
theory bearing many fruits, and with the importance of crossing symmetry at
the cradle of string theory on ones mind, the proposal to occupy part of the
physically underpopulated m-universe with m as in modular theory, may after
all not turn out to be as outrageous as it appears on rst sight.

acknowledgement 3 i am indebted to detlev buchholz for giving some ad-
vice in the writing of this manuscript and to my fu-berlin experimentalphysik
kollege william brewer, who recreated to me (over some drinks at a bar in
copacabana) a bit of the zeitgeist of the 60ies at berkeley, when he took theory
courses from prof. eyvind wichmann. finally i thank marinus winnink for
having conrmed the historical correctness of some of my remarks concerning
the dawn of modular theory.

references

[1] r. haag, local quantum physics, springer 1992

[2] d. buchholz, current trends in axiomatic quantum eld theory, hep-

th/9811233

[3] b. schroer, aop vol. 255, no.2, (1997) 270

[4] r.f. streater and a.s. wightman, pct, spin and statistics and all that,

benjamin 1964

[5] s. weinberg, the quantum theory of fields, i, cambridge university press

1995

[6] k. fredenhagen, k.-h. rehren and b. schroer, rev. math. phys., special

issue (1992) 113 and references therein

[7] d. guido and r. longo, commun. math. phys. 181 (1996) 11, and papers

quoted therein

19

[8] k.-h. rehren, lett. math. phys. 46, (1998) 95

[9] h.-j. borchers, on the tcp-theorem in the theory of local observables,

univerity of gorttingen preprint 1999 and references therein.

[10] k.-h. rehren, algebraic holography, hep-th/9905179

[11] d. buchholz, m. florig and s.j. summers, hawking-unruh temperature

and einstein causality in anti-de sitter space-time, hep-th/9905178

[12] b. schroer, modular wedge localzation and the d=1+1 formfactor pro-

gram, in print, scheduled to appear in annals of physics 275, (1999)

[13] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular constructions of quantum field

theories with interactions, hep-th/9812251

[14] b. schroer, test of nonperturbative concepts in d=1+1 factorizing models

of qft, notas de fisica, cbpf-nf-019/99

[15] b. schroer, basic quantum theory and measurement from the viewpoint

of local quantum physics, quantum

[16] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, looking beyond the thermal horizon:

hidden symmetries in chiral models, hep-th/9901031

[17] d. buchholz, o. dreyer, m. florig and s. summers, geometric modular

action and spacetime symmetry groups, hep-th/

[18] h.-w. wiesbrock, commun. math. phys. 157, (1993) 83, commun. math.

phys. 193, (1998) 269

[19] b. schroer and h.-w. wiesbrock, modular theory and geometry, math-

th/9809003

[20] k. fredenhagen and m. joerss, conformal haag-kastler nets, pointlike lo-
calized elds and the existence of operator product expansions, commun.
math. phys. 176 (1996) 541

[21] g. t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, utrcht preprint

tau 93, gr-qc/9310000

[22] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2, (1998) 253

[23] f. a. smirnov, int.j. mod. phys. a4, (1989) 156

[24] m. hortacsu, r. seiler and b. schroer, phys. rev. d 5, (1972) 2519

[25] b. schroer and j. a. swieca, phys. rev. d 10, (1974) 480

b. schroer, j. a. swieca and a. h. voelkel, phys. rev. d 11, (1975) 1509

20

[26] b. schroer, principles of general quantum field theory versus new in-
tuition from model studies, an essay dedicated to the memory of jorge
andre swieca (1936-1980), in: the algebraic theory of superselection sec-
tors, introduction and recent results, page 573-604, ed. daniel kastler,
world scientic 1990

21

