9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

5

 
 

1
v
9
4
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

exact results in gauge theories: putting

supersymmetry to work

the 1999 sakurai prize lecture a

theoretical physics institute, university of minnesota, minneapolis, mn 55455

m. shifman

powerful methods based on supersymmetry allow one to nd exact solutions to
certain problems in strong coupling gauge theories. the inception of some of
these methods (holomorphy in the gauge coupling and other chiral parameters, in
conjunction with instanton calculations) dates back to the 1980s. i describe the
early exact results  the calculation of the  function and the gluino condensate 
and their impact on the subsequent developments. a brief discussion of the recent
breakthrough discoveries where these results play a role is given.

preamble

when the question of this talk arose arkady vainshtein, valya zakharov and
i had to decide how to split the contents into three parts. the division that
seemed natural was that i got the part covering the analytic properties of su-
persymmetric gauge theories, the exact results following from these properties,
and the implications for nonperturbative gauge dynamics. before delving into
the depths of this fascinating topic let me make a few historic remarks.

i vaguely remember the seminar given by yuri golfand1 at the end of 1970
or the beginning of 1971 entitled something like extensions of the poincare
algebra by bispinor generators. in those days i knew too little about high
energy physics to understand the contents of the talk, let alone the novelty
of the idea of supersymmetry (susy) and its potential. my experience was
limited, as i started studying theoretical high energy physics only a year be-
fore, although this was my fth year at the moscow institute for physics and
technology. before that i was specializing in the dynamics of gas ows. the
choice of the subject was not mine, i was just assigned to a group of students
whose major was gas dynamics and whose nal destination was one of many
classied laboratories doing research for the military. i made several attempts
to switch to more fundamental disciplines, but this was not allowed. this was
a common practice, our choices were always made for us by somebody else.
i managed to get into another group of students, specializing in high energy

abased on the talk at the centennial meeting of the american physical society, march 20-
26, atlanta, ga, on the occasion of receiving the 1999 sakurai prize for theoretical particle
physics. report-no. tpi-minn-99/20-t, umn-th-1759/99.

1

physics, only around 1970, with the help of v.b. berestetskii, who became, for
a short time, my rst physics adviser.

it produced an impression on me.

i remember very well, however, the paper2 of volkov and akulov is the
neutrino a goldstone particle?. it appeared in 1973, when i had just started
working on my phd. now we would say that the work was devoted to the
issue of the nonlinear realization of supersymmetry and the occurrence of a
massless goldstino.
i started pestering
colleagues, who were a couple of years older, with whom i shared the attic
of the old mansion occupied by the theory department of the institute of
theoretical and experimental physics (itep), the dovecote as we called it,
with questions of whether the work of volkov and akulov, and the idea in
general, were worth studying. the unanimous conclusion of the elders was
negative. in retrospect, this was evidently the wrong recommendation, and
i feel sorry that i took it for granted. well, in retrospect everything seems
pretty obvious; it is much harder to recognize the future potential of ideas
at their birth, especially if one is a beginner in the eld. sometimes i think
that even the pioneers of supersymmetry  scherk, ramond, golfand, volkov,
wess, zumino, and others  could not foresee in the early 1970s that they had
been opening to us the gates of the superworld, which would become one of
the most important components of our understanding of nature, a component
that will stay with us forever.

it should be added that this was the time of the triumph of non-abelian
gauge theories, when quantum chromodynamics (qcd), the theory of hadrons,
was born. this was a new unexplored area, closely related to experiment,
which was rapidly developing. valya zakharov and arkady vainshtein got me
involved in qcd. this was the type of physics i liked, and i submerged in it
so deeply that what was happening outside was of no concern to me. thus,
the rst decade of supersymmetric theories, when some of the most beautiful
results were obtained (e.g. vanishing of the vacuum energy, nonrenormalization
theorems,3 and so on) slipped by.

when i look back, i recollect these days with a nostalgic feeling. the-
ory and experiment went side by side. experimental puzzles and unanswered
questions that had been accumulating over the previous decade were unfold-
ing one after another, the solutions being provided by the most fundamental
theory of the day. the game was fascinating  we felt that all appropriate
pieces of the riddle were nally there, for the rst time in many years. bits
and pieces of knowledge started being melded in a big picture. theoretical de-
velopments, in turn, were prompting what was to be done next in experiment.
there was a live dialogue between theorists and experimentalists, at the end
of the day theoretical calculations would produce a number which could be

2

b

x

a

h

f=mg

figure 1: quantum mechanics of a particle () on a one-dimensional topologically nontrivial
manifold, the circle.

tested immediately or, at least, in the near future. will this time ever repeat
itself?

it was not until 1981 when my attention was attracted in earnest to super-
symmetric theories. the major role in this turn of events belongs to wittens
paper4 dynamical breaking of supersymmetry. it discusses, in general terms,
why supersymmetry could be instrumental in the solution of the hierarchy
problem, and why instantons could play a distinguished role in supersymmet-
ric theories. by that time zakharov, vainshtein and i had been studying
instanton eects in qcd for several years. instantons, discovered5 in 1975,
revealed one of the most profound features of non-abelian gauge theories 
the existence of a nontrivial topology in the space of elds.6 one of innitely
many coordinates describing the space of elds has the topology of the circle.
to get an idea of the underlying physics, one can consider a simple analog
problem from quantum mechanics. consider a particle in the gravitational
eld conned to a circle oriented vertically (fig. 1). the potential energy of
the particle is

v = gh = gr (1  cos x) .

(1)

if the kinetic energy of the particle is small enough, classically it oscillates
near the bottom (point a). the fact that the circle is closed at the top (point
b) plays no role. only at high energies does the classical particle feel that it
lives on the circle, since its trajectory can wind around. quantum-mechanically

3

v(x)

-2

-1

0

1

2


x/2

figure 2: if we unwind the circle of fig. 1 onto a line we get a periodic potential.

the possibility of winding drastically aects even the ground (lowest-energy)
state of the system. the particle can tunnel under the potential barrier near
the top, and return to the very same point a from the other side. to
solve the problem quantum-mechanically we must cut the circle and map it
(many times) onto a line (fig. 2). all wave functions have the bloch form; in
particular, the ground state wave function is

(x) =



xn=

einn(x) ,

(2)

where n(x) is the wave function of the n-th prevacuum, corresponding to
oscillations near the point n in fig. 2, and  is the vacuum angle, an analog
of the bloch quasimomentum. in qcd the circle variable (analogous to the
angle x in figs. 1, 2) is a composite eld built from the gluon four-potential,

k =

g2

322 z k0(x)d3x

(3)

where

 +

g
3

4

k = 2(cid:16)aa
is the so-called chern-simons current. winding around the circle n times
corresponds to shifting k by n units.

 aa

f abcaa

ab

ac

(cid:17)

(4)

a remarkable phenomenon occurs when the gluon elds are coupled to
massless fermions (quarks). each tunneling in k (i.e. k  k + 1) is accom-
panied, by necessity, with the production of a pair of quarks of each avor with
chirality violation.7 this can never happen at any nite order of perturbation
theory, where the chirality is conserved. the instanton-induced quark vertex
was found by t hooft, it goes under the name of the t hooft interaction.

although instantons in qcd were instrumental in establishing the non-
trivial vacuum structure, the existence of the vacuum angle , and in the
qualitative solution of the  problem,8 all attempts to exploit them for a
quantitative solution of qcd seemed fruitless. b any sensible calculation would
drag instantons into the domain of large radii, where the coupling constant
becomes large and theoretical control is lost. we spent a lot of time and eort
trying to identify uses of instantons in the theory of hadrons. the outcome
was not very inspiring. our results were limited to a few semiquantitative
observations,10 and one curious calculation11 which proved to be crucial in
supersymmetric theories.

the research project which is the subject of this talk spanned many years,
approximately from 1981 till 1991. when i say we implying the authors of
the project, i should be more denite. from 1981 till 1985 our group included
novikov, vainshtein, zakharov, and myself (as friends joked, the gang of
four). in one crucial link we joined our forces with misha voloshin. beginning
in 1986 i worked on this project with arkady vainshtein.

the puzzle of the t hooft interaction in supersymmetric
gluodynamics

when we began thinking of supersymmetric gauge theories in 1981, the ques-
tion of the instanton eects surfaced immediately. in supersymmetric gauge
theories, massless fermions (gauginos, or gluinos  i will use these terms indis-
criminately), are the superpartners of gauge bosons, which one cannot switch
o. a gaugino interaction of the t hooft type is generated by instantons.
there was no doubt in that. at the same time, there was no doubt that this
interaction was forbidden by supersymmetry, which requires every fermion
vertex to be accompanied by a bosonic partner.
in the theory with mass-
less fermions, there are no purely bosonic type instanton transitions. in other
words, there is no boson counterpart to the t hooft interaction.

b it would be more exact to say that this was our feeling in the early 1980s. the instanton
liquid models of the qcd vacuum suggested somewhat later9 were perfected in the last
decade to the extent that they reportedly capture all basic regularities acting in the low-
energy hadronic physics.

5

surprisingly, this problem was not considered in the literature at that time.
the paradox was clear-cut, the eect was qualitative, and yet there was com-
plete silence in the literature regarding this issue. we talked to experts, carried
out a literature search, and found next-to-nothing. in general, most studies
of supersymmetry were limited to perturbative aspects. there was little eort
to marry nonperturbative gauge dynamics with supersymmetry, although non-
abelian supersymmetric theories were known12 since 1974. wittens paper,13
where his famous index was introduced, could be, perhaps, viewed as the rst
work where the topic of nonperturbative gauge dynamics was addressed in
earnest. then, there was a paper14 by aeck, harvey and witten which dealt
with the instanton-induced eective superpotentials in three-dimensional eld
theories. this work was very elegant, but  alas  it was of little help. it did
not address the problem that preoccupied us. it should be added that we were
deeply involved, for quite a time, with the instanton puzzle when these papers
appeared.

in the beginning, the theory we mostly worked with was the simplest non-
abelian supersymmetric model in four dimensions, supersymmetric gluodyna-
mics,12

l = 

 ga

 +


322 ga



ga

 +

i
g2 ad 

a 

1
4g2 ga
4 (cid:18) 1

1

g2  i

=



82(cid:19)z d2 tr w 2 + h.c. ,

(5)

where the second line is given in the supereld notation, ga
 is the gluon eld
strength tensor,  is the vacuum angle, and a is the gluino eld in the weyl
representation. note that the (inverse) coupling constant gets complexied in
supersymmetric theories, see the second line in eq. (5). this circumstance
has far reaching consequences, as will be seen shortly.

if the gauge group is su(2), there are four gluino zero modes in the instan-
ton background eld; consequently, the t hooft vertex generated by the instan-
ton represents a four-fermion interaction of the type 4. the anti-instanton
gives rise to 4 (fig. 3).

at the classical level, the lagrangian (5) is invariant under chiral u(1)
rotations,    exp(i). this is a valid symmetry in perturbation theory.
in the full theory it is absent, however. the instantons reveal the anomalous
nature of the chiral u(1) through the t hooft interaction which violates u(1)
charge conservation, see fig. 3. nonetheless, a discrete subgroup z4 survives
(in the case of su(n ) the discrete chiral invariance is z2n ).

given an instanton of size , it was not dicult to calculate the coecient
of the four-fermion interaction in order to check that it did not vanish for

6






i(x  ,   )
0 0





figure 3: the instanton-generated t hooft interaction in su(2) supersymmetric gluody-
namics. x0 and 0 are the (super)coordinates of the instanton center.

accidental reasons. sure enough, it did not. paradoxically, the failure of our
early attempt to supersymmetrize the t hooft interaction was because our
focus on supersymmetry was too narrow. certainly, we understood that the
family of the instanton solutions possessed a wider symmetry, superconformal.
the superconformal group includes, in particular, the scale transformations
which change the instanton size. since our task was checking supersymmetric
ward identities we believed, however, that the instanton size  could be kept
xed.

for over a year this problem was a constant nightmare. at a certain point
we became so desperate that we started to suspect that susy was incompati-
ble with nonperturbative eects, an absolutely crazy idea. the rst relief from
this agony came when we considered15 the higgsed version of the model (5).
in the su(2) model we added a higgs sector, with relatively heavy (physical)
higgs elds. the higgs sector generated a mass for the gluons and gluinos. the
four gluino zero modes i mentioned above have a very transparent geometrical
meaning. two are related to the supersymmetry of the model, and two corre-
spond to the (classical) superconformal symmetry of the lagrangian (5). the
higgs mass eliminated the superconformal invariance, and gone with it were
the superconformal zero modes. the two-fermion t hooft vertex generated by
the remaining zero modes turned out to be a total derivative, 2(). the cor-
responding contribution in the action vanishes, and there is no contradiction
with supersymmetry.

this was a hint  the paradox we got stuck in, was due to our (incorrect)
presumption that one could x the instanton size without aecting supersym-

7

metry. in fact, once one shifts in the fermion direction in the instanton mod-
uli space, the scale transformations and the supersymmetry transformations
get entangled.16 one cannot expect to obtain supersymmetric results unless
the  integration is done. in retrospect, the misconception seems obvious.

the gluino condensate

after we realized that, the story began to unfold very rapidly. it was quickly
understood that the t hooft vertex was not a good object to have chosen.
we should have focused instead on calculating observable amplitudes. the
correlation function

(x)a(x) , b

ht (cid:8)a

(0)b (0)(cid:9)i

(6)

was the most natural candidate in the su(2) theory, given the zero mode
structure of the instanton (see fig. 3). this understanding  the shift towards
the observable correlators and integration over   melted the ice. one evening
we just sat down and did the calculation, essentially, on the back of an envelope.
we found that: (i) the result was nonvanishing, with no visible boson partner
(this was expected), and (ii) the correlation function (6) turned out to be an
x-independent constant,

ht (cid:8)tr2(x) , tr2(0)(cid:9)iinst =

2104

5

m 6

pv

1

g4 exp(cid:26)

82

g2 (cid:27) ,

(7)

where mpv is the pauli-villars cuto parameter. this was unexpected. but
this was the most favorable outcome one could hope for: the way out.

indeed, supersymmetry does not forbid the correlation function (6), pro-
vided that this two-point function is spatially constant, i.e. x independent. the
proof is quite straightforward and is based on three elements: (i) the super-
charge q  acting on the vacuum state annihilates it; (ii) q  anticommutes with
; (iii) the derivative  () is representable as the anticommutator of q 
and g. one dierentiates eq. (6), substitutes   () by { q , g},
and obtains zero. c thus, supersymmetry requires the x derivative of (6) to
vanish. it does not require the vanishing of the correlation function per se. a
constant is okay.

the instanton calculation is reliable at short distances |x|  1 where
 is the scale parameter of the theory. once we get a nonvanishing constant
at short distances, and once susy requires it to be one and the same at

cby analogy with the terminology accepted in topological eld theory the operator  can
be called q-closed, while the operator   () is q-exact.

8

any distance, we can use eq. (7) at |x|   to apply cluster decomposition.
the latter then implies that the gluino condensate develops in supersymmetric
gluodynamics, and that it is double-valued in the su(2) theory,

htri = 

252
5

m 3

pv

1

g2 exp(cid:26)

42

g2 (cid:27) .

(8)

this result was remarkable for several reasons. first of all, we were able
to prove17,18 that eq. (7) was exact, in the mathematical sense. perturba-
tion theory per se gives no contribution in the correlation function (7) to any
order. this correlator is saturated by a single (anti)instanton  for two or
more instantons the number of the zero modes does not match. moreover, the
(anti)instanton background eld is chiral, it preserves one half of supersymme-
try. the residual supersymmetry is sucient to nullify all loop corrections to
the instanton conguration. there is no g2 series in this problem. the two-
point function (7) is not renormalized, and neither is the gluino condensate.

at one loop, the cancellation of quantum corrections in the instanton eld
was known previously.19 we generalized this assertion to all orders, putting
it on par with the vanishing of the vacuum energy or the nonrenormaliza-
tion theorem for the superpotentials.3 in this way, a number of generalized
nonrenormalization theorems was established.

the reason why such theorems are valid in all backgrounds which preserve
a part of supersymmetry (usually one half), is the fermion-boson degeneracy,
which persists in such backgrounds. the possible exception is the zero modes,
which are to be treated separately. this is the same phenomenon that makes
the energy of the empty vacuum vanish.

the instanton is just a particular example of a magic background preserv-
ing a part of susy. another example is provided, for instance, by saturated
domain walls  they were discovered in various important supersymmetric mod-
els recently.20,21 the very fact of the absence of quantum corrections in magic
backgrounds is universal. details of the proof may vary.
in the instanton
problem it is so simple that i cannot resist the temptation to present it here.
in supersymmetric gluodynamics the instanton center is characterized by
two collective coordinates, x0 and its superpartner 0, see fig. 3. it is impor-
tant that, because of the selfdual (chiral) nature of the eld, there is no 0.
now, consider, say, a two-loop graph in the instanton background (fig. 4).
this graph has two vertices; its contribution can be written as an integral over
d4xd2d2  and d4xd2d2 . after one integrates over the supercoordinates of
the second vertex and over d4xd2 (but not ), one is left with the integral

r d2 f (). the function f must be invariant under the simultaneous susy

transformations of  and the instanton collective coordinates. since there is no

9

 

x,   ,


x ,    ,



figure 4: a typical two-loop supergraph. the solid lines denote the propagators of the
quantum superelds in the (anti)instanton background.

quod erat demonstrandum.

0, the only allowed solution is f = const. if so, the integral r d2 f () = 0,

certainly, this is only the skeleton of the proof. subtleties must be taken
care of (e.g. the absence of infrared divergences). you may believe me that
the statement of no corrections in eq. (7) is clean.

the exactness of the one-instanton result for the correlation functions of
appropriate chiral superelds (the operators involved must be the lowest com-
ponents of the superelds of one and the same chirality, and must saturate
all instanton zero modes) is a rigorous mathematical statement. whether the
calculation of the gluino condensate outlined above is physically complete is
a dierent story, on which i will dwell later. now let me only note that it
opens three distinct directions: (i) to topological eld theories; (ii) to exact 
functions; (iii) to condensates in the strong coupling regime. i will consider
these issues in turn.

the road to topological eld theories

the line of reasoning that led us to the gluino condensate (see the discussion
after eq. (7)) was a hint that the quantity we calculated was nondynami-
cal. indeed, the gluino condensate was determined through arbitrarily small
instantons. the subsequent observation22 that in weak coupling the gluino
condensate was saturated by zero-size instantons was an even stronger mes-
sage.

we were discussing the issue over and over. around 1986, arkady and
i did an instructive exercise. we considered susy gluodynamics in gravita-
tional backgrounds rather than in minkowski space. certainly, for an arbitrary
background, supersymmetry is lost. however, some backgrounds still preserve
(a part of) supersymmetry. an example of this type is the theory on a four-
dimensional euclidean sphere of radius r. an even simpler example is provided
by the theory on a four-torus with arbitrary periods li. in the limit r, li  
one returns back to at space. it seemed instructive, for reasons which i will
mention later, to keep these dimensional parameters nite.

in the case of the sphere, the exercise is more complex technically than the

10

pv g4 exp(cid:8)82/g2(cid:9) does

minkowski-space calculation, while for the torus it is only marginally dierent
from that in minkowski space. (moreover, on the torus one can nd23 htri
directly, using torons24). we found the analog of the correlation function (7)
in both cases and observed that (i) the result depends neither on r nor on
li, and (ii) the numerical coecient in front of m 6
depend on whether we are on the sphere or the torus. this was a clear indica-
tion of the topological nature of the sector of the theory under consideration.
the nding was exciting, and we discussed the situation with arkady many
times. i described what i knew in a lecture at the zakopane school in may
1988. from there it was only one step to isolating this sector, by discarding the
rest of the theory. our mathematical culture was not high enough, however, to
make this step possible. after i returned from zakopane, a colleague of mine
told me that he had heard of wittens work on topological eld theory.25 we
went to the library to look at the preprint (it was published in february 1988).
it was stolen. this was not unusual. since we had essentially no access to pho-
tocopying machines, interesting papers, especially wittens, would frequently
disappear upon arrival. i do not want to say that i or any of my colleagues
were stealing from the library, but some preprints were just disappearing into
thin air. so, we had to wait till the journal publication came. it was remark-
able to see how far witten advanced the strategy i described in the passage
after eq. (7). he peeled o the dynamical contents of the supersymmetric
gauge theories; what remains was formulated in a form preserving a residual
supersymmetry in any gravitational background. topological eld theories are
metric-independent. all correlation functions in topological eld theories are
treatable in the same manner as we treated the 2 two-point function, see eq.
(6). it is most remarkable that topological eld theory became a powerful tool
for solving some long-standing mathematical problems which were apparently
of paramount importance for mathematicians. d

gluino condensate and spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry

the assertion that the correlation functions of the lowest components of the su-
perelds of one and the same chirality (all chiral or all antichiral) are coordinate-
independent is valid not only for the gluino operators tr 2. this theorem is
general and is applicable to any operator. we did not take advantage of this
circumstance. it was rossi and veneziano who initiated27 a systematic search
for correlation functions of the type (6) which are saturated by one instanton,
in various theories with matter. in practice, the search is quite an easy task

dlater i learned that a special topological eld theory was suggested26 by albert schwarz
as early as in 1978.

11

since the analysis essentially reduces to a dimensional counting (the dimension
of the appropriate correlation function must match the rst coecient of the
 function) and keeping the balance of the zero modes. this line of research
culminated in the very beginning of 1984 when the su(5) model with m quin-
tets v and m antidecuplets x was considered.28 for instance, for m = 1 the
appropriate correlation function is

(x, y) = ht [tr2(x), tr2(y),s(0)]i ,

s = xxv x2 .

(9)



the color indices are contracted in s in a self-evident way, namely, s =
xx (v x
 ) (the lorentz indices of the gluino elds are sup-
pressed). all operators in the correlation function (x, y) are the lowest com-
ponents of chiral superelds. the one-instanton contribution does not vanish
and does produce a constant times 13. (the number 13 looks odd; in fact,
this is the rst coecient of the  function in the model at hand; 13 matches
the dimension of (x, y).) if x, y  1 one expects that the one-instanton
contribution saturates (x, y), so that the constant obtained in this way is
if so, one can pass to the limit x, y   and use the property
reliable.
of clusterization at large x, y to prove that the gluino condensate develops,
htr i 6= 0. the solution with htri = 0 and hsi   is ruled out due
to the absence of at directions. since the superpotential is absent in this
model, the gluino condensate is the order parameter for susy breaking. one
concludes that supersymmetry is spontaneously broken.28 in fact, this was the
rst direct demonstration that nonperturbative eects in the gauge theories
in four dimensions can lift the classical supersymmetric vacua resulting in the
dynamical breaking of supersymmetry. later on this technique was overshad-
owed by the eective lagrangian approach elaborated29 by aeck, dine and
seiberg (ads). in many instances the latter is indeed more user-friendly,
since it allows one to easily trace the response of the theory to the continuous
deformations of parameters, starting from the weak coupling higgs regime.
the condensate-based analysis remains useful in the strong-coupling regime.
there is one unsolved mystery associated with this analysis, which i will return
to at the end of the talk. the relation between the two approaches seems pretty
obvious now  in the weak coupling they are totally equivalent. apparently,
this was not so evident then. i remember that shortly after the ads papers,
i spent a month at cern in geneva. this was my rst serious exposure to
the western world, i was sort of depressed by the contrast between what i saw
around and my every-day experiences in moscow, so i decided that the best
thing to do was not to venture outside cern at all. i spent the entire month
conned in the oces of daniele amati and gabriele veneziano. we had end-
less discussions of how the transition from the weak coupling higgs regime to

12

the strong coupling regime could occur.
in the end, i left with our under-
standings still far apart. one of the conjectures was especially close to the
hearts of daniele and gabriele; i did not like it then, and appreciated it only a
decade later. the equivalence between the condensate-based program18,27 and
the ads approach in the weak coupling regime was elucidated in a dedicated
paper.30

strong vs. weak coupling regime: the power of holomorphy

the one-instanton contribution to the correlation functions (6), (9) does not
vanish and is compatible with supersymmetry (i.e. one gets a coordinate-
independent constant). when all coordinates are close to each other, at short
distances, this is not so surprising: the result is saturated by small-size in-
stantons. in asymptotically free theories, where the short-distance behavior is
controllable, the calculation seems to be safe. however, the one-instanton con-
tribution continues to be the very same constant at large distances. technically
this is due to the fact that at x, y, ....   the integration over the instanton
size  is saturated at   . moreover, there are no quantum corrections
in the instanton background eld whose explosion could signal the failure of
this regime. coherent eld uctuations of that large size do not make sense
in conventional conning theories. we did not feel satised with our degree of
understanding of the strong coupling calculations. arkady and i kept trying to
get a clearer picture or, at least, formulate a clean roundabout procedure that
would allow us to obtain the gluino condensate in the strong coupling regime
starting from the weak coupling higgs regime, where we were condent in all
stages of the analysis. the guiding principle was the smooth transition be-
tween the weak and strong coupling domains in the theories with fundamental
matter, a conjecture known in the literature for quite a time.31 we debated the
issue for a couple years, o and on, until a strategy crystallized as to how one
could pin down the gluino condensate, in the fully controllable environment
(this happened after a very illuminating conversation with gabriele veneziano,
who was visiting itep in late spring 1987).

the basic idea was as follows.32 consider, for instance, su(2) sqcd with
one avor. the vacuum structure in this theory was found,29 in weak coupling,
by aeck, dine and seiberg by integrating out heavy degrees of freedom and
analyzing the eective low-energy lagrangian for the light degrees of freedom
(moduli). the lagrangian of the model is obtained by adding to eq. (5) the
matter term

lmatter =

1

4z d2d2  qf ev qf +(cid:26) m

4 z d2 qf

q

f + h.c.(cid:27) ,

(10)

13

where q
f is a chiral supereld,  and f are the color and subavor indices,
respectively, , f = 1, 2. the weak coupling regime is achieved when the matter
mass parameter m is small, m  . in this case the expectation value of the
modulus qf

q

f is large,

hqf qfi =  2m1/2 m 5/2

pv

1

g2 exp(cid:26)

42

g2 (cid:27) .

(11)

the gluons and gluinos are heavy and are integrated out in the ads la-
grangian. nevertheless, the vacuum value of the modulus quoted above unam-
biguously determines the gluino condensate, by virtue of the konishi relation,33
namely

htri = 82mhqf qfi =  m1/2(cid:0)242(cid:1) m 5/2

pv

1

g2 exp(cid:26)

42

g2 (cid:27) .

(12)

the key observation of ref. 32 is that the square root dependence of the
gluino condensate on the bare mass parameter m is exact. it is the consequence
of supersymmetry and a generalized r symmetry of the model at hand.
it
is possible to establish the exact relation because tr is a chiral operator
while m is a chiral parameter; in the modern language one says that m can
be promoted to an auxiliary chiral supereld. then, tr can depend only
on m but not on m. the gluino condensate is an analytic function of m.
thus, in supersymmetric theories the notion of smoothness can be replaced
for chiral quantities by an exact analytic dependence.
if so, by calculating
the gluino condensate at small m, when the theory is weakly coupled, one
can analytically continue to large m, i.e. m  mpv, where the matter elds
become heavy, and can be integrated out, thus returning us to strongly coupled
susy gluodynamics. and yet, we know the gluino condensate exactly. in this
way, htri was found in the strong coupling regime for all gauge groups.32,34
this idea  extrapolating from weak to strong coupling on the basis of holo-
morphy  became a dominant theme for arkady and i beginning in 1987. it
was later elevated35 to new heights by seiberg. he considered superpotentials
in theories with arbitrary gauge and yukawa couplings and established, using
a similar line of reasoning, various nonrenormalization theorems and a wealth
of elegant exact results. note that since the arguments are essentially based
only on holomorphy, they are valid not only perturbatively but also nonpertur-
batively. the strategy of picking up chiral quantities with known holomorphic
behavior, calculating them (e.g. through instantons) at weak coupling, with
the subsequent analytic continuation to strong coupling, is a standard practice
now, after the works of seiberg36 that shook the world. it was quite an exotic
endeavor back in 1987.

14

the exact  functions

now, let me return to the topic of exact  functions in supersymmetric theo-
ries. in the beginning of the talk i mentioned a curious calculation we did in
1981 in (non-supersymmetric) qcd. it was observed11 that the running of the
gauge coupling s, as it emerges in the instanton measure, has a remarkable
interpretation. as is well-known, the rst coecient b of the gell-mannlow
function can be represented as37 (for the su(n ) gauge group)

b =

11
3

n =(cid:18)4 

1

3(cid:19) n .

(13)

here 4n represents an antiscreening contribution, which in perturbation the-
ory (in the physical coulomb gauge) is associated with the coulomb gluon
exchange and has no imaginary part, while n/3 is the normal screening
contribution, the imaginary part of which is determined by unitarity. within
instanton calculus, the term 4n is entirely due to the zero modes. it has a
geometrical meaning, and its calculation is trivial. the part which is relatively
hard to obtain, n/3, comes from the nonzero modes. when we learned, from
dadda and di vecchias work,19 that the nonzero modes in supersymmetric
theories cancel in the instanton measure at one loop, we immediately realized
that the cancellation would persist to all orders, and the  function would be
exactly calculable, in a technically trivial way.

in supersymmetric gluodynamics the  function turns out to be a geo-
metrical progression. this is seen from the instanton measure or, which is
essentially the same, from the gluino condensate. being an observable quan-
tity, it is certainly renormalization-group invariant. since eq. (8) is exact, an
exact relation between the ultraviolet parameter mpv and the bare coupling
constant emerges: the explicit mpv dependence of the right-hand side of eq.
(8) must be canceled by an implicit dependence coming from 1/g2.

in this way one gets the  function,

this is for su(2); for an arbitrary gauge group

,

 =

g2
4

.



(cid:17)1

() = 

62

2 (cid:16)1 

() = 

3tg 2

2 (cid:18)1 

tg 

2 (cid:19)1

,

(14)

(15)

where tg is the dual coxeter number (it is also called the dynkin index). as
will be explained shortly, eqs. (15) and (14) are exact not only perturbatively,

15

but nonperturbatively as well. our approach makes explicit that all coecients
of the  function have a geometric interpretation e  they count the number of
the instanton zero modes which, in turn, is related to the number of nontrivially
realized symmetries. indeed,

nf

() = (cid:16)nb 

2 (cid:17) 2

2 (cid:20)1 

(nb  nf ) 

4

(cid:21)1

,

(16)

where nb and nf count the gluon and gluino zero modes, respectively. in this
form the result is valid in theories with extended supersymmetry, too. for
n = 2, one gets nb = nf = 4tg, implying that the  function is one-loop. for
n = 4 the  function vanishes since nf = 2nb.
in theories with matter, apart from the gluon and gluino zero modes, one
has to deal with the zero modes of the matter fermions. while the gluon/gluino
z factors are related to the gauge coupling constant g2 itself, this is not the
case for the z factors of the matter fermions. the occurrence of the additional
z factors brings new ingredients into the analysis, the anomalous dimensions
of the matter elds i. therefore, in theories with matter the exact instanton
measure implies an exact relation between the  function and the anomalous
dimensions i,

() = 

2

2 "3 tg xi

t (ri)(1  i)#(cid:18)1 

tg 

2 (cid:19)1

,

(17)

where t (ri) is the dynkin index in the representation ri,

tr (t at b) = t (ri) ab ,

and t a stands for the generator of the gauge group g; the latter can be
arbitrary.

equation (17), which is sometimes referred to as the novikov-shifman-
vainshtein-zakharov (nsvz)  function, is valid for arbitrary yukawa inter-
actions of the matter elds. the yukawa interactions show up only through
the anomalous dimensions.

e even more pronounced is the geometric nature of the coecients in the two-dimensional
kahler sigma models, for obvious reasons: these models are geometrical. the supersymmet-
ric kahler sigma models have extended supersymmetry, n = 2. therefore, the  function
is purely one-loop. we performed38 the instanton calculation of the rst coecient for all
nonexceptional compact homogeneous symmetric kahler manifolds. it might seem that in
theories with matter, see eq. (17) below, the geometrical interpretation of the second and
higher coecients of the  function is lost because of the occurrence of the anomalous dimen-
sions i. in fact, it has been recently shown39 that the running gauge coupling one obtains
within d-brane engineering is compatible with eq. (17). thus, a geometric interpretation is
recovered.

16

the nsvz  function has the unique property that if one evolves the gauge
coupling all the way down, till its evolution is complete and the coupling
is frozen, the value of the frozen coupling is as if the  function were one-
loop, although, in fact, the evolution is certainly governed by the multiloop 
function. i will explain this point later.

in the beginning our attention was almost entirely focused on perturbative
calculations of the  functions. the reason is quite obvious  the generalized
nonrenormalization theorem in the instanton background we had established
is valid order by order in perturbation theory. later we realized that one can
apply, additionally, r symmetries to prove that in typical models, eq. (17) is
also valid nonperturbatively. this aspect is discussed, in particular, in ref. 40.
the fate of the assertion of nonperturbative exactness is rather surprising: it
is being rediscovered again and again, see e.g. fresh publications.41,42 i hasten
to add that exceptional models, in which the nsvz  function is corrected at
the nonperturbative level, are not rare. the most notable one is the n = 2
theory that played the key role in seiberg and wittens breakthrough43 in
in the n = 2 theory the nsvz  function is one-loop. however,
1994.
instantons generate an innite series of nonperturbative terms, for reasons
that are well understood.44 the full  function is rather nontrivial, it can be
explicitly found45 from the seiberg-witten solution.

the master formula (17) kept us busy for several years. we derived it more
than once: rst from the analysis of perturbation theory,46 and then from the
consistency of the anomalies in supersymmetric theories.47 the latter topic,
the consistency of the anomalies, has far-reaching consequences by itself. i will
discuss it shortly. as for implications of the nsvz  function, let me mention
a few examples. an immediate consequence is the one-loop nature of the 
function in n = 2 extended supersymmetries and the vanishing in n = 4. of
course, these facts were established long ago from other considerations.
more productive are the applications where the nsvz  function leads
to novel results. for instance, it allows one to generate nite theories even in
the class of n = 1. the simplest example was suggested in ref. 48, further
developments are presented in ref. 49. the general idea is to arrange the
matter sector in such a way that the conditions 3 tg  pi t (ri) = 0 and

i = 0 are met simultaneously. for instance, consider the su(3) gauge model
with nine triplets qi and nine antitriplets qi and the superpotential48

w = h(cid:16)q1q2q3 + q4q5q6 + q7q8q9 + q1 q2 q3 + q4 q5 q6 + q7 q8 q9(cid:17) ,

(18)
where contraction of the color indices by virtue of ijk is implied. the avor
symmetry of the model ensures that there is only one z factor for all matter

17

elds. since the condition 3 tgpi t (ri) = 0 is satised, niteness is guaran-

teed provided that the anomalous dimension  vanishes. at small g and h the
anomalous dimension (g, h) is determined by a simple one-loop calculation,

(g, h) = 

g2

32 + |h|2
42 .

(19)

this shows that the condition (g, h) = 0 has a solution, at least for small
couplings. if the initial conditions g0 and h0 are chosen in such a way that
(g0, h0) = 0, the coupling constants do not run  they stay at g0 , h0 forever.
the yukawa coupling h is frozen due to the fact that the  function for h is
proportional to (g, h).

straightforward extensions of the methods developed in connection with
the nsvz  function yield a spectrum of exacts results going well beyond the
original range of applications. for instance, renormalization of the soft super-
symmetry breaking parameters has been recently treated along these lines,50
to all orders in the gauge coupling constant. among other uses, i would like to
mention the determination of the boundaries of seibergs conformal window.36
a related issue is the determination of the conserved r current for the theories
lying in the conformal window. we obtained (see the second paper in ref. 40)
a unied expression which interpolates between seibergs current in the ultra-
violet and the geometric current in the infrared conformal limit. furthermore,
the nsvz  function allows one to exactly calculate the conformal central
charges.51 these are good problems; unfortunately, their discussion will lead
us far astray.

as a curious fact, let me note that the  function in supersymmetric
gluodynamics rst appeared in the form of a geometric progression in the paper
of jones,52 one of many early works devoted to the superanomaly problem, a
topic on which i will dwell shortly. both, the starting assumption of this work
and the basic steps of derivation are irrelevant, as we understand it now, and
yet, paradoxically, eq. (15) shows up. closer to the modern understanding of
the superanomaly problem is a construction suggested by clark, piguet and
sibold.53 it is very hard to read these papers, but those who managed to work
through them would be rewarded by extracting a simplied version of eq. (17),

() =

2


[1  ()] ,

(20)

applicable in susy qed.

18

three geometric anomalies and supersymmetry

this problem has many facets. it lies at a junction of several deep phenomena
in supersymmetric theories. to put things in the proper perspective, i should
start from 1974 when ferrara and zumino noted54 that the axial current a,
the supercurrent s and the energy-momentum tensor  enter in one and
the same supermultiplet, dubbed the supercurrent supermultiplet j . it is
curious that supersymmetric gluodynamics was treated in an appendix to
ref. 54, while the main body of the paper dealt with the wess-zumino model.
it was proved that in classically conformal theories

d j  = 0 ,

(21)

while in the generic supersymmetric theories d j  = d where  is a chiral
supereld, elementary or composite. equation (21) combines the conservation
laws for the chiral current, supercurrent and the energy-momentum tensor.

as is well-known, all three objects above have quantum anomalies. it was
noted, in the most explicit form by grisaru,55 that if a, s and  form
a supermultiplet, the same must be valid for the corresponding anomalies. it
was checked55 that this is, indeed, the case at the one-loop level.

the anomaly saga in supersymmetric gluodynamics starts from two loops.
on the one hand, according to the adler-bardeen theorem,56 the chiral anomaly
is exhausted by one loop. on the other hand, the anomaly in the trace of the
energy-momentum tensor 
 was believed to be proportional to the  func-
tion. it was apparently multiloop. this discrepancy deed supersymmetry.
the contradiction was irritating, it was a dark spot on the otherwise beautiful
face of supersymmetry. quite a signicant eort was invested in this problem.
a couple of dozen works appeared in the late 1970s and early 1980s suggest-
ing various solutions, to no avail (for a representative list of references see
e.g. ref. 47). the mystery of superanomalies resisted all attempts at a rea-
sonable solution. to give you a feeling of how desperate people were, in 1984
we published a paper entitled anomalies are not supersymmetric. is susy
anomalous?.57 in this paper a no-go theorem was established ruling out the
possibility of two chiral currents (one of them belonging to the supercurrent
supermultiplet and another obeying the adler-bardeen theorem) that would
dier by a subtraction constant. this was the most popular construction on
the theoretical market of the day. of course, now this theorem has no value
other than historical.

to tell you the truth, we became obsessed with this puzzle. the supera-
nomaly problem was always at the back of my mind even when i was doing
something else. this went on for several years. i do not remember why, but

19

in the late spring of 1985 arkady and i decided to do an elementary exercise
 nd the eective action at two loops in massless scalar electrodynamics. we
did it in an unconventional way, by applying the background eld technique
and the fock-schwinger gauge for the background photon. i remember i was
wrestling with this elementary exercise well into summer, on vacations in
parnu on the baltic sea. we kept obtaining a nonsensical expression until we
discovered58 a remarkable feature: the second loop was actually infrared. it
was saturated by virtual momenta of order of the momentum of the external
photon. this seemingly insignicant observation opened our eyes.

in addition, approximately at the same time, we received two works,59
which produced a very strong impression on us, in the technical sense. in fact,
they pointed in the same direction. following these hints, we found a solution
which turned out to be quite unexpected.

in the works,59 the supergraph background eld technique was applied to
a direct calculation of the eective action in supersymmetric gluodynamics at
two loops. the authors used the supersymmetric regularization via dimen-
sional reduction (dr). the result for the eective action exhibited a very clear
distinction between the rst and all higher loops. the operator

z d2 tr w 2 + h.c. ,

(22)

which is gauge invariant with respect to the background eld, appears only
at one loop. the second loop gives rise to a distinct structure, reducible to
(22) through an articial substitution which, at rst glance, seemed very
suspicious to us. indeed, in 4   dimensions, apart from (22), there exists
another operator, 2, gauge invariant with respect to the background eld.
here  is the gauge connection, and the caret means its projection onto the
extra  dimensions. f the two-loop supergraphs in a direct calculation yield a
nonchiral term

1

2 z d2d2   ,

(23)

which reduces to (22) by virtue of the relation 2  = w 2. the structure
(23) does not exist in four dimensions. the operator (23) had been interpreted
in59 as a local counterterm leading to the distinction between the two alleged
axial currents. the results of ref. 59 taken at their face value  not the
interpretation suggested by the authors  pointed in the opposite direction:
the second and higher loops in the eective action are in fact an infrared

f in the original publication the authors use two carets, one on top of the other. being
typeset in latex such a tower looks too ugly.

20

eect.47 in four dimensions eq. (23) should have been converted into

z d2d2  w

d2
2 w ,

(24)

which, certainly, reduces to eq. (22) but at the price of an explicit infrared
singularity.

the wilsonean action, deprived of the infrared contributions by construc-
tion, would not contain the term (23) or (24). we concluded that, if the theory
is regularized in the infrared domain, the gauge term in the eective action
is renormalized only at one loop. the wilsonean coupling gets no corrections
beyond one loop.

it is worth stressing that in the given context the infrared contribution
has nothing to do with the distances  1. we mean rather the contribution
associated with the virtual momenta p of order of the external momentum
carried by the background eld, as opposed to the ultraviolet contribution
associated with p  muv. the external momentum can be as large as we
want, it plays the role of the running parameter in the renormalization-group
evolution.

the nonrenormalization theorem above is akin to the one we had proven
for the instanton measure, where a natural infrared regularization is provided
by the instanton size . in fact, the proof is quite similar; it follows from the
analysis of the supergraphs of fig. 4 in the chiral background eld. this time,
unlike the instanton analysis, one assumes the background eld to be weak
(and chiral). one expands in w , keeping only the quadratic terms in w .

as a result, the gauge term in the wilsonean action is renormalized only

at one loop, g

1
g2 =

1
0 
g2

3tg
82 ln

muv



.

(25)

correspondingly, the superanomaly written in operator form is also one-loop,

d j  = 

tg
82 dtr w 2 .

(26)

thus, it was not the anomaly in the adler-bardeen current that had to be
reinterpreted, but, rather, the anomaly in the trace of the energy-momentum
tensor.

the idea that the anomaly in the trace of the energy-momentum tensor
is proportional to the  function was so deeply rooted that the simple step

gequations (25) and (26) refer to supersymmetric gluodynamics. their extensions valid in
the general theory with arbitrary matter are presented below.

21

reected in eq. (26) was painfully dicult to make. as i mentioned, it took
us years of long debates. in view of the importance of the issue it is worth
rephrasing the result somewhat dierently. the operator anomaly in the trace
of the energy-momentum tensor is


 = 

3tg
82 ga

 ga .

(27)

this expression is exact. the higher order terms in g2 on the right-hand side
can appear only at the stage of taking the matrix element of the operator g2
in the given background eld. h

in the general case of the gauge theory with matter {i} and arbitrary

superpotential w the superanomaly relation takes the form

d j  =

2
3

d("3w xi
 " 3tg pi t (ri)

162

i

i#
w

tr w 2 +

i d2( i ev i)#) .

(28)

1

8xi

the rst line comes from a classical calculation, the second line presents the
anomaly. this result was obtained almost 15 years ago;47 i will comment
on its derivation momentarily. the general superanomaly relation (28) was
conrmed recently from an unexpected side. it turns out that the expression
in the braces determines20,21 the central charge in the central extension of the
n = 1 superalgebra. the anomalous term in the central charge is obtained by
combining eq. (28) with the konishi anomaly,33

d2 ( iev i) = 4 i

w
i

+

t (ri)
22 tr w 2 .

(29)

then, the coecient in front of tr w 2 in the central charge comes out propor-

tional to tgpi t (ri). in supersymmetric qcd it vanishes provided that the

number of colors n is equal to the number of avors nf . the vanishing of the
anomalous term in the central charge is an indispensable feature of seibergs

hlet me note in passing that the anomaly in 
 is not proportional to the full  function
in (nonsupersymmetric) qcd either. the question arises at two loops. to get the anomaly
in operator form one must carefully single out (and discard) the infrared contribution. sur-
prisingly, this has never been done, in spite of the mature age of qcd. why? at two loops
virtually all calculations with gluons are done in dimensional regularization, which does not
allow one to easily separate the infrared part. therefore, the answer is unknown till the
present day.

22

solution36 of the nf = n theory. unfortunately, i do not have time to dwell
on details of this intriguing theme, a comprehensive explanation can be found
in the review paper60 which just appeared.

if the coecient of tr w 2 in the superanomaly (28) is purely one-loop,
where does the multiloop  function come from? this is a legitimate question.
to answer it, let us have a closer look at the right-hand side of the supera-
nomaly relation. assume that the superpotential w vanishes (this assumption
is not crucial, it just facilitates the task).
in the second line of eq. (28) we deal with a quantum operator. the full
 function emerges in passing to the matrix element of this operator in the
given (c-number) background eld. it is convenient to carry out the transition
in two stages. first, eliminate d2 ( iev i) in favor of tr w 2 by virtue of the
konishi formula. this is still an operator relation. it is seen that at this stage
the numerator of the nsvz  function is recovered. at the second stage we
convert the quantum operator tr w 2 into tr w 2
bkgr where the subscript bkgr
means background. this conversion gives rise to the denominator of the nsvz
 function.

the wilsonean action

the solution of the superanomaly problem is intertwined with another sub-
tle question which was put forward47 in 1986  the distinction between the
wilsonean and canonic actions. surprisingly, before our work people did not
realize that this distinction existed and was instrumental in understanding the
analytic properties of supersymmetric theories in the gauge coupling constant.
so far my denition of the wilsonean action and its canonic counterpart was
operational and rather vague. the distinction is best illustrated in the theo-
ries with matter, where its origin is absolutely transparent. assume we have
a supersymmetric gauge theory with arbitrary matter {i}. assume that at
the ultraviolet cut o the lagrangian is

l = (cid:26) 1
+ (cid:26) 1

4g2 z d2 tr w 2 + h.c.(cid:27) +
2 z d2 w(i) + h.c.(cid:27) ,

1

4xi z d2d2  iev i

(30)

where w is the superpotential. after evolving down to , the eective la-
grangian becomes

lw = (cid:26) 1

4(cid:20) 1
g2 

3tg p t (ri)

82

ln

muv

 (cid:21) z d2 tr w 2 + h.c.(cid:27)

23

1

+

 (cid:19)z d2d2  iev i

zi(cid:18) muv

4xi
2 z d2 w(i) + h.c.(cid:27) ,
+ (cid:26) 1

(31)

where zi stands for the z factor of the matter eld i. equation (31) presents
the wilsonean eective action. it immediately entails, in turn, eq. (28). a
remarkable feature of supersymmetric theories is the complexication of the
gauge coupling, see the second line in eq. (5),

1
g2 

1
g2  i


82 .

(32)

the real part of g2 is the conventional coupling constant with which one deals,
say, in perturbation theory. the imaginary part is related to the vacuum angle.
the wilsonean action preserves the complex structure in g2, due to the fact
that the renormalization of tr w 2 is exhausted by one loop. it goes without
saying that the complex structure, wherever it appears, is a very precious
theoretical asset. as we will see shortly, in the canonic action the property of
analyticity is lost.

the kinetic terms in eq. (31) are normalized noncanonically. we would
like to pass to a c-number functional (sometimes called the generator of the
one-particle irreducible vertices ). note that our  is identical to what is
called the canonic eective action in the current literature. calculation of 
is equivalent to the canonic normalization of the kinetic terms.

it is best to start from the matter elds. again, we will assume that
w = 0. passing to the canonically normalized matter, naively we would say
that the factors zi have no impact whatsoever and can be omitted. in fact,
they do have an impact. the easiest way to detect the impact of the zi factors
is to expand in zi  1, assuming that zis are close to unity. the linear term
of expansion is unambiguously xed by the konishi anomaly (29). once we
realized that the linear term in zi  1 emerged in the canonic eective action,
it was not dicult to gure out the full answer. elimination of the zi factors
of the matter elds in the canonic action requires that t (ri) ln muv in front
of trw 2 be replaced by t (ri) ln(muv/zi),

t (ri) ln muv  t (ri) ln

muv

zi

.

(33)

to complete the transition to the canonic eective action one must analyze
the same eect in the gauge sector. denote by gc the canonic gauge coupling.

24

it is the canonic gauge coupling that is routinely used in all perturbative cal-
culations. usually the subscript c is omitted.
i will keep it for a while to
emphasize the distinction between the wilsonean and canonic couplings.

one observes that re g2

is nothing but the z factor of the gauge elds
and gauginos. in the transition to the canonically normalized gauge kinetic
term, the replacement to be done is

c

ln muv  ln

muv
z 1/3

= ln

muv
[re (g2

c )]1/3

.

(34)

the power of z is dierent from that for the chiral superelds (one third versus
unity, cf. eq. (33)) because of the dierent spin weights, but the essence is
the same. this is explained in detail in ref. 47. its main thrust was on the
infrared manifestation of the anomaly.

every anomaly has two faces  ultraviolet and infrared  and can be re-
vealed in both ways. the fact of equivalence is elementary and was discussed
in the literature many times (see e.g. the review61). for instance, the chiral
anomaly in supersymmetric theories can be obtained as a pole in the axial
current, or, alternatively, as an ultraviolet anomaly in the measure.62 the
same is true for the anomaly associated with the rescaling of the gluon/gluino
elds displayed in eq. (34). recently it was rederived42,63 from the ultra-
violet side, from the noninvariance of the measure. this is analogous to the
konishishizuya derivation of the konishi anomaly.

(let me parenthetically note that the absence of the explicit separation
of the ultraviolet and infrared contributions led the authors42,63 to a misinter-
pretation of the anomaly supermultiplet. in fact, they introduce a second
energy-momentum tensor. as i have just discussed, in the case at hand dr
works as the infrared rather than the ultraviolet regulator. in addition, i would
like to warn that refs. 42, 63 introduce some confusion in the nomenclature.
the coupling constant g2
h which the authors call holomorphic is not, since it
includes logarithms of the z factors of the matter elds.
i am aware of no
quantity which would depend on g2
h holomorphically. in what follows i will
reserve the term holomorphic for the wilsonean coupling, the coecient of
tr w 2 in the wilsonean action.)

the following relation between the wilsonean and canonic couplings ensues

1
g2 =

1
c 
g2

tg
82 ln re

1
g2
c

.

(35)

assembling all these elements together we readily nd the  function for the
canonic coupling.
it is identical to the nsvz  function quoted above in
connection with the instanton derivation, see eq. (17).

25

as was mentioned, in supersymmetric theories the gauge coupling is com-
plexied, as indicated in eq. (32). the complex structure of the coecient in
front of trw 2 is preserved if and only if the action is not renormalized beyond
one loop. this property is inherent to the wilsonean action. at the same
time, the z factors of the elds (including those of gluons and gluinos) depend
on 1/g2 nonholomorphically (via reg2). that is why upon the transition to
the canonical coupling one looses the holomorphy. the occurrence of ln z, or
ln re g2
for the gauge elds, in the transition to the canonically normalized
eective action was repeatedly emphasized and illustrated in many ways in our
1986 paper. nonetheless, apparently, this point is dicult to understand.

c

shortly after my arrival to the us in 1990 i discussed the issue of the
wilsonean versus canonic coupling with dan freedman. he told me that
our presentation of this topic did not seem clear to him, to put it mildly. i
was surprised to hear that, because i thought that everything was crystally
transparent. so, i ignored his comment. well, life shows that he was right and
i was wrong. this is seen from the fact that several extended commentaries
were published recently. they add no new physical content in the problem,
just reinterpret the 1986 results in dierent terms. yet, these commentaries are
perceived by many as a substantial clarication. is this a language barrier,
or a cultural dierence, or both? i do not know. this is not the rst time
i nd myself in a similar situation. you have just heard, in arkadys talk,
that our penguin paper, being absolutely correct, was thought to be totally
wrong for several years. four referees explained to us, one after another,
that it contradicts the glashowiliopoulosmaiani cancellation. the penguin
mechanism was accepted only after mary k. gaillard advocated it in one of
her review talks.

holomorphic anomaly

the coecients of various f terms which may be present in the action (e.g.
the matter mass terms, the inverse couplings g2, the yukawa couplings) can
be promoted to auxiliary chiral superelds. the original coupling constants
are then treated as the expectation values of the auxiliary superelds. now, in
many instances the subject of analysis is itself a chiral operator, for example,
the operator tr 2. in these cases the outcome of the analysis must depend on
the expectation values of the chiral superelds, the antichiral ones cannot enter.
this means that the chiral quantities must depend on the chiral parameters
holomorphically.

the holomorphic dependence is an exceptionally powerful tool in explo-
rations of the gauge dynamics in the strong coupling regime. in essence, the

26

seiberg-witten revolution of 1993/94 was based on the power of holomorphy. i
have discussed various uses of holomorphy which were elaborated in the 1980s,
in particular, the exact determination of the gluino condensate. in the su(2)

model, with one avor, htri  m. the fact that the conjugate parameter
m does not appear in htri, is instrumental in establishing the square root
dependence on m.

the inverse gauge coupling g2 is also a chiral parameter. hence, one
can expect a holomorphic dependence of htri on g2 too. surprisingly,
indeed, while g2
examination of eq. (8) shows that this is not the case.
in the exponent is the complexied coupling constant, in the pre-exponential
factor we actually deal with re g2, rather than with the full complex g2.
had g2 appeared in the pre-exponential factor, the  dependence of the gluino
condensate would come out wrong.

does this mean that something went wrong with the general argument?
yes and no. there are two gauge couplings  canonical and the one that enters
in the wilsonean action. the proper question to ask is, to which coupling
does the proof of holomorphy refer. this question was not asked until 1991.
only then did we realized in full64 that it is always the wilsonean coupling
that one deals with in the statement of holomorphy (thats where the term
holomorphic coupling comes from). if one expresses the gluino condensate (8)
in terms of the wilsonean coupling by virtue of eq. (35), one gets htri =
const. exp(42/g2). this dependence is perfectly holomorphic.

at the same time, holomorphy is violated for the canonical coupling, due
to infrared singularities. this is called the holomorphic anomaly. the loss
of holomorphy is associated with the z factors which are nonchiral and get
entangled, with necessity, as soon as we pass to the canonical gauge coupling.

the most graphic illustration of the phenomenon which i can think of can
be given in susy qed. denote the bare mass term of the electron m0 and the
bare coupling constant g0. at the ultraviolet cuto muv the holomorphic and
canonical couplings coincide. as one descends from muv down to lower values
of the normalization point  they diverge. the  function for the canonic
coupling is multiloop, see eq. (20). the second and higher loops are entirely
due to the anomalous dimension of the electron (selectron) eld and are in
one-to-one correspondence with the loss of holomorphy. the running g2()
depends on g2
0 nonholomorphically. however, once the evolution is completed
(i.e. at   m) and the gauge coupling freezes, the holomorphic dependence
on g2
and m0 is restored. in fact, one obtains the low-energy (frozen) g2
by using the one-loop (holomorphic)  function, with a ctitious value of the

0

27


1/g  (   )

2

m

0

m phys

ln

uvm

figure 5: evolution of the gauge coupling in susy qed (schematic). the straight lines
represent the one-loop evolution with the fake bare threshold m0. the actual evolution is
given by the smooth curve. the outcome at   m is the same.

threshold, m0,

=

1
g2
0

+

1
42 ln

muv
m0

,

(36)

1

g2(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)m

rather than the physical threshold, which is given by the physical electron
(selectron) mass. the latter, in turn, is a nonholomorphic function of g2
0. the
nonholomorphic dependence of m on g2
0 combines with the nonholomorphic
part in the  function to cancel each other. this is illustrated in fig. 5 (for a
more detailed discussion see ref. 46).

this situation is general. when the chiral quantity measured is a nal
product, summarizing dynamics at all scales, it is expressible in terms of the
wilsonean coupling in a holomorphic way. at the same time, the snapshot
en route, at a given value of , captures the canonical coupling which carries
the violation of holomorphy.64

this solution could have been found much earlier, in 1986. we had all
necessary elements handy, but missed the point then. the late 1980s were an
especially hard time for me personally, for various reasons. life in the capital
of the last world empire had always been like the theater of the absurd, except
it was real. i could not stand it anymore, and i could not focus on physics.

28

the explorations of the holomorphy issue were resumed only in 1990 when both
arkady and i moved to minneapolis. when our paper was essentially written,
we received a preprint65 by dixon, kaplunovsky and louis. these authors
came across a similar holomorphic anomaly in a mass parameter, in the context
of stringy calculations at one loop. they identied the reason lying behind the
anomaly as an infrared singularity due to the propagation of massless matter
elds in the loop. it was yet another manifestation of the general phenomenon
we had worked on. it was staggering to see how the parallel lines of reasoning
led to one and the same conclusion. later, vadim kaplunovsky told me that
the apparent loss of holomorphy in the string calculation they had done baed
them for quite some time, and he was startled by the treatment of the problem
in our paper.

unsolved mystery of 4/5

now i have to return to the gluino condensate to fulll several promises made
in passing. we already know that it was obtained by various distinct methods:
at rst, from the correlation function (6) at short distances, and, later, htr 2i
was obtained in the higgs regime. the key element of the rst derivation was
cluster decomposition.
instrumental in the second derivation was the holo-
morphic dependence of htr 2i on the bare mass parameter of the auxiliary
matter. although the functional dependence of htr 2i on the ultraviolet cut-
o and the gauge coupling comes out the same in both methods, the numerical
coecients are dierent! (cf. eqs. (8) and (12) which exhibit a mismatch fac-

tor p4/5.) since the discrepancy is certainly not due to an algebraic error,

something conceptual must have been overlooked. the calculation based on
the higgs regime and holomorphy seems ironclad. the only plausible expla-
nation suggested so far66 was a chirally symmetric vacuum, whose existence
in supersymmetric gluodynamics could have an impact on the strong coupling
calculation. (i leave aside explanations associated with fantastic creatures like
tensionless strings.) let me explain this in more detail.

the model described by the lagrangian (5) is invariant with respect to the
phase rotations of the gluino eld (the chiral rotations). this symmetry, valid
at the classical level, is broken by the triangle anomaly. a discrete chiral z2n
symmetry survives, however, as an exact quantum symmetry.13 the gluino
condensate is noninvariant with respect to the chiral zn rotations, it breaks
(spontaneously) z2n  z2. consequently, if the gluino condensate develops, it
can take n dierent values which mark the distinct chirally asymmetric vacua
of the theory. for instance, in the su(2) model the condensate is double-
valued, see eq. (8).

29

to elucidate the reason why the weak and strong coupling calculations
of htr 2i may dier, we may invoke the hypothesis due to amati et al.67
(remember, the one which i was reluctant to accept in 1985, in heated debates
with amati and veneziano, and appreciated only a decade later). according
to this hypothesis, the strong coupling calculation of the correlation function
htr 2(x) tr 2(0)i yields, in fact, a result averaged over all vacuum states of
the theory. assume there exists a chirally symmetric vacuum,66 with htr 2i =
0. then, it would contaminate the correlation function (6), thus explaining a
suppression factor that popped out22 in the strong coupling regime compared
to the calculation at weak coupling. in the latter, a large vacuum expectation
value of the squark eld picks up the vacuum state unambiguously  in the
su(2) model it has to be one of two chirally asymmetric vacua.

there are arguments in favor of and against this unexpected chirally
symmetric vacuum. an additional indication of its existence is provided by
the veneziano-yankielowicz eective lagrangian,68,66 and its subsequently ex-
tended versions.69 i must admit that the available evidence is circumstantial,
at best.

if the vacuum at htr 2i = 0 does exist its properties must be quite exotic.
the chirally symmetric vacuum must give zero contribution to wittens index
since the latter is fully saturated by the chirally asymmetric vacua. this im-
plies that massless fermions are mandatory in the trh2i = 0 phase of susy
gluodynamics. if so, it is potentially unstable under various deformations. for
instance, putting the system in a nite-size box lifts the vacuum energy density
from zero.70 this vacuum disappears in nite volume. this instability  the
tendency to escape under seemingly harmless deformations  may explain
why the vacuum at htr2i = 0 is not seen in wittens d-brane construction.71
perhaps, this is not surprising at all. indeed, there is a good deal of extrap-
olation in this construction, against which the chirally asymmetric vacua are
stable (they have no choice since they have to saturate wittens index) while
the htr2i = 0 vacuum need not be stable and may not survive the space-time
distortions associated with the d-brane engineering. neither is it seen in the
seiberg-witten solution43 of n = 2 susy gluodynamics slightly perturbed by
a small mass term for the matter eld mtr 2, (m  ). in this model the
chirally symmetric state trh2i = hm2i = 0 resembles a sphaleron: it real-
izes a saddle point in the prole of energy. if the chirally symmetric vacuum
develops it can happen only at large values of m, i.e. m  .

30

conclusions

the study of the analytic properties of supersymmetric theories, which began
in the 1980s, brought lavish fruits in the 1990s. the arsenal of tools based on
holomorphy expanded. the range of applications grew even more dramatically,
especially after the fundamental works of seiberg and witten in 1994. at the
same time, the end of the road is not even in sight. the list of profound
unanswered questions in qcd, related to phenomena at large distances, is
almost as large now as it was twenty years ago, in spite of extremely impressive
progress in numerous applied problems. the potential of the holomorphy-
based methods in the prototype supersymmetric gauge theories is far from
being exhausted.

one last general remark

on the last pages of the book the character of physical law, feynman writes72
about two alternative scenarios of what can happen to physics at the very
end. either all fundamental laws will be found and we will be able to pre-
dict everything; the predictions will always be in full accord with experiment.
or it will turn out that new experiments will become too expensive or too
complicated technically, so that we will understand about 99.9% of physical
phenomena, leaving the remaining 0.1% of inaccessible phenomena without
solid theory. one will have to wait for a long time until new extremely dicult
and expensive experiments are done, so that the cognitive process becomes
exceedingly slow and uninteresting. feynman notes that he was very lucky to
live in a time when great discoveries in high energy physics could be made. he
compares his time with the discovery of america, which was discovered once
and forever. this can never be repeated again. some theorists of my gener-
ation believe that this may well be the case, the glorious days of high energy
physics are over.

i do not think so. it is certainly true that the most fundamental theory
of the day, string theory and its osprings (m theory, d branes, etc.), operate
with the planck scale which lies so far away from the (present) human scale,
that there is no hope of carrying out direct experimental studies. i do not know
whether we will be able to advance without direct experimental guidance, led
only by aesthetical principles. my prime interests lie in qcd and other gauge
theories. no matter what happens at the planck scale, new developments in
m theory and d branes give new insights to qcd practitioners. they have
already produced a strong impact on our understanding of qualitative features
of qcd. let me mention, for instance, wittens observation of an innite
set of vacua in qcd in the limit n  . this result was rst obtained in

31

the stringy context,73 and only later was demonstrated in eld theory.74 the
powerful tools of supersymmetry were instrumental in both cases. there are
good reasons to believe that more advances are about to come.

acknowledgments

it is a great honor to have been awarded the j.j. sakurai prize for theoretical
particle physics. for me this event has a special signicance.
i am deeply
grateful to the american physical society. i was moved by warm congratula-
tions from many friends and colleagues, to whom i want to say thank you. i am
grateful to my coauthors arkady vainshtein, valya zakharov, vitya novikov,
misha voloshin, ian kogan, gia dvali, alex kovner, and boris chibisov, with
whom i shared fun and excitement of the journey in supersymmetric gauge
theories that started in 1981 and continues till present.

i am grateful to a. gorsky, a. ritz, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov for
useful comments in the process of conversion of notes which i had prepared for
the talk at the centennial meeting of the american physical society into this
expanded written version. the work was supported in part by doe under the
grant number de-fg02-94er40823.

1. y. golfand and e. likhtman, pisma zhetf 13, 452 (1971) [jetp
lett. 13, 323 (1971)]; for a more detailed version of this paper see y.
golfand and e. likhtman, in problems of theoretical physics, i.e. tamm
memorial volume (nauka, moscow, 1972), p. 37.

2. d.v. volkov and v.p. akulov, phys. lett. b46, 109 (1973) [reprinted in
supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic, 1987)
vol. 1, p. 11]. .

3. j. wess and b. zumino, phys. lett. b49, 52 (1974) [reprinted in
supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic, 1987)
vol. 1, p. 77]; j. iliopoulos and b. zumino, nucl. phys. b76, 310 (1974)
[reprinted in supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world
scientic, 1987) vol. 1, p. 222]; p. west, nucl. phys. b106, 219 (1976)
[reprinted in supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world
scientic, 1987) vol. 1, p. 264]; m. grisaru, m. rocek, and w. siegel,
nucl. phys. b159, 429 (1979) [reprinted in supersymmetry, ed. s.
ferrara (north holland/world scientic, 1987) vol. 1, p. 273].

4. e. witten, nucl. phys. b185, 513 (1981) [reprinted in supersymmetry,

ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic, 1987) vol. 1, p. 443].

32

5. a.a. belavin, a.m. polyakov, a.s. schwarz, and yu.s. tyupkin, phys.
lett. b59, 85 (1975) [reprinted in instantons in gauge theories, ed.
m. shifman (world scientic, 1994) p. 22].

6. v.n. gribov, 1975, unpublished; c. callan, r. dashen and d. gross,
phys. lett. b63, 334 (1976) [reprinted in instantons in gauge the-
ories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic, 1994) p. 29]; r. jackiw and
c. rebbi, phys. rev. lett. 37, 172 (1976) [reprinted in instantons in
gauge theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic, 1994) p. 25].

7. g. t hooft, phys. rev. d14, 3432 (1976); erratum phys. rev. d18,
2199 (1978) [reprinted in instantons in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman
(world scientic, 1994) p. 70].

8. g. t hooft, phys. rev. lett. 37, 8 (1976) [reprinted in instantons in

gauge theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic, 1994) p. 226].

9. for a recent review and an extensive list of references see e.g. t. schafer

and e. shuryak, rev. mod. phys. 70, 323 (1998).

10. v. novikov, m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, nucl. phys.
b191, 301 (1981). the instanton results reported in this work served as
an initial impetus in the development of the instanton liquid model.9

11. a. vainshtein, v. zakharov, v. novikov and m. shifman, usp. fiz.

nauk, 136, 553 (1982) [sov. phys. uspekhi, 25, 195 (1982)].

12. s. ferrara and b. zumino, nucl. phys. b79 (1974) 413 [reprinted in
supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic, 1987)
vol. 1, p. 93].

13. e. witten, nucl. phys. b202, 253 (1982) [reprinted in supersymmetry,

ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic, 1987) vol. 1, p. 490].

14. i. aeck, j. harvey, and e. witten, nucl. phys. b206, 413 (1982).
15. v. novikov, m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, nucl. phys.

b223, 445 (1983).

16. v. novikov et al., nucl. phys. b229, 394 (1983) [reprinted in instantons

in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic, 1994) p. 298].

17. v. novikov, m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, nucl. phys.

b229, 381 (1983).

18. v. novikov, m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, nucl. phys.
b229, 407 (1983) [reprinted in supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north
holland/world scientic, 1987) vol. 1, p. 606].

19. a. dadda and p. di vecchia, phys. lett. b73, 162 (1978) [reprinted in
instantons in gauge theories, ed. m. shifman (world scientic, 1994)
p. 293].

20. g. dvali and m. shifman, phys. lett. b396, 64 (1997), erratum phys.

lett. b407, 452 (1997).

33

21. b. chibisov and m. shifman, phys. rev. d56, 7990 (1997), erratum

phys. rev. d58, 109901 (1998).

22. v. novikov, m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, nucl. phys.
b260, 157 (1985) [reprinted in instantons in gauge theories, ed. m.
shifman (world scientic, 1994) p. 311].

23. e. cohen and c. gomez, phys. rev. lett. 52, 237 (1984).
24. g. t hooft, commun. math. phys. 81, 267 (1981).
25. e. witten, commun. math. phys. 117, 353 (1988).
26. a. schwarz, lett. math. phys. 2, 247 (1987).
27. g.c. rossi and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b138, 195 (1984) [reprinted
in supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic,
1987) vol. 1, p. 620].

28. y. meurice and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b141, 69 (1984).
29. i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b241 493, (1984);
b256, 557 (1985); i. aeck, m. dine, and n. seiberg, phys. rev. lett.
52, 1677 (1984) .

30. a.i. vainshtein, v.i. zakharov, v.a. novikov, and m.a. shifman, pisma

zhetf 39, 494 (1984) [jetp lett. 39, 601 (1984)].

31. t. banks and e. rabinovici, nucl. phys. b160, 349 (1979); e. fradkin

and s. shenker, phys. rev. d19, 3682 (1979).

32. m. shifman and a. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b296, 445 (1988).
33. k. konishi, phys. lett. b135, 439 (1984).
34. a. morozov, m. olshanetsky and m. shifman, nucl. phys. b304, 291

(1988).

35. n. seiberg, phys. lett. b318, 469 (1993).
36. n. seiberg, phys. rev. d49, 6857 (1994); nucl. phys. b435, 129

(1995).

37. i.b. khriplovich, yad. fiz. 10, 409 (1969) [sov. j. nucl. phys. 10, 235
(1970)]; t. appelquist, m. dine, and i.j. muzinich, phys. lett. b69,
231 (1977).

38. v. novikov, m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, phys. lett.
b139, 389 (1984); a. morozov, a. perelomov and m. shifman, nucl.
phys. b248, 279 (1984).

39. k. hori, nucl. phys. 540, 187 (1999).
40. i. kogan and m. shifman, phys. rev. lett. 75, 2085, (1995), see the
discussion after eq. (4); i. kogan, m. shifman, and a. vainshtein, phys.
rev. d53, 4526, (1996).

41. m. graesser and b. morariu, phys. lett. b429, 313 (1998).
42. n. arkani-hamed and h. murayama, hep-th/9707133.
43. n. seiberg and e. witten, nucl. phys. b426, 19 (1994); (e) b430, 485

34

(1994); b431, 484 (1994).

44. n. seiberg, phys. lett. b206, 75 (1988).
45. j. minahan and d. nemeschansky, nucl. phys. b468, 72 (1996); g.
bonelli and m. matone, phys. rev. lett. 76, 4107 (1996); a. ritz,
phys. lett. b434, 54 (1998). the rst two papers present derivations
of ( ) from the seiberg-witten curve; the last paper does not directly
use the seiberg-witten solution.

46. for a recent review and list of references see m. shifman, int. j. mod.

phys. a11, 5761 (1996).

47. m. shifman and a. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b277, 456 (1986).
48. a. parkes and p. west, phys. lett. b138, 99 (1984); d.r.t. jones and
l. mezincescu, phys. lett. b138, 293 (1984); s. hamidi, j. patera and
j. schwarz, phys. lett. b141, 349 (1984).

49. r.g. leigh and m.j. strassler, nucl. phys. b447, 95 (1995); c. lucchesi
and g. zoupanos, fortsch. phys. 45, 129 (1997); a. hanany, m.j.
strassler, and a.m. uranga, j. high energy phys. 9806, 011 (1998)
[hep-th/9803086]; a. hanany and y.-h. he, j. high energy phys. 9902,
013 (1998) [hep-th/9811183].

50. j. hisano and m. shifman, phys. rev. d56, 5475 (1997); i. jack, d.r.t.
jones, and a. pickering, phys. lett. b426, 73 (1998); t. kobayashi,
j. kubo, and g. zoupanos, phys. lett. b427, 291 (1998); n. arkani-
hamed and r. rattazzi, hep-th/9804068.

51. d. anselmi, d.z. freedman, m.t. grisaru, and a.a. johansen, nucl.
phys. b526, 543 (1998); d. anselmi, j. erlich, d.z. freedman, and
a.a. johansen, phys. rev. d57, 7570 (1998).

52. d.r.t. jones, phys. lett. b123, 45 (1983).
53. t.e. clark, o. piguet, and k. sibold, nucl. phys. b143, 445, (1978);
nucl. phys. b172, 201 (1980); o. piguet and k. sibold, nucl. phys.
b196, 428; 447 (1982).

54. s. ferrara and b. zumino, nucl. phys. b87, 207 (1975) [reprinted in
supersymmetry, ed. s. ferrara (north holland/world scientic, 1987)
vol. 1, p. 117].

55. m. grisaru, in recent developments in gravitation (cargese lectures,
1978), eds. m. levy and s. deser (plenum press, new york, 1979),
page 577, and references therein.

56. s. adler and w. bardeen, phys. rev. 182, 1517 (1969).
57. v. novikov, m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, preprint itep-
85/1984. in the journal version, jetp lett. 40, 920 (1984), the title
was softened, at the request of the referee.

58. a. vainshtein and m. shifman, yad. fiz. 44, 498 (1986) [sov. j. nucl.

35

phys. 44, 321 (1986)].

59. m. grisaru, b. milewski, and d. zanon, phys. lett. b157, 174 (1985);
m. grisaru, b. milewski, and d. zanon, nucl. phys. b266, 174 (1986).

60. m. shifman, and a. vainshtein, hep-th/9902018.
61. m. shifman, phys. rep. 209, 341 (1991).
62. k. konishi and k. shizuya, nuov. cim. a90, 111 (1985).
63. n. arkani-hamed and h. murayama, phys. rev. d57, 6638 (1998).
64. m. shifman, and a. vainshtein, nucl. phys. b359, 571 (1991).
65. l. dixon, v. kaplunovsky, and j. louis, nucl. phys. b355, 649 (1991).
66. a. kovner and m. shifman, phys. rev. d56, 2396 (1997).
67. d. amati, k. konishi, y. meurice, g. rossi and g. veneziano, phys.

rep. 162, 557 (1988).

68. g. veneziano and s. yankielowicz, phys. lett. b113, 231 (1982).
69. g. gabadadze, nucl. phys. b544, 650 (1999) [hep-th/9808005].
70. i. kogan, a. kovner, and m. shifman, phys. rev. d57, 5195 (1998).
71. e. witten, nucl. phys. b507, 658 (1997).
72. r.p. feynman, the character of physical law (cox and wyman, lon-

don, 1965).

73. e. witten, phys. rev. lett. 81, 2862 (1998).
74. m. shifman, phys. rev. d59, 021501 (1999).

36

