9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

3
1

 
 

1
v
5
9
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

thu-99/15
hep-th/9906095

modications of the area law and n=2

supersymmetric black holes

bernard de wit

institute for theoretical physics, utrecht university

3508 ta utrecht, the netherlands

abstract

modications of the area law are crucial in order to nd
agreement with microscopic entropy calculations based on
string theory, when including contributions that are sub-
leading for large charges. the deviations of the area law
are in accord with walds proposal for the entropy based
on a noether charge. we discuss this for the case of four-
dimensional n = 2 supersymmetric black holes.

it is a pleasure and an honour to speak at this conference and pay
tribute to francois englerts scientic achievements. this meet-

ing brings back so many memories of previous encounters with him
which were both enjoyable and scientically fruitful. i will speak

about some recent work, done in collaboration with gabriel lopes

cardoso and thomas mohaupt, on the entropy of n = 2 super-
symmetric black holes [1]. the rst law of black hole mechanics

relates a change in the mass and angular momentum of a black
hole to the change in the area of its event horizon. this then leads

to the bekenstein-hawking area law, which expresses the black hole
entropy in terms of the horizon area. the rst law relates global

quantities of a black hole, such as its energy or mass and its an-
gular momentum which can be determined from the behaviour of
the elds at spatial innity, to the horizon area which is dened

at the inner boundary of the black hole solution. the similar-
ity with thermodynamics suggests a possible interpretation of the

entropy in terms of microstates. such a connection has recently
been provided in the context of string theory [2]. more specically,

for four-dimensional extremal black holes in the limit of large elec-
tric/magnetic charges q, it was found that the entropy is generically

of the form

this result can be compared to macroscopic results based on corre-

s  qq4 .

(1)

sponding eective eld theories. these theories are complicated and
will depend on many elds and eventually involve higher-derivative

interactions. as it turns out, the latter interactions are related to
corrections to (1) that are subleading in the charges and of order q0.
such subleading terms have recently been obtained for iia string
theory and m-theory [3] and full agreement with the macroscopic
description has been established in [1].

how can the results of the macroscopic description, which is
very complicated, yet be so constrained as to precisely reproduce

the results from the counting of microstates? before answering this
question let me rst characterize the black-hole solutions that i

will be discussing. they are four-dimensional, static, rotationally

2

symmetric solitonic interpolations between two n = 2 supersym-
metric groundstates: at minkowski spacetime at spatial innity

and bertotti-robinson spacetime at the horizon. globally the so-
lution possesses only a residual n = 1 supersymmetry, so that one

is dealing with a bps state and thus an extremal black hole. the
eective eld theory is based on n = 2 supergravity coupled to a

number of vector multiplets whose gauge elds are associated with
electric and magnetic charges, denoted by qi and pi, respectively.
the theory incorporates, in a systematic fashion, the phenomenon

of electric/magnetic duality, according to which the electric and
magnetic charges can be interchanged and/or rotated and it in-

cludes higher-derivative couplings with among them a certain class
of terms quadratic in the riemann tensor.

the crucial ingredient that is responsible for the remarkable re-
strictions on the entropy formulae obtained on the basis of these

complicated eective eld theories, is the enhancement to full su-
persymmetry at the horizon. however, it turns out that in order
to obtain agreement for the rst subleading corrections with the

counting of microstates provided by string theory, one is forced to
depart from the bekenstein-hawking area law. instead one must

adopt walds proposal for the entropy which ensures the validity
of the rst law of black hole mechanics for more generic eld the-

ories. this proposal is based on the existence of a noether charge
associated with an isometry evaluated at the corresponding killing

horizon [4]. when evaluating this current subject to the eld equa-
tions, current conservation becomes trivial and the current takes
the form of an improvement term, i.e., the divergence of an an-

tisymmetric tensor. this antisymmetric tensor, sometimes called
the noether potential, is a local function of the elds and of the

(arbitrary) gauge transformation parameters.

3

in order to elucidate some of this this let me briey consider
a simple abelian gauge theory, with a gauge-invariant lagrangian
depending on the eld strength f, its derivatives f, as well
as on matter elds  and rst derivatives thereof. furthermore we

add a so-called topological mass term, so that the total lagrangian
takes the form

ltotal = linv(f, f, , ) + c a a ,

(2)

where   is the covariant derivative of  and c is some constant.
note that the topological mass term restricts us to three spacetime
dimensions, but this is not relevant for what follows. under gauge

transformations

a(x) =  (x) ,

(x) = i(x) (x) ,

(3)

the lagrangian is not invariant but changes into a total derivative,

ltotal = n (, ) = c   a ,

(4)

where generically  denotes all the elds and  denotes the trans-
formation parameters.

under arbitrary variations    +  we have the standard

decomposition into a surface term and the eld equations,

ltotal = (, ) +   e() .

(5)

here e() denotes the eld equations. the conserved noether cur-

rent is then dened by

j (, ) = (, )  n (, ) ,

(6)

where we observe that, unlike the rst term, the second term is not
necessarily proportional to the symmetry variations . for the

4

above example the explicit expression for the current reads,

j (, ) = 2 l   2l(,)  + 2 l[,]   + l 
(7)

2c  a + c ( a) ,

where l, l, and l denote the derivatives of the action with
respect to f, f and , respectively. observe that the
bianchi identity implies l[,] = 0. i also included an improvement
term parametrized by an arbitrary constant c, which reects an
ambiguity in dening n . its signicance will become clear shortly,
but at this point i note that for c = 2c the current depends only
on the derivative of  (which equals a). on the other hand, the
current is only gauge invariant when we choose c = 0.

because (7) is conserved for any function , one argues that, for
elds satisfying the eld equations, the current can be written as

the divergence of a so-called noether potential,

j  =  q .

(8)

in the example, the noether potential q takes the form

q(, ) = 2 l   2 l,  + l,  + c a  ,

(9)

and is thus a local function of the elds and of the transformation
parameter . observe that q does not have to vanish for eld
congurations that are invariant (in the case at hand, this would
imply  =  = 0).

integration of the noether potential over the boundary of some
(spacelike) hypersurface leads to a surface charge, which, when re-

stricting the gauge transformation parameters to those that leave
the background invariant, is equal to the noether charge in the

usual sense. under certain conditions this surface charge remains

5

constant under variations that continuously connect solutions of the
equations of motion. here i have in mind a continuous variety of

solutions of the eld equations which are left invariant under a cor-
responding variety of residual gauge transformations. hence, the

parameters  that characterize the residual symmetry may change
continuously with the solution. denoting the combined change of
the solution  and the symmetry parameters  by the variation ,
one may thus write

(cid:16)(cid:17) = 0 .

(10)

now suppose that the noether current can be written as a func-
tion of  and . in that case one knows that j(, ) remains
proportional to  and must therefore vanish for the symmetric
congurations. consequently q(, ) must vanish up to a closed
form, [], so that the surface charge obtained by integration
over a cauchy surface c with volume element d,

zc

d j (, ) = ic

d q(, ) ,

(11)

is constant under the variations induced by .
in the example
this situation is realized by choosing c = 2c, because in this case
the -dependence of the current is fully captured in . observe,
however, that the integrand on the right-hand side is in principle
nonvanishing and nonconstant, so that the constancy of the total
surface charge represents a nontrivial result.

let me now return to general relativity and try to apply the
same arguments. here the gauge transformations are represented

by the dieomophisms and the residual gauge symmetries corre-
spond to certain killing vectors. the lagrangian is not invariant
but transforms as a density, which implies that n (, )   l.
under eld variations the lagrangian will vary into the quantity
(, ) dened in (5), so that the variations of the noether charge

6

will show a certain systematics which will reect itself in the nal
result. when the lagrangian depends arbitrarily on the riemann
tensor r (but not on its derivatives) and on matter elds and
their rst-order derivatives, one can show that the noether poten-

tial takes the form

q(, ) = 2l   +    ,

(12)

where the extra terms depend on  but not on derivatives thereof
and l is dened by l/r. observe that l is antisym-
metric in [] and in [] and it is symmetric under pair exchange
and satises the cyclicity property, l = l = 2 l[].

as was shown by wald [4] one can employ the noether charge in

order to nd generalized denitions of the black hole entropy that
ensure the validity of the rst law of black hole mechanics. the

crucial observation [4] is that there exists a hamiltonian, whose
change under a variation of the elds (wald assumes that the vector
eld  associated with the dieomorphism remains constant) can
be expressed in terms of the corresponding change of the noether
charge and takes the following form

h = (cid:16)zc

d j (, )(cid:17)  2 zc

d (cid:16)[ ](, )(cid:17) .

(13)

here the second term is induced by the variation of the n  compo-
nent of the current, which in this case is associated with a particular
timelike killing vector eld  whose killing horizon coincides with
the black hole event horizon. the quantity h can be associated

with a hamiltonian that governs the evolution along the integral
timelike lines of . in order that this hamiltonian exists, the sec-
ond term in (13) should be expressible as the variation of some other
term. whenever  is a killing vector of the background solution
and  connects dierent solution of the equations of motion, h

7

will vanish. on the other hand, when imposing the equations of
motion, (13) takes the form of surface integrals over the boundary
c with surface element d ,

h = zc

d (cid:16)q(, )   (, ) +  (, )(cid:17) .

(14)

here it is important that the last two terms are proportional to the
killing vector and not to its derivatives. i already mentioned that

one assumes that these terms can be rewritten (at least locally)
as variations. then, up to a proportionality factor, the resulting

variations of the surface integrals at innity correspond to the mass
and angular momentum variations that one has in the rst law,

while the surface integral at the horizon denes the variation of the
entropy. hence the mass, the angular momentum and the entropy
are surface charges derived from the same current. the entropy

takes the form of an integral over the noether potential

s =  zhor q  (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)=0, [ ]=

.

(15)

here hor denotes a spacelike cross section of the killing horizon
(which usually has the topology of s2) and we have used d =
 h d2x. furthermore  denotes the binormal spanned by
two lighlike vectors at the horizon, which is normalized accord-
ing to  = 2. to appreciate the two conditions,  = 0 and
[ ] = , we rst note that the noether potential q can gen-
erally be decomposed according to q = n   + y [ ].
this is so, because the derivatives of a killing vector eld are not

independent: the rst derivative is proportional to the curl owing
to the killing condition whereas higher derivatives are related to
.
lower ones according to the general identity   = r
obviously the condition on the curl of the killing vector just sets

its normalization and that of the corresponding noether potential.

8

in many cases the terms proportional to  cannot contribute for
symmetry reasons. both these conditions are subtle for extremal

black holes, because the surface gravity vanishes at the horizon. we
leave these issues aside here and refer to the literature but we stress

that the denition (15) applies to both extremal and nonextremal
black holes.

obviously, the constancy of the surface charge implied by the
vanishing of the left-hand side of (14) then ensures the validity
of the rst law. the normalization in (15) has been chosen such

that, with our conventions, we reproduce the bekenstein-hawking
area law for static black holes in general relativity.
in the pres-

ence of higher-derivative terms, the entropy of a static black hole
solution will in general not any longer be given by the area. when

the lagrangian depends on the riemann curvature (but not on its
derivatives) and on matter elds and their rst derivatives, one can

make use of (12) so that the entropy of the static black hole equals

s = 2zhor l   .

(16)

this is the result i will be using for the supersymmetric black holes.
let me now turn to the supergravity lagrangians that give rise

to these extremal black holes, which are based on the coupling of
n vector multiplets to n = 2 supergravity. in general they contain
various other couplings, such as those associated with hypermulti-

plets, which, however, play only a limited role in the following and
will be omitted. the construction of the coupling of vector multi-

plets to n = 2 supergravity utilizes the so-called superconformal
multiplet calculus which enables one to straightforwardly include

the interactions proportional to the square of the riemann tensor
(the appropriate references can be found in [1]). in the supercon-

formal framework, there is a multiplet, the so-called weyl multi-

9

plet, which comprises the gravitational degrees of freedom, namely
the graviton, two gravitini as well as various other superconformal

gauge elds and also some auxiliary elds. one of these auxiliary
elds is an anti-selfdual lorentz tensor eld t ab ij, where i, j = 1, 2
denote chiral su(2) indices. the eld strengths corresponding to
the various gauge elds in the weyl multiplet reside in a so-called
reduced chiral multiplet, denoted by w ab ij, from which one then
constructs the unreduced chiral multiplet w 2 = (w ab ijij)2. the
lowest component eld of w 2 is equal to a = (t ab ijij)2.

in addition, there are n + 1 abelian vector multiplets labelled
by an index i = 0, . . . , n. the extra vector multiplet is required to

provide the graviphoton eld of supergravity. each vector multiplet
contains a complex scalar eld x i, a vector gauge eld w i
 with
eld strength f i
, as well as a doublet of gaugini and a triplet of
auxiliary scalar elds. the couplings of these n + 1 vector multi-

plets to the weyl multiplet are encoded in a holomorphic function
f (x i, a), which is homogenous of degree two and thus satises
x ifi + 2 af a = 2f , where fi = f/x i , f a = f/ a.

the eld equations of the vector multiplets are subject to equiv-
alence transformations corresponding to electric-magnetic duality,

which do not involve the elds of the weyl multiplet. these equiv-
alence transformations constitute sp(2n + 2; z) transformations.

two complex (2n+2)-component vectors can now be dened which
transform linearly under sp(2n + 2; z) transformations, namely

x i

and

  f i


g

fj (x, a) !

v =  
 , g
j ) denotes the (anti-)selfdual part of (f i

j ! ,

where (f i
, gj ).
the eld strength g
j is dened by the variation of the action
with respect to f j
 . by integrating the gauge elds over two-
dimensional surfaces enclosing their sources, it is possible to as-

(17)

10

sociate to (f +i
magnetic and electric charges.

j ) a symplectic vector (pi, qj ) comprising the
it is then possible to construct a

 , g+

complex quantity z out of the charges and of v which is invariant
under symplectic transformations, as follows,

z = ek/2 (pifi (x, a)  qi x i) ,

(18)

where ek = i[ x ifi(x, a)  fi( x,

a)x i].

the associated (wilsonian) eective lagrangian describing the
coupling of these vector multiplets to supergravity is complicated.

we only display those terms which will be relevant for the compu-
tation of the entropy of a static supersymmetric black hole,

2 r

  1

12 r 

8l =  1

2 ekr + 1

2(if a

c + h.c.) +    ,

 + 16 ij t ijf

(19)
where c = 64 c c 
 tkl kl +    . here
c 
 denotes the anti-selfdual part of the weyl tensor c, and
 = 1
 +   . eventually we set ek = 1 in or-
f
der to obtain a properly normalized einstein-hilbert term. we
note that the lagrangian contains c 2
-terms, but no terms in-
volving derivatives of the riemann curvature tensor. by expand-
ing the holomorphic function f (x, a) in powers of a, f (x, a) =
g=0 f (g)(x) ag, we see that the lagrangian (19) contains an in-
p
nite set of curvature terms of the type c 2(t ijij)2g2 (where
g  1) with scalar eld-dependent coupling functions f (g)(x).

as alluded to above, the static, supersymmetric black hole is

constructed as a solitonic interpolation between two n = 2 super-
symmetric groundstates. the near-horizon solution can be speci-

ed by imposing full n = 2 supersymmetry on the bosonic quan-
tities. a careful analysis [1] of the resulting restrictions on the
bosonic background shows that the x i and a must be constant
at the horizon. the near-horizon space-time geometry is deter-
mined to be of the bertotti-robinson type, with t 01 ij = it 23 ij =

11

2 ij exp[k/2] z 1, while all other components of t ab ij vanish.
therefore we have a = 64 exp[k] z 2.

the requirement of n = 2 supersymmetry at the horizon does
not by itself x the actual values of the constants x i. to do
so, we have to invoke the so-called xed-point behaviour [5] for
the scalar elds x i at the horizon, according to which, regard-
less of their values at spatial innity, the x i (or rather, ratios of
the x i) evolve towards the horizon and take values that are de-
termined in terms of the charges carried by the black hole. this

xed-point behaviour has been established in the absence of higher-
derivative interactions. assuming that such a behaviour holds in

the presence of these interactions, one can generally argue on the
basis of electric/magnetic duality that the symplectic vectors v
and (pi, qj ) must be proportional, which in many cases suces
to explicitly evaluate the x i in terms of the charges. however,
the x i are dened projectively, so that they are only determined
modulo an uniform complex constant. this is one of the reasons
why it is convenient to introduce rescaled variables y i = ek/2 zx i
and  = ek z 2 a = 64. using the homogeneity property of f
mentioned earlier, it follows that the relation between moduli and
charges now reads y i  y i = ipi and fi(y, )  fi( y , ) = iqi.
these equations determine the values of the rescaled elds y i in
terms of the black hole charges. furthermore it follows from (18)
that |z|2 = pifi(y, )  qiy i, which determines the value of |z|
in terms of (pi, qj ).

the entropy of the static black hole solution described above
can now be computed from (16), using (19). the result takes the

remarkably concise form

s = h|z|2  256 im f ai .

(20)

12

the rst term denotes the bekenstein-hawking entropy contribu-
tion, whereas the second term is due to walds modication of the

denition of the entropy in the presence of higher-derivative inter-
actions (the actual contribution originates from r t 2-terms). note
that when switching on the higher-derivative interactions, the value
of |z| changes and hence also the horizon area changes. there are
thus two ways in which the black hole entropy is modied, namely
by a change of the near-horizon geometry and by an explicit devia-
tion from the area law. the entropy (20) is now entirely determined

in terms of the charges carried by the black hole.

with these results one can now consider the eective eld theory

corresponding to type-iia string theory compactied on a calabi-
yau threefold, in the limit where the volume of the calabi-yau

threefold is taken to be large, and compare the result for the black
hole entropy with the results of [3] obtained from the counting of

micro states for the very same objects in the same limit. the asso-
ciated homogenous function f (y, ) is given by (with i = 0, . . . , n
and a = 1, . . . , n)

f (y, ) =

dabcy ay by c

y 0

+ da

y a
y 0  ,

(21)

where the constants dabc and da are related to the intersection
numbers cabc of the four-cycles and the second chern-class num-
ber c2a of the calabi-yau manifold by dabc =  1
6 cabc and
1
da =  1
64 c2a. the lagrangian (19) associated with this homoge-
nous function thus contains a term proportional to c2a im za c 2
,
where za = y a/y 0. the y i can now be solved for black holes
with p0 = 0. substituting the result into the formula (20) for the
macroscopic entropy, one nds [1],

24

s = 2q 1

6 |q0|(cabc papbpc + c2a pa) ,

(22)

13

where q0 = q0 + 1
12dabqaqb with dab = dabcpc and dabdbc =
c
a . the expression (22) for the macroscopic entropy is in exact
agreement with the microscopic entropy formula computed in [3]
via state counting.

references

1. g. l. cardoso, b. de wit and t. mohaupt, phys. lett. b451
(1999) 309, hep-th/9812082; deviations from the area law

for supersymmetric black holes, hep-th/9904005; macroscopic

entropy formulae and non-holomorphic corrections for super-

symmetric black holes, hep-th/9906094.

2. a. strominger and c. vafa, phys. lett. b379 (1996) 99,

hep-th/9601029.

3. j. m. maldacena, a. strominger and e. witten, j. high en-
ergy phys. 12 (1997) 2, hep-th/9711053; c. vafa, adv. theor.

math. phys. 2 (1998) 207, hep-th/9711067.

4. r. m. wald, phys. rev. d48 (1993) 3427, gr-qc/9307038; t.
jacobson, g. kang and r. c. myers, phys. rev. d49 (1994)
6587, gr-qc/9312023; v. iyer and r. m. wald, phys. rev.

d50 (1994) 846, gr-qc/9403028; t. jacobson, g. kang and
r. c. myers, black hole entropy in higher curvature gravity,

gr-qc/9502009.

5. s. ferrara, r. kallosh and a. strominger, phys. rev. d52
(1995) 5412, hep-th/9508072; a. strominger, phys. lett.

b383 (1996) 39, hep-th/9602111; s. ferrara and r. kallosh,
phys. rev. d54 (1996) 1514, hep-th/9602136; phys. rev.
d54 (1996) 1525, hep-th/9603090; g. moore, attractors

and arithmetic, hep-th/9807056; arithmetic and attractors,
hep-th/9807087.

14

