2
0
0
2

 
l
u
j
 

9
2

 
 

6
v
2
4
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

hub-ep-99/26
dfpd 99/th/25
hepth/9906142

superbranes and superembeddings

dmitri sorokin

humboldt-universitat zu berlin, mathematisch-naturwissenshaftliche fakultat,

institut fur physik, invalidenstrasse 110, d-10115 berlin

universit`a degli studi di padova, dipartimento di fisica galileo galilei

and

ed infn, sezione di padova

via f. marzolo, 8, 35131 padova, italia

abstract

we review the geometrical approach to the description of the dynamics of su-
perparticles, superstrings and, in general, of superpbranes, dirichlet branes and
the m5-brane, which is based on a generalization of the elements of surface theory
to the description of the embedding of supersurfaces into target superspaces.

being manifestly supersymmetric in both, the superworldvolume of the brane
and the target superspace, this approach unies the neveuschwarzramond and
the greenschwarz formulation and provides the fermionic symmetry of the
greenschwarztype superbrane actions with a clear geometrical meaning of stan-
dard worldvolume local supersymmetry.

the dynamics of superbranes is encoded in a generic superembedding condition.
depending on the superbrane and the targetspace dimension, the superembed-
ding condition produces either only oshell constraints (as in the case of n = 1
superparticles and n = 1 superstrings), or also results in the full set of the super-
brane equations of motion (as, for example, in the case of the mtheory branes).
in the rst case worldvolume superspace actions for the superbranes can be con-
structed, while in the second case only component or generalized supereld actions
are known.

we describe the properties of the doubly supersymmetric brane actions and show

how they are related to the standard greenschwarz formulation.

in the second part of the article basic geometrical grounds of the (super)embedding

approach are considered and applied to the description of the m2brane and the
m5brane. various applications of the superembedding approach are reviewed.

alexander von humboldt fellow. on leave from kharkov institute of physics and technology,

kharkov, 310108, ukraine

contents

1 introduction

4

2 doubly supersymmetric particles

12
2.1 the bosonic particle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2 spinning particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3 superparticles, -symmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.4 spinning superparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.5 worldline supereld actions for standard superparticles. the superembed-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
ding condition.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.5.1 n = 1, d = 3 superparticle and twistors
25
2.5.2 onshell relationship between superparticles and spinning particles
2.5.3 the superembedding condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.5.4 n = 1, d = 4, 6, 10 superparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
2.6 coupling to supersymmetric maxwell elds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
2.7 superembedding into curved superspaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

3 superstrings

42
3.1 greenschwarz formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.2 doubly supersymmetric n = 1 superstrings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.2.1 null superstrings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
3.2.2
string tension generating mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.2.3 weil triviality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.2.4 worldsheet supereld action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3.3 coupling to supergravity background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
3.4 heterotic fermions
3.5 type ii superstrings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60

4 basic elements of (super)surface theory

61
4.1 bosonic embedding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.2 superembedding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
4.3 symmetry from the point of view of superembedding . . . . . . . . . . . 74
4.4 n = 1, d = 10 superparticles and superstrings from the general perspective

of superembedding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76

5 mtheory branes

5.1 the supermembrane

78
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
5.1.1 the fermionic equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
5.1.2 the bosonic equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
5.1.3 main superembedding equations for the m2brane . . . . . . . . . . 86

2

5.2 the super5brane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
5.2.1 the tensor eld equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
5.2.2 the fermionic equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
5.2.3 the scalar equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
5.2.4 main superembedding equations for the m5brane . . . . . . . . . . 96

6 other developments and applications

97
6.1 the generalized action principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
6.2 dbranes, lbranes and branes ending on branes
6.3 nonlinear realizations and superembeddings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100

7 concluding remarks and outlook

103

3

1 introduction

string theory to much more extent than any other theory requires for its description vari-
ous important developments of classical and quantum eld theory, group theory, geometry
and topology.

to comprehend dierent properties of string theory and to uncover underlying relations
between them one should use for the analysis dierent (often intertwined) mathematical
tools and methods.

one of such basic geometrical tools is surface theory which describes the embedding
of surfaces into higher dimensional manifolds. the application of surface theory to the
description of string theory is quite natural, since the string is a onedimensional rela-
tivistic object which sweeps a twodimensional surface (worldsheet) when it propagates
in a (target) spacetime. the dynamics of the string completely determines the geomet-
rical properties of the worldsheet describing its embedding into the target space, and vice
versa, specifying geometrical properties of the embedding of a surface into a target space
one can, in principle, get the full information about the details of the dynamics of a string
whose worldsheet is associated with this surface.

for instance, a metric gmn() (m, n = 0, 1) of a string worldsheet locally parametrized
by coordinates m = (, ) is an induced metric which is related to a ddimensional
targetspace metric gmn(x) (m, n = 0, 1, ..., d  1) through the condition 

gmn() = mx mgmn(x())nx n,

(1.1)

which is the simplest example of the embedding condition.

note that with taking into account worldsheet reparametrization symmetry the in-
duced metric condition (1.1) amounts to virasoro constraints on string dynamics (see
[1, 2, 3] for details on superstring theory).

the classical trajectories of the string are surfaces of a minimal (or more generally,

extremal) area. this follows from the nambugoto string action

s = t z d2q det gmn(x()),

(1.2)

whose geometrical meaning is to be the total area of the worldsheet of a string with the
tension t . the variation of the action (1.2) vanishes for minimal area surfaces, which
produces the string equations of motion. therefore, from the geometrical point of view the
string equations describe minimal (area) embedding of the worldsheet into target space.
a direct application of the geometrical methods of surface theory in string theory was
initiated in [4, 5] and revealed a connection of the string equations of motion with two

in what follows the underlined indices will correspond to targetspace objects (coordinates, elds,
etc.), while not underlined indices will correspond to the worldsurface. this will allow us to escape, to
some extent, the proliferation of indices.

4

dimensional (exactly solvable) nonlinear equations, such as the singordon and liouville
equation.

though, of course, all string formulations imply that string worldsheet is a surface
embedded into a target spacetime, the geometrical embedding approach explores this
in the most direct way. it deals with such objects as induced vielbeins of the surface,
extrinsic curvature and torsion of the surface, and reduces the string equations to the
system of the codazzi, gauss and ricci equations completely determining the embedding
of the surface (see [7] for the details on surface theory and [6] on its applications to
strings).

the embedding approach was also used in connection with the problem of formulating
a consistent quantum string theory in noncritical spacetime dimensions and has been
developed in a number of papers (see [6, 8] and references therein).

in addition to particles and strings a variety of other extended relativistic objects have
been discovered in d = 10 superstring theories and d = 11 supergravity. this includes a
d = 11 membrane [9], a d = 11 vebrane [10] and dirichlet branes [11, 12]. collectively
all these extended objects are called superbranes or superpbranes, where p denotes the
number of spatial dimensions of a given brane.

the existence of the superbranes reects and causes important duality chains which
connect d = 11 supergravity with ve basic d = 10 superstring theories and string
theories among themselves (see [13, 3] for a review on dualities). this gives rise to a
conjecture that d = 11 supergravity and the d = 10 string theories can be associated
with dierent vacua of a single underling quantum theory called utheory [14]. this
theory is also often called mtheory [16], but following sen [14] and schwarz [15] we shall
reserve the latter name for a d = 11 sector of utheory whose low energy eective eld
theory limit is d = 11 supergravity, and which also contains a membrane (m2brane)
and a vebrane (m5brane) as part of its physical spectrum.

since the superbranes are surfaces in target superspaces it is natural to apply for
studying their properties the same geometrical methods as for strings, i.e. to describe the
propagation of superbranes by specifying the embedding of brane worldvolumes in target
superspaces. for instance, a bosonic part of a superpbrane worldvolume action is a
(p+1)dimensional analog of the nambugoto action (1.2). it produces bosonic equations
of motion which are equivalent to minimal (volume) embedding of the corresponding
worldvolume into spacetime.

as we have already mentioned, at the classical level the use of geometrical embedding
methods allow one to nd a connection between equations of motion of bosonic branes
and integrable [17], and in the case of strings, with exactly solvable nonlinear equations
[4, 5, 6, 8, 20]. analogous relations were also found for superstrings [21, 22]. as a result,
one can relate, for example, (super)strings to exactlysolvable wesszuminonovikov
witten models [23, 24, 22].
( for a review on wznw models and related topics see

5

[25, 26] and references therein). this provides us with useful information about the
details of brane dynamics.

in the case of supersymmetric extended objects the use of the embedding approach has
turned out to be even more fruitful, since it has allowed one to clarify the geometrical origin
of local symmetries of superbrane worldvolumes [27][45], to relate dierent formulations
of superbrane dynamics [46][49], and to get equations of motion for those superbranes for
which the construction of worldvolume actions encountered problems, such as d(irichlet)-
branes [50] and the m5-brane [51]. it has also allowed one to make a progress towards a
solution of the problem of covariant quantization of superstrings [53, 33, 48, 54, 140, 55].
let us also mention that supergravity can also be described as a theory of supersurfaces
[56].

to apply the embedding approach to the description of superbranes one should rst
generalize the method itself and nd supersymmetric analogs of bosonic embedding con-
ditions such as the induced metric condition (1.1) and the minimal embedding of the su-
perbrane worldvolume which would be equivalent to the superbrane equations of motion
[45]. a reasonable generalization is to consider superbrane worldvolumes as super surfaces
locally parametrized by (p + 1) bosonic coordinates m and n fermionic coordinates 
( = 1, ..., n) embedded (in a specic way) into target super spaces locally parametrized
by d bosonic coordinates x m and 2[ d
2 ] grassmann spinor coordinates  (where brackets
denote the integer part of d

2 ). thus we get a superembedding.

the assumption that such a superembedding should underlie the worldvolume dynam-
ics of superbranes is prompted by a well known fact that the d = 10 superstring theories
can be formulated in two dierent ways.

in the neveuschwarzramond (or spinning string) formulation [57] superstring prop-
agation is described by a supersurface, possessing n = 1 local worldsheet supersymmetry,
embedded into bosonic spacetime. spacetime supersymmetry appears in this model
only upon quantization as a symmetry of quantum string physical states singled out by
the gliozzischerkolive projection [59].

on the other hand in the greenschwarz formulation [58] the superstring worldsheet
is a bosonic surface embedded into a target superspace. this formulation is manifestly
spacetime supersymmetric and, in addition, possesses a local worldsheet fermionic sym-
metry called kappasymmetry. the number of independent symmetry transformations
is half the number of target superspace grassmann coordinates. kappasymmetry was
rst observed in the case of superparticles [60, 61] and is inherent to all superbranes in the
greenschwarz formulation [1, 9, 62, 63, 64]. it plays an important role ensuring that su-
perbranes form stable, so called, bogomolnyiprasadsommerfeld congurations whose
presence in a superspace background preserves half of the spacetime supersymmetries
of a background vacuum. for d = 10 superstrings this means, in particular, that their
quantization results in consistent quantum supersymmetric theories.

6

at the same time local fermionic symmetry causes problems with performing the
covariant hamiltonian analysis and quantization of superbrane theories. this is due to
the fact that the rstclass constraints corresponding to symmetry form an innite
reducible set, and in a conventional formulation of superparticles and superstrings it
turned out impossible to single out an irreducible set of the fermionic rstclass constraints
in a lorentz covariant way. (note however that it is possible to do this in the case of
dbranes [65]).

it is therefore desirable to replace symmetry with something more natural and sim-
ple. to do this one can notice that symmetry transformations resemble supersymmetry
transformations. spacetime supersymmetry transformations of x m and  with a su-
persymmetry parameter  are

 = ,

x m = i m,

(1.3)

while symmetry transformations of x m and  on the superbrane worldvolume have
the following form

() =

1
2

(1 + )



(),

x m() = i m,

()2 = 1

(1.4)

2(1 + ) is a projection operator constructed from the m matrices. the projector
where 1
is specic for each type of the superbranes, and its presence implies that the number of
independent symmetry transformations is twice less than the number of the spacetime
supersymmetries (1.3).

notice the dierence in the sign of the x mvariations in (1.3) and (1.4). this dier-
ence implies that if ordinary supersymmetry is associated with left boosts in the target
superspace, the symmetry is associated with right boosts.

it is instructive to understand how the presence of the branes breaks symmetries
of target superspace vacua. for this consider an innite at membrane in a d = 11
minkowski superspace.

i) d = 11 lorenz symmetry so(1, 10) is broken down to d = 3 lorentz symme-
try so(1, 2) of the worldvolume times so(8) rotations in directions orthogonal to the
membrane;

ii) d = 11 poincare invariance is broken down to a translational symmetry along the

membrane worldvolume (generated by momenta pm, m=0,1,2),

iii) therefore, unbroken supersymmetries are those generated by supercharges whose
anticommutators close on the unbroken translations along the membrane worldvolume.
there are 16 such generators q (=1,...,16) among 32.

{q, q} = 2ipmm.

16 targetsuperspace grassmann coordinates (let us call them ) which are shifted by the
action of the 16 unbroken supercharges can be regarded as ones parallel to the membrane.

7

it is important to stress that it is the unbroken supersymmetry transformations of 
which can be compensated by appropriate worldvolume symmetry transformations,
and, hence, these 16 grassmann coordinates can be associated with fermionic directions
which extend the bosonic worldvolume of the membrane to a superspace embedded into
the target superspace. other 16 targetspace grassmann coordinates (let us call them )
correspond to the spontaneously broken supersymmetries. they are goldstone fermion
physical modes of the brane.

from the above analogy we see that, since symmetry is a local worldvolume fermionic
symmetry, it would be natural to endow it with the direct meaning of being a manifes-
tation of conventional nextended local supersymmetry of the superbrane worldvolume.
this would allow one to get rid of unpleasant features of symmetry by dealing directly
with well understood properties of conventional linearly realized supersymmetry. such an
interpretation of symmetry was proposed in [27].

for this one should construct a formulation of superbrane dynamics which would be
manifestly supersymmetric on both the worldvolume and the target superspace. such
a doubly supersymmetric formulation would then unify the nsr and gs formulations.
note that the nsr formulation of superbranes with p > 1 is unknown and the doubly
supersymmetric formulation may provide one with an idea what spinning branes might
look like.

to have the worldvolume and target space supersymmetry manifest the doubly super-
symmetric formulation should be constructed as a supereld theory on both the world-
volume superspace and the target superspace, the former being (super)embedded into the
latter. we thus again arrive at the superembedding approach.

the idea to use doubly supersymmetric models for a combined treatment of the nsr
and the gs superstrings rst appeared in [66]. it has then been applied to the construction
of an interesting class of so called spinning superparticle [67] and spinning superstring [68]
models. in general, however, these models describe objects with twice larger number of
physical states than, for example, corresponding nsr spinning strings or gs superstrings
have themselves. they also do not resolve the problem of symmetry, since the latter
is still present in the spinning superbranes as an independent symmetry in addition to
double supersymmetry.

a main reason why spinning superbranes have redundant symmetries and physical
states is that embedding of their superworldvolumes into target superspaces is too general.
to describe conventional (i.e. not spinning) superbranes in the superembedding approach
(with kappasymmetry replaced by local worldvolume supersymmetry) one should nd
an appropriate superembedding condition which would amount to conditions required for
the description of the dynamics of the standard superbranes.

the basic superembedding condition was rst found in [27] for superparticles and then,
as a result of the development of the superembedding approach [27][51], was proved to

8

be generic to all known types of superbranes. from the geometrical point of view this
condition is quite natural and simple.

consider the pullback onto the superworldvolume (with n = 2[ d

2 ]1 grassmann direc-
tions) of the vector component ea(z) of a target space supervielbein em (z) = (ea, e)
(where z m = (x m, ), and the indices from the beginning of the alphabets correspond
to the (co)tangent space of the target superspace which has 2n = 2[ d
2 ] grassmann direc-
tions). the pullback of ea is a onesuperform on the superworldvolume and, therefore,
can be expended in a superworldvolume supervielbein basis ea(, ) = (ea, e)

ea(z(, )) = eaea

a + eea
.

(1.5)

the superembedding condition reads that the pullback components of the vector su-

pervielbein ea(z) along the grassmann directions of the superworldvolume are zero

ea

(z(, )) = 0.

(1.6)

the geometrical meaning of this condition is that at any point on the superworldvolume
the worldvolume tangent space grassmann directions form a subspace of the grassmann
tangent space of the target superspace.

in a certain sense eq. (1.6) is analogous to the induced metric condition (1.1) (actu-
ally, eq. (1.6) implies a superspace generalization of (1.1)). as we shall see below, the
dynamical meaning of the superembedding condition (1.6) is that it produces virasoro
like constraints on the dynamics of the superbranes, and in many cases its integrability
conditions lead to superbrane equations of motion. it also provides a link between 
symmetry of the standard gs formulation and local worldvolume supersymmetry of the
doubly supersymmetric formulation of superbranes [27], as well as a classical relation be-
tween the nsr and gs formulation in the case of superparticles [46, 47] and superstrings
[48, 49].

in the cases when the superembedding condition does not produce the superbrane
equations of motion one can construct worldvolume supereld actions for corresponding
superbranes. such actions have been constructed for n = 1,  d = 3, 4, 6, 10 massless
superparticles [27, 31, 32, 36, 38, 39], n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6, 10 superstrings [28, 29, 33, 34,
37, 40], n = 2, d = 2, 3, 4, 6 massless and massive superparticles [35, 38, 42, 69], an
n = 2, d = 3 superstring [41, 42] and an n = 1, d = 4 supermembrane [70].

in the case where worldvolume superembedding corresponds to the type ii d = 10
superstrings and dbranes, the d = 11 supermembrane and the supervebrane the
superembedding condition produces superbrane equations of motion [42, 45, 50, 51]. it
is remarkable that in such cases the superembedding condition contains full information
about the physical contents of supersymmetric theories on the worldvolumes of the super-
branes. for instance, in the case of the d-branes one derives from (1.6) that the dbranes

the capital n stands for the number of the spinorial supercharges of targetspace supersymmetry.

9

carry on their worldvolumes vector gauge elds of the diracborninfeldtype, and the
m5brane carries a selfdual secondrank tensor gauge eld. the superembedding ap-
proach allowed one to get the full set of nonlinear equations of motion of dbranes [50]
and the m5brane [51, 52] before the greenschwarztype worldvolume actions for these
objects were constructed in [62, 63, 64] .

when the superembedding condition produces superbrane equations of motion one
cannot construct worldvolume supereld actions for these branes. the problem is the
same as in the case of extended supersymmetric eld theories and supergravities when
constraints imposed on superelds put the theory on the mass shell. in these cases one
should either consider component actions (such as greenschwarztype actions), or apply
a generalized action principle [72] based on a groupmanifold approach to the description
of supersymmetric theories [73]. in the latter case one gets an action which produces the
supereld superembedding condition as an equation of motion, though the action itself
is not a fully edged supereld action in the sense that the integral is taken only over a
bosonic submanifold of the superworldvolume.

in some cases the superembedding condition is not enough even for the oshell de-
scriptions of superbranes [50]. this happens, for instance, with d6 and d8branes of
the type iia superstring theory [74] or with spacelling branes, such as the d9brane of
the type iib superstring [75]. in these cases an additional superworldvolume condition is
required to constrain superelds describing gauge elds propagating in the worldvolume
of the branes.

as another important and profound feature of the superembedding approach it is
worth mentioning that it provides a natural link between spacetime and twistor [76, 77]
description of relativistic systems. actually, in the rst series of papers on the doubly
supersymmetric description of superbranes the approach was called twistorlike, and only
quite recently it has acquired the present name of the geometrical [45, 78] or simply the
superembedding [79] approach.

in the superembedding approach auxiliary commuting spinors appear as superpartners
of the target superspace grassmann coordinates and have properties of twistors [76, 77,
80, 27] and/or lorentz harmonics [87],[88][94, 53].

the use of twistorlike variables to formulate the theory of supersymmetric relativistic

objects has the following deep grounds.

when a superbrane propagates in a nontrivial gauge supereld or supergravity back-
ground symmetry requires background superelds to satisfy supereld constraints,
which (in most of the cases) are equivalent to background supereld equations of mo-
tion.

for instance, the symmetry of a massless superparticle propagating in a super

a gauge xed action for a spacelling d3brane was rst constructed in [71] as a result of studying

partial breaking of n = 2, d = 4 supersymmetry.

10

yangmills background requires geometrical integrability of the background along light
like lines of the superparticle trajectories, which implies constraints on background super-
elds. in the case of n = 3, 4, d = 4 or n = 1, d = 10 superyangmills background,
for example, this is equivalent to the sym eld equations [95, 96]. analogous results
were obtained for supergravity backgrounds [95, 97]. and it was understood that the
correspondence between geometrical integrability along massless superparticle orbits and
superyangmills and supergravity equations is based on a twistor interpretation of these
theories. in this connection twistor formulations of superparticles and superstrings have
been studied in a number of papers [80, 81][86, 97, 30, 38, 54, 98, 99, 100].

as we shall see, the superembedding condition (1.6) contains a cartanpenrose rela-
tion between vectors and commuting spinors. and the cartanpenrose relation turns out
to be the twistorlike solution of the virasorotype constraints which govern the dynamics
of any brane.

therefore, through the superembedding condition one establishes the relationship be-
tween various spacetime, twistorlike and harmonic formulations of superparticles, su-
perstrings and superbranes.

in this review we shall consider basic features of the superembedding approach. we
shall show how one arrives at the superembedding condition by constructing an appro-
priate worldline supereld action for a massless superparticle. we shall demonstrate how
local worldvolume supersymmetry transformations reduce to symmetry transformations
upon the elimination of the auxiliary components of worldvolume superelds which made
local supersymmetry manifest. for those superbranes for which the superembedding con-
dition does not put the theory on the mass shell we shall present doubly supersymmetric
(worldvolume supereld) actions which produce the superembedding condition, and will
discuss their symmetry properties.

we shall perform the analysis of the superembedding condition in cases when it puts
the theory onshell producing superbrane equations of motion. in these cases, such as the
d = 11 m2brane and the m5brane, we shall demonstrate how superbrane equations of
motion arise as a requirement of the integrability of the superembedding condition, and
will discuss the problem of constructing doubly supersymmetric actions for such branes.
since the (super)embedding approach has a rather wide range of applications, it is not
possible in one review to cover in detail all points where this approach has been found to
be useful. some of them we shall just sketch referring the reader to corresponding original
literature. for instance, we leave aside the relation of the method to integrable models,
and an important and interesting problem of covariant quantization of greenschwarz
superstrings, which itself requires a separate review article. the details on solving this
problem with methods related to the superembedding approach the reader may nd in
[54, 33, 48, 140, 53, 55].

the article is organized as follows.

11

it can be conventionally divided into two parts. the rst part consists of sections 2

and 3, and sections 4 and 5 constitute the second part.

in section 2 we introduce the basic ideas of the superembedding approach with a
simple example of superparticles. this instructive example should facilitate the readers
understanding of all the features, ingredients and techniques of the approach, which will
be applied (in exactly the same way) in subsequent sections to the description of more
complicated models of superstrings and superbranes.

in section 3 we discuss the superembedding formulation of n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6, 10
superstrings. as in the case of n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6, 10 superparticles, the superembedding
condition does not produce dynamical equations of motion of the n = 1 superstrings,
and one can construct worldsheet supereld actions, from which the dynamical equations
are derived. an interesting feature of these actions is that the string tension appears
there through an auxiliary dynamical variable [40]. this is a realization of the idea of a
dynamical generation of the brane tension, various aspects of which have been discussed
in references [101, 102, 103]. we then describe worldsheet supereld actions for n = 1
superstrings in curved target superspaces and show that the latter should obey supergrav-
ity constraints. finally, we introduce into the doubly supersymmetric construction chiral
(heterotic) fermions which extend the n = 1, d = 10 closed superstring to a d = 10
heterotic string.

in section 4 we present basic geometrical ideas which underlie the theory of bosonic

surfaces and then extend them to the description of superembeddings.

in section 5 we apply general tools of superembeddings to the description of classical

dynamics of the supermembrane and the super5brane of mtheory.

in section 6 we briey review other applications of the superembedding approach.

2 doubly supersymmetric particles

2.1 the bosonic particle

we start by recalling the form of actions for a massless bosonic particle which we will
then subject to various kinds of supersymmetrization. this will allow us to describe the
dynamics of particles having spin degrees of freedom.

a well known quadratic action for the massless bosonic particle propagating in d

dimensional minkowski space is

s = z d l(x, x, e) = z d

1

2e( )

xm xnmn,

(2.1)

where mn is the diagonal minkowski metric (, +, ..., +),  is the time variable parametriz-
ing a particle worldline xm( ) (m = 0, 1..., d1) in the target spacetime, xm   xm and
e( ) is an auxiliary eld which can be regarded as a (nondynamical) gravitational eld on

12

the worldline of the particle. the latter ensures the invariance of the action (2.1) under
worldline reparametrizations (dieomorphisms)  = f ( ), the worldline elds xm( ) and
e( ) transforming as scalars and a onedimensional covariant vector, respectively,

xm() = xm( ),

e() =

d
d

e( ) =

1

f ( )

e( ).

(2.2)

the consequence of the reparametrization invariance is the constraint on the dynamics of
the particle

1
e2 xm xm = 0,

or

pmpm = 0,

(2.3)

which is obtained by varying (2.1) with respect to e( ). in eq. (2.3) pm = l
the canonical momentum of the particle.

 xm = 1

e xm is

the constraint (2.3) implies that the particle is massless.
using the canonical momentum variable pm( ) we can rewrite the action (2.1) in the

rst order form

s = z d (pm xm 

e
2

pmpm).

(2.4)

we will now generalize both versions of the massless particle action to describe various

supersymmetric particles.

2.2 spinning particles

let us assume that the trajectory of a particle in a bosonic spacetime is not a line
but a supersurface parametrized by one bosonic variable  and one fermionic variable 
(which can be regarded as a one-dimensional worldline spinor). the functions x m(, )
describing the embedding of this supersurface into d-dimensional bosonic target space
become worldline superelds

x m(, ) = xm( ) + im( ),

(2.5)

where, as above, xm( ) are the coordinates of the particle in the target space and m are
their grassmannodd superpartners.

the onedimensional graviton e( ) becomes a member of a (supergravity) supereld

e(, ) = e( ) + 2i( )

(2.6)

and thus acquires a gravitino eld ( ) as its grassmannodd superpartner.

in (2.5) and below capital letters stand for worldvolume superelds, while corresponding small letters
denote leading components of these superelds which are associated with conventional dynamical variables
of the superbranes.

13

the particle momentum pm enters a supereld

pm(, ) = pm( ) + im( ).

(2.7)

to get an action for a spinning superparticle one can supersymmetrize both the ac-
tion (2.1) or its rstorder form (2.4). since the generalization of the latter is more
sophisticated [104] we shall not describe it below.

the action (2.1) is generalized to a superworldline integral as follows [105]

where

s = z d d

i
2e

dx m xm = z d d

1
2e

dx md(dxm),

(2.8)

d =




+ i




,

d2 =

1
2{d, d} = i

(2.9)

is a grassmann covariant derivative.

the action (2.8) is invariant under local worldline superreparametrizations which in-
clude bosonic worldline reparametrizations and local supersymmetry transformations.
the innitesimal superreparametrizations are

   =  = (, )  1
   =  =  i
d  d = d =  1

2 d,
d,

2

2d,

(2.10)

where (, ) = a( )+i( ) is the superreparametrization parameter which contains the
worldline bosonic reparametrization parameter a( ) and the local supersymmetry param-
eter ( ). under (2.10) the supereld x m(, ) (2.5) transforms as a scalar xm(, ) =
x m(, ), its components having the following variation properties (x m  xm(, ) 
x m(, ))

xm = a( ) xm 

( )m,

i
2

m = a( ) m 

1
2

a( )m 

1
2

( ) xm.

the supereld pm(, ) also transforms as a scalar p m(, ) = pm(, )

pm = a( ) pm 

i
2

( )m,

m = a( ) m 

1
2

a( )m 

1
2

( ) pm.

finally, the transformation properties of the supereld e(, ) are

e =  (e) +

i
2

dde,

(2.11)

(2.12)

(2.13)

from which one derives the variation of the worldline graviton e( ) and the gravitino ( )

e =  (ae)  i( ),
 = a( )   3
2 a  1
14

4( ) e  1

2 ( )e.

(2.14)

let us note that the geometry of the superworldline associated with the superreparametriza-

tions dened in eq. (2.10) is conformally at. this means that worldline supervielbeins
ea(, ) = (e , e) describing such a geometry dier from at supervielbeins ea
0 (, ) =
(e

0 = d) by a conformal factor (the subscript 0 indicates the at basis). namely,

0, e

e = e(, )e

0 = e(, )(d + id),

e = e

1

2 (, )d  ie

0de

1

2 .

(2.15)

(note that as in the at case such a form of the supervielbein satises the worldline torsion
constraint t   de = ie  e.)

in the case of the conformally at worldline supergeometry (and a corresponding world-
sheet supergeometry of superstrings) it is convenient to use at supercovariant derivatives
(2.10) and supervielbeins rather than curved ones and just take into account conformal
factors where they are required for the covariance.

integrating (2.8) over  (using the grassmann integration rulesr d = 0 andr d = 1)

we get the component action

s = z d (cid:20) 1

2e

( xm xm + i mm) 

i

e2 m xm(cid:21) .

(2.16)

in addition to the masslessness constraint (2.3) the action (2.16) yields the fermionic
constraint which comes from the variation of the last term in (2.16) with respect to ( )

where now the canonical momentum is

mpm = 0,

pm =

1
e

( xm 

i
e

m).

(2.17)

(2.18)

(note that since m are grassmannodd, mm  0).

upon quantization the constraint (2.17) becomes the dirac equation imposed on a
rstquantized spinorial wave function. therefore, the action (2.3) or (2.16) describes a
relativistic particle with spin 1/2, and the grassmann vector m describes the spinning
degrees of freedom of the particle [106, 105].

to get an action for relativistic particles of an arbitrary spin n

2 (where n is a natural
number) one should consider the worldline of a particle to be a supersurface parametrized
by n fermionic variables q (q = 1, ..., n) [107, 108].

2.3 superparticles, -symmetry

let us now do an opposite thing. instead of considering the embedding of a worldline
supersurface into a bosonic ddimensional spacetime consider an embedding of a bosonic
worldline into a at target superspace parametrized by bosonic coordinates xm (m =

15

0, 1, ..., d  1) and grassmann spinor coordinates  ( = 1, ..., 2[ d
2 ]). depending on the
dimension d the spinors  can be chosen to be dirac, majorana or majoranaweyl ones.
the global supersymmetry transformations of the target superspace coordinates are

 = ,

xm = im,

(2.19)

and we would like to construct an action for a particle which would be invariant under
these transformations.

for the construction of such an action one uses supercovariant oneforms e a = (e a,e )

which form an orthogonal supervielbein basis in the at target superspace

e a = (cid:16)dxm  idm(cid:17) a

m,

e  = d
 ,

(2.20)

the target superspace geometry is at, i.e. it has zero curvature, but nonzero torsion (the
external dierential acts from the right)

t a = de a = idad.

(2.21)

[when superspaces are at we shall usually not make a distinction between tangent
space at indices (from the beginning of the alphabets) and coordinate indices (from the
middle of the alphabets), since in this case the two types of indices are simply related by
the unit matrix, as in the denition of the supervielbeins (2.20).]

the pullback of the supervielbeins (2.20) onto the particle worldline with the image

z m ( ) = (xm( ), ( )) is

e a(z( )) = de a

 (z( )) = d (cid:16) xa  i a(cid:17) ,

(2.22)

e (z( )) = d  ( ).

the superparticle action is obtained by replacing xm in (2.1) or (2.4) with the vector
component e a

 of the supervielbein pullback (2.22). thus we get [109, 110, 111]

s = z d

1
2e( )e a

 e b

 ab,

s = z d (pae a
 

e
2

papa).

(2.23)

(2.24)

or in the rst order form

the superparticle equations of motion derived from (2.23) or (2.24) are

 (

1
e( )e a

 ) =  pa = 0,

 a)
(e a

  = (paa)

  = 0,

(2.25)

.

 =  xa  i a = e( )pa.
e a

16

by construction the actions (2.23) and (2.24) are invariant under the targetspace
supersymmetry transformations (2.19), and under the worldline reparametrization of xm,
e( ) (2.2), pm() = pm( ) and () = ( ), which is responsible for the massshell con-
dition (2.3). in addition, these actions possess a hidden worldline fermionic symmetry
[60, 61]. the transformations of the worldline elds are



( ),

 = i(pmm)
xm = im  ie a  z me a
e = 4 ,
pm = 0,

m = 0,

(2.26)

where ( ) is a grassmann spinor parameter of the transformations.

one can notice that not all ( ) contribute to the transformations, and that, in

fact, the transformations (2.26) are innitely reducible.

consider a particular choice of ( ) when

( ) = i(pmm)



( ).

then, due to the dening relations for the dirac matrices

{m, n} = mn + mn = 2mn,

the transformation of  takes the form

( ) = pmpm.

(2.27)

(2.28)

(2.29)

this transformation vanishes on the mass shell p2 = 0 (2.3). therefore, the parameters of
the form (2.27) do not eliminate any onshell gauge degrees of freedom of the superparticle.
if in (2.27) we choose  = pmm we will see that on the mass shell (2.3) the
parameter (2.27) turns to zero. we can continue such a substitution an innite number of
times and nd that at any stage there are parameters for which the transformations
are trivial on the mass shell. the reason for this (innite) reducibility is that the spinorial
matrix pmm has the rank which on the mass shell (2.3) is half the maximum rank, i.e.
half the dimension 2[ d
2 ] components of 
only half of the components are independent and eectively contribute to the symmetry
transformations. this also concerns fermionic constraints on the superparticle dynamics
whose appearance is the consequence of symmetry. in the dirac terminology [112] these
constraints belong to the rst class, and in the canonical hamiltonian formulation they
are regarded as the generators of the local symmetry. the constraints in question are

2 ] of the spinor. this means that among the 2[ d

( )(pmm)



 = 0,

(2.30)

where  = l
 is the momentum canonically conjugate to the grassmann
coordinate . since the expression for  does not contain timederivatives it is a fermionic

  = i(pmm)

17

spinorial constraint

d =   i(pmm)
under the canonical poisson brackets [pm, xn] = n
m, {, } = 
have the anticommutation properties of the superpoincare algebra

 = 0.

(2.31)

 the constraints (2.31)

{ d, d} = 2i(pmm)



.

(2.32)

as we have seen, the matrix on the right hand side of (2.32) is degenerate and has the rank
one half of the maximum rank. thus half the constraints (2.32) are of the second class
and another half are of the rst class, the anticommutator of the latter being (weakly)
zero.

without introducing auxiliary elds it turns out to be impossible to split the fermionic
spinor constraints (2.31) into irreducible lorentz covariant sets of rst and second class
constraints because the spinor representation of the lorentz group is the fundamental one
and cannot be decomposed into any other lorentz group representations.

the maximum we can do in the present situation is to get an innite reducible covariant
set of the rst class fermionic constraints (2.30) multiplying (2.31) by pmm, or to break
manifest lorentz covariance.

if we try to covariantly quantize the superparticle model, the innite reducibility of -
symmetry and of the corresponding constraints will require the introduction of an innite
set of ghosts for ghosts [113] and, in addition, we should also manage with the second class
constraints contained in (2.31). all this makes the problem of the covariant quantization
of superparticles and superstrings a dicult one.

to be able to split the fermionic constraints (2.31) into irreducible sets of rst and
second class constraints it has been proposed to enlarge the space of superparticle (and
superstring) variables with auxiliary bosonic spinor variables (twistors [77, 80][84, 27],
or lorentz harmonics [87],[88][94, 53]) and to use these variables to carry out a covariant
split of the constraints.

below we shall see that these auxiliary variables naturally appear in the doubly su-

persymmetric formulations of the superpbranes.

2.4 spinning superparticles

let us now make the next step and to construct particle models which would be invariant
under both the worldline (2.10) and the targetspace (2.19) supersymmetry transforma-
tions. the worldline of such a particle is a supersurface zm = (, ) embedded into the
target superspace z m = (x m, ). i.e. the particle trajectory is

z m (zm ) = z m (, ) = (x m(, ), (, )) ,

(2.33)

the brackets [, ] and {,} stand for commutation and anticommutation relations, respectively.

18

where the worldvolume supereld x m(, ) is the same as in (2.5) and

(, ) = ( ) + ( ).

(2.34)

we see that the grassmann spinor coordinate ( ) of the particle acquires a commuting
spinor superpartner ( ).

under worldline superreparametrizations (2.10) (, ) transforms as a scalar super-

eld

 = a( )  

1
2

( ),

 = a( )  

1
2

a( ) 

i
2

( ) .

(2.35)

the pullback onto the superworldline of the superinvariant forms e a = (e a,e ) (2.20)

takes the form

e (z(zm )) = dzme 
e a(z(z)) = dzme a

m (z(z)) = dzm m (z) = e
m (z(z))

0  + e

0d,

= e

0(cid:16) x a  i a(cid:17) + e

0(cid:16)dx a  id a(cid:17) ,

where we have expanded the target superforms in the at supervielbein basis (2.15) of
the superworldline.

note that the worldline spinor components of the superforms (2.36) are basic ones in
the sense that the  components can be constructed from the former by applying to the
components the covariant derivative d. we thus have

(2.36)

(2.37)

  = id (d) ,
 =  x a  i a
e a

= id(cid:16)dx a  id a(cid:17)  d ad.

therefore, it is sucient to use the basic components to construct doubly supersym-
metric actions.

it turns out that depending on which action (2.8), (2.23) or (2.24) is generalized
to acquire the second supersymmetry we get dierent doubly supersymmetric particle
models.

the second supersymmetrization of the actions (2.8) and (2.23) results in a same
doublysupersymmetric action which describes the dynamics of so called spinning super-
particles [67, 114].

to get this action we should, for example, simply replace dx m in (2.10) with the

basic component of the targetspace vector supervielbein pullback (2.36)

the resulting action is [67, 114]

 = dx a  id a.
e a

s = z d d

1
2ee a

 dea.

19

(2.38)

(2.39)

we shall not discuss the properties of the particle model described by the action (2.39).
the reader may nd the details in references [67, 114, 31]. we only mention that the rst
quantized spectrum of this particle is the direct product of the spectra of the corresponding
spinning particle (2.8) and superparticle (2.23). and this is the reason for the name
spinning superparticle.

for instance, in d=4 the rstquantized states of the spinning particle (2.8) have spin
1
2. the quantization of the n = 1, d = 4 massless superparticle results in states described
by a chiral supermultiplet (0, 1
2) which contains one complex scalar and one weyl spinor.
the direct product of these spectra ts into an n = 1, d = 4 chiral scalar (0, 1
2 ) and
vector ( 1
2, 1) supermultiplet. therefore, the rstquantized states of the d = 4 spinning
superparticle have two spins 0, two spins 1
2 and spin 1. this spin content is the same as
one described by an n = 2, d = 4 vector supermultiplet. the latter arises as a result
of the quantization of an n = 2, d = 4 superparticle [115]. the equivalence of the two
models was demonstrated in [114, 31].

we now turn to the construction of a doubly supersymmetric action which would
describe a particle model with the same physical content as the standard superparticle
model based on the actions (2.23) and (2.24), the role of the local worldline supersymmetry
being to substitute the symmetry.

2.5 worldline supereld actions for standard superparticles. the

superembedding condition.

we have seen that the number n of the independent symmetry transformations is half
the number of components of the grassmann spinor coordinates of the superparticle.
therefore, if a superparticle propagates in superspace with d bosonic and 2[ d
2 ] fermionic
directions, one should construct an n = 2[ d
2 ]1 worldline supersymmetric action for being
able to completely replace n symmetries with nextended worldline supersymmetry.
we shall see that such actions can be constructed for n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6 and 10 massless
superparticles. a particular property of these critical bosonic dimensions is that there
exists a twistorlike (cartanpenrose) representation of a lightlike vector in terms of
a commuting spinor. note that standard classical greenschwarz superstrings also exist
only in these dimensions [58, 1], which is implicitly related to the same fact. superparticles
(including massive ones as [34, 35]) and superstring models in other spacetime dimensions
can be obtained from these basic models by a dimensional reduction [38, 69].

let us rst consider the simplest case of an

2.5.1 n = 1, d = 3 superparticle and twistors

in this case the majorana spinor has two components and symmetry has only one inde-
pendent parameter. our goal is to identify the independent symmetry transformations

20

of (2.26) with the local worldline supersymmetry transformations (2.10). to this end we
write down a worldline supersymmetric version of the rstorder action (2.24)

s = z d d(cid:20)pae a

  l

2

pap a(cid:21) ,

(2.40)

where the worldline even supereld pa and the odd supereld e a
 are dened in eqs. (2.7)
and (2.38), respectively, and the lagrange multiplier supereld l(, ) is grassmann odd
for the second term of (2.40) to have the right grassmann parity.

by construction the action (2.40) is invariant under the worldline superreparamet-
rizations (2.10) and targetspace supersymmetry transformations (2.19), and it is also
invariant under fermionic transformations (2.26), where all variables are replaced by cor-
responding superelds, and d
d is replaced by the supercovariant derivative d. at the
rst glance it seems that we have not got rid of the symmetry since it appeared again
at the worldline supereld level. however, as we shall see, the second term of (2.40) is
unnecessary [38]. its role would be to produce a supereld generalization of the mass shell
condition (2.3), but, it turns out that eq. (2.3) follows already from the rst term of the
action (2.40). we therefore skip the second term. then the resulting action [27]

s = iz d dpae a

 = iz d dpahdx a  id ai

(2.41)

does not have any redundant symmetry, and, as we shall now demonstrate, is equivalent
to the standard superparticle action (2.24) in d = 3.

as we shall see in subsection 2.5.4.

in n = 1, d = 4, 6 and 10 target superspaces
the n = 1 worldsheet supereld action (2.41) also describes standard superparticles, since
then in addition to n = 1 worldsheet supersymmetry it has d  3 hidden local fermionic
symmetries.

note that the action (2.41) is of a topological chernsimons nature [32] since it
is invariant under the local worldline superreparametrizations but does not contain the
superworldline metric.

performing integration in (2.41) we get the following action for the components of

the superelds (2.5), (2.7) and (2.34)

s = z d pa( xa  i a  a) + iz d a(a  a).

(2.42)

the second term in (2.42) reads that a and a are auxiliary elds satisfying algebraic
equations

the equations of motion of xa and  are, respectively,

a = 0, a = a.

 pa = 0,

(paa)

  = 0.

21

(2.43)

(2.44)

they are the same as eqs. (2.25) yielded by the action (2.24). we should now show that
the mass shell condition (2.3) also follows from the action (2.42). this can be derived in
two ways.

the variation of (2.42) with respect to pa gives

from which it follows that

 |=0  xa  i a = a,
e a

abe a

 e b

|=0 = 0.

this is because the square of the r.h.s. of (2.45) is identically zero

due to a property of the matrices in d = 3

(a)(a)  0

(2.45)

(2.46)

(2.47)

(m)

(cm) + (m)

(cm) + (m)

(cm) = 0,

(2.48)

where c =  is the charge conjugation matrix which can be used to raise and lower
the spinor indices.

the identities (2.47) and (2.48) can be easily checked in the majorana representation

of the dirac matrices where the majorana spinor is real, and

(2.49)

c = 0 = 


1

0

1 0 
 ,

1 = 


0 1

1 0 
 ,

2 = 


0

1

0 1 
 .

the identity (2.48) also holds in d = 4, 6 and 10 spacetime dimensions, and the
eq.
(2.47) is valid in these dimensions for the majorana (or weyl), simplectic su(2)
majoranaweyl [117, 120] and the majoranaweyl spinors, respectively. as a conse-
quence of these identities any lightlike vector in these dimensions can be represented as
the bilinear combination of commuting spinors (2.45). such a representation is called the
cartanpenrose (or twistor) representation of the lightlike vector. note that its existence
in the special dimensions d = 3, 4, 6 and 10 is related to the existence of four division al-
gebras associated with real, complex, quaternionic and octonionic numbers, respectively,
(see [116], and [117, 118, 119] as nice reviews for physicists) which form an algebraic
basis for corresponding twistor constructions [76, 81]. in application to the superembed-
ding formulation of superparticles and superstrings these structures were exploited, for
example, in references [80, 81, 27, 29, 82, 83, 121].

let us now derive the cartanpenrose relation as a solution of the equation of motion

of 

if the matrix paa is nondegenerate the equations (2.44) and (2.50) are satised only when

(paa)

 = 0.

(2.50)

  = 0,

 = 0,

(2.51)

22

which (in virtue of (2.45)) leads to

 xm = 0.

such a solution describes a particle which is frozen in a single point of super spacetime (it
even does not evolve along the time direction x0). since this solution is physically trivial it
can be discarded by requiring that the components of  do not turn to zero simultaneously
. this requirement is in agreement with the denition of twistor variables [76] which are
commuting spinor variables parametrizing a projective space. then the eq. (2.50) has
nontrivial solutions if the matrix paa is degenerate, the general solution of (2.50) being

pa =

1

e( )

a,  papa = 0,

or, because of the matrix identity (2.48),

pa(ca) =

2

e( )

.

(2.52)

(2.53)

thus we have again arrived at the cartanpenrose representation of the lightlike vector.

comparing (2.52) with (2.45) we see that

pa =

1
e( )e a

 |=0 =

1

e( )

( xa  i a)

(2.54)

has the meaning of the superparticle canonical momentum as in the standard formulation
of subsection 2.3, and the multiplier e( ) can be identied with the worldline gravitation
eld.

one can notice that the cartanpenrose relation (2.52) establishes a onetoone cor-
respondence between the twocomponent commuting spinor  and the d = 3 lightlike
vector pa which also has two independent components. [the graviton e( ) is completely
auxiliary and can be gauge xed to a constant by the worldline reparametrizations (2.2).]
therefore, either pa or  can be considered as independent dynamical variables in
the phase space, and the number of physical degrees of freedom of the doubly supersym-
metric particle is the same as that of the standard superparticle. if we choose pa as an
independent variable then the independent equations of motion (2.44), (2.52) and (2.54)
of the dynamical variables pa, xa and  derived from the action (2.42) coincide with the
massless superparticle equations (2.25) and (2.3) yielded by the action (2.24). the local
worldline supersymmetry can be used to eliminate one (pure gauge) degree of freedom of
. all this testies to the classical equivalence of the two actions.

the only thing which remains to establish is the relationship of the worldline supersym-
metry and symmetry. for this consider the worldline supersymmetry transformations

note that in the standard formulation of relativistic particles this requirement is analogous to ex-

cluding the point e( ) = 0 from the solutions of the particle equations of motion (2.25).

23

(2.11), (2.12) and (2.35) of , , xa and pa, when the relations (2.43) for the auxiliary
elds a and a hold,

 = 

1
2

( ),

 =

( ),

i
2

xa =

i
2

a( ) = ia,

pa = 0.

(2.55)

(2.56)

(2.57)

without losing generality we can always replace the supersymmetry parameter ( ) with
the following expression

4i
( ) = 
e
where ( ) is an arbitrary grassmann spinor.

,

(2.58)

if we now substitute eq. (2.58) into (2.55) and (2.56) and take into account (2.53) we
shall see that the supersymmetry transformations become the symmetry transforma-
tions (2.26) for xa and .

it remains to derive the variation of the worldvolume eld e( ) (2.26).
to this end we make use of the relation (2.52), where e( ) appears in the formulation
under consideration, and observe that when a = 0, the particle momentum is invariant
(2.57) under the local supersymmetry transformations (2.12). for consistency we must
require that the r.h.s. of the cartanpenrose representation (2.52) of pa is also invariant
under the supersymmetry transformations. to show this we should nd the supersym-
metry variation of e( ) which cancels the variation of  (2.55). at this point we should
also take into account that  satises the equation of motion (2.44). this requirement is
justied by the fact that the worldline supersymmetry transformations relate the bosonic
kinematic equation (2.50), and its solution (2.52), (2.53), to the fermionic dynamical
equation (2.44). in view of (2.50) and (2.53) the general solution of (2.44) is

 =  ( ),

where ( ) is a grassmannodd worldline function.

then the required worldline supersymmetry variation of e( ) is

e( ) = ie( )( ) ( ).

(2.59)

(2.60)

substituting (2.58) in (2.60) we get the symmetry variation (2.26) of e( ).

therefore, fermionic symmetry is nothing but the worldline supersymmetry trans-
formations of the superparticle dynamical variables when the auxiliary eld components
of the corresponding worldline superelds are eliminated. the independent parameter
(or the supersymmetry parameter) is the (lorentzinvariant) projection of the spinorial
symmetry parameter onto the commuting spinor  (2.58).

24

the (irreducible) rst class fermionic constraint which generates n = 1 worldline

supersymmetry (and/or irreducible symmetry) is

d = 0,

{d, d} = 2ipm

m = 0,

(2.61)

where d was dened in (2.31).

this completes the proof of the classical equivalence of the doubly supersymmetric
model based on the action (2.41) and the standard superparticle (2.23), (2.24) in n = 1,
d = 3 superspace.

before going further it is worth mentioning the relation of the doubly supersymmetric
action (2.41) and (2.42) with twistor formulations of (super)particles [77, 80][31, 84, 86].
we have already observed similarity between the commuting spinor variables  and
twistors which manifests itself through the cartanpenrose relation between  and pm
(2.52).

if we consider  and not pm as independent dynamical variables we can replace pm
2   ) and dropping out

in (2.42) with . then hiding e( ) by redening  (e 1
the term with the fermionic auxiliary elds we get

s = z d a(cid:16) xa  i a(cid:17) .

(2.62)

this action is one on which the supertwistor formulation [77, 80, 81, 82] of superparticles in
spacetimes of dimension d = 3, 4, 6 and 10 is based. various versions of the supertwistor
formulation have been developed in a number of papers [80][86, 30, 100]. the doubly
supersymmetric formulation provides us with a natural link between the standard (2.23)
and the twistor description of superparticles.

2.5.2 onshell relationship between superparticles and spinning particles

we have seen that in the doubly supersymmetric formulation of superparticles the grass-
mann superpartners m of the particle coordinates xm are treated as auxiliary variables
expressed in terms of  and  (eq. (2.43)). note that the equation (2.43) can be re-
garded [46] as an odd counterpart of the cartanpenrose twistor relation (2.45), in fact,
they are worldline supersymmetry partners.

on the contrary, in the theory of spinning particles (section 2.2) m is a dynamical

(spin) variable obeying the equations

mpm = m( xm 

i
e

m) = 0,

m =

1
e

 xm +

e
2e

m,

(2.63)

(2.64)

which are yielded by the spinning particle action (2.16).

we shall now demonstrate that the equations (2.63) and (2.64) are equivalent to the

superparticle equations (2.44).

25

m =

1
e

m + m 

=

1
e

( xm 

i
e

m) + m .

 =

e
2e



(2.66)

(2.67)

 is found to be

by solving

remember that the solution of the fermionic equation in (2.44) is eq. (2.59). substi-
tuting (2.59) into the expression for the superparticle momentum (2.54) and taking into
account (2.43), i.e. that a = a, we have

pa =

1

e( )

( xa  i a) =

1

e( )

( xa  i a).

(2.65)

we see that in this form the superparticle momentum coincides with the spinning particle
momentum (2.18) if we take  = 1
e , both momenta satisfying the same equation of
motion pa = 0.

contracting (2.65) with a = a and taking into account the cartanpenrose rela-

tion (2.52) for pa we nd that the equation (2.63) is identically satised.

we now check that the solution m = m is compatible with the equation of motion
(2.64). for this take the time derivative of m. then, in view of (2.59), (2.52), (2.65) and
that we put  = 1

e , we get

pm =  (cid:18)1

m(cid:19) = 0.
e
hence, the last term in (2.66) is equal to e
2e m, and eq. (2.66) coincides with eq. (2.64).
we have shown that the dynamical variables of the n = 1, d = 3 superparticle and
the n = 1 spinning particle, and their equations of motion are related to each other by
the cartanpenrose (twistortransform) expressions (2.43) and (2.45)

pm =

1
e

m, m = m.

therefore, the doubly supersymmetric action (2.41) can be regarded as a master action
for both types of the particles. it provides us with superparticle or spinning particle equa-
tions of motion depending on whether the grassmann vector m or the spinor  is chosen
as an independent dynamical variable. the two particles are thus classically equivalent,
though quantum mechanically (as is well known) these are systems with dierent spectra
of states.

the onshell relationship between n = 1 superparticles and n = 1 spinning particles
[46, 47], and between n = 1 superstrings and n = 1 spinning strings [48, 49] holds also
in spacetime dimensions d = 4, 6 and 10. to demonstrate this relationship one should
gauge x all but one local worldsheet supersymmetries (or symmetries) of the target
space supersymmetric objects. the remaining local worldsheet supersymmetry is then

26

identied with n = 1 worldsheet supersymmetry of the corresponding spinning objects.
the commuting twistorlike spinors relate the dynamical variables of the two types of
models.

it is well known that the equivalence between d = 10 superstrings and d = 10
spinning strings extends to the quantum level so that the two models describe one and the
same quantum string theory, provided the nsr spinning strings have been gso-projected.
the twistor transform demonstrated above allows one to utilize useful properties of
both the greenschwarz and the nsr formulation to study the problem of covariant
quantization of superstring theory [54, 33, 48, 140, 55].

another example of quantum equivalent systems (which we have mentioned in sub-
section 2.4) is the equivalence between the free n = 1, n = 1 spinning superparticle and
the n = 2 superparticle in d = 4 [114].

2.5.3 the superembedding condition

we now return to the consideration of the action (2.41) and repeat its analysis directly
at the worldline supereld level with the purpose of getting the principal condition of the
superembedding of the particle superworldline into target superspace and to analyze its
properties.

the superembedding condition is derived by varying the action (2.41) with respect to
the supereld pa(, ), and it reads that the superparticle moves in target superspace in
such a way that the pullback of the targetspace supervielbein vector component along
the grassmann direction of the superworldline is zero

 = dx a  id a = 0.
e a

the consequence of eq. (2.68) is obtained by hitting (2.68) with the derivative d

 x a  i a  d ad = 0.

(2.68)

(2.69)

eq. (2.69) implies that the component of e a along the time direction of the worldline is
expressed in terms of the spinor components e  = d of the target space supervielbein
(2.36) along the grassmann direction of the worldline

 (, )   x a  i a = d ad.
e a

(2.70)

this is the supereld version of the cartanpenrose relation (2.45) which states that
e a
 (, ) is lightlike and, hence, the superparticle is massless.

the condition (2.70) is the only consequence of eq. (2.68) which one has in the case
under consideration. we see that the superembedding condition (2.68) itself does not lead
to the dynamical equations of motion of the superparticle (2.44). the supereld form of

27

the dynamical equations is obtained from the action (2.41) by varying it with respect to
x a and 

dpa = 0,

paad = 0.

(2.71)

therefore, in the case of the n = 1, d = 3 superparticle the superembedding condition
(2.44) prescribes the superparticle to be massless but does not completely dene its
classical dynamics. the classical equations of motion of the superparticle should be
derived separately, for example, from the action principle as above.

it turns out that the same situation holds for superparticles in n = 1, d = 4, 6 and

10 target superspaces.

2.5.4 n = 1, d = 4, 6, 10 superparticles

the symmetry of the n = 1, d = 4, 6, 10 superparticles has n = d  2 = 2, 4, 8
independent parameters, respectively. hence, to replace symmetry with local worldline
supersymmetry one should consider the embedding into n = 1, d = 4, 6, 10 target
superspace of a superworldline m1,n parametrized by the bosonic time variable  and
n = d  2 fermionic variables q (q = 1, ..., d  2).

note that, in general, one can consider doubly supersymmetric models in d = 4, 6 and
10 with the number n of worldvolume supersymmetries being less than d2. such models
also describe standard superbranes but with only part of the symmetries represented as
manifest nextended worldline supersymmetry, the other d2n symmetries remain-
ing hidden. in the case of superparticles and superstrings n = 1 doubly supersymmetric
formulations with n < d  2 are used for establishing the classical relationship between
spinning and super objects [46][49] as well as for superstring quantization [54, 140].

for instance, the n = 1 worldline supereld action (2.41) is also a consistent action
for standard n = 1, d = 4, 6, 10 superparticles, since it does possess additional fermionic
symmetries which complement the n = 1 worldline supersymmetry to n = d  2 
symmetries.

in the d = 4 case the additional symmetry transformations are

 = k(, )(5d), 5 = i0123,

(2.72)

x m = i m,

pa = 0,

where k(, ) = ( ) + b( ) is an n = 1 supereld parameter independent of the n = 1
supersymmetry parameter (, ) (2.10).

the bosonic component b( ) of k(, ) allows one to gauge away one of the four
real components of . the remaining three components correspond to three indepen-
dent components of the d = 4 lightlike vector m associated with the superparticle
momentum.

28

the appearance in (2.72) of the matrix 5 reects (in the language of the majorana
spinors) the presence of the complex structure inherent to the weyl representation of
the d = 4 spinors. (the symmetry with the parameter b( ) then becomes local u(1)
symmetry acting on weyl spinors ). this allows one to promote the second fermionic
symmetry (2.72) to the second manifest worldsheet supersymmetry by constructing an
n = 2 supereld action in n = 1, d = 4 superspace as an alternative to (2.41) (see
[27, 36, 38]).

in d = 6 the action (2.41) should possess 4 fermionic symmetries one of which is n = 1
worldline supersymmetry (2.10). to show how the other three look we should introduce
the notion of the su(2) simplectic majoranaweyl spinors (see [117, 120] for details). the
spinor index  = 1, ..., 8 splits into the su(2) index i = 1, 2 and the index  = 1, ..., 4 of
a fundamental representation of su(4)  so(1, 5). by denition the su(2) simplectic
majoranaweyl spinor satises a pseudoreality condition

i :=  

i = b 

jji,

(2.73)

where the matrix b is dened by the conditions

bmb1 = (m), bb = 1

and * denotes complex conjugation.

the 4  4 matrices m replace the d = 6 dirac matrices and are analogs of 2  2

matrices in d = 4. they are antisymmetric

then 3 hidden local fermionic symmetries of the action (2.41) in d = 6 are given by

 = m
m
.

(2.74)

i = ki(, )(i)i

jdj,

(2.75)

where (i)i
(2.72).

j (i = 1, 2, 3) are the su(2) pauli matrices. x a and pa are transformed as in

the commuting spinor i has now 8 real components. 5 of these components cor-
respond to ve independent components of a d = 6 lightlike vector (the particle mo-
mentum), and another three are to be pure gauge degrees of freedom. indeed, they are
eliminated by local su(2) transformations

i = bi ( )(i)i

jj

(2.76)

which are part of (2.75), where bi( ) = dki|=0.

the n = 4 supereld generalization of (2.41), which involves only one twistorlike
spinor i and makes the symmetries (2.75) manifest, was constructed in [36] by the use
of the harmonic superspace technique [87].

29

in the d = 10 case the situation becomes much more complicated since to furnish
all 8 fermionic symmetries of the action (2.41) in an irreducible form one should deal
with the nonassociative octonionic structure [29].
[a corresponding n = 8 octonionic
supereld action which would directly produce (2.42) is unknown]. however, it is possible
to write down a reducible set of transformations which complement the n = 1 local
supersymmetry (2.82) to eight independent fermionic symmetries of the action (2.41) in
the d = 10 case [30, 48]

 = (d ad)(ak)  2d(d k).

(2.77)

x m = i m.

the transformations (2.77) are reducible since the parameters k (, ) in the form

k = (aka)d, ka = k(d ad)

do not contribute to (2.77). it can be shown that the number of independent components
in k  is 7.

the fermionic superparameter k (, ) contains bosonic parameters which allow one
to eliminate 7 of the 16 components of , so that the remaining 9 components again
correspond to a lightlike d = 10 vector.

it is worth mentioning that the appearance in (2.72)(2.77) of extra bosonic gauge
transformations which reduce the number of independent components of  is related to
the well known fact that in d = 3, 4, 6 and 10 the commuting spinors (twistors) with
n = 2(d  2) = 2, 4, 8 and 16 components parametrize, respectively, s1, s3, s7 and
s15 spheres. (in each case one spinor component can be xed to be a constant by scale
transformations, which corresponds to worldline reparametrizations when these spinors
appear in particle models). these spheres are hopf brations (ber bundles) which are
associated with the division algebras r, c, h and o of the real, complex, quaternionic
and octonionic numbers. the bases of these ber bundles are, respectively, the spheres
s1, s2, s4 and s8, and the bers are the group manifolds z 2, s1 = u(1) and s3 = su(2),
and a sphere s7 (which is not a group manifold). the base spheres correspond to and are
parametrized (up to a scaling factor) by lightlike vectors (massless particle momenta) in
d = 3, 4, 6 and 10, respectively, and the bers correspond to pure gauge degrees of freedom
associated with additional gauge symmetries of the superparticle models discussed above.
we have thus shown that the n = 1 supereld action (2.41) is nonmanifestly 
symmetric in d = 3, 4, 6 and 10 spacetime dimensions and, hence, describes n = 1
superparticles. the generalization of the action (2.41) to a d = 2 worldsheet will describe
n = 1 d = 3, 4, 6, 10 tensionless superstrings.

as we have already mentioned there are dierent ways of constructing appropriate
(classically equivalent) manifestly n = d  2 worldline supersymmetric actions for n = 1

30

superparticles [27, 36] and n = 1 superstrings [28, 33, 34, 37] in d = 4 and 6 target super-
spaces which make use of complex and quaternionic (or harmonic) analyticity structure
inherent to these superspaces. however, the simplest way (and the only known one for
n = 1, d = 10 superparticles [58] and superstrings [33, 40]) is to write down a straight-
forward generalization of the action (2.41). for this we should dene an appropriate
geometry of an n = d  2 worldline superspace m1,n.

as in the case of n = 1 worldline superspace (2.10), (2.15) the supergeometry of m1,n
can always be chosen to be superconformally at. i.e. the worldline supervielbeins have
the form

e = e(, )e

0 = e(, )(d + iqdq),

eq = e

1

2 (, )dq  ie

0dqe

1

2 ,

q = 1,   , n

(2.78)

(indices p, q, r, s... from the end of the latin alphabet will be always reserved for a repre-
sentation of an internal group transformations of q). and one can again work with at
supervielbeins e

0 = dq and at supercovariant derivatives

0 and eq

dq =


q + iq ,

{dq, dr} = 2iqr .

(2.79)

for the worldline superdieomorphisms zm = zm (zn ) of the m1,n coordinates zm =
(, q) to preserve the conformal structure on m1,n they must be restricted to satisfy the
constraint

which implies that the odd supercovariant derivatives transform homogeneously under
the restricted superdieomorphisms

dq  irdqr = 0,

(2.80)

dq = dqrdr.

(2.81)

the innitesimal form of the superreparametrizations (restricted superdieomorphisms)
(2.80) is determined (as in eq. (2.10)) by a single unconstrained superparameter (, q)

 = (, )  1
q =  i
dq =  1

2dq,
dq + i

2

2 qdq,

4[dq, dr]dr.

(2.82)

in addition to the bosonic reparametrization parameter a( ) = |=0 and the world-
line supersymmetry parameter q( ) = idq|=0 the superfunction (, ) contains
parameters of local so(n) rotations bqr( ) = [dq, dr]|=0. the fermionic coordinates
q transform under an ndimensional representation of so(n). the so(n) indices are
raised and lowered by the unit matrix and hence there is no distinction between them.
let us embed the superworldline m1,n into n = 1, d = 4, 6, 10 target superspace. the
image of m1,n is described by the worldline superelds z m (zm ) = (x m(, q), (, q))
which now have many more components than in the n = 1 case

x m(, q) = xm( ) + iqm

q ( ) + ...,

(2.83)

31

(, q) = ( ) + q


q ( ) + ...,

(2.84)

where dots denote terms of higher orders in q.

the pullback onto m1,n of the targetspace supervielbeins (2.20) is
0  + eq

0dq,

e (z(zm )) = dzme 
e a(z(z)) = dzme a

m (z(z)) = dzm m (z) = e
m (z(z))

= e

0(cid:16) x a  i a(cid:17) + eq

0(cid:16)dqx a  idq a(cid:17)

(2.85)

we postulate that the dynamics of massless superparticles in dimensions d = 4, 6, 10

is governed by the superembedding condition similar to eq. (2.68)

q (z(z)) = dqx a  idq a = 0.
e a

(2.86)

let us analyze the consequences of (2.86). we shall see that (2.86) contains the mass
shell condition of massless superparticle dynamics, and that only the leading components
of the superelds (2.83) and (2.84) are independent, while all other components are aux-
iliary and expressed in terms of the leading components and their derivatives [33, 42].

taking the covariant derivative dr of (2.86), symmetrizing the result with respect to

the indices r and q and taking into account eq. (2.79) we get
qr( x a  i a) = dq adr,

(2.87)

where the r.h.s of (2.87) is automatically symmetric in q and r because of symmetry
properties of the matrices in d = 3, 4, 6 and 10.

from eq. (2.87) it follows that

 (zm ) =  x a  i a =
e a

dq adq,

1

d  2

dq adr =

qrds ads.

1

d  2

(2.88)

(2.89)

and



the condition (2.88) is analogous to (2.70), and (2.89) is an additional one. it, in par-
ticular, restricts the number of independent components of the n = d  2 commuting
spinors 
 determined in (2.88)
is lightlike. to check this one should simply convince oneself that the square of the r.h.s.
of (2.88) is identically zero due to the properties (2.48) of the matrices and by virtue
of the relation (2.89).

q = dq|=0 in the supereld (2.84) in such a way that e a

hence, the superparticle with the superworldline embedding specied by the condition

(2.86) is massless.

we shall now show that the superembedding condition (2.86) completely determines
the higher components of the superelds (2.83) and (2.84) in terms of their leading com-
ponents xm and  up to bosonic local worldline reparametrizations and local so(d  2)
rotations (2.82).

32

to this end one should prove that because of eq. (2.89) the number of independent
components of the bosonic matrix dq is equal (up to the so(d  2) rotations) to the
number of the independent components of the lightlike vector e a

 (2.88).

the vector e a

 has (up to  reparametrizations) n = d  2 independent components

and parametrizes an snsphere. indeed, the condition e a

 e b

 ab = 0 implies that

(e d1



)2 +

i=d2

xi=1

 )2 = (e 0
(e i

 )2  ( x 0  i 0)2,

(2.90)

where i stands for d  2 transverse spatial directions and 0 denotes the time component
of the vector. the r.h.s. of (2.90) can be put to 1 by gauge xing, in an appropriate way,
the worldline bosonic a( )reparametrizations contained in (2.82) of x 0 (2.11). thus the
remaining d  1 spatial components of the lightlike velocity e a
 , among which d  2 are
independent, parametrize an snsphere.

the matrix dq has 2(d  2)2 components, since the spinor representations which
2 (d  2)(d  3) + 1 com-
we choose in d = 3, 4, 6 and 10 have dimension 2(d  2).
ponents of this matrix can be eliminated by the use of so(d  2) rotations and a( )
reparametrizations (2.82), since dq carries the so(d  2) index and dq transforms
homogeneously under nite worldline reparametrizations and so(d  2) rotations

1

dq(z) = dqrdr(z).

(2.91)

one can derive eq. (2.91) from the nite extension (2.80) of the worldline superreparametriza-
tions (2.82).

note that dqr satises the same dierential conditions as dq, i.e.

{ds, dq}r 

2i

d  2

sq




r = 0,

(2.92)

and algebraic constraints

dqrdsr + dsrdqr =

1

d  2

qsdtrdtr,

(2.93)

which resemble the integrability condition (2.89). the conditions (2.93) are, in fact, the
integrability conditions of the constraint (2.80) for the worldline superreparametrizations
to preserve the conformally at geometrical structure of the superworldline.

this guarantees that 1

2(d  2)(d  3) + 1 components of dq can be gauged away

by appropriate so(d  2)rotations and a( )reparametrizations.
2(d  2)(d  3)  1 = 1

we thus remain with 2(d  2)2  1

2(d  2)(3d  5)  1

components.

from (2.89) it follows that eq. (2.88) holds for each value of the index q separately
(without the factor n = d 2 on the r.h.s.). this means that (d 1)(d 2) components
of dq are expressed in terms of d  1 components of the lightlike vector. thus the

33

number of components of the matrix dq still remaining undetermined is 1
5)  1  (d  1)(d  2) = 1

2(d  1)(d  2)  1.

2(d2)(3d

we now show, following the nice reasoning of refs. [39], that these remaining compo-

nents are restricted to be zero by the algebraic equations (2.89).

let us consider a particular form of the matrices, which corresponds to a choice
of lightcone coordinates in ddimensional target space. this breaks manifest lorentz
symmetry so(1, d  1) of the target space down to its subgroup so(1, 1)  so(d  2).
(we have already made a lightcone splitting of the components of a lightlike vector when
we analyzed the geometrical meaning of the masslessness condition (2.90)).

further on, the case of spacetime dimension d = 6 should be handled separately,
since there are no majorana spinors in this dimension and we deal instead with su(2)
simplectic majoranaweyl spinors (2.73). the choice of an appropriate realization of the
d = 6 matrices diers from that in d = 3, 4 and 10 spacetime dimensions. anyway,
the d = 6 analysis can be performed along exactly the same lines and gives the same
results as the analysis of the d = 4 and d = 10 case below, and we leave it for the reader
as an exercise.

in the dimensions d = 3, 4, and 10 in the majorana representation the matrices

(ca) are symmetric and can be chosen as follows

c0 = 


1 0

0 1 
 ,

ci = 


0

(i)t

i

0 
 ,

cd1 = 


0

1

0 1 
 ,

(2.94)

where i
qq are spinor matrices in a (d  2)dimensional space (d = 3, 4, 10) associated
with the space transverse to the particle trajectory. the indices i = 1, ..., d  2, q =
1, ..., d  2 and q = 1, ..., d  2 are indices, respectively, of the vector and two (generally
nonequivalent) spinor representations of the group so(d  2) of transformations acting
in this space. for so(d  2) we use the same indices q, r, ... as for the worldline internal
group so(n) (n = d  2), since in an appropriate gauge both groups are identied, as
we shall see in a minute.

when d = 4 the transverse space is twodimensional. the group of transverse rota-

tions is so(2), and it has one 2dimensional spinor representation.

in the case of d = 10 the 16 16 matrices (2.94) which act on the 16component real
majoranaweyl spinors are analogs of d = 4 matrices rather than the dirac matrices
which are 32  32 matrices in d = 10 (see, for example, [45] for details on d = 10
and d = 11 matrices). the transverse space is now 8dimensional, and so(8) has
one vector and two dierent spinor representations, all three being related by a famous
triality property, which shows up in properties of octonions [118, 119].

in the basis (2.94) the matrix e
e



q = dq splits into two (d  2)  (d  2) matrices
q = dq = (e r
(2.95)

q ,e r
q ),



34

and the eqs. (2.89) take the form

e t
qe t
r =

1

d  2
q =

s

qre t
se t
2

d  2
qre t
s e t
s .

q i
e s

sse s

sse s
1

r i
r + e s
e t
q e t

r =

d  2

tte t
si
qre t

s

(2.96)

(2.97)

(2.98)



to proceed with the analysis of eqs. (2.96)(2.98) we should rst require that the
matrix e
q has the maximum rank d  2. this requirement is of the same nature as one
which we introduced in the case of the n = 1, d = 3 superparticle (subsection 2.5.1)
when, to discard an unphysical frozen particle solution, we assumed that all components
of the commuting spinor  cannot be equal to zero simultaneously.

when the rectangular matrix e

maximum rank is equivalent to the requirement that the determinant of either e r
is nonzero.


q is split as in (2.95) the requirement for it to have the
q or e r

q

from (2.96) and (2.98) we see that e r

q and e r

q

properties of the orthogonal matrices so(d  2). hence, if, for example, dete r
can use the worldline transformations (2.91) to gauge x e 

q to be the unit matrix

satisfy (up to a normalization) the
q 6= 0, we

q = dqr = r
e r
q .

(2.99)

it identies the so(d  2) group of
the meaning of this gauge condition is twofold.
superworldline transformations with the subgroup so(d 2) of the target space lorentz
group so(1, d  1), and it identies half of the target space grassmann coordinates
 = (r, r) with the grassmann coordinates of the superworldline

r = qr

q  r|=0 = r( ) = 0.

(2.100)

thus, half of the target space supersymmetries are identied with worldsurface supersym-
metry. it is this half of the supersymmetries of the target space vacuum which remain
unbroken in the presence of superbranes.

the condition (2.99), (2.100) is the superworldsheet counterpart of the lightcone
condition (0 + d1) = 0 often used in the standard formulation of superparticles and
superstrings to gauge x the symmetry [1].

in the gauge (2.99) the condition (2.96) is identically satised and eq. (2.97) takes the

form

qqe q
i

r + i

rqe q

q =

2

d  2

qri

sqe q
s .

(2.101)

it can be easily checked that the general solution of (2.101) in the dimensions d2 = 2

and 8 is

qqvi(z),

eqq = i
35

(2.102)

where vi(z) is an so(d  2)vector supereld. then eq. (2.98) is identically satised.

substituting the expressions (2.99) and (2.102) for e 

into (2.88) we nd that the
vector v i coincides with the (independent) transverse components of the lightlike particle
velocity e a

 (2.90)

q

 + e d1
e 0



= 1,

e 0
  e d1



= v iv i,

e i
 = v i.

(2.103)

we have thus proved that, up to the worldline superreparametrizations, the integra-
bility conditions (2.88) and (2.89) of the superembedding condition (2.86) completely
q = dq in terms of the components of
express the components of the spinor matrix e 
 =  x a i a.  then from the form of (2.86), (2.102) and (2.103) it follows that
e a
(up to the worldline superreparametrizations) all higher components of the superelds
x a(z) and (z) are expressed through their leading components which are dynamical
variables in the superparticle model. this is a remarkable property of the superembed-
ding condition given the large number of the components which constitute the worldline
superelds when, for instance, d = 10 and the number of superworldline grassmann
coordinates is n = 8.

it implicitly follows from the solution (2.102) and (2.103) of the integrability conditions
(2.88) and (2.89) that the superembedding condition does not contain the dynamical
equations of motion (2.44) of the physical particle variables xm( ) and ( ), i.e.  xm and
  remain unrestricted. hence again, as in the case of the n = 1, d = 3 superparticle,
to completely determine the classical dynamics of the superparticle one should construct
an action from which the dynamical equations of motion are derived.

the straightforward generalization of the action (2.41) which produces the superem-

bedding condition is

q = iz d dd2p q
s = iz d dd2p q
ae a

a hdqx a  idq ai .

(2.104)

a dierence between eqs. (2.104) and (2.41) is that now p q
a (, ) is a grassmannodd
supereld for the action (2.104) to be grassmanneven. an appropriate variation of p q
a
ensures the invariance of eq. (2.104) under the worldline superreparametrizations.

the component of p q

a associated with the particle momentum is

pa = q1...qd2dq1...dqd3p a

qd2|=0,

(2.105)

which can be seen from a corresponding term in the component action obtained by inte-
grating (2.104) over . in (2.105) q1...qd2 is the totally antisymmetric unit tensor.

we have seen that the independent components of the matrix e 

q parametrize the sphere sd2.
in subsection 4.4 we shall demonstrate that this sphere can be realized as a compact subspace of a
2(d  2)dimensional coset space
q are associated with
lorentzharmonic variables in a spinor representation of so(1, d  1).

so(1,1)so(d2) , and that the components of e 

so(1,d1)

36

the superembedding condition is obtained by varying the action (2.104) with respect
a . and the variations of (2.104) with respect to x a(z) and (z) result in the

to p q
supereld equations

dqp q

a = 0,

p q
a adq = 0,

(2.106)

which (as one can check) contain the dynamical equations (2.44) for the superparticle
variables xm( ) and ( ).

to complete the proof that the action (2.104) describes standard massless superpar-
ticles we should convince ourselves that the supereld p q
a (z) does not contain any extra
independent dynamical variables (which would otherwise mean that the model has redun-
dant degrees of freedom).

to show this one should notice that the number of independent components of p q

a (z)
substantially reduces because of an additional local invariance of the action (2.104) with
respect to the following transformations of p q

a [39]

p q

a = dr(qrsads),

(2.107)

where the tensorial parameter qrs
each pair of the indices q, r, s.

 (z) is totally symmetric and traceless with respect to

then, by analyzing the equations (2.106), it can be shown that the components of
the supereld p q
a (z) can either be gauged away by independent local transformations
contained in (2.107) or are expressed in terms of components of dq. the reader may
nd the details of this analysis in the references [39, 40].

in particular, we again get the superparticle equations of motion (2.44) and the

cartanpenrose representation of the superparticle momentum (2.105)

qrpa =

1

e( )

dq adr|=0 =
1

 qar =

d  2

1

e( )

qar 

qr

sas.

(2.108)

coordinates
when the auxiliary elds are eliminated the worldline supersymmetry transformations

of the remaining elds take the form

 = q( )q,

q = iq ,

taking q( ) =  2(d2)i
(paa)

e

xa = ia,

pa = 0.

q( ) and using the relation (2.108) which implies

 =

1

e( )(d  2)

qaq(a)

 =

1

e( )


q

q

we again recover the symmetry transformations (2.26).

37

(2.109)

(2.110)

(2.111)

note that in general the expansion of the symmetric matrix 

q 


q in the basis of

matrices has additional terms, for instance, in d = 10



q 


q =

1
16

(qaq)


a +

1

16  5!

(qa1...a5q)(a1...a5),

(2.112)


a are the same as in eq. (2.94) but have the vector index down and the spinor

where 
indices up. (actually, 


a are inverse of (ca)).

in our case the terms with the antisymmetrized product of the matrices vanish

qa1...a5q = 0

(2.113)

because of the condition (2.108) on the commuting spinors, which can be proved using
the results of the analysis of the equations (2.89), (2.95)(2.102). the same happens in
the dimensions d = 4 and 6.

this completes the demonstration that the worldline supereld action (2.104) based
on the superembedding condition (2.86) describes massless superparticles propagating in
at n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6 and 10 target superspaces.

2.6 coupling to supersymmetric maxwell elds

so far we have dealt with free superparticle models. we will now consider how the
interaction of superparticles with abelian gauge elds is described in the superembedding
approach [39].

when supersymmetric gauge theory is formulated in superspace the gauge superpo-
tential am (x, ) = (am, a) is subject to constraints (see, for instance, [123, 124, 125, 126]
and references therein). this is done to eliminate redundant elds (especially those of
higher spins) in the component expansion of the supereld am (x, ). the constraints are
imposed on the eld strength of am (x, ) which is a target space twoform

f (2) =

1
2

dz n dz m fm n =

1
2

dz n dz m (m an  ()m n n am ).

(2.114)

fm n is grassmannantisymmetric, i.e. it is antisymmetric when one or both indices are
bosonic (of parity 0) and symmetric when both indices are fermionic (of parity 1). (in
eq. (2.114) and below the wedge product of external dierentials and forms is implied.
the external dierential is assumed to act on the dierential forms from the right, i.e.
d(p q) = p dq + (1)qdp q for a pform p and a qform q).

we shall also use the expansion of the forms in the supervielbein basis such as (2.20)

where

f (2) =

1
2e be afab,

fab = ()m (b+n )e m

a e n

b fm n

38

(2.115)

(2.116)

and e m

a is the supervielbein matrix inverse to e a = dz me a
m .

the constraints are imposed on components of the eld strength. the essential con-

straint being generic to all superyangmills theories in any spacetime dimension is

f = 0.

(2.117)

constraints on other components of fab are obtained from the consistency of the bianchi
identities df (2) = 0 with the constraint (2.117). we thus get that

fa = w(a)



,

(2.118)

where w(z) is a spinorial supereld.

in the case of n = 1, d = 10 superyangmills theory the consistency of the bianchi
identities in the presence of the constraint (2.117) also implies the equations of motion
for the elds of the sym supermultiplet, i.e. the constraint (2.117) puts d = 10 sym on
the mass shell [126, 95].

in [95] it was observed that symmetry of the action of the superparticle coupled
to the supermaxwell eld am requires that the maxwell eld is integrable along the
lightline trajectories of the superparticle, i.e.
that its eld strength is zero along the
superparticle trajectories. this takes place if the gauge eld obeys the constraint (2.117).
thus symmetry demands that the gauge eld superbackground is constrained.

in the superembedding formulation lightlike integrability means that the pullback of
the eld strength fab onto the superworldline satisfying the superembedding condition
(2.86) vanishes [39].
the pullback is

where e a

a = (e a

 ,e a

q ) are dened in (2.85).

taking into account (2.86) and (2.87) we have

fab = e a

ae b

b fab,

(2.119)

(2.120)

(2.121)


r f,

fqr = e 
q e
1


q f +

eraere


q fa.

d  2

f q = e 
 e

we observe that the components (2.120) and (2.121) vanish, and, hence,

fab = 0  fm n = m z n n z m (m an  ()m n n am ) = 0

(2.122)

if the supermaxwell eld satises the constraints (2.117) and (2.118).

on the other hand, using the properties of e b

can be shown that fab = 0 implies the supermaxwell constraints.

a discussed in the previous subsection it

the condition (2.122) can also be regarded as an additional superembedding condition

when the gauge eld superbackground in target superspaces is nontrivial.

39

we would like to get this condition (2.122) from a superparticle action. so we extend
the free superparticle action (2.104) by an appropriate maxwell coupling term. the
extended action is

q +z d dnp m (m z m am  m ),
s = iz d dnp q
ae a

(2.123)

where n = d 2, p m (z) is a lagrange multiplier and (z) is an auxiliary superworldline
eld.

the action (2.123) is invariant under abelian gauge transformations a = d(z) pro-
vided (z) transforms under the pullback of (z) as a goldstone eld (z) = (z(z)).

the condition (2.122) arises as the integrability condition of the equation of motion

s
p m = m z m am  m  = 0.

the variation of the action (2.123) with respect to  yields the equation

whose general solution is

m p m = 0,

p m = l lm +

1
n!

q1...qnq1....qnm

 e,

(2.124)

(2.125)

(2.126)

where e is a constant and lm (z) is an arbitrary grassmann antisymmetric supereld.

the eld lm (z) is a pure gauge if the action (2.123) is invariant under the following

transformations of p m

p m = llm ,

(2.127)

the variation of the action (2.123) under (2.127) is

where lm (z) = ()lm m l(z).
s = z d dnabfab = z d dnab(e 
ae
the last term in (2.128) contains e a
q and hence can be compensated by an appropriate
variation of the lagrange multiplier p q
a in (2.123), while the rst two terms must vanish if
(2.127) is a symmetry of the action. this implies the supermaxwell constraints (2.117)
and (2.118).

bf + 2e a
ae

(2.128)





bfa + e a

ae b

bfab).

using the symmetry (2.127) one reduces the solution for p m to the last term in
(2.126). then substituting this term back into the action (2.123) we get the standard
minimal coupling maxwell term

sm = ez d z m am ,

(2.129)

where e plays the role of the electric charge. thus in the superembedding formulation
the electric charge arises as an integration constant of an auxiliary superworldline eld.
below we shall see that the string tension appears in the superembedding approach in a
similar way.

this is analogous to how gauge coupling constants appear in kaluzaklein theories upon integrating

out extra compact directions.

40

2.7 superembedding into curved superspaces

consider now the propagation of superparticles in curved n = 1 target superspaces
of bosonic dimension d = 3, 4, 6 and 10. then the super poincare transformations of
z m = (x m, ) are extended to the targetspace superdieomorphisms

zm = zm (z).

the at supervielbeins e a (2.20) are generalized to curved supervielbeins

ea = dz m ea

m (z),

(2.130)

(2.131)

whose leading components correspond to the target space graviton ea
the gravitino 

m(x) = e

m(x) = ea

m|=0 and

m|=0.

parallel transport of (spin)tensors in curved target superspace is determined by a
m b taking values in the algebra of the tangent space

b = dz m  a

connection oneform  a
group which is the lorentz group so(1, d  1).

the geometry of curved superspace is characterized by its torsion

ea  (dea + eb a

b )  t a =

1
2

ecebt a

bc,

and curvature

r a

b = d a

b +  c

b  a
c ,

(2.132)

(2.133)

where  = d +  is the covariant external dierential in the curved target superspace.

the superembedding condition (2.86) is now imposed on the superworldline pullback

of ea

ea(z(z)) = e

0(z) z m ea

m + eq

0(z)dqz m ea

m  eb

0 ea

b

and takes the form

q (z(z))  dqz m ea
ea

m = 0.

(2.134)

(2.135)

the worldline supereld action which produces (2.135) has the same form as eq.

(2.104) but with e a

q replaced by ea
q

s = iz d dd2p q
a ea
q .

(2.136)

this action is manifestly invariant under the targetspace superdieomorphisms and su-
perworldline restricted superdieomorphisms (2.82). for consistency it must also be in-
variant under local variations of p q

a which generalize the transformations (2.107)

p q

b = (a

b dr +  a

rb )(qrsaes),

(2.137)

where es stands for e
traceless with respect to the each pair of indices q, r, s.

s = dsz m e

m , and remember that qrs is totally symmetric and

41

the variation of (2.136) under (2.137) is

s =

i

2 z d dd2(qrsbes)(cid:18)e

q e


r t b

 + 2ea

q ea

aa(cid:19) ,
r t b

(2.138)

where t a

ba are components of the target superspace torsion (2.132).

the last term of (2.138) can be canceled by the following variation of p q
a

p q

a = ()a(qrsbes)ea

r t b

aa,

and the rst term of (2.138) must vanish, which requires the constraint on the targetspace
torsion

t a
 = 2i(ca).

(2.139)

this is the basic constraint of the supereld formulation of supergravity in any dimension
[123, 124, 127, 128, 129]. note that the at superspace torsion (2.21) is compatible with
this constraint.

to conclude subsections 2.6 and 2.7 we remark that in the superembedding formulation
the constraints on gauge eld and target space superbackgrounds are not a requirement
of local worldsheet fermionic symmetry (as in the standard approach) but of additional
local symmetries of the action under variations of the lagrange multipliers which ensure
the superembedding conditions.

in this regard it is worth mentioning that the case of the n = 1, d = 3 superparticle
is a special one. the n = 1 worldline supersymmetry action in d = 3 supergravity and
supermaxwell background can be constructed in such a way that maxwell coupling is
described by the standard minimal coupling term

sn =1,d=3 = iz d dhpadz m ea

m + edz m ami .

(2.140)

in contrast to the standard symmetry formulation (2.23), in the form (2.140) the n = 1,
d = 3 superparticle action does not have any local symmetries which would require the
targetspace and gauge eld background to satisfy the constraints (2.117) and (2.139). in
this case the constraints should be imposed by hand at the level of equations of motion.

3 superstrings

we now turn to the consideration of superstrings in the superembedding approach, but
rst let us recall standard forms of the superstring action.

3.1 greenschwarz formulation

in this formulation (see [58, 1] for details) superstring dynamics is described by the em-
bedding into a target superspace of a bosonic twodimensional worldsheet parametrized

42

by coordinates m = (, ). the requirement of targetspace supersymmetry of the super-
string action restricts the possible dimensions of the target superspace in which classical
superstrings can propagate to d = 2, 3, 4, 6 and 10 bosonic dimensions and 2n(d  2)
real fermionic spinor dimensions (where n = 1, 2 counts the number of spinors). to avoid
dealing with boundary terms, in what follows we restrict ourselves to the discussion of
closed superstrings.

the intrinsic geometry of the worldsheet is described by the zweibein

ea() = dmea

m()

where a = 0, 1 are so(1, 1) vector indices of the tangent space.

below we shall also often use the lightcone basis

e++() = e0 + e1,

e() = e0  e1,

(3.1)

(3.2)

where (++,) stand for so(1, 1) lightcone vector components. we reserve a single
(+,) for lightcone components of worldsheet spinors.

in the lightcone basis the d = 2 minkowski metric takes the form

++, = ,++ = 

1
2

,

++,++ = , = 0,

so that

the worldsheet metric is

e = 

1
2

e++,

e++ = 

1
2

e.

gmn() = ea

m()ean() = 

1

2 (cid:16)em e++

m (cid:17) ,
n + en e++

and

det gmn  g = (det ea

m)2,

det ea

m =

1
2

mnem e++

n

(3.3)

(3.4)

(3.5)

(3.6)

(01 = 10 = 1, 00 = 11 = 0).

the pullback of the targetspace supercovariant forms (2.20) onto the worldsheet is

e a = dme a

m = dm(cid:16)mxm  im
e i = dme i

imi(cid:17) a

m = ea(cid:16)daxm  ida
 = eadai
 ,

m = dmmi

where

imi(cid:17) a

m,

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

a () is the inverse of ea

and em
m). the index i = 1, 2 indicates that
the number of coordinates can be 1 or 2 depending on whether we deal with n = 1 or
n = 2 target superspace.

m() (i.e. em

da  em
a ()ea

a ()m,

n() = n

for simplicity we again work in at target superspace.

43

the n = 2 greenschwarz superstring action is

s = 

t

2 z d2ggmne a
nab + t z b(2)(),
me b
2dmdnmz n nz m b(2)

where t is the string tension and b(2)() = 1
sheet pullback of the target superspace twoform

(3.10)

m n (z) is the world-

b(2) = idxa(d1a1  d2a2) + d1a1d2a2.

(3.11)

the physical meaning of b(2) is that, for instance, in d = 10 it describes a at
limit of the neveuschwarz twoform gauge eld in the supereld formulation of d = 10
supergravity. as we see from the action (3.10), the strings couple minimally to b(2), and
the string tension is associated with the b(2)charge.

the b(2) term in (3.10) is called the wesszumino term since it is an integral of an
external dierential form which does not contain the worldsheet metric and is invariant
under the target space supersymmetry transformations (2.19) only up to a total derivative
(and only in d = 3, 4, 6 and 10 where the dirac matrices satisfy eq. (2.48)).

the denite relative coecient between the two terms of the action (3.10) is required
by symmetry. the symmetry transformations of the superstring dynamical variables
are

where p mn



i = 2imim(), m  e a
ma
xm = ii mi  z me a
1nl1 + p ml

(ggmn) = 16g(cid:16)p ml



m = 0,

+ 2nl1(cid:17) ,

are projectors

p mn



p mn
 =
gnlp lm



1
2

(gmn 

1

g

mn),

= p mm

, p mn

gnlp lm

= 0,







and the parameters i

m () (i = 1, 2) are (anti)selfdual worldsheet vectors

1m = p mn



1
n,

2m = p mn

+ 2
n.

in the lightcone basis (3.2) the components of i are

1


= em


1
m,

2
++ = em

++2
m;

1
++ = 0,

2


= 0.

(3.12)

(3.13)

(3.14)

(3.15)

the dynamical equations of motion of the superstring are obtained by varying (3.10)

with respect to () and xm()

mhg(cid:16)gmnnxm + 2ip mn
 n

mp mn
mp mn

 n1 = 0,
+ n2 = 0,
2m2(cid:17)i = 0.

1m1 + 2ip mn

+ n

44

(3.16)

varying the action (3.10) with respect to the worldsheet metric we get

1
2

gmn(cid:16)glpe a
pab(cid:17) = e a
me b
l e b

nab  gmn.

(3.17)

rewritten in the lightcone basis eqs. (3.17) take the form of the virasoro constraints

e a
ea = 0,

e a
++e++a = 0.

(3.18)

from eqs. (3.17) it also follows that the intrinsic worldsheet metric gmn can be iden-
nab induced by embedding into the target

tied with the worldsheet metric gmn = e a
superspace

me b

gmn =

gmn.

(3.19)

1

g

1

g

the two metrics can be made equal by gauge xing the invariance of the action (3.10)
under the weyl rescaling of gmn (gmn  ()gmn).

using (3.19) we can eliminate the metric gmn from the superstring action and rewrite

it in the nambugoto form

s = t z d2qdetgmn + t z b(2)().

(3.20)

it is instructive to note that in this form of the superstring action it is more natural
m () of the symmetry

to replace the (anti)selfdual worldsheet vector parameters i
transformations (3.12) with worldsheet scalar parameters

which satisfy the condition

i()  2i(cid:16)mim(cid:17)

,

i =

1
2

(1 + )i

j j ,

where 1

2(1 + ) is the spinor projection matrix

1
2

(1 + )

1
2

(1 + ) =

(1 + ),

1
2

(3.21)

(3.22)

(3.23)

 =

1

2 det gmn

m1m2m1m2k,
0 1 
kij = 
0
 ,


1

()2 = 1, t r = 0,

and, as in (3.12), m = e a
matrices.

ma denes the worldsheet pullback of the target space dirac

eq.

(3.22) implies that, again as in the case of the superparticles, the number of
independent transformations is half the number of components of  and is equal to
n(d  2).

45

the property (3.22) of the parameters (3.21) can be checked using the (anti)self
m (3.14) where in the projectors (3.13) the metric gmn is replaced by gmn

duality of i
.

following our strategy we would like to replace the symmetry transformations with
local supersymmetry transformations. in the case of the n = 2 superstrings the world-
sheet supersymmetry transformations should be parametrized by n = d  2 worldsheet
chiral and n = d  2 antichiral majoranaweyl fermionic parameters, which can be
denoted as (n, n)supersymmetry.

in the case of the n = 1 superstrings (when one of the coordinates in (3.10) is
put to zero) the worldsheet supersymmetry should be of a heterotic type (n, 0) and have
n = d  2 chiral or antichiral parameters. the reason why in the n = 1 case the
worldsheet supersymmetry associated with symmetry should have the heterotic (chiral)
structure is that in this case there is only one symmetry parameter which is either the
antiselfdual (antichiral) or selfdual (chiral) worldsheet vector (see eq. (3.13)(3.15)).
to realize local supersymmetry on the worldsheet we should extend the latter to a
supersurface m2;n,n parametrized by two bosonic coordinates m = (, ) and n(d  2)
real fermionic coordinates q = (q, +q) (where  = , + are the spinor (chirality)
indices in the lightcone basis and q, q = 1, ..., n are indices of internal so(d  2) group
transformations which can be independent for  and +). thus real q satisfy the d = 2
weyl condition

q = 01q = 3q,

(3.24)

where a (a = 0, 1) and 3 are d = 2 dirac matrices which can be chosen to have the form
of (2.49).

in the next subsection we consider the superembedding of a superworldsheet which

describes n = 1 superstrings.

3.2 doubly supersymmetric n = 1 superstrings

to describe the embedding of a supersurface m2,n with d=2 bosonic coordinates m =
(, ) and n = d  2 real fermionic coordinates q into n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6, 10 target
superspace we should rst specify the geometrical properties of m2,n appropriate for the
description of the superstrings.

as in the case of the superparticles, we would like to make life as simple as possi-
ble and to deal with an m2,n geometry which would be almost at and, at the same
time, preserved by restricted worldsheet superdieomorphisms containing unrestricted
d = 2 local reparametrizations m = am(, ) and local supersymmetry transforma-

 note that the parameters in the form (3.21), (3.22) can also be used directly in (3.12). this would
lead to a more complicated form of a redened variation of the intrinsic metric gmn. see [9] for details
on this form of transformations in the case of a supermembrane.

46

tions q = q(, ). in d = 2 superspaces this can always be achieved starting from
the most general form of the supervielbeins, imposing suitable (supergravity) constraints
on the superworldsheet torsion and restricting the number of independent supervielbein
components by partially gauge xing the general worldsheet superdieomorphisms [122].

a suitable choice of m2,n geometry is as follows.
the constraints on the torsion t a = 1

2ecebt a

bc  dea(z) (where the covariant exter-

nal dierential d = a

bd +  a

b (z) contains a tangent space connection) are

t 
q,r = iqr,
the worldsheet supervielbeins ea(z) are

t ++ = 0.

(3.25)

ea(zm ) = (cid:16)dm  idqem

eq(zm ) = dq,

q(z)(cid:17) ea

m(z),

(3.26)

and the supercovariant derivatives da (which form the tangent basis dual to (3.26)) are

d++ = em

1
n

dqem

q(z)m,

++(z)m, d =
dq = q + iem

q(z)m,

(3.27)

(3.28)

++(z) and 1

where em
vielbein in the lightcone basis

n dqem

q(z) form the vectorvector components of the inverse super-

(cid:16)em



so the supervielbein matrix is

, em

++(cid:17) = (cid:18) 1

n

dqem

q, em

++(cid:19) .

(3.29)

(3.30)

(3.31)

and its inverse is

e a

m = 

a = 


e m

ea
m
rr
mem



iea

0
q





em
a
iem
q

0

q


 ,

note that em

++ can be transformed to the component m

++ of the unit matrix by ap-
propriate tangent space transformations em
++, and hence
e++
m , are completely auxiliary. this allows one to consider an even simpler form [40] of
supervielbeins and covariant derivatives (3.26)(3.31). however, we prefer to keep em
++
 (at q = 0) they are identied with the components of
arbitrary since together with em
the worldsheet zweibein (3.1)(3.5).

a . therefore, em

++ = l a

++(z)em

in accordance with the torsion constraints (3.25) the supercovariant derivatives (3.27),

(3.28) are required to satisfy the at superalgebra

{dq, dr} = 2iqrd,
47

{dq, d} = 0.

(3.32)

this imposes the constraint on the form of the supervielbein components em

q(z)

dqem

r + drem

q =

2
n

qrdsem
s.

(3.33)

the form of (3.27) and (3.28) is preserved (up to local tangent space transformations
q dp which include weyl rescaling) by restricted superdieo-

a da, d

da = l a
morphisms whose innitesimal form is

q = l p

1
2

qdq,
em
(dqdr)dr,

m = m 
dq =
em
q = idqm +

i
2

q = 

i
2

dq,

i
2

(dr)dqem
r,

(3.34)

(3.35)

where m(, ) and (, ) are independent worldsheet superfunction parameters. (, )
is a selfdual vector in the same sense as the ones in eqs. (3.15).

in the wesszumino gauge dq|=0 = q one can use local transformations with

parameters

d[q1dq2]m|=0, ..., d[q1    dqn1]m|=0

to put all components of em

q(z) to zero except for
q|=0 = em

dqem

1
n

(),

(3.36)

which is a lightcone component of the inverse zweibein (3.2).
in this gauge the con-
straint (3.33) is identically satised. if we then impose on the worldsheet zweibein the
conformal gauge em
a , the covariant derivatives (3.27) and (3.28) become at,
and the superdieomorphisms (3.34) reduce to the chiral (heterotic) superconformal (n, 0)
transformations

a (, ) = m

  (  ) = (, q) 

1
2

qdq,

q = 

i
2

dq;

(3.37)

++  ( + ) = ++(++).

we are now in a position to write down the superembedding condition for the n = 1,
d = 3, 4, 6, 10 superstring. it again prescribes that in the basis (3.26) the grassmann
component of the superworldsheet pullback of the target space supervielbein e a(z) (2.20)
is zero

q(z(z)) = dqx a  idq a = 0.
e a

(3.38)

the only dierence between eq.

(3.38) and the superembedding condition for the

n = 1 superparticles is that now dq contains the zweibein components em

q(z).

the analysis of the superembedding condition (3.38) is carried out in exactly the
same way as the superparticle case (subsection 2.5.3) and results in the same conclusions
[33, 40]:

48

i) all higher components in the expansion of the superelds x m(, ) and (, )
are expressed in terms of the leading components xm() and () which are dynamical
variables of the superstrings.

ii) the dynamical equations of motion (3.16) of xm() and () do not follow from

the superembedding condition.

iii) one of the virasoro constraints (3.18) of the n = 1 superstrings appears as a

consequence of (3.38) which produces the cartanpenrose relation

qre a

  qr(cid:16)dx a  id

a(cid:17) = dq adr

 e a

ea = 0.

(3.39)

(3.40)

iv) because of the relation (3.39), the symmetry (3.12) of the n = 1 greenschwarz

formulation (2 = 0) is identied with local worldsheet supersymmetry.

v) the superstring dynamical equations and the second virasoro condition should be

derived from a worldsheet supereld action in n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6, 10 target superspace.

we start to construct this action by writing down the term which produces the su-

perembedding condition (3.38)
s0 = iz d2dnp q
a e a

q = iz d2dnp q

a

where n = d  2.

hdqx a  idq ai ,

(3.41)

to this action one should, in principle, add a lagrange multiplier term which takes
into account the superworldsheet geometry constraint (3.33), but since this constraint is
identically satised in the wesszumino gauge (3.36) such a term is purely auxiliary and
does not contribute to the component superstring action [40]. we therefore skip this term.
as in the superparticle case the action (3.41) is invariant under the local transforma-

tions of the lagrange multiplier

p q

a (z) = (dr + imem

r)(qrs

++ads),

(3.42)

where the parameter qrs
pair of the so(n) indices q, r, s.

++(z) is totally symmetric and traceless with respect to the each

again, as in the superparticle case, this symmetry allows one to reduce the number of
a (z), and to express the remaining ones in

independent components of the supereld p q
terms of components of (z) by solving the equations of motion

(dq + imem

q)p q

a = 0,

p q
a adq = 0.

(3.43)

the action (3.41), however, does not describe the fully edged n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6, 10
superstrings [137]. as we shall see in the next subsection, it describes so called null (or
tensionless) superstrings, extended objects which are characterized by having zero tension
and a degenerate worldsheet metric [130]. the reason is that we have not yet incorporated
a wesszuminolike term into the worldsheet supereld action, which will generate the
string tension dynamically.

49

3.2.1 null superstrings

.

null strings [130] (and in general null (super)branes or tensionless branes) have at-
tracted certain attention from various points of view [131, 101, 132, 133, 134, 135, 102,
136]. as far as their properties are concerned the null strings are closer to the massless
particles than to the strings. actually, they describe a continuum of massless particles
moving along a degenerate lightlike surface [131, 135]. moreover the null strings do not
need any critical dimension of spacetime to live in [132, 133] and the null superstrings
[131, 134, 135], in contrast to the ordinary superstrings, do not require a wesszumino
term to be symmetric.

it has been assumed [101, 135, 136] that the null strings and branes may be regarded
as a high energy limit of the ordinary string thus providing a way for describing strings
beyond the plancks scale.

we now show that the action (3.41) describes null superstrings in n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6

and 10 superspaces [137].

for simplicity consider the case when the superworldsheet in (3.41) has only one
fermionic direction (i.e. n = 1). this case directly corresponds to an n = 1, d = 3
superstring but the action (3.41) with n = 1 describes n = 1, d = 4, 6 and 10 superstrings
as well, though in these higher dimensions only one of d  2 symmetries is manifest.
the form of the hidden  symmetries is exactly the same as in the case of superparticles
(2.72)(2.77).

let us integrate (3.41) over the worldsheet fermionic variable and solve for algebraic
(2.43). then the action

equations of motion of auxiliary variables analogous to eqs.
reduces to

s0 = z d2pa

()(mxa  im a)  ai ,
hem

(3.44)

where

pa () = p a

(z)|=0,





 = d(z)|=0,

em


() = dem


(z)|=0.

as in the superparticle case, from the action (3.44) we derive the cartanpenrose

relations

pa = e4()a

e a
() = em


()(mxa  im a) = a =

1
e4 pa,

(3.45)

where e4() is a proportionality coecient with four upper minus so(1, 1) indices.

 satises the virasoro constraint (3.40).

eq. (3.45) implies that e a
in addition the variation of (3.44) with respect to em

(mxa  im a) = 0,

pa

gives

(3.46)

50

nema = 0.

en
e a
is nonzero, which we assume) the induced worldsheet

(3.47)

gmn = e a

mena

det gmn = 0.

v m() = e4em


,

(3.48)

the worldvolume

which in view of (3.45) implies

from eq. (3.47) it follows that (if en
metric



is degenerate

this is a characteristic feature of the null strings and branes.

making use of the relations (3.45) and introducing instead of em


vector

we can rewrite the action (3.44) so that it takes the form of the null superstring action
considered, for example, in [135]

s0 = z d2v mv n(cid:16)mxm  im m(cid:17)(cid:16)nxm  in m(cid:17) .

(3.49)

one gets exactly the same form (3.49) of the null superstring action from the action (3.41)
with n = d  2, though, the procedure becomes a bit more complicated because of the
much greater number of auxiliary elds entering the initial supereld action.

thus the doubly supersymmetric action (3.41) describes n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6, 10 null
superstrings. note that in contrast to the greenschwarz action the null superstring
action (3.49) does not contain the wesszumino term. however it is still symmetric
(which is the relic of the linearly realized worldsheet supersymmetry of the action (3.41)).
the symmetry transformations are

 = iv m(cid:16)mxm  im m(cid:17) 

m,

v m = 2v mv nn .

xm = im,

to get a doubly supersymmetric action for the fully edged n = 1 superstrings we
should add to the action (3.41) a term which would generate the string tension and make
the worldsheet metric nondegenerate. such a term should reproduce the wesszumino
term of the greenschwarz formulation.

the treatment of the string tension as a dynamical variable has been discussed in
various aspects [101, 102, 103]. in particular, it allows one to construct superbrane actions
which are manifestly targetspace supersymmetric [102, 138, 139, 103], i.e. do not contain
the standard wesszumino term. the replacement of tension with the worldvolume p-
form eld is also useful when one deals with branes ending on other branes [138].

51

3.2.2 string tension generating mechanism

before considering the doubly supersymmetric case let us rst show how one can extend
the null superstring component action (3.44) to describe the standard n = 1 superstring.
this construction is similar to that of references [102] and is analogous to the super
maxwell coupling of the superparticles discussed in subsection 2.6.

one introduces an electromagnetic eld am() on the superstring worldsheet and
constructs a worldsheet twoform which is invariant under the target space supersymmetry
transformations (2.19). the appropriate twoform is

f (2) = ee++e a

e b

++ab + b(2) + da.

(3.50)

it includes the worldsheet pullback of the wesszumino form (3.11) (where 2 = 0 because
we deal with n = 1), i.e.

b(2) = idxada,

(3.51)

and e++ = dme++
zweibein (3.1), (3.2).

m () and e = dmem () are the lightcone components of the

since under the supersymmetry transformations b(2) transforms as a total derivative

b(2) = id(cid:20)(dxa 

i
3

da)a(cid:21)

the vector eld am() must also vary as

a = i(dxa 

i
3

da)a

to cancel the variation of b(2) in (3.50).

the vector eld am() should not be a new propagating worldsheet eld since our
aim is to describe the ordinary superstrings which do not carry such elds. hence we
must require that on the mass shell am() is expressed in terms of superstring dynamical
variables. this is achieved by assuming that the twoform (3.50) vanishes on the mass
shell, i.e.

da = ee++e a

e b

++ab  b(2).

(3.52)

eq. (3.52) implies that the eld strength of am() is not independent and hence does not
describe new redundant physical degrees of freedom. from eq. (3.52) it also follows that
its r.h.s. is a closed form, which is true for any twoform on a d = 2 bosonic manifold.

to get eq. (3.52) as an equation of motion we add to the action (3.44) the term

st = z d2()mnhem e++
n e a

e b

++ab + b(2)

mn + mani ,

where () is a lagrange multiplier whose variation gives rise to eq. (3.52).

the extended action (3.44)+(3.53)

s = s0 + st

52

(3.53)

(3.54)

is invariant under new local transformations found in [33, 40]

pa = ++()mne++

m en (e a

 + a)()
en

(3.55)

 = 0.
if () is nonzero this symmetry allows one to eliminate pa
eqs. (3.45) hold.

++ = ++()en

,

en

on the mass shell when the

let us now see how the string tension appears, and the greenschwarz action is

recovered. varying (3.53) with respect to am we get

m = 0   = t,

(3.56)

where t is an integration constant.

if t is nonzero, and we substitute (3.56) into the action (3.53), the term mnman
becomes a total derivative and can be skipped. as a result the action st (3.53) reduces
to the n = 1 greenschwarz action (3.10) (with 2 = 0). the rst term of the green
schwarz action is nothing but the rst term in (3.53), which can be checked using the
expressions (3.2)(3.6). we see that t is the string tension.

moreover, when  (and hence t ) is nonzero the local transformations (3.55) allow one
satisfying (3.45) to zero. thus the term s0 (3.44) drops out of the extended

to put pa
action (3.54) and the latter coincides with the n = 1 greenschwarz action

sn =1 = t z d2mnhem e++
n e a

e b

mni .
++ab + b(2)

(3.57)

on the contrary, when t = 0 the second term st (3.53) disappears from (3.54) and it
reduces to the null superstring action (3.44). therefore, eq. (3.54) is the generic action
which is nonsingular in the tensionless limit and describes superstrings with all values of
the tension.

our next step is to lift the action st on to the worldsheet superspace.
so now we consider the twoform (3.50) given on the superworldsheet m2,n, i.e. all

its ingredients depend on zm = (m, q).

3.2.3 weil triviality

an interesting observation concerning properties of the twosuperform (3.50) on m2,n
was made in [33, 140].

the twosuperform f (2) is closed on m2,n when the superembedding condition (3.38)
is satised. the closure of a twoform on m2,n is a nontrivial property because of the
presence of n grassmann directions.

let us check this property, but rst rewrite (3.50) in a more appropriate form

f (2) = e a  e++e++a + b(2) + da.

(3.58)

53

by denition of the pullback

e a = ee a

 + e++e a

++ + eqe a
q,

(3.59)

we see that if the superembedding condition e a
with (3.50).

q = 0 (3.38) holds, the form (3.58) coincides

then, in view of the denition of b(2) (3.51),

df (2) = d(cid:16)e ae++e++a(cid:17) + db(2) =

= (de a)e++e++a + e ad(e++e++a) + ie ad ad.

(3.60)

because of the targetspace torsion constraint (2.21) and the expansion (3.59), the rst
term of (3.60) can be rewritten as

 id ade++e++a = id ade a + id ad(cid:16)ee a

 + eqe a

q(cid:17) .

(3.61)

if the superembedding condition (3.38) and its consequences (3.39) and (3.40) are satised,
the last two terms of (3.61) vanish, and the rst term cancels the last term in (3.60).

by virtue of the worldsheet torsion constraints (3.25) and the superembedding condi-

tions (3.38)(3.40) the second term in (3.60) also vanishes

e ad(e++e++a) = ee a

e++eqqe++a 

 ee a

e++eqd++ adq = 0.

(3.62)

the transition to the expression after the similarity sign  has been made by getting the
expression for e++eqqe++a as a component of the tangent space torsion constraint
(2.21), de a = idad, in the worldsheet supervielbein basis and taking into account
(3.25) and (3.38)(3.40).

we thus get

df (2) = q
where  are some threesuperforms.

a e a

q + {qr}

a

dre a

q = 0,

(3.63)

the variation of f (2) with respect to the m2,n superdieomorphisms zm = zm +

zm (, ) is

(3.64)
now take the integral of f (2) over the twodimensional slice of m2,n such that r = 0,

f (2) = d(if (2)) + idf (2).

i.e. take the integral over the ordinary worldsheet

st = t zm2 f (2).

(3.65)

eq. (3.65) is nothing but the action (3.53) where () is replaced with t (the term with
am() is a total derivative and can be skipped).

54

the variation of (3.65) with respect to the worldsheet superdieomorphisms (3.64) is

(up to a total derivative)

st = t zm2

idf (2).

(3.66)

since df (2) (3.63) is proportional to the superembedding condition, the variation of st
can be canceled by an appropriate variation of the lagrange multiplier of the action (3.41)
if we take the sum of the two actions.

thus, the action

s = iz d2dnp q
a e a

q + t zm2 f (2)

(3.67)

possesses local n = d  2 worldsheet supersymmetry though the second term is not an
integral over the whole superworldsheet. as we have learned in the previous subsection
the component version of this action describes n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6, 10 superstrings.

the doubly supersymmetric action in the form (3.67) was proposed in [33]. the
property of f (2) to be a closed superform up to the superembedding condition and the
corresponding nonmanifest superdieomorphism invariance of the action (3.67) was called
weil triviality, a property which had been found to be useful for studying chiral anomalies
in super yangmills theories [141]. actually, the action (3.65) is a particular example of
the generalized actions of the group manifold (rheonomic) approach to the description of
supersymmetric eld theories [73] and superbranes [197].

3.2.4 worldsheet supereld action

to make the action st (3.65) manifestly supersymmetric on the superworldsheet one
constructs a lagrange multiplier term [40] which produces the onshell condition

the superstring action which includes such a term is

f (2) = 0.

s = s0 + st = iz d2dnp q
a e a

q +z d2dnp m nf (2)

m n ,

where now

st = z d2dnp m nf (2)

m n = z d2dnp m n he a

[m e++

n}e++a + b(2)

m n + [m an}i .

(3.68)

(3.69)

(3.70)

[,} denotes graded antisymmetrization of the superworldsheet indices (i.e. if one or both of
the indices m, n are bosonic they are antisymmetrized, and if both of them are fermionic
they are symmetrized).

in addition to all symmetries discussed above the action (3.69) is invariant under the

local transformations of the lagrange multiplier p m n

p [m n} = l[lm n}(z).

(3.71)

55

indeed, the variation of the st term (3.70) with respect to (3.71) is

st = z d2dn[lm n}(df (2))lm n ,

(3.72)

where df (2) has the form of eq. (3.63), and, hence, the variation (3.72) is canceled by an
appropriate variation of the lagrange multiplier p q

in (3.69).

a

varying the action (3.70) with respect to am we get

m p [m n} = 0,

whose general solution is

p [m n} = l [lm n}(z) +

1
n!

q1...qnq1....qn[m

n}++t,

(3.73)

(3.74)

where t is a constant.

the rst term in (3.74) can be put to zero by gauge xing the local transformations
(3.71). then, substituting (3.74) (with  = 0) back into the action (3.69) we see that
upon the integration it reduces to (3.67).

we have thus demonstrated that the worldsheet supereld action (3.69) describes the

n = 1, d = 3, 4, 6, 10 superstrings.

note that in the case when the superworldsheet has only one fermionic direction, i.e.
when n = 1, there exists another form of the supereld action st [33], which involves
only one grassmann component b(2)
,++ of the m2,1 pullback of the twoform b(2) (3.51).
in this form the full action is

s = s0 + st = iz d2dp a e a

 + t z d2dsdet(e)b(2)
,++,

(3.75)

where sdet(e) is the superdeterminant of the supervielbein matrix ea

m (3.30).

in subsection 3.2 (eqs.

(3.38)(3.40)) we demonstrated that the superembedding
condition gives rise only to one of the superstring virasoro constraints. the second
constraint, namely e a
++e++a = 0, arises as a result of the variation of the full action (in
any of its forms, (3.67), (3.69) or (3.75)) with respect to the supervielbein component em
.
a completely twistorized version of the doubly supersymmetric action for the n = 1
superstrings, where both virasoro constraints have a twistor origin, was constructed in
[142].

3.3 coupling to supergravity background

the generalization of the superstring action (3.69) to describe a superstring propagating
in curved target superspace introduced in subsection 2.7 is almost straightforward [33, 40].
q  ea
in (3.69) and (3.70) one should replace the at supervielbeins with curved ones e a
q,
consider b(2)(z) as a twoform gauge supereld, whose leading component bmn(x) is

56

the neveuschwarz gauge potential entering the supergravity multiplet, and introduce a
dilaton supereld (z) coupling by redening f (2)(z) as follows
m n + [m an}.

e++a + b(2)

f (2)
m n = eea

[m e++
n}

(3.76)

the superstring action takes the form

s = s0 + st = iz d2dnp q
a ea

q +z d2dnp m nf (2)

m n .

(3.77)

by construction (3.77) is superdieomorphism invariant on the superworldsheet and in
the target superspace, and it must also be invariant under the variation (3.71) of the
lagrange multiplier p m n . this means that the variation (3.72) of the action (3.77) must
be compensated by an appropriate variation of the lagrange multiplier p q
a . for this,
df (2) must have the form of the l.h.s. of eq. (3.63), i.e.
q + {qr}

drea
q.

df (2) = q

a ea

(3.78)

a

performing the direct computation of the external dierential of (3.76) one nds that
it has the form of eq. (3.78) if the superbackground satises the supergravity torsion
constraint (2.139)

and the components of the eld strength h (3) = db(2) of the twofrom gauge supereld
are constrained as follows

t a
 = 2i(ca),

(3.79)

ha = 2ie(z)(ca),

h = 0

(3.80)

(where (z) is the dilaton eld).

thus, as in the case of the greenschwarz formulation, the consistency of coupling
the doubly supersymmetric strings to the supergravity background demands that the
superbackground obeys the supergravity constraints (3.79) and (3.80). in d = 10 these
constraints put n = 1 supergravity on the mass shell [128, 97].

3.4 heterotic fermions

so far we have dealt with classical n = 1 superstrings in spacetime of dimensions
d = 3, 4, 6 and 10. quantum consistency of superstring theory singles out 10dimensional
spacetime. in addition, to be anomaly free a closed n = 1, d = 10 superstring should be
heterotic [143], i.e. it should contain extra (heterotic) matter on its worldvolume which
upon quantization produces an n = 1, d = 10 superyangmills eld am (z) taking
its values in the adjoint representation of the gauge group so(32) or e8  e8. such
worldsheet matter elds can be 32 chiral fermions a(), where  is the chiral spinor
index of the d = 2 lorentz group so(1, 1) and a = 1,   , 32 is the index of the 32
dimensional vector representation of the targetspace gauge group so(32). therefore,

57

the chiral fermions can be minimally coupled to the so(32) gauge supereld a[ab]
m (z).
note that a() cannot be minimally coupled to a gauge eld of the e8  e8 group
whose lowestdimensional representation is 496 = 2  248. the e8  e8 gauge elds
appear in heterotic string theory in a much more subtle way (see, for instance, [1]) and
we shall not describe them here.

our aim now is to introduce the heterotic fermions into the superembedding approach.
in the greenschwarz formulation the heterotic fermion term, which is added to the

n = 1, d = 10 superstring action (3.57), is

s =

i
2

t z d2em

()(m  mz m am ).

(3.81)

varying (3.81) with respect to  we get the equation of motion which has the form

of a chirality condition on 

em


(m   +

m  mz m am ) = 0,

where  +

m () is a worldsheet spin connection.

in the conformal gauge em


and when am = 0 eq. (3.82) reduces to

() = m

a = 0

which implies that the heterotic fermions are worldsheet leftmovers

a = a(++) = a( + ).

(3.82)

(3.83)

(3.84)

for comparison let us note that in the conformal gauge the equations of motion of ()
deduced from the n = 1 greenschwarz action (3.57) imply that () are rightmovers,
i.e.

 = () = (  ).

under the symmetry transformations (3.12)(3.15) the heterotic fermions transform

as follows

 = a(e a

a)




++.

(3.85)

therefore, they are inert with respect to the transformations when the sym background
is switched o (note that when n = 1, from (3.12)(3.15) it follows that em


we would like to extend the heterotic fermion action (3.81) and the chirality condition
(3.82) to the superworldsheet formulation of the heterotic string whose n = 1, d = 10
targetsuperspace part is described by the action (3.69).

= 0).

the generalization of the chirality condition (3.82) is straightforward. we consider the
heterotic fermions as worldsheet superelds a(m, q) and assume that on the mass
shell they satisfy the equation of motion

hdq  dqz m ami  = 0,

58

(3.86)

where the covariant derivative dq was determined in eq. (3.28).

it can be easily checked that in the wesszumino gauge (3.36), eq. (3.86) reduces to
eq. (3.82), and hence, in the conformal gauge and in the absence of the sym background,
the heterotic fermions  are chiral (3.84) and do not transform under the leftmoving
conformal supersymmetry transformations (3.37), which is in agreement with their 
symmetry properties (3.85).

note that, as usual, symmetry, or (in the worldsheet supereld formulation) the
integrability of (3.86) requires the sym constraints (2.117) and (2.118) on the background
gauge eld am .

now the problem is to get the equation (3.86) from a worldsheet n-extended superspace

action.

when n = 1, the action (3.81) admits the straightforward generalization

s = 

t

2 z d2d(d  dz m am ).

(3.87)

when n = 2 there is a generalization of (3.87) in terms of complex chiral n = 2

superelds [33].

for the worldsheet supersymmetry formulation with n > 2 dierent forms of the
supereld action of chiral fermions were proposed [144, 145, 146]. the most elegant
formulation, which we shall sketch for n = 8, was proposed by p. howe [145].

let us split the 32dimensional index a of a(z) into an index i = 1, ..., 8 and an
index a = 1, 2, 3, 4, and identify the index i with the index of the vector representation
of the group of internal isomorphisms so(8) of the n = 8 worldsheet supersymmetry
(remember that q transform under a spinor representation of so(8)). the index a
labels the vector representation of a target superspace gauge group so(4) and a[ab]
m (z)
are now so(4)gauge elds which the heterotic fermions can couple to. note that the
possible minimal coupling of the heterotic fermions is now reduced from so(32) gauge
coupling to so(4) coupling. this is a shortcoming of the present formulation which,
however, seems to be akin to the general problem of directly coupling e8 e8 gauge elds
mentioned at the beginning of this subsection.

assume that o the mass shell the supereld ia(z) satises the constraint

jdq  

qi  (cid:16)i
is an so(1, 1)  so(8) superworldsheet connection, the so(8) gamma
where 
matrices have already been introduced in (2.94), and p qa(z) is a supereld in the spinor
representation of so(8) dual to that of q.

jdqz m am(cid:17) j = i

i

q,j  i

i
q,j

qqp q

,

(3.88)

on the mass shell p qa(z) should vanish and then eq. (3.88) reduces to the chirality

condition analogous to (3.86)

thus, providing us with the equations of motion of the heterotic fermions.

p q

= qi = 0,

(3.89)

59

it seems instructive to note that the constraint (3.88) resembles the superembedding
condition (3.38), and, indeed, (3.38) reduces to the exactly the same form when the local
worldsheet supersymmetry is gauge xed as in eqs. (2.99) and (2.100). to see this, take
the transverse part of (3.38) which, in view of eqs. (2.94)(2.100), is

dqx i  ipi
i = 1, ..., 8;

pqdqq
q = 1, ..., 8;

  ii

qqq

 = 0,
q = 1, ..., 8 .

(3.90)

the second term of (3.90) can be absorbed by redening the transverse coordinate
x i = x i  ipi

, and we nally get

pqq

qqq
,
whose form is the same as that of the constraint (3.88).

dq x i = 2ii

(3.91)

the constraint (3.88) can be explicitly solved [145], the solution being in terms of an

unconstrained supereld v 8a

q

(z) (with eight so(1, 1) minuses)

i = i

qq7

qv 8

q

,

(3.92)

where 7
can nd in ref. [145].

q is a dierential operator of a 7-th power in q whose explicit form the reader

the action which gives rise to eq. (3.89) is

s = z d2d8 sdet(e)v 8

q p q

,

(3.93)

where under p q one should imply eq. (3.88) with i being replaced by its prepotential
(3.92).

this completes the construction of the manifest doubly supersymmetric formulation

of the n = 1, d = 10 heterotic string, and we now briey discuss the case of

3.5 type ii superstrings

as we have already mentioned at the end of subsection 3.1, to replace the symmetry of
the n = 2 superstring action in the greenschwarz formulation (3.10) with local world-
sheet supersymmetry one should deal with an (n, n) worldsheet superspace parametrized
by bosonic coordinates m (m = 0, 1) and 2n = 2(d  2) worldsheet spinor coordinates
q ( = , +; q = 1, ..., d  2). the basic condition specifying the superembedding of
such a supersurface into an n = 2 target superspace parametrized by supercoordinates
z m = (x m, i) (i = 1, 2) is

ea

q = dqz m ea

m (z(z)) = 0,

where (as above) dq is a spinorial covariant derivative on the worldsheet supersurface
and ea

m are components of the targetspace supervielbein.

60

the content and consequences of this superembedding condition were analyzed in the
references [42, 45]. it was shown that in the case of an n = 2, d = 3 superstring the
superembedding condition does not contain dynamical equations of motion of the super-
string coordinates and, hence, a doubly supersymmetric action for the n = 2, d = 3
superstring can be constructed in the form analogous to those of the n = 1 superstrings
[33, 40]. in the case of iia and iib superstrings in tendimensional spacetime the su-
perembedding condition contains the dynamical equations, which was demonstrated in
detail in refs. [42, 45]. this is similar to the appearance of the equations of motion in the
constraints of higher dimensional superyangmills and supergravity theories, as we have
mentioned above. in such cases standard supereld actions cannot be constructed, since,
for example, if one tried to introduce the superembedding condition into an action with a
lagrange multiplier, lagrange multiplier components would contain propagating (redun-
dant) degrees of freedom which would be provided with kinetic terms by the dynamical
equations contained in the superembedding condition.

though the standard supereld actions cannot be constructed in the cases when the
superembedding condition puts a superbrane theory on the mass shell, in these cases the
superembedding condition contains exhaustive information about the classical dynamics
of the superbranes. this is very useful when one deals with new brane objects for which
a detailed worldvolume theory has not yet been developed, as it was, for instance with
dbranes, and especially with the mtheory vebrane [50, 51].

we now leave the superstrings and, upon the discussion of general geometrical grounds
of (super)embedding, turn to the consideration of mtheory branes, the d = 11 super-
membrane and the super5brane, whose classical properties are completely determined
by the superembedding condition.

4 basic elements of (super)surface theory

4.1 bosonic embedding

consider a (p + 1)dimensional bosonic surface mp+1 embedded into a ddimensional
curved bosonic target space md.

a local orthogonal basis in the cotangent space of mp+1 is given by a vielbein oneform
(4.1)

ea(m) = dmea

m(),

which transforms under the vector representation of so(1, p). the matrix ea
inverse em

m() and its
a () relate the local orthogonal basis on mp+1 to the local coordinate basis dm.
mathematically profound presentation of surface theory the reader may nd in [7], and its extension

to superembeddings in [45, 79].

61

they have the following properties

ea
m()emb() = ab,

ab = (, +, ..., +),

meb
ea

nab = gmn(),

(4.2)

where gmn() is a metric on mp+1.

we assume that the bosonic surface has zero torsion, i.e.

its connection  a

b

() =

dm a
mb

satises the condition

t a = dea + eb a

b = 0.

(4.3)

similarly, in the target space md we introduce a local orthogonal cotangent basis

given by a vielbein oneform

ea(xm) = dxmea

m(x),

(4.4)

which transforms under the vector representation of so(1, d 1) and whose components
satisfy the conditions

ea

memb = ab,

ab = (, +, ..., +),

ea

meb

nab = gmn(x),

where gmn(x) is a metric on md which is assumed to be torsion free as well

t a = dea + eb a

b = 0.

(4.5)

(4.6)

to embed the surface mp+1 into the target space md means to relate the intrinsic
geometry of mp+1 to the geometry of md. to this end we consider how the local md
frame ea behaves on the surface, i.e consider the pullback of ea on to mp+1

ea(x()) = dmmxmea

m = eaea
a ,

(4.7)

where

a (x())  em
ea

(4.8)
since the orthogonal frame ea is determined up to the local so(1, d1) transformations,
rotating it by an appropriate so(1, d  1) matrix u a
b (), it is always possible to adapt
its pullback on mp+1 in such a way that (up to a rescaling factor)

a mxmea
m.

ea  ebu a

b = ea,

ei  ebu i

b = ebeb

bu i

b = 0,

(4.9)

(4.10)

where we have split the upper index of the so(1, d  1) matrix u a
into the index
a = 0, 1, ..., p (of the md directions parallel to mp+1) and the index i = 1, ..., d  p  1

b

62

(of the md directions transverse to mp+1). these indices are, respectively, the indices
of the subgroups so(1, p) and so(d  p  1) of so(1, d  1)

b (cid:17) .
b , u i
note that, by denition, the so(1, d1) matrix u a
a u d
u c

b = (cid:16)u a

d cd = ab,

c u b
u a

u a

b cd = ab,

b satises the orthogonality conditions

(4.11)

(4.12)

which are preserved by the independent left and right so(1, d  1)l  so(1, d  1)r
transformations of u a
b

u a
b = (ol) d

b u c

d (o1

r ) a
c .

(4.13)

the meaning of eqs. (4.9) and (4.10) is the following. when the surface mp+1 is
embedded into md the vielbein frame ea of md can always be chosen in such a way
that the pullback onto mp+1 of p + 1 of its components coincides with a given local
frame ea() on mp+1, and the other d  p  1 components of ea are orthogonal to the
surface. with such a choice one identies a subgroup so(1, p) of the target space group
so(1, d  1)r acting on u a
b on the right (see eq. (4.13)) with the group so(1, p) of
rotations in the (co)tangent space of mp+1.

eqs. (4.9) and (4.10) are invariant under the transformations of so(1, p)  so(d 
p  1) of the group so(1, d  1)r (4.13). thus, so(1, d  1)r is broken down to
so(1, p) so(d p 1), where so(d p 1) acts in the subspace of md transverse to
the surface mp+1. therefore, the so(1, d  1) matrix (4.11) which brings the pullback
of ea to the form (4.9) and (4.10) is determined up to the so(1, p)  so(d  p  1)
rotations. this means that its elements, which are called (lorentzvector) harmonics
[87, 88, 91], parametrize a coset manifold

so(1,d1)

so(1,p)so(dp1).

we should stress that the left group so(1, d  1)l of (4.13), which is associated with
the local lorentz transformations of the targetspace vielbein (4.4), remains unbroken.
this ensures the lorentzcovariant description of the embedding.

the equations (4.9) and (4.10) can be regarded as embedding conditions. their struc-
ture reects the fact that the embedded surface mp+1 breaks the local lorentz symmetry
so(1, d  1)r of the target space md down to so(1, p)  so(d  p  1) acting in the
directions parallel and transversal to mp+1. eq. (4.9) denes the vielbein ea on mp+1
as the vielbein induced by embedding. using (4.5), (4.9) and (4.10) one can easily check
that ea

a dened in (4.8) are orthonormal

ea

a eba = ab,

and, hence, the mp+1 metric (4.2) is the induced metric

gmn() = mxmnxngmn(x()).

 notice that in the case of strings the eq. (4.14) is equivalent to the virasoro constraints.

(4.14)

(4.15)

63

because of the orthonormality property (4.14) the components of ea

a can be identied
a components of the so(1, d 1) harmonic matrix inverse to (4.11) (as usual,

with the u a
the lorentz indices are raised and lowered by the minkowski metrics)

remember that by virtue of (4.12) the matrix inverse to the orthogonal matrix u a
b

is

ea

a(x()) = u a

a ()  abu b

b ba.

(4.16)

(u1) a

b = acu d

c db  (u a

a , u a
i ).

(4.17)

to simplify notation we shall always skip the superscript -1 of the components of the
inverse so(1, d  1) matrices when their lower index is decomposed into the so(1, p) 
so(dp1) indices. this should not lead to a confusion if we keep in mind that only the
upper index of the direct so(1, d1) matrices can be subject to so(1, p)so(dp1)
splitting, as in eq. (4.11).

we shall now show that the spin connection  a

b of the surface mp+1 is related to the
b of md by local so(1, d  1) transformations of the

pullback of the spin connection  a
latter.

consider the integrability condition of eq. (4.7) by taking the md external covariant
dierential  = d +  of its left and righthand side. then, in view of (4.6), (4.3) and
(4.16), we get

eb a

b u b

a = ebe b

b  eb(du b

b + u a

b  b

a ).

(4.18)

multiplying eq. (4.18) by u a
expression

b and taking into account (4.12) and (4.16) we arrive at the

 a

b = (cid:16)u b

b (cid:17) u a

b  du b

b u a

b + u a

b  b

a u a
b ,

where du b

b u a

b are so(1, p)-valued components of the so(1, d  1) cartan form

 b
0a  d(u1) c

a u b

c = (u1) c

a du b

c

(4.19)

(4.20)

a was dened in (4.17)).  b

0a identically satises the maurercartan (zerocurvature)

((u1) c
equations

d b

0a +  c

0a  b

0c = 0.

(4.21)

the integrability of the maurercartan equations is the basis for relating (super)branes
to integrable systems [4, 5, 6, 8, 17][22].

as a generalization of (4.20) we also introduce a covariantized cartan form (which

is, of course, nothing but the lorentztransformed spin connection  on md)

 b
a  (u1) c

a u b

c = d(u1) c

a u b

c + (u1) c

a  d

c u b
d .

(4.22)

remember that the spin connections are antisymmetric with respect to the lorentzgroup indices.
b
c )u a
b ,

note also that with such a choice of  a

b = (du

b  b

b
b +u

a

which contains both connections, is identically zero (cid:16) u

b

b (cid:17) u a

b the covariant dierential(cid:16) u
b  0.

b

b (cid:17) u a

a  c
b u

64

written in terms of the connection , the curvature twoform on md

a  d b
r b

a +  c

a  b

c

takes the form

(u1) c

a r d

c u b

d = d  b

a +  c

a

 b
c .

(4.23)

(4.24)

from (4.19), (4.22) and (4.24) it follows that the curvature r b

r b
a  d b

a +  c

a  b

c = u c

a r d

c u b

d   i

a

a of the surface mp+1 is
 b
(4.25)
i ,

where i = 1, ..., d  p  1 are the transverse indices (see eq. (4.11)) and
i = ijab  j
 a
b .

b  du b

b + u c

c u i
d ,

a  d

a u i

 i

a = (cid:16)u b

a (cid:17) u i

(4.26)

note that though only the targetspace covariant derivative enters the expression (4.26)
for  i
a , it is also covariant with respect to the local so(1, p) transformations on the
surface, since the term with the surface spin connection is identically zero because of the
orthogonality properties of the harmonics

a u a
 b

b u i

a  0.

in surface theory the equation (4.25), which expresses the surface curvature in terms
of the targetspace connection and curvature, is called the gauss equation. the other
two determining equations of surface theory contained in (4.24) are the codazzi and ricci
equations (see [7, 6] for details). we shall present the explicit form of these equations for
superembeddings in the next subsection.

note that when the target space is at r b

a can be gauge xed to zero,
a on mp+1 coincides with the so(1, p) components of the

a = 0 and  b

the induced spin connection  b
cartan form 0

and

 b
a = du b

a u b

b

(4.27)

in at md.
let us now derive the restriction on components of  i

rab =  i

0a  i
0b

integrability condition (4.18). to this end we multiply (4.18) by u i
side of (4.18) becomes zero and we get

a

(4.26) which follows from the
b , then the left hand

ea  i

a = eaeb  i

b,a = 0   i

b,a =  i
a,b,

(4.28)

which implies that  i
a,b is symmetric in the so(1, p) indices a and b. this symmetric
matrix is called the second fundamental form of the surface, and its trace hi = ab  i
characterizes average extrinsic curvatures of the surface in the target space [7, 6].

a,b

65

to summarize, the conditions (4.9) and (4.10) whose integrability leads to eqs. (4.19),
(4.24) (containing (4.25)), and (4.28) completely determine the geometrical properties of
embedding a general (pseudo) riemann surface mp+1 into a (pseudo) riemann manifold
md in terms of the vielbein, connection and curvature forms of md pulled back on to
mp+1. in other words eqs. (4.9), (4.10), (4.19) and (4.28) determine the induced geometry
on the embedded surface.

from the physical point of view the induced geometry of the surface means that,
though the surface is a curved manifold and hence contains a (p + 1)dimensional gravity,
this gravity is not fully edged in the sense that the graviton on mp+1 is described by
the induced metric (4.15) and, hence, is a composite eld built from the worldsurface
scalars xm() .

we would like the embedded surface mp+1 to be associated with the worldvolume of
a pbrane. the worldvolume which describes the classical motion of the pbrane in the
target space is of a minimal volume. this is an additional condition of embedding mp+1
which is equivalent to the pbrane equations of motion.

in the geometrical language the minimal embedding of mp+1 is specied by the re-
a,b determined in (4.26) and

quirement that the trace of the second fundamental form  i
(4.28) is zero

ab  i

a,b = 0,

(4.29)

which implies that the average extrinsic curvatures of mp+1 in md are zero.

let us now show that eq. (4.29) is equivalent to the pbrane equations of motion
which one gets, for example, from the nambugoto action (1.2). using the denition
(4.26) of  i
a,b and the relations (4.16), (4.2), (4.5) and (4.15) we can rewrite eq. (4.29) as
follows

ab  i

= aben

b mxmea

a,b = ab(cid:16)aeb
b(cid:17) u i
b = aba(cid:16)em
b mxmgmn(x)(cid:17) enbu i
an(cid:16)em
= " 1
m(cid:16)ggmnnxmgmn(x)(cid:17)  gmnmxmnxlgmp
g

a mxmgmn(cid:16)benb(cid:17) u i
ln# enbui

m(cid:17) eanenbu i

b

b + abem

p

b

(4.30)

b = 0,

where a = em

p
a (m + mxmm), and 
ln(x) is the d-dimensional christoel symbol

p



ln(x)  (le

p

b )eb

n = (cid:16)le

p

b   c
lb e

n.

p

c(cid:17) eb

(4.31)

in the square brackets of the last line of (4.30) one can recognize the standard equations
of motion of a bosonic pbrane propagating in a ddimensional target space. in (4.30)
they are projected on to the dp1 directions transverse to the pbrane. this projection
reects the fact that, because of the (p+1)dimensional worldvolume reparametrization

an interpretation of general relativity as induced gravity in the worldvolume of a brane has been

discussed in [147].

66

invariance, among the d equations obtained from the nambugoto action (1.2) only
d  p  1 transverse equations are independent, and these are explicitly singled out
by the geometrical embedding condition (4.29), (4.30), while the other p + 1 equations
(parallel to the brane) are identically satised. to see this let us in the last line of (4.30)
b , which corresponds to projecting the equations of motion of xm()
substitute u i
along the brane worldvolume. then moving in the direction opposite to that which we
followed developing eq. (4.30) we get

b with u c

e

(cid:20) 1
= abh(aea

m(cid:16)egmnnxmgmn(x)(cid:17)  gmnmxmnxlgmp
b ) u c

a  c

b ) u c

mbi = abh(au a

a  em

b =

p

ln(cid:21) enbu c
a  c

mbi  0,

a  em

which is identically zero by virtue of the embedding condition (4.19) for the mp+1 spin
connection.

thus, in the embedding approach the bosonic pbrane equations of motion are de-
scribed by the minimal embedding condition (4.29) on components of the mp+1 pullback
(4.22) of the target space connection form  b
a .

we shall now generalize the results of this subsection to the description of superem-

beddings [45, 50].

4.2 superembedding
consider a supermanifold md,2n locally parametrized by supercoordinates z m = (x m, )
(m = 0, ..., d  1;  = 1, ..., 2n). when md,2n is at the index  is associated with an
irreducible spinor representation of so(1, d  1) and, in addition, can also include an
internal index corresponding to n-extended supersymmetry, as in the case of the n = 2,
d = 10 superstrings (section 3).

we assume that the supergeometry on md,2n is such that it describes a ddimensional
supergravity (see subsections 2.7 and 3.3). this implies that the structure group of the
tangent superspace of md,2n is so(1, d  1) (or more precisely spin(1, d  1)) and the
supervielbein components

ea(z) = dz m ea

m = (ea, e)

(4.32)

satisfy the torsion constraint (3.79).

we are interested in embedding into the target superspace md,2n a supersurface
mp+1,n locally parametrized by supercoordinates zm = (m, ). with such an embedding
we would like to describe the dynamics of superbranes whose n-dimensional symmetry
is replaced by more fundamental worldvolume supersymmetry. so, we take a supersur-
face with the number of fermionic directions  which is half the number of the target

67

superspace fermionic directions..

we should stress that the consideration of general properties of superembeddings car-
ried out in this subsection is schematic, as far as spinors and matrices are concerned,
since it is pretty hard to describe with one and the same set of exact formulae dierent
types of spinor representations (majorana, majoranaweyl, simplecticmajorana, etc.)
which are used in each given case of superembedding depending on d and p.

a local cotangent frame on mp+1,n is given by the supervielbein

ea(z) = dzm ea

m = (ea, eq)

(4.33)

whose components are transformed under vector and spinor representations of the struc-
ture group so(1, p)so(dp1) of mp+1,n (remember that d is the bosonic dimension
of the target superspace). the index a = 0, 1, ..., p is the index of the vector representation
of so(1, p), while  and q are the indices of irreducible spinor representations of so(1, p)
and so(d  p  1), respectively, such that dim spin(1, p)  dim spin(d  p  1) = n.
these requirements on the structure group of mp+1,n and its spinor representations put
restrictions on the dimensions of supersurfaces which can be embedded into a given target
superspace. the analysis of possible superembeddings of this kind shows that they cor-
respond to all known superbranes (superpbranes, dbranes and mbranes) and their
dimensional reductions (possibly accompanied by a dualization). this results in a brane
scan [50] similar to the standard one [149].

at the moment we do not make any assumption concerning the supergeometry of

mp+1,n, since, as we shall see, it is determined by the superembedding condition.

consider the pullback on to mp+1,n of the md,2n supervielbein ea

ea = eae m

a m z m ea

m  eaea
m  eae
a (z) is the supervielbein matrix inverse to e a

a m z m e

e = eae m

where e m

a + eqea

q,

a + eqe
q,

m (z).

(4.34)

(4.35)

as in the bosonic case we postulate that the superembedding is such that with an
appropriate choice of the local frame ea on mp+1,n and by the use of local so(1, d  1)
rotations (4.11)(4.13) one can direct the vector component pullback (4.34) of ea on the
supersurface such that

ea  ebu a

b (z) = ea(z),

(4.36)

one can study the embedding of a more general class of supersurfaces with the dimension df of
the odd (fermionic) subspace being less than n. as we have seen with the examples of superparticles
(subsection 2.5.4) and superstrings (subsection 3.2.1), such embeddings may also describe superbranes
which preserve half of the targetspace supersymmetries, but there may exist superembeddings which
describe bps states preserving a lower number of target space supersymmetries. let us also mention that
the embedding of supersurfaces with df > n, in general, seems to be too restrictive to describe physically
interesting models (see, however, [148]).

68

(4.37)
eqs. (4.34), (4.36) and (4.37) imply that ea(z) is the induced supervielbein on mp+1,n
since it coincides with the pullback of ea. we also see that

ei  ebu i

b (z) = ebeb

b = 0.

bu i

ea

a(z(z)) = u a

a (z).

(4.38)

but what is most important, in view of (4.34)(4.37), we get the basic superembedding

condition

q  em
ea

qm z m ea

m = 0.

(4.39)

thus, the superembedding condition (4.39) is a natural consequence of the embedding
carried out in such a way that the bosonic cotangent subspace of mp+1,n is a subspace
of the bosonic cotangent subspace of md,2n. alternatively, eq. (4.39) implies that the
fermionic tangent subspace of mp+1,n is a subspace of the fermionic tangent subspace of
md,2n.

the embedding conditions (4.36), (4.37) and (4.39) imply that (as in the bosonic case

(4.15)) the supersurface metric

gmn(z)  e a

m e b

n ab = mz m ea

m nz n eb

n ab = ea

mena

(4.40)

is the induced metric.

in addition to the vector components the supervielbein (4.32) contains the spinor
components (4.35). when the vector components are transformed by the so(1, d  1)
b , the spinor components must be simultaneously transformed by a matrix v 
matrix u a

of the spinor representation of so(1, d 1). the matrices u a
 are related to each
other by the standard ddimensional matrix dening conditions

b and v 

b
u a

b  v 

 a

v


 .

(4.41)

eq. (4.41) implies that u a
components corresponding to d(d  1)/2 independent generators of spin(1, d  1).

 , which have d(d  1)/2 independent

b are composed of v 

the choice of the matrices depends on the dimensions d and p, but for the embed-
ding under consideration they can always be schematically represented by the following
so(1, p)  so(d  p  1) invariant set of matrices (compare with eq. (2.94)). in the
directions parallel to the supersurface

a

 = 


a
r
q
0

and in the directions normal to the supersurface

0

ar

q 
 ,

a = 0, 1, ..., p ,

(4.42)

i

 = 


0

(i)qq


 i

qq

0 
 ,

69

i = 1, ..., d  p  1 ,

(4.43)

 are d = p + 1 matrices, and the matrices i

where a
qq obey the so(d  p  1)
cliord algebra, the indices q and q corresponding to (in general nonequivalent) spinor
representations of so(d  p 1). note that in (4.42) and (4.43) the so(1, d  1) spinor
indices ,  split into the so(1, p)  so(d  p  1) spinor indices (q) of the mp+1,n
odd subspace and the so(1, p) so(d  p  1) spinor indices  := (q) transverse to
the supersurface.

the spinor components of the supervielbein pullback (4.35) transformed with

take the form

v 

 (z)  (cid:16)v q



, v 

 (cid:17)

ev 

 = (cid:16)ev q



, ev 

 (cid:17) , where

(4.44)

(4.45)

v 
  v,q.

in the same way as we have done with the vector basis (4.36), we can always make a
choice of a spinor basis eq on mp+1,n such that

which, in view of (4.35), implies

evq

 = eq,

e


a v q

 = 0,



e

rv q

 =  

  q
r ,

and, hence,

where

ev 

  eqh 

q + eae


a v 
 ,

h 
q (z)  hq,q(z),

(4.46)

(4.47)

(4.48)

(4.49)

(4.50)

is an so(1, p)  so(d  p  1)valued matrix on mp+1,n. from eqs. (4.47)(4.50) we
derive that

where by v



q and v 

 we have dened the components of the matrix


q = v

e



q + h 

q v


 ,

(v1) 

  (cid:16)v 

(cid:17)
q , v 

(4.51)

(4.52)

inverse to v



  (cid:16)v q

 (cid:17).
 , v 

the inverse matrices (4.17) and (4.52) are related by the equation similar to (4.41)

(u1) a
b

b  (v1) 

 a

(v1)


 .

(4.53)

note that the embedding conditions (4.36), (4.37), (4.46) and (4.49) are dened up to
the local so(1, p)  so(d  p  1) rotations which reduce the number of independent
components of u a
 (z) from d(d  1)/2 down to d(d  1)/2  (p + 1)p/2 
(d  p  1)(d  p  2)/2 = (p + 1)(d  p  1). hence, as in the bosonic case, the

b (z) and v



70

matrices u a
which parametrize the coset space

b and v


 (z) are, respectively, lorentzvector and lorentzspinor harmonics

so(1,d1)

so(1,p)so(dp1) [92, 93, 45].

as we shall see in section 5 the physical meaning of the supersurface eld h 

q (z)
is that it appears in (4.49) due to the presence of gauge elds on the worldvolume of
superbranes, such as diracborninfeld vector elds of the dbranes and the selfdual
antisymmetric gauge eld of the m5brane. h 
q (z) is expressed in terms of the eld
strengths of these elds [50, 51, 197].

for the ordinary superpbranes (where there is no worldvolume matter other than
scalar and spinor elds associated with the transverse oscillations of the brane in the target
superspace) h 
q (z) is either auxiliary (as in the case of an n = 1, d = 4 supermembrane
[70]) or zero [45]. we shall demonstrate this for the n = 1 superparticles and superstrings
in the next subsection, and for the d = 11 supermembrane in subsection 5.1.

we now consider the consequences of the superembedding conditions (4.36)(4.39),
(4.46)(4.51) for the properties of the induced supergeometry of mp+1,n. as in the bosonic
case (eq. (4.18)), we take the md,2n external dierential  = d +  of the vector super-
vielbein pullback (4.34). then, in view of (4.38), (4.39) and the target space supergravity
torsion constraint

t a  ea = dea + eb a

b = iea

e,

(4.54)

where all other components of the twoform t a are (conventionally) put to zero , we get

e = t au b

a  eb(cid:16) a
b u b

b (cid:17) .
a  u b

 ieb
2 ebeat a

ab = dea + eb a
b

is the supersurface torsion and e b

a = u b
a

remember that t a = 1
(4.38).

from (4.55) it follows that (up to an appropriate redenition of t a) the mp+1,n spin

b u a

b , as in the bosonic case (4.19)

connection  a

b can always be identied with u b
b + u a

b u a

b = u b
 a

b  (du b

b  b

a )u a

b   a
b .

(4.55)

(4.56)

(4.57)

(4.58)

then (4.55) reduces to

t a 

1
2

and

ebeat a

ab = iea

eu a

a  t au a

a

eae b

a u i

b = eau b

a u i

b  ea  i

a = iea

eu i
a .

the equations (4.57) and (4.58) are the integrability conditions of the superembedding

conditions (4.37), (4.39), (4.46) and (4.56).
a

provided that the basic torsion constraint t

 is imposed, all other torsion constraints
are derived by solving for the torsion bianchi identities. in addition, by redening the supervielbeins
a
and superconnection one can always put all components of t a except for t
 to zero (see [151][154],

 = 2ia

[128, 127, 129] for a detailed analysis of supergravity constraints in various dimensions).

71

in particular, eq. (4.57) implies that the superembedding conditions (4.39), (4.46) and
(4.56) require the supersurface torsion to satisfy constraints, whose form depends on the
concrete superembedding under consideration [45] (see section 5).

thus, if target space supergeometry is constrained to be of the supergravity type, the
superembedding induces supergeometry on the supersurface such that it corresponds to
a worldvolume (induced) supergravity. the supermultiplet of the induced supergravity
includes the graviton and gravitino which are composed from components of a worldvol-
ume matter supermultiplet. the matter supermultiplet consists of the d  p  1 scalar
2 spinor modes  of the brane transverse uctuations, and it may
modes xi() and the n
also contain worldvolume gauge elds (as in the case of the dbranes and the m5brane).
let us now briey discuss the consequences of the integrability equation (4.58). in
each given case of superembedding, eq. (4.58) allows one to nd out whether or not the
superembedding condition (4.39) contains the superbrane equations of motion.

from eq. (4.58), in view of (4.41), (4.43), (4.46) and (4.49), it follows that, as in the
a,a is symmetric

bosonic case (4.28), the vector component of the superform  i
with respect to the so(1, p) vector indices

a = ea  i

eaeb  i

b,a = 0,   i

b,a =  i
a,b.

(4.59)

by analogy with the bosonic embedding we can identify  i
a m z mm ea
b u i
components of the second fundamental form of the supersurface mp+1,n dened as

a,b  e m

a with

where

k c 

ab = e m

a (cid:16)m z mm ea
q ), ea
  v q

 h 

b +  c

m b ea

c(cid:17) e c 

a

e c 
a  (u i

a , v 

be c 

a  0,  = (r)

(4.60)

in many cases of embedding mp+1,n into md,2n the integrability conditions of (4.39)
require additional restrictions on the components of  i
a,a, such as a (possibly inhomoge-
neous) analog of the tracelessness of its vector part ab  i
b,a = 0, which is equivalent to the
bosonic eld equations (4.30), and the condition on the spinor part of the following type
[94, 45]

(a)  i

q,a = 0.

(4.61)

as we shall see in the next section, eq. (4.61) amounts to the fermionic eld equations,
and, hence, is a superembedding counterpart of the bosonic minimal embedding condition
(4.29).

therefore, when integrability requires (4.61) or its inhomogeneous generalization due
to the structure of the supergravity background, the superembedding condition (4.39) (or
equivalently (4.36) ) contains the equations of motion of the corresponding superbrane.
this is in contrast to the bosonic embedding where the minimal embedding condition
(4.29), being equivalent to the dynamical equations for the bosonic brane, is always im-
posed as an additional condition.

72

note that eq. (4.61) is a generic minimal superembedding condition, and it can be
also used (as an addition condition) to nd the superbrane equations of motion in the
cases where the basic superembedding condition (4.39) is oshell.

to nd out whether the superembedding condition (4.39) puts a given superbrane
theory on the mass shell one should examine each case separately. in the next section we
shall make such an analysis for the mtheory branes.

to conclude the description of the induced supergeometry of mp+1,n we should identify
the so(d  p  1) connection a r
q acting on the spinor
components eq of the mp+1,n supervielbein (4.33). note that the spin(1, p) connection
 
 (z) is given by the standard relation

q = dzm a r

m q (z) = 1

4 aij(ij) r

 

 (z) =

1
4

ab(ab) 

 =

1
4

ab(ab) 
 .

(4.62)

let us take the md,2n external dierential  of eq. (4.35) and

to nd the form of a r
q
multiply the result by v r
 . in view of eqs. (4.47) (4.51) we get
q (v
)v r
q i ,
 a r

= t r + ea(e
+ eqh(v
q)v r

 + eqh 
   

a )v r
   r

t v r

q  





where t r  der + er 

 + eqa r
q

is the spinor component of the mp+1,n torsion form.

using the harmonic relations (4.41) and (4.53) one can show that

(4.63)

q)v r

 =

(v

1
4

r
q

ab(ab) 

 +

1
4

 


ij(ij) r
q ,

(4.64)

where ab and ij are components of the targetspace connection form dened in (4.22)
and (4.56).

in eqs. (4.56) and (4.62) we have identied ab with ab. then from eqs. (4.63) and
(4.64) it follows that we can identify the so(d  p  1) connection form on mp+1,n with
ij , i.e.

aij = ij, a r

q =

ij(ij) r
q ,

(4.65)

1
4

and eq. (4.63) reduces to the expression dening t r as the induced torsion of mp+1,n
(4.66)

t r = t v r

  ea(e

a )v r

  eqh 

q (v 

 )v r
 .

the curvature forms associated with the induced connections  b

i are ob-
tained by taking the corresponding components of the pullback (4.24) of the target space
curvature. r b

a has the form similar to the gauss equation (4.25)

a and a j

r b
a  d b

a +  c

a  b

c = u c

a r d

c u b

d   i

a

 b
i ,

(4.67)

our choice of the supersurface connections (4.62) and (4.65) is such that [(d +  +  + a)v

(see also the footnote to eq. (4.19)). this diers from the choice of refs.
the connections has been xed in such a way that the supersurface torsion components t c
vanish.

  0
[51, 52] where the form of


q ]v r

ab and t s

q,r

73

and r j
i

is determined by the socalled ricci equation

i  da j
r j

d   a

i

i + a k

i a j

k = u c

i r d

c u j

 j
a .

(4.68)

the last equation contained in (4.24) is the codazzi equation which species the form of
the supersurface covariant dierential of  i

a

d  i

a  d  i

a +  b

a

 i

b +  j

a a i

j = u c

a r d

c u i
d .

(4.69)

from eq. (4.69) we see that in the at target (super)space (r = 0) the (super)embedding
is such that the external covariant dierential of  i

a on the (super)surface vanishes.

to summarize, the equations (4.36), (4.37), (4.46), (4.56) and (4.65)(4.69) completely
determine the induced geometrical properties of the embedded supersurface in terms of
the pullbacks of the targetsuperspace supervielbein and superconnection adapted to the
supersurface by the use of the lorentz harmonics.

note that, analyzing the general properties of the superembedding, we have from the
beginning imposed the constraints (4.54) on targetsuperspace geometry, which we nd
more instructive. but instead of introducing the targetsuperspace constraints, we might
from the beginning specify the supergeometry on the supersurface. then the constraints
on the geometry of target superspace would arise as consequences of the integrability of
the superembedding condition.

these two initial options of choosing the superspace constraints for studying the su-
perembeddings are equivalent, and depending on the problem considered it is convenient
to use one option or another.

this equivalence follows from the general property of the basic superembedding con-
dition (4.39). if we only impose this condition and do not assume any constraints on the
supersurface and targetsuperspace torsion, the spinor components of the torsion t a and
the pullback of t a are related by the following identity

t a
q,rea

a = e 

q e 

r t a
,

(4.70)

which can be easily derived from (4.34) by taking the covariant external dierential of
both of its sides and taking into account (4.39).

we shall now demonstrate how in the generic case to extract symmetry transfor-
mations from general local superdieomorphisms of the embedded supersurface [27, 45,
72, 51, 52, 70].

4.3 symmetry from the point of view of superembedding

as we have already mentioned (see eqs. (1.4), (2.26) and (3.12) as examples) for all known
superbranes in the greenschwarztype formulation the symmetry transformations of
the superbrane coordinates z m () in target superspace have the following generic form

z m e

m =

1
2

(1 + )

,

74

(4.71)

z m ea

m = 0,

(4.72)

where 1

2(1 + )

 is a spinor projection matrix specic to each type of superbranes.

at the same time, in the superembedding approach z m (zm ) (zm = (m, )) are
worldvolume superelds transformed as scalars under the mp+1,n superdieomorphisms
zm = zm (z), their innitesimal variations being

z m = zm m z m = zm ea

m (en

a n z m ).

(4.73)

multiplying (4.73) by ea
) we get

m and splitting the index a on the vector and spinor indices (a,

z m e

m = zm ea

m (en

z m ea

m = zm ea

m (en

a n z m e
a n z m ea

m )  zm ea
m )  zm ea

m e
a,
m ea
a.

because of the superembedding condition (4.39), eq. (4.75) reduces to

z m ea

m = zm ea

m ea
a.

(4.74)

(4.75)

(4.76)

comparing (4.76) with (4.72) we see that to get symmetry transformations from
the worldvolume superdieomorphisms we should consider such variations of zm for which
the grassmanneven superdieomorphisms are zero

zm ea

m = 0 = z m ea
m .

(4.77)

then only the grassmannodd part zm eq
tributes to the variation (4.74), and we get

m of the mp+1,n superdieomorphisms con-

z m e

m = zm eq

m e
q.

(4.78)

since zm eq

m are arbitrary variations we can (without losing generality) replace them

with

eq. (4.78) takes the form

zm eq

m  (z)v q



.

(4.79)

(4.80)

z m e

q(cid:17) .
 e 
if we now recall the superembedding conditions (4.48), (4.51) (e
 = p 
shall notice that v q
2(1 + ) from (4.71), i.e.
identied (possibly, up to linear transformations) with 1

m = (z)(cid:16)v q

 (z) is a projector (p

q = p 

q = v 

q + h 

 ) we
 ). this projector can be

q v 


 p 

 e

1
2

(1 + )

 = v q

 e
q.

(4.81)

we conclude that the leading ( = 0) components of the innitesimal superdieo-

morphisms (4.80) and (4.77) yield the symmetry transformations (4.71) and (4.73).

75

here it is also the place to note that in the superembedding formulation of the super-
branes we have not introduced wesszumino terms as independent objects. the reason
is that in superbrane actions the wesszumino term is introduced to ensure the nonman-
ifest symmetry of the worldvolume action, while in this formulation the construction is
manifestly worldvolume superdieomorphism invariant. in the superembedding approach
the wesszumino term shows up in the structure of the bosonic equations of motion,
which we will see with the examples of the mtheory branes.

4.4 n = 1, d = 10 superparticles and superstrings from the

general perspective of superembedding

let us now connect the general properties of the superembeddings considered in the
previous subsection with the doubly supersymmetric description of n = 1, d = 10 su-
perparticles and superstrings given in sections 2 and 3. superembeddings which describe
superparticles have been discussed in [150], and the n = 1, 2, d = 10 superstrings have
been studied in [45].

in these cases the target superspace is m10,16 (for simplicity, we take it to be at),
and the embedded supersurface is md,8 (where d = 1 for the superparticles and d = 2 for
the superstrings).

the targetspace structure group so(1, 9) is broken by the presence of the super-
particle or the superstring down to so(1, 1)  so(8). the explicit realization of the
matrices (4.42) and (4.43) is given by eq. (2.94), with the matrices c0 and c9, or
c = c(0  9) corresponding to the so(1, 1) subgroup of so(1, 9). the indices
a = (, ++) and  = (, +) are, the lightcone indices of the vector and the spinor
representation of so(1, 1), respectively. in the case of the superparticle the worldline co-
ordinate  is identied with the coordinate  of the superworldsheet m = (, ++).
and recall that the odd coordinates q of md,8 are onecomponent worldline or world-
sheet (chiral) spinors.

the so(1, 1)  so(8) splitting of the lorentzharmonic matrices (4.11), (4.44) is

u a

b = (cid:16)ub
 (z) = (cid:16)v q

v 



, u++

, u i

b

b (cid:17)
(cid:17) .

so(1,9)

, v +q



the harmonics parametrize the coset space
in the at target superspace the projection (4.45) of the spinor supervielbein e  = d

so(1,1)so(8) .

is

(4.82)

(4.83)

(4.84)

dv 

 = (cid:16)dv q



, dv +q



(cid:17) .

in (4.84) we can recognize the lorentzcovariant version of the splitting of dq discussed
in eqs. (2.95)(2.99), when we made the analysis of the superembedding condition for the
n = 1 superparticle.

76

to get (2.95) from (4.84) we should simply take v 

b =  a
b .
this, of course, breaks both the right and the left so(1, 9) group associated with the
lorentz harmonics (see eq. (4.13) and below) and, hence, breaks the manifest target
superspace covariant description of the superembedding. then, for instance, eq. (4.48)
reduces to eq. (2.99).

 which implies u a

 =  

furthermore, comparing (4.49) with (2.95), (2.102) and (2.103) (where   ) we

nd that

 are transverse components of the vector supervielbein pullback e a

hq,q = i

qqe i

,

(4.85)
 = x a

where e i
i

a (2.103).
now notice that by taking u a
embedding condition (4.37) (i.e. e i

b =  a

b

(and v 

 =  

 ) we do not (in general) have the

 6= 0) for an adapted local frame such that

e b
u i

b = 0.

(4.86)

to get (4.86) we must perform an appropriate so(1, 9) transformation of e a
, as has
been explained in the previous subsections. once this has been done, the tensor hq,q
(4.85) vanishes.

thus, in the case of the n = 1 superparticles and superstrings, when the pullback of
the targetspace supervielbein ea is adapted (by the lorentz harmonics) to the super-
worldline or the superworldsheet such that eqs. (4.36), (4.37) and (4.46) are satised, the
hcomponent of e

q is zero and (in the at target superspace) we have





e

q  dq = v



q.

(4.87)

from (4.87) it follows that its leading (q = 0) component, which is the commuting
spinor variable 
q, coincides with components of the inverse lorentzspinor harmonics
(4.88)









q() = v

q|=0.

and from (4.38) it follows that

e a
  x a  i

a = u a


(4.89)

coincides with a lightlike component of the inverse lorentzvector harmonics.

e



using the dening harmonic relations (4.53) one can convince oneself that e a
q are related by the cartanpenrose formula (2.87)
 = vqcavr.

qru a

 and

in the subsection 2.5.4 we have demonstrated that in d = 10 the independent compo-

q
q (which are new auxiliary variables

q parametrize the s8 sphere, while from eq. (4.87) we see that e

nents of the matrix e
coincides with components of lorentz harmonics v





77




 = (v

introduced in the superembedding formulation). as we have mentioned, the harmonics
(v1)
so(1,1)so(8). there-
fore, there should be an additional local symmetry which allows one to reduce the number
of independent components in (v1)


+q) parametrize larger (16dimensional) coset space


 from 16 to 8.

q, v

so(1,9)

this symmetry indeed occurs since half of the harmonics, namely v

+q, do not enter
the relations dening the pullback of the targetspace supervielbein (4.87), (4.89). hence,

+q in a way which keeps the harmonic condition (4.53) intact.
we can vary the form of v
the allowed variations have the form of boost transformations ki



v



q = 0,
u a

u a

 = 0,

++ = k i

++u a
i ,

u a

i =



v

+q = k i

++(z)i

(4.90)



q,
qqv
1
k++iu a
,
2

where k i

++(z) are eight independent parameters.

therefore, we see, from a somewhat dierent point of view, that in the case of the
n = 1, d = 10 superparticles and superstrings the commuting (harmonic or twistorlike)
spinor variables parametrize the compact manifold s8sphere, which is realized as a coset
space [92, 40]

s8 =

so(1, 9)

[so(1, 1)  so(8)] s ki

,

where the stability subgroup is the semidirect product of so(1, 1) so(8) with the boost
transformations ki (4.90).

we conclude that the doubly supersymmetric formulation of n = 1 superparticles
and superstrings, which we have developed in sections 2 and 3 on dynamical grounds,
completely ts into the general geometrical picture of superembeddings.

let us now apply the general properties of superembedding to the description of m

branes.

5 mtheory branes

mtheory [16] is a d = 11 theory whose low energy limit is d = 11 supergravity [155]
and which also contains supermembranes [9, 156] and super5branes [10] as part of its
nonperturbative spectrum.

the d = 11 supergravity multiplet consists of the graviton ea

m(x)
and the antisymmetric 3rank gauge eld almn(x), which are leading components of
the supervielbein ea(x, ), e(x, ) and the threeform a(3)(x, ), respectively (a =
0, 1..., 10;  = 1, ..., 32).

m(x), the gravitino 

the supermembrane minimally couples to the gauge eld a(3), as superstrings mini-
mally couple to the neveuschwarz eld b(2) (3.10). the greenschwarztype superme-
mbrane action is [9]

sm 2 = z d3q det gmn +zm3

78

dz ldz m dz n an m l(z)

(5.1)

(gmn() = ea

mena, and the tension is put equal to one).

the super5brane minimally couples to a sixform gauge eld a(6) whose sevenform
eld strength f (7) = da(6)  a(3)da(3) is dual to the fourform eld strength f (4) = da(3)
of a(3). the 5brane also (nonminimally) couples to a(3) via the extended selfdual eld
strength

h (3)() = db(2)  a(3)(z())

(5.2)

of an antisymmetric eld bmn() living in the worldvolume of the 5brane [157]. in this
sense the 5brane is a dyonic object. the form of the 5brane supergravity coupling
is uniquely dened by local symmetries of the 5brane worldvolume action which are
responsible for the selfduality properties of bmn() [158]. the borninfeldlike super
5brane action is [63, 64]

sm 5 = z d6(q det(gmn + hmn) +

g

4

hmnhmn)

1
2

(5.3)

(a(6) 

db(2)  a(3)),

+ zm6
mena, hmn  hmnlvl(), hmn  1g mnll1l2l3vlhl1l2l3 and vl() =
where gmn() = ea
la()(a)2 is the normalized derivative of the auxiliary scalar eld a() which ensures the

covariance of the 5brane action, its construction being based on a generic method for
the covariant lagrangian description of dualitysymmetric elds proposed in [159, 160].
a dualitysymmetric component action for d = 11 supergravity, which includes both
gauge elds, a(3) and its dual a(6), and which thus couples to both the membrane and
the 5brane, was constructed in [161]. this action reduces to the cremmerjuliascherk
action [155] when the eld a(6) is eliminated by solving for an algebraic part of the duality
relations between f (7) and f (4).

the symmetry of the supermembrane and the super5brane worldvolume actions
requires the superbranes to propagate in targetsuperspace backgrounds whose superge-
ometry is constrained to be that of d = 11 supergravity.

in the case of the superspace description of d = 11 supergravity the constraints
b , curvature
c , and on the dual eld strengths f (4)(z) and f (7)(z) have

imposed on components of the torsion t a(z) = ea = dea + eb a
a  b
r(z) b
the following form [127, 129]

a = d b

a +  c

t a = i eae,

t  =

1
288

rab = 

i

144

e(cid:16)ab

f (4) = da(3) =

a

a b2...b4](cid:17)
fb1...b4ea(cid:16) b1...b4
 8[b1
c4](cid:17) ef c1...c4 +
c3b
c1...c4 + 24[c1c2a



e,

1
2

edecr ab

cd

,

ea4...ea1fa1...a4,

1
4!

i
2

eaeb ebae +

79

(5.4)

(5.5)

(5.6)

(5.7)

f (7) = da(6) 

1
2

a(3)da(3)

=

ea1...ea5 ea5...a1e +

i
5!

1
7!

ea7...ea1fa1...a7,

(5.8)

where the eld strength components fa1...a4 and fa1...a7 are related by the hodge duality

fa1...a7 =

1
4!

a1...a7b1...b4f b1...b4.

(5.9)

the constraints (5.4)(5.9) are onshell d = 11 supergravity constraints since they
imply the d = 11 supergravity equations of motion (which can be alternatively obtained
from the d = 11 supergravity component actions [155, 161]).

note that in d = 11 we deal with 32component majorana spinors  = (t )c
where c is the charge conjugation matrix, and we can use c and its inverse (c1) =
c  = c to lower and raise the spinor indices. then the following antisymmetric
products of the matrices

a
  c(a)
are symmetric in the spinor indices.


,

(ca1a2),

(ca1...a5)

(5.10)

we are now in a position to describe the m-branes by applying the superembedding

methods of section 4.

5.1 the supermembrane

the superembedding of the d = 11 supermembrane was rst analyzed in [45].

the target superspace m11,32 is that of d = 11 supergravity and the embedded
supersurface m3,16, associated with the supermembrane worldvolume, is characterized by
a local supervielbein basis ea(z) = (ea, eq) (a = 0, 1, 2;  = 1, 2; q = 1, ..., 8) transformed
under the action of so(1, 2)  so(8). the d = 3 spinors are twocomponent majorana
spinors.

an appropriate form of the d = 11 matrices (4.42), (4.43), which reects the

embedding, and of the charge conjugate matrix c  to raise indices, is

a

i

a
qr
0

 = 

 = 

c  = 


0

i
qq

0


 i
qq

aqr 
 ,
0 
 ,
qr 
 .

0

0

qr

80

where i

qq  i

d = 3 matrices a

qq are the so(8) matrices, a

 are symmetric, and the
 were dened in eq. (2.49). the d = 3 spinor indices are raised

  a

a = 0, 1, 2 ,

i = 1, ..., 8 ,

(5.11)

(5.12)

(5.13)

and lowered by the unit antisymmetric matrices  and , and the so(8) indices are
raised and lowered by the unit matrices qr, qr, so that there is no distinction between
the upper and lower so(8) indices. (recall that the unprimed index q and the primed
index q correspond to dierent spinor representations of so(8)).

induced supergeometry on m3,16 is described by the general superembedding condi-

tions (4.36)(4.39), (4.46) (4.51), (4.56)(4.59) and (4.65).

we shall now analyze whether in the case under consideration their integrability puts
additional restrictions on the form of the supervielbein pullback (4.49) and on components
of the oneform  i
a,a is related to the second
fundamental form (4.28), (4.60) of the (super)surface, and if its components satisfy addi-
tional conditions, such as eqs. (4.29) and (4.61), these reproduce (super)brane equations
of motion, as eq. (4.30) in the bosonic case.

a,a in (4.58). remember that  i

a = ea  i

consider in more detail the equation (4.58). making use of the harmonic relations
(4.41), the form of the d = 11 matrices (5.11), (5.12), and the equations (4.46), (4.49),
we can rewrite eq. (4.58) in the following form

ea  i

a = eae b

a u i
= 2iereqi
a , see eq. (4.38) ).

(recall that e b

a = u b

b = ea(de b

a + e c

a  b
r, + 2ieaeqi

qqh q

c )u i

b

a v q



qqe

.

(5.14)

comparing the left and righthand sides of (5.14) we nd that

b,a =  i

eaeb  i

b,a = 0   i
 i
q,a = qe b

a u i

b = 2ii

a u i
b ,

a,b = be b
qqe
,

a v q





and

qqh q
i

r, = i

rqh q
q, .

(5.15)

(5.16)

(5.17)

let us analyze eq.
respect to the pair of the indices (r) and (q).

(5.17).

it implies that the matrix i

qqh q

r, is antisymmetric with

a general matrix hr,q is decomposed in the basis of the elements of the so(8) and

so(1, 2) cliord algebras as follows

hr,q = (hj i

qr + hj1j2j3j1j2j3

qr

) + a

(haj j

qr + haj1j2j3j1j2j3

qr

),

(5.18)

where j1j2j3

qr

denotes the antisymmetric product of the so(8) matrices [j1

qqj2

qr j3]
rr.

substituting (5.18) into (5.17) we get

qq(hj j
i

qr + hj1j2j3j1j2j3

qr

)  (q  r) = 0,

and

qq(haj j
i

qr + haj1j2j3j1j2j3

qr

) + (q  r) = 0.

(5.19)

(5.20)

81

using the dening properties of the matrices i

qq and i

qq  i

qq

qq j
i

qr + j

qq i

qr = 2qr,

we nd that eqs. (5.19) and (5.20) imply that all components of the matrix (5.18) vanish

hr,q = 0.

(5.21)

hence, in the case of the supermembrane eq. (4.51) for the spinor components e
m11,32 supervielbein pullback reduces to
q  em
e

qm z m e


m = v


q(z).




q of the

(5.22)

this, in particular, means that the induced superworldvolume torsion (4.57) obeys the
standard d = 3, n = 8 supergravity constraint

t a
q,r = 2iqra
,
which follows from (4.57), (4.41), (5.11) and (5.22).

(5.23)

the vanishing of the hmatrix (5.21) also implies that, in view of the d = 11 super-
gravity torsion constraint (5.5), the purely spinor components of the superworldvolume
torsion t q dened in (4.66) are zero

t q
r,s = 0.

(5.24)

in turn, the torsion constraints (5.23) and (5.24) imply that the covariant spinor

derivatives da  em

a m + a + aa of the superworldvolume satisfy the algebra

{dq,dr} = 2iqra

da + rqr(z),

(5.25)

where r

qr,a (z) are components of the superworldvolume curvature (4.67), (4.68).

b

5.1.1 the fermionic equation

applying the covariant derivative dr to eq. (5.22), symmetrizing the result with respect
to r and q, and making use of the basic superembedding condition (4.39), the torsion
constraint t


 = 0 (5.5) and the superalgebra (5.25) we get



dre

q + dqe



r = 2iqra


q



r  v


r

q





e
a  v

q + dqv


r.

= drv
and using the orthogonality properties of the spinor

(5.26)

then multiplying eq. (5.26) by v q
harmonics we obtain



2iqra

e



a v q

 = (rv



q)v q

 + (q  r).

(5.27)

82

(remember that r is the spinor component of the pullback of the external targetspace
dierential  = d +  and 

making use of the harmonic relations (4.41), (4.53) and the representation (5.11),

4ab(ab)


 = 1


 ).

(5.12) of the matrices, one can show that


q)v q

 =

(rv

1
4

(ru a

a )u i

a (a) 

 (i) q

q 

1
4

 i

r,a (a) 

 (i) q
q .

(5.28)

substituting (5.28) into (5.27) and taking the trace of its left and right hand side with

respect to the indices (q, r) and (

) we get

16ia

e


a v q

 =

1
4

 i

r,a (a) 

 (i)rq

.

(5.29)

on the other hand, let us take the earlier found relation (5.16) and multiply it by
 and  qr

, the result is

i

(a) 

16ia

e



a v q

 =   i

r,a (a) 

  rq

i

.

(5.30)

comparing (5.30) with (5.29) we see that their right hand sides have dierent coecients
and, hence, are zero. we thus get the additional restriction on components  i
r,a of the
second fundamental form (4.60)

 i

r,a (a)(i)rq

or, in view of (5.16),

= (a)



e

a v q

 = 0,

 i
r,a (a) = reb

au i

b (a) = 0.

(5.31)

(5.32)

eq. (5.31) is nothing but the 16component diractype fermionic equation of mo-
tion of the d = 11 supermembrane [9] written in the lorentzharmonic form [133] and
promoted to the worldvolume superspace [45]. to see this let us rewrite (5.31) in a form
similar to the fermionic equation which one derives from the supermembrane action (5.1).
first of all notice that, with the use of the harmonic relations (4.53), the form of the
a (4.38),
matrices (5.11), and the embedding conditions e
eq. (5.31) can be presented in the following form

 = 0 (4.47) and ea

a = u a


a v q

(a) 

 e


a v,q = e


a (abea

b a)v

q = 0



multiplying eq. (5.33) by v q

 we get


a (abea

e

b a)v



q v q

 

1
2

abe



a hea

b a(1  )i

where, because of the projector

1
2

(1  )



  v q




q ,
v

83

(5.33)

= 0

(5.34)

the l.h.s. of (5.34) identically vanishes under the action of the projector

1
2

(1 + )

  v q

 v 

q

(5.35)

in which one can recognize the symmetry projector of eq. (4.80). thus symmetry
insures that among the 32 equations in (5.34), only 16 are independent. and these 16
equations reduce the number of the fermionic physical modes of the supermembrane down
to 8.

using the eqs. (4.38), (4.41), (4.53), (5.11) and (5.12) it is not hard to verify that the
matrix  dened in (5.35) has exactly the same form as in the symmetry projector and
in the equations of motion of the greenschwarz formulation of the supermembrane [9]

 =

1
3!

abcabc, where a = ea

a a

(5.36)

(note that the lorentz harmonics have disappeared from eq. (5.36).) thus, at ( = 0)
the worldvolume supereld equation (5.34) (which is the consequence of (5.31) ) reduces
to the standard fermionic component equations of the supermembrane. to show this one
should choose the wesszumino gauge (see, for instance, [123]) for the components of the
inverse supervielbein e m

a (z)|=0 on the supersurface such that

 ,

a (z)|=0 = 


a () r
e m
a ()
 
  r
0
q

e m

(5.37)

(5.38)

(5.39)

(5.40)

(5.41)

and take into account the superembedding conditions ea
(5.22). then,

q = 0 (4.39) and e

q = v 
q

a v,q|=0 = em
e

a ()mz m e

and the worldvolume gravitino eld q

a|=0 = em
ea

a ()mz m ea

a ()ea

m(z()),

m|=0  em
m v,q|=0  em
a () (5.37) is express in terms of e

m(z())v,q().

a ()e

m(z())

q
a () = e() m

a e

mv q

 (),

due to the superembedding condition (4.47).

then the component equation of motion for () takes the form

gmne



mhea

na(1  )i

= 0,

gmn() = ea

mena() = ea

meb

nab.

5.1.2 the bosonic equation

once the supermembrane fermionic equations are implied by superembedding, we can
expect that (because of supersymmetry) also the bosonic equations should appear. as
we have shown, the bosonic eld equations (4.30) of a bosonic brane are encoded in the
minimal embedding condition (4.29). we shall now nd an inhomogeneous generalization

84

of the minimal embedding condition, the inhomogeneity reecting the interaction of the
supermembrane with the supergravity gauge eld a(3)(z).

it is a simple exercise to show that the bosonic eld equations must hold provided
that the fermionic equations (5.31) hold. this can be veried in dierent ways, one of
which is to analyze the pullback components t 
of the torsion constraint (5.5). we,
however, nd it here simpler to look at the eqer components of the codazzi equation
(4.69)

a,qv r



 2iqrb



b,a  dq  i
 i

r,a  dr  i

q,a = r

i
qr,a .

(5.42)

multiplying (5.42) by a and qr, and taking into account the fermionic equation (5.31)
we get

ab  i

b,a  ab(aea

b )u i

a = 

i
32

aqrr

i
qr,a .

(5.43)

we observe that, in comparison with the bosonic minimal embedding condition (4.29), the
bosonic equation (5.43) acquires the r.h.s. if we now look at the supergravity curvature
constraint (5.6) we realize that the r.h.s. of (5.43) contains components of the eld
strength f (4) of the d = 11 supergravity gauge eld a(3). hence, the r.h.s. of (5.43)
describes the coupling of the supermembrane to a(3). its form is the same as that obtained
from the wesszumino term of the supermembrane worldvolume action (5.1). to see this
we should take the corresponding eqer components of the curvature pullback (5.6) and
make use of the basic superembedding condition (4.39), the relation (5.22), the form of
the matrices (4.42), (4.43) and the harmonic relations (4.41), (4.53). if we do this, and
take the leading ( = 0) component of eq. (5.43) in the wesszumino gauge (5.37)(5.40),
the r.h.s. of (5.43) takes the form

i
32



aqrr

i

qr,a|=0 = 
= 

1
3!

1

3!g

abced

aec

b eb

cf a

bcd u i

a

lmned

l ec

neb

nf a

bcd u i
a ,

where

m  mz m ea
ea

m|=0,

gmn() = ea

mena() = ea

meb

nab.

the  = 0 component of the lefthand side of eq. (5.43) is rewritten as follows

(5.44)

(5.45)

1

=

=

b )u i

ab(aea
a |=0 = abem
a ()(men
b ea
gm(cid:16)ggmnea
1
n(cid:17) u i
a  2igmne
gm(cid:16)ggmnea
n(cid:17) u i
mv q
a  2ie
gm(cid:16)ggmnea
2i
n(cid:17) u i
g
a 
= " 1
m(cid:16)ggmnea
n(cid:17) + gmnea
meb
g

=

1

n)u i

a ()  abq
 e


n v,r(i) r
q

mv q

a ()(qea

b )u i

a ()

 ([mn])e



n v r



(i)qr

 (l)e


n v r



(i)qr

lmne

mv q
a,b # u i
n a
a 

85

lmneb
l

em a

b enu i
a .

i

g

when developing eq. (5.45) we used the relations (5.37)(5.40) and (5.16), the harmonic
relations (4.41), the matrices (5.11) and (5.12), and the fermionic equation (5.31).

putting together (5.44) and (5.45) we nally get

m(cid:16)ggmnea

n(cid:17) + gmnea
meb

n a

a,b +

1

3!g

" 1
g

where

lmned

l ec

meb

n f

a

bcd = lmn[ed

l ec

meb

nf a

bcd  3!ieb

l

lmned

l ec

n eb

n f

a

bcd # u i

a = 0,

(5.46)

em a

b en]

is the pullback onto the bosonic worldvolume of the constrained eld strength (5.7).

in the square brackets of (5.46) one can recognize the conventional scalar eld equa-
tions of the supermembrane [9] obtained from the action (5.1). if we multiply them by
ema we may check that they are identically zero (modulo the fermionic equations (5.41) ),
which reects the d = 3 worldvolume reparametrization invariance of the theory. hence,
indeed, only eight worldvolume scalar eld equations are independent.

to conclude this subsection we repeat the main expressions which describe the d = 11

supermembrane in the superembedding approach.

5.1.3 main superembedding equations for the m2brane

the superembedding conditions are

ea(x m(z), (z)) = eau a

a (z)  ea

q = 0,

e(x m(z), (z)) =

1
2

1
2

(1  )

  v q



v 
q ,

(1  )
1
 =
3!

 eae


a + eqv 

q(z),

abcabc, a = ea

aa.

(5.47)

(5.48)

this form of the projector was introduced in [94, 53].

the supermembrane equations of motion (encoded in (5.47) and (5.48) ) are

a )u i

a (a) = 0 = (a)

e



a v q



,

(5.49)

(rea
(cid:18)abaea

b +

abced

in the static gauge x a = a, v r

1
3!
 = r, in at target superspace and in the at
q = dqx a  idqa,
(linearized) limit of the worldvolume supergeometry, where ea
the superembedding condition reduces to the supereld constraint on the transversal
oscillations of the supermembrane

bcd (cid:19) u i
cf a

a = 0.

(5.50)

aec

b eb

dqx i = i(i) q

q q,

q  v,q.

(5.51)

this constraint describes an n = 8, d = 3 onshell scalar supermultiplet.

86

note that acting on  by the harmonics v r

and v,q we transform the worldvolume
scalar fermions  into the worldvolume spinors r and q. when this is done, eq. (5.49)
becomes the standard d = 3 dirac equation for q. indeed, using the superembedding
relations, it is a simple exercise to varify that in at target superspace, where e = d,
eq. (5.49) can be rewritten (modulo (5.43) or (5.50)) in the dirac form



a m +  

a + a r

aq

(a)daq = 0,
is the worldvolume covariant derivative.

(5.52)

where da = e m

thus, the supersymmetric eld theory in the worldvolume of the supermembrane
governed by eqs. (5.49) and (5.50) is that of the n = 8, d = 3 scalar supermultiplet
having eight bosonic and eight fermionic physical modes.

5.2 the super5brane

we now turn to the most impressive example of the power of superembedding which has
allowed one to get the onshell description of the mtheory 5brane without using the
action principle [51, 52].

the supersurface m6,16 associated with the super5brane worldvolume is charac-
terized by a local supervielbein frame ea(z) = (ea, eq) (a = 0, 1, ..., 5,  = 1, ..., 4;
q = 1, ..., 4) whose components form the vector and spinor representations of the group
so(1, 5)  so(5). namely, the index  stands for a spinor representation of su(4) 
spin(1, 5) and the index q is that of the spinor representation of usp(4)  spin(5).

the d = 6 spinors are usp(4) simplectic majoranaweyl spinors [117, 120]. they
are dened in the same way as the su(2) simplectic majoranaweyl spinors, which we
introduced in subsection 2.5.4, eqs. (2.73)(2.74).

eq := e 

q = b 

ercrq,

(5.53)

where cqr is the antisymmetric usp(4) invariant tensor, its inverse being (c1)qr =
c qr  cqr. the matrices c qr and cqr can be used to raise and lower the usp(4)
spinor indices using the rules er = eqcqr, eq = c qrer.

the matrix b is dened by the conditions

bab1 = (a), bb = 1

and * denotes complex conjugation.

the 4  4 matrices (a) are antisymmetric.
we note that the matrix b 

 can be used to convert the dotted indices (of the complex
conjugate representation) into undotted ones, so that one can always deal with only
undotted indices, but there is no su(4) invariant tensor for lowering the su(4) spinor

87

indices. thus, the spinors q and q
chiral (weyl) and another one is antichiral.

 have dierent su(4) chiralities, one of them is

the supersurface m6,16 under consideration is therefore a d = 6, (2, 0) chiral super-

space (where 2 stands for usp(4)) .

an appropriate form of the d = 11 matrices (4.42), (4.43) and of the charge con-

jugation matrices c = c  , which reects the embedding of m6,16 into m11,32, is

a

i

0

a = 0, 1, ..., 5 ,

0
(i)q

r

a
cqr
0

ac qr 
 ,

 ,

 = 

 = 


c = c  = 

s ctr are usp(4)  so(5) gammamatrices. the matrices

0 
 .

0
q

r

i = 1, ..., 5 ,

(5.56)


 (i) r
q

0

 r

q

(5.54)

(5.55)

 and a are antisymmetric and dened by the

in (5.55) (i)q
(i)qr = (i) t

r = c qs(i) t

q ctr are antisymmetric.
in (5.54) the su(4) matrices a

following relations

a
 b + b

 a = 2

ab,

tr(ab) = 4ab,

aa

 = 2.

 = abc

([abc])  abc
([abc]) =

 = 
abcdef (def ).

abcdef (def ).

1
6

1
6

(5.57)

(5.58)

(5.59)

eqs. (5.58) and (5.59) imply that the antisymmetric product of three so(1, 5) 

matrices is symmetric in spinor indices and (anti)selfdual in vector indices.
the su(4) usp(4) splitting of the d = 11 lorentzspinor harmonics v


 and their

inverse is as follows


 = (v r
v

 , v,r),

(v1) 

 = (v 

r , vr,).

(5.60)

the induced supergeometry on m6,16 is described by the general superembedding
conditions (4.36)(4.39), (4.46)(4.51), (4.56)(4.59), (4.65). as in the case of the super-
membrane, our goal is to nd further restrictions on components of  i
a,a required
by the integrability of the superembedding conditions and to identify these restrictions
with the 5brane equations of motion. so we repeat the steps made in the previous
subsection.

a = ea  i

the n = 1, d = 6 superspace with one su (2) simplectic majoranaweyl coordinate (discussed
in subsection 2.5.4) is also called d = 6, (1,0) chiral superspace, since the number of its grassmann
coordinates is half the number of those in the (2, 0) superspace.

88

we again analyze the condition (4.58). making use of the harmonic relations (4.41)
and (5.60), the form of the d = 11 matrices (5.54) and (5.55), and the equations (4.46)
and (4.49), we rewrite eq. (4.58) in the following form

ea  i

a = eae b

a u i

b = ea(du b

a + u c

a  b

c )u i

b

= 2ieqer(i) s

q hr,s + 2ieaeq(i) r

q e


a v,r.

comparing the left and the righthand side of (5.61) we nd that

b,a =  i

eaeb  i

b,a = 0   i
 i
q,a = qe b

a u i

a u i
b ,

a,b = be b

a v,r,
q e

b = 2i(i) r

and

(i) s

q hr,s = (i) s

r hq,s.

(5.61)

(5.62)

(5.63)

(5.64)

in the basis of the so(1, 5)  so(5) matrices an arbitrary matrix hq,r has the

following decomposition

hq,r = cqr[haa

 +

1
6

habcabc

 ] + ij

qr[h[ij]aa

 + h[ij]abcabc
 ].

(5.65)

substituting eq. (5.65) into (5.64) we nd that the only nonzero component of hq,r is

hq,r = cqrh =

1
6

cqrhabcabc
 ,

habc =

1
6

abcdef hdef ,

where habc(z) is a selfdual tensor due to the matrix relations (5.58).

the matrix h satises the identities

h ah = 2habchbcdd
,


a h a = 0,

tr(h[abc]) = 8habc,

(5.66)

(5.67)

(5.68)

(5.69)

which we shall use below.

we have thus observed that the integrability of the superembedding conditions reveals
the presence of a selfdual tensor eld on the embedded supersurface. later on this self
dual tensor will be related to the eld strength h (3) = db(2)  a(3) of the 5brane tensor
gauge eld which appeared in the m5brane action (5.3).

in view of eq. (5.66) the general embedding condition (4.51) reduces to



q  em
e

qm z m e


m = v



q (z) + hcqrvr,.

(5.70)

we may now derive the eqer components of the supersurface torsion (4.57) and

(4.66).

89

using eqs. (4.57) and (5.70), the harmonic relations (4.41), the matrix decomposi-

tion (5.54) and the identity (5.67) we get

t a
q,r = 2icqrb

m a

b , m a

b   a

b  2hbcdhacd.

(5.71)

we observe that eq. (5.71) diers from the standard supergravity torsion constraint
(5.23) by the nonunit matrix m a
b . the reason for this is that (as in the case of the
bosonic surface) we have chosen the bosonic embedding condition (4.36) such that the
induced metric of the embedded surface is of the standard greenschwarz type (4.38)
which is used in the construction of the m5brane action (5.3). if we wanted to have the
standard constraint on the torsion of the supersurface m6,16 (i.e. with  a
instead of m a
b
in (5.71)), we should redene the m6,16 supervielbein ea in (4.36) as follows

b

ea  ebu a

b (z) = ea(z) = ebm a
b ,

the price for this would be that in the new frame ea the metric gmn = ea
mena on m6,16
does not coincide with the induced metric of the greenschwarztype. so we prefer to
work in the standard (induced) frame on m6,16 .

we now look at the eqer components of the torsion t s (4.66). because of our choice
of the supersurface connection (4.62), (4.65) and the presence of the tensor h(z), they are
nonzero and have the following form

t s
q,r = cqth(rvt,)v s

 + (q)  (r).

(5.72)

in view of (5.71) and (5.72) the anticommutator of the supersurface covariant deriva-
tives dq gets modied and acquires an additional term in comparison with that of the
supermembrane (5.25)

{dq,dr} = 2icqra

m b

a db  t s

q,rds + rq,r(z).

(5.73)

5.2.1 the tensor eld equation

we are now in a position to relate habc(z) to the eld strength hlmn() of the worldvolume
gauge eld bmn() of the m5brane action. by denition, in the bosonic worldvolume (5.2)

the bianchi identity for (5.74) is

h (3) = db  a(3).

dh (3) = da(3) = f (4),

(5.74)

(5.75)

where a(3) and f (4) are the pullbacks onto the bosonic worldvolume of the d = 11 gauge
eld potential and of its eld strength, respectively.

the eaframe has been used for the description of the m5brane superembedding in the reference

[51], and the transition to the greenschwarz frame has been discussed in [52].

90

to nd the relation between h (3) and habc(, ) we should promote the equations
(5.74) and (5.75) to the supersurface m6,16, i.e. to consider b(2)(z) and h (3)(z) as m6,16
superelds.

since habc(z) carries only vector indices it is natural to assume that the supereld

habc = e l

a e m

b e n

c hlm n (z),

also has only nonzero components with three vector indices habc(z), i.e.

hq,bc(z) = 0.

(5.76)

the assumption (5.76) about the structure of the superform h (3) is consistent with the
bianchi identity (5.75) extended to the supersurface, which allows one to express habc(z)
in terms of habc(z) and to nd the equation of motion of habc(z) (or habc(z)), as we shall
do in a moment.

we should stress in advance that eq. (5.76) is not an additional constraint on the
superembedding since, as the analysis has shown [51, 52], the equations for habc(z) which
follow from the bianchi identity (5.75) are equivalent to those which are contained in the
basic superembedding condition ea

q = 0 (4.39).

let us analyze the bianchi identity (5.75). to this end we rewrite it in the following

form

dh (3) =

1
2

(dec)ebeahabc +

edecebeadahbcd

1
6

1
6

edecebeaddhabc = 

1
4!

=

1
2

t cebeahabc +

edecebeafabcd.

(5.77)

in view of (5.76), of the torsion constraint (5.71) and of the d = 11 eld strength con-
straint (5.7), the rst nonzero component of eq. (5.77) is that of eqereced

icqra

m b

a hbcd = ie

q(ab)e



rea

c eb
d.

(5.78)

making use of the harmonic relations (4.41) and (5.60), the form (5.54)(5.61) of the
matrices, the relation (5.70) for e

c , we reduce (5.78) to

q, and that ea

c = ua

a
m d

a hdbc = ([bc]) 

 h  h([bc])
.

(5.79)

then, multiplying (5.79) by 
nally arrive at the relation between habc and habc

a

and making use of the identities (5.57) and (5.69), we

a hdbc = 4habc  habc = 4(m1) d
m d

a hdbc.

(5.80)

using the selfduality of habc and the denition (5.71) of m b

a =  b

a  2hacdhbcd one can

show that

(m1) b

a =

1
1  2

3k2 (2 b

a  m b
a ),

a  hacdhbcd,
k b

k2 

1
6

tr(kk).

(5.81)

91

it is then not hard to check that the r.h.s. of (5.80) is indeed totally antisymmetric
because of the selfduality of habc. for this one should notice that k d
a hdbc is antiselfdual

k d
a hdbc = 

1
6

abcdef kdd1h ef

d1

.

(5.82)

the form of the expressions (5.80) implies that though habc obeys ordinary hodge
selfduality (5.66), the eld strength habc satises a much more complicated nonlinear
selfduality condition. its explicit form can be derived from the m5brane action (5.3)
as an equation of motion of bmn [162, 159, 63, 64], or directly from (5.80) [163]. we refer
the reader to these papers for details on the dierent forms of the generalized selfduality
condition.

note that at the linearized level, when m a
b

is replaced with  a

b , habc becomes propor-

tional to habc and satises the ordinary hodge selfduality condition.

when the eld strength of a gauge eld is selfdual, its bianchi identities are equivalent
to the gauge eld equations of motion. we shall now show how the bianchi identities (5.75)
produce the tensor eld equations in the case under consideration.

consider the eaebeced component of the bianchi identity (5.77). it has the form

1
6

abcdef (cid:16)dchdef + 3t f1

cd hef f1(cid:17) = 

1
4!

abcdef ed

c ec

d eb

e ea

f fabcd,

or

1
6

abcdef dchdef = 

1
4!

abcdef ed

c ec

d eb

e ea

f fabcd,

where, for convenience, we have introduced the covariant derivative dc

dc = e m

c m + c,ba = e m

c m +(cid:18)c,ba 

1
2

(tcb,a  tca,b  tba,c)(cid:19) .

(5.83)

(5.84)

(5.85)

for such a

note that in the pure bosonic limit the connection ba is torsion free, i.e.
connection the components t a

bc of the torsion t a = dea are zero.

we now substitute hdef in (5.84) with (m1) f1

d hf1ef (5.80), and use the relations

(5.81), (5.71) and (5.82) to get

4 dc(

1
1  2

3k2 mc

dhdab) = 

1
4!

abcdef ed

c ec

d eb

e ea

f fabcd.

(5.86)

eq. (5.86) is the equation of motion for the selfdual tensor eld habc.

we conclude that the bianchi identity (5.75) with h (3) dened by the relation (5.80)

is equivalent to the eld equations of the selfdual worldvolume tensor eld.

let us now proceed with deriving

5.2.2 the fermionic equation

to get the fermionic eld (z) equation of the m5brane we hit the left and the right
hand side of eq. (5.70) with the covariant derivative dr, symmetrize with respect to the

92

pairs of indices (q) and (r), and multiply the resulting expression by v,s. we thus
obtain









a e

b v,s + cqth(rvt,)v t1
 e

t1v,s  e
m b
qv,s + (drhcqtvt,)v,s + (q)  (r).

icqra
= drv
to simplify eq. (5.87) we should make use of the expression (5.70), the identity (5.67),
a and the target
a , and to recall that due to the harmonic relations (4.59) and

the relations (4.62) and (4.65) between the supersurface connection  b
superspace connection  b
(4.76), and the form of the matrices (5.54) and (5.55)

r, v,s + (q)  (r)
(5.87)

q


q)v,s =

(rv
(rvq,)v s

 =

1
(ru a
4
1
(ru a
4

a )u i

1
(i)qs 
4
a a(i)qs 

 i

r,a a
1
4

 i

a )u i

a a

(i)qs,

r,a a(i)qs.

(5.88)

we thus reduce (5.87) to

2icqra

m b

a e


b v,s =

1
4

b
m a

b

 i
r,a (i)qs + drhcqs + (q)  (r).

(5.89)

let us multiply eq. (5.89) by c qr and 
with the covariant derivative of h vanishes and we get

c c. because of the identity (5.68) the term

16i

b mbae



a v,s = 

b mba  i

q,a (i)q

s.

(5.90)

now take the relation (5.63) and multiply it by (i)q

s and 

b mba. we have

10i

b mbae



a v,s = 

b mba  i

q,a (i)q

s.

(5.91)

comparing (5.90) with (5.91) we see that the coecients on their lefthand sides do not
match, and hence (also in view of (5.63))


b mbae

a v,q = 0 = 

b mba  i
q,a .



(5.92)

we have thus arrived at the 16component fermionic eld equation of motion of the
m5brane similar to that of the supermembrane (5.31), the only dierence being in the
presence of the worldvolume selfdual tensor habc(z) in the m5brane equation via the
matrix m a

b =  a

b  hbcdhacd.

let us now rewrite eq. (5.92) in the greenschwarz form similar to the supermembrane

equation (5.34).

first of all we use the harmonic relations (4.41) and (5.60), the form of the matrices

(5.54), and the embedding conditions e


a v q

 = 0 (4.47) and ea

a = u a

a (4.38) to get

mbae


a (ea

b a)vq, = 0.

(5.93)

93

then, to hide the supersurface spinor indices, we multiply (5.93) by

e,q  vq  v r

 hcrq.

(5.94)

we get

mbae


a (ea

b a)vq,e,q 

1
2

mbae



a hea

b a(1  )i

= 0.

(5.95)

the choice of the matrix e,q is prompted by the requirement that the resulting fermionic
equation is invariant under the symmetry transformations (as the superbrane dynamical
equations must always be). this means that this equation should be annihilated by the
symmetry projector (4.80), (4.81) whose form is

(1 + )

1
2

  v r

 e 

r = v r

 (v 

r + crshvs,).

(5.96)

so we have chosen e,q in such a way that e 

r e,q  0.

finally we use the form (5.66) of h and the harmonic relations (4.41) to nd the
explicit form of the matrix  of eq. (5.95) in terms of antisymmetric products of the
d = 11 matrices (5.54), (5.55)

 =

1
6!

a1...a6a1...a6 +

1
3

habcabc, a = ea

a a.

(5.97)

thus we have derived the greenschwarztype fermionic equation of motion (5.95) of
the super5brane. in the wesszumino gauge (5.37) its  = 0 component has the form

1
2

mbaem

b en

ae



mhea

na(1  )i

= 0,

(5.98)

where ea

m = mz m ea

m (z()), (a = , a).

5.2.3 the scalar equation

to identify the equations of motion of the superworldvolume scalar elds x m(z) we an-
alyze the eaeq components of the pullback of the target superspace torsion t  (5.5)
multiplied by e,r dened in (5.94).

t e,r  (e)e,r

= t ae
= t be

ae,r + ea(e
b e,r + ea(e

a   b
a   b

a e
a e

b)e,r
b)e,r

(5.99)

where t a = (t b, t q) is the supersurface induced torsion dened in (4.57) and (4.66).
note that the term with t q has disappeared from (5.99) since by denition e
qe,r  0
(see eqs. (5.94), (5.96) ). the eaeq components of (5.99) are

t 
a,qe,r = t b

a,qe

b e,r  (qe

a +  b

q,ae

b )e,r  (ae

q)e,r.

(5.100)

94

using the denition of e

q (5.70) and e,r (5.94), i.e.

e

q = v 

q(z) + hcqsvs,, e,r = vr  v s

 hcsr,

the orthogonality properties of the harmonics (5.60) and the relations (4.62), (4.64) and
(5.88) for the supersurface and target superspace connections, the last term of (5.100)
can be rewritten as

(ae

q)e,r =

1
4

 i

a,bm c

b c(i)qr + dahcqr.

thus eq. (5.100) takes the following form

 i

a,b m c

b c(i)qr + dahcqr = (t b

a,qe

b  t 

a,q)e,r  kq,a,r,

1
4

where

(5.101)

(5.102)

kq,a,r  (qe

a + 

b

q,a e

b )e,r

are components of the second fundamental form introduced in (4.60).

the equation of motion of the worldvolume scalar elds x m(z) is obtained from (5.102)

by multiplying the latter by mad

d (i)rq

mbcm a
c

=

1
4

 i
a,b  mbcm a
d (i)qrh(t b

c (aea
a,qe

b )u i
b  t 

a

mad

a,q)e,r  kq,a,ri .

(5.103)

we observe that the l.h.s. of (5.103) has the form similar to the supermembrane
replacing the minkowski metric ab.
bosonic equation (5.43) but with the matrix mbcm a
c
the complicated r.h.s. of eq. (5.103) describes the interaction of the super5brane with
the d = 11 gauge eld strength f (4) = da(3).

note that since (5.102) contains the vector derivative of h, from (5.102) we can also
derive another form of the equation of motion of the tensor eld habc. to this end we
multiply (5.42) by c qr and mad([dbc]). using the identity (5.69) we get

1
32

c qrmad([dbc])h(t b

maddahdbc = 
the form of eq. (5.104) diers from that of eq. (5.76), but a somewhat tedious analysis
shows that the two equations are in fact equivalent [51, 52] modulo the fermionic equation
(5.95).

a,q)e,r  kq,a,ri .

b  t 

a,qe

(5.104)

the ve scalar eld equations (5.103) have a rather complicated structure of the right
hand side. cumbersome manipulations using the form of the torsion constraints (5.4) and
(5.5), the superembedding conditions ea
q = 0 and (5.70), the harmonic relations (4.41),
the form of the d = 11 matrices (5.54)(5.56) and the identities (5.80)(5.82) allow

95

one to disentangle eqs. (5.103) and to present their leading ( = 0) components (which
are the proper equations for xm()) in the following form

hgmn(dnea
g(1  2


m1m6

m + eb

m a
nb )
3k2)   1

f a

6!

m6m1 

1
(3!)2 (f a

m6m5m4  ea

nf n

m6m5m4)hm3m2m1!# u i

a = 0,

(5.105)

where all quantities depend only on the bosonic worldvolume coordinate m,

gmn() = mbcm a

c em

b en

a(),

ea

m = mz m ea

m (z()),

fmpm1 = e

ap

mp    ea1

m1fa1ap(z()),

(p = 4, 7)

and

dm = m + l

mn()

is the covariant derivative with the christoel symbol l
volume induced metric gmn() = ea

meb

nab.

mn() determined by the world-

the expression in the square brackets of (5.105) is the same as the one obtained from

the m5brane action (5.3) as the xm() equation of motion.

the equivalence of the m5brane equations of motion (5.98) and (5.105), and of the
selfduality relation (5.80) to the equations of motion yielded by the m5brane action
(5.3) has been demonstrated in [164]. the proof is not straightforward, since in the action
one deals directly with the eld strength hmnl and not with habc, and a projector 1
2(1 + ),
which appears in an natural way in the symmetry transformations of the action, diers
from the symmetry projector (5.96), (5.97) of the superembedding approach. the two
projectors are related to each other by the identities

1 + 

1 + 

2

2

=

1 + 

2

,

1 + 

1 + 

2

2

=

1 + 

2

.

for details we refer the reader to the papers [63, 164], and to [165] where the equivalence
of the covariant energymomentum tensors of the m5brane in both approaches has been
discussed.

the two formulations of the m5brane have been applied to studying various aspects
of mtheory and its duals in [65, 166][170, 161, 171][182, 103][190] and [74, 191][196].
to summarize, in the superembedding approach the m5brane is described by the

following main relations.

5.2.4 main superembedding equations for the m5brane

the superembedding conditions are

ea(x m(z), (z)) = eau a

a (z)  ea

q = 0,

(5.106)

96

e(x m(z), (z)) =

1
2

(1  0)

 eae


a + eq(v 

q(z) + hcqrvr,),

(5.107)

h =

1
6

abc
 habc,

1
2

(1  0)

 = v,rvr,, 0 =

1
6!

a1a6a1a6, a = ea

aa.

the m5brane equations of motion encoded in (5.106) and (5.107) are the fermionic eld
equation


b mbae



a v,q = 0 = 
b  2k a
b ,

b mbaqeb
k a
b = hacdhbcd,

au i
b ,

m a

b =  a

(5.108)

the worldvolume scalar eld equation

mbcm a

c (aea

b )u i

a =

f a

a6a1 

1
(3!)2 f a

a6a5a4ha3a2a1! u i

a ,

(5.109)

6!

a1a6
3 k2   1
1  2
ap    ea1

ap

where f a
and the selfdual tensor eld equation

apa1 = f a

apa1e

a1 , (p = 3, 6);

1
4!

edecebeafabcd, habc = 4(m1) d

dh (3) = 
as in the case of the supermembrane (see eq. (5.51)) in the linearized limit the su-
perembedding condition (5.106) reduces to the constraint on the superelds corresponding
to the transverse oscillations of the super5brane

abcdef hdef .

a hdbc,

(5.110)

habc =

1
6

dqx i = i(i) r

q r,

r  v,r,

i = 0, 1    5,

q, r = 1,   , 4 .

this constraint describes an n = (2, 0), d = 6 onshell tensor supermultiplet.

thus, the supersymmetric eld theory in the worldvolume of the m5brane governed
by eqs. (5.108)(5.110) is that of the n = (2, 0), d = 6 tensor supermultiplet which on the
mass shell has ve scalar, three (selfdual) tensor and eight fermionic physical modes.

6 other developments and applications

6.1 the generalized action principle

in sections 2 and 3 we have constructed doubly supersymmetric supereld actions for su-
perparticles and superstrings which produce the basic superembedding condition ea
q = 0
dynamically. this has been possible because in these cases the superembedding condition
does not contain dynamical eld equations, and the latter should be obtained by imposing
the minimal embedding conditions, or from an action.

this method of constructing worldvolume supereld actions can be used in other cases
where the superembedding condition does not put the superbrane on the mass shell, as,

97

for example, n = 2, d = 3, 4 and 6 superparticles [42, 69], the n = 2, d = 3 superstring
[42], the n = 1, d = 4 supermembrane [70] and an n = 2, d = 4 spacelling d3brane.
as we have seen, in the case of the mtheory branes the superembedding condition
implies the dynamical equations of motion. therefore, if one tried to construct a world-
volume supereld action for these branes using the prescription of sections 2 and 3, i.e.
by introducing the superembedding condition into the action with a lagrange multiplier,
this lagrange multiplier supereld would acquire dynamical equations and thus would
contain redundant degrees of freedom, which are absent from the spectrum of the brane
theories of interest. this is analogous, for instance, to the supereld formulations of
tendimensional superyangmills theory and d = 10 and d = 11 supergravities whose
supereld constraints put the theories on the mass shell, and the way of constructing
supereld actions for them has not been found.

in such cases one should either deal with component actions, as greenschwarztype
actions for the superbranes, or consider so called generalized actions, whose construction is
based on a group manifold (rheonomic) approach which has been developed in application
to supersymmetric eld theories in [73] and in application to superbranes in [72] and, from
somewhat dierent perspective, in [70].

the main principles of the construction of the generalized actions (which we enumerate

for superbranes [72, 78]) are

i) in the superworldvolume of the superbrane with the number of bosonic dimensions
d = p + 1 embedded into a ddimensional target superspace one constructs a p + 1
superform l(p+1) which is closed, dl(p+1) = 0, modulo the superembedding condition
ea
q = 0 (or the one which replaces it in the case of the spacelling branes [75]). the
superform is constructed from the pullbacks of the targetspace supervielbeins, the har-
monic variables (which are auxiliary worldvolume superelds) and from the eld strengths
of the worldvolume gauge elds, when present. it contains both the kinetic and the wess
zumino term of the superbrane lagrangian. a systematic way to get this form (which
can always be found) has been proposed in [70]. an example of such a form has been
considered in the case of the heterotic string in subsections 3.2.2 and 3.2.3 (eqs. (3.50)
and (3.58)).

ii) the integral of this superform over an arbitrary p + 1dimensional bosonic sub-

manifold mp+1 = (m, ()) of the superworldvolume is the generalized action

s = zmp+1

l(p+1).

(6.1)

so the generalized action is not a fully edged worldvolume supereld action.

iii) but, in spite of the fact that the integration is performed over a bosonic subman-
ifold, the action (6.1) is superdieomorphism invariant in the whole superworldvolume
modulo the superembedding condition

s = zmp+1

l(p+1) = zmp+1

d(il(p+1)) +zmp+1

idl(p+1),

(6.2)

98

where il(p+1) := 1
(6.2) is a total derivative and the second term vanishes because of the condition i).

p!dzlp    dzl1zm lm l1lp. we see that the rst term in the variation

iv) the variation of the surface mp+1 in the action functional (6.1) is equivalent to the
superdieomorphisms () of the superworldvolume in the odd directions orthogonal to
mp+1, which leads to the condition dl(p+1) = 0. as a result, because of iii) the variation
of the action (6.2) with respect to the worldvolume superelds yields the superembedding
conditions and the supereld equations of motion in the whole worldvolume superspace.
when contained in the superembedding conditions, the equations of motion do not pro-
duce any new information in addition to the superembedding conditions.

v) when the integration surface is chosen to be (m;  = 0) and we take the integral
of the leading component l(p+1)|=0=d of the superform, the generalized action (6.1) is
reduced to a component action, which can be then rewritten in the greenschwarz form.
an example related to the generalized action taken at  = 0 is the property of the
weil triviality of the term (3.65) of the doubly supersymmetric string action considered
in subsection 3.2.3, with the twoform (3.58) being closed up to the superembedding
condition.

because of a solid geometrical ground the generalized action formalism can be useful,
for example, for deriving component actions of supersymmetric models for which actions
have been unknown.

the generalized actions have been constructed for the ordinary superpbranes [72,
150], the superdbranes [197, 75] and (implicitly) for so called lbranes [198] whose
physical modes form linear supermultiplets. for the m5brane the generalized action
which extends the greenschwarz-type action (5.3) to the worldvolume superspace and
which produces the superembedding conditions is still unknown because of problems
caused by the presence of the selfdual eld.

for further details on the generalized action approach to supereld theories we refer

the reader to original literature [73, 72, 197, 78, 150, 75, 70].

6.2 dbranes, lbranes and branes ending on branes

we have already mentioned that the superembedding approach is applicable to the de-
scription of all known superbranes, including the dirichlet branes [50, 197, 75], and it
has also been used to derive equations of motion and actions for a class of branes called
lbranes [50, 198] which contain on their worldvolumes antisymmetric gauge elds dual
to worldvolume scalars or vectors.

as in the case of the m5brane the worldvolume gauge elds of the dbranes and l
branes (or more precisely their eld strengths) show up in the superembedding condition
(4.49) as the spintensor eld h 
q (z). the analysis of the superembedding integrability
conditions involving h 
is made along the lines explained with the example of the m5-
q

99

brane and reveals the borninfeld structure of equations of motion of the gauge elds.

lbranes can be obtained, by dualizing vector elds of dpbrane actions [199, 158, 177,
207], and from standard superpbranes by a direct dimensional reduction of the target
superspace and the dualization of worldvolume scalars, corresponding to compactied
dimensions, into rank p  1 antisymmetric elds, which enter the linear supermultiplet of
the supersymmetric worldvolume eld theory.

in some cases, when, for example, there are eight supersymmetries in the worldvolume,
the scalar supermultiplets are on the mass shell, while the corresponding dual linear
supermultiplets are oshell, and the lbranes admit the o-shell worldvolume supereld
description [198].

in the superembedding approach lbranes naturally appear when for a given super-
surface and target superspace the basic superembedding condition yields the supereld
constraint of the linear supermultiplet [50]. the lbrane duals of d-branes also occur
when one considers dpbranes ending on d(p+2)branes [74].

the consideration of open branes ending on another (host) branes from the point of
view of superembedding is an interesting problem of its own, as, for instance, studying
an m2brane ending on an m5brane. the investigation of such brane congurations
has been carried out in [74], where it has been demonstrated that the basic principles of
superembedding work perfectly well also in these cases. it has been shown that if the
constraints on the superworldvolume of the open brane are imposed, the superembedding
conditions determine the superworldvolume constraints for the host branes, and provide
one with information about the dynamics of the boundary of the open brane in the host
brane.

for further details we refer the reader to the original literature cited above.

6.3 nonlinear realizations and superembeddings

we have already discussed that the presence of the superbranes in the target superspaces
(partially) breaks supersymmetry of the background vacuum. this supersymmetry break-
ing is spontaneous, since the worldvolume equations of motion of the superbrane are
manifestly invariant under targetspace supersymmetry, while their (classical vacuum)
solutions preserve only a fraction of the supersymmetry transformations.

the superbrane congurations whose worldvolume actions possess symmetry, with
the number of independent parameters being half the number of targetspace supersym-
metries, include bps states which preserve half the supersymmetry.

an eective grouptheoretical and geometrical method to describe theories with spon-
taneously broken symmetries is the method of nonlinear realizations of symmetries (or
the coset space approach) which is based on the cartan theory of group manifolds and
coset spaces.

100

for the rst time this method was applied in physics to the construction of phenomeno-
logical lagrangians of particle interactions by callan, coleman, wess and zumino [200],
and independently by volkov [201].
it was then used for the construction of the rst
globally supersymmetric eld theory [202] and supergravity [203].

since branes naturally provide us with a geometrical mechanism of partial (super)symmetry

breaking (which is nothing but the goldstonehiggs mechanism), it is natural to apply
to the description of the eld theory on the worldvolume of the brane the method of
nonlinear realizations.

this has been done in a number of papers.
a super3brane in n = 1, d = 6 superspace as a model of partial spontaneous n = 2

supersymmetry breaking in d = 4 was considered in [204, 205].

an n = 1, d = 4 supermembrane and n = 2, d = 2 superparticles were discussed in

[206].

in the static gauge a worldvolume n = 1 supereld borninfeldtype action for the
d3brane in n = 2, d = 4 superspace was rst constructed in [71] as the nonlinear action
of the goldstonemaxwell supermultiplet for partially broken n = 2 supersymmetry. and
the gauge xed supereld action for its dual l3brane was derived in [207].

the formalism of partial supersymmetry breaking has been further developed in ap-

plication to branes in superstring and mtheory in [208, 209, 210, 211].

because of its nature, this method is applicable to the description of (super)branes
propagating in the backgrounds with isometries, which have the geometry of coset (su-
per)spaces, such as at superspace or antidesitter superspaces. for instance, in the
framework of the ads/cft (superconformal eld theory) correspondence [212], the coset
space approach has been used to get the explicit form of the supervielbeins of adsp+2 
sdp2 superspaces and to construct gauge xed superconformal actions for superstrings
[176, 213, 216], a d3brane [176, 214, 216] and mbranes [176, 215, 216] propagating in
these superbackgrounds.

as a simple example of the use of the method of nonlinear realizations let us consider
a supermembrane in n = 1, d = 4 at superspace parametrized by coordinates x a and
 (a = 0, 1, 2, 3;  = 1, 2, 3, 4). from the point of view of the worldvolume eld theory
this is the model of spontaneous breaking n = 2, d = 3 supersymmetry down to n = 1
[206, 210].

the at superspace is associated with the coset (actually supergroup) manifold of the

n = 1, d = 4 translations whose element can be exponentially parametrized as

k(x, ) = e

i(x apa+q



)

,

where pa and q are the supertranslation generators

{q, q} = 2ipa(ca),

[q, pa] = 0.

101

(6.3)

(6.4)

the coset element (6.3) can be multiplied by the lorentzgroup coset matrix u = so(1,3)
so(1,2)
[208, 210], which corresponds to the harmonic matrices (4.11) and (4.44) of the superem-
bedding approach.

the cartan oneform k1dk takes its values in the superalgebra (6.4) and yields the

supervielbeins of the superspace under consideration

1
i

k1dk = e apa + e q,

(6.5)

where

e a = dx a  id a,

(6.6)
in the superembedding approach we have considered the pullbacks e a(z(z)) of the
supervielbeins (6.6) onto the supermembrane worldvolume parametrized by coordinates
z = (a, ) (a = 0, 1, 2;  = 1, 2), and imposed the superembedding condition e a
 = 0 to
specify the embedding corresponding to the dynamics of the brane.

e  = d.

in the method of nonlinear realizations one, from the beginning, (i.e. already in
(6.3)) identies part of the superspace coordinates x a and  with the superworldvolume
coordinates a and 

a = x a (a = 0, 1, 2),

 = (1 + 012).

(6.7)

the corresponding supertranslations pa and q = 1
supersymmetry which remains unbroken in the superworldvolume of the brane.

2(1 + 012)q generate n = 1, d = 3

the coordinates x 3(, ) and (, ) = (1 012) transverse to the brane are associ-
ated with the goldstone superelds of spontaneously broken supertranslations generated
by p3 and s = 1

2(1  012)q.

thus, from the perspective of the n = 2, d = 3 worldvolume eld theory the n = 1,

d = 4 superalgebra (6.4) looks as

{q, q} = 2paa
,

{s, s} = 2paa
,

{q, s} = 2p3,

(6.8)

where p3 plays the role of the central charge.

the goldstone superelds x 3(, ) and (, ) are then subject to constraints which
should reduce the number of their components to a suitable irreducible supermultiplet.
(such constraints can be found, for instance, with the help of a so called inverse higgs
eect [217]). in the case under consideration the constraint is

dx 3 = ,

(6.9)

which singles out a scalar n = 1, d = 3 supermultiplet describing physical degrees of
freedom of the supermembrane.

in some cases [205][211] the constraints can be solved in terms of superelds which

can be used to construct nonlinear actions.

102

comparing this formalism with the superembedding approach we see that the choice
(6.7) of the superbrane coordinates is nothing but the static gauge, which can be cho-
sen in the superembedding approach to x worldvolume superdieomorphisms, and the
constraint (6.9) imposed on the goldstone superelds is similar to the superembedding
condition (5.47), (5.51).

thus, the method of the nonlinear realizations can be regarded as a gauge xed version
of the covariant superembedding description of superbranes, which can provide us with a
way of explicit solving for the superembedding constraints and with an alternative method
to construct (gauge xed) superbrane actions.

a detailed analysis of the relation between the two approaches in dierent cases is an

interesting subject for future study.

7 concluding remarks and outlook

we have given an introduction to generic features of the geometrical approach to the
description of the theory of superbranes.

this powerful approach unies on the grounds of supersurface theory various for-
mulations of supersymmetric extended objects, such as the greenschwarz, twistor and
lorentzharmonic formulation, and the method of nonlinear realizations.

being manifestly supersymmetric in the worldvolume and in the target space, this ap-
proach also establishes (at the classical level) the link between spinning particles and su-
perparticles, and between neveuschwarzramond and the greenschwarz superstrings.
superembedding explains the nature of the symmetry of the greenschwarztype
actions as odd superdieomorphisms (local supersymmetry) of the superbrane worldvol-
ume.

these properties of superembeddings allow one, in certain cases, to overcome the

covariant quantization problem of superparticles and superstrings.

as we have seen, in many cases the basic superembedding condition contains the
full information about the dynamics of the superbrane, i.e.
it produces the superbrane
equations of motion. this is of particular importance for the description of new objects
for which the use of other methods may encounter problems.

depending on whether or not the superembedding condition puts the superbrane on
the mass shell, the approach gives a recipe for the construction of component, generalized
or supereld actions of the superbranes by the use of a closed (p + 1)superform which
exists in the brane superworldvolume.

as further applications of the superembedding approach, one may use it to search
for new types of (dual) families of branes, study superembeddings which correspond to
brane congurations preserving less than half targetspace supersymmetry, as intersecting
branes, carry out more detailed analysis of the relation between the superembedding

103

approach and the method of nonlinear realizations, and to use it for studying the dynamics
of branes and gauge xed brane actions in ads superbackgrounds in connection with the
ads/cft correspondence conjecture.

acknowledgements

the author is grateful to j. bagger for the suggestion to write down this article and to n.
berkovits, s. krivonos, p. pasti, c. preitschopf, h. skarke and m. tonin for interest to
this work, useful discussions and comments, and especially to i. bandos, f. bettella and
d. smith for reading the manuscript and numerous discussions which helped the author to
make some points more transparent. the author acknowledges the nancial support from
the alexander von humboldt foundation. this work was also partially supported by the
european commission tmr programme erbfmpx-ct96-0045 to which the author is
associated, by the intas grant 96-308 and under the project n 2.5.1/52 of the ukrainian
state committee on science and technology.

references

[1] m. green, j. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory, cup, 1987.

[2] d. lust and s. theisen, lectures on string theory, lecture notes in physics 346,

berlin etc., springer (1989) 346 p.

[3] j. polchinski, string theory, cambridge university press, 1998.

[4] f. lund and t. regge, phys. rev. d14 (1976) 1524.

[5] r.omnes, nucl. phys. b149 (1979) 269.

[6] b. m. barbashov and v. v. nesterenko, relativistic string model in hadron physics,

moscow, energoatomizdat, 1987.
introduction to relativistic string theory, singapore, world scientic (1990) 249 p.

[7] s. kobayashi and k. nomizu, foundations of dierential geometry, vol. ii, wiley

interscience, 1963;
l. eisenhart, riemannian geometry, princeton university press, princeton, nj,
1964;
dubrovin, novikov and fomenko, modern geometry, mir, moscow, 1987.

[8] a. zheltukhin, sov. j. nucl. phys. (yadern.fiz.) 33 (1981) 1723 ; theor. mat.
phys. 52 (1982) 73 ; phys. lett. b116 (1982) 147; theor. mat. phys. 56 (1983)
230.

104

[9] e. bergshoe, e. sezgin and p. k. townsend, phys. lett. 189b (1987) 75; ann. of

phys. 185 (1988) 330.

[10] r. guven, phys. lett. b276 (1992) 49.

[11] j. dai, r. g. leigh and j. polchinski, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2073;

r. g. leigh, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2767.

[12] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724.

[13] j. h. schwarz, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 55b (1997) 1;

p. k. townsend, four lectures on m-theory, hepth/9612121;
a. sen, an introduction to non-perturbative string theory, hep-th/9802051.

[14] a. sen, developments in superstring theory, hep-ph/9810356.

[15] j. h. schwarz, introduction to m theory and ads/cft duality, hep-th/9812037.

[16] p. k. townsend, phys. lett. b350 (1995) 184;

e. witten, nucl. phys. b443 (1995) 85;
j. h. schwarz, phys. lett. b367 (1996) 97;
p. horava and e. witten, npb 460 1996 506.

[17] j. hoppe, phys. lett. b250 (1990) 44;

m. bordemann and j. hoppe, phys. lett. b317 (1993) 315; phys. lett. b325
(1994) 359.

[18] a. l. larsen and n. sanchez, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 2801.

[19] i. bakas and k. sfetsos, phys. rev. d54 (1996) 3995.

[20] i. bandos, e. ivanov, a. kapustnikov, s. ulanov, general solution of string inspired

nonlinear equations, hep-th/9810038.

[21] i. bandos, d. sorokin and d. volkov, phys. lett. b372 (1996) 77 (hepth/9510220).

[22] d. sorokin and f. toppan, nucl. phys. b480 (1996) 457; letters in math. phys.

42 (1997) 139.

[23] a. n. redlich and h. schnitzer, phys. lett. b167 (1986) 315.

d. gepner and e. witten, nucl. phys. b278 (1986) 493.
j. balog, l. oraighfertaigh, p. p. forgacs and a. wipf, nucl. phys. b325 (1989)
225.
i. bars and d. nemeshansky, nucl. phys. b348 ((1991)) 89.
i. bars, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 3308.

105

[24] e. witten, phys. rev. d44 (1991) 314.

i. bars and k. sfetsos, mod. phys. lett. a 7 (1992) 1091; phys. rev. d46 (1992)
4495.
p. ginsparg and f. quevedo, nucl. phys. b385 (1992) 527.
c. kounnas and d. lust, phys. lett. b289 (1992) 56.
a. giveon, e. rabinovici and a. a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b409 (1993) 339.
k. sfetsos and a. a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b415 (1994) 116.
e. ragoucy, a. sevrin and p. sorba,commun. math. phys. 181 (1996) 91.

[25] l. feher, l. oraifeartaigh, p. ruelle, i. tsutsui and a. wipf, phys. reports 222

(1992) 1.

[26] m.b. halpern, e. kiritsis, n.a. obers and k. clubok, phys. reports 265 (1996)

1.

[27] d. sorokin, v. tkach and d. v. volkov, mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 901.

[28] n. berkovits, phys. lett. 232b (1989) 184.

[29] n. berkovits, phys. lett. 241b (1990) 497.

[30] n. berkovits, phys. lett. b247 (1990) 45; nucl. phys. b350 (1991) 193.

[31] d. p. sorokin, fortshr. phys. 38 (1990) 923.

[32] p. s. howe and p. k. townsend, phys. lett. b259 (1991) 285.

[33] m. tonin, phys. lett. b266 (1991) 312; int. j. mod. phys. a7 1992 6013.

[34] e. ivanov and a. kapustnikov, phys. lett. b267 (1991) 175; int. j. mod. phys.

a7 (1992) 2153.

[35] j. p. gauntlett, phys. lett. b272 (1991) 25.

[36] f. delduc and e. sokatchev, class. quantum grav. 9 (1992) 361.

[37] f. delduc, e. ivanov and e. sokatchev, nucl. phys. b384 (1992) 334.

[38] a. pashnev and d. sorokin, class. quantum grav. 10 (1993) 625.

[39] a. galperin and e. sokatchev, phys. rev. d46 (1992) 714.

[40] f. delduc, a. galperin, p. howe and e. sokatchev, phys. rev. d47 (1992) 587.

[41] v.chikalov and a.pashnev, mod. phys. lett. a8 (1993) 285.

[42] a. galperin and e. sokatchev, phys. rev. d48 (1993) 4810.

106

[43] p. pasti and m. tonin, nucl. phys. b418 (1994) 337.

[44] e. bergshoe and e. sezgin, nucl. phys. b422 (1994) 329.

[45] i. bandos, p. pasti, d. sorokin, m. tonin and d. volkov, nucl. phys. b446 (1995)

79.

[46] d. v. volkov and a. zheltukhin, sov. phys. jetp lett. 48 (1988) 61; letters in

math. phys. 17 (1989) 141; nucl. phys. b335 (1990) 723.

[47] d. sorokin, v. tkach, d. v. volkov and a. zheltukhin, phys. lett. b216 (1989)

302.

[48] s. aoyama, p. pasti and m. tonin, phys. lett. b283 (1992) 213.

[49] n. berkovits, nucl. phys. b420 (1994) 332, nucl. phys. b431 (1994) 258.

[50] p. s. howe and e. sezgin, phys. lett. b390 (1997) 133.

[51] p. s. howe and e. sezgin, phys. lett. b394 (1997) 62.

[52] p. s. howe, e. sezgin and p. c. west, phys. lett. b399 (1997) 49.

[53] i.a. bandos and a.a. zheltukhin, jetp. lett. 54 (1991) 421;

phys. lett. 1992 b288 77;
phys. part. nucl. 25 (1994)453.

[54] n. berkovits, nucl. phys. b358 (1991) 169; ibid b379 (1992) 96; ibid b420 (1994)

332.

[55] d. polyakov, nucl. phys. b449 (1995) 159; nucl. phys. b485 (1997) 128.

[56] v. i. ogievetsky and e. s. sokatchev, phys. lett. b79 (1978) 222; sov. j. nucl.

phys. (yadern.fiz.) 28 (1978) 1631, ibid. 31 (1980) 264, 821.
a. s. schwarz, commun. math. phys. 87 (1982) 37; a. a. roslyi and a. s. schwarz,
commun. math. phys. 95 (1984) 161; commun. math. phys. 96 (1984) 285.

[57] a. neveu and j. h. schwarz, nucl. phys. b31 (1971) 86;

p. ramond, phys. rev. d3 (1971) 2415.

[58] m. green and j. schwarz, nucl. phys. b243 (1984) 285.

[59] f. gliozzi, j. scherk and d. olive, phys. lett. 65b (1976) 282.

[60] j. de azcarraga and j. lukierski, phys. lett. b113 (1982) 170; phys. rev. d28

(1983) 1337.

107

[61] w. siegel, phys. lett. b128 (1983) 397.

[62] m. cederwall, a. von gussich, b. e. w. nilsson, a. westerberg, nucl. phys. b490

(1997) 163;
m. cederwall, a. von gussich, b. e. w. nilsson, p. sundell and a. westerberg,
nucl.phys. b490 (1997) 179;
m. aganagic, c. popescu, j.h. schwarz, phys. lett. b393 (1997) 311;
e. bergshoe, p.k. townsend, nucl.phys. b490 (1997) 145.

[63] i. bandos, k. lechner, a. nurmagambetov, p. pasti, d. sorokin and m. tonin,

phys. rev. lett. 78 (1997) 4332.

[64] m. aganagic, j. park, c. popescu and j. h. schwarz, nucl. phys. b496 (1997) 191.

[65] e. bergshoe, r. kallosh, t. ortin and g. papadopoulos, nucl. phys. b502 (1997)

149;
r. kallosh, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 3515.

[66] s. j. gates jr. and h. nishino, class. quantum grav. 3 (1986) 391.

j. kowalski-glikman, phys. lett. b180 (1986) 358.
r. brooks, f. muhammed and s. j. gates jr. class. quantum grav. 3 (1986) 745.

[67] j. kowalski-glikman, j. w. van holten, s. aoyama and j. lukierski phys. lett.

b201 (1987) 487.
a. kavalov and r. l. mkrtchyan. spinning superparticles. preprint yer.phi
1068(31)-88, yerevan, 1988 (unpublished).

[68] r. brooks. phys. lett. b186 (1987) 313;

j. m. l. fisch, phys. lett. b219 (1989) 71;
a. galajinsky and o. lechtenfeld, towards a stringy extension of self-dual super
yang-mills, hep-th/9903149.

[69] i. bandos, a. maznytsia and d. sorokin, int. j. mod. phys. a14 (1999) 1975.

[70] p. s. howe, o. raetzel and e. sezgin, jhep 9808 (1998) 01.

[71] j. bagger and a. galperin, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 1091.

[72] i. bandos, d. sorokin and d. volkov, phys. lett. b352 (1995) 269.

[73] y. neeman and t. regge, phys. lett. b74 (1978) 54, rivista del nuovo cim. 1

1978 1;
r. dauria, p. fr`e and t. regge, rivista del nuovo cim. 3 1980 1;
l. castellani, r. dauria, p. fr`e. supergravity and superstrings, a geometric per-
spective, world scientic, singapore, 1991 (and references therein).

108

[74] c. s. chu and e. sezgin, jhep 9712 (1997) 001. c. s. chu, p. s. howe and e.
sezgin, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 59. c. s. chu, p. s. howe, e. sezgin and p. c.
west, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 273.

[75] v. akulov, i. bandos, w. kummer and v. zima, nucl. phys. b527 (1998) 61.

[76] r. penrose, j. math. phys. 8 (1967) 345; rep. math. phys. 12 (1977) 65;

r. penrose and m.a.h. maccallum, phys.rep. 6 (1972) 241;
r. penrose and w. rindler, spinors and spacetime, v.1,2. cambridge univ. press,
1986.

[77] a. ferber, nucl. phys. b132 (1977) 55.

[78] i. bandos, p. pasti, d. sorokin and m. tonin, superbrane actions and geometrical
approach, d. v. volkov memorial volume, lecture notes in physics, vol. 509, p.
79. springerverlag, berlin, heidelberg 1998.

[79] p. s. howe, e. sezgin and p. c. west, aspects of superembeddings, d. v. volkov
memorial volume, lecture notes in physics , vol. 509, p. 64, springerverlag, berlin,
heidelberg 1998.

[80] t. shirafuji, progr. theor. phys. 70 (1983) 18.

[81] a.k.h. bengtsson, i. bengtsson, m. cederwall and n. linden, phys. rev. d36

(1987) 1766;
i.bengtsson and m.cederwall, nucl. phys. b302 (1988) 104;
m.cederwall, phys. lett. b226 (1989) 45.

[82] y. eisenberg and s. solomon, nucl. phys. b309 (1988) 709; phys. lett. b220,

562 (1989).

[83] m. s. plyushchay, phys.lett. b240 (1990) 133.

[84] a. gumenchuk and d. sorokin, sov. j. nucl. phys. 51 (1990) 350.

[85] i. bandos, a. nurmagambetov, d. sorokin and d. volkov, class. quant. grav. 12

(1995) 1881.

[86] i. bandos, a. maznytsia, i. rudychev and d. sorokin, int. j. mod. phys. 12 (1997)

3259.

[87] a. galperin, e. ivanov, s. kalitzin, v. ogievetsky and e. sokatchev, class. quan-

tum grav. 1 (1984) 469; class. quantum grav. 2 (1985) 155.

[88] e. sokatchev, phys. lett. b169 (1987) 209; class. quantum grav. 4 (1987) 237.

109

[89] e. nissimov, s. pacheva, s. solomon, nucl. phys. b296 (1988) 469; nucl. phys.
b299 (1988) 183; nucl. phys. b297 (1988) 349; nucl. phys. b317 (1989) 344;
phys. lett. b228 (1989) 181;
e. nissimov and s. pacheva, phys. lett. b221 (1989) 307.

[90] r. kallosh and m. rahmanov, phys. lett. b209 (1988) 233; phys. lett. b214

(1988) 549.

[91] i. a. bandos, sov. j. nucl. phys. 51 (1990) 906; jetp. lett. 52 (1990) 205.

[92] a. galperin, p. howe and k. stelle, nucl. phys. b368 (1992) 248.

[93] a. galperin, f. delduc and e. sokatchev, nucl. phys. b368 (1992) 143.

[94] i. bandos and a. zheltukhin, jetp. lett. 55 (1992) 81; int. j. mod. phys. a8

(1993) 1081; class. quantum grav. 12 (1995) 609.

[95] e. witten, nucl. phys. b266 (1986) 245.

[96] l.-l. chau, m.-l. ge, c.-s. lim, phys. rev. d33 (1986) 1056,

l.-l. chau and b. milewski, phys. lett. 216b (1989) 330.

[97] j. a. shapiro and c. c. taylor, phys.rept. 191 (1990) 221.

[98] l. brink, m. cederwall and c. preitschopf, phys. lett. b311 (1993) 76.

[99] p. claus, m. gunaydin, r. kallosh, j. rahmfeld and y. zunger, jhep 9905 (1999)

019.

[100] p. claus, j. rahmfeld and y. zunger, a simple particle action from a twistor

parametrization of ads5, hep-th/9906118.

[101] a. zheltukhin, theor. mat. phys. 77 (1988) 1264; sov. j. nucl. phys. 51 (1990)

950.

[102] j. a. de azc`arraga, j. m. izquierdo and p. k. townsend, phys. rev. d45 (1992)

3321;
p. k. townsend, phys. lett. b277 (1992) 285;
e. bergshoe, l. a. j. london and p. k. townsend, class. quantum grav. 9
(1992) 2545.

[103] e. bergshoe and p. k. townsend, nucl. phys. b531 (1998) 226;

e. bergshoe, d. sorokin and p. k. townsend, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 303.

[104] p. solomonsen, phys. rev. d18 (1978) 1868.

110

[105] l. brink, s. deser, b. zumino, p. di vecchia and p. howe, phys. lett. 64b (1976)

435;
l. brink, p. di vecchia and p. howe, nucl. phys. b118 (1977) 76.

[106] f.a. berezin and m.s. marinov, ann. phys. 104 (1977) 336.

[107] v.d. gershun and v.i. tkach, jetp letters 29, 320 (1979).

[108] p. howe, s. penati, m. pernici and p. townsend, phys. lett. b215 (1988) 555.

[109] r. casalbuoni, nuovo cim. 33a, 389 (1976).

[110] a. i. pashnev and d. v. volkov, theor. math. phys. 44 (1980) 321.

[111] l. brink and j. schwarz, phys. lett. 100b, 310. (1981).

[112] p. a. m. dirac, lectures on quantum mechanics, academic press, ny 1967.

[113] a. micovic, m. rocek, w. siegel, p. van nieuwenhuizen, j. yamron and a. van de

ven, phys. lett. b235 (1990) 106;
e. bergshoe, r. kallosh and a. van proeyen, phys. lett. b251 (1990) 128;
r. kallosh, phys. lett. b251 (1990) 134.

[114] d. sorokin, v. tkach and d. volkov, yad. fiz. 49 (1990) 844 (sov. j. nucl. phys.).

[115] v. p. akulov, i. a. bandos and d. p. sorokin, mod. phys. lett. a3, 1633 (1988).

[116] n. jacobson, basic algebra i, w. h. freeman and company, san francisco 1974,

pp. 472.

[117] t. kugo and p. townsend, nucl. phys. b221 (1983) 357;

p. s. howe, g. sierra and p. k. townsend, nucl. phys. b221 (1983) 331.

[118] m. gunaydin and f. gursey, j. math. phys. 14 (1973) 1651.

[119] f. gursey and c.-h. tze, on the role of division, jordan and related algebras in

particle physics, world scientic, singapore, 1996.

[120] p. west, supergravity, brane dynamics and string duality, hep-th/9811101.

[121] m. cederwall, j. math. phys. 33 (1992) 388.

[122] p. nelson and g. moore, nucl. phys. b274 (1986) 509;

p. s. howe and g. papadopoulos, class. quant. grav. 4 (1987) 11.

[123] j. wess and j. bagger, supersymmetry and supergravity, princeton university press,

princeton, new jerzy, second edition, 1992.

111

[124] s.j. gates, m. t. grisaru, m. rocek and w. siegel, superspace or one thousand
and one lessons in supersymmetry, frontiers in physics, 58, benjamin/cummings
1983, 548 p.

[125] i. l. buchbinder and s. m. kuzenko, ideas and methods of supersymmetry and

supergravity: a walk through superspace, bristol, uk: iop (1995) 640 p.

[126] b.e.w. nilsson, o-shell elds for ten-dimensional supersymmetric yangmills the-

ory, preprint itp, goteborg, goteborg-81-6, feb 1981. 7pp (unpublished),
b. e. w. nilsson, class.quantum grav. 3 (1986) l41.

[127] e. cremmer and s. ferrara, phys. lett. 91b (1980) 61;

l. brink and p. s. howe, phys. lett. 91b (1980) 384.

[128] b. e. w. nilsson, nucl. phys. b188 (1981) 46.

[129] a. candiello and k. lechner, nucl. phys. b412 479.

[130] a. shild, phys. rev. d16 (1977) 1722;

a. karlhede and u. lindstrom, class. quantum grav. 3 (1986) l73;
a. p. balachandran, f. lizzi and g. sparano, nucl. phys. b263 (1986) 608; nucl.
phys. b277 (1986) 359.

[131] a. zheltukhin, sov. phys. jetp lett. 46 (1987) 208; sov. j. nucl. phys. 48 (1988)

375.

[132] f. lizzi, b. rai, g. sparano and a. srivastava, phys. lett. b182 (1986) 326; phys.

rev. lett. 1821987376;
(j.) gamboa, c. ramirez and m. ruizaltaba, phys. lett. b225 (1989) 335.

[133] i. a. bandos and a. a. zheltukhin, sov. phys. jetp lett. 51 (1990) 547; sov.
phys. jetp lett. 53 (1991) 5; phys. lett. b261 (1991245;) theor. mat. phys.
88 (1991) 358; fortsch. der phys. (1993) 619.

[134] a. barcelos-neto and m. ruiz-altaba, phys. lett. b228 (1989) 193.

[135] u. lindstrom, b. sundborg and g. theodoridis, phys. lett. b253 (1991) 319;

phys. lett. b258 (1991) 331.

[136] u. lindstrom and r. von unge, phys. lett. b403 (1997) 233.

[137] i. a. bandos, d. p. sorokin, m. tonin and d. v. volkov, phys.lett. b319 (1993)

445.

[138] p. k. townsend, phys. lett. b409 131.

112

[139] m. cederwall and p. k. townsend, jhep (1997) 003;

m. cederwall and a. westerberg, jhep 9802 (1998) 004.

[140] m. tonin, twistorlike formulation of heterotic strings, talk at the x italian con-
ference on general relativity and gravitational physics, bardonecchia, 1992, hep
th/9301055.

[141] l. bonora, p. pasti and m. tonin, phys. lett. b156 (1986) 191; nucl. phys. b261

(1985) 241; nucl. phys. 286 150.

[142] i. a. bandos, m. cederwall, d. p. sorokin and d. v. volkov, mod. phys. lett. a9

(1994) 2987.

[143] d. j. gross, j. a. harvey, e. martinec and r. rohm, phys. rev. lett. 54 (1985)

253; nucl. phys. b256 (1986) 253; ibid. 267 (1986) 75.

[144] d. sorokin and m. tonin, phys. lett. 326b (1994) 84.

[145] p. s. howe, phys. lett. b332 (1994) 61.

[146] e. ivanov and e. sokatchev, chiral fermion action with (8,0) worldsheet supersym-

metry, hep-th/9406071.

[147] i. bandos, mod. phys. lett. a12 (1997) 799;

i. bandos and w. kummer, poisson sigmamodels and embedding approach to (p +
1)dimensional gravity, hep-th/9703099, int. j. mod. phys. (in press).

[148] i. bandos, j. lukierski, tensorial central charges and new superparticle models with

fundamental spinor coordinates, hep-th/9811022, mod. phys. lett. a, in press;
i. bandos, j. lukierski and d. sorokin, superparticle models with tensorial central
charges, hep-th/9904109.

[149] m. j. du, ramzi r. khuri and j. x. lu, phys. rept. 259 (1995) 213.

[150] i. bandos and a. nurmagambetov, class. quant. grav. 14 (1997) 1597.

[151] m. sohnius, nucl. phys. b136 (1978) 461.

[152] n. dragon, z. phys. c2 (1979) 29.

[153] r. grimm, j. wess and b. zumino, nucl. phys. b152 (1979) 255.

[154] i. a. bandos and v. g. zima, theor. math. phys. 70 (1987) 76.

[155] cremmer, b. julia and j. scherk, phys. lett. b76 (1978) 409.

[156] m. j. du and k. s. stelle, phys. lett. 253b (1991) 113.

113

[157] o.aharony, nucl. phys. b476 (1996) 470; e. bergshoe, m. de roo and t. ortn,

phys. lett. 386b (1996) 85.

[158] p. pasti, d. sorokin and m. tonin, phys. lett. 398b (1997) 41.

[159] p. pasti, d. sorokin and m. tonin, phys. lett. b352 (1995) 59;

phys. rev. d52 (1995) 4277.

[160] p. pasti, d. sorokin and m. tonin, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 6292.

[161] i. bandos, n. berkovits and d. sorokin, nucl. phys. b522 (1998) 214.

[162] m. perry and j. h. schwarz, nucl. phys. 498 (1997) 47;

j. h. schwarz, phys. lett. b395 (1997) 191.

[163] p. s. howe, e. sezgin and p. c. west, phys. lett. b400 (1997) 255.

[164] i. bandos, k. lechner, a. nurmagambetov, p. pasti, d. sorokin and m. tonin,

phys. lett. b408 (1997) 135.

[165] o. baerwald, n. d. lambert and p. c. west, on the energy momentum tensor of

the m-theory fivebrane, hep-th/9904097.

[166] s. cherkis and j. h. schwarz, phys. lett. b403 (1997) 225.

[167] l. bonora, c. s. chu and m. rinaldi, jhep 9712 (1997) 007.

[168] ph. brax and j. mourad, phys. lett. b416 (1998) 295.

[169] d. sorokin and p. k. townsend, phys. lett. b412 (1997) 265.

[170] j. brodie and s. ramgoolam, nucl. phys. b521 (1998) 139.

[171] j. de boer, k. hori, h. ooguri and y. oz, nucl. phys. b518 (1998) 173.

[172] p. claus, r. kallosh and a. van proeyen, nucl. phys. b518 (1998) 117.

[173] t. adawi, m. cederwall, u. gran, m. holm and b. e. w. nilsson, int. j. mod.

phys. a13 (1998) 4691.

[174] j. p. gauntlett, joaquim gomis and paul k. townsend, jhep 9801 (1998) 003.

[175] r. kallosh, j. kumar and a. rajaraman, phys. rev. d57 (1998) 6452.

[176] p. claus, r. kallosh, j. kumar, p. k. townsend and a. van proeyen, jhep 9806

(1998) 004.

[177] m. abou zeid and c. m. hull, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 277.

114

[178] j. gomis, d. mateos, j. simon and p. k. townsend, phys. lett. b430 (1998) 231.

[179] l. dolan and ch. r. nappi, nucl. phys. b530 (1998) 683.

[180] d. s. berman, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 317.

[181] a. nurmagambetov, phys. lett. b436 (1998) 289.

[182] t. sato, phys. lett. b439 (1998) 12; nucl. phys. b548 (1999) 231.

[183] c. grojean and j. mourad, class. quant. grav. 15 (1998) 3397.

[184] k. lechner, nucl. phys. b537 (1999) 361.

[185] p. claus, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 066003.

[186] t. adawi, m. cederwall, u. gran, b. e. w. nilsson and b. razaznejad, jhep

9902 (1999) 001.

[187] j. gauntlett, c. koehl, d. mateos, p. townsend and m. zamaklar, phys. rev. d60

(1999) 045004.

[188] c. chryssomalakos, j. a. de azcarraga, j. m. izquierdo and j.c. perez bueno, the

geometry of branes and extended superspaces, hep-th/9904137.

[189] b. a. ovrut, n=1 supersymmetric vacua in heterotic m-theory, hep-th/9905115.

[190] ch. van den broeck and k. van hoof, batalin-vilkovisky gauge-xing of a chiral

two-form in six dimensions, hep-th/9905117.

[191] p. s. howe, n. d. lambert and p. c. west, nucl. phys. b515 (1998) 203;

p. s. howe, n. d. lambert and p. c. west, phys. lett. b419 (1998) 79.

[192] p. s. howe, n. d. lambert and p. c. west, phys. lett. b418 (1998) 85;

n. d. lambert and p. c. west, nucl. phys. b524 (1998) 141.

[193] n. d. lambert and p. c. west, phys. lett. b424 (1998) 281.

[194] j. p. gauntlett, n. d. lambert and p. c. west, commun. math. phys. 202 (1999)

571.

[195] j. p. gauntlett, n. d. lambert and p. c. west, supersymmetric fivebrane solitons,

hep-th/9811024.

[196] n. d. lambert and p. c. west, monopole dynamics from the m-fivebrane, hep-

th/9811025.

[197] i. bandos, d. sorokin and m. tonin, nucl. phys. b497 (1997) 275.

115

[198] p. s. howe, o. raetzel, i. rudychev and e. sezgin, class. quant. grav. 16 (1999)

705.

[199] a. a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b469 (1996) 51;

m. aganagic, j. park, c. popescu amd j. h. schwarz, nucl. phys. b496 (1997)
215.

[200] s. coleman, j. wess and b. zumino, phys. rev. 177 (1969) 2239;

s. callan, s. coleman, j. wess and b. zumino, phys. rev. 177 (1969) 2247.

[201] d. v. volkov, sov. j. part. nucl. 4 (1973) 3.

[202] d. v. volkov and v. p. akulov, jetp letters 16 (1972) 438; phys. lett. b46

(1973) 109.

[203] d. v. volkov and v. a. soroka, jetp letters 18 (1973) 312.

[204] j. hughes, j. liu and j. polchinski, phys. lett. b180 (1986) 370;

j. hughes and j. polchinski, nucl. phys. b278 (1986) 147.

[205] j. bagger and a. galperin, phys. lett. b336 (1994) 25.

[206] a. achucarro, j. gauntlett, k. itoh and p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b314 (1989)

129;
j. p. gauntlett, k. itoh and p. k. townsend, phys. lett. b238 (1990) 65.

[207] j. bagger and a. galperin, phys. lett. b412 (1997) 296.

[208] s. belucci, e. ivanov and s. krivonos, partial breaking n = 4 to n = 2: hypermul-

tiplet as a goldstone supereld , hepth/9809190.
s. belucci, e. ivanov and s. krivonos, partial breaking of n = 1, d = 10 super-
symmetry, hepth/9811244.

[209] f. gonzalezrey, i. y. park and m. rocek, nucl. phys. b544 (1999) 243;

m. rocek and a. tseytlin, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 106001.

[210] e. ivanov and s. krivonos, phys. lett. b453 (1999) 237.

[211] s. v. ketov, mod. phys. lett. a14 (1999) 501;

born-infeld-goldstone supereld actions for gauge-xed d-5- and d-3-branes in 6d ,
hep-th/9812051.

[212] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231;

s. s gubser, i. r. klebanov and a. m. polyakov, phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105;
e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 253.

116

[213] r. r. metsaev and a. a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 109;

i. pesando, jhep 9811 (1998) 002; mod. phys. lett. a14 (1999) 343; jhep 9902
(1999) 007;
r. kallosh and j. rahmfeld, phys. lett. b443 (1998) 143;
r. kallosh and a. a. tseytlin, jhep 9810 (1998) 016. i. oda, phys. lett. b444
(1998) 127; jhep 9810 (1998) 015.

[214] r. r. metsaev and a. a. tseytlin, phys. lett. b436 (1998) 281;

[215] b. de wit, k. peeters, j. plefka and a. sevrin, phys. lett. b443 (1998) 153;

g. dallagata, d. fabbri, c. fraser, p. fre, p. termonia and m. trigiante, nucl.
phys. b542 (1999) 157.

[216] p. pasti, d. sorokin and m. tonin, phys. lett. b447 (1999) 251.

[217] e. a. ivanov and v. i. ogievetsky, teor. mat. fiz. 25 (1975) 164.

117

