9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

3
2

 
 

1
v
8
7
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

brx th459

two outcomes for two old (super-)problems1

s. deser

department of physics

brandeis university, waltham, ma 02454, usa

abstract: i briey review the outcomes of two very dierent old questions  where
global susy improves on ordinary qft  when they are in turn posed in the local,
sugra, context. the rst concerns the unexpectedly powerful role of the dirac square
root graded algebra relation e = q2, originally found in d=4 susy by golfand and
likhtman, in proving positive energy theorems both in sugra and in ordinary gravity
theories, where e and q have very dierent  gauge generator  denitions. the second
seeks sugra counterparts of the boson/fermion loop ultraviolet cancellations in susy
models. here the result is negative: local supersymmetry cannot overcome the innities
associated with the dimensional gravitational 2 even, as recently shown, in maximal
d=11 sugra.

1. introduction

we are here commemorating the birth of d=4 supersymmetry, (susy), as well as the memory
of the late yuri abramovich golfand, who with evgeny pinkhusovich likhtman, discovered it [1]
in one of those soviet-era works often overlooked in the west  and in this case, also in the east!

so universal has the susy gospel become in so short a time that few of us still envisage
particle theory without (broken) susy or gravity without supergravity (sugra), even in the
absence of any experimental evidence. this is a strong testimonial to the naturalness of susy,
since it diers from ordinary qft in a discrete way. by this i mean that a generalization, such as
einsteins of newtonian gravity, is usually continuously related to it by a natural group contraction,
there c  . here there is no such parameter (except the far too strong h  0) to rely on. nor
do we have a unique natural susy-breaking mechanism. while awaiting explicit verication of
uniquely susy predictions, its theoretical persuasiveness rests on tangible formal successes. in this
essay, i will concentrate on two problems where susy undeniably improved on ordinary qft,
but take them one step further, translated to the local susy, namely sugra, context. i chose
the two for balance: one succeeded beyond expectation, the other failed according to expectation.

the rst problem stems from perhaps the deepest aspect of the graded poincare group,
the supercharge anticommutator given in [1], whose relevant part for us is that the square of two
supercharges is the energy. i will recall the adaptation of this relation to the proof of positive energy
of supergravity and of einstein gravity, where both supercharge and energy have very dierent
meanings. my other example involves heavier machinery, and in its latest and nal incarnation
the result has only recently been obtained: what is the impact of supersymmetry on ultraviolet

1dedicated to two founders of d=4 susy on its (nearly) 30th birthday.

1

divergences in sugra? are any supergravity models renormalizable, or more exactly, nite? since
this is neither a report of new work nor a real review, all details (and many references) are left to
the references.

2. positive energy

if one looks at the graded algebra of susy, it contains (besides the existence of a constant
supercharge) one really novel relation, that the square of q is the total energy. this is the true
improvement on the poincare algebra, imposing the huge (and desirable) restriction on super-
symmetrizable models, that more generally, their 4-momentum is future timelike. i should caution
that it does not exclude systems having a trivial kind of negative energy. consider for example,
two copies of a free multiplet, the second of whose actions has relative ghost sign; each is separately
supersymmetric and yet the total energy need not be positive. indeed, the more rened arena of
sugra models with actions quadratic in curvature is essentially of the above type, and provides
some instructive examples [2] of the role of the hilbert space metric in interpreting e = q2. still,
this caveat is more of a curiosity; every bose/fermi pair of excitations must share purely positive
(or purely negative) energy, and that is really the heart of susys dirac square root character,
as was already exploited (for global susy) in [3].

in 1976, when sugra was found, the problem of positive energy in einstein gravity (gr)
had more or less exhausted those of us who had worked on it over the previous 15 years, ever since
gravitational energy rst became suciently understood to ask the question. while there were no
(correct) counter-examples, there were also only physicists proofs [4]. it was only for special
initial value congurations that explicit positivity could be exhibited, and no underlying square
of a square root structure of the energy was ever observed in the process. it was agreed (among
some of the experts at least) that it was both necessary for physical consistency and probably
true, that not only did gr have positive energy but that e = 0 implied the vacuum, i.e., only
at space had vanishing energy (for some history, see [5]). actually, just about that time the rst
positivity proof did emerge [6]; while rigorous, it was not very intuitive. the obstacle to obtaining
a direct physical proof of positivity of gr in the sense that the energy of say (even nonabelian)
2 r d3r(e2 + b2), is that not only is gr a gauge
vector gauge theory is manifestly positive, e = 1
theory with energy as the charge, but an innitely self-interacting one. while its (linearized) free
massless spin 2 excitations consist of a positive harmonic-oscillator frequency sum once the gauge
constraints are imposed, the higher terms are not easily bounded: the full einstein theorys action
is an innite series ie  r d4x p
n=1 hn(h)2, where h = g   is the deviation from atness
of the covariant metric, on top of which the ten h consist of four pairs of unphysical gauge and
constraint variables (akin to the longitudinal vector potential and electric eld in electrodynamics),
the latter are themselves spatially non-local functionals of the two remaining physical components
(as well as of the matter stress-tensor).

aside from the above technical diculties of the pure gr problem, interest now moved to
the more complicated  because including a matter source and being intrinsically quantized 
sugra, seemingly an even more dicult arena. yet it had that magic e = q2 formula; however,
when we turned it to advantage [7], we were met with scepticism because of the well-known special
status as surface integrals of e already in gr, and q for the spin 3/2 eld. besides, how could
an ancient unsolved problem in the simpler classical setting be trivially solved in this much more
complicated one? this is not the place to provide the details of our results, but only to indicate the
beauty of the theory and the robustness of these charges upon transition to the sugra context.

2

0 = t 0

recall that in gr  with or without sources such as the spin 3/2 eld   the total energy e
(dened for asymptotically at solutions) being a gauge charge, could be expressed as a surface
integral of a purely gravitational quantity at spatial innity. to oversimplify enormously what
took a long time to understand, the equivalent of the gauss constraint on the coulomb potential,
with charge density as source (2 = ) is here the g0
0 einstein constraint, which can be
rewritten to resemble linear gauss form for a certain component ht of the metric, 2ht = t0
0. here,
however the energy density t0
0 of gravity plus matter depends in a complicated way on ht : energy
self-interacts! still, the value e can be read o by elementary poisson equation considerations
as the coecient of 1/r in ht at spatial innity (whatever the complications). but whether its
sign is always positive remains hidden in the full interior counting, e = r d3xt0
0(h), of the local
contributions, just as the total charges functional form, in contrast with its surface value, as the
coecient of 1/r in , is only obtainable by counting all the interior electrons. fortunately, if
it can be shown generically that e is itself always the square of a hermitian operator, then this
suces to prove its positivity by functional form without needing recourse to the volume integral.
this is where the supercharge q of sugra comes to the rescue. everything that has just been said
in our childs description of gravitational energy holds for the spin 3/2 elds supercharge. it is also
simultaneously both a surface integral as well as one over the interior volume. what we were then
able to show was that indeed the golfandlikhtman relation e = q2  0 continues to hold as an
operator statement in sugra, where e is now the total (non-vanishing!) hamiltonian operator of
sugra, including both graviton and gravitino contributions. [this is an essential point, since the
(e, q) seemingly vanish by the respective constraint equations, and a delicate analysis is required.]
furthermore, because the relevant hilbert space (after gauge xing) has positive metric, e can
vanish if and only if q vanishes on all states; but q| >= 0 in turn implies that there are no
excitations: spacetime is then at and there are no gravitinos. this result even remains valid in
presence of supermatter (and hence necessarily of positive energy) sources, since (e, q) remain the
total generators, and obey the same algebra independent of any sources. those details are simply
hidden in the constraints. likewise, for n > 1 sugras, the e-q relation still holds as a sum over
the various charges, e = pn

i=1 q2

i  0.

the positive energy proof was perhaps the rst formal benet that sugra brought to the
gravity world, but at rst it seemed both too much and too little. the too much was that it
was a quantum result; what was its implication to the smaller world of classical and non-susy
gravity, with sources such as stars or photons? the too little was that formal results of sugra
could not be trusted, since its likely nonrenormalizability (see sec. 3) would render all quantities
innite and the relations between them suspect. given that the magic e = q2 mantra yielded
so much for so little eort compared to the frontal assaults, both unsuccessful and successful, in
the classical theory, we cautiously claimed only the formal sugra victory in [7].
it was soon
pointed out, however, that at this same formal level our proof remained valid in the classical and
non-fermionic limit [8]: as h  0, all internal, closed loop, contributions from either the graviton
or from  disappear, while considering matrix elements of the e = q2 operator relation between
purely bosonic states then reduces everything, including the result, to ordinary tree-level/classical
gr.

the next step was to nd a purely classical proof that utilized only the smile of sugra,
i.e., the necessary positiveness of pure gr that underlies its supersymmetrizability. the dirac
square character of the classical gr constraint equations that dene the four-momentum for
asymptotically at space was exhibited, in a celebrated work [9], in terms of a classical spinor

3

parameter that is the sole (gauge function) remnant of sugra; this was rened and spelled out
further in many subsequent papers (e.g., [10]). so the sugra argument really did teach us a
lot about the physical constraints imposed on a classical theory, in this case gr, for it to be part
of a susy one, thereby also providing yet another lesson in the liberating eects of (grassmann)
extending number systems. there have been many subsequent examples of susy constraints, from
the restrictions on potentials allowed in normal susy models to the simple helicity-conservation
rules dictated for graviton-graviton scattering in gr due to its sugra embeddability.
[there is
undoubtedly still progress to be made in this connection at higher dimensions, by nding the right
d>4 helicity generalizations and thence their susy constraints.] let me also mention that the
currently important world of ads gravity, with negative cosmological constant, also benets from
the above energy results. for, not only can sugra be extended to encompass anti-desitter sign
cosmological terms (except for the maximal, d=11, case [11]) but so can the notion of energy 
or at least the nearest that the asymptotically ads (rather than at) boundary conditions allow
there [12].

3. nonrenormalizability of sugras

my second, very dierent, topic has been studied almost as long as sugra itself; its renor-
malizability (or more precisely, niteness; the dimensional nature of the gravitational constant
precludes counterterms of the same derivative order as the original action). although not discussed
directly in [1], it was soon realized, in the realm of ordinary susy theories, that having equal num-
bers of fermionic and bosonic excitations leads to all sorts of marvellous cancellations of ultraviolet
loop divergences, such as that of zero-point energy [3]. it was no wonder then, that one of the hopes
following the discovery of d=4 sugra was that, despite describing gravity plus (spin 3/2) mat-
ter (which was already known to be one-loop divergent generically), it would be more convergent
by virtue of its extended symmetries. indeed, there was both one- and two-loop improvement: the
one-loop counterterms, precisely as in pure gravity (rather than as in gravity coupled to ordinary
matter), were eld-redenable-away arrays proportional to the eld equations of supergravity,
e.g., i1 = r d4x(g  2t ())x  , while the two-loop term (where gr rst fails [13]) was
absent altogether due to supersymmetry, there being no susy companion to 2r3
. alas, [14],
three-loop invariants did exist both for the original n=1 and higher n models. their structure
follows the lines of the simpler global susy case, where the systems stress tensor t , super-
current j and chiral current c form a supermultiplet from which a quadratic susy invariant
 r d4x[t 2
2 c2c ] can be constructed. as we know, there is no tensorial stress-
tensor for the gravitational eld itself, the nearest, higher derivative, analog being the belrobinson
tensor b quadratic in the curvature. on-shell (r = 0) b is totally symmetric, (covariantly)
conserved and traceless and there is again a quadratic invariant  r d4x[b2  i j 6 j + 3
2 c 2c]
constructed from b and corresponding (also higher derivative) super- and chiral currents. surpris-
ingly, it was even possible to learn something about the actual coecients of such counterterms:
for the non-maximal 1n<8 models, where covariant superspace quantization is possible, it was
concluded [15] that they are uniformly non-vanishing. for the special maximal n=8 case, very
beautiful recent work [16] suggests that, while the three-loop coecient may vanish, its 5-loop
coecient probably does not. similarly, for dimensions, 4<d<11, it is possible to construct susy
counterterms explicitly where a suitable superspace formulation exists and the construction and
negative conclusions of [16] apply.

  i j 6 j  + 3

this left only d=11 sugra [17] as the remaining candidate to which the earlier argu-
ments did not directly apply. after a long period of neglect because it fell beyond string the-

4

orys d=10 regime, it has revived in the wake of its m-theoretical connections. it represents the
highest-dimensional susy model allowed by kinematic consistency (a single graviton, no higher
spins etc.).
it is unique in many other respects, including being only n=1, i.e., simultaneously
minimal/maximal and matter-free because there is no lower spin susy system at d=11. unfor-
tunately, it also lacks any formalism that would enable one to test the susy of, let alone construct,
candidate invariant counterterms. it is this construction and its consequences that i now describe;
details are in [18]. the celebrated d=11 sugra action has, in its bosonic sector, in addition to
the graviton, a 3-form potential a with associated eld strength f  [a]. it contains
besides their kinetic terms, a cubic metric-independent chernsimons (cs) term in which the 11 in-
dices of the epsilon symbol are saturated by two f s and one a. it is clear, because dimension is odd

(and 2  l+9 since the einstein action here is ie = 2 r d11g r), that no 1-loop  0 r d11x
candidate i1 exist  one cannot make gravitational scalars with odd numbers of derivatives. at
2-loop, lowest possible, order then, i2  2 r d11x l20 where l20 has dimension 20. the di-
mensional regularization we use here uniformly has logarithmic cuto so all l are l20s. now
since a curvature is dimensionally equivalent to two covariant derivatives d, candidate terms are
schematically of the form l20  p10
n=4 rn d2(10n). the simplest and rst interesting level is
n = 4 because clearly the lower ns are either (like r3) not parts of super-invariants or are leading
order trivial (like r2 which can be removed by eld redenitions). thus, our lowest possible choice
is i2  2 r d11x[r4d12 + . . .] where the ellipsis represents the susy completion, if any. how
does one construct a suitable i2 in absence of any guiding super-calculus? our procedure was
the following. as was also recognized in [16], there is certainly one on-shell nonvanishing lowest
order susy invariant that starts out quartic in h : the tree-level 4-point scattering amplitude m
generated by the d=11 action itself. it has the enormous advantage that, since there are no loops,
and susy transformations are linear at this level, the purely bosonic terms are guaranteed to be
part of the overall susy invariant that is the total 4-point amplitude. however, its usefulness in
providing a counterterm faces two immediate obstacles: we want a local invariant and indeed one
with twelve explicit derivatives, whereas the amplitude has a denominator, from virtual particle
exchanges; can we extract such a local but still susy residue l from m? the answer is yes, be-
cause each term in the amplitude is in fact proportional to the product (1/stu) of the mandelstam
variables and we can insert the additional d12, without losing susy or having everything vanish
on-shell, by further multiplication with (stu)2 or (s6 + t6 + u6), after the initial stu one.

after expanding the einstein plus form eld actions to lowest relevant order in h , one
computes the various 4-part amplitudes. these consist of four dierent types of scatterings: a)
graviton-graviton ( r4), b) graviton-form ( r2f 2), c) form-form ( f 4) and d) form-graviton
bremsstrahlung ( f 3r).
it is a straightforward, if index-intensive, procedure to perform the
explicit calculations. the worst, graviton-graviton scattering, is fortunately already known [19]
and provides a very useful check.
it is proportional to the famous lowest string correction to
the einstein action in d=10: lg = stu mg  t8t8 rrrr where t8 is a constant 8-index tensor.
the three remaining, form-dependent, types of amplitudes can also be calculated.
[the resulting
total bosonic component of the full susy invariant is interesting in its own right as the correction
to the d=11 sugra action from m-theory, of which we mostly know that it contains sugra
as the local limit.] let me summarize the various localized on-shell 4-point amplitudes a)d).
schematically (see [18] for details), with b a belrobinson-like curvature quadratic and f always
2 (g, f ) = 2 r d11x[b2 + (f )4 + b(f )2 + r(f )3], where we can
appearing with a gradient, i b
actually write each part as squares of (themselves quadratic) currents. these terms are at this
stage only accurate to lowest, fourth, order in the combined rs and f s, and of course are to

5

be supplemented by fermion-dependent terms that we do not write down. nevertheless linearized
susy is guaranteed by our construction, and the existence of a full on-shell invariant (however
horrible) is also secure.

of course, a counterterm is only dangerous if its coecient is non-zero. a powerful tool
for answering this question was provided by the amazing correspondence between sugra and
super-yangmills models established and exploited in [16] to obtain many otherwise impossible
results, such as mentioned above for n=8 d=4 sugra. while sym is only dened for d10 one
can argue, quite convincingly, that the results as provided really do not depend directly on d, and
extend analytically also to d=11. this extension may also be possible to verify intrinsically; thus,
already at leading 2-loop level, the strong odds are against niteness of even this maximal theory.

summary

in this celebration of the birth of d=4 susy, we have discussed some consequences of the
supersymmetry algebra and of its invariants within the local, sugra, extension. the core of susy
grading is e = q2  0 and requires candidate susy models to have positive energy, up to some
(noted) ne print. this seemingly banal requirement on supersymmetrizable qft had an enormous
impact on sugra and thence on pure gr because the supersymmetrizability-dirac square root
relation yielded an immediate physical understanding of positive gravitational (as well as sugra)
energy. the second eect of susy, to soften ultraviolet divergences by producing cancellations in
boson/fermion loop contributions, could not, however, overcome the dimensionality of the einstein
constant even in maximal d=11 sugra: there exist invariants that can provide counterterms
and their coecients do not vanish. this negative result points to the need for string-like (but
still susy) nonlocality to provide a nite description of gravity; a tting conclusion, given the still
more elemental, d=2, source of supersymmetry!

acknowledgements: this work was supported by the national science foundation under grant
phy99-73935. it is a pleasure to have collaborated respectively with c. teitelboim and d. seminara
on the joint work reported here.

references

[1] yu.a. golfand and e.p. likhtman, jetp lett. 13 (1971) 323.

[2] d. boulware, s. deser and k.s. stelle, in qft and quantum statistics ii, i.a. batalin, c.j.

isham, and g.a. vilkovisky, eds. (adam hilger, bristol, 1987).

[3] b. zumino, nucl. phys. b9 (1975) 535.

[4] d. brill and s. deser, ann. phys. 50 (1968) 542; d. brill, s. deser and l. faddeev, phys. lett.

26a (1968) 538.

[5] d.r. brill and p.s. jang, in general relativity and gravitation, edited by a. held (plenum,
new york, 1980); j. york, in essays in general relativity, edited by f. tipler (academic,
new york, 1980).

[6] r. schoen and s.t. yau, comm. math. phys. 65 (1979) 45; 79 (1981) 231.

6

[7] s. deser and c. teitelboim, phys. rev. lett. 39 (1977) 249.

[8] m. grisaru, phys. lett. 73b (1978) 207.

[9] e. witten, comm. math. phys. 80 (1981) 381.

[10] s. deser, phys. rev. d27 (1983) 2805; d30 (1984) 1392; g. horowitz and a. strominger,
d27 (1983) 2793; c. teitelboim, d29 (1984) 2763; c.m. hull, comm. math. phys. 90 (1983)
545.

[11] k. bautier, s. deser, m. henneaux, and d. seminara, phys. lett. b406 (1997) 49.

[12] l.f. abbott and s. deser, nucl. phys. b195 (1982) 76.

[13] m.h. goro and a. sagnotti, nucl. phys. b266 (1986) 709; a.e.m. van de ven, nucl. phys.

b378 (1992) 309.

[14] s. deser, j.h. kay, k.s. stelle, phys. rev. lett. 38 (1977) 527; s. deser and j.h. kay, phys.

lett. 76b (1978) 400.

[15] p.s. howe, k.s. stelle, p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b236 (1984) 125.

[16] z. bern, l. dixon, d.c. dunbar, m. perelstein, j.s. rozowsky, nucl. phys. b530 (1998) 401.

[17] e. cremmer, b. julia and j. scherk, phys. lett. b79 (1978) 409.

[18] s. deser and d. seminara, hep-th/9812136, phys. rev. lett. 82 (1999) 2435; construction

and applications of local invariants in d=11 supergravity brx th-456.

[19] s. sannan, phys. rev. d34 (1986) 1749.

7

