9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

3
1

 
 

1
v
3
9
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

swat/99-233
hep-th/9906093

the dirac quantisation condition for uxes on four-manifolds

marcos alvarez

and david i. olive

department of physics, university of wales swansea,

e-mail:

singleton park, swansea sa2 8pp, u.k.
d.olive@swansea.ac.uk, pyma@swansea.ac.uk

abstract

a systematic treatment is given of the dirac quantisation condition for electromag-
netic uxes through two-cycles on a four-manifold space-time which can be very compli-
cated topologically, provided only that it is connected, compact, oriented and smooth.
this is sucient for the quantised maxwell theory on it to satisfy electromagnetic duality
properties. the results depend upon whether the complex wave function needed for the
argument is scalar or spinorial in nature. an essential step is the derivation of a quan-
tum stokes theorem for the integral of the gauge potential around a closed loop on the
manifold. this can only be done for an exponentiated version of the line integral (the
wilson loop) and the result again depends on the nature of the complex wave functions,
through the appearance of what is known as a stiefel-whitney cohomology class in the
spinor case. a nice picture emerges providing a physical interpretation, in terms of quan-
tised uxes and wave-functions, of mathematical concepts such as spin structures, spinc
structures, the stiefel-whitney class and wus formula. relations appear between these,
electromagnetic duality and the atiyah-singer index theorem. possible generalisation to
higher dimensions of space-time in the presence of branes is mentioned.

1. introduction

the main purpose of this paper is to provide a systematic discussion of the dirac
quantisation condition for u (1) (electromagnetic) uxes through two-cycles on a generic
four-manifold m4. by generic we mean that m4 is allowed to possess rather general
topological features subject to the requirements that it be smooth, connected and poincare
dual. so it is oriented and compact but does not have to be simply connected.

our motivation for doing this is to improve understanding of the electromagnetic
duality properties of the quantised pure maxwell theory on such manifolds. it does appear
that electromagnetic duality and poincare duality of the underlying space-time are linked.
we believe that our results are new and do reveal an interplay with the various versions
of duality.

fluxes of the electromagnetic eld can only occur if m4 possesses nontrivial two-
cycles. roughly these are closed surfaces through which the ux may ow. topologically

1

they may be spheres, two-tori, surfaces of any genus or even integer linear combinations
of these.

because m4 is oriented, such two-cycles  can be assigned an integer i(, ) counting
the number of points of self-intersection taking into account orientation. to understand
this idea it is necessary to imagine a small distortion of  away from itself to form .
then, if this is done appropriately, the two surfaces  and  intersect in a nite number
of points and the resultant self-intersection number is independent of how this is done.

flux quantisation is a quantum phenomenon, of course. accordingly one considers a
complex scalar wave function for a bosonic particle carrying electric charge qb. given its
existence on m4, diracs condition [1931] reads

qb

2h z

f  z.

(1.1)

now consider a complex spinor wave function for a fermionic particle carrying electric
charge qf . our result is that, instead,

qf

2h z

f +

1
2

i(, )  z.

(1.2)

notice that this condition, unlike (1.1) is special to four-manifolds as the intersection num-
ber of two-cycles only makes sense there. notice also that if the four-manifold m4 possesses
any two-cycle with odd self-intersection number the ux through it must be fractional. in
particular the ux cannot vanish. putting qf to zero in (1.2) then yields a contradiction.
this means that such manifolds cannot support neutral spinors. the simplest example
of this, already known for some time, is when m4 is the complex projective space cp (2)
[hawking and pope 1978].

likewise, if m4 does possess real (uncharged) spinor wavefunctions all two-cycles
must have even self-intersection number. this was rst concluded on the basis of totally
dierent arguments by geroch [1968 and 1970]. but the converse is not true. there do
exist four-manifolds, all of whose two-cycles possess even self-intersection number, that
do not support a real spinor eld. all these four four-manifolds have the feature that
they cannot be simply connected. the simplest example is the product of two two-spheres
divided by a parity z2 [habegger 1982, kirby 1989].

our treatment explains these phenomena in a unied way. it uses heavily the fea-
ture that the free two-cycles on m4 form a unimodular lattice and that the permitted
uxes are related to a similar lattice (the reciprocal). such unimodular lattices possess
special elements, known as characteristic vectors. their components are related to the
self-intersection numbers occurring in the condition (1.2) in a way that is explained, based
an application of the atiyah-singer index theorem for the electromagnetic dirac operator
on m4. the unimodularity feature is an essential ingredient in verifying electromagnetic
duality as the quantum maxwell partition function turns out to be a generalised theta
function based upon a sum over this lattice [e verlinde 1995, e witten 1995].

an important role in our arguments is played by various versions of what we call a
quantum stokes theorem. ordinary stokes theorem does not apply to gauge potentials

2

on topologically complicated manifolds because the potential is only dened in contractible
regions. to deal with this the manifold must be covered with contractible neighbourhoods.
then the gauge potentials in overlapping neighbourhoods must be patched together with
gauge transformations. this procedure introduces ambiguities in the candidate stokes
theorem which can be eliminated by a suitable exponentiation, yielding the exponential
version of stokes theorem that we refer to as quantum stokes theorem.

the success of this procedure presupposes that the underlying complex wave function
is scalar. but when the complex wave function is spinor rather than scalar, the exponenti-
ated line integral acquires an extra overall sign ambiguity stemming from the double-valued
nature of the spinor representation. this sign can be eliminated only by squaring it. this
phenomenon means that, in the presence of complex spinor wave functions, the quantum
stokes theorem can be formulated only for uxes through surfaces whose boundary either
vanishes or is even (that is twice a closed curve). such surfaces are respectively orientable
and non-orientable. there remains an unexpected sign but this is now well-dened and un-
ambiguous, taking the values 1 according to whether what is called the stiefel-whitney
class of the surface is even or odd (see equation (6.4)).

this result and its implications match precisely with a construction known to mathe-
maticians from a dierent point of view, and referred to as z2 cohomology. thus we shed
a more physical light on this mathematical nicety together with the stiefel-whitney class
which is an element of the second z2 cohomology group. following from this is the distinc-
tion between the quantisation conditions (1.1) and (1.2) and other more subtle physical
eects that we discuss. the stiefel-whitney class is shown to be a concept extending that
of the self-intersection number in (1.2), and equivalently, the characteristic vector of the
ux lattice. this is encapsulated in a formula known as wus formula.

the reader will notice that we have never used the words magnetic monopole. this
is because there are none, as far as the space-time m4 is concerned. one can imagine that
the uxes originate with magnetic monopoles but these have to be situated somewhere
outside space-time. this means there is never any question of singularities in the elds at
points of m4 corresponding to their positions.

2. four-manifolds and their homology

we are going to be interested in space-times consisting of compact, connected and
oriented four-manifolds m4. this is because such manifolds obey poincare duality, a
symmetry of the topological properties that seems to be related to the electromagnetic
duality that is our main interest. we shall not require m4 to be simply connected as this
would exclude one of the most interesting phenomena. the sort of topological structure
of m4 that is relevant to the study of electromagnetic uxes is known as homology (and
cohomology) and is described in many textbooks to which we refer, e.g. [a schwarz 1994].
thus hp(m, z) denotes the abelian group formed by adding (over integers z) classes
of closed pcycles mod pboundaries. dual to the boundary operator, , is the cobound-
ary operator, , which likewise squares to zero.
it denes the cohomology groups for
coclosed pcocycles mod pcoboundaries, h p(m, z). we shall be supposing m to be suf-
ciently well behaved that these groups be nitely generated. each may contain elements
of nite order. these form well-dened nite subgroups, called the torsion subgroups,

3

denoted tp(m, z) and t p(m, z), respectively. thus a pcycle  has nite order n if n
is the smallest integer such that n  is a boundary:

n  = .

(2.1)

as 2 = 0,  = 0, that is,  is closed.

the torsion subgroups are automatically selfconjugate subgroups and the quotients

fp(m, z) = hp(m, z)/tp(m, z),

f p(m, z) = h p(m, z)/t p(m, z)

(2.2)

are innite free abelian groups taking the form of a nite number of copies of the integers
z. thus

fp(m, z) = z  z  . . . z = bp z.

(2.3)

the integers bp and bp counting these numbers of copies are known as the pth betti
numbers of m. if one works over real numbers (instead of integers) the torsion becomes
invisible, leaving just the free parts.
it will also be relevant to work over the integers
mod 2, i.e. z2, but the corresponding groups hp(m, z2) and h p(m, z2) contain no new
information since they can be constructed explicitly from the hp(m, z) and h p(m, z) by
what is known as the universal coecient theorem. this theorem also implies the following
isomorphisms between cohomology and homology:

f p(m, z)  fp(m, z),

t p(m, z)  tp1(m, z).

(2.4)

in particular, the betti numbers bp and bp are equal. so far everything has been rather
general but now the special fact that m is assumed to possess the features guaranteeing
poincare duality means that:

h p(m, z)  hmp(m, z),

(2.5)

where m is the dimension of m, (understood to be 4 when m4 is indicated). in particular,
yet more betti numbers become equal:

bp = bp = bmp = bmp.

(2.6)

cycles  and  of complementary dimensions (i.e. adding to m) usually intersect in a
nite number of discrete points. owing to the fact that m is oriented these points can be
assigned values 1 and the sum of these values over the points of intersection yields an
integer known as the intersection number of  and , denoted i(, ). this integer only
depends on the homology classes to which the cycles belong, and more than that, only
upon the cosets fp(m, z) to which they belong. this is because all torsion cycles have
zero intersection number with any other cycle. for

i(, ) = i(n , )/n = i(, )/n = i(0, )/n = 0,

using linearity and equation (2.1).

4

on four-manifolds, 2cycles will have such discrete points of intersection with each
other. let us consider a basis 1, 2, . . . b2 of the integer lattice f2(m4, z) and denote

i(i, j) = (q1)ij.

(2.7)

q is a matrix with b2 rows and columns and integer entries.
it is unimodular i.e. has
determinant 1, another consequence of poincare duality. finally it is symmetric (as it is
for any such intersection matrix for mid-cycles when m is a multiple of four):

q = qt  z,

det q = 1.

(2.8)

this matrix and these properties will play an important role in what follows. we see that
the free 2cycles form a unimodular lattice, namely f2(m4, z). notice that the scalar
product of this lattice, as dened by the matrix q1, is, in general, indenite. if it is of
type (b+, b) where b2 = b+ + b the signature

(m4) = b+  b

(2.9)

is known as the hirzebruch signature of m4.

3. fluxes and the dirac quantisation condition

let f be a two-form eld strength dened on m. it is closed:

df = 0,

and as a consequence there exists a one-form u (1) connection a such that

f = da

(3.1a)

(3.1b)

at least in each contractible neighbourhood used in a covering of m. associated with any
2cycle  is a ux

z

f.

(3.2)

stokes theorem guarantees that this ux is unaltered if we replace    =  + r and
f  f  = f + db. thus the ux (3.2) depends only on the homology class of  (or rather
the coset f2(m4, z)) and the cohomology class of f . however there is a subtlety as the
cohomology used here is known as de rham cohomology and works with real coecients.
integer coecients were restored by dirac [1931] by showing that if the gauge potential a
coupled minimally to the scalar wave function dened on space-time, then the principles
of quantum mechanics requires a quantisation of the ux

qb z

f
2h

 z

(3.3)

where qb is the electric charge carried by the bosonic particle created by the scalar eld
when quantised. that this equation (3.3) is independent of any assumed equations of

5

motion and of any choice of metric on m was made particularly clear in a version of this
argument due to wu and yang [1975]. however this worked only when the 2cycle  was
topologically a sphere. the extension to any 2cycle was explained by o alvarez [1985]
and we shall extend his version further in what follows.

before doing so, let us consider the integral rm4

f  f which occurs both as part of
the maxwell action and the atiyah-singer index for the electromagnetic dirac equation on
m4. again both m4 and f  f are closed so a denite value can be anticipated. in fact
the following identity holds

zm4

f  f =

b2

xi,j=1

zi

f qij zj

f.

(3.4)

this is just a special case of a much more general identity which, when applied to riemann
surfaces yields riemanns bilinear identity. q is dened in (2.7) and it is now clear from
(3.4) why it should be symmetric. since uxes through the torsion cycles always vanish
(by a similar argument to that above for intersection numbers), it is entirely equivalent to
rewrite the dirac quantisation condition (3.3) in the form

qb zi

f
2h

= mi  z.

inserting this into (3.4) yields

q2

b zm

f
2h



f
2h

=

b2

xi,j=1

miqijmj.

(3.5)

(3.6)

thus this integral is also quantised, its integral value being quadratic in the quantised
uxes and depending on the topology of m through the intersection matrix q. physicists
are used to this integral for non-abelian gauge theories when it is the instanton number and
exists even if m is the sphere s4. but (3.6) vanishes whenever b2 vanishes, for example for
s4 or r4. on the other hand, the second betti number is non-zero for many interesting
four-manifolds e.g. b2(t 4) = 6, b2(cp (2)) = 1 and b2(k3) = 22.

note that (3.6) means that the dirac quantised uxes on m form a unimodular
lattice (because the scalar product q has unit determinant) with signature (2.9). such
lattices have interesting properties [see goddard and olive 1984] and can be used in the
construction of functions transforming nicely under an action of the modular group.

now recall the argument of o alvarez [1985]. m4 is covered with a nite number
of neighbourhoods u. since u is contractible, there exists in it a u (1) gauge poten-
tial/connection a and a scalar wave function . in the overlap region u  u of two
contiguous neighbourhoods u and u, also assumed to be contractible, these are related
by a u (1) gauge transformation:

a  a = d,

 = ei

qb
h 

.

(3.7)

6

without loss of generality we can assume  +  = 0 in u  u. in the triple overlap
region of three contiguous neighbourhoods, u  u  u, all three of ,  and  are
all dened and related by the three gauge transformations ,  and . the self
consistency of these three actions on the scalar eld requires that

c  (p ) + (p ) + (p ) 

2h
qb

z,

(3.8)

for any point p in u  u  u. so c is independent of the choice of this point p .

now apply this to a 2cycle  and suppose that it is covered by a nite number of
neighborhoods u  with no more than triple overlaps. further imagine that these neigh-
bourhoods u   be reduced to non overlapping neighbourhoods v sharing a common
boundary when u and u are contiguous. then the ux of f through  is a sum of the
uxes through the v, since f is gauge invariant and so f  = f  in u  u. ordinary
stokes theorem applies to each v so

z

f = x

zv

f = x

zv

a.

each common boundary l of v and v in u u contributes a line integral rl (a 
a) = |l . each triple overlap u u u  has three such boundary lines incident
on it and, as a result, contributes c to r f . hence
c 

z

2h
qb

z

f = xuu u 

by (3.8). this is the dirac quantisation condition (3.3).

more can be extracted from this line of argument by considering rst a closed 1cycle
 and seeking to dene the line integral of a around it. suppose  is contained in a sequence
of consecutive neighbourhoods u1, u2, . . . un = u0, un+1 = u1. let pk,k+1 be a point on 
uk uk+1 and break  into consecutive segments p1,2p2,3, p2,3p3,4, . . . , pk,k+1pk+1,k+2, . . ..
then a sensible denition might be

i

a = xk (cid:16)z pk,k+1

pk1,k

ak  k,k+1(pk,k+1)(cid:17).

(3.9)

this has the virtue of being independent of the choices of the points pk,k+1, as can be
seen by dierentiation with respect to them. but it is not independent of the choice of
neighbourhoods on . indeed adding a neighbourhood modies the above sum to include
an extra term but also adds a term of the form (3.8). thus the line integral has an
quantised ambiguity of the form of integral multiples of 2h/qb. this ambiguity can then

be eliminated by considering only the exponential exp(iqb h a/h), with the exponent

dened by (3.9). thus it is only possible to dene a line integral of a u (1) gauge potential
on a non-trivial manifold in this way.

7

if now  is a boundary , the argument can be repeated to give

z

f = i

a + xuu u 

c.

(3.10)

again because the ambiguities are quantised they can be eliminated by exponentiation:

e i

qb

h r

f = e

i

qb

h h

a

.

(3.11)

if  contracts to a point (3.11) reduces to the dirac quantisation condition (3.3) or (1.1).
because of the essential way that plancks constant occurs in (3.10), we can think
of (3.11) as a quantum version of stokes theorem. notice that without the notion of
quantum wave function it would be dicult to formulate any version of stokes theorem
for u (1) gauge potentials on non-trivial manifolds.
it is entirely natural that the right
hand side of (3.11) should be diracs path dependent phase factor, nowadays known as a
wilson loop.

4. spinor elds and the dirac quantisation condition

the preceding argument shows how dependent the behaviour of the uxes on m is
upon the assumed existence of the complex scalar eld  on m. it is natural therefore to
examine what happens in the presence of a complex spinor eld . it is known that a real
(neutral) spinor eld need not necessarily exist on m. there exists a possible obstruction,
known as the stiefel-whitney class w(2) which is an element of h 2(m, z2). its vanishing,
mod 2, is the necessary and sucient condition for neutral spinors to exist on m.in this
case m is said to possess a spin structure. if it does not vanish it may be possible to
dene a complex rather than a real spinor eld on m. such a eld, , would carry an
electric charge qf , thereby coupling to a, rather as the complex scalar eld  did (but
with charge qb).

in fact it is known that this is possible whenever w(2) lifts from h 2(m, z2) to an
element of h 2(m, z) when integer coecients are used. according to the universal coe-
cient theorem, the w(2) can lift either to h 2(m, z) or to t 3(m, z). these possibilities are
easy to understand. if w(2) = 0, mod two, then, when integer coecients are considered,
either w(2) = 0 (and we have an element of h 2(m, z)) or w(2) = 2 where  is a 3co-
chain. as  squares to zero it follows that  is a 3torsion-cocycle, thereby furnishing an
element of t 3(m, z) of order two.

when w(2) lifts to h 2(m, z) a complex spinor can exist on m and m is said to possess
a spinc structure. but reasonable counterexamples exist whenever the dimension of m,
m, is ve or more. for example, the ve-dimensional symmetric space su (3)/so(3) has
no spinc structure [lawson and michelsohn 1989].

however for four-manifolds with poincare duality something special happens. the
conditions (2.4) and (2.5) together with the statement that m4 is connected imply that
there are just two independent betti numbers, b1 = b3and b2 as b0 = b4 = 1, and one
independent torsion group because of the isomorphisms

t 3(m4, z) = t 2(m4, z) = t2(m4, z) = t1(m4, z).

(4.1)

8

the other torsion groups vanish.

we can now see what an undesirable degree of simplication would occur were it
assumed, in addition, that m4 was simply connected. then h1(m4, z) would vanish, and
hence, by (4.1), all the torsion groups.

on the four-manifolds considered it can always be said that w(2) lifts to h 2(m4, z) as
t 3 and t 2 are the same thing, according to the isomorphisms (4.1). so such four-manifolds
always possess spinc structures and hence complex spinor elds.

accordingly, we shall henceforth assume that complex spinor elds exist on m4 and
consider the eect on diracs quantisation condition. so we reconsider the argument of
the previous section and take the same nite cover of m4 by neighbourhoods u.

because the wave functions now transform as so(4) spinors we have to introduce
more structure in each neighbourhood. as well as the previous u (1) connection or gauge
potential a we must introduce an oriented frame (vierbein) f  and a complex spinor
wave-function . these choices, made in the neighbourhood u, are not independent.
there is a freedom of choice related to local u (1) gauge transformations

and to local so(4) transformations

qf
  e i
h ,
a  a + d,

f   l f ,
  s(l),

where l  so(4). note that the lift l  s(l) has a sign ambiguity because the quotient
of the spin group spin(4) by z2 is isomorphic to so(4).

in a double overlap of two contiguous neighbourhoods, u  u 6= 0, we must dene

transition functions involving both transformation groups

a = a + d,
f  = lf ,
 = s(l) e i

qf
h 

.

(4.2a)
(4.2b)

(4.2c)

without loss of generality, we can suppose

l = (l)1,

 = 

and s(l) = (s(l))1.

(4.3)

in a triple overlap region, u  u  u 6= 0, again assumed to be contractible, we nd
consistency conditions as before;

lll = i,

(4.4)

where the right hand side is the unit element of so(4). this follows by relating the frame
f  back to itself. likewise for the spinor wave-function

 = e i

qf

h ( + +)s(l)s(l)s(l).

9

the product of the three matrices s here will play an important role in what follows and
we shall introduce a special notation for that product

()  s(l)s(l)s(l) = i.

(4.5)

that the right hand side is the unit matrix, up to a sign, follows by lifting (4.4) from so(4)
to spin(4). the sign cannot be determined as it depends on the choices made in (4.2).
nevertheless the signs in (4.5) for dierent triple overlaps are not totally independent as
we shall see. so the upshot of the spinor consistency condition is that, in terms of c
dened in (3.8),

= (),

(4.6)

qf
h c

e i

rather than unity, as was the case for the scalar wave function (with qb replacing qf ). so,
repeating the argument for evaluating the ux through a two-cycle , we nd

where the sign is given by the nite product over triple overlaps

e i

qf

h r

f = (1)w(),

(1)w() =

yuu u 6=0

().

(4.7)

(4.8)

equation (4.7) is the the preliminary version of the dirac quantisation condition in the
presence of a complex spinor wave-function. notice how w() (which is dened mod 2)
must be independent of the choices made in covering the two-cycle  with neighbourhoods,
even though its denition (4.8) involved those choices. this is because of its relation (4.7)
to the ux which is certainly independent of those choices. likewise w() is unchanged
if the two-cycle is replaced by a homologous one    =  + r. furthermore w()
vanishes if  is a torsion element. all this suggests that w is closely related to the stiefel-
whitney two-cocycle w(2) over z2 mentioned earlier, and this is indeed true as we shall
see.

denoting wi = w(i), where i is the basis of f2(m4, z) introduced in section 2, the

quantisation condition can be rewritten as

qf

2h zi

f 

1
2

wi  z,

i = 1, 2, . . . , b2.

(4.9)

so we see the possibility of fractional units of ux. we still have to identify the number
wi with the self-intersection number of i mod 2 as described in the introduction.

in this context the possibility of fractional uxes was rst pointed out by hawking
and pope [1978] who considered just the example of m4 being cp (2). however a similar
eect had already been established in the context of gauge theories in r3,1 describing both
colour and a maxwell u (1) [corrigan and olive 1976]. this modied dirac quantisation
condition could explain how the fractional electric charge of quarks was related to their
colour transformation properties.

10

5. atiyah-singer index theorem and identication of w()

because complex spinors always exist on any m4 under consideration, we can evaluate
the index of the dirac operator da acting on them. according to the index theorem the
result is

index(d/a) = 

(m4) +

f  f

(5.1)

1
8

q2
f

82h2 zm4

such results are familiar to physicists because of their relation to the chiral anomaly.

we have already met the expressions on the right hand side. the signature  is that
given by (2.9) while the integral is evaluated by (3.4) making use of the dirac quantisation
conditions in the version (4.9). the result is

index(d/a) = 
1
8

=

1
8

(m4) +

1
2

(m +

) q (m +

w
2

)

(5.2)

(w q w  (m4)) +

(m q m + m q w),

w
2
1
2

on rearrangement. the quantities m1, m2, . . . , mb2 are integers. because the spinors exist
on m4, this has to be an integer for all integers mi. as a result we deduce the following
two conditions

w q w = (m4) + 8z

m q m + m q w = 2z.

(5.3a)

(5.3b)

recall that the matrix q is integer valued and unimodular with signature (m4). there
is a general theorem that states that such a matrix possesses a characteristic vector c, say,
satisfying (5.3b) [milnor and husemoller 1973]. this vector is unique up to an ambiguity
in its components of precisely 2z. furthermore it automatically satises (5.3a). in other
words, equation (5.3b) completely determines wi mod 2 in terms of the intersection matrix
q1. in fact, inserting into (5.3b) the integral choices mi = (q1)ik, (k = 1, 2, . . . or b2)
we nd the solution

wk = q1

kk + 2z = i(k, k) + 2z,

(5.4)

using (2.7) for the self-intersection number explained in the introduction.

unimodular (integral) matrices are said to be even if all diagonal elements qii (or,
equivalently all q1
ii ) are even. otherwise they are odd. in the former case wi is even
by (5.4), and so can be taken to vanish. in that case (5.3a) states that the hirzebruch
signature is a multiple of eight. on the other hand, if q is odd, wi is non vanishing for at
least one value of the sux i.

thus the quantisation condition (1.2) has been established for all the i. as these form
a basis for the free 2cycles f2(m4, z), the validity of the quantisation condition (1.2)
extends to all of these. we have already seen that both the ux and the self-intersection
number vanish for torsion 2cycles. hence the result (1.2) is established for all 2cycles
.

it is now easy to understand the example of m4 being complex projective space cp (2)
[hawking and pope 1978]. as the betti number b2 equals one, q = 1, by unimodularity
and hence is odd. so cp (2) possesses only one 2cycle (actually a sphere) and that has

11

odd self-intersection. as a result there is no spin structure but complex spinors are allowed.
as the hirzebruch signature cannot vanish (mod 8) when the second betti number is odd,
the concluded absence of real spinors extends to any four-manifold with odd second betti
number.

6. new aspects of the dirac quantisation condition

in section 3, we saw how a  quantum stokes theorem could be established, (3.11), in
connection with a complex scalar wave function. it is natural to enquire about an analogous
result in connection with a complex spinor wave function. in general, it is bound to dier
as we have already seen that it does when a two-cycle with odd self-intersection number
is considered.

in order to continue the argument of section 4 to the case that  has a boundary
we need to understand better how it is that the sign factor (1)w() dened by (4.8)
is independent of the choice of covering used in this denition. to this end we must
investigate the properties of the sign factors () dened by (4.5) and associated with
triple overlaps.

the rst point to note is that () is totally symmetric in its three indices. for
() is conjugate to (). but since it is proportional to the unit matrix it commutes
with all the matrices s(l). so () is invariant with respect to cyclic permutations.
it remains to check invariance under anticyclic permutations and this follows from the
identity ()() = 1, proven only using (4.3).

now let us suppose that there is a quadruple overlap of four neighbourhoods u, u,
in it, four quantities (4.5) can be dened, but not independently, as their

u and u.
product equals the unit matrix.

()()()() = i.

(6.1)

in the quadruple overlap we can also dene new quantities with four indices, for example:

()  s(l)s(l)s(l)s(l)

which also equals the unit matrix up to a sign as it is the lift of

llll = i

these quantities are likewise invariant under cyclic and anticyclic permutations of their
four indices. that is no longer sucient to guarantee complete symmetry and it leaves
three distinct quantities specied by signs when the indices are distinct. again using only
(4.3)

()() = ().

(6.2)

there are six identities of this type and they imply (6.1).

we can now use (6.1) to show how the addition of a neighbourhood u, say to a cover
of  does not aect (1)w() given by (4.8) provided it aects only the interior. we shall
compare the original covering without u to the one in which u is added so that it includes

12

the triple overlap u  u  u . we can then imagine that u, u and u are contracted in
such a way that u  u  u disappears. the eect is that the triple overlap u  u  u
is replaced by three triple overlaps u  u  u, u  u  u and u  u  u. so, in
(1)w(), () is replaced by ()()(). but these are the same by (6.1), as
required.

now consider the ux through  with non-trivial boundary . the argument leading
to (3.10) still holds good and so the equation remains valid. the dierence is that now
c satises (4.6) and so the exponential could be minus one instead of just plus one.
that means that exponentiation yields

e i

qf

h r

f = e i

a

qf

h h

yuu u 6=0

().

(6.3)

the problem with this result is that although the right hand side is independent of the
choice of neighbourhoods the two individual factors are not. we have just argued that
adding a neighbourhood to the interior of  does not aect the second factor and obviously
it does not aect the rst factor. the problem comes when we add a neighbourhood to
the cover of the boundary . that can change the sign of both factors. this means that
the individual factors are not intrinsically dened and we do not know of any better way
of formulating stokes theorem in this context. of course we could eliminate the problem
by squaring (6.3). this would yield the same result as (3.11) with qb replaced by 2qf but
this discards information.

however there is a situation where (6.3) is useful. suppose that the boundary of  is

even, that is that  = 2. then we do have

e i

qf

h r

f = (1)w()e2i

a

qf

h h

(6.4)

and the two factors on the right hand side are well dened in the sense that they are
independent of choices of neighbourhoods. this is because the second factor is, in view of
the factor two in the exponent. it follows that w() is well dened (mod 2) on such 
with even boundary.

we shall argue that there is good reason to regard (6.4) as a new aspect of the dirac

quantisation condition.

suppose the four-manifold m4 is equipped with a spinor and that all its two-cycles
possess even self-intersection number. that means, as we have shown, that all uxes
are integral and in particular may all vanish. then it is possible and reasonable to take
vanishing eld strength on m4. then, one might think that the spinor experiences no
electromagnetic coupling so that it could perfectly well be taken to be real. but this
conclusion can be wrong, as (6.4) shows. for, suppose m4 contains a two-chain  whose
boundary is even, that is twice a one-cycle , as in (6.4). suppose further that w() is
non-vanishing (mod 2). then (6.4) reads

this means that it is impossible for qf (or a) to vanish. in other words we have a new
sort of obstruction to the existence of real spinors. crudely speaking such four-manifolds

e2i

qf

h h

a = 1.

13

possess uxes leaking through holes enclosed by torsion cycles such as , even when the
eld strength vanishes on the manifold itself. the situation m4 = s2  s2/z2 mentioned
in the introduction furnishes an example of precisely this. in this case  is topologically
the real projective plane and so not orientable, and this is a general feature.

there is a construction, known to mathematicians as wus formula, for the action of
the stiefel-whitney cocycle acting on two-cycles when it is understood that in all calcula-
tions integers are identied mod 2. it is

w(2)() = j(, ) mod 2,   h2(m4, z2).

(6.5)

here j(, ) is the intersection number of  and , dened now as simply the number
of points of intersection mod 2. this denition, unlike the one for i(, ) in section 2,
also applies to  and  with even boundaries, as above, since such  are closed when
identifying coecients mod 2 i.e. working over z2. the potentially confusing possibility
that intersection points may migrate out of  through the boundary is actually harmless.
this is because the fact that the boundary is twice a cycle implies such a migration occurs
in pairs thereby preserving j(, ) mod 2. such  with even (non-vanishing) boundary
are not oriented and this is likewise no problem as 1 and 1 agree, mod 2.

it follows from all that we have said that the two quantities w and w(2) are both
elements of the same cohomology group h 2(m4, z2). furthermore, when  and  are
closed, the two denitions of their intersection number i(, ) and j(, ) dier by an
even integer. consequently, using the result of section 5,

w() = j(, ), mod 2

if  = 0.

comparison with wus formula, (6.5), then suggests that w, as dened in our discussion,
and the stiefel-whitney class, w(2), are the same. indeed this is true, as there is a mathe-
matical result stating that w(2) does satisfy our denition (4.8), see appendix a, [lawson
and michelsohn 1989].

it is remarkable that relatively straightforward physical arguments involving complex
spinor wave functions and the quest for a generalised version of stokes theorem have led
inexorably and naturally to the initially abstruse concept of z2 cohomology.

finally let us note a nice statement of poincare duality, following from (2.5) and the
universal coecient theorem that equates the homology and cohomology under consider-
ation [see schwarz 94]:

h 2(m4, z2)  h2(m4, z2).

7. classication of four-manifolds relevant to electro-magnetic duality

our main result, representing a generalised version of the dirac quantisation condition
in the presence of complex spinor wave-functions, is equation (6.4). it applies whenever the
two-chain  is either closed (and so orientable) or possesses even boundary (and so is not
orientable). the quantity w() appearing is well-dened modulo 2 and can be identied
with an element of the stiefel-whitney class in h 2(m4, z2).

14

we shall see how this result leads to a natural classication of all relevant four-
manifolds into three distinct classes, that we shall denote i, ii and iii. (by relevant we
mean connected, oriented, compact and smooth and hence satisfying poincare duality).

the rst category, type i manifolds, are those for which all two-chains  with even

(or vanishing) boundary have even w(). then the quantisation condition (6.4) reads

if  is a two-cycle i.e. if  vanishes, this yields

e i

qf

h r

f = e 2i

qf

h h

a.

qf

2h z

f  z    h2(m, z),

which is the same as the quantisation condition (1.1) with qf replacing qb. if this is the
only constraint then it is consistent for all uxes to vanish and hence all eld strengths
and all gauge potentials. alternatively it is consistent for the charge qf to vanish which
is the same as saying that the four-manifold admits neutral spinors, or in mathematical
terminology, possesses a spin structure. notice that in this case i, the intersection matrix
dened in section 2 is even, i.e. has even entries on the diagonal. thus the vanishing of
w mod 2 leads to the same conclusion as the vanishing of the stiefel-whitney class, as it
should, according to the mathematical result quoted earlier.

if w is not always even, there are two possibilities, namely that it is odd on some
cycles (type ii) or that it is even on all cycles so that the oddness is visible only on some
two-chains with even boundary. this is the type iii possibility.

let us consider the type ii possibility. we already noted that w(), being a self-
intersection number i(, ), vanished on torsion cycles. hence the relevant cycle  must
be free and the quantisation condition (1.2) implies that the ux through  is fractional.
in particular it cannot vanish. nor can the spinor charge qf and hence neutral spinors are
not admitted. mathematically it is said that the four-manifold possesses a spinc structure
but not a spin structure. notice that in this case the intersection matrix for free cycles is
odd in the terminology of section 5.

for type iii four-manifolds the intersection matrix for free two-cycles is even, yet,
nevertheless, the gauge potential cannot be gauge equivalent to zero even though the elds
strengths f may vanish. the proof was given in the previous section.

to summarise, all three types support charged spinors, that is, spinc structures, but

only type i manifolds support neutral spinors, that is, spin structures.

on the other hand, only four-manifolds of types i and iii possess even intersection ma-
trices for their free two-cycles. it is this distinction that will aect the way electromagnetic
duality is realised.

the question of a likely relation between the two electric charges qb and qf carried by
the scalar and spinor wave functions has been deliberately left open until now. there are
two reasonable choices; either qf equals qb or half that. given the rst choice it follows
from the quantisation conditions (1.1) and (1.2) that on type i and iii four-manifolds (for
which i(, ) is always even) that the scalar and spinor wave functions coexist on the
same backgrounds of uxes. but on type ii four-manifolds the required backgrounds are

15

incompatible so that there is no choice for which both wave functions coexist. however it
seems that it is this choice that accords best with electromagnetic duality as we intend to
explain [m alvarez and d olive to appear]. with the second choice, in which qf equals
one half qb, the backgrounds that allow both wave functions are precisely those required
by the spinor wave function.

8. conclusions and discussion

we believe the results clarify, as intended, the close relationship between several no-
tions concerning four-manifolds, the idea of spin structure, the dirac quantisation condition
for uxes, the atiyah-singer index theorem for the u (1) dirac operator on the manifold
and electromagnetic duality, not to mention the role of z2 cohomology. evidently even
such a simple gauge theory has a remarkably rich structure.

however the discussion was limited to a certain class of four-manifold and there are
reasons to think that the relevant class could be larger. thus there are several ways in
which it would be interesting and relevant to extend the results.

all the four-manifolds considered admit riemannian (positive denite) metrics but
some admit minkowski metrics and it would be worth knowing that the results extended
to the corresponding minkowski spinors. this is very likely as most of the argument is
topological and so independent of metric. those manifolds admitting minkowski metrics
must have vanishing euler number, where (m4) = 2  2b1 + b2, using poincare duality.
hence the rst betti number has to be two or more if there are nontrivial uxes and so
such manifolds cannot be simply connected.

a more urgent question concerns the extension to non-compact manifolds as these are
more interesting physically. in fact there is a modied version of poincare duality that
holds in these cases and this could be relevant. see e.g. [schwarz 94]. recall that the
more physical example of electromagnetic duality [montonen and olive 1977] involves a
supersymmetric su (2) gauge theory in r3,1 which is certainly non-compact.

although electromagnetic duality of maxwell elds is special to space-times of four
dimensions the poincare duality of the underlying space-time that seems to be an essential
prerequisite is not special to four dimensions. hence another interesting question concerns
possible generalisations of our work to higher dimensions than four. this would have
to involve higher order gauge potentials and wave functions for pbranes (whatever these
wave functions are). thus, on a (poincare dual and connected) manifold m4k, of dimension
4k, 2k eld strengths could play a special role, as in the k = 1 case investigated in this
paper. the (2k  1)-form gauge-potentials a for which f = da could couple to the
wave function of a (2k  2)brane. one might anticipate that at least one important
obstruction to the existence of wave functions for spinning (2k  2)branes would be
supplied by an element w2k  h 2k(m4k, z2), which is presumably the appropriate stiefel-
whitney class. if so, as w2k = 0, mod 2, either w2k = 0 or w2k = 2 where  is a
(2k + 1)-torsion-cocycle. thus we have a lift either to h 2k(m4k, z) or t 2k+1(m4k, z).
but by equations (2.4) and (2.5),

t 2k+1(m4k, z) = t2k(m4k, z) = t 2k(m4k, z).

so the same miracle that we saw for k = 1 in section 4 repeats itself. so maybe the existence
of spinning (2k  2)-branes on general (poincare dual) backgrounds actually requires the

16

coupling to the 2kform eld strength originally noted by kalb and ramond [1974] in the
case of strings.

in general, these, and other, extensions of the sort of analysis in this paper are likely
to be important in a comprehensive theory of strings and branes moving in non-trivial
backgrounds.

acknowledgments

we wish to thank the following for discussions; tobias ekholm, gary gibbons, stephen
howes, robion kirby, nadim mahassen and albert schwarz. we are grateful to the mittag-
leer institute for hospitality and to epsrc and to tmr grant fmrx-ct96-0012 for
assistance.

references

o alvarez; topological quantization and cohomology, comm math phys 100 (1985)
279-309.
e corrigan and di olive; colour and magnetic monopoles, nucl phys b110 (1976) 237.
pam dirac; quantised singularities in the electromagnetic eld, proc roy soc a33
(1931) 60-72.
r geroch 1968; spinor structures of space-times in general relativity i,journ math phys
9 (1968) 1739-1744.
r geroch 1970; spinor structures of space-times in general relativity ii,journ math phys
11 (1970) 343-348.
p goddard and di olive; algebras, lattices and strings in vertex operators in mathe-
matics and physics, msri publications 3 (springer 1984) 51-96.
n habegger; une variete de dimension 4 avec forme dintersection paire et signature-8
commun math helv 67 (1982) 22-24.
sw hawking and cn pope; generalised spinor structures in quantum gravity, phys lett
b73 (1978) 42-44.
m kalb and p ramond; classical direct interstring action, phys rev d9 (1974), 2273-
2284
rc kirby; the topology of 4-manifolds, (springer lecture notes in mathematics 1374,
1989).
hb lawson and m-l michelsohn; spin geometry, princeton mathematical series 38,
(princeton 1989)
j milnor and d husemoller; symmetric bilinear forms (springer 1973)
c montonen and di olive; magnetic monopoles as gauge elds?, phys lett 72b (1977)
117-120.
a schwarz; topology for physicists, springer 1994.
e verlinde; global aspects of electric-magnetic duality, nucl phys b455 (1995) 211-228.
e witten; on s duality in abelian gauge theory, selecta math (ns) 1 (1995) 383-410,
hep-th/9505186.
tt wu and cn yang; concept of non-integrable phase factors and global formulation of
gauge elds, phys rev d12 (1975) 3845-3857.

17

