9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

3
2

 
 

1
v
0
8
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

wilson loops

in two-dimensional

yang-mills theories

roberto begliuomini

university of trento (italy)

thesis submitted for the ph.d. degree in physics

at the faculty of science, university of trento.

january 1999

contents

acknowledgements

introduction

1 preliminaries

t hooft model

1.1
1.2 two-dimensional yang-mills theories

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.1 going towards d = 2: the d > 2 case . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2.2 the strictly two-dimensional case . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.3 wilson loops: not only a tool

2 light-like wilson loop

2.1 light-like wilson loop in feynman gauge . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 light-like wilson loop in light-cone gauge . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.1 cauchy principal value prescription . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2.2 mandelstam-leibbrandt prescription . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 space-time wilson loop

3.1 space-time wilson loop in feynman gauge . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 space-time wilson loop in light-cone gauge . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.1 cauchy principal value prescription . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2.2 mandelstam-leibbrandt prescription (d = 2)
. . . . . . .
3.2.3 mandelstamleibbrandt prescription (d  2) . . . . . . .
3.3 concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

conclusions

a exchange diagrams in feynman gauge

b bubble diagrams in feynman gauge

c spider diagrams in feynman gauge

iii

v

1

4
4
7
8
10
13

18
19
22
22
23
25

28
29
37
37
38
42
45

48

52

55

57

d crossed diagrams in cpv formulation

e crossed diagrams in ml formulation (d = 2)

f bubble diagrams in ml formulation

g three point green function in the limit d  2

60

61

70

72

acknowledgements

i want to thank all the people who have directly or indirectly contributed to this
work, in particular:

 my tutor and coauthor giuseppe nardelli for many discussions and hints,

and for proofreading the thesis,

 my coauthor prof. antonio bassetto for the fruitful collaboration and for

proofreading the thesis,

 luca griguolo and dimitri colferai,
 the ph.d. students at the department of physics in trento,
 luisa rossi doria,
 my family for their support and encouragement,
 my graduation thesis advisor at pisa university mihail mintchev,
 the italian ministry of university for its nancial support,
 the theoretical group at department of physics in trento university for

warm hospitality and for nancial support in these last four months,

 infn for nancial support of my visit in cambridge at the summer school

connement, duality, and nonperturbative aspects of qcd.

 the university of trento for nancial support to cover partly house rent

expenses.

v

introduction

twodimensional models have been an extraordinary laboratory to test ideas in
quantum eld theory (see for a review ref. [?]). the interest in studying two
dimensional theories is mainly due to the possibility of obtaining sometimes exact
solutions, which are believed (or at least hoped!) to share important features
with the more realistic (but also much more dicult to face with) situation in
four dimensions.

schwingers model (massless electrodynamics in two dimensions qed2) is the
key example, which can be exactly solved, exhibiting very interesting and peculiar
properties, like fermion connement, thetavacua and the presence of a non
vanishing chiral condensate.

qcd2 is its nonabelian generalization and has recently received most at-
tention in many investigations, also thanks to the discovery of a string picture
for it [?]. it is widely believed that several phenomena that can be fairly easily
understood in two dimensions, could persist when dimensions are increased.

the facts exposed above are the motivations of our perturbative enquiries on
pure yangmills theories in 1 + 1 dimensions, which are interesting at least for
two reasons.

first, the reduction of the dimensions to d = 2 entails tremendous simpli-
cations in the theory, so that several important problems can be faced in this
lower dimensional context and, sometimes, solved. we are thinking for instance
to the exact evaluation of vacuum to vacuum amplitudes of wilson loop oper-
ators, that, for a suitable choice of contour and in some specic limit, provide
the potential between two static quarks. another example is the spectrum of the
bethesalpeter equation, when dynamical fermions are added to the system.

the second reason, as we will see along this thesis, is that yangmills theories

in d = 2 have several peculiar features that are interesting by their own:

a) in d = 2 within the same gauge choice (light-cone gauge) two inequivalent

perturbative formulations of the theory seem to coexist;

b) d = 2 is a point of discontinuity for yangmills theories; this is an intriguing

feature whose meaning has not been fully understood so far.

all the features we have listed are most conveniently studied if the lightcone
gauge is chosen. in such a gauge the faddeevpopov sector decouples and the

1

2

introduction

unphysical degrees of freedom content of the theory is minimal. the price to
be paid for these nice features is the presence of the so called spurious poles in
the vector propagator. to handle the spurious pole at n  k = 0 is a delicate
matter; basically all diculties encountered in the past within the lightcone
gauge quantization are related to this problem. as we shall see, there are two
possible, inequivalent, ways for handling the pole: the cauchy principal value
(cpv) prescription and the mandelstam-leibbrandt (ml) prescription.

they result from dierent procedures of quantization. the cpv prescription
is derived in the socalled nullframe formalism, but it is well dened only in
strictly two dimension. the twodimensional case, for cpv prescription, is a sort
of happy island: everything works well, the connement seems to show itself
already at a perturbative level, the boundstates equation in the large n limit
provides a discrete spectrum for mesons. but as soon as we try to escape towards
higher dimensions, we will see that the theory encounters a lot of inconsistencies.
instead, the ml prescription derives from the equaltime quantization, and
is more sincere:
it does not provide any miracle, but it is consistent also in
higher dimensions, where it is in perfect agreement with the milestone repre-
sented by feynman gauge 1. nevertheless, also for the ml prescription, the
twodimensional case is peculiar: in fact, in approaching d = 2, we will discover
the surprise of its discontinuity.

the coexistence of these two formulations for d = 2 motivates our pertur-
bative enquiries, in order to understand their relationship and if there is any
physical reason to have a preference for one of them.

as a technical tool, we will use the wilson loop, owing to its gauge invariance
and to its reasonable infrared properties.
it is indeed well known that, when
approaching d = 2, ultraviolet singularities are no longer a concern, but wild
infrared behaviors usually show up. besides, this tool will help us to reduce the
computational eort: actually the graphs coming from the perturbative expansion
of the wilson loop, to a given order in the coupling constant, are much easier
to compute than the ones of the corresponding s-matrix elements. the latter,
furthermore, are not well dened when are computed onshell, due to their
infrared divergences.

this ph.d. thesis reaches two main results. the rst one is represented by
a detailed study, in feynman gauge, of the perturbative o(g4) contribution to a
spacetime wilson loop, with respect to its (expected) abelianlike time exponen-
tiation when the temporal side goes to innity. as soon as we are in dimensions
greater than two, the expected behavior is found. but if we proceed rst to the
dimensional limit d  2, the exponentiation is not recovered. the limits t  
and d  2 do not commute. this result has been reached in collaboration with
antonio bassetto and giuseppe nardelli [?].

1unfortunately feynman propagator fails to be a tempered distribution for d = 2, then we

will not be able to make a comparison with the covariant gauge in strictly two dimensions.

introduction

3

the other result is the computation in dimensions d = 2 +  and in light-cone
gauge with ml prescription of the perturbative o(g4) contribution to the same
wilson loop, coming from diagrams with a self-energy correction in the vector
propagator. in the limit   0 the result is nite, in spite of the vanishing of
the triple vector vertex in lightcone gauge, and provides the expected agreement
with the analogous calculation in feynman gauge. also this result has been
reached in collaboration with antonio bassetto and giuseppe nardelli [?].

let us conclude this introduction with a brief outline of the thesis.
in chapter 1 we start reviewing t hooft model and its successes, and in-
troduce the main ingredients for the formulation of two-dimensional yangmills
theories, with particular emphasis on the two dierent lightcone gauge formula-
tions, cpv and ml. we end with a brief reminder of wilson loop, exposing its
usefulness as a test of gauge invariance and its physical meaning.

chapter 2 is a review of the results contained in ref. [?], that represents the
starting point from which our research begins. a lightlike wilson loop is com-
puted in perturbation theory up to o(g4) in 1+1 dimensions, using feynman and
lightcone gauges to check its gauge invariance. after dimensional regularization
in intermediate steps, a nite gauge invariant result is obtained, which, however,
does not exhibit abelian exponentiation. this result is at variance with the com-
mon belief that pure yangmills is free in 1+1 dimensions: only cpv formulation
gives an abelianlike result. both the discontinuity of ml formulation and the
inequivalence of ml and cpv formulations are explicitly shown.

in chapter 3 we report the results obtained from our research and exposed
above, turning to study a spacetime wilson loop and reviewing also intermediate
results contained in refs. [?, ?].

in the conclusions we comment our results, comparing them to the available

nonperturbative results, and point out some open questions.

at the end, there are some technical appendices, in which we report the main

aspects of the computations leading to the results exposed in chapter 3.

chapter 1

preliminaries

in this rst chapter we review some facts and tools that we will use throughout
this thesis. in section 1.1 we recall the basic features of t hooft model, namely
qcd2 in the large n limit. this model is the most famous example of the
simplications that derive from lowering dimensions of the theory from four to
two.
in section 1.2 we will discuss the possible choices of gauge in treating
yangmills theories, with particular attention to their reliability according to the
dimensions. we will distinguish between d > 2 and d = 2, where d is the
dimension in which the theory is dened. finally, in section 1.3 we will recall
the denition of the wilson loop operator, explaining its main features and its
relevance in the study of yangmills theories, in particular as a tool to test gauge
invariance and to cope with the connement issue.

1.1 t hooft model

in 1974, g. t hooft proposed a very interesting model [?] to describe mesons,
starting from a su(n) yangmills theory in 1 + 1 dimensions in the large n
limit.

quite remarkably in this model quarks look conned, while a discrete set of
quarkantiquark bound states emerges, with squared masses lying on rising regge
trajectories. the model is solvable thanks to the instantaneous character of
the potential acting between quark and antiquark.

how does the mechanism of connement work in t hooft model? follow-
ing coleman [?], let us start from considering schwinger model, namely two
dimensional quantum electrodynamics. the theory is dened by the following
lagrangian:

(f01)2 + (i  ea  m),

(1.1)

1
2

l =
where

4

t hooft model

f01 = 0a1  1a0.

if we choose axial gauge

a1 = 0,

the lagrangian becomes

l =

1
2

(1a0)2 + (i  ea00  m).

5

(1.2)

(1.3)

(1.4)

this lagrangian is independent from time derivatives of a: then a is not a

dynamical variable, but a constrained variable, that obeys to:

2
1 a0 = e  ej0.

we can eliminate a0 from (1.4), solving eq. (1.5) and obtaining:

(1.5)

(1.6)

l = l0f +

e2

4 z dx1dy1j0(x0, x1)(cid:12)(cid:12)x1  y1(cid:12)(cid:12) j0(x0, y1),

where l0f is the free fermion lagrangian.
the interaction between charges is linear: this potential assures connement,
at least for small couplings, i.e.
in the perturbative regime. the interaction
between charges can be expressed as the eect of exchange of a photon propagator:

d(k) = 

i
2

00z d2xeikx(cid:12)(cid:12)x1(cid:12)(cid:12) (x0)

1
(k1)2 ,

= i00p

where p is the cauchy principalvalue symbol,

p

1
z2 =

1

2(cid:20)

1

(z + i)2 +

1

(z  i)2(cid:21) = 



z (cid:20)p(cid:18) 1

z(cid:19)(cid:21) .

(1.7)

(1.8)

the presence of (x0) shows the instantaneous character of this interaction.
the principalvalue prescription for the pole violates causality, but in strictly
two dimensions this is not a problem, because there are no propagating degrees
of freedom at all.

6

preliminaries

it is straightforward to generalize this simple model to chromodynamics. con-
sidering the simplest case of one avor, we can easily realize that the non linear
terms in f01 are proportional to the product of a0 and a1. then in axial gauge the
selfcoupling terms of the gauge eld vanish. the only dierence from schwinger
model is the presence of color indices, su(n) being the color gauge group:

l = l0f +

where

g2

n z dx1dy1jb

0a(x0, x1)(cid:12)(cid:12)x1  y1(cid:12)(cid:12) ja

0b(x0, x1),

jb
0a = 

ab 

b
a
n

cc.


(1.9)

(1.10)

the original t hooft work diers in some technical aspects from this peda-
gogical presentation. but the connement is basically due to the reason exposed
above.

first, t hooft chose lightcone gauge, namely he used lightcone coordinates:

x =

(x0  x1)

2

and put

a = a+ = 0

(1.11)

(1.12)

second, in the original work of t hooft an infrared cuto is used, instead
of the principal value prescription. but a quite remarkable feature of this theory
is that bound state wave functions and related eigenvalues turn out to be cuto
independent. as a matter of fact in ref. [?], it has been pointed out that the
singularity at k = 0 of the propagator in lightcone gauge can also be regular-
ized by a cauchy principal value prescription without nding dierences in the
resulting meson spectrum.

the 1/n expansion of qcd2 implies that we have to consider the limit
n   at g2n xed: it corresponds to taking only the planar diagrams with
no fermion loops.
in this limit the model was almost exactly soluble; the simplest greens func-
tions could be found in closed form and, moreover, the bethesalpeter equation
was solved numerically, providing a discrete spectrum for the twoparticle states.
the quarkantiquark states are only bound states (mesons) and only colourless
states can escape the coulomblike potential. the physical mass spectrum con-
sists of a nearly straight regge trajectory.

two-dimensional yang-mills theories

7

in 1977, three years after t hooft work, such an approach was criticized by
t.t. wu [?], who replaced the instantaneous t hoofts potential by an expression
with milder analytical properties, choosing a causal prescription for the infrared
singularity in the propagator.

unfortunately this modied formulation led to a quite involved bound state
equation, which may not be solved. an attempt to treat it numerically in the
zero bare mass case for quarks [?] led only to partial answers in the form of a
completely dierent physical scenario. in particular no rising regge trajectories
were found. another recent investigation [?] conrms these results.

after that pioneering investigation, many interesting papers followed t hoofts
approach, pointing out further remarkable properties of his theory and blooming
into the recent achievements of twodimensional qcd [?, ?, ?, ?, ?] whereas wus
approach sank into oblivion.

still, equal time canonical quantization of yangmills theories in lightcone
gauge [?] leads precisely in 1 + 1 dimensions to the wus expression for the vector
exchange between quarks [?].
in the next section we will review in detail the
equal time canonical quantization of yangmills theory. we will also compare the
vector propagator obtained in this quantization scheme to the one still obtained
in lightcone gauge but with a dierent quantization procedure, the nullframe
formalism: in so doing, we will point out the advantages and disadvantages of
the two dierent procedures.

1.2 two-dimensional yang-mills theories

we will use the following conventions for the gauge xed yangmills la-
grangian,

1
4

l = 

f a
f a + lg.f. ,
where, in lightcone gauge:

llcg
g.f. = a(naa) ,

(1.13)

(1.14)

and a are lagrange multipliers enforcing the light-cone gauge condition

naa

 = aa

 = 0 ,

(1.15)
n = (1/2)(1, 1) being a constant (gauge) vector, while in feynman gauge:

lf
g.f. = +

1
2

aa

aa
 .

(1.16)

8

preliminaries

without loss of generality, we consider su(n) as gauge group, so that the

eld strength in eq. (1.13) is dened as

f a
 = aa

  aa

 + gf abcab

ac

 ,

(1.17)

f abc being the structure constants of su(n).
for later convenience, we recall that the casimir constants of the fundamental

and adjoint representations for su(n), cf and ca, are dened through

cf =

1
n

tr(t at a) =

n 2  1
2n

,

and

caab = f acdf bcd = abn .

(1.18)

(1.19)

in section 1.2.1 we focus on the d 6= 2 case, and discuss the so called mani-
festly unitary and causal formulations of the theory in lightcone gauge. we
shall see that the correct formulation is the causal one: the manifestly unitary
formulation will meet so many inconsistencies to make it unacceptable. instead,
the causal one is fully consistent with covariant gauges.

in section 1.2.2 we compare the two lightcone formulations at strictly d = 2.
surprisingly, in this case both seem to coexist, without obvious inconsistencies.
thus, a natural question arises: are the two quantization schemes equivalent in
d = 2? do they provide us with equal results? this question is the source of our
enquiries: at the end of this thesis we will be able to answer in a quite accurate
way. moreover, we will get a deeper insight into the possible formulations of
twodimensional yangmills theories.

1.2.1 going towards d = 2: the d > 2 case

a formulation of yangmills theories in which no unphysical degrees of freedom
are present is called manifestly unitary. it can be obtained by quantizing the the-
ory in the so called nullframe formalism, rst introduced by kogut and soper [?],
which implies the use of lightcone coordinates and interprets x+ as the evolu-
tion coordinate (time) of the system; the remaining components x, x will be
interpreted as space coordinates. within this quantization scheme, one of the
unphysical components of the gauge potential (say a) is set equal to zero by the
gauge choice whereas the remaining unphysical component (a+) is no longer a
dynamical variable but rather a lagrange multiplier of the secondary constraint
(gauss law). thus, already at the classical level, it is possible to restrict to the
phase space containing only the physical (transverse) polarization of the gauge

going towards d = 2: the d > 2 case

9

elds. then, canonical quantization on the null plane provides the answer to the
prescription for the spurious pole in the propagator, the answer being essentially
the cauchy principal value (cpv) prescription.

unfortunately, following this scheme, several inconsistencies arise, all of them

being related to the violation of causality that cpv prescription entails:

 nonrenormalizability of the theory: already at the one loop level,
dimensionally regularized feynman integrals develop loop singularities that
manifest themselves as double poles at d = 4 [?].

 power counting criterion is lost: the pole structure in the complex k0
plane is such that spurious poles contribute under wick rotation. as a con-
sequence euclidean feynman integrals are not simply related to minkowskian
ones as an extra contribution shows up which jeopardizes naive power count-
ing [?].

 gauge invariance is lost: due to the above mentioned extra contributions,
the n = 4 supersymmetric version of the theory turns out not to be nite,
at variance with the feynman gauge result [?].

consequently, manifestly unitary theories do not seem to exist. as explained
above, all the bad features of this formulation have their root in the lack of
causality of the prescription for the spurious pole, and the subsequent failure of
the power counting criterion in the perturbative formulation of the theory. thus,
a natural way to circumvent these problems is to choose a causal prescription. it
was precisely following these arguments that mandelstam [?] and leibbrandt [?]
independently, introduced the ml prescription

1
k  ml(

1
k

) =

k+

k+k + i

=

1

k + isign(k+)

.

(1.20)

it can be easily realized that with this choice the position of the spurious pole
is always coherent with that of feynman ones, no extra terms appearing after
wick rotation which threaten the power counting criterion for convergence. how
can one justify such a recipe? one year later bassetto and collaborators [?]
lled the gap by showing that ml prescription naturally arises by quantizing the
theory at equal time, rather than at equal x+. eventually they succeeded [?]
in proving full renormalizability of the theory and full agreement with feynman
gauge results in perturbative calculations [?].

at present the level of accuracy of the lightcone gauge is indeed comparable

with that of the covariant gauges.

an important point to be stressed is that equal time canonical quantization in
lightcone gauge, leading to the ml prescription for the spurious pole, does not
provide us with a manifestly unitary formulation of the theory. in fact in this for-
malism gauss laws do not hold strongly but, rather, the gauss operators obey

10

preliminaries

to a free eld equation and entail the presence in the fock space of unphysical
degrees of freedom. the causal nature of the ml prescription for the spurious
poles is a consequence of the causal propagation of those ghosts. a physical
hilbert space can be selected by imposing the (weakly) vanishing of gauss op-
erators. this mechanism is similar to the gupta bleuler quantization scheme for
electrodynamics in feynman gauge, but with the great advantage that it can be
naturally extended to the nonabelian case without faddeev popov ghosts [?].

1.2.2 the strictly two-dimensional case

let us start from considering twodimensional yangmills theory in lightcone
gauge. the causal formulation of the theory can be straightforwardly extended
to any dimension, including the case d = 2, since the ml propagator is still a
tempered distribution. on the other hand, the manifestly unitary formulation
can only be dened in d = 2 without encountering obvious inconsistencies. the
reason is simple: all problems are related to the lack of causality encoded in
the cpv prescription. but at exactly d = 2 there are no degrees of freedom
propagating at all, and then causality is no longer a concern. moreover, at exactly
d = 2 and within the lightcone gauge, the 3 and 4gluon vertices vanish, so that
all the inconsistencies related to the perturbative evaluation of feynman integrals
are no longer present in this case. a manifestly unitary formulation provides
the following instantaneouscoulomb type form for the only non vanishing
component of the propagator:

dab
++(x) = 

iab

(2)2 z d2k eikx 

k

p(cid:18) 1

k(cid:19) = iab|x|

2

(x+) ,

(1.21)

where p denotes cpv prescription, whereas equal time canonical quantiza-

tion [?] gives, for the same component of the propagator,

dab

++(x) =

iab

2 z d2k eikx

k2
+

(k2 + i)2 =

ab(x)2
(x2 + i)

.

in fact, starting from the lagrangian density

l =

1
2

f a
+f a

+ + anaa,

(1.22)

(1.23)

a being lagrange multipliers, by imposing the equal time commutation relations

[aa

1(t, x), f b

01(t, y)] = i(x  y)ab,

(1.24)

we recover for the vector propagator exactly the ml prescription restricted at
d = 2.

the strictly two-dimensional case

in this context the equation for the lagrange multipliers

n  a = 0

11

(1.25)

is to be interpreted as a true equation of motion and the elds a provide prop-
agating degrees of freedom, although of a ghost type [?]. the space of states
emerging from this treatment is an indenitemetric hilbert space. it is possible
to select a physical subspace, with a positivesemidenite metric, by imposing in
it the vanishing of the gauss operator.

in fact, the potentials aa

+ have the momentum decomposition

aa

+(k) = ua(k) + va(k),

a (k) being proportional to ua: a = k+ua.
the canonical algebra (1.24) induces on ua and va the algebra

[va

(k+), ub

(q+)] = (k+  q+)ab,

va
 and ua

 being dened as

va(k+) = (k+)va

+(k+) + (k+)va

(k+),

ua(k+) = (k+)ua

+(k+)  (k+)ua

(k+),

and with the adjoint operators being:

+(k+)(cid:3) = va
(cid:2)va
+(k+)(cid:3) = ua
(cid:2)ua

(k+),

(k+).

(1.26)

(1.27)

(1.28)

all others commutators are vanishing.
this algebra eventually produces the propagator (1.22).
let us consider for instance the state ua

+|0i, |0i being the fock vacuum. the

norm of this state is:

h0|ua

ua

+|0i = h0|ua

+ua

|0i = 0

(1.29)

where the rst equality follows from the commutation relations and the second
. therefore there is a nonnull

from the denition of the destruction operator ua
state with vanishing norm, leading to an indenite-metric hilbert space.

thus, it seems we have two dierent formulation of yangmills theories in
d = 2, and within the same gauge choice, the lightcone gauge [?]. whether

12

preliminaries

they are equivalent and, in turn, whether they are equivalent to a dierent gauge
choice, such as feynman gauge, has to be explicitly veried.

we can summarize the situation according to the content of unphysical degrees
of freedom. since the paper by t hooft in 1974 [?], it is a common belief that
pure yangmills theory in d = 2 has no propagating degrees of freedom. this
happens in the manifestly unitary formulation leading to cpv prescription for the
spurious pole, to the propagator (1.21) and to t hooft bound state equation. this
formulation, however, cannot be extended outside d = 2 without inconsistencies.
alternatively, we have the same gauge choice but with a dierent quantization
scheme, namely at equal time, leading to the causal (ml) prescription for the
spurious pole, to the propagator (1.22) and to wus bound state equation [?].
here, even in the pure yangmills case, some degrees of freedom survive, as we
have propagating ghosts. such a formulation is in a better shape when compared
to the previous one as it can be smoothly extended to any dimension, where
consistency with feynman gauge has been established.

feynman gauge validity for any d 6= 2 is unquestionable, while, at strictly
d = 2, the vector propagator in this gauge fails to be a tempered distribution,
at variance with the behavior of lightcone gauge propagator both with ml and
with cpv prescription. still, in the spirit of dimensional regularization, the best
one can do is to evaluate the wilson loop in d dimensions, with d > 2, and
to take eventually the limit d  2. in following this attitude, the number of
degrees of freedom is even bigger as faddeevpopov ghosts are also to be taken
into account. in addition, in the covariant gauge 3- and 4- gluon vertices do not
vanish and the theory does not look free at all.

we have summarized the situation in the following table:

formulation

feynman

d = 2

not viable

d > 2

ok

lightcone (cpv)
lightcone (ml)

ok
ok

not viable

ok

two possible kind of enquiries can be made:

 vertical enquiry, i.e. tests of equivalence of two dierent formulations;
 horizontal enquiry, i.e.

tests of continuity, comparing a formulation in

d = 2 with the same formulation for d > 2, taking the limit d  2.

we see from the table that we can consider for such enquiries three dierent

couples, namely two vertical couples and one horizontal couple.

but the complete equivalence between feynman gauge and lightcone gauge
with ml prescription for d > 2 (rst vertical couple) has been established in
ref. [?]. in the next chapter we will examine the second vertical couple, namely if

wilson loops: not only a tool

13

there is a complete equivalence between the two dierent formulations in light
cone gauge for d = 2, and the only horizontal couple, namely if the ml formu-
lation of lightcone gauge is continuous.

the tool we will use in these enquiries is the wilson loop, that we are going

to describe in the next section.

1.3 wilson loops: not only a tool

starting from the second half of the seventies, people began to study the socalled
phase factors (exponentials of integrals over gauge potentials ordered along a
closed path) [?]. the main idea was to describe the dynamics of the gauge elds
in terms of the phase factors, which are nonlocal gauge invariant objects [?, ?, ?].
if we consider the special case of a rectangular path, we have the phase factor
usually known as the wilson loop [?, ?]. its study may give information on the
quark connement problem, in the sense that the asymptotic behavior of the loop
(in a suitable limit which will be claried in the sequel) gives the structure of the
interaction potential between two quarks [?, ?, ?, ?].

to our purposes, the investigation of the wilson loop will not concern the
formulation of gauge theories in terms of phasefactors. rather, our interest in
it will be twofold:

a) test of gauge invariance: the wilson loop, being a gauge invariant quan-
tity, will allow us to perform perturbative tests of gauge invariance, in order
to answer to equivalence and continuity issues explained at the end of
the previous section. we will also study the consistency of the perturbative
formulation of yangmills theory by means of a suitable criterion derived
by the asymptotic behavior of the loop plus gauge invariance;

b) connement issue:

in the (simplied) strictly two dimensional case we
will be able to get also some consequences about the interaction potential
between two quarks and the boundstate equation. essentially, we will
determine the interaction potential between two quarks assuming that we
can reconstruct it from a resummation of the perturbative series. in so doing
we will follow an approach that, since the pioneering work of t hooft [?],
regards connement in qcd2 as a perturbative feature. we will discuss in
our conclusions the validity of this assumption, but we can anticipate that
our results lead to a criticism of this approach.

let us consider rst a yangmills theory at the classical level; we dene the

following functional

e[a; dx] = exp(igdxa);

(1.30)

14

preliminaries

it is easy to check that, under a gauge transformation on the gauge potential,

a  a

 = uau 1 

i
g

uu 1,

e[a, dx] transforms as

e[a; dx]  e[a; dx] = u(x + dx)e[a; dx]u 1(x),

(1.31)

(1.32)

apart from higher orders in dx; the proof of eq. (1.32) can be obtained by

expanding in powers of dx its righthand side.

now we want to generalize eqs.

(1.30) and (1.32) to the case of a nite
displacement; to this aim we consider an arbitrary oriented path  starting from
the point x and ending at the point y.

the simplest thing to do is to decompose  as a riemann sum of innitesimal
displacements and to use, for each of them, eq.
k a
small displacement, oriented in the  direction, centered at the point xk  ,
k = 1, . . . , n. in this way, the natural generalization of the functional given in
eq. (1.30) for a nite displacement  will be

(1.32). let us call x

e[a; ] = lim

n

x

k 0

y

yxk=x

exp(igx

k  a(xk)).

(1.33)

equation (1.33) denes the socalled p integral, that is, the pathordered

integral along the contour ,

e[a; ] = p exp(cid:18)igz

dxa(x)(cid:19) .

(1.34)

using eq. (1.32), it is easy to obtain the transformation law for e[a; ] under

a gauge transformation, namely

e[a; ]  u(y)e[a; ]u 1(x);

(1.35)

in particular, if we choose a closed path 0, we have x = y so that e[a; 0]

will transform covariantly according to the corresponding representation,

e[a; 0]  u(x)e[a; 0]u 1(x);

(1.36)

in this case e[a; 0] is commonly called phase factor. from eq. (1.36) it
follows that the trace of e[a; 0] will be a gauge invariant object. we dene the

wilson loops: not only a tool

15

quantum phase factor by means of the following vacuum to vacuum expectation
value:

w0 =

1

n h0|tr(cid:20)t pexp(cid:18)igi0

dx aa

(x)t a(cid:19)(cid:21)|0i ,

(1.37)

where t orders gauge elds in time and p orders generators t a of the gauge
group su(n) along the closed integration path 0.
we stress that in the denition of the quantum phase factor (1.37) the vac-
uum has to be meant the true physical vacuum of the theory, and not the
perturbative (fock) vacuum. in general they are dierent, and we will really ex-
ploit this dierence to explain our nal results about the dierent formulations
of the twodimensional case.

nevertheless, since the quantum phase factor is dened as a functional average
of a gauge invariant quantity, if we expand the r.h.s. of eq.(1.37), gauge invariance
has to hold orderbyorder also in the perturbative expansion, that results:

w0 = 1 +

1
n



xn=2

(ig)ni0

dx1

1   i0

dxn

n (x1 >    > xn)

 tr[g1n(x1,   , xn)] ,

(1.38)

where g1n(x1,   , xn) is the lie algebra valued n-point green function, and
the heavyside -functions order the points x1,   , xn along the integration path
0.
as a consequence, by comparing the results within dierent gauge choices, we
can obtain a powerful test of gauge invariance. if we choose as closed path 0
the rectangular one in fig. 1.1, the phase factor is usually called wilson loop.
it is easy to show that the perturbative expansion of w0 is an even power

series in the coupling constant, so that we can write

w0 = 1 + g2w (1) + g4w (2) + o(g6) .

(1.39)

the advantage of using wilson loop as a test of gauge invariance with respect
to another gauge invariant quantity, the scattering amplitude (perturbative s-
matrix elements), is at least twofold:

 in the nonabelian case, the perturbative s-matrix is only formally dened

due to the occurrence of severe infrared singularities onshell ;

 to a given order in the coupling constant, the computation of the graphs
coming from the perturbative expansion of the wilson loop is much easier
than the ones of the corresponding smatrix elements.

16

preliminaries

x0

t

2 

l

1

1

x

3

4

figure 1.1: parameterization of the closed rectangular loop  in four segments
i.

another important symmetry of yangmills theories in the twodimensional
case is their invariance under area preserving dieomorphisms. the general rea-
son for this fact, rst emphasized by witten [?], is that the eld strength is a
two-form in two dimensions. the action is therefore invariant under all dieomor-
phisms that preserve the volume element of the surface. then, the wilson loop is
not only gaugeinvariant, but is also invariant under these dieomorphisms and
depends only, in strictly 1 + 1 dimensions, from the area of the loop, no matter
the orientation and the shape of the path.

it is possible to derive [?, ?] that the asymptotic behavior of the wilson loop

at xed l is

t w(l, t ) = const. e2it v (2l) ,
lim

(1.40)

where v (2l) is the potential between a static qq pair in the fundamental
representation, separated by a distance 2l, and the wilson loop is the one in
fig. 1.1, one side along the space direction and one side along the time direction,
of length 2l and 2t respectively.

as a matter of fact, in the strictly twodimensional case, it is possible to
express in closed form the expectation value of the wilson loop, summing all the
contributes in the perturbative series. when it is not possible, we will investigate
its asymptotic behavior up to the g4 order. the tests we are going to accomplish
represent only necessary but, in general, not sucient conditions to verify the
correctness of the quantization scheme within the assigned subsidiary condition
and, in particular, of the prescription we use for the spurious poles. in order to

g
g
g
g
wilson loops: not only a tool

17

perform the test in the framework of the perturbation theory, we consider the
expansion of the exponential:

exp(2it v ) = 1  2it v  2t 2v 2 + . . . .

(1.41)

the potential v (2l) may be developed, in turn, as a perturbative series in

g2, namely

v = g2v1 + g4v2 + . . . .

(1.42)

a necessary condition to get the exponential behavior of the wilson loop reads
that the coecient of t 2 at the order g4 is onehalf the square of the linear coe-
cient in t at the order g2; this is equivalent to the cancellation of the nonabelian
terms increasing like t 2 (or worse) in the large t limit. in order to explain this
fact, we rst recognize as nonabelian terms in the perturbative expansion of the
wilson loop the ones proportional to the factor f abcf abc = ca(n 2  1), where
ca is the casimir factor in the adjoint representation of su(n). the above
mentioned equivalence is clear, once we realize that all the terms linear in t at
the order g2 are abelian. hence, for any diagram coming from the perturbative
expansion of the wilson loop, we shall only deal with its nonabelian contribu-
tions behaving, at the order g4, as t 2 (or worse) in the asymptotic limit. in order
to obtain the expected exponential behavior, the sum of those contribution must
vanish up to order g4. as we already pointed out, the test of the exponential
behavior, in the large t limit, of the wilson loop w0 is a necessary although
not sucient condition to check the gauge relativity principle, namely that in the
perturbative quantum eld theories dierent gauge choices must yield equivalent
descriptions of the physical phenomena, i.e. the same value of gaugeinvariant
quantities.

the aim of this test is clear: as the exponential behavior of the wilson loop
(or, better, the cancellation up to g4 of the nonabelian terms behaving like t 2
or worse) is a necessary condition for the gauge invariance, if it is not reproduced
within a given gauge choice, then the corresponding formulation of the pertur-
bation theory turns out to be poorly dened. therefore the results of this test,
performed in particular in chapter 3, will be crucial to check the soundness of
the perturbative approach with dierent choices of gauge and to compare the
dierent results obtained.

chapter 2

light-like wilson loop

we have seen in chapter 1 that yangmills theory without fermions in two di-
mensions is, in t hooft approach, a free theory. this feature is at the root of
the possibility of calculating the mesonic spectrum in the large n approxima-
tion [?, ?], when quarks are introduced.

still diculties in performing a wicks rotation in those conditions have been
pointed out [?], and a causal prescription for the infrared singularity has been
advocated, leading to a quite dierent solution for the vector propagator.
in
this context the bound state equation with vanishing bare quark masses [?] has
solutions with quite dierent properties, when compared with the ones of refs. [?,
?].

in view of the above mentioned controversial results and of the fact that
pure yangmills theory does not immediately look free in feynman gauge,
where degrees of freedom of a ghosttype are present, it was worth performing
a test [?] on a gauge invariant quantity: the review of this test is the subject of
chapter 2.

following [?], we choose a rectangular wilson loop with lightlike sides, di-
 = (l, l), with l, t > 0, parame-

rected along the vectors n = (t,t ) and n
terized according to the equations:

c1
c2
c3
c4

: x
: x
: x
: x

1 (t) = (tl,tl) = nt,
2 (t) = (l + tt,l + tt ) = n + nt,
3 (t) = (t + l  tl, t  l + tl) = n + n(1  t),
4 (t) = (t  tt, t  tt ) = n(1  t),
0  t  1 ,

and with area

ac = 2lt .

18

(2.1)

(2.2)

feynman gauge

19

this contour has been considered in refs. [?, ?] for an analogous test of gauge
invariance in 1 + 3 dimensions. its lightlike character forces a minkowski treat-
ment.

we will review a perturbative calculation up to o(g4); in so doing topological
eects will not be considered. the computation was performed in feynman gauge
(section 2.1) and in light-cone gauge (section 2.2), with cauchy principal value
prescription (section 2.2.1) and mandelstamleibbrandt prescription (section
2.2.2) for the spurious pole in the vector propagator. we can anticipate the
unexpected results that was obtained: the gauge invariant theory is not free at
d = 1 + 1, at variance with the commonly accepted behavior; the theory in
d = 1 + (d  1) is discontinuous in the limit d  2. besides, two dierent,
inequivalent formulations within the same choice of gauge, the lightcone gauge,
seem to coexist: the cauchy principal value and the mandelstamleibbrandt
formulations.

2.1 light-like wilson loop in feynman gauge

in feynman gauge already the free vector propagator does not exist as a tempered
distribution in 1 + 1 dimensions. a regularization is thereby mandatory and
we choose to adopt the dimensional regularization, which preserves gauge
invariance:

df
(x) = g

d/2

4

(d/2  1)(x2 + i)1d/2,

(2.3)

the calculation in feynman gauge of the lightlike wilson loop (2.1), in 1 +
(d  1) dimensions up to o(g4) has been performed in ref. [?]. actually in
ref. [?] part of the contribution from graphs containing three vector lines, has
only been given as a laurent expansion around d = 4, owing to its complexity.
in the following we shall exhibit its general expression in terms of a generalized
hypergeometric series and then we shall expand it around d = 2. we only report
the nal results concerning the contributions of the various diagrams.

the single vector exchange (o(g2)) gives

1
2 cf

(2.4)

w (1)
f = 
where cf is the casimir operator of the fundamental representation of color

(d/2  1)
(d  4)2 c,

su(n) and

c h(2ac + i)2d/2 + (2ac + i)2d/2i.

(2.5)

20

light-like wilson loop

one immediately notices that the propagator pole at d = 2 is cancelled after

integration over the contour, leading to a nite result.

there are a lot of feynman diagrams contributing to the wilson loop ex-
pectation value at order o(g4) of perturbation theory. however, the number of
diagrams one has to evaluate could be drastically reduced using the nonabelian
exponentiation theorem [?, ?]. according to this theorem

wc  1 +



xn=1

g2nw (n) = exp

w(n),



xn=1

(2.6)

where w(n) is given by the contribution of w (n) with the maximal nonabelian
color factor to the order o(g2n) of perturbation theory, which is equal to cf for
n = 1 and cf ca for n = 2, where ca is the casimir operator of the adjoint
representation.

in so doing, at order o(g4) we could restrict ourselves to the maximally non
abelian contributions proportional to cf ca.
in fact, the terms proportional
to cf ca and to cf are distinct and cannot mix. the test reported in this
chapter is concerned only with the nonabelian terms.
instead, in the next
chapter our attitude will be to compare the terms proportional to cf ca and to
verify explicitly that, at order o(g4), the terms proportional to cf are those that
we expect from the o(g2) computation using the nonabelian exponentiation
theorem. the computation of the (abelian) terms proportional to cf will be
only a further check of the internal consistency of our results, but in all cases the
signicant test of gauge invariance will be given by the cf ca term.

the diagrams contributing to order o(g4) can be grouped into three distinct

families:

 the ones in which the gluon propagator contains a selfenergy correction;
 the ones with a double gluon exchange in which the propagators can either

cross or uncross;

 the ones involving a triple vector vertex.

in strictly two dimensions and in an axial gauge only the second family is present.
but in feynman gauge all of them must be taken into account; moreover we are
here considering the problem in ddimensions. the second family is also the
only one contributing to the abelian case.

we start by considering the diagrams belonging to the rst category.
the selfenergy correction to the propagator gives

w (2;se)

f

=

cf ca
644

2(d/2  1)(3d  2)
(d  4)3(d  3)(d  1)e,

(2.7)

feynman gauge

where

e h(2ac + i)4d + (2ac + i)4di

and the fermionic loop has not been considered (pure yangmills theory). eq.

(2.7) exhibits a double pole at d = 2.

next we consider the contribution of the socalled cross graphs, the ones

with two non interacting crossed vector exchanges

w (2;cr)

f

= 

cf ca
164

2(d/2  1)
(d  4)4

(cid:20)e + 8b(cid:18)1 

2(3  d/2)
(5  d) (cid:19)(cid:21) ,

where

21

(2.8)

(2.9)

(2.10)

b h(2ac + i)(2ac + i)i2d/2

.

again a double pole occurs at d = 2.
the contribution coming from graphs with three vector lines is by far the
most complex one. it is convenient to split it into two parts, one coming from
graphs with two vector lines attached to the same side

w (2;ss)

f

=



cf ca
164

1

d  3

e
(d  4)4(cid:20)2(3  d/2)(d/2  1)(d  3)
2(d/2  1)(cid:21)

(2.11)

and another one in which the three gluons end in three dierent rectangle sides

f

=

cf ca

644 e(cid:26)2(d/2  2)(4  d/2)(d  3)

w (2;ds)
(d  4)4h(3  d/2)(d/2  1)(d  3)  2(d/2  1)i(cid:27) .
4

(d/2)

f (d)

+

the function f (d) is dened as

f (d) = s(d) +

d/2  1

(3  d/2)(d  4)h5(3  d/2)  (d/2  1)
2(1)  2(5  d)i,

(2.12)

(2.13)

22

light-like wilson loop

(d) being the digamma function and s(d) the convergent generalized hy-

pergeometric series

s(d) =



xn=0

1

(n + 1)2

1
n!

(n + d  3)

(d  3)

(n + 4  d/2)

(4  d/2)

(d/2)

(n + d/2)

.

(2.14)

both contributions exhibit a double pole at d = 2. the laurent expansion

of eq. (2.12) around d = 4, reproduces exactly the expression given in ref. [?].

summing eqs. (2.7), (2.9), (2.11) and (2.12) and performing a careful laurent
expansion around d = 2, it is tedious but straightforward to prove that double
and single poles cancel, leaving only the nite contribution

w (2)
f (d = 2) =

c

cf caa2
162 (cid:18)1 +

2

3 (cid:19) .

(2.15)

the presence of a non vanishing cf ca contribution is a dramatic result: it
means that the theory does not exponentiate in an abelian way, as a bona
de free theory should do. in order to better understand this result, it is worth
turning now our attention to the same wilson loop calculation, performed in the
lightcone axial gauge n  a = 0.

2.2 light-like wilson loop in light-cone gauge

we have seen in section 1.2.1 and 1.2.2 that, once we have chosen the light-cone
gauge, it is possible to adopt two dierent prescriptions for the pole of the vector
propagator in 1 + 1 dimensions:

 the so-called manifestly unitary formulation, or cauchy principal value pre-

scription;

 the causal formulation, or mandelstam-leibbrandt prescription.

in this section we will compare these two formulations to the result of the previ-
ous section, obtained in feynman gauge. the lightlike character of the wilson
loop leads to the vanishing of a lot of feynman diagrams, thus simplifying the
computation.

2.2.1 cauchy principal value prescription

in this section we stick in 1 + 1 dimensions, since cpv prescription is well de-
if we interpret x+ as time direction, the eld a+ is
ned only in this case.
not an independent dynamical variable and just provides a nonlocal force of

mandelstam-leibbrandt prescription

23

coulomb type between fermions. in momentum space it can be described by the
exchange k2

 has to be interpreted as in eq. (1.8):

 [?, ?], where k2

dcp v
++ (x) = 

i

(2)2 z eikxd2k



k (cid:20)p(cid:18) 1

k(cid:19)(cid:21) = 

i
2|x|(x+).

(2.16)

it is straightforward to check that, by inserting eq. (2.16) in our wilson loop,

the result (2.4) at o(g2) is recovered.
at o(g4) in 1 + 1 dimensions, the only a priori surviving nonabelian con-
tribution, which is due to cross graphs, vanishes using eq. (2.16) (see appendix
d). henceforth no cf ca term appears, in agreement with abelian exponentia-
tion, but at variance with the result obtained (after regularization!) in feynman
gauge. the sum of the perturbative series easily gives:

wcp v = exp(cid:18)

i
2

cf g2ac(cid:19) .

(2.17)

on the other hand no fully consistent vector loop calculation would be feasible
in 1 + (d  1) dimensions, using a cpv prescription or introducing infrared
cutos [?].

2.2.2 mandelstam-leibbrandt prescription

the free vector propagator in lightcone gauge is very sensitive to the prescription
used to handle the socalled spurious singularity. the only prescription which
allows to perform a wicks rotation without extra terms and to calculate loop
diagrams in a consistent way [?] is the causal mandelstamleibbrandt (ml)
prescription [?, ?].
in a canonical formalism it is obtained by imposing equal
time commutation relations [?]; in two dimensions a ghost degree of freedom
still survives, as extensively discussed in section 1.2.2. when ml prescription is
adopted, the free vector propagator is indeed a tempered distribution at d = 2 [?],
at variance with its behavior in feynman gauge. in particular, when x = 0,

dm l

++ (x) =

2d/2(d/2)

4  d

(x)2

(x2 + i)d/2 .

(2.18)

the calculation of the wilson loop under consideration at o(g4) in 1+(d1)
dimensions, using lightcone gauge with mandelstamleibbrandt prescription,
has been performed in ref. [?]. here we shall report those results and then perform
their laurent expansion around d = 2, the value we are interested in.

one might wonder why dimensional regularization should be introduced at all,
as one might presume that single graph contributions are likely to be nite in this

24

light-like wilson loop

gauge. on the other hand, while remaining strictly at d = 2, no selfinteraction
should be present. these arguments are true, but the dimensional approach is
necessary to make a complete comparison between the mandelstamleibbrandt
results and the feynman ones.

in fact, the calculation o(g2) is easily performed and the result exactly co-
incides with eq. (2.4), for any value of d. therefore at o(g4) we again conne
ourselves to the maximally nonabelian contributions, without losing informa-
tion. the selfenergy graph now gives

w (2;se)
m l =
2(d/2  1)(cid:21) +

cf ca

164 e(cid:26)

4

(4  d)4(d  3)(cid:20) 2(3  d/2)(d  3)
2(d/2  1)
d  2
(4  d)3(d  3)(cid:20)3 
d  3(cid:21)(cid:27).

3d  2
4(d  1) 

(5  d)

(2.19)

its limit at d = 2

cf caa2
162

c

w (2;se)
m l (d = 2) =
is nite, but it does not vanish, as one might have naively expected.
we shall discuss this point at the end of the section. for the time being let
us recall that, when d 6= 2, transverse vector components are turned on and,
although their contribution is expected to be o(d  2), it can compete with
singularities arising from loop corrections. this is indeed what happens in the
selfenergy calculation.

(2.20)

similarly the contribution from the cross graphs

w (2;cr)

m l = 

cf ca
164

2(d/2  1)
(d  4)4 (cid:26)2e

d  2
d  3

+ 8b(cid:20)1  2

2(3  d/2)
(5  d) (cid:21)(cid:27)

(2.21)

leads to a nite, non vanishing, result in the limit d = 2

cf caa2

w (2;cr)
m l (d = 2) =
summing eqs. (2.20) and (2.22) we exactly recover eq. (2.15).
as a matter of fact the contribution due to graphs with three gluon lines [?]

(2.22)

48

c

.

w (2;3g)

m l

= (cid:26)(d/2  2)(3  d/2) +


2

(2  d/2)

s1(d)  (4  d)(3  d/2)s2(d)(cid:27)

2(3  d/2)
(5  d)

6d  28

(d  2)(d  4)

(2.23)

concluding remarks

where

 =

2cf ca
(2)d (2ac)4de

id

2

cos(cid:18)d

2 (cid:19) (d  4)
(d  4)2 ,

25

(2.24)

1



(n + 3  d/2)n!(cid:20)
(n + 2  d/2)

xn=0
+(n + d/2)  (n + 3  d/2) 

2

(n + d/2  1)(n + d/2)

n + 3  d/2

+

(n + d/2  1)(5  d)

(4 + n  d/2)

(cid:21) (2.25)

s1(d) =

and

s2(d) =



xn=0

(n + 3  d/2)
(n + 6  d) (cid:20)(d/2  2)(cid:18) (n + 5  d)

(n + 3  d/2) 

+ 2

(n + 1)(d/2)
(n + 1 + d/2)

(n + 5  d)(d/2  1)

+

(n + 4  d/2)

(n + 2)

(n + d/2)(cid:19)
(n + 1)(3  d/2)
(n + 4  d/2) (cid:21)



(2.26)

vanishes when d = 2.
as a consequence the same nite result for the wilson loop o(g4) at d = 2 is
obtained both in feynman and in lightcone gauges. however nonabelian terms
are denitely present; the theory cannot be considered a free one in quantum loop
calculations at d = 2, in spite of the quadratic nature of its classical lagrangian
density in lightcone gauge. from a practical view point, in this fully interacting
theory, the hope of getting solutions, when quarks are included, e.g.
for the
mesonic spectrum, in analogy with t hoofts treatment, seems remote.

if we remain strictly in 1 + 1 dimensions, neither selfenergy corrections nor
graphs with three vector lines should be considered, and we have only the con-
tribution of crossed graphs (2.22). the result we obtain neither coincides with
the one in feynman gauge (the limit d  2 being discontinuous), as we have
neglected the nonvanishing selfenergy correction, nor obeys abelian exponen-
tiation as in cpv approach, the reason being rooted in a dierent content of the
degrees of freedom (the ghost elds a of eq. (1.25)).

2.3 concluding remarks

the computation of the expectation value of the wilson loop (2.1) gave the
following unexpected results.

the o(g4) perturbative loop expression in d = 1 + (d  1) dimensions is
nite in the limit d  2. the results in feynman and lightcone gauge (with

26

light-like wilson loops

mandelstamleibbrandt prescription) coincide, as required by gauge invariance.
they are function only of the area ac for any dimension d and exhibit also a
dependence on ca, the casimir constant of the adjoint representation.
this dependence, when looked at in the light-cone gauge calculation, comes
from non-planar diagrams with the colour factor cf (cf ca/2). besides, there is
a genuine contribution proportional to cf ca coming from the one-loop correction
to the vector propagator. this is surprising at rst sight, as in strictly 1 + 1
dimensions the triple vector vertex vanishes in axial gauges. what happens is
that transverse degrees of freedom, although coupled with a vanishing strength
at d = 2, produce nite contributions when matching with the self-energy loop
singularity precisely at d = 2, eventually producing a nite result. such a
dimensional anomaly-type phenomenon is responsible of the discontinuity of
yangmills theories at d = 2, namely of the nite, non vanishing result of eq.
(2.19) in the limit d  2.
surely this phenomenon could not appear in a strictly 1 + 1 dimensional
calculation, which would only lead to the (smooth) non-planar diagram result.
we stress that this contribution is essential to get agreement with the feynman
gauge calculation, in other words with gauge invariance.

we notice that no ambiguity aects our light-cone gauge results, which do
not involve innities; in addition the discrepancy cannot be accounted for by a
simple redenition of the coupling, that would also, while unjustied on general
grounds, turn out to be dependent on the area of the loop.

in order to make the argument complete, we recall that a calculation of the
same wilson loop in strictly 1 + 1 dimension in light-cone gauge with a cpv
prescription for the spurious singularity produces a vanishing contribution from
nonplanar graphs. only planar diagrams survive, leading to abelianlike results
depending only on cf , which can be resummed to all orders in the perturbative
expansion to recover the expected exponentiation of the area.

this result, which is the usual one found in the literature, although quite
transparent, does neither coincide with the limit d  2 of the lightcone gauge
result with ml prescription (which is in agreement with the limit d  2 in
feynman gauge), nor with the ml result in strictly two dimensions. the test
cannot be generalized to d 6= 2 dimensions as cpv prescription is at odds with
causality in this case [?].
what we can certainly state is the perturbative inequivalence of cpv and
mandelstamleibbrandt formulations. at this point, we have two inequivalent
formulations of the same theory, the twodimensional yangmills theory, within
the same gauge choice. now, a natural question arises: is there any formulation
that is clearly wrong, or are they both legitimate?

to answer to this question, we will study the transition from d > 2 to d =
2, both in feynman gauge and in lightcone gauge with ml prescription, in
order to test the soundness of our perturbative approach when we are going
towards the twodimensional case from higher dimensions. to do that, we will

concluding remarks

27

apply the criterion exposed at the end of section 1.3, namely the wilson loop
exponentiation, therefore considering a dierent wilson loop, viz a spacetime
rectangular loop rather than a lightlike one. we already know that this wilson
loop, from a physical point of view, is even more interesting and provides also
information about the interaction potential between a quark and an antiquark.
these computations, that are the subject of the next chapter, will help us to
understand the features of yangmills theories in ml formulation.

chapter 3

space-time wilson loop

in order to clarify whether the appearance at o(g4) of the maximally nonabelian
term (proportional to ca) is indeed a pathology, one should examine the potential
v (2l) between a static qq pair in the fundamental representation, separated
by a distance 2l. therefore in this chapter, following the refs. [?, ?, ?], we will
consider a dierent wilson loop, namely a rectangular loop with one side along
the space direction and one side along the time direction, of length 2l and 2t
respectively. eventually the limit t   at xed l is to be taken: the potential
v (2l) between the quark and the antiquark is indeed related to the value of the
corresponding wilson loop amplitude w(l, t ) through the equation [?, ?]

t w(l, t ) = const. e2it v (2l) .
lim

(3.1)

the crucial point to notice in eq.(3.1), as already discussed in section 1.3,
is that the dependence on the casimir constant ca should cancel at the leading
order when t   in any coecient of a perturbative expansion of the potential
with respect to coupling constant. this criterion has often been used as a check
of gauge invariance [?] and its failure has been considered as the proof of a sick
formulation of fourdimensional theories [?]. actually, at the end of our enquiry
we will discover that the criterion is not satised just in the twodimensional
case. but here we will choose to have a more constructive attitude:
in fact in
the twodimensional case it is possible to obtain exact nonperturbative results.
since they are at our disposal, we can proceed to a comparison with the results
derived from our perturbative test. we could say that, in so doing, we check the
behavior of our criterion, varying the dimension in which we are working, in the
transition to d  2. there are some indications [?, ?] that support the conjecture
that the failure of our perturbative criterion in the strictly twodimensional case
depends on the need of taking into account the nonperturbative contributions,
rather than on inconsistencies in the perturbative ml formulation. anyway, we
will defer the discussion of this point until the conclusions.

28

feynman gauge

29

then we choose the closed path  parameterized by the following four seg-

ments i,

1
2
3
4

: x
: x
: x
: x

1 (s) = (st, l) ,
2 (s) = (t,sl) ,
3 (s) = (st,l) ,
4 (s) = (t, sl) ,

1  s  1.

(3.2)

describing a (counterclockwise-oriented) rectangle centered at the origin of the
plane (x1, x0), with length sides (2l, 2t ), respectively (see fig. 1.1 at page 16)
and with area

a = 4lt

(3.3)

to have a sensitive check of gauge invariance, one has to consider at least the
order g4, i.e. one has to evaluate w (2), as this is the lowest order where genuinely
nonabelian cf ca contributions may appear. in turn, in the calculation of w (2),
only the so called maximally nonabelian contribution needs to be evaluated,
that in our case comes from the terms proportional to cf ca. the abelian
contribution, proportional to c 2
f , can be easily obtained thanks to the non
abelian exponentiation theorem [?] and will be computed explicitly as a further
check of consistency.

in section 3.1 we will proceed to the computation of the loop (3.2) in feynman
gauge, while in section 3.2 we will choose light-cone gauge, respectively with
cpv (section 3.2.1) and with mandelstam-leibbrandt (sections 3.2.2 and 3.2.3)
prescriptions for the propagator pole. we can anticipate the main result of this
chapter, namely that, in the large t -limit when d > 2, the perturbative o(g4)
contribution is proportional only to cf , and does not contain terms proportional
to ca. if instead we compute the wilson loop at d = 2, the result depends also
on ca, a pure area law behavior is recovered, but the term proportional to ca
survives also in the limit t  .

3.1 space-time wilson loop in feynman gauge

in this section we will compute the wilson loop (3.2) in feynman gauge [?], in
the framework of dimensional regularization (d = 2).

an explicit evaluation of the function w (1) in eq.(1.39) gives the diagrams

contributing to the loop with a single exchange (i.e. one propagator), namely

w (1)
f = 
where df

1
2

cf i i df

(x  y)dxdy ,

(3.4)

(x) is the usual free propagator (2.3) in feynman gauge.

30

space-time wilson loop

a fairly easy calculation leads to the result

w (1)
f =

cf

 (2l)22lt(cid:20)i(  3/2)(1/2)
  2   1
(  2)

3  2  ei

(n +   2)



xn=1

2()

+

2n+24

(2n  1)(2n + 2  3)n!!(cid:21),

(3.5)

where  = l/t .

it should be noticed that this result does not coincide with the corresponding
one of eq. (2.4), which was evaluated with the same gauge choice but with the
loop sides along the x+ and x directions. contrary to what happens in eq. (2.4),
eq. (3.5) exhibits an explicit dependence on the ratio  = l/t . only in the two
dimensional limit the two results coincide: the limit   1 is smooth and restores
the pure area dependence

w (1)
f (d = 2) = 

i
2

cfa.

(3.6)

as in section 2.1, the diagrams contributing to w (2)

f can be grouped into three

distinct families

w (2)
f = w (2;2g)

f

+ w (2;se)

f

+ w (2;3g)

f

:

(3.7)

a) the ones with a double gluon exchange in which the propagators can either

cross or uncross;

b) the ones in which the gluon propagator contains a selfenergy correction;

c) the ones involving a triple vector vertex.

in strictly two dimensions and in an axial gauge only the rst family is present,
but in feynman gauge all of them must be taken into account; moreover we
are here considering the problem in d-dimensions, because of the dimensional
regularization. the rst family is also the only one contributing to the abelian
case.

feynman gauge

31

a. exchange diagrams in feynman gauge

we start by considering the diagrams belonging to the rst category, namely

the ones with a double gluon exchange. a straightforward calculation gives

w (2;2g)

f

=

1

8n iiii tr[p(t a

x t a

y t b

z t b

w)]d(x  y)d(z  w) dxdydzdw ,
(3.8)

where subscripts in the matrices have been introduced to specify their ordering.
from eq. (3.8), the diagrams with two-gluons exchanges contributing to the order
g4 in the perturbative expansion of the wilson loop fall into two distinct classes,
depending on the topology of the diagrams:

1. non-crossed diagrams: if the pairs (x, y) and (z, w) are contiguous around
the loop the two propagators do not cross (see fig. 3.1a) and the trace in
(3.8) gives

tr[t at at bt b] = nc 2
f ;

(3.9)

2. crossed diagrams: if the pairs (x, y) and (z, w) are not contiguous around
the loop the two propagators do cross (see fig. 3.1b) and the trace in (3.8)
gives

tr[t at bt at b] = tr[t a(t at b + [t b, t a])t b] = n(c 2

f  (1/2)cacf ),
(3.10)

ca being the casimir constant of the adjoint representation dened by
f abcf dbc = caad.

(a)

(b)

figure 3.1: example of non-crossed and crossed diagrams.

we see that the c 2

f term is present in both types of diagrams and with the
same coecient. this term is usually denoted abelian term: were the theory
abelian, only such c 2
f terms would contribute to the loop. on the other hand,
the cf ca term is present only in crossed diagrams and is typical of nonabelian
theories.

32

space-time wilson loop

thus, we can decompose w (2;2g)

f

part,

as the sum of an abelian and a nonabelian

f

w (2;2g)
moreover, the abelian part is simply half of the square of the order-g2 term,

+ w (2;na)

= w (2;ab)

(3.11)

f

f

.

i.e.

w (2;ab)

f

=

=

c 2

1
8
1

f i i i i df
2(cid:18)
cf i i df

1
2

(x  y)df
(x  y)dxdy(cid:19)2

(z  w) dxdydzdw

.

(3.12)

crossed exchange diagrams (see appendix a for details).

this result at o(g4) has been explicitly checked calculating the relevant non-
equation (3.12) agrees with the nonabelian exponentiation theorem, which
tells us that the abelian terms (depending only on cf ) in the perturbative ex-
pansion of the wilson loop sum up to reproduce the abelian exponential

f (l, t ) = exp(cid:18)
w ab

1
2

cf g2i i df

(x  y)dxdy(cid:19) ,

where the result in eq.(3.5) can be introduced.

(3.13)

in the limit d  2 the simple exponentiation of the area is easily recovered

f (l, t ) = exp(cid:18)
w ab

i
2

cf g2a(cid:19) .

(3.14)

we have now to calculate loop integrals of the type given in eq.(3.8). in view
of the parameterization (3.2), it is convenient to decompose loop integrals as sums
of integrals over the segments i, and to this purpose we dene

i, j = 1, . . . , 4 ,

(3.15)

ef

ij (s, t) = df

(cid:2)i(s)  j(t)(cid:3) 

i (s) 

j (t) ,

where the dot denotes the derivative with respect to the variable parameterizing
the segment. in this way, each diagram can be written as integrals of products of
functions of the type (3.15). each graph will be labelled by a set of pairs (i, j),
each pair denoting a gluon propagator joining the segments i and j.

due to the symmetric choice of the contour  and to the fact that propagators
(x), we have the following identities that

are even functions, i.e. df
halve the number of diagrams to be evaluated:

(x) = df

ef
ij (s, t) = ef
ef
11(s, t) = ef
22(s, t) = ef
ef

ji(t, s) ,
33(s, t) ,
44(s, t) .

(3.16)

feynman gauge

33

we remind the reader that in feynman gauge the propagators can attach
either to the same rectangle side or to opposite sides, but not on a couple of
contiguous ones.

we have now to consider the o(g4) cf ca-terms coming from crossed dia-

grams (maximally nonabelian ones), that need to be evaluated

w (2;na)

f

= 

 

1
2

1
2

cacf xi,j,k,l
cacf xi,j,k,l

z dsz dtz duz dv ef

ij (s, t)ef

kl(u, v)



c f

(ij)(kl) ,

(3.17)

where the primes mean that we have to sum only over crossed propagators cong-
urations and over topologically inequivalent contributions, as carefully explained
in the following; we have not specied the integration extrema as they depend on
the particular type of crossed diagram we are considering (the extrema must be
chosen in such a way that propagators remain crossed).

the last equality in eq.

it is
a diagram with two crossed propagators joining the sides (ij) and (kl) of the
contour (3.2). in fig. 3.2 a few examples of diagrams are drawn to get the reader
acquainted with the notation.

(3.17) denes the general diagram c f

(ij)(kl):

v

s

t

u

v
s
u
t

s

u
t
v

figure 3.2: examples of crossed diagrams; they are labelled as c(13)(13), c(11)(11)
and c(13)(11), respectively

the rst of eq. (3.16) permits to select just 11 types of topologically distinct
crossed diagrams. the remaining symmetry relations (3.16) further lower the
number to 7. as a matter of fact, although topologically inequivalent, from eq.
(3.16) it is easy to get

c f
c f

(11)(11) = c f
(11)(13) = c f

(33)(33)

(33)(13)

,

,

c f
c f

(22)(22) = c f
(22)(24) = c f

(44)(44)
(44)(24).

,

(3.18)

which are the 4 relations needed to lower the number of diagrams to be evaluated
from 11 to 7. besides the 8 diagrams quoted in eq. (3.18), there are three other
crossed diagrams that do not possess any apparent symmetry relation with other
diagrams: c f
(13)(24) (see fig. 3.3), so that the number of
topologically inequivalent crossed diagrams is indeed 11.

(24)(24) and c f

(13)(13), c f

the calculation of the 7 independent diagrams needed is lengthy and not
trivial. the details of such calculation are sketched in appendix a. each diagram

34

space-time wilson loop

v

s

t

u

t

u

v

s

s

u

v

t

figure 3.3: the three crossed diagrams that are unrelated to other diagrams
through symmetry relations; they are c(13)(13), c(24)(24) and c(13)(24).

depends not only on the area a = 4lt of the loop, but also on the dimensionless
ratio  = l/t through complicated multiple integrals.
adding all the contributions as in eq. (3.17) we eventually arrive at the follow-
ing result o(g4) for the nonabelian part of the exchange diagrams contribution:
(3.19)

(lt )2e2i

(2t )44

= cf ca

w (2;na)

f

2
2(  1)

(cid:16)

(2  4)(2  3)h1 +

1  

(4  5)(2  3)

+ o(54)i(cid:17).

we notice that the expression above exhibits a double and a single pole at

 = 1, whose laurent expansion gives

w (2;na)

f

2e2i

cf ca(2t )44(lt )2 =

1

2(  1)2 +

1  
(  1)  1  2 + 2 +

2
12

+ o(  1) ,
(3.20)

 being the euler-mascheroni constant.

b. bubble diagrams in feynman gauge

we turn now our attention to the calculation of w (2;se)

, namely of the dia-
grams with a single gluon exchange in which the propagator contains a selfenergy
correction o(g2). of course both gluon and ghost contribute to the selfenergy.
the color factor is obviously a pure cf ca.
ij the contribution of the
diagram in which the propagator connects the rectangle segments i, j (see fig.
3.4).

we call them bubble diagrams. we denote by bf

f

there are 10 topologically inequivalent diagrams; however, the symmetries we
have already discussed and the symmetric choice of the contour entails the four
22 = bf
conditions bf
23, whereas the remaining
two diagrams bf
24 are unrelated by any symmetry relation. in addition,
it is easy to see by performing a simple change of variable that bf
34 are
equal. thus, there are 5 independent diagrams to be evaluated

33, bf
13 and bf

14 and bf

14 = bf

11 = bf

12 = bf

44, bf

34, bf

w (2;se)

f

= bf

13 + bf

24 + 2bf

11 + 2bf

22 + 4bf
12.

(3.21)

feynman gauge

35

figure 3.4: examples of bubble diagrams. they are labelled as b11, b13 and b34,
respectively.

the calculation is sketched in appendix b. we here report the nal result in

the form of an expansion with respect to the variable 

w (2;se)

f

= cf ca

(2t )44

2

h (3  1)2()
2(2)(4  )

(lt )2e2i 
(1  )(2  2)(cid:16)2  6
5  4

(3.22)

+ o(54)(cid:17)i.

again we notice the presence of a double and of a single pole at  = 1. the
relevant laurent expansion is

w (2;se)

f

2e2i

cf ca(2t )44(lt )2 =

=

1

(  1)2 +

9  4
2(  1)

+

39
2  9 + 22 +

2
6

+ o(  1) ,

(3.23)

c. spider diagrams in feynman gauge

the third quantity w (2;3g)

is by far the most dicult one to be evaluated. it
comes from spider diagrams, namely the diagrams containing the triple gluon
vertex. we denote by sf
ijk the contribution of the diagram in which the propaga-
tors are attached to the segments i, j, k (see fig. 3.5).

f

figure 3.5: examples of spider diagrams. they are labelled as s123, s112, respec-
tively.

it can be checked that all the spiders with the three legs attached to the same
line vanish, as well as the spiders with two legs on one side and the third leg
attached to the opposite side, i.e. sf
133 =

111 = sf

444 = sf

222 = sf

333 = sf

113 = sf

36

space-time wilson loop

sf
224 = sf
244 = 0. thus, there are 12 non-vanishing topologically inequivalent
diagrams; however, their number is just halved by the symmetric choice of the
contour (sf
124 = sf
144 =
223), so that w (2;3g)
sf
can be expressed in terms of the remaining 6 independent
ones

233 = sf

112 = sf

344 = sf

123 = sf

234, sf

134, sf

334, sf

122, sf

114, sf

f

w (2;3g)

f

= 2sf

112 + 2sf

123 + 2sf

124 + 2sf

233 + 2sf

144 + 2sf

344.

(3.24)

each term is represented by a multiple integral which cannot be evaluated for a
generic dimension  in closed form. in particular it exhibits complicated analyt-
icity properties in the variable , just in the neighborhood of the value  = 0
which is of interest for us. the main aspects of the calculation are again deferred
to an appendix (appendix c).

we have succeeded in obtaining the following result for d > 2

w (2;3g)

f

2e2i

lim
0

cf ca(2t )44(lt )2 =

= 

3

2(  1)2 +

3  11/2
(  1) 

35
2

+ 11  32 +

2
12

+ o(  1) .

(3.25)

a double and a single pole at d = 2 again are present in this expression.

* * *

since the abelian part of our results depends only on the casimir constant
cf and smoothly exponentiates in the larget limit even when d > 2 (see
eqs.(3.5,3.13)), in the following we focus our attention on the non-abelian part,
namely on the quantity containing the factor cf ca
+ w (2;3g)

+ w (2;se)

w (2;na)

f

f

f

.

it is actually convenient to divide by the square of the loop area, by introduc-

ing the new expression n

n cf caa

2 = w (2;na)

f

+ w (2;se)

f

+ w (2;3g)

f

.

(3.26)

then, from eqs. (3.19,3.22,3.25), it is easy to conclude that, thanks to the factor
t 44, n vanishes in the limit t   when  > 1.
this is precisely the usual necessary condition required at o(g4) in order
to get agreement with abelianlike time exponentiation when summing higher
orders [?].

we cannot discuss the limit   1 for generic (small) values of  in our results

as we are only able to master the expressions at  = 0.

light-cone gauge

nevertheless if we consider the quantity

lim
1

lim
0

(t 44n ) ,

37

(3.27)

we get a quite interesting result. indeed double and simple poles at  = 1

cancel in the sum, leading to

lim
1

lim
0

(t 44n ) =

1

162(cid:18)1 +

2

3 (cid:19) ,

(3.28)

which exactly coincides with eq. (2.15).
this is, rst of all, a formidable check of all our calculations, if we conjecture

that the same result is obtained by performing the limit

lim
0

1n .
lim

(3.29)

but it also entails the quite non trivial consequences we are going to discuss in
section 3.3. but rst we will review the corresponding calculations in lightcone
gauge.

3.2 space-time wilson loop in light-cone gauge

in this section we will proceed to the computation of wilson loop (3.2) in light-
cone gauge, in order to compare the results obtained with the ones in feynman
gauge. we will review the computations done in d = 2 with cauchy principal
value prescription (section 3.2.1), and with mandelstamleibbrandt prescription
(section 3.2.2), following ref. [?]. at the end we will complete the twodimensional
case, computing the selfenergy contribution that arises in d > 2 and that sur-
vives in the d  2 limit (section 3.2.3).

3.2.1 cauchy principal value prescription

in this section we report the results of the computation of wilson loop (3.2) in
light-cone gauge with cauchy principal value prescription. we shall begin with
the o(g2) contribution. from eq.
(3.2), (2.16), (3.15) and
(3.16)(or, better, the analogous of eq. (3.16) for lightcone gauge, see eq. (3.34))
one can easily get

(3.4), using eqs.

w (1)
cp v = 

1
2

cf

4

xi,j=1z 1

1

dsz 1

1

dt ecp v

ij

(s, t) = 

i
2

cfa .

(3.30)

38

space-time wilson loop

once the o(g2) term is known, simple arguments permit to evaluate any
order in the perturbative expansion, so that in this case the loop can be exactly
obtained. let us indeed consider the o(g4) term. as explained in the previous
section, only the genuine non-abelian part needs to be evaluated, i.e.
the
crossed diagrams containing the factor cf ca, as the abelian part is already
given by eq. (3.12), which in this case leads to

w (2;ab)
cp v = 

1
8

c 2
fa2
 .

(3.31)

however, due to the contact nature of the propagator in the cpv case, all the
crossed diagrams trivially vanish so that w (2;na)
cp v = 0: the (x+) term in the
propagator only tolerates diagrams with parallel propagators, which therefore
cannot cross, both in the abelian and in the non-abelian case. obviously, this
argument holds at any order in the perturbative expansion, so that only abelian
terms contribute and the sum of all of them, due to the abelian exponentiation
theorem, reproduces the exponential

wcp v (l, t ) = exp(cid:18)

i
2

g2cfa(cid:19) .

(3.32)

a detailed discussion of this point can be found in appendix d.

consequently, from eq. (3.1), null plane light-cone quantization provides a
linear conning potential for a quarkantiquark pair, with string tension  =
g2cf /2. this is the very same result one would have obtained in an abelian
theory, apart from the factor cf . in this sense null plane light-cone gauge quan-
tization provides a free theory: the wilson loop does not feel the non-abelian
colour structure of the theory. this result, obtained in a minkowskian framework,
is in agreement with analogous euclidean calculations [?].

3.2.2 mandelstam-leibbrandt prescription (d = 2)

in strictly d = 2 the contribution to the expectation value of wilson loop (3.2) is
only given by feynman diagrams with double gluon exchange, in which the prop-
agators are crossed or uncrossed, as already discussed for the lightlike contour.
the analysis of the diagrams is similar to the one developed in feynman gauge.
the only dierence is that we shall use the mandelstam-leibbrandt propagator
for d = 2:

d(m l)cd

++

(x) = dm l

++ (x)cd =

icd

2 z d2k eikx

k2
+

(k2 + i)2 =

cd


(x)2

(x2 + i)

(3.33)

instead of feynman propagator (2.3) in d dimensions.

mandelstam-leibbrandt prescription (d = 2)

39

the fact that we are in strictly 1 + 1 dimensions greatly simplies the pertur-
bative expansion (1.38), as the complete green functions appearing in it become
products of free propagators.

we will again use the denition (3.15), with the same notations of the feyn-
man case. due to the symmetric choice of the contour  and to the fact that
propagators are even functions, i.e. dm l
 (x), we have the following
identities that halve the number of diagrams to be evaluated:

 (x) = dm l

em l
em l
em l
em l
em l

(s, t) = em l
ij
12 (s, t) = em l
23 (s, t) = em l
11 (s, t) = em l
22 (s, t) = em l

(t, s) ,

ji
34 (s, t) ,
41 (s, t) ,
33 (s, t) ,
44 (s, t) .

(3.34)

at variance with the feynman case (3.16), here also diagrams with propaga-
tors attaching on a couple of contiguous sides contribute to the nal result, thus
leading to a more cumbersome computation. we begin with the o(g2) terms.
following the notation introduced in the previous section, w (1)
m l can be written
as the sum of 16 diagrams

w (1)
m l = 

 

1
2

1
2

cf

cf

dsz 1

1

dtem l

ij

(s, t)

4

4

1

xi,j=1z 1
xi,j=1

ij

c m l

.

(3.35)

thanks to the symmetry properties (3.34), only 6 of them are independent, and
an explicit evaluation gives

40

space-time wilson loop

c m l

11 = c m l

33 =

c m l

22 = c m l

44 =

c m l

12 = c m l

21 = c m l

l2

 (cid:18)

1

2(cid:19)

l2

34 = c m l

43 =

c m l

14 = c m l

41 = c m l

23 = c m l

32 =

c m l

13 = c m l

+(cid:18) 2

l2

31 =

 (cid:20) 1

2 +(cid:18) 2
  2(cid:19) ln(1  )(cid:21)
 (cid:20)1 +(cid:18) 2
2 +

42 =

l2

c m l

24 = c m l

l2

1

l2

 (cid:20)i  ln() +(cid:18)1 
 (cid:20) ln() +(cid:18)1 
  2(cid:19) i + 4 ln() (cid:18) 2

2(cid:19) ln(1  )(cid:21)
2(cid:19) ln(1 + )(cid:21)
+ 2(cid:19) ln(1 + )



1

2

(cid:19) ln(1 + ) +(cid:18) 2
2 

2

(cid:19) ln(1  )(cid:21)

(3.36)

summing up all the coecients (3.36) as in (3.35) one gets that the secondorder
calculation is

i
2

cfa .

w (1)
m l = 
the secondorder calculation is in agreement with the cpv case (see eq.
(3.30)). however, as often happens in wilson loop calculations, an o(g2) compu-
tation is too weak a probe to check consistency and gauge invariance. thus, we
have to consider the o(g4) terms. again, only crossed diagrams (maximally
nonabelian ones) need to be evaluated

(3.37)

w (2;na)

m l

= 

 

1
2

1
2

cacf xi,j,k,l
cacf xi,j,k,l

z dsz dtz duz dv em l

ij

(s, t)em l

kl (u, v)



c m l

(ij)(kl) ,

(3.38)

where the primes mean that we have to sum only over crossed propagators cong-
urations and over topologically inequivalent contributions, as carefully explained
in the following; we have not specied the integration extrema as they depend on
the particular type of crossed diagram we are considering (the extrema must be
chosen in such a way that propagators remain crossed).

the last equality in eq.

it is
a diagram with two crossed propagators joining the sides (ij) and (kl) of the

(3.38) denes the general diagram c m l

(ij)(kl):

mandelstam-leibbrandt prescription (d = 2)

41

contour (3.2). the notation is the same of the feynman case (see fig. 3.2 at
page 33). the rst of eq. (3.34) permits to select just 35 types of topologically
distinct crossed diagrams, and to multiply each representative by a factor 8, which
is the number of permutations of the points (x, w, y, z) leaving the propagators
dm l
 [x(s)  y(t)]dm l
 [w(u)  z(v)] crossed. the remaining symmetry relations
(3.34) further lower the number to 19. as a matter of fact, although topologically
inequivalent, from eq. (3.34) it is easy to get

(33)(33)

(33)(13)

(33)(34)

(33)(23)

(13)(34)

(13)(23)

c m l
c m l
c m l
c m l
c m l
c m l
c m l
c m l

(11)(11) = c m l
(11)(13) = c m l
(11)(12) = c m l
(11)(14) = c m l
(13)(12) = c m l
(13)(14) = c m l
(12)(14) = c m l
(12)(12) = c m l

(23)(34)

(34)(34)

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

(44)(44)

(44)(24)

(44)(14)

(44)(34)

c m l
c m l
c m l
c m l
c m l
c m l
c m l
c m l

(22)(22) = c m l
(22)(24) = c m l
(22)(23) = c m l
(22)(12) = c m l
(24)(23) = c m l
(24)(12) = c m l
(12)(23) = c m l
(23)(23) = c m l

(24)(14)

(24)(34)

(14)(34)

(14)(14)

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

(3.39)

which are the 16 relations needed to lower the number of diagrams to be evaluated
from 35 to 19. besides the 32 diagrams quoted in eq. (3.39), there are three other
crossed diagrams that do not possess any apparent symmetry relation with other
diagrams: c m l
(13)(24) (see fig. 3.3 at page 34), so that the
number of topologically inequivalent crossed diagrams is indeed 35.

(24)(24) and c m l

(13)(13), c m l

the calculation of the 19 independent diagrams needed is lengthy and not
trivial. the details of such calculation are fully reported in the appendix e.
each diagram depends not only on the area a = 4lt of the loop, but also
on the dimensionless ratio  = l/t through complicated functions involving
powers, logarithms and dilogarithm functions, denoted by li2(z). since we shall
be interested in the larget behavior, we always consider the region  < 1 (see
appendix e for details).

adding all the contributions as in eq.

(3.38) we eventually arrive at the

following result for the nonabelian part of the o(g4) contributions:

w (2;na)
m l =

cacfa2



48

.

(3.40)

several important consequences can be drawn from eq. (3.40):

1. the sum of all nonabelian terms, proportional to cf ca, does not vanish.
this fact prevents any possible agreement with the cpv formulation, where
the result is a simple abelian exponentiation (see eq. (3.32));

42

space-time wilson loop

2. a little thought is enough to realize that the perturbative series wm l cannot
sum to a phase factor, even taking into account possible extra nonabelian
terms in the argument of the exponent.

the result of eq. (3.40) was conrmed in ref. [?]:

as the calculation o(g4) is really heavy, a consistency check of its accuracy has
been performed. the contribution from uncrossed graphs o(g4) (which only in-
volve c 2
f ) has been indeed independently computed and then it has been summed
to the expression for the corresponding c 2
f terms coming from the crossed graphs,
which have twice the weight of eq. (3.40) (see eq. (3.10)); in so doing the full
o(g4) abelian result has been correctly recovered.
in this work the authors
managed to do a complete resummation of the perturbative series, obtaining the
1:
exact expression for the wilson loop for any contour p with the given area ap
z (cid:19)n
exp(cid:0)  ig2ap z(cid:1)(cid:18)z + 1

wm l(ap ) = exp(cid:18)i

n  1
2n

g2ap(cid:19) 1

n i dz

2i

.

(3.41)

the contour integral, which encloses the multiple pole at z = 0, gives a laguerre
polynomial in g2ap of order n  1: l1
this last result coincides, at o(g4), with eq. (3.40), but diers from the cpv
result (3.32). therefore we can state that the perturbative series of wilson loop
computed in lightcone gauge with cpv and mandelstamleibbrandt prescrip-
tions are denitely dierent: this dierence, as we will discuss in the conclusions,
can be related to the dierent behavior of t hoofts and wus bound states equa-
tions with respect to the connement issue.

n 1(ig2ap ).

3.2.3 mandelstamleibbrandt prescription (d  2)
the computation of wilson loop in mandelstamleibbrandt prescription for d 
2 is performed following the same scheme of the previous sections of this chapter.
the diagrams contributing to the nonabelian part of w (2)
m l can be grouped in
(ij)(kl), spider diagrams sm l
the usual three families, namely crossed diagrams cm l
ijk
and bubble diagrams bm l
in arbitrary dimensions, the calculation of the wilson loop is much more
awkward in lightcone gauge than in feynman gauge, due to a more complicated
form of the vector propagator. however, when considering the d  2 limit,
diagrams in lightcone gauge have much better analyticity properties in  than
the ones in feynman gauge. in fact the vector propagator in lightcone gauge
with ml prescription is a tempered distribution at d = 2, at odds with the one
in feynman gauge. moreover it is summable along the (compact) loop contour.

ij

.

1we recall that in the twodimensional case we have a dependence only from the area of the

loop, and not from the shape of the path.

mandelstam-leibbrandt prescription (d  2)

43

due to this property, we can conclude that all the maximally nonabelian
contributions arising from diagrams with crossed propagators sum to an expres-
sion that, in the limit d  2, reproduces eq. (3.40), namely

w (2;na)
m l (d = 2) =

cacfa2



48

.

(3.42)

now we consider the contribution w (2;se)

coming from bubble diagrams. in
lightcone gauge and on the plane x0  x1, the only non vanishing component
of the two point green function m l
++ (x)  m l(x),
that reads, at x = 0 [?],

 at the order o(g2) is m l

m l

m l(x) = 

g2
82 ca

(x)2

(x2 + i)22 f () ,

(3.43)

where

f () =

1

(2  )3(cid:20) 2(3  )(2  3)

(5  2)



(  1)()(102  19 + 10)
(3.44)

4(2  3)(2  1)

(cid:21) .

there are 10 topologically inequivalent bubble diagrams that contributes to
w (2;se)
m l . however, due to the symmetry of the green function and to the sym-
metric choice of the contour, only six of them are independent, and the o(g4)
contribution to the wilson loop arising from bubble diagrams can be written as

w (2;se)
m l = 2(bm l

11 + bm l

22 + bm l

13 + bm l

24 + 2bm l

12 + 2bm l

14 ) ,

(3.45)

where each single contribution bm l
(3.43) in the formula

ij

can be calculated by replacing eqs. (3.2),

bm l
ij = 

1
2

g2cf z 1

1

dsz 1

1

dtm l

 (i(s)  j(t)) 

i (s) 

j (t) .

(3.46)

the main details of the calculation are deferred to an appendix (appendix f).

the nal result is

44

space-time wilson loop

w (2;se)
m l =

cf ca

2 f ()(lt )2(2l)44(cid:26)e2i46(cid:20)

1

(7  4)(8  4)

+

5  2

(cid:18)1 (8 4)2f1(2  2, 2  7/2; 2  5/2; 2) + (7 4)(1 2)32(cid:19)
1  (1  2)42

(3  2)(4  2)
(1  2)32
(3  2)(4  2)  2f1(2  2, 2  5/2; 2  3/2; 2)
+ e2i44(cid:20)
2f1(2  2, 1/2; 3/2; 2)i + i

(6  4)(4  2)(cid:0)1  (1  2)32(cid:1)(cid:21)
(5  4)
(  2)(2  7/2)

(2  2)

e2i 42

3

2f1(2  2, 3/2; 5/2; 2) +

2

(7  4)(cid:27) .

(3.47)

some comments are here in order. first of all there is a dependence on the
dimensionless ratio  = l/t , besides the area, at variance with the analogous
result (2.19) in lightcone gauge (ml) for the rectangle with light-like sides. how-
ever, in the equation above, one can easily check that the quantity w (2;se)
m l /(lt )2
is not singular for   0. actually eq.(3.47) exhibits, for  > 1, the expected
damping factor t 44 in the larget limit.
in the limit   1 the dependence on  disappears and the pure area law is

recovered:

cf caa2
162



.

w (2;se)
m l (d = 2) =
this is exactly the missing term to be added to the expression of eq. (3.40)
to obtain the nal result for the maximally non abelian contribution to the
perturbative o(g4) wilson loop in the limit d  2,
cf caa2
162 (cid:18)1 +

w (2;se)
m l (d = 2) + w (2;na)

m l (d = 2) =

3 (cid:19) .

(3.48)

(3.49)

2



equation (3.49) is in fact in full agreement with eqs. (3.263.28), where the

same wilson loop is calculated in feynman gauge.

in turn the result above implies that spider diagrams, namely diagrams
with a triple vector vertex, cannot contribute in the limit d  2. this is not
surprising, as also the contribution (2.23), where the contour of the loop is chosen
along the (x+, x) directions, does not contribute in the same limit.

in order to support this conclusion, we can show that the relevant three point

green function at o(g), vanishes in that limit.

concluding remarks

45

to this aim, let us consider the three point green function v m l

 (x, y, z). due
to the lightcone gauge choice, its only non vanishing component when consid-
ering the loop in the x0  x1 plane is v m l(x, y, z) = v m l
+++(x, y, z); up to an
irrelevant multiplicative constant, it is given by

v m l(x, y, z) =z d2



z (cid:20) 

x


y+ 


y



x+(cid:21) f (x  )f (y  )g(z  )

+ cycl. perm. {x, y, z}  (v1  v2) + cycl. perm. {x, y, z} .

(3.50)

here the index  runs over the transverse components and the functions g

and f are the following fourier transforms

g(x) =z d2p
f (x) =z d2p

eipx

p2 + i

= (  1)(cid:18)

x2
4

+ i(cid:19)1

,

eipx

(p2 + i)(p+ + ip)

= i(  1)z x+

0

d(cid:18)x2

  2x

4

+ i(cid:19)1

.

(3.51)

(3.52)

let us consider, for instance, the rst term in eq. (3.50), that we call v m l
.
using standard feynman integrals techniques, integrations over momenta and
over the intermediate point  can be performed, so that v m l
can be rewritten,
after some convenient change of variables, as

1

1

i(4)3

v m l
1 =

8

(2  1)(  1)
z 1
ddd [(1  )]1z 
d

[(x  z)2  (1  )(y  z)2   (1  )(x  y)2 + i]21 .

[(x  z)+ +  (1  )(x  y)+][(y  z)+ +  (y  x)+]2

[1 +  ( + (1  ))]25

(1 +  )

0

0

(3.53)

1

since v m l

has an explicit zero at  = 1, if we show that the integral in (3.53)
is convergent when evaluated at  = 1, we have proved that the three point
green function vanishes at d = 2. the derivation of this result is exhibited in
the appendix g.

3.3 concluding remarks

in this chapter we have proceeded to the computation of the wilson loop (3.2)
in dierent gauges and dimensions.

46

space-time wilson loop

one feature that is conrmed in this series of investigations, as already seen
in chapter 2, is the discontinuity of yangmills theories in two dimensions. the
lightcone results in strictly 1 + 1 dimensions are dependent from the dierent
prescription adopted for the vector propagator. but, at a rst sight, one could
have thought to recover the result obtained in strictly 1 + 1 dimensions with ml
prescription, if we are coming from d > 2, both with feynman gauge and with
lightcone gauge (ml). this is not the case; as a matter of fact in strictly 1 + 1
dimensions and in lightcone gauge the contribution from diagrams containing
a selfenergy insertion is missing, in spite of the fact that, if calculated rst at
d > 2, it does not vanish in the limit d  2. this contribution is essential in
order to get agreement with the feynman gauge computation. this phenomenon,
discovered rst in ref. [?], has been discussed at length in chapter 2.

what may be surprising is that this extra contribution, required by gauge
invariance, when considered in the limit d  2, exhibits a pure area dependence
on its own, being the same no matter the orientation of the loop. moreover,
in lightcone gauge (ml), dierent families of diagrams (crossed and bub-
ble diagrams) give the same contribution (cf ca
respec-
tively) no matter the orientation of the loop (compare eqs. (2.20),(2.22) with
eqs. (3.48),(3.42)). remarkably, the geometrical arguments (invariance under
area-preserving dieomorphism) which lead to a pure area dependence in two
dimensions, but not in higher ones, are recovered in the limit d  2, in spite
of the singular nature of this limit, and of the dierence in the two results (with
and without self-energy diagrams).

 (cid:1)2
and cf ca(cid:0) lt

(lt )2

3

we consider this point quite intriguing; it seems that, in order to get beyond
two dimensions towards higher ones, the theory needs further inputs which cannot
be a priori guessed in two dimensions. on the other hand it is known that
operators exist which are irrelevant at d > 2, but can be competitive in exactly
two dimensions [?, ?].

our result can therefore be interpreted as a warning when one tries to extend
straightforwardly conclusions obtained in strictly two dimensions to more realistic
situations.

but the new result of this chapter is that we have checked that our ndings
at o(g4) comply with the abelianlike time exponentiation in the large-t limit,
as long as d > 2. at d = 2 this is not the case.
in fact, while in any dimension d > 2 perturbative wilson loop calculations
are in agreement with abelian-like time exponentiation, as all ca dependent
terms turn out to be depressed in the large-t limit, at d = 2 neither the result
in ref. [?] nor the one in ref. [?] share this property, as they both exhibit an
explicit ca-dependence in the coecient of the leading term when t  . at
d = 2 exponentiation in terms of cf occurs perturbatively only in light-front
formulation (see eq. (3.32)).

but our investigation is purely perturbative, while the wilson loop is dened
by means of the true vacuum, that might have nonperturbative contribu-

concluding remarks

47

tions. there are, in fact, arguments supporting the hypothesis that the expected
abelianlike time exponentiation in the equaltime quantization could be restored
by genuine nonperturbative contributions. this point is going to be thoroughly
discussed in the conclusions.

conclusions

in this thesis we have performed a perturbative inquiry on the features of two
dimensional yangmills theories.

the rst result, obtained in chapter 2 and conrmed in chapter 3, is that
two dierent, inequivalent perturbative formulations of twodimensional yang
mills theories within the lightcone gauge seem to coexist:

a) the lightfront quantization formulation, leading to (instantaneous) cauchy
principal value (cpv) prescription for the spurious pole of the gluon prop-
agator;

b) the equaltime quantization formulation, leading to (causal) mandelstam

leibbrandt (ml) prescription for the same pole.

the cpv formulation lives only in d = 2 and in higher dimensions man-
in fact it leads to a nonrenormalizable theory and does
ifests inconsistencies:
instead, the ml formulation is in full
not agree with feynman gauge results.
agreement with feynman gauge results for d > 2, but the comparison cannot be
performed in strictly 1+1 dimensions, since the free propagator (2.3) in feynman
gauge is not a tempered distribution for d = 2.

just to compare these two dierent formulations at d = 2, in order to decide
if one or the other is wrong or if there is a sort of compatibility (in spite
of the dierent results with respect to our test of gauge invariance), we have
performed in chapter 3 a test on the asymptotic behavior of the spacetime
wilson loop: the dependence on ca should cancel at the leading order when
t   in any coecient of its perturbative expansion. the failure of this
criterion has been interpreted in the past as an evidence of a pathology of four
dimensional perturbative formulations of quantum eld theories [?]. the second
result obtained in this thesis is that the vanishing of the term proportional to
ca at o(g4), and the subsequent abelianlike time exponentiation of the wilson
loop, happens only for d > 2, but in the limit d  2 its asymptotic behavior
fails to be the abelianlike one. in other words, if we take rst the limit d  2,
no damping occurs when t  : the two limits do not commute. with respect
it provides
to this criterion the cpv formulation seems to be in better shape:
the expected abelianlike exponentiation in an exact way, once we have summed
all the feynman diagrams contributing to the perturbative series.

48

conclusions

49

let us summarize in detail the main perturbative features found in our wilson
loop computations, which are common to both feynman and light-cone gauges.
for d > 2 the o(g4) result depends on the contour: if it has lightlike sides,
there is a dependence only on the area, no matter the value of d. if instead the
contour is a space-time rectangle, for d > 2 there is also a dependence on the
ratio   l/t , still reproducing the expected exponential behavior in the limit
t   ( = 0).
the limit d  2 of such o(g4) result is nite and depends only on the area,
no matter the orientation and the shape of the contour. it consists of two addenda
(compare eq. (2.15) with eq. (3.28)).

in light cone gauge the second addendum comes from crossed diagrams,
the rst one is due to the self-energy correction to the gluon propagator.
in
axial gauges the transverse degrees of freedom are coupled with a strength of
order d  2; nevertheless they produce a nite contribution when matching the
self-energy loop singularity precisely at d = 2.
thus the ml formulation exhibits a kind of instability with respect to a
change of dimensions and looks indeed discontinuous in the limit d  2.
in
fact in exactly 1 + 1 dimensions the rst addendum is missing and one just gets
the result of ref. [?], conrmed in ref. [?] following a dierent approach. its area
dependence is hardly surprising in view of the symmetry under area preserving
dieomorphisms at d = 2; it is perhaps remarkable that also the rst addendum,
which originates at d > 2, exhibits in the limit d  2 a pure area dependence
on its own.
however both contributions contain the factor cf ca and thereby disagree
with the simple area exponentiation, that is obtained only in cpv formulation.
at a perturbative level there is a discontinuity, which is not surprising in the
light of the argument presented in ref. [?], namely the possibility of dening
(generalized) qcd2 [?]: it tells us that one must pay attention in trying to extend
twodimensional results to higher dimensions. however it does not explain why
agreement with the simple area behavior is not recovered.

moreover, the authors of ref. [?], working in exactly 1 + 1 dimensions, have
succeeded in resumming the perturbative series: the result (3.41) they get does
not exhibit the usual purely exponential area law. besides the appearance of
laguerre polynomials, the coecient in the exponent multiplying the area is
dierent from the usual one. we are thereby faced with a discrepancy.
it is
interesting to point out that they note that the limit for n   of eq. (3.41)
gives an expression for the wilson loop that is not able to assure connement,
at variance with its behavior at nite n. this feature suggests that wus bound
state equation [?] is not expected to lead to a discrete meson spectrum, and is in
agreement with the fact that no rising regge trajectories were found in refs. [?, ?].
now we want to discuss the consequences concerning the abelianlike time
exponentiation in the large-t limit. we have checked in chapter 3 that the space
time wilson loop at o(g4) is in agreement with the expected cf leading behavior,

50

conclusions

as long as d > 2. at d = 2, instead, a term proportional to ca survives;
however it is likely that this is not an evidence of a pathology of twodimensional
ml formulation, as it might appear at a rst glance. rather, there are some
arguments that show that this failure has his roots in a nonperturbative issue,
and that the expected behavior can be restored by istantonic, non perturbative
contributions, reconciling gauge invariance with basic spectral properties and
solving the paradox.

as a matter of fact the t hooft d = 2 well established result can most safely
be obtained by means of non perturbative techniques. actually, connement in
qcd2 is usually regarded as a perturbative eect: in any axial gauge the theory
is quadratic and it was a wideaccepted belief that the gluon propagator gave rise
to a linear potential, which provides the usual area behavior for the wilson loop
by resumming the perturbative series. but this is true only in axial gauges with a
peculiar prescription for the propagator (the cauchy principal value, which works
wonderfully only in d = 2, but is certainly incorrect for d > 2). the reason why
this happens might be deep and related to peculiar properties of the d = 2 light-
front vacuum in light-front quantization. in fact, in this latter procedure there
are no degrees of freedom at all (manifestly unitary formulation), at variance with
ghosts (unphysical) degrees of freedom in ml formulation: therefore there is
no way to introduce creation and destruction operators to construct the hilbert
space of the theory starting from the fock vacuum. this vacuum is therefore the
only state of the space. perhaps just this feature could explain why we obtain
the usual, abelian result for wilson loop already at a perturbative level. this
does not happen with ml prescription: we could say that, also from this point of
view, this latter approach is more honest, in the sense that it does not hide the
nonperturbative roots of the connement.

at a non-perturbative level there are arguments which show that at large
n and on the sphere s2 a phase transition occurs, induced by instantons (see
refs. [?, ?, ?, ?]). the purely exponential area behavior occurs only in the strong
coupling phase, which is dominated by instantons. in the weak coupling phase the
result is completely dierent and agrees (after decompactication) with the ones
of refs. [?, ?]. this is the reason why it has been suggested that the discrepancy
can be solved by taking instantons into account [?, ?]; they obviously do not
contribute to any perturbative calculation, even when the perturbative series is
fully resummed.

one could say that perturbative results are irrelevant at d = 2. but just
our perturbative results are a clear evidence of the need of a nonperturbative
approach to the connement issue also in the twodimensional case.
t hooft
model works wonderfully in strictly two dimensions, but it is at least doubtful
that it could give lessons for the real, four dimensional world. besides, at d > 2
perturbative results are the only easily accessible ones; several perturbative tests
of gauge invariance have been performed in the past at d > 2, just assuming
the simple area exponentiation in the large t -limit. in chapter 3 we have proved

conclusions

51

that indeed at d > 2 such an exponentiation occurs as expected.

we do not think it is immaterial to understand how these nice features behave
in the transition d  2, also in order to contrast them against genuine non
perturbative results.

why genuinely non perturbative contributions, which are likely to be relevant
also in higher dimensions, are crucial only in two dimensions to possibly recover
abelianlike time exponentiation, is at present unknown. this very interesting
issue, together with the dierence between the vacuum structure in ml and cpv
formulations, remain open questions to be investigated.

appendix a

exchange diagrams in feynman
gauge

in order to get the o(g4) contribution to the wilson loop arising from the ex-
change diagrams, we only have to evaluate the maximally non abelian diagrams,
that in the present case are the so called crossed diagrams. in fact, the contri-
bution coming from planar diagrams can be easily obtained through the abelian
exponentiation theorem, as explained in the main text. in this appendix we shall
give the main sketch of computation of the seven independent crossed diagrams
needed:

c f

1

1

1

1

1

1

(13)(13) =z 1
(24)(24) =z 1
(13)(24) =z 1
(11)(13) =z 1
(22)(24) =z 1
(11)(11) =z 1
(22)(22) =z 1

u

u

dv

dv

dv

l4

t 4

(l2t 2)

duz 1
duz 1
duz 1
duz 1
duz 1
dtz 1
dtz 1

[4l2  (u + v)2t 2 + i]1 z 1
[l2(u + v)2  4t 2 + i]1 z 1
[l2(u + v)2  4t 2 + i]1 z 1
[4l2  (u + v)2t 2 + i]1 z u
[l2(u + v)2  4t 2 + i]1 z u
dsz 1
duz 1
duz 1
dsz 1

(2t 4)

(2l4)

dv

t

t

s

s

dv

u

u

dv

dv

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

c f

c f

c f

c f

c f

c f

v

v

dtz 1
dtz 1
dtz 1
dtz 1
dtz 1

u

u

(2t 4)

[(t  s)2t 2 + i]1[(u  v)2t 2 + i]1 ,
[(t  s)2l2 + i]1[(u  v)2l2 + i]1 ,

(2l4)

ds

[4l2  (t + s)2t 2 + i]1 ,

(a.1)

ds

[l2(t + s)2  4t 2 + i]1 ,

(a.2)

1

1

1

1

1

ds

[4l2  (t + s)2t 2 + i]1 ,

(a.3)

1

ds

[(t  s)2t 2 + i]1 ,

ds

1

[(t  s)2l2 + i]1 ,

(a.4)

(a.5)

(a.6)

(a.7)

where  = [(  1)]2/(162). as an example, we report the main sketch of

52

exchange diagrams in feynman gauge

53

computation of c f

(13)(13).

in order to perform the integrations a series expansion of the denominators
in (a1) is not enough as the series does not converge in the entire integration
domains. the necessary analytic continuations are provided by two mellin-barnes
transformations:

c f

(13)(13) = t 4(4l2)22

[(  1)]2
dy(  1 + y)(y)(cid:18)

z +i

i

1

1

(2i)2

1

i

2  i(cid:19)yz +i
z 1
dv(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

duz 1

1

1

1

2  i(cid:19)z
dz(  1 + z)(z)(cid:18)
2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
ds(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2yz 1

dtz 1

s + t

2z

2

u

v

u + v

,

(a.8)

where the path of integration over z is chosen in such a way that the poles of
the function (  1 + z) lie to the left of the path of integration and the poles
of the function (z) lie to the right of it (the same for the integration over y).

after the integration over s, t, v and u we have the following expression:

c f

(13)(13) = t 4(4l2)22

1

1

(2i)2 
2  i(cid:19)yz +i
1

i

[(  1)]2
dy(  1 + y)(y)(cid:18)

i

z +i
(2z + 1)(2z + 2)(cid:20)


25

1

(2y + 1)(2y + 2) 

dz(  1 + z)(z)(cid:18)

1

1

2  i(cid:19)z

(2y + 1)(2y + 2z + 4)
1

+

(2y + 2z + 3)(2y + 2z + 4) 

(2z + 3)(2y + 1)

(2z + 2y + 5)

(cid:21) .

(a.9)

then one has to integrate over z and y; the integration contours have to be
suitably chosen: for instance, in the present example, in order to apply jordans
lemma, the integration paths must be closed with half-circles lying in the half
planes rez < 0 and rey < 0. these integrations produce several double power
series in the variable 2 with nite convergence radii, which are particularly suited
for a large t (small ) expansion. for instance, the last term in the square bracket
of eq. (a.9) gives the following contribution

54

appendix a

t 4(4l2)22

z +i

i
(2t )44

=

2

 f4(2





 f4( 
xm=0
xl=0

+ i54(

1

2  i(cid:19)y

1

1

1

25

i

(2i)2 z +i
dy(  1 + y)(y)(cid:18)
[(  1)]2
2  i(cid:19)z
dz(  1 + z)(z)(cid:18)
(lt )2(e2i2(
sin()(cid:19)2
)(cid:18) 
2 )( 9
1
; 2, 2) + ei12 i
, 
, 2 4, 
2
4
2  ; 2, 2) + ei22 1
5
1
2

7
2
5
2
(m + 1)(l + m +   3

2 )(l + m +   2)

,   2,  

4
(2)l

( 1

1
2

1
8

,

(2z + 1)(2z + 2)(cid:20)
2  )

(2z + 3)(2y + 1)

(2z + 2y + 5)

(cid:21)



2( 3
2  2)(5  2)
2 )( 3
(3  )( 7
1
) 
2

sin()

( 1

(



2  )(  3
2 )
2  )

sin()
(2)m

l!

m!

+44 2(  3
2 )2( 1
2 )
4

1
2

)( 

3
2

)( 

5
2

) + 2(  2)(cid:21))

(a.10)

(l +   1
1
2

)(  2)( 

2 )(m + 3  )(m + 3
2 )
(cid:20) 1
2(

64

) 

3
2

2

2

with the notations as in [?].
repeating this procedure for each integral (a1)-(a7), one eventually recover

eq. (3.19).

as a check of our calculations, we have explicitly veried the abelian expo-
nentiation theorem. the sum of all the crossed diagrams, which are proportional
to c 2
f  (1/2)cf ca, behaves like (lt )2t 44, and therefore is depressed in the
large t limit as long as  > 1. this means that only planar diagrams should
contribute to the abelian exponentiation in the large t limit. as a matter of fact
this is in fact what happens: there is a single planar diagram that, alone, provides
the dominant term for the abelian exponentiation; it is the one in fig. (3.1a) at
page 31. it can be checked that for such a diagram the leading term in the large t
expansion is (1/22)((2l)44(cf lt )2((  3/2)(1/2))2, which is precisely
the half of the square of the corresponding leading term of the sum of the single
exchange diagrams.

appendix b

bubble diagrams in feynman
gauge

the complete one loop propagator (including ghost interaction) is given by
(1  3)(2  )(3  2)(1  )2()(2  4)

d(2)f,ab



= ab g2ca
162
 (cid:20)
xx

(x2 + i)  g

(2)(4  )(x2 + i)23
2  5
2(3  2)(cid:21) .

(b.1)

writing explicitly all the possible bubble diagrams bf
14 = bf

ij , it is not dicult to
realize that bf
23. in addition, the two
last pairs of bubbles are in turn equal after a trivial change of variables, so that
eq. (3.21) follows. the ve independent bubbles are then

11 = bf

22 = bf

12 = bf

33, bf

44, bf

34, bf

bf

bf

bf

bf

bf

1

1

1

1

1

1

11 =z 1
22 =z 1
13 =z 1
24 =z 1
12 =z 1

dsz 1
dsz 1
dsz 1
dsz 1
dsz 1

1

1

1

1

dt

dt

dt

dt

dt

(t 2)

(l2)

(t 2)

[(s  t)2t 2 + i]23 (cid:20) 2  1
2(3  2)(cid:21) ,
[(s  t)2l2 + i]23 (cid:20) 1  2
2(3  2)(cid:21) ,
[(s + t)2t 2 + 4l2 + i]23 (cid:20)
[(s + t)2l2  4t 2 + i]23 (cid:20)
l2t 2(t  1)(s + 1)

[(s + 1)2l2  t 2(t  1)2 + i]22 ,

(l2)

(s + t)2t 2

4l2  (s + t)2t 2 + i 

(s + t)2l2

(s + t)2l2  4t 2 + i

+

(b.2)

(b.3)

2  5
2(3  2)(cid:21) ,
2  5
2(3  2)(cid:21) ,

(b.4)

(b.5)

(b.6)

(b.7)

where

 =

g4cf ca
162

(3  1)(2  )(3  2)(1  )2()(2  4)

(2)(4  )

55

again, integration can be performed using mellin-barnes techniques leading

appendix b

56

to

w (2;se)

f

=

cf ca(2l)44(lt )22()(31)(1)(22)



22(2)(4)
1(47)(12)42 +(48)2f1(23, 27/2; 25/2; 2)

(cid:26)e2i46(cid:20) (21)
(46)

(46)(24)

21

1

+

(24)(23)

[2f1(24,1/2; 1/2; 2)1]+
[(12)421](cid:21)

(24)(47)

1

23

[2f1(23,1/2; 1/2; 2)1]

+e2i44 2(23)2f1(22, 25/2; 23/2; 2)(45)(12)32

(23)(45)

(3)(1/2)(27/2)

+i

(22)

+2

3

(2)(47)(cid:27) .

(b.8)

by performing the large t limit in eq. (b.8) one arrives at eq. (3.22).

appendix c

spider diagrams in feynman
gauge

the spider diagrams are by far the most complicated to evaluate. the sum of
the 6 inequivalent spider diagrams, with the appropriate weights, is given by

w (2;3g)

f

= 2(s124 + s123 + s122 + s144 + s112 + s114) 

d3(1  1  2  3)(123)2 

1

0

0

1

1

1

322

1

1

1

1

z 1

0

d1z 1

d2z 1

ds3(1(1  1) + 2(2  1)  212 + (2  1)s33)
2)3(s2
ds3(1(1  1) + 3(3  1)  213 + (1  3)s22)
2)3(s2

12)2(12s2

1)2(12s2

cf ca(2  2)l2t 64
(cid:26)z 1
[(12s33)22(s11s22 +3)21(12s2
+z 1
[(s112s33)22(1 +s223)21(s2
+z 1
[(1 +2+s33)22(s11 +s223)21(1s2
+ z 1
[(1 +2s33)22(s11 +s22 +3)21(1s2
+ z 1
[(1 +s22 +s33)22(s1123)21(1s2
+ z 1
[(1s22s33)22(s11 +2+3)21(1s2

ds2z 1
ds2z 1
ds2z 1
ds2z 1
ds2z s2
ds2z s2

ds1z 1
ds1z 1
ds1z s1
ds1z s1
ds1z 1
ds1z 1

ds3(1(1  1)  2(2  1) + (1  2)s33)
12)2(12s2
ds3(1(1  1) + 2(2  1) + (1  2)s33) 
12)2(12s2
ds3(2(1  2) + 3(3  1) + (2  3)s11)

ds3(2(2  1) + 3(1  3) + (2  3)s11) 

12)2(s2

22)3(s2

12)2(s2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

32)+i]22

32)+i]22

2)3(s2

32)+i]22

2)3(s2

32)+i]22

22)3(s2

32)+i]22

32)+i]22(cid:9) .

(c.1)

57

58

appendix c

the above integrals can be more conveniently grouped as

w (2;3g)

f

=

cf ca(lt )2(2t )44

2

e2i[i1(2) + i2(2) + i3(2) + i4(2)]

(c.2)

where

1

0

0

[p 32

1

i1(2) = (2  3)2410z 1
i2(2) = (2  3)2410z 1
i3(2) = (2  2)247z 1
i4(2) = (2  2)247z 1

[d]z 1
+ (s1  s2)p 32
[d]z 1
+ (s1  s2)p 32
[d]z 1
[d]z 1

[ds](123)2 1  2
1 + 2
+ (s1  s2)p 32
[ds](123)2
+ (s1  s2)p 32
[ds](123)2 12
1 + 2
[ds](123)2 12
1 + 2

[p 32

]
2  1

2

5

3

6

0

0

1

1

1

4

p 22

1

p 22

4

(c.3)


s3


s3

2(1 + 2)

]

where [ds] = ds1ds2ds3, [d] = d1d2d3(1  1  2  3) and

p1 = (12+s33)22(s11s223)21(1s2
p2 = (1 +2+s33)22(s11 +s223)21(1s2
p3 = (1 +2s33)22(s11 +s22 +3)21(1s2
p4 = (s11s223)22(12+s33)21(s2
p5 = (s11 +s22 +3)22(1 +2s33)21(s2
p6 = (s11 +s223)22(1 +2+s33)21(s2

12)2(12s2
12)2(12s2
12)2(12s2

2)3(s2
2)3(s2
2)3(s2
22)3(1s2
22)3(1s2
22)3(1s2

32)+i
32)+i
32)+i
32)+i
32)+i
32)+i

12)2(s2
12)2(s2
12)2(s2

(c.4)

as already anticipated in the main text, the above integrals have not been
evaluated exactly. however, the leading power of t is just the factor t 64
contained in the overall constant, as can be easily realized by the fact that the
integrals i1,   , i4 are nite when evaluated for  = 0. in turn, only i1(2 = 0)
and i3(2 = 0) can be evaluated analytically, whereas for i2(2 = 0) and i4(2 =
0) we have only an expansion around  = 1 that, however, is just what we need.
the results are

spider diagrams in feynman gauge

59

i1(2 = 0) =

i2(2 = 0) = 
17
4

+

(2  2)
3  2 (cid:20)
4(  1)2 +

1

()( + 1)

(  2)2(2  1) 
  1/2
2(  1)



(2  4) sin()(cid:21)

+

1
2
2

(1  ) +

7
24

2  2 log 2 

3
2

(3) + o(  1)



1

i3(2 = 0) =

(5  2)(cid:20)(2  2)(1  )(3  ) +
n!(cid:18) (2  2 + n)(3 + n  )
xn=1
i4(2 = 0) = 
2(  1)2 +
+ 8  2  22 +

  4
(  1)
2
12

(2n + 1)(n + )

+ 2 log 2 +



3
2

1

(3) + o(  1) .



sin()

(c.5)

(2n + 3  2)(2   + n)(cid:19)#
(n +   1)(4  2 + n)

by expanding i1 and i3 one can easily get eq. (3.25).

appendix d

crossed diagrams in cpv
formulation

in order to understand why crossed diagrams cannot contribute in the cpv case,
we rst exhibit the quantities ecp v
(s, t). only two of them are independent,
thanks to eq. (3.34), and dierent from zero:

ij

and

ecp v

12

(s, t) =

ecp v

13

(s, t) =

il2
2

il2


(1 + t)(1  s  (1 + t)),

(s + t + 2),

(d.1)

(d.2)

(we are considering the case  < 1).

let us look at the rst diagram in fig.3.3; its contribution would be c cp v

(13)(13),
according to the notation developed in eq. (3.38). in this case the integration
domain would be constrained by the product (s + t + 2) (u + v + 2), with
the conditions t > u and s > v, to produce the crossing. these conditions clearly
cannot be fullled.

finally c cp v

another independent possibility would be c cp v

(12)(13). the constraint now would
be given by (1  s  (1 + t)) (u + v + 2) with the crossing condition u > s,
which is clearly impossible.
(12)(12) would be aected by the constraint (1s(1+t)) (1u
(1 + v)) with the conditions s > u and t > v, which again are clearly impossible.
in higher orders the argument can be repeated considering the propagators
pairwise. on the other hand the conclusion on the vanishing of crossed diagrams
would become immediately apparent in a graphical picture.

therefore only planar diagrams survive, both in the abelian and in the non-
abelian case. but, for planar diagrams, the only dierence between the two cases
is the appearance in the latter of the casimir constant cf . hence the abelian
exponentiation theorem continues to hold, leading to eq. (3.32) (see eqs. (3.4),
(3.13) and (3.30)).

60

appendix e

crossed diagrams in ml
formulation (d = 2)

in this appendix we shall give the main sketch for the computation of the inde-
pendent diagrams c m l
(ij)(kl) needed to derive the o(g4) term in the perturbative
expansion of the wilson loop w m l
(l, t ) in the causal formulation of the light-
cone gauge. as already explained in the main text, we can restrict ourselves to the
maximally non-abelian diagrams, namely those providing a cf ca factor. such
diagrams are those in which the position of the propagators is crossed, and there
are 35 topologically inequivalent diagrams of this type. however, thanks to the
symmetry relations (3.34), the number of independent diagrams to be evaluated
is 19 (see eq. (3.39)).



we rst need the em l

(t, s) functions dened in eq. (3.15) that are appropriate
to the present case: substituting the parameterization of the path (3.2) and the
propagator in the causal formulation (3.33) in eq. (3.15), we can derive all the
functions em l

(t, s). they are given by

ij

ij

em l

11 (t, s) = em l

em l

22 (t, s) = em l

em l

12 (t, s) = em l

l2
42

34 (t, s) =

44 (t, s) =

33 (t, s) = 
l2
4
l2
4
l2
4
l2
42
l2
4

13 (t, s) =

41 (t, s) =

em l
24 (t, s) = 

em l

em l

23 (t, s) = em l

1  t + (1 + s)

1  t  (1 + s)  i
(1  t)  (1 + s)
(1  t) + 1 + s

t + s  2

t + s + 2 + i
t + s + 2
t + s  2

(e.1)

where,  = l/t and the symmetry relations (3.34) have been taken into account.

61

62

appendix e

23 (t, s), em l

the position (and the appearance) of poles in the above functions clearly depends
on the magnitude of . being interested in the larget limit, we shall always
consider the domain  < 1. consequently, the functions em l
41 (t, s) and
em l
24 (t, s) do not present poles: this is the reason why in eq. (e.1) we omitted
the prescription for those functions as irrelevant (to this purpose, remember that
s, t  [1, 1], see eq. (3.2)).

(s, t). the notation is such that c m l

(ij)(kl) are then dened in eq. (3.38) as multiple integrals of
functions em l
(ij)(kl) denotes the diagram with
two crossed propagators, the rst joining the segments (i, j) and the second
joining the segments (k, l). once one diagram c m l
(ij)(kl) is evaluated, its value
has to be multiplied by a factor 8, which is the number of permutations of the
indices (ij)(kl) that maintains the position of the two propagators crossed: this
is a consequence of the rst equation in (3.34). more explicitly, this means

the diagrams c m l

ij

c m l

(ij)(kl) = c m l

(ji)(kl) = c m l

(ij)(lk) = c m l

(ji)(lk) = c m l

(kl)(ij) = c m l

(lk)(ij) = c m l

(kl)(ji) = c m l

(lk)(ji) .
(e.2)

to preserve crossing, the integration extrema have to be carefully chosen, and
the integration variables t, s, u, v have to be suitably nested. just as an example,
in the diagram c(11)(11) the integration variables have to be such that 1 > v >
s > u > t > 1 (see fig. 3.2 at page 33). consequently, once t  [1, 1], all
the other integration extrema are xed by the nesting, i.e. u  [t, 1], s  [u, 1],
v  [s, 1].
in the following calculation, we shall omit, for brevity, the factor l2/4, which
is common to all the propagators (e.1), dening

e m l
(ij)(kl)(t, s) = (4/l2)em l

(ij)(kl)(t, s).

the corresponding diagrams will obviously rescale by a factor (l2/4)2, and will
be denoted by cm l

(ij)(kl), namely cm l

(ij)(kl) = (4/l2)2c m l

although in principle the evaluation of the 19 independent (rescaled) diagrams
is now clear, the practical calculation is rather cumbersome. we shall list here
the nal results.

(ij)(kl).

(11)(11) =z 1
cm l

1

dtz 1

t

duz 1

u

dsz 1

s

dv e m l

11 (t, s) e m l

11 (u, v) =

(22)(22) =z 1
cm l

1

dtz 1

t

duz 1

u

dsz 1

s

dv e m l

22 (t, s) e m l

22 (u, v) =

2
34

2
3

(e.3)

(e.4)

crossed diagrams in ml formulation (d = 2)

63

(11)(13) =z 1
cm l
= 

11 (t, s)

64
3

ln() +

duz 1
dv e m l
1
1
32 +(cid:18)
8
64
34 +
+(cid:18) 16
16
 
33 
duz 1

13 (u, v)z u
dtz 1
ds e m l
1
u
3 (cid:19) i +
32
16
16
 
33 +
3 (cid:19) ln(1 + ) +(cid:18)
32
24 (u, v)z u

dtz 1

ds e m l

1

1

1

u

dv e m l
+

22 (t, s)

16
33 +

16
 

32

3 (cid:19) ln(1  )

(e.5)

32
34 +

16
3 

16

3(cid:19) ln(1  )

(e.6)

16
3 +

16

3(cid:19) ln(1 + ) +(cid:18)
12 (u, v)z u
dtz 1
+ 8(cid:19) i +(cid:18) 32

1

dv e m l
+(cid:18)
32
3

u

11 (t, s)

ds e m l
3  8(cid:19) ln() +
+(cid:18) 8

34 

32
3

=

8
3

(22)(24) =z 1
cm l
64
32 
+(cid:18)
32
34 
(11)(12) =z 1
cm l
= 

duz 1
1
20
32 +

1
8


(22)(23) =z 1
cm l

1

dv e m l

1

duz 1
= 

23 (u, v)z u
20
8
32 
3 

1
8
3

(11)(14) =z 1
duz 1
cm l
20
= 
32 

1

1

(22)(12) =z 1
cm l

1

1

duz 1
8
3 

=

8

3

14 (u, v)z u
dv e m l
 (cid:18) 32
21 (u, v)z u
dv e m l
20
i 
32 +

1
8
3

8
3

22 (t, s)

u

dtz 1
ds e m l
ln() +(cid:18) 8
4 +
dtz 1

u

1

ds e m l
+ 8(cid:19) ln() +(cid:18) 8

34 +

11 (t, s)

22 (t, s)

u

dtz 1
ds e m l
ln() +(cid:18) 8
4 

+ 8(cid:19) ln(1  )

(e.7)

32
33 +

8

3(cid:19) ln(1 + )

(e.8)

32
3

+ 8(cid:19) ln(1 + )

(e.9)

32
33 +

8

3(cid:19) ln(1  )

(e.10)

64

appendix e

+ 32 + 32i(cid:19) ln() +
3 (cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1 + )  32 ln2() +
64
33 +
64
33 +

32
2 
32
2 

3 (cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1  ) +
3 (cid:21) ln2(1  ) +

32

32

13 (t, s)

u

3

3

1

1

+

32

16

dtz 1

12 (u, v)z 1
(12)(13) =z 1
duz 1
dv e m l
ds e m l
cm l
1
=(cid:18) 162
3 +(cid:18) 162
3(cid:19) 1
3  16i(cid:19) 1
8
9 
2 +
162
+(cid:18)
i(cid:19) 1
  16i +(cid:18) 32
16
32 +
3
+(cid:20) 16
3  16 +(cid:18) 32
64
32
2 
32 
33 +
3  16 +(cid:18)
+(cid:20)
16
16
16
32
32 +
3 +
34 +
+(cid:20) 16
3 (cid:21) ln2(1 + ) +(cid:20)
32
16
32
33 +
2 +

3 (cid:21) ln() ln(1 + ) +
+(cid:20)
32
32
33 
2 
+(cid:20)
3 (cid:21) ln() ln(1  ) +
32
64
33 
2 +
  32(cid:21) ln(1 + ) ln(1  ) +
+(cid:20) 32
32
32
2 
3 +
2(cid:21) li2 () +(cid:20) 32
+(cid:20)
32
32
33 
33 +
32

3

32
2 +
li2(cid:18)1 

32

32


32


160

32

+

+

+

+

32

3 (cid:21) li2(cid:18) 
1 + (cid:19) 
(cid:19) +(cid:20)
32
33 

32

1

2(cid:21) li2(cid:18) 1

1 + (cid:19)

(e.11)

duz 1
1
162
33 +
16
4 
16
4 +

(23)(24) =z 1
cm l
= 
+(cid:20)
+(cid:20)
+(cid:20) 16
34 
+(cid:20)
32
4 +
+(cid:20)
32
34 +



1

1

+

32

64

32

u
162

24 (t, s)

3 (cid:21) ln() +
3(cid:21) ln() ln(1 + ) +

dtz 1
23 (u, v)z 1
ds e m l
dv e m l
162
9 (cid:19) 1
32 +(cid:18) 8
+(cid:20)
16
64
3 
32 +

3 (cid:21) ln(1 + ) +(cid:20)
32
16
16
16
32 
2 
 
33 +
3(cid:21) ln2(1 + ) +
32(cid:21) ln(1  ) +(cid:20)
16
32
32
64
2 +
33 +
3 (cid:21) ln() ln(1  ) +
128
16
16
2 
3 +
32
32
2 
3 +
32
32
3 
2 +

16
34 +
3(cid:21) ln2(1  ) +(cid:20)
64
2 +
 (cid:21) ln(1 + ) ln(1  ) +
3(cid:21) li2 (1  ) +(cid:20) 32
2 
34 li2(cid:18) 1
1 + (cid:19) +(cid:20)

3(cid:21) li2(cid:18)1 
32
2 +

(cid:19) +
3(cid:21) li2(cid:18)

16

32

32

32

32

32

+

1

1

(cid:19)

(e.12)

crossed diagrams in ml formulation (d = 2)

65

dtz 1

3

3

+

1
16

13 (t, s)

1
162

ds e m l
2 +(cid:18) 162
i(cid:19) 1
i(cid:21) ln()  16i 
3 16+(cid:18)
32
3 +
32
33 +

80
3
32
2 +
32


3
16

32

32

+

ln2() +

+

32

3

i(cid:19) 1
 

322

9

+

 32(cid:19)i(cid:21)ln(1 + ) +
3 (cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1  ) 

32

3 (cid:21) ln2(1  ) +

32
2 

32


+

14 (u, v)z u
dv e m l
9 (cid:19) 1
3 +(cid:18)

3

3

1

+

64

+ 32 +

1
162

duz 1

(13)(14) =z 1
cm l
=(cid:18) 8
+(cid:20) 32
16
32 
3
+(cid:20)
16
16
32
34 
32 
3 +
+(cid:20) 16
3  16 +(cid:18) 
32
32 +
+(cid:20) 64
32
2 
33 +
+(cid:20) 32
64
2 
33 
+(cid:20) 32
32
33 
2 +
+(cid:20)
32
32
2 +
3 +
2(cid:21) li2 () +
+(cid:20) 32
32
33 
+(cid:20)
32
32
2 
33 +

32

32

32

16

+

32
2 
3 (cid:21) ln2(1 + ) +(cid:20)
32
33 +
3 (cid:21) ln() ln(1 + ) +
3 (cid:21) ln() ln(1  ) +

128

32

+

  32(cid:21) ln(1 + ) ln(1  ) +
1 + (cid:19) +

32
3

li2(cid:18) 
3 (cid:21) li2(cid:18)

32

32


+



1  (cid:19) +(cid:20)

32
33 +

32

2(cid:21) li2 (1  )

(e.13)

3

9

3

1

1

1

+

i +

64

32

64

162

3
16

24 (t, s)

1
162

dv e m l
162

21 (u, v)z u

(12)(24) =z 1
cm l
= 
+(cid:20)
+(cid:20)
+(cid:20) 32
34 +
+(cid:20)
32
34 +
+(cid:20)
32
2 +
+(cid:20) 32
32
2 +

duz 1
dtz 1
ds e m l
33 +(cid:18)
2 +(cid:18)
+ 16i(cid:19) 1
i(cid:19) 1
8
 
3 
3 (cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1 + ) +
32 +(cid:18) 
16
32
32
32
4 
34 
33 +
3 +
3 (cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1  ) +
+(cid:18)
16
16
16
32
32
32
16
2 
 
32 +
4 +
33 +
34 +
3
3(cid:21) ln2(1 + ) +(cid:20)
3 (cid:21) ln() +
64
16
16
16
32
32 
2 +
3 +

3(cid:21) ln2(1  ) +(cid:20)
 (cid:21) ln() ln(1 + ) +
32
64
32
32
2 
2 
3(cid:21) ln() ln(1  ) +(cid:20)
32
32
64
32
4 
3 +
2 +
3(cid:21) li2(cid:18) 
3(cid:21) li2 () +(cid:20)
1 + (cid:19) 
+(cid:20) 32
32
3 +
34 +

 (cid:21) ln(1 + ) ln(1  ) +
32
34 li2 (1  ) +
3(cid:21) li2(cid:18) 1
32
2 +

1 + (cid:19)

32
2 

64

32

32

32

32

+

(e.14)

66

appendix e

3

+

64

56

64

28

64
3

16
32 

3 (cid:21) ln()+

i+(cid:20)
+ 8(cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1 + ) +
3  8(cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1  ) +
3  8(cid:21) ln2(1 + ) +
34 
3  8(cid:21) ln2(1 ) +
16
2 +
2(cid:21) li2 () +
32
1 + (cid:19) +
2(cid:21) li2(cid:18) 1
1  (cid:19)

(e.15)

32

64



64

+

=

1

u

+

+

64

i+

128

28
3

1
42

3
8


14 (t, s)

34 

8

128

8
3
28
3

dv e m l
162

(12)(14) =z 1
cm l

ds e m l
1
82
16

3

12 (u, v)z 1
dtz 1
i(cid:19) 1
2 +
+(cid:18) 8
34 
+(cid:18) 8
34 

duz 1
94 +(cid:18)8
3 
+(cid:20) 8
44
32
32 
33 
2 
+(cid:20)
44
16
8
33 
32 +
2 +
+(cid:20)
3 (cid:21) ln() ln(1 + ) +(cid:20) 4
8
16
34 +
2 +
3 (cid:21) ln() ln(1 ) +(cid:20) 8
+(cid:20)
48
16
2 
34 
34 +
+(cid:20) 16
2 + 16(cid:21) ln(1 + ) ln(1  ) +(cid:20)
8
32
4 
34 +
+(cid:20) 8
1 + (cid:19) +(cid:20)
3  8(cid:21) li2(cid:18) 
8
16
2 
34 +
3  8(cid:21) li2(cid:18)
+(cid:20) 8
16
34 
2 +
(12)(23) =z 1
duz 1
23 (u, v)z 1
dtz 1
cm l
dv e m l
ds e m l
=(cid:18)642
i(cid:19) 1
9  8i(cid:19) 1
3 +(cid:18)8
2 
3 
+(cid:20) 28
+(cid:18)8
64
44
34 
33 +
4 +
32 +
3(cid:21) ln(1  ) +(cid:20) 104
+(cid:20) 28
44
32 
32 
34 +
+(cid:20)
3(cid:21) ln2(1 + ) +(cid:20)
8
4
32
4
33 
4 
4 +
2  16(cid:21) ln() ln(1 + ) +(cid:20) 16
+(cid:20) 16
+(cid:20) 16
4 
+(cid:20) 32
2 

2 + 16(cid:21) ln(1 + ) ln(1  ) +(cid:20)
3(cid:21) li2(cid:18) 
64
33 +
64
33 

1 + (cid:19) +(cid:20) 8
4 
+(cid:20)
8
4 

8
3 
8
3 
64
33 +

8
3
40

21 (t, s)

8
3
8

42
9

52

i +

1

1

u

1

32

8

3

+

40
3

ln2() +

40

3 (cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1 + ) +
i(cid:21) ln() +
3(cid:21) ln2(1  ) +
8
2 +

3

4

8

2  16(cid:21) ln() ln(1  ) +
3(cid:21) li2 () +
3(cid:21) li2 (1  ) +
1 + (cid:19)
3(cid:21) li2(cid:18) 1

32
2 +
8
16
2 
16
2 +

8

(e.16)

crossed diagrams in ml formulation (d = 2)

67

v

u

1

4
3

1
42

12 (t, s)

ds e m l
+ 4i(cid:19) 1

(12)(12) =z 1
duz 1
12 (u, v)z 1
dtz 1
cm l
dv e m l
3 +(cid:18)
+ 8i(cid:19) 1
2(cid:18) 4
34 +(cid:18)
4
= 
3
+ 8i(cid:21) ln()+8 ln2()+(cid:20) 8
(cid:20) 8
4
8
4 
3 
2 
3 +
+(cid:20)
28
16
16
3 
34 +
33 +
+(cid:20) 16
2  16(cid:21) ln() ln(1  ) +

+(cid:18)8
4 
4 li2 (1  ) + 8 li2(cid:18)1 

28
3
8
2 +

28
3

16

8i

+

3

8

2 + 8(cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1  ) +

u

=

(23)(23) =z 1
cm l
1
42
34 +
+(cid:20)
28
34 
+(cid:20) 4
16
4 

23 (u, v)z 1
dv e m l
4
32 +
8
2 

duz 1
1
4
33 
16
33 +
2 + 4(cid:21) ln2(1 + ) +(cid:20) 16

42
3
28

16
3 

4
3

+

v

+

28

8
3

23 (t, s)

4
2 

dtz 1
ds e m l
+(cid:20) 8
3 
3 (cid:21) ln(1 + ) + 4 ln2() +
2  8(cid:21) ln() ln(1 + ) 
4 li2(cid:18) 1

1 + (cid:19) 

 8 li2(cid:18) 

8

1 + (cid:19)

3 (cid:21) ln() +

i +

u

1

1

=

64


13 (u, v)z 1
dv e m l
32
32 
64


duz 1
32
33 i 
64
2 i +
160

(13)(13) =z 1
cm l
4
4 +
+(cid:20)
32
33 
+(cid:20) 32
64
33 

 64 ln() ln(1  ) +(cid:20)

160
3

64

+

+

3 (cid:21) ln(1  ) +(cid:20) 64

dtz 1

v

13 (t, s)

ds e m l
i (cid:20) 320

3

3

160

+ 64i(cid:21) ln() +
+ 64i(cid:21) ln(1 + ) + 64 ln2() +
2  64(cid:21) ln() ln(1 + ) 

2 + 64(cid:21) ln(1 + ) ln(1  ) +

+

64
2 li2 () 

64
2 li2 (1  )

28

42
3 

3 (cid:19) 1

i
2 + 8(cid:21) ln2(1)+

16

3

1

(cid:19)

(e.17)

(e.18)

(e.19)

68

appendix e

1

duz 1
1
32
32 + 4 +

(24)(24) =z 1
cm l
= 
+(cid:20) 160
34 +

64
3 

v

u

32

24 (t, s)

ds e m l
64

24 (u, v)z 1
dtz 1
dv e m l
2 ln2(1 + ) +(cid:20) 64
4 
3(cid:21) ln(1 + ) +(cid:20) 160
34 
64
2 li2 () +

2(cid:21) ln(1 + ) ln(1  ) +
3(cid:21) ln(1  ) 
64
3 +
1 + (cid:19)
2 li2(cid:18) 



32

32

64

1

1

24 (u, v)

dv e m l

ds e m l
1
32


(13)(24) =z 1
dtz 1
13 (t, s)z 1
duz 1
cm l
1
16
= 
i + 32i  64 ln() +
2 
 (cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1 + ) +
+(cid:20) 32
+ 32 +(cid:18)64
64
32
32
3 
3 +
4 +

+(cid:20) 32
+ 32 +(cid:18) 64
32
128
32
3 
4 
3 
2 +

 (cid:21) ln2(1 + ) +(cid:20) 64
+(cid:20)
128
64
3 
2 
3 
 (cid:21) ln() ln(1 + ) +(cid:20)128
+(cid:20)128
128
2 
2 +

 (cid:19)i(cid:21) ln(1  ) +
 (cid:21) ln2(1  ) +
128
2 +
 (cid:21) ln() ln(1  )
128

64

64

64

.

(e.20)

(e.21)

some technical details on the dilogarithm function li2(z) and on its analytic
continuations are in order. as is well known, li2(z) can be dened through its
integral representation

li2 (z) =z 0

z

ln(1  )



d ,

(e.22)

where the path joining z and 0 is arbitrary, provided it does not intersect the
half-line ]1, +[ , which is the branch-cut of the integrand function. on its
branch-point the dilogarithm is nite, and takes the value li2 (1) = 2/6.
if  < 1, the calculation of the above diagrams involves dilogarithmic func-
tions, with arguments bounded by the region  < re z < 1. eventually, we
shall be interested in taking the limit   0 (i.e. large t ). the arguments of the
dilogarithms arising from a rst integrations of eqs. (e.3)(e.21) can tend to 0, 1
and  as   0. on the other hand, the simplest expansion of the dilogarithm
is around the point z = 0, where a simple series representation holds

li2 (z) =

zk
k2 ,



xk=1

|z| < 1 .

(e.23)

crossed diagrams in ml formulation (d = 2)

69

consequently, we need analytic continuation to convert dilogarithms with argu-
ments tending to 1 and  into dilogarithms with arguments tending to 0, for
  0. these are given by

2
6

+

1
2

li2 (z) = 
2
6  ln(z) ln(1  z)  li2 (1  z) .

ln2(1 + z)  ln(z) ln(1 + z) + li2(cid:18) 1

li2 (z) =

1 + z(cid:19) ,

(e.24)

(e.25)

to get the nal result for the maximally non-abelian o(g4) terms in the causal
formulation, we have

1. to sum all the results (e.3)(e.21); the integrals from eqs. (e.3) to (e.18)
have to be multiplied by an extra factor 2 to take into account the 16
relations (3.39);

2. to multiply the result by l4/(4)2 to take into account the rescaling from

cm l
(ij)(kl) to c m l

(ij)(kl);

3. to multiply by a factor 8 to take into account permutations of indices as in

eq. (e.2);

4. to multiply by a factor cacf /16 as shown in eq. (3.38).
following the above points (1) to (4) one arrives at eq. (3.40): using eqs. (e.24),
(e.25), the dependence on the dimensionless ratio  = l/t exactly cancels, lead-
ing to a pure area behavior for any value of t .

appendix f

bubble diagrams in ml
formulation

writing explicitly all the possible bubble diagrams bm l
realize that bm l
eq. (3.45) follows. the six independent bubbles, following eq. (3.46), are then

, it is not dicult to
14 = bm l
23 , so that

ij
12 = bm l

11 = bm l

33 , bm l

22 = bm l

44 , bm l

34 , bm l

bm l

bm l

bm l

bm l

1

1

1

1

1

1

11 =z 1
22 =z 1
13 =z 1
24 =z 1
12 =z 1
14 =z 1

dsz 1
dsz 1
dsz 1
dsz 1
dsz 1
dsz 1

1

1

1

1

1

1

(t 4)(s  t)2

dt

dt

dt

[(s  t)2t 2 + i]22 ,
(l4)(s  t)2
[(s  t)2l2 + i]22 ,
(t 2) [t (s + t) + 2l]2
[(s + t)2t 2 + 4l2 + i]22 ,
(l2) [l(s + t)  2t ]2
[(s + t)2l2  4t 2 + i]22 ,
lt [t (1  t)  l(1 + s)]2
[l2(s + 1)2  t 2(1  t)2 + i]22 ,
dt lt [t (1  t) + l(1 + s)]2
[l2(s + 1)2  t 2(1  t)2 + i]22 ,

dt

dt

bm l

bm l

where

 =

g4cf ca
642 f () ,

(f.1)

(f.2)

(f.3)

(f.4)

(f.5)

(f.6)

(f.7)

with f () dened in eq. (3.44).
at this stage we could already choose d = 2, since each bubble gives a
nite contribution, at variance with the feynman gauge result:
in so doing we
will easily recover eq. (3.48). but we want to study also the behavior of the

70

bubble diagrams in ml formulation

71

bubble contribution for d > 2. again, integration can be performed (using,
when necessary, mellin-barnes techniques), leading to

bm l

11 = e2it 84

274

(7  4)(2  )

,

bm l

22 = l84

274

(7  4)(2  )

,

bm l

13 = t 84294(e2i" 2
 2f1(2  2, 2  7/2; 2  5/2; 2) 
(2  2)(cid:18)(3/2)(2  5/2) 

i74



1
3

(f.8)

(f.9)

1

5  4 2f1(2  2, 2  5/2; 2  3/2; 2) +

7  4

1

#
(1  2)32 2(5  2) + 3  2
2(2  3)(2  4)),
84(2  5)

2(2  3)
(5/2)(2  7/2)(cid:19) +

2  4

(f.10)

bm l

24 = e2it 84294(2f1(2  2, 1/2; 3/2; 2)2 + 2f1(2  2, 3/2; 5/2; 2)

4
3



1

2(2  3)(cid:20)(1  2)32(cid:18)1 +

2(2  3)
2  4 

1

2  4(cid:19)  1 +

1

2  4(cid:21)),

bm l

14 + bm l

12 = 

284t 84

(2  3)(2  4)(cid:2)84 + e2i(cid:0)1  (1  2)42(cid:1)(cid:3) .

(f.11)

(f.12)

summing all contributions according to eq. (3.45), we obtain eq. (3.47).

appendix g

three point green function in
the limit d  2

in this appendix we show that the three point green function tends to zero when
d  2. as explained in the main text, it is sucient to prove that the integral
in eq. (3.53), with the constant containing the simple zero ( 1) factorized out,
is convergent when evaluated at  = 1. such an integral, after the change of
variables  = ,  = (1  ) and after explicit integration over d, reads

i =z 1


0

dd(1    )(cid:26)1    
1  
[(x  z)+ +  (x  y)+]

[1 +  ( + )]3

+  log

(1  )(1  )

(cid:27)z 
[(y  z)+ +  (y  x)+]2



0

d

(1 +  )

[(x  z)2  (y  z)2   (x  y)2 + i]

,

(g.1)

 being the heavyside function. the most delicate region of this integral is
    0, so that in order to check convergence of eq. (g.1) we can restrict
ourselves to the case when the curly bracket is replaced by one. after this re-
placement, we set  =  and  = (1 ). in the expression obtained after this
change of variables, we rescale  =  at xed  . the integral over the  variable
can be factorized providing a factor log(1 + 1/). finally, renaming  = 1/, eq.
(g.1) with the curly bracket replaced by one can be equivalently written as

i = z 1

0

dz 

0

d


log(1 + )
(1 + )3

[(x  z) + (1  )(x  y)]+[(y  z) + (y  x)]2

[(x  z)2 + (1  )(y  z)2 + (1  )(x  y)2  i]

+

.

(g.2)

dividing the  integration domain as [0, 1]  [1,), we split i as i1 + i2. in
i1,   [0, 1] and therefore we can use the following majorations: log(1 + ) < 
and (1 + )3 < 1. thus, integration in d is straightforward, providing

72

three point green function in the limit d  2

73

i1  z 1
(cid:20) 1

3

0

+

(x  z)+(y  z)2

+

d

(x  z)2 + (1  )(y  z)2  i 
(a  c) + (b  c)2 + b + 2ab  ac + (a  c)(b  c)2 log(cid:18) 1 + c

c (cid:19)(cid:21) ,

1
2

(g.3)

where a, b and c are dened as

a = (1  )(x  y)+/(x  z)+ ,
b = (x  y)+/(z  y)+ ,
c = (1  )(x  y)2/[(x  z)2 + (1  )(y  z)2  i] .

(g.4)

in this form, it is manifest that integration over  is convergent. the ex-
plicit result goes beyond the purpose of the paper, but it can be easily evaluated
providing combinations of rational functions, logarithms and dilogarithms.

in i2, the  integration domain is [1,) and therefore we can use (1 + )3 <

3. thus, the  dependent part of the integrand can be approximated by

( + a)( + b)2

log(1 + )

=

4

( + c)
log(1 + )
( + c)

+

=

a( + b)2 + (b2 + 2b)

log(1 + )

( + c)3



(g.5)

to check convergence, in the second term of the r.h.s. we can replace log(1 +
)/ by 1. then, integration over  becomes straightforward and the second term
in eq. (g.5) provides integrals over d of the same kind of those in i1, where
convergence can be easily checked. the rst term in the r.h.s. of eq. (g.5) is
more delicate. here the majoration log(1 + ) <  is too strong as it would spoil
convergence in the  integration. an explicit integration over  of this term gives

1

d

(x  z)+(y  z)2

z 1
i f irst
c (cid:20)li(cid:18) c
c  1(cid:19) + li (c)  log 2 log(cid:18) 1 + c
1

(x  z)2 + (1  )(y  z)2  i 

+

0

1  c(cid:19)  li(cid:18) 2c

c  1(cid:19)(cid:21) ,(g.6)

li(z) being the dilogarithm function. although cumbersome, integration over 
is nite.

