iktuw 9906401

9
9
9
1

 

g
u
a
1
3

 

 
 

2
v
6
8
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

chiral poincare transformations and their anomalies

institut fur kernphysik, technische universitat wien

jan b. thomassen

a1040 vienna, austria

august 31, 1999

abstract

i consider global transformations of a dirac fermion eld, that are generated by the
generators of poincare transformations, but with a 5 appended. such chiral translations
and chiral lorentz transformations are usually not symmetries of the lagrangian, but naively
they are symmetries of the fermionic measure. however, by using proper time regularization
in minkowski space, i nd that they in general give rise to a nontrivial jacobian. in this
sense they have anomalies. i calculate these anomalies in a theory of a massive fermion
coupled to an external abelian vector eld. my motivation for considering chiral poincare
transformations is the possibility that they are relevant to bosonization in four dimensions.

pacs numbers: 11.30.rd; 11.15.tk; 11.30.qc
keywords: chiral anomalies; bosonization; proper time regularization

1

introduction

the global symmetries of the lagrangian of a dirac fermion include phase transformations,
spacetime translations and lorentz transformations. these symmetries are linked to charge,
mass, and spin  quantum numbers that together characterize the particle states described by
the lagrangian.

if a 5 is appended to the generators of these transformations, we get chiral phase and chiral
poincare transformations. although chiral phase transformations have been extensively studied,
little is known about chiral translations and chiral lorentz transformations. the obvious reason
for this is that they are not symmetries of the lagrangian unless the fermion is free and massless.
however, chiral phase transformations are also not symmetries of the lagrangian if the fermion
is massive, and still these play a role in physics. in qcd, chiral phase transformations in avor
space are believed to be approximate symmetries that are spontaneously broken and give rise
to a goldstone boson octet with s, ks and the   even if the quarks are massive. thus we
cannot rule out the possibility that a transformation has physical meaning on the grounds that
it is not a symmetry.

chiral phase rotations have the property that they are, naively, symmetries of the fermionic
measure. this is also true for the chiral poincare transformations, and they are therefore singled

supported by fonds zur forderung der wissenschaftlichen forschung, p11387phy
e-mail: thomasse@kph.tuwien.ac.at

1

out from the set of all possible transformations of a dirac fermion that are not symmetries of
the lagrangian.

in this paper i investigate chiral poincare transformations within a simple abelian model of
a fermion coupled to an external vector eld. my motivation for this has to do with bosonization
[1]. while bosonization is a well established concept in two dimensions (see e.g. [2] and references
therein), the same thing cannot be said about four dimensions (however, see [3]). if we consider
the various bosonization schemes in the path integral [2], they all have the property that the
bosonic eld in the bosonized theory is the chiral phase of the fermion, and the bosonic action
sbos is given by the jacobian j = exp(isbos) of a local chiral transformation of the fermion.
but in four dimensions it cannot be expected that just the chiral phase of a fermion is enough
to describe the physics. it is therefore necessary to identify further degrees of freedom of the
fermion that are relevant for bosonization. i think the degrees of freedom that correspond to
chiral poincare transformations are good candidates for this.

if chiral poincare transformations really is to play a similar role in four dimensional bosoniza-
tion as chiral phase rotations does in the two-dimensional case, then they must give rise to a
jacobian when a change of variables is performed in the path integral. in this paper i will restrict
my attention to this jacobian and calculate it for innitesimal chiral lorentz transformations
and translations. a calculation of the jacobian for nite transformations and an investigation
of the bosonization procedure itself will be reported in a separate publication [4].

the jacobian j[] = exp(ir d4xa) of a chiral rotation with parameter (x) contains the

chiral anomaly a(x).
it is a quantum correction to the naive expectation that j is unity.
thus, since the same thing happens for chiral poincare transformations they also have a kind of
anomaly. this is a distinguishing property of chiral poincare transformations and is logically
independent of the fact that they are not symmetries of the lagrangian. in lack of a better word,
i will sometimes refer to the quantity that corresponds to a for chiral poincare transformations
as anomaly as well.

i should also mention a paper by alvarez [5] which is slightly related to this work. he tried
to calculate the fermionic determinant of a fermion that is coupled to a vector eld by using
a decoupling transformation. his decoupling transformation corresponds to the spin part of
a chiral lorentz transformation. there is also the recent paper [6] where a similar decoupling
transformation is used. however, my work is not directly related to investigations of local lorentz
symmetry [7].

the organization of the paper is the following.

in sec. 2, i discuss classical properties of
the chiral poincare transformations. i point out that they make sense if they are regarded as
active, transforming the physical system, rather than passive. in sec. 3, i consider the quantum
theory which i regularize using the proper time representation of the fermionic determinant in
minkowski space. i prefer this to the usual euclidean formulation (see e.g. the review by ball
[8]), because better control over the anomalies is achieved. in sec. 4, i calculate the jacobians,
which is a generalization of the calculation that leads to the adlerbelljackiw (abj) anomaly
[9]. the new features which we must give attention to is the presence of derivative operators
and a  -matrix in the generators. in sec. 5, i summarize and discuss the generalization to
non-abelian theories. i also speculate on a possible application in strong interaction physics.

2 chiral poincare transformations

the model we consider is a dirac fermion  with mass m coupled to an external vector eld
a. the simplicity of this model allows us to discuss the main ideas without the complications

2

of non-abelian structure or couplings to other elds. the lagrangian is

l = [i6  6a  m].

(1)

a can be a gauge potential or an arbitrary external source.

we rst recall the elementary discussion of phase and poincare transformations. this is
useful for comparison. since we are considering an abelian model, the phase transformations
are generated by the unit operator. the poincare transformations are generated by

the generator of translations, and

p = i,

j = 1

2  + (xi  xi)  s + l ,

(2)

(3)

the generator of lorentz transformations.

our transformations are active. that is, they transform the physical system, the fermion
eld, in contrast to passive transformations where the coordinate system is transformed. this is
essential for the chiral transformations. thus no transformation law is assigned to the a-eld.

the transformations are:

1. phase transformations:

(x)  ei(x),

(x)  (x)ei

 is a dimensionless constant. the lagrangian is invariant.

2. translations:

(x)  eiap 

(x),

(x)  (x)eiap 

(4)

(5)

a is a constant vector with the dimension of length. for a innitesimal, l transforms
into

l  [i6  6a  a6a  m].

if we assign the transformation law

a  a  aa

(6)

(7)

to a to accompany (5), we will have that l is invariant. the innitesimal transformation
(7) is of course identical to that found from a translation of the coordinate system.

3. lorentz transformations:

(s)  ei 1

2  j 

(x),

(x)  ei 1

2  j 

 is a dimensionless constant antisymmetric tensor. for innitesimal  we have

l  [i6  6a   a  1

2 (x6a  x6a)  m]

from which we can construct the transformation rule

(8)

(9)

a  a + i 1

2 (j) a

(j)  i(gg  gg ) + (xi  xi)g

(10)

which leads to invariance.

3

the chiral versions of these are then the following.

1. chiral phase transformations:

(x)  ei5 (x),

(x)  (x)ei5

(11)

 is a dimensionless pseudoscalar constant. these are the usual ones, and lead to the
lagrangian

l  [i6  6a  m  2im5].

2. chiral translations:

(x)  eibp 5 (x),

(x)  (x)eibp 5

b is a constant axial vector with the dimension of length. this leads to

l  [i6  6a  b6a5  m + 2m5b].

3. chiral lorentz transformations:

(x)  ei 1

2  j  5 (x),

(x)  (x)ei 1

2  j  5

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

 is a dual tensor (i.e. it has properties like f under c, p and t ) and is dimensionless.
this leads to

l  [i6  6a   a5  1

2 (x6a  x6a)5  m  im j  5]. (16)

it is now impossible to nd transformation rules for a which restores invariance. chiral
transformations includes 5 in the innitesimal generators, and the left- and right-handed parts
of the fermion are transformed in an opposite sense, as can be seen from the representation
where 5 is diagonal:

5 = (cid:18) i

0 i (cid:19) .

0

(17)

in this case there are no interpretations in terms of transformations of the coordinate system,
but as long as they are regarded as active the chiral poincare transformations make just as much
sense as the non-chiral ones. note also that new derivative operators have been generated in
the dirac operator.

3 proper time representation and poincare invariance

i now turn to the the quantum theory and the calculation of anomalies, or in other words,
jacobians. i use proper time regularization of the fermionic determinant [8], which i will discuss
in some detail even if it is a well known scheme. the reasons for this are, rst, that i work in
minkowski space and that there are dierences from the usual euclidean formulation. second, i
need to demonstrate that the scheme is both phase and poincare invariant. and third, compared
to the calculation of the abj anomaly, there are additional features coming from the  and
the derivative operators in the generators. the calculations in this section are essentially model
independent.

4

in minkowski space, ambiguities are resolved by adding a small positive imaginary part to

the dirac operator:

l = (d + i),

d = i6  6a  m.

(18)

this is the usual -prescription which will render all momentum integrals well dened, and which
gives the fermion mass a small negative imaginary part, i.e. the fermion mass is mc  m  i.

the quantum theory is expressed by the path integral z, which denes the fermionic deter-

minant,

z = z dd eir d4x d  detd,

(19)

where  and  are the independent quantities, and the eective action w (z  eiw ) is given
by

w = itr ln d.

(20)

these quantities are formal and will become well dened when we regularize the theory.

i will calculate the jacobian of a local innitesimal change of path integration variables. let

us collectively denote the phase and poincare transformations by

  eia,

  eia,

where

a = ,

1

2 (ap  + p a),

or

1

2 ( 1

2 j  + 1

2 j  ).

(21)

(22)

the parameters are now local,  = (x), etc. we use symmetric products for the local trans-
lations and lorentz transformations, since these are dirac hermitian. similarly, their chiral
counterparts are

  eib5 ,

  eib5 ,

with

b = ,

1

2 (bp  + p b),

or

1

2 ( 1

2  j  + 1

2 j  ).

these transformations induce a change in the dirac operator:

d  eia+ib5 deia+ib5

= d + i(da  ad) + i(db5 + b5d)
 d + d,

which in turn induces a change in w :

w = itrd

1
d

.

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

the jacobian j is then determined by the requirement that the path integral z is unchanged
by a change of variables:

z = j eiw +iw  eisj eiw +iw = eiw ,

(27)

5

where we have dened the action sj  i ln j. therefore sj can be found by

sj = w = itrd

1
d

.

(28)

this is the quantity we are interested in, and which contains the anomalies.

we now introduce an operator d and a proper time integral, thereby dening the formal

trace:

sj = itrd

1
d
= itrd d

1
d d

= z 

1/2

dstrd deis(d d+i)

(29)

the operator d is a priori arbitrary, except that it must be chosen to give the right -prescription,
like i have written here. this will then ensure convergence at the upper integration limit. for
the lower integration limit the cuto  is introduced, which is to be taken to innity at the end
of the calculation. i will discuss the appropriate choice for d below. when this choice is made
sj will be regular and well dened.

we can use the expression for d (eq. (25)) to perform the proper time integral and write

sj in a fujikawa-like form [9] (see also [10]):

sj = z 

1/2

dstr i(da  ad + db5 + b5d) deisd d
 eid d/2(cid:17)  tr b5(cid:16)ei dd/2

= tr a(cid:16)ei dd/2

+ eid d/2(cid:17) .

(30)

here i have used the cyclicity of the trace, the identity deisd dd = ddeis dd, and the fact that
only the lower limit of the integral contributes due to the implicit presence of the .

we must now make an appropriate choice for d, one which preserves phase and poincare
invariance and leads to the right -prescription. in principle d can still be completely unrelated
to d; for instance we can choose the unit operator, d = i. but the choice i will adopt, to be
justied in a moment, is

d = (i5)d(i5).

(31)

for our qed-like theory we get d = i6 6 a + m, with plus in front of the mass, and

dd = d d = dd  1

2  f   m2,

d =  + ia,

(32)

the familiar square of the dirac operator. i is implied. using the cyclicity of the trace and
the fact that 5 commutes with a, we have

sj = 2tr b5ei dd/2

.

the terms proportional to a in eq. (30) have thus cancelled out. the vector current, energy-
momentum tensor and angular momentum tensor are then conserved, and both phase and
poincare invariance are intact.

i have two reasons for the choice (31) of d. first, i want to relate it to d such that dd
and d d are second order derivative operators. this simplies later calculations. second, it
automatically respects both phase and poincare invariance. furthermore, in a non-abelian
model with an external vector v a
, this choice gives the bardeen anomaly 
the wesszumino consistent anomaly.

 and axial vector aa

6

4 jacobians for the chiral transformations

for the calculation of the jacobians, it is necessary to consider each form of b separately.
as i have already mentioned, there are two further ingredients in the calculation of the chiral
poincare jacobians compared to the chiral phase case, namely the occurrence of  in j and
of derivative operators in p and j .

let us write

2  f  + m2.
it is useful rst to recall the familiar calculation of the abj anomaly [9]

dd = dd  y,

y = 1

s = 2tr 5ei dd/2

 z d4xl.

l is given by

l = 2z
= 2z
= 24z

d4k
(2)4 eikxtr5ei(d2y )/2
d4k
(2)4 tr5ei(k2+2ikdd2y )/2
tr5 exp i(cid:18) 2ikd

d4k
(2)4 eik2



eikx



d2 + y

2 (cid:19) ,

(33)

(34)

(35)

where i have scaled k  k. expanding the exponential and keeping only terms that are not
suppressed by the cuto , we get

l = 2z

d4k
(2)4 eik2

tr5( 1

8 f f )

=

1
82 f f .

in comparison we have for chiral translations

lb = 2z
= 2z
 l(1)

b + l(2)

b

d4k

(2)4 eikxtr(cid:0) 1
(2)4 tr(cid:2) 1

2 ib(cid:1) 5ei dd/2

2 bi + 1
2 i(b) + bk(cid:3) 5ei(k2+2ikdd2y )/2

eikx

d4k

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

i have used partial integration to bring the rst term into the form of the abj anomaly, for
which we get

the second term, after scaling, is

l(1)

b

=

1
82 (i 1

2 b)f f .

trbk5 exp i(cid:18) 2ikd





d2 + y

2 (cid:19)

12 df f  + 1

12 f df  + 1

12 f f d(cid:17)

l(2)

b

= 25z
= 2z

d4k
(2)4 eik2
d4k
(2)4 eik2
 b(cid:16) 1
1
162 (ib)f f +

=

kktr5

1
82

baf f .

7

summing the two contributions, we get

lb =

1
82 baf f

(40)

this expression is not invariant under the gauge transformation a  a   (when a is a
gauge potential). this is slightly surprising, since we were careful about gauge invariance when
we regularized our theory. i will discuss this point in the next section.

for the chiral lorentz transformations, there are again two terms which are handled essen-
tially in this way, but in addition there is now a third term, coming from the 1
2  5 in j 5,
which requires special attention. this time the trace leads to only one factor of f , and the
term computes to

  2z
l(3)

d4k
(2)4 eikxtr( 1

2 

1

2 5)ei dd/2

eikx

=

1
482 ((cid:3) + 6m2) f  .

the complete chiral lorentz anomaly is given by

l =

1
482  ((cid:3) + 6m2) f  +

1
82

1

2  (xa  xa)f f

(41)

(42)

in addition to being gauge non-invariant, this is also not manifestly poincare invariant. however,
this is an artifact of writing the anomaly in terms of a lagrangian since we integrate this

expression over spacetime to nd the action: s = r d4xl. the integration then picks out only

the poincare invariant part of l, and physics does not depend on the coordinate system.

5 discussion

to summarize, i used proper time regularization in minkowski space to regularize a theory of a
massive dirac fermion coupled to an external vector eld. when the regularization is chosen to
respect phase rotation and poincare invariance, this lead to a nontrivial transformation of the
fermionic measure under chiral translations and lorentz transformations in the path integral.
i emphasize that the chiral poincare transformations are anomalous transformations and not
anomalous symmetries. the anomalies depend on external sources and the mass of the
fermion, which at the same time break the would-be symmetry explicitly.

the existence of a jacobian for innitesimal chiral poincare transformations implies of course
that nite transformations give rise to a jacobian as well, which is what we want for the four
dimensional bosonization procedure. such a nite jacobian is a complicated nonlinear quantity
with innitely many derivatives, and is very hard to calculate. furthermore, if the bosonic elds
,  and b are relevant degrees of freedom for bosonization, and if lj is to be the bosonized
lagrangian it is necessary to make them decouple from the fermion. work on this problem is
in progress [4].

let us return to the problem of the gauge non-invariance of the anomalies, eqs. (40) and
(42). since we were careful with choosing a gauge invariant regularization of the theory, the full
path integral cannot depend on the part of a that is a gradient. that is, if we make the hodge
decomposition

a =  + 1

2 ,

(43)

8

it does not depend on . we are therefore allowed to make the replacement

a   

 a  (cid:18)g 

 


(cid:3) (cid:19) a =

1
(cid:3)

f

(44)

in all expressions, where  is a projection operator which removes the gradient from a. due
to our gauge invariant regularization, this can be done without loss of generalization.

let me also remark on our choice of regularization operator d. another reasonable choice
would be d = cdt c 1, where c is the charge conjugation matrix and the transposition
is with respect to the dirac matrix structure. this is the charge conjugate of d. it gives
identical results for our qed-like theory, but in the non-abelian case with a vector and an axial
vector it leads to the covariant chiral anomaly instead of the bardeen anomaly, and thus the
vector current is not conserved in this case. however, other terms proportional to a in eq. (30)
are non-zero as well. the energy-momentum tensor and angular momentum tensor are then also
not conserved. in other words, poincare invariance is lost!

it is possible to generalize the discussion to non-abelian fermions. let us call the internal
quantum number avor. first of all, since we have taken the active point of view for our
transformations, it is possible to translate or lorentz transform each avor of fermion
separately. these transformations are generated by tap and taj , where ta are generators of
rotations in avor space. their chiral counterparts are generated by tap5 and taj 5. all
of these transformations are naive symmetries of the fermionic measure, but none of them are
symmetries of the lagrangian, except when the theory under consideration is trivial. they are
also not the generators of a group, since their algebra does not close. however, the chiral set of
generators gives rise to nontrivial jacobians, and for this reason these may still, together with
chiral phase rotations, play a role in four dimensional non-abelian bosonization.

finally, i will speculate on a possible application of avored chiral poincare transformations
in strong interaction physics. recall that hadrons can be classied, with reasonable success, in
terms of the group su (6), which is assumed to contain su (2)spin su (3)avor [11]. according to
the su (6) scheme, the s enter in the same multiplet as the s. but the s can be understood
within qcd as goldstone bosons of spontaneously broken chiral symmetry, which raises the
question of whether the s could be goldstone bosons as well. this question was discussed in
a paper by caldi and pagels [12]. however, shortly after the discovery of su (6) in the 60s, it
became clear that a symmetry group that mixes internal and spacetime degrees of freedom in
any but a trivial way does not exist for a relativistic theory (see the lecture note and reprint
volume by dyson [13]). this means that the s cannot correspond to the broken generators
of any symmetry group. caldi and pagels suggested that the s were nevertheless dormant
goldstone bosons in a certain static limit.

i claim that the s correspond to chiral lorentz transformations, and that these are in some
sense broken. this is not in conict with the no-go theorems of the 60s [13] because the chiral
lorentz transformations are neither symmetries nor a group. if we consider eqs. (12) and (16)
in avor space, we can read o from the mass terms the quark wavefunctions that correspond
to the transformation parameters. they are

a  qita5q,
a
  qita 1

2 j 5q = qita 1

4  5q + qita 1

2 l 5q.

the latter implies

a
  qta 1

4 q + orbital part.

(45)

(46)

the electric part of the spin part of  is the same wavefunction for the -meson as that
suggested in ref. [12]. thus, if the eld a describes the pseudoscalar octet (, k, ), and the

9

 describes the vector mesons (, k , ) and  (for t0  i), then they correspond to
eld a
quark wavefunctions with the correct quantum numbers. perhaps it is possible to test this idea
by the methods of chiral perturbation theory.

acknowledgments
p.h. damgaard for calling my attention to some of the references.

i thank m. faber and a.n. ivanov for comments and discussions, and

references

[1] s. coleman, phys. rev. d11 (1975) 2088
[2] p.h. damgaard, h.b. nielsen and r. sollacher, nucl. phys. b385 (1992) 227;

j.b. thomassen, mod. phys. lett. a14 (1999) 745

[3] c.p. burgess, c.a. lutken and f. quevedo, phys. lett. b336 (1994) 18;

r. banerjee, nucl. phys. b465 (1996) 157;
c.d. fosco and f.a. schaposnik, phys. lett. b391 (1997) 136

[4] j.b. thomassen, in preparation
[5] o. alvarez, nucl. phys. b238 (1984) 61
[6] j.l. cortes, j. gamboa and l. velazquez, phys. lett. b432 (1998) 397
[7] l. alvarez-gaume and e. witten, nucl. phys. b234 (1983) 269;

l.n. chang and h.t. nieh, phys. rev. lett. 53 (1984) 21;
h.t. nieh, phys. rev. lett. 53 (1984) 2219

[8] r.d. ball, phys. rep. 182 (1989) 1
[9] k. fujikawa, phys. rev. lett. 42 (1979) 1195
[10] j.l. petersen, acta. phys. pol. b16 (1985) 271
[11] j.f. donoghue, e. golowich and b.r. holstein, dynamics of the standard model, cam-

bridge university press, 1992

[12] d.g. caldi and h. pagels, phys. rev. d14 (1976) 809
[13] f.j. dyson, symmetry groups in nuclear and particle physics, w.a. benjamin, 1966

10

