hep-th/9906064

mit-ctp-2874
pupt-1867
buhep-99-13

an alternative to compactication

joseph henry laboratories, princeton university, princeton, nj 08543, usa

lisa randall

and

center for theoretical physics,

massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma 02139, usa

raman sundrum

department of physics,

boston university, boston, ma 02215, usa

randall@baxter.mit.edu

sundrum@budoe.bu.edu

abstract

conventional wisdom states that newtons force law implies only four non-compact dimen-
sions. we demonstrate that this is not necessarily true in the presence of a non-factorizable
background geometry. the specic example we study is a single 3-brane embedded in ve di-
mensions. we show that even without a gap in the kaluza-klein spectrum, four-dimensional
newtonian and general relativistic gravity is reproduced to more than adequate precision.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

8

 
 

1
v
4
6
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1 introduction

there exists lore that convinces us that we live in four non-compact dimensions. certainly
standard model matter cannot propagate a large distance in extra dimensions without con-
ict with observations. as has recently been emphasized, this can be avoided if the standard
model is conned to a (3 + 1)-dimensional subspace, or 3-brane, in the higher dimensions
[1  8]. however, this solution will not work for gravity, which necessarily propagates in all
dimensions as it is the dynamics of spacetime itself. the experimental success of of newtons
1/r2 law and general relativity would therefore seem to imply precisely four non-compact
dimensions. additional dimensions would be acceptable, so long as they are compact and
suciently small to be consistent with current gravitational tests. one further piece of lore
is that if there are n extra compact dimensions, the planck scale is related to the higher
p l = m 2+nvn, where vn is the extra-
dimensional scale of gravity, m, through the relation m 2
dimensional volume.

the point of this letter is to argue that none of the statements about gravity in the
previous paragraph is necessarily true. the previous properties rely on a factorizable ge-
ometry, namely the metric of the four familiar dimensions is independent of coordinate in
the extra dimensions. the story can change signicantly when this assumption is dropped.
perhaps the most dramatic consequence is that we can live in 4 + n non-compact dimensions,
in perfect compatibility with experimental gravity. we will give an example with one addi-
tional dimension (n = 1). we will show that mp l is determined by the higher-dimensional
curvature rather than the size of the extra dimension. this curvature is not in conict with
four-dimensional poincare invariance. earlier work on non-compact extra dimensions stud-
ied trapping of matter elds to be eectively four-dimensional [9] or studied nite-volume
but topologically non-compact extra dimensions [10]. here we carefully study the trapping
of gravity itself to be eectively four-dimensional, where the extra-dimensional volume is
innite.

the reason the above statements can be true is that a curved background can support a
bound state of the higher-dimensional graviton, which is localized in the extra dimensions.
so although space is indeed innite in extent, the graviton is conned to a small region within
this space. the existence of a bound state can be understood as follows. small gravitational
uctuations satisfy a wave equation of the form

(cid:16)  jj + v (zj)(cid:17) h(x, zj) = 0,

with a non-trivial potential, v , arising from the curvature. the  indices run from 0 to
3 whereas the j labels the additional dimensions. (we have dropped lorentz indices on the
uctuations for simplicity.) general uctuations can be written as superpositions of modes,
h = eip.x (z), where  is an eigenmode of the following equation in the extra dimensional
coordinates:

(1)

(2)

and p2 = m2. this implements the kaluza-klein (kk) reduction of the higher-dimensional
gravitational uctuations in terms of four-dimensional kk states, with mass-squared, m2,

(cid:16)jj + v (z)(cid:17) (z) = m2 (z),

1

given by the eigenvalues of eq. (2).
it is useful to note that eq. (2) takes the form of
an analog non-relativistic quantum mechanics problem. if there is a zero-mode (which is
guaranteed if the background preserves four-dimensional poincare-invariance) which is also
a normalizable state in the spectrum of eq. (2), it is the wave function associated with the
four-dimensional graviton. this state is indeed a bound state and falls o rapidly away from
the brane.

in addition there exists a tower of kk modes. if there were a gap, as is conventional
in product space compactications, one would reproduce four-dimensional gravity up to the
scale determined by the gap.
instead, in our theory, there is a continuous kk spectrum
with no gap. however, four-dimensional physics is extremely well approximated because
the bound state mode reproduces conventional four-dimensional gravity, while the other kk
modes give only a small correction, as we will demonstrate.

the set-up for our theory is a single 3-brane with positive tension, embedded in a ve-
dimensional bulk spacetime. in order to carefully quantize the system, and treat the non-
normalizable modes which will appear in the kaluza-klein reduction, we choose to rst work
in a nite volume by introducing another brane at a distance rc from the brane of interest,
and taking the branes to be the boundaries of a nite fth dimension. we will eventually
take this second brane to innity, thereby removing it from the physical set-up. analogous
domain walls were discussed in ref. [11] and references therein. the action for our system
is

s = sgravity + sbrane + sbrane

sgravity = z d4xz dyg{ + 2m 3r}
sbrane = z d4xgbrane{vbrane + lbrane},

(3)

where r is the ve-dimensional ricci scalar made out of the ve-dimensional metric, gm n ,
and  and vbrane are cosmological terms in the bulk and boundary respectively. the coupling
to the branes and their elds and the related orbifold boundary conditions are described in
refs. [8](see also [4]). (the new coordinate y is rc in the coordinates of ref. [8].)

the solution to einsteins equations was derived in ref. [8] and is

ds2 = e2k|y|dxdx + dy2,

(4)

where 0  y  rc is the extra-dimensional coordinate and rc is essentially a compactication
radius. it can be identied as a slice of ads5. the solution holds only when the boundary
and bulk cosmological terms are related by

vbrane = vbrane = 24m 3k,  = 24m 3k2,

(5)

which we assume from now on. we remind the reader that this condition amounts to setting
the cosmological constant of the four-dimensional world to zero in this context, and we
simply accept this necessary ne tuning without further explanation here. notice that in the

2

solution given in eq. (4), we have reversed the labels for the visible and hidden branes
relative to ref.
[8]. the solution for the background metric is the same, with the metric
exponentially falling from one brane to the other. however, whereas in the solution to the
hierarchy problem proposed in ref [8] the massless graviton wavefunction is biggest on the
hidden brane, in the scenario considered here it is critical that the graviton is bound to
the visible brane.

we also review the derivation of the four-dimensional eective planck scale, mp l as given
in ref. [8]. the four-dimensional graviton zero mode follows from the solution, eq. (4), by
replacing the minkowski metric by a four-dimensional metric, g(x). it is described by an
eective action following from substitution into eq. (3),

sef f  z d4xz rc

0

dy 2m 3rce2k|y|g r,

(6)

where r denotes the four-dimensional ricci scalar made out of g(x), in contrast to the
ve-dimensional ricci scalar, r, made out of gm n (x, y). because the eective eld is four-
dimensional, we can explicitly perform the y integral to obtain a purely four-dimensional
action. from this we derive

m 2

p l = 2m 3z rc

0

dye2k|y| =

m 3
k

[1  e2krc].

(7)

we see that there is a well-dened value for mp l, even in the rc   limit. this is a clue
that one can get a sensible eective four-dimensional theory, with the usual newtonian force
law, even in the innite radius limit, in sharp contrast to the product-space expectation that
m 2

p l = m 3rc.
clearly, there is no problem with taking the rc   limit of the background metric
given above. this will remove the regulator brane from the set-up. however, we still
need to determine whether the spectrum of general linearized tensor uctuations g =
e2k|y| + h(x, y) is consistent with four-dimensional experimental gravity. this requires
an understanding of all modes that appear in the assumed four-dimensional eective theory.
we therefore perform a kaluza-klein reduction down to four-dimensions. to do this, we
need to do a separation of variables; we write h(x, y) = (y)eipx, where p2 = m2 and m2
permits a solution to the linearized equation of motion for tensor uctuations following from
eq. (3) expanded about eq. (4):

"m2

2

e2k|y| 

1
2

2

y  2k(y) + 2k2# (y) = 0,

(8)

where the assumed orbifold boundary conditions tell us to consider only even functions of y.
the eect of the regulator brane will be considered later; here it has been taken to innity.
the  indices are the same in all terms if we work in the gauge where h = h
 = 0, so
they are omitted. here m is the four-dimensional mass of the kk excitation.

it is more convenient to put the above equation into the form of an analog non-relativistic

quantum mechanics problem by making a change of variables, z  sgn(y)(cid:16)ek|y|  1(cid:17) /k,

3

(z)  (y)ek|y|/2, h(x, z)  h(x, y)ek|y|/2. eq. (8) then reads
z + v (z)(cid:21) (z) = m2 ,

(cid:20)

1
2

2

where

v (z) =

(9)

(10)

15k2

8(k|z| + 1)2 

3k
2

(z).

much can be understood from the general shape of this analog non-relativistic potential.

first, the -function supports a single normalizable bound state mode; the remaining
eigenstates are continuum modes. we have already discussed the role of the bound state
mode as the massless graviton of the eective four-dimensional theory. with the explicit
form of the kk potential, we can also understand the properties of the continuum modes.
first, since the potential falls o to zero as |z|  , there is no gap, and the continuum
modes asymptote to plane waves. furthermore, the amplitudes of the continuum modes is
suppressed near the origin, due to the potential barrier near z = 0. finally, the continuum
kk states have all possible m2 > 0.

the precise continuum modes are given in terms of bessel functions, and are a linear
combination of (|z|+1/k)1/2y2(m(|z|+1/k)) and (|z|+1/k)1/2j2(m(|z|+1/k)). the zero mode
wavefunction follows (after changing variables) from eq. (4), 0(z) = k1(k|z| + 1)3/2.1 we
can better understand the kk modes by studying the small and large argument limits of
the bessel functions. for small m

k (|z| + 1) we have

j2(m(|z| + 1/k)) 

m2(|z| + 1/k)2

8

, y2(m(|z| + 1/k))  

4

m2(|z| + 1/k)2 

1


(11)

therefore to satisfy the boundary condition implied by the -function potential on the brane
at z = 0, for small m (relevant at long distances) we must choose the linear combination,

m  nm(|z| + 1/k)1/2"y2(m(|z| + 1/k)) +

4k2

m2 j2(m(|z| + 1/k))# .

here nm is a normalization constant. for large mz,

zj2(mz)  s 2

m

cos(mz 

), zy2(mz)  s 2

m

5
4

sin(mz 

5
4

).

(12)

(13)

let us now consider what happens when we reintroduce the regulator brane at yc  rc,
that is zc  (ekrc  1)/k. it simply corresponds to a new boundary condition at zc,

z (zc) = 

3k

2(kzc + 1)

(zc).

(14)

1 though the zero mode is not a bessel function, it is the limit of m2(|z| + 1)1/2y2(m(|z| + 1)) when

m  0.

4

it is easy to check that our zero-mode satises this new boundary condition. however, this
condition does restrict the allowed continuum modes and quantizes the allowed values of
m. for large zc they are all in the plane-wave asymptotic regime of eq. (13) when they
satisfy the new condition. therefore their masses are approximately quantized in units of
1/zc. furthermore their normalization constants are predominantly those of plane waves, in

particular, nm  m5/2/(4k2zc).
having obtained the large but nite rc asymptotics we can determine the proper measure
for sums over the continuum states in the rc   limit. because these asymptotics were
dominated by plane wave behavior, this measure is simply dm after dropping the 1/zc
factor in nm to go a continuum normalization. we have also demonstrated the claim made
in ref. [8], that when zc is kept large but nite, these kk states are quantized in units of
1/zc, which in ref.
[8] corresponded to the tev scale. also note that the normalized kk
wavefunctions at the brane at zc are all of order 1/zc since they are all plane waves at a
maximum or minimum according to eq. (14), which is kzc times larger than 0(zc). this
proves the claim of ref. [8] that the kk states couple 1015 more strongly to matter on the
brane at zc than does the massless graviton.

clearly, the rc   limit gives rise to a theory with a semi-innite extra dimension.
however, we were initially interested in studying a theory without the orbifold boundary
condition, that is a theory with innite extent in both the positive and negative z direction.
it is trivial to extend the set-up we have studied to a fully innite extra dimension by allowing
even and odd functions of z rather than the restriction to purely even functions demanded
by the orbifold conditions. from now on we will consider this to be the case. however,
we will make use of the density of states we have found by the study of the nite volume
situation.

having found the kk spectrum of the eective four-dimensional theory, we can now
compute the non-relativistic gravitational potential between two particles of mass m1 and
m2 on our brane at z = 0, that is the static potential generated by exchange of the zero-mode
and continuum kaluza-klein mode propagators. it is

v (r)  gn

m1m2

r

+z 

0

dm

gn
k

m1m2emr

r

m
k

.

(15)

note there is a yukawa exponential suppression in the massive greens functions for m > 1/r,
and the extra power of m/k arises from the suppression of continuum wavefunctions at z = 0
following from eq. (11), discussed above. the coupling gn /k in the second term is nothing
but the fundamental coupling of gravity, 1/m 3, by eq. (7). therefore, the potential behaves
as

(16)

v (r) = gn

m1m2

r

(cid:18)1 +

1

r2k2(cid:19)

this is why our theory produces an eective four-dimensional theory of gravity . the leading
term due to the bound state mode is the usual newtonian potential; the kk modes generate
an extremely suppressed correction term, for k taking the expected value of order the funda-
mental planck scale and r of the size tested with gravity. furthermore, since our propagators

5

are relativistic in general, going beyond the non-relativistic approximation we nd all the
proper relativistic corrections, again with negligible corrections from the continuum modes.
from the small m limit of the continuum wave functions, we also learn that the produc-
tion of the the continuum gravitational modes from the brane at z = 0 is suppressed by
(dm/k)(m/k) due to the continuum wavefunction suppression there. this is very important,
because it means the amplitude to produce the continuum modes in low-energy processes on
the brane is extremely small, far smaller than gravitational strength. were this not the case,
we would be in danger of continuously losing energy to the additional dimension. because
of this suppression factor, the probability of producing kk modes is suppressed by (p/k)2
relative to the zero mode, where p is the momentum of a process. for k of order the planck
scale, this is extraordinarily small for any process we presently observe, or are ever likely to
observe.

we have shown that a scenario with an innite fth dimension in the presence of a brane
can generate a theory of gravity which mimics purely four-dimensional gravity, both with
respect to the classical gravitational potential and with respect to gravitational radiation. it
is also important to verify that the gravitational self-couplings are not signicantly modied.
for gravitions which couple to matter elds with gravitational strength, these have been
tested at the 103 level of precision (see ref. [13] for a review). because the kk modes have
p/k-suppressed coupling to matter on the brane relative to the zero mode, tests in which
the kk modes ultimately couple to matter on the brane (ie detectors) are insensitive to the
existence of the many new gravitational modes. it is only the zero mode which contributes
at any measurable level. the zero mode exchanges and self-couplings are just those of a
four-dimensional general relativistic dynamics described by eq. (6).

however, it is important to also verify that the energy loss induced by gravitational self-
interactions is also insignicant, that is the coupling of the zero mode to kk modes which do
not ulimately couple back to matter on the brane. we will now demonstrate that this is also
small. however, to do so requires an understanding of the limitations of the perturbative
approach to the graviton uctuations that we have implicitly assumed.

we will now show that for any nite energy, the graviton self-coupling gets large at
an energy-dependent value of the coordinate z. subsequently, we will demonstrate that
uctuations originating on the brane in low-energy processes have only a small probability
to get to this large z. graviton emission and the associated missing energy can be bounded
within the framework of the low-energy eective theory, and we will argue that it is small.
we rst explore the limitation of the linearized kk spectrum calculation we have per-
formed. the problem can best be understood by considering the graviton couplings in
position space in the extra dimension. we have solved for the kk modes in a linear expan-
sion about the classical gravitional background. the linear approximation is well justied in
the vicinity of the brane, but higher order terms in the perturbation are signicant far from
the brane.

the leading term giving the graviton coupling is

s  z d4xz dzgr  z d4xz dzz3/2

h(x, z)

h(x, z)

h(x, z)

mp l

.

(17)

6

in this language, it is clear that there is a strong coupling at large z. the source of the
problem is that the coupling of the gravitons diverges as one approaches the ads horizon.
this is related to the standard blue-shift near the horizon of ads space. this can be seen by
examining the large-z behavior of our continuum kk modes from eq. (13), (z)  eimz/k.
no matter how soft such a mode is when produced near the 3-brane (small m), it is blue-
shifted into a hard mode as measured in the background ve-dimensional metric at large
z, gm n  m n /z2, m, n = , z . therefore at large z it can have strong gravitational
couplings to other modes.
in fact, this strong coupling in our eective eld theory description is probably essential
if one is to obtain a consistent four-dimensional theory. this is because our theory respects
four-dimensional general covariance and therefore each graviton mode in the four-dimensional
eective theory must be coupled consistently. however, we know the wave function overlap
between the zero mode and the continuum modes is very small. in position space in the ve-
dimensional theory, this must be compensated by a large coupling of the linearized modes
at large z to reproduce the correct four-dimensional result.

the question remains whether this strong-coupling regime is problematic. we presume
that if our set-up is embedded in fundamental string theory, then the strong coupling in-
teractions at large z has an alternative description not encompassed by our perturbative
approach. essentially all the physics relevant to the four-dimensional world occurs on or
near the brane. if strong interactions were a very frequent conseqeunce of low-energy pro-
cesses on the 3-brane however, we would lose all predictivity within the eective eld theory
framework of this letter. fortunately this is not the case, as we show by a simple es-
timate. by eq.
(17), ve-dimensional gravitational uctuations have couplings of order
energy.z3/2/mp l. we presently only perform experiments at energies of order a tev or
less.
in order for gravitational uctuations emerging from such processes to be coupled
more strongly than the percent level for example, they must escape out to z > 109. now,
as we saw, there is negligible probability for low-energy brane processes to directly create
continuum kk modes, they will almost exclusively result in massless gravitons (possibly o-
shell). so our problem reduces to nding the probability for these massless gravitons to be
at z > 109. consulting the massless gravitons wavefunction, this probability is 1018! thus,
while low-energy brane processes can lead to strong gravitational interactions at large z, not
captured by weakly coupled eective eld theory, they almost never do. with almost unit
probability, low-energy brane processes interact with the massless graviton mode according
to an eective four-dimensional general relativity, without exciting continuum kk modes.

to conclude, we have found that we can consistently exist with an innite fth dimension,
without violating known tests of gravity. the scenario consists of a single 3-brane, (a piece
of) ads5 in the bulk, and an appropriately tuned tension on the brane. the need for this
delicate adjustment is the equivalent of the the cosmological constant problem in this context,
and is taken as a given and not solved.

in this framework, we have found that an inevitable consequence is a bound state graviton
mode, whose shape is determined by the brane tension and bulk cosmological constant. there
are no very large or small numbers assumed for the dierent gravitational mass scales in the

7

problem, so the four dimensional planck scale is comparable to the fundamental mass scale
of the higher dimensional theory. in addition to the bound state mode, there is a continuum
of kaluza-klein modes. these have very weak coupling to low-energy states on the brane,
but are essential to the consistency of the full theory of gravity and would couple strongly
to planck-energy brane processes.

notice that one interpretation of our result is as a solution to the moduli problem, for
the particular modulus determining the distance between two branes. it says that the usual
disasterous possibility, namely that the modulus runs away to innity, is perfectly acceptable.
furthermore, in the rc   limit, the modulus is not coupled to matter on the brane, and the
need for a modulus mass is eliminated. in fact, it is interesting to speculate that the problem
associated with geometric moduli can be eliminated, because there is no compactication at
all, and gravity is bound by a mechanism akin to that suggested in this letter. this would
be a worthwhile problem to study within the context of fundamental string theory.

because our eective theory clearly breaks down before rc   for (rare) processes
involving kaluza-klein modes, it might be thought that this theory is in some sense com-
pactied. it should be noted that this theory is clearly very dierent from truly compactied
theories. first, the extra-dimensional measure is straighforwardly dy in the coordinate y,
which takes values on the entire real line. the low dimensional planck scale and all physical
parameters of the eective four-dimensional theory are independent of rc, so long as it is
much greater than 1/k. furthermore, at suciently low energies, the theory breaks down
further and further from the origin, since the blue shifted energy becomes large further away.
from these perspectives, the theory provides a well dened alternative to geometric com-
pactication. however, it is intriguing to speculate that there exists a dual description of
this theory in terms of a cut-o conformal eld theory in four-dimensions, akin to the duals
discussed in [12].

many interesting questions remain to be addressed. given a valid alternative to con-
ventional four-dimensional gravity, it is important to also consider the astrophysical and
cosmological implications. this dierent scenario might even provide a new perspective for
solving uresolved issues in quantum gravity and cosmology.

acknowledgements: we wish to acknowledge useful discussions with vijay balasub-
ramanian, martin gremm, gary horowitz, igor klebanov, juan maldacena, joe polchinski,
massimo poratti, herman verlinde, dan waldram, and especially andy strominger. the re-
search of lisa randall was supported in part by doe under cooperative agreement de-fc02-
94er40818 and under grant number de-fg02-91er4071. the research of raman sundrum
was supported by the us department of energy under grant no. de-fg02-94er40818.

8

references

[1] v. a. rubakov and m. e. shaposhnikov, phys. lett. b125 (1983) 136.

[2] n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett. b429 (1998) 263, hep-
ph/9803315; i. antoniadis, n. arkani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and g. dvali, phys. lett.
b436 (1998) 257, hep-ph/9804398.

[3] g. shiu and s. h. h. tye, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 106007, hep-th/9805157.

[4] r. sundrum, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 085009, hep-ph/9805471.

[5] z. kakushadze and s. h. h. tye, brane world, hep-th/9809147.

[6] s. nussinov and r. shrock, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 105002, hep-ph/9811323.

[7] a. donini and s. rigolin, anisotropic type i string compactication, winding modes

and large extra dimensions, hep-ph/9901443.

[8] l. randall and r. sundrum, a large mass hierarchy from a small extra dimension,

hep-ph/9905221.

[9] v. a. rubakov and m. e. shaposhnikov, phys. lett. b125 (1983) 139; m. visser, phys.
lett. b159 (1985) 22; m. gogberashvili, four dimensionality in non-compact kaluza
klein model, hep-ph/9904383.

[10] m. gell-mann and b. zwiebach, nucl. phys. b260 (1985) 56; h. nicolai and c. wet-

terich, phys. lett. b150 (1985) 347.

[11] m. cvetic and h. h. soleng, phys. rep. 282 (1997) 159, hep-th/9604090.

[12] j. maldacena, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 231, hep-th/9711200; o. aharony, s.
s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri and y. oz, large n field theories, string theory
and gravity, hep-th/9905111.

[13] t. damour, gravitation and experiment, gr-qc/9711061.

9

