hep-th/9906018

duality and instantons in string theory

elias kiritsis

physics department, p.o. box 2208, university of crete

gr-71003 heraklion, greece

abstract

in these lecture notes duality tests and instanton eects in supersymmetric vacua of string
theory are discussed. a broad overview of bps-saturated terms in the eective actions is
rst given. their role in testing the consistency of duality conjectures as well as discovering
the rules of instanton calculus in string theory is discussed. the example of heterotic/type-i
duality is treated in detail. thresholds of f 4 and r4 terms are used to test the duality as
well as to derive rules for calculated with d1-brane instantons. we further consider the case
of r2 couplings in n=4 ground-states. heterotic/type ii duality is invoked to predict the
heterotic ns5-brane instanton corrections to the r2 threshold. the r4 couplings of type-ii
string theory with maximal supersymmetry are analysed and the d-instanton contributions
are described other applications and open problems are sketched.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

3
1

 
 

2
v
8
1
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

may 1999

based on lectures given at the 1999 trieste spring school on string theory

e-mail address: kiritsis@physics.uch.gr

contents

1 introduction

2 bps-saturated terms and non-renormalization theorems

3 survey of bps-saturated terms

3.1 n=1 supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2 n=2 supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.3 n=4 supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.4 n=8 supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 instantons in string theory

5 heterotic/type-i duality and d-brane instantons

5.1 heterotic/type-i duality in ten dimensions.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2 one-loop heterotic thresholds

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.3 one-loop type-i thresholds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.4 circle compactication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.5 two-torus compactication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.6 d-instanton interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.7 heterotic/type-i duality in d < 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6 n=4 r2 couplings and ve-brane instantons

6.1 general remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.2 one-loop corrections in six-dimensional type iia and iib theories . . . . . .

6.3 one-loop gravitational corrections in four-dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.4 cp-odd couplings and holomorphic anomalies

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.5 from the type-ii to the heterotic string . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6.6 ns5-brane instantons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.7 absence of d=4 instanton corrections for trf 4 in the n=4 heterotic theory .

7 n=8, r4 couplings and d-brane instantons in type ii string theory
8 summary and open problems

references

1

2

4

9

9

11

15

19

19

21

22

23

25

27

30

34

38

40

41

43

46

48

49

49

52

52

55

59

1 introduction

non-perturbative dualities have changed our way of thinking about string theory. they have
also gave us the possibility to calculate non-perturbative eects that we expected to be there
but had no a priori way of setting up, let alone calculate.

there two basic issues that will be addressed in these lecture notes. they are inextricably
linked to one-another. one is testing duality conjectures. the second is putting them to
work.

we will have to be clear in what we mean by testing a duality conjecture. in a theory
where we do not have an a priori non-perturbative denition a weak-strong coupling duality
is a denition of the strongly coupled theory. in general and for minimal supersymmetry it
might not even be a complete non-perturbative denition. the issue becomes non-trivial if
there a independent non-perturbative denition of the theory. this however is not the case
so far for supersymmetric theories since the only other known non-perturbative denition,
namely formulation on a lattice, breaks supersymmetry. thus, the only issue at stake in
the case of duality is consistency of the denition. even in the case of eld theory we know
of examples where consistency alone poses constraints in the non-perturbative denition of
a theory.
it is for example well known that cluster decomposition and dening the non-
perturbative theory without including (smooth) monopoles are inconsistent. thus, what
we are testing at best is the consistency of the set of rules that duality uses to dene the
non-perturbative theory.

the consistency checks are stringent for eective couplings that have special properties.
we call them bps-saturated eective couplings. in a sense that will be made more precise
later, supersymmetry constraints the form of their thresholds. they are the most reliable
tools in checking consistency of duality conjectures.

there have been many qualitative checks of various non-perturbative dualities, but so
far quantitative checks are scarce.
in order to do a tractable quantitative test of a non-
perturbative duality we need to carefully choose the quantity to be computed. since usually
a weak coupling computation has to be compared with a strong coupling one, one has to
choose a quantity whose strong coupling computation can also be done at weak coupling.
such quantities are very special and generally turn out to be terms in the eective action that
obtain loop contributions from bps states only. they are also special from the supersym-
metry point of view, since the dependence of their couplings on moduli must satisfy certain
holomorphicity or harmonicity conditions. moreover, when supersymmetry commutes with
the loop expansion, they get perturbative corrections from a single order in perturbation
theory. such terms also have special properties concerning instanton corrections to their ef-
fective couplings. in particular, they obtain corrections only from instantons that leave some
part of the original supersymmetry unbroken. sometimes, such terms are directly linked to
anomalies.

the other role such eective couplings play is in that duality can be used to calculate
their non-perturbative corrections. one can then identify the non-perturbative eects re-

2

sponsible for such corrections. for theories with more than n=2 supersymmetry 1 such
non-perturbative eects are due to instantons. instantons in string theory can be associated
to euclidean branes wrapping around an appropriate compact manifold. by studying such
non-perturbative thresholds we can learn the rules of instanton calculus.

while solitons have been studied vigorously in the context of duality, the attention paid to
instantons has been lesser and more recent: it includes work on the point-like d-instanton of
type iib [1][9], on the resolution of the type-iia conifold singularity by euclidean 2-branes
[10][12], and on non-perturbative eects associated with euclidean 5-branes [13][16]. here
we will rst look as an instructive example, at a simpler case, that of euclidean d-strings
present in type-i so(32) string theory [17, 18, 19]: these are physically less interesting,
since they are mapped by strong/weak-coupling dualities to standard world-sheet instanton
eects on the type-iib, respectively heterotic side. our motivation is however to gain a
better understanding of the rules of semi-classical d-instanton calculations, which could
prove useful in more interesting contexts. we will further consider the case of r2 couplings
in n=4 ground-states [15, 16]. in this case the relevant instanton corrections as we will argue
are due to the ns5-brane in the heterotic string [15], or the d5-brane in the type-i string.
the threshold on the other hand is one-loop exact in the type-ii dual. although we will
go some way towards interpreting the threshold, a complete instanton calculation is lacking
here.

finally there is another area where duality and d-instanton corrections are at play. this is
the case of the threshold corrections to eight-derivative terms in type-ii vacua with maximal
supersymmetry. a representative eight-derivative term is the r4 term. here one can use
t-duality, perturbative dp-brane dynamics and eleven-dimensional input to successfully
calculate the non-perturbative corrections. this has been done down to six-dimensional
compactications, [2],[4]-[8],[20]-[23] with a fairly good understanding of the d-instanton
calculus, but not without some puzzles.

the structure of these lectures is as follows: in section two we provide a general dis-
cussion on the nature and properties of bps-saturated terms. in section three we give a
survey of known such terms in theories with varying amounts of global or local symmetry.
in section four we discuss the anticipated structure of instantons in string theory as well
their similarities and dierences with standard eld theory instantons. in section ve we
discuss in detail heterotic/type-i duality in various dimensions. the two theories are com-
pared in perturbation theory in nine-dimensions. in eight dimensions there are d1-instanton
corrections on the type-i side that are mapped by the duality to the perturbative heterotic
contribution. we use this to derive the instanton rules. in section six we analyse r2 cou-
plings in n=4 ground-states. the threshold is one-loop exact in the type ii string on k3t 2
and related via duality to ns5-brane instanton corrections in the heterotic dual. in section
seven we summarize the results on the r4-threshold in type-ii ground-states with maximal
supersymmetry. finally section eight contains a short summary as well a survey of open
problems.

1we count the supersymmetries using four-dimensional language (in units of four supercharges).

3

2 bps-saturated terms and non-renormalization the-

orems

supersymmetry plays an important role in uncovering and testing the consistency of duality
symmetries. it provides important constraints into the dynamics. moreover, it has special
non-renormalization theorems that help in discerning some properties of the strong coupling
limit.

a central role is played by the bps states. these are shorter than normal represen-
tations of the appropriate supersymmetry algebra2. their existence is due to some of the
supersymmetry operators becoming null, in which case they do not create new states.
the vanishing of some supercharges depends on the relation between the mass of a multiplet
and some central charges appearing in the supersymmetry algebra. these central charges
depend on electric and magnetic charges of the theory as well as on expectation values of
scalars (moduli) that determine various coupling constants. in a sector with given charges,
the bps states are the lowest lying states and they saturate the so-called bps bound which,
for point-like states, is of the form

m  maximal eigenvalue of z ,

(2.1)

where z is the central charge matrix.

massive bps states appear in theories with extended supersymmetry. bps states behave

in a very special way:

 at generic points in moduli space they are absolutely stable. the reason is the depen-
dence of their mass on conserved charges. charge and energy conservation prohibits their
decay. consider as an example, the bps mass formula
m,n = |m + n|2
m 2

(2.2)

,

2

where m, n are integer-valued conserved charges, and  is a complex modulus. this bps
formula is relevant for n=4, su(2) gauge theory, in a subspace of its moduli space. consider
a bps state with charges (m0, n0), at rest, decaying into n states with charges (mi, ni)
i=1 mi, n0 =
i=1 ~pi = ~0.

and masses mi, i = 1, 2,   , n. charge conservation implies that m0 = pn
i=1 ni. the four-momenta of the produced particles are (qm 2
pn
i , ~pi) with pn

conservation of energy implies

i + ~p2

mm0,n0 =

n

xi=1qm 2

i + ~p2

i 

mi

.

n

xi=1

(2.3)

also in a given charge sector (m,n) the bps bound implies that any mass m  mm,n, with
mm,n given in (2.2). thus, from (2.3) we obtain

2for a more complete discussion, see [24, 25].

mm0,n0 

n

xi=1

4

mmi,ni

,

(2.4)

and the equality will hold if all particles are bps and are produced at rest (~pi = ~0). consider
now the two-dimensional vectors vi = mi +  ni on the complex  -plane, with length ||vi||2 =
|mi + ni|2. they satisfy v0 = pn
i=1 vi. repeated application of the triangle inequality
implies

n

xi=1 ||vi|| .

||v0|| 

(2.5)

this is incompatible with energy conservation (2.4) unless all vectors vi are parallel. this
will happen only if  is real.3 for energy conservation it should also be a rational number.
on the other hand, due to the sl(2,z) invariance of (2.2), the inequivalent choices for 
are in the sl(2,z) fundamental domain and  is never real there.
in fact, real rational
values of  are mapped by sl(2,z) to 2 = , and since 2 is the inverse of the coupling
constant, this corresponds to the degenerate case of zero coupling. consequently, for 2
nite, in the fundamental domain, the bps states of this theory are absolutely stable. this is
always true in theories with more than eight conserved supercharges (corresponding to n> 2
supersymmetry in four dimensions). in cases corresponding to theories with 8 supercharges,
there are regions in the moduli space, where bps states, stable at weak coupling, can decay
at strong coupling. however, there is always a large region around weak coupling where they
are stable.

 their mass-formula is supposed to be exact if one uses renormalized values for the
charges and moduli. the argument is that quantum corrections would spoil the relation
of mass and charges, if we assume unbroken susy at the quantum level. this would give
incompatibilities with the dimension of their representations. of course this argument seems
to have a loophole: a specic set of bps multiplets can combine into a long one. in that
case, the above argument does not prohibit corrections. thus, we have to count bps states
modulo long supermultiplets. this is precisely what helicity supertrace formulae do for us
[24, 25]. even in the case of n=1 supersymmetry there is an analog of bps states, namely
the massless states.

thus, the presence of bps states can be calculated at weak coupling and can be trusted
in several cases at strong coupling. their mass-formula is valid beyond perturbation theory,
although both sides can obtain non-trivial quantum corrections in n=2 supersymmetric
theories. there are no such corrections in n 3 supersymmetric theories.

there is another interesting issue in theories with supersymmetry: special terms in the
eective action, protected by supersymmetry. we will generically call such terms bps-
saturated terms for reasons that will become obvious in the sequel. we cannot at the
moment give a rigorous denition of such terms for a generic supersymmetric theory, due
to the lack of o-shell formulation. however, for theories with an o-shell formulation the
situation is better and all bps-saturated terms are known.

we will try here before we embark in a detailed discussion of various cases to give some

generic features of such terms.

(a) supersymmetry constraints their (moduli-dependent) coecients to have a special

3it can also happen when the charges are integer multiples of the same charge. in that case the composite
states are simple bound states of some fundamental states. we will not worry further about this possibility.

5

structure. the simplest situation is complex holomorphicity but there several other cases
less common where one would have special conditions associated with quaternions, as well
as non-compact groups of the o(p,q) type , etc. we will generically call such constraints
holomorphicity constraints.

(b) in cases where there is a supereld formulation, such terms are (chiral) integrals over
parts of superspace. this is at the root of the holomorphicity conditions of the previous
item.

(c) such terms satisfy special non-renormalization theorems. it should be stressed here
and it would be seen explicitly later that some of the non-renormalization theorems depend
crucially on the perturbation theory setup.

before we embark further into a discussion of the non-renormalization theorems we should
stress in advance that they are generically only valid for the wilsonian eective action. the
reason is that many non-renormalization theorems are violated due to ir divergences. there
are several examples known, we will mention here the case of n=1 supersymmetry: in the
presence of massless of massless contributions a quantum correction to the kahler potential
(not protected by a non-renormalization theorem) can be indistinguishable from a correction
to the superpotential (not renormalized in perturbation theory), [26]. thus, from now on
we will be always discussing the wilsonian eective action.

to continue further, we would like here to separate two cases.

 absolute non-renormalization theorems. such theorems state that a given term in the
eective action of a supersymmetric theory does not get renormalized. this should be
valid both for perturbative and non-perturbative corrections. a typical example of this
is the case of two derivative terms in the eective action of an n=4 supersymmetric
theory (with or without gravity).

 partial (or perturbative) non-renormalization theorems. such theorems usually claim
the absence of perturbative corrections for a given eective coupling, or that the only
corrections appear in a few orders only in perturbation theory. typically this happens
at one-loop order but we also know of cases where renormalization can occur at a single,
arbitrarily-high, loop order. it is also common in the case of one-loop corrections only
that the appropriate eective couplings are related to an anomaly via supersymmetry.
the appropriate adler-bardeen type theorem for the anomaly guarantees the absence
of higher loop corrections, provided the perturbation theory is set up to respect super-
symmetry. an example of such a situation is the case of two-derivative couplings in a
theory with n=2 supersymmetry (global or local).

one should note a potentially very interesting generalization of supersymmetric non-
renormalization theorems: their analogues in the case where supersymmetry in softly broken
(in eld theory) or spontaneously broken (in supergravity or string theory). although, there
are some results in this direction mostly in eld theory [27], i believe that much more needs
to be done. moreover this subject is of crucial importance in any unied theory that uses
supersymmetry as a solution to the hierarchy problem.

6

it should be stressed here that the way perturbation theory is setup is crucial for the
applicability of such partial non-renormalization theorems. many of the non-perturbative
string dualities amount simply to dierent perturbative expansions of the same underlying
theory. as we will see in more detail later on the appropriate partial non-renormalization
theorems for the same eective coupling are dierent in dual versions. in many cases this
can be crucial in obtaining the exact result.

there are several examples that illustrate the general discussion above. we will mention

some commonly known ones.

1. heterotic string theory on t 6 is dual to type ii string theory on k3t 2. the r2
eective coupling, has only a one-loop contribution on the type ii side. on the heterotic side
apart from the tree-level contribution there are no other perturbative corrections. there are
however non-perturbative corrections due to ve-brane instantons [15, 16].

2. heterotic string theory on k3t 2 is dual to type iia on a calabi-yau (cy) manifold
that is a k3-bration. all two derivative eective couplings are tree-level only on the type-
ii side. on the other hand they obtain tree-level, one-loop as well as non-perturbative
corrections on the heterotic side.

it can sometimes happen that a given perturbative expansion does not commute with
supersymmetry. this is the case generically in type-i string theory. one way to see this is
to note that the leading correction to the trf 4 term in ten dimensions comes from the disk
diagrams while the b trf 4 term obtains a contribution from one-loop only (green-schwarz
anomaly-canceling term). the two terms are however related by supersymmetry [28].

there is another general property that is shared by bps-saturated terms: the quantum
corrections to their eective couplings can be associated to bps states. there are two
concrete aspects of the statement above:

 their one-loop contributions are due to (perturbative) bps multiplets only.4 the way
this works out is that the appropriate one-loop diagrams come out proportional to helicity
supertraces. the helicity supertrace is a supertrace in a given supersymmetry representation
of casimirs of the little group of the lorentz group [31]. in four dimensions, this is a supertrace
of the helicity  to an arbitrary even power (by cpt all odd powers vanish):

b2n = str [2n]

the helicity supertraces are essentially indices to which only short bps multiplets con-
tribute [30, 25]. it immediately follows that such one-loop contributions are due to bps states
only. the appropriate helicity supertraces count essentially the numbers of unpaired bps
multiplets. it is only these that are protected from renormalization and can provide reliable
information in strong coupling regions. in fact, calling the helicity supertraces indices is more
than an analogy. they thus provide the minimal information about ir-sensitive data. in
particular they do not depend on the moduli. unpaired bps states in lower dimensions are
intimately connected with the chiral asymmetry (conventional index) of the ten-dimensional

4this was observed in [29] for n=2 two-derivative couplings, and in [30, 25] for n=4 four-derivative

couplings and n=8 eight-derivative couplings.

7

(or eleven-dimensional) theory. it is well known that the ten-dimensional elliptic genus is the
stringy generalization of the dirac index [32, 33]. projecting the elliptic genus on physical
states in ten dimensions gives precisely the massless states, responsible for anomalies. in
lower dimensions, bps states are determined uniquely by the elliptic genus, as well as the
compact manifold data.

we will describe here a bit more the properties of helicity supertraces. further informa-

tion and detailed formulae can be found in the appendix of [24].

n=2 supersymmetry. here we have only one kind of a bps multiplet the 1/2 multiplet
(preserving half of the original n=2 supersymmetry). the trace b2 is non-zero for the 1/2
multiplet but zero from the long multiplets. the long multiplets on the other hand contribute
to b4.

n=4 supersymmetry. here we have two types of bps multiplets, the 1/2 multiplets and
the 1/4 multiplets. for all multiplets b2 = 0. b4 is non-zero for 1/2 multiplets only. b6 is
non-zero for 1/2 and 1/4 multiplets only. long massive multiplets start contributing only to
b8. a similar stratication appears also in the case of maximal n=8 supersymmetry [24].

thus, there is a single index in the case of an n=2 supersymmetric theory, and it gov-
erns the one-loop corrections to the two-derivative action, in standard perturbation theory.
in the n=4 case there are two distinct indices. b4 controls one-loop corrections to several
four-derivative eective couplings of the trf 4, trf 2trr2 and trr4 type. b6 seems to be
associated to some six derivative couplings like trf 6.

 bps-saturated couplings may receive also instanton corrections. the instantons how-
ever that contribute, parallel in a sense the bps states that contribute in perturbation theory.
they must preserve the same amount of supersymmetry. since in string theory instantons
are associated with euclidean solitonic branes wrapped on compact manifolds, it is straight-
forward in most situations to classify possible instantons that contribute to bps-saturated
terms. we will see explicit examples in subsequent sections.

let us summarize here the generic characteristics of bps-saturated couplings.

(1) they obtain perturbative corrections from bps states only.

(2) the perturbative corrections appear at a single order of perturbation theory, usually

at one-loop.

(3) they satisfy holomorphicity constraints.

(4) they contain simple information about massless singularities.

(5) they obtain instanton corrections from bps-instantons (instanton congurations

that preserve some fraction of the original supersymmetry).

(6) if there exists an o-shell formulation they can be easily constructed.

here we would like to remind the reader of a few facts about string perturbation theory.
in particular we focus on heterotic and type-ii perturbation theory. almost nothing is known
for type-i perturbation theory beyond one loop.

there are many subtleties in calculating higher-loop contributions that arise from the
presence of supermoduli. there is no rigorous general setup so far, but several facts are

8

known. as discussed in [34] there are several prescriptions for handling the supermoduli.
they dier by total derivatives on moduli space. such total derivatives can sometimes obtain
contributions from the boundaries of moduli space where the riemann surface degenerates
or vertex operator insertions collide. thus, dierent prescriptions dier by contact terms.
in [35] it was shown that such ambiguities eventually reduce to tadpoles of massless elds
at lower orders in perturbation theory. the issue of supersymmetry is also the subject of
such ambiguities. it is claimed [34, 35] that in a class of prescriptions n  1 supersymmetry
is respected genus by genus provided there are no disturbing tadpoles at tree level and one
loop. the only exception to this is the case of an anomalous u(1) in n = 1 supersymmetric
ground-states. in this case there is a non-zero d-term at one loop [36].

to conclude, if all (multi) tadpoles vanish at one loop and we use the appropriate prescrip-
tion for higher loops, we expect supersymmetry to be valid order by order in perturbation
theory. it is to be remembered, however, that the above statements apply on-shell. some-
times there can be terms in the eective action that vanish on-shell, violate the standard
lore above, but are required by non-perturbative dualities. an example was given in [16].

3 survey of bps-saturated terms

in this section we will describe the known bps-saturated terms for a given amount of su-
persymmetry. we use four-dimensional language for the supersymmetry, which can even-
tually be translated to various other dimensions bigger than four. for example n=2 four-
dimensional theories are related by toroidal compactication to n=1 six-dimensional theories
and so on.

3.1 n=1 supersymmetry

n=1 supergravity in four dimensions contains the supergravity multiplet (it contains the
metric and a gravitino) vector multiplets (each contains a vector and a gaugino) and chiral
multiplets (each contains a complex scalar and a weyl fermion).

the critical dimension is four, in the sense that we cannot have an n=1 theory in more

than four dimensions.

the full two-derivative eective action is determined by three functions5
(a) the kahler potential k(zi, zi). it is an arbitrary real function of the complex scalars
zi of the chiral multiplets. it determines, among other things, the kinetic terms of chiral
multiplets (matter) via the kahler metric gij = ijk.

(b) the superpotential w (zi): it determines the part of the scalar potential associated
to the f-terms as vf  gijiw j
w . supersymmetry constraints w to be a holomorphic
function of the chiral multiplets. moreover, it should have charge 2 under the u(1) r-
symmetry that transforms the superspace coordinates   eia and the chiral superelds
5a slightly more extended description can be found in the appendix of [24, 37]. for a detailed exposition

as well as a discussion of the non-renormalization theorems [38] the reader is urged to look in [39].

9

z i  eiaz i. the reason is that the superpotential is integrated over half of the superspace
as r d2 w . it is thus a chiral density. it turns out that in all cases where and o-shell
supereld formulation exists all bps-saturated terms are chiral densities. both in string
theory (supergravity) and in the global supersymmetric limit (decoupling of gravity) it is
not renormalized in perturbation theory.
in string theory the argument is based on the
holomorphicity [40]. the string coupling constant (dilaton), is assembled with the axion
(dual of the antisymmetric tensor in four dimensions) into the complex chiral s eld. the
peccei-quinn symmetry associated to translations of the axion is valid in string perturbation
theory, but it is broken by non-perturbative eects since it is anomalous. in perturbation
theory, corrections to w are multiplied by powers of the coupling constant, (im s)n.
however such corrections must be holomorphic and thus proportional to sn. this however
breaks the peccei-quinn symmetry in perturbation theory. thus, no such perturbative
corrections can appear. beyond perturbation theory, instanton eects break the peccei-
quinn symmetry to some discrete subgroup and exponential holomorphic corrections are
allowed [13]. in the global limit a similar argument works.

(c) the wilsonian gauge couplings fa(z i). they are also holomorphic. the index a labels
dierent simple or u(1) components of the gauge group. they are also chiral densities since

they appear through r d2fa(z i)w w in the eective action, where w  is the spinorial

vector supereld. they can obtain corrections only to one-loop in perturbation theory
[39]. the argument is similar to that about the superpotential, the anomaly here allowing
also a one-loop contribution we should stress here though that the physical eective gauge
couplings have corrections to any order in perturbation theory. this is due to the fact that
the physical matter elds have a wave function renormalization coming from, the kahler
potential which is not protected from renormalization.

(d) in string theory, there is a possibility of anomalous u(1) factors of the gauge
group [41]. the term anomalous here is strictly speaking a misnomer. the particular u(1)
factor in question will have a non-zero sum of charges for the massless elds. under normal
circumstances it would have been anomalous. in string theory, this anomaly is canceled by an
anomalous transformation law of the antisymmetric tensor (or an axion in four dimensions).
we will have to distinguish two distinct cases.

in heterotic perturbation theory the anomaly-cancellation mechanism is a compactica-
tion descendant of the green-schwarz anomaly cancellation in ten dimensions. the appro-
priate coupling is bf  which appears at one-loop in the heterotic string. thus it is the
standard antisymmetric tensor that cancels the anomaly. there is a d-term contribution
to the potential. it contains a one-loop contribution that was calculated in [36]. moreover
supersymmetry implies that there should be a two-loop contact term. this was veried by
an explicit calculation [42]. such non-trivial contributions appear since the supersymmetric
partner of the antisymmetric tensor (axion) is the dilaton that controls the string perturba-
tive expansion. the states that contribute at one loop are the charged massless particles.
in this sense this is an anomaly. as mentioned earlier such states are the closest analogue
of bps states of n=1 supersymmetry (they have half the degrees of freedom compared to
massive states). moreover, upon toroidal compactication to three or two dimensions, they
become bona-de bps states. the two-dimensional case was analyzed in [43].

10

in type-ii and type-i perturbation theory the situation is dierent [44]. the axions that
are responsible for canceling the u(1) anomaly come from the rr sector and they are usually
more than one. in orbifold constructions they belong to the twisted sector. since their scalar
partners do not coincide with the string coupling constant the d-term potential appears here
at tree level.

(e) there is a series ig of higher derivative terms which are f-terms and involve chiral
projectors of vector superelds [45]. they obtain a perturbative contribution only at g-loops.

3.2 n=2 supersymmetry

n=2 supersymmetry has critical dimension six. the relevant massless multiplets in six di-
mensions are the supergravity multiplet (graviton, second rank tensor, a scalar a gravitino
and a spin-half fermion), the vector multiplet (a vector and a gaugino), and the hypermulti-
plet (a fermion and four scalars). the vector multiplets contain no scalars in six dimensions
and as such have a unique coupling to gravity. this is not the case with hypermultiplets that
have a non-trivial -model structure. this structure persists unchanged in four dimensions,
and we will discuss it below.

in four dimensions, the supergravity multiplet contains the metric a graviphoton and two
gravitini. the vector multiplet contains a vector, two gaugini and a complex scalar while
the hypermultiplet is the same as in six dimensions.

, i = 1, 2, . . . , nv , and the scalar partners of ai

we will describe briey the structure of the eective supergravity theory in four dimen-
sions [46]. the interested reader can consult [47] for further information. picking the gauge
group to be abelian is without loss of generality since any non-abelian gauge group can be
broken to the maximal abelian subgroup by giving expectation values to the scalar part-
ners of the abelian gauge bosons. we will denote the graviphoton by a0
, the rest of the
 as t i, t i. although
gauge bosons by ai
the graviphoton does does not have a scalar partner, it is convenient to introduce one. the
theory has a scaling symmetry, which allows us to set this scalar equal to one where k is the
kahler potential. we will introduce the complex coordinates z i, i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , nv , which
will parametrize the vector moduli space (vms), mv . the 4nh scalars of the generically
massless hypermultiplets parametrize the hypermultiplet moduli space mh and supersym-
metry requires this to be a quaternionic manifold6. the geometry of the full scalar manifold
is that of a product, mv  mh.

n=2 supersymmetry implies that the vms is not just a kahler manifold, but that it
satises what is known as special geometry. special geometry eventually leads to the property
that the full action of n=2 supergravity (we exclude hypermultiplets for the moment) can
be written in terms of one function, which is holomorphic in the vms coordinates. this
function, which we will denote by f (z i), is called the prepotential. it must be a homogeneous
function of the coordinates of degree 2: z i fi = 2, where fi = f
z i . for example, the kahler
6in the global supersymmetry limit in which gravity decouples, mplanck  , the geometry of the

hypermultiplet space is that of a hyperkahler manifold.

11

potential is

k =  loghi( z i fi  z i fi)i ,

(3.2.1)

which determines the metric gi j = i j k of the kinetic terms of the scalars. we can x
the scaling freedom by setting z 0 = 1, and then t i = z i/z 0 are the physical moduli. the
kahler potential becomes

k =  logh2(cid:16)f (t i) + f( t i)(cid:17)  (t i  t i)(fi  fi)i ,

(3.2.2)

where f (t i) = if (z 0 = 1, z i = t i). the kahler metric gij has the following property

rijkl = gijgkl + gilgkj  e2kwikmgm m w mjl ,

(3.2.3)

where wijk = ijkf . since there is no potential, the only part of the bosonic action left
to be specied is the kinetic terms for the vectors:

where

lvectors = 

1
4

ij f i

f j, 

ij
4

f i


f j, ,

ij =

i
4

[nij  nij]
nij = fij + 2i

,

ij =

1
4

[nij + nij ] ,

im fik im fjlz kz l

im fm n z m z n

.

(3.2.4)

(3.2.5)

(3.2.6)

here we see that the gauge couplings, unlike the n=1 case, are not harmonic functions of
the moduli.

the self-interactions of massless hypermultiplets are described by a -model on a quater-

nionic manifold (hyperkahler in the global case) a quaternionic manifold must satisfy:

(1) it must have three complex structures j i, i = 1, 2, 3 satisfying the quaternion algebra

j i j j = 1ij + ijkj k

with respect to which the metric is hermitian. the dimension of the manifold is 4m, m  z.
the three complex structures guarantee the the existence of an su(2)-valued hyperkahler
two-form k.

(2) there exists a principal su(2) bundle over the manifold, with connection  such that

the form k is closed with respect to 

k = dk + [, k] = 0

(3) the connection  has a curvature that is proportional to the hyperkahler form

d + [, ] =  k

where  is a real number. when  = 0 the the manifold is hyperkahler. thus the holonomy
of a quaternionic manifold is of the form su(2)h while for a hyperkahler manifold h, with

12

h  sp(2m, r). the existence of the su(2) structure is natural for the hypermultiplets since
su(2) is the non-abelian part of the n=2 r-symmetry that acts inside the hypermultiplets.
the scalars transform as a pair of spinors under su(2). when the hypermultiplets transform
under the gauge group, then the quaternionic manifold has appropriate isometries (gauging).
more information can be found in [47].

thus, supersymmetry implies (a) that all two-derivative couplings in the vector mul-
tiplets are determined by a holomorphic function of the moduli, the prepotential. here
the symmetry is u(1)  complex holomorphicity (b) all two derivative couplings of the
hypermultiplets are determined by quaternionic geometry  su(2) holomorphicity.

in n=2 supersymmetry all two-derivative couplings are of the bps-saturated type. their

precise non-renormalization properties though depend on the perturbation theory setup.

 global n=2 supersymmetry.

it can be obtained by taking the mp   limit of
the locally supersymmetric case. here the holomorphic prepotential that governs the vector
multiplet moduli space obtains quantum corrections only at one-loop in perturbation theory.
beyond the perturbative expansion it obtains instanton corrections. on the other hand
the massless hypermultiplet geometry does not have any perturbative or non-perturbative
corrections. in the quantum theory the only thing that can change are the points where
various higgs branches intersect themselves or the coulomb branch, [48]. the argument of
[48] for this non-renormalization is supersymmetry and is an adaptation of a similar argument
valid in heterotic string theory to be discussed below. in this context the crucial constraint
imposed by supersymmetry is that the geometry of the vector moduli space is independent
of the geometry of the hypermoduli space. put otherwise, the only couplings between vector
and hypermultiplets are those dictated by the gauge symmetry.

 local n=2 supersymmetry. here we must distinguish three dierent types of pertur-

bation theory.

(a) type-ii perturbation theory. this is relevant for type ii ground-states with (1,1) four-
dimensional supersymmetry. one of the supersymmetries comes from the left moving sector
while the other from the right moving one. a typical class of examples much studied is type
iia,b theory compactied on cy threefold. the type-iia compactication gives an eective
theory with nv = h1,1 vector multiplets and nh = h1,2 + 1 neutral hypermultiplets (see for
example [24]). in the type-iib compactication the roles of h1,1 and h1,2 are interchanged.
on the other hand such (1,1) ground-states need not be left-right symmetric. what is
an important feature of these ground-states is that the dilaton that determines the string
coupling constant belongs to a hypermultiplet. this has far reaching consequences for the
perturbative expansion.
if this fact is combined with the supersymmetric constraint of
the absence of neutral couplings between vectors multiplets and hypermultiplets, then we
conclude:
in type-ii (1,1) ground-states the tree-level prepotential is non-perturbatively
exact, while the hypermultiplet geometry obtains corrections both in perturbation theory and
non-perturbatively. thus, the exact prepotential in type-iia ground-states can be obtained
by a tree-level calculation, in the appropriate -model. it describes the geometry of kahler
structure of the cy manifold. non-trivial -model instantons render this calculation very
intricate. on the other hand, in type-iib ground-states, the exact prepotential is given

13

by the geometry of the moduli space of complex structures, which can be calculated using
classical geometry. mirror symmetry can be further used [49] to solve the analogous type-iia
problem.

an interesting phenomenon, is that generically, cy manifolds develop some conifold
(logarithmic) singularities at some submanifolds of their kahler moduli space.
in a type
iia compactication such singularities appear at tree level and cannot be smoothed out
by quantum eects since as we have argued there arent any. at such conifold points a
collection of two-cycles shrinks to zero size.
it was however been pointed out [50], that
at such points, non-perturbative states (d2-branes wrapped around the vanishing cycles)
become massless. if we included them explicitly in th eective theory, then the singularity
disappears. alternatively, integrating them out reproduces the conifold singularity. the
message is the type ii perturbation theory gives directly the full quantum eective action
after integrating out all massive degrees of freedom.

in the type-iib ground-state the conifold singularity appears in the hypermoduli space.
here we expect both perturbative and non-perturbative corrections to smooth-out the sin-
gularity. this has been conrmed in some examples [11].

(b) heterotic perturbation theory. this type of perturbation theory applies to ground-
states of heterotic theory compactied on a six-dimensional manifold of su(2) holonomy
(a prototype is k3t2) and type-ii asymmetric vacua with (2,0) supersymmetry (ie. both
supersymmetries come from the left-movers or right-movers).
in such vacua, the dilaton
belongs to a vector multiplet. thus supersymmetry implies that the tree-level geometry of
the hypermoduli space is exact. on the other hand the geometry of the vector moduli space
(prepotential) receives perturbative corrections only at one-loop, as well as non-perturbative
corrections due to space-time instantons. several such vacua seem to be dual to type-ii (1,1)
vacua [51]. this duality can be used to determine exactly the geometry both of the vector
moduli space as well as the hypermoduli space. moreover, such a map is consistent with the
non-renormalization theorems mentioned above, and it reproduces the one-loop contribution
on the heterotic side [52] as well the seiberg-witten geometry in the global limit [53].

one more property should be stressed here:

in heterotic-type n=2 vacua, there is no
renormalization of the einstein term. on the other hand there is a gravitational (universal)
contribution to the gauge couplings [54, 55] as well as the kahler potential [56]. this can be
thought of as due to world-sheet contact terms [54] or as the gravitational back reaction [55].
its diagrammatic interpretation (for the gauge coupling) is that of a space-time contact term
where two gauge bosons couple to the dilaton which couples to a generic loop of particles
(see [24] for more details).

(c) type-i perturbation theory. this is the perturbation theory of type ii orientifolds
that contain open sectors. here we have both open and closed unoriented riemann surfaces.
here the dilaton belongs partly to a vector multiplet and partly to a hypermultiplet. as
a result both the vector moduli space as well as the hypermoduli space receive corrections
perturbatively and non-perturbatively. moreover there is another subtlety: there is no uni-
versal renormalization of the gauge couplings and the kahler potential. on the other hand
there is a one-loop (cylinder) renormalization of the the einstein term [57] consistent with

14

type-i/heterotic duality.

there is a whole series of chiral f-terms ig that generalize the prepotential and the

two-derivative eective action, [58, 59, 60, 61]

where

ig =z d2 w 2gfg(x)

w ij

 = f ij

  rij +   

(3.2.7)

(3.2.8)

is the supergravity supereld, with the anti-self-dual graviphoton eld strength f ij
anti-self-dual riemann tensor. the square is dened as w 2 = ijklw ij
x, stand for the vector multiplet superelds, x i = i + 1
to the graviphoton.

 and the
kl . the superelds
12 +   , x 0 corresponds

w 

2 f i

in type ii perturbation theory, we can go to the -model frame by the gauge xing
condition x 0 = ek/2/gs where k is the kahler potential and gs = e is the string coupling
constant. then z i = x i/x 0 are the true moduli scalars. from supersymmetry we know
that fg must be a homogeneous function of degree 2  2g. thus,

fg  (x 0)22g fg(z i)  e(1g)k (g2

s)g1 fg(z i)

(3.2.9)

this implies that such eective terms obtain a contribution only at the g-th order in type-ii
perturbation theory. this was indeed veried by an explicit computation, [58]. f0 is indeed
the prepotential that governs the two derivative interactions. f1 governs among other things,
the r2 terms and obtains contributions from one loop only.

the (almost) holomorphic threshold is given by the topological partition function, of a
twisted cy -model [58]. the mild non-holomorphicity is due to an anomaly and it provides
for recursion relations among the various fgs. they have the form

 afg =

1
2

c a b ce2kgb bgc c dbdcfg1 +xr

dbfrdcfgr!

(3.2.10)

where da is the kahler covariant derivative and cabc are the holomorphic yukawa couplings.
for g = 1 it is equivalent to

a af1 =

1

2(cid:18)3 + h11 

1
12

(cid:19) ga a 

1
2

ra a

(3.2.11)

near a conifold point they all become singular in a dierent fashion as one approaches
the singularity. their singularity structure was shown to be captured by the c=1 topological
matrix model [62].

3.3 n=4 supersymmetry

the critical dimension of n=4 supersymmetry is ten. in ten dimensions it corresponds to
a single majorana-weyl supercharge which decomposes to four supercharges upon toroidal

15

compactication to four dimensions. the relevant massless multiplets are the supergravity
multiplet (the graviton, second rank tensor a scalar, a majorana-weyl gravitino and a ma-
jorana weyl fermion of opposite chirality in ten dimensions) and the vector multiplet ( a
gauge boson and a majorana-weyl gaugino). in d dimensions, the supergravity multiplet
contains apart from the metric and second rank tensor and original scalar, (10-d) vectors
(graviphotons). the vector multiplet contains apart from the vector an extra (10-d) scalars.

the two-derivative eective action is completely xed by supersymmetry and the knowl-
edge of the gauge group.
its salient features are that it has no scalar potential in ten
dimensions (since there are no scalars in the theory), and it has a chern-simons coupling
of the gauge elds to the second-rank tensor crucial for anomaly cancellation via the green-
schwarz mechanism. the explicit action and a discussion can be found in [24].

in lower dimensions scalars appear from the components of the metric, second rank tensor
and gauge elds. there is a potential for the scalars due in particular to the non-abelian
eld strengths. the minima of the potential have at directions parametrized by expectation
values of the scalars coming from the supergravity multiplet as well as those coming from the
cartan vectors. these expectation values break generically the non-abelian gauge symmetry
to the maximal abelian subgroup. at special values of the moduli massive gauge boson can
become massless and gauge symmetry is enhanced.

supersymmetry constraints the local geometry of the scalars in d dimensions to be that
of the symmetric space o(10-d,n)/o(10-d)o(n) where n is the number of abelian vector
multiplets. moreover, if we neglect the massive gauge bosons, and focus on the generically
massless elds then the eective action is invariant under a continuous o(10-d,n) symmetry
under which the metric, second rank tensor and original scalar are inert, while the vectors
transform in the vector while the scalars in the adjoint. the o(10-d) part of this symmetry
is the r-symmetry that rotates the supercharges.

the o(10-d,n) symmetry is broken by the massive states. in string theory a discrete
subgroup remains that is generically a subgroup of o(10-d,n,z). the interested reader can
nd a more detailed discussion of the above in [24]

since supersymmetry and knowledge of the rank of the gauge group completely xes
the two-derivative eective action of the massless modes, we expect no perturbative or
non-perturbative corrections. this has been explicitly veried in various contexts. in the
context of eld theory (global n=4 supersymmetry) it can be shown that in the higgs phase
perturbative corrections vanish, as well as instanton corrections (due to trivial zero mode
counting) [63]. moreover, in the higgs phase there are no subtleties with ir divergences. in
the local case (string theory) perturbative non-renormalization theorems have been advanced
(see [64]).

the knowledge of bps-saturated terms for n=4 supersymmetry is scarce. the next
type of terms beyond the two derivative ones, are those related by supersymmetry to r2
(cp-even). among these, there are the cp-odd terms trr  r (four dimensions) and
in a type-ii (1,1) setup, there is no tree-level r2 term
b  trr  r (six dimensions).
it has been conjectured [15] that there
[64, 65], but there is a contribution at one-loop.
are no further perturbative and non-perturbative corrections. arguments in favor of this

16

conjecture were advanced in [16]. in particular this conjecture seems to be in agreement with
heterotic/type ii duality. in the respective heterotic perturbation theory, the r2 term has
a tree level contribution [65], but no further perturbative contributions. one could expect
non-perturbative contributions in four dimensions due to euclidean ve-brane instantons
wrapped around t 6 [15]. this is compatible with the type ii one-loop contribution and
heterotic/type ii duality. the situation in type-i perturbation theory seems to be less clear:
it is only known that there is a non-trivial one-loop (cylinder) contribution to the r2 term
below ten dimensions [66]. the one-loop correction to the r2 term is proportional to the
conformal anomaly. moreover the conformal anomaly depends on the duality frame [67];
although in four dimensions a pseudoscalar is dual to a second rank tensor, they contribute
dierently to the conformal anomaly; when the scalar contributes 1 the second-rank tensor
contributes 91. in the heterotic side we have an antisymmetric tensor and this provides for
the vanishing one-loop result while on the type-ii side we are in a dual frame and this gives
a non-zero one-loop result.

there are several other terms with up to eight derivatives that are of the bps saturated
type. these include f 4,f 2r2 and r4 terms [68, 30, 17, 25]. so far, we have been vague
concerning the tensor structure of such terms. here, however, we will be more precise [28,
68, 30]. there are three types of r4 terms in ten dimensions: t8(trr2)2, t8trr4 and (t8t8 
1010/8)r4, where t8 is the standard eight-index tensor [64] and 10 is the ten-dimensional
totally antisymmetric  symbol. the precise expressions can be found for example in [68].
there are also the t8trr2trf 2, t8trf 4 and t8(trf 2)2 terms. these dierent structures can
be completed in supersymmetric invariants [28, 68]. the bosonic parts of these invariants
are as follows:

1
8

j0 = (cid:18)t8t8 +
i2 = t8(trf 2)2 

1010(cid:19)r4
10b(trf 2)2

1
4

i4 = t8(trr2)2 

1
4

10b(trr2)2

,

1
4

,

10btrf 4

i1 = t8trf 4 
1
10btrr4
4
1
10b(trr2)(trf 2) .
4

i3 = t8trr4 
i5 = t8(trr2)(trf 2) 

,

(3.3.1a)

(3.3.1b)

(3.3.1c)

as is obvious from the above formulae, apart from the j0 combination, the other four-
derivative terms are related to the greenschwarz anomaly by supersymmetry. thus, in ten
dimensions, they are expected to receive corrections only at one loop if their perturbative
calculation is set up properly (in an adlerbardeen-like scheme). the j0 invariant is not
protected by n = 4 supersymmetry. heterotic/type-ii duality in six dimensions implies that
it receives perturbative corrections beyond one loop. it is however protected in the presence
of n = 8 supersymmetry [5].

the relevant n=4 string vacua are the following:
 type-i o(32) string theory. it is related by weak-strong coupling duality to the o(32)

heterotic string.

 the heterotic o(32) and e8e8 strings.
 f-theory on k3. this is an d=8 vacuum and is conjectured to be dual to the heterotic

string compactied on t 2.

17

 type iia on k3. it is conjectured to be dual to the heterotic string on t 4. there
are further type-ii n=4 vacua in less than six dimensions [16]. they have either type ii or
heterotic duals.

we consider rst type ii n=4 vacua. the case of f-theory compactications [69] stands
apart in the sense that it has no conventional perturbation theory. the f 4 couplings were
derived recently [70] using geometric methods that mimic those used in type-ii n=2 vacua.

on the other hand there is no computation so far for such terms in the type-ii string
compactied on k3. this is the obvious quantitative test of the heterotic/type-ii duality
and it is still lacking.

most of the information is known for heterotic and type-i vacua. the cp-odd terms
in (3.3.1) were explicitly evaluated at arbitrary order of heterotic perturbation theory in
[71]. there, by carefully computing the surface terms, it was shown that such contributions
vanish for g > 1. the cp-even terms are related to the cp-odd ones by supersymmetry
(except for j0). if there are no subtleties with supersymmetry at higher loops, then these
terms also satisfy the non-renormalization theorem. this was in fact conjectured in [71]. in
view of our previous discussion on the structure of supersymmetry, we would expect that
once supersymmetry is working well at g  1, it continues to work for g > 1 for a suitable
denition of the higher-genus amplitudes.
it is thus assumed that the cp-even terms do
not get contributions beyond one loop. on the other hand, the j0 term (which is non-zero
at tree level) is not protected by the anomaly. thus, it can appear at various orders in the
perturbative expansion. it can be veried by direct calculation that it does not appear at
one loop on the heterotic side. however, heterotic/type-iia duality in six dimensions seems
to imply that there is a two-loop contribution to this term on the heterotic side. in all of
the subsequent discussion for n=4 ground-states , when we refer to r4 terms we will mean
the anomaly-related tensor structures, i3, i4, which can always be distinguished from j0.

in the type-i theory several of these terms have been calculated and match what is
expected by heterotic/type-i duality [68]. most of them appear at tree level (disk) and one
loop. there are subtleties though. the heterotic tree-level (trf 2)2 term implies via duality
that there should be a two-loop contribution in the type-i side. that anomaly related terms
obtain two-loop contributions is hardly surprising if we recall that supersymmetry (that
related cp-even and cp-odd terms) is not respected by type-i perturbation theory [17].

in the heterotic theory, the potential instanton contributions must come from congu-
rations that preserve half of the supersymmetry. thus the only relevant conguration is
the heterotic euclidean ve-brane. it can provide an instanton provided there is a six- or
higher-dimensional compact manifold to wrap it around. thus, there are no non-perturbative
contributions to such terms in d > 4 on the heterotic side. in four dimensions we generically
expect corrections due to ns5-brane instantons. there is a prediction of global supersym-
metry about f 4 thresholds [72]: it states that there are no corrections beyond one loop (in
the absence of gravity). we will give an argument in a subsequent section that the same is
implied in the local (string) case by heterotic/type ii duality.

the situation is dierent on the type-i side. there the relevant congurations are d1

and d5 branes and provide instanton corrections already in eight dimensions.

18

no more bps saturated terms are known in n=4 ground-states. it was conjectured in
[17] that in analogy with lower supersymmetry there is an innite tower of bps-saturated
terms as well in the n=4 case. this rests on the existence of a tower of topological partition
functions in the topological -model on k3 [73] in analogy with the n=2 case. the leading
topological amplitude was shown to correspond to the r4 amplitude of the type ii string
compactied on k3.

3.4 n=8 supersymmetry

n=8 ground-states are toroidal compactications of the type-ii string. their critical di-
mension is eleven, and the master theory is eleven-dimensional supergravity [74] expected
to describe the strong coupling limit of the type-iia theory. the relevant massless repre-
sentation in eleven dimensions is the supergravity multiplet and contains the graviton, a
three-index antisymmetric tensor and the gravitino.

like n=4 supergravity all two-derivative eective couplings receive no renormalization
at all. unlike n=4 supergravity, four-derivative and six-derivative eective couplings do
not appear at tree level and do not get renormalized at one-loop. it is expected that they
are not renormalized at all (even beyond perturbation theory). there are eight-derivative
bps-saturated terms however. i3, i4 as in the n=4 case, but also j0 in this case. there are
also related to the c  r4 coupling of eleven-dimensional supergravity. these terms obtain
tree level plus one-loop corrections in type-ii perturbation theory [2, 75, 22, 76]. beyond
perturbation theory they obtain corrections from d-instantons.

4 instantons in string theory

in eld theory with n  2 supersymmetry instantons are responsible for all non-perturbative
corrections (in the coulomb branch at least). what are instantons in string theory? despite
some prescient papers that touched this issue [77] the subject took a denite shape only after
the duality revolution. the central idea is that a string instanton to the zeroth approximation
is an instanton of the eective supergravity theory. a very important aspect is that instanton
solutions preserve a part of the space-time supersymmetry.

an important conceptual simplication that occurs in string theory is the direct relation
between space-time instantons and wrapped euclidean solitonic branes [10]. the concept
is rather simple. string theory (or the eective supergravity) contains solitonic branes that
usually preserve some amount of supersymmetry (bps branes). these can be found as
classical solutions to the supergravity equations of motion. they include d-branes, the ns5-
brane and the m2 and m5 branes of d=11 supergravity. for d-branes in particular there
is an alternative stringy description as dirichlet branes [78]. an instanton can be produced
by wrapping the euclidean world-volume of a given brane around an appropriate compact
manifold.

what kind of instanton corrections we expect for bps-saturated terms was discussed case
by case in the previous section. here we will stress that depending on the term we will need

19

instantons with a given number of zero modes. however, this analysis needs care. a typical
example is that of multi-instanton congurations.
in multi-instanton solutions, there are
in general more bosonic moduli describing relative positions and orientation. if the multi-
instanton leaves some supersymmetry unbroken, there will be more fermionic zero modes,
supersymmetric partners of the bosonic moduli related by the unbroken supersymmetry.
if, however their moduli space contains orbifold singularities, then there are contributions
localized at the singularities where the number of zero modes is reduced. we will see later an
explicit example of this in the case of d1-instanton contributions to four-derivative couplings
in type-i string theory.

an important question to be answered is: what part of the supersymmetry can an
instanton conguration break? the answer to this depends on the particular instanton
(euclidean brane) as well as the number of non-compact dimensions. it depends crucially
on the compact manifold, and the way the euclidean brane is wrapped around it [10, 79].

can we compare between the instantons we are using in string theory and standard
eld-theory instantons? in eld theory, we are usually considering two types of instantons.
the rst are instantons with nite action, and a typical example is the bpst instanton
[80], present in non-abelian four-dimensional gauge theories. examples of the other type
are provided by the euclidean dirac monopole in three dimensions, which is relevant, as
shown in [81], to the understanding of the non-perturbative behaviour of three-dimensional
gauge theories in the coulomb phase. this type of instanton has an ultra-violet (short-
distance)-divergent action, since it is a singular solution to the euclidean equations of motion.
however, by cutting o this divergence and subsequent renormalization, it can contribute
to non-perturbative eects. the generalization to the compact gauge theories of higher
antisymmetric tensors was also discussed in the context of (lattice) eld theory [82]. another
famous case in the same class is the two-dimensional vortex of the xy model, responsible
for the kt phase transition [83]. in four dimensions we also have the bcd merons [84],
with similar characteristics, although their role in the non-perturbative four-dimensional
dynamics is not very well understood.

in the context of string theory, we have these two types of instantons. here, however,
the behaviour seems to be somewhat dierent. let us consider rst the heterotic ve-brane
[77]. this solution is intimately connected to bpst instantons in the transverse space and is
smooth provided the instanton size is non-zero. at zero size the solution has an exact cft
description but the string coupling is strong. non-perturbative eects are important and a
conjecture has been put forth to explain their nature [85]. another type of instanton whose
eective eld-theory description is regular is the d3-brane of type-iib theory. on the other
hand, the other d-brane instantons have an eective description that is of the singular type.
however, their ultra-violet divergence is cured in their stringy description. this is already
clear in the case of the type-i d1-brane that will be described in these lectures, where the
eective description is singular [86, 87] while the stringy description turns out to be regular
and in particular, as we will see later, their classical action is nite.

there seems to be a correspondence of the various eld-theory instantons to stringy ones.
we have already mentioned the example of the heterotic ve-brane, but the list does not
in [88] it was shown that the three-dimensional polyakov qed instanton as
stop there.

20

well as various non-abelian merons have an exact cft description and thus correspond to
exact classical solutions of string theory. moreover, the three-dimensional instanton can be
interpreted as an avatar of the ve-brane zero-size instanton when the theory is compact-
ied to three dimensions. similar remarks apply to the stringy merons, which require the
presence of ve-branes with fractional charge [88]. in that respect they are solutions of the
singular type in the eective eld theory. in the context of the string theory, the spectrum
of instanton congurations is of course richer, since the theory includes gravity. however,
the correspondence of eld-theory and some string-theory instantons implies that the eld-
theory non-perturbative phenomena associated with them, are already included in a suitable
stringy description.

5 heterotic/type-i duality and d-brane instantons

the conjectured duality [89, 87, 86, 90] between the type-i and heterotic spin(32)/z2 string
theories is particularly intriguing. the massless spectrum of both theories, in ten space-
time dimensions, contains the (super)graviton and the (super)yang mills multiplets. su-
persymmetry and anomaly cancellation x completely the low-energy lagrangian, and more
precisely all two-derivative terms and the anomaly-canceling, four-derivative green-schwarz
couplings [64, 68]. one logical possibility, consistent with this unique low-energy behaviour,
could have been that the two theories are self-dual at strong coupling. the conjecture that
they are instead dual to each other implies that this unique infrared physics also has a unique
consistent ultraviolet extrapolation.

one of the early arguments in favour of this duality [89, 87, 86] was that the heterotic
string appears as a singular solution of the type-i theory. strictly-speaking this is not an
independent test of duality. since the two eective actions are related by a eld redenition
this is not surprising. the real issue is whether consistency of the theory forces us to include
such excitations in the spectrum. this can for instance be argued in the case of type ii
string theory near a conifold singularity of the calabi-yau moduli space [50].

we are not aware of such a direct argument in the case of the heterotic string solution.
what is, however, known is that it has an exact conformal description as a d(irichlet) string
of type-i theory [90]. in certain ways, d-branes lie between fundamental quanta and smooth
solitons so, even if we admit that they are intrinsic, we must still decide on the rules for
including them in a semiclassical calculation. do they contribute, for instance, to loops
like fundamental quanta? and with what measure and degeneracy should we weight their
euclidean trajectories?

here we will analyse some calculations [30, 17] in which these questions can be answered.
the rules consistent with duality turn out to be natural and simple. d-strings, like smooth
solitons, do not enter explicitly in loops 7, while their (wrapped) euclidean trajectories
contribute to the saddle-point sum, without topological degeneracy if one takes into account
correctly the non-abelian structure of d-branes.

7a (light) soliton loop can of course be a useful approximation to the exact instanton sum, as is the case
near the strong-coupling singularities of the seiberg-witten solution. for a d-brany discussion see also [7].

21

5.1 heterotic/type-i duality in ten dimensions.

we will start our discussion by briey describing heterotic/type-i duality in ten dimensions.
it can be shown [91] that heterotic/type-i duality, along with t-duality can reproduce all
known string dualities.

consider rst the o(32) heterotic string theory. at tree-level (sphere) and up to two-

derivative terms, the (bosonic) eective action in the -model frame is

shet = z d10xge(cid:20)r + ()2 

1
12

h 2 

1
4

f 2(cid:21) .

(5.1.1)

on the other hand for the o(32) type i string the leading order two-derivative eective

action is

si = z d10xg(cid:20)e(cid:16)r + ()2(cid:17) 

1
4

e/2f 2 

1
12

h 2(cid:21) .

(5.1.2)

the dierent dilaton dependence here comes as follows: the einstein and dilaton terms
come from the closed sector on the sphere ( = 2). the gauge kinetic terms come from
the disk ( = 1). since the antisymmetric tensor comes from the rr sector of the closed
superstring it does not have any dilaton dependence on the sphere.

we will now bring both actions to the einstein frame, g = e/4g:

shet

1
8

e =z d10xg(cid:20)r 
e =z d10xg(cid:20)r 

si

1
4

()2 
1
8

()2 

e/4f 2 
1
4

e/4f 2 

1
12

1
12

e/2 h 2(cid:21) ,
e/2 h 2(cid:21) .

(5.1.3)

(5.1.4)

we observe that the two actions are related by    while keeping the other elds
invariant. this suggests that the weak coupling of one is the strong coupling of the other
and vice versa. as mentioned earlier the fact that the two eective actions are related by a
eld redenition is not surprising. what is is interesting though is that the eld redenition
here is just an inversion of the ten-dimensional coupling. moreover, the two theories have
perturbative expansions that are very dierent.

let us rst study the matching of the bps-saturated high derivative terms in ten dimen-
sions. at tree level, the only four-derivative term is the (trf 2)2.it is part of the chern-simons
related combination (trf 2  trr2)2 [65]. via the duality this term should correspond to a
type-i contribution that comes from a genus-3 surface. this, of course, has never been
computed. at one loop f 4 terms would correspond to disk term in the type-i theory. fortu-
nately, the only non-zero one-loop contribution is of the type trf 4 and agrees with the disk
computation. (trf 2)2 is zero at one-loop in the heterotic theory, a good thing since it would
be impossible to obtain such a term from the disk (that has a single boundary). similar
remarks apply to the r4 and mixed terms.

we should stress again here that the matching of the one-loop heterotic terms with
specic disk and one-loop terms in type-i is not a test of duality. it is rather a consequence
of n=1 supersymmetry and anomaly cancellation in ten dimensions.

22

5.2 one-loop heterotic thresholds

as discussed previously, the terms that will be of interest to us are those obtained by
dimensional reduction from the ten-dimensional superinvariants, whose bosonic parts read
[28, 68]

1
4
1
4

i1 =t8trf 4 
i3 =t8trr4 
i5 =t8(trr2)(trf 2) 

10btrf 4,
10btrr4,
1
4

10b(trr2)(trf 2) .

i2 = t8(trf 2)2 
i4 = t8(trr2)2 

10b(trf 2)2
10b(trr2)2

(5.2.1)

1
4
1
4

these are special because they contain anomaly-canceling cp-odd pieces. as a result
anomaly cancellation xes entirely their coecients in both the heterotic and the type i
eective actions in ten dimensions. comparing these coecients is not therefore a test of
duality, but rather of the fact that both these theories are consistent [68].
in lower di-
mensions things are dierent: the coecients of the various terms, obtained from a single
ten-dimensional superinvariant through dimensional reduction, depend on the compactica-
tion moduli. supersymmetry is expected to relate these coecients to each other, but is not
powerful enough so as to x them completely. this is analogous to the case of n=1 super
yang-mills in six dimensions: the two-derivative gauge-eld action is uniquely xed, but
after toroidal compactication to four dimensions, it depends on a holomorphic prepotential
which supersymmetry alone cannot determine.

on the heterotic side there are good reasons to believe that these dimensionally-reduced
terms receive only one-loop corrections. to start with, this is true for their cp-odd anomaly-
canceling pieces [71]. furthermore it has been argued in the past [35] that there exists a
prescription for treating supermoduli, which ensures that space-time supersymmetry com-
mutes with the heterotic genus expansion, at least for vacua with more than four conserved
supercharges8. thus, we may plausibly assume that there are no higher-loop corrections to
the terms of interest. furthermore, the only identiable supersymmetric instantons are the
heterotic ve-branes. these do not contribute in d > 4 uncompactied dimensions, since
they have no nite-volume 6-cycle to wrap around. non-supersymmetric instantons, if they
exist, have on the other hand too many fermionic zero modes to make a non-zero contri-
bution. it should be noted that these arguments do not apply to the sixth superinvariant
[28, 68]

j0 = t8t8r4 +

1010r4,

(5.2.2)

1
8

which is not related to the anomaly. this receives as we will mention below both perturbative
and non-perturbative corrections.

the general form of the heterotic one-loop corrections to these couplings is [92, 93]

i het = n zf

d2
 2
2

(222)d/2 d,d a(f ,r,  )

(5.2.3)

8a notable exception are compactications with a naively-anomalous u(1) factor [36, 42].

23

where a is an (almost) holomorphic modular form of weight zero related to the elliptic genus,
f and r stand for the gauge-eld strength and curvature two-forms, d,d is the lattice sum
over momentum and winding modes for d toroidally-compactied dimensions, f is the usual
fundamental domain, and

n =

v (10d)
2106

(5.2.4)

is a normalization that includes the volume of the uncompactied dimensions [30]. to keep
things simple we have taken vanishing wilson lines on the d-hypertorus, so that the sum
over momenta (p) and windings (w),

d,d = xp,w

e 2

2 (p2+w2/2)+i1pw ,

(5.2.5)

factorizes inside the integrand. our conventions are

 =

1
2

, q = e2i , d2 = d1d2

(5.2.6)

while winding and momentum are normalized so that p  1
z and w  2l z for a circle of
radius l. the lagrangian form of the above lattice sum, obtained by a poisson resummation,
reads

l

d,d =(cid:16) 2

2(cid:17)d/2det g xni,miz

2 pi,j(g+b)ij (mini)(mj nj )
e 2

(5.2.7)

with gij the metric and bij the (constant) antisymmetric-tensor background on the com-
pactication torus. for a circle of radius l the metric is g = l2.

the modular function a inside the integrand depends on the vacuum.

it is quartic,
quadratic or linear in f and r, for vacua with maximal, half or a quarter of unbroken
supersymmetries. the corresponding amplitudes have the property of saturating exactly
the fermionic zero modes in a green-schwarz light-cone formalism, so that the contribution
from left-moving oscillators cancels out [93]9. in the covariant nsr formulation this same
fact follows from -function identities. as a result a should have been holomorphic in q,
but the use of a modular-invariant regulator introduces some extra 2-dependence [93]. as
a result a takes the generic form of a nite polynomial in 1/2, with coecients that have
laurent expansions with at most simple poles in q,

a(f ,r,  ) =

rmax

xr=0

xn=1

1
 r
2

qn a(r)

n (f ,r).

(5.2.8)

the poles in q come from the would-be tachyon. since this is not charged under the gauge
group, the poles are only present in the purely gravitational terms of the eective action.
this can be veried explicitly in eq. (5.2.9) below. the 1/ r
2 terms play an important role
in what follows. they come from corners of the moduli space where vertex operators, whose
fusion can produce a massless state, collide. each pair of colliding operators contributes
9modulo the regularization, a is in fact the appropriate term in the weak-eld expansion of the elliptic

genus [92, 93, 32, 33]

24

one factor of 1/2. for maximally-supersymmetric vacua the eective action of interest
starts with terms having four external legs, so that rmax = 2. for vacua respecting half the
supersymmetries (n=1 in six dimensions or n=2 in four) the one-loop eective action starts
with terms having two external legs and thus rmax = 1.

much of what we will say in the sequel depends only on the above generic properties of
a. it will apply in particular in the most-often-studied case of four-dimensional vacua with
n=2. for deniteness we will, however, focus our attention to the toroidally-compactied
so(32) theory, for which [92, 93]

1

4

a(f ,r,  ) = t8 trf 4 +
27  32  5
e2
2 e2
29  32 h e3
4
24  2
24 +
28  32 h e2e4e6
2 e2
4
24 

e2

+

1

1

+

(5.2.9)

e3
4
24 t8 trr4 +
e2e4e6

1

29  32

e2
2e2
4
24 t8 (trr2)2

24  27  32i t8 (trf 2)2

24 i t8 trf 2trr2 .

here t8 is the well-known tensor appearing in four-point amplitudes of the heterotic string
[64], and e2k are the eisenstein series which are (holomorphic for k > 1) modular forms
of weight 2k. their explicit expressions are collected for convenience in the appendices of
[18]. the second eisenstein series e2 is special, in that it requires a non-holomorphic regu-
larization. the entire non-holomorphicity of a in eq. (5.2.9), arises through this modied
eisenstein series.

in the toroidally-compactied heterotic string all one-loop amplitudes with fewer than
four external legs vanish identically [94]. consequently eq. (5.2.3) gives directly the eective
action, without the need to subtract one-particle-reducible diagrams, as is the case at tree
level [65]. notice also that this four-derivative eective action has infrared divergences when
more than one dimensions are compactied. such ir divergences can be regularized in a
modular-invariant way with a curved background [55, 95]. this should be kept in mind,
even though for the sake of simplicity we will be working in this paper with unregularized
expressions.

5.3 one-loop type-i thresholds

the one-loop type-i eective action has the form

i i = 

i
2

(t + k + a + m)

(5.3.1)

corresponding to the contributions of the torus, klein bottle, annulus and mobius strip
diagrams. only the last two surfaces (with boundaries) contribute to the f 4, (f 2)2 and
f 2r2 terms of the action. the remaining two pure gravitational terms may also receive
contributions from the torus and from the klein bottle. contrary to what happens on the
heterotic side, this one-loop calculation is corrected by both higher-order perturbative and
non-perturbative contributions.

25

for the sake of completeness we review here the calculation of pure gauge terms following
refs.
[96, 30]. to the order of interest only the short bps multiplets of the open string
spectrum contribute. this follows from the fact that the wave operator in the presence of a
background magnetic eld f12 = b reads

o = m 2 + (p)2 + (2n + 1) + 2

(5.3.2)

where   b + o(b3) is a non-linear function of the eld,  is the spin operator projected
onto the plane (12), p denotes the momenta in the directions 034   9, m is a string mass
and n labels the landau levels. the one-loop free energy thus formally reads

i i = 

1

2z 

0

dt
t

str e t

2 o

(5.3.3)

where the supertrace stands for a sum over all bosonic minus fermionic states of the open
string, including a sum over the chan-paton charges, the center of mass positions and
momenta, as well as over the landau levels.

let us concentrate on the spin-dependent term inside the integrand, which can be ex-

panded for weak eld

et =

(t)n

n!

()n .

(5.3.4)

xn=0

the n < 4 terms vanish for every supermultiplet because of the properties of the helicity
supertrace [30], while to the n = 4 term only short bps multiplets can contribute. the only
short multiplets in the perturbative spectrum of the toroidally-compactied open string
are the so(32) gauge bosons and their kaluza-klein dependents.
it follows after some
straightforward algebra that the special f 4 terms of interest are given by the following
(formal) one-loop super yang-mills expression

i i = 

v (10d)

3  2124 z 

0

dt
t

(22t)

d

21 xp

etp2/2  t8tradjf 4

(5.3.5)

where  is the lattice of kaluza-klein momenta on a d-dimensional torus, and the trace is
in the adjoint representation of so(32).

this expression is quadratically uv divergent, but in the full string theory one must
remember to (a) regularize contributions from the annulus and mobius uniformly in the
transverse closed-string channel, and (b) to subtract the one-particle-reducible diagram cor-
responding to the exchange of a massless (super)graviton between two trf 2 tadpoles, with
the trace being here in the fundamental representation of the group. the net result can be
summarized easily, after a poisson resummation from the open-channel kaluza-klein mo-
menta to the closed-channel windings, and amounts to simply subtracting the contribution
of the zero-winding sector [96, 30]. using also the fact that tradjf 4 = 24trf 4 + 3(trf 2)2 we
thus derive the nal one-loop expression on the type-i side

i i = 

v (10)

2106 z 

0

dt

t2 xw\{0}

ew2/2t  t8(cid:16)trf 4 +

1
8

(trf 2)2(cid:17) .

(5.3.6)

26

the conventions for momentum and winding are the same as in the heterotic calculation of
the previous section.

the calculation of the gravitational terms is more involved because we have no simple
background-eld method at our disposal. it can be done in principle following the method
described in ref. [57]. there is one particular point we want to stress here: if the one-loop
heterotic calculation is exact, and assuming that duality is valid, there should be no world-
sheet instanton corrections on the type-i side. such corrections would indeed translate to
non-perturbative contributions in the heterotic string [97], and we have just argued above
that there should not be any. the dangerous diagram is the torus which can wrap non-
trivially around the compactication manifold. the type-i torus diagram is on the other
hand identical to the type iib one, assuming there are only graviton insertions. this latter
diagram was explicitly calculated in eight uncompactied dimensions in ref.
[5], conrm-
ing our expectations: the cp-odd invariants only depend on the complex structure of the
compactication torus, but not on its kahler structure. this is not true for the cp-even
invariant j0.

5.4 circle compactication

let us begin now our comparison of the eective actions with the simplest situation, namely
compactication on a circle. there are no world-sheet or d-string instanton contributions in
this case, since euclidean world-sheets have no nite-area manifold in target space to wrap
around. thus, the one-loop heterotic amplitude should be expected to match with a pertur-
bative calculation on the type-i side. this sounds at rst puzzling, since the heterotic theory
contains innitely more charged bps multiplets than the type-i theory in its perturbative
spectrum. indeed, one can combine any state of the so(32) current algebra with appropriate
s1-winding and momentum, so as to satisfy the level-matching condition of physical states.
the heterotic theory thus contains short multiplets in arbitrary representations of the gauge
group.

the puzzle is resolved by a well-known trick, used previously in the study of string ther-
modynamics [98, 99], and which trades the winding sum for an unfolding of the fundamental
domain into the half-strip,  1
2 and 2 > 0. the trick works as follows: starting
with the lagrangian form of the heterotic lattice sum,

2 < 1 < 1

(222)1/2 1,1 = 2l x(m,n)z2

e2l2|mn|2/2 .

(5.4.1)

one decomposes any non-zero pair of integers as (m, n) = (jc,jd), where j is their greatest
common divisor (up to a sign). we will denote the set of all relative primes (c, d), modulo
an overall sign, by s. the lattice sum can thus be written as

(222)1/2 1,1 = 2lh 1 + xjz\{0} x(c,d)s

e2l2j 2|c +d|2/2i .

(5.4.2)

27

  

  

 
 


  

 
 



 

 


 

 


     


  

  

  

  

  


 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 


  

  

  

  

  


figure 1: a type-i diagram with euler characteristic  = 1. this contributes to the
(trf 2)2 piece of the eective action, only in degeneration limits such as the one depicted
above.

now the set s is in one-to-one correspondence with all modular transformations,

 =

a + b
c + d

= 2 =

2

|c + d|2

(5.4.3)

such that  1
to s, and the solution is unique modulo a shift and an irrelevant sign

2 . indeed the condition ad bc = 1 has a solution only if (c, d) belongs

2 < 1  1

(cid:18) a b

d(cid:19)  (cid:18) 1

0 1(cid:19)(cid:18) a b

d(cid:19) .

c

c

l

(5.4.4)

by choosing l appropriately we may always bring  inside the strip, which establishes the
above claim.

using the modular invariance of a, we can thus suppress the sum over (c, d)  s and

unfold the integration regime for the j 6= 0 part of the expression. this gives
e2l2j 2/2 a # .

i het = 

2 a + zstrip

v (9)l

295 "zf

d2
 2

d2
 2

2 xj6=0

(5.4.5)

there is one subtle point in this derivation [99]: convergence of the original threshold integral,
when a has a 1
q pole1, requires that we integrate 1 rst in the 2   region. since constant
2 lines transform however non-trivially under sl(2,z), the integration over the entire strip
would have to be supplemented by a highly singular prescription. the problem could be
avoided if integration of the m 6= 0 terms in the lagrangian sum (i.e. those terms that
required a change of integration variable) were absolutely convergent. this is the case for
l > 1, so expression (5.4.5) should only be trusted in this region.

1(physical) massless states do not lead to ir divergences in four-derivative operators in nine dimensions

28

let us now proceed to evaluate this expression. the fundamental domain integrals can

be performed explicitly by using the formula [93]

zf

d2
 2
2

( e2)rr =



3(r + 1)

[c0  24(r + 1)c1]

where

r(q) =

xn=1

cnqn

(5.4.6)

(5.4.7)

is any modular form of weight 2r which is holomorphic everywhere except possibly for a
simple pole at zero. as for the strip integration, it picks up only the o(q0) term in the
expansion of a. modulo the non-holomorphic regularization, only the so(32) gauge bosons
contribute to the elliptic genus at this order, in agreement precisely with the result of the
type-i side! for k  1 let us dene more generally
e2l2j 2/2 =

(5.4.8)

2(k)(2k)
(2l2)k 

nk
l2k ,

z 

0

d2
 1+k

2 xj6=0

where l is the radius of the compactication circle. the one-loop so(32) heterotic action
takes nally the form

i het = 

v (10)

2106 ( 

1

n1

1
1
8 f 2r2 +
8 r4 +
5
(f 2)2 
16 f 2r2 +

3h f 4 
l2h f 4 +
l4h3(f 2)2  5 f 2r2 + 2(cid:16)r2(cid:17)2i +

32(cid:16)r2(cid:17)2i+
31
240r4 +
21
642 

1
8

n2

+

5
16



19

192 (cid:16)r2(cid:17)2i

n3

l6 (f 2  r2)2 ) .

(5.4.9)

to simplify notation we have written here f 4 instead of t8 trf 4, (f 2)2 instead of t8 trf 2trf 2
etc.

we have expressed the result as an expansion in inverse powers of the compactication

volume. since the heterotic/type-i duality map transforms (-model) length scales as

l2
h = l2

i /i

(5.4.10)

with i the open-string loop counting parameter, this expansion can be translated to a
genus expansion on the type-i side. the euler number of an non-orientable surface is given
by  = 2  2g  b  c where g is the number of holes, b the number of boundaries
and c the number of cross-caps. the leading term corresponds to the disk and projective
plane diagrams and is completely xed by ten-dimensional supersymmetry and anomaly
cancellation [68]. to check this, one must remember to transform the metric in both v (10)
and the tensor t8 appropriately. notice that the type-i sphere diagram, which is the same
as in type iib, only contributes to the j0 invariant which we are not considering here.
the subleading o(l2) terms correspond to the annulus, mobius strip, klein bottle and
torus diagrams, all with  = 0. for zero background curvature these agree with the type-i
calculation [30] as described in section 5.3.

29

the last two terms in the expansion (5.4.9) correspond to diagrams with  = 1,2.
these contributions must be there if the duality map of ref.
[89] does not receive higher-
order corrections. such corrections could anyway always be absorbed by redening elds
on the type-i side, so that if duality holds, there must exist some regularization scheme in
which these higher-genus contributions do arise. these terms do on the other hand come
from the boundary of moduli space. for instance the  = 1 contribution to the (f 2)2 term
comes from the boundary of moduli space shown in gure 1. it could thus be conceivably
eliminated in favour of some lower-dimension operators in the eective action.

it is in any case striking that a single heterotic diagram contains contributions from
dierent topologies on the type-i side. notice in particular that the divergent w = 0 term
in the one-loop eld theoretic calculation, regularized on the heterotic side by replacing the
strip by a fundamental domain, is regularized on the type-i side by replacing the annulus by
the disk.

5.5 two-torus compactication

the next simplest situation corresponds to compactication on a two-dimensional torus.
there are in this case world-sheet instanton contributions on the heterotic side, and our
aim in this and the following sections will be to understand them as (euclidean) d-string
trajectory contributions on the type-i side. the discussion can be extended with little eort
to toroidal compactications in lower than eight dimensions. new eects are only expected
to arise in four or fewer uncompactied dimensions, where the solitonic heterotic instantons
or, equivalently, the type-i d5-branes can contribute.

the target-space torus is characterized by two complex moduli, the kahler-class

and the complex structure

t = t1 + it2 =

(b89 + ig)

1


u = u1 + iu2 = (g89 + ig)/g88 ,

(5.5.11)

(5.5.12)

where g and b are the -model metric and antisymmetric tensor on the heterotic side.
the one-loop thresholds now read

i het =

v (8)

294 zf

d2
2

2,2 a(f ,r,  ) ,

(5.5.13)

where the lattice sum takes the form [100]

2,2 =

t2

2  xmmat(22,z)

e2it detm e t2

2u2|(1 u )m( 

1)|2

.

(5.5.14)

the exponent in the above sum is (minus) the polyakov action,

spolyakov =

1

4 z d2(gggx x  + ibx x ) ,

(5.5.15)

30

evaluated for the topologically non-trivial mapping of the string world-sheet onto the target-
space torus,

x 9(cid:19) = m (cid:18) 1
(cid:18) x 8

2(cid:19)  (cid:18) m1 n1

m2 n2(cid:19)(cid:18) 1

2(cid:19) .

(5.5.16)

(5.5.17)

the entries of the matrix m are integers, and both target-space and world-sheet coordinates
take values in the (periodic) interval (0, 2]. to verify the above assertion one needs to use
the metrics

g =

t2

u2 (cid:18) 1

u1

u1

|u|2(cid:19) ,

g =

1
 2

2 (cid:18) ||2 1

1 (cid:19) .

1

the polyakov action is invariant under global reparametrizations of the world-sheet,

which transform

 

a + b
c + d

c

2(cid:19)  (cid:18) a b
(cid:18) 1

2(cid:19) ,
d (cid:19)(cid:18) 1
, and m  m (cid:18) d
c a(cid:19) .

b

(5.5.18)

(5.5.19)

following dixon, kaplunovsky and louis [100], we decompose the set of all matrices m into
orbits of psl(2,z), which is the group of the above transformations up to an overall sign.
there are three types of orbits,

invariant : m = 0
degenerate : detm = 0, m 6= 0
non  degenerate : detm 6= 0

a canonical choice of representatives for the degenerate orbits is

m =(cid:18) 0 j1
0 j2(cid:19)

(5.5.20)

where the integers j1, j2 should not both vanish, but are otherwise arbitrary. distinct el-
ements of a degenerate orbit are in one-to-one correspondence with the set s, i.e. with
modular transformations that map the fundamental domain inside the strip, as in section
5.4. in what concerns the non-degenerate orbits, a canonical choice of representatives is

m = (cid:18) k

0

j

p(cid:19) with 0  j < k ,

p 6= 0 .

(5.5.21)

distinct elements of a non-degenerate orbit are in one-to-one correspondence with the fun-
damental domains of  in the upper-half complex plane.

trading the sum over orbit elements for an extension of the integration region of  , we

can thus express eqs. (5.5.13,5.5.14) as follows

i het = 

v (8)t2

294 (zf

d2
 2

2 a + zstrip
2 x0j<k

d2
 2

p6=0

+ 2 zc+

d2
 2

2 x(j1,j2)6=(0,0)
e2it pk e t2

e t2

2u2|j1+j2u|2

a

2u2|kjpu|2

a)  ipert + iinst.

(5.5.22)

31

the three terms inside the curly brackets are constant, power-suppressed and exponen-
tially-suppressed in the large compactication-volume limit. they correspond to tree-level,
higher perturbative and non-perturbative, respectively, contributions on the type-i side.
the discussion of the perturbative contributions follows exactly the analogous discussion in
section 5.4. the only dierence is the replacement of eq. (5.4.8) by

z 

0

d2
 1+k
2

x(j1,j2)6=(0,0)

e t2

2 u2|j1+j2u|2

t2(cid:19)k
=(k)(cid:18) u2

x(j1,j2)6=(0,0) |j1 + j2u|2k

(5.5.23)

2(k)(2k)

=

(t2)k e(u, k).

where e(u, k) are generalized eisenstein series. in the open-string channel of the type-i side
this takes into account properly the (double) sum over kaluza-klein momenta [30]. notice
that the holomorphic anomalies in a lead again to higher powers of the inverse volume, which
translate to higher-genus contributions on the type-i side. notice also that the k = 1 term
has a logarithmic infrared divergence, which must be regularized appropriately, as discussed
in the introduction.

we turn now to the novel feature of eight dimensions, namely the contributions of world-
sheet instantons. plugging in the expansion (5.2.8) of the elliptic genus, we are lead to
consider the integrals

in,r =zc+

d2
 2
2

e t2

2 u2|kjpu|2 1
 r
2

e2i n

(5.5.24)

doing rst the (gaussian) 1 integral, one nds after some rearrangements

in,r =

1

ks u2

t2

e2in( j+pu1

k

)e2kpt2z 

0

d2
 3/2+r
2

e t2

u2

(k+ nu2
kt2

)22ep2t2u2/2

(5.5.25)

the 2 integration can now be done using the formula

z 

0

dx

x3/2+r eaxb/x = 



b!rr 

b

e2ab

(5.5.26)

where a = t2
)2 and b = p2t2u2 are both proportional to the volume of the
u2
compactication torus. the leading term in the large-volume limit is obtained when all
derivatives hit the exponential in the above expression. using (5.5.26) we nd

(k + nu2
kt2

in,r =

1

k|p|t2   k

|p|u2!r

e2k(p|p|)t2e2in[ j+pu1

k +i|p| u2

k ] (cid:16)1 + o(

1
t2

)(cid:17)

and plugging back into eq. (5.5.22) we obtain

i het
inst  

2v (10)

2106 x0j<k

p>0

1

kpt2

e2it pk a(cid:18)j + pu

k

(cid:19) + c.c.

32

(5.5.27)

(5.5.28)

figure 2: embedding of the lattice  (d1-brane) in the lattice  (target space torus).

this equality is exact for the holomorphic parts of the elliptic genus. correction terms have
the form of an order-rmax polynomial in inverse powers of the volume, as we will discuss in
a minute.

expression (5.5.28) has an elegant rewriting in terms of hecke operators hn [101, 102].
on any modular form r(z) of weight 2r, the action of a hecke operator, dened by [101]

hn [r](z) =

1

n 2r+1 xk,p>0

kp=n x0j<k

k2r r(cid:18)pz + j

k (cid:19) ,

(5.5.29)

gives another modular form of the same weight. the hecke operator is self-adjoint with
respect to the inner product dened by integration of modular forms on a fundamental
domain. using the above denition one nds

i het
inst  

2v (10)
2106

xn =1

1
t2

e2in t hn [a](u) + c.c.

(5.5.30)

in the above form the result might be easier to compare with a calculation based on the
heterotic matrix string theory [103].

let us complete now the calculation, by taking into account the sub-leading terms in the
large-volume limit. using eq. (5.5.26) we can in fact evaluate explicitly the integrals (5.5.24).
after some long but straightforward algebra the correction terms can all be expressed in
terms of the induced moduli

u =

j + pu

k

and t = kpt .

in,2  in,2   1 +

in,1  in,1 (cid:18) 1 +

(2nu2 +

3
2

) +

1
t2

1
t2
1
t 2

2

(nu2 +

(n2u 2

2 +

)(cid:19) ,
1
2
3nu2
2

33

(5.5.31)

(5.5.32)

(5.5.33)

+

3

42 )! .

these terms can be rewritten elegantly by using the operator

this is a modular invariant operator, which annihilates holomorphic forms. the correction
terms for all r = 0, 1, 2 are summarized by the expression

 u 2

2 u

u

(5.5.34)

2 e2iu n 1 +
u r

1
t2

+

1
2

1
2t 2

2

( 2  /2)! u r

2 e2iu n.

(5.5.35)

the instanton sum is modied accordingly to

2v (10)

i het
inst = 

1
t2
one nal rearrangement puts this to the form

2106 xinstantons

e2it  1 +

1
t2

+

1
2

1
2t 2

2

( 2  /2)! a(u) + c.c. . (5.5.36)

i het
inst = 

2v (10)

2106 xinstantons

1
t2

e2it   xs=0

1
s!

1
t s

2

(id)s(u 2

2

u )s! a(u) + c.c. .

(5.5.37)

where here d is the covariant derivative, which acting on a modular form r of weight 2r
gives a form of weight 2r + 2,

dr =(cid:18) i



u 

r

u2(cid:19) r .

(5.5.38)

the virtue of this last rewriting is that the sth operator in the sum annihilates explicitly
the rst s terms in the expansion of the elliptic genus in powers of 1
. from the general
u2
form of a, eq. (5.2.8) we conclude that only the terms with s  2 (s  1) contribute in
the case of sixteen (eight) unbroken real supercharges. the modular-invariant descendants
of the genus, obtained by applying the sth operator on a, determine in fact the corrections
to other dimension-eight operators in the eective action. the full eective action can be
expressed in terms of generalized holomorphic prepotentials, a result that we will not develop
further here.

5.6 d-instanton interpretation

we would now like to understand the above result from the perspective of type-i string
theory. the world-sheet instantons on the heterotic side map to d-brane instantons, that
is euclidean trajectories of d-strings wrapping non-trivially around the compactication
(5.5.16) denes a sublattice () of the
torus. a euclidean trajectory described by eq.
compactication lattice (). if ei=1,2 are the two vectors spanning , then  is spanned
by the vectors ei = mjiej (gure 2). under a change of basis for  () the matrix m
transforms by left (right) multiplication with the appropriate elements of sl(2,z). using
reparametrizations of the world-sheet we can thus bring the basis ei into the canonical form,
eq. (5.5.21), as described in the previous section (see also gure 2).

34

   

   

   

   

   

   

   


   

   

   

   


figure 3: a d1-brane instanton correction to trf 4.

now the key remark is that on the heterotic world-sheet we have an induced complex

structure and kahler modulus, which for positive p are given by

u =

j + pu

k

and t = kpt .

(5.6.1)

for negative ps, describing anti-instantons, we must take the absolute value of p and complex
conjugate these expressions. one can check these facts by inspection of gure 2, or by
computing explicitly the pull-backs of the metric and antisymmetric tensor eld,

g = gx x  , b = bx x  .

(5.6.2)

notice that n = kp is the total number of times the world-sheet wraps around the compact-
ication torus. in terms of induced moduli the instanton sum (5.5.28) takes the form

iinst  

2v (10)

2106 xinstantons

1
t2

e2it a(u) + c.c. .

(5.6.3)

the various terms of this expression have a simple interpretation on the type-i side. the

action of a wrapped d-string is [104]

sdstring =

1

2i z d2q|det gi| 

i

2 z bi

(5.6.4)

where bi is the type-i 2-form coming from the rr sector. using the heterotic/type-i map

t het
2 = t i

2 /i , bhet = bi

(5.6.5)

and the fact that the world-sheet area of the d-string is 42t i
2 , we see that the exponential
of this nambu-goto action reproduces exactly the exponential in the instanton sum, eq.

35

(5.6.3). the inverse factor of the volume comes from the integration of the longitudinal
translation zero modes. finally the elliptic genus of the d-brane complex structure, should
come from the functional integration over the (second quantized) string elds in the instanton
background. a typical diagram contributing to the f 4 coupling is shown in gure 3. for
the purely holomorphic pieces of the elliptic genus the result is topological, so it should be
expected to coincide with the heterotic -model calculation of refs.
[92, 93, 32, 33]. put
dierently, massive string modes and higher-order terms in the eective d-string action are
expected to play no role in the calculation.

from the type-i point of view expression (5.5.28) is, however, still somewhat unnatural.
the three congurations of gure 4 correspond to the same (singular) eective-eld-theory
solution, characterized by two units of the appropriate ramond-ramond charge. why then
should we count them as distinct saddle points? furthermore, the uctuations of the double
d-brane are not described by the usual heterotic -model, but by its (non-abelian) 2  2-
matrix generalization [105, 103], which is the low-energy limit of an open string theory. why
should then the result be proportional to the conventional elliptic genus?

in order to answer these questions it is convenient to put the eective action (5.5.28) in

the more elegant form

i inst = 

v (8)
284

with

e2in thn a(u) + c.c.,

xn =1
n xkp=n

1

0j<k

hn a(u) 

a(cid:18)j + pu

k

(cid:19) .

(5.6.6)

(5.6.7)

we have just seen the geometric interpretation of the hecke operators in terms of inequivalent
n-fold wrappings of the torus by the (heterotic) world-sheet. we will now describe an
alternative interpretation, more appropriate on the type-i side, in terms of the moduli space
of instantons [106, 17]. the key will be to treat this moduli space as a symmetric orbifold
[107, 108, 102], an idea that is more familiar in the context of black-hole state counting [109].

the low-energy uctuations around a conguration of n instantonic d-branes are de-
scribed by a heterotic matrix -model, with local so(n) symmetry on the world-sheet
[105, 103]. the coupling of a constant target-space background eld reads

i  z f 

ij t rs

  t

r hx i dx j 

1
8

sijsis .

under the so(n) gauge symmetry the supercoordinates x i and s a are symmetric matrices,
the current-algebra fermions r are vectors, and d is the antiholomorphic covariant deriva-
tive. we are interested in the functional integral of this -model, with four insertions of i.
notice that contributions of massive string modes are expected to cancel out for this special
amplitude, justifying the reduction of the calculation to the matrix model.

the moduli space of this multi-instanton has a coulomb branch along which the x i
in the type i language these label the positions of n

have diagonal expectation values.

36

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        

        


            

            

            

            

            

            

            

            

            


                 

                 

                 

                 

                 

                 

                 

                 


figure 4: the three distinct ways in which the (shaded) heterotic world-sheet can wrap twice
around the target-space torus.

d0-particles on the orientifold plane 2. at a generic point in this moduli space there are 8n
fermionic zero modes, corresponding to the diagonal components of the matrices s a. since
only eight of them can be absorbed by the insertions of the vertex i, one would naively
conclude that the sectors n > 1 do not contribute. this is wrong because of the residual
gauge symmetry that permutes the positions of the d-branes. the moduli space is thus a
symmetric orbifold and there are potential contributions from its xed points.

let us illustrate how this works in the case of two instantons. the massless uctuations
of the double d-brane are described by a conformal eld theory with target space m 
m/z2, where m is the (transverse) target space of the heterotic string, and z2 is the
exchange symmetry. there are four contributions to the amplitude, corresponding to the
four boundary conditions on the torus. the untwisted sector has 2 8 fermionic zero modes
and does not contribute. the contribution of the remaining three sectors is proportional to

a(2u) + a(cid:16) u

2(cid:17) + a(cid:16)u + 1

2

(cid:17) ,

as can be shown using standard z2-orbifold techniques. this is precisely the action of the
hecke operator h2, corresponding to the sum over the three surfaces of gure 1. the overall
coecient also checks, including the orbifold normalization of 1
2, and the simple factor of the
transverse volume characteristic of the twisted-sector contributions.

the generalization to any n is straightforward. the target space is now the symmetric

2there is also a higgs branch, corresponding to the motion of mirror pairs of d0-particles o the orientifold

plane. because of the so(n)-gaugino zero modes, this part of the moduli space does not contribute.

37

orbifold

n times (cid:30)sn
{z

m  ...  m
}
|

the non-vanishing contributions to the amplitude come from those boundary conditions for
which only the trace part of s a is (doubly) periodic on the torus. up to a common overall
normalization, the result is given by hn a(u), which is the matrix-model generalization of
a. the non-perturbative type-i eective action is obtained by summing over all n, as in
expression (5.6.6).

5.7 heterotic/type-i duality in d < 8

we will now discuss heterotic thresholds in toroidal compactications to d < 8. as we
argued earlier, if d > 4 then the heterotic result is still one-loop only and can be evaluated.
using heterotic/type-i duality we nd again the non-perturbative type-i corrections and we
show that their corresponding d1-brane interpretation is in agreement with the d1-brane
rules given in section 5.6.

our starting point is the general form of the one-loop thresholds

d = ndzf
i het

d2
 2
2

( d/2
2 d,d(g, b)) a( ) ,

where the d + d = 10 and the d-dimensional lattice sum d,d is given by

d,d(g, b) =

g
2 xmi,niz
 d/2

exp(cid:20)


2

(g + b)ij(mi + ni )(mj + nj  )(cid:21) ,

(5.7.1)

(5.7.2)

where g and b are the d-dimensional metric and antisymmetric tensor respectively.

the corresponding integral (5.7.1) can be evaluated again, using the method of orbits.
we refer to [18] for the main steps, and quote here only the result of the non-degenerate
orbit, which comprises the type-i instantonic contributions:

iinst = 2nd

max

2(cid:19)s
xs=0 (cid:18) 3

xm,n

g
(t m,n

2

)s+1 e2it m,n

as(u m,n)

(5.7.3)

here, the induced kahler and complex structure moduli are given by

t m,n = mbn + iq(mgm)(ngn)  (mgn)2
u m,n = (cid:18)mgn + iq(mgm)(ngn)  (mgn)2 (cid:19) /ngn

and the pm,n is over the non-degenerate orbits, which are parametrized by the following
integer-valued 2  d matrices
non-degenerate orbit : at = (cid:18) n1

. . . nk
. . . mk mk+1

. . . md(cid:19)

m1

0

. . .

0

(5.7.4a)

(5.7.4b)

(5.7.5a)

38

1  k < d , nk > mk  0 ,

(mk+1, . . . , md) 6= (0, . . . , 0) . (5.7.5b)

note that for d = 2 the general result (5.7.3) reduces to the one given in (5.5.28).

turning to the d1-brane interpretation of the result, we rst wish to establish that the
exponential factor e2it m,n agrees with the classical action of a d1-brane. the map that
describes the wrapping of the d1-brane world-sheet around a 2-cycle in the d-torus is

x i = ni1 + mi2 ,

i = 1 . . . d ,

(5.7.6)

where x i are the coordinates on t d and 1,2 the d1-brane coordinates. we observe that
modular transformations on the d1-brane coordinates act on the matrix a that enters (5.7.6)

(5.7.7)

a = 


n1 m1
...
...
nd md




by right sl(2,z) transformations, which forces us to pick the representative congurations
described by the matrices in (5.7.5).
i = (ai
and antisymmetric tensor elds are

i )t = (ni, mi), i = 1, 2, we see that the induced metric

in terms of the matrix m i

gij = m i

igijm j

j ,

bij = m i

ibijm j
j .

(5.7.8)

in particular, going through the same steps as in section 5.6, we nd from the d1-brane
classical action (5.6.4) and (5.7.4), (5.7.8) that esclass precisely reduces to the exponential
factor e2it m,n, which is to be summed over the ranges indicated in (5.7.5). we also note

that we correctly observe the overall factor g/q g = g/t m,n

determinant is evaluated at the induced modulus u m,n of the wrapped d1-brane.

2

. moreover, the uctuation

this establishes the claim that the d1-brane rules in d < 8 are consistent with those
in summary, we have found the intuitively expected result: the
obtained for d = 8.
situation is as in eight dimensions with the dierence that now the d1 world-volume can
wrap in many more ways on submanifolds of t 10d.

in the eight-dimensional case it was shown [17, 18] that dierential equations satised by
the (2,2) toroidal lattice sum translate into recursion relations for the thresholds, which can
be solved in terms of holomorphic prepotentials. there is a generalization of such equations
for the (d, d) toroidal lattice sum.

it was noted in refs. [55, 110] that the toroidal partition function d,d(g, b;  ) satises

the following dierential equation:



xij


gij



gij

+

2

2 
1  d


+

1

2xijkl

which in the case d = 2 reduces to

gikgjl

2

bijbkl 

1
4  4 2

2

2

 


ht 2
2 t  t   2

2  i 2,2(t, u;  ) = 0 .

39

d,d(g, b;  ) = 0

(5.7.9)

(5.7.10)

however, the general dierential equation in (5.7.9) is not invariant under the full o(d, d, z)
duality group. it may be veried that it is invariant under integer b shifts and sl(d, z)
basis changes, but there is no invariance under the remaining generators of the duality group,
which are the inversion and factorized duality. the latter two transformations act on the
matrix e  g + b as follows:

e  e1 , e  [(1  ei)e + ei][eie + (1  ei)]1 ,

(ei)k,l = ikil .

(5.7.11)

for example, in the d = 2 case the factorized dualities correspond to t  u and t  1/u
for i = 1 and 2 respectively, which do not leave the dierential equation in (5.7.10) invariant.

this implies that there must be further constraints on d,d generalizing the d = 2 relation

ht 2
2 t  t  u 2

2 u  ui 2,2(t, u;  ) = 0 .

(5.7.12)

to nd the generalization of this relation we note that there is another o(d,d,z)-invariant
dierential equation on the lattice sum, which reads


xijkl

gikgjl

2

eijekl

gij



eij

+

1
4

+xij

d(d  2)  4 2

2  

 d,d(e;  ) = 0 .

(5.7.13)

this is in fact the o(d,d) laplacian [23]. as a consequence we nd that the dierence
between (5.7.9) and (5.7.13) is the dierential equation,


xijkl

(gijgkl  gjkgil)

2

eijekl

+ (1  d)xij

gij



eij

 d,d(e;  ) = 0 ,

(5.7.14)

which, for d = 2, turns out to precisely reduce to (5.7.12).

clearly (5.7.14) is not invariant under the duality group, since (as (5.7.9)) the inver-
sion and factorized duality are broken, but these transformations should be used to form a
complete irreducible set of dierential equations.

the threshold as well as the associated dierential equations were analysed further in
[23]. there, the perturbative threshold was conjectured to be equal to the s=1 eisenstein
series of the spinor of o(d,d).

it is an open problem to dene the analog of prepotentials in the lower-dimensional case.

6 n=4 r2 couplings and ve-brane instantons
in this section we will discuss r2 eective couplings in theories with n=4 supersymmetry.
in particular we will analyse type ii (2,2) vacua as well as the dual heterotic vacua. the
prototype (2,2) vacuum is type ii theory compactied on k3. the dual vacuum is het-
erotic theory compactied on t 4. we will analyse this dual pair and follow it also in four
dimensions.

40

6.1 general remarks

as mentioned in a earlier section, contributions to r2 couplings depend on the type of n = 4
vacua we are considering: (2, 2) vacua, where two supersymmetries come from the left-movers
and two from the right-movers, or (4, 0) vacua, where all four supersymmetries come from
the left-movers only. all heterotic ground-states with n = 4 supersymmetry are of the
(4, 0) type, but (4, 0) type ii vacua can also be constructed [111]. in that case, the axion
dilaton corresponds to the complex scalar in the gravitational multiplet in four dimensions
and, as such, takes values in an su(1,1)/u(1) coset space, while the other scalars form an

dimensions. on the other hand (2, 2) vacua only exist in the type ii theory and have a

so(6,nv ).(cid:16)so(6)so(nv )(cid:17) manifold, where nv is the number of vector multiplets in four
dierent structure: the dilaton is now part of the so(6, nv ).(cid:16)so(6) so(nv )(cid:17) manifold,
while the su(1,1)/u(1) coset is spanned by a perturbative modulus. duality always maps
a (2, 2) ground-state to a (4, 0) ground state [112]. we shall argue that r2 couplings are
exactly given by their one-loop result in all (2, 2) vacua. translated into the dual (4, 0)
theory, the exact r2 coupling now appears to arise from non-perturbative eects, which can
be identied with ns5-brane instantons [15, 16].

at tree level, r2 terms can be obtained directly from the relevant ten-dimensional cal-
culations (see [65]) upon compactication on the appropriate manifold, k3, k3t 2 or t 6.
they turn out to be non-zero in (4, 0) ground-states (heterotic or type ii) and zero for (2, 2)
ground-states. they may a priori also receive higher-loop perturbative corrections, but (4, 0)
ground-states appear to have no perturbative corrections at all, while the perturbative cor-
rections in (2, 2) vacua are expected to come only from one loop owing to the presence of
extended supersymmetry.

these terms are related by supersymmetry to eight-fermion couplings. as such they
may receive non-perturbative corrections from instantons having not more than 8 fermionic
zero-modes. this rules out generic instanton congurations, which break all of the 16 su-
persymmetric charges and therefore possess at least 16 zero-modes. however, there exist
particular congurations that preserve one half of the supersymmetries (this is the only pos-
sibility in six dimensions where there only two supercharges), thereby possessing 8 fermionic
zero-modes3. these congurations correspond to the various p-brane congurations of the
original ten-dimensional theory.

all superstrings in ten dimensions have in common the ns 5-brane that couples to the
dual of the nsns antisymmetric tensor and breaks half of the ten-dimensional supersym-
metry. type ii superstrings also have d p-branes that are charged under the various rr
forms and their duals: p = 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 for type iia theory, p = 1, 1, 3, 5, 7 for type iib. ob-
viously, d-branes are absent from heterotic ground-states. the only instanton conguration
for such vacua is therefore the ns5-brane, which only starts to contribute for dimensions
less than or equal to four.

in (2, 2) models the situation is a bit more involved. let us consider rst the type iia

3instantons with less than 8 zero-modes do not exist, in agreement with the absence of corrections to the

two-derivative or four-fermion action.

41

or iib string compactied on k3 to six dimensions. since k3 is four-dimensional, only
branes with p + 1  4 need be considered as instantons. wrapped in a generic fashion
around submanifolds of k3 they break all supersymmetries and thus do not contribute, in
our calculation. there are, however, supersymmetric 0, 2 and 4 cycles in k3. the relevant
instantons will then have p + 1 = 0, 2, 4, found only in type iib. thus in type iia theory
in type iib theory, all scalar elds span an
we do not expect any instanton corrections.

so(5,21).(cid:16)so(5)so(21)(cid:17) coset space. the perturbative t -duality symmetry o(4,20,z)

combines with the sl(2,z) symmetry in ten dimensions into an o(5,21,z) u-duality symme-
try group. the exact non-perturbative threshold should therefore be an o(5,21,z)-invariant
function of the moduli and, as argued in [5, 6, 7, 23], it can be written as linear combina-
tions of the eisensteinpoincare series. however, all such series have distinct and non-zero
perturbative terms when expanded in terms of any modulus, in disagreement with the fact
that all perturbative corrections should vanish. we thus conclude that the r2 threshold is
non-perturbatively zero also in type iib on k3.

there is an independent argument pointing to the same result. consider compactifying
type iia, b on k3s1. then iia and iib are related by inverting the circle radius. from
the type iia point of view there are now potential instanton corrections from the p = 0, 2, 4-
branes wrapping around a 0, 2, 4 k3 cycle times s1. however, on the heterotic side we are
still in a dimension larger than four so we still have no perturbative or non-perturbative
corrections. this implies that the contribution of the iia instantons still vanishes, as it does
for the iib instantons, which are just the same as the six-dimensional ones. the instanton
contributions in six dimensions thus also have to vanish.

compactifying further to four dimensions on an extra circle, the scalar manifold becomes

su(1,1)/u(1)so(6,22).(cid:16)so(6)so(22)(cid:17) and the duality group sl(2,z)o(6,22,z). the
instanton contributions can come from 5-branes wrapped around k3t 2 as well as, in type
iib, from d3-branes wrapped around t 2 times a k3 2-cycle, and (p, q) d1-branes wrapped
around t 2. the d1-brane contribution is zero since it is related via sl(2,z) duality to that
of the fundamental string world-sheet instantons, which vanish from the one-loop result4.
all other instanton corrections depend non-trivially on the o(6, 22) moduli. again, it is
expected that an o(6, 22)-invariant result would imply perturbative corrections depending
on the o(6, 22) moduli, which are absent, as we will show. therefore, we again obtain that
the non-perturbative corrections vanish in iib, and also in iia. this can also be argued
via type-ii/heterotic/type-i triality. on the heterotic and type-i side these corrections come
from the 5-brane wrapped on t 6. the world-volume action of the d5-brane in type ii theory
is known (and will be calculated further on). wrapping it around t 6 and translating to
heterotic variables produces a result depending only on the s eld. thus on the heterotic side
we do not expect o(6, 22)-dependent corrections, and therefore no instanton contributions
in type ii.

the upshot of the above discussion is that, in (2, 2) models, various dualities imply
that on the type ii side instanton corrections to r2 terms are absent in six, ve and four
4this is equivalent to the statement that in iib the one-loop threshold only depends on the complex
structure u of the torus. this no longer holds for other thresholds such as hh and it is found [16] that
those are non-perturbatively corrected even in type ii.

42

dimensions.

6.2 one-loop corrections in six-dimensional type iia and iib the-

ories

in this section, we compute the one-loop four-derivative terms in the eective action for
type iia and iib theory compactied to six dimensions on the k3 manifold. we will work
in the z2 orbifold limit of k3 in order to be explicit but, as we will show, the result will
be valid for all values of the k3 moduli. to compute the massless spectrum we need the
following geometric data of k3: the einstein metric on k3 is parametrized by 58 scalars,
and the non-zero betti numbers are b0 = b4 = 1 and b2 = 22. out of the 22 two-forms, 3
are self-dual, while the remaining 19 are anti-self-dual. at the t 4/z2 orbifold point of k3,
those correspond to the 3 + 3 z2-even two-forms dxi  dxj and to 16 anti-self-dual two-forms
supported by the two-sphere that blows up each of 16 xed points. with this in mind, it is
easy to derive the massless spectrum:

type iia. the ten-dimensional bosonic massless spectrum consists of the nsns elds
gm n , bm n ,  and of the rr three-form and one-form potentials am n r and am . com-
pactication on k3 then gives in the nsns sector g and 58 scalars, b and 22 scalars,
and the dilaton ; in the rr sector we have a and 22 vectors in addition to a. in
six dimensions, a can be dualized into a vector, so all in all the bosonic elds comprise a
graviton, 1 antisymmetric two-form tensor, 24 u(1) vectors and 81 scalars. hence, we end
up with the following supermultiplets of six-dimensional (1, 1) (non-chiral) supersymmetry:

1 supergravity multiplet , 20 vector multiplets ,

(6.2.1)

where we recall that:
 the (1, 1) supergravity multiplet comprises a graviton, 2 weyl gravitinos of opposite chi-
rality, 4 vectors, 4 weyl spinors of opposite chirality, 1 antisymmetric tensor, 1 real scalar;
 a vector multiplet comprises 1 vector, 2 weyl spinors of opposite chirality, 4 scalars.

the scalars parametrize r+so(4,20).(cid:16)so(4) so(20)(cid:17), where the rst factor corresponds

to the dilaton up to a global o(4,20,z) t -duality identication.

type iib. the ten-dimensional massless bosonic spectrum consists of the nsns elds
gm n , bm n , , and the self-dual four-form a+
m n rs, the two-form am n and the zero-form
a from the rr sector. compactication on k3 then gives in the nsns sector the same
as for type iia. in the rr sector, we obtain respectively a+
 (which is not physical), 22
brr
(of which 19 anti-self-dual and 3 self-dual) and 1 scalar, a and 22 scalars, and the
scalar a itself. if we decompose both b and a into a self-dual and an anti-self-dual part,
the bosonic content comprises a graviton, 5 self-dual and 21 anti-self-dual antisymmetric
tensors and 105 scalars. hence, we end up with the following six-dimensional (2, 0) (chiral)
supermultiplets:



1 supergravity multiplet , 21 tensor multiplets ,

(6.2.2)

where we recall that:
 the (2, 0) supergravity mulitplet comprises a graviton, 5 self-dual antisymmetric tensors,

43

2 left weyl gravitinos, 2 weyl fermions;
 a (2, 0) tensor multiplet comprises 1 anti-self-dual antisymmetric tensor, 5 scalars, 2 weyl
fermions of chirality opposite to that of the gravitinos.

the scalars including the dilaton parametrize the coset space so(5,21).(cid:16)so(5)so(21)(cid:17),

and the low-energy supergravity has a global o(5,21,r) symmetry [113]. the o(5,21,z)
subgroup is the non-perturbative u-duality symmetry [112].

we will consider the three graviton or antisymmetric tensor scattering amplitude at one
loop. we are interested in the piece quartic in momenta of the three-point function (since
the terms we are after are four-derivative terms ):

i = 123zf

d2
 2

2 z

3

yi=1

d2zi

 dv (p1, z1, z1)v (p2, z2, z2)v (p3, z3, z3)e .

(6.2.3)

here the space-time indices run over  = 0, . . . , 5 (see [16] for conventions), and the vertex
operators in the 0-picture are

v (p, z, z) = (cid:16) x (z, z) + ip  (z) (z)(cid:17)(cid:16)x (z, z) + ip  (z)(z)(cid:17)eipx(z,z) ,
where the polarization tensor  is symmetric traceless for a graviton (  1) and antisym-
metric for an antisymmetric two-form gauge eld (  1).

(6.2.4)

altogether the physical conditions are

 =  , p = 0 , pp = 0 , p1 + p2 + p3 = 0 .

(6.2.5)

note that they imply pi  pj = 0 for all i, j. were the pis real and the metric minkowskian,
this would indicate that the momenta are in fact collinear, and all three-point amplitudes
would vanish due to kinematics. this can be evaded by going to complex momenta in
euclidean space.

the expression (6.2.4) gives the form for all the vertex operators when we take the even
spin structure both on the left and the right. when one spin structure (say left) is odd,
though, the presence of a conformal killing spinor together with a world-sheet gravitino
zero-mode requires one of the vertex operators (say the last one) be converted to the 1-
picture on the left

v (p, z, z) = (cid:16) x (z, z) + ip  (z) (z)(cid:17) (z)eipx(z,z) ,

and a left-moving supercurrent

gf = x  + gint
f

(6.2.6)

(6.2.7)

be inserted at an arbitrary point on the world-sheet [114].

there are four possible spin-structure combinations to consider, which can be grouped

in two pairs according to whether they describe cp-even or cp-odd couplings,

cp-even: (cid:26) ee
oo

cp-odd: (cid:26) eo
oe ,

44

(6.2.8)

where we denote e (o) the even (odd) spin structure on the left and the barred analogues for
those on the right.

the low-energy action can then be determined by nding lorentz-invariant terms that
yield the same vertices on-shell. depending on the polarization of the incoming particles,
the string amplitude can be reproduced by the following terms in the eective action (see
[16] for more details):

r2  rr

hh  hh 
b  r  r  br 

 r

b  h  h  bh 
h  h  r  hh 

 h
 r

(6.2.9)

(6.2.10)

(6.2.11)

(6.2.12)

(6.2.13)

h = b + b + b is the eld strength of the two-form potential, and the
left-hand side denes a short-hand notation for the corresponding term (in agreement with

standard notation up to factors of g).

note that other four-derivative terms such as squared ricci tensor or squared scalar
curvature do not contribute at three-graviton scattering in traceless gauge, so that their
coecient cannot be xed at this order. that this remains true at four-graviton scattering
was proved in [115]; it can be seen as a consequence of the eld redenition freedom g 
g + ar + brg, which generates r2 and rr couplings from the variation of the
einstein term. similarly, the coupling of two antisymmetric tensors and one graviton could
as well be reproduced by a variety of rhh terms, equivalent under eld redenitions.

we can do the calculation at the z2 orbifold limit of k3 [16]. we will argue below that

the result is valid for arbitrary k3 moduli.

 the ee sector manifestly receives o(p4) contributions from contractions of four fermi-

ons on both sides, and the resulting terms in the eective action are

e = 323z d6xg(cid:18)r2 +
i ee

1

6hh(cid:19) .

(6.2.14)

 in the oo sector we nd the same result, but with an overall minus sign depending

on whether we consider type iia or iib ( = 1 in iia and  = 1 in iib) :

e = 323z d6xg(cid:18)r2 +
i oo

1

6hh(cid:19) .

(6.2.15)

therefore, one-loop string corrections generate r2 and hh terms in the eective
action of type iia superstring on k3, while no such terms appear in the type iib
superstring.

45

 the cp-odd sectors eo and oe again lead to the same vertices up to a sign depending

on type iia, b but also on the nature of the particles involved. this leaves

e, iia = 323z d6xg
i cpodd

1
2

(b  r  r + b  h  h) ,

e, iib = 323z d6xg
i cpodd

1
6

h  h  r .

(6.2.16a)

(6.2.16b)

summarizing, we can put the results (6.2.14), (6.2.15) for the cp-even terms and (6.2.16)
for the cp-odd terms together, and we record the one-loop four-derivative terms in the
six-dimensional eective action for type iia and iib:

b  (r  r + h  h)(cid:19) ,

(6.2.17a)

(6.2.17b)

ie, iia =

1

 z d6xg(cid:18)2r2 +
ie, iib = 

1
2

1
3hh +
6 z d6xg h  h  r ,

1

the cp-odd term b  tr(r  r) was rst calculated in [116]. there, it was also explained
how it can be obtained from the analogous ten-dimensional term b r4 by reducing on k3.
as a check note that the type iia theory should be invariant under a combined space-
time (p ) and world-sheet parity (). since the levicivita  tensor changes sign under p
while the b eld changes sign under , we verify the correct invariance under p . on the
other hand, the type iib theory is correctly invariant under the world-sheet parity , since
the interactions contain an even number of antisymmetric tensor elds.

we should stress here that these thresholds, although they were computed at the t 4/z2
orbifold point of k3 are valid for any value of the k3 moduli. the reason is that the
threshold is proportional to the elliptic genus of k3 (which in this case is equal to the k3
euler number) and thus is moduli-independent. it can also be seen directly in the t 4/z2
calculation as follows. the result is obviously independent of the (4, 4) orbifold moduli.
all the other moduli have vertex operators that are proportional to the twist elds of the
orbifold. the correlator of three gravitons or antisymmetric tensors and one of the extra
moduli is identically zero, since the symmetry changes the sign of twist elds. thus, the
derivatives of the threshold with respect to the extra moduli are zero.

6.3 one-loop gravitational corrections in four-dimensions

further compactication of six-dimensional n = 2 type iia, b string theory on a two-
torus yields n = 4 string theories in four dimensions. six-dimensional duality between
heterotic string on t 4 and type iia string on k3 is expected to descend to a duality between
the corresponding four-dimensional n = 4 compactied theories.5. the thresholds here
will depend on the two-torus moduli t, u. we will be interested in computing the moduli

5for a derivation of the explicit map see [24, 25].

46

dependence of the four-derivative terms involving the graviton, antisymmetric tensor and
dilaton, more generally called gravitational thresholds. the terms of interest are therefore:

ie =

2

3z d4xg

(cid:16) gr(t, u)rr + gr(t, u)rr 
+ as(t, u)hh  + as(t, u)hh 
+ dil(t, u) + dilas(t, u)h
+ gras(t, u)rh 





(6.3.1)



(cid:17) .

again, we will use a short-hand notation for each term appearing in the above expression:
r2, r  r, hh, hh, , h, r h. note that there is no non-
vanishing on-shell rh-coupling between one graviton and one two-form, nor any  
 or   r couplings.

the thresholds in eq. (6.3.1), as advocated earlier, are expressible in terms of the 4

helicity supertrace [16] and, as such, will receive contributions from 1/2-bps states only.

by direct calculation [15, 16] we can extract the derivatives of the thresholds with respect
to the torus moduli. they are expressible as integrals over the two-torus partition function.
moreover each of the thresholds depends only on one complex modulus but not the other.
for example

u gr = 0

type iia: ( t gr = rf
type iib: ( t gr = 0
u gr = rf

d2
2

t b4

d2
2

u b4 .

(6.3.2a)

(6.3.2b)

we recover in this way the well-known result that gr only depends on the kahler moduli
t and not on the complex-structure moduli u in type iia, while the reverse is true in
type iib [58]. similar interferences occur for all thresholds and yield the following moduli
dependences:

iia : gr(t ) , as(u) , dil(u) , gr(t ) , as(t ) , gras(u) , dilas(u) , (6.3.3a)
iib : gr(u) , as(t ) , dil(t ) , gr(u) , as(u) , gras(t ) , dilas(t ) . (6.3.3b)
the dependence of gr(t ) is consistent with our argument that the r2 term does not
get corrections beyond one loop. however, there exists a subgroup of so(6, nv , z) that
exchanges the (type iia) u-modulus with the dilaton s-modulus, so that so(6, nv , z)
duality implies that as, dil, gras, dilas are also s-dependent, i.e. are perturbatively
and non-perturbatively corrected. the loophole in the argument of section 2 is that, for
these couplings, the world-sheet instantons of the type iib string are non-zero (since they
depend on the type iib t -modulus), and therefore the (p, q) d 1-branes do contribute to
instanton corrections. from now on we shall restrict ourselves to r2 thresholds, for which
the type ii one-loop result is exact.

the helicity supertrace b4 entering in the threshold can be readily computed with the

result:

b4 = 36 2,2 .

47

(6.3.4)

we insert b4 into eq. (6.3.2a) and use the fundamental-domain integral [100] to obtain the
r2 thresholds [15]:

type iia: gr(t ) = 36 log(cid:16)t2 |(t )|4(cid:17) + const. ,
type iib: gr(u) = 36 log(cid:16)u2 |(u)|4(cid:17) + const. ,

(6.3.5a)

(6.3.5b)

where the constant is undetermined. note that the one-loop thresholds are respectively
invariant under sl(2,z)t and sl(2,z)u , as they should.

6.4 cp-odd couplings and holomorphic anomalies

moving on to the cp-odd couplings and focusing on the iia case for deniteness, we nd
[16]

t gr = 

9i

22 t log(cid:16)t2 |(t )|4(cid:17) ,  t gr =

9i

22  t log(cid:16)t2 |(t )|4(cid:17) .

(6.4.1)

would the non-harmonic t2 term be absent, those two equations could be easily integrated
and would give

gr(t ) =

9
22 log 4(t ) .

(6.4.2)

however, in the presence of the t2 term the notation t  and  t  for cp-odd couplings
between two gravitons and one modulus no longer makes sense. this non-integrability of
cp-odd couplings has already been encountered before [56]. this problem can be evaded
simply by rewriting the cp-odd coupling as

i cpodd

gr

= z   (zt dt + z t d t ) ,

(6.4.3)

where  is the gravitational chernsimons three-form, such that d = r  r.
in the
special case zt = t (t, t ), z t =  t (t, t ), one retrieves by partial integration the usual
integrable cp-odd coupling. in the case at hand,

zt = 

9i

22 t log(cid:16)t2 |(t )|4(cid:17) , z t =

9i

22  t log(cid:16)t2 |(t )|4(cid:17) .

(6.4.4)

we can take advantage of the special structure of eq. (6.4.4) and rewrite eq. (6.4.3) as

i cpodd

as

=

3

2 z (cid:18)(cid:16)log 4(t )(cid:17) r  r 

1
t2

  dt1(cid:19) .

in the decompactication limit t2  , only the rst term survives and we obtain

i cpodd

gr

=

3

2 z (cid:18)

3

t1 r  r + o(1/t2)(cid:19) .

this reproduces the six-dimensional type iia result (6.2.17a).

48

(6.4.5)

(6.4.6)

6.5 from the type-ii to the heterotic string

the type ii theory compactied on k3t 2 is dual to the heterotic string compactied on
t 6. the duality map exchanges s and t , where s is the axiondilaton multiplet, sitting in
the gravitational multiplet on the heterotic side. it also acts by electric-magnetic duality on
the two gauge elds coming from the antisymmetric tensor on the t 2 [25, 24].

contrary to the type-ii theory, the heterotic string theory possesses a tree-level r2
coupling6 required for anomaly cancellation through the greenschwarz mechanism, together
with an r2 coupling required for supersymmetry. the world-sheet fermions now have 8 zero-
modes, so that the one-loop three-particle amplitude vanishes (in even spin structure, one
would need four fermionic contractions to have a non-vanishing result after spin-structure
summation). in particular, we conclude that there is no one-loop correction to tree-level r2
coupling.

we can therefore translate the type iia result (6.3.5a) for the heterotic string on t 6:

gr(s) = 36 log(cid:16)s2 |(s)|4(cid:17) = 12s2  36 log(s2) +

(6.5.1)

+72

xn =1


xp|n

1

p
he2in s + e2in si

the s2   heterotic weak-coupling limit exhibits the tree-level r  rr coupling to-
gether with a non-perturbative logarithmic divergence. such a logarithmic divergence is also
present in other instances [5]. the full threshold is manifestly invariant under sl(2,z)s, and
could in fact be inferred from sl(2,z)s completion of the tree-level result. the exponentially
suppressed terms in eq. (6.5.1) can be identied [15] with the instanton contributions of the
neutral heterotic ns5-brane wrapped on t 6, the only instanton conguration preserving half
the space-time supersymmetry that can possibly occur in four-dimensional heterotic string.

the same mapping can be executed for the cp-odd r  r coupling:
  ds1(cid:19) .

= 18z (cid:18)(cid:16)log 4(s)(cid:17) r  r 

i cpodd

1
s2

gr

(6.5.2)

there, however, in addition to the tree-level term and instead of the logarithmic divergence,
we nd a coupling between the axion and the gravitational chernsimons form. dualizing
the axion into a two-form and keeping track of the powers of the heterotic coupling s2,
this translates into a one-loop coupling h between one two-form and two gravitons,
excluded by a one-loop heterotic calculation. happily enough, the chernsimons form is co-
closed, so that this coupling is a total derivative and does not contribute to matrix elements.

6.6 ns5-brane instantons

the heterotic ns5-brane is a bps 5-brane that breaks half of the supersymmetry [77]. its
long-range elds in the transverse space include four-dimensional instanton congurations.

6this coupling exists in the axion-dilaton frame. in the frame with the antisymmetric tensor this coupling

becomes the gravitational chern-simons correction to the antisymmetric tensor eld strength.

49

in the heterotic theory, the zero mode uctuation spectrum for a thick ve-brane is composed
of hypermultiplets. it was further shown using heterotic/type-i duality that in the limit of
zero thickness (zero instanton size) there is an su(2) gauge symmetry restored [85]. the
most important for us terms of its world-volume action are cp-even nambu-goto volume
term as well as the the cp-odd coupling to the dual of the antisymmetric tensor. the other
terms involving the gauge elds as well as the charged hypermultiplets are not excited in a
supersymmetric (bps) conguration and we will ignore them. thus,

s5brane = t5z d6 eqdet g + it5z d6 b012345 +   

the induced elds are dened as

gab = g

x
a

x
b

(6.6.1)

(6.6.2)

and similarly for the six-form b1,6 that is the dual of b in ten dimensions. x are coor-
dinates in ten-dimensional space-time whereas a are the coordinates of the six-dimensional
world-volume. the dots in (6.6.1) stand for interactions that are not relevant for our analy-
sis. the tension t5 can be obtained by saturating the nepometchie-teitelboim quantization
condition [82, 117] (the analogue of the dirac quantization condition for branes) which in
ten dimensions reads

tpt6p =

2n
22
10

(6.6.3)

the electric dual of the heterotic ns5-brane is the perturbative heterotic string with tension
t1 = 1/(2). using 22
10 = (2)74 and (6.6.3) for n=1, we obtain the ns5-brane tension

t5 =

1

(2)53

(6.6.4)

remember that the full tension is et5 = t5/g2
string coupling.

s where gs is the ten-dimensional heterotic

we can use the denition of the six-form b,

db = e d b  (1
and the denition of the four-dimensional axion

b27 + cyclic) =

17

1
3!

det g

8910

e (8b910 + cyclic) (6.6.5)

e4h =





g

a

(6.6.6)

to show that when the ten-dimensional b has only four-dimensional (transverse) depen-
dence then

1
6!

16 b16 = a

(6.6.7)

we have suppressed above an overall constant that cannot be determined from the duality
transformation. this is necessary in order to match the instanton action.

50

we must now consider the ns5-brane rotated to euclidean space. moreover, in order
for it to have a nite action, its (euclidean) world-volume must wrap (supersymmetrically)
around t 6. we will now calculate esclass and show that it has the form expected from
duality in (6.5.1).

we will take the world-volume of the ns5-brane to be also a six-torus. the supersym-

metric map is then

(6.6.8)
b is an integer valued matrix. the volume of the target t 6 is (2)63v6. it is

x a = m a

bb

where m a
straightforward to evaluate

z d6qdet g = (2)63v6|det m|

(6.6.9)

n = det m is the winding number, that tells us how many times the brane is wrapping
around the torus. we also have

for constant axion. putting everything together we obtain

z d6 b012345 = (2)63 a det m
sclass = t5z d6 eqdet g + it5z d6 b012345 = 2|n|

(6.6.10)

v6
g2
s

+ 2nia =

(6.6.11)

= 2|n|

1
g2
4

+ 2ina = 2(|n| s2 + ina)

where in the last equality we have introduced the four-dimensional (dimensionless) heterotic
string coupling as the imaginary part of the complex s eld. thus, for positive n we obtain
the instanton factor

esclass = e2in s

(6.6.12)

which is holomorphic in s. for n negative we obtain the anti-instanton contribution instead

esclass = e2in s

(6.6.13)

these instanton correction factors have exactly the form predicted by duality in (6.5.1).

duality predicts that the determinant is  pp|n

1
p, while there are no further corrections.
it is hard to see how one could reproduce this determinant from a ns5-brane calculation.
if the brane is free to wrap any possible way around t 6 without any other factor, then we
should be gauge-xing the sl(6,z) world-sheet symmetry acting on the left on m and sum
on the left-over entries. this does not reproduce the result. rather, it seems that the brane
wraps in a unique way on a t 4 subtorus, and then freely (modulo sl(2)) on the left-over t 2.
it would be very interesting to calculate the determinant from rst principles. a promising
approach would be to do the calculation in the type-i dual picture in which case we will be
dealing with the type-i d5-brane.

there are further n=4 d=4 type-ii ground-states that are dual to heterotic string ground-
states. some of them are not left-right symmetric so that they do not have a direct geo-
metrical interpretation. moreover, the montonen-olive duality relevant in the heterotic side
corresponds to proper subgroups of sl(2,z)s. similar tests for these extended dualities (cor-
responding to calculating the r2 and other thresholds) have been carried out in [16, 118].

51

6.7 absence of d=4 instanton corrections for trf 4 in the n=4

heterotic theory

we had argued that the rst dimension where non-perturbative eects are expected to modify
bps-saturated amplitudes in the heterotic string is d=4. there is however already a eld
theory result [72] that claims that non-perturbative eects cannot renormalize f 4 couplings
in n=4 four-dimensional super yang-mills theory. there, the full result is one-loop only. we
will argue here that the same is true when gravity is included for the trf 4 terms (instanton
eects cannot be excluded for the graviphoton f 4 terms).

heterotic/type iia duality in six dimensions implies that the one loop trf 4 terms in
the heterotic theory should be generated at tree level in the type-ii theory. moreover it
is easy to argue that there cannot be any d-instanton corrections to such terms in six
dimensions in the type iia theory. the reason is that the potential instantons are due to
d0, and d2 branes and these need supersymmetric one- and three-cycles inside k3 and
there is none. let us consider further compactication on a two-torus. the tree-level result
will remain independent from the volume t2 of the two torus. moreover, now there are
potential non-perturbative corrections due to d0,d2,d4 and ns5 branes. all the d-branes
cannot wrap supersymmetrically the whole of t 2. they wrap one-cycles, the contribution

is proportional to the length t2 but this makes 1/g6  1/g4 up to the complex structure
modulus. consequently the threshold due to these is independent of t2. the same is true for
the ns5-induced threshold, since there the wrapping of ns5 around k3t 2 would produce
6. the upshot of the above is that the full f 4 threshold in four-dimensional
1/g2
type ii theory on k3t 2 is dependent only on o(6,22) moduli, and is independent on the
sl(2)/u(1) modulus, t.

4 = t2/g2

the above automatically implies that the heterotic results is independent of s so that
in particular there are no instanton corrections in d=4 to trf 4 terms in the heterotic string
[119].

7 n=8, r4 couplings and d-brane instantons in type

ii string theory

another context where our knowledge on stringy instanton corrections has improved consid-
erably recently is that of the r4 thresholds in the toroidal compactications of type-ii string
theory with maximal supersymmetry. we will be brief here since there are already three
good recent reviews of several aspects of the problem at hand [120, 121, 122]. there, various
aspects of the problem are treated in more detail. here we will only provide an overview.
in ten dimensions, for maximal n=8 supersymmetry, the two r4 invariants are both
1/2-bps-saturated (as discussed in section 3.4). they get contributions from tree level and
one-loop only. a detailed discussion of the tree and one-loop contributions in the type-iia,b
strings can be found in [5]. in [123] a two-loop calculation of the four graviton amplitude
was performed. this implies a potential two-loop contribution for the r4 threshold [124],

52

which is not obviously zero. there are independent arguments though that indicate that the
two and higher loop contributions would vanish [75, 22, 76]. the way out would be that the
two-loop integrand [124] is a total derivative on moduli space.

in the ten-dimensional type-iia case there are no potential instanton corrections. the
lowest order d-brane here, is a d0 brane which needs a one-dimensional compact manifold in
order to provide a nite instanton correction. in ten-dimensional type-iib theory, however,
we have d(-1) instantons, that break half of the space-time supersymmetry and are thus, just
right to give non-perturbative corrections to the r4 threshold. in fact, such non-perturbative
corrections are required by the conjectured sl(2,z) invariance of the ten-dimensional type-
iib theory. the non-perturbative threshold was rst conjectured [2] to be given by the
sl(2,z), weight-3/2 eisenstein series which was sl(2,z) invariant and matched perturbation
theory. afterwards, this conjecture was found to be a consequence of heterotic/type ii duality
[8], and the sl(2,r) structure of n=2 supersymmetry [75, 22, 76].

another insight was provided in [4] where the threshold was calculated by using an
eleven-dimensional perspective. upon compactication in nine dimensions, we have two
complementary pictures. in the type-iib theory we still expect only d(-1) instanton contri-
butions which, since they are localized in space-time, are essentially the same as in ten (up
to trivial compactication factors). the next type-iib brane namely the d1-brane needs
a two-dimensional compact manifold to provide an instanton and can start contributing in
eight or lower dimensions, but not in nine. on the other hand, in the type-iia theory,
the d0 branes can now wrap their world-lines around the s1 and provide instanton con-
tributions to the r4 threshold. moreover, the type iia and iib thresholds are mapped
to one-another by the r  1/r standard t-duality relating the type-iia,b vacua in nine
dimensions. now d0-branes are essentially the kaluza-klein modes of the supergraviton of
the eleven-dimensional m-theory. this gives an intuitive explanation why the full threshold
can be calculated in nine-dimensions from a one-loop amplitude in eleven-dimensional su-
pergravity (there is also a subtlety: the power divergence of this amplitude must be cut-o
by hand [4]). moreover, in a generic compactication of the type-ii theory on a t n torus
to 10-n dimensions, the eleven-dimensional one-loop supergraviton amplitude is giving the
d0-instanton contribution to the threshold. however in d < 9 dimensions there are further
non-perturbative contributions.

the problem at hand is: can we calculate the r4 threshold at various lower-dimensional
ground-states? the motivation for this is manyfold: the eective r4 terms and their su-
persymmetric partners [20, 76] are the leading -corrections to the supergravity eective
action (with maximal supersymmetry) and they are useful for checking the departure from
eld theory in many contexts. for example, stringy corrections to black-hole entropy can be
associated with these eective terms [125]. such cp-even terms are related by supersym-
metry to cp-odd terms that are crucial in anomaly (inow) arguments [126]. thus, their
(non-perturbative) corrections are also of importance. finally, we need to understand the
quantitative rules of d-instanton calculus, which can be useful in other more complicated
situations.

the essential approach for dealing with lower dimensions is a tumbling-down process
by jumping alternatively between type-iia and type-iib language. we have already argued

53

that in nine-dimensions by t-duality we have understood the non-perturbative corrections as
euclidean d0-branes wrapping around the s1. going to d=8 by compactifying the type-iia
theory on t 2, we can still calculate the d0-contribution: the only dierence here is that d0-
branes can now wrap on either cycle of the t 2. moreover since the d2-branes need a three-
manifold to give instanton corrections, the d0-brane result captures all non-perturbative
corrections in d=8. now, by a t-duality we translate the threshold in type-iib language.
here we expect both d(-1) and d1-instanton corrections. since the d(-1)-contributions are
already understood in d=10, knowledge of the full result allows us to dissentagle the d1-
contributions. thus, at the end, in d=8 we know all d(-1), d0 and d1 rules. going now to
d=7 by compactifying the theory on t 3, we can now do the full calculation in the type-iib
language. the reason is that all non-perturbative contributions come from the d(-1) and
d1 branes (the d3 brane needs a four-manifold to contribute). by t-dualizing we can learn
the d2-brane contribution in the type-iia theory which contributes in d=7. it is obvious
that by bouncing back and forth using t-duality between type-iia and type iib language
we will be able to work out all dp-brane instanton rules as well as the r4 threshold in lower
dimensions.

there are other possibilities though.

in [5], the focus has rst been in d=8 type-iib
theory. there, we have a one-loop contribution, which is given by the integral of the toroidal
partition function on the fundamental domain of the torus modulus. this integral is well
known [100] and gives a degenerate contribution (depending on the complex structure u
of the torus), and a non-degenerate contribution that contains terms that are exponentially
suppressed as functions of the torus volume t2. these are contributions of fundamental
string instantons, where the string wraps its world-sheet around the two-torus. the sl(2,z)
symmetry of the theory implies that apart from the fundamental (1,0) string we also have
(p,q) strings. the (0,1) string is the d1-string, and the (p,q) strings can be thought of
as bound states at threshold [127]. using sl(2,z) to calculate the eective torus volume,
the full threshold can be written as a sum of the d(-1) instanton contribution as well as
a sum over the instanton contributions of the (p,q) strings. this almost captures the full
threshold. the subtlety arises from the logarithmic infrared divergence of the threshold in
eight dimensions. an extra logarithm of the moduli needs to be added so that the threshold
is invariant under the u-duality group sl(3,z)sl(2,z). the nal result is the sum of the
weight-3/2 eisenstein series for sl(3,z) and the weight-1 eisenstein series for sl(2,z). this
can be independently understood from eleven dimensions. the relevant contributions is that
of supergravitons on t 3 that generate the sl(3,z) eisenstein series as well as the m2-brane
wrapped on t 3 that generates the sl(2,z) eisenstein series.

in seven dimensions, the u-duality group is sl(5,z). a natural guess for the threshold
is the weight-3/2 sl(5,z) eisenstein series. this turns out to be correct [5] as it gives
the correct one-loop threshold and its non-perturbative piece agrees with the d(-1) and d1
instanton corrections that are expected in the seven-dimensional type-iib theory.

finally, there is the procedure inspired by the eleven-dimensional origin of the type-iia
theory [6, 7]. the idea is the following: the supergraviton one-loop threshold of the eleven-
dimensional theory compactied on t n, appropriately regularized, gives the d0-instanton
contribution of the type-ii theory compactied on t n1. picking a direction in the torus, say

54

the rst, we can perform a t duality transformation. this automatically gives as the ampli-
tude for d1 branes in the 1-direction as well as d(-1) instantons. however, the t-dualization
has been done in a specic direction. in order to obtain the most general d1+d(-1) instan-
ton contribution on t n we need to covariantize the result in the eleven-dimensional sense.
this can be done, [6]. continuing further with t-duality, we can obtain the d2-d0 instanton
contribution, the d3-d1-d(-1) instanton contribution etc. furthermore, such contributions
(as well as the one-loop ones) can be neatly described as appropriate generalized eisenstein
series for the u-duality groups en(n)(z) [23]. the precise conjecture is that the r4 threshold
is proportional to the weight s=3/2 ed(d) eisenstein series for the string representation (the
5 for sl(5,z), the 10 for so(5,5,z), the 27 of e6(6), the 133 of e7(7) etc. [121]).

this procedure was worked out in detail up to six-dimensional toroidal compactications
of type ii theory. the the six-dimensional r4 threshold seems to contain e1/g2
s contributions
that are characteristic of ns5-instantons but which, on the other hand, cannot contribute
in six dimensions. their contribution though is not uniform [23]. the answer to this puzzle
is so far unknown.

8 summary and open problems

we have given a survey of bps-saturated terms in extended supersymmetric theories. such
terms:

(1) obtain perturbative corrections from bps states only.

(2) the perturbative corrections appear at a single order of perturbation theory, usually

at one-loop.

(3) they satisfy holomorphicity constraints.

(4) they obtain instanton corrections from bps-instantons (instanton congurations

that preserve some fraction of the original supersymmetry).

(5) if there exists an o-shell formulation they can be easily constructed.

due to the properties cited above, they are important in testing the consistency of non-
perturbative dualities in supersymmetric theories. they are also central in understanding
the detailed rules of non-perturbative dualities and in particular those of instanton calculus.

we have given an extended example of such techniques here: we analysed in some detail
the issue of heterotic/type-i duality. the two theories are dual in ten dimensions. the
relevant bps-saturated couplings that obtain non-trivial corrections are f 4 and r4 type
couplings. their coecients match properly in ten dimensions. upon compactication on
a circle, it turns out that the thresholds still match in perturbation theory (up to contact
terms that we will return to later). this implies that no soliton loops are necessary for
agreement. moreover, in nine-dimensions no instanton contributions are expected in either
theory.

compactifying to eight dimensions, the heterotic thresholds are still one-loop. however,
now instanton corrections are expected on the type-i side due to the euclidean d1-brane

55

wrapping around the two-torus. this was conrmed and using duality we derived the relevant
instanton sum. the summation rules in the type-i side were also elucidated, and are in
accord with what is expected from a matrix theory setup. moreover it can be checked that
the picture works also in less than eight dimensions.

there has been more work in this direction conrming the picture above, and testing
further the duality as well as instanton calculations, [66, 128, 129]. perturbative corrections
around the instantons have been computed [130]. since the eight-dimensional heterotic string
is expected to be dual to f-theory on k3, this suggested a geometric way of understanding
f 4 thresholds in the f-theory compactication. such an understanding has been pursued in
[70] where the thresholds were written in terms data on multiple k3 surfaces.

there are, however, several open problems. as we saw, the heterotic threshold and duality
implies that there should be extra contact terms on the type-i side that seem to correspond
to higher orders of type-i perturbation theory ( = 1,2). moreover, the r2 threshold on
the annulus in the type-i theory, turns out to be non-zero [66] and depends on the complex
structure modulus. a similar situation (planck-mass one-loop renormalization in type-i and
heterotic unmatched contact term ) occurred in n=2 heterotic/type-ii compactications to
four dimensions [57]. there, the duality map had to be modied and accounted for the
discrepancy. it is not obvious what the resolution is in our case.

another open problem is the application of the instanton rules derived here to the type-i
d5-brane. this will generate new instanton corrections in four dimensions for r4 terms or in
three-dimensions for the f 4 terms. moreover, via duality they will be related to ns5-brane
instanton corrections on the heterotic side7.

there should also be an innite series of bps-saturated terms sensitive to 1/2 bps
multiplets in n=4 supersymmetry. as mentioned earlier, their type-ii thresholds should
be related to topological amplitudes of the k3 -model, [73]. moreover there should exist
bps-saturated terms (like f 6 terms that are sensitive to 1/4-bps states. the existence of
such terms (namely r4t 4g4, with t the graviphoton eld strength) is also suggested in [66]
where the appropriate thresholds have been computed in eight dimensions. thresholds of
1/4 bps-saturated terms are crucial in order to test the existence and spectrum of 1/4-bps
states due to string networks [131]

in the type-i theory, the leading (disk) eective action is given by the born-infeld action
that provides, if expanded, an innite series of higher f 2n terms. we have been analysing
the f 4 piece of that series. according to heterotic/type-i duality the higher terms should
come from two and higher loops in the heterotic theory. this has never been checked.

we have further looked at another example where there is an interplay of duality and
instantons. this was the case of heterotic/type iia duality in six dimensions and its four-
dimensional avatar. on the type-ii side, the r2 threshold is given by a one-loop result and
depends on the volume modulus t of the t 2. by duality t  s and this gives the tree
level heterotic result plus terms that as we have argued can be interpreted as ns5-brane
instantons. this is another situation where duality implies some rules of instanton calculus,
which on the other hand do not look as natural as we had seen in the previous case. it seems

7some as yet unpublished work in this direction was reported to me by k. narain.

56

that the ns5-brane has to wrap once around t 4 and then in any possible way around the
extra t 2.8 an natural interpretation of the instanton uctuation determinant is lacking.

in six dimensions, there is no extensive quantitative test of heterotic/type-ii duality.
this would amount to a comparison of f 4 and r4 terms on both sides. as in the heterotic
case, we do not expect non-perturbative corrections on the type-ii side for the f 4,r4,r2f 2
terms. this can be seen as follows: the relevant dp-branes of the ten-dimensional iia theory
have p = 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 with world-sheets being 1, 3, 5, 7, 9-dimensional. to obtain an instanton
contribution we need appropriate supersymmetric cycles on k3 with dimension belonging
to the list above. it is known that there are no such cycles. moreover, we also have the
ve-brane, which is magnetically coupled to the ns-ns antisymmetric tensor. since its
world-sheet is six-dimensional it can only give instanton corrections in d < 5 dimensions.
thus, in d = 6, heterotic/type-ii duality can be tested for the special terms in perturbation
theory. the relevant objects on the type-ii side are the n = 4 topological amplitudes dened
in [73]. the tree-level f 4 terms on the type-ii side should match the one-loop corrections
to such terms on the heterotic side. the innite series of higher-loop f 2n terms. on the
heterotic side correspond here to an innite sequence of tree level f 2n terms.

we can further compactify both theories on a circle to ve dimensions. there are still no
non-perturbative corrections on the heterotic side. in the type-ii theory, we expect instanton
corrections from the d2- and d4-branes, which are electrically (magnetically) charged under
the 3-form. the d2-brane can wrap around s1 and a supersymmetric two-cycle of k3. the
d4-brane can wrap on s1 and the whole of k3. these non-perturbative type-ii corrections
are expected to reproduce the heterotic cross-terms coupling the (4,4) and the (1,1) lattice.
a more thorough investigation is needed, however.

finally, in the last section we gave a brief account of r4 thresholds in toroidal compact-
ications of type-ii string theory, and their relation to dp-brane instantons. we described
various ways of guessing or calculating the dp-instanton contributions. up to seven dimen-
sions, the situation is simpler and the rules are well understood, [2, 4, 5, 6, 132, 7]. the
situation in six dimensions has been worked out in [6, 23] and seems at present to indicate
puzzling e1/g2
s non-perturbative terms (although the expansion is not under strict control).
there is certainly more to be learned in this direction. moreover, other higher derivative
terms have been analysed in this context [21, 133] and their non-perturbative thresholds
have been linked to eleven dimensions [21, 134].

there is a further puzzle that was evident in the case of four-dimensional heterotic/type-
ii duality for the r2 terms, but it is in fact generic. this is the problem of logarithmic moduli
dependence due to logarithmic ir divergences. in this particular context, the problem was
as follows: the one-loop type-ii r2 threshold depends logarithmically on t2 and this is due
to the (physical) ir-divergence. this, upon duality implies for the heterotic threshold a
term that is logarithmic in the string coupling. the heterotic origin of such a term is at least
obscure. another example is related to the r4 type-ii couplings and discussed in [5]. in
d=8, the r4 threshold is logarithmically ir divergent. this is reected by the appearance
8a similar phenomenon seems to appear in the case of m2-brane instanton corrections to the r4 coupling

in compactied type iia theory.

57

of moduli logarithms in the one-loop result. once we add the instanton contributions, the
threshold is almost sl(3,z)-invariant but not quite, [5]. an extra logarithmic term has to
be added in order to render it invariant. there are more examples related to r2 thresholds
in n=2 ground-states in four dimensions [135]

acknowledgements

this research was partially supported by eec grant tmr-erbfmrxct96-0090.

i
would like to thank my collaborators, c. bachas, c. fabre, a. gregori, c. kounnas, n.
obers, b. pioline and p. vanhove for collaboration, friendship, ideas and explanations. i
would also like to thank the organizers of the spring school for giving me the opportunity
to present these lectures. i am indebted to n. obers and b. pioline for a critical reading of
the manuscript.

58

references

[1] m. green and j. polchinski, phys. lett. b335 (1994) 377, hep-th/9406012;

j. polchinski, phys. rev. d50 (1994) 6041, hep-th/9407031;
m.b. green, phys. lett. b354 (1995) 271, hep-th/9504108.

[2] m.b. green and m. gutperle, nucl. phys. b498 (1997) 195, hep-th/9701093.

[3] j.l.f. barbon, phys. lett. b404 (1997) 33, hep-th/9701075;

j.l.f. barbon and m.a. vasquez-mozo, nucl. phys. b497 (1997) 236, hep-
th/9701142.

[4] m.b. green and p. vanhove, hep-th/9704145;

m.b. green, m. gutperle and p. vanhove, hep-th/9706175.

[5] e. kiritsis and b. pioline, nucl. phys. b508 (1997) 509, hep-th/9707018.

[6] b. pioline and e. kiritsis, phys. lett. b418 (1998) 61, hep-th/9710078.

[7] b. pioline, fortsch. phys. 47 (1999) 271; hep-th/9712155.

[8] i. antoniadis, b. pioline and t.r. taylor, nucl. phys. b512 (1998) 61, hep-

th/9707222.

[9] j. russo and a.a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b508 (1997) 245, hep-th/9707134.

[10] k. becker, m. becker and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b456 (1995) 130, hep-

th/9507158.

[11] h. ooguri and c. vafa, phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 3296, hep-th/9608079;

b. greene, d. morrison and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b481 (1996) 513, hep-th/9608039.

[12] m. oloughlin, phys. lett. b385 (1996), hep-th/9601179.

[13] e. witten, nucl. phys. b474 (1996) 343, hep-th/9604030;

r. donagi, a. grassi and e. witten, mod. phys. lett. a11 (1996) 2199, hep-
th/9607091;
p. mayr, nucl. phys. b494 (1997) 489, hep-th/9610162.

[14] s. kachru, e. silverstein and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b480 (1996) 170, hep-

th/9605036;
s. kachru and e. silverstein, nucl. phys. b462 (1996) 92, hep-th/9608194.

[15] j. harvey and g. moore, hep-th/9610237.

[16] a. gregori, e. kiritsis, c. kounnas, n. obers, m. petropoulos and b. pioline, hep-

th/9708062.

[17] c. bachas, c. fabre, e. kiritsis, n. obers and p. vanhove, nucl. phys. b509 (1998)

33, hep-th/9707126.

59

[18] e. kiritsis and n. obers, jhep 9710 (1997) 004, hep-th/9709058.

[19] c. bachas, nucl. phys. [proc.suppl.] 68 (1998) 348, hep-th/9710102;

p. vanhove, hep-th/9712079.

[20] a. kehagias and h. partouche, phys. lett. b422 (1998) 109; hep-th/9710023.

[21] a. kehagias and h. partouche, int. j. mod. phys. a13 (1998) 5075; hep-th/9712164.

[22] b. pioline, phys. lett. b431 (1998) 73; hep-th/9804023.

[23] n. obers and b. pioline, hep-th/9903113.

[24] e. kiritsis introduction to string theory, leuven university press, 1998, 315 p,

isbn 90 6186 8947, hep-th/9709062.

[25] e. kiritsis,introduction to non-perturbative string theory, hep-th/9708130.

[26] p. howe and p. west, phys. lett. b223 (1989) 377; lett. b258 (1991) 369; phys.

lett. b261 (1991) 396;
i. jack, t. jones and p. west, phys. lett. b258 (1991) 375.

[27] l. girardello and m. grisaru, nucl. phys. b194 (1982) 65.

[28] e. bergshoe and m. de roo, nucl. phys. b328 (1989) 439;

m. de roo, h. suelmann and a. wiedemann, phys. lett. b280 (1992) 39; nucl.
phys. b405 (1993) 326, hep-th/9210099.

[29] j. harvey and g. moore, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 315, hep-th/9510182.

[30] c. bachas and e. kiritsis, nucl. phys. [proc.suppl.] 55b (1997) 194; hep-th/9611205.

[31] s. ferrara, c. savoy and l. girardello, phys. lett. b105 (1983) 363.

[32] o. alvarez, t. p. killingback, m. mangano and p. windey, in the proceedings of the
irvine conf. on non-perturbative methods in physics, irvine, calif., jan 5-9, 1987
nucl. phys. b (proc. suppl.) 1a;
o. alvarez, t. p. killingback, m. mangano and p. windey, commun. math. phys,
111 (1987) 1.

[33] e. witten, commun. math. phys. 109 (1987) 525;

e. witten, the dirac operator in loop space, in p. landweber, elliptic curves and
modular forms in algebraic topology, lecture notes in mathematics, springer verlag,
1988.

[34] e. verlinde and h. verlinde, phys. lett. b192 (1987) 95;

j. atick, g. moore and a. sen, nucl. phys. b308 (1988) 1.

[35] j. atick, g. moore and a. sen, nucl. phys. b307 (1988) 221.

60

[36] j. atick, l. dixon and a. sen, nucl. phys. b292 (1987) 109.

[37] j. louis and b. de wit, hep-th/9801132.

[38] j. wess and b. zumino, phys. lett. b49 (1974) 52;

j.iliopoulos and b. zumino, nucl. phys. b76 (1974) 310;
p. west nucl. phys. b106 (1976) 219.

[39] v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, nucl. phys. b422 (1994) 57, hep-th/9402005; nucl.

phys. b444 (1995) 191, hep-th/9502077 .

[40] m. dine and n. seiberg, phys. rev. lett. 57 (1986) 2625.

[41] m. dine and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 589; m. dine, i. ichinose and n.

seiberg, nucl. phys. b293 (1987) 253.

[42] j. atick and a. sen, nucl. phys. b296 (1988) 157.

[43] w. lerche, jhep 11 (1997) 004, hep-th/9709146.

[44] l. ibanez, r. rabadan and a. uranga, hep-th/9808139.

[45] i. antoniadis, e. gava, k. narain and t. taylor, nucl. phys. b476 (1996) 133,

hep-th/9604077.

[46] e. cremmer, c. kounnas, a. van proeyen, j.p. derendinger, s. ferrara, b. de wit

and l. girardello, nucl. phys. b250 (1985) 385;
b. de wit, p.o. lauwers and a. van proeyen, nucl. phys. b255 (1985) 569;
s. cecotti, s. ferarra and l. girardello, int. j. mod. phys. a4 (1989) 2475.

[47] l. andrianopoli, m. bertolini, a. ceresole, r. dauria, s. ferrara, p. fre and t.

magri, j. geom. phys. 23 (1997) 111, hep-th/9605032;
j. louis and k. foerger, holomorphic couplings in string theory, hep-th/9611184.

[48] p. c. argyres, m. r. plesser and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b471 (1996) 159, hep-

th/9603042.

[49] p. candelas, x. de la ossa, p. green and l. parkes, nucl. phys. b359 (1991) 21;

s. hosono, a. klemm and s. theisen, lectures on mirror symmetry hep-
th/9403096.

[50] a. strominger, nucl. phys. b451 (1995) 96, hep-th/9504090;

b. r. greene, d. r. morrison and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b451 (1995) 109,
hep-th/9504145.

61

[51] s. kachru and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b450 (1995) 69, hep-th/9505105;

s. ferrara, j. harvey, a. strominger and c. vafa, phys. lett. b361 (1995) 59, hep-
th/9505162;
a. klemm, w. lerche and p. mayr, phys. lett. b357 (1996) 313, hep-th/9506112;
s. kachru, a. klemm, w. lerche, p. mayr and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b459 (1996)
537, hep-th/9508155;
g. aldazabal, a. font, l. ibanez and f. quevedo, nucl. phys. b461 (1996) 85,
hep-th/9510093, phys. lett. b380 (1996) 33, hep-th/9602097.

[52] b. de wit, v. kaplunovsky, j. louis and d. lust, nucl. phys. b451 (1995) 53; hep-

th/9504006;
i. antoniadis, s. ferrara, e. gava, k. s. narain and t. r. taylor, nucl. phys. b447
(1995) 35; hep-th/9504034.

[53] a. klemm, w. lerche, p. mayr, c. vafa and n. warner, nucl. phys. b477 (1996)

746, hep-th/9604034;
w. lerche and n. p. warner, phys. lett. b423 (1998) 79, hep-th/9608183;
w. lerche, p. mayr and n. p. warner, nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 125, hep-th/9612085;
w. lerche, nucl. phys. 55b [proc.suppl.] (1997) 83; fortsch. phys. 45 (1997) 293;
hep-th/9611190.

[54] i. antoniadis, e. gava and k. s. narain, nucl. phys. b383 (1992) 93, hep-

th/9204030.

[55] e. kiritsis and c. kounnas, nucl. phys. b442 (1995) 472, hep-th/9501020; nucl.

phys. [proc. suppl.] 41 (1995) 331, hep-th/9410212; hep-th/9507051.

[56] i. antoniadis, e. gava, k.s. narain and t.r. taylor, nucl. phys. b407 (1993) 706,

hep-th/9212045.

[57] i. antoniadis, c. bachas, c. fabre, h. partouche and t. taylor, nucl. phys b489

(1997) 160, hep-th/9608012.

[58] m. bershadsky, s. cecotti, h. ooguri and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b405 (1993) 279,

hep-th/9302103; commun. math. phys. 165 (1994) 311, hep-th/9309140.

[59] i. antoniadis, e. gava, k.s. narain and t.r. taylor, nucl. phys. b413 (1994) 162,

hep-th/9307158 ; nucl. phys. b455 (1995) 109, hep-th/9507115.

[60] b. de wit, g. lopes cardoso, d. lust, t. mohaupt, sj. rey, nucl. phys. b481

(1996) 353, hep-th/9607184.

[61] i. antoniadis, h. partouche and t.r. taylor, nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 29, hep-

th/9703076;
m. serone, phys. lett. b395 (1997) 42; erratum-ibid b401 (1997) 363, hep-
th/9611017;
m. serone and j.f. morales, hep-th/9703049.

62

[62] d. ghoshal and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b453 (1995) 121, hep-th/9506122.

[63] m. sohnius and p. west phys. lett. b100 (1981) 45;

s.mandelstam, nucl. phys. b213 (1983) 149;
p.s. howe, k.s. stelle and p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b214 (1983) 519; nucl. phys.
b236 (1984) 125;
l. brink, o. lindgren and b. nilsson, nucl. phys. b212 (1983) 401.

[64] m.b. green, j.h. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory, cambridge u. press,

1987.

[65] d. gross and j. sloan, nucl. phys. b291 (1987) 41.

[66] c. foerger, hep-th/9812154.

c. foerger and s. stieberger, hep-th/9901020.

[67] m. du, in the proceedings of the trieste spring school on supergravity, 1981.

[68] a. tseytlin, phys. lett. b367 (1996) 84, hep-th/9510173; nucl. phys. b467 (1996)

383, hep-th/9512081

[69] c. vafa, nucl. phys. b469 (1996) 403, hep-th/9602022.

[70] w. lerche, s. stieberger and n. warner, hep-th/9811228; hep-th/9901162;

w. lerche, s. stieberger, hep-th/9804176; hep-th/9903232.

[71] o. yasuda, phys. lett. b215 (1988) 306; phys. lett. b218 (1989) 455.

[72] m. dine and n. seiberg, phys. lett. b409 (1997) 239, hep-th/9705057.

[73] n. berkovits and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b433 (1995) 123, hep-th/9407190;

h. ooguri and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b451 (1995) 121, hep-th/9505183.

[74] e. cremmer, b. julia and j. scherk, phys. lett. b76 (1978) 409.

[75] n. berkovits, nucl. phys. b514 (1998) 191; hep-th/9709116.

[76] m. green and s. sethi, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 046006; hep-th/9808061.

[77] c. callan, j. harvey and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b359 (1991) 611; nucl. phys.

b367 (1991) 60.

[78] j. polchinski, phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 4724; hep-th/9510017.

[79] k. becker, m. becker, d. r. morrison, h. ooguri, y. oz and z. yin, nucl. phys.

b480 (1996) 225; hep-th/9608116;
g.w.gibbons and g.papadopoulos, comm. math. phys. 202 (1999) 593; hep-
th/9803163;
j. gauntlett, n. lambert and p. west, comm. math. phys. 202 (1999) 571; hep-
th/9803216;

63

j. m. figueroa-ofarril, hep-th/9806040;
j. gutowski, g. papadopoulos and p.k. townsend, hep-th/9905156.

[80] a. belavin, a. polyakov, a. schwartz and y. tyupkin, phys. lett. b59 (1975) 85.

[81] a. polyakov, nucl. phys. b120 (1977) 429.

[82] r. savit, phys. rev. lett. 39 (1977) 55;
p. osland, nucl. phys. b205 (1982) 107;
r. pearson, phys. rev. d26 (1982) 2013.

[83] j. kosterlitz and d. thouless, j. phys. c6 (1973) 1181.

[84] v. dealfaro, s. fubini and g. furlan, phys. lett. b65 (1976) 163;
c. callan, r. dashen and d. gross, phys. rev. d17 (1978) 2717;
a. actor, rev. mod. phys. 51 (1979) 461.

[85] e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 541, hep-th/9511030.

[86] a. dabholkar, phys. lett. b357 (1995) 307, hep-th/9506160.

[87] c. hull, phys. lett. b357 (1995) 545, hep-th/9506194; nucl. phys. b468 (1996) 113,

hep-th/9512181.

[88] c. bachas and e. kiritsis, phys. lett. b325 (1994) 103, hep-th/9311185.

[89] e. witten, nucl. phys. b443 (1995) 85, hep-th/9503124.

[90] j. polchinski and e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 525, hep-th/9510169.

[91] a. sen, nucl. phys. [proc.suppl.] 58 (1997) 5; hep-th/9609176.

[92] w. lerche, b. nilsson and a. schellekens, nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 609;

w. lerche, b.e.w. nilson, a.n. schellekens and n.p. warner, nucl. phys. b299
(1988) 91;
w. lerche, a. schellekens and n. warner, phys. rep. 177 (1989) 1.

[93] w. lerche, nucl. phys. b308 (1988) 102

[94] j. atick and a. sen, phys. lett. b186 (1987) 339.

[95] m. chemtob, phys. rev. d56 (1997) 2323, hep-th/9703206.

[96] c. bachas and c. fabre, nucl. phys. b476 (1996) 418, hep-th/9605028.

[97] e. silverstein, phys. lett. b396 (1997) 91-96, hep-th/9611195.

[98] b. mcclain and b.d.b. roth, commmun. math. phys. 111 (1987)539;

k. o brien and c. tan, phys. rev. d36 (1987) 1184;
p. ditsas and e.g. floratos, phys. lett. 201 (1988) 49.

64

[99] , d. kutasov and n. seiberg, nucl. phys. b358 (1991).

[100] l.j. dixon, v.s. kaplunovsky and j. louis, nucl. phys. b355 (1991) 649.

[101] j.p. serre, cours d arithmetique, puf paris 1970.

[102] r. dijkgraaf, g. moore, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, hep-th/9608096.

[103] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde,nucl. phys. b500 (1997) 43, hep-

th/9703030;
t. banks and l. motl, jhep 9712 (1997) 004, hep-th/9703218;
a. lowe, nucl. phys. b501 (1997) 134, hep-th/9702006; phys. lett. b403 (1997)
243, hep-th/9704041;
n. kim and s. j. rey, nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 189, hep-th/9701139;
s.j. rey, nucl. phys. b502 (1997) 170, hep-th/9704158;
p. horava, nucl. phys. b505 (1997) 84, hep-th/9705055.

[104] j. polchinski, s. chaudhuri and c. johnson, hep-th/9602052;

j. polchinski, hep-th/9611050;
c. bachas, hep-th/9806199.

[105] u. danielsson, g. ferretti, int. j. mod. phys. a12 (1997) 4581, hep-th/9610082;

s. kachru and e. silverstein, phys. lett. b396 (1997) 70, hep-th/9612162;
t. banks, n. seiberg and e. silverstein, phys. lett. b401 (1997) 30, hep-th/9703052;

[106] c. bachas and p. vanhove, 1997, (unpublished).

[107] c. vafa and e. witten, nucl. phys. b431 (1994) 3, hep-th/9408074.

[108] c. vafa, nucl. phys. b463(1996)415,hep-th/9511088; ibid. b463(1996) 435, hep-

th/9512078;
m. bershadsky, v. sadov and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 420, hep-th/9511222.

[109] a. strominger and c. vafa, phys. lett. b379 (1996) 99, hep-th/9601029;

j. maldacena and l. susskind, nucl. phys. b475 (1996) 679, hep-th/9604042.

[110] e. kiritsis and c. kounnas, nucl. phys. [proc. suppl.] 45bc (1996) 207, hep-

th/9509017; hep-th/9507051.

[111] s. ferrara and c. kounnas, nucl. phys. b328 (1989) 406.

[112] c.m. hull and p.k. townsend, nucl. phys. b438 (1995) 109, hep-th/9410167.

[113] l. romans, nucl. phys. b276 (1986) 71.

[114] d.j. gross and p.f. mende, nucl. phys. b291 (1987) 653.

[115] k. forger, b.a. ovrut, s.j. theisen and d. waldram, phys. lett. b388 (1996) 512,

hep-th/9605145.

65

[116] c. vafa and e. witten, nucl. phys. b447 (1995) 261, hep-th/9505053.

[117] r. nepomechie, phys. rev. d31 (1985) 1921;

c. teitelboim, phys. lett. b167 (1986) 69.

[118] a. gregori, c. kounnas and p. m. petropoulos, nucl. phys. b537 (1999) 317; hep-

th/9808024; hep-th/9901117.

[119] e. kiritsis, n. obers and b. pioline, to appear.

[120] b. pioline, phd thesis, hep-th/9806123.

[121] n. obers and b. pioline, hep-th/9809039.

[122] m. green, hep-th/9903124.

[123] r. iengo and c. j. zhu, phys. lett. b212 (1988) 313.

[124] r. iengo and c. j. zhu, hep-th/9905050.

[125] j. maldacena, a. strominger and e. witten, jhep 12 (1997) 002; hep-th/9711053.

[126] m. li, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 351; hep-th/9510161;

m. douglas, hep-th/9512077;
m. bershadsky, v. sadov and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 420; hep-th/9511222;
m. green, j. harvey and g. moore, class. quant. grav. 14 (1997) 47; hep-
th/9605033.

[127] e. witten, nucl. phys. b460 (1996) 335; hep-th/9510135.

[128] i. kostov and p. vanhove, phys. lett. b444 (1998) 196, hep-th/9809130;

p. vanhove, hep-th/9903050.

[129] m. green and m. gutperle, phys. rev. d58 (1998) 046007, hep-th/9804123;

m. gutperle hep-th/9903010, hep-th/9905173.

[130] m. bianchi, e. gava, f. morales and k.s. narain, hep-th/9811013;

e. gava, a. hammou, j.f. morales and k.s. narain hep-th/9902202.

[131] k. dasgupta and s. mukhi, phys. lett. b423 (1998) 261, hep-th/9711094;

a. sen, jhep 9803:005,1998, kep-th/9711130

[132] n. obers, b. pioline and e. rabinovici, nucl. phys. b525 (1998) 163, hep-

th/9712084.
n. obers and b. pioline, hep-th/9809039.

[133] n. berkovits and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 181; hep-th/9803145.

[134] r. gopakumar and c. vafa, hep-th/9809187; hep-th/9812127.

[135] v. kaplunovsky, j. louis, s. theisen, phys. lett. b357 (1995) 71; hep-th/9506110.

66

