hep-th/9906246
scipp-99/23
pupt-1875

remarks on the racetrack scheme

michael dinea and yuri shirmanb

asanta cruz institute for particle physics, santa cruz ca 95064
bphysics department, princeton university, princeton, nj 08544

abstract

there are only a small number of ideas for stabilizing the moduli of string theory. one
of the most appealing of these is the racetrack mechanism, in which a delicate interplay
between two strongly interacting gauge groups xes the value of the coupling constant. in
this note, we explore this scenario. we nd that quite generally, some number of discrete
tunings are required in order that the mechanism yield a small gauge coupling. even
then, there is, in general, no systematic weak coupling approximation. on the other hand,
certain holomorphic quantities can be computed, so such a scheme is in principle predictive.
searching for models which realize this mechanism is thus of great interest. we also remark
on cosmology in these schemes.

0
0
0
2

 
t
c
o
8
1

 

 
 

5
v
6
4
2
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

introduction

understanding how the moduli of string or m -theory compactications are xed is one of the

greatest challenges of the subject. for compactications with more than four supersymmetries

(n > 1 in four dimensions), general considerations suggest that there is an exact moduli space.

in the case of four or less supersymmetries, generically the at directions are lifted, with the

potential typically tending to zero in any region in which the appropriate couplings tend to zero
or the radii tend to .1

this argument suggests that the string coupling should be strong, and the scales of the

theory should be comparable [2]. this in turn raises the question: why are the observed

gauge couplings in nature weak and unied, and why does the unication scale seem to dier

signicantly from the planck scale? this is the real issue in stabilization of the moduli: given

that stabilization must occur, if at all, in regions where no sort of weak coupling approximation

can be valid, why should anything be calculable? it is, after all, not hard to imagine schemes to

stabilize the moduli, but it is hard to see why the coupling should be small, except as a result

of numerical accidents, shrouded in mysterious high energy physics. in this view, none of the

parameters of low energy physics would be calculable in any systematic approximation scheme.

these points are illustrated by the various toy models of modulus stabilization which appear

in the literature. most of these focus on a single modulus, and postulate superpotentials from

one or another source which provide stabilization [3, 4, 5]. generically, however, the couplings

turn out to be of order one in these proposals, and it is necessary to suppose that uncontrolled

strong coupling dynamics explains why the coupling is small. these models certainly illustrate

that the gauge coupling can be small, but they do not predict that any of the parameters of

low energy physics should be calculable.

it is perhaps worth noting that one can construct

weakly coupled string models with (at tree level), as few as a single modulus [6], or in which all

moduli or all moduli but one are charged under discrete symmetries. one can also contemplate

theories with no moduli at all [7] or in which all moduli transform under unbroken symmetries,

but it is unclear whether any controlled approximation might be available.

there are only a small number of proposals for xing moduli in which some quantities

are calculable. one is known as kahler stabilization [8]. here one imagines starting with

1in compactications of non-supersymmetric string theories, the story is slightly dierent. generically, in the
loop expansion, one nds a non-zero cosmological constant, as a result of which the energy may blow up for large
radius, but will still tend to zero for small coupling. an example of an n = 1 theory where some of the moduli
are exact was given in [1].

2

some weakly coupled limit of m theory (i.e. some limit in which a systematic approximation

is available), where one can calculate holomorphic quantities such as the gauge coupling func-

tions and the superpotential. in other words, as one takes some modulus to extreme values,
m  , one comes to a regime where one can perform systematic calculations in m1. the

superpotential and gauge couplings are holomorphic, and because of discrete shift symmetries,
they are functions of em. as one increases the couplings one supposes that, in a regime where

the exponential is small, there are large corrections to the kahler potentials of the moduli, such

that the potential has a minimum at weak coupling. any holomorphic quantity which can be

computed in the weak coupling limit will be calculable in such a picture.

a second proposal involves the possibility of maximally enhanced symmetry [9]. here

one argues that the minimum of the full potential might naturally lie at a point where all of

the moduli transform under unbroken symmetries.

in addition to the fact that such points

are automatically stationary points of the eective action, this hypothesis naturally solves the

moduli problem of string cosmology. however, generically in such states,   1. one must

hope that there are some such states for which the eective low energy couplings happens to

be small (and unied). little is calculable in such a picture; however, this hypothesis leads

to the prediction that supersymmetry will be broken at low energies, and that some sort of

gauge mediation will play a crucial role. a third possibility is that there are simply no moduli.

operationally, this hypothesis is similar to that of maximally enhanced symmetry.

in the

context of large extra dimensions, possibilities involving large topological charges have been

proposed [10, 11, 12], and in some cases, the size of the extra dimension is correlated with

the smallness of the gauge couplings [13]. finally, we will focus in this note on the racetrack

mechanism [14, 15, 16, 17].

the racetrack proposal is in some sense more ambitious than the others we have listed.

here one hopes for a systematic analysis of moduli stabilization in the low energy eective eld

theory. the basic idea is that competing eects from dierent low energy gauge groups may

give rise to a local minimum for the moduli, in a computable fashion, at weak coupling. one

might then hope to compute other quantities relevant to low energy physics.

from the beginning, questions have been raised about calculability in this scenario [18, 19].

this question will be a central focus of our investigation. we will see that in some versions

of the racetrack scheme, nothing is computable and that most quantities are not likely to be

computable in any circumstance. but upon more careful consideration, it will become clear

that the racetrack scenario has many features in common with the kahler stabilization and

3

maximally enhanced symmetry hypotheses in that in some cases, holomorphic quantities such

as the gauge couplings and superpotential are computable. to simplify the discussion, we will

assume unication, so the standard model gauge couplings are controlled by a single modulus,

which we will loosely refer to as the dilaton. we point out that in order to have any control

over low energy physics, it is necessary that the scale of the gauge groups be hierarchically small,

i.e. that it be much below the fundamental scale. this requires one (discrete) ne-tuning. even

then, one is unlikely to be able to compute the kahler potential in a systematic weak coupling

approximation; there is, in general, no quantity which one can take arbitrarily small in order to

justify such a calculation. holomorphic quantities, however, may be computable, just as in the

case of kahler stabilization. in other words, one can compute holomorphic quantities at weak

coupling, and these computations should be reliable at the true minimum. the point is simply

that, by symmetries and holomorphy, corrections to holomorphic quantities are controlled by
powers of es, so that if this quantity is hierarchically small, corrections are similarly small.

this is not the case for the kahler potential and other non-holomorphic quantities. no

simple symmetry argument controls its dependence on s. in some instances, we can exhibit

large corrections to the kahler potential by examining the low energy eective eld theory. if

we assume that the appropriate cuto for this theory is that governed by the relations between

couplings and scales of the weakly coupled heterotic string, corrections to the kahler potential,

as we will see, are formally of order one. if we take the scalings suggested by the horava-witten

picture,the story is somewhat dierent. in this limit, corrections to the kahler potential are

suppressed by powers of , the size of the eleventh dimension. corrections to higher derivative

operators in the low energy eld theory are of order one. if one assumes that a type i picture is
g2
ef f
82 .

valid, as we will see, corrections to quantities in the low energy theory are suppressed by

given that one cannot make the gauge groups (and hence the coupling constants) arbi-

trarily small in these limits, the message we take from these observations is that generally only

holomorphic quantities will be calculable. still, we cannot rule out the possibility that we might

be lucky, and that leading order computations might be reliable for other quantities as well.

apart from these dierences, it is perhaps worthwhile to distinguish two cases: supersym-

metry unbroken at the minimum of the potential, and supersymmetry broken. in the latter

case, because of the potential problem of computing the kahler potential, it is dicult to per-

form any analysis. if one supposes that the kahler potential is calculable, then one can compute

the cosmological constant; for typical forms of the superpotential, it is unlikely to vanish.

in the case that the potential for s does not break supersymmetry, one has, in principle,

4

more control. holomorphic quantities are computable. moreover, as will be described else-

where, such a situation might be desirable for cosmology. in this case, some other sector of

the theory must be responsible for supersymmetry breaking. if gravity is the principle mes-

senger of supersymmetry breaking (as is possible if the symmetries are not enhanced), the

non-calculability of the kahler potential means that one has little control over the low energy

dynamics. soft breakings, in particular, are not computable. the situation is potentially quite

dierent if supersymmetry is broken by low energy dynamics, as in gauge mediated models.

the gauge couplings and some yukawa couplings (i.e. ratios which depend only on holomorphic

quantities) would be computable. the soft breakings would be computable in terms of a small

number of parameters (some terms in the low energy eective superpotential would depend

on uncontrollable kahler potential corrections). many of the uncomputable non-holomorphic

quantities may be of little relevance to low energy physics.

the racetrack explains how one modulus is xed, with a large value for its mass. if there

are other moduli, they may still pose problems for cosmology. on the other hand, if these

moduli all sit at enhanced symmetry points, the cosmological moduli problem[20, 21] is solved,

and low energy breaking, as in the case of maximally enhanced symmetry, is inevitable. in such

a picture, it is quite natural that only one modulus has a large value in fundamental units,

and thus is responsible for the observed values of the gauge couplings and their unication. as

stressed by the authors of [20], any low energy supersymmetry breaking scheme has a drawback:

in order to generate a term in the superpotential of the correct order of magnitude to lead to

vanishing cosmological constant, it is necessary to postulate some additional strong dynamics

beyond that which breaks supersymmetry. we will make some remarks on this below. it is not

clear whether this problem is truly more severe than the extreme ne tuning required in any

case.

this picture is indeed attractive from a cosmological point of view, as discussed in [20].

these authors argued that it might be desirable to x the mass of some moduli at scales well

above the scale of supersymmetry breaking. any remaining moduli pose potential cosmological

problems, unless, as argued in [22], they sit at enhanced symmetry points.

before investigating these questions, we should introduce our basic assumptions and some

terminology. our focus is on the question: why are the gauge couplings small and unied. to

address this, we will assume, as stated above, that there is one modulus whose value controls

the size of the observed gauge couplings (other moduli, with small expectation values, could

also couple). we will refer to this modulus as the dilaton, and denote it by m, though we

5

wont assume that this eld is to be identied with what is usually called the dilaton in weakly

coupled string theory. second, we need to explain, as in any such discussion, what is meant

by the term modulus. clearly, since we are discussing the problem of stabilization, we are

not supposing that there is an exact moduli space. we have instead in mind the possibility

that there are approximate moduli, whose masses at their minima are small compared to the

fundamental scale, and which become exact moduli in some limit. finally, we are assuming

throughout that there is approximate low energy supersymmetry. indeed, we will see that it is

hard to make sense of the racetrack scheme without it.

one must also note that there are actually several versions of the racetrack idea. most are

tied specically to gaugino condensation, but this is not necessary [23], and, as we will see, has

certain disadvantages. all involve generating a superpotential in the low energy theory. in most

versions of the scenario, the dynamics which xes the moduli does not break supersymmetry.

we will argue that this is essential if the gauge couplings are to be calculable. in perhaps the

simplest proposal, there are several groups coupled to the dilaton with very large -functions [17,

23]. in this case, as we will see, the usual low energy analysis yields a small value for the gauge

coupling. however, the scale of the low energy theory is of order the fundamental scale, and the

low energy analysis is not valid. one might have hoped that holomorphy and symmetries would

allow one to extend the range of validity of these methods. however the modulus superpotential,

even assuming the relevance of the low energy theory, is a much more complicated function

than usually assumed. this superpotential is not calculable, and the mass of the modulus is of

order one. generically, the cosmological constant will be of order one, though it is possible, in

principle, for it to vanish at this level, due to symmetries. so, in this case, little is gained over

simply assuming that the theory has a supersymmetry-preserving minimum at some desired

value of the coupling.

more promising is a second, (discretely) ne-tuned version, in which several groups have

very similar, large -functions.

in this case, the coupling can be small, and there can be a

hierarchy of scales. in the case where gluino condensation is the origin of the superpotential,

at least three groups must have nearly equal, large -functions, and special relations must

hold among threshold factors. however, following [23], we can consider models with unbroken

r symmetries (in this reference it was supposed that the symmetries were continuous but

discrete symmetries can also accomplish the same objectives; the role of discrete r symmetries

in obtaining unbroken supersymmetry was rst stressed in [20]).

in this case, only one ne

tuning is required, though one also needs many gauge singlet elds and discrete symmetries.

6

even in this discretely ne-tuned case, it is unlikely that some sort of weak coupling

analysis will be possible. first, there is no small parameter (such as 1/n ) which justies

such an approximation. second, if one assumes the relations of couplings and scales as in the

weakly coupled heterotic string, while the gauge couplings are numerically small, it is easy to

exhibit loop corrections, at least for non-holomorphic quantities, which are of order one. as

we have already noted, the situation is dierent in other string theories, but given that one

cannot obtain very large gauge groups in these limits, we view this result as suggestive of a

more general diculty. however, certain holomorphic quantities are under control, and may

be susceptible to analysis in the low energy theory. to understand this, one should imagine

rst passing to the weak coupling limit. in this limit, high energy, eects in the superpotential
and gauge coupling function go as powers of em. the low energy analysis yields a coupling
such that em is extremely small. so these corrections should be under control. in a scheme

of this sort, one must still understand the breaking of supersymmetry and the xing of any

other moduli. if the breaking is at scales intermediate between the weak and planck scales,

(as in supergravity models), low energy soft breaking is not calculable. if breaking is at low

energies, as in gauge mediation, many of the important features of the low energy theory may

be calculable.

dierent scalings hold in the type i or strongly coupled heterotic string limits and it is con-

ceivable that the kahler potential is calculable. but even if many quantities are not calculable,

one would be left with a rather appealing picture. allowing one numerical coincidence (some

close relation among beta functions), one would hope to develop a complete phenomenology

starting from a weakly coupled limit. one would still need to understand the problem of the

cosmological constant, of course.

we turn, nally, to the possibility that supersymmetry is broken simultaneously with xing

the moduli. for such scenarios, we note that, in light of our observation that one cannot compute

the kahler potential, very little, if anything is accessible to analysis. the gauge couplings would

not be calculable, nor would soft breaking terms. it is possible that, as in the case of kahler

stabilization, some terms in the superpotential might be. even if one could use the lowest order

kahler potential (as we will see might conceivably be the case) one has another diculty: the

cosmological constant is calculable, and typically non-vanishing at the minimum.

in the following sections, we review the racetrack idea and describe these possibilities in

greater detail. we conclude by arguing that indeed the racetrack idea, whether ultimately

realized in nature or not, does provide a viable model for understanding the smallness of the

7

gauge couplings in a theory which is inherently strongly coupled. as an application, we consider

the implication of such a picture for scenarios with large internal dimensions.

2 the susy conserving version of the racetrack idea

kaplunovsky and louis have put forth an appealing version of the racetrack idea. they note

that studies of f -theory compactications have yielded classical ground states of the theory

with enormous gauge groups. suppose, now, that one has two gauge groups (without matter 

these remarks all readily generalize to cases with matter in which the strong gauge group does

not by itself break supersymmetry) with very large -functions, say

b1 = an

b2 = bn,

(1)

where n is a large integer, and a and b are (rational numbers) of order unity. suppose the

gauge couplings of both groups are controlled by a single modulus, m, i.e. the lagrangian at

low energies looks like

z d2m(w 2

1 + w 2

2 ).

then the usual arguments for gluino condensation yield a superpotential for m:

w = b1em/b1  b2em/b2 .

(2)

(3)

(if the couplings are not the same at the fundamental scale, this dierence can be absorbed

into the bis.) here  and  are numbers of order one which arise due to threshold corrections.
this superpotential has a stationary point at

for large n , this behaves as

m =

b1b2

b1  b2

ln(




).

m  n ln(/).

at the stationary point, however, w is non-zero,

w = (b1  b2)(cid:18) 

(cid:19)

b2

b1b2

(when b1 = b2, there is no stationary point).

8

(4)

(5)

(6)

this would appear to be what is needed to stabilize the dilaton at weak coupling, and would

even seem to be rather generic. there are at least two diculties, however, which appear more or

less fundamental. the rst has to do with the self consistency of the calculation, and the second

to do with the problem of the cosmological constant. the usual analysis of gluino condensation

assumes that the scale of the low energy gauge theory, , is well below the fundamental scale.

but in this scheme,  is of order one. as a result, it is not at all clear why one can look at the

gauge group, and not consider the full set of massive string (m-) theory states.

still, sometimes holomorphy and symmetries can signicantly constrain the form of the

superpotential, so we might hope that the low energy analysis captures some of the truth.

to assess this possibility, let us consider the eects of non-renormalizable operators on the

low energy analysis. the usual discussion of gluino condensation starts by noting that at the

renormalizable level, the eective theory has an r symmetry under which the modulus m,

transforms. this r symmetry uniquely determines the dependence of the condensate, hi on

m,

where

hi = z,

z = e 3m
bo .

(7)

(8)

now suppose that there are terms in the eective action just below the string scale of the form

z d2w 4 + w 6 + . . .

(9)

we can think of  and , etc., as spurions which transform under the r symmetry;  has r

charge 2,  charge 4, etc. the same argument which gave the leading term gives

hi = z + az2 + bz3 + . . .

(10)

where a and b are constants of order one.

so we see that the superpotential is a general function of z, even in the case of one modulus.

at the stationary point, these corrections are not suppressed.

indeed, even with only one

modulus there may now be a stationary point with large m. it is not possible to determine the

location of this stationary point, however, without an understanding of the full string theory.

the low energy theory is insucient.

in order that one obtain a supersymmetric vacuum with vanishing cosmological constant,

it is necessary that both the superpotential and its rst derivative vanish. this is not the case

9

for our simplied treatment of the example above; at the stationary point of w , w is non-zero.

it is conceivable that there are models for which w has special properties such that it vanishes

at the stationary point. after all, the vanishing of w in weakly coupled string compactications

is a consequence of detailed features such as the peccei-quinn symmetry. it is possible that

models whose dynamics preserves a discrete r symmetry could naturally yield a vanishing w

at the stationary point. we will discuss this possibility below in a dierent context, but the

other diculties remain.

finally, note that in these schemes, the modulus itself is massive, with mass of order one.

so one might as well suppose that one is studying m theory vacua (in some approximation)

with fewer moduli from the start. logically, there is no problem with this idea, but it leaves

unanswered the questions of why the couplings are weak and whether anything is calculable.

3

improvement through fine tuning

in our example above, if b1  b2, one can perhaps improve the situation. in this case, z can be
small. for example, if the two quantities are within ten percent of each other, than z  1010.

the scales are now well separated, and arguably the use of the low energy eective action is

self-consistent. the situation with respect to the cosmological constant is also somewhat better.

for suppose supersymmetry breaking arises from some more weakly coupled gauge group with

beta function b3  b1. it is possible (for example if the leading order contribution  in z  to

the cosmological constant vanishes) that the various terms could cancel with one another.

in the nely tuned case, it is possible to analyze the possible vanishing of w with several

gauge groups. with two gauge groups there are still no solutions, but with three or more

gauge groups with very similar, large -functions, there are solutions, for suitable values for the

threshold corrections [15]. one can analyze this problem by considering a superpotential of the

form

w = b1em/b1 + b2em/b2 + b3em/b3

(11)

we want to ask whether there can be solutions of the equations w  = w = 0, for some values

of ,  and . it is a simple algebraic exercise to verify that this is the case. whether the

required values of the threshold corrections actually arise is another question, but it is not

perhaps completely implausible, given that corrections to ,  and  from their one loop form

will be exponentially small.

10

izawa and yanagida have proposed a variant on the racetrack scheme which would ame-

liorate this diculty [23]. field theories with quantum moduli spaces, at the level of non-

renormalizable terms, leave unbroken r symmetries. if such a theory appears in the low energy

limit of a string theory, and if the theory has a (discrete) r symmetry, then the superpotential

can naturally vanish at the stationary point (the fact that r-symmetries can account for unbro-

ken supersymmetry and vanishing cosmological constant was stressed in [20] and is crucial to

the cosmological scenario outlined in [24]). these authors give an example with two (discretely
tuned) low energy groups. a large number (of order n 2) singlets with suitable couplings to

the matter elds of these groups are required to achieve the desired stabilization. additional

discrete symmetries are required in order to obtain the desired patterns of couplings. on the

other hand, in brane constructions such large numbers of singlets might be plausible, and elabo-

rate discrete symmetries are familiar in string theory. this type of r-symmetry based scenario,

then, seems the most plausible.

figure 1: contributions to dilaton kahler potential proportional to n 2.

finally, there is the question of what is calculable in this picture. looking at the explicit

solutions, one sees that if the -functions are of order n , and their dierences of order 1,
the gauge couplings are of order 1/n 2. this is probably enough to ensure that holomorphic

quantities are given by their weak coupling values. corrections to the superpotential and the
gauge coupling functions go as em, for example, and this is suitably small. however, non-

holomorphic quantities are not, in general, described by any weak coupling approximation.

in particular, consider corrections to the kahler potential for m, such as those indicated
in g. 1. these diagrams come with a factor of n 22/m 2
p , where the n 2 arises from the
n 2 particles propagating in the loop, and  is a cuto[25]. in the weakly coupled heterotic
string, 2 = g2m 2
contributions to the soft masses are of the order n 22/(162m 2

p , and so these corrections are of order 1. the resulting one loop sugra
p ) [26]. taking into account
factors of  in our denition of the dilaton we nd that they are of order 1. we should stress

here that in some models supergravity contributions may be numerically small. if one examines

the scenarios discussed in ref. [16], one nds that for most of them, g2p n 2

i
162

is 30% or larger,

but there is one where it is as small as 10  15%. one might hope that the corrections can be

reliably computed. however, it will be dicult to establish this fact, since, as we have argued,

11

there is no formal small expansion parameter.

so far we have focused on the weakly coupled heterotic string theory in order to estimate

the cuto. some hope for optimism is provided by considering other string theories (we are

grateful to i. antoniadis for a remark which prompted an examination of this question). in the

limit of the strongly coupled heterotic string one would expect the cuto to be given by m11.

however, for quantities which are predicted by 10 dimensional supersymmetry, the relevant

cuto will related to the compactication scale. support for this comes from studies of the

kahler potential in the horava-witten limit, which is easily seen by symmetry arguments to

be the same as in the weak coupling limit, up to terms of order 1/, where  is the size of the

eleventh dimension. this can be traced to the fact that one can pass from one limit to the

other in such a way that the theory is always approximately ten dimensional. so the kahler

potential may be calculable. for example, if the typical size of the m-theory compactication
manifold is r > m 1

11 , then the susy above the compactication scale may provide the relevant
p  n 2g3  1/n . certain
higher dimensional operators would obtain non-calculable corrections, but this could be of

cuto.

in such a case corrections could be of order n 2r2/m 2

little relevance to low energy eective theory. in the type i theory, assuming compactication
at the string scale, 2 = g4m 2

p , and so again one might hope that these corrections are under
control for suciently large n (applied to the examples of [16], this gives corrections in some

cases as small as 7%, with 20% being more typical). of course, to argue this formally requires

that there exist a set of theories characterized by n such that one can take the limit n  ,
and this seems unlikely to exist in these limits.2 f-theory suggests that very large gauge groups

may exist, but we do not know how to perform the corresponding analysis for f theory, and

suspect that one will have similar diculties to those of the weak coupling heterotic picture. we

will adopt the pessimistic view in what follows that one does not expect to be able to compute

the kahler potential. in this view, one does not expect to be able to calculate quantities which

depend on the detailed form of the kahler potential. but it is again important to keep in mind

that there may be instances where much more is calculable.

in sum, the nely tuned case is a scenario in which a low energy analysis can in principle

provide an explanation of small couplings and large hierarchies. holomorphic quantities are

in principle calculable in such a scheme, but non-holomorphic quantities are probably not. if

supersymmetry is broken at an intermediate scale, it will not be possible to say much about

the low energy spectrum, since the kahler potential is not known. on the other hand, if super-

2the same, of course, is true for holomorphic quantities, but given their exponential dependence, this seems

more plausible.

12

symmetry is broken at low energies, as in gauge mediation, many quantities may be calculable.

apart from the gauge couplings themselves, physical quantities which depend holomorphically

on terms in the superpotential will be calculable. the soft breakings should be expressible in

terms of a small number of parameters.

4 supersymmetry violating version of the racetrack scheme

when originally proposed, it was hoped that the racetrack scheme would provide a mechanism

for xing some moduli (assumed to be the usual dilaton of weakly-coupled heterotic string

theory) while simultaneously breaking supersymmetry in a calculable manner, and generating

a weak gauge coupling and large hierarchy. this possibility was most thoroughly analyzed

in [16], where many interesting examples were developed. still, we can ask whether such a

proposal can truly be analyzed in terms of a low energy eective action.

as in the supersymmetric case, it is necessary, in order that any low energy eective action

analysis make sense (and presumably also that one obtain hierarchically small supersymmetry

breaking) that one has several (at least two) groups with nearly identical -functions. however,

determining whether a minimum of the potential exists, and its location (and in particular

determining the value of the gauge coupling) requires, in this case, knowledge of the kahler

potential for the modulus. we have argued, however, that this may not be calculable. the

problem can be stated more strongly: there is no simple argument, in these cases, that the

superpotential is simply a sum of the superpotentials for the dierent groups. the usual

symmetry arguments [27] for the form of the superpotental no longer hold. moreover, at generic

points in the moduli space, the larger condensate induces non-zero  and large  contributions

to the other. examining the appropriate diagrams, one can see that this problem is closely tied
to the problem of understanding the kahler potential. 3

indeed, this situation is not so much dierent than that of kahler stabilization, where

it is supposed that with a single gauge group, the kahler potential is such as to give rise to a

minimum of the potential at weak coupling. the principle dierence is the two, nearly equal,

-functions provide a slightly dierent explanation for the smallness of the gauge coupling than

3similar issues were raised in [34], where it was noted that in certain grand unied theories, one obtained
inconsistencies if one assumed the superpotential was a simple sum of this type. in [35], it is asserted that the
superpotential is a sum. however, this analysis treats the dilaton supereld as a non-dynamical background and
ignores the fact that one condensate induces corrections to the other. it is conceivable that the correct form is
a sum, and that these other eects can be absorbed into corrections to the kahler potential, but this is by no
means obvious, and is a question worthy of further investigation.

13

the accident proposed in [8].

as we have remarked above, the analysis of [16] is consistent with these remarks.

in

most cases, a rough estimate of the corrections yields a large value for the eective expansion

parameter, but in one of their examples it is about 10%. whether this is good enough in string

theory is, of course, an open question.

operationally, it is not clear that there is much dierence between the two hypotheses. in

particular, in both cases, some quantities protected by holomorphy, i.e. the superpotential and

gauge coupling functions, are accessible. quantities which are not, such as the soft breaking

masses, are unpredictable. recently, in [28], it has been shown that a combination of kahler

stabilization and multiple condensates provides an interesting model for stabilization. a quite

specic and plausible picture for the origin of the kahler potential corrections is presented,

though again control of non-holomorphic quantities, in the sense of there being a systematic,

weak coupling approximation scheme, is limited.

it should be noted that if the kahler potential is given by its weak coupling (or strong

heterotic coupling) form, the cosmological constant can be calculated at the level of the eective

action. the dilaton potential is (now calling the dilaton s, as appropriate to the weak coupling

limit),

v (s, s) =

1

s + s (cid:20)|(

w
s

+

1

s + s w |2(s + s)2  3|w |2(cid:21) .

(12)

it is not easy to nd systems whose w gives minima with v = 0[14].

5 other alternatives to the racetrack scheme

we have stressed in the preceding sections that the problem in string theory is not to explain

how moduli can be stabilized, but rather how they can be stabilized in such a way that the

gauge couplings are weak and supersymmetry is hierarchically broken, and such that anything

is computable. we have argued that the nely tuned version of the racetrack scheme does

provide a picture in which the gauge couplings could be xed at small values and a hierarchy

explained in a calculable fashion. of course, we do not have a detailed string model which

realizes these ideas, but at least the scenario permits us to frame the discussion.

the literature contains discussion of other proposals for stabilizing the moduli, which are

alternatives to the racetrack scheme. they all suer, however, from diculties similar to those

14

which have been discussed here. we will not attempt a complete review, but mention a few

examples.

ref. [4] focuses specically on the heterotic string dilaton, though similar arguments can be

applied to other moduli. it is argued that modications of the gauge coupling function along

with gaugino condensation can lead to stabilization. sl(2,z) duality is used to signicantly

constrain the form of this function, as well as the form of the kahler potential. not surprisingly,

however, this leads to stabilization at values of the coupling () of order one.

it is argued,

there, that uncomputable corrections might give a phenomenologically acceptable value for the

coupling. however, this means precisely that nothing is computable in such a picture. the

smallness of the low energy gauge couplings is an accident; no aspect of string (m-) theory

dynamics is accessible to a systematic, weak coupling analysis.

in ref. [5], another low energy mechanism for stabilizing the moduli is proposed. in this

scheme, the low energy theory, in a certain approximation, has a quantum-modied moduli

space. the authors only consider the global limit; their models do not yield supersymmetry-

conserving minima with vanishing cosmological constant when coupled to gravity. ignoring this

issue, as these authors note, the generic value of the gauge coupling is of order one. it is possible

to obtain smaller couplings, if the models have large discrete symmetries. these models are not

suciently developed to decide whether a weak coupling analysis is applicable, but we would

argue it is unlikely that any sort of perturbative treatment of non-holomorphic quantities is

possible. if free of anomalies, large discrete r-symmetries require large gauge groups (or large

matter content) . these lead to problems of calculability identical to those we have described

above. even if anomalies are cancelled by a green-schwarz mechanism, it is dicult to avoid

such large groups.

6 conclusions

conceptually, the dicult issue in understanding how moduli are stabilized in string theory

is understanding why couplings are weak and unied, and there are large hierarchies.

it is

certainly not hard to imagine that moduli are stabilized in such a way that couplings and

dimensionless ratios are of order one. how large pure numbers arise in a theory without small

parameters is distinctly more puzzling. the racetrack scheme and its variants which have been

reviewed here are probably the most concrete proposals for how moduli are stabilized at weak

gauge coupling. we have seen that in order that one obtain small couplings in a controllable

15

approximation, some degree of ne tuning is required:

if gaugino condensation is the origin

of the moduli superpotential, one must have at least three gauge groups with closely related

-functions; in theories with an unbroken discrete r symmetry, one needs two groups and

an elaborate eld and symmetry structure. in these cases, not everything is calculable, but

holomorphic quantities such as the superpotential and the gauge coupling functions may be. if

supersymmetry is broken at intermediate energy scales, many quantities will not be computable.

if supersymmetry is broken at low energies, it is likely that many quantities relevant to low

energy physics could be.

comparing with other proposals for modulus stabilization in string theory, the racetrack

model has a certain appeal. while the ne-tuning is unattractive, and we dont have explicit

examples which provide a complete realization, the scenario is quite concrete. as we have

described here, it oers the hope of computing the gauge couplings and the superpotential.

if supersymmetry is broken at low energies, many quantities relevant to low energy physics

might be computable. kahler stabilization, by contrast, invokes uncontrollable and unknown

corrections to the kahler potential. as in the racetrack scenario, certain holomorphic quantities

are calculable, but not the gauge couplings. it is hard to reconcile this mechanism with low

energy supersymmetry breaking. maximally enhanced symmetry, while possessing a certain

economy, requires that through some mysterious mechanism the gauge couplings are quite

small, and while it does suggest low energy supersymmetry breaking, is not likely to oer the

hope of computing even holomorphic quantities.

there has been much interest recently in the possibility of large internal dimensions. the

rst well-developed proposal of this type appeared in [29], where it was assumed that the strong

coupling limit of the heterotic string, with compactication on a calabi-yau space was appro-

priate. the diculty with this idea, noted in [31] is that at large radius, the supersymmetry of

the higher dimensional theory insures that the potential vanishes. clearly, however, something

like the racetrack picture could operate here as well[30] in the scheme of [29], in particular, one

has two walls, and supersymmetry breaking arises from dynamics in the walls. two competing

groups could give rise to a potential for the moduli, with a minimum for some large value of

some of the radii.

in this regime, again, the kahler potential would not be calculable, but

the gauge couplings and other holomorphic quantities would be. this would presumably mean

that one could not take the geometric picture too literally; at best, it would only be qualita-

tively correct. similar remarks apply to other scenarios in which stabilization for large values

of geometrical moduli is required, e.g. [32].

16

it is also interesting to consider the possibility that the dilaton of this picture is an inaton

(these remarks are inspired by the recent work of [24] as well as earlier work of [33]).

in

the models here, the dilaton is xed, with a mass large compared to the expected scale of

supersymmetry breaking. this is perhaps promising, since for ination one wants a rather large

scale. moreover, the potential, as a result of the discrete ne tuning, is rather at. determining

whether or not ination occurs, and the values of the relevant scales, requires an understanding

of the kahler potential, which we have argued is not calculable in these schemes. in any case,

the scale of the potential can quite naturally be two or three orders of magnitude below the

planck scale, perhaps leading to a suitable spectrum of density uctuations. determining the

number of e-foldings also requires knowledge of the kahler potential, but it is plausible that

this number might be large. because the potential is a function of s/n , taking the kahler
potential to be of order (n )0, a simple scaling argument gives ne  n 2. in other words, the
ne tuning required to obtain a weak gauge coupling might be the same as the ne tuning

required to obtain adequate ination.

ination in this picture requires explicit, if plausible, assumptions about the kahler poten-

tial. still, the connection of the tuning required to obtain small gauge couplings in this picture

and that required to obtain ination raises the possibility that the two are truly correlated;

perhaps the explanation of the smallness of the gauge couplings is that only regions with weak

gauge couplings inate.

acknowledgements:

we thank t. banks and n. seiberg for comments and a critical reading of an early version of

the manuscript. we are particularly grateful to i. antoniadis for raising the question of scalings

in theories other than the weakly coupled heterotic string. the work of m.d. was supported in

part by the u.s. department of energy. the work of y.s. was supported in part by nsf grant

phy-9802484.

references

[1] t. banks and m. dine, quantum moduli spaces of n=1 string theories, phys. rev.

d53 (1996), [hep-th/9508071].

[2] m. dine and n. seiberg, phys. lett. 162b (1985) 299.

[3] e. dudas, holomorphy and dynamical scales in supersymmetric gauge theories, phys.

lett. b375 (1996) 189, [hep-th/9512004].

17

[4] a.niemeyer and h.p. nilles, gaugino condensation and the vacuum expectation value

of the dilaton, hep-th/9503173.

[5] g. dvali and z. kakushadze, a remark on dilaton stabilization, phys. lett. b417

(1998) 50, [hep-th/9709093].

[6] a. dabholkar and j.a. harvey, string islands, jhep 9902:006,1999, [hep-th/9809122].

[7] m. dine and e. silverstein, new m theory backgrounds with frozen moduli, hep-

th/9712166.

[8] t. banks and m. dine, coping with strongly coupled string theory, phys. rev. d50

(1994) 7454, [hep-th/9406132].

[9] m. dine, y. nir and y. shadmi, enhanced symmetries and the ground state of string

theory, phys. lett. b438 (1998) 61, [hep-th/9806124].

[10] r. sundrum, compactication for a three-brane universe, phys. rev. d59, 085010

(1999) [hep-ph/9807348].

[11] n. arakani-hamed, s. dimopoulos and j. march-russell, stabilization of submillimeter

dimensions, the new guise of the hierarchy problem, hep-th/9809124.

[12] t. banks, m. dine and a. nelson, constraints on theories with large extra dimensions,

jhep 9906, 014 (1999) [hep-th/9903019].

[13] m. dine, seeking the ground state of string theory, prog. theor. phys. suppl. 134, 1

(1999) [hep-th/9903212].

[14] n.v. krasnikov, phys. lett. b193 (1987) 37; l.j. dixon, supersymmetry breaking in
string theory, in the rice meeting: proceedings, b. bonner and h. miettinen, eds.,
world scientic (singapore) 1990.

[15] t.r. taylor, dilaton, gaugino condensation and supersymmetry breaking, phys. lett.

252b (1990) 59.

[16] b. de carlos, j.a. casas and c. munoz, supersymmetry breaking and determination of
the unication gauge coupling constant in string theories, nucl. phys. b399 (1993)
623, [hep-th/9204012].

[17] this idea has been presented most compellingly in v. kaplunovsky and j. louis, phe-

nomenological aspects of f theory, phys. lett. b417 (1998) 45, [hep-th/9708049].

[18] n. seiberg, private communication.

[19] t. banks, private communication.

[20] t. banks, d.b. kaplan and a.e. nelson, cosmological implications of dynamical super-

symmetry breaking, phys. rev. d49 (1994) 779, [hep-ph/9308292].

18

[21] b. de carlos, j.a. casas, f. quevedo and e. roulet, model-independent properties and
cosmological implications of the dilaton and moduli sectors of 4-d strings, phys. lett.
b318 (1993) 447, [hep-ph/9308325].

[22] m. dine, l. randall and s. thomas, supersymmetry breaking in the early universe,
phys. rev. lett. 75 (1995) 398, [hep-ph/9503303]; baryogenesis from flat directions of
the supersymmetric standard model, nucl. phys. b458 (1996) 291, [hep-ph/9507453].

[23] k. izawa and t. yanagida, r invariant dilaton fixing, prog. theor. phys. 101, 171

(1999) [hep-ph/9809366].

[24] t. banks, remarks on m theoretic cosmology, hep-th/9906126.

[25] m. k. gaillard and v. jain, supergravity coupled to chiral matter at one loop, phys.
rev. d49, 1951 (1994) [hep-th/9308090]. m. k. gaillard, pauli-villars regularization of
supergravity coupled to chiral and yang-mills matter, phys. lett. b342, 125 (1995) [hep-
th/9408149]. k. choi, j. s. lee and c. munoz, supergravity radiative eects on soft terms
and the mu term, phys. rev. lett. 80, 3686 (1998) [hep-ph/9709250].

[26] k. choi, h. b. kim and c. munoz, four-dimensional eective supergravity and soft terms

in m-theory, phys. rev. d57, 7521 (1998) [hep-th/9711158].

[27] s. ferrara, l. girardello and h.p. nilles, phys. lett. b155 (1985) 65; m. dine, r. rohm,

n. seiberg and e. witten, phys. lett. b156 (1985) 55.

[28] k. choi, h.b. kim and h. kim, moduli stabilization in heterotic m theory, mod. phys.

lett. a14 (125), [hep-th/9808122].

[29] e. witten, strong coupling expansion of calabi-yau compactication, nucl. phys.

b471 (1996) 135, [hep-th/9602070].

[30] such a possibility has been explored in j. ellis, z. lalak, s. pokorski and s. thomas,
supergravity and supersymmetry breaking in four-dimension, nucl. phys. b563, 107
(1999) [hep-th/9906148]. however, in this case, it is assumed that supersymmetry is broken,
so the issue of the calculability of the kahler potential arises.

[31] t. banks and m. dine, couplings and scales in strongly coupled heterotic string the-

ory, nucl. phys. b479 (1996) 173, [hep-th/9605136].

[32] l. randall and r. sundrum, out of this world supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys.

b557, 79 (1999), [hep-th/9810155].

[33] t. banks, m. berkooz, s.h. shenker, g. moore, p.j. steinhardt, modular cosmology,
phys. rev. d52 (1995) 3548, [hep-th/9503114]; t. banks, m. berkooz, and p.j. stein-
hardt, the cosmological moduli problem, supersymmetry breaking, and stability in
postinationary cosmology, phys. rev. d52 (1995) 705, [hep-th/9501053].

[34] m. dine and y. shirman, some explorations in holomorphy, phys. rev. d50, 5389

(1994) [hep-th/9405155].

19

[35] c.p. burgess, j.p. derendinger, f. quevedo and m. quiros, on gaugino condensation

with eld-dependent gauge couplings, annals phys. 250, 193 (1996) [hep-th/9505171].

20

