preprint typeset in jhep style. - paper version

hep-th/9906126
ru-99-22

remarks on m theoretic cosmology

tom banks

department of physics and astronomy
rutgers university, piscataway, nj 08855-0849
e-mail: banks@physics.rutgers.edu

abstract: i present cosmological arguments which point towards a horava-witten
like picture of the universe, with the unication scale of order the fundamental gravi-
tational scale. the susy breaking scale is determined by the dynamics of gauge elds
which are weakly coupled at the fundamental scale. bulk moduli whose potential origi-
nates at short distances are the inatons, while bulk moduli whose potential originates
from susy breaking are the origin of the energy density in the present era. the latter
decay just before nucleosynthesis, and a consistent theory of baryogenesis requires that
there be renormalizable baryon number violating interactions at the tev scale. the
dark matter is a boundary modulus, perhaps the qcd axion, and the temperature
of matter radiation equality is related to the ratio between the fundamental and ef-
fective four dimensional planck scales. the same ratio determines the amplitude of
uctuations in the microwave background.

keywords: string duality, cosmology.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

6
1

 
 

1
v
6
2
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

contents

1. moduli and ination

1.1 susy breaking
1.2 density fluctuations redux
1.3 generalizing horava-witten

2. conclusions

2
6
11
12

13

the purpose of this note is to revisit certain issues in string (now m theory) cos-
mology, in light of the string duality revolution. our previous investigations of these
issues are contained in [2][5]. our basic claim is that certain observations in cosmology
suggest (though we will certainly not claim that they prove) that the world is close
to a vacuum state of m-theory similar to that which arises from calabi yau compact-
ication of the strongly coupled heterotic string of horava and witten [22]. we will
describe what may be a large class of generalizations of the horava witten scenario.

the major issues we discuss may be itemized as follows:

 one of the central claims of [2] , following the seminal work of [1] , was that
moduli of string theory are natural inaton candidates. however, there is a sort
of contradiction in this statement. moduli are cleanly dened only when they
are true zero modes. inatons must have a potential. in [2] this contradiction
was hidden beneath the assumption that the natural scale of the potential during
ination is much smaller than the fundamental scale of string theory, which was
identied with the four dimensional planck mass. however these papers also made
much of the coincidence between the scale of inationary vacuum energy and the
unication scale. wittens explanation of the ratio between the unication and
planck scales in the context of the horava-witten scenario[23], identies the
former with the fundamental scale of the theory. in this context, the separation
of inaton elds with a potential of order the fundamental scale of m theory
from the rest of the high energy degrees of freedom of the theory seems highly
suspicious. we will see that these conundra are simultaneously resolved in any
scenario with 8 supercharges (susys) preserved in the bulk and only 4 preserved

1

on certain lower dimensional submanifolds or branes. we will argue that there
may be many such compactications of m theory, generalizing that of horava
and witten. in such compactications, ne e-foldings of ination require only a
small coecient of order 1/ne in the superpotential of bulk moduli. the size
of primordial energy density uctuations is naturally explained in terms of the
unication scale and the four dimensional planck scale.

 in [2] the existence of an independent, lower, scale for susy breaking was con-
sidered an embarrassment. here we ascribe it to the existence of a true moduli
space of the low energy eective theory with 4 susys, which is identied as the
locus of an enhanced discrete r symmetry with certain properties. nonpertur-
bative low energy gauge interactions spontaneously break both this r symmetry
and the remaining four supercharges. the details of the resulting physics depend
somewhat on whether we assume the true moduli space contains bulk moduli, or
only elds whose origin is on one of the branes. we somewhat prefer the case with
bulk moduli because it leads to a natural explanation of the relation between the
scales of r symmetry and susy breaking, that is necessary in any supergravity
theory in which the cosmological constant vanishes. in passing we note that this
scenario for susy breaking resolves the overshoot problem of [10].

 both bulk and brane modes of susy breaking lead to a version of the cosmological
moduli problem [7]. we review a resolution of this problem [5] in which the
moduli decay and reheat the universe to a temperature just above that needed for
nucleosynthesis. the baryon asymmetry is produced in the decay of the moduli.
this implies that the low energy theory at energies of order 1 tev contains
renormalizable baryon number violating interactions . as a consequence, there is
no natural susy candidate for dark matter.

 we review and generalize the observation of [5] that a brane modulus with su-
ciently small potential is a natural dark matter candidate in the above scenario.
the qcd axion (with a decay constant of order the unication scale) is a possi-
ble realization of this mechanism. however, there is nothing which requires the
potential of the dark matter candidate to be of the qcd scale.

1. moduli and ination

generic compactications of m theory to four dimensions with only four susys have
no moduli. that is, there are no theorems which prevent the occurence of a superpo-
tential on the would be moduli space. furthermore, all symmetries of m theory are

2

gauge symmetries. as a consequence of d-terms, the true moduli space is made up
of elds invariant under all continuous gauge symmetries. thus, the superpotential is
restricted only by discrete symmetries and these generically do not require it to vanish.
the exception is a discrete complex r symmetry, [8]. the submanifold of eld space
invariant under such a symmetry, and containing no directions of r charge 2, is a true
moduli space1.

most discussions of the phenomenology of string/m theory have been based either
on low energy sugra, or weakly coupled string expansions.
in these discussions
the apparent moduli space of the theory is much larger than the true moduli space.
there are theorems which prevent the occurence of a superpotential to all orders in the
perturbative expansion. if one works in the regime where nonperturbative corrections
to the superpotential are small then the phrase superpotential for moduli is not an
oxymoron. it was in this context that the idea of moduli as inatons was proposed [1][2]
. a serious problem with this regime was pointed out long ago by dine and seiberg
[11]. within the context of a systematic perturbative expansion one cannot stabilize
the moduli (small couplings or large radii) whose large values justify the expansion.
racetrack models [18] and kahler stabilization [4] are two attempts to get around this
problem. neither leads to a reliable calculational framework, and their fundamental
postulates have not been veried.

another reason for avoiding extreme regions of moduli space was pointed out by
moore and horne [19]. in extreme regions of moduli space, the metric on the space can
be reliably calculated and the innite regions have nite volume. this means that the
system dynamically avoids the extreme regions. for example, if the potential has two
minima with vanishing cosmological constant, one in the interior of moduli space and
the other in one of the extreme regions, then a generic motion of the system will end
up at the minimum in the interior.

in a vacuum state with no large moduli on the other hand, it is not clear what the
term modular ination could mean. this is particularly true if one adopts wittens
explanation of the ratio between the planck and unication scales, with the concomitant
conclusion that the fundamental scale of m theory is on the order of 1016 gev. the
simplest interpretation of the magnitude of primordial energy density uctuations in
inationary cosmology invokes a vacuum energy during ination of approximately this
order of magnitude. in what sense can elds with a potential energy of this order of

1another possible region of eld space where the superpotential vanishes has been explored by
witten [9]. wittens argument for vanishing superpotential uses a u (1) symmetry valid only in
a certain large volume limit to draw exact conclusions about the superpotential.
i nd it mildly
suspicious and will not include wittens region in the discussion here, but it may have an important
role to play.

3

magnitude be considered moduli? recall that the motivation for separating moduli out
from the other degrees of freedom of m theory is that they are supposed to parametrize
low energy motions of the system among would be ground states.

in fact, scenarios like that of horava and witten contain the clue to an answer to
this question. the universe is separated into branes and bulk, and the latter has
more susy than the former. thus, the bulk universe has 8 approximately conserved
supercharges and thus contains elds which would act as true moduli if it were not
for the presence of the branes. the superpotential for the moduli is generated on the
branes.

let us examine the consequences of this fact. at an energy scale small compared
to the mass of the bulk kaluza-klein modes on the compact manifold, the world is
eectively four dimensional. the moduli become elds in this four dimensional eec-
tive eld theory. since the eective theory has only four susys, these elds have a
superpotential. since it comes only from the vicinity of the branes on which the larger
susy algebra is broken, it is independent of the volume of the internal space, and has,
by dimensional analysis, the form

w = m 3w(a)

(1.1)

where a are dimensionless parameters characterizing the internal geometry. on the
other hand, the kinetic term for these zero modes, just like the einstein term for the
zero modes of the gravitational eld, is proportional to the volume v7 of the internal
manifold, and has the form

m 9v7ggab()ab.

(1.2)

8gn

p = 1

note that m 9v7 = m2
is, as the notation indicates, the same coecient which
multiplies the einstein action. furthermore, although the volume v7 is itself a modulus,
when we pass to the einstein conformal frame in which v7 is replaced by its vacuum
value, the kinetic term of the moduli is rescaled in precisely the same manner as the
gravitational action. it is then natural to dene canonical scalar elds by a = mp a.
their action has the form

z ggab(/mp )ab 

m 6
m2
p

v(/mp ).

the slow roll equations of motion derived from this action are

3hda/dt = 

m 6
m2
p

gab v
b .

4

(1.3)

(1.4)

and lead to the equation

dv/dt =

m 3
pv

3m2

avgabbv.

(1.5)

where a refers to the derivative with respect to the dimensionless variable a. we
have also used the slow roll expression for h in terms of the potential. from 1.5 we
immediately derive an expression for the number of e-foldings

ne = 3z

v

avgabbv

cvdc.

(1.6)

where the integral is over the trajectory in moduli space that the system follows during
the time interval when the slow roll approximation is valid. we see that in order to
obtain a large number of e-foldings we need a potential which is at in the sense that
|v|/v  1/ne. the phenomenologically necessary ne  60 can be achieved with
only a mild ne tuning of dimensionless coecients. correspondingly, the conditions
on the potential which ensure the validity of the slow roll approximation are order one
conditions on the derivatives of the potential and do not contain any small dimensionless
numbers.

the fact that actions of the form 1.3 give rise to ination with minimal ne tuning,
and that such actions naturally arise for moduli in string theory was pointed out in
[2]. the general point that moduli might provide the at potentialled, weakly coupled
elds necessary to ination was rst made in [1]. here we note that in brane scenarios,
it is the bulk moduli which play this role. by contrast, moduli associated with a single
brane will have a natural scale m and do not play the role of inatons in quite as
gracious a manner.

another pleasant surprise awaits us when we plug the potential from 1.3 into the
standard formula for the amplitude of the primordial energy density uctuations gen-
erated by ination. up to numbers of order one we nd


  n(m/mp )3  105

(1.7)

where the numerical value comes from the measured cosmic microwave background
uctuations, and n  50. this gives m  (2/10)1/3  2  1016 gev, which, given the
crudeness of the calculation, is the unication scale. to put this in the most dramatic
manner possible, we can say that a brane scenario of the horava-witten type, given
the unication scale as input, predicts the correct amplitude for inationary density
uctuations. furthermore, the whole scenario only makes sense because of the same
large volume factor that underlies wittens explanation of the ratio between the planck
and unication scales. this is necessary at a conceptual level to understand why it is

5

sensible to think about a modulus with a super potential of order the fundamental
scale, and at a phenomenological level to understand the magnitude of the density
uctuations.

although it has no connection with our discussion here we cannot resist pointing
out the other piece of evidence for a scale of the same order as m. any theory of
the type we are discussing would be expected to contain corrections to the standard
model lagrangian of the form (in supereld notation) 1
m llh 2, which gives rise to
neutrino masses. it is a matter of public record [14] now that such masses exist, with
an estimated value for m between .6 and 1.8  1015 gev. although this is an order
of magnitude shy of the unication scale i believe the uncertainties in coecients of
order one in dimensional analysis could easily make up the dierence. if not, we will
have the interesting problem of explaining the existence of two close but not identical
energy scales in fundamental physics. [17].

finally, we want to note that this scenario for ination does not suer from the
runaway problem pointed out by brustein and steinhardt [10]. these authors noted
that the inationary vacuum energy is much larger than the susy breaking scale.
furthermore, the minimum of the eective potential was assumed close to the region of
weak string coupling. there was then a distinct possibility that the inaton eld would
overshoot the small barrier separating it from the extreme weak coupling regime where
string theory is incompatible with experiment. in the present scenario, the coupling is
not assumed to be weak (nor the volume extremely large). furthermore the inationary
potential has nothing to do with susy breaking. there is no runaway problem at all.

1.1 susy breaking

the authors of the papers in [2] agonized over the discrepancy between the unication
scale and the scale of susy breaking. in fact, they discussed and discarded what i
now believe is the obvious solution of this problem, because of problems specic to
weakly coupled string theory. the obvious way to avoid susy breaking at the scale
m, is to insist that the superpotential 1.1 has a susy minimum. in fact, the existence
of such minima is generic , requiring only the solution of n complex equations for n
unknowns. however, in general, the superpotential will not vanish at such a minimum
but instead will give rise to a negative cosmological constant. we refer the reader to
[2] for the elementary argument that in a postinationary universe, such a susy point
in moduli space is not a stable attractor of cosmological solutions.
instead, generic
solutions which try to fall into such a minimum, recollapse on microscopic time scales.
the stable postinationary attractors of a supersymmetric cosmology are points
in moduli space with vanishing superpotential and susy order parameters. these can
be characterized in terms of a symmetry. namely, any complex r symmetry forces

6

the superpotential to vanish, and if there are no elds of r charge 2 then the susy
order parameter vanishes as well. the r symmetry must of course be discrete, since
we are discussing m theory. if in addition, there do exist elds of r charge 0, then
there will be an entire submanifold on which the superpotential vanishes and susy
is preserved. our future considerations will concentrate on this submanifold, which,
following the terminology in the introduction, we call the true moduli space. it is the
locus of restoration of a discrete r symmetry with the above properties.

before proceeding to the discussion of susy breaking on the true moduli space,
we should introduce the nal characters in our story, the boundary or brane moduli.
we could in fact have inserted such elds, which arise as excitations localized on one of
the branes, into our discussion of ination. however, they would have been of little use
there, as their natural scale is m rather than mp and they are rapidly driven to their
instantaneous minima during the inationary era. at lower energies however they will
play an interesting role.

in addition to these moduli elds, any brane scenario will contain a variety of gauge
elds and matter elds in nontrivial representations of the gauge group. the moduli will
interact with these elds via the moduli dependence of bare gauge and yukawa coupling
parameters in the eective theory as well as thru a variety of irrelevant operators. if
the gauge couplings are asymptotically free and do not run to infrared xed points at
low energy, this description of the physics only makes sense if the bare gauge couplings
are suciently small that the scale at which the eective coupling becomes large is
substantially below the scale m. otherwise it is not consistent to include the gauge
degrees of freedom in the low energy eective theory. the weakness of bare couplings in
these scenarios is not evident a priori, as it would be in a purely perturbative approach.
the underlying physics is assumed to be strongly coupled. witten has shown how the
small unied coupling of the standard model can be explained in terms of a product
of a large number of factors of order one in a geometry of large dimensions. we will
assume that similar numerical factors explain the strength of the gauge interactions
that lead to susy breaking.

the main role of the gauge interactions is not to break susy, but rather the discrete
r symmetry. if we x the moduli and treat the gauge theory as a at space quantum
eld theory, then susy remains unbroken even though a nonperturbative superpoten-
tial is generated. the scale of this superpotential is determined via a standard renor-
malization group analysis in terms of the bare gauge coupling function f (/mp , /m),
where we have indicated dependence on both bulk and boundary moduli. for simplicity
we assume that f is a large constant f0 plus a smaller, moduli dependent, term. the
conclusions are not aected by this assumption. the scale  of the nonperturbative

7

superpotential is then determined by f0. it takes the form

w1 = 3w1(/mp , /m)

(1.8)

we have eliminated all (composite) superelds related to the gauge interactions from
this expression by solving their f and d atness conditions for xed values of the
moduli. the possibility of doing this is equivalent to the statement that the gauge
theory does not itself break susy. we assume that w1 does not vanish at any minimum
of the eective potential. this is the statement of spontaneous r symmetry breaking.
as a consequence, susy minima of the potential have negative cosmological constant
of order at least 6/m2
p and are not attractors of the cosmological equations. thus,
cosmologically, r symmetry breaking forces the moduli to choose a minimum with
spontaneously broken susy2.

phenomenology requires a value of  which gives acceptable squark masses. the
details depend on whether or not we can set the f terms of the boundary moduli equal
to zero (if there are no bulk moduli this is not consistent with our other assumptions).
if we can, then the nonvanishing f terms are of order 3
. a standard argument shows
mp
that squark masses will be of order 3
, about the same as the gravitino. assuming
m2
this is about a tev we nd   1013 gev . an attractive feature of this scenario is
that the positive and negative terms in the sugra potential are naturally of the same
order of magnitude. although we have no real understanding of why the cosmological
constant is so small, this fact of nature is an indication of a relation between the scales
of r symmetry breaking and of susy breaking. in models in which the susy breaking
f term originates as a bulk modulus the correct order of magnitude relation between
these scales arises automatically.

p

by contrast, if we assume that the susy breaking f term is that of a boundary
modulus, the negative term in the potential is of order m 2
p  104 smaller than the
m2
positive term. to understand the cancellation of the cosmological constant, one can ,
following [2] introduce two gauge groups. the rst leads to spontaneous r symmetry
breaking with unbroken susy at a scale 1 while the second breaks susy at 2. if
p /m 2 one can again obtain order of magnitude cancellation of the
(1/2)6  m2
cosmological constant, but the scenario clearly lacks simplicity. in this scenario squark
masses are of order 3
2/m 2, and the gravitino is lighter than this by a factor  104
and weighs about 100mev . 2 has to be about 5  1011 gev.

the rst of these scenarios is clearly simpler, but as we now recall, it leads to the
cosmological moduli problem. the scalar elds in the bulk moduli multiplets acquire

2the tunneling amplitudes of such nonsupersymmetric vacua into supersymmetric ads vacua are

incredibly tiny and might be identically zero, as discussed in [2].

8

masses from the susy violating potential of order mm  3/m2
p which is the same
order of magnitude as the gravitino and squark masses, i.e. a tev. they have only
nonrenormalizable couplings to ordinary matter, scaled by mp . thus, their nominal
reheat temperature , qm3
m /mp is of order  3 102 mev, and the universe is matter
dominated at the time that nucleosynthesis is supposed to be taking place. the thermal
ination scenario [12] can solve this problem, and we will review another solution [5]
below, but it might tempt us into adopting the scenario with boundary moduli as the
instigators of susy breaking.

in this case, one would assume that all bulk moduli are frozen by the initial su-
perpotential of order m 3. dine [3] has advocated that the proper vacuum should be
an enhanced symmetry point of moduli space at which all moduli (he does not make a
distinction between bulk and boundary elds) are nonsinglets. we temporarily adopt
this point of view, but only for the bulk moduli. then the boundary moduli masses
are of order 1 tev, but their couplings to ordinary matter are scaled by m rather
than mp . the reheat temperature is rescaled by a factor of 102 and is (just) above the
temperature for nucleosynthesis. the hot big bang occurs just in time to light the
furnace in which the primordial elements were formed.

one still has to account for baryogenesis. adopting a mechanism suggested long
ago by holman, ramond and ross [15] we aver that this can come from the decay
of the moduli themselves. all of their interactions are of order the fundamental scale
of m theory, so there is no reason for them to preserve accidental symmetries like
baryon and lepton number. it is quite reasonable that they also violate cp, though
the status of cp in m theory is somewhat more obscure. the decay itself is an out
of equilibrium process, so all of the sakharov criteria for baryogenesis are fullled.
however, we must also take note of the theorem of weinberg [16], according to which
baryon number violating terms in the hamiltonian must act twice in order to generate
an asymmetry. in the decay of moduli, the rst action of the hamiltonian comes at no
cost in amplitude, because the modulus must decay somehow and there is no reason for
its baryon number violating decays to be signicantly smaller than those which conserve
baryon number. however the second baryon number violating interaction should not be
highly suppressed if we want to generate a reasonable baryon asymmetry. indeed, a one
tev, gravitationally coupled, particle which produces a baryon asymmetry of order one
in its decay, also produces of order (1tev/3mev) or  3  105 photons. thus a large
suppression of the average baryon number per decay would give too small a baryon
asymmetry. a way out of this diculty is to admit renormalizable baryon number
violating operators in the supersymmetric standard model. discrete symmetries such
as a z2 lepton parity [13] can adequately suppress all unobserved baryon and lepton
number violating processes in the laboratory, while allowing such operators with quite

9

large coecients. an unfortunate casualty of this mechanism is the lightest susy
particle. the lsp is no longer stable in the scenario described above and we have to
look elsewhere for a dark matter candidate.

with this scenario in mind, let us return to the situation with bulk moduli. suppose
that the coecient in the order of magnitude relation between the moduli mass and
the fundamental parameters is mm = 5  3/m2
p , while the squark mass is actually
m q = 3/4m2
p = 1 tev. then the reheat temperature for the bulk moduli is multiplied
by a factor of 203/2  102 and is again just above 1 mev. nucleosynthesis is again saved
and baryogenesis can take place in the process of reheating. again we must invoke
renormalizable baryon number violation. now however, there are natural candidates
for dark matter. imagine a boundary modulus whose potential energy is substantially
smaller than the the estimate 3/m 2 coming from 1.8. we will call this the dark
modulus, because it will be our dark matter candidate. it has a potential of the form
u = 4u(d/m). (in [5], where this scenario was rst proposed, the candidate was
a qcd axion eld (which arises under certain natural conditions in horava-witten
scenarios[24]). this model works, but the mechanism is much more general and does
not require energy densities as small as those of the axion.

now, briey review cosmic history. first we have ination generated by bulk
moduli elds which are not on the true moduli space3 . this period ends after of
order 100 e-foldings, and the universe is heated by inamoduli decay to a temperature
of order 109 gev . the primordial plasma quickly redshifts away. furthermore, as
soon as the inamoduli potential energy density falls to 6/m2
p , the universe becomes
dominated by the coherent oscillations of the true bulk moduli. the dark modulus
remains frozen at some generic point on its potential until the hubble parameter falls
to the mass scale of this eld. at this point the energy density of the universe is of
order   m2
p 4/m 2 which is of order (mp /m)2  104 times larger than the energy
density of the dark modulus. the important point now is that this ratio is preserved
by further cosmic evolution until the true bulk moduli decay. after that time, the
dark energy density grows linearly with the inverse temperature relative to radiation,
and matter radiation equality occurs at 104mev . this is close enough to the true
value for the observable universe that the factors of order one which we have neglected
throughout might account for the dierence.  must satisfy two constraints in order
for this scenario to work: the dark moduli must remain frozen until the true bulk
moduli begin to oscillate, and the dark modulus must have a lifetime at least as long
as the age of the universe. the second constraint is by far the stronger, and leads
to  < 3  106 gev. axions satisfy this constraint by a large margin. note that

3perhaps we should call these inamoduli.

10

this scenario completely removes the conventional cosmological constraint on the axion
decay constant. axions will be very weakly coupled and will escape all of the usual
schemes for detecting them.

in view of the more natural explanation of the ratio between r symmetry and
susy breaking scales, and the existence of a dark matter candidate in the bulk mod-
ulus scenario for susy breaking, we tentatively reject the idea that susy breaking
is triggered by the f term of a boundary modulus. its only advantage over the bulk
modulus scenario is that we do not have to massage coecients of order one in order
to push the reheat temperature above an mev.

for completeness, we should also discuss the possibility that susy breaking itself is
caused by gauge interactions which are weakly coupled at the fundamental scale. this
is required if we assume, with dine [3][21][20], that moduli are xed at some enhanced
symmetry point. scenarios of this sort are attractive because they allow us to use
the idea of gauge mediation [6] to solve the susy avor problem. gauge interactions
generate superpotentials of the form 3
2wg 2(c2/m2), where the c s
are composite superelds and the mi the nonperturbative low energy scales generated
by asymptotic freedom. again, in order to cancel the cosmological constant, we must
introduce an r breaking gauge theory with scale (m1), which preserves susy and a
susy breaking gauge theory, with scale related by m6

1wg 1(c1/m1) + 3

1 = m2

p m4
2.

there is no cosmological moduli problem in this picture, since all moduli are as-
sumed to be frozen by the initial superpotential. moduli and dark matter in gauge
mediated susy breaking models have been discussed in [25].

1.2 density fluctuations redux

there is a small discrepancy in what we have said up till now, which reader may have
been rushed into ignoring. we bragged about achieving the right magnitude for energy
density uctuations of the inaton, but then proceeded to claim that the energy we see
today in the universe comes from another source entirely, viz. the true bulk moduli.

it is easy to see however that the true moduli inherit the uctuations of the inaton.
in a given region the moduli elds start to oscillate when the hubble constant is
about equal to their mass. in a region of inaton overdensity, this will happen later
and the ratio of modular energy density in the overdense and average regions will
start to increase like a3. this will continue until the moduli in the overdense region
begin to oscillate, a fter which the ratio will remain constant. since the decrease of
oscillating modular energy and oscillating inaton energy follows the same scaling law,
the magnitude of modular uctuations will be the same as those in the original inaton
eld.

11

we have assumed here that the true moduli begin to oscillate before the inatons
decay into radiation. since the reheat temperature is 109 gev and the oscillation
energy scale is 1011 gev, this assumption is valid.

another question to worry about is the possibility of large isocurvature uctuations
in the true bulk moduli elds. however, during ination, when the inamoduli are
excited away from their minimum, these are not light elds. the nonzero values of
the inamoduli break r symmetry. the true moduli space is a river valley running
between the hills of the inationary potential, and during ination the system lies
in the hills above the valley, where the potential is not at in the valley direction.
indeed, this situation persists long into the era when the inamoduli have begun to
oscillate, because of the factor of 1020 between the inationary and susy violating
energy densities.

these issues deserve a more careful analysis, because it is possible that the transfer
of uctuations could leave some observable relic in the cosmic microwave background or
that an observable level of isocurvature uctuations could be generated. it is unclear to
me whether reliable conclusions can be obtained without more information about the
nature of the potential. nonetheless, it appears that to a rst approximation, the true
moduli inherit the adiabatic perturbations of the inaton eld, so that the estimates
we made above can be directly related to measurements of microwave background
uctuations.

1.3 generalizing horava-witten
the moduli space of 11 dimensional sugra compactications which preserve n = 1
susy in four minkowski dimensions splits into three components. these are joyce
sevenfolds, f theory limits of compactication on calabi-yau fourfolds, and heterotic
limits of compactication on k3  cy3. these may be continously connected when
short distance physics is properly taken into account. in addition, there may be many
branches of moduli space which join onto these through generalized extremal transi-
tions. the moduli space is thus highly complex.

the cosmological arguments of this paper indicate that the phenomenologically rel-
evant compactications may belong to a highly constrained submanifold of this com-
plicated space. namely, they should preserve eight supercharges in the bulk. the
breaking to n = 1 should occur only on branes. sugra compactications preserving
eight susys are much more constrained. the holonomy must be contained in su(3)
which implies that the manifold is the product of a calabi-yau threefold times a torus,
modded out by a discrete group . in order to obtain a smooth manifold with eight
susys ,  should act freely and the holonomy around the new cycles created by 
identication should be in su(3). clearly, a way to obtain horava-witten like sce-

12

narios is to allow xed manifolds of , on which an additional susy is broken. the
original scenario of horava and witten was a cy3  s 1 compactication in which 
is a z2 reection on the s 1. the xed planes carry e8 gauge groups, and one must
also choose an appropriate gauge bundle. a further generalization allows ve branes
wrapped on two cycles of cy3 to live between the planes.

it seems likely that more complicated choices of  might lead to a wider class of
scenarios. the problem of classifying scenarios of this type seems quite manageable
4. the moduli space of compactications of m theory on cy3 times a torus has a
reasonably complicated structure, replete with extremal transitions. nonetheless, it
is considerably simpler than the fourfold or joyce manifold problem, and we know
much more about its structure. thus, if cosmology really points us in the direction of
generalized horava-witten compactications, we have made real progress in the search
for the true vacuum of m theory.

2. conclusions

wittens explanation of the discrepancy between the planck and unication scales in
the context of horava-witten compactications, poses a challenge for inationary cos-
mology and particularly for the notion that moduli are inatons. in fact, the enhanced
bulk susy of these compactications gives us a clean denition of modular inatons.
the scenario then makes an order of magnitude prediction of the amplitude of primor-
dial density uctuations in terms of the unication scale.

cosmological arguments rst discussed in [2] then focus attention on the true mod-
uli space of m theory, a locus of enhanced discrete r symmetry. such a space almost
certainly exists [8]. it is the attractor of postinationary cosmological evolution. the
further evolution of the universe then depends on whether this space contains bulk
moduli. in the attractive scenario in which it does, the initial hot big bang generated
by ination, is soon dominated by the energy density stored in coherent oscillations of
true bulk moduli. by making optimistic but plausible assumptions about coecients
of order one in order of magnitude estimates, one obtains a reheat temperature above
that required by nucleosynthesis. the decay of true bulk moduli, rather than that of
the inaton, generates the hot big bang of classical cosmology. the baryon asymme-
try must also be generated in these decays, and this is possible if the susy standard
model contains renormalizable baryon number violating interactions (compatible with
laboratory tests of baryon and lepton number conservation). as a consequence of this,
there is no lsp dark matter candidate. instead, boundary moduli with a suppressed

4preliminary results on the classication problem have been obtained by l.motl.

13

potential energy act as a natural source of dark matter. indeed, the ratio between the
planck and unication scales appears again in this scenario, this time in explaining
the temperature at which matter and radiation make equal contributions to the energy
density of the universe. this estimate comes out an order of magnitude too high, but
given the crudity of the calculation it seems quite plausible that this mechanism could
be compatible with observation. the dark modulus which appears in this scenario
could be a qcd axion with decay constant of order the unication scale. our uncon-
ventional origin for the hot big bang completely removes the cosmological upper bound
on this decay constant. such a particle would be undetectable in presently proposed
axion searches.

if a cosmology like that outlined here turns out to be correct, one might be tempted
to revise einsteins famous estimate of the moral qualities of a hypothetical creator.
the current standard model of cosmology was constructed in the sixties. since then
there has been much speculation about cosmology at times earlier than that at which
the primordial elements were synthesized. most of it has been based on an eminently
reasonable extrapolation of the hot big bang to energy densities orders of magnitude
higher. if the present scenario is correct, no such extrapolation is possible, and the
conditions in the universe in the rst fraction of the first three minutes were con-
siderably dierent from those at any subsequent time. there was a prior big bang
after ination, whose remnants may be forever hidden from us. the dark matter which
dominates our universe is so weakly coupled to ordinary matter that its detection is far
beyond the reach of currently planned experiments. the qcd and electroweak phase
transitions never occurred.

the only dramatic prediction of this scenario for currently planned experiments
is the occurrence of renormalizable baryon number violation in the low energy susy
world. the details of the baryogenesis scenario envisaged here should be worked out
more carefully, and combined with laboratory constraints, to nail down precisely which
kind of operators are allowed. the scenario is thus easily falsiable, but even the
discovery of renormalizable baryon number violating interactions among susy particles
will not be a conrmation of our cosmology. similarly, any evidence for the existence
of more or less conventional wimp dark matter will be a strong indication that the
present speculations are incorrect, but the failure to discover wimps will not prove
that they are correct.

instead one will have to rely on the slow accumulation of evidence against alterna-
tives: ruling out vanishing up quark mass and spontaneous cp violation as solutions
to the strong cp problem, the failure of conventional axion and wimp searches, the
discovery of renormalizable b violation. these will be steps on the road to proving
that this cosmology is correct, but the end of that road is not in sight.

14

acknowledgments

i am grateful to sean carroll, willy fischler, lubos motl and paul steinhardt for
valuable discussions. this work was supported in part by the doe under grant number
de-fg02-96er40559.

references

[1] p. binetruy, m.k. gaillard, candidates for the inaton field in superstring models,

phys. rev. d 34 (1986) 3069-3083.

[2] t. banks, m. berkooz, s.h. shenker, g. moore, p.j. steinhardt, modular cosmol-
ogy,, phys. rev. d 52 (1995) 3548-3562, hep-th/9503114; t. banks, m. berkooz,
p.j. steinhardt, the cosmological moduli problem, supersymmetry breaking,
and stability in postinationary cosmology, phys. rev. d 52 (1995) 705-716,
hep-th/9501053.

[3] m. dine, seeking the ground state of string theory, invited talk at 13th nishinomiya-
yukawa memorial symposium on dynamics of fields and strings, nishinomiya, japan,
12-13 november, 1998. hep-th/9903212; m. dine, y. nir, y. shadmi, enhanced sym-
metries and the ground state of string theory, phys. lett. b444, 103, (1998),
hep-th/9806124.

[4] t. banks, m. dine,  coping with strongly coupled string theory, phys. rev. d50,

7454, (1994) ,hep-th/9406132.

[5] t. banks, m. dine, cosmology of string theoretic axions, nucl. phys. b505, 445,

(1997), hep-th/9608197.

[6] m. dine, w. fischler, a phenomenological model of particle physics based on super-
symmetry, phys. lett. 10b, 227, (1982): m. dine, a. nelson, dynamical supersym-
metry breaking at low energies , phys. rev. d48, 1277, (1993), hep-ph/9303230.

[7] g.d. coughlan, w. fischler, e.w. kolb, s. raby, g.g. ross, cosmological problems for
the polonyi potential, phys. lett. 131b, 59, (1983); t. banks, d. kaplan, a. nelson,
cosmological implications of dynamical supersymmetry breaking , phys. rev. d49,
779, (1994), hep-ph/9308292.

[8] t. banks, m. dine, quantum moduli spaces of n=1 string theories, phys. rev. d53,

5790, (1996), hep-th/9508071.

[9] e. witten, nonperturbative superpotentials in string theory, nucl. phys. b474, 343,

(1996), hep-th/9604030.

15

[10] r. brustein, p.j. steinhardt, challenges for superstring cosmology, phys. lett. b302,

196, (1993), hep-th/9212049.

[11] m. dine, n. seiberg, is the superstring weakly coupled?, phys. lett. 162b, 299,

(1985).

[12] d. lyth, e. stewart, thermal ination and the moduli problem, phys. rev. d53, 1784,

(1996), hep-ph/9510204.

[13] l. ibanez, g.g. ross, discrete gauge symmetry anomalies, phys. lett. b260, 291,

(1991); g. eyal, y. nirlepton parity in supersymmetric models, hep-ph/9904473.

[14] t. kajita (for the super-kamiokande and kamiokande collaboration), atmospheric
neutrino results from super kamiokande and kamiokande: evidence for neutrino (mu)
oscillations, talk given at the 18th international conference on neutrino physics and
astrophysics, takayama, japan, 4-9 june 1998, hep-ex/9810001.

[15] r. holman, p. ramond, g.g. ross, phys. lett. 137b, 343, (1984).

[16] s. weinberg, cosmological production of baryons, phys. rev. lett. 42, 850, (1979).

[17] k. babu, j.c. pati, f. wilczek, fermion masses, neutrino oscillations, and proton de-

cay in the light of superkamiokande, hep-ph/9812538

[18] l. dixon, v. kaplunosky, m. peskin, unpublished; n.v. krasnikov, phys. lett. b193, 37,

(1987).

[19] j. horne, g. moore, chaotic coupling constants, nucl. phys. b432, 109, (1994),

hep-th/9403058.

[20] a. dabholkar, j.a. harvey, string islands, hep-th/9809122.

[21] m. dine, e. silverstein, new m-theory backgrounds with frozen moduli,

hep-th/9712166.

[22] p. horava, e. witten, heterotic and type i string dynamics from eleven dimensions,

nucl. phys. b 460 (1996) 506-524, hep-th/9510209.

[23] e. witten, strong coupling expansion of calabi-yau compactication, nucl. phys.

b 471 (1996) 135-158, hep-th/9602070.

[24] t. banks, m. dine, couplings and scales in strongly coupled heterotic string theory,

nucl. phys. b 479 (1996) 173-196, hep-th/9605136.

[25] m. kawasaki, n. sugiyama, modern physics letters a12, 1275, (1997), hep-ph/9607273;
s. dimopoulos, g.f. giudice, a. pomarol, phys. lett. b389, 37. (1996), hep-ph/9607225;
t. asaka, m. kawasaki, m. yamaguchi, phys. lett. b451, 317, (1999), hep-ph/9810334
(and references cited therein).

16

