vibrational spectrum of the b=7 skyrme soliton

department of mathematical sciences, university of durham, science laboratories, south road, durham, dh1 3le, u.k.

(february 1, 2008)

w. k. baskerville

the nite energy vibrational normal modes of the baryon number b=7 skyrme soliton are com-
puted. the structure of the spectrum obtained displays considerable similarity to those previously
calculated for baryon numbers 2, 3 and 4. all modes expected from an approximate correspondence
between skyrmions and bps monopoles are found to be present. however, in contrast to earlier
calculations, they do not all have energies below the pion mass. the remaining breather-type
modes also conform to predictions, except that one predicted multiplet is not observed.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

8

 
 

1
v
3
6
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

i. introduction

the normal mode spectra of multiskyrmions are be-
lieved to play a key role in their quantisation [1]. in the
skyrme model [2], nuclei appear as topological solitons
in a classical, non-linear eld theory of -mesons. since
the model is not renormalisable, a proper treatment as
a quantum eld theory is very dicult. the usual ap-
proach to quantisation is based on the suggestion of man-
ton, that the low energy dynamics of n skyrmions may
be approximated by motion on some nite dimensional
manifold. the simplest possibility is the moduli space
generated by the zero modes of the minimal energy so-
lution. for b=1, collective coordinate quantisation of
(coupled) spin and isospin gives a description of nucleons
and the  resonance in qualitative agreement with exper-
iment [3,4]. however, such a quantisation includes eects
of order h2 while ignoring eects of order h. also, it is
known that for real nuclei, nucleons in the ground state
have relatively large kinetic energies. hence, the num-
ber of degrees of freedom quantised must at least equal
the number of nucleon coordinates. widely separated
skyrmions can be labelled by their positions and relative
isospin orientations, so a minimum of 6b degrees of free-
dom are required to describe a skyrme conguration of
baryon number b. however, the minimum energy always
occurs when the skyrmions coalesce into a single large
soliton [5,6], with a maximum of 9 zero modes: trans-
lation, spin and isospin. clearly, in the neighbourhood
of such a conguration, the moduli space approximation
must be extended to include low-lying vibrational modes.
the rst step in this direction was taken by leese et
al [7], who quantised a ten-dimensional manifold along
the b=2 attractive channel, using an instanton approx-
imation for the eld congurations. while still not in-
corporating quite enough degrees of freedom, their re-
sults were signicantly better than had previously been
obtained from a simple quantisation of the eight zero
modes. walet [8] later extended this treatment, again
employing the instanton approximation, to estimate the
full normal mode spectra for b=2 and b=3. the vi-
brational spectra for b=2, 3 and 4 have now been di-

rectly computed by barnes et al [1,9], who were also
able to classify the modes according to the representa-
tions they form of the symmetry groups of the static
solutions. a remarkable pattern emerged. the lower
frequency modes correspond to known attractive chan-
nel scatterings; it was also observed that these modes
fall into representations exactly corresponding to those
for small zero mode deformations of bps monopoles, for
monopole charges equal to the baryon numbers of the
multiskyrmions. this strongly suggests an underlying
link between the two theories, and in fact houghton et
al [10] have demonstrated a connection through ratio-
nal maps. they speculate that the correspondence be-
tween bps monopoles and skyrmions should hold for any
baryon number (monopole charge), and have used this as-
sumption to predict the lowest twenty one modes for the
b=7 skyrmion.

the remaining, higher frequency parts of the b=2, 3
and 4 spectra consist of breathing-type modes. the
rst mode above the pion mass is in all cases a trivial
breather, a simple size uctuation of the multiskyrmion.
above this lie more complicated breathing modes, where
one part of the soliton expands, while another part is
compressed. baskerville and michaels [11] recently pro-
posed a simple geometric explanation of these modes,
based on the movement of branch lines:
lines of (ap-
proximately) zero baryon density radiating out from the
centre of the minimal energy solutions. this ansatz ex-
plains all the higher frequency normal modes observed for
b=2, 3 and 4, although it also predicts an extra triplet
for b=4 which was not observed numerically. it is pos-
sible that this mode, if it exists, might have a rather
high frequency, which could explain why it was not seen.
baskerville and michaels also published a complete set
of predictions for the vibrational spectra of b=5, 6 and
7 multiskyrmions.
in general, their geometrical ansatz
predicts 4b  7 higher breathing modes, in addition to
a trivial breather, for a minimal energy skyrme solution
of baryon number b, if b > 2. the monopole analogy of
houghton et al predicts a further 4b 7 lower frequency,
scattering-type modes. added to the nine zero modes
(for b > 2), this gives a total of 8b  4 degrees of free-

1

dom. this is rather more than the 6b zero modes of b
widely separated skyrmions, throwing open the question
as to how many degrees of freedom are really relevant in
the vicinity of the minimal energy solution, and therefore
how many should be quantised. it is interesting to note
that instanton generated approximations to skyrme eld
congurations naturally have 8b  1 degrees of freedom.
houghton [12] recently computed the vibrational spec-
tra of the instanton-generated 3-skyrmion, and obtained
the same modes as predicted by a combination of the
monopole and geometrical methods, plus an additional
triplet, with axial vector symmetry.

in this article, the vibrational normal modes of the
b=7 skyrmion are computed, using the same method as
in [1,9]. their symmetries are then classied according
to the symmetry group of the static soliton, in this case
the icosehedral group, the minimal energy solution hav-
ing the shape of a perfect dodecahedron [6]. the b=7
spectrum is of particular interest since a full set of pre-
dictions already exists for the normal modes.
it thus
provides a good test of both the monopole analogy and
the geometrical ansatz for higher modes. in fact, all of
the expected vibrations are observed, except for one ve-
fold degenerate multiplet. the b=7 vibrational spectrum
may also be important for another reason. irwin [13] re-
cently performed a zero mode quantisation of minimal
energy skyrmions for baryon numbers four to nine and
seventeen. for baryon numbers four, six and eight he
obtained ground states in agreement with experimental
observations. however, for baryon numbers ve, seven,
nine and seventeen, the calculated ground states have
the wrong spins. for the specic case of b=7, it may be
possible to resolve the problem through the inclusion of
vibrational modes. the experimentally observed ground
state is an isodoublet with spin 3
2 , whereas the lowest al-
lowed state in the skyrmion quantisation is an isodoublet
with spin 7
2 rota-
tional state could be combined with a vibrational state to
give an allowed state. if the vibrational energy involved
was small enough, the resultant state might have lower
energy than the spin 7
2 isodoublet. obviously, knowledge
of the exact frequencies and symmetries of the low-lying
vibrational states is a prerequisite for progress in this
direction.

2 . however, it is possible that a spin 3

ii. computation and interpretation of

the spectrum

the normal mode spectrum is computed using the
same method and computer codes developed for the b=2,
3 and 4 calculations [1,9]. skyrme elds, being su(2)-
valued, lie on a 3-sphere, and can thus be represented by
a scalar eld   4, with the constraint aa = 1. the
skyrme lagrangian density can then be written, in terms
of the usual dimensionless skyrme units [17], as

2

l =
+

  + 2

1
2
1
4{(   )(  )(  )(   )}

1 + (    1)

(1)

where  is a lagrange multiplier eld, and  = 2m
f e is a
dimensionaless constant, the oscillation frequency of the
homogeneous pion eld. as in [1,9], the standard value
[4]  = .526 has been used.

the skyrme equations of motion are derived by dis-

cretising the action s = r d4xl on a nite lattice, then

varying with respect to each eld component a(t, i, j, k),
at each point in the lattice. this leads in general to a
coupled system of equations, due to the mixed time and
space derivatives in the quartic skyrme term. the rel-
evant, kinetic part of the lagrangian density can be
written

lkin =

.

a


1
2

k ab(i)

b

.



(2)

where k ab = ab(1 + (i)2)  iaib acts as a spa-
tially dependent inertia tensor. it is the time dependence
of k ab which leads to the coupling, with all its inherent
numerical diculties. however, for very small perturba-
tions about the static solution, (t, x) = st(x) + (t, x),
the time dependent parts of k ab give rise to terms of
order at least 3. if   1, such terms can be neglected
to a good approximation, and the matrix k ab assigned
its value at the static classical solution. the discretised
equations of motion then reduce to the form

a(t + 1, i, j, k) = ra(t, i, j, k) + a(t, i, j, k)

(3)

where  is a constant related to the lagrange multiplier,
and ra is a function of the elds at the current and
previous timesteps only. invoking the su(2) constraint
a
t+1a

t+1 = 1 yields a quadratic equation for 

2 + 2raa + rara  1 = 0,

(4)

the positive square root of which is the desired solution
(the denitions of  and ra can be chosen so as to ensure
this: see [14] for details). substituting  back into eq. (3)
then gives a deterministic time evolution for the skyrme
elds.

the vibrational spectrum can be directly computed
using this algorithm. the static solution is found by nu-
merical relaxation, using elds derived from the rational
map ansatz as a starting point [10]. a small random
perturbation is then applied, after which the elds are
evolved forward for a long time at constant energy. the
evolving elds take the form

nn(x) cos(nt) + o(2),

(t, x) = st(x) + xmodes
where the functions n(x)  4, obeying n(x)  st(x) =
0 are the normal modes, each excited with amplitude n.

(5)

the normal mode frequencies n are obtained by fourier
analysis of the eld (t, x), with respect to time, at any
point in the box.

once the frequencies have been identied, the time
evolution process is repeated. maps of the normal modes
n(x) can be constructed by performing discrete fourier
sums on each component of the evolving eld. the space
of perturbations has a very useful inner product

h1|2i = zbox

a
1 (x)k ab(x) b

2(x) d3x,

(6)

the matrix k ab(x) being included in this denition to en-
sure orthogonality between modes of dierent frequency:
h1|2i = 0 if 1 6= 2. in general, the normal modes fall
into degenerate multiplets at discrete frequencies. each
such multiplet forms a matrix representation of the sym-
metry group of the static soliton, via the inner product
hi|s|ji. the symmetry operations s in general consist
of a physical operation, for example a rotation or reec-
tion, which leaves the energy and baryon densities of the
static soliton invariant, plus an isospin transformation
of the pion elds (2, 3, 4), which undoes the ef-
fect of the physical operation on the static elds. modes
of the same frequency always form an irreducible rep-
resentation (irrep) of the symmetry group, which places
strong constraints on the allowed degeneracies.
in the
case of the b=7 multiskyrmion, the symmetry group of
the static soliton is the icosehedral group, which has irre-
ducible representaions of degeneracy one, three, four and
ve only.

determining the degeneracy and symmetry of each
multiplet is in principle straightforward. for degener-
ate modes, each random initial perturbation will pro-

duce a dierent linear combination pi ii(x), when one

projects out the relevant frequency. applying the sym-
metries of the static soliton will yield yet other, dierent
combinations. the degeneracy of a given frequency can
be found by computing the rank of the matrix of inner
products between dierent linear combinations of the de-
generate modes. it is also possible to project any given
linear combination out of all the others. in this way, a
library of orthonormal modes can be built up. once a
full orthonormal basis has been obtained for a given fre-
quency, it is easy to calculate its symmetry. irreducible
representations are uniquely labelled by the characters

(traces pihi|s|ii) of certain symmetry operations s.

unfortunately, several diculties arise in this proce-
dure for the particular case of b=7. the main problem
is that the simulations are carried out on a nite, cu-
bic lattice, which breaks the dodecahedral symmetry of
the static solution. the most immediate consequence of
this is that some multiplets may be articially split, for
example a ve-fold degenerate multiplet into a doublet
and triplet of close, but not identical, frequency. the
breaking may also cause certain modes to be generated
more easily than others, if they t better onto the -
nite grid. thus dierent initial conditions do not re-
ally produce randomly dierent linear combinations of

degenerate modes. this can eectively hide some of
the degeneracy, since the method outlined above depends
on nding enough independent linear combinations. a
closely related technical diculty is that not all of the
symmetry operations of the icosehedral group can be
exactly realised on a cubic lattice.
if the cubic lattice
does not map onto itself under some physical operation,
then interpolation must be used to nd the new eld val-
ues. this can be done accurately enough to compute the
character of such a symmetry, given an orthonormal ba-
sis; but is not suitable for separating out such a basis
in the rst place. since only 24 (out of 120) physical
symmetries can be performed exactly on the cubic lat-
tice, this is a severe limitation. the last (but certainly
not least) problem is contamination between modes of
dierent frequency. forty-three vibrational modes are
predicted for b=7, lying in at least eleven dierent mul-
tiplets. these are all expected to occur within a fairly
small range of frequencies. the nite time scale of the
simulation leads inevitably to nite-width peaks in the
power spectrum. considerable overlap between dierent
multiplets is therefore possible, and does in fact occur,
as can immediately be seen from figure ().

the resolution of these diculties requires a closer ex-
amination of the icosehedral symmetry group ih, as well
as the particular alignment of the dodecahedral static so-
lution on the cubic lattice. the character table for ih is
given in table i. the physical symmetries can be divided
into ten conjugacy classes of like operations. the iden-
tity 11 and inversion i both form classes on their own.
there are six ve-fold rotational axes in a dodecahedron,
running through the centres of opposite faces. rotations
by 2
5 about these, in either direction, form one conjugacy
class (with 12 elements), labelled c5, while rotations by
4
5 form another, c2
5 , also with 12 elements. there are
ten three-fold axes, through pairs of opposite corners of
the dodecahedron. the 20 2
3 rotations associated with
these form another conjugacy class, c3. the nal ro-
tational symmetry is two-fold, about axes which bisect
pairs of opposite edges of the dodecahedron. this gives
15 rotations by  (there are 30 edges, since each edge
is shared by two of the twelve pentagonal faces), form-
ing the conjugacy class c2. the remaining symmetry
operations are all combinations of inversion with one of
the rotations already mentioned, and are denoted icn,
for rotation cn. (note that ic2 gives pure reections,
in planes which contain two opposite edges, and bisect
four pentagonal faces.) the characters for these classes
are exactly the same as for the equivalent rotations with-
out inversion, except that negative parity representations
pick up a minus sign. this is because the full icosehedral
group ih is just the group of rotations of an icosehedron
(dodecahedron) i, extended by inversion: ih = i  z2.
the irreducible representations are labelled by their de-
generacies and parities, where this is sucient to dis-
tinguish them (eg. 5 is a ve-fold degenerate multiplet
with negative parity). the only exceptions are the four
three-dimensional irreps, which are labelled f1 and f2,

3

tiplets. it is very useful, at this stage, to keep in mind
some sort of physical model for representations of various
degeneracies. for example, the cartesian axes will obvi-
ously transform as a triplet (in fact f 1 ). given a general
mixture of all three (a vector in a random direction), the
symmetry operations (11 + cx), (11 + cy) and (11 + cz),
or equivalently (cy + cz), (cx + cz) and (cx + cy),
will project out the x, y and z components respectively,
where cx is a 180 rotation about the x-axis, etc. de-
generacies four and ve are a little trickier. the ve
cubes mentioned above form a representation, since all
symmetries of the dodecahedron will rotate them among
themselves. this representation is not irreducible, since
the sum or symmetric combination of all ve transforms
trivially (as 1+), ie. this combination is invariant under
all physical symmetries of the dodecahedron. however,
the four remaining antisymmetric congurations, orthog-
onal to the symmetric combination and to each other, do
give an irreducible 4+ representation. labelling the ve
cubes {|1i|5i}, a suitable orthonormal basis for the
degeneracy 4 irrep can be written

|ai =

|bi =

|ci =

1
2

1
2

1
2

(|1i+|2i|3i|4i)

(|1i+|3i|2i|4i)

(|1i+|4i|2i|3i)

|di =

1
25

(4|5i|1i|2i|3i|4i).

(7a)

(7b)

(7c)

(7d)

if the cube which is aligned with the lattice is taken to
be |5i, then the c2 rotations about the cartesian axes
act as follows:

cx : (a, b, c, d)  (a,b,c, d)

cy : (a, b, c, d)  (a, b,c, d)

cz : (a, b, c, d)  (a,b, c, d).

(8a)

(8b)

(8c)

using these results, it is quite simple to construct pro-
jection operators for the orthonormal basis

pa = 11 + cx  cy  cz

pb = 11  cx + cy  cz

pc = 11  cx  cy + cz

pd = 11 + cx + cy + cz.

(9a)

(9b)

(9c)

(9d)

fig. 1. schematic diagram of one cube within a dodeca-
hedron. the edges of the dodecahedron are drawn as dotted
lines on the faces of the cube. in reality, they would project
slightly, and the edges of the cube would lie slightly behind
the pentagonal faces.

again with superscripts denoting parity. with this nota-
tion, a vector has symmetry f 1 , while an axial vector
transforms as f +
2 .

next, we need to examine the alignment of the do-
decahedral soliton on the cubic grid. a dodecahedron
contains within itself ve cubes; that is, there are ve
sets of eight vertices, each of which form the corners of
a cube. each of the 20 vertices of the dodecahedron is
a member of two such cubes. in the b=7 static soliton
used in simulations, one of these cubes is aligned with the
axes of the cubic lattice. see figure (1) for a schematic
diagram.
it should be obvious, looking at this figure,
which symmetry operations map this cube to itself (and
hence preserve the grid structure): the identity, inversion,
three c2 rotations (about the cartesian axes), three re-
ections, eight c3 rotations (about the body diagonals of
the cube), and the same eight rotations combined with
inversion. the vital question is how to use these symme-
tries to produce orthonormal bases for all possible mul-

11 12c5 12c 2

5 20c3 15c2 i 12ic5 12ic 2

5 20ic3 15ic2

1


1+ 1
f +
1 3
f +
2 3 1  
4+ 4
5+ 5
1 1
f 1 3
f 2 3 1  
4 4
5 5

-1
0
1


-1
0

1

1  


-1
0
1

1  


-1
0

1
0
0
1
-1
1
0
0
1
-1

1
-1
-1
0
1
1
-1
-1
0
1

1  

  1

1

1



-1
0
-1

1
3
3 1  
-1
4
0
5
-1
-1
-3 
-3   1 
1
-4
-5
0

1
0

1
0
0
1
-1
-1
0
0
-1
1

1
-1
-1
0
1
-1
1
1
0
-1

table i. character table for ih.  = 5+1

2

.

4

it should be noted at this stage that pa, pb and pc also
act as projectors for the triplet formed by the cartesian
axes. what now for a ve-fold basis? there are six
c5 rotational axes, giving a 6-dimensional representation
which decomposes in a similar way to the 5 cubes: again
the symmetric combination transforms trivially as 1+,
while ve orthogonal antisymmetric combinations form
5+. labelling the six c5 axes {|1i|6i}, a possible
basis for the latter is

|ai =

1
2

(|1i|2i),

|bi =

1
2

(|3i|4i),

(10a)

|ci =

1
2

(|5i|6i),

|di =

1
2

(|1i+|2i|3i|4i), (10b)

|ei =

1
23

(2|5i+2|6i|1i|2i|3i|4i).

(10c)

the action of cx, cy and cz on these states is as follows

cx : (a, b, c, d, e)  (a,b,c, d, e)

cy : (a, b, c, d, e)  (a, b,c, d, e)

cz : (a, b, c, d, e)  (a,b, c, d, e).

(11a)

(11b)

(11c)

it is then apparent that the projection operators pa, pb
and pc dened in eq. (9) also act as projectors for states
|ai, |bi and |ci respectively, while pd will project out
some combination of states |di and |ei. it may seem an
incredible coincidence that the same symmetries project
out the basis states for multiplets of degeneracy three,
four and ve, but in fact this is deeply related to the way
in which the cubic lattice breaks the icosehedral sym-
metry. furthermore, these same projectors work for all
degeneracy three, four and ve multiplets, not just f 1 ,
4+ and 5+, from which they were derived. this last is
not obvious, in fact is perhaps counter-intuitive, but nev-
ertheless has been found to work in practice.

the projectors dened in eq. (9) are the main tool re-
quired to separate out the various multiplets, when con-
tamination occurs between them. states of dierent par-
ity can easily be separated, using the projectors

p+ = 11 + i,

p = 11  i.

(12)

however, contamination between degenerate multiplets
of the same parity is more awkward. the coincidence
between the projection operators means that mode |ai
of a 4+ cannot be distinguished from mode |ai of a 5+
for example, or from the x component of f +
1 or f +
2 .
however, it is possible to tell whether the three modes
projected out by pa, pb and pc are derived purely from
a single multiplet, or represent some mixture, by consid-
ering their behaviour under c3 rotations. a 120 degree

3

3 )pd ( where c3 and c1

rotation in physical space causes a cyclic permutation of
the three projections. this is also a 120 degree rotation
in the phase space of the three modes, and since the
modes may be aligned or anti-aligned with the carte-
sian axes of this space, two of the modes may pick up
minus signs. this occurs randomly, and the chance of
it happening the same way for two dierent multiplets
which are mixed together is only 1
64 . hence if the overlap
h|pa|i is exactly equal to h|c3pb|i, we are almost
certainly dealing with a pure multiplet. if, furthermore,
h|pd|i = 0, then |i represents a pure triplet. other-
wise, the mode must have degeneracy four or ve. the
latter possibilities can be distinguished by the behaviour
of pd|i under c3 rotations. if the multiplet has degen-
eracy four, then h|p dc3pd|i = 1, while for a degen-
eracy 5 multiplet h|p dc3pd|i =  1
2 . for degeneracy
5, the operator (c3  c1
are
120 rotations in opposite directions about the same axis)
projects out a linear combination orthogonal to that pro-
jected out by pd, thus completing the orthonormal basis.
the overall procedure for interpretation of the spec-
trum is then as follows. first of all, any contamination
by zero modes (spin or linear momentum) is projected
out. a careful watch is kept during the simulation to
make sure that drift (ie. excitation of zero modes) is
kept within strict limits, to ensure the validity of the ba-
sic assumption underlying the computer algorithm. ad-
ditionally, severe damping is applied at the edges of the
box for the rst 1000 timesteps of the simulation, be-
fore any data collection begins. this helps to decrease
the proportion of radiation relative to real vibrational
modes, and also helps reduce the subsequent drift. still
slight contamination from zero modes occurs, which must
be removed from the perturbations a(x). next, the per-
turbations are separated into positive and negative parity
components. the projectors pa to pd are applied to the
resulting states. the overlaps h|pi|i and h|c3pi|i are
calculated, as is the matrix element h|p dc3pd|i.
if
a pure multiplet is found, an orthonormal basis for it is
constructed. this can then be projected out of all other
frequencies. hopefully this will remove enough contami-
nation that at least one other mode (of the same parity)
will now be pure. the procedure can then be repeated,
until there are no pure modes left. as the library of ba-
sis states for pure multiplets is built up, a check is kept
on how much of each frequency is accounted for. if all
modes are suitably normalised, then

xi,n

h|(i)

n ih(i)

n |i = 1

(13)

for all original perturbations |i, where {|(i)

n i} is the
full set of orthonormal basis states. it may happen that
some multiplets are inextricably mixed, so that it is not
possible to extract a pure set of basis states for them.
this will apply mainly to the triplet states, as modes
|di of 4 and {|di,|ei} of 5 can always be separated at

5

least from each other. it is still possible to tell how many
triplets there are. applying pa, pb and pc to any
one of the remaining frequencies will give basis vectors
in the combined space of the remaining multiplets. this
can be projected out of the other frequencies, and the
process repeated, as for the pure modes, until all modes
have been accounted for. in practice, this means until
all the sums in eq. (13) add to at least 0.995. thus it
is always possible to fully classify the symmetries of all
vibrational modes in the spectrum, even if they cannot
all be projected out cleanly. the main dierence is that
frequencies can be condently assigned to the pure multi-
plets, whereas mixtures will in general merely be conned
within a certain range of frequencies. sometimes a ten-
tative assignment can be made if a pure |di mode or
{|di,|ei} doublet appears strongly at a given frequency.
one last technical detail should be mentioned. as was
explained above, the symmetry operations that will be
applied to the perturbations {|i}, are combinations of
physical symmetries and isospin transformations. the
alignment of the static solution on the cubic grid is as
shown in figure 1. it is also necessary to determine the
exact symmetry of the pion elds in the static solution,
or at least, how they transform under the specic sym-
metries needed to identify the perturbations. from the
foregoing discussion, it should be clear that the symme-
try operations needed to project out orthonormal bases
for all modes are inversion, the three -rotations cx, cy
and cz, plus one 2
3 - rotation (any of the eight which can
be realised on the cubic lattice will do) and its inverse.
additionally, we will need to calculate the character of
one 2
5 rotation, to distinguish between the triplet rep-
resentations f1 and f2. the following equations give
the full symmetry operations used, both the physical op-
erations on the cartesian axes (x, y, z), and the isospin
transformations which restore the original elds of the
static solution.

i : (x, y, z)  (x,y,z)

(1, 2, 3)  (1,2,3)

(14a)

cx : (x, y, z)  (x,y,z)




1
2
3


  


cos 

0

 sin 

0  sin 
1
0  cos 

0






1
2
3


 (14b)

cy : (x, y, z)  (x, y,z)

(1, 2, 3)  (1, 2,3)

(14c)

)
r
e
w
o
p
(
g
o
l

cz : (x, y, z)  (x,y, z)
 cos 
sin 


  





1
2
3

0

sin 

0
1
0 cos 

0

c3 : (x, y, z)  (y, z, x)






1
2
3


 (14d)

6




1
2
3


 

 sin  cos   cos 


 sin 
 cos2

sin2
 cos 
 sin  sin  cos 

0

5+1
51

4

c5 : 




x
y
z

1
2
3



 


  


1

4
1
2

4

4

2 
5+1
51
1
0  cos 
0  sin 

0

4

51
 1
2
5+1

4

0










x
y
z

1
2
3

5

sin 
5
5  cos 

5

(14e)






1
2
3







 (14f)

where  = 1.0206, and  = 1.1410. note also that
(1, 2, 3) are the elds (2, 3, 4), in the notation used
earlier in this section.

iii. results.

simulations of the vibrations of the b=7 multi-
skyrmion were carried out on a nite lattice of 653 points,
with side length l = 8 in skyrme units. the resulting
power spectrum is displayed in figure 2.

the lowest peak in the spectrum, at frequency 0.019,

was found to have total overlap pih.019|jiihji|.019i =

.9911 with angular momentum zero modes.
it is thus
identied as comprising the rotational modes of the static
soliton, which are broken from zero to nite energy by the
discrete lattice. the same thing happened in the b=2, 3
and 4 vibrational spectra. the next three peaks contain
a pure 5+ multiplet (mainly in the middle of the three
peaks) and a pure 5 multiplet, which is split between the
rst and third peaks, with the modes {|ai,|bi,|ci} mainly
in one peak, and {|di,|ei} mainly in the other. pictures
of all the modes may be found in figure 3. both of these

-10

-12

-14

-16

-18

-20

0

pi3(27)

0.2

0.4

frequency

0.6

0.8

1

fig. 2. b=7 power spectrum.

degeneracy 5 multiplets represent scattering type modes.
in the positive parity 5+ at frequency 0.302, two opposite
pentagonal faces of the dodecahedron split away. pre-
sumably these will become b=2 tori, which, if the mode
were amplied, would move away in opposite directions,
leaving a b=3 tetrahedron at the origin. the 5 modes,
split between frequencies 0.289 and 0.320, are more dif-
cult to decipher.
it appears that one edge is pulled
away, suggesting that the dodecahedron may be splitting
into a single skyrmion and a b=6 soliton. both these
scattering processes have a line symmetry, which may
explain their degeneracy. there are six natural lines in
the dodecahedron, the c5 axes. exciting modes in all
six directions simultaneously however would be equiva-
lent to the trivial breather, so that only ve directions
are really independent, hence the degeneracy. this argu-
ment is certainly valid for the positive parity modes. it is
not as obvious for the negative parity vibrations, but the
similarity between the symmetries is certainly suggestive.
the next peak, at frequency 0.358, is a pure triplet,
with symmetry f 2 .
in this scattering, two pentagons
from nearby, but not adjacent, faces of the dodecahe-
dron are pulled away. from their relative alignments, it
seems likely that these two tori will later coalesce into a
single b=4 cube. this mode probably therefore repre-
sents the breaking of the dodecahedron into two clusters,
one with b=3 and the other b=4. a pure 4 multiplet
is split between the next two peaks, at frequencies 0.446
and 0.459. this mode has a tetrahedral symmetry, with
four corners of the dodecahedron, arranged in a tetrahe-
dron, being pulled away. presumably these will become
four single skyrmions, leaving a b=3 tetrahedron in the
centre. the opposite extreme of the motion goes through
the dual tetrahedron, hence the negative parity.

the next peak, at frequency 0.522, is a trivial breather
(1+), a simple size uctuation. after that, at 0.553, is a
triplet of dipole breathing modes, with symmetry f 1 .
the remaining peaks all contain a mixture of several
modes. there is a pure 4 multiplet, spread between fre-
quencies 0.741 to 0.842, which is a breathing mode with
tetrahedral symmetry.the last negative parity mode is a
pure, radiative f 2
triplet. this is the expected k = 0
radiation, which because of the damping at the begin-
ning of the run does not appear as a separate peak, but
merely causes slight contamination (about 20%) in the
peak at frequency 0.609.

one more reasonably pure multiplet was identied,
a 4+ spread across the frequency range 0.609 to 0.716.
this is the last of the scattering modes predicted by the
monopole analogy. it breaks the pattern previously ob-
served in the b=2, 3 and 4 vibrational spectra, in that it
has a higher frequency than two breathing type modes.
this may be explained by the fact that it represents a
maximal breaking up of the b=7 soliton, splitting it into
seven single skyrmions. this mode clearly corresponds to
the scattering recently proposed by singer and sutclie
[16], using the instanton approximation, as a comparison
to the pictures in their paper will demonstrate.

7

frequency degeneracy symmetry description

0.019

0.289 - 0.320

0.302

0.358

0.446 - 0.459

0.522
0.553
0.609

0.609 - 0.716

0.697 - 0.716
0.741 - 0.842

0.826 - 0.842

3

5

5

3

4

1
3
3
4

5
4

4

f +
2

5

5+

f 2

4

1+
f 1
f 2
4+

5+
4

4+

broken spin zero
modes: j +.
scattering: 1 + 6.
one edge splits away
as a single skyrmion.
scattering: 2 + 3 + 2.
two opposite faces of
the dodecahedron
split o as b=2 tori.
scattering: 3 + 4.
two nearby tori split
away, then recombine
as a b=4 cube.
scattering:

3 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1.

tetrahedral symmetry.
trivial breather.
dipole breather.
k = 0 radiation.
scattering: 1 + 1 + 1

+ 1 + 1 + 1 + 1.

cubic symmetry.
quadrupole breather.
breather.
tetrahedral symmetry.
breather
cubic symmetry.

table ii. summary of b=7 vibrational modes.

the remaining positive parity modes cannot be cleanly
separated, but are a mixture of one 4+ and one 5+ mul-
tiplet. in fact the mixing is not too severe (this can be
seen when computing the characters), and the 5+ modes
can be identied as quadrupole breathing motions, while
the 4+ are breathers with a line symmetry similar to that
of the 4+ scattering mode described above.

this completes the list of all modes found below fre-
quency 0.9. a summary is given in table ii. denite
frequencies are given where they can be condently as-
signed; where a mode is split into two or more peaks,
or appears as part of an inseparable mixture, a range
of frequncies is given. modes are characterised as either
scattering or breathing type, and an attempt is made
to classify the former in terms of the clusters (of dier-
ent baryon number) into which the dodecahedron breaks
up. some of these identications are fairly certain, while
others are more tentative. a full dynamical simulation
of these attractive channels will be necessary to conrm
the guesses made here.

iv. conclusions.

acknowledgents.

i would like to thank n. manton, c. houghton, r. bat-
tye, p. sutclie and w.j. zakrzewski for useful discus-
sions of this work. in particular, p. sutclie provided the
computer code which generated the approximate static
solution, and n. manton suggested some of the scatter-
ing interpretations oered above. all simulations were
performed on cosmos, the origin 2000 supercomputer
owned by the uk-ccc and supported by hefce and
pparc. many thanks to s. rankin for his help with
a variety of computer-related problems. this work was
supported nancially by pparc.

[1] c. barnes, w.k. baskerville and n. turok, phys. rev.
lett. 79 (1997) 367-370; phys. lett. b411 (1997) 180-
186

[2] t. h. r. skyrme, proc. roy. soc. 260 (1961) 127
[3] g.s. adkins, c.r. nappi and e. witten, nucl. phys.

b228 (1983) 552

[4] g. adkins, c.r. nappi, nuc. phys. b233 (1984) 109.
[5] e. braaten, s. townsend and l. carson, phys. lett.

b235 (1990) 147

[6] r.a. battye and p.m. sutclie, phys. rev. lett. 79

(1997) 363-366

[7] r.a. leese, n.s. manton and b.j. schroers, nucl. phys.

b442 (1995) 228

[8] n. walet, nucl. phys. a606 (1996) 429
[9] w.k.baskerville, c. barnes and n. turok, talk given
at solitons conference: kingston, ontario, july 1997;
submitted to conference proceedings.

[10] c.j. houghton, n.s. manton and p.m. sutclie, nucl.

phys. b510 (1998) 507.

[11] w.k. baskerville and r. michaels, phys. lett. b448

(1999) 275-280

[12] c.j. houghton, instanton vibrations of the 3-skyrmion,

damtp-1999-52, hep-th/9905009

[13] p. irwin, zero mode quantisation of multi-skyrmions,

damtp-1998-26, hep-th/9804142

[14] u. pen, d. spergel and n. turok, phys. rev. d49 (1994)

692

[15] m. hamermesh, group theory and its application to

physical problems, dover, 1962.

[16] m.a. singer and p.m. sutclie, symmetric instantons

and skyrme fields, hep-th/9901075

[17] t.h.r. skyrme, nucl. phys. 31 (1962) 556

the vibrational spectrum of the b=7 dodecahedral
skyrme soliton has been calculated, and a full identi-
cation of the symmetries for all modes lying below fre-
quency 0.9 has been made. the sums dened in eq. (13)
were computed for all peaks, and all exceed 0.995, so
it seems certain that nothing has been missed at these
frequencies.

all attractive channel scattering modes predicted by
the monopole analogy [10], were observed numerically.
four of the ve predicted complex breathing motions
[11] were also observed. the absentee is a predicted
5 breathing mode.
it is possible that this multiplet
may be lurking at a frequency higher than those consid-
ered here.
if so, it could be rather dicult to nd it
amongst the radiation which becomes more predominant
as the frequency increases. while this mode is missing,
the conjecture of baskerville and michaels [11], that there
should be a total of 8b-4 modes for a multiskyrmion of
baryon number b, cannot be said to have been conclu-
sively proved. however, thirty eight vibrational modes
have been identied, giving a total of forty seven modes
on inclusion of the nine zero modes. this is denitely
more than 6b or 6b+1 (forty two or forty three), and
while it is possible that more vibrational modes may be
discovered in the future, it is dicult to see how one could
get rid of some already found. the fact that the sym-
metries of the breathing modes observed were correctly
predicted by [11] is also persuasive. note that the instan-
ton inspired counting suggested by houghton [12], giving
8b-1 modes, is not ruled out either. this ansatz gives
the same vibrational modes as the geometrical method
of [11], plus an extra triplet. if one multiplet may have
been missed due to its high frequency, perhaps a second
could be hiding up there too. the evidence would seem
to favour the mode counting scaling roughly like 8b, at
any rate; whether precisely as 8b-4 or 8b-1 remains to
be decided. however, on the whole, the predictions made
for the vibrational spectrum of the b=7 skyrme soliton
have proved to be accurate.

as to the problem of the wrong spin obtained by zero
mode quantisation of the b=7 skyrmion [13], there cer-
tainly exist vibrational modes of low enough frequency
to permit hope of its resolution.
in general, the more
symmetry that is exhibited by a particular solution, the
greater are the constraints imposed upon its possible spin
states. therefore, to nd states with lower spin than
the 7
2 permitted for the static solution, the vibrations
must break its dodecahedral symmetry. the two lowest
frequency modes found both have rather low symmetry,
which is promising. indeed, one can only hope that these
vibrations still possess enough symmetry to forbid spin
1
2 states. this calculation is beyond the scope of this pa-
per, but the results presented here certainly point to it
as a promising direction for future research.

8

fig. 3. contours of constant baryon density for the b=7 soliton, combined with its normal modes, as indexed by their
frequencies in table ii. where a frequency range is given in this table, modes are labelled by the lower limit of that range.
note that the radiation at frequency 0.609 is not plotted, so that the mode labelled .609 is the 4+ singer-sutclie scattering
mode. all other modes are uniquely determined by their frequency or lower frequency limit, and appear in the same order as
in table ii. two dierent basis modes are shown for frequency 0.302, as the break-up into separate clusters shows up better in
one, and the overall symmetry in the other.

9

