9
9
9
1

 

v
o
n
5
2

 

 
 

2
v
5
4
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

gelfand-fuchs cohomology and m-theory as a

topological quantum field theory

ioannis p. zois1

mathematical institute, 24-29 st. giles, oxford ox1 3lb

1izois @ maths.ox.ac.uk and izois @ cc.uoa.gr

abstract

we propose a lagrangian density for m-theory which is purely topo-
logical using gelfand-fuchs cohomology which characterises up to homotopy
q-structures and hence foliations in particular. then using s-duality, we
conjecture on the existence of certain plane elds on s11. finally we calcu-
late the partition function of the theory.

pacs classication: 11.10.-z; 11.15.-q; 11.30.-ly

keywords: gelfand-fuchs cohomology; m-theory; haeiger structures

to my brother demetrios and to e.

0.1 short review of current status in m-theory

we shall start with a brief overview of old superstring theory, namely the
picture arround the end of 80s before advances in dualities and p-branes.

what we actually had was not one but ve consisten superstring theories
in d=10, namely types i, iia, iib, heterotic so(32) and heterotic e8  e8
which was an embarrassment of richness. these theories were related via
a pertutbative symmetry called t-duality when compactied in d=9 (this
duality is a symmetry of theories with compactied spatial dimmensions
where in the case of calabi-yau 3-folds t-duality takes the form of mirror
symmetry). moreover we believed that d=10 n=1 supergravity (various
versions of it) was the low energy limit (or innite string tension limit) of
these superstring theories in d=10.

there was however another piece of knowledge available which was some-
how forgotten, and that was d=11 n=1 supergravity. this theory emerged
as folows: assuming that spacetime carries a metric with minkowski signa-
ture, namely that there is only one timelike coordinate and assuming also
that there are zero modes with no grater than 2 spin, then supersymmetry
puts restrictions on dimensionality of spacetime, hence dmax = 11. this
made phenomenologists over the years to study all possible representations
of super-poincare in various dimensions up to d=11. one of the possibil-
ities then was this maximal d=11 n=1 supergravity. however this theory
was rather unpopular because it was overshadowed by superstring theory in
d=10 (with which no apparent relation was known) but also perhaps for
a more important reason:
it was proved to be non-renormalisable. at this
point we make a prothysteron: this defect is not possible to be overcome
and one reminicent of it is the fact that the supermembrane in d=11 has
continoum spectrum; there is however an attempt to encorporate this feature
in the framework of matrix models.

situation changed rapidly around mid 90s (or perhaps earlier), the most

important advances being:

1.) it was proved that various versions of d=10 n=1 supergravity admit
strings as solutions, a fact that now puts the two theories on a rather equal
footing.

2.) new evidence for a type of non-perturbative symmetry called s-
duality was found. this symmetry interchanges the strong/weak coupling re-
gions of a theory as well as elementary/soliton solutions (and hence topology

1

and dynamics; it is essentially a hodge star duality between eld strengths).
this s-duality emerged as a generalisation of electric/magnetic duality in
maxwell theory and as furter evidence of montonen-olive duality in su-
persymmetric yang-mills theories. now eventually s-duality has lead to
string/5-brane duality in d=10 and to membrane/5-brane duality in d=11
(let us restrict ourselves to the old brane-scan for the moment and forget
d-branes also).

3.) the observation that the ve dierent superstring theories in d=10
was an artifact of perturbation theory; these theories should emerge from
one non-perturbative theory in d=11 which was called m-theory.

4.) the relation between supermembranes in d=11 with d=11 n=1
supergravity as well as with d=10 superstring theories; the later is done by
a process which now comes under the name dimensional reduction process.
this is a general scheme which has been generalised to incorporate arbitrary
dimension d and arbitrary p-branes.

5.) applying s-duality in d=11 supermembranes we get the membrane/5-

brane duality in d=11, something which we mentioned earlier.

(see references [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7] and referencees therein).

0.2 a topological lagrangian for m-theory

hence we have something called m-theory consisting of membranes and 5-
branes living on an 11-manifold which is non perturbative. this theory has
a very intriguing feature: we can only extract information about it from its
limiting theories, namely either from d=11 n=1 supergravity or from super-
strings in d=10. this is so because this theory is genuinly non perturbative
for a reason which lies in the heart of manifold topology:

let us recall that in string theory, the path integral involves summation
over all topologically distinct diagrams (same for point particles of course).
strings are 1-branes hence in time they swep out a 2-manifold. at the tree
level then we need all topologically distinct simply connected 2-manifolds (ac-
tually there is only one, as topology tells us) and for loop corrections, topol-
ogy again says that topologically distinct non simply connected 2-manifolds
are classied by their genus, so we sum up over all riemann surfaces with
dierent genus.

it is clear then that for a perturbative quantum eld theory involving p-

2

branes we have to sum upon all topologically distinct (p+1)-dim manifolds:
simply connected ones for tree level and non simply connected ones for loop
corrections. thus we must know before hand the topological classication of
manifolds in the dimension of interest. that is the main problem of manifold
topology in mathematics.

but now we face a deep and intractable problem: geometry tells us,
essentially via a no-go theorem which is due to whitehead from late 40s,
that: we cannot classify non simply connected manifolds with dimension
greater or equal to 4! hence for p-branes with p greater or equal to 3, all
we can do via perturbative methods is up to tree level!

what happens for 3-manifolds then (hence for membranes)? the answer
from mathematics is that we do not know if all 3-manifolds can be classied!
so even for 2-branes it is still unclear whether perturbative methods work
(up to all levels of perturbation theory)!

the outlet from this situation that we propose here is not merely to look
only at non perturbative aspects of these theories, as was done up to now,
but to abandon perturbative methods completely from the very beginning.
there is only one way known up to now which can achieve this radical so-
lution to our problem: formulate the theory as a topological quantum field
theory and hence get rid of all perturbations once and for all.

let us explain how this can be acieved.

our approach is based on one physical principle:

a theory containing p-branes should be formulated on an m-dim mani-

fold which admits q-structures, where q = m  p  1.

n.b.
although we used in our physical principle q-structures which are more
general than foliations, we shall use both these terms meaning essentially the
same structure. the interested reader may refer to [11] for example to see
the precise denitions which are quite complicated. the key point however is
that the dierence between q-structures (or haeiger structures as they are
most commonly known in topology) and codim-q foliations is essentially the
dierence between transverse and normal. this does not aect any of what

3

we have to say, since bott-haeiger theory of characteristic classes is formu-
lated for the most general case, namely -structures. we would also like to
mention the relation between -structures and -spectra which is currently
an active eld in topology.

(for d-branes we need a variant of the above principle, namely we need
what are called plane foliations but we shall not elaborate on this point here).

one way of thinking about this principle is that it is analogous to the
past histories approach of quantum mechanics. clearly in quantum level
one should integrate over all foliations of a given codim.

a piece of warning here: this principle does not imply that all physical
process between branes are described by foliations. although the group of
foliations is huge, in fact comparable in size with the group of local dieo-
morphisms [12], and foliations can be really very nasty, we would not like
to make such a strong statement. what is denitely true though is that
some physical process are indeed described by foliations, hence at least this
condition must be satised because of them.

note:
before going on furter, we would like to make one crucial remark: this
principle puts severe restrictions on the topology that the underlying man-
ifold may have, in case of m-theory this is an 11-manifold. it is also very
important if the manifold is open or closed. this may be of some help, as we
hope, for the compactication problem of string theory or even m-theory,
namely how we go from d=10 (or d=11) to d=4 which is our intuitive di-
mension of spacetime. we shall address this question in the next section.
the nal comment is this: this principle puts absolutely no restriction to
the usual quantum eld theory for point particles in d=4, e.g. electroweak
theory or qcd. this is so because in this case spacetime is just r4 which is
non compact and we have 0-branes (point particles) and consequently 1-dim
foliations for which the integrability condition is trivially satised (essentially
this is due to a deep result of gromov for foliations on open manifolds, which
states that all open manifolds admit codim 1 foliations; in striking contrast,
closed manifolds admit codim 1 foliations i their euler characteristic is zero,
see for example in [11], [14] or references therein).

4

if we believe this principle, then the story goes on as follows: we are on
an 11-manifold, call it m for brevity and we want to describe a theory con-
taining 5-branes for example (and get membranes from s-duality). then m
should admit 6-dim foliations or equivalently codim 5 foliations. we know
from haeiger that the q-functor, namely the functor of codim q haeiger
structures and in particular codim q foliations, is representable. practically
this means that we can have an analogue of chern-weil theory which charac-
terises foliations of m up to homotopy using cohomology classes of m. (one
brief comment for foliations: one way of describing haeiger structures more
generally is to say that they generalise bre bundles in exactly the same way
that bre bundles generalise cartesian product. this observation is also im-
portant when mentioning gerbes later on).

in fact it is proved that the correct cohomology to classify haeiger struc-
tures up to homotopy (and hence foliations which constitute a particular ex-
ample of haeiger structures) is the gelfand-fuchs cohomology. this is a
result of bott and haeiger, essentially generalising an earlier result due to
godbillon and vey which was dealing only with codim 1 foliations, [15].

now we have a happy coincidence: the bott-haeiger class for a codim
5 foliation (which, recall, is what we want for 5-branes on an 11-manifold)
is exactly an 11-form, something that ts well with using it as a lagrangian
density!

the construction for arbitrary codim q foliations goes as follows:

let f
be a codim q foliation on an m-manifold m and suppose its normal bundle
(f ) is orientable. then f is dened by a global decomposable q-form .
let {(ui, xi)}ii be a locally nite cover of distinguished coordinate charts
on m with a smooth partition of unity {i}. then set

 = xii

idxmq+1

i

 ...  dxm
i

since  is integrable,

where  some 1-form on m. the (2q+1)-form

d =   ,

(1)

5

 =   (d)q,

(2)

is closed and its de rham cohomology class is independent of all choices
involved in dening it, depending only on homotopy type of f . thats the
class we want.

clearly for our case we are on an 11-manifold dealing with 5-branes, hence

6-dim foliations, hence codim 5 and thus the class  is an 11-form.

q is the classifying space for r

this construction can be generalised to arbitrary r

q-structures as a mixed
de rham-cech cohomology class and thus gives an element in h 2q+1(br
q; r),
where br
q-structures. note that in fact the
bhgv class is a cobordism invariant of codim q foliations of compact (2q+1)-
dim manifolds. this construction gives one computable characteristic class
for foliations. optimally we would like a generalisation of the chern-weil
construction for glq. that is we would like an abstract gda with the
property that for any codim q foliation f on a manifold m there is a gda
homomorphism into the de rham algebra on m, dened in terms of f such
that the induced map on cohomology factors through a universal map into
h (br
q; r). this algebra is nothing more than the gelfand-fuchs lie coal-
gebra of formal vector elds in one variable.

more concretely, let  be a transitive lie-pseudogroup acting on rn and
let a() denote the lie algebra of formal  vector elds associated to .
here a vector eld dened on on u  rn is called a  vector eld if the local
1-parameter group which it engenders is  and a() is dened as the inverse
limit

a() = limak()

of the k-jets at 0 of  vector elds. in the pseudogroup  let 0 be the set
of elements of  keeping 0 xed and set k
0 equal to the k-jets of elements in
0.

then the k

0  k

0 whose projection on every k

0 form an inverse system of lie groups and we can nd a
subgroup k  limk
0 is a maximal compact
subgroup for k > 0. this follows from the fact that the kernel of the projec-
tion k+1
0 is a vector space for k > 0. the subgroup k is unique up to
conjugation and its lie algebra k can be identied with a subalgebra of a().
for our purposes we need the cohomology of basic elements rel k in a(),
namely h(a(); k) which is dened as follows: let a{ak()} denote the

6

algebra of multilinear alternating forms on ak() and let a{a()} be the
direct limit of the a{ak()}. the bracket in a() induces a dierential on
a{a()} and we write h{a()} for the resulting cohomology group. the
relative group h (a(); k) is now dened as the cohomology of the subcom-
plex of a{a()} consisting of elements which are invariant under the natural
action of k and annihilated by all inner products with elements of k. then
the result is:

let f be a -foliation on m. there is an algebra homomorphism

 : h{a(); k}  h(m; r)

it is a principal k

which is a natural transformation on the category c().
the construction of  is as follows:
let p k() be the dierential bundle of k-jets at the origin of elements
of .
0-bundle. on the other hand  acts transitively
on the left on p k(). denote by a(p ()) the direct limit of the algebras
a(p k()) of dierential forms on p k(). the invariant forms wrt the action
of  constitute a dierential subalgebra denoted a. one can then prove
that it is actually isomorphic to a(a()).

now let f be a foliation on m and let p k(f ) be the dierentiable bundle
over m whose bre at every point say x  m is the space of k-jets at this
point of local projections that vanish on x. this is a k
0-principal bundle. its
restriction is isomorphic to the inverse image of the bundle p k(), hence the
dierential algebra of -invariant forms on p k() is mapped in the algebra
a(p k(f )) of dierential forms on p k(f ).
if we denote by a(p (f )) the
direct limit of a(p k(f )) we get an injective homomorphism  of a(a()) in
a(p (f )) commuting with the dierential.

this homomorphism is compatible with the action of k, hence induces
a homomorphism on the subalgebra of k-basic elements. but the algebra
a(p k(f ); k) of k-basic elements in a(p k(f )) is isomorphic to the algebra
of dierential forms on p k(f )/k which is a bundle over m with contractible
0/k.hence h(a(p k(f ); k)) is isomorphic via the de rham theorem
bre k
to h(m; r). the homomorphism  is therefore obtained as the composition

h(a(); k)  h(a(p (f ); k)) = h(m; r)

but we think that is enough with abstract nonsense formalism. let us

make our discussion more down to earth:

7

consider the gda (over r)

w oq = (u1, u3, ..., u2(q/2)1)  pq(c1, ..., cq)

with dui = ci for odd i and dci = 0 for all i and

wq = (u1, u2, ..., uq)  pq(c1, ..., cq)

with dui = ci and dci = 0 for i=1,...,q where degui = 2i  1, degci = 2i
and  denotes exterior algebra, pq denotes the polynomial algebra in the
cis mod elements of total degree greater than 2q. the cohomology of wq
is the gelfand fuchs cohomology of the lie algebra of formal vector elds
in q variables. we note that the ring structure at the cohomology level is
trivial, that is all cup products are zero. then the main result is that there
are homomorphisms

 : h (w oq)  h (br

q; r)

 : h (wq)  h ( br
for r  2 with the following property ( br

q; r)

q denotes the classifying space
for framed foliations): if f is a codim q c r foliation of a manifold m, there
is a gda homomorphism

f : w oq  (m)

into the de rham algebra on m, dened in terms of the dierential geometry
of f and unique up to chain homotopy, such that on cohomology we have
f = f   , where f : m  br
q classies f . if the normal bundle of f is
trivial, there is a homomorphism

f : wq  (m)

with analogous properties.

combining this result with the fact that b 0

q is contractible, we deduce
that a foliation is essentially determined by the structure of its normal bundle;
the chern classes of the normal bundle are contained in the image of the map
 above but we have additional non trivial classes in the case of foliations

8

(which are rather dicult to nd though), one of which is this bhgv class
which we constructed explicitly and it is the class we use as a lagrangian
density which is purely topological since its degree ts nicely for describing
5-branes.

there is an alternative approach due to simons [19] which avoids pass-
ing to the normal bundle using circle coecients. what he actually does is
to associate to a principal bundle with connection a family of characteris-
tic homomorphisms from the integral cycles on a manifold to s1 and then
dening an extension denoted k 2k
q of h 2k(bglq; z). this approach is re-
lated to gerbes. a gerbe over a manifold is a construction which locally looks
like the cartesian product of the manifold with a line bundle. clearly it is
a special case of foliations (remember our previous comment on foliations).
however this approach actually suggests that they might be equivalent, if the
approach of bott-haeiger is equivalent to that of simons, something which
is not known.

now the conjecture is that the partition function of this lagrangian is

related to the invariant introduced in [9].

in order to establish relation with physics, we must make some identi-
cations. the 1-form  appearing in the lagrangian has no direct physical
meaning. in physics it is assumed that a 5-brane gives rise to a 6-form gauge
eld denoted a6 whose eld strength is simply

da6 = f7

(3)

the only way we can explain geometrically this is that this 6-form is the
poincare dual of the 6-chain that the 5-brane sweps out as it moves in time.
we know that since we have s-duality between membranes and 5-branes,

in an obvious notation one has

which is the s-duality relation, where

f7 = f4

f4 = da3

(4)

(5)

observe now that the starting point for 5-brane theory is a6 where the
starting point to construct the bhgv class was the 5-form . how are they
related?

9

there are three obvious possibilities:
i. d = a6 that would imply that a6 is pure gauge.
ii.df4 =  this is trivial because it implies d = 0, hence d =  = 0.
iii. the only remaining possibility is

 a6 = 

(6)

we call this reality condition. so now in principle we can substitute
equations (6) and (1) into (2) and get an expression for the lagrangian
which involves the gauge eld a6.

the euler-lagrange equations which are actually analogous to d=11 n=1

supergravity euler-lagrange equations (see equation 8 below) read:

d  d +

1
5

(d)5 = 0

(7)

the on-shell relation with d=11 n=1 supergravity is established as fol-

lows: recall that the bosonic sector of this supergravity theory is

z f4  f4  a3

where f4 = da3 with euler-lagrange equations

d  f4 +

1
2

f4  f4 = 0

(8)

constraining a3 via (8), by (5), (4), (3), (6) and (1) we get a constraint

for  which can be added to the class  as a lagrange multiplier.

let us note that a lagrangian density with only the bhgv class would

give as euler-lagrange equations the condition that  is closed.

in principle, one must end up with an equivallent theory starting with
membranes (thats due to s-duality), provided of course a suitable class was
found. clearly the bhgv class for a membrane would be a 17-form.

the nal comment is this:

it is a rather intriguing feature of this ap-
proach that although we start with 5-branes which give rise to 6-forms as
gauge potentials, we end up with a characteristic class for foliations as a la-
grangian density which involves 1-forms. if we see this 1-form  appearing

10

in the lagrangian as a gauge potential, that would imply the existence of
point particles which are really the fundamental elements. this idea is in
accordance to what was described in [27] for instance, since matrix models
use point particles degrees of freedom.

0.3 plane elds

we now pass on to the second question raised in this work, namely the
restrictions on the topology of the underlying manifold of a theory containing
p-branes via our physical principle.

it is clear from the denition that the existence of a foliation of certain
dim, say d (or equivalently codim q=n-d) on an n-manifold (closed) depends:

a.) on the existence of a dim d subbundle of the tangent bundle
b.) on this d-dim subbundle being integrable.
the second question has been answered almost completely by bott and
in a more general framework by thurston. botts result dictates that for
a codim q subbundle of the tangent bundle to be integrable, the ring of
pontrjagin classes of the subbundle with degree > 2q must be zero. there
is a secondary obstruction due to shulman involving certain massey triple
products but we shall not elaborate on this. however botts result suggests
nothing for question a.) above. let us also mention that this result of
bott can be deduced by another theorem due to thurston which states that
the classifying space b 
q of smooth codim q framed foliations is (q+1)-
connected.

on the contrary, thurstons result reduces the existence of codim q > 1
foliations (at least up to homotopy) to the existence of q-plane elds. this is a
deep question in dierential topology, related to the problem of classication
of closed manifolds according to their rank.

now the problem of existence of q-plane elds has been answered only
for some cases for spheres sn for various values of n,q [16]. in particular we
know everything for spheres of dimension 10 and less. we should however
mention a theorem due to winkelnkemper [17] which is quite general in
nature and talks about simply connected compact manifolds of dim n greater
than 5. if n is not 0 mod 4 then it admits a so-called alexander decomposition
which under special assumptions can give a particular kind of a codim 1
foliation with s1 as space of leaves and a surjection from the manifold to s1.

11

if n is 0 mod 4 then the manifold admits an alexander decomposition i its
signature is zero.

let us return to string theory now: string theory works in d=10 and in
this case we have the old brane-scan suggesting the string/5-brane duality.
the new brane-scan contains all p-branes for p  6 and some d-7 and 8-
branes are thought to exist. however topology says that for a sphere in dim
10 we can have only dim 0 and dim 10 plane elds (in fact this is true for
all even dim spheres), hence by thurston only dim 0 and dim 10 foliations
and then our physical principle suggests that s10 is ruled out as a possible
underlying topological space for string theory.

what about m-theory in d=11 then?

for the case of s11 then it is known that s11 admits a 3-plane eld, hence
by our physical principle a theory containing membranes can be formulated
on s11. for s11 nothing is known for the existence of q-plane elds for q
greater than 3. but now we apply s-duality between membranes/5-branes
and conjecture that:

s11 should admit 5-plane elds.

let us close this section with two remarks:
1. there is extensive work in foliations with numerous results which
actually insert many extra parameters into their study, for example metric
aspects, existence of foliations with compact leaves (all or at least one or
exactly one), with leaves dieomorphic to rn for some n etc. we do not
have a clear picture for the moment concerning imposing these in physics.
let us only mention one particularly strong result due to wall generalising a
result of reeb [18]: if a closed n-manifold admits a codim 1 foliation whose
leaves are homeomorphic to rn1, then by thurston we know that its euler
characteristic must vanish, but in fact we have more: it has to be the n-torus!

the interesting point however is that although all these extended objects
theories in physics are expressed as  models [9], hence they involve metrics
on the manifold (target space) and on the worldvolumes ie on the leaves,
in our approach the metric is only used in the reality condition (6) which
makes connection with physical elds (that is some metric on the target

12

space) where at the same time we do not use any metric on the source space
(worldvolumes-leaves of the foliation).

2. in [9] another lagrangian density was proposed. it is dierent from the
one described here but they are related in an analogous way to the relation
between the polyakov and nambu-goto (in fact dirac [21]) actions for the
free bosonic string: extended objects basically immitate string theory and
we have two formalisms: the  model one which is the lagrangian exhibited
in [9] using polyakovs picture of  models as at principal bundles with
structure group the isometries of the metric on the target space [20]; yet we
also have the embedded surface picture which is the dirac (nambu-goto)
action and whose analogue is described in this work.

0.4 the partition function

let us try to see what we can say about the quantum theory with the bhgv
class as lagrangian density. hopefully we can actually say rather a lot.

the starting point will be the crucial observation that the original godbillon-

vey class for codim 1 foliations is simply

ada

, which is actually the abelian part of the 3-dim chern-simmons form.
this topological term was for the rst time used in physics to describe some
peculiar properties of the spin and statistics of skyrmions, see [23]. at that
moment of course it was not realised that this was actually a characteristic
class for foliations. skyrmions are soliton solutions of 3-dim non-linear 
model with target the group o(3) and source, in most cases r3 compactied
to s3. at that paper it was described as the hopf invariant, emerging from
the rst known hopf bration s2  s3. this class is also a characteristic
class for at foliations of bundles. the picture is consistent because from
polyakov we know that non-linear  models can be seen as at bundles (for
more details on this see [9]).

the hopf invariant is related to linking number between curves in r3.
the non-abelian 3-dim generalisation was related to knots and the jones
polynomial in [6]. one of the main dierences in these two cases is the

13

dirac quantisation condition of the parameter needed in the non-abelian
case.

this observation make as to believe that the answer to the problem of
quantising the bhgv class in 11-dim is actually reduced to quantisation of
abelian chern-simons theory. the answer was given by schwarz [25]: the re-
sult is the ray-singer analytic torsion of the laplacian on our 11-manifold.
as far as we know it is not yet proved the long standing conjecture that this
actually coincides with the combinatorial reidemeister torsion of algebraic
topology.

let us make some remarks on this point: schwarzs result is actually
more general than what we need in this particular case. he uses the notion
of elliptic resolvent of a linear functional. in the special case where this el-
liptic resolvent is actually an ellitpic complex, he proves that the partition
function of the functional is actually the analytic torsion of the correspond-
ing elliptic complex. in the even more special case where the functional is
actually of the form

r(d)nr1

where  is some real valued form (see [25] for more details), which is actually
the case for the bhgv class, then the corresponding elliptic complex is the
de rham complex, hence the result.

some properties of the ray-singer torsion (denoted t in the sequel) might

be helpfull:

1. t = 0 for even dim manifolds.

2. the torsion of a cartesian product equals torsion of rst factor raised
to the power equal to the euler characteristic of second factor (simply con-
nected case).
3. for complex manifolds one has to use the dolbeault complex. in this case
for a riemannian surface (complex dim 1) with genus 1 t can be expressed
in terms of elliptic zeta functions, for higher genus one uses selbergs zeta
function.
4. for the complex torus of complex dim greater than 1, one has that t = 1.
5. for hopf surfaces (complex dim 2) one has that the torsion equals the
torsion of the torus which is its bre over the sphere (for these results and

14

more see [26]).

the above discussion actually dictates that our foliation picture to de-
scribe branes should rather correspond to a free, i.e. non-interacting theory.
the natural generalisation then for interacting 5-branes would be to consider
the full 11-dim chern-simons theory with some non-abelian gauge group.
this theory has been proved to be completely soluble in dim 3 using geomet-
ric quantisation methods. we know that for large k, using stationary phase
approximation (following terminology of [6]), the theory becomes abelian.
the problem in dim 11 is considerably harder though. the main point is
that in dim 3 one can reduce the problen essentially to riemann surfaces by
performing surgeries on the original 3-manifold. we do not know for the
moment if these surgeries can be performed in dim 11. moreover, in contrast
to dim 2 case, geometric quantisation for 10-manifolds is still at its infancy
as a theory.

another point to consider is the following:

if one wants to get a non-
abelian generalisation as described above, one might loose s-duality. this
is an abelian symmetry, namely the isomorphism given by the hodge star
operator for real valued forms. although we have observed in [10] that the
hodge isomorphism holds for at bundle valued forms (even with a non-
abelian structure group), it brakes down in the general case. let us recall
however that this is the on-shell case for chern-simons theory (i.e. the euler-
lagrange equations simply read that the connection is at).

since the partition function of the bhgv class gives the ray-singer an-
alytic torsion, this is a topological invariant. hence if we could nd an ap-
propriate 11-form which could characterise foliations with codim 8, namely
to start with membranes insted of 5-branes, the result would be the same.
hence s-duality holds. in other words it does not really matter how we fo-
liate our manifold, clearly a manifold can be foliated in many dierent ways
and in many dierent codimensions, since the partition function of the char-
acteristic class which describes the foliation is a topological invariant. this
guarantees s-duality.

the nal comment would be that these topological terms in the la-
grangians related to characteristic classes for foliations (very closely related
to non-linear  models) are also met in some other interesting cases, namely

15

 vacua and qcd, massive 3-dim yang-mills and 3-dim gravity as well as
fermions coupled to gauge elds again in dim 3 and the non-conservation of
parity (see [24], [23], [22]). all these cases refer to odd dim real manifolds.
maybe of some relevance also for even (real) dim manifolds whose dim is an
odd multiple of 2, using complex structure and the dolbeault complex.

16

bibliography

[1] m. j. du et all: string solitons, phys. rep. 259 (1995) 213

[2] m. j. du: supermembranes, hep-th 9611203

[3] p. k. townsend: four lectures on m-theory, hep-th 9612121

p. k. townsend: the d=11 supermembrane revisited, phys. lett.
b350 (1995)

[4] b. de wit and j. louis: supersymmetry and dualities in various di-

mensions, hep-th 9801132

[5] p. c. west: supergravity, brane dynamics and string dualities, hep-th

9811101

[6] e. witten: string theory dynamics in various dimensions, nucl. phys.

b443 (1995)
n. seiberg and e. witten: nucl. phys. b426 (1994)
quantum field theory and the jones polynomial, commun. math.
phys. 121 (1989), 351-399

[7] c. montonen and d. olive: magnetic monopoles as gauge particles,

phys. lett. b72 (1977), 117

17

[8] r. bott: lectures on characteristic classes and foliations, springer

lnm 279, 1972
r. bott and a. haeiger: characteristic classes of -foliations, bull.
am. math. soc. 78.6, (1972)

[9] i. p. zois: a new invariant for  models, hep-th 9904001 (to appear in

commun. math. phys., communicated by a. connes)

i.p. zois: on search for the m-theory lagrangian, phys. lett. b402
(1997)

[10] s.t. tsou and i. p. zois: geometric interpretation of two-index poten-
tials as twisted de rham cohomology (to appear in rept. math. phys.)

[11] h. b. lawson: foliations, bull. am. math. soc. 80.3, 1974

[12] w. thurston: foliations and groups of dieomorphisms, bull. am.

math. soc. 80.2 (1974)

[13] w. thurston: theory of foliations of codim greater than 1, comment.

math. helvetici 49 (1974), 214-231

[14] m. l. gromov: stable mappings of foliations into manifolds, izv.

akad. nauk. ussr ser. mat. 33 (1969)

[15] c. godbillon and j. vey: un invariant des feuilletages de codim 1, c

r acad. sci. paris ser ab 273 (1971)

[16] n. steenrod: the topology of bre bundles, princeton 1951

18

[17] h. e. winkelnkemper: manifolds as open books, bull. am. math.

soc. 79 (1973)

[18] g. reeb: feuillages, resultats anciens et nouveaux, montreal 1982

[19] j. simons: characteristic forms and transgression, preprint suny

stony brook

[20] a.m. polyakov: gauge particles as rings of glue, nucl. phys. b164

(1979)

[21] p.a.m. dirac: proc. roy. soc. london a166 (1969)

[22] s. deser et all: 3-dim massive gauge theories, phys. rev. lett. 48, no

15 (1982)

[23] f. wilczek and a. zee: linking numbers, spin and statistics of soli-

tons, phys. rev. lett. 51, no 25 (1983)

[24] a.n. redlich: gauge non-invariance and parity non-conservation of 3-

dim fermions, phys. rev. lett. 52, no 1 (1984)

[25] a.s. schwarz: the partition function of degenerate quadratic func-

tional and the ray-singer invariants, lett. math. phys. 2 (1978)

[26] d.b. ray and i.m. singer: r-torsion and the laplacian on riemannian

manifolds, advances in math. 7 (1971)
analytic torsion for complex manifolds, ann. of math. 98 (1973)

19

[27] t. banks et all: m-theory as a matrix model: a conjecture, phys.

rev. d55 (1997), 5112

20

