t99/058

renormalization of gauge theories and master equation

j. zinn-justin*

cea-saclay, service de physique theorique**, f-91191 gif-sur-yvette
cedex, france

abstract

the evolution of ideas which has led from the rst proofs of the renormalizability
of non-abelian gauge theories, based on slavnovtaylor identities, to the modern
proof based on the brs symmetry and the master equation is recalled. this
lecture has been delivered at the symposium in the honour of professor
c. n. yang, stony-brook, may 21-22 1999.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

5
1

 
 

1
v
5
1
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

email: zinn@spht.saclay.cea.fr
laboratoire de la direction des sciences de la mati`ere du commissariat `a

lenergie atomique

1 introduction

2

it is a rare privilege for me to open this conference in honour of professor yang.
his scientic contributions have been for me an essential source of inspiration.
the most obvious example, yangmills elds or gauge theories, will be illus-
trated by my talk. but there are other important aspects of pr. yangs work
which have also directly inuenced me: professor yang has consistently shown
us that a theorist could contribute to quite dierent domains of physics like par-
ticle physics, the statistical physics of phase transitions or integrable systems....
moreover his work has always emphasized mathematical elegance.

finally by oering me a position at the itp in stony-brook in 1971, pr. yang
has given me the opportunity to start with the late benjamin w. lee a work on
the renormalization of gauge theories, which has kept me busy for several years
and played a major role in my scientic career.

let me add a few other personal words. the academic year 19711972 i
spent here at the itp has been of the most exciting and memorable of my
scientic life. one reason of course is my successful collaboration with ben lee.
however another reason is the specially stimulating atmosphere professor yang
had managed to create at the itp, by attracting talented physicists, both itp
members and visitors, by the style of scientic discussions, seminars and lectures.
my interest in yangmills elds actually dates back to 1969, and in 1970 i
started a work, very much in the spirit of the original paper of yang and mills,
on the application of massive yang-mills elds to strong interaction dynamics.
although in our work massive yang-mills elds were treated in the spirit of
eective eld theories, we were aware of the fact that such a quantum eld
theory was not renormalizable.

in the summer of 1970 i presented the preliminary results of our work in a
summer school in carg`ese, where ben lee was lecturing on the renormalization
of spontaneous and linear symmetry breaking. this had the consequence that
one year later i arrived here at the itp to work with him.

ben had just learned, in a conference i believe, from t hoofts latest work
on the renormalizability of non-abelian gauge theories both in the symmetric
and spontaneously broken phase and was busy proving renormalizability of the
abelian higgs model. we immediately started our work on the much more in-
volved non-abelian extension.

our work was based on functional integrals and functional methods and a gen-
eralization of so-called slavnovtaylor identities, consequence of the properties
of the faddeevpopov (fp) determinant arising in the quantization of gauge
theories. in a series of four papers (19721973), we examined most aspects of
the renormalization of gauge theories.

2 classical gauge action and quantization

3

the principle of gauge invariance which promotes continuous global (or rigid)
symmetries to local (gauge) symmetries provides a beautiful geometrical method
to generate interactions between particles. the pure yangmills action has the
form

1

4e2 z ddx tr f2

s (a) = 

 (x) ,

where a(x) is the gauge eld, a matrix belonging to the lie algebra of the sym-
metry group, and f (x) the associated curvature obtained from the covariant
derivative d

d =  + a ,

by

f (x) = [d, d] = a   a + [a, a] .

matter elds which transform non-trivially under the group will then be coupled
to the gauge eld. for fermions the action takes the typical form

sf(cid:0) , (cid:1) = z ddx  (x) (6d + m )  (x) ,

and for the boson elds:

sb() = z ddxh(d) d + v ()i ,

in which v () is a group invariant function of the scalar eld .

quantization. the classical action results from a beautiful construction, but
the quantization apparently completely destroys the geometric structure. due
to the gauge invariance the degrees of freedom associated with gauge transfor-
mations have no dynamics and therefore a straightforward quantization of the
classical action does not generate a meaningful perturbation theory (though non-
perturbative calculations in lattice regularized gauge theories can be performed).
it is thus necessary to x the gauge, a way of expressing that some dynamics
has to be provided for these degrees of freedom. for example, motivated by
quantum electrodynamics, one may add to the action a covariant non-gauge
invariant contribution

sgauge =

1

2e2 z ddx tr (a)2 .

(2.1)

however, simultaneously, and this is a specicity of non-abelian gauge theories,
it is necessary to modify the functional integration measure of the gauge eld to
maintain formal unitarity. in the case of landaus gauge (2.1) one nds

[da(x)] 7 [da(x)] det m ,

(2.2)

4

where m is the operator

m(x, y) = d(x  y).

this (faddeevpopov) determinant is the source of many diculties.
indeed
after quantizing the theory one has to renormalize it. renormalization is a
theory of deformations of local actions. however the determinant generates a
non-local contribution to the action. of course, using a well-known trick, it is
possible to rewrite the determinant as resulting from the integration over un-
physical spin-less fermions c, c (the ghosts) of an additional contribution to
the action

sghosts = z ddx c(x)dc(x).

after this transformation the action is local and renormalizable in the sense of
power counting. however, in this local form all traces of the original symmetry
seem to have been lost.

3 renormalization

the measure (2.2) is the invariant measure for a set of non-local transformations
which for innitesimal transformations takes the form

a(x) = z dy dm1(x, y)(y),

the eld (x) parametrizing the transformation. using this property it is possible
to derive a set of wardtakahashi (slavnovtaylor) identities between greens
functions and to prove renormalizability of gauge theories both in the symmetric
and spontaneously broken higgs phase. the non-local character of these trans-
formations and the necessity of using two dierent representations, one non-local
but with invariance properties, the other one local and thus suitable for power
counting analysis, explains the complexity of the initial proofs.

though the problem of renormalizing gauge theories could then be consid-
ered as settled, one of the remaining problems was that the proofs, even in the
most synthetic presentation like in leezinn-justin iv, were complicated, non-
transparent, and more based on trial and error than systematic methods.

returning to saclay i tried to systematize the renormalization program of
quantum eld theories with symmetries. i abandoned the determination of renor-
malization constants by relation between greens functions, for a more systematic
approach based on loop expansion and counter-terms.

the idea is to proceed by induction on the number of loops. quickly summa-

rized:

one starts from a regularized local lagrangian with some symmetry properties.
one derives, as consequence of the symmetry, identities (generally called ward
takahashi or wt identities) satised by the generating functional  of one-
particle irreducible (1pi) greens functions (or proper vertices). by letting the

5

cut-o go to innity (or the dimension to four in dimensional regularization)
one obtains identities satised by the sum div of all divergent contributions at
one loop order. at this order div is a local functional of a degree determined
by power counting. by subtracting div from the action one obtains a theory
nite at one-loop order. one then reads o the symmetry of the lagrangian
renormalized at one-loop order and repeats the procedure to renormalize at two-
loop order. the renormalization program is then based on determining general
identities valid both for the action and the 1pi functional, which are stable under
renormalization, i.e. stable under all deformations allowed by power counting.
one nally proves the stability by induction on the number of loops.

unfortunately this program did not apply to non-abelian gauge theories, be-
cause it required a symmetry of the local quantized action, and none was appar-
ent. wt identities were established using symmetry properties of the theory in
the non-local representation

in the spring of 1974 my student zuber drew my attention to a preliminary re-
port of a work of becchi, rouet and stora who had discovered a strange fermion-
type (like supersymmetry) symmetry of the complete quantized action including
the ghost contributions. there were indications that this symmetry could be
used to somewhat simplify the algebra of the proof of renormalization. some
time later, facing the daunting prospect of lecturing about renormalization of
gauge theories and explaining the proofs to non-experts, i decided to study the
brs symmetry. i then realized that the brs symmetry was the key allowing
the application of the general renormalization scheme and in a summer school
in bonn (1974) i presented a general proof of renormalizability of gauge theories
based on brs symmetry and the master equation.

4 brs symmetry

the form of the brs transformations in the case of non-abelian gauge trans-
formations is rather involved and hides its simple origin. we thus give here
a presentation which shows how brs symmetry arises in apparently a simpler
context. let  be a set of dynamical variables satisfying a system of equations:

e() = 0 ,

(4.1)

where the functions e() are smooth, and e = e() is a one-to-one map
in some neighbourhood of e = 0 which can be inverted in  = (e). this
implies in particular that the equation (4.1) has a unique solution 
s . we then
consider some function f () and we look for a formal representation of f (s),
which does not require solving equation (4.1) explicitly. we can then write:

f (s) = z (cid:26)y
= z (cid:26)y

de   (e)(cid:27)f(cid:0)(e)(cid:1)
d  [e()](cid:27)j () f (),

(4.2)

with:

6

j () = det e , e 

e


.

we have chosen e() such that det e is positive.

slavnovtaylor identity. the measure d():

d() = j ()y

d ,

(4.3)

has a simple property. the measure q de is the invariant measure for the

group of translations e 7 e + .
it follows that d() is the invariant
measure for the translation group non-linearly realized on the new coordinates
 (provided  is small enough):

 7  with e ()   = e().

(4.4)

this is the origin, in gauge theories, of the slavnovtaylor symmetry.

the innitesimal form of the transformation law can be written more explicitly:

 = [e 1()] .

(4.5)

brs symmetry. let us again start from identity (4.2) and rst replace the

-function by its fourier representation:

y

 [e()] = z y

d
2i

ee() .

(4.6)

the -integration runs along the imaginary axis. from the rules of fermion
integration we know that we can also write the determinant as an integral over
grassmann variables c and c:

det e = z y

(dcdc) exp(cid:0)cec(cid:1) .

(4.7)

expression (4.2) then takes the apparently more complicated form

f (s) = n z y

(ddcdcd) f () exp [s(, c, c, )] ,

(4.8)

in which n is a constant normalization factor and s (, c, c, ) the quantity:

s (, c, c, ) = e()  ce()c .

(4.9)

7

while we seem to have replaced a simple problem by a more complicated one,
in fact in many situations (and this includes the case where equation (4.1) is a
eld equation) it is easy to work with the integral representation (4.8).

quite surprisingly the function s has a symmetry, which actually is a conse-
quence of the invariance of the measure (4.3) under the group of transformations
(4.5). this brs symmetry, rst discovered in the quantization of gauge theories
by becchi, rouet and stora (brs), is a fermionic symmetry in the sense that it
transforms commuting variables into grassmann variables and vice versa. the
parameter of the transformation is a grassmann variable, an anti-commuting
constant . the variations of the various dynamic variables are:

(cid:26) =c ,

c = ,

c =0 ,
 =0 ,

(4.10)

with:

2 = 0 ,

c + c  = 0 ,

c + c = 0 .

the transformation is obviously nilpotent of vanishing square: 2 = 0.

the brs transformation can be represented by a grassmann dierential op-

erator d, when acting on functions of {, c, c, }:

d = c 

 +  

c

.

(4.11)

the nil-potency of the brs transformation is then expressed by the identity:

d2 = 0 .

(4.12)

5 the master equation

in gauge theories the role of the  variables is played by the group elements
which parametrize gauge transformations and the equation (4.1) is simply the
gauge xing equation. the form of the brs transformation is more complicated
only because it is written in terms of group elements:

(cid:26)a(x) = dc(x) ,

 c(x) = (x),

c(x) = c2(x),
(x) = 0 .

(5.1)

however this form of brs transformations is not stable under renormalization
because the form of the gauge transformations is modied by the renormalization.
to discuss renormalization it is necessary to add to the action two sources k,

l, for the brs transformations which are not linear in the elds

s 7 s +z d4x tr(cid:0)k(x)dc(x) + l(x)c2(x)(cid:1) .

8

the sources for brs transformations, k and l, have been later renamed anti-
elds.

the stable relation satised by the complete action, including these additional
contributions, then takes a, at rst sight disappointingly simple, quadratic form
(here written in a simple example, without matter elds)

z d4x(cid:18) s

a

(x)

s
k 
 (x)

+

s

s

c (x)

l(x)

+ (x)

s

 c (x)(cid:19) = 0 .

(5.2)

in particular the master equation (5.2) contains no explicit reference to the initial
gauge transformation. therefore one may worry that it does not determine the
renormalized action completely, and that the general renormalization program
fails in the case of non-abelian gauge theories. however, one slowly discovers
that the master equation has remarkable properties. in particular all its local
solutions which satisfy the power counting requirements, have indeed the form
of an action for a quantized non-abelian gauge theory. then continuity implies,
in the semi-simple example at least, preservation of all geometric properties.

one surprising outcome still bothered me for some time: the master equation
has solutions with quartic ghost interactions, which cannot be obviously related
to a determinant. on the other hand the master equation by itself (and this one
of its main properties) implies gauge independence and unitarity.

only a few years later, elaborating on a remark of slavnov, was i able to
reproduce a general quartic ghost term as resulting from a generalized gauge
xing procedure (zinn-justin 1984).

after the renormalization program was successfully completed, one important
problem remained, of relevance for instance to the description of deep-inelastic
scattering experiments: the renormalization of gauge invariant operators of di-
mension higher than four. using similar techniques stern-kluberg and zuber
were able to solve the problem for operators of dimension six and conjecture the
general form. only recently has the general conjecture been proven rigourously
by non-trivial cohomology techniques (barnich, brandt and henneaux 1995).

acknowledgments. to professor c.n. yang as a testimony of admiration

and gratitude, stony-brook, may 21, 1999.

bibliographical notes

after the fundamental article

c.n. yang and r.l. mills, phys. rev. 96 (1954) 191,

the main issue was the quantization of gauge theories

r.p. feynman, acta phys. polon. 24 (1963) 697;
b.s. dewitt, phys. rev. 162 (1967) 1195, 1239;

9

l.d. faddeev and v.n. popov, phys. lett. 25b (1967) 29;
s. mandelstam, phys. rev. 175 (1968) 1580.

in the following article we tried to apply the idea of massive yangmills elds
to strong interaction dynamics

j.l. basdevant and j. zinn-justin, phys. rev. d3 (1971) 1865.

among the articles discussing wardtakahashi and renormalization see for in-
stance

g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b33 (1971) 173; ibid. b35 (1971) 167.
a.a. slavnov, theor. math. phys. 10 (1972) 99.
j.c. taylor, nucl. phys. b33 (1971) 436.
b.w. lee and j. zinn-justin, phys. rev. d5 (1972) 3121, ibid. 3137, ibid. 3155;

ibid. d7 (1973) 1049.

g. t hooft and m. veltman, nucl. phys. b50 (1972) 318.
d.a. ross and j.c. taylor, nucl. phys. b51 (1973) 125;
b.w. lee, phys. lett. 46b (1973) 214; phys. rev. d9 (1974) 933.

the anti-commuting type symmetry of the quantized action is exhibited in

c. becchi, a. rouet and r. stora, comm. math. phys. 42 (1975) 127.

most of the preceding articles are reprinted in

selected papers on gauge theory of weak and electromagnetic interactions,
c.h. lai ed., world scientic (singapore 1981).

the general proof, based on brs symmetry and the master equation, of renor-
malizability in an arbitrary gauge, can be found in the proceedings of the bonn
summer school 1974,

j. zinn-justin in trends in elementary particle physics (lectures notes in
physics 37), h. rollnik and k. dietz eds. (springer-verlag, berlin 1975).

see also

j. zinn-justin in proc. of the 12th school of theoretical physics, karpacz 1975,
acta universitatis wratislaviensis 368;
b.w. lee in methods in field theory, les houches 1975, r. balian and j.

zinn-justin eds. (north-holland, amsterdam 1976).
finally a systematic presentation can be found in

j. zinn-justin, quantum field theory and critical phenomena, clarendon
press (oxford 1989, third ed. 1996).

for an an alternative proof based on brs symmetry and the bphz formalism
see

c. becchi, a. rouet and r. stora, ann. phys. (ny) 98 (1976) 287.

non-linear gauges and the origin of quartic ghost terms are investigated in

j. zinn-justin, nucl. phys. b246 (1984) 246.

renormalization of gauge invariant operators and the brst cohomology are
discussed in

h. kluberg-stern and j.-b. zuber, phys. rev. d12 (1975) 467;
g. barnich, and m. henneaux, phys. rev. lett. 72 (1994) 1588; g. barnich,

f. brandt and m. henneaux, comm. math. phys. 174 (1995) 93.

