9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

6
1

 
 

1
v
2
2
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

dsf/19-99
hep-th/9906122
may 1999

noncommutative geometry, strings and

duality

fedele lizzi

dipartimento di scienze fisiche, universit`a di napoli federico ii,

and infn, sezione di napoli

mostra d oltremare pad. 20, i-80125, napoli, italy.

talk delivered at the arbeitstagung:

the standard model of elementary particle physics,

mathematical and geometrical aspects,

hesselberg, march 14-19 1999.

abstract

in this talk, based on work done in collaboration with g. landi
and r.j szabo, i will review how string theory can be considered as
a noncommutative geometry based on an algebra of vertex operators.
the spectral triple of strings is introduced, and some of the string
symmetries, notably target space duality, are discussed in this frame-
work.

fedele.lizzi@na.infn.it

it is a common belief that at distances of the order of plancks length,
where neither quantum mechanics nor general relativity can be considered
perturbations of classical physics, a change in the very structure of spacetime
will be necessary, and classical geometry will no longer be the appropriate
tool. a suitable candidate for the mathematics:
is noncommutative geo-
metry, [1], a theory which substitutes the study of classical notions such as
point, line etc. with the study of the algebras dened on hausdor topo-
logical spaces, with the obvious generalization given by noncommutative
algebras.
i will not introduce noncommutative geometry here, there are
excellent reviews, and it is covered in several of the contributions to this
arbeitstagung.

on the physics side, a candidate to describe the theory of physical inter-
actions at the planck length is string theory [2]. an introduction of strings
will also be a task too formidable for this short talk, but the basic motivation
behind string theory as a fundamental theory of spacetime, historically has
been the presence in the spectrum of the theory of a spin two massless par-
ticle, identied with the graviton. string theory is a two-dimensional theory
in which spacetime coordinates are elds on a 2-d surface, the world-sheet of
the string. interactions, that is joining and splitting of strings, is described
by higher genus surfaces. at very high energies (of the order of plancks
energy), strange things begin to happen -genus surfaces, duality, branes
whose coordinates are (noncommuting) matrices...

in this talk i will try to construct the noncommutative geometry of string
theory. the key idea is due to frohlich and gawedzki [3], and in this talk
i will mainly sketch the developments of [4]-[10], to which i refer for further
details and references.

string theory is described by a conformally invariant eld theory on a
2-dimensional surface, the worldsheet, which is to be interpreted as the
analog of the world line, swept by the string in its motion. spacetime co-
ordinates appear as elds on this two dimensional surface, which is usually
assumed to be compact. we will consider bosonic strings, compactied on
a d dimensional torus, rd quotiented by an abelian innite group (a lattice)
 generated by d generators ei. on the generators of  we dene an inner
product which provides a metric (of euclidean signature) on the torus td:

hei, eji  gij

.

1

(1)

the dual lattice  is spanned by the basis ei with (we implicitly complex-

ify  and extend the product):

hei, eji = i

j

.

(2)

the inner products of the eis dene a metric which is the inverse of gij, that
is:

hei, eji  gij

.

(3)

notice that, if all of the ei are quantities of order r (we take plancks length
to be unit unless otherwise stated), with det g of order rd, then the size of
the dual lattice is a quantity of order 1/r. in this sense, if to a given lattice
corresponds a large universe, to its dual it will correspond a small one, the
dual torus td.

classically the string is described by a two dimensional nonlinear  model,
whose fundamental objects are the fubiniveneziano elds, which, for the
case of a closed string are:

x i(, ) = xi + gijpi + gijwi +xk6=0

1
ik

()i

k

eik()

,

(4)

where x represents the centre of mass of the string, p its momentum and
w is the winding number, the number of times the string wraps around the
direction dened by the ei. notice that, since the space is compact, the
momentum is quantized, and in fact it must be p  , while the winding
number must belong to the dual lattice w  .
if the size of the target
space is extremely large, then the momentum will have a spectrum with
very close eigenvalues, a nearly continuous spectrum, while the windings will
have values far apart. but apart from these scale considerations, the role
of p and w in (4) is symmetric. in the following we will concentrate on the
zero modes of the string, mostly ignoring the oscillator modes. these are
internal excitations of the other string, and are not sensible to the target
space in which the strings live, and will therefore play an indirect role for the
structure of spacetime. moreover, the oscillators describe excitations which
are starting at the planck mass, while most of our considerations relate to the
low energy sector of the theory. however thay cannot be ignore altogether,
as they reveal the string character of the theory.

strictly speaking however this conclusion is only valid only in the absence of torsion

(introduced below) in the action [11].

2

we have therefore a nonlinear  model described by the action:

s =

1

4 z ddx igijxj + bijx ix j

,

(5)

where  is the world sheet two dimensional metric,  is the antisymmetric
tensor with 12 = 1, g is the metric dened in (1), and b is an antisymmetric
tensor which represent the torsion of the string.

we can perform a chiral decompositions of the xs dening:

x i
(  ) = xi

 + gijpj (  ) +xk6=0

1
ik

()i

k

eik()

.

(6)

the zero modes xi
(the centre of mass coordinates of the string) and the

(centre of mass) momenta pi = 2pi(gb)ijwj are canonically conjugate
variables,
(7)

[xi


, pi ] = ij

i

with all other commutators vanishing. the left-right momenta are

pi = 12

(pi  hei, wi)

the ps belong to the lattice:

 =   

(8)

(9)

we can therefore dene the elds x = x+ + x, and we may equally well
dene x  x+  x, whose zero mode we will indicate as x.

exchange of a lattice with its dual is a symmetry called t-duality [12, 13].
it corresponds to an exchange of the momentum quantum number with the
winding, and of the zero mode corresponding to x, the position of the centre
of mass of the string with its dual x. this is a symmetry of the hamiltonian:

h =

=

1

1
2

(p2

+ + p2

2(cid:0)(2)2pigijpj + wi(g  bg1b)ijwj + 4wibikgkjpj(cid:1)
+xk>0

k (+)j

gij (+)i

d
12

gij ()i

k ()j

k 

k +xk>0
) + oscillators 

d
12

(10)

(11)

3

with the term  d
and windings belong to a lattice the spectrum is discrete.

12 due to normal ordering pon quantization. since momenta

two target spaces related by a t-dual transformation are indistinguish-
able at low energies. this can be seen heuristically as follows [14]: in ordinary
quantum mechanics position is just a derived concept, as the fourier trans-
form of momentum spaces. in a string theory is possible however to consider
winding (and its eigenstates) rather than momentum. if the compactication
radius is of the order one, the two choices are equivalent, but for a very large
radius the eigenvalues of momentum are nearly continuous, while the ones of
winding are far apart, the rst one above zero being at a very large energy.
it is therefore dicult to make localized wave packets with the fourier
transform of winding. conversely, with a small radius of compactication, it
is the winding which gives the possibility to create localized wave packets.

in the torsionless case, b = 0, this corresponds to an exchange of g with
its inverse g1, and the change of size of the target space in which the radius
r  1/r. in the presence of torsion the exchange is g1  g  bg1b and
bg1  g1b, and it depends crucially on the values of the bij.
in the
toroidal case it is possible to exchange only some of the generators of the
lattice with their duals, giving rise to a group of factorized t-dualities.

the full group of symmetry is even larger: it is in fact o(d, d, z) [15, 13],

generated from three kinds of transformations:

- the factorized dualities we have already discussed.

- the changes of base of the lattices, made via a matrix which belongs

to g(d, z), the group of integer valued matrices of unit determinant.

- the transformation bij  bij + cij with c an antisymmetric tensor with
integer entries.

there is a further z2 symmetry obtained exchanging  and  on the world
sheet, this last symmetry does not aect the target space.

the theory has also two continuous symmetries:

 target space reparametrization:

x(z)  x(z) + x(z)

(12)

4

 world sheet conformal invariance, represented by two virasoro alge-

bras:

(cid:2)lk , lm(cid:3) = (k  m)lk+m + c
(cid:2)lk , l+

m(cid:3) = 0 ,

12(cid:0)k3  k(cid:1) k+m,0

both these symmetries play a crucial role in the theory.

(13)

given this scenario we want to construct the noncommutative geometry
of interacting strings. we will therefore construct, in the spirit of connes, a
spectral triple, the frohlich-gawedzki spectral triple [3]

let us rst construct the hilbert space of string states. upon rst quan-

tization the oscillator modes become creation and annihilation operators:

k

h()i

, ()j

m i = kgijk+m,0

(14)

while the zero modes have the usual commutation relations (7). the hilbert
space of (excited) string states therefore is:

h = l2(sp(t d))  f +  f

(15)

where l2(sp(t d)) (spinors on t d) is a set of spinors for each winding sector,
labelled by the lattice . these are the so called tachyon states, although,
depending on the actual string theory at hand, they may not be tachyons
(and hopefully they are not, as in superstring theory). the spaces f are
the fock spaces of higher excitations (graviton, dilaton etc.) acted upon by
the oscillator creation and annihilation modes. they represent the internal
excitations of the strings and have an indirect eect on spacetime, which is
described by the zero modes.

the description of interacting strings is done via the insertion on the
worldsheet of vertex operators. the fundamental operator is thetachyon
vertex operator

(16)
where :  : represents normal ordering obtained putting creators to the left
of annihilators:

vq(z) = : eiq

() :

i x i

: ()i

k ()j

m : = ()i
= ()j

k ()j
m ()i

m

k

for k < m

for k > m

(17)

(18)

5

to the left of pi . the tachyon vertex operator represents the insertion
and xi

on the world sheet of a ground state (tachyon) of a given momentum. higher
states (the dilaton, graviton etc.) are obtained acting with the appropriate
combination of creation operators.

vertex operator algebras have a distinguished place in mathematics,
they have connections with modular functions, monster group, lie algebras
and they are well reviewed in several publications, among wich [16]. i have
no room to describe the beautiful mathematical intricacies of the theory, for
most of our purposes in fact vertex operators will just be operators on h.

one of the aspects of vertex operator algebras which is important in
this context is the operatorstate correspondence. we can put the generic
vertex operator:

(j)+
i

r

(nj1)! nj

in correspondence with the state:

v (z+, z) =: i vq+q(z+, z)qj
|i = |q+; qi qj r(j)+
(+)i
of h, where (q+, q), (r+, r)    .

+qk
nj|0i+ qk r(k)j

z+x i

i

r

(k)
j

(mk1)! mk

z x j
 :

()j
mk|0i

we thus have the second element of the spectral triple, an algebra of ver-
tex operator. a warning however: a vertex operator algebra (in the common
use of the term) is not a c algebra. in general vertex operators are not even
bounded operators! the problem stems from the fact that vertex operators
are not dened at coinciding points giving rise to nontrivial operator prod-
uct expansions [2]. one can do two things to regularize the theory: smear
the vertex operators [3, 17]:

(19)

(20)

(21)

v (, f ) =z dzv(z)f (z)

but this not always cures the problem, as discussed for example in [18]. an
alternative is to consider truncated vertex operators:

n

v n
q(z) = nn

yn=0
where w0 contains the zero modes x and p, while the wns (n 6= 0) involve
only the nth oscillator modes ()
n . this is equivalent to an ultravi-
olet cuto on the world sheet, a standard practice in string theory to avoid

and ()

(22)

wn

n

6

the innities arising from the product of operators at coincident points. at
the end one considers n  .

it is however fair to say that, at present, the rigourous denition of a c-
algebra of operators representing interacting strings is (at least to my mind
and my knowledge) still an open problem. we have the tachyon operators
and the higher spin state (19), and one should regularize them, and create an
algebra with the appropriate completion. it is in a sense like attempting to
construct c(r) from the knowledge of plane waves eipx. the general idea is
present but many (crucial) details have to be lled. this is an area in which
the collaboration of mathematicians would be of paramount importance. in
the following we will indicate with the generic term vertex operator algebra
a proper completion of the regularized operators.

+  u(1)d

we can easily recognize the two fundamental symmetries of the theory
in the vertex operator algebra. as we said the tachyon operators are in a
sense a fourier or plane waves basis on the space of conformal eld con-
gurations. the tachyon states are highest weight states of the level a pair
of u(1)d
 current algebra (14), so that the entire hilbert space can
be built up from the actions of the ks for k < 0 on these states. this cur-
rent algebra represents the target space reparametrization symmetry of the
string theory. on the other side, the two virasoro algebras which represent
the world sheet conformal invariance have irreducible representation whose
highest weights grade the hilbert space h. the virasoro operators in the
present case are lk = 1
0  gijpj . they
generate a representation of the virasoro algebra (13) of central charge d.
the grading is dened on the subspaces hq  h of states (20) which are
highest weight vectors,

2pmz gij : ()i

km :, with ()i

m ()j

l0 |i = q |i
2gijq+

i q+

,

lk |i = 0 k > 0 ,

(23)

q = 1

where +
sponding operator-valued distributions (19) are called primary elds.

2gijqi qj +pk mk. the corre-

j +pj nj and q = 1

the last element to complete the spectral triple is the dirac operator.

we have not one but two natural dirac operators:

d = i i


i


= ix i


(24)

these two operators generate target space reparametrization of x. more-
over it can be seen that they they are square roots of the laplacebeltrami

7

operator. they are also naturally related to the other symmetry of the string
theory, in fact worldsheet conformal symmetry has the conserved stress en-
ergy:

t (z) = 

1
2

: d(z)2 : =xk

lk zk2



(25)

(26)

(27)

in analogy with the x and x we can dene:

d = d+ + d ; d = d+  d
the spectral triple t of string geometry therefore is:

a h d

one can ask now what happened to ordinary spacetime? spacetime
emerges as a subtriple t0, that is, a spectral triple with a subalgebra,
a subspace of hilbert space, and an operator which is the reduction of the
dirac operator on the subspace:

a0 h0 /

(28)

in order to construct the low energy subtriple we rst have to project out all of
the oscillator modes to obtain a0 and h0. the rationale behind this is that,
since the excited oscillators start at the planck mass, and this is much larger
than ordinary space time energies, we have to isolate the modes of the string
which will be accessible at low energies. this is still not sucient however,
as, in the case of large uncompactied directions, the modes associated to
the winding are also highly energetic. we therefore choose:

c(rd) :
f  a0 :
l2(t d, sp) :   h0 :

[ d, f ] = 0 commutant of d
d = 0

kernel of d

(29)

it is easy to connect a0 with the algebra of complex valued function
on spacetime, it is sucient to notice that it is constructed from the (com-
mutative) vertex operator eipx0. here we encounter the already mentioned
problems of the appropriate completion in order to obtain a well dened c-
algebra . the essence of t-duality lies in the relatively simple observation
the instead of d we could have chosen d as well. in this case we would have

8

obtained the triple pertaining to the torus whose coordinated are the x, that
is the t-dual torus t0, with all the radii of compactications inverted:

d  d d  d

(30)

that the full theory is invariant under his change is ensured by the ob-
servation that this transformation is a gauge transformation. in fact there
are (many) u  a unitary such that:

for example:

with

udu1 = d

u = eig

(31)

(32)

(33)

(z)(cid:1) fs(z+, z)

4z+z (cid:0)a

g =z dz+ dz
where a = , j(i)
is a smearing function.

a =: eaik

(i)

j x j

+,i[x] j +(i)

a

(z+) + a

,i[x] j(i)

a

 :,  are sections of the spin bundle and fs

this t-duality is a however a gauge transformation only in the full fg-
triple. when this is projected to the subtriple so to give a commutative
spacetime, in general the process will give rise to very dierent spacetimes.
we can in fact consider t-duality to be the commutativity of the following
diagram:

td
p0 
t0

u t d = td
 p0
t0 t0

(34)

the operation t0 is what we call t-duality, and from the previous discussion
it is clear that it is just the low energy projection of a gauge transformation.
all of the remaining o(d, d, z) dualities can be obtained in the same way, as
gauge transformations [5].

there are many more inner automorphisms, gauge transformations, which

project down to non trivial transformations. dening the currents:

j i


(  ) = x i


(  ) =



xk=

9

()i

k

eik()

(35)

a general spacetime coordinate transformation x  (x), with (x) a local
section of spin(t n), is generated by g = g with
+(z+) + j i

(36)

g =z dz+ dz
4z+z

i(x)(cid:0)j i

(z)(cid:1) fs(z+, z)

the means that the also the dieomorphisms of the (low energy) target
space are gauge transformations of the full spectral triple. the inner au-
tomorphisms project down to outer automorphisms of spacetime. this is,
in my opinion, one of the best justications of the often heard statement
that general relativity is a gauge theory. we can see also a glimpse of an
huge group of symmetries, which when projected down connects dierent low
energy theories.

if we try then to uncover the structure of spacetime at higher energies we
would have to consider momentum and winding modes on a par. this will
be relevant when the radius of compactication is comparable with plancks
length, as in this case is not possible to ignore the former over the latter.
we will however limit ourselves for the time being to the tachyonic case.
nevertheless the oscillators (at least the lower ones) do play an important
role. consider therefore tachyon vertex operators, for which we only excite
 of   ). the commutation relation
the rst n oscillators (for the basis ei
among the elementary operators are:

v n
ei


v n
ei


v n
ei


ej


ej


(zi) v n
(zi) v n
(zi) v n

(zj) = v n
(zi) = v n
(zj) = e2in

(zj) v n
(zi) v n
 v n
ej


(zi)
(zi) = i
(zj) v n

ej


ei


ei


ei


ei


ij

(zi)

ei


,

i 6= j

(37)

where the z

i are distinct points, and

n

ij

 = gij log  zi

zj ! 

1

zj !n
n   zi

 zj

zi !n!! .

(38)

n

xn=1

one can easily recognize in (37) a noncommutative torus structure [19]. if
we enclose more and more oscillators:

n

lim
n

ij

 = ij

 =  gij sgn(arg zi  arg zj ) i 6= j

(39)

10

the symmetries of the theory are still present, even in this truncated
version, in fact theories related by o(d, d, z) transformations give rise to
morita equivalent tori [7, 20]. the commutative case is recovered in the
uncompactied/large compactication radius because when r  , the o
diagonal elements of gij  0 and we recover the commutative torus.

turning the ncg crank it is also possible to write a low energy dual

symmetric action [7]:

l = (f + f )ij (f + f )ij

i  i(cid:16)i + i ai(cid:17)   i  i(cid:18) i + i

ai(cid:19) 

where the dual eld strength is dened:

(40)

(41)

fij = iaj  jai + ihai, aji

gik gjl(cid:16) k al  l ak + ih ak, ali(cid:17)

all of the o(d, d, z) transformations, being unitary transformations, do
not change the spectrum of d. let us analyse in some details the trans-
formation which changes the components of the antisymmetric second rank
tensor bij by the addition of an arbitrary, integer valued, constant matrix.
altough this transformation does not change the lattice , it will change the
momenta conjugated to the zero modes of x and x. in particular, in the
spectrum (11), the relative contribution of the momenta (represented by the
rst term,) with respect to the windings, and the mixed term will change.
choosing the components of the antisymmetric tensor b arbitrarily large, we
can make the contribution of the second and third term arbitrarily large.
we have therefore concentrated the lowest eigenvalues of the hamiltonian in
the momentum part. the low energy spectrum is made only of the momen-
tum eigenvalues. the lattice is still the same, but the strings are extremely
twisted, and we have transferred the lowest eigenvalues of the energy from
winding to momentum. roughly speaking, a low energy strings, which in the
original (small radius) lattice had a combination of momentum and winding,
will now be twisted in such a way that it will appear to have just momentum,
it is like the lattice repeats itself over and over.

again, as in the case of the of the r  1/r symmetry, we have to ask our-
selves what is position ? how is it measured ? and using the same heuristic

11

arguments of [14], we can think of making wave packets using superpositions
of the eigenvalues of the momentum in the case of large torsion the eigen-
values of momentum are continuous for all practical purposes, therefore the
superposition will have the character of a uncompactied space, rather than
a string moving on a lattice. and this will be the situation until energies in
which the new eigenvalues (coming from windings or the oscillatory modes)
start to play a role.

let us briey discuss the role of the classical conguration space in ordi-
nary quantum mechanics in the language and formalism of noncommutative
geometry. we will be very brief and refer to [9] for further details and refer-
ences. consider a purely quantum observer, that is a set of operators which
form an algebra. for example bounded operators constructed from p and x.
the information on the topology of m, the manifold on which the motion
is happening, can be recovered in the programme of noncommutative geo-
metry by considering the algebra of position operator, that is, the algebra of
continuous, complex valued, functions on m, seen as operators on l2(m),
with a norm given by the maximum of the modulus of the function. this is
a simple application of the gelfandnaimark theorem.

we will consider the conguration space of a quantum mechanical space
therefore not as a set of points, but rather as an abelian c-algebra. the
hilbert space could also be easily constructed a posteriori by giving a sesquilin-
ear form (a scalar product) on the algebra, and completing it under the norm
given by this product. other choice for the hilbert space are possible, a rele-
vant one for instance is the space of spinors. a quantum observer will have at
his disposal, among the bounded operators on the hilbert space, an abelian
subalgebra a0 which he will identify with the continuous function on his
space.

the size of this conguration space is given by the dirac operator via

connes distance formula [1]:

d(x, y) = sup

||[d,a]||1|a(x)  a(y)| a  a0 .

(42)

noncommutative geometry equips our quantum observer with a series of
tools suited to him: algebras of operators, traces etc. in the commutative

in the following we will consider m compact, therefore continuous functions are

bounded as well.

12

case these tools reconstruct the usual dierential geometry, but they can be
used in the noncommutative case as well. if we are in a commutative case,
the quantum observer has therefore at his disposal an algebra of observables,
in this algebra he recognizes an abelian subalgebra, that he calls the space
on which he lives, and with formula (42) he calculates distances, metric etc.

in string theory, spacetime, as described for example by (37),the quantum
observer nds himself on a noncommutative space. that is, among his set of
quantum observable he does not identify an abelian algebra giving him the
conguration space, he can however dene some sort of noncommutative
space, to which it corresponds a noncommutative algebra.

to specify the meaning of low energy we will resort to the spectral
action principle [21], and will argue that the meaning of low energy means
a theory in which only the low part of the spectrum of d plays a role.
this is possible because in the framework of noncommutative geometry one
constructs a spectral geometry, in which the information is stored in the
spectrum of d. and low energy refers to an action in which only the lower
part of the spectrum is excited.

the spectral action principle is based on the covariant dirac operator,
and on the variation of its eigenvalues. the action must be read in a wilson
renormalization scheme sense, and it depends on an ultraviolet cuto m0:

sm0 = tr (cid:18)d2
0(cid:19)

a
m2

(43)

where da is the covariant dirac operator and (x) is a function which is
1 for x  1 and then goes rapidly to zero (some smoothened characteristic
function). the action (43) eectively counts the eigenvalues of the covariant
dirac operator up to the cuto. considering, in fact, the eigenvalues of da
as sequences of numbers, and these sequences as dynamical variables of eu-
clidean gravity, the spectral action is then the action of general relativity
in this space [22]. the trace in the action can be calculated using known
heath kernel techniques [21], and the resulting theory contains a cosmologi-
cal constant, the einsteinhilbert and yangmills actions, plus some terms
quadratic in the riemann tensor.

what is important in the present context is the spectral principle, that
is, the starting point is the spectrum of an operator, and its variations as
the backgrounds elds (the oneform a in this case) change. one can ask,

13

in fact, what is the role of the algebra in the spectral action, as the latter
depends just on the trace of the dirac operator. of course the role of the
algebra is in the fact that in (43) appears the covariant dirac operator. and

the form a = p ai[d, bi] depends on the algebra chosen. let us now apply

these considerations to the frohlich-gawedzki spectral triple.

the spectrum of d and d, or of any operator obtained from them with an
o(d, d, z) unitary transformation, are the same. let us call d for convenience
the one for which the lowest eigenvalues are the one relative to momentum.
here by lowest we mean the ones which are lower than the energy of the
oscillatory modes (of the order of the planck mass mp). if the cuto m0 is
lower than mp, the cuto function  causes the projection of the operator
on the hilbert space h0. elements of the algebra which commutes with
d (such as the elements of a) will not contribute to the variations of the
action, and will therefore be unobservable. this algebra can be constructed
as the commutant of the t-dual operator d. this means that the winding
modes degrees of freedom are unobservable. since the dirac operator has a
near continuous spectrum, the tachyonic, low energy, algebra is spanned by
operators of the kind

vp = eipx ,

(44)

can be considered the fourier modes describing an uncompactied space.

in fact, a quantum observer with a spectral action, will be able to measure
(in the form of elds, potentials etc.) only the elements of the algebra which
give low energy perturbations of the lowest eigenvalues of d, always with
the assumption of the cuto m0 < mp so that oscillatory modes do not play
a role. this is the abelian algebra of functions on some space time. if, as
we have seen, there are many low eigenvalues, the observer will experience
an eectively decompactied space time. the algebra which he will measure
will be composed of the operators which will create low energy perturbation
to d. at this point we have to make the sole assumption that d has a
spectrum with several small eigenvalues. in this way the quantum observer
will experience a (nearly) continuous spectrum of the momentum, the sign
of an uncompactied space.

the strings could still be seen as compactied on a small lattice, but the
presence of a very large torsion term b has drastically changed the operator
content of the theory, and this has rendered space eectively uncompactied.

14

conclusions

in both string theory and noncommutative geometry, the interaction be-
tween physics and mathematics has been very fruitful, but he mathematics
used in string theory has been essentially classical dierential geometry. in
this talk i tried to give an impressionistic way on how the mathematics well
suited to describe strings in the high energy regime (which is proper to them)
should be some sort of noncommutative geometry. while from the physical
point of view some (initial) result are already to be seen: duality, gauge
transformations . . . , from the mathematical point of view the structures to
use are still in need of proper denitions.

a proper mathematical sharpening of the tools is necessary not so much
for abstract mathematical rigour, but to help uncover the beauty which lies
behind such a rich structure.

acknowledgements.
i would like g. landi and r.j. szabo for a very fruitful collaboration, f. scheck,
h. upmeier and w. werner for organizing the arbeitstagung and inviting
me to participate in it, and principally all of the participants for making the
workshop a most interesting and enjoyable one!

references

[1] the classical reference is: a. connes, noncommutative geometry (aca-

demic press, 1994).
among the other reviews there are:
g. landi, an introduction to noncommutative spaces and their ge-
ometries, springer lecture notes in physics 51, springer verlag (berlin
heidelberg) 1997;
j. madore, an introduction to noncommutative geometry and its phys-
ical applications, lms lecture notes 206 (1995);
j.c. varilly an introduction to noncommutative geometry, lectures
delivered at the lisbon summer school, 1997, (physics/9709045);
h. figueroa, j.m. gracia-bonda and j.c. varilly, elements of noncom-
mutative geometry, birkhauser, boston, to appear in late 1999.

15

[2] m.b. green, j.h. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory, (cam-

bridge university press, 1987).

[3] j. frohlich and k. gawedzki, conformal field theory and geometry of

strings, crm proc. lecture notes 7 (1994) 57, (hep-th/9310187).

[4] f. lizzi and r.j. szabo, target space duality in noncommutative geo-

metry, phys. rev. lett. 79 (1997) 3581. (hep-th/9706107).

[5] f. lizzi and r.j. szabo, duality symmetries and noncommutative geo-
metry of string spacetimes, comm. math. phys. 197 (1998) 667, (hep-
th/9707202)

[6] f. lizzi and r.j. szabo, noncommutative geometry and spacetime
gauge symmetries of string theory, chaos, solitons and fractals 10
(1999) 445.

[7] g. landi, f. lizzi and r.j. szabo, string geometry and the noncom-

mutative torus, (hep-th/9806099) to appear in comm. math. phys..

[8] d. song and r.j. szabo, spectral geometry of heterotic compactica-

tion, (hep-th/9812235).

[9] f. lizzi, strings, noncommutative geometry and the size of the target

space, hep-th/9902187

[10] f. lizzi and r.j. szabo noncommutative geometry and string duality
proceeding of the corfu euroconference on the standard model and
beyond, cofu sept. 1998, prhep-corfu98/073.

[11] m. douglas and c. hull, d-branes and the noncommutative torus,

jhep 02 (1998) 008.

[12] k. kikkawa and m. yamasaki, casimir eects in superstring theories,

phys. lett. 149b (1997) ;
n. sakai and i. senda, vacuum energies of string compactied on
torus , progr. theor. phys. 75 (1986) 692;
v.p. nair, a. shapere, a. strominger and f. wilczek, compactication
of the twisted heterotic string, nucl. phys. b289 (1987) 414.

[13] a. giveon, m. porrati and e. rabinovici, target space duality in string

theory, phys. rep. 244 (1994) 77 (hep-th/9401139).

16

[14] r. brandenberger and c. vafa, superstrings in the early universe, nucl.

phys. b316 (1989) 391.

[15] k.s. narain, new heterotic string theories in uncompactied dimen-

sions < 10, phys. lett. 169b (1986) 41;
k.s. narain, m.h. sarmadi and e. witten, a note on toroidal com-
pactication of heterotic string theory, nucl. phys. b279 (1987) 369.

[16] i.b. frenkel, j. lepowsky and a. meurman, vertex operator algebras
and the monster, pure appl. math. 134 (academic press, new york,
1988);
r.w. gebert, introduction to vertex algebras, borcherds algebras and
the monster lie algebra, int. j. mod. phys. a8 (1993) 5441;
v. kac vertex algebras for beginners, ams university lecture series,
vol. 10 (1997).

[17] j. frohlich, o. grandjean and a. recknagel, supersymmetric quan-
tum theory, noncommutative geometry and gravitation, in: quantum
symmetries, proc. lxiv les houches session, eds. a. connes and k.
gawedzki, to appear, (hep-th/9706132).

[18] f. constantinescu and g. scharf, smeared and unsmeared chiral vertex

operators, hep-th/9712174.

[19] m.a. rieel, c-algebras associated with irrational rotations, pac. j.

math. 93 (1981) 415.

[20] m.a. rieel, induced representations of c-algebras, bull. amer. math.
soc. 78 (1972) 606609; adv. math. 13 (1974) 176257; morita equiv-
alence for operator algebras, in: operator algebras and applications,
proc. symp. pure math. 38, r.v. kadison ed. (american mathematical
society, 1982) 285298;
m.a. rieel and a. schwarz, morita equivalence of multidimensional
noncommutative tori, math.qa/9803057, to appear in int. j. of math.
a. schwarz, morita equivalence and duality, nucl. phys. b534 (1998)
720, (hep-th/9805034).

[21] a.h. chamseddine and a. connes, universal formula for noncommuta-
tive geometry actions: unication of gravity and the standard model,

17

phys. rev. lett. 77 (1996) 4868; the spectral action principle, com-
mun. math. phys. 186 (1997) 731, (hep-th/9606001); b. iochum, d.
kastler and t. schucker, on the universal chamseddine-connes ac-
tion i. details of the action computation, j. math. phys. 38 (1997)
4929, (hep-th/9607015).

[22] g. landi and c. rovelli, gravity from dirac eigenvalues, mod. phys.
lett. a13 (1998) 479 (gr-qc/9708041); general relativity in terms of
dirac eigenvalues, phys. rev. lett. 78 (1997) 3051, (gr-qc/9612034);
g. landi, contribution to these proceedings.

18

