holography in general space-times

raphael bousso

department of physics, stanford university,

stanford, california 94305-4060

su-itp-99-24

3 june 1999

hep-th/9906022

abstract

we provide a background-independent formulation of the hologra-
phic principle. it permits the construction of embedded hypersurfaces
(screens) on which the entire bulk information can be stored at a den-
sity of no more than one bit per planck area. screens are constructed
explicitly for ads, minkowski, and de sitter spaces with and without
black holes, and for cosmological solutions. the properties of screens
provide clues about the character of a manifestly holographic theory.

bousso@stanford.edu

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

3

 
 

1
v
2
2
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

1 holographic principle

1.1 the holographic principle for general spacetimes

in ref. [1] a covariant entropy bound was conjectured to hold in general
space-times. the bound can be saturated, but not exceeded, in cosmology
and in collapsing regions. applied to nite systems of limited self-gravity,
it reduces to bekensteins bound [2]. for a d-dimensional lorentzian space-
time, the covariant bound can be stated as follows:

covariant entropy conjecture let a be the area of a connected (d2)-
dimensional spatial surface b. let l be a hypersurface bounded by b and
generated by one of the four null congruences orthogonal to b. let s be the
total entropy contained on l.
if the expansion of the congruence is non-
positive (measured in the direction away from b) at every point on l, then
s  a/4.

the conjecture can be viewed as a generalization of an entropy bound pro-
posed by fischler and susskind [3].
it diers in that it considers all four
light-like directions and selects some of them by the criterion of non-positive
expansion. we should also point out a number of other recent proposals for
entropy bounds in cosmology [48] (see also sec. 3.4).

the covariant entropy bound is manifestly invariant under time reversal.
this property cannot be understood if the bound applies only to thermody-
namic entropy. one is thus forced to interpret the bound as a limit on the
number of degrees of freedom (ndof ) that constitute the statistical origin of
any thermodynamic entropy that may be present on l. since no assumptions
about the microscopic properties of matter were made, the limit is funda-
mental [1]. there simply cannot be more independent degrees of freedom
on l than a/4, in planck units. this conclusion compels us to embrace the
holographic conjecture of t hooft [9] and susskind [10], and it motivates the
following background-independent formulation of their hypothesis:

holographic principle let a be the area of a connected (d  2)-dimen-
sional spatial surface b. let l be a hypersurface bounded by b and generated
by one of the four null congruences orthogonal to b. let n be the number
of elements of an orthonormal basis of the quantum hilbert space that fully
describes all physics on l. if the expansion of the congruence is non-positive

2

(measured in the direction away from b) at every point on l, then n  ea/4.

simplifying slightly,1 one could state that ndof  a/4, where ndof is the total
number of independent quantum degrees of freedom present on l.

the holographic principle thus assigns at least two light-like hypersurfaces
to any given spatial surface b and bounds ndof on those hypersurfaces. the
relevant hypersurfaces can be constructed as follows (see ref. [1] for a more
detailed discussion). there will be four families of light-rays orthogonal to b:
a past-directed and a future-directed family on each side of b. consider only
the families with non-positive expansion away from b. generically there will
be two such families, but if the expansion is zero in some directions, there
may be as many as three or four. pick one of the allowed families and follow
each light-ray until the expansion becomes positive or a boundary of space-
time is reached. the null hypersurface thus generated is called a light-sheet.
ndof on a light-sheet of b will not exceed a quarter of the area of b.

in general, the holographic principle associates the area of a surface b
with ndof on null hypersurfaces, not spatial regions, bounded by b. under
certain conditions, however, the bound does apply to space-like hypersurfaces
as well. this was shown in ref. [1] for the covariant entropy bound. for
the holographic principle, the derivation can be repeated, with entropy
replaced by ndof. it yields the following theorem:

spacelike projection theorem let a be the area of a closed surface b
possessing a future-directed light-sheet l with no boundary other than b. let
the spatial region v be contained in the intersection of the causal past of l
with any spacelike hypersurface containing b. let ndof be the total number
of independent quantum degrees of freedom present on v . then ndof  a/4.

the theorem can be widely applied and easily understood. under the stated
conditions, none of the degrees of freedom on v can escape through holes
in l or be destroyed on a singularity. then causality and the second law of
thermodynamics require all degrees of freedom on v to be present on l as
well. on l their number is bounded by the holographic principle, so it must
be bounded also on v . the spacelike projection theorem will be of use in a
number of spacetimes, including de sitter and ads (sec. 3).

1we thank gerard t hooft for suggesting a formulation in terms of hilbert space.

3

1.2 outline

the holographic principle is a relation between space-time geometry and the
number of degrees of freedom.
it is not equivalent to the statement that
there exists a conventional theory without gravity, living on the boundary of
a space-time region, with one degree of freedom per planck area, by which
all bulk phenomena including quantum gravity can be described. the holo-
graphic principle is clearly necessary for the existence of such a theory, but
as we will argue below, it is not sucient.

the holographic principle does imply, however, that all information con-
tained on l can be stored on the surface b, at a density of no more than
one bit per planck area. (we neglect factors of ln 2.) we shall work with
this interpretation. for a given space-time, we ask whether the information
in the interior can be completely projected (in accordance with our formu-
lation of the holographic principle) onto suitable hypersurfaces which will
be called screens. we are led to a construction (sec. 2) under which the
space-time is sliced into null hypersurfaces l. each light-ray on l is followed
in the direction of non-negative expansion until the expansion becomes zero.
this yields a preferred location for a screen encoding the information on
l. by repeating this procedure for every slice l, one obtains one or more
screen-hypersurfaces. they will either be located on the boundary or will
be embedded in the interior of the spacetime. we establish conditions under
which projection along spacelike directions is possible.

in sec. 3 we apply the construction to examples of space-times, including
anti-de sitter space, minkowski space, de sitter space, cosmological solu-
tions, and black holes. we nd that ads has highly special properties under
our construction, as it admits spacelike projection onto timelike screens of
constant area. for all examples we nd that the information in the entire
spacetime can be projected onto preferred screens. for spaces with black
holes, inequivalent slicings lead to dierent screen structures. we relate this
to the question of information loss.

we discuss the structure of holographic screens in sec. 4, and draw some
conclusions. in a number of examples, the screen-hypersurfaces are spacelike.
in other examples they are null or timelike, with the spatial area depending on
time. one would not expect such screens to admit a conventional lorentzian
quantum eld theory with one degree of freedom per planck area, because
the number of degrees of freedom would have to be time-dependent.

this suggests that a distinction should be made between a dual theory,

4

and the holographic theory (sec. 4.2). in both types, the holographic principle
would be manifest. a dual theory would be characteristic of a certain class
of space-times. it would be a conventional theory without gravity, living on
the geometric background dened by a holographic screen of the space-time
and containing one degree of freedom per planck area. it would complement,
or be equivalent to, a quantum gravity theory living in the bulk, and could
thus be used to describe bulk physics. the conformal eld theory on the
boundary of ads [1114] is an example of a dual theory.

the existence of a dual theory in a given class of space-times will de-
pend on certain properties of the projection and the screen which we aim
to expose. more generally, the structure of screens points to a fundamental
theory in which quantum degrees of freedom are a derived concept, and their
number can change. the theory must give rise to gravity by permitting the
unique reconstruction of space-time geometry from the eective number of
degrees of freedom in such a way that the holographic principle is manifestly
satised (sec. 4.3). we call this the holographic theory. clearly it cannot be
a conventional quantum eld theory living on a pre-dened geometric back-
ground. perhaps an indication of its character can be gained from certain
proposals of t hooft [9, 15].

notation and conventions we work with d-dimensional lorentzian man-
ifolds m. the terms light-like and null are used interchangeably. any (d1)-
dimensional submanifold h  m is called a hypersurface of m [16]. if d  2
of its dimensions are everywhere spacelike and the remaining dimension is
everywhere timelike (null, spacelike), h is called a timelike (null, spacelike)
hypersurface. by a surface we always refer to a (d  2)-dimensional space-
like submanifold b  m; by area we mean the proper volume of a surface.
by a light-ray we do not mean an actual electromagnetic wave or photon,
but simply a null geodesic. we use the terms null congruence, and family
of light-rays, to refer to a congruence of null geodesics [16, 17]. the term
light-sheet is dened in sec. 1.1; the terms projection, screen, and screen-
hypersurface in sec. 2.1; dual theory and holographic theory in sec. 4.2. we
set h = c = g = k = 1.

2 holographic projection

5

2.1 screens

the construction described in the previous section answers the following
question: given a surface b of area a, what is the hypersurface l on which
ndof is bounded by a/4? we will now consider space-times globally, and ask
a dierent question: which surfaces store the information contained in the
entire space-time? to answer this question, the above prescription should
be inverted. given a null hypersurface l, one should follow the geodesic
generators of l in the direction of non-negative expansion. one can stop
anytime, but one must stop when the expansion becomes negative. this
procedure will be called projection. the (d  2)-dimensional spatial surface
b spanned by the points where the projection is terminated will be called a
screen of the projection. if the expansion vanishes on every point of b, it
will be called a preferred screen.

preferred screens are of particular interest for a simple reason. the ex-
pansion of the projection typically changes sign on a preferred screen b.
therefore b will be a preferred screen for projections coming from two direc-
tions, e.g., the past-directed outgoing and future-directed ingoing directions.
it will thus be particularly ecient in encoding global information. (actu-
ally, there may be a deeper reason why preferred screens play a special role.
we suspect that they are precisely the surfaces for which the holographic
bound, ndof  a/4, is saturated. this is suggested by considerations in
sec. 4.2 of ref. [1]. there it was found that the covariant entropy bound
can be saturated on the future light-sheet of an apparent horizon, but not on
the future light-sheets of smaller spheres inside the apparent horizon. un-
der the projection that generates those light-sheets, the apparent horizon is a
preferred screen. this argument should be viewed with caution, however, be-
cause there might be independent, practical reasons why the thermodynamic
entropy cannot be made as large as ndof for the smaller spheres.)

by following all generators of the null hypersurface l in a non-contracting
direction to a screen, we obtain a projection of all information on the hyper-
surface onto one or more screens, which may be embedded in the hypersur-
face, or may lie on its boundary. the number of screens can be minimized
by using preferred screens whenever possible.

6

2.2 screen-hypersurfaces

in order to project the information in a space-time m, our strategy will
be to slice m into a one-parameter family of null hypersurfaces, {l}. this
will be possible in all examples we consider. usually the slicing is highly
non-unique, but the symmetries of most space-times of interest reduce the
number of inequivalent slicings considerably. to each slice l, we apply the
projection rule. this procedure yields a number of one-parameter families
of (d  2)-dimensional screens. each family forms a (d  1)-dimensional
screen-hypersurface embedded in m or located on the boundary of m. (this
sounds a lot more complicated than it issee the recipe in sec. 2.3 and
the gures in sec. 3 below.) the screen-hypersurfaces can be time-like, null,
or space-like; in sec. 3 examples of each type will be found. in general, the
causal character can change from time-like to space-like within the screen-
hypersurface.

usually it will be clear whether we are talking about a screen (a spatial
surface), or a (d  1)-dimensional hypersurface formed by a one-parameter
family of screens. therefore we will often refer to a screen-hypersurface
loosely as a screen of m. if the hypersurface consists of preferred screens,
we call it a preferred screen-hypersurface, or loosely a preferred screen of
m.
if the expansions of both independent pairs of orthogonal families of
light-rays vanish on a screen, it will be preferred under all four projections
that end on it. we will call such a screen, and hypersurfaces formed by such
screens, optimal.

so far we have discussed only null projection, i.e., projection of informa-
tion along null hypersurfaces. it is sometimes possible to project information
along spacelike hypersurfaces. namely, spacelike projection of the informa-
tion in a spatial region v onto a screen b is allowed if v and b satisfy the
conditions set forth in the spacelike projection theorem (sec. 1.1). this
will be signicant in a number of space-times, in particular in de sitter and
anti-de sitter space.

2.3 the recipe

to construct screens, one must slice a space-time into null hypersurfaces. in
view of the spherical symmetry of all metrics considered below, it will be

7

natural to slice them into a family {l} of light-cones centered at r = 0.2
the family can be parametrized by time. this will leave two inequivalent
null projections, namely along past or future-directed light-cones. often the
light-cones will be truncated by boundaries of the space-time and will not
include r = 0, but this does not matter. in the case of spherical symmetry,
one thus obtains the following recipe for the construction of screens:

1. draw a penrose diagram. every point represents a (d  2)-sphere.
each diagonal line represents a light-cone. the two inequivalent null
slicings can be represented by the ascending and descending families of
diagonal lines.

2. pick one of the two families. now the question is in which direction to

project along the diagonal lines.

3. identify the apparent horizons, i.e., hypersurfaces on which the expan-
sion of the past or future light-cones vanishes. they will divide the
space-time into normal, trapped, and anti-trapped regions.
in each
region, draw a wedge whose legs point in the direction of negative ex-
pansion of the cones.

4. on a given diagonal line (i.e., light-cone), project each point towards
the tip of the local wedge, onto the nearest point (i.e., sphere) bi where
the direction of the tip ips, or onto the boundary of space-time as the
case may be.

5. repeat for every line in the family. the surfaces bi will form (preferred)

screen-hypersurfaces hi.

below we will strive to make these steps explicit by including two or three
penrose diagrams for most examples.
in the rst diagram, the apparent
horizons will be identied and the wedges placed. for each inequivalent
family of light-cones, we will then provide a diagram in which the projection
directions are indicated by thick arrows. we invite the reader to verify that
these directions are uniquely determined by the wedges. screens will be
denoted by thick points, preferred screen-hypersurfaces by thick lines.

2in minkowski-space, we will also consider a family of light-rays orthogonal to a at

(d  2)-plane.

8

3 examples

3.1 anti-de sitter space

type iib string theory on the background ads5  s5, with n units of ux on
the s5, appears to be dual to (3+1)-dimensional u(n) supersymmetric yang-
mills theory with 16 real supercharges [11]. one can consider this theory to
live on the boundary of the ads space. the correspondence between bulk
and boundary [12, 13] relates infrared eects in the bulk to ultraviolet eects
on the boundary [13, 18, 19]. this feature was exploited by susskind and
witten [14] to show that the boundary theory has only one degree of freedom
per planck area, as required by the holographic principle in the traditional,
spacelike form in which it has often been expressed.

we wish to understand some of these properties from the perspective of
the general formulation of the holographic principle given in sec. 1.1. from
this point of view, the bulk information is projected along null directions in
general, and along spacelike directions only if certain conditions are met. we
will verify that these conditions are indeed satised in ads. moreover, we
will nd that the boundary at spatial innity is a preferred (and optimal)
screen under our construction. finally, we will note that ads admits screen-
hypersurfaces of constant spatial area that encode their space-time interior.
the concurrence of these properties is special to ads (and to some unstable
solutions identied in sec. 3.5), and may be a necessary condition for the
existence of the kind of duality that has been found in this space-time.

anti-de sitter space can be scaled into the direct product of an innite

time axis with a unit spatial ball [14]. in this form it has the metric

ds2 = r2"

1 + r2
1  r2 dt2 +

4

(1  r2)2 (cid:16)dr2 + r2d2(cid:17)# .

(3.1)

the constant scale factor r is the radius of curvature. the spacelike hyper-
surfaces are open balls given by t = const, 0  r < 1. the boundary of space
is a two-sphere residing at r = 1. the proper area of spheres diverges as
r  1.

consider the past directed radial light-rays emanating from a caustic
( = +) at r = 0, t = t0 (fig. 1). they form a past light-cone l with
a spherical boundary. the cone grows with ane time until the light-rays
reach the boundary of space at r = 1. it is straightforward to check that the
expansion, , is inversely proportional to the ane time. it thus decreases

9

singularity

horizon

schwarzschild-
ads

h

h

8

l

v b
b

0
 
=
 
r

b

8

1
 
=
 
r

ads

t

r

figure 1: conventions and methods used in all diagrams are spelled out in sec. 2.3.
anti-de sitter space contains no apparent horizons; all spheres are normal. space-
like projection is allowed. all null and spacelike projections are directed away
from the center at r = 0. interior information can thus be projected onto a screen-
hypersurfaces h of constant area; h encodes no exterior information. the screen
at spatial innity, h, is optimal and encodes all bulk information.  the upper
part of the gure shows a diagram for schwarzschild-ads. since the future light-
sheets of the screen surfaces are not complete (see dotted line), the black hole
interior cannot be projected onto h along space-like directions, but only along
past light-cones.

10

monotonically, but remains positive; one nds that

  0 as

r  1.

(3.2)

consider a sphere b, of area ab, on the lightcone l. the part of l in
the interior of b, lb, has negative expansion in the direction away from b,
and therefore constitutes a light-sheet of b. by the holographic principle,
the number of degrees of freedom on lb does not exceed a quarter of the
area of b:

ndof(lb) 

.

(3.3)

ab
4

ab
4

because the cone closes o at r = 0, it has no boundary other than b.
the spatial interior of b on any spacelike hypersurface through b, vb, lies
entirely in the causal past of lb. therefore the conditions for the spacelike
projection theorem are met.
it follows that area bounds ndof on spatial
regions of ads:

ndof (vb) 

.

(3.4)

since the light-cone expansion is positive for all values of r, these con-
clusions remain valid in the limit as the sphere b moves to the boundary
of space, b  b. by eq. (3.2), b is a preferred screen. as expected,
the preferred screen is precisely the one which encodes the entire space. by
time reversal invariance of eq. (3.1), the expansion of future-directed radial
lightrays arriving at b will also vanish; thus b is an optimal screen.

so far we have considered screens bounding ndof on a particular light-cone
or spatial hypersurface. a screen-hypersurface encoding the entire space-
time is obtained by repeating the construction for every single light-cone
in the slicing of ads. by the time-translation invariance of eq. (3.1), this
repetition is trivial. the family of nite screens b(t) of constant area ab
thus forms a timelike screen-hypersurface h of topology r  sd2. by
the holographic principle, ndof in the enclosed space-time region does not
exceed ab/4. from the spacelike projection theorem it follows that it does
not matter whether one counts degrees of freedom on null or on spacelike
hypersurfaces intersecting h. after taking the limit b(t)  b(t), one
nds that the timelike boundary at r = 1, h, is an optimal screen of anti-
de sitter space. it encodes the entire information in the bulk, by spacelike
or null projection.

let us briey discuss what happens when a black hole forms. this is
shown in the upper part of fig. 1. let us assume that the constant screen

11

area, ab, is so large that the black hole never engulfs the screen-hypersurface
h formed by the screens b(t). then the past-directed ingoing light-sheet of
any b(t) lies outside the event horizon, and has no boundary other than
b(t). by arguments similar to those leading to the spacelike projection
theorem [1], this implies that ndof in the region between the black hole and
h never exceeds ab/4. generic space-like hypersurfaces passing through the
interior of the black hole, however, are not contained in the causal past of
any complete future-directed light-sheet of b (see dotted line in fig. 1). the
spacelike projection theorem does not apply to those regions, and therefore
the spacelike projection of the interior of the event horizon onto h is not
possible. of course, the entire black hole interior can be encoded on h by
null projection along past light-cones. (alternatively, it can be projected onto
the apparent horizon; we discuss this in more detail in sec. 3.2 for the case
of schwarzschild black holes.) this discussion remains valid in the limit as
b  b, and thus applies to the boundary of schwarzschild-ads at spatial
innity.

3.2 minkowski space

we now turn to space-times which are asymptotically at. the discussion
of nite bound systems in minkowski space does not dier much from the
treatment in ads. the space-time region occupied by them can be projected
onto a screen-hypersurface of topology rsd2, formed by a spherical screen
circumscribing the system. as long as no black holes form, the projection
can be spacelike. a spherical screen of nite size is not preferred unless the
interior is on the verge of gravitational collapse (see sec. 3.5).

a bound system can also be projected along past-directed light-rays onto
a remote at plane. all families of null-geodesics orthogonal to the plane have
zero expansion; therefore the screen is optimal. it can encode bulk informa-
tion on both sides. this projection was originally proposed by susskind [10]
and was further investigated in ref. [20]. if the system does not contain black
holes, it can be projected onto the plane along future-directed light-rays as
well.

for the discussion of scattering processes (fig. 2) we shall follow the
recipe given in sec. 2.3. by following past light-cones centered at r = 0,
all of minkowski space is projected onto past null innity, i , where   0.
similarly, by following future light-cones one can project the bulk onto future
null innity, i +. both innities are preferred screens of minkowski space.

12

 

0
=
 
r

i+

_

i

(a)

i+

(c)

_

i

(b)

figure 2: like ads, minkowski space contains no trapped or anti-trapped spheres
(a). unlike ads, the two allowed null projections lead to dierent preferred screens,
i  (b) and i + (c). either screen is sucient to encode the entire spacetime. this
can be viewed as an expression of the unitarity of the s-matrix.

each screen alone suces to store all information in the interior of the space-
time; one can interpret this as a statement of the unitarity of the s-matrix [21]
in the absence of black holes.

let us now assume that a black hole forms during scattering (fig. 3a).
the past light-cones still project all points in the spacetime onto i , including
the interior of the black hole (fig. 3b). the screen i +, however, encodes only
the exterior of the black hole, via future-directed outgoing light-rays (fig. 3c).
this discrepancy can be interpreted as information loss in classical black
holes. the black hole interior can be encoded onto the apparent horizon,
which forms a preferred screen, by future-directed outgoing and past-directed
ingoing lightrays.

the picture becomes more interesting when the quantum radiation of
black holes, as well as its back-reaction, is included. this restores the pos-
sibility of unitarity. after the black hole has formed from classical matter,
the apparent horizon shrinks due to the quantum pair creation of parti-
cles [22]. in this process a positive energy particle escapes to innity, while
its negative energy partner crosses into the black hole. unlike positive energy
matter, this particle anti-focusses light: it violates the null convergence con-
dition and causes the expansion of light-rays to increase. outgoing light-rays
immediately inside the horizon can thus change from negative to positive
expansion without going through a caustic (fig. 4). (if the null convergence

13

singularity

horizon

apparent

event horizon

_

i

i+

(a)

 

0
=
 
r

_

i

(b)

i+

(c)

figure 3: a classical black hole forms in a scattering process. the spheres within
the apparent horizon are trapped (a). all information can be projected along past
light-cones onto i  (b). but i + only encodes the information outside the black
hole; this reects the information loss in the classical black hole. the black hole
interior can be projected onto the apparent horizon (c).

condition [16] holds, the expansion becomes positive only at caustics, or
focal points, of the light-rays. caustics thus are the generic endpoints of
light-sheets [1].) this leads to a situation which would not be possible in a
classical space-time. there exists a hypersurface h, namely the black hole
apparent horizon during evaporation, from which one has to project away in
both directions. thus, past-directed ingoing light-rays map h onto a dier-
ent part of the apparent horizon (h), and future-directed outgoing light-rays
map it onto a part of i +.

a digression on unitarity

let us examine the evaporation process in more detail. when a negative
mass particle enters the horizon, the expansion of the generators of the hori-
zon changes from zero to a positive value. there will be a nearby null con-
gruence, inside the black hole, whose expansion is changed from a negative
value to zero by the same process. this congruence will now generate the
apparent horizon. since it has smaller cross-sectional area, the horizon has
shrunk. the movement of the apparent horizon will leave behind a trace in
the hawking radiation, causing a deviation from a thermal spectrum over
and above the deviation caused by greybody factors. this is similar to the
distortion in the thermal spectrum of radiation enclosed in a cavity, while

14

+

i

 

0
=
 
r

h

i

{
h

 

0
=
 
r

figure 4: a quantum black hole forms in a scattering process. because negative
energy particles cross the apparent horizon during the evaporating phase (h), its
size decreases. the expansion of future light-cones immediately inside the apparent
horizon changes from negative to positive in this process. therefore the maximal
area of the apparent horizon marginally exceeds the maximal area of the event
horizon. the diagram shows the projection of this space-time along future light-
cones onto screens formed by the apparent horizon and by i + (thick lines). the
past light-cones would lead to the usual projection onto i .

the wall of the cavity is being moved.

the amount by which the apparent horizon decreases during a given pair-
creation event depends on the prole, (a), of the expansion of the outgoing
future-directed null geodesics near the horizon. the cross-sectional area a
of null congruences becomes smaller, and the expansion  more negative, the
further inside the black hole they are located. if the black hole was formed

15

by a system of low entropy, for example by the collapse of a homogeneous
dust ball of zero temperature, the prole will be a featureless monotonic
function, and the horizon will decrease very smoothly during evaporation.
the back-reaction, in this case, will not imprint a signicant signature onto
the thermal spectrum. however, if the black hole was formed by a highly
enthropic system, the prole will be more complex.

consider a shell of matter falling into a black hole. for now, assume
that the shell contains only radial modes, and is thus exactly spherically
symmetric even microscopically.
if a lot of entropy is stored in the shell,
its density will be a complicated function of the radius. by raychauduris
equation [16, 17], the density prole of the infalling shell will be imprinted
on the expansion prole of the outgoing future-directed null geodesics that
eventually pass through the apparent horizon during evaporation. corre-
spondingly, the same type of pair creation process will sometimes cause the
horizon area to decrease by a larger step, sometimes by a smaller amount,
depending on the expansion prole of the null geodesics passing through h
at the pair creation event. the back-reaction will be irregular, and the cor-
responding deviations of the hawking radiation from the thermal spectrum
will be complex. there is thus a signature in the radiation which encodes
the irregularity of the back-reaction, which in turn encodes the complexity
of the matter system that formed the black hole.

it is easy to extend this discussion to systems containing also angular
modes. they will deect outgoing lightrays into angular directions. the ex-
pansion will now be a local function of the cross-sectional area, (a; , ).
the back-reaction will not be spherically symmetric, and the apparent hori-
zon will develop dents and bulges. this leaves a non-spherical signature in
the hawking radiation.

in this way information about the material falling into the black hole may
be transferred onto the outgoing hawking radiation. the information will
be encoded in a subtle way and it will typically be necessary to measure the
entire radiation emitted by the black hole before the ingoing state can be re-
constructed. of course, we have sketched only a qualitative picture, and we
have taken the pair creation model of black hole evaporation rather literally.
moreover, no mechanism can copy ingoing information onto outgoing radi-
ation unless one implicitly assumes that the fundamental theory evades the
quantum xeroxing no-go theorem [23], for example by non-locality [24].3

3we thank lenny susskind for pointing this out, and for a number of related discussions.

16

we have aimed to outline a specic mechanism by which information may
be transferred in the semi-classical picture. in general terms, our discussion
is strongly related to the approach of t hooft [2527].

3.3 de sitter space

de sitter space is the maximally symmetric solution of the vacuum einstein
equation with a positive cosmological constant . it may be visualized as a
(d  1, 1)-hyperboloid embedded in (d + 1)-dimensional minkowski space.
a metric covering the entire space-time is given by

ds2 = dt2 + h 2 cosh2ht d2

d1,

where

h = s 

3

(3.5)

(3.6)

is the hubble parameter, or inverse curvature radius.
in this metric, the
spacelike hypersurfaces are spheres, sd1. they contract, and then expand,
at an exponential rate. de sitter space also admits metrics with maximally
symmetric spatial sections of zero or negative curvature, as well as a static
metric,

1  h 2r2 + r2d2
those metrics cover only certain portions of the spacetime.

ds2 = (1  h 2r2)d 2 +

d2.

dr2

(3.7)

(3.8)

(3.9)

the metric on the spatial (d  1)-sphere is given by:

d2

d1 = d2 + sin2 d2

d2,

whence

r = h 1 cosh ht sin .

a geodesic observer is immersed in a bath of thermal radiation [28] of tem-
perature t = h/(2), which appears to come from the cosmological horizon
surrounding the observer. the causal structure of de sitter space is shown
in fig. 5. the only boundaries are past and future innity, i  and i +; they
are both spacelike. the space-time is divided in half by the event horizon,
e, of a geodesic observer, who can be taken to live at  = r = 0.

consider the past light-cones centered at  = 0, i.e., at one of the two
poles of the sd1. just as for ads and minkowski, the expansion starts with

17

 

0
=


 

i+

i
(a)

 


=


 

i+

i

(b)

e

(c)

figure 5: penrose diagram for de sitter space. the sd1 spacelike slices would
correspond to horizontal lines through the square. the diagonals are apparent
horizons dividing the space-time into four regions (a). the (d  2)-spheres near
past (future) innity are trapped (anti-trapped); the spheres near the poles are
normal. null projection must be directed towards the tips of the wedges (see
fig. 1). it follows that de sitter space can be projected onto past and future innity
(b), which are spacelike, optimal screen-hypersurfaces of (exponentially) innite
size. a more interesting screen is obtained by applying the spacelike projection
theorem to spheres near the event horizon e of an observer at  = 0 (a). by taking
a limit, one can show that all information in the observable region of de sitter
space can be projected onto the preferred screen e, which is a null hypersurface
of constant spatial area 4h 2 (c).

the value + and decreases. any surface on the light-cone bounds ndof on
the part of the cone it encloses. by the spacelike projection theorem, it also
bounds ndof on any spatial hypersurface in its interior. perhaps surprisingly,
this holds even for surfaces which are both near the event horizon and near
the past singularity (see fig. 5a, dashed line). their area will be  h 2, but
they enclose an exponentially large spatial region.

when the light-cone reaches i , the expansion approaches zero. thus
the boundary surface on past innity is a preferred screen. (actually it is
optimal because a past light-cone arriving from the other pole,  = , will
also have   0 near i .) repeating this projection for all times, one nds
that half of de sitter space, namely the region within the event horizon of
an observer at  = 0, can be projected onto past innity. the projection
of only half of the space-time is peculiar to de sitter space. by contrast,

18

past light-cones project all of minkowski, or all of ads, onto their respective
innities (secs. 3.1 and 3.2). by using past light-cones emanating from the
other pole of the spatial sd1, an additional portion of de sitter can be
projected onto past innity. but this still leaves out the antitrapped region
beyond the cosmological horizons. it can only be projected by future-directed
lightrays onto future innity. a global null projection of de sitter space can
thus be achieved by using two optimal screen-hypersurfaces: past and future
innity. this is shown in fig. 5b. indeed, the potential holographic role of
these boundaries has been speculated upon for some time [21]. both global
screens are spacelike hypersurfaces. because surfaces near future innity are
anti-trapped, one cannot encode global de sitter space on a nite number of
timelike or null screens.

however, we can apply the spacelike projection theorem (sec. 1.1) to the
screens that form the event horizon e of an observer at  = 0. they are all
of constant area, 4h 2. (since e never reaches  = r = 0, this argument
strictly requires a limiting procedure starting from spheres in the vicinity of
e; see fig. 5a.) because e is generated by light-rays of zero expansion, all
screens on it are manifestly preferred. thus, the null hypersurface e is a
preferred screen of constant area. because of its degeneracy, e encodes only
itself under null projection along e. under spacelike projection, however, it
encodes half of the space-time (fig. 5c), namely the region within the event
horizon. one can reasonably argue that the region beyond the event horizon
has no meaning because it cannot be observed, and that de sitter space
should not be treated globally [29, 30] (fig. 5c); thus the screen e should
suce for a holographic description of de sitter space.

in inationary models, the de sitter phase is followed by a matter or
radiation dominated phase, and the entire space-time during this era can
be projected onto the screens available in the relevant frw models [1] (see
sec. 3.4).  black holes in de sitter space can be treated much like black
holes in ads or minkowski space.

3.4 frw cosmologies

friedmann-robertson-walker (frw) cosmologies are described by a metric
of the form

ds2 = a2()hd2 + d2 + f 2()d2i .

(3.10)

19

here f () = sinh , , sin  corresponds to open, at, and closed universes
respectively. frw universes contain homogeneous, isotropic spacelike slices
of constant (negative, zero, or positive) curvature. we will not discuss open
universes, since they display no signicant features beyond those arising in
the treatment of closed or at universes.

the matter content will be described by tab = diag(, p, p, p), with pres-
sure p = . we assume that   0 and 1/3 <   1. the case  = 1
corresponds to de sitter space, which was discussed in sec. 3.3. the apparent
horizon is dened geometrically as the spheres on which at least one pair of
orthogonal null congruences have zero expansion. it is given by

where

 = q,

q =

2

1 + 3

.

the solution for a at universe is given by

q!q
a() =   

.

(3.11)

(3.12)

(3.13)

its causal structure is shown in fig. 6. the interior of the apparent horizon,

i+

(a)

 

0
=
 
r

apparent
horizon

past singularity

(b)

(c)

figure 6: penrose diagram for a at frw universe dominated by radiation. the
apparent horizon,  = , divides the space-time into a normal and an anti-trapped
region (a). the information contained in the universe can be projected along past
light-cones onto the apparent horizon (b), or along future light-cones onto null
innity (c). both are preferred screen-hypersurfaces.

  q, can be projected along past light-cones centered at  = 0, or by

20

space-like projection, onto the apparent horizon. the exterior,   q, can
be projected by the same light-cones, but in the opposite direction, onto the
apparent horizon. the apparent horizon is thus a preferred screen encoding
the entire space-time. alternatively, one can use future light-cones to project
the entire universe onto future null innity, another preferred screen.

by eq. (3.11), the apparent horizon screen is a timelike hypersurface for
1/3 <  < 1/3, null for  = 1/3, and spacelike for 1/3 <   1. in a
universe dominated by dierent types of matter in dierent eras, the causal
character of the apparent horizon hypersurface can change from timelike to
spacelike or vice versa (see, e.g., fig. 5 in ref. [1]).

for a closed universe, the solution is given by

a() = amax sin



q!q

.

(3.14)

in addition to eq. (3.11), a second apparent horizon emanates from the
opposite pole of the spatial sd1, at  = ; it is described by

 = q(  ).

(3.15)

the two hypersurfaces formed by the apparent horizons divide the space-time
into four regions, as shown in fig. 7. let us choose the rst apparent horizon,
eq. (3.11), as a (preferred) screen-hypersurface. on one side,   q, lies a
normal region and a trapped region. these regions can be projected onto the
screen by past-directed radial light-rays moving away from the south pole
( = 0). the other half of the universe,   q, can be projected onto the
same screen by future directed radial light-rays moving away from the north
pole ( = ). therefore the preferred screen given by eq. (3.11) encodes the
entire closed universe.

a number of cosmological entropy bounds have been proposed [48] which
are based on the idea of dening a horizon-size spatial region to which beken-
steins bound can be directly applied. we have emphasized the importance
of these bounds in ref. [1], where we also discuss their relation to the co-
variant entropy bound (sec. 1.1). those bounds can be given a holographic
interpretation by considering them as limits on ndof
in the specied ken.
because they refer to limited regions, however, it is not clear how global
screen-hypersurfaces could be constructed.

21

future singularity

 

)

=

(

 

 

)
0
=

(

 

 

e
l
o
p
h
t
u
o
s

 

e
l
o
p
h
t
r
o
n

(a)

past singularity

(b)

figure 7: penrose diagram for a closed frw universe dominated by pressureless
dust. two apparent horizons divide the space-time into four regions (a). the in-
formation in the universe can be projected onto the embedded screen-hypersurface
formed by either horizon (b).

3.5 einstein static universe

the einstein static universe (esu) is a closed frw space-time containing
ordinary matter as well as a positive cosmological constant of a certain critical
value [16, 31]. its metric can be written as a direct product of an innite time
axis with a (d  1)-sphere of constant radius a:

ds2 = dt2 + a2d2

d1.

(3.16)

the causal structure is shown in fig. 8. each hemisphere can be projected
along past- or future-directed light-rays, or by spacelike projection, onto
the equator. this screen is optimal, because all four families of orthogonal
light-rays have vanishing expansion. moreover, the screen forms a timelike
hypersurface, with spatial slices of constant nite size.

this is reminiscent of the properties of the screen at the boundary of
anti-de sitter space: the screen is optimal, timelike, of constant size, and
encodes the entire space-time by space-like projection. the dierence is that
the ads screen has innite proper area, while the equator in the esu is a

22

 

e
l
o
p
h
t
r
o
n

 

e
l
o
p
h
t
u
o
s

r
o
t
a
u
q
e

figure 8: penrose diagram for the einstein static universe. the equator separates
two normal regions. it forms an optimal, timelike screen-hypersurface of constant
area, encoding all information by null or spacelike projection. these properties
are shared by the boundary of ads.

(d 2)-sphere of nite area  ad2. it lies not on a boundary of space (there
is none in the esu), but is embedded in the interior.

the properties of the projection might give rise to the hope that a bound-
ary theory, dual to the bulk description, could be formulated on the equator
of the esu. the example may be of limited use, however, because the esu
is not a stable solution [16, 31]. another unstable solution with similar prop-
erties is given by a static spherical system just on the verge of gravitational
collapse. its radius will be equal to its gravitational radius, and the expan-
sion of both past- and future-directed outgoing light-rays goes to zero at the
surface of the system.

23

4 holographic theory

4.1 summary

from a universal entropy bound found in ref. [1], we obtained a background-
independent formulation of the holographic principle [9, 10]. this led us to a
construction of hypersurfaces (screens) on which all information contained in
a space-time can be stored. the screens are embedded, or lie on the boundary
of the space-time, and contain no more than one bit of information per planck
area. in this sense, the world is a hologram.

the construction was applied to a number of examples. for anti-de sit-
ter space it yields the timelike boundary at spatial innity as a preferred
screen. in minkowski space, past or future null innity, or a at plane, can
encode all information. de sitter space is mapped along light-rays onto the
spacelike innities in the past and future; alternatively, all information in
the observable half of the de sitter space can be stored on the event horizon
(a null hypersurface of nite area) via spacelike projection. cosmological
spacetimes may not have a boundary, but embedded screens can be found;
they may be spacelike, timelike, or null, depending on the matter content.
the information in a black hole can be mapped onto the apparent horizon,
or onto past null innity.

from the examples one can draw the following observations:

 holographic screens can be spacelike hypersurfaces.

 if they are timelike or null, the spatial area is not necessarily constant

in the induced, or any other, time-slicing.

before explaining why these features may be signicant, let us briey discuss
a tempting but misguided conclusion. one might argue that holographic
projection onto spacelike screens is a trivial accomplishment, because in any
conventional theory one can specify initial conditions on a cauchy surface and
predict, or retrodict, the past and future development of the system. that is
true, but it is a dierent kind of information storage. in that case, one stores
not only the information at one moment of time, but also a machine (namely
the theory) which is capable of recovering the state of the system at all other
times. a holographic construction, on the other hand, feigns ignorance of any
theory describing the matter evolution, and simply encodes all information,
at all times, onto screens of dimension d  2. the space-time is sliced into

24

null hypersurfaces; slice by slice the information is encoded onto (d  2)-
dimensional spatial surfaces at a maximum density of one bit per planck
area. these surfaces form a (d  1) dimensional screen hypersurface which
may be timelike, spacelike, or null, but from the point of view of holographic
information storage its causal character is irrelevant.

4.2 theories on the screen

our interpretation, so far, has centered on the information needed to describe
a state. this is measured by the number of degrees of freedom. therefore
we can use the holographic principle (which refers to ndof ) to project all
information in the space-time onto screen-hypersurfaces. in this sense, the
holographic principle implies a drastic reduction of the complexity of nature
compared to naive expectations of, perhaps, one degree of freedom per planck
volume.

we did not, however, use the holographic principle to describe nature.
the holographic principle is far from manifest in the description of the world
in terms of general relativity and quantum eld theory; yet these theories
are very successful. working within their frame, one nds a number of non-
trivial eects which appear to insure that the entropy bound implied by the
holographic principle is always satised [1]; but these results could not have
been immediately inferred from the basic axioms of gr and qft.

as a kind of external restriction imposed on physical theories, holography
is interesting but unsatisfactory.
if the number of degrees of freedom is
limited by the holographic principle, there ought to be a description of nature
in which this restriction is manifest. let us call this hypothetical description
the holographic theory. one would expect the holographic theory to remain
valid when semi-classical gravity breaks down [9, 11]; in this regime it may
be the only possible description. these are good reasons to search for a
holographic theory.

the simplest idea would be to dene a theory on the geometric back-
ground given by the screen-hypersurface(s). if the theory contained one de-
gree of freedom per planck area, and was related by a kind of dictionary (du-
ality) to the space-time (bulk) physics, the holographic principle would
be manifest. let us call this type of theory a dual theory.

this idea works for certain asymptotically anti-de sitter space-times.
the screen encoding the entire bulk information is the timelike hypersur-
face formed by the boundary of space (sec. 3.1). according to maldacenas

25

remarkable conjecture [11], a super-yang-mills theory living on this hypersur-
face describes the bulk physics completely. by considering a nite boundary
and taking the limit as it moves to spatial innity, one can show that the
theory contains no more than one degree of freedom per planck area [14].
therefore it is a dual theory in the sense of our denition.

perhaps it will be possible to nd dual theories for some other classes
of space-times; certainly this would be be an important contribution to the
understanding of holography and of quantum gravity. in general, however,
the dual theory approach will not work. the theories we usually think of
have a xed number of degrees of freedom built into them; these degrees of
freedom evolve in lorentzian time. but consider the cosmological solutions
studied in sec. 3.4. the area of the screens is time-dependent. the screen
theory would have to be capable of creating or activating degrees of
freedom. moreover, the area can decrease, as seen in the closed universe
example. in the screen theory this would correspond to the destruction, or de-
activation, of degrees of freedom. eventually their number would approach
zero, and the second law of thermodynamics would be violated in the screen
theory.4 (note that this does not, of course, imply a violation of the second
law in the bulk. rather, it is related to the creation, or destruction, of degrees
of freedom at the initial and nal singularities of the universe.)

this suggests that one should not in general think of the screen theory as
a conventional theory with a xed number of degrees of freedom. rather, one
might expect it to be a theory with a varying number of active degrees of
freedom. thus, its properties would be very dierent from those of ordinary
physical theories. moreover, since the screen hypersurface can be spacelike
or null, one should not expect the theory to live in lorentzian time.

4.3 geometry from entropy

we would like to advocate a more radical approach. one should not be
thinking about a screen theory (a theory dened on some hypersurface
of space-time) at all. the screen theory approach cannot be fundamental,
because it presumes the existence of a space-time background, or at least of
an asymptotic structure of space and time. in order to use the holographic
principle for a full description of nature, we suggest it should be turned
around. loosely speaking, one should not constrain entropy by geometry, but

4we are grateful to andrei linde for stressing this point to us.

26

construct geometry from entropy. (strictly, number of degrees of freedom
should replace entropy here.) the construction must be such that the
holographic principle, in the form given in sec. 1.1, is automatically satised.
it thus appears that two problems must be overcome if a holographic
theory is to be found. first, one must formulate a theory with a varying
number of degrees of freedom. a possibility may be that the theory can
activate or de-activate degrees of freedom from an innite reservoir.5 an
extreme but perhaps more satisfying resolution would be to treat quantum
degrees of freedom not as fundamental ingredients, but as a derived concept.
t hooft has long been advocating that models should be sought in which
quantum degrees of freedom arise as a complex, eective structures (see
ref. [15] and references therein).
it would be natural for ndof to vary in
such models.

the second challenge is to nd a prescription that allows the unique
reconstruction of space-time geometry from the varying number of degrees
of freedom (see ref. [32] and references therein for a discussion of related
questions). part of this prescription will be to equate ndof with the proper
area of an embedded (d  2)-dimensional preferred or optimal screen. a
more dicult question is how the intrinsic geometry of screen-hypersurfaces
can be recovered.
it may be undesirable to identify the discrete steps of,
say, a cellular automaton [33, 34] with lorentzian time. but the number and
character of the degrees of freedom provide information about the matter
content. therefore a complete reconstruction of space-time geometry is not
inconceivable.

acknowledgments

i am indebted to gerard t hooft, andrei linde, and lenny susskind for very
helpful discussions, as well as important criticism and suggestions. i thank
lenny susskind for valuable comments on a draft of this paper.

references

[1] r. bousso: a covariant entropy conjecture, hep-th/9905177.

5we thank lenny susskind for this suggestion and related discussions.

27

[2] j. d. bekenstein: a universal upper bound on the entropy to energy ratio

for bounded systems. phys. rev. d 23, 287 (1981).

[3] w. fischler and l. susskind: holography and cosmology, hep-

th/9806039.

[4] r. easther and d. a. lowe: holography, cosmology and the second law

of thermodynamics, hep-th/9902088.

[5] g. veneziano: pre-bangian origin of our entropy and time arrow , hep-

th/9902126.

[6] d. bak and s.-j. rey: cosmic holography, hep-th/9902173.

[7] n. kaloper and a. linde: cosmology vs. holography, hep-th/9904120.

[8] r. brustein: the generalized second law of thermodynamics in cosmol-

ogy, gr-qc/9904061.

[9] g. t hooft: dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, gr-qc/9310026.

[10] l. susskind: the world as a hologram. j. math. phys. 36, 6377 (1995),

hep-th/9409089.

[11] j. maldacena: the large n limit of superconformal eld theories and
supergravity. adv. theor. math. phys. 2, 231 (1998), hep-th/9711200.

[12] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov and a. m. polyakov: gauge theory cor-
relators from noncritical string theory. phys. lett. b428, 105 (1998),
hep-th/9802109.

[13] e. witten: anti-de sitter space and holography. adv. theor. math.

phys. 2, 253 (1998), hep-th/9802150.

[14] l. susskind and e. witten: the holographic bound in anti-de sitter

space, hep-th/9805114.

[15] g. t hooft: quantum gravity as a dissipative deterministic system, gr-

qc/9903084.

[16] s. w. hawking and g. f. r. ellis: the large scale stucture of space-time.

cambridge university press, cambridge, england (1973).

28

[17] r. m. wald: general relativity. the university of chicago press,

chicago (1984).

[18] s. s. gubser, i. r. klebanov and a. w. peet: entropy and temperature

of black 3-branes. phys. rev. d 54, 3915 (1996), hep-th/9602135.

[19] s. s. gubser and i. r. klebanov: absorption by branes and schwinger
terms in the world volume theory. phys. lett. b413, 41 (1997), hep-
th/9708005.

[20] s. corley and t. jacobson: focusing and the holographic hypothesis.

phys. rev. d 53, 6720 (1996), gr-qc/9602043.

[21] e. witten: baryons and branes in anti-de sitter space. talk given at

strings 98, santa barbara (1998),
http://www.itp.ucsb.edu/online/strings98/witten/.

[22] s. w. hawking: particle creation by black holes. commun. math. phys.

43, 199 (1974).

[23] l. susskind, l. thorlacius and j. uglum: the stretched horizon
and black hole complementarity. phys. rev. d 48, 3743 (1993), hep-
th/9306069.

[24] d. a. lowe, j. polchinski, l. susskind, l. thorlacius and j. uglum:
black hole complementarity versus locality. phys. rev. d 52, 6997
(1995), hep-th/9506138.

[25] t. dray and g. t hooft: the gravitational shock wave of a massless

particle. nucl. phys. b253, 173 (1985).

[26] t. dray and g. t hooft: the eect of spherical shells of matter on the

schwarzschild black hole. commun. math. phys. 99, 613 (1985).

[27] c. r. stephens, g. t hooft and b. f. whiting: black hole evapora-
tion without information loss. class. quant. grav. 11, 621 (1994), gr-
qc/9310006.

[28] g. w. gibbons and s. w. hawking: cosmological event horizons, ther-

modynamics, and particle creation. phys. rev. d 15, 2738 (1977).

[29] l. susskind: private communication.

29

[30] r. bousso: quantum global structure of de sitter space, hep-th/9902183.

[31] c. w. misner, k. s. thorne and j. a. wheeler (eds.): gravitation.

freeman, new york (1973).

[32] t. jacobson: black hole entropy and induced gravity, gr-qc/9404039.

[33] g. t hooft: equivalence relations between deterministic and quantum

mechanical systems. j. statist. phys. 53, 323 (1988).

[34] g. t hooft: quantization of discrete deterministic theories by hilbert

space extension. nucl. phys. b342, 471 (1990).

30

