9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

3
2

 
 

1
v
4
7
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

su-4240-702

the spin-statistics connection in quantum gravity

a.p. balachandran1, e. batista2, i.p. costa e silva3 and p. teotonio-sobrinho3

1department of physics,syracuse university

syracuse, ny 13244-1130, usa

2universidade federal de santa catarina, centro de fisica e matematica,

dep. mtm, cep 88.010-970, florianopolis, sc, brazil

3universidade de sao paulo, instituto de fisica-dfma
caixa postal 66318, 05315-970, sao paulo, sp, brazil

abstract

it is well-known that in spite of sharing some properties with conventional par-
ticles, topological geons in general violate the spin-statistics theorem. on the other
hand, it is generally believed that in quantum gravity theories allowing for topology
change, using pair creation and annihilation of geons, one should be able to recover
this theorem.
in this paper, we take an alternative route, and use an algebraic
formalism developed in previous work. we give a description of topological geons
where an algebra of observables is identied and quantized. dierent irreducible
representations of this algebra correspond to dierent kinds of geons, and are la-
beled by a non-abelian charge and magnetic ux. we then nd that the usual
spin-statistics theorem is indeed violated, but a new spin-statistics relation arises,
when we assume that the uxes are superselected. this assumption can be proved
if all observables are local, as is generally the case in physical theories. finally,
we also discuss how our approach ts into conventional formulations of quantum
gravity.

1 introduction

the spin-statistics theorem is one of the most fundamental relations in the theories de-
scribing the particles of nature. as far as experimental tests are concerned, no elementary
particles were ever found which violate it. it was therefore a surprise when it was discov-
ered [1, 2] in the middle 80s that topological geons did violate this relation in general, at
least in the case when the spatial topology is not allowed to change. topological geons are
soliton-like excitations of the spatial manifold  [1, 3]. they can be thought of as lumps
of nontrivial topology. for example, in (2 + 1)d, the topology of an orientable, closed
surface  is determined by the number of connected components of  and by the number
of handles on each connected component. each handle corresponds to a topological geon,
i.e., a localized lump of nontrivial topology.
it is well known that these solitons have
particle-like properties such as spin and statistics. however, as we observed before, un-
like ordinary particles they can violate the spin-statistics relation. it has been suggested
[1, 2, 4, 5] that the standard spin-statistics relation can be recovered if one considers pro-
cesses where geons are (possibly pairwise) created and annihilated, but this necessarily
implies a change of the topology of . in other words, one may have to consider topology
change in order to have a spin-statistics theorem for geons [4, 5].

to appreciate the importance of having (or not having) a spin-statistics connection
for geons, one must recall that in ordinary quantum eld theories in minkowski space,
the particles which arise when we second quantize, for instance, have this connection
naturally. now, in a hypothetic quantum theory of topology, one could think of geons
as a kind of particle, representing excitations of the topology itself. it seems therefore
natural to ask about whether they share this connection with trueparticles. as we have
mentioned, they do not, but still we nd that in the formalism we develop here a dierent,
weaker version of the spin-statistics connection arises.

in the absence of a full-edged quantum gravity theory, it has become a current prac-
tice to consider simple models which retain some of its aspects while being more tractable
in the formal aspects. accordingly, our intention in this work is to use a very simple
model, a gauge theory with a nite gauge group in (2 + 1)d space-time dimensions, to
understand the spin-statistics theorem in quantum gravity. this model has the advantage
of isolating the topological degrees of freedom, which are in a certain sense canonically
quantized independently from degrees of freedom coming from metric and other elds.
the same model has been considered in a companion paper [6], and there we show that
we may consider topology change as a quantum phenomenon depending on the scale of
observations. therefore this model features spatial topology change in some sense. ac-
tually, in spite of the fact that topology change has been inspired by quantum gravity,
it has been demonstrated in [7] that it can happen in ordinary quantum mechanics. in
this approach, metric is not dynamical, but degrees of freedom related to topology are
quantized. the notion of a space with a well dened topology appears only as a classical
limit. (see also [8] for related ideas).

1

let us consider a manifold m and some generic eld theory (possibly with gauge and
higgs elds) interacting with gravity. it is reasonable to expect that if we could quantize
such a complex theory, its observables would give us information on the geometry and
topology of m. the main point is that one does not need to consider the full theory to get
some topological information. it is possible that, in a certain low energy (large distance)
limit, there would be a certain set of observables encoding the topological data. we know
examples where this is precisely the case. in general, the low energy (large distance) limit
of a eld theory is not able to probe details of the short distance physics, but it can
isolate degrees of freedom related to topology. we may give as an example the low energy
limit of n = 2 super yang-mills, known as the seiberg-witten theory [9]. we also have
examples of more drastic reduction where a eld theory in the vacuum state becomes
purely topological [10]. inspired by these facts we will identify the degrees of freedom, or
the algebra a(n) of observables, capable of describing n topological geons in (2 + 1)d.
actually, we will argue later in this paper that not all the operators in this algebra are
observables in the strict sense. rather, this algebra is a sort of eld algebra (see, for
instance, [11] and references therein for more information on eld algebras). we say
that a(1) describes a single geon in the same way that the algebra of angular momentum
describes a single spinning particle. in this framework what we mean by quantizing the
system is nothing but nding irreducible representations of a(1). as in the case of the
algebra of angular momentum, dierent irreducible representations have to be thought of
as dierent particles. for the moment, we will not be concerned with dynamical aspects.
we would like to concentrate on the quantization itself and leave the dynamics to be xed
by the particular model one wants to consider.

an intuitive way of understanding the algebra a(1) for a topological geon comes from
considering a gauge theory with gauge group g in two space dimensions spontaneously
broken to a discrete group h. for simplicity we will assume that h is nite. as an
immediate consequence it follows that the gauge connection (at far distances) is locally
at. in other words, homotopic (based) loops  and   produce the same parallel transport
(holonomy). the set of independent holonomies are therefore parametrized by elements
[] in the fundamental group 1().
it is quite clear that such quantities are enough
to detect the presence of a handle. the phase space we are interested in contains only
topological degrees of freedom. therefore such holonomies can be thought of as playing
the role of position variables. we also have to take into account the dieomorphisms
(dieos) that are able to change []. they will be somewhat the analogues of translations.
it is clear that the connected component of the group of dieomorphisms preserving the
basepoint and a frame thereat, the so-called small dieos, cannot change the homotopy
class of . to change the homotopy class of a curve  one needs to act with the so-called
large dieomorphisms. therefore the analogues of translations have to be parametrized
by the large dieos modulo the small dieos. this is exactly the mapping class group
m. also, since we must x a base point p to dene 1(), we must take into account
the fact that the discrete group h can change the holonomies by a conjugation. these
three sets of quantities will comprise our algebra a(1). contrary to what happens in eld

2

theory or even in quantum mechanics, we nd that a(1) is nite dimensional. this will
be important to avoid technical problems of various kinds. the algebra a(1) contains the
analogue of positions and translations and can be thought as a discrete weyl algebra.
there seems to be no great obstacle to generalize our results also to the case where h is
a lie group [12].

our algebraic description of geons is analogous to what has been developed for 2d non-
abelian vortices by the amsterdam group [13]. these ideas have been further developed
by some of us and coworkers and applied to rings in (3 + 1)d. their results will not be
discussed here since a complete account will be reported in [14].

the algebra encountered by [13] was a special type of hopf algebra, namely the
drinfeld double of a discrete group [15]. in our case, however, the algebra a(1) is not
hopf, but it has a drinfeld double as a subalgebra. for a pair of geons we nd that the
corresponding algebra a(2) is closely related to the tensor product a(1)  a(1) of single
geon algebras. this fact allows us to determine the appropriate algebra a(n) for an arbi-
trary number n of geons. among the elements of a(2) we nd the elements corresponding
to the operations of exchanging the positions of two geons and rotating one of them by 2.
these are the two operations we need in order to answer whether there is a spin-statistics
relation. the usual theorem states that the exchange of two identical components (statis-
tics) is equivalent to the rotation by 2 of one of its components. it turns out that this is
no longer true. however, spin and statistics are not independent but fulll a well-dened
relation.

we would like to point out some dierences with respect to the approaches of [2]
for the spin-statistics connection. to show their results, the authors of [2] have used
anti-particles together with rules for pair creation and annihilation. in our approach the
spin-statistics relation follows entirely from the the properties of the eld algebras. it is
true that we can also have creation and annihilation of geons, but these processes are not
directly linked to the spin-statistics relation. for other approaches to the spin-statistics
theorem see [16, 17, 18].

one advantage of the algebraic approach is that we can do this analysis without
going into the details of the complete underlying eld theory. we can determine the
spectrum a(1) of the geons, i.e., the set of possible irreducible representations of a(1), but a
particular eld theory may restrict the available possibilities in a(1). the determination of
these possibilities requires the study of particular examples of the underlying eld theories.
that may be a very dicult task.
in this paper our intention is to use the simplied
algebraic eld theory and see what it can teach us. it is remarkable that such a simple
framework can reveal important features of quantum geons such as a constraint involving
spin and statistics. rules for quantum topology change are discussed in a companion
paper [6].

there is a systematic way to incorporate our algebraic methods in conventional ap-
proaches to quantum gravity. when that is done, we end up selecting a particular class
of vector bundles, the sections of which are state vectors of quantum gravity (they specify

3

domains of operators like the hamiltonian). we shall discuss these issues in detail else-
where, limiting ourselves to a concise discussion in section 6 in this paper. the present
paper therefore can be interpreted as sponsoring the use of these bundles in quantizing
gravity. we think that there are powerful reasons supporting this point of view. indeed
our work here shows that these bundles nicely incorporate information on classical spa-
tial topology and imply a (generalized) spin-statistics theorem, whereas if this selection
of bundles is abandoned, there are many possible choices of bundles in the presence of
geons, and most do not imply any sort of spin-statistics connection.

this paper is organized as follows. the eld algebras a(n) are described in section
2. in particular, the representations of a(1) will play an important role when we discuss
the spin-statistics connection. quantization of the system is given in section 3. in this
section we are able to classify the irreducible representations for a class of algebras a
that includes our algebra of interest as a particular example.
it is important to note
that these sections are shortened copies of sections in the companion paper [6], which we
reproduce here for the benet of the reader, rendering this paper basically self-contained.
the original part is in the following sections. the existence of a novel spin-statistics
connection for 2d orientable geons is established in section 4, under certain asumptions
which become clear in section 5, with the introduction of the property of clustering for
a system of n geons, and superselection of the global uxes of geons. section 6 explores
how one can use the representations of the algebra of observables for geons to obtain geon
states in quantum gravity. the paper ends with some general remarks and an outlook on
future work.

2 the algebras for (2 + 1)d topological geons

throughout this work our setting is a space-time of the form   ir. here, the spatial
manifold  is two-dimensional, and will be typically assumed to be a plane with one
or several handles. topological geons in this (2 + 1)d context are simply (for orientable
space-times) these handles on the spatial manifold (for a more detailed account and a
more general denition of geons see, for instance, [1, 6, 19]). our aim in this section
is to dene some observables which describe the topological character of a geon. as
we will see later, the algebras we obtain contain some operators which are not really
observables, since they represent non-local operators which are in a certain sense gauged
away whenever we perform physical measurements for geons. thus we will refer to the
kind of algebra we will encounter as a eld algebra [11].

the presentation of the eld algebra of geons given here will not be detailed. the

reader is refered to [6] for a more comprehensive discussion.

we will follow an approach inspired by the work of the amsterdam group, which is
reported in ref. [13]. in this work, the group investigates the properties of vortex solutions

4

of a (2 + 1)d gauge eld theory in minkowski spacetime where the gauge symmetry of a
lie group g is spontaneously broken to a nite group h by a non-vanishing expectation
value of a higgs eld . see [13] for details. the lagrangian is given by

l =

1
4

f a
f 

a + t r[(d)  (d)]  v () ,

(2.1)

where ,  = 0, 1, 2, and a is a lie algebra index. for simplicity, we assume that g is
connected and simply connected. the elds f a
 are the components of the eld strength
of the yang-mills potential aa
 and d denotes the covariant derivative determined by
this potential. the higgs eld  is in the adjoint representation and can be expanded in
terms of generators t a of the lie algebra of g, and v () is a g-invariant potential. in this
paper we shall be concerned with the low energy, or equivalently, the long range behavior
of this theory, in the temporal gauge aa
0 = 0. this is obtained by minimizing the three
terms in the energy density separately. minimizing the term corresponding to the energy
density of the yang-mills eld, we obtain the condition f a
 = 0, from which we conclude
that we are dealing only with at connections. the minimum of the potential restricts
the values of the higgs eld to the vacuum manifold, which is invariant by h. finally,
the condition d = 0, required for minimizing the energy density from the second term,
tells us that the holonomies

 () = p exp{z

aa

i tadsi} ; i  {1, 2} ,

(2.2)

take values in the nite group h.

here and in what follows we will x a base point p for loops, so that all loops will

begin and end at p .

this gauge theory may have topologically non-trivial, static solutions such as vortices.
it is very well known that the core radii of these vortices are inversely proportional to the
mass of the higgs boson, and therefore they may be viewed as point-like in the low-energy
regime of the theory. hence, according to a standard argument, to describe the n-vortex
solutions we may consider solutions for the vortex equations

f a
ij = 0;
di = 0;
v () = 0,

(2.3)

on a spacetime of the form   ir, where  is the plane with n punctures, playing the
role of the vortices.

one way to explain our approach is based on a eld theory like (2.1). addition
of gravitational terms to (2.1) would not aect our arguments. the dierence in our
approach is that we shall work in the zero vortex number sector of this theory, but on a
plane with geons. hence, instead of puncture, the non-trivial topology is characterized
by handles. now, take a solution (a, ) for the vortex equations (2.3). by xing a

5

point p  , the holonomy of a around any path  based at p depends only on its
homotopy class, since a is at. it takes values in a subgroup h of g, which preserves
the vacuum manifold, in view of the equations for  [13]. therefore, any solution of the
vortex equations determines a homomorphism  ,

 : 1()  h,

(2.4)

of the fundamental group 1() to the group h. conversely, given such a homomorphism
 we can dene a solution for eqs.(2.3) in the following way. take the universal covering
space  of .
it is the total space of a principal bundle over  with structure group
1(). via the homomorphism  we can construct an associated principal h-bundle over
, which is a subbundle of the original g-bundle. since h is nite, this bundle has a
unique at connection aa
i , which can be viewed as a reducible connection on the g-bundle.
we now nd a . after xing some 0 in the vacuum manifold, we dene (p ) = 0.
then, since  must be covariantly constant, its value can be obtained for each x   by
parallel transporting 0 along some path from p to x in :

(x) = p exp{z x

p

aa

i tadsi}0.

(2.5)

the pair (aa
i , ) thus constructed is obviously a solution of the vortex equations. there-
fore the space of solutions for the vortex eqs. (2.3) is essentially parametrized by ho-
momorphisms  : 1()  h. each such homomorphism is then a vortex conguration
when we have punctures. in our context, we will call one such homomorphism a geon
conguration. in general, it gives non-zero magnetic uxes around non-trivial elements
of 1().

the nite group h acts on the space of solutions. in terms of homomorphisms we

have that, under these h-transformations, a ux  transforms as

 7 hh1 ,

(2.6)

in other words, we have an action of h by conjugation of the uxes. we shall simply
refer to this action as the h-transformations. the group elements h  h will be regarded
as operators when we quantize the theory, also denoted by h. the multiplication of two
h-transformations is the same as the group multiplication. therefore the algebra of such
operators turns out to be the group algebra c(h).

as for the physical interpretation of the h-tranformations we note that the mathe-
matical action depicted in (2.6) is entirely equivalent, from a physical standpoint, to what
occurs when one makes a ux  encircle a source of ux h at innity. since such an op-
eration is non-local, one must conclude that the h-transformations cannot be considered
local in the theory, i.e., cannot be implemented by local operators.

the total algebra in the case of vortices (punctures)is the semi-direct product d(h) =
c(h) f (h), where f (h) is the algebra of complex-valued functions on h with product
given by pointwise multiplication:
it describes the position observables for a vortex.

6

the reason for this denomination will become clear when we discuss geons. the algebra
d(h) is the so-called drinfeld double [13]. it has the structure of a quasi-triangular hopf
algebra. the hopf structure [15] means in particular the existence of a co-product, i.e, a
map

 : d(h)  d(h)  d(h) ,

which is a homomorphism of algebras. in [13] the uxes are seen as particles in (2 + 1)d
the (internal) hilbert space h is constructed, and the
and are then rst quantized:
elements of the algebra d(h) act as operators on this hilbert space. h decomposes
into irreducible representations of d(h), corresponding to the dierent particle sectors
of the quantum theory. the existence of a co-product allows one to understand fusing
processes between particles. the quasi-triangularity implies the existence of the r-matrix,
r  d(h)  d(h), responsible for all braiding processes between particles. again, for
further details see [13].

how is the topology of  taken into account in this approach? first of all, we have seen
that the physically distinct (for vortices and/or geons) congurations are in one-to-one
correspondence with conjugacy classes of homomorphisms of 1() into h. moreover,
it is well known that for a nite group h the elements in the latter space are in one-
to-one correspondence with equivalence classes of principal h-bundles over . therefore
the only degree of freedom in this theory is the topology of these bundles. second,
a conguration for which the holonomy is trivial around some puncture or handle is
indistinguishable, from the standpoint of the low-energy theory, to another in which
that particular puncture or handle is absent. therefore the low-energy theory somehow
actually allows for topology uctuations of  as long as we stay within its limits. such a
way of viewing topology change is explored in [6]. it is very much akin to the views pursued
in non-commutative geometry, where one uses an algebra to encode space-time geometry
and topology. in this approach the usual classical view of a background manifold is
secondary, and the topology is actually viewed as a consequence of the algebraic setting
one uses.

in order to determine the eld algebra for a topological geon, we will rst try to nd
the analogues of the position observables for a geon. now,  is the plane with one or
more handles, and for simplicity we shall assume throughout that there are no vortices,
i.e., we work in the zero vortex number sector of the low-energy limit of the theory given
by the lagrangian in (2.1). in this case, all non-trivial congurations will be related solely
to holonomies around and through the handles.

let us start by taking  to be the plane with a handle. on all gures, a geon will be
thought of as a square hole on the plane, with the opposite sides identied. one can show
that 1() has two generators [1] and [2], shown by fig. 2.1. it can be shown that

[3] = [1][2][1]1[2]1

actually, 1() is freely generated by [1] and [2]. let g = w ([1], [2])  1(), be a
word in [1], [2] and their inverses. then  maps g to w (a, b)  h where a =  (1) and

7

1

2

3


p

fig. 2.1: the gure shows the loops i (1  i  3). the homotopy classes [1] and [2]
generate the fundamental group. the class [3] is not independent of [1] and [2].

b =  (2). therefore the map  : 1()  h is completely characterized by the uxes
 (1) = a and  (2) = b. since there is no relation between a and b, the set t of all maps
is labeled by h  h.

we now dene more precisely what we mean by a geon conguration. let h be a

nite group and  the plane with one geon, i.e., a two dimensional manifold given by

m = r2 # t2 .

let 1 and 2 denote representative loops whose classes generate 1(). we dene a
classical conguration (a,b)  t of a geon as the homomorphism dened by

(a,b)(1) = a, and (a,b)(2) = b.

(2.7)

it is important to bear in mind that t = h  h and therefore that it is a nite
discrete set. for simplicity of notation, a geon conguration will be denoted simply by a
pair (a, b) of uxes. note that we are not explicitly identing those congurations which
dier by an h-transformation. this is because wave functions need only be covariant
under the symmetries of the problem, and only its modulus squared and other observable
quantities, like aharonov-bohm phases, must be invariant.
in our approach, this will
happen naturally, just as in [13].

with t = h  h being the conguration space for a geon, the corresponding algebra
of position observables is f (t ), the algebra of complex-valued functions on t with
product given by pointwise multiplication. instead of working with the abstract algebra,
we specify a representation. let v be the (nite-dimensional) complex vector space

8

generated by the vectors | a, bi, a, b  h. we will call the representation on v , to be
dened below, the dening representation. the algebra f (t ) is generated by projectors
on v denoted by q(a,b). they are dened by

q(a,b) | c, di = a,c b,d | c, di .

(2.8)

the operator q(a,b) represents a delta function supported at (a, b), i.e., it gives 1 when
evaluated on (a, b), and zero everywhere else. indeed, from (2.8) one nds that

q(a,b)q(c,d) = a,cb,dq(c,d) .

(2.9)

besides the projectors q(a,b), which play the role of position operators in ordinary
quantum mechanics, we have also some operators capable of changing (a, b). they are
somewhat analogous to momentum operators. for example, like in the case of vortices,
h-transformations act on the congurations.
it turns out that for a geon there are
additional operators besides h-transformations. they correspond to the action of the
group dif f () of dieomorphisms of  that keeps innity invariant.

we will start by rst examining the h-transformations.

the group h acts on t simply by conjugating both uxes in (a, b). this will induce

an operator g for each g  h, acting on the dening representation v by

from (2.10) one sees that the multiplication of operators g is given by

g | a, bi = | gag1, gbg1i.

g h = gh .

(2.10)

(2.11)

the corresponding algebra generated by g is the group algebra c(h). the relation
between f (h  h) and c(h) can be derived from (2.8) and (2.10). one sees immediately
that

gq(a,b)

1
g = q(gag1, gbg1) .

(2.12)

in other words, the algebra c(h) acts on f (h  h).

besides h-transformations, uxes (a, b) can change under the action of the group
dif f (). it is clear that elements belonging to the subgroup dif f 
0 (), the component
connected to identity, act trivially on 1() 1 and hence on (a, b). therefore what matters
is the action of the so-called mapping class group m [20, 21], dened as

m =

dif f ()
0 ()
dif f 

.

(2.13)

for the present case,  is the plane with a single geon and the mapping class group
is isomorphic to the central extension of the group sl(2, z), denoted by st(2, z) and

1for simplicity, we take the basepoint p to be at innity.

9

a

b

0

2

2 

0

c

2

2

0

fig. 2.2: dehn twists corresponding to dieomorphisms of the mapping class group. the
annuli enclose loops, which we have omitted in the gure. rotations are counterclockwise
by convention.

called the steinberg group. this is the same as the mapping class group of a torus minus
one point [19]. we denote generators of m = st(2, z) by a and b. they correspond
to (isotopy classes of) dieomorphisms 2 called dehn twists. a dehn twist is realized
as follows. take a loop in . then draw an annulus enclosing the loop and introduce
radial coordinates r  [0, 1], with r = 0 and r = 1 corresponding to the boundaries of the
annulus, see fig. 2.2. then rotate the points of the annulus in such a way that the angle
of rotation (r) is zero for r = 0 and gradually increases, becoming 2 at r = 1. figure
2.2 shows how to produce dehn twists, and in fig. 2.3, we show how the dehn twist b
deforms the loop 1. there is also the dehn twist along a loop enclosing the geon, which
can be interpreted as the 2-rotation of the geon [1, 3, 19]. it will be important when we
discuss spin of the geon. the corresponding dieo is denoted by c2 in fig. 2.2. however,
c2 is not independent of a and b. one can show that [19]

c2 = (ab1a)4.

(2.14)

the group m is generated by a and b, with the relation that c2 commutes with a
and b. it is useful to think of the elements of m as words w (a, b) in a, b and their
inverses.

the action of a and b on [i]  1() induces an action on (a, b)  t , and therefore
induces operators a and b in the dening representation acting on v . let us take as an
example the action of b on 1, as given by fig. 2.3. one sees that [1]  [1][2], and
therefore a  ab. on the other hand, b keeps [2] invariant. one can verify that a and
2one can see from (2.13) that the mapping class group consists of isotopy classes of dieomorphisms.

throughout this paper we shall loosely use a representative in a class as the class itself.

10


p

fig. 2.3: dehn twist b and its action on 1.

b induce the following operators:

a | a, bi = | a, bai ,
b | a, bi = | ab, bi ,

(2.15)

for an arbitrary word w (a, b), the corresponding operator is w ( a, b), i.e., the same
word but with a and b replaced by a and b. for example, the dehn twist c2 of fig. 2.2
is written as (ab1a)4 and the corresponding operator c2 can be immediately computed
to be

c2 | a, bi = | c1ac, c1bci ,

(2.16)

where c = aba1b1.

the algebra generated by the operators a and b is the group algebra c(m). together
with c(h) and f (h  h) it gives us the total algebra a(1) for a single topological geon.
from the denitions (2.8), (2.10) and (2.15) one sees that

g a = ag,

g b = bg,

gq(a,b)

1
g = q(gag1,gbg1),

c2 a = a c2,

c2 b = b c2,

aq(a,b) a1 = q(a,ba), bq(a,b) b1 = q(ab,b).

(2.17)

therefore, both algebras c(h) and c(m) act on f (h  h). the action of a generic word
w ( a, b) on q(a,b) will be denoted by

w ( a, b)q(a,b) = q(w(a),w(b))w ( a, b).

(2.18)

11

where (w(a), w(b)) is a pair of words in a and b and their inverses, representing the action
of w (a, b) on (a, b).

there are two equivalent ways of presenting a(1). one is by using the dening repre-
sentation of (2.8), (2.10) and (2.15). another way is to dene a(1) as the algebra generated
by q(a,b), g, a and b with the relations (2.17). in any case, we have that

a(1) = c(h  m)  f (h  h).

(2.19)

we may introduce the algebra for two topological geons following exactly the same
ideas as for a single topological geon. we will briey outline here the main constructions.
for details, see [6]. we recall that for a single geon, a(1) consists of three sub-algebras,
generated by the position observables f (t ), the h-transformations c(h), and the
translations , i.e., a realization m of the mapping class group m. the algebra a(2) for
two geons will consist of the same three distinct parts, with t = h  h  h  h  h 4
and  replaced by a plane with two handles.

it is natural to work with the dening representation on v  v spanned by vectors of

the form

| a1, b1i | a2, b2i ,

where the subscripts denote the respective geons. the position observables are gener-
ated by projectors q(a1,b1)  q(a2,b2) acting on v  v in the obvious way, i.e.,

q(a1,b1)  q(a2,b2) | a

1, b

1i | a

2, b

2i = a1,a

b1,b

1

a2,a

2

b2,b

2

| a1, b1i | a2, b2i .

(2.20)

1

therefore, the position operators belong to a(1)  a(1).

the action of an h-transformation g  h on the uxes (a1, b1, a2, b2) is by a global

conjugation. this induces the action

| a1, b1i | a2, b2i  | ga1g1, gb1g1i | ga2g1, gb2g1i

(2.21)

on v  v . the corresponding operator is obviously identied with g  g  c(h) c(h),
since

g  g | a1, b1i | a2, b2i =| ga1g1, gb1g1i | ga2g1, gb2g1i

(2.22)

hence, h-transformation operators also belong to a(1)  a(1).

we now start to consider the action of the mapping class group m. for two or more
geons, m is much more complicated than for a single geon [20]. the mapping class group
is generated by dehn twists of the type a and b (see fig. 2.2) for each individual geon
together with dieomorphisms involving pairs of geons.

let ai, bi, i = 1, 2 be the generators of the internal dieos for each individual geon.

the corresponding operators acting on v  v are clearly given by

a1 = a  ii,

a2 = ii  a

12

1

2

fig. 2.4 geon exchange.

b1 = b  ii,

b2 = ii  b

(2.23)

where ii is the identity operator on v .

there are two additional classes of transformations besides the internal dieos. the
rst one, called exchange, is the analogue of the elementary braiding of two particles.
the second, called handle slide, has no analogue for particles, since it makes use of the
internal structure of the geon.

so far, all operators in the algebra for a(2) were of the form xy  a(1) a(1). it turns
out that this is not the case for exchanges and handle slides. they correspond somewhat
to interactions and cannot be written strictly in terms of operators in a(1) a(1). in order
to describe interactions between geons, we need to dene a pair of ip automorphisms of
v v . they are necessary in the construction of the exchange and handle slide operators.

denition: given a two geon state

| a1, b1i | a2, b2i  v  v ,

the ip automorphisms  and  are dened by:

 | a1, b1i | a2, b2i
 | a1, b1i | a2, b2i

:= | a2, b2i | a1, b1i ,
:= | a1, b2i | a2, b1i .

both are not given geometrically as morphisms of the mapping class group, but unless
one introduces these operators, the algebra of two geons cannot be related directly to the
algebras for a single geon. we will show that the algebra a(2) can be obtained from the
tensor product a(1)  a(1) when we add  and .

in the exchange process, two geons permute their positions. in our convention, the
geon on the right (left) moves counterclockwise to the position of the left(right) (see fig.
2.4). the eect of a geon exchange on the states is of the form

r | a1, b1i | a2, b2i = | c1

1 a2c1, c1

1 b2c1i | a1, b1i ,

(2.24)

13

0

2

0

2

2

0

(a)

0

2

(b)

fig. 2.5: the handle slide is interpreted geometrically as the full monodromy of two
handles followed by a rotation of 2 of each handle. the gure shows two equivalent
representations for the handle slide: in (a), the geon is viewed as a rectangular box on the
plane. in (b), we have identied two edges of the rectangle and the geon is represented
as two circles on the plane.

where c1 = a1b1a1
also satises the yang-baxter equation,

1 b1

1 . this operator is equivalent to braiding operators for particles and

(r  ii)(ii  r)(r  ii) = (ii  r)(r  ii)(ii  r) .

(2.25)

one can verify that the exchange operator (2.24) may be written as the product

where r  a(1)  a(1) is the analogue of the universal r-matrix for a quasi-triangular
hopf algebra. in our case r is given by

r =  r

(2.26)

r = xa,b

q(a,b)  1

aba1b1

(2.27)

the handle slide s is shown in fig. 2.5. in (a), the geon is viewed as a rectangular
box on the plane. in (b), we have identied two edges of the rectangle and the geon is
represented as two circles on the plane connected by dotted lines. the action of s on the
states and its presentation in terms of the other operators is given in [6].

this completes the description of a(2). the algebra for two geons is generated by the

elements of a(1)  a(1), r and the handle slide s.

these constructions can be easily generalized to write down the algebra a(n) for n

geons [6].

14

3 quantization

the algebra a(1) describes the topological degrees of freedom for a single geon on the
plane. to quantize the system we need to nd an irreducible representation of a(1) on a
hilbert space h. however, this hilbert space will branch into irreducible representations
of the eld algebra:

h = rhr,

(3.1)

where hr denotes a particular irreducible representation describing a certain geon type.
the algebra is nite dimensional, and therefore there will be a nite number of irreducible
representations of a(1). furthermore, the hilbert spaces h are all nite dimensional. each
representation gives us a possible one-geon sector of the theory.

in the case of quantum doubles, the irreducible representations are fully classied.
see for instance ref. [22]. for the case of geons, the algebra is more complicated because
of the existence of internal structure. nevertheless, the representations of a(1) are quite
similar to the ones of the quantum double of a nite group. this is not totally surprising,
since in a certain limit, as discussed in the previous section, we recover the quantum
double d(1) = d(h). actually, we can dene a class of algebras a, called transformation
group algebras, that can have its representations classied and that are generic enough
to contain the quantum double and the algebra a(1) as particular cases. in the spirit of
[22], one can then get all representations of a.

denition: let x be a nite set and g a nite group acting on x. in other words,
there is a map g : x  x for each g  g. as usual, we denote by f (x) the algebra
of functions on x and by c(g) the group algebra of g. we dene the algebra a as the
vector space

a := f (x)  c(g)

with basis elements denoted by (qx, g), qx  f (x) and g  c(g), and the multiplication

(qx, g)  (qy, h) := (qxqg(y), gh) .

(3.2)

here, qx is the characteristic function supported at x  x. let x0 be an element of x.
we denote by kx0  g the stability subgroup with respect to x0, i.e.,

kx0 = {g  g | g(x0) = x0} .

(3.3)

the stability subgroup kx0 divides the group g into equivalence classes of left cosets.
let n be the number of equivalence classes and let us choose a representative i  g,
i = 1 . . . n for each class, with the convention that 1 = e. we can write the following
partition of g into left cosets:

g = 1kx0  2kx0  . . .  n kx0 .

(3.4)

we can now state the following result.

15

theorem let | ji, j = 1 . . . n be a basis of a subspace v of c(g) carrying an irr  of
kx0. then, for (a xed) x0  x, elements i  g, i = 1 . . . n and | ji  c(g), j = 1 . . . n
as stated above, the vectors

i | x0i | ji :=| i(x0)i | ji ,

form a basis for an irr of the algebra a, given by

(qx, g) | i(x0)i | ji := x,

i (x0) | i (x0)i  ()()kj | ki ,

where i and  are uniquely determined by the equation

and () is the matrix for the representation .

gi = i ,

this result follows from a standard construction in induced representation theory (cf.

discussion of the poincare group in [23]).

the quantum double d(h) and the algebra a(1) are particular cases of transformation
group algebras. the quantum double is obtained by taking x = h, g = h, with the
action g(h) = ghg1. as for the algebra of a single geon, one takes

x = h  h

and for the group g the product h  m. the actions of g  h and w  m commute
and are given by

and

g(a, b) = (gag1, gbg1),

g  h

w (a, b) = (w(a), w(b)), w  m,

where we have used the notation of (2.18). the irrs for the algebra (2.19) can be
constructed given an element (a, b)  h  h. the stability subgroup k(a,b)  h  h is
dened by

k(a,b) = n(g, w )  h  m | gw (a, b) := (gw(a)g1, gw(b)g1) = (a, b)o .

(3.5)

then, after choosing representatives 1, . . . , n for the left cosets, the partition of h  m
can be written as

h  m = 1k(a,b)  2k(a,b)      n k(a,b) .

(3.6)

let | 1i, . . . , | ni  c(h  m) be a basis of an irr of k(a,b). then, according to the
theorem, the vectors

| i(a, b)i | ji ,

(3.7)

with i = 1 . . . n, j = 1 . . . n, form a basis of an irr of the algebra a(1).

16

let us express the representations of a(1) in a more compact notation. the action of
h  m on x = h  h divides x into orbits. we denote by [a, b] the orbit containing
the element (a, b)  h  h. we will collectivelly call  the quantum numbers labeling
the irrs of k(a,b). one can see from (3.7) that an irr r is characterized by a pair
r = ([a, b], ). a basis for an irr r of a(1) will therefore be written as vectors | i, ji(a,b)
,i = 1, ..., n; j = 1, ..., n dened by

r

| i, ji(a,b)

r

:= i | a, bi | ji

(3.8)

where | a, bi is a state in the dening representation, i are the same as in (3.6) and
| ji are base elements in the irreducible representations  of k(a,b). of course, the set
of vectors thus dened depend on the pair (a, b) we choose. we x an a and a b, and
henceforth omit the superscript.

the action of q(a,b) is given by

q(a,b)|i, j >r= q(a,b) i|a, b > |j >= q(a,b)|ai, bi > |j >= a,aib,bi|i, j >r . (3.9)

let gw be a generic element of h  m. the equation

gw i = i

(3.10)

denes uniquely a new class i, together with an element of the stability group   k(a,b).
the action of gw  a(1) on | i, jir is determined by (3.10) and it reads

gw | i, jir = i | a, bi   | ji =
()()kj | i, kir

= xk

(3.11)

where () is the matrix representation of k(a,b).

each irr r = ([a, b], ) describes a distinct quantum geon. the corresponding vector
spaces hr generated by states | i, jir, are all nite dimensional. therefore we can easily
make it into a hilbert space by introducing the scalar product

hi, j  | i, jir = iijj .

(3.12)

since the algebras a(1) are not the same for dierent choices of the discrete group h,
we cannot say in general what is the spectrum of a geon. first, we need to x a group h
and then compute the spectrum for the corresponding a(1).

consider now two geons described by representations r1 and r2. the associated hilbert

space of states is simply

h(12) := hr1  hr2.

(3.13)

as explained in section 2, the eld algebra consists of a(1)  a(1) together with r and
s. the elements of a(1)  a(1) act naturally on (3.13). it remains to be said what is the
action of r and s on states in hr1  hr2.

17

the action of r is completely determined by the formula (2.26):

r =  xa,b

q(a,b)  1

aba1b1.

in other words

.

r | i, jir1 | k, lir2 = xa,b

1
aba1b1 | k, lir2  q(a,b) | i, jir1

(3.14)

the generalization for n geons is straightforward.

we may think of r and s as scattering matrices for a pair of geons. the r-matrix
represents an elastic interaction in the sense that two incoming geons of quantum num-
bers r1 and r2 are scattered into two objects carrying the same quantum numbers r1 and
r2. the handle slide s on the contrary is a nontrivial scattering, each one of the two
outgoing geons being a superposition of many geons in the spectrum.

4 the spin-statistics connection for (2 + 1)d topo-

logical geons

the spin-statistics theorem is a well-established law of physics, and it holds true for
most of the quantum particles in nature. in considering quantum topology change and,
more generally, quantum gravity, one is naturally led to inquire whether a sort of eld
theory exists which gives geons as quantum excitations on a topologically trivial classical
background. such a theory remains hitherto utterly elusive, but one may try to investigate
some of its aspects. for instance, in such a theory the quanta would be geons, so one
fundamental research work would be a thorough analysis of the spin and statistics of geons
and in particular whether the geons enjoy the canonical spin-statistics connection.

in order to pose the problem properly, we start with some general comments. spin
and statistics are two properties which can be dened independently of each other. they
refer not only to particles, but in general to localized sub-systems that may consist of
several particles or even extended objects like solitons. the tensorial or spinorial nature
of spin is determined by the behavior of the wave function when the sub-system undergoes
a 2 rotation. statistics determines what happens when two identical sub-systems are
exchanged. the canonical spin-statistics connection asserts the identity of the operators
implementing 2-rotation and exchange. it is thus clear that our rst task is to dene
the quantum operators responsible for 2 rotation and exchange. in the case of (2 + 1)d
orientable geons, we can easily nd these operators among the algebra described in section
2.
in doing so, we will be led to a denite spin-statistics relation diering from the
canonical one by a phase.

18

in the usual spin-statistics theorem, we prepare a two-particle state which is a tensor
product of two copies of the same (arbitrary) one-particle state with the same spin, in
order to probe the relation between the exchange and 2-rotation operators. however,
here we meet a problem: we have only been able to prove the existence of such a relation in
the special case when the total uxes of each geon not only belong to the same conjugation
class, but are the same . this is rather unexpected at rst sight, because in the denition
of the irrs of the one-geon algebra, eq. (3.8), we can see that each vector of the basis
of a representation space has an associated and possibly distinct ux ci = ic1
, where
c = aba1b1. the geon state is in general a superposition of such vectors, and therefore
the ux of a geon state is not well dened for most states in a given representation. to
overcome this problem we advance the claim that the total ux should be a superselected
quantity in the same sense that electric charge is superselected. we shall explain how this
superselection occurs in section 5. here we simply note that as a consequence, the only
physical states are superpositions of basis vectors with the same total ux. if we assume
this, then the spin-statistics connection holds for all physical states.

i

we start by considering a pair of geons on the plane. the algebra a(2) is xed as
soon as we choose a nite group h. in section 2 we saw that the exchange of two geons
is realized by the operator r dened in (2.26). similarly, the 2 rotation of one of the
geons can be written as c2  ii or ii  c2. we would like to know if the algebra a(2)
implies any kind of relation between exchange and 2 rotations.

let us start by xing a representation r = ([a, b], ) of a(1). state vectors | i, jir  hr
given by (3.8) do not have a well-dened spin, or in other words, they are not eigenstates
of c2. in order to establish the spin-statistics relation we need rst to know what are
the eigenstates of c2. we recall that c2  m and that m is a nite group. therefore
there exists a least non-negative integer n such that

c n

2 = 1

(4.1)

and the eigenvalues of c2 are ei2s, where the spin s = 0, 1/n, 2/n, ..., (n  1)/n. one
can see that the operator

ps =

1
n

n 1

xn=0

ein2s c n
2

(4.2)

projects into states with spin s. the front factor is just a normalization constant to ensure
that p 2
s = ps, and we assume of course that n  2, so that we have a non-trivial behavior
under 2-rotation. furthermore, any state of hr with spin s can be obtained by linear
combinations of | s; iji given by

| s; i, ji = ps | ijir.

(4.3)

consider a pair of geons both carrying the same representation r = ([a, b], ) and the
same spin s. in addition, let us consider both geons to have the same total ux ci = ic1
,
where c = aba1b1, i.e., we assume that each geon is in a state which is the superposition
of basis vectors having the same ux. this will have the following consequence. the is

i

19

in (3.7) act on | a, bi in such a way that the ux c becomes conjugated by i. in other
words, the ux of each vector in the basis {| i, jir} will be equal to ci. hence ci becomes
a quantity characterizing the particular superselection sector within r.we are going to
show that the statistics of the system is completely determined by the spin s and the
representation r. it does not depend on ci. more precisely,

r | i | i = ei(2sr) | i | i,

(4.4)

where the states | i and | i transform according to the same represention r and have
both the same spin s and the same total ux ci. also, r is an angle that depends only on
the representation r. the usual spin-statistics connection is true only for representations
r such that r = 0.

it is enough to show that (4.4) is true for states | i and | i in the basis (4.3):

| i = ps | ijir =

1
n

| i = ps | klir =

1
n
ci = ck.

n 1

xn=0
xn=0

n 1

ein2s c n

2{ i | a, bi | ji},

ein2s c n

2{ k | a, bi | li},

using (3.14) one can show after some algebra that

with

r {ps | ijir  ps | klir} =| i  ps | ijir.

| i =

1
n xn

ein2s c n
2

1
ci { | ak, bki | li}.

in the last formula, we used the notation

| ak, bki := k | a, bi,

(4.5)

(4.6)

(4.7)

(4.8)

with ci, the total ux of | ai, bii, being given by ci = aibia1
product where only the rst factor is not yet in the desirable form of (a phase) | i.

. the result ( 4.6) is a tensor

i b1

i

let us take a closer look at | i. first let us dene

ei = ci

c2

and write | i as

| i = ei2s 1

n xn

to proceed, we will show that

ein2s c n

2e 1

i { k | a, bi | li}.

eik = ke1,

20

(4.9)

(4.10)

(4.11)

where e1 = c c2 with c = aba1b1. indeed, rst note that

eik|a, b >= cic2k|a, b >= cic2|ak, bk >= |ak, bk >= k|a, b >,

(4.12)

where we have used the fact that ci = ck. therefore

eik = k ,

(4.13)

where  belongs to the stability group k(a,b) of |a, b >.

all we have to do is to show that in fact  = e1 := cc2. we recall that by denition

1 = e.

from (4.13) it follows that

(4.14)
if we take a generic k to be of the form gkk for some gk  h and k  m, we see that

k eik.

 = 1

 = 1
k

1
gk ( cic2 )gkk = 1

gk ( cic2 )gk = g1

k cigk

c2,

(4.15)

since k commutes with h-transformations. we will show presently that

which allows us to conclude, from (4.15), that  = e1, and hence (4.11) follows. in order
to show (4.16) we write

ci = ck = gkcg1
k ,

(4.16)

|ak, bk >= k|a, b >:= gkk|a, b >= k|gkag1

k , gkbg1

k > .

(4.17)

remembering that the elements of m do not change the total ux, we can compare the
total uxes of the rst and last expressions. that gives us

now, from (4.11) we have

ck = gkcg1
k .

e 1

i k = ke 1
1 .

(4.18)

(4.19)

it is a simple exercise to show that e1 is in the center of the stability group k(a,b) of
| a, bi. therefore, from (3.11), we can write

e 1

i {k | a, bi | li} = k | a, bi  e 1
1

| li .

(4.20)

since the states | li form a basis for an (unitary) irr of k(a,b), from schurs lemma
we conclude that the operator e1 gives a phase eir in ( 4.20) depending on the irr
r = ([a, b], ). putting the results together we have

| i = ei(2sr) 1

n xn

ein2s c n

2{k | a, bi | li} = ei(2sr)ps | kli.

(4.21)

this concludes the demonstration of equation (4.4). since the phase r comes from general
considerations, it is indeterminate in our formalism.

21

5 the role of h: superselection and clustering

in this short section we are interested in emphasizing how the hypothesis of superselection
of total uxes and the possibity of clustering of geon subsystems arise naturally if we
conne ourselves to local operators as the only ones with physical signicance.

we therefore start o by noting that the h-transformations in our one-geon algebra
are actually non-local operations, since they are eectively equivalent, from the stand-
point of the one geon, to move distant geons, or alternatively, distant uxes in a
circle at innity around the geon. this apparently innocent observation entails a striking
conclusion: since all elements of the algebra other than the h-transformations (which
elements are also local operators), commute with the total ux, we have that the total
ux must be a superselected quantity. as we saw in the previous section, this is enough
to ensure the spin-statistics connection for geons. this may appear to be strange at
rst: we have seen that the total ux can be changed by the action of h. however,
since h-transformations are non-local, they cannot aect local observables in a sensible,
local theory. the only local operators would therefore be the elements of the mapping
class group, and these clearly do not change the total ux. this can be generalized for
n geons: the total ux of the entire n-geon system is then superselected, the ux of
each geon being however subject to changes, much as it occurs in qed charged sectors.
however, in this case one must have a suitable notion of clustering, i.e., if we consider
n  1 geons to be distant in a suitable sense, the remaining solitary geon can be seen
as really isolated, and it must be in a state belonging to a one-geon algebra irr. we will
explain the necessity of these concepts in what follows.

first of all we must make precise what our notion of distant is. we should recall
that we are actually studying the low-energy limit of a eld theory, and in spite of the
fact that the theory in this limit is eectively independent of the metric, we have started
o with a metric in order to dene our theory. therefore it makes sense to use this metric
to measure distances and assume distant geons or uxes to be those which are much
further than the characteristic size of the geon under consideration. we hereafter take
this to be the meaning of distant. local will then mean within distances comparable
to the characteristic size of the geon.

with these denitions we can now proceed to clarify how the notions of clustering and
superselection should arise to ensure the spin-statistics connection for geons. to establish
this connection in the previous section we considered states of the form | i | i, where
| i and | i were states transforming in the same irr r and having the same spin s. we
made, in the course of our demonstration, two basic asumptions:

 the states | i and | i were considered to have denite, well-dened total uxes
ci and ck, i.e., they were each superpositions of basis vectors having the same total
ux;

 the uxes ci and ck are the same.

22

the second asumption is very natural and easily implemented, since as pointed out
in [24] in a similar context, the uxes being equal is a well-dened, h-invariant notion.
one only has to prepare two one-geon states with same total ux. the rst asumption,
however, looks quite articial at rst sight, without some extra input. after all, each
irr vector space is generated by vectors having dierent total uxes, although in the
same conjugacy class. to impose that only superpositions of vectors having the same ux
should be considered apparently threatens generality. this is not so however, if we assume
that the notions of clustering of geon subsystems and superselection of total ux should
play a role in our physical description. first, let us consider the clustering property.
consider a system of n geons on the plane. it is really rather natural to assume that
geon subsystems can be isolated as long as we consider only local operators. this means
that, if we x one geon and take the other n  1 geons to innity, this remaining geon
should be described by the one-geon algebra a(1), and its state should belong to an irr
of a(1). on the other hand, the total ux of the n-geon system is superselected, but the
total uxes of individual geons are not uniquely dened by the n-geon total ux, and in
particular a geon can even be in a superposition of various ux states. it is to preclude
this possibility that the clustering property appears: since the geon can be isolated, it is
eectively equivalent to a one-geon system, and in particular all operations which change
its ux are indistinguishable from h-transformations on a one-geon system. therefore
the isolated geon in a pure state must have a denite total ux as well. (impure one-geon
states with a probability distribution of total uxes are of course permitted).

the consequence of the previous discussion for a two-geon system is as follows. for a
one-geon system, superselection of the total ux means that the irrs r must further split
into superselected subspaces, and the physical states belong to these subspaces. now, for
a two-geon system in a state | i | i, only the total ux must be superselected, but
the clustering property ensures that each geon must have a denite ux. therefore for
physical states, | i and | i must separately be superpositions of states with denite
ux. the conclusion is that the two asumptions we made to check the spin-statistics
connections become most natural if we include superselection of the total ux and the
clustering property as physical requirements of the theory.

6 geons in quantum gravity

in this section our aim is to describe what are the consequences of our results to quantum
in the canonical metric formalism of gravity on a spacetime manifold m of
gravity.
the form   ir, we may perform a space versus time splitting and dene the classical
conguration space q as follows. let us specialize to (2 + 1)d. let r() be the space of
all riemannian metrics on the space manifold  which are equal to some conical metric

23

in a neighborhood n of innity1. we quotient this space by the group dif f () of
dieomorphisms of the spatial 2-manifold  to obtain q [21]. therefore we may denote
the q as

q =

r()

dif f ()

,

(6.1)

now, q is not simply-connected in general, and in this case one may have many distinct
quantizations, a phenomenon which is seen for example in the  vacua of qcd2. to see
this we resort to the so-called covering space quantization, which we briey review here
(for a more complete account, see ref. [21]). in this approach, wave functions (dening
domains of operators like the hamiltonian) are taken to be functions on the universal
covering space q of q with certain specic properties. it can be shown that in our case

q =

r()

dif f 

0 ()

,

(6.2)

0 () is the component connected to the identity, and hence a normal sub-
where dif f 
group, of dif f (). in what follows it will always be understood that these dieos are
of , and hence we will omit the argument.

it is well known that the universal covering x of any topological space x is a principal
bundle over x with structure group 1(x), and the projection p : x  x given by the
covering map. the structure group has a free right action  : x  x on x and the
quotient x/1(x) by this action is again x. this action is ber-preserving, i.e., for every
  1(x), x  x we have p(x) = p(x). therefore q is a principal bundle over q with
structure group 1(q), which can inferred from (6.1) and (6.2) to be isomorphic to the
mapping class group m.

wave functions  need not be single-valued on q if q contains non-contractible loops.
actually the transformation of the wave function when such loops are traversed gives a
representation of 1(q). this can be seen in the following way. all that must be single-
valued are observables like . on the other hand, since the universal covering space is
by denition simply-connected, functions on it can always be taken to be single-valued.
therefore, if we could dene wave functions as functions on q such that  is still a
function on q, we would circumvent the multi-valuedness of the wave functions while
leaving the probability interpretation unharmed. this task is easily accomplished in the
following way. let h be a complex vector space with a hermitian inner product h , i
carrying a unitary representation  of 1(q)  m. we say that a function  : q  h
is equivariant if for every   1(q), q  q we have

(q) = (1)(q).

(6.3)

1these boundary conditions for the metric substitute the usual (3+1)d asymptotically minkowskian

scenario for the (2 + 1)d case. see [25] and references therein for a more complete discussion.

2in this section, the word quantization will have a meaning slightly dierent from the rest of the
paper. it will mean simply an appropriate assignment of a hilbert space of wave functions to a classical
conguration space.

24

hence, since q/1(q) = q, we have that h, i can indeed be viewed as a function on
q, as we wanted. therefore our quantum hilbert space v may be taken to be (the norm
completion of) the space of equivariant functions  : q  h such that the function
h, i, seen as a function on q, gives a nite number when properly integrated on the
whole of q (the latter process denes the inner product). this recipe obviously depends
on which representation  we take. actually, it can be shown [21] that there are at least
as many inequivalent quantizations as there are unitary irreducible representations of m.

as we have mentioned, wave functions on q pick an aharonov-bohm phase when-
ever they traverse a non-contractible path in q, i.e., they transform according to some
representation of 1(q). since this group is non-abelian in general, the wave function
may transform via a non-abelian representation. this is akin to the behaviour of sections
of a vector bundle with a at connection. actually this is the case: it is well-known (see
e.g., [26]) that the set of equivariant functions on a principal bundle taking values in some
vector space v is in bijective correspondence to the set of sections of the associated vector
bundle with ber v . since the structure group is discrete, the bundle is always at.

we therefore arrive at the conclusion that any unitary representation of the mapping
class group provides a vector bundle over q whose space of square-integrable sections
forms a possible hilbert space for geons in quantum gravity as far as kinematics is con-
cerned. these spaces must have further imposed dynamical constraints, i.e., they must
be a suitable arena for dynamics before they really can be claimed to be authentic quan-
tum gravity hilbert spaces for geons. in this (2 + 1)d context we can actually do more
than this. it is possible to impose all the dynamical constraints of general relativity to
obtain the reduced conguration space, thereby taking into account dynamical aspects
as well. our space q will then be the moduli space of the surface , and its universal
covering q will be the teichmuller space [27]. again, 1(q) will be the mapping class
group and our discussion will go mostly along the same lines 3. this state of aairs is
somewhat reminiscent of quantization of matter particles in minkowski spacetime, in the
context of usual quantum mechanics. one can have many representations of the lorentz
group, but on the one hand only some of them seem to be realized in nature, and on the
other hand the dynamics selects which representation survives in each physical situation,
e.g., the tensorial representations for the klein-gordon eld or the spinorial and tensorial
representations for the dirac eld.

thus, we are led to the questions of whether, and how, the hilbert spaces we have
presented in the previous sections t into this scheme, and in particular whether the spin-
statistics connection we have found extends to these quantum gravity geon states. first of
all, we note that some of the hilbert spaces hr, carrying representations r = ([a, b], ) of
our eld algebra a (in the notation dened in section 5) carry naturally a representation of
the mapping class group: we recall that the elements of this group were naturally included
in a, and hence we may say that r contains a representation (possibly reducible) of the
mapping class group. we will again denote this representation by r. therefore the vector

3strictly speaking, this discussion is valid for genus g  2. for genus 1, things are a bit more

complicated. for details see, for instance, [28].

25

bundle associated to q with ber hr, where the rs are just as stated, gives another
hilbert space for geons in quantum gravity, via its square-integrable sections. in this new
scenario the bers are internal state spaces.

however, we are now faced with another problem: do these sections carry a represen-
tation of the mapping class group? in other words, is it possible to extend the action
on each ber to an action on the space of sections? the answer is known to be negative
in general [19, 29]. one can nevertheless implement operators corresponding to elements
of m on states localized at a point q  q. in particular, we may extend the operators
r and c2, related to statistics and spin respectively, to operators r and c2 acting
on such localized states. we will show at the end of this section that such states obey
a spin-statistics connection inherited from the bers. here we presently give a simple
geometrical discussion to bring out the reasoning behind these remarks.

a very useful construction of the universal covering space q is as follows [21]. let us
assume that the space q is connected (if this is not so we can always choose a connected
component). let q0 be a point of q which once chosen is not to be changed. let q be
a path on q from q0 to another point q  q 4. the path space pq of q is the space
{q} of these paths. let us next say that two paths q and 
q are equivalent and write
q  
q if one of them can be deformed to the other holding q0 and q xed. one can then
show that the space q is the same as the space of equivalence classes [q] of such paths,
the projection map p : q  q being given by [q] 7 q. for a xed q, these equivalence
classes form the ber over the point q.

q0][q0] = [

the group 1(q) can be identied with the set of equivalence classes of loops starting
q0 q0], where we
and ending at q0, i.e., [q0], with the compositions of loops [
q0]. this group acts on q on the right via the composition
rst trace [q0], and then trace [
[q][q0] = [q  q0]. this corresponds to the free, berwise action of 1(q)
of paths:
on q that we mentioned before. note moreover that we have chosen a ducial point and
put 1(q)  1(q; q0), the latter denoting the homotopy group of paths based at q0, to
be our model for the structure group. now, we might consider 1(q; q), the homotopy
group of paths based at another point q  q. this group is isomorphic to 1(q; q0), but
the isomorphism is not canonical, and we will see that this fact prevents the extension of
the action of 1(q) when this group is non-abelian. we point out that 1(q; q) acts on
the space {[q]} on the left, and therefore does not interfere with the action of 1(q; q0);
if we denote an element of 1(q; q) by [q], we have that [q][q] = [q  q].

we now show that exchange and 2-rotation correspond to actions like that of 1(q; q),
and not to the globally dened right action of 1(q). if d denotes a dieo and h a metric,
let hd denote the pull-back metric dh. then q consists of elements hdif f 
0 , q of
0 acts on q on the right 5: hdif f 
0 
elements hdif f , and 1(q) = dif f /dif f 
[0, 1]  q|(0) = q0; (1) = q} with dierent

4in this discussion all parametrized curves { :

parametrizations but with same image in q are to be regarded as the same path.

5let g be any group and x a space on which g acts on the right. we may take the quotient x/g of
equivalence classes by the action. let also x  x. we denote by xg the equivalence class of x in x/g.

26

0 )(ddif f 

0 ) = hddif f 

0 of dif f /dif f 
0

0 , with d  dif f . this action is globally dened. the
(hdif f 
association of a 2-rotation or exchange however is not to this action of dif f /dif f 
0 .
instead, it is obtained as follows. let q = hdif f   q correspond to two well-separated
geons and let {q(t) : 0  t  1} be a loop in q based at q(0) = q(1) = q. we can write
q(t) = h(t)dif f , and there exists an element d  dif f  such that h(1) = h(0)d, since
q(0) = q(1). now it is shown elsewhere [19] that the physical process of exchange say is
associated with an element rdif f 
(r  dif f ) and a loop based
at q(0)  q. but this correspondence is not unique, being deduced from the 1(q; q)
action on q. thus according to [19], the exchange process gives a curve {h(t)} with
0 } in q and the loop {h(t)dif f } in
h(1) = h(0)r. it becomes the curve {h(t)dif f 
q. now to nd the dieo and the loop for exchange based at q(0), the starting metric
can be h(0) or h(0) = h(0)d, for any d  dif f  as both give rise to the same q(0).
then for the two curves {h(t)} and {h(t)}, we have h(1) = h(0)r and h(1) = h(0)r.
0 } in q and the loops {h(t)dif f }
they give the curves {h(t)dif f 
and {h(t)dif f } in q. but the homotopy classes of these loops are not in general the
same, being related by the action of 1(q; q). they do not therefore always dene an
unambiguous element of q. to see this rst note that {h(t)d1dif f 
0 } also projects to
the loop {h(t)dif f } while at the same time it has the same starting point h(0)dif f 
0
0 }. it follows that the lifts of the loops {h(t)dif f } and {h(t)dif f }
as {h(t)dif f 
to q with the same starting point h(0)dif f 
0 } and {h(t)d1dif f 
0 }.
0 are {h(t)dif f 
0 and h(0)drd1dif f 
but their endpoints in general are dierent, being h(0)rdif f 
0
respectively, showing that the two loops may not be homotopic. further the dieos
associated to the exchange can be r or drd1 and their images in dif f /dif f 
0 can
be dierent.

0 } and {h(t)dif f 

suppose then that we want to consider a global action of 1(q) on the quantum
states. the two-geon conguration hdif f   q  q is described in quantum theory by
an equivariant function  on q taking values in some vector space h which carries a
0 . we assume that  is localized at a point [q]  q in
representation  of dif f /dif f 
the ber over q. the exchange process will then correspond to a loop class [q]  1(q; q).
this will act on the wave function by

([q])([q]) = ([q]1[q]).

(6.4)

since [q]1[q] = [1
such that [1

q  q] = [q][

q q] is in the ber over q as well, there exists a unique [

0 ]  1(q)

0 ]. therefore
([q]1[q]) = ([

0 ]1)([q]).

(6.5)

however, this association of an element of the fundamental group of q based at q
to an element of 1(q) is canonical only for  localized at a point q in the ber over q
q]  p1(q) which is related to [q] by the
as stated, otherwise we may pick another [
relation [

q] = [q][t], for some [t]  1(q). then we have
q]) = ([q]1[q][t])

q]) = ([q]1[

([q])([

(6.6)

= ([q][

0 ][t]) = ([t]1[

0 ]1[t])([

q]).

27

thus we have problems with continuity of the action for non-abelian  if we try to extend
the action of 1(q) to non-localized states.

we are now ready to consider the content of the spin-statistics theorem in this context
of localized states. let h be a hilbert space carrying a representation  of the algebra
for one geon. consider the space of equivariant functions  : q  h, which is the space
of states of the geon in quantum gravity, and denote it by v. we have seen that the
mapping class group will not act on all of v, but will have an action on localized states.
technically speaking these are delta functions concentrated at some point q  q. this
means distributions, i.e., linear functionals q on the s such that, for each   v, we
have

q()  (q).

(6.7)

let d  dif f /dif f 
then dif f /dif f 

0 , and q = hdif f 

0 , where as before h denotes some metric on .

0 acts on the localized space as follows:

dq = qd1,

(6.8)

and given any state   v, qd1() = (qd1) = (d)q(), from the equivariance
property. hence we may simply put, with a slight abuse of notation,

dq = (d)q.

(6.9)

we are actually interested in the action of r and c2. like in the case of vectors in
h, we can construct localized states with denite spin s, namely by applying the spin
projector ps in (4.2) to any generic state. note, nevertheless that the denition given
in (6.8) does not apply directly in this case, since ps is not an element of the mapping
class group as it has been dened. this needs not bother us, though, since the denition
of (6.9) extends by linearity to the algebra generated by the mapping class group, so we
may dene a localized state of spin s, denoted by (s)
q

through the equation

(s)
q = (ps)q.

(6.10)

now pick two equal states (s)
localized at the same point q  q and with the same spin
q
s. these are eigenvectors of the operator c2 with eigenvalue exp i2s, and we may write,
for any two states  and  in v:

r (s)

q  (s)

q (, ) = r {(ps)(q)  (ps)(q)}.

(6.11)

but since the vectors in the parenthesis are both vectors in h, the spin-statistics relation
is valid for them. since  and  are arbitrary, we may conclude from (4.4) that

r (s)

q  (s)

q = ei(2sr) (s)

q  (s)

q

,

(6.12)

which is the expression for the spin-statistics connection for the localized geon states in
quantum gravity.

28

7 final remarks

in this paper, we have shown how to explicitly encode information on non-trivial spatial
topology in the quantum theory of topological geons. we have described its classical
degrees of freedom by using the low-energy limit of a yang-mills theory coupled to a
higgs eld in the higgs phase, where the symmetry is spontaneously broken down to
a nite gauge group. it has been argued that this is enough to capture aspects of the
topology of the underlying space manifold, and it has been shown how such a theory
can be quantized. the eld algebra for one or many geons has been derived, and its
representations, corresponding to the various geonic sectors of the theory, have been
worked out in detail.

our discussion borrowed heavily from the theory of quantization of vortices [13]. it
led to a striking consequence: we have been able to derive a new spin-statistics relation
obeyed by the geonic states. in this relation, there is still a parameter r to be xed for
each representation of the geon algebra a(1), but to obtain it explicitly one has to to x a
nite group h and use the formalism to work out the representations of the geon algebra.
we will attempt this elsewhere. we have also shown how the geonic states we describe
here correspond to quantum gravity states of geons.

one is naturally led to inquire whether the framework developed in this paper can be
extended to cover the more general case when the gauge group is a lie group. in particular
it is known that general relativity in (2 + 1)d can be viewed as a chern-simons theory
with gauge group iso(2, 1) [30], and therefore one may investigate the spin-statistics
connection when h in this paper is replaced by iso(2, 1). such generalizations will be
the issues of a forthcoming paper.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank j.c.a. barata, b.g.c. da cunha, a. momen and s. vaidya for
many helpful discussions. the work of a.p. balachandran was supported by the de-
partment of energy, u.s.a., under contract number de-fg02-85err40231. the work
of e. batista, i.p. costa e silva and p. teotonio-sobrinho was supported by fapesp,
capes and cnpq respectively. a.p.b. acknowledges the wonderful hospitality of den-
joe oconnor and support of cinvestav at mexico, d.f. while this work was being
completed.

29

references

[1] r. sorkin: introduction to topological geons, in topological properties and global
structure of spacetime, edited by p.g. bergmann and v. de sabhata, plenum, new
york (1986).

[2] a.p. balachandran, a. daughton, z.c. gu, g. marmo, r.d. sorkin and a.m. sri-

vastava: int. j. mod. phys. a8 (1993) 2993.

[3] j.l. friedman and r.d. sorkin: phys. rev. lett. 44 (1980) 1100;

j.l. friedman and r.d. sorkin: gen. rel. grav. 14 (1982) 615.

[4] h.f. dowker and r.d. sorkin: a spin-statistics theorem for certain topological

geons,gr-qc/9609064.

[5] r.d. sorkin and s. surya: geon statistics and uirs of the mapping class group,

hep-th/9704081.

[6] a.p. balachandran, e. batista, i.p. costa e silva and p. teotonio-sobrinho: quan-

tum topology change in (2 + 1)d, hep-th/9905136.

[7] a.p. balachandran, g. bimonte, g. marmo, a. simoni: nucl. phys. b446 (1995)

299-314, gr-qc/9503046.

[8] d. marolf: phys.lett. b392(1997)287-290, gr-qc/960203.

[9] n. seiberg and e. witten: nucl. phys. b426 (1994) 19.

[10] a.p. balachandran and p. teotonio-sobrinho: int. jour. mod. phys. a8(1993) 723-

752, hep-th/9205116.

[11] r. haag: local quantum physics, springer-verlag (1992).

[12] t.h. koornwinder and n.m. muller: j. lie theory 7 (1997), 33-52;

t.h. koornwinder, f.a. bais and n.m. muller: uva-wins-wisk. 97-14 preprint,
q-alg/9712042.

[13] m.d.f. de wild propitius and f.a. bais: discrete gauge theories proc. crm-
cap summer school particles and fields 94, ban, springer verlag (1996), hep-
th/9511201
m.d.f. de wild propitius: topological interactions in broken gauge theories, phd.
thesis university of amsterdam, 1995, hep-th/9511195.

[14] a.p. balachandran, a. momen, p. teotonio-sobrinho and s. vaidya: topological

quantization and quantum groups, to appear.

[15] c. kassel: quantum groups, springer-verlag (1995).

30

[16] m.v. berry and j.m. robbins: proc. roy. soc. lond. a 453 (1997) 1771.

[17] j. anandan: relativistic spin-statistics connection and kaluza-klein space-time,

hep-th/9806070.

[18] i. duck and e.c.g. sudarshan: am. j. phys. 66 (1998) 284 and references therein;
m.j. york: spatial asymmetry for particle pairs and the spin-statistics theorem,
and references therein.

[19] c. aneziris, a.p. balachandran, m. bourdeau. s. jo, t.r. ramadas and r.d. sorkin:

mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 331;
c. aneziris, a.p. balachandran, m. boureau, s. jo, r.d. sorkin and t.r. ramadas:
int. jour. mod. phys. a4 (1989) 5459.

[20] j.s. birman: braids, links and mapping class groups, princeton university press

(1972).

[21] a.p. balachandran,, g. marmo, b.s. skagerstam and a. stern: classical topology

and quantum states, world scientic (1991).

[22] k. szlachanyi and p. vecsernyes: quantum symmetry and braid group statistics

in g-spin models, comm. math. phys. 156 (1993) 127.

[23] a.p. balachandran and c.g. trahern: lectures on group theory for physicists,

monographs and textbooks in physical science 3, bibliopolis, napoli (1985).

[24] h.-k. lo and j. preskill: phys. rev. d48 (1993) 4821.

[25] j. samuel: phys. rev. lett. 71 (1993) 215.

[26] d. husemoller: fibre bundles, 2nd ed., springer verlag, berlin (1975).

[27] s. carlip: lectures on (2+1) dimensional gravity, gr-qc/9503024.

[28] j. louko and d.m. marolf: class. quantum grav. 11 (1994) 311.

[29] a.p balachandran, g. marmo, n. mukunda, j.s. nilsson, e.c.g. sudarshan and f.

zaccara: phys. rev. lett. 50 (1983) 1553; phys. rev. d29 (1984) 2919;
p. nelson and a. manohar: phys. rev. lett. 50 (1983) 943.

[30] a. achucarro and p.k. townsend, phys. lett. b180 (1986) 89;

e. witten, nucl. phys. b311 (1988) 46.

31

