9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

7
2

 
 

1
v
8
0
2
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the deconfining phase transition

as an aharonov-bohm effect 

janos polonyi

laboratoire de physique theorique, universite louis pasteur,

3, rue de luniversite, 67084 strasbourg cedex france,

and

department of atomic physics, l. eotvos university,

pazmany p. setany 1/a 1117 budapest, hungary

february 1, 2008

abstract

a subjective and incomplete list of interesting and unique features
of the deconnement phase transition is presented. furthermore a
formal similarity of the density matrix of the aharonov-bohm system
and qcd is mentioned, as well.

1 introduction

the rst strong hints of the deconned quarks at high temperature appeared
more than ten years ago [1], the numerical conrmation [2] followed soon.
subsequently a large number of details has been claried but the driving
force of the deconnement transition, the connement-deconnement mech-
anism, remained elusive. a subjective and a rather sketchy list of remarks

to appear in the proceedings of the workshop understanding deconnement in

qcd, trento, italy, march, 1999.

1

is presented here to indicate a unique and challenging aspect of this phase
transition. only one detail will be discussed in a slightly more detailed man-
ner, the formal similarity between the density matrix of the aharonov-bohm
(a-b) system and of qcd.

one can distinguish two connement mechanisms [3], a hard and a soft
one. the hard mechanism is responsible for the linear potential between
static test quarks in the absence of dynamical quarks. the soft, low energy
mechanism is which screens a test quark and was thought by v. gribov to
be similar to the supercritical vacuum of qed. more precisely the infrared
instability of the perturbative qcd, the source of the hard connement mech-
anism, leads to strong gluon interactions at large distances. suciently far
from a test quark the coupling constants reaches a large enough value to
ignite the spontaneous creation of the quark-anti quark pairs which in turn
shield the test quark charge. most of the remarks mentioned here refers to
the hard connement mechanism which is more elementary and should be
claried before embarking the study of the soft mechanism of full qcd.

2 unusual or unique features

1. dierent degrees of freedom: we nd dierent degrees of freedom at the
two sides of the phase transition. this happens in a number of other phase
transitions, the mott or the localisation-delocalisation transitions may serve
as examples. observe that the elementary degrees of freedom are recovered
among the highly excited states in these cases. this does not happen in the
hadronic phase. the relevance of this obvious remark becomes clear by con-

sidering the thermal average of an observable a, hai = z 1pnhn|a|nieen/t .

in order to reproduce the thermal averages we use the color singlet asymp-
totic states |ni of the hamiltonian of the strong interactions. how can we
recover the contributions of an isolated, deconned quark to the given ob-
servable? the only way out of this problem is the modication of the hilbert
space at the phase transition.

2. weakly or strongly coupled phase? the asymptotically free running
coupling constants becomes small around the typical energy scale p = t
at high energies, t > qcd  tc. does that mean that the deconned
phase is weakly coupled at high enough temperature? the answer is known
to be negative since long time [4]. the small parameter of the perturbation

2

expansion at high temperature stems from a non-perturbative quantity, the
magnetic screening mass. this can be understood by recalling that the ther-
mal bath breaks the lorentz invariance. though the typical energy scale is
pushed up at high temperature e  t , the (o-shell) momentum scale in
the loop integrals is eected dierently by the temperature and the infrared
stabilization of the long wavelength modes remains a dicult question. this
is because the partition function of the high temperature 3 + 1 dimensional
qcd can be approximated by a 3 dimensional (classical) yang-mills-higgs
system and the infrared sensitivity of the partition function increases by low-
ering the dimension. thus the fate of the perturbation expansion which is
based on massless gluons depends on the screening mechanism. the usual
strategy of dealing with the ir divergences, the separation of the scales t , gt
and g2t , can not solve this problem because g does not reach small enough
values, g(mp lanck)  1/2.

3. order parameter: the order parameter related to the hard connement
mechanism is the trace of the heavy quark propagator continued over complex
time,

(1)

(~x, t) = h0|(cid:18)~x, t +

i

t (cid:19) (~x, t)|0i.

in the high temperature phase where the time extent of the euclidean space-
time is shorter than the correlation length, 1/t <   1
qcd, the gluon
eld variables are correlated along the world line of the heavy quark and
the order parameter develops a non-vanishing expectation value. a distin-
guishing feature of the deconning transition is that its order parameter is
not a canonical variable. it controls the symmetry with respect the global
center 1 gauge transformations performed at the initial or the nal state of
a transition amplitude. it is important to keep in mind that the center of
the global gauge transformations is the fundamental group of the gluonic
conguration space [5], z3 = 1(su(3)/z3) 2. the only other known dy-
namical breakdown of the fundamental group symmetry is the liquid-droplet
quantum phase transition.

4. finite volume eects: the ratio of the gluonic partition functions with

1the center c(g) of the group g is a subgroup of g. it consists of the elements which

commute with g, [c, g] = 0, e.g. c(su (n )) = zn .

2consider the gauge transformation ~a(~x)  g(~x)(~ + ~a(~x))g(~x) acting on the anti-
hermitean gauge eld in the temporal gauge. the global gauge transformations which
commute with other gauge transformations leave ~a(~x) invariant.

3

and without a static quark is given by the expectation value of the order
parameter, e(fq
f )/t = hi. since the spontaneous symmetry breaking
does not occur in a nite system, hi = 0 and the static quarks always
appear conned, fq = , in nite volume. where does the singular free
energy density, fq/v = , come from? this problem is solved by taking
into account the destructive interference between the homotopy classes in
the gluonic conguration space.

5. symmetry breaking by the kinetic energy: the spontaneous symme-
try breaking mechanism is operating at low energy where the order parameter
is driven to a non-symmetrical value due to the degenerate minima of the
potential energy. the kinetic energy might drive a spontaneous, or more
precisely dynamical symmetry breaking at high energies. the dynamical
breakdown of the center symmetry results from such a mechanism [5]. this
can be understood by inspecting a quantum top, the baby version of the
su(2) yang-mills model. the conguration space which consists of the 3  3
orthogonal matrices, {r} = so(3) = su(2)/z2, is doubly connected and the
wave functions are single and double valued in the integer (gluons) and the
half-integer (quarks) spin subspaces, respectively. consider now the transi-
tion amplitude a(r, r) = hr|eith/h|ri as the function of the nal state
r. since an orientation of the top is undistinguishable from its 2 rotated
copy the integer spin amplitude is doubly degenerate on the covering space
su(2), a(r, r) = a(r, r) where the nal points r, r  su(2) dier in a
rotation by 2, r = r (center symmetry). suppose that r is closer to
the initial point r than r. then the kinetic energy tends to suppress the
propagation to r if the time available for the propagation is short (high
temperature or energy). the result for an innite top whose coordinate r
inuences innitely many degrees of freedom (global gauge transformations)
is that the propagation to r is totally suppressed (center symmetry break-
down). the connement can be understood as the destructive interference
in the quark propagator between the dierent homotopy classes.
in fact,
the center symmetry of the pure gluon system yields identical amplitudes in
dierent homotopy classes. but a particle in the fundamental representation
of the gauge group su(n) propagating along the system picks up the phases
e2in/n , n = 1,    , n which add up to zero. the result is the absence of these
particles in the nal states. we nd here another characteristic feature of
the deconnement transition: it corresponds to a transition amplitude rather
than to the vacuum. this is the key to nd a synthesis between the high

4

and the low energy scattering experiments, described in terms of the partons
and the hadronic bound states, respectively. in other words, as the time of a
collision process is shortened the transition matrix elements go over the de-
conned, center symmetry broken phase and the elementary constituents
(partons) appear.

6. permanent connement of triality [5]: (i) the deconning phase tran-
sition consists of the dynamical breakdown of the gauss law and the modi-
cation of the hilbert space for gluons,

h = (cid:26) h0

t < tc,
h0  h1  h1 t > tc,

(2)

where the subscript stands for the triality, the center charge 3. such a de-
scription of the phase transition is the resolution of the puzzle mentioned in
point 1. (ii) the triality is permanently conned at any temperature. the
deconned quark seen in the numerical simulation is actually a composite
particle containing a quark and its vacuum polarization cloud. the latter
has a multi-valued wave functional in such a manner that the total (quark
plus gluon) wave functional is single valued. the triality charge of the quark
is screened by the unusual gluon state. (iii) the color-magnetic monopoles
relate the rotations in the external and the color spaces. these monopoles
acquire a half-integer spin in the gluonic states with multi-valued wave func-
tional, a manner similar to the generation of the spin for skyrmions. the
unusual gluonic screening cloud is the sum of states with odd and even num-
ber of monopoles. these components correspond to fermionic and bosonic
exchange statistics. thus the state of a deconned quark is the sum of
components with bosonic (odd number of monopoles) and fermionic (even
number of monopoles) properties. the breakdown of the center symmetry
leads to the mixing of the fermi and bose statistics for the deconned quarks.
7. triality-canonical ensemble: the transition between the canonical and
the grand-canonical ensembles requires smooth enough dependence on the
density. due to the connement mechanism the formal energy density di-
verges for non-integer baryon numbers, or non-vanishing triality charges

3the wave functional [ ~a(~x)]  h changes by the phase factor e2in/3 when the global
center gauge transformation e2in/3 is performed on ~a(~x). the multi-valued nature of the
wave functional is to keep track of the global center gauge transformations, the elements
of the fundamental group of the gluonic conguration space which are represented in a
trivial manner on the gluon eld.

5

(point 4.).
it turns out that the triality-canonical ensemble predicts dif-
ferent center domain structure at the deconning phase transition than the
usual grand-canonical ensemble [6]. this may happen because the center
symmetry is broken spontaneously by the quark-anti quark see for t < tc
and dynamically by the kinetic energy for t > tc in the canonical ensemble.
this furthermore means that the formal center symmetry is preserved in the
presence of dynamical quarks and the results mentioned in this talk remain
valid in the triality-canonical ensemble with dynamical quarks.

3 density matrix for the a-b system and for

gluons

a-b system: consider a charged particle moving on the unit circle in peri-
odic gauge where the wave function is periodic, ( + 2) = (). the
hamiltonian is h = (i  /2)2/2, where  = 2a stands for the mag-
netic ux of the circle. the eigenstates and the eigenvalues are n() = ein,
and en = (n  /2)2/2, respectively. the density matrix is given by
(, ) = z 1pn ein()(n/2)2/2t , where z is the partition function,
z = pn e(n/2)2/2t . notice that the probability density p() = (, )

is real non-negative, as it should be. the periodicity of the wave functions
gives (,  + 2) = (, ).

let us go into an aperiodic gauge by performing the transformation
()  ei/2(). the hamiltonian is simpler, h  2
/2, but has
the same spectrum as before because the wave functions are multi-valued,
(+2) = ei(). in particular, the eigenvectors are n() = ei(n/2).
the density matrix transforms as (, )  ei()/2(, ), and becomes
multi-valued, as well, (,  + 2) = ei(, ) which makes the construc-
tion of the probability density non-trivial.
in fact, the choice of dierent
riemann-sheets for the two coordinate variables yields complex probability
and partition function. but notice that the complex factor is the same for
each contribution,

zcompl = z d(,  + 2) = ei z d(, ),

(3)

and the imaginary part of the entropy is an overall constant which does not
inuence the thermalization and thermodynamics can be applied.

6

qcd: a similar argument can easily be constructed for gluons yield-
ing the following results: (i) the multi-valued nature of the gluonic wave
functional of a deconned quark is shown by the possible non-positive or
complex expectation value of the order parameter hi, the partition function
of a quark.
(ii) the density matrix for gluons and a deconned quark is
multi-valued as it happens for the a-b system in the aperiodic gauge. the
change of the riemann-sheet, (, )  (,  + 2), corresponds to the
center transformation. (iii) thus the complex part of the free energy and
the entropy of a deconned quark is a simple kinematical constant which
agrees for each contribution to the partition function and does not inuence
the thermalization and the applicability of the rules of thermodynamics. (iv)
the complex part of the deconned quark entropy may lead to observable
eects in the triality-canonical ensemble [7] which is more realistic than the
grand-canonical one.

references

[1] l. susskind, phys. rev. d 20, 2610 (1979); a. m. polyakov, phys. lett.

b 72, 447 (1978).

[2] l. mclerran, b. svetitsky, phys. lett. b 98, 196 (1980); j. kuti, j.
polonyi, k. szlachanyi, phys. lett. b 98, 199 (1980); j. f. engels, f.
karsch, h. satz, i. montvay, phys. lett. b 101, 89 (1981).

[3] j. polonyi, connement and renormalization, in the proceedings of the

international school of physics, enrico fermi, course cxxx, 1996.

[4] a. d. linde, phys. lett. b 96, 289 (1980).

[5] j. polonyi in quark-gluon plasma, ed. r. c. hwa, (worls scientic,

singapore, 1989).

[6] m. oleszczuk, j. polonyi, canonical versus grand canonical ensem-
bles in qcd, 1992, unpublished preprint; m. faber, o. borisenko, g.
zinovev, nucl. phys. b 444, 563 (1995).

[7] m. oleszczuk, j. polonyi, ann. phys. 277, 76 (1993).

7

