dftuz 99/10

vector symmetries and -vacuum

vicente azcoiti and angelo galante

departamento de fsica teorica, facultad de ciencias, universidad de zaragoza,

50009 zaragoza (spain).

abstract

under very general assumptions we show that vafa-witten theorem on vector
symmetries in vector-like theories can be extended to some physically relevant
gauge theories with non-positive denite integration measure as qcd with
a -vacuum term.

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

5
1

 
 

1
v
0
1
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

the vacuum realization of vector and axial symmetries in gauge theories

with dynamical fermions, as qcd, plays a fundamental role in the under-

standing of the dynamics of these models at zero and nite temperature. the

spontaneous breakdown of chiral symmetry in qcd at zero temperature and

the realization of the goldstone theorem allow us to understand many essen-

tial features of the low energy spectrum of this model, and the restoration

of this symmetry at high temperature is the main signal expected for the

deconning phase transition.

concerning vector symmetries as avor or baryon number, vafa and wit-

ten showed [1] few years ago that they can not be spontaneously broken in

vector-like theories as qcd. the two main ingredients in the demonstra-

tion were i) the positivity of the path integral measure in the eective gauge

theory obtained after integration of the grassman degrees of freedom and ii)

the antihermiticity and local character of the massless dirac operator.

the second ingredient was essential in order to derive bounds which show

exponential fall-o at large distances for the massive quark propagator in

any background gauge eld. the authors of [1] noticed that the correlation

function of any quark-composite local gauge-invariant operator carrying a

non vanishing conserved vector charge should be proportional to at least

one power of the quark propagator. taking also into account that the mean

value of an upper-bounded quantity computed with a probability distribution

function is always less or equal than its upper-bound, an exponential fall-o

at large distances was found for the correlation function of all vector charge

carrying operators. this result allowed to show not only that the mean

2

value of any local order parameter for a vector symmetry should vanish but

also that massless quark composites can not be constructed from massive

constituents.

even if vafa-witten theorem applies also to vector-like theories at nite

temperature, there are some physically relevant formulations in which at least

one of the two essential ingredients in the demonstration are not realized. the

most interesting cases are qcd with a -vacuum term and qcd at nite

chemical potential.

in qcd with a -vacuum term the factor of i picked-up by the f f

operator under wick rotation makes the euclidean action complex. even if

the partition function is real, the integration measure is no longer positive

denite and therefore the rst ingredient in the theorem breaks-down. the

second one is however preserved since the -vacuum term does not change

the structure of the massless dirac operator.

the introduction of a nite chemical potential is su(n) gauge theories

makes also the eective gauge action obtained after integration of the grass-

man degrees of freedom complex in the most interesting case of n = 3.

furthermore the introduction of a chemical potential modies also the struc-

ture of the massless dirac operator.

it looses its antihermiticity and the

second ingredient of the theorem breaks-down too.

since both cases, qcd with a -vacuum term and qcd at nite chem-

ical potential, are physically relevant, it is worthwhile to ask to which extent

and under what limitations the theorem can be extended to these formula-

tions. we will devote this paper to qcd with a -vacuum term leaving

3

the nite chemical potential case, which shows the additional complication

previously stated, for a separate publication.

in order to extend the theorem to qcd with a -vacuum term we will

made use of two very general assumptions. first we will assume that parity

is not spontaneously broken in qcd at  = 0, which is a necessary condition

for the euclidean free energy density be well dened at  6= 0 [2].

the second general assumption, which is standard in statistical mechan-

ics, is that in the thermodynamical limit any intensive operator does not

uctuate in a vacuum or equilibrium state. this is equivalent to the general

quantum field theory statement that all connected correlation functions of

local operators verify cluster.

to better understand the physical meaning of this last assumption let us

think for a while in the ising model.

in the high temperature symmetric

phase the system has one vacuum or equilibrium state. the density of mag-

netization is an intensive operator and its probability distribution function

will become a single  function in the thermodynamical limit since otherwise

we would have uctuations of the density of magnetization. since the z(2)

symmetry of the ising model is realized in the high temperature phase, the

 function is centered at the origin.

in the low temperature phase the z(2) symmetry is spontaneously bro-

ken. since the density of magnetization mi is an order parameter for this

symmetry, its probability distribution function becomes now 1/2 the sum of

two  functions. the density of magnetization uctuates in the thermody-

namical limit because we have two vacuum or equilibrium states and mi is

4

not invariant under z(2) transformations. however if we choose an intensive

operator invariant under z(2) transformations, as for instance the energy

density or m2

i , it does not uctuate in spite of the fact that we have two

vacuum states. indeed the mean value of any power of these operators does

not depend on the vacuum state it is computed.

the lesson we learn from this simple example is that if the only reason to

have a degenerate vacuum is spontaneous symmetry breaking (i.e. no acci-

dental vacuum degeneration) and we choose an intensive operator invariant

under symmetry transformations, it does not uctuate in the thermodynam-

ical limit independently of the symmetry realization. these features are not

exclusive of the ising model but a general property of any statistical system.

let us consider now the euclidean formulation of qcd with a -vacuum

term. the euclidean partition function is

z = z [da][d ][d]er d4x(l(x) i

162 x(x))

(1)

where l(x) is the standard qcd lagrangian and x(x) = t rff the

-vacuum lagrangian. x(x) is real in euclidean space and we have exhibited

in (1) the factor of i which arises from wick rotation.

when we integrate out the fermionic degrees of freedom we get an eective

gauge theory

z = z [da] det (m, a)esg(a)ei x(a),

(2)

where (m, a) = m + i(a) is the dirac operator for quarks of bare mass
162 r d4xx(x) the -vacuum

m, sg(a) the pure gauge action and x(a) = 1

action.

5

the integrand in (2) is a complex number due to the -vacuum contri-

bution. the imaginary part of the integrand gives no contribution to the

partition function (the qcd action is parity invariant). the real part how-

ever is not positive denite except at  = 0.

let j(x) be any quark composite gauge invariant operator with non zero

isospin or baryon number and let us consider the correlation function q(x) =

hj(x)j (0)i. this correlation function will be given by the following ratio

q(x) = r [da]qa(x) det (m, a)esg(a)+i x(a)

r [da] det (m, a)esg(a)+i x(a)

(3)

where qa(x) is the correlation function in a given background gauge eld

a(x). if, as previously assumed, j(x) carries a conserved fermion charge,

then qa(x) will be proportional to at least one power of the fermion prop-

agator 1

a (m, 0, x) from 0 to x. vafa and witten essentially showed in [1]

that the norm of the quark propagator matrix

k1

a (m, 0, x)k  ekxyk

(4)

falls-o at least exponentially for any gauge conguration since  and  in (4)

are two constants independent of the gauge conguration. in the previous

statement the world essentially stands for the fact that, strictly speaking,

relation (4) is not true in the continuum formulation (it is true in the lattice

regularization approach). this problem can be surmounted by considering

smeared correlation functions [1] or using a lattice regularization scheme. in

order to preserve as much as possible the simplicity in the notations, we will

assume relation (4) true in what follows.

6

at  = 0, relation (4) plus the fact that the integration measure in (3) de-

nes a probability distribution function, carried vafa and witten to conclude

that a bound similar to (4) holds also for the correlation function q(x) and

consequently that vector symmetries can not be spontaneously broken. they

noticed also in [1] that introduction of a -vacuum term would invalidate the

proof because the positivity of the integration measure is loosed.

to overcome this problem, we will make use now of the second general

assumption discussed in the introduction of this paper, i.e. in any statistical

system intensive operators do not uctuate or equivalently, in a well dened

quantum system, all the correlation functions of local operators verify the

cluster property. we will apply this general assumption to the intensive

operator x(a) = 1
v

1

162 r d4x x(a) which denes the -vacuum term in

the action.

the cluster property tells us that

d x ne = d xen

n

(5)

due to the factor of i which arises from wick rotation, the mean value

< x > is a pure imaginary number whereas the operator x takes real values

in euclidean space. this two features however are not in contradiction since

the mean value in (5) is computed with a complex action. in order to avoid

complications related to factors of i, we will consider the operator

y = x 4,

(6)

the mean value of which is always real and positive. furthermore (5) implies

7

analogous relations for the y operator:

hy ni = hy in

n

(7)

let us assume now that o is any parity conserving operator as for instance

the operator y previously dened or the correlation function of any gauge

invariant quark-composite operator driving avor or baryon number. we can

write

hoi = r [da][d ][d]o( , , a)esqcd( ,,a) cos(v x)

r [da][d ][d]esqcd( ,,a) cos(v x)

which, after integration of the grassman degrees of freedom becomes

hoi = r [da]o(a) det (a)esg(a) cos(v x)

r [da] det (a)esg(a) cos(v x)

(8)

(9)

where, in order to leave notation as simple as possible, we have used the

same symbol o to design the operator in the eective gauge theory obtained

after integration of the fermion degrees of freedom.

in order to dene a pseudo-probability distribution function we will in-

troduce in (9) the trivial identity

1 = z 

0

d y (y (a)  y )

which allows us to write expression (9) as

hoi = r 

0 d y n( y )o( y )esef f ( y ) cos(v y 1/4)
0 d y n( y )esef f ( y ) cos(v y 1/4)
r 

where n( y ) is the density of states

n( y ) = z [da](y (a)  y )

8

(10)

(11)

(12)

and esef f ( y ) and o( y ) are respectively

esef f ( y ) = r [da] det (a)esg(a)(y (a)  y )

r [da](y (a)  y )

o( y ) = r [da] det (a)esg(a)o(a)(y (a)  y )

r [da] det (a)esg(a)(y (a)  y )

this relations allow us to write for < o > the simple expression

(13)

(14)

(15)

where

p ( y ) =

hoi = z 

0

d y p ( y )o( y )

n( y )esef f ( y ) cos(v y 1/4)

0 d y n( y )esef f ( y ) cos(v y 1/4)
r 

is a pseudo-probability distribution function since it is not positive denite

due to the factor cos(v y 1/4) in the numerator. in spite of that, equations

(7) and (14) tell us that in the innite volume limit

z 

0

d y p ( y ) y n = y n
0

y n
0  0

(16)

equation (16) implies that in the innite volume limit p ( y ) becomes a

true probability distribution function: a dirac distribution ( y  y0). the

mean value of operator o will be in this limit

hoi = z 

0

d y ( y  y0) = o( y0)

(17)

where y0 will depend on the theory parameters: gauge coupling, quark masses

and  angle.

it turns out that to compute the expectation value of our parity invariant

operator it is enough to calculate its average over a subset of gauge elds,

actually all the gauge elds characterized by a xed value of y (a). the

9

expectation value of our operator coincides with its mean value given by the

expression (13) and evaluated at y = y0.

lets see the consequences for any correlation function of a gauge invari-

ant composite quark operator driving avor or baryon number. it is clear

that expression (13) denes a true probability distribution function (the in-

tegration measure is positive denite for every y ). it follows that if |o(a)|

veries the vafa-witten bounds for all gauge congurations the same hap-

pens for |o( y )| whatever the value of y .

in particular this will be true

for y = y0 and therefore we conclude that the expectation value of any of

these correlation functions in presence of a non zero -vacuum term shows

exponential fall-o at large distances.

in conclusion the two main consequences of vafa-witten theorem i) the

impossibility to break spontaneously a vector symmetry and ii) the non ex-

istence of massless bound states made up with massive constituents, apply

also to qcd with a -vacuum term, assumed the euclidean formulation of

this model can be consistently done.

acknowledgements

this work has been partially supported by cicyt (proyecto aen97-

1680). a.g. was supported by a istituto nazionale di fisica nucleare fellow-

ship at the university of zaragoza.

10

references

[1] c. vafa, e. witten, nucl. phys. b234 (1984) 173.

[2] v. azcoiti, a. galante, hep-th/9901068.

11

