kul-tf-99/20
hep-th/9906080

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

0
1

 
 

1
v
0
8
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

new solutions to an old equation

f. denef, j. raeymaekers and w. troost

institute for theoretical physics

k.u. leuven, belgium

abstract

we present a brief historical overview of the classical theory of a radi-
ating point charge, described by the lorentz-dirac equation. a recent
development is the discovery of tunnelling of a charge through a po-
tential barrier, in a completely classical context. also, a concrete
example is discussed of the existence of several physically acceptable
solutions for a range of initial data. we end by pointing out some
open problems in connection with d-brane and monopole physics.

presented at the conference fundamental interactions: from symmetries to black holes
in honor of francois englert, brussels, march 25-27, 1999.

1. introduction

more than one hundred years ago, lorentz determined that the force exerted
on a particle (charge e, no spin, but we will call it electron nevertheless)
by an electromagnetic eld is given by1

f = ef(x) x.

(1.1)

the electromagnetic eld in eq. (1.1) is to be taken at the position of the
charge. however, a charge generates an electromagnetic eld that is singular.

hence the expression for the force in eq. (1.1) can not be taken literally:
somehow it should not include the eld generated by the particle itself, which

would render the expression meaningless. on the other hand, just leaving
it out is not satisfactory either, since it would miss an important physical
eect: a charge may radiate, and this radiation acts back on the motion.

the resolution of this question dates from the beginning of this century, and
resulted in an equation, nowadays called the lorentz-dirac equation (lde),

that takes into account this back-reaction.
in the next section we review
some highlights in the history of this equation. it can be formulated as a

third order dierential equation, which entails some peculiar features of the
associated particle trajectories. among these peculiarities we mention (in
section 3) the well known runaways, and call attention to the fact that there

is an indeterminacy in the theory: for given initial conditons (combined with
physical asymptotic conditions), multiple trajectories may be possible.

there has been a steady (if limited) interest in this subject that never
completely faded. it may come therefore as a surprise that recently we discov-

ered a whole new class of solutions, which, if not very relevant experimentally,
nevertheless poses some intriguing theoretical questions. this class describes

tunnelling, in a completely classical context:
it is possible for a charge to
traverse a classically forbidden region, provided this is accomplished in a

1even though lorentz didnt, of course, we use relativistic notation: x is the space-
time position of the particle, and the dot denotes a derivative with respect to its proper
time.

2

suciently short time. we illustrate this in section 4. we end with an as-
sortment of additional remarks connecting this old chapter to more modern

developments, like monopoles and d-branes.

2. the lorentz-dirac equation: a short historic overview

here is the lorentz-dirac equation 2:

..

x =

e
m c

f  .

x +

2e2
3m c3 (

(1)

..

x2 .
x
c2 +
(2)

...

x)

(3)

(2.1)

the rst term is the lorentz force. the second term results from the non-

relativistic theory of the radiation reaction as developed by lorentz and
abraham in the (eighteen-)nineties (the electron was discovered experimen-

tally at the end of that period). it takes into account the energy loss due
it was also found to be in agreement
to radiation, as should be familiar.

with considerations of extended models for a charged particle (poincare), in
the limit that its size tends to zero. this involves a classical renormalisation

of the mass of the charged particle. that the third term in eq. (2.1) is a
necessary is clear when one checks that x2 = 1 is preserved. it follows from a
proper relativistic treatment as given rst by schott (1915), and is (perhaps

surprisingly) called the schott term.

facing some pecularities of the solutions of eq. (2.1)  to which we come

back soon, over the years, several alternatives have been (re-)proposed. for
point electrons, these typically run into diculties, with energy-momentum

conservation. indeed, dirac showed[1] in 1938 that the equation as it stands
follows from very general considerations on the conservation of the energy-
stress tensor everywhere up to the immediate vicinity af the electron world
line.3 therefore, the only alternative is an extended model, but this is not
without problems. a rigid model is incompatible with special relativity.

2see [3] for general references.
3diracs derivation eventually attached his name to the equation.

3

diracs own deformable model of 1962 (which he hoped would explain the
muon) was shown in 1978 [2] to be instable.4 the situation was summed up
in the sixties in the classical work of rohrlich[4]5

in the meantime, with the improved understanding of the physical (i.e.

quantum mechanical) electron, the quantum eld techniques were applied
to this problem, without shocking results: the equation (2.1) also follows

if one[6] applies the new renormalisation techniques. a singularly missing
piece of the puzzle however is a direct connection of the equation to quantum
electrodynamics.

3. solutions

now we look at some solutions of eq. (2.1). already for the motion of the
electron in a region without external electromagnetic elds there is a surprise:

apart from the familiar linear solutions there is a solution with exponential
rising rapidity, like x = c (cosh y, sinh y, 0, 0) with y = exp( 
). here,
0
0 = 2e2
3m c3 is the natural time unit for this runaway phenomenon, its value
for an electron is  0.62 1023 s. this phenomenon is not observed in nature.
in quantum theory, for an electron, a typical timescale would be given by the
2 . therefore, a way
compton radius divided by the light velocity,
out is to state that one should not take seriously the classical theory down

m c2 = 0

h

3

to this timescale. be that as it may, one should eliminate these solutions
from the classical theory. this is achieved by an asymptotic (large time)

condition: one decrees that, if the particle ends up in a force free region,
it does not accelerate asymptotically. while eliminating the runaways, this
procedure in turn gives rise to two new surprises. the rst appears if we

solve eq. (2.1) for a particle moving into the vicinity of a potential step: it
starts to accelerate before it reaches the edge of the step. the pre-acceleration

time, i.e. the characteristic time of this onset of the acceleration, is again 0.

4this is illustrative of the slow but steady progress in this outpost of classical physics.
5at present, it is still an excellent starting point, even though it is incomplete (see

further). the paper by t. erber[5] contains complementary information.

4

although some may consider this a violation of causality, the phenomenon
is less shocking if one takes into consideration that the coulomb eld, with

its singularity at the position of the particle, is noticed in the region of the
force eld long before the particle arrives there. the second is the existence of

multiple solutions of eq. (2.1) for given initial position and velocity. although
in [4] the question of uniqueness was called one of the most important

unsolved problems of the theory [7], the older literature already contains
examples of non-uniqueness, as well as conditions for uniqueness6. during
the seventies (see for example [8, 9]) this aspect was stressed at the occasion

of (often numerical) studies of the lde in various circumstances. a recent
addition[11] is the proof of uniqueness in a constant magnetic eld, a study

issued from the ill-fated ssc-laboratory. more on this non-uniqueness topic
in the next section.

during the seventies, an interesting interpretation of eq. (2.1) was worked

out (see [13]) in terms of a bound momentum

p = m x



2e2
3 c3

..
x

(3.1)

which contains, apart from the usual velocity term, also a contribution from

the acceleration when the particle is charged. this quantity is a property
of the particles motion at a xed time, and corresponds to a consistent

split of the energy-momentum tensor in a part bound to the electron, and
a part radiating away.
in terms of this momentum, transfering the third

term on the right hand side of eq. (2.1) to the left, the equation of motion
assumes a completely conventional interpretation: the rate of change of the
momentum is equal to the applied force, where the latter consists of two

pieces, the externally applied force (term (1)) and the radiation reaction
force (term (2)). this interpretation is very useful, as we shall see, to guide

the intuition.

6 which time does not permit us to go into, but see [10].

5

4. tunnelling

in spite of the venerable history of the subject, a whole new class of solutions
lay undiscovered until recently[12]. the surprising fact is that, according to

eq. (2.1), a classical particle may cross a potential barrier provided it can do
so in a time of the order of 0. the demonstration is completely elementary
for a particle crossing a rectangular potential barrier, in one dimension. the

equation, in natural units, reduces to

.
p=

.
v 

..
v= f .

(4.1)

this may be viewed as the non-relativistic approximation (where v is the
velocity), but the equation is in fact exact also relativistically if v is taken to
be the rapidity. 7 the electron only experiences a force when crossing the
boundaries of the regions of constant potential. the solutions in the separate
force-free regions, which are easy to write down explicitly, are connected using
the following matching condition8 on the momentum, or the acceleration, the
position and the velocity being continuous:

p =  v = v /v .

(4.2)

this results in the following set of equations relating the initial and nal
velocities to the time t spent in the barrier region of width w and height v :

w = vf t 

v
vf

(et

 1 + t ) ,

vi = vf 

v
vf

+

vf 

v
vf

v
(1  et )

.

(4.3)

although the analysis of these equations in general is not very dicult, it
becomes particularly simple when the nal electron energy is equal to half

7the presentation we follow in the sequel is non-relativistic, but only because of the
more transparant relation between distance and velocity in that case. none of our conclu-
sions depend on it.

8this can be checked using the formal equation

rectangular barrier idealisation is discussed in [12].

6

.

p= v  (x). the validity of the

the barrier height, v = v2

f . an explicit example is, for v = 144, w = 3:

x = 7(et  1) + 16t

9(et  1)

3 + 12(t  t )

t < 0 ,
0 < t < t ,
t < t

,

(4.4)

with t = log 4/3. the matching condition eq.(4.2) implies jumps of 16 and

12 units in the acceleration at t = 0 and t = t . tunneling occurs, the
initial energy is equal to 128, a fraction 1/9 below the barrier height.

the motion can be described intuitively by following the bound momen-
tum, eq. (4.1), while the electron crosses the barrier. its value is piecewise
constant, but the velocity component of the momentum and the acceleration

component may change continuously, v = p + constant. exp( ). this is akin
to the pre-acceleration phenomenon. in the regions outside the barrier the

momentum is equal to its asymptotic value. under the barrier itself the value
is vf  v /vf . thus, the momentum may be in the same direction or opposite
to the velocity.9 within a time of the order of the pre-acceleration time 0
this situation may be rectied, bringing momentum and velocity back in
line. however, in the meantime the electron may have reached the other side

of the barrier. in that case, it tunnels through.

whereas the details of this example are of course special, the tunnelling

phenomenon is actually quite generic. a decisive parameter is the width of
the potential. if the electron can cross the barrier within a time of order 1,

i.e. the pre-acceleration time 0, tunnelling occurs. the smaller the width,
the wider the range of initial velocities for which the electron will tunnel.

since a sudden step in the potential actually corresponds to an innite
force, one may well be worried that the tunnelling solutions are an artifact
of that unphysical feature. this is not the case. we have made a detailed

investigation of what happens at a (steep) ramp, a potential step being an
idealisation of this. the results are shown in gure 1, taken from [12].

9the explicit example given above is special in that the momentum vanishes in the

intermediate region.

7

figure 1: plot of the initial velocity vs. the nal velocity for the solution
of the lorentz-dirac equation in a linearly rising step potential (note the
dierence in scale). the dotted lines leave out the radiation reaction. the
inset shows the potential and kinetic energy as a function of position for four
representative examples. the four types of motion are discussed in the text.
for the plots, a step height v = 9 was used, and a slope width  = 0.5.

8

in keeping with the solution strategy that corresponds to integrating the
equations backwards (so as to use the asymptotic condition with maximal

eciency), the plot is of incoming velocity (rapidity) vs. outgoing velocity.
the inset shows the four types of motion around the ramp, the main gure

shows the relation between the asymptotic velocities. the branch labeled
iv is investigated in very great detail in [14]. the branch ii, in the limit

of an innitely steep potential, is investigated numerically in [15], where it
is concluded that for a certain range of initial velocities no solution exists.
whereas this is true for the innitely steep case, we see that the missing range

of small initial velocities is covered by our branch i, and it is therefore an
unphysical feature of the innite -force approximation. we see clearly that

it corresponds to the particle turning back under the sloping region, which is
reduced to zero width in that approximation. for more details on gure 1,

we refer to the original paper. the complete gure is a good illustration of
the fact that for specic initial velocities several dierent solution may exist:

up to ve in this case, on branches i,ii and iv. a complementary remark is
that actually for all initial values a solution is found. we do not know of a
proof of this fact in any generality, nor have we attempted to construct one.

it would clearly be worrying if some initial velocities would turn out to be
impossible, but happily this is not the case here.

5. remarks

for the electron, as mentioned in section 3, the pre-acceleration time (times c)
is a factor  smaller than the compton wavelength, and therefore one expects
quantum eects to mask any classical eect on that timescale. lacking any

solid investigation, it is an open question whether a full quantum theory,
qed for instance, does give rise to the lde in some suitable limit. if so,

the classical tunnelling solutions we found (and the undeterminacy of nal
velocities) should have a quantum counterpart and correspond to physical

features of the electron theory.

9

for magnetic monopoles, this argument may be reversed10: since in that
case the size of the coupling is the inverse of the electric coupling, quantum

theory does not bail out the classical theory, so the strange features of the
lde and its solutions should nd a resolution within the classical theory.

happily, purely classical eld theories are available where a monopole exists
[16] as a soliton. the monopole is extended, and the elds have a nite

energy so that no innite renormalisation is needed. since another length
scale comes in due to the nite extension, the nal form of the eective
equation of motion does not have to reproduce eq. (2.1) exactly. it would
be interesting to investigate11 to what extent it does, and especially what
happens to the unexpected features like tunnelling.

as soon as a substructure of the electron is considered, other possibili-
ties lie open. apart from mechanical models, probably the oldest variation

on this theme is the modication of electrodynamics known as born-infeld
electrodynamics. in currently fashionable developments in connection with

string and m-theory, actions of the born-infeld type govern the dynamics of
d-branes. point charge solutions in the classical theory got a new lease of
life12 following their use[18, 19] for the description of strings ending on these
branes. in such an interpretation, an electrostatic self-energy divergence is
re-interpreted as the (innite) length of a string stretching from a 3-brane

to innity. a nite energy solution is obtained by having the string end on
another brane, at a nite distance. therefore, from a vantage point on the

brane, this conguration provides a nite relativistic model for a point charge
as well. a serious drawback, for our purposes, of the born-infeld dynamics
is its non-linearity. it is not clear whether a consistent split can be made

between the eld of the point charge and the external elds, or between the
energy-momentum bound to this charge and the energy -momentum of

10this remark discusses a point raised by g. t hooft at the meeting.
11 in [17], in a the nonrelativistic approximation, a correction to eq.

(2.1) is found

proportional to fourth order derivatives.

12old solutions to new equations.

10

radiation: these were instrumental in the development of the lorentz-dirac
it would certainly be amusing if string theory would not only
equation.

open new vistas on traditional eld theory, but would improve the status of
classical electron theory as well.

acknowledgements: f.d. acknowledges the nancial support of the f.w.o.
(belgium). w.t. thanks the organisers of the meeting in honor of f. englert

for the occasion to present this work.

references

1. p. a. m. dirac,proc. roy. soc. (london) a167 (1938)148

2. p. gnadig, z. kunszt, p. hasenfratz and j. kuti, ann. phys. 116 (1978)

380

3. j. d. jackson, classical electrodynamics (wiley, new york 1962)

a. o. barut, electrodynamics and classical theory of elds and particles,
2nd ed., dover, new york, 1980

p. pearle, classical models of the electron, in electromagnetism: paths
to research, d. teplitz, ed. (plenum, new york, 1982)

4. f. rohrlich, classical charged particles (addison-wesley, reading, ma,

1965). the ve page story the classical description of charged particles
in physics today (march 1962, p. 18) is a somewhat lighter read.

5. t. erber, fortschr. phys. 9 (1961) 343

6. s. coleman, classical electron theory from a modern standpoint, rand
corporation preprint rm-2820-pr, september 1961; published in elec-

tromagnetism: paths to research, d. teplitz, ed. (plenum, new york,
1982)

7. f. rohrlich, loc. cit. p. 155.see also p.261.

8. w. e. baylis and j. huschilt, phys. rev. d13, 3237, (1976)

11

9. a. carati, p. delzanno, l. galgani and j. sassarini, nonlinearity 8, 65

(1995)

10. r. haag, z. naturforsch.a10 (1955) 752

11. d. endres, the physical solution to the lorentz-dirac equations in a

constant magnetic field, sscl-530, mar 1992

12. f. denef, j. raeymaekers, u. m. studer and w. troost, phys.rev. e56

(1997) 3624

13. c. teitelboim, phys. rev. d 1, 1572 (1970); 2, 1763 (1970)

c. teitelboim, d. villaroel and ch. g. van weert, riv. nuovo cimento

3, 1 (1980)

14. s. parrott and d. j. endres, found. phys. 25, 441 (1995)

15. s. f. gull, charged paticles at potential steps, in the electron, d.
hestenes and a. weingartshofer eds. (kluwer, dordrecht, the nether-

lands, 1991)

16. g. t hooft, nucl.phys.b79 (1974) 276

a.m. polyakov, jetp lett.20 (1974) 194

17. dongsu bak and hyunsoo min, phys.rev. d56 (1997) 6665.

18. c. g. callan and j. m. maldacena, nucl.phys. b513 (1998) 198

19. a. hashimoto, phys.rev.d57 (1998) 6441

12

