father time. ii. a physical basis behind feynmans idea of

antiparticles moving backward in time, and an extension

of the cpt theorem to include non-local gauge fields

t k rai dastidar* and krishna rai dastidar

indian association for the cultivation of science, calcutta 700 032, india

abstract

it was demonstrated in a recent paper (mod.phys.lett. a13, 1265 (1998) ; hep-
th/9902020) that the existence of a non-thermodynamic arrow of time at the atomic level
is a fundamental requirement for conservation of energy in matter-radiation interaction.
since the universe consists of two things only  energy and massive matter  we argue
that as a consequence of this earlier result, particles and antiparticles must necessarily
move in opposite directions in time. our result further indicates that the cpt theorem
can be extended to cover non-local gauge elds.

9
9
9
1

 
t
c
o
1
2

 

 
 

2
v
3
3
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

* atomic & molecular physics group, department of materials science. electronic

address : mstkrd@mahendra.iacs.res.in

 department of spectroscopy. electronic address : spkrd@mahendra.iacs.res.in

1

i. introduction

some time ago [1] we obtained a result that matter elds possess a non-local u(1)
gauge transformation symmetry that necessitates invoking a non-local electromagnetic
eld, and that a non-thermodynamic arrow of time at the quantum (atomic) level is en-
forced upon us as a necessary condition for conservation of energy in matter-radiation
interactions. based upon this result, it was subsequently predicted [2] that the spectrum
of a blackbody radiation passing through gaseous matter would show an apparent devia-
tion from the planck formula. a very simple experimental test for verifying this prediction
has been suggested in [2], where it was also shown that the results of a balloon-borne
measurement [3] of the cosmic microwave background radiation (cmbr) spectrum does
seem to show such a featurea.

subject to verication of the above theoretical prediction, we argued recently [5] that,
as a necessary condition for energy conservation in matter-radiation interactions, all parti-
cles in the universe subject to electromagnetic interactions should follow this one and the
same arrow of time through the agency of the cmbrb. the present paper, which is a com-
panion to [5], addresses reactions which do not conserve energy, but involve massenergy
conversion, e.g. particle-antiparticle annihilation, pair production, particle decay etc.

ii. theory and results

to make the present paper self-contained, we briey recapitulate here how the times
arrow appears in the theory as a necessary condition for conservation of energy in the
atomic level. (see [1] for details.) a matrix element for matter-radiation interaction with
the non-local electromagnetic eld potential a(x, x) where x(r,t) is typically of the form

mf i(t)  hf (x), nf |p.a(x, x)|i(x), nii,

the integration running over d3r and d4x. special relativity requires that the time integral
over dt should run from  to (t  /c) [where  = |r  r|] for the retarded interaction,
and from (t + /c) to + for the advanced interaction. after fourier expanding a in
two sets of photon modes (see, e.g. [6]), the time integration over dt gives us the energy-
conserving delta-function (ef , ei + h + h ) in the correlated two-photon absorption
process (see below ; this is one of the new results in [1]). formally, this time integration
runs from t =  to t = +. however, if we agree to dene that the atom has been
excited, i.e. the matrix element has come into existence, at the time t = 0, then it is

a in [2] we also discuss why the cosmic background explorer (cobe ) satellite measure-

ments of the cmbr spectrum [4] do not show this feature.

b the restriction, that the particles must be subject to electromagnetic interactions,
simply reects the present status of the theory (which is undergoing continual develop-
ment), and there seems to be no reason why it should be fundamental ; work is in progress
to see if it can be removed.

2

at once obvious that the segment r 0

giving nally a double integral to be chosen from

 dt does not contribute anything to the t-integral,

0

where f (t) = exp(cid:2) i

g(t)dt,

f (t)dt z t/c

z 
h (ef t  ht)(cid:3) , g(t) = exp(cid:2) i



t+/c

g(t)dt!

z 
h (eit + h t)(cid:3). it is obvious that the

retarded interaction gives the required -function for energy conservation, while the ad-
vanced interaction fails to do so. thus we are constrained to limit the non-local temporal
correlation to the past only ; the fundamental principle of energy conservation has given
us an arrow of time, i.e. the principle of causality, as a corollary.c

we are thus led to the result that in atomic-scale reactions, forward motion in time
of all the reactants/products is a necessary condition for conservation of energy. what
happens if energy is not conserved ? the universe contains but two things  energy
and massive matter  and massenergy conversion is the only possible outcome of such
reactions. however, according to our earlier result, such non-conservation of energy in
atomic-scale reactions can take place if and only if one or more of the reactants/products
do not move forward in time, i.e. move backward in time (since time is one-dimensional).

we may ask the question from the opposite viewpoint : what happens in a reaction
if one or more of the reactants/products travel backward in time ? according to [1], the
answer is simple ; energy will not be conserved, hence massenergy conversion must occur
in such reactions. (of course, the precise time interval between the start of the reaction
and the massenergy conversion depends on the particular characteristics in the process
involved ; for example, positron-electron annihilation can take place either instantaneously
or after positronium formation, depending on the collision geometry.)

we see therefore that from our times arrow, we have obtained the result that in
reactions where massenergy conversion takes place, at least one of the reactant/product
particles must be travelling in time in a direction opposite to the others. when we recall
that such reactions must involve both particles and antiparticles, then from known
properties of antiparticles, we conclude that an antiparticle can be obtained only under
a combined operation of charge conjugation c, parity p and time reversal t (in any
order) on a particle ; similarly, cpt operating on an antiparticle gives us a particle.
since the total number of particles and antiparticles in any process involving particles and
antiparticles is always even, the matrix element for the process remains invariant under
the cpt operation. (this invariance is not quite self-evident, as we remember that the
cpt theorem is supposed to be valid for local eld theories only ; our work seems to have
broadened its scope.)

c as shown in [1], however, we have to pay a price for it ; the correlation with the past
is to be understood in an epr-like sense and not in a lorentz invariant sense, if we are
to maintain energy conservation. (this serves to remind us that quantum mechanics and
special relativity have always been strange bedfellows.) it is, of course, just a convention
of language that we visualise particles, i.e. the constituents of our own universe as moving
forward in time, thus establishing a causal link with the past and not with the future.

3

to conclude, we have found a physical basis for feynmans idea that antiparticles can
be considered as particles moving backward in time, and we have also found that the scope
of the cpt theorem can be extended to cover non-local gauge elds.

we thank dr j chakravarti, department of theoretical physics for his interest in the

ongoing work.

4

references

1. t k rai dastidar and krishna rai dastidar, mod. phys. lett. a13, 1265 (1998) ;

errata a13, 2247 (1998) ; hep-th/9902020

2. t k rai dastidar, mod. phys. lett. a 14, 1193 (1999) ; quant-ph/9903043

3. d p woody and p l richards, phys. rev. lett. 42, 925 (1979)

4. j c mather et al, astrophys. j. 420, 439 (1994)

5. t k rai dastidar, father time. i. does the cosmic microwave background radi-
ation provide a universal arrow of time ? quant-ph/9903053 (to appear in mod.
phys. lett. a).

6. i m gelfand and g e shilov, generalised functions (acad. press, 1964) vol. 1,

chap. 2, eq. 1.3(1)

5

