9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

5
1

 
 

1
v
6
0
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

hep-th/9906106
aei-1999-8

on hidden symmetries in d = 11 supergravity

and beyond1

h. nicolai

max-planck-institut fur gravitationsphysik

am muhlenberg, haus 5
d-14476 golm, germany

this talk is about hidden symmetries in eleven dimensions, but
it is equally a tribute to a scientist and friend, who is eminently

visible in four space-time dimensions: francois englert, in whose
honor this meeting is being held. therefore, before entering dans
le vif du sujet i would like to express my gratitude for having had

the opportunity and privilege to learn from him and to work with
him, and for all the fun we have had  involving, amongst other

things, dinosaurs within dinosaurs [1] (the ancestor of all modern
inationary theories) and their eleven-dimensional avatars [2], as

well as higher states of consciousness [3] and monster strings [4].

these days, many of us who have not yet attained the wisdom

that comes with an emeritat, but who share francois enthusiasm

1invited talk at the conference fundamental interactions: from symme-
tries to black holes, 24 - 27 march, universite libre de bruxelles, belgium.

for all of physics mysteries, are participants in the hunt for a still
elusive theory, called m theory, which is to unify all known con-

sistent string theories and to relate them through a web of non-
perturbative dualities [5, 6]. this theory would also accommodate

d = 11 supergravity [7] as a strong coupling limit via the relations

r11 = sgs

p = 3
3

sgs

where p is the d = 11 planck length, s the string length, gs the
string coupling constant, and r11 the radius of the circle on which
d = 11 supergravity is compactied to ten dimensions (the limit is
taken in such a way that p stays nite while gs   and s  0,
hence r11  ).
it is clear from these relations that present
knowledge covers only the boundary of m theory (where either
the massive string modes or the d = 11 kaluza klein modes are

sent to innity), but tells us almost nothing about its bulk  the
true domain of quantum gravity. still, we can probably anticipate

that it will be a pregeometrical theory in the sense that space time
as we know it will emerge as a derived concept and that it should

possess a huge symmetry group involving new types of lie algebras
(such as hyperbolic kac moody algebras) and perhaps even more

general structures such as quantum groups.

according to the currently most popular proposal, m theory
is the n   limit of the maximally supersymmetric quantum

mechanical su(n) matrix model (see e.g. [8] for reviews and many
references). this model had already appeared in an earlier study

of the d = 11 supermembrane in a at background in the light cone
gauge, and for any nite n, it can alternatively be obtained by

dimensional reduction of the maximally extended supersymmetric
yang mills theory in d = 10 with gauge group su(n) to one (time)

dimension. however, while matrix theory is pregeometrical in the

2

sense that the target space coordinates are replaced by matrices,
thus implying a kind of non-commutative geometry, the symmetries

of dimensionally reduced supergravities that we are concerned with
here, are hard to come by.

in this contribution, i will briey describe some recent work
done in collaboration with s. melosch [9], and with k. koepsell

and h. samtleben [10], which was motivated by recent advances in
string theory (as well as the possible existence of an ashtekar-type
canonical formulation of d = 11 supergravity). although, at rst

sight, this work may seem to have little to do with the issues raised
above, it could actually be relevant in the context of m theory, as-

suming (as we do) that further progress will crucially depend on the
identication of the underlying symmetries, and that the hidden ex-

ceptional symmetries of maximal supergravity theories discovered
long ago [11, 12] may provide important clues as to where we should

be looking. support for this strategy derives from the fact that
some local symmetries of the dimensionally reduced theories can
be lifted back to eleven dimensions. more precisely, it was shown

in [13, 14] that there exist new versions of d = 11 supergravity with
local so(1, 3)  su(8) and so(1, 2)  so(16) tangent space sym-

metry, respectively. in both versions the supersymmetry variations
acquire a polynomial form from which the corresponding formulas

for the maximal supergravities in four and three dimensions can
be read o directly and without the need for complicated duality

redenitions. this reformulation can thus be regarded as a step
towards the complete fusion of the bosonic degrees of freedom of
d = 11 supergravity (i.e. the elfbein and the antisymmetric tensor
am n p ) in a way which is in harmony with the hidden symmetries
of the dimensionally reduced theories.

the existence of alternative versions of d = 11 supergravity,

3

which, though equivalent on-shell to the original version of [7], dif-
fer from it o-shell, strongly suggests the existence of a novel kind of

exceptional geometry for d = 11 supergravity, and thus the big-
ger theory containing it. this new geometry would be intimately

tied to the special properties of the exceptional groups, and would
be characterized by relations which have no analog in ordinary rie-

mannian geometry. much of the ongoing work centers on the role
of extended objects (such as 2- and 5-branes in eleven dimensions),
which couple to the antisymmetric tensor elds present in d = 11

and d = 10 supergravities. since these antisymmetric tensors are
here dualized away, our formulation might open new vistas on a

unied description of the basic objects of m theory.

we will here concentrate on the so(1, 2)  so(16) invariant

version of d = 11 supergravity [14]. to derive it from the original
formulation of d = 11 supergravity, one rst breaks the original

tangent space symmetry so(1,10) to its subgroup so(1, 2)so(8)
through a partial choice of gauge for the elfbein, and subsequently
enlarges it again to so(1, 2)  so(16) by introducing new gauge

degrees of freedom. the construction thus requires a 3+8 split
of the d = 11 coordinates and indices, implying a similar split

for all tensors of the theory. the symmetry enhancement of the
transverse (helicity) group so(9)  so(1, 10) to so(16) requires

suitable redenitions of the bosonic and fermionic elds, or, more
succinctly, their combination into tensors w.r.t. the new tangent

space symmetry. it is important, however, that the dependence on
all eleven coordinates is retained throughout.

in the bosonic sector, the elfbein and the three-index photon

are combined into new objects covariant w.r.t. to d = 3 coordinate
reparametrizations and the new tangent space symmetry so(1, 2)

so(16) (similar redenitions must be made for the fermionic elds,

4

but we will not give explicit formulas here for lack of space). in a
special lorentz gauge the elfbein takes the form

m =  1e a

0

e a

 b m
 e a
m
e a
m

!

where curved d = 11 indices are decomposed as m = (, m) with

 = 0, 1, 2 and m = 3, ..., 10 (with a similar decomposition of the
at indices), and  := det e a
m . it thus contains the (weyl rescaled)
m, all of which are left
dreibein and the kaluza klein vectors b
untouched. by contrast, we will trade the internal achtbein e a
m
for a rectangular 248-bein em
a ) containing the remaining
matter-like degrees of freedom, where the index a  ([ij], a)
labels the 248-dimensional adjoint representation of e8(8) in the
so(16) decomposition 248  120  128. this 248-bein, which
in the reduction to three dimensions contains all the propagating

a  (em

ij , em

bosonic matter degrees of freedom of d = 3, n = 16 supergravity,
is dened in a special so(16) gauge by

(em

ij , em

a ) :=( 1e m

0

a a
 

if [ij] or a = ( )
otherwise

where the so(16) indices ij or a are decomposed w.r.t. the diag-
onal subgroup so(8)  (so(8)  so(8))diag of so(16) (see [14] for
details). being the inverse densitized internal achtbein contracted
with an so(8) -matrix, this object is similar to the inverse densi-
tized triad in ashtekars reformulation of einsteins theory [15].
 ) and qa

  (qij

in addition we need composite elds qa
m , p a

m 
(qij
m), which together make up an e8(8) connection again in
eleven dimensions. their explicit expressions in terms of the d =
11 coecients of anholonomity and the four-index eld strength
fm n p q are, however, too lengthy to reproduce here [14].

 , p a

5

the new geometry is encoded into constraints between the viel-
bein components, which rely in an essential way on special proper-
ties of the exceptional group e8(8). with the e8(8) indices a, b, . . . (=
1, . . . , 248), we have

(pj)ab

cdem

c en

d = 0

where pj are the projectors onto the j = 1 , 248 and 3875 represen-
tations of e8(8). (note that the projectors onto the j = 27000 and
30380 representations do not vanish.) in addition, the 248-bein
and the new connection elds are subject to a vielbein postulate

similar to the usual vielbein postulate, which states the covariant
constancy of the 248-bein w.r.t. to an e8(8) covariant derivative
involving the e8(8) connection qa
m . for instance, for m = m we
have

men

a + fab

cqb

men

c = 0

where f abc are the e8(8) structure constants. (the relations with
m and are slightly more
m =  involve the kaluza klein vectors b
complicated). the supersymmetry variations of d = 11 supergrav-
ity can now be re-expressed entirely in terms of these new variables

and their fermionic partners [14, 9].

despite the e8(8) covariance of these relations, it must be
stressed, however, that the full theory does not respect e8(8) invari-
ance, as is already obvious from the fact that the fermions do not
t into representations of e8(8). however, the algebraic relations
given above can be exploited to show [10] that there exists an e8(8)
matrix v in eleven dimensions such that

em
a =

1
60

tr(cid:16)z mvxav 1(cid:17)

where the xa are the generators of e8(8), and the z m span an
eight-dimensional nilpotent subalgebra of e8(8) (there are altogether

6

36 = 8 + 28 such nilpotent generators, whose role in relating the
various dualized forms of dimensionally reduced supergravity has

been explained in [16]). because the fundamental and the adjoint
representations of e8(8) are the same, we have vxav 1 = xbv b
and can thus rewrite this relation in the form

a

em
a = v m

a

this means that the (inverse densitized) achtbein, which itself is
part of the elfbein of d = 11 supergravity, has become part of an
e8(8) matrix v in eleven dimensions! furthermore, it then follows
from the generalized vielbein postulate stated above that the m =
m part of the e8(8) connection qa
m can be simply expressed in terms
of this matrix via

qm = v 1mv

this simple formula, however, does not work for the low dimen-
sional components qa
 .

the results obtained so far suggest further extensions incorpo-
rating innite dimensional symmetries. more specically, the fact

that the construction outlined above works with a 4+7 and 3+8
split of the indices suggests that we should be able to construct

versions of d = 11 supergravity with innite dimensional tangent
space symmetries, which would be based on a 2+9 or even a 1+10
split of the indices. this would also be desirable in view of the fact

that the new versions are simple only in their internal sectors, as
put in evidence by the above formula for qa
m. the general strategy
would thus be to further enlarge the internal sector by absorbing
more and more degrees of freedom into it, such that in the nal

step, only an einbein would be left in the low dimensional sector.
however, it is also clear that the elaboration of these ideas will not

be an easy task. after all, it took a considerable eort extending

7

over many years to show that the general pattern continues when
one descends to d = 2 and that the hidden symmetries become in-

nite dimensional, generalizing the geroch group of general relativity
[17].

there is some reason to believe that a generalization along these
lines will take us beyond d = 11 supergravity. the fundamental ob-

ject of the theory could then turn out to be an innite generalization
of the vierbein of general relativity, which would be acted upon from
one side by a vast extension of the lorentz group, containing not

only space-time, but also internal symmetries, and perhaps even
local supersymmetries. for the left action, one would have to ap-

peal to some kind of generalized covariance principle, which would
involve the e11d symmetries.

to put these ideas into perspective, let us recall some facts about
dimensionally reduced maximal supergravity to two dimensions.

following the empirical rules of dimensional reduction one is led
to predict e9 = e(1)
as a symmetry for the dimensional reduction
8
of d = 11 supergravity to two dimensions [12, 18]. this expectation

is borne out by the existence of a linear system for maximal n = 16
supergravity in two dimensions [19] (see [20] for the bosonic theory,

and [21] for a more recent summary). as is usually the case for
integrable systems, the linear system requires the introduction of

an extra spectral parameter t, and the extension of the -model

matrix v(x) to a matrix bv(x; t) depending on this extra parameter

t. an unusual feature is that, due to the presence of gravitational
degrees of freedom, this parameter becomes coordinate dependent,
i.e. we have t = t(x; w), where w is an integration constant, some-

times referred to as the constant spectral parameter whereas t
itself is called the variable spectral parameter.

the (nite dimensional) coset structure of the higher dimen-

8

sional theories has a natural continuation in two dimensions, with
the only dierence that the symmetry groups are innite dimen-

sional. this property is manifest from the transformation proper-

ties of the linear system matrix bv, with a global ane symmetry

acting from the left, and a local symmetry corresponding to some
maximal compact subgroup acting from the right:

bv(x; t)  g(w)bv(x; t)h(x; t)

here g(w)  e9(9) with ane parameter w, and the subgroup
to which h(x; t) belongs is dened as follows [18, 20, 21]. let
 be the involution characterizing the coset space e8(8)/so(16):
then h(t)  so(16) is dened to consist of all   invariant el-
ements of e9(9), where the extended involution   is dened by
 (h(t)) :=  h(t1), with  = +1 (or 1) for a lorentzian (eu-
clidean) worldsheet. observe that so(16) is dierent from the
ane extension of so(16) for either choice of sign.

introducing a suitable triangular gauge and taking into account
the compensating so(16) transformations to re-establish the cho-
sen gauge where necessary, one nds that these symmetries are re-

alized in a non-linear and non-local fashion on the basic physical
elds. moreover, they act as duality transformations in the sense

that they mix scalar elds with their duals. at the linear level, a
scalar eld  and its dual  in two dimensions are related by

  = 

if we were just dealing with free elds (as in conformal eld theory),
there would not be much more to duality than this simple equation,

since a second dualization obviously brings us back to the original
eld (up to an integration constant). the crucial dierence here is

that, as a consequence of the non-linearity of the eld equations,

9

there are innitely many dual potentials because each dualization
now produces a new (i.e. higher order) dual potential.
it is ba-

sically this non-linearity inherited from einsteins equations which
explains why the group of duality transformations becomes innite

dimensional in two dimensions. remarkably, however, already the
free eld relation above (with  replaced by any target space coor-

dinate) is central to modern string duality  for instance implying
the emergence of d(irichlet) branes through the interchange of neu-
mann and dirichlet boundary conditions for open strings [22]. it is

furthermore well known that the integration constant arising in the
dualization of a compactied string target space coordinate is as-

sociated with string winding modes, and that duality interchanges
kaluza klein and winding modes. since we here get innitely many

such integration constants (i.e. one for every dualization), we are
led to predict the existence of an innite tower of novel winding

modes over and above the ones seen so far seen in string theory.
these could be related to the mysterious states found in [23] that
cannot be accounted for by the standard counting arguments.

by representing the moduli space of solutions m of the bosonic
equations of motion of d = 11 supergravity with nine commuting

space-like killing vectors as

m =

solutions of eld equations

dieomorphisms

=

e9(9)

so(16)

one has managed to endow this space, which a priori is very com-
plicated, with a group theoretic structure that makes it much easier

to handle. in particular, the integrability of the system is directly
linked to the fact that m possesses an innite dimensional isome-
try group e9(9). the introduction of innitely many gauge degrees
of freedom embodied in the subgroup so(16) linearizes and local-
izes the action of this isometry group on the space of solutions. of

10

course, in making such statements, one should keep in mind that
a mathematically rigorous construction of such spaces is a thorny

problem. we can ignore these subleties here, not least because these
spaces ultimately will have to be quantized anyway.

elevating the local symmetries of maximal supergravity in two
dimensions to eleven dimensions would thus require the existence

of yet another extension of the theory, for which the lorentz group
so(1, 10) is replaced by so(1, 1)so(16) (the subgroup so(16)
can be interpreted as an extension of the transverse group so(9)

in eleven dimensions). accordingly, we would now decompose the
elfbein into a zweibein and nine kaluza klein vectors b m
(with
m = 2, ..., 10). the remaining internal neunbein would have to be
replaced by an unendlichbein (or -bein, for short) em
a (x; t).
the parameter t is necessary in order to parametrize the innite di-
mensional extension of the symmetry group; whether it would still



be a spectral parameter in the conventional sense of the word for
the lifted theory, remains to be seen. one important dierence
with the dimensionally reduced theory is, however, clear: in eleven

dimensions, there is no anolog of the dualization mechanism, which
would ensure that despite the existence of innitely many dual po-

tentials, there are only nitely many physical degrees of freedom.
this means that the construction will almost certainly take us be-

yond d = 11 supergravity.

some information can be deduced from the requirement that in

a (x; t) to the linear system matrix bv(x; t), analogous to

the dimensional reduction to d = 2, there should exist a formula
relating em
the one relating em
a (x) to the e8(8) matrix v(x) before. for this
purpose, we would need a ninth nilpotent generator to complement
the z ms; an obvious candidate is the central charge generator c,
since it obeys hc|ci = hc|z mi = 0 for all m = 3, ..., 10. the param-

11

eter t, introduced somewhat ad hoc for the parametrization of the
-bein, must coincide in the dimensional reduction with the spec-

tral parameter of the d = 2 theory. furthermore, the generalized
-bein postulate should reduce to the linear system of d = 2

supergravity in this reduction.

one dierence with the previous situation, where the tangent
space symmetry was still nite, is that the lie algebra of so(16)
also involves the non-compact e8(8) generators, but in such a way
that the generalized cartan killing form on e9(9) is still positive on
all these generators. this follows from consideration of the t de-
pendence of the linear system of the dimensionally reduced theory
and shows that the new connections would constitute an so(16)
rather than an e9(9) gauge connection. this means that the co-
variantizations in the generalized vielbein postulate would be in
precise correpondence with the local symmetries, in contrast with
the previous relations which looked e8(8) covariant, whereas the full
theory was actually invariant only under so(16). another curious
feature is the following: in two dimensions, the linear system ma-

trix contains all degrees of freedom, including the fermionic ones,
and the local n = 16 supersymmetry can be bosonized into a local
so(16) gauge transformation [24]. this could mean that there is
a bosonization of fermions in the sense that em
a (x; t) would describe
bosonic and fermionic degress of freedom.

what has been said here could be summarized as follows:

in

searching for a possible candidate m theory, one should not only
concentrate on dimensionally reduced maximally extended rigidly
supersymmetric theories (= supersymmetric yang mills theories),

but also consider the dimensionally reduced maximally extended
locally supersymmetric theory. the idea (already proposed in [19])

is that a third quantized version of maximal supergravity in two

12

dimensions would give rise via a kind of bootstrap to a theory be-
yond d = 11 supergravity that would contain the latter in the same

way as superstring theories contain d = 10 supergravity and d = 10
super-yang-mills theories as special limits. however, it is not clear

how (and if) this idea ts with presently accepted points of view.

acknowledgements:

i am very grateful to the organizers for

i would also like to thank
inviting me to this splendid event.
k. koepsell, s. melosch and h.a.j. samtleben for the enjoyable

collaboration on which the new and as yet unpublished results re-
ported here are based, and b. de wit for discussions.

references

1. r. brout, f. englert, e. gunzig, gen. rel. grav. 10 (1979) 1

2. f. englert, h. nicolai, cern-th-3711 (1983)

3. b. biran, b. de wit, f. englert, h. nicolai, phys. lett. 124b

(1983) 45

4. f. englert, h. nicolai, b. schellekens, nucl. phys. b274

(1986) 315

5. e. witten, nucl. phys. b443 (1995) 85, nucl. phys. b460

(1995) 335

6. p.k. townsend, phys. lett. b350 (1995) 184, hep-th/9612121

7. e. cremmer, b. julia, j. scherk, phys. lett. 76b (1978) 409

8. b. de wit, hep-th/9701169;

t. banks, hep-th/9710231

9. s. melosch, h. nicolai, phys. lett. b416 (1998) 91

10. k. koepsell, h. nicolai, h.a.j. samtleben, work in progress

11. e. cremmer, b. julia, nucl. phys. b159 (1979) 141

13

12. b. julia, in superspace and supergravity, eds. s.w. hawking

and m. rocek (cambridge university press, 1981)

13. b. de wit, h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b274 (1986) 363

14. h. nicolai, phys.lett. 187b (1987) 363

15. a. ashtekar, phys. rev. lett. 57 (1986) 2244

16. e. cremmer, b. julia, c.n. pope, h. lu, nucl. phys. b523

(1998) 73

17. r. geroch, j. math. phys. 13 (1972) 394;

w. kinnersley, d.m. chitre, j. math. phys. 18 (1977) 1538

18. b. julia, in unied theories and beyond, proc. 5th johns hop-
kins workshop on current problems in particle theory, johns

hopkins university, baltimore, 1982

19. h. nicolai, phys. lett. 194b (1987) 402

20. p. breitenlohner, d. maison, ann. inst. h. poincare 46 (1987)

215

21. b. julia, h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b482 (1996) 431

22. j. polchinski, hep-th/9611050

23. s. elitzur, a. giveon, d. kutasov, e. rabinovici, hep-

th/9707217

24. h. nicolai, n.p. warner, comm. math. phys. 125 (1989) 384

14

