9
9
9
1

 

p
e
s
9
2

 

 
 

5
v
0
9
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

yitp-99-37
hep-th/9906090
june 1999

branes in type 0/type ii duality

yosuke imamura

yukawa institute for theoretical physics,
kyoto university, kyoto 606-8502, japan

abstract

we derive relations between type 0 and type ii d-brane congurations under
the t-duality suggested by bergman and gaberdiel and conrm that the mass-
less elds on d-branes are identical to those on the dual d-brane congurations.
furthermore, we discuss dualities of type 0 and type ii ns5-branes and nd that
the dual of an unwrapped type 0 ns5-brane is a kaluza-klein monopole with
non-supersymmetric blow up modes.

imamura@yukawa.kyoto-u.ac.jp

1 introduction

during the last year, type 0 string theories[1, 2], which are superstring theories without space-

time supersymmetry, have attracted much attention. they allow us the possibility to analyze
non-supersymmetric qcd by means of the brane techniques developed for supersymmetric
theories[3]. however, the properties of type 0 theories are not as well known as other super-

symmetric string theories, because bps conditions, which provide a great deal of information
concerning supersymmetric theories, are not available. recently, bergman and gaberdiel

found a duality between type 0 and type ii theories[4]. with this duality, it may become pos-
sible to obtain new properties of type 0 theories from knowledge of type ii theories. therefore,

it is important to investigate this duality. the purpose of this paper is to nd the duality
relations between brane congurations in type 0 theories and those in type ii theories.

2 type 0/type ii duality

as is mentioned in [4], type ii theory compactied on s1 with monodromy (1)fs is t-
dual to type 0 theory on s1 with monodromy (1)fr, where fs and fr are operators that
count spacetime fermions and right-moving worldsheet fermions, respectively.1
in ref.[4],
these compactications are represented as compactications on s1/z2. z2 is generated by an
operator s  (1)fs or s  (1)fr, where s is a half shift of s1. these two expressions are the
same, except that the denitions of the radius of s1 are dierent by a factor 2. (precisely,
duals of type iia and type iib are type 0b and type 0a, respectively. we omit the letters

a and b in what follows.) instead of explicitly showing the equivalence of these two theories
in terms of the world sheet cft, we only give the spectra of these theories in table 1 and
in these tables, n and p9 represent the wrapping number and the kaluza-klein
table 2.
momentum along the compactied direction.
indeed, according to the results given in these
tables, we nd that these two spectra are identical if we swap the wrapping number and the

kaluza-klein momentum. in particular, a type ii (type 0) closed string with wrapping number
1 corresponds to a type 0 (type ii) kaluza-klein mode with momentum p = 1/(2r). this

implies the relations

2r(ii)t (ii) =

1

2r(0) ,

2r(0)t (0) =

1

2r(ii) ,

(1)

1i would like to thank s. sugimoto for clearing up my misunderstanding of the denition of these operators.

1

table 1: spectrum of type ii theory on s1 with monodromy ()fs. the upper (lower) signs
in the complex signs correspond to type iib (iia) theory. the variables n and p9 represent
the wrapping number and the kaluza-klein momentum along the compactied direction.

n  2z

n  2z + 1

p9  z/r
(ns+,ns+)
(r,r+)
(ns,ns)
(r,r)

p9  (z + 1/2)/r

(ns+,r+)
(r,ns+)
(ns,r)
(r,ns)

table 2: spectrum of type 0 theory on s1 with monodromy ()fr. the upper (lower) signs
in the complex signs correspond to type 0b (0a) theory. the variables n and p9 represent the
wrapping number and the kaluza-klein momentum along the compactied direction.

n  2z

n  2z + 1

p9  z/r
(ns+,ns+)
(r,r+)
(ns+,r+)
(r,ns+)

p9  (z + 1/2)/r

(ns,ns)
(r,r)
(ns,r)
(r,ns)

where t (ii) (t (0)) and r(ii) (r(0)) are the string tension and the compactication radius in
type ii (type 0) theory. using these two equations, we obtain t (ii) = t (0) and

r(ii)r(0) =

l2
s
2

,

(2)

where ls is the string length scale dened with the common string tension by t (ii) = t (0) =
1/(2l2
s). the relation (2) is dierent from that in usual type ii/type ii t-duality by the
factor 1/2 on the right-hand side. this is the same as in the case of heterotic/heterotic t-
duality where, for example, an e8  e8 heterotic string with wrapping number 1 is dual to a
kaluza-klein mode with momentum p = 1/(2r) in the (16, 16) representation of unbroken
so(16)  so(16)  so(32).

concerning the string coupling constants g(ii) and g(0), we can obtain the following relation

by requiring the nine-dimensional newtons constants of the two theories to agree:

r(ii)
(g(ii))2 =

r(0)
(g(0))2 .

2

(3)

3 dualities of d-branes

similarly to the type ii/type ii t-duality, under the type 0/type ii t-duality, wrapped d-
branes and unwrapped d-branes are transformed into unwrapped d-branes and wrapped d-

branes, respectively. however, the situation is more complicated and interesting.

it is known that the tensions of type 0 d-branes are 1/2 times those of type ii d-branes[5].
namely, with the string coupling constant and the string length scale, the tensions of d-branes
are represented as

t (ii)
dp =

1

(2)plp+1

s

g(ii)

, t (0)

dp =

1
2

1

(2)plp+1

s

g(0)

.

using (2), (3) and (4), we can obtain

t (ii)
dp = 2  2r(0)t (0)

d(p+1).

(4)

(5)

this equation implies that an unwrapped type ii d-brane is transformed into a wrapped d-

brane with wrapping number 2 by the duality. at rst sight, this seems strange because it
seems that we can decompose the type 0 d-brane into two wrapped d-branes with wrapping
number 1. this is, however, impossible on the type ii side.

this is interpreted as follows. in the type 0 theory, by the monodromy ()fr around s1,
the two r-r elds c and c are transformed into c and c, respectively. (the elds c and
c are massless elds in the (r,r+) and (r,r) sectors, respectively.) in terms of the
d-brane charge, this implies that when an electric (magnetic) d-brane goes around s1, it is
changed into a magnetic (electric) d-brane. (we call d-branes electric when the signs of two
r-r charges are the same and magnetic when they are opposite, although, except for d3-

branes, these are not electric nor magnetic in the usual meanings.) therefore, if the wrapping
number of a d-brane is 1, it cannot be closed. to connect two endpoints of a wrapped d-brane,

the wrapping number should be even. this is the reason that a type 0 d-brane with wrapping
number 2, which is dual to the single type ii d-brane, cannot be decomposed (figure 1).

on a stack of n type ii d-branes, there exist u(n) gauge bosons and adjoint fermions,
and they make a vector multiplet of ten-dimensional n = 1 supersymmetry. following
the argument above, the type 0 dual of this brane conguration is a stack of n electric
and n magnetic type 0 d-branes. the eld theory on the type 0 brane conguration is
known to be u(n)  u(n) yang-mills theory with fermions belonging to the bi-fundamental
representation[6]. however, now, because the electric d-branes and the magnetic d-branes are

connected, the gauge group is broken to the diagonal u(n). as a result, all massless elds on

3

electric

magnetic

dual

type ii

type 0

figure 1: the t-dual of an unwrapped type ii dp-brane is a type 0 d(p + 1)-brane with
wrapping number 2. due to the monodromy ()fr, an electric (magnetic) type 0 d-brane
changes into a magnetic (electric) d-brane when it goes around s1.

d-branes belong to the adjoint representation of this u(n), and the massless spectrum agrees
with that on type ii d-branes.

next, let us consider the duality between wrapped type ii d-branes and unwrapped type

0 d-branes. using (2), (3) and (4) we obtain

2r(ii)t (ii)

d(p+1) = t (0)
dp .

(6)

this equation implies that the dual of a wrapped type ii d(p + 1)-brane is an unwrapped

type 0 dp-brane. is it electric or magnetic? we should remember the fact that because of
the existence of the monodromy ()fr, we cannot globally dene electric and magnetic
d-branes. therefore, we can freely call a certain d-brane electric or magnetic. however, it
makes sense to say that two d-branes are of the same type or not. if two type 0 d-branes
are of dierent types, where does the dierence come from on the type ii side? to obtain an

answer to this question, let us consider an electric type 0 unwrapped d-brane. it is dual to a
type ii wrapped d-brane. on the type 0 side, we can change the d-brane to a magnetic one
by moving it around s1. on the type ii side, this corresponds to a change of the wilson line

g = exp ih a9dx9. in the case of type ii/type ii duality, to move an unwrapped d-brane round
s1 corresponds to a change of the wilson line g  e2ig. now, however, the size of s1 of type
0 theory is r(0) = 1/(2r(ii)), unlike 1/r(ii) in type ii/type ii duality, and this implies that
the change of the wilson line should also be halved. namely, the change should be g  eig.
therefore, we can conclude that electric and magnetic unwrapped type 0 d-branes correspond
to wrapped type ii d-branes with wilson lines g and g, respectively (fig.2).

we can show that the massless spectra on these type 0 and type ii d-branes agree. let
us consider a stack of n1 electric and n2 magnetic unwrapped type 0 d-branes. the massless
elds on this stack are u(n1) u(n2) gauge elds and fermions in the (n1, n2) and (n1, n2)

4

electric

dual

g

-g

type ii

magnetic

type 0

figure 2: the charge of dual type 0 d-branes depends on the wilson line on the original
wrapped type ii d-branes.

representations. the dual brane conguration is a stack of n1 + n2 type ii d-branes with the
wilson line diag(g1n1,g1n2), where g is a phase factor which does not aect the spectrum.
with the wilson line, the gauge group u(n1 + n2) is broken to u(n1)  u(n2). fermions
in the adjoint representation are decomposed into (adj1, 1), (1, adj2), (n1, n2) and (n1, n2).
in addition to the wilson line acting on these four representations as +1, +1, 1 and 1, we
should take account of the monodromy (1)fs, which reverses the sign of wave functions of
all the fermion elds. as a result, fermions in (n1, n2) and (n1, n2) remain massless. this
is consistent with the type 0 spectrum.

4 dualities of ns5-branes

as d-branes, ns5-branes play important roles in brane constructions of yang-mills theories[7],
and they are important to establish the duality relations of ns5-branes. in this section, we

give the duals of type 0 and type ii ns5-branes.

regardless of the type of string theory in question, we can obtain the tensions of ns5-

branes by using the dirac quantization condition as follows:

t (0)
n s5 =

1
s(g(0))2 ,
(2)5l6

t (ii)
n s5 =

1
s(g(ii))2 .
(2)5l6

from (3) and (7), the relation

2r(0)t (0)

n s5 = 2r(ii)t (ii)
n s5,

(7)

(8)

is obtained. this relation strongly suggests that the dual of a wrapped type ii ns5-brane is

a wrapped type 0 ns5-brane.

in type ii/type ii t-duality, an unwrapped ns5-brane is transformed into a kaluza-klein
monopole with nut charge 1. on the other hand, in the case of type 0/type ii duality, the

5

dual of an unwrapped ns5-brane should be a kaluza-klein monopole with nut charge 2.

the reason for this is as follows. because the momentum of kaluza klein modes along the
compactied direction is quantized as n/(2r), the minimum electric charge coupled with the
u(1) gauge eld g9 is 1/2. therefore, due to the dirac quantization condition, the minimum
nut charge is 2.

kaluza-klein monopoles with nut charge 2 can be made by dividing the taub-nut
manifold by z2, generated by a half shift of the s1 cycle. because there exists the monodromy
(1)fs ((1)fr) in type ii (type 0) theory, the shift should be accompanied by the operator
(1)fs ((1)fr). the central region of this kaluza-klein monopole is r4/z2. z2 is generated
by p(1)fs (type ii) or p(1)fr (type 0), where p is the parity operator which changes the
coordinates x on the r4 to x. therefore, the origin of the manifold is the a1 singularity.
next, let us consider massless spectra on ns5-branes. on every ns5-brane, there exist four
massless scalar elds representing the position of the brane. in the dual picture, they appear

as zero modes of ns-ns elds on the kaluza-klein monopole. in addition to these, on type
ii ns5-branes, a one-form u(1) gauge eld (type iib) or self-dual two-form and zero-form
gauge elds (type iia) exist.2 (here, we focus only on bosonic elds.) these gauge elds are
represented as zero modes of r-r elds on the kaluza-klein monopoles. indeed, there is one
zero mode of a self-dual two-form eld on the taub-nut manifold. therefore, in type 0a
theory, a zero mode of an r-r three-form eld ci (the indices  and  label the directions
contained in the taub-nut manifold, and i labels the at directions parallel to the kaluza-

klein monopole.) gives a u(1) gauge eld, while a zero mode of the other r-r three-form
eld c i is projected out by z2. in the same way, on the kaluza-klein monopole in type 0b
theory, there are zero modes of the four-form eld c +
ij and the two-form eld c, and they
correspond to the self-dual two-form eld and zero-form gauge eld on type iia ns5-branes.
zero modes of c 

ij and c  are projected out by z2 again.

conversely, by analyzing the type ii kaluza-klein monopoles, we can nd gauge elds on
type 0 ns5-branes. on the type iia kaluza-klein monopole, there is a zero mode of the r-r
three-form eld ci, and on the type iib kaluza-klein monopole, zero modes of c +
ij and
c exist. because the monodromy (1)fs acts on bosonic elds trivially, none of these zero
modes are projected out.

furthermore, to obtain complete spectra, we should consider the twisted sector at the
orbifold singularities. from the (r,r) sectors of twisted closed strings at the singularities,
2we refer to scalar elds which do not correspond to the uctuation of branes as zero-form gauge elds

because they are magnetic duals of four-form gauge elds on ve-branes.

6

we obtain a one-form gauge eld (type iia) or a zero-form gauge eld and an anti-self-dual

two-form eld (type iib). therefore, we conclude that gauge elds on type 0 ns5-branes are
doubled and non-chiral, like the r-r elds in the bulk. that is, in addition to four scalar

elds corresponding to uctuations of branes, there exist two zero-form gauge elds and an
unconstrained two-form eld on a type 0a ns5-brane and two one-form elds on a type 0b
ns5-brane.3 these elds are necessary for the electric and magnetic d-branes to be attached
independently on ns5-branes.[9]

in the supersymmetric r4/z2 orbifold case, four massless scalar elds appear in the
(ns+,ns+) sector of twisted closed strings. they belong to the (1, 3) + (1, 1) of the so(4) =
su(2)l  su(2)r rotation group and correspond to the (geometric and non-geometric) blow-
in the present case, from the twisted (ns,ns) sector, we
up modes of the singularity.
have four massless scalar elds belonging to the (3, 1) + (1, 1) representation. because they
have chirality opposite to that of those in the supersymmetric case, they correspond to non-

supersymmetric blow up modes; they express a blow up respecting hyper-kahler structure
that diers from that of the kaluza-klein monopole before the blow up. if these modes are

switched on, all the supersymmetries are broken. due to this property, they can acquire mass,
and, perhaps, they are removed from the massless spectrum. after the blow up, the mani-
fold becomes smooth and simply connected. therefore the wrapping number of a string is

not conserved and, at rst sight, it seems that the gso projection, which depends on the
wrapping number, is ill-dened. however, this is not a problem, as explained below. because
the worldsheet fermions  (we use ns-r formalism.) take values in the tangent bundle of
the target space at x , the boundary conditions of  depend on the target space holonomy
along closed strings. using the complex coordinates 1 = 6 + i7, 2 = 8 + i9 and their
hermitian conjugates (i) (i = 1, 2), the action of su(2)l  su(2)r rotation is expressed as

u  glugr, u   1 (2)

(1) ! ,

2

gl  su(2)l,

gr  su(2)r.

(9)

the kaluza-klein monopole with non-supersymmetric blow up is approximately divided into
two parts: the central region, which is almost a1 ale, and the outer region, which is only
weakly aected by the blow up modes. these two regions possess dierent hyper-kahler
structures, and holonomies of cycles in the outer and central regions are elements of su(2)l
and su(2)r, respectively. let us consider a process in which a wrapped string in the outer
region moves adiabatically into the central region and the wrapping becomes loose. in the
initial and nal string congurations, the holonomy along the string is 12 (the rank two unit

3in the previous version of this paper, the argument regarding the twisted sector was missing. the massless

spectra on type 0 ns5-branes were rst obtained in ref.[8] using type 0a/type 0b duality.

7

matrix). on a string passing across the border between the two regions, where the target
space is approximately r4/z2, the holonomy is 12. connecting these with passes in su(2)l
and su(2)r, we obtain the change of the holonomy during the adiabatic process as follows:

the outer region

the border

the central region

12  gl  su(2)l  12  gr  su(2)r  12

(10)

more explicitly, for example, we can choose the path of the string so that gl = exp(i1z)
and gr = exp(i2z), where 1 (2) is a parameter in the outer (central) region changing from
0 to  (from  to 0). in this case, the phases i in the boundary conditions of the fermions
i( + 2) =  exp(ii)i() are change as

the border

the central region

the outer region
1
2

: 0  1    2
 0
: 0  1    2  2  2.

(11)

(here, we are considering the ns-ns sector. for the r-r sector, we should use the bound-
ary conditions i( + 2) = + exp(ii)i().) therefore, this process causes a shift of the
oscillators of 2 (2
n+1/2 for
the right-moving fermions) while the oscillators of 1 do not change (1
n+1/2 and
e1
n+1/2  e1
n+1/2). this shift implies that even if we started from a string in the ground state
|0i  |0i, we have an excited state 2
1/2)|0i after the adiabatic process. these
two states have dierent eigenvalues of operators (1)fr and (1)fl, where fl is operator
that counts left-moving worldsheet fermions. if the initial state is (not) projected away by
the gso projection, the nal state also should (not) be projected away. therefore, we should

n1/2 for the left-moving fermions and e2

n1/2  e2
n+1/2  1

n+1/2  2

1/2|0i  (e2

impose dierent gso projection on the initial and nal states.

finally, i would like to note that the scenario described above does not work for type
0 kaluza-klein monopoles, which are dual to type ii ns5-branes, because the ()fr twist
cannot be explained by holonomies of the target space. this is consistent with the fact that

no bosonic elds appear in the twisted sector of type 0 strings.

5 conclusions

we have derived the following duality relations between type ii and type 0 brane congura-
tions.

 the dual of an unwrapped type ii dp-brane is a stack consisting of a wrapped type 0

electric d(p + 1) brane and a wrapped type 0 magnetic d(p + 1) brane.

8

 the dual of a wrapped type ii d(p + 1)-brane is an unwrapped type 0 d-brane. the

charge of the type 0 d-brane depends on the wilson line on the type ii d-brane.

 the dual of a type 0 (type ii) wrapped ns5-brane is a type ii (type 0) wrapped ns5-

brane.

 the dual of a type 0 (type ii) unwrapped ns5-brane is a kaluza-klein monopole with
nut charge 2 (a1-singularity) in type ii (type 0) theory. at the singularity in type
ii theory, there exist non-supersymmetric blow up modes, which probably acquire mass
and are removed from the massless spectrum.

acknowledgements

this work is supported in part by a grant-in-aid for scientic research from the ministry of
education, science, sports and culture (#9110).

references

[1] l. dixon and j. harvey,

string theories in ten dimensions without space-time supersymmetry,
nucl. phys. b274 (1986) 93.

[2] n. seiberg and e. witten,

spin structures in string theory,

nucl. phys. b276 (1986) 272.

[3] a. polyakov,

the wall of the cave,
int.j.mod.phys.a14(1999)645, hep-th/9809057.

[4] o. bergman and m. r. gaberdiel,

dualities of type 0 strings,
hep-th/9906055.

[5] i. r. klebanov and a. a. tseytlin,

d-branes and dual gauge theories in type 0 strings,

nucl.phys. b546 (1999) 155, hep-th/9811035.

9

[6] i. r. klebanov and a. a. tseytlin,

a non-supersymmetric large n cft from type 0 string theory,
j. high. energy phys. 9903 (1999) 015, hep-th/9901101.

[7] a. armoni, b. kol,

non-supersymmetric large n gauge theories from type 0 brane congurations,
hep-th/9906081.

[8] b. craps and f. roose,

ns vebranes in type 0 string theory,

hep-th/9906179.

[9] a. strominger,

open p-branes,
phys.lett. b383 (1996) 44, hep-th/9512059.

10

