iktuw 9906401

9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

1
1

 
 

1
v
6
8
0
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

chiral poincare transformations and their anomalies

institut fur kernphysik, technische universitat wien

jan b. thomassen

a1040 vienna, austria

june 11, 1999

abstract

we consider global transformations of a dirac fermion eld that are generated by the
generators of poincare transformations, but with a 5 appended. using proper time reg-
ularization in minkowski space, we nd that these chiral translations and chiral lorentz
transformations in general have anomalies, and we calculate these in a theory of a massive
fermion coupled to an external abelian vector eld. for this calculation, a certain freedom
in the regularization scheme has been xed to ensure both phase and poincare invariance.
we show that theories which are regularized to give covariant anomalies does not respect
poincare invariance. if we interpret sj in the expression j = exp(isj ) for the jacobian of
nite chiral transformations as an action for a theory where the transformation parameters
are the dynamical elds, then these anomalies describe the decay into one, two, or three ex-
ternal vectors. the chiral degrees of freedom thus realizes bosonization in four dimensions.
we argue that this may be relevant for an eective description of positronium in the case of
qed, and the non-abelian generalization may play a role in eective theories of qcd.

pacs numbers: 11.30.rd; 11.15.tk; 11.30.qc
keywords: chiral anomalies; bosonization; proper time regularization

1

introduction

the global symmetries of the lagrangian of a dirac fermion include phase transformations,
spacetime translations and lorentz transformations. these symmetries are linked to charge,
mass, and spin  properties that together characterize the particle states described by the
lagrangian. if a 5 is appended to the generators of these transformations, we get chiral phase
and chiral poincare transformations.

little is known about chiral translations and chiral lorentz transformations, in contrast to
their chiral phase counterpart. the obvious reason for this is that they are not symmetries of
the lagrangian unless the fermion is free and massless, and therefore an investigation of these
transformations appears to be pointless. however, chiral phase transformations are also not
symmetries of the lagrangian if the fermion is massive, and still these play a role in physics.
in qcd chiral phase transformations in avor space are believed to be approximate symmetries
that are spontaneously broken and give rise to a goldstone boson octet with s, ks and the 

supported by fonds zur forderung der wissenschaftlichen forschung, p11387phy
e-mail: thomasse@kph.tuwien.ac.at

1

 even if the quarks are massive. thus we cannot rule out that chiral poincare transformations
have physical meaning as well.

in this paper we investigate (global) chiral poincare transformations and calculate their
anomalies within a simple abelian model of a fermion coupled to an external vector eld. our
motivations for this are, rst, that the jacobian j = exp(isj ) of a local chiral coordinate change
in the path integral admits a physical interpretation, according to which sj is an action that
describes the theory of a number of bosonic elds: the local transformation parameters. this
has been used for chiral avor transformations in qcd in papers by diakonov and eides [1]
and by balog [2] for derivations of the chiral lagrangian. however, this can only be part of the
story since a fermion has more degrees of freedom than just the ones corresponding to the chiral
avor phases. thus, if chiral poincare transformations are anomalous, or in other words have
non-trivial jacobians, then they would be candidates for these additional degrees of freedom.

second, some time ago caldi and pagels [3] argued that the -mesons are dormant gold-
stone bosons. their arguments were based on su (6) classication, where the s enters in
the same multiplet as the s. (recall that su (6) is the group which is assumed to contain
su (2)spin  su (3)avor , and which can be used to classify hadrons with reasonable success [4].)
since the s are goldstone bosons of spontaneously broken chiral symmetry, this suggests that
the s are goldstone bosons as well. however, such a unitary picture of s and s might also
be achieved if the jacobians of the chiral phase and chiral poincare transformations (in avor
space) would eectively describe a theory of the transformation parameters, and if the s and
the s corresponded to chiral phase and chiral poincare transformations, respectively.

a paper by alvarez [6] should also be mentioned. he tried to calculate the fermionic de-
terminant of a fermion that is coupled to a vector eld by using a decoupling transformation.
his decoupling transformation corresponds to the spin part of a chiral lorentz transformation.
there is also the recent paper [7] where a similar decoupling transformation is used. however,
this work is not directly related to investigations of local lorentz symmetry [8].

the organization of the paper is the following. in sec. 2, we discuss the classical properties
of the chiral poincare transformations. chiral transformations are shown to make sense if they
are regarded as active, transforming the physical system, rather than passive.

in sec. 3, we consider the quantum theory which we regularize using the proper time rep-
resentation of the fermionic determinant in minkowski space. we prefer this to the usual eu-
clidean formulation (see e.g. the review by ball [5]), because better control over the anomalies
is achieved. by choosing appropriately an operator d, related to the dirac operator d, we
can immediately get a phase and poincare invariant regularization. in the non-abelian case,
this choice gives the wesszumino consistent bardeen anomaly. another choice will give, for
instance, covariant anomalies. but as a byproduct of this procedure, we nd that the covariant
choice for d not only violates the conservation of the vector current  a well known result [5] 
it also violates the conservation of the energy-momentum and angular momentum tensors. thus
poincare invariance is violated. this is a new result.

in sec. 4, we calculate the anomalies, which is a generalization of the calculation of the
adlerbelljackiw (abj) anomaly. the new features to which we must give attention is the
presence of derivative operators and a -matrix in the generators.

in sec. 5, we oer some generalizations, in particular to non-abelian theories. we also
discuss the physical meaning of the anomalies, and their possible application to qcd and qed.
the fact that both chiral phase and chiral poincare transformations are anomalous means that
a dynamical theory of the transformation parameters exists. in two dimensions this leads to
bosonization [9], which works equally well for massive fermions [10]. this is evidence that also
in four dimensions such a dynamical theory would give an equivalent description of the fermion
eld, that is, four-dimensional bosonization.
in the bosonic theory the anomalies themselves

2

can be interpreted as interaction vertices between the dynamical elds and the external vector
source.

2 chiral poincare transformations

the model we consider is a dirac fermion  with mass m coupled to an external vector eld
a. the simplicity of this model allows us to discuss the main ideas without the complications
of non-abelian structure or couplings to other elds. the lagrangian is

l = [i6  6a  m].

(1)

a can be a gauge potential or an arbitrary external source.

we rst recall the elementary discussion of phase and poincare transformations. this is
useful for comparison. since we are considering an abelian model, the phase transformations
are generated by the unit operator. the poincare transformations are generated by p and j ,
where

is the generator of translations, and

p = i

j = 1

2  + (xi  xi)  s + l

(2)

(3)

is the generator of lorentz transformations.

our transformations are active. that is, they transform the physical system, the fermion
eld, in contrast to passive transformations where the coordinate system is transformed. this
will be essential for the chiral transformations. thus no a priori transformation law is assigned
to the a-eld. the transformations are:

1. phase transformations:

(x)  ei(x),

(x)  (x)ei

 is a dimensionless constant. the lagrangian is invariant.

2. translations:

(x)  eiap 

(x),

(x)  (x)eiap 

(4)

(5)

a is a constant vector with the dimension of length. for a innitesimal, l transforms
into

l  [i6  6a  a6a  m].

if we assign the transformation law

a  a  aa

(6)

(7)

to a to accompany (5), we will nd that l is invariant. this is of course expected since
(7) is the innitesimal transformation of a as found from a (passive) translation of the
coordinate system.

3

3. lorentz transformations:

(s)  ei 1

2  j 

(x),

(x)  ei 1

2  j 

 is a dimensionless constant antisymmetric tensor. for innitesimal  we have

l  [i6  6a   a  1

2 (x6a  x6a)  m]

from which we can construct the transformation rule

(8)

(9)

a  a + i 1

2 (j) a

(j)  i(gg  gg ) + (xi  xi)g

(10)

which leads to invariance.

the chiral versions of these are the following.

1. chiral phase transformations:

(x)  ei5 (x)

(x)  (x)ei5

(11)

 is a dimensionless pseudoscalar constant. these are the usual ones, and lead to the
lagrangian

l  [i6  6a  m  2im5].

2. chiral translations:

(x)  eibp 5(x),

(x)  (x)eibp 5

b is a constant axial vector with the dimension of length. this leads to

l  [i6  6a  b6a5  m + 2m5b].

3. chiral lorentz transformations:

(x)  ei 1

2  j  5(x),

(x)  (x)ei 1

2  j  5

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

 is a dual tensor (i.e. it has properties like f under c, p and t ) and is dimensionless.
this leads to

l  [i6  6a   a5  1

2 (x6a  x6a)5  m  im j  5]. (16)

it is now impossible to nd transformation rules for a which restores invariance. chiral
transformations includes 5 in the innitesimal generators, and the left- and right-handed parts
of the fermion are transformed in an opposite sense, as can be seen from the representation
where 5 is diagonal:

5 = (cid:18) i

0 i (cid:19) .

0

(17)

in this case there are no interpretations in terms of transformations of the coordinate system,
so they make sense only if they are active. note also that new derivative operators has been
generated in the dirac operator.

4

3 proper time representation and poincare invariance

we turn now to the the quantum theory and the calculation of anomalies. we use proper time
regularization of the fermionic determinant [5], which we will discuss in some detail even if it is
a well known scheme. the reasons for this are, rst, that we work in minkowski space and that
there are dierences from the usual euclidean formulation. second, we need to demonstrate that
the scheme is both phase and poincare invariant. and third, compared to the calculation of the
abj anomaly, there are additional features coming from the  and the derivative operators
in the generators.

in minkowski space, ambiguities are resolved by adding a small positive imaginary part to

the dirac operator:

l = (d + i),

d = i6  6a  m.

(18)

this is the usual -prescription which will render all momentum integrals well dened, and which
gives the fermion mass a small negative imaginary part, i.e. the fermion mass is mc  m  i.

in this section everything will be model independent, except for some remarks at the end.
the fermion could in principle be coupled to other external elds, or be in some representation
of a non-abelian group.

the quantum theory is expressed by the path integral z, which denes the fermionic deter-

minant,

z = z dd eir d4x d  detd,

(19)

where  and  are the independent quantities, and the eective action w (z  eiw ) is given
by

w = itr ln d.

(20)

these quantities are formal and will become well dened when we regularize the theory.

we will calculate the jacobian of a local innitesimal change of path integration variables.

let us collectively denote the phase and poincare transformations by

  eia,

  eia,

where

a = ,

1

2 (ap  + p a)

or

1

2 ( 1

2  j  + 1

2 j ).

(21)

(22)

the parameters are now local,  = (x), etc. we use symmetric products for the local trans-
lations and lorentz transformations, since these are dirac hermitian. similarly, their chiral
counterparts are

  eib5 ,

  eib5 ,

with

b = ,

1

2 (bp  + p b) or

1

2 ( 1

2  j  + 1

2 j  ).

these transformations induce a change in the dirac operator:

d  eia+ib5 deia+ib5

= d + i(da  ad) + i(db5 + b5d)
 d + d,

5

(23)

(24)

(25)

which in turn induces a change in w :

w = itrd

1
d

.

(26)

the jacobian j is then determined by the requirement that the path integral z is unchanged
by a change of variables:

z = jeiw +iw  eisj eiw +iw = eiw ,

where we have dened the action sj  i ln j. therefore sj can be found by

sj = w = itrd

1
d

.

(27)

(28)

this is the quantity we are interested in, and which contains the anomalies.

we now introduce an operator d and a proper time integral, thereby dening the formal

trace:

sj = itrd

1
d
= itrd d

1
d d

= z 

1/2

dstrd deis(d d+i)

(29)

the operator d is a priori arbitrary, except that it must be chosen to give the right -prescription,
like we have written here. this will then ensure convergence at the upper integration limit. for
the lower integration limit the cuto  is introduced, which is to be taken to innity at the
end of the calculation. we will discuss the appropriate choice for d below. when this choice is
made sj will be regular and well dened.

we can use the expression for d (eq. (25)) to perform the proper time integral and write

sj in a fujikawa-like form [11] (see also [12]):

sj = z 

1/2

dstr i(da  ad + db5 + b5d) deisd d
 eid d/2(cid:17)  tr b5(cid:16)ei dd/2

= tr a(cid:16)ei dd/2

+ eid d/2(cid:17) .

(30)

here we have used the cyclicity of the trace, the identity deisd dd = ddeis dd, and the fact
that only the lower limit of the integral contributes due to the implicit presence of the .

we must now make an appropriate choice for d, one which preserves phase and poincare
invariance and leads to the right -prescription. in principle d can still be completely unrelated
to d; for instance we can choose the unit operator, d = i. but the choice we will adopt, to be
justied in a moment, is

d = (i5)d(i5).

(31)

for the qed-like theory we get d = i6 6 a + m, with plus in front of the mass, and

dd = d d = dd  1

2  f   m2,

d =  + ia,

(32)

the familiar square of the dirac operator. i is implied. using the cyclicity of the trace and
the fact that 5 commutes with a, we have

sj = 2tr b5ei dd/2

.

6

the terms proportional to a in eq. (30) have thus cancelled out. the vector current, energy-
momentum tensor and angular momentum tensor are then conserved, and both phase and
poincare invariance are intact.

we have two reasons for the choice (31) of d. first, we want to relate it to d such that
dd and d d are second order derivative operators. this simplies later calculations. second,
it automatically respects both phase and poicare invariance. furthermore, in a non-abelian
model with an external vector v a
, this choice gives the bardeen anomaly 
the wesszumino consistent anomaly.

 and axial vector aa

another reasonable choice would be d = cdt c 1, where c is the charge conjugation
matrix and the transposition is with respect to the dirac matrix structure. this is the charge
conjugate of d. it gives identical results for the qed-like theory, but in the non-abelian case
with a vector and an axial vector it leads to the covariant chiral anomaly instead of the bardeen
anomaly. it is well known that the vector current is not conserved in this case, but the other
terms proportional to a in eq. (30) are dierent from zero as well. the energy-momentum tensor
and angular momentum tensor are then also not conserved. in other words, poincare invariance
is lost. as far as we know, this property of covariant anomalies has not been noted before.

4 anomalies for the chiral transformations

we now return to the qed-like theory again, and it is at this point necessary to consider each
form of b separately. as we have already mentioned, there are two further ingredients in the
calculation of the chiral poincare anomalies compared to the chiral phase case, namely the
occurrence of  in j and of derivative operators in p and j .

let us write

2  f  + m2.
it is useful rst to recall the familiar calculation of the abj anomaly [11]

dd = dd  y,

y = 1

s = 2tr 5ei dd/2

 z d4xl.

l is given by

l = 2z
= 2z
= 24z

d4k
(2)4 eikxtr5ei(d2y )/2
d4k
(2)4 tr5ei(k2+2ikdd2y )/2
tr5 exp i(cid:18) 2ikd

d4k
(2)4 eik2



eikx



d2 + y

2 (cid:19) ,

(33)

(34)

(35)

where we have scaled k  k. expanding the exponential and keeping only terms that are
not suppressed by the cuto , we get

l = 2z

d4k
(2)4 eik2

tr5( 1

8 f f )

=

1
82 f f .

(36)

in comparison we have for chiral translations

lb = 2z

d4k

(2)4 eikxtr(cid:0) 1

2 bi + 1

2 ib(cid:1) 5ei dd/2

eikx

7

d4k

= 2z
 l(1)

b + l(2)

b

(2)4 tr(cid:2) 1

2i(b) + bk(cid:3) 5ei(k2+2ikdd2y )/2

we have used partial integration to bring the rst term into the form of the abj anomaly, for
which we get

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

l(1)

b

=

1
82 (i 1

2 b)f f .

the second term, after scaling, is

b

l(2)

= 25z
= 2z

d4k
(2)4 eik2
d4k
(2)4 eik2
 b(cid:16) 1
1
162 (ib)f f +
summing the two contributions, we get

=

kktr5

12 df f  + 1
1
82 baf f .

trbk5 exp i(cid:18) 2ikd





d2 + y

2 (cid:19)

12 f df  + 1

12 f f d(cid:17)

lb =

1
82 baf f

unfortunately, this expression is not gauge invariant if a is a gauge potential. this point will
be discussed in the next section.

for the chiral lorentz transformations, there are again two terms which are handled essen-
tially in this way, but in addition there is now a third term, coming from the 1
2  5 in j 5,
which requires special attention. this time the trace leads to only one factor of f , and the
term computes to

  2z
l(3)

d4k
(2)4 eikxtr( 1

2 

1

2 5)ei dd/2

eikx

=

1
482 ((cid:3) + 6m2) f  .

the complete chiral lorentz anomaly is

l =

1
482  ((cid:3) + 6m2) f  +

1
82

1

2  (xa  xa)f f

(41)

(42)

this anomaly is not only gauge non-invariant, but it is also manifestly not poincare invariant.
however, while disturbing, it is not necessarily a fundamental problem, since we will integrate

this expression over spacetime to nd the action: s = r d4xl. the integration then picks out

only the poincare invariant part of l, and physics does not depend on the coordinate system.
if desirable, one can use these anomalies to obtain anomalous ward identities like the non-
vanishing divergences of the axial current, axial energy-momentum tensor, and axial angular
momentum tensor.

8

5 discussion

one problem with the expressions for the anomalies, eqs. (40) and (42), as we have already
pointed out, is that they depend explicitly on a and are therefore not gauge invariant. we
have no solution for this, but there may be a way to avoid the problem. in fact, this phenomenon
is exactly the same as that which appears in the path integral solution of the schwinger model
in two dimensions [13]. that theory is solved by applying a decoupling transformation to the
fermion, which produces the mass term e2a2/2 for the gauge eld. however, this holds only for
the part of a that is a curl, i.e. for a =   for some pseudoscalar , which is in agreement
with the possibility to decouple the gradient part by a local redenition of the fermion. this
suggests that also the as in our anomaly expressions in four dimensions can be replaced by
a with the gradient part removed. this gradient-free version of a then does not have to
transform under a gauge transformation, and the problem of gauge invariance is avoided.

let us consider generalizations of our results. the freedom we obtain by considering active
rather than passive transformations opens up several new possibilities. one set of possibilities
are chiral scale transformations, given by

  e5 ,

  e5 ,

(43)

where  is the transformation parameter. these give no anomalies, as can be seen by following
the discussion in sec. 3. but this is to be expected, since the scale transformations are known
to be the anomalous ones.

two other kinds of generalizations appear for non-abelian fermions. first we can exploit
the possibility to translate or lorentz transform each avor of fermion separately. these
transformations are generated by tap and taj , where ta are generators of rotations in avor
space. the other class is of course generated by ta5, tap5 and taj 5, which are the chiral
counterparts. (there are also avored and avored chiral scale transformations.)

what is the physical interpretation of the anomalies? if we interpret sj in the expression
j = exp(isj ) for the jacobian of (nite) chiral transformations as the action of a bosonic
theory, then this might give an alternative way to describe the physical system  a kind of four-
dimensional bosonization. the appearance of anomalies indicates that such a bosonic theory
exists. this will be a complicated non-linear theory with the chiral transformation parameters
as the dynamical elds, and with innitely many derivatives. the anomalies then describe the
interaction vertices of one chiral eld with one, two or three external as. this is familiar from
the theory of the abj anomaly. thus, the pseudoscalar  may decay into two as, the axial
vector b into three as, and the tensor  into a virtual a or three as.

we can now come back to the caldipagels paper [3]. for qcd with, say, three avors, we
would have the chiral transformations at our disposal in avor space (and also in color space, but
that will not concern us here). we easily see that the chiral elds corresponds to the following
quark wavefunctions:

a  qita5q,
  qita5iq,
ba
a
  qita 1

2 j 5q = qita 1

4  5q + qita 1

the latter implies

a
  qta 1

4 q + orbital part.

2 l 5q.

(44)

(45)

the electric part of the spin part of  is the same wavefunction for the -meson as that which
caldi and pagels suggested, and all our chiral elds transform as a (3, 3) + (3, 3) representation

9

of su (3)su (3). from all this the contours of a scenario emerges that, in addition to the chiral
phase transformations, chiral translations and chiral lorentz transformations are spontaneously
broken, giving rise to the s, s, their su (3) partners, and also other elds, as goldstone
bosons. the mechanism of such chiral symmetry breakdown in qcd would then be anomalies, or
better to say, a non-trivial jacobian. it should be possible with existing technology to calculate
the eective bosonic theory at low energies (i.e. few derivatives) and small eld amplitudes (i.e.
few powers of the elds), and see if one could reproduce mass formulas, mixing angles, decay
rates, and so on. it is also interesting that the s, s, etc. are bound states at the quark level,
since such an approach might then be an alternative to bethesalpeter calculations, nrqft,
and pnrqft [14] for fermion-antifermion systems.

in order to test some of these ideas in a simple setting, we should be able to consider qed,
and to investigate the equivalent bosonic theory of the electron. the decay modes into two or
three photons suggests that  and the electric part of  is connected with the singlet and
triplet of the ground state of positronium. since the ground state of positronium is not stable,
the eective singlet and triplet elds would not be true goldstone bosons, which would explain
why chiral symmetry is not broken in qed. work in this direction is in progress.

acknowledgments
p.h. damgaard for pointing out some references.

i thank m. faber and a.n. ivanov for comments and discussions, and

references

[1] d.i. diakonov and m.i. eides, pizma zh. eksp. teor. fiz. 38 (1983) 358 [jetp lett. 38

(1983) 433]

[2] j. balog, phys. lett. 149b (1984) 197
[3] d.g. caldi and h. pagels, phys. rev. d14 (1976) 809
[4] j.f. donoghue, e. golowich and b.r. holstein, dynamics of the standard model, cam-

bridge university press, 1992

[5] r.d. ball, phys. rep. 182 (1989) 1
[6] o. alvarez, nucl. phys. b238 (1984) 61
[7] j.l. cortes, j. gamboa and l. velazquez, phys. lett. b432 (1998) 397
[8] l. alvarez-gaume and e. witten, nucl. phys. b234 (1983) 269;

l.n. chang and h.t. nieh, phys. rev. lett. 53 (1984) 21;
h.t. nieh, phys. rev. lett. 53 (1984) 2219

[9] a.a. andrianov, phys. lett. 157b (1985) 425
[10] j.b. thomassen, preprint iktuw 9811401, hep-th/9811137
[11] k. fujikawa, phys. rev. lett. 42 (1979) 1195
[12] j.l. petersen, acta. phys. pol. b16 (1985) 271
[13] r. roskies and f. shaposnik, phys. rev. d23 (1981) 558
[14] w.e. caswell and g.p. lepage, phys. lett. 167b (1986) 437;

g.t. bodwin, e. braaten and g.p. lepage, phys. rev. d51 (1995) 1125; ibid. d55 (1997)
5853 (e);
a. pineda and j. soto, nucl. phys. b (proc. suppl.) 64 (1998) 428

10

