9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

7
1

 
 

1
v
2
3
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

state vector reduction as a shadow of a

noncommutative dynamics

vatican observatory, v-00120 vatican city state

michael heller

wies law sasin and zdzis law odrzygozdz

institute of mathematics,

warsaw university of technology

plac poitechniki 1, 00-661 warsaw, poland

january 28, 2014

abstract

a model, based on a noncommutative geometry, unifying general
relativity and quantum mechanics, is further developed. it is shown
that the dynamics in this model can be described in terms of one-
parameter groups of random operators. it is striking that the noncom-
mutative counterparts of the concept of state and that of probability
measure coincide. we also demonstrate that the equation describing
noncommutative dynamics in the quantum mechanical approximation
gives the standard unitary evolution of observables, and in the space-
time limit it leads to the state vector reduction. the cases of the spin
and position operators are discussed in details.

1 introduction

there are many attempts to create a quantum theory of gravity, or at least
a generalized version of the theory of general relativity, based on a noncom-
mutative geometry (for example, [1, 2, 4, 9, 19, 20, 21, 26]). the starting

1

idea of all these works consists in transforming the space-time manifold into
a noncommutative space. in the series of works (refs. 12-15) we have pro-
posed another strategy. it turns out that if one replaces space-time m with a
groupoid g over m, one can construct a consistent model unifying general
relativity and quantum mechanics. the idea is to dene a noncommutative
algebra a of complex valued functions on the groupoid g (with convolution
as multiplication) such that the algebra a, if narrowed to (a subset of) its
center z(a), is isomorphic with the algebra c (m) of smooth functions
on a space-time m (with the usual pointwise multiplication). then a non-
commutative (derivation based) dierential geometry is developed in terms
of the algebra a, and a noncommutative generalization of general relativity
is constructed. it turns out that, after this construction is done, the alge-
bra a can be completed to the c -algebra (it is called einstein c -algebra).
the next step is to quantize the system in close analogy with the standard
c -algebraic method. details of this approach are summarized in section 2.
noncommutative geometry, which in this approach is supposed to model
the pre-planck epoch, is strongly nonlocal with no local concepts (such as
that of space point or time instant) having any meanings. in sections 3 and
4 it is shown that, in spite of this, in the noncommutative regime, the true
albeit generalized dynamics is available. it is only during the phase transi-
tion from the noncommutative geometry to the usual (commutative) geom-
etry that space, time and other local structures emerge. it can be demon-
strated that some nonlocal phenomena, known from quantum mechanics and
cosmology, such as einstein-podolsky-rosen experiment [14] or the horizon
problem [17], can be explained as shadows or remnants of the primordial
totally global regime. it also turns out that in the noncommutative regime
the singularity concept loses its meaning (the algebra a does not distinguish
between singular and nonsingular states), and classical singularities are but
products of the transition to standard physics of the commutative era [11, 16].
the main goal of the present paper is to show that the probabilistic char-
acter of quantum mechanics is a direct consequence of our model, and that
the generalized noncommutative dynamics unies in itself both the unitary
evolution of quantum observables and the reduction of the state vector.
the key point is that the von neumann algebra m, generated by the alge-
bra a, is both a dynamical object and a noncommutative generalization of
the probability measure [3, 5]. on the strength of the tomita-takesaki theo-
rem we introduce one-parameter groups which serve to dene the generalized

2

evolution of von neumann operators (i. e. elements of m). we demonstrate
that these operators correspond to random operators on a hilbert space and
that generalized dynamics of these operators, in the quantum mechanical
approximation, gives the unitary evolution of observables known from quan-
tum mechanics (section 5), and in the space-time limit it leads to the
reduction of the state vector; the cases of the spin and position operators are
analyzed in details. (section 6). it looks as if the source of the measure-
ment problem in quantum mechanics was the fact that quantum processes
do not occur in space-time whereas the act of measurement is, out of its very
nature, a spatio-temporal event. as a byproduct of this analysis we show
that the generalized dynamics of our model need not be assumed a priori (by
postulating an additional equation describing this evolution, as it was done
in our previous works), but it can be deduced from the model under rather
mild conditions. in section 7, we collect our main results.

2 a noncommutative unication of general

relativity and quantum mechanics

in this section we briey summarize our model in a quasi-axiomatic way; the
model presented earlier (refs. 12-15) could be considered as a special instant
of this more general scheme.

1. let us consider a product g = e  , where e is a smooth manifold
(or, more generally, a dierential space of constant dimension [10]), and 
a lie group acting on e (to the right). g can be given the structure of a
smooth groupoid (see [3, p. 99], [23]). we additionally assume that there is
a subset z of the center z(a) of the algebra a such that z is isomorphic
with c (m) where m is the space-time manifold (or its dierential space
generalization).

2. we dene the involutive algebra a = (c 

c (g, c), +, , ) of compactly
supported, complex valued functions on the groupoid g where + is the
usual addition, and the multiplication is dened to be the convolution

(a  b)() =zgq

a(1)b(2),

where  = (q, qg)  g,  = 1  2, and gq is the ber of g over q  e;

3

the integral is taken with respect to the (left) invariant haar measure. the
involution is dened in the following way: a() = a(1). let us notice that
instead  = (q, qg) we can simply write  = (q, g).

3. let dera be the set of all derivations of the algebra a; it has the
structure of a z(a)-module. we dene the dierential algebra (a, v ) where
v is a z(a)-submodule of dera of the form v = ve  v with ve being
the set of all derivations parallel to e and v the set of all derivations
parallel to .

4. a metric on v is dened to be a z(a)-bilinear nondegenerate sym-

metric mapping g : v  v  a. for our model we choose the metric

g = pr

ege + pr

g

(1)

where ge and g are metrics on e and , respectively, and pre and pr are
the obvious projections. it has been demonstrated by madore and mourad
[20] that for a broad class of derivation based dierential algebras the metric
is essentially unique. this is the case for the -part of metric (1), but the
e-part of this metric is determined by the lorentz metric on the space-time
m.

5. now, we develop the noncommutative dierential geometry as in
[12, 15]: we dene the linear connection (with the help of the koszul for-
mula), the curvature and the ricci operator r : v  v , and we write the
noncommutative einstein equation

g = 0

(2)

where g = r + 2i with r being the ricci operator,  a constant related
to the usual cosmological constant, and i the identity operator; kerg is
evidently the solution of this equation. because of the form of metric (1) eq.
(2) can be written in the form

ge + g = 0

where ge is the part parallel to e, and g is the part parallel to . since in
the -direction there is essentially one metric, the equation g = 0 should
be solved for derivations v  kerg  v. the equation ge = 0 is a lifting

4

of the usual einstein equation in the space-time m (therefore, it should be
solved for the metric); all derivations v  ve satisfy it, and all derivations
v  v satisfy it trivially. it can be easily seen that kerg = kerge  kerg
is a z(a)-submodule of v (see [12, 15]).

6. let q : a  b(h) be a representation of the algebra a in the hilbert
space h = l2(gq), where b(h) denotes the algebra of bounded operators on
h, given by the formula

(q(a))() = (aq  )(),

(3)

aq is here a restriction of a  a to the ber gq, q  e, and   g,   h.
the completion of a with respect to the norm k a k = supqe k q(a) k is a
c -algebra (see [3, p. 102]). this algebra will be called einstein c -algebra.

7. we quantize the above system with the help of the algebraic method
based on classical works by jordan, von neumann, and wiener [18], segal
[24, 25], haag and kastler [8]. let s denote the set of states on the einstein
c -algebra a. we assume that elements of s represent states of the system
and pure states of s represent pure states of the system. let a  z(a) be a
hermitian element of a and let   s. in such a case, (a) is the expectation
value of the observable a if the system is in the state .

let us, for simplicity, assume that  is a compact group (general case
is discussed in [15]). two bres gp and gq of g, p, q  e, are said to be
equivalent if there is g   such that q = pg. the set of all functions of
a which are constant on the equivalence classes of bres of this equivalence
relation are called projectible functions; they form a subalgebra of a denoted
by aproj. it can be easily seen that aproj  z(a), and consequently aproj
is a commutative algebra. in fact, it is isomorphic with the algebra c (m)
of smooth functions on the space-time m. in this way, we recover the usual
general relativity (in gerochs formulation [7]). in subsequent sections we
shall show that the standard quantum mechanics is also incorporated into
our model.

we have computed the above presented model for the case in which
g = e  d4 where e is the total space of the frame bundle over the
minkowski space-time and d4 a group of 4 rotations and 4 reections (it
is a noncommutative subgroup of su(2)) [15] and, more generally, for the
case when  is a nite group [12]. these cases should be regarded as toy
models demonstrating the consistency of our approach.

5

3 random operators

let a = c 
c (g, c) (in fact, in what follows we can assume that a is the
einstein algebra). for each a  a there is a function a on e with values in
the space of operators given by

a(p) = p(a)

for p  e. the function a is said to be -invariant if, for every g 
, a(pg) = a(p).

lemma 3.1 the function a is -invariant if and only if a  aproj.

proof. let us notice that a(pg) = a(p) is equivalent to apg  pg = ap  p
which gives apg = ap.

lemma 3.2 if a = b then a = b (almost everywhere). 

therefore, we have two equivalent descriptions of our noncommutative
geometry: one in terms of the algebra of smooth, compactly supported, com-
plex valued functions (with convolution as multiplication) on the groupoid
g; another in terms of the algebra of operator valued functions on e. the
rst description is, in many cases, easier to work with, and gives us the
direct contact with better known commutative functional algebras (such as
the algebra c (m) on a manifold m); the second description gives us better
insight when the underlying space is strongly singular.

let us notice that the groupoid g = e   has the natural structure of
foliation; this foliation will be denoted by f . the bres gp, p  e, are leaves
of the foliation f (for simplicity, we assume that g is a smooth manifold).
let the space of leaves be denoted by y . we should notice that y is in the
bijective correspondence with e. let  : g  y be the natural projection
of the element   g onto the leaf containing , i. e., () = gp where
 = (p, g); we shall also write p = beg.

let us consider a bundle of hilbert spaces (l2(g()))g. sections
of this bundle form one-parameter families ()g such that, for every ,
  l2(()).

6

denition 3.1 the random operator is a one-parameter family r = (rp)pe
of operators rp  end(l2(gp)), p  e, satisfying the following measurability
condition: for any sections ()g and ()g of (l2(g()))g the func-
tion g  c, given by  7 (beg()(a), ), is measurable (in the usual
sense).

this denition is an application of the general concept of random operator
[3, p. 51] to our case.

the norm of the random operator r is dened as k r k= suppe k rp k.
the equivalence classes of random operators, modulo almost everywhere,
equipped with the obvious algebraic operations, form the von neumann al-
gebra [3, p. 52] which will be denoted by n .
it is also called the von
neumann algebra of the foliationf .

let us notice that any function a  a determines the random operator
a given by a = p(a) for p  e (but not every random operator must be
determined by a function a  a); a is in fact a one-parameter family of
operators parametrized by the elements of the set e, and it is easy to check
that it satises the condition of denition 3.1.

proposition 3.1 lpe p(a) is a subalgebra of the von neumann algebra
n of the foliation f , and (lpep(a)) is a von neumann subalgebra of n .



4 state dependent evolution of random op-

erators

first, let us remind some well known concepts. let a be a subalgebra
of the algebra b(h) of bounded operators on a hilbert space. a vector
  b(h) is separating for the algebra a acting on h if, for every t  a,
t  = 0 implies t = 0. a vector   b(h) is cyclic for a acting on h if a
is dense in h. the fact that  is cyclic for a acting on h implies that  is
separating for a. if a is a von neumann algebra the reverse is also true (see
[6, appendix a14]). now we go back to our case.

lemma 4.1 if a is an algebra with unit then the vector  = 1  l2(gq) is
cyclic for the von neumann algebra (q(a)) acting on l2(gq).

7

proof. we have the obvious equality: aq = q(a)1 where aq = {aq :
a  a}. the functional space aq contains polynomial functions, therefore
aq is dense in l2(gq), and consequently  is cyclic in l2(gq).

let t = q(a), a  a, be an operator such that t  = 0. in such a case,

aq  1 = 0 which implies aq  1 = 0, and t = 0. 

corollary 4.1 if a is the algebra with unit then the vector  = (1q)qe,
where 1q  l2(gq) and 1q is the constant function equal to one, is cyclic

and separable for the von neumann algebra m = (lqe q(a)) acting on
lqe l2(gq). 

this allows us to formulate the following theorem.

theorem 4.1 let a be the algebra with unit. with every state  on the von

neumann algebra m = (lqe q(a)) there is associated the one-parameter

t )tr of automorphisms of m given by

group (



t (b) = itbit,

(4)

for every b  m, where  = s s, and the operator s : m  m is dened
by s(b)() = b() where  = (q)qe is cyclic in l2(gq)qe. 

proof. on the strength of theorem 1 from [13] there exists the unique
state  = (q)qe, where q = (q(a)q, q) with q cyclic in l2(gq), such
that

q (a)[b] = [q(a)(b)],

(5)

b  qa, is a gns representation of the algebra a. here [...] represents
the element of the quotient space with respect to the ideal nq = {a  a :
q(aa)}. now, the tomita-takesaki theorem [27] asserts that the mapping

t : m  m, t  r, is a one-parameter group of automorphisms of the von
neumann algebra m with the desired properties. 

the one-parameter group 

t , t  r, is called the modular group of the
state  on the von neumann algebra m which, by proposition 3.1, is ob-
viously a von neumann subalgebra of the van neumann algebra n of the
foliation f .

with any element a  a there is associated the random operator a =
(q)qe. if a belongs to the von neumann algebra m we can consider the

8

function of the form t 7 
t (a) which denes a one-parameter group of
random operators representing the evolution of these operators starting
from the initial random operator a = 
0 (a). let us take the closer look
at this evolution.

if we assume that a  m, we have



t (a) = eitaeit.

after dierentiating and multiplying by ih this equation assumes the form

ih

d
dt

|t=0

t (a) = [a, h ln ].

(6)

the hamiltonian h ln , through the dependence on the endomorphism
s, depends on the state . this equation should be regarded as describing
a noncommutative dynamics of random operators.

for any random operator r = (rq)qe we dene its eigenfunction (q), q 

e by the equation

rq = (q)

(7)

for any   l2(gq) (for simplicity, we consider a nondegenerate case). we
also dene the eigenfunction  : e  r  c for the evolution of a random
operator r by the following equation

(

 (r))qe = (q, t),

(8)

for any   l2(gq) where 

 (r) is a random operator at the instant t =  .

in the noncommutative regime there is no time, and consequently there
cannot be any dynamical equations (in the usual sense). however, as we
have seen, a noncommutative counterpart of dynamics is encoded in (state
dependent) modular groups of random operators.
it is important to see
how these modular groups project to the standard dynamics in the quantum
mechanical case.

first, let us notice that if a random operator is of the form r =(q(a))qe,
where a  aproj, then the function  : e  c is -invariant, i. e., (qg) =
(q) for every g  .

lemma 4.2 if a  aproj then the operator a can be identied with the
function a : m  c. for any x  m, (x) is the eigenvalue of the operator
a(p) where m (p) = x.

9

proof. we have

a(p) = ap  .

since a  aproj, ap =const on the set 1
m (x). for x  m, such that m (p) =
x, one has ap = (x) where  : m  c is a function on m such that
a =   m . therefore,

a(p) = (x)  .

(9)

consequently, (x) is the eigenvalue of the operator a and we can identify
a(p) with . 

corollary. for a  aproj the operator p(a) = a(p), p  e, is a ho-
mothety with the constant (x), and consequently its eigenspace is the whole
space l2(gp). 

the function a is, in fact, the spectrum of the operator a.

if a is a
random operator, the function a : m  c is measurable in the usual sense
(because of the measurability condition in denition 3.1) the function  (or
a(p) understood as a function on m) is an eigenfunction of a. of course, if
a is hermitian, the eigenvalues (x) are real.

lemma 4.2 is expressed in terms of operator valued functions on e. how-
ever, it can be equivalently expressed in terms of the algebra a = c (g, c).
it then says that with every a  aproj there is the canonically associated
function (measurable in the usual sense) a : m  c such that a  m = a.
for any x  m, a(x) is an eigenvalue of the operator a(q) where m (q) = x.

let m = (lqe q(a)) be the von neumann subalgebra of the von

neumann algebra n of the foliation f . it is easy to check that the mapping
 : a  m given by (a) = a, for a  a, is a homomorphism of algebras,
and consequently we have (z(a))  z(m)  z(n ).
it follows that if
a  aproj  z(a) then the one-parameter group 
t (a) is constant. there-
fore, if we go to the space-time approximation (if we restrict to aproj) the
noncommutative dynamics is switched o. let us notice, however, that this
is valid only for a given state . it is not unlike in the schrodinger picture of
quantum mechanics in which operators are constant and all time dependence
goes to the state vectors. we should expect that the dynamics reappears in
the quantum mechanical approximation.

such an approximation is obtained if we narrow the algebra a to its

subalgebra

a := {f  pr : f  f c 

c (, c)}

10

where pr : g   is the obvious projection. for any a  a, the random
operator a = (q(a))qe is a family of operators which can be identied with
each other (because of the natural isomorphism of leaves of the foliation f ).
in this sense any random operator a, with a  a, is a constant family
projectible to the typical leaf . in such a case, the operator, to which the
random operator a projects, will be denoted by a; it belongs to end(l2()).
let us notice that a is not a random operator since random operators are
dened on the foliated space and not on the typical leaf. now, eq. (6)
assumes the form

ih

d
dt

|t=0

t (a) = [a, h ln f ].

(10)

the modular group 
t (a) is here dened with respect to the von neumann
algebra (q(a)) where q is any element of e. eq.
(10) describes the
evolution depending on the state ; we shall return to this problem in the
subsequent section.

it is interesting to notice that the modular group 

t , t  r, determines

the derivation v  derm of the von neumann algebra m. we dene

v(q (a)) :=

d
dt

(

t (q(a)))

where a  m, and the representation q is dened by eq. (5). after simple
calculations (see [13]), from eq. (4) we obtain

v(q(a)) = i[q (a), ln ] = iadln (q (a)).

the one-parameter groups 
v  kerg such that

t , t  r, for which there exists a derivation

v(q(a)) =

d
dt

(

t (q (a))

deserve to be called integral curves of the noncommutative einstein equation.

5 unitary evolution of random operators

in this section we show that eq. (6), in the quantum mechanical approxima-
tion, gives the usual unitary evolution of quantum observables.

11

let us rst notice that the (above dened) homomorphism of algebras
 : a  m is a monomorphism. indeed, if (a) = 0 then (q(a))qe = 0
which implies that aq = 0 for each q  e, and this means that a = 0.
therefore, we have proved the following lemma.

lemma 5.1  : a  (a) is an isomorphism of algebras. 

let u = {u  a : uu = uu = 1} be the unitary group of the algebra a.
then (u) is the unitary group of the algebra (a). let us notice that for
the subalgebra a  a we have (a)  (a) and the unitary group of this
subalgebra is of the form

u = {u  a : uu = uu = 1}.

evidently u  u, and correspondingly (u)  (u).

let r = ((a)) be the von neumann algebra generated by the algebra
of random operators (a).
in agreement with the general construction
[5, 13], the automorphisms  : r  r and  : r  r are said to be inner
equivalent if there is an element u  (u) such that

u(b) = (b)u

for every b  r. the set of equivalence classes of this relation is called the
group of outer automorphisms and is denoted by outr. as well known, the
one-parameter group 
t , t  r, canonically projects onto the (nontrivial)
one-parameter group t, t  r, in outr which is independent of the state
.

from eq. (6) it follows that t satises the following equation in outr

d
dt

|t=0[t(a)] = i[[a], [ln ]]

where [...] denotes the equivalence class of inner equivalence. this equation
can also be written in the form
d
dt

|t=0 t(a) = [a, h]

ih

where h = h[ln ]. this equation, after being projected to the typical
leaf , assumes the form

ih

d
dt

|t=0 t(a) = [a, h]

12

(11)

which is the same as eq. (10) but now independent of the state . this
is, in fact, the schrodinger equation in the heisenberg picture of quantum
mechanics in which operators evolve but state vectors are time independent.
in this way, by projecting to the typical leaf , we recover from our model
the unitary evolution of ordinary quantum operators.

6 reduction of the state vector

the product structure of the groupoid g = e   plays the essential role
in our model. the e-component of the model is, in principle, responsible
for its gravitational eects, whereas the -component is responsible for
quantum mechanical eects. in the quantum mechanical approximation we
simply forget about the e-component eects. in this section we show that
precisely this fact leads to the eect which, from the -perspective, looks
like the reduction of the state vector. first, however, we must do some
preparatory work.

let us consider a function f : g  c on the groupoid g = e  . with

xed g   we obtain the function fg : e  c given by

fg(p) = f (p, g)

for p  e. we recognize in it the eigenfunction (q) of equation (7). this
function determines the one-parameter family of functions (fg)g. for a
xed g   we obtain the sequence of the values (fg(p))pe of the function
f on the bre e  {p} for each p  e. in particular, for any hermitian
element a  aproj we obtain the sequence of real values ag(p), p  e.
in
this case, the sequence (ag(p))pe does not depend of g   (since elements
of aproj are constant on bres gp for every p  e). on the strength of
lemma 4.2 and the subsequent corollary, if a  aproj is hermitian then the
random operator a = (p(a))pe is a one parameter family of homotheties
with constants a(p, g) where g is any xed element of the group , and the
operator rp = p(a), for a xed p  e, satises the eigenvalue equation

rp = (p)

(12)

for  = l2(gq). the eigenspace of the operator rp is the whole hilbert space.
since a  aproj the eigenfunction (p) = a(p, g) assumes constant values on

13

the bres 1(x), x  m. consequently, there is the real valued function
 : m  r such that   m = , and the random operator a = (rp)pe has
the following set of eigenvalues

{(p) : p  e} = {(x) : x  m}.

let us notice that in every act of measurement the measuring apparatus
is always located at a given point in space-time x  m. this automatically
causes the function  to collapse to its value (x) (in the examples below
we shall see that this indeed is connected with the reduction of the state
vector). such a procedure is meaningful only with respect to operators which
commute with the position operator since measuring the eigenvalue (x), for
a given x, presupposes the knowledge of x  m.

the above analysis is carried out from the perspective of the e-component
of our model; to go back to the standard measurement interpretation in quan-
tum mechanics we must see how the process looks like from the perspective of
its -component. let us choose an orthonormal basis {n(g)} in the hilbert
space l2(). we are looking for the operator  acting in this space the
eigenvalues of which would be (p). this does not necessarily mean that the
spectrum of this operator is continuous. for instance, if the function (p) is
constant there is only one eigenvalue. let us rst assume that the spectrum
(p) is discrete. in this case, the looked for operator is

 =xn

npn,

where pn is the projector onto the direction determined by n (for simplic-
ity, we consider the nondegenerate case). in the case of continuous spectrum,
we proceed analogously and use the corresponding spectral theorem (see be-
low example 2). in this way, we recover the standard formalism of quantum
mechanics. if this formalism is taken separately, without paying attention to
what happens in the e-direction, all interpretative problems of quantum me-
chanics immediately arise. the following examples show that these problems
are naturally solved if the model is regarded in its totality.

example 1. spin measurement. in [14] it has been shown that to the
usual z-component spin operator sz there correspond two elements s1 and s2
of the noncommutative algebra a such that

p(s1) = +

h
2

 if   c+

14

and

p(s2) = 

h
2

 if   c

where c+ = c + {0} and c = {0} + c. since s1 and s2 are observables we
assume that they are hermitian and elements of aproj; consequently, they
can be regarded as real valued functions on m dened by: s1 = + h
2 and
s2 =  h
2 . since s1 and s2 are constant functions they also belong to the
subalgebra a. both s1 and s2 are homotheties, and consequently the entire
hilbert space l2(gp) is the eigenspace of these operators. this means that
the results of the spin measurements are strictly predetermined (i. e., they
are obtained with certainty), although at the present we do not know the
mechanism of this predetermination. however, for the sake of concreteness,
let us naively assume that it is given by the following random operator

rp =( p(s1)

p(s2)

if 3(p)  0,
if 3(p) < 0,

(13)

2 , ) are measurable.

2 or  h

where 3(p) = x3 is the projection onto the third space coordinate (z-
it is indeed the random operator since the mappings  7
coordinate).
(+ h

2 , ) and  7 ( h
to see what happens in the perspective of the observer performing
the measurement we must situate the observer in space-time m (the e-
component of our model). let us suppose that the measuring apparatus is at
a space-time point x = m (p), p  e. the result of the measurement will be
+ h
2 (with probability 1) depending on whether 3(p) 0 or 3(p) < 0
with m (p) = x. these two conditions are not known to the observer, there-
fore, in computing the probability of the result he uses the -perspective (i.
e., the standard machinery of quantum mechanics), and the outcome of the
measurement looks for him as the collapse of the wave function. we can
see this by choosing two orthonormal vectors 1, 2  l2() which span the
subspace h1, 2ic  l2(); then with the help of the spectral theorem we
recover the usual spin operator

sz = +

h
2

p1 

h
2

p2

where p1 and p2 are projecting operators onto the directions determined
by 1 and 2, respecrively. in this way, the operator sz is determined by the

15

random operator rp. as usually, if the system is in the state  the probability
that the result of a measurement will give + h
2 is |h, 1i|2, and analogously
for  h
2 . of course, in the act of measurement the state vector  collapses
either to the eigenvalue + h
2 in agreement with the
standard procedure of quantum mechanics.

2 or to the eigenvalue  h

the conditions either 3(p)  0 or 3(p) < 0 in the formula (13) were
put there by hand and we could easily imagine some other conditions which
would do the job. however, it could be hoped that if the theory is more
developed (i. e., if the concrete algebra a and the concrete group  are
chosen basing on physical grounds), the correct mechanism selecting either
p(s1) or p(s2) will be determined by the theory itself. by now, we could
only guess that this mechanism is connected with the random character of
the operator rp (formula (13)). the essential point is that since p(s1) is a
homothety the eigenspace of the eigenvalue + h
2 is the entire hilbert space,
and the result of the measurement must be strictly predetermined. the
same is true for the eigenvalue  h
2 . this means that there is some very well
hidden mechanism predetermining the outcome of the measurement.

example 2. position measurement. let, for simplicity, m be r4,

and let fprk : r4  r, k = 0, 1, 2, 3, be the projection function dened by
fprk(x0, x1, x2, x3) =xk. one can see that prk = fpr  m  e, (e : g  e

being the obvious projection) is a hermitian element of aproj. it can be easily
guessed that pr is an observable corresponding to the position operator. its
eigenvalue equation is

for   l2(gq), where x = m (p), p  e. hence we obtain

p(prk) = prk(x)

p(prk) = xk,

(14)

(15)

as it should be (the position operator acts by multiplication). the spectrum
of the position operator p(prk) is evidently r. the operator p(prk) is a ho-
mothety, and consequently the entire hilbert space l2(gp) is the eigenspace
corresponding to the eigenvalue prk(x). in other words, the result of the po-
sition measurement of a quantum object is always predetermined, although
at the present stage of the development of the model the mechanism of this
predetermination is not known. therefore, the only thing we could do is
to change to the -perspective. we simply look for the operator acting on
the hilbert space l2() the spectrum of which is equal to r. by using the

16

spectral theorem we nd (in the one-dimensional case)

x =z +



xde(x)

where e is a suitable spectral measure (see, for instance, [22, pp.24-31]).
then we can write down the standard eigenvalue equation (which essentially
is the same as eq. (15)) and compute the probabilities of the expected results.
after completing the measurement we would say that the wave function has
collapsed. however, if the entire model is taken into account there is no real
collapse; the measurement result is strictly predetermined by the fact that
p(prk) is a homothety.

7 conclusions

the overview picture that emerges from the above analysis is the follow-
ing. in general, the noncommutative regime is atemporal. the only meaning
which we can ascribe to the term dynamics is through the fact that certain
geometric quantities are expressed in terms of derivations of the algebra a
dening the considered noncommutative geometry. derivations are counter-
parts of vector elds, and as such they can be regarded as modelling certain
type of global change. the concept of dynamics improves if the algebra a
has properties admitting the existence of one-parameter modular groups (see
[13]). then the von neumann algebra, generated by the algebra a, becomes
a dynamical object (see [5]), and modular groups describe the evolution
of the corresponding operators. in what follows, we shall assume that the
algebra a admits the existence of modular groups.

in our model this means that the dynamics of the system is described by
eq. (6). this dynamics (or evolution) depends on the state  in which
the system nds itself. it is especially interesting to consider the evolution
of random operators. this is not a limitation since, by lemma 5.1 there
is an isomorphism between the algebra a and the von neumann algebra of
random operators. this fact has its further important consequences. ran-
dom operators, as elements of the von neumann algebra, are probabilistic
objects albeit in a generalized sense. let us remind that the noncommutative
counterpart of the probability space is a pair (m, ) where m is a von neu-
mann algebra and  a (faithful and normal) state on m. by the denition

17

of state,  is positive (i. e. (aa)  0 for every a  m), and normal-
ized (i. e., (1) = 1), in close analogy to the standard probability measure.
it is striking that in the noncommutative regime the concept of state and
that of probability measure coincide.
if we go to the quantum mechanics
approximation these concepts split but remain strictly interconnected. we
are entitled to say that the probabilistic character of quantum mechanics is
the consequence of the fact that the quantum mechanical observables are but
shadows (projections) of random operators.

we have demonstrated that in the dynamical equation (6) there are en-
coded both the unitary evolution of observables of the standard quantum
mechanics and the reduction of the state vector (collapse of the wave func-
tion) occurring in the act of measurement of a given observable. to obtain
the unitary evolution of observables of the usual quantum mechanics two
steps must be made. the rst step is to project dynamical equation (6) to
the typical leaf . this leads to eq. (10). as the consequence of this pro-
cedure the random operator a changes into the ordinary operator a, but
its evolution is still state dependent. in the second step, we form the group
of outer automorphisms (see section 5) and obtain one-parameter groups
t, t  r, which are now state independent. with this modication dy-
namical equation (10) changes into eq. (11) which is the usual schrodinger
equation (in the heisenberg picture) of quantum mechanics describing the
unitary evolution of observables. this process of the transition to quan-
tum mechanics truncates the model leaving aside its e-component (in this
sense the usual quantum mechanics is incomplete). we should notice that
precisely the e-component of the model is responsible for all measurements
(every measuring device as a macroscopic object is situated in space-time).
we have shown that exactly this truncation is the reason why what is seen
from the -perspective looks like a sudden collapse of information in the act
of measurement.

we could briey summarize the situation by saying that the unitary evo-
lution of quantum observables and the reduction of the state vector in the
act of their measurements are but two dierent projections of the same
process, namely, of the generalized dynamics in the noncommutative regime.

references

18

[1] a. h. chamseddine, g. felder and j. frohlich, commun. math. phys.

155, 1993, 205.

[2] a. h. chamseddine and a. connes, phys. rev. lett. 77, 1996, 4868.

[3] a. connes, noncommutative geometry, academic press, new york -

london, 1994.

[4] a. connes, commun. math. phys. 182, 1996, 155.

[5] a. connes and c. rovelli, class. quantum grav. 11, 1994, 2899.

[6] j. dixmier, les c -alg`ebres et leurs representations, gauthier-villars,

paris, 1969.

[7] r. geroch, commun. math. phys. 26, 1972, 271.

[8] r. haag and d. kastler, j. math. phys. 5, 1064, 848.

[9] p. m. hajac, j. math. phys. 37, 1996, 4549.

[10] m. heller and w. sasin, j. math. phys. 36, 1995, 3644.

[11] m. heller and w. sasin, j. math. phys. 37, 1996, 5665.

[12] m. heller, w. sasin and d. lambert, j. math. phys. 38, 1997, 5840.

[13] m. heller and w. sasin, phys. lett. a250, 1998, 48.

[14] m. heller and w. sasin, einstein-podolski-rosen experiment from
noncommutative quantum gravity, in: particles, fields, and gravita-
tion, ed. j. rembielinski, the american institute of physics, woodbury
- new york, 1998, 234-241.

[15] m. heller and w. sasin, noncommutative unication of general rel-

ativity and quantum gravity, int. j. theor. phys. (in press).

[16] m. heller and w. sasin, gen. relat. grav. 31, 1999, 555.

[17] m. heller and w. sasin, nonlocal phenomena from noncommutative

pre-plackian regime, to be published.

19

[18] p. jordan, j. von neumann, and e. p. wiegner, ann. math. 35, 1934,

29.

[19] j. madore, j. math. phys. 39, 1998, 423.

[20] madore, j. and j. mourad, j. math. phys. 39, 1998, 424.

[21] j. madore and l. a. saeger, class. quantum grav. 15, 1998, 811.

[22] r. omn`es, interpretation of quantum mechanics, princeton university

press, princeton, 1994.

[23] j. renault, a groupoid approach to c -algebras, lecture notes in

mathematics, no 793, springer, berlin-heidelberg-new york, 1980.

[24] i. e. segal, ann. math. 48, 1947, 930.

[25] i. e. segal, bull. am. math. soc. 53, 1947, 73.

[26] a. sitarz, class. quantum grav. 11, 1994, 2127.

[27] m. takesaki, tomitas theory of modular hilbert algebras and its ap-
plications, lecture notes in mathematics, vol. 128, springer, new york,
1970.

20

