9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

1
2

 
 

1
v
8
5
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

regularisation of chiral gauge theories

by

n.d. hari dass

institute of mathematical sciences, c.i.t campus, chennai 600 113

abstract

this article gives a review of the topic of regularising chiral gauge theories
and is aimed at a general audience.it begins by clarifying the meaning of
chirality and goes on to discussing chiral projections in eld theory, parity
violation and the distinction between vector and chiral eld theories.it then
discusses the standard model of electroweak interactions from the perspective
of chirality. it also reviews at length the phenomenon of anomalies in quan-
tum eld theories including the intuitive understanding of anomalies based
on the dirac sea picture as given by nielsen and ninomiya.it then raises the
issue of a non-perturbative and constructive denition of the standard model
as well as the importance of such formulations. the second nielsen-ninomiya
theorem about the impossibility of regularising chiral gauge theories under
some general assumptions is also discussed. after a brief review of lattice
regularisation of eld theories, it discusses the issue of fermions on the lattice
with special emphasis on the problem of species doubling. the implications
of these problems to introducing chiral fermions on the lattice as well as the
interpretations of anomalies within the lattice formulations and the lattice
dirac sea picture are then discussed.finally the diculties of formulating
the standard model on the lattice are illustrated through detailed discus-
sions of the wilson-yukawa method, the domain wall fermions method and
the recently popular ginsparg-wilson method.

1 introduction

chirality simply means handedness. handedness in its most basic meaning
means a correlation between circular motion and linear motion. for exam-
ple,when the head of a corkscrew is given a rotation, the tip of the screw
moves forward or backward depending on which way the head is rotated. a
quantity representing this correlation is the scalar product of angular mo-

1

mentum ~j,the generator of rotations and momentum ~p , the generator of
translations. actually the magnitudes of the angular momentum and lin-
ear momentum are irrelevant for quantifying the desired correlation. this
quantity ~j  ~p is called helicity of the particle.

for massive particles, it can easily be seen that helicity depends on the
initial frame of reference. if the inertial frame is the rest frame of the massive
particle, helicity is not even dened. the direction of the linear momentum
can change depending on the frame while the direction of angular momentum
does not. hence helicity can take both signs.

but for massless particles helicity has a lorentz-invariant meaning. no
rest frame is available to these particles and consequently the direction of
the momentum can not be reversed by a change of frames. this fact is
of special signicance in the case of fermions. specically, in d = 4,the
dirac-weyl equation describing massless fermions is invariant under the 5-
transformation:

 = i5

(1)

as a consequence,5 is conserved and its eigenvalues are the particle helicities.
from now onwards we shall call the 5-eigenvalues chirality.

it also follows that we can introduce the chirality projection operators

p = 1

2(1  5) and write

l = p+
r = p

(2)

2 parity violation

a development of great signicance in physics was the discovery of parity
violation. it was found that in -decay,the electron was emitted in a direction
predominantly anti-parallel to the direction of nuclear spin.in a landmark
development sudarshan,marshak,feynman,gell-mann and sakurai showed
that the weak interaction currents were of the v  a type. we will see
that this has had profound implications for the conceptual developments in
particle physics. in its impact and timelessness this discovery should rank
along with galileos inertia, einsteins equivalence principle etc.

mathematically speaking the weak interaction current has the form

j +
 = plnl

2

(3)

the remarkable feature of this current is that it is made of only the lefthanded
elds. in fact it is a property of -interactions that they preserve chirality.it
is instructive to compare the structure of the electromagnetic current also
expressed in terms of the chiral components:

 = ll + rr
j el

(4)

again the current does not mix the l and r components.however,in the elec-
tromagnetic current the l and r elds occur on an equal footing, reecting
the parity conserving nature of the electromagnetic interactions.such theo-
ries will henceforth be referred to as vector theories in contrast to the theory
of weak interactions which shall be called chiral.

as far as the structure of these currents are concerned, it appears pos-
sible to treat the l and r elds as independent species of particles. but as
mentioned before, chirality does not have a lorentz-invariant meaning for
massive particles. in fact the mass term in a lagrangean expressed interms
of l and r elds looks like

m  = m( lr + rl)

(5)

thus inertia can be viewed as merely an interaction that switches l and r
species! this is indeed a major paradigm shift in elementary particle theory.

3 the standard model of weak and electro-

magnetic interactions

the next major development of relevance is the standard model which unied
in one step the old fermi theory of weak interactions, the v  a structure
of weak currents inspired by the observed parity violation in beta decay,and
remarkably,the electromagnetic interactions. other highlights of this theory
were the dynamical origin of masses, existence of weak neutral currents and
from a theoretical point of view, renormalisability.

the construction of the standard model is based on the symmetry group
su(2)l  u(1).restricting ourselves to the leptonic sector(electron,neutrino)
for convenience, the basic elds are taken to be (el, el) transforming as a
doublet under su(2)l,and er transforming as a singlet under su(2)l. both
the left-handed doublet and the righthanded singlet transform non-trivially

3

under u(1).furthermore, the u(1) charges of the l and r elds are dier-
ent.the vector currents l~ l transforming as a triplet under su(2)l and
ll, rr couple to the gauge elds ~w and b. the neutral currents
couple to the u(1)-gauge eld in proportion to the hypercharges of the l and
r elds.

it should be emphasised here that the parity violations are put in by
hand in the standard model.this is realised by ascribing very dierent prop-
erties (like hypercharges,su(2)l representations) to the r and l elds.these
dierence do not arise as manifestations of any deeper dynamics.whenever
l and r elds transform dierently under the group, one says that there are
complex representations of the group.

associated with the gauge elds are the following local gauge transfor-
mations under which the theory is invariant. in addition to the fermionic
elds and gauge elds, the standard model also has the so called higgs eld
which transforms as a complex su(2)l doublet.the four real components of
this complex doublet can also be arranged as a 2  2 matrix :

0 + 3
1  i2

1 + i2
0 + i3

(6)

likewise,the gauge elds ~w can be equivalently represented as a matrix
w = ~w  ~ . in terms of these elds and the fermionic elds the gauge
transformations are:

b 
(x) = b(x) + (x)
~w
(x) = g(x)wg1(x)  ig(x)  g1(x)
l(x) = g(x)eiyl(x)l(x)

r(x) = eiyr(x)l(x)

(x) = ei(ylyr)(x)g(x)

(7)

these transformation rules allow for gauge-invariant interactions of the type

ly ukawa = gy lr + h.c

(8)

it is easily recognised that the same interaction can generate masses for
the fermions(see eq()) if the higgs eld  develops a vacuum expectation
value.but that would mean that the global part of su(2)l  u(1) would

4

be spontaneously broken and by the goldstone theorem there ought to be
massless goldstone bosons equalling at least the number of broken gener-
ators.the latter is estimated on noting that su(2)l-rotations about the di-
rection along which the vev of  points still leave the action invariant.thus
there are three broken generators and in perturbative analysis one nds three
goldstone bosons. because the global invariance is elevated to a local one,
the relevant phenomenon is the anderson-higgs mechanism by which three
of the vector bosons acquire masses and the gauge boson corresponding to
the unbroken generator is identied as the massless photon.this is inded the
conceptual economy of the standard model which , while unifying weak and
electromagnetic interactions, naturally realises their importance,namely,the
dierence in the ranges of the interactions.

as already stressed, the standard model is perturbatively renormalis-
able. this hinges on the delicate fact that breaking the symmetries spon-
taneously does not spoil renormalisability and that the symmetric version
of the theory is renormalisable.in fact one of the biggest stumbling blocks
towards the construction of a eld theory of weak interactions was the non-
renormalisability of generic massive yang-mills theories.establishing this
consists of rst regularising the theory , then checking all the ward iden-
tities for the regularised theory and nally using denitions of an optimal
set of observables to renormalise. one has the choice of either regular-
ising the theory maintaining all the symmetries(if possible),in which case
the ward identities are automatically satised in the regularised theory, or,
using non-invariant regularisation schemes and adding the requisite (non-
invariant)counter terms to realise the ward identities.

one of the popular techniques for regularisation is the so-called dimen-
sional regularisation where the dimension of space-time is taken to be n =
4   and removing cut-o is equivalent to taking the limit   0. this way
of regularising has the advantage that it is manifestly gauge invariant.

but already at this stage chirality begins to pose some problems.the
origin of this diculty lies in the fact that chirality is a very dimension
dependent concept i.e in odd dimensions there are no weyl fermions.more
explicitly,5 which enters the chiral projection operators(in d = 4) is given
by 5 = 0123 and it is clear that there is no straightforward way of
generalising this to arbitrary dimensions. however, there is a procedure due
to breitenlohner and maison,which seems to succesfully address this question
,at least in low orders of perturbation theory.

5

3.1 a caveat : the anomalies

the renormalisability of the standard model hinges on a caveat of the absence
are cancellation of the so called anomalies.conceptually,anomalies will play
a vital role in the rest of our discussions, so it is worth our while to exam-
ine them carefully.anomaly is an eect in quantum field theory whereby
a symmetry is destroyed by the quantum uctuations.it is highly counter-
intuitive as it is not clear why quantum uctuations should invalidate con-
servation laws.

on closer examination,anomalies can be understood as arising because
of innite number of degrees of freedom characterstic of all eld theories.it
should be recalled that the occurrence of divergences in qft necessitating
the renormalisation procedure is also a consequence of these innitely many
degrees of freedom.in the case of a theory like quantum electrodynamics
or quantum yang-mills theory, regularisation and renormalisation can be
carried out preserving the corresponding gauge invariances.if, however, we
consider a theory with several invariances at the so-called classical level,the
likelihood of there being no way of regularising the theory maintaining all
the ward identities can not be ruled out.then a choice has to be made to give
up some of the invariances. this in a nutshell is the basis of the anomalies.
before we analyse the anomalies in depth,it is relevant to point out that
not all invariances need be symmetries in the wignerian sense,which,among
other things,would associate degeneracies with symmetries.therefore,contrary
to the oft-used language,local gauge invariances are not symmetries and hence
the expression gauge symmetry is an abuse of language.what local gauge
invariances represent are statements about the number of degrees freedom or
more precisely,they specify the physical conguration space of the theory.a
rigid or global gauge invariance,on the other hand, is a symmetry of the
theory. instead of leading to degeneracies,it leads to superselection rules.

let us now take a more detailed look at the anomalies.for that purpose,let
us consider a theory which is classically(in the sense of ignoring the eect of
quantum uctuations) is invariant under

(x) = (x)(x)

a = (x)
(x) = (x)

6

(9)

with the associated conservation laws

j = 0
j5
 = 0

(10)

the big surprise was that no regularisation scheme could be found that
maintained the ward identities corresponding to both the gauge transforma-
tions ((x) - transformations) and the chiral transformations(-transformations).
consequently if j

ren = 0,then j

5,ren 6= 0.

in the example considered above,chiral symmetry was global. in the stan-
dard model,the invariances are local.also,for simplicity we only considered
abelian transformations.but in the standard model we have both abelian
and non-abelian transformations.it turns out that when the non-abelian
group is su(2), there can not be any non-conservation of the non-abelian
currents(in d = 4) and one should only worry about the u(1) anomaly.

it is clear that when the current coupling to a gauge eld is anomalous,
gauge invariance is lost.as stated earlier,gauge invariance can be viewed as
a statement about the degrees of freedom of a theory.thus if the object
is to construct a consistent theory with the required number of degrees of
freedom,anomalies would render such a theory sick.

indeed the general folklore was that anomalous gauge theories are sick and
ill-dened.if ,however,we take the view point that the true degrees of freedom
could be larger than the naive count of degrees of freedom,anomalous gauge
theories could in principle be consistent.

that this could indeed be the case was shown by jackiw and rajara-
man.they showed that in d = 2 anomalous gauge theories can indeed be
consistent,and the price for the consistency were additional degrees of free-
dom.whether or not the same thing works in higher dimensions is still an
open issue,though the chances seem remote.

now the caveat in proofs of renormalisability is that the presence of
anomalies leads to additional sources of divergences which can not be ab-
sorbed into the allowed set of counterterms.this was rst pointed out by
gross and jackiw.

the miracle of the standard model is that the full theory including quarks
and leptons is actually anomaly free and the above-mentioned caveat is no
longer of any concern.

7

3.2 a non-perturbative denition of the standard model?

so far our analysis of the standard model, a chiral gauge theory, has been
perturbative. but it is well known that perturbative analyses can be highly
misleading as for example in the 4 theory in d = 4 where perturbation
theory yields a non-trivial s-matrix but a fully non-perturbative analysis
shows the theory to be trivial(technically the proofs are still a bit incomplete
in d = 4).of course there are indications of this theory being problematic
through the appearance of so-called landau ghosts in perturbative analalysis.
but it is not clear whether these are artefacts of perturbation theory.

in the case of quantum electrodynamics,predictions of perturbation the-
ory are very well borne out experimentally.that theory too suers from the
presence of landau ghosts, so one can not immediately conclude from the
presence of landau singularities that perturbative analysis is unreliable.

in the case of the standard model also, predictions of perturbation the-
ory are in excellent agreement with observations.so perturbative analysis is
perhaps not as misleading as in the case of d = 44 theory.

nevertheless a non-perturbative formulation of the theory that is math-
ematically well dened is always desirable.from the point of view of con-
fronting the theory with experiments also such a formulation is desirable as
it will make hitherto inaccessible aspects of the theory amenable for verica-
tion.from a matter of principle also one should insist on such a formulation
because for the theory to make sense it should be well dened in all regions
of its parameter space i.e both perturbative and non-perturbative regions.

so we pose the following two questions about the standard model:

1. is there a nonperturbative denition of the theory?
2. if so, can that denition be a constructive one?

before answering these questions it is instructive to take another look
at the anomalies. we shall closely follow the reasonings of nielsen and
ninomiya[1],who wanted to arrive at an intuitive understanding of the
anomalies.in particular, to clarify the mystery of how a classical conser-
vation law disappears quantum mechanically?.

following them let us start with weyl-particles in 1 + 1 dimensions.the

dispersion relations are given by

 = p

8

(11)

where the  refere respectively to right and left movers.let these weyl par-
ticles carry charges and consider the action of an electric eld f01.without
loss of generality let qf01 > 0 where q is the charge of the weyl particles.

3.3 single particle picture

if one restricted attention to the single particle sector with positive energy,
t is easy to see that under the inuence of the electric eld, the particle mo-
mentum will steadily increase with time. for the right-movers this will imply
a steadily increasing energy while for the left-movers the energy steadily de-
creases. the motion is along the dispersion curve, as shown in the gures
below.this is also called a spectral ow.

clearly no net chirality is produced;by net chirality we mean the dier-

figure 1: single particle picture

ence in the number of right-movers and left-movers. it is also obvious that
this picture remains if we consider a collection of left and right-movers where
each individual particle is of positive energy.this is essentially the classical
picture.

it is also clear that the above picture holds irrespective of whether the
dynamics conserves parity or not as long as it conseves chirality.more pre-
cisely,instead of the parity conserving electromagnetic interaction

lem = ( ll + rra

one had considered the parity violating interaction

l = (g1 ll + g2 rrb

(12)

(13)

9

net chirality would still be preserved even though the rates at which the left
and right-movers move along the spectral curve would be dierent.if on the
other hand,the dynamics was itself chirality non-conserving even if parity-
conserving as in

l = lr + h.c

(14)

there would be net chirality production in proportion to the original chirality.

3.4

inuence of the dirac sea

however, we know that the single particle picture is quantum mechanically
incomplete both for fermions and bosons.
in the former case,one possible
resolution is to invoke the concept of the dirac sea whereby all the physi-
cally undesirable negative energy states are completely lled. pauli exclusion
principle would then forbid transitions from the positive energy states into
negative energy states thereby stabilising the positive energy states.however,
it would always be possible to lift a particle in the dirac sea to a positive
energy state leaving behind a hole in the dirac sea which would have pos-
itive energy relative to the dirac sea state(vacuum state) and be oppositely
charged compared to the electron.this is the positron state, popularly
called the anti-particle state.

though modern formulations of eld theory exist which do not explicitly
invoke the concept of the dirac sea,it is nevertheless instructive to analyse
eld theoretic phenomena in terms of the visually more transparent dirac
sea.

following nielsen and ninomiya, let us now take a fresh look at the eect
of the electromagnetic elds on charged weyl particles.the vacuum or the
dirac sea has all the right-handed particle states with negative momentum
and all the left-handed particle states with positive momentum fully occu-
pied, as shown in the gure below: using the spectral ow picture it is easy
to see that when the electric eld is applied on the vacuum state,there will
be a steady creation of r-particles and at the same time a steady depetion
of l-particles. thus there will be net creation of chirality and the axial cur-
rent j5
 is no longer conserved! but since the number of holes created is
the same as the number of particles created, total electric charge is indeed
conserved.

thus we get a qualitative understanding of axial anomalies through the

10

figure 2: the dirac sea picture

dirac sea picture.actually even quantitatively the correct anomaly follows.if
the electric eld has constant value e over a region of length l,one has

dnl
dt
dnr
dt

= l

= l

qe
h
qe
h

where h is the plancks constant.these equations immediately imply

j5

 =

q


e

which is the correct form of the anomaly.

3.5 the four dimensional case

(15)

(16)

the extension of the above mentioned arguments to higher even-dimensional
cases is straight forward.let us consider the d = 4 case as an example.the
weyl equation now reads:

id = 0

d =   iqa

iterating this equation twice one gets

{dd +

i
2

[, ]f} = 0

(17)

(18)

let us consider those eld congurations for which ff  6= 0. by choosing
an appropriate lorentz-frame,it is possible to make f01 6= 0 and f23 6= 0 with

11

all other components of f vanishing.on noting that[0, 1], [2, 3] and 5 =
i0123 form a mutually commuting set,the spectrum can be labelled by
their simultaneous eigenvalues.in the magnetic eld f23,the charged particles
form landau levels with degeneracy  2f23(area)23
. now because of the special
choice of directions of the electric and magnetic elds,the 3 + 1-dimensional
problem can be treated as if it were a 1 + 1-dimensional problem with the
additional degeneracy.thus

(2)2

leading to

d(nr  nl)

dt

=

v ol
(2)2 qf01f23

j5

 =

q
(2)2 f f 

(19)

(20)

which is again the correct formula for the u(1)-anomaly.

it would be interesting to work out the non-abelian versions of these

results.

lesson: anomaly is the continuing pumping out of the (innite) dirac
sea!stated dierently,it is the bottomlessness of the dirac sea that allows
pumping of net chirality without any paying any price.

3.6 regularising the dirac sea

an innitely deep dirac sea is clearly an unphysical idea arising out of the
idealisation that energy and momenta can take arbitrary values.another way
of stating the crux of this matter is that the innite dirac sea is tantamount
to innitely many degrees of freedom. it should be recalled that the ultravio-
let divergences arising in quantum field theory, necessitating the renormal-
isation procedure, always have their source in the assumption of innitely
many degrees of freedom.in fact,mathematically the theory is meaningless
under these circumstances.therefore one rst works with a regularised ver-
sion of the theory which is mathematically well dened. a regularised version
of a quantum eld theory is a suitably and consistently truncated version of
that theory.

clearly,the dirac sea has also to be regularised or in other words pro-
vided with a bottom.alternatively, regularisation in qft throws away the
processes happening at the bottom of the sea as events occurring at a very

12

high energy scale and not relevant to the physics at low energy scales.in par-
ticular, the contribution to the net chirality by the inow at the bottom of
the sea is ignored in the process of regularisation. since the anomaly was

figure 3: truncated dirac sea

seen to be heavily dependent on the dirac sea being innite,one may wonder
as to the fate of the anomalies if one were to regulate the dirac sea.

indeed it is clear that when one regularises the dirac sea,one unavoidably
introduces dynamics which breaks the conservation of chirality unless one
invents a very special type of regularisation.we shall see later that
lattice regularisation is special in this sense.of course, care should be exer-
cised as to how exactly the dirac sea is regularised as otherwise even electric
charge and perhaps momentum also may not be conserved.

3.7 what constitutes a regularisation?

essentially a regularisation is replacing the original continuum (but mathe-
matically ill-dened) theory by one that is a very good approximation to it
at large distance scales but is nite(and hence mathematically well-dened).
it is a very reasonable premise that the truly fundamental theory is mathe-
matically well-dened and therefore nite.from a physical stand point also,it
is reasonable to expect it to be nite as innity is an idealisation never to be
realised under actual physical circumstances. it is important to emphasise
that by this reckoning the truly fundamental theory should be nite and not
just renormalisable as in the latter case one hides some ignorance through
the renormalisation procedure and can not qualify to be a truly fundamental
theory.

13

thus the nite fundamental theory can be thought of as a reg-

ularisation for its lower energy eective theory.

then the paradox of regularisation,namely,the unavoidable breaking of
chirality conservation in a regularised theory(generic),will also be a paradox
for any truly fundamental theory.

4 the second nielsen-ninomiya theorem

[2] nielsen and ninomiya proved two important theorems in the context of
chirality. in the rst they showed that it was impossible to put neutrinoes
on a lattice without explicitly breaking chiral invariance. in the equally fun-
damental second theorem they showed that under rather general conditions
it would be impossible to regularise chiral gauge theories.in our discus-
sion till now the gauge aspects have only been implicit to the extent that a
classically conserved chiral charge was assumed but its coupling to a gauge
eld was not considered.the second nn-theorem deals with the diculties
of regularisation of chiral gauge theories.

statement: it is not possible to simultaneously fulll all of the following:
1. fundamental regularisation
the fundamental theory is taken to be a nite theory.
2. parity violation
dierent number of right and left-handed species for given representations

of symmetry groups.

3. exact gauge invariance
this eans gauge invariance should be valid also at the regularisation scale.
veltman has argued that even small violations of gauge invariance at short
distances can have large eects on s-matrix elements. this is also in confor-
mity with our earlier remarks on gauge invariance being a specication of the
degrees of freedom and that there can not be any meaning to the breaking
of this invariance.

4. bilinearity a technical assumption is made about the action being

bilinear in the weyl-elds.

14

4.1 are superstrings an exception?

as commented by nielsen and ninomiya, superstring theories seem to oer
a way out of the no-go theorem. superstring theories are nite, at least
perturbatively. it is worth commenting on the sense in which these theories
are nite.in these theories only the spectrum and s-matrix are calculable.
the s-matrix is found to be nite in every order of perturbation theory
without recourse to any renormalisation.however,the spectrum contains an
innite species of particles and momenta can take arbitrarily large values.
it would be interesting to investigate whether non-perturbatively there are
indeed nite degrees of freedom as betting a truly fundamental theory.

now the point is that some superstring theories have in their spectrum
chiral fermions in complex representations as well as gauge eld coupled to
them.

to this extent superstring theories seem to evade the no-go theorem.how
exactly do they achieve this?is it that the no-go theorem is valid only in local
eld theories?though superstring theories are not local eld theories, they
do have some locality properties in that the string-interactions are local. it
will be interesting to fully understand this issue.

it should be emphasised that the possibility that some of these super-
string theories may not turn out to be phenomenologically succesful is of no
consequence to this discussion of matters of principle.

5 lattice regularisation

a

figure 4: an one dimensional regular lattice

in the lattice regularisation space-time is approximated by a discrete set

15

of points i.e x  na where n is an integer-valued four-vector and a is
the lattice spacing.a scalar eld (x),for example,is represented by n where
n stands for the four-vector.it turns out to be useful to work with only
dimensionless objects viz. l = a etc. the derivatives of elds are replaced
by nite dierences. for example,

(x) 

n

  n
ma

(21)

where n  n = me and e is the unit vector in the -direction.

it is quite clear that the choice of lattice i.e hypercubic,triangular etc as
well as the choice of nite dierence chosen to approximate eld derivatives
are arbitrary.it is believed that in the continuum limit these dierences should
become irrelevant.

some of the remarkable features of the lattice formulation are that it af-
fords a manifestly gauge-invariant regularisation even for non-abelian gauge
theories. furthermore,it produces a regularised theory while most regulari-
sation schemes used in continuum quantum eld theories regularise process
by process as for example in pauli-villars regularisation of feynman dia-
grams.this also means that lattice regularisation is a non-perturbative
regularisation.therefore it gives a non-perturbative formulation of the the-
ory.

an important feature of lattice regularisations is that momentum space
is compact and is topologically a d-torus if the quantum eld theory is formu-
lated in d-spacetime dimensions. this will be seen to have a profound impact
on regularising chiral gauge theories.more precisely,the euler characterstic of
the momentum space(brilloin zone) is 0.

5.1 fermions on the lattice

[4] consider the continuum dirac equation

i + m = 0

a possible candidate for the lattice equivalent of this is

i + m = 0

where the (forward)shift operator  is dened by

f (x) = f (x + ae)  f (x)

16

(22)

(23)

(24)

in momentum space the continuum eqn(22) reads

(ip + m) = 0

while the lattice-dirac eqn (23) reads

(i sin p + m) = 0

(25)

(26)

as was rst pointed out by smit and wilson(independently),the dierence
between the two dirac eqns is profound.to see this note that the sin-function
vanishes not only at p  0 but also at p  a
 are four momenta
such that the components are either 0 or (note that p, m in eqn(25,26) are
dimensionless).indeed,a takes values 1, .., 16 corresponding to four vectors
(0, 0, 0, 0),(, 0, 0, 0)(4 in number),(, , 0, 0)(6 in number),(, , , 0) (4 in
number) and (, , , ).if we expand p around a
 + q where q
are small,we would have sin p =  sin q.it is quite easy to nd nonsingular
operators sa such that

 as p = a

 where a

sas 1

a = 

(27)

for every  such that a
chosen to be .now the lattice dirac eqn takes the form

 = . in fact for any  such that a

 6= ,sa can be

sa(i sin q + m)s 1

a  = 0

for every value of a.alternatively, (a) = s 1

a  satisfy

(i sin q + m) (a) = 0

(28)

(29)

thus the lattice-dirac eqn(23) actually represents 16 dirac particles and in
the continuum limit,the lattice theory has the wrong spectrum!

6 vector gauge theories on the lattice

consider a vector gauge theory like quantum chromodynamics(qcd) on
the lattice. this is vector like because the left and right-handed elds both
transform as the fundamental representation of su(3).the su(3) is also
gauged, with the interaction between the gauge elds aa
 and the quark
elds given by

lf er,gauge = aa

( l al + r ar)

(30)

17

wilson proposed the following remedy for the problem of species dou-
bling(16 dirac particles in place of 1,doubling in each space-time direc-
tion).he proposed modifying the fermion lagrangean to

l =

1
2

x d + m x   r dd

where

d = u(x)(x + e)  (x)

(31)

(32)

with u(x) being the link variables(see mckellars talk for details). wilsons
modication has the eect of the replacement

 sin p   sin p + r x


(1  cos p

(33)

in the lattice-dirac eqn(23).for p  a
for r 6= 0 they have the eect of moving the masses of the doublers to  1
a
and hence innity in the continuum limit.consequently the doublers can be
made to decouple in the continuum limit.

 , a 6= 0,the added terms are (2r, 4r, 6r, 8r).thus

it is very important for this construction that the (added)wilson term is

manifestly gauge-invariant.

6.1 anomaly on the lattice

it is straight-forward to work out the divergence of the axial current in the
lattice regularisation.the result is

j5

(x) = 2m (x)5(x) +

( (x)5(x) 

r
a

1
2

x


(x)5u(x + e)) (34)

when r = 0,i.e when the wilson modication is not made,the anomaly is
seen to vanish exactly(we will explain the physical origin of this shortly) but
when r 6= 0 it can be shown that in the continuum limit a  0,the correct
anomaly is reproduced by the above equation.

7 chiral fermions on the lattice

species doubling,unlike in the case of vector gauge theories where it can be
handled quite satisfactorily,becomes really problematic in the case of chiral

18

gauge theories and it essentially makes it very dicult to lattice-regularise
such theories.however,very recently,a ray of hope appears to have emerged
which will be discussed in the last section. suppose we atart with

lchiral =

1
2

x ldl

(35)

where l = 1
2(1 + 5) is the left-handed eld in the continuum. the naive
expectation would be that the above lagrangean represents a single species of
a chiral(left-handed in this case) fermion.recall that in the case of the dirac
fermion,the naive expectation was belied by species doubling.what happens
in the present case?are there also 16 chiral(left-handed) fermions?in fact
what happens is far more subtle and dangerous.

to see this recall that the transformation sa used to map the lattice-
dirac eqn to the same form around all the a
 changed the signs of those 
such that  were the directions where the components of a were . this
can be used to see the eect of sa on 5 = i0123.this is presented below

0 = (0, 0, 0, 0) 1
 = (, 0, 0, 0) 4
 = (, , 0, 0) 6
 = (, , , 0) 4
s = (, , , ) 1

+, +, +, + 5  5
, +, +, + 5  5
, , +, + 5  5
, , , + 5  5
, , ,  5  5

(36)

thus around the points 0,  and s we do indeed have left-handed modes
but at ,  we actually have right-handed modes! taking into account
the multiplicities of these points we see that eqn() naively thought to repre-
sent one left-handed eld actually represents 16 elds 8 of which are left-
handed and 8 are right-handed!not only have the species been doubled,the
naive parity asymmetric situation actually represents parity symmetric
situation!

a more careful analysis reveals that the left and right-handed elds carry
the same representation of the gauge group. further the doubling arranges
for the total axial charge to be zero i.e p q5 = 0.

before analysing the implications of this striking result, let us explain the
earlier mentioned result in the context of vector theories,namely,the vanishing
of the anomaly in the r = 0 case.the naive dirac eld can again be thought

19

of as being composed of a right-handed eld and a left-handed eld, both
transforming identically under the gauge group.as we have just seen,both
the naive left and right-handed elds are really 8 left and 8 right-handed
elds on the lattice.the total axial chrge being zero,there is no anomaly!

7.1 lattice dirac sea picture

at this stage it is instructive to understand the results of species doubling
and the vanishing of the anomaly from a lattice dirac sea picture.this was
done by ambjorn,greensite and peterson [3] by extending the dirac sea
ideas of nielsen & ninomiya, and peskin.

as in the continuum case, it is useful to adopt the hamiltonian ver-

sion.the lattice dispersion relation for weyl particles reads

k =  x
i

sin ki

(37)

this dispersion relation shows a dramatic change in the nature of the
regularised dirac sea! a naive regularisation of the dirac sea would have
envisaged a sea with a bottom but nevertheless such that the bottom is
at a considerable depth. consequently one may have imagined that the
happenings at the bottom of the sea are not of much relevance to low energy
phenomena. however,the lattice dispersion relation () shows that the states

ka = 0



= 0

= 0

ka = 0


ka = 



= 0


ka = 



=

figure 5: the lattice dirac sea

with maximum momentum in any of the directions(but zero momentum in
the orthogonal directions) are also at zero energy and hence at the top of
the sea! what happens there is very much of consequence for low energy
physics!

20

other notable features of the lattice dirac sea are (i) no gauge invari-
ance violation at the bottomof the sea and as discussed in the previous
section,(ii) chirality is ipped at half the number of bottoms.putting all
these together one nds that there is net pumping of chirality.

7.2 generic nature of doubling

one may wonder whether the species doubling that we have encountered is
an artefact of the way the fermions have been latticised and whether with
some luck one may nd a way of latticising that would avoid species dou-
bling.the answer to this as given by the rst nielsen-ninomiya theorem is
no.according to this theorem the occurrence of doubling is generic. the

figure 6: a function with a pair of simple zeroes on the circle

crux of this theorem is that the origin of species doubling is topological in
nature. as already stated before the momentum space(brilloin zone) is a d-
torus with euler characterstic 0.the momentum space is also compact.this
implies that simple zeroes of a function i.e zeroes near which the function
is linear,must occur in pairs.it is the occurrence of such zeroes in pairs that
translates into species doubling.thus chirality also must occur in pairs of
opposite chirality.

thus the problem of nding a discretisation that avoids species doubling
amounts to nding one whose associated brilloin zone has non-zero euler
characterstic. this appears to be a very dicult task.

21

8 standard model on the lattice?

if the standard model could also be formulated on the lattice,we would have
a non-perturbative gauge-invariant formulation of it.but the lesson we have
learnt is that species doubling makes the theory vector-like without parity
violation,unless a clever way is found to avoid species doubling.this raises
the following important question:

can we move the doublers to the cut-o scale as was done for
qcd by the wilson method? in the standard model the left-handed
and the right-handed elds transform dierently under the gauge group.this
precludes a bare mass-term for the fermions.in fact,as discussed right in the
beginning,masses for fermions are obtained through the higgs mechanism.
for the same reasons,the wilson mass term is also not gauge invariant
in this context.there have been many attempts to formulate chiral gauge
theories on tilhe lattice over the last 15 years.most of them have failed in
realising their objectives.in the next section ill describe three attempts at
solving this problem.it is very dicult to cover in a comprehensive way all
the proposals that have been made to alleviate this problem.many of the
discussions in the literature are very technical. often,a conceptual separation
is lacking of the problem of putting generic chiral gauge theories on the lattice
and the problem of putting the standard model on the lattice. due to a lack
of space and time, i have had to leave out the discussion of many interesting
proposals like the rome propsal[7], the proposal of thooft [5] to use dierent
regularisations for fermions and gauge elds,the proposal of slavnov [6], the
overlap formalism of narayanan and neuberger [10] etc.(see [11] for a more
detailed coverage)

9 some attempts to put standard-like mod-

els on the lattice

9.1 wilson-yukawa models

[8] let us again recapitulate how the mass terms for fermions were gener-
ated in a gauge invariant manner within the standard model:the mass term

lmass = m( lr + rl)

(38)

22

is not gauge invariant in a theory where the left and right-handed elds
transform dierently under the gauge group.the remedy was to consider the
gauge-invariant interaction term

ly ukawa = gy

lr + h.c

(39)

gauge-invariance is achieved through a suitable transformation property of
. in the spontaneously broken phase of the theory, develops a vacuum
expectation value i.e <  >= v.then the interaction term looks like

ly ukawa = (gy v) lr + h.c + ....

(40)

the fermion mass is given by mf = gy v and to get light fermions in the
spectrum one has to tune gy appropriately.

one may attempt a similar trick to give masses of the order of cut-o to
the unwanted doublers.the idea is to generalise the wilson mass term into
a gauge invariant wilson-yukawa term:

lw ilsony ukawa = l(y  w x

 )r + h.c

(41)



here w plays a role similar to r in the wilson term for vector theories;  is the
backward shift operator.it should be remarked that this construction is aimed
more towards standard-model like theories rather than towards,say,chiral
gauge theories on their own.

now the doubler masses can be moved to innity(cut-o scale) by taking
the limit w  . but this puts the theory in the strongly coupled phase.a
very careful study of this phase has been made by golterman,petcher, smit
and others (for details, see [8]).their conclusions are as follows:

i)gauge singlets are formed as bound states of l and .this in itself
need not be alarming in view of the so called thooft complimentarity pic-
ture according to which there is no phase boundary between the higgs and
conning phases. the spontaneously broken phase can be viewed in a mani-
festly gauge-invariant picture and the massive gauge bosons would be viewed
more like the gauge-invariant glue ball states of pure qcd and would appear
as bound states of the higgs and gauge elds. but in the context of chi-
ral fermions the situation could be potentially problematic as some authors
claim a violation of complimentarity in this case.

23

ii)the real problem for the construction comes when one examines the
interactions in the theory.all interactions are seen to vanish in the
w   limit.

iii)the doublers and the right-handed particles decouple leaving behind
a massive fermion of mass mf = y.recall that mf = mphys
a.thus to get light
fermions,y has to be extemely ne-tuned.in fact y has to vanish as a.the
degree of ne-tuning needed is much more severe than what is required to
get light fermions in the continuum standard model where mf = gy v because
there gy = mphys

/vphys.

f

f

with even very slight mismatch, all fermions decouple from the spec-
trum!. even if ne-tuning could be achieved,the massless spectrum would
consist of both right-handed and left-handed particles.
thus the wilson-yukawa approach does not work.

9.2 domain wall fermions

[9] another interesting proposal to put chiral fermions on the lattice was
put forward by kaplan [9]. his proposal consists in working on a ve di-
mensional lattice to start with. since there are no chiral fermions in odd
space-time dimensions and since there are no problems in formulating vector
theories on the lattice,this ve dimensional theory can be consistently and
non-perturbatively formulated. next he considers a four-dimensional domain

figure 7: an anti-domain wall

wall to which chiral fermions are constructed to be glued onto.the way this
is accomplished is by considering a 5-dimensional dirac fermion whose mass
depends on the 5th coordinate as follows:

m5(x5) = m x5 > 0

24

= 0 x5 = 0
=  m x5 < 0

(42)

here m > 0 and the four-dimensional domain wall is at x5 = 0.

the point is that normalisable solution of the dirac equation is a single
chiral fermion with 5 = 1 living on the domain wall.in the limit that the
extent l5 along the 5th direction tends to innity. narayanan and neuberger
have shown that this picture can be given a purely four-dimensional inter-
pretation also.the anomaly in this picture arises as a chern-simons current
owing out of the domain wall.

9.2.1 problems

with periodic boundary conditions (usually preferred in lattice studies) in
the 5th direction,one inevitably has an anti-domain wall with a 5 = 1
chiral fermion living on it.for nite values of l5 there are contaminations by
unwanted chirality states.coupling a gauge eld to the domain wall chiral
fermion requires d = 4 gauge elds only close to the domain wall and zero
elsewhere. though there are some proposals on how to handle this,the fact
that this implies gauge invariance violation is not very encouraging.

it is of course possible to consider open boundary conditions in which
case some of these problems disappear.what results then is essentially the
overlap formalism of narayanan and neuberger.we shall not discuss that any
further here as it is rather technical and the program is still incomplete.

9.3 wilson-ginsparg method

ginsparg and wilson (for details see [13] ) gave a very interesting inter-
pretation of what exact chiral symmetry on the lattice means.they started
with a cut-o theory with exact chiral symmetry and consider block spin-
ning transformations which are chirally asymmetric.this way they obtain a
coarse grained theory whose action is chirally asymmetric but whose contin-
uum theory is indeed chirally symmetric.in this manner they found that the
grrens function of the coarse grained theory should satisfy

5d + d5 = d5d

(43)

instead of the naive symmetric greens function that would satisfy 5d +
d5 = 0. incorporating non-abelian gauge elds can be problematic.interest

25

in this idea was revived by the observation of hasenfratz that the xed point
action of qcd satises the ginsparg-wilson relation.

though the original work of ginsparg and wilson did not directly con-
front the problem of regularising chiral gauge theories,much attention has
been focussed in that direction by an observation of neuberger and narayanan
that the overlap formalism produces a d satisfying the ginsparg-wilson re-
lation and by lueschers [?] claim of having constructed a u(1) chiral gauge
theory on the lattice. on introducing the lattice chiral transformations

 = 5(1 

  = (1 

ad
2

)

ad
2

)5

for abelian gauge theories and

 = t 5(1 

ad
2

)

  = (1 

ad
2

)5t

for non-abelian gauge transformations,it is easy to verify that

( d) = 0

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

however,the measure for the functional integration over fermions is not in-
variant under these transformations and the anomalies are reproduced this
way very much the way the fujikawa derivation of anomalies works in the
continuum.

though the ginsparg-wilson method oers at the moment the best hope
for putting chiral gauge theories on the lattice,there are still many open
issues. even lueschers[?] construction is a progress as far as matters of prin-
ciple are concerned,but is not at a stage where one can implement it.the non-
abelian extensions of it,an understanding of the gw construction in terms
of the lattice dirac sea,a better understanding of how the nielsen-ninomiya
theorem is circumvented are issues yet to be tackled.the eventual goal would
of course be an implementable lattice regularisation of the standard model.

26

references

[1] h.b. nielsen and m. ninomiya, int. jour. mod. phys a, vol. 6, no. 16

(1991) 2913-2935.

[2] h.b. nielsen and m. ninomiya, phys. lett. 105b, 219,1981.

[3] j. ambjorn, j. greensite and c. peterson, nucl. phys. b221:381,1983.

[4] j. smit, acta. phys. pol. b17 (1986) 531.

[5] g. thooft, phys. lett. b349 (1995) 491.

[6] a.slavnov, phys. lett. b319 (1993) 231, b348 (1995) 553.

[7] a. borelli, l. maiani, g.-c. rossi, r. sisto and m. testa, nucl. phys.

b333 (1990) 335.

[8] d.n. petcher, nucl. phys. (proc. suppl.) b30 (1993) 50.

[9] d.b. kaplan, phys. lett. b288 (1992) 342; nucl. phys. (proc. suppl.)

b30 (1993) 597.

[10] r. narayanan and h. neuberger, phys. lett. b302 (1993) 62.

[11] y. shamir, nucl. phys. (proc. suppl.) b47 (1996) 212.

[12] m. luescher, phys. lett. b248:342,1998.

[13] f. niedermayer, hep-lat/9810026.

27

