9
9
9
1

 

n
u
j
 

1
2

 
 

1
v
5
6
1
6
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ift-p.051/99

reply to the comment by d. kreimer and e. mielke.

osvaldo chandaa and jorge zanellib,c

(a) instituto de fsica teorica, universidade estadual paulista,

rua pamplona 145, sao paulo, brasil

(b) centro de estudios cientcos de santiago, casilla 16443, santiago, chile

(c) departamento de fsica, universidad de santiago de chile, casilla 307, santiago 2,

chile

abstract

we respond to the comment by kreimer et. al. about the torsional contri-

bution to chiral anomaly in curved spacetimes. we discuss their claims and

refute its main conclusion.

in the article by d. kreimer and e. w. mielke [1] the existence of a chiral anomaly in

spaces with torsion as reported by us in [2] is challenged. their result is presumably based

on standard diagramatic techniques and regularization prescriptions. our results, on the

other hand, are derived using functional methods to evaluate formally the expectation value

of the divergence of the chiral current as the regularized trace of the chiral operator.

their claim that the nieh-yan four-form has been shown to be irrelevant for the anomaly

is contradictory with subsequent conrmations by obukhov et al. (second article in [3]) who

obtain the same anomaly in the heat kernel approach, soo [4] and chang and soo [5], who

apply the pauli-villars technique in a standard diagramatic approach, and our own [6,7],

where the anomaly is obtained as the atiyah-singer index using supersymmetry. so, apart

from the puzzling fact that one of the authors of the comment is also coauthor of the paper

by obukhov et al., it is not at all clear that our result was demonstratedly incorrect.

1

in our view there are a number of unproven and false statements in the comment which we

would like to point out. as a result, the main claim of the comment cannot be substantiated.

below we analyze those statements one by one as they appear in the text.

1)(section i, second paragraph) the fact that the anomaly is stable against radiative

corrections guarantees that it can be given a topological interpretation.

response: here the order should be reversed: the anomaly is stable under perturbative

corrections because it is a topological invariant.

2)(third paragraph) ...there is no doubt that the ny term can be possibly generated,

as demonstrated previously [3,8],..

response: it should be claried that the second article in ref. [3] did not precede

ours. as stated in the abstract of ref. [3], following chandia and zanelli, two spaces with

non-trivial translational chern-simons forms are discussed. we then demonstrate, rstly

within the classical einstein-cartan-dirac theory and secondly in the quantum heat kernel

approach to the dirac operator, how the nieh-yan form surfaces in both contexts, in contrast

to what has been assumed previously.. moreover, although the ny form can be found in

the rst article of ref. [3] and in ref. [8], it is not identied as a topological invariant and

mixed with dozens of other terms which are collectively discarded as irrelevant. so, to say

that in refs. [3,8] it was demonstrated that the ny term is undoubtedly generated is

a gross overstatement. to set the record straight, we were the rst to point out that the

topological ny-four form is generated in einstein-cartan spaces.

3)(third and fourth paragraphs) in rescaling the tetrad, the authors of ref. [2] ignore

the presence of renormalization conditions and the generation of a scale upon renormal-

ization. rescaling the tetrad would ultimately change the wave function renormalization

z-factor...this factor creeps into the denition of the ny term at the quantum level, and

thus a rescaling of the tetrad does not achieve the desired goals... with no renormalization

condition available for the ny term, and other methods obtaining it as zero, we can only

conclude that [the anomaly] delivers no ny term. or, saying it dierently, its nite value is

zero after renormalization.

2

response: anomaly calculations assume a given background which is not necessarily

quantized and a quantized chiral eld. pertubative radiative corrections cannot change the

a topological density, which is a function of the background eld [adler-bardeen-zumino

theorem]. then, it is sucient to check that the result is a topological invariant (including

scale invariance, of course), in order to be sure it does not renormalize. kreimer et al. do not

show in this paper or elsewhere that the rescaled nieh-yan four form, l2[t ata  rabeaeb]

is not a topological invariant, nor have they shown that renormalization does what they

claim. hence, there is no ground to claim that our result is spurious and will be erased by

renormalization.

4) (section ii, third paragraph) since the coframe is the translational part of the cartan

connection...

response: that identication rests on the assumption that the tangent space be at

and with a poincare ber. since minkowski space has no scale, identifying the vielbein with

the connection associated to translations is a slippery issue: the vierbein has dimensions of

length, while the connection is dimensionless. hence, one is forced to introduce an articial

length scale in a scale invariant space. instead, we would prefer to identify the tangent space

with a manifold of constant curvature with (a)ds local invariance. this has the advantage

of having a naturally dened length scale l (radius of curvature).

5) (fourth paragraph)the corresponding cs term c spplits via c = crr  2ct t into

the linear one and that of translations, see the footnote 31 of ref. [9]. this relation has

recently been recovered by chandia and zanelli [2].

response: here the wording and the use of quotation marks is meant to imply that

we have appropriated an idea found in ref. [9] without acknowledging it. this splitting

was recovered by the present authors as much as by the authors of ref. [9]. it is rst

mentioned in the original papers by nieh and yan [10], and further discussed also, several

years prior to ref. [9], in a paper by a. mardones and j. zanelli [11]. what was not at all

clear in the literature before our paper, was the topological nature of the ny invariant or

its relationship with the chern classes of so(5) and so(4), and much less, its relevance for

3

the chiral anomaly.

6) (section iii, second paragraph) the decomposed lagrangian (3.1) leads to the fol-

lowing form of the dirac equation

i    d + m = i    (cid:20)d{} +

i
4

m +

i
4

a5(cid:21)  = 0

(3.2)

in terms of the riemannian connection {} with d{} = 0 and the irreducible piece (2.3)

in the torsion. hence, in a rc spacetime a dirac operator does only feel the axial torsion

one-form a. this can also be seen from the identity (3.6.13) of ref. [9] which specializes

here to the on shell commutation relation

[ d, d] = {} +

i
4

5da 

i
8

m2.

(3.3)

response: although the on shell dirac operator d is not clearly dened, it is not

true that because other components of the torsion do not appear in the dirac equation (3.2),

they will not contribute to the interaction. the expression for the commutator is incorrect.

the correct form is found in the literature and can be easily checked to be

[d, d] =

1
4

j abj cdrab cd  j abe

ae

b e

c t c

d.

clearly, if one uses the on shell relations, one could cancel some part of the second term

in the rhs. the problem is then how to justify using on shell relations which dont go

through in the quantum regime. it is precisely this last term that gives rise to the nieh-yan

form through the fujikawa method, which obviously could not be reproduced starting from

(3.3).

7) (fifth paragraph) from einsteins equations ... and the purely algebraic cartan

relation... one nds

dj5

= 4dct t =

2
l2 (cid:16)t   t + r  (cid:17)

(3.4)

which establishes a link to the ny four form, but only for the massive elds.

response: there are three remarkable points here: the rst is that in spite of the above

relation, the authors continue to believe that in a rc spacetime a dirac operator does only

4

feel the axial torsion one-form a (see 6, above). how can this be if at the same time the

violation of the fermionic chiral current is due to the interaction with torsion through the

ny torsional term?. the second point is their use of the einstein equations. why should

the einstein equations be at all relevant to this problem? in fact, as is well known, the

integrability condition for the dirac operator is precisely einsteins quations (in particular,

that is why local supersymmetry requires gravity, and that is one way in which supergravity

arises). thus, had they computed the integrability condition correctly, they would have

found einsteins equations and the rest of the argument would follow naturally. the third

remarkable point is their claim that the result be valid for massive elds only. this is

puzzling because there is no mass parameter in (3.4) and nothing seems to prevent taking

the limit m  0. this last observation shows that there must be something shy about

their next claim:

8) (sixth paragraph)in the limit m  0, we nd within the dynamical framework of

ecd theory that the ny four-form tends to zero on shell, i.e. dct t

= (1/4)dj5  0.

response: again, the suspect on shell relations are invoked to justify an otherwise

irreproducible result, because the only relation that links dj5 with the mass are on shell

equations.

concentrate on the last term [ 1

9) (section iv, second and third paragraphs) [in order to calculate the anomaly, we]
4 a  5  ] in the lagrangian... this term can be regarded
as an external axial covector a ... coupled to the axial current j5 of the dirac eld in an

initially at spacetime. by applying the result (11-225) of itzykson and zuber..., we nd that

only the term da  da arises in the axial anomaly, but not the ny type term d  a = dct t

as was recently claimed [2].

response: the calculation in itzykson and zuber (i-z) would be valid for commutation

relations of the form (3.3), but unfortunately, as we said in 6), this is not the case. eq. (3.3)

is valid only on shell, but that is insucient to apply the i-z result, especially because this

is supposed to be a quantum calculation. so it is not that the i-z approach is wrong, it is

just not designed to handle a dirac operator that satises a more complicated relation such

5

as that in rc spaces, so it should be rederived in order to apply it to this case, something

kreimer and mielke didnt do.

for the purposes of our work, the u(1) anomaly is completely standard and cannot yield

anything new which was not there already, say, in electrodynamics.

in particular, since

3[u(1)] is trivial [12], its presence can be gauged away.

10) (fifth paragraph) whereas in n = 4 dimensions the pontrjagin type term k4 is

dimensionless, the term k2  2l2dct t carries dimensions. it can be consistently absorbed

in a counterterm, and thus discarded from the nal result for the anomaly.

response: kreimer and mielke provide no proof of this claim. they do not exhibit the

counterterm or the radiative corrections that can give rise to it. although they often refer

to renormalization and counterterms, there is not a single one-loop calculation to be found

anywhere in the paper.

11) (seventh paragraph)in ref. [2] it is argued that such contributions can be main-

tained by absorbing the divergent factor in a rescaled coframe  := m and propose to

consider the wigner-inonu contraction m   in the de sitter gauge approach [6], with

ml xed.

response: this is not true. we did not propose that rescaling. all we did was to

observe that if one replaces  by (ml)1 [eq. (30) in our paper], the result reads,

a(x) =

1

82 (cid:20)rab

rab +

2
l2 (t a

ta  rab ea

eb)(cid:21) .

(1)

this, in the language of kreimer and mielke is equal to dcrr + dct t , which is just the

chern class for so(5).

12) (ninth paragraph) 1. as the dierence (2.1) of two pontrjagin classes, the term

dct t is a topological invariant after all. now, it is actually not this term which appears as the

torsion-dependent extra contribution to the anomaly, but more precisely d  a = 2l2dct t .

thus, measuring its proportion in units of the topological invariant dct t , we nd that it

vanishes when we consider the proposed limit m  , keeping ml constant.

response: the redenition   (ml)1, does not change the units (assuming c and

6

h are dimensionless). the scaling properties of ct t = l2a  ta depend on how  and l

are supposed to scale. if the elds are properly dened, the one-form  has dimensions of

length and therefore l1 is dimensionless, like any well dened connection one-form. then,

ct t , dct t and the anomaly are scale invariant as they should.

13) (tenth and eleventh paragraphs) ...consistently a renormalization condition can be

imposed which guarantees the anomaly to have the [torsion-free] value. even if one renders

this extra term nite by a rescaling as in ref. [2], one has to confront the fact that a (nite)

renormalization condition can be imposed which settles the anomaly at this value.... from

a renormalization group point of view, it is the scaling of the coupling which determines

the scaling of the anomaly... a property which is [needed to satisfy the conditions of] the

adler-bardeen theorem. or, to put it otherwise, an anomaly is stable against radiative

corrections for the reason that such corrections are compensated by a renormalization of

the coupling. while, on the other hand, the topological invariant of ref. [2] has no such

property, its interpretation as an anomaly seems dubious to us.

response: as it is easily seen, kreimer and mielkes comment is more of a warning

about the problems one might encounter than a proof that something wrong has actually

been done. as they produce no evidence in support of their contention, they end up in a

sceptical remark. this is the most honest claim in the entire comment (even if it is incorrect

because the topological invariant of ref. [2] does possess the property they would like it to

have). in our opinion, they should have limited themselves to just that last line.

14) (fifth section) here kreimer and mielke essentially repeat their claims without

adding any new arguments.

in conclusion, we can summarize the following points:

a the authors of the comment do not argue against the fact that the ny term is present

in the chiral anomaly as we had shown.

b they challenge the contribution of the nieh-yan topological invariant, on the grounds

that they do not nd it through manipulations in which they use on shell conditions.

c they furthermore claim that radiative corrections will renormalize the ny term to

7

zero, although they do not produce any evidence for this (e.g., loop corrections to the

eective action, etc.). their claim rests on a scaling argument, according to which the ny

term scales with the mass, which is incorrect or at best arbitrary.

d they criticize a rescaling argument which they attribute to us but which is nowhere

to be found in our paper.

acknowledgments

this work was partially supported by grants 1970151, 1980788 and 1990189 from

fondecyt-chile, grant 98/02380-3 from fapesp-brasil and grant 27-9531zi from

dicyt-usach. the institutional support by fuerza aerea de chile and a group of chilean

companies (afp provida, business design associates, cge, codelco, copec, empre-

sas cmpc, gener s.a., minera collahuasi, minera escondida, novagas and xerox-

chile) is also recognized.

8

references

[1] d. j. kreimer and e. w. mielke, comment on :topological invariants, instantons, and

the chiral anomaly on spaces with torsion.

[2] o. chanda and j. zanelli, phys. rev.d55, 7580 (1997), hep-th/9702025.

[3] y. obukhov, nucl. phys. b212, 237 (1983); y. obukhov, e. mielke, j. budczies and f.

w. hehl, on the chiral anomaly in non-riemannian spacetimes, biedenharn memorial

volume, koln report (january 1997), e-print gr-qc/9702011.

[4] c. soo, phys. rev. d59 045006 (1999), hep-th/9805090.

[5] c. soo and l. chang, massive torsion modes from adler-bell- jackiw anomalies, e-print

hep-th/9905001.

[6] o. chanda and j. zanelli, torsional topological invariants (and their relevance for real

life), in: trends in theoretical physics, edited by h. falomir, r. gamboa sarav and

f. schaposnik, aip conf. proc. 419 251, (aip, new york, 1997); hep-th/97.

[7] o. chanda and j. zanelli, phys. rev. d58, 045014 (1998), hep-th/980034.

[8] s. yajima, class. quantum grav. 13, 2423 (1996).

[9] f. w. hehl, j. d. mccrea, e. w. mielke, y. neeman, phys. rep. 258, 1 (1995).

[10] h. t. nieh and m. l. yan, j. math. phys. 23, 373 (1982);ann. phys. 138, 237 (1982).

[11] a. mardones and j. zanelli, class. quantum grav. 8, 1545 (1991).

[12] m. nakahara, geometry, topology and physics, adam hilger, bristol (1991).

9

