hep-th/9907038
lbnl-43634, slac-pub-8187, su-itp-99/34

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

6
2

 
 

3
v
8
3
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

orientifolds, rg flows, and closed string tachyons

shamit kachru,1 jason kumar,2 and eva silverstein3

1department of physics

university of california at berkeley

berkeley, ca 94720

and

ernest orlando lawrence berkeley national laboratory

mail stop 50a-5101, berkeley, ca 94720

2 department of physics

3 slac

stanford university

stanford, ca 94309

we discuss the fate of certain tachyonic closed string theories from two perspectives. in

both cases our approach involves studying directly congurations with nite negative tree-

level cosmological constant. closed string analogues of orientifolds, which carry negative

tension, are argued to represent the minima of the tachyon potential in some cases. in

other cases, we make use of the fact, noted in the early string theory literature, that strings

can propagate on spaces of subcritical dimension at the expense of introducing a tree-level

cosmological constant. the form of the tachyon vertex operator in these cases makes

it clear that a subcritical-dimension theory results from tachyon condensation. using

results of kutasov, we argue that in some scherk-schwarz models, for nely-tuned tachyon

condensates, a minimal model cft times a subcritical dimension theory results. in some

instances, these two sets of ideas may be related by duality.

july 1999

1. introduction

many closed string theories contain tachyons. in addition to the bosonic string, nu-

merous orbifold models have tachyons appearing in a twisted sector. although there are

also many string backgrounds which do not contain tachyons in the perturbative spectrum,

it is potentially of interest to understand the fate of those which do.

some work that was done earlier involved attempting to study the tachyon potential

directly through (o-shell) calculations of the tachyon eective potential [1]. in this paper

we take a somewhat dierent approach to this question (using a combination of orientifold

physics and the observations in [2]) and discuss some examples which realize it. a basic

issue that arises is the following. a perturbative closed string compactication has van-

ishing tree-level vacuum energy (formally all one-point functions, including those of the

dilaton and graviton, vanish in the closed-string sphere diagram). therefore the tachyon

potential, at xed dilaton vacuum expectation value, looks like gure 1 in the regime ac-

cessible to the perturbative closed string description; in particular the tachyonic maximum

of the potential is at v (0) = 0. then tachyon condensation leads to congurations with

negative energy. our main question is whether (1) there is a minimum conguration with

nite negative energy into which the system can roll (and then what the eventual solution

of the dilaton equation of motion is) or whether (2) the tachyon rolls to negative innity.

v

t

figure 1: tachyon on top of potential hill

we will here consider two dierent ways of obtaining congurations with nite neg-

ative tree-level cosmological constant. the rst involves the physics of orientifolds (and

1

analogous congurations in closed string theories); the second involves strings propagating

on spaces of subcritical dimension. as we will mention below, these two methods may in

fact be related to each other by dualities.

in the context of open string theories orientifold backgrounds [3,4,5] have the feature

one would need for possibility (1), namely a negative contribution to the tree-level vacuum
energy, which is nite for xed nonzero string coupling. in 2 we will set up an open string
theory which involves orientifolds, anti-orientifolds, branes, and anti-branes in which the

potential looks like gure 1. this model is similar to one discussed earlier in the context

of string-string duality by bergman and gaberdiel [6] (and formulated earlier by bianchi

and sagnotti [7]). then using locally the mechanism of [8,9,10], we will see that the

tachyons condense, leaving the system in a nite-negative-energy minimum involving only

orientifolds and anti-orientifolds.

we nd that in some closed string theories, non-perturbative congurations, analogous

to orientifolds in the open string case, exist and can play a similar role. these congura-

tions include the s-duals of orientifold planes [11,12] and non-level-matched but anomaly

free orbifold backgrounds such as those of [13]. we will discuss these congurations, which
look locally like gure 2, in 3. in this approach, problem is then to relate congurations
of the type in gure 1 with those of the type in gure 2.

v

t

figure 2: tachyon at minimum of its potential

the simplest such examples are given by the s-dual of the open string theory of 2
(and various heterotic cousins of this s-dual model). we discuss these theories in 4.
they involve orbifold xed points whose degrees of freedom microscopically represent the

collective coordinates of ns ve-branes sitting at the singularities [11], as well as other

2

orbifold xed points, breaking a complementary half of the supersymmetries from the

rst set, where ns anti-ve-branes sit. globally this system is unstable, and can undergo

ns brane-anti-brane annihilation. condensation of the unstable mode therefore leaves

a vacuum with s-dual orientifolds and anti-orientifolds; the negative (s-dual) orientifold

tensions account for the negative vacuum energy after tachyon condensation.

our second approach, based on [2], is the following. an a priori dierent way of get-

ting backgrounds with nite negative tree-level cosmological constant was explained in [2],

in which corresponding solutions to the dilaton and graviton equations of motion (linear

dilaton solutions) were obtained. (the latter step in particular eliminates the dilaton and

graviton tadpoles which we ignored in the preceeding discussion.) these solutions involve

strings propagating on spaces of sub-critical dimension, in which the worldsheet beta func-
tions are cancelled by the contributions of dilaton gradients. in 5 we will argue that a
large class of tachyonic theories can be seen to ow to such backgrounds upon tachyon

condensation. this analysis uses simple features of the closed string tachyon vertex oper-

ators in this class of examples. in particular generically these vertex operators constitute

(or generate) mass terms lifting some of the degrees of freedom on the worldsheet, and one

is left after renormalization-group ow with a theory of sub-critical dimension of the type
considered in [2]. for instance, we will see in 5 that by tuning the tachyon condensate in
some scherk-schwarz models one can obtain minimal model cfts times a sigma model on

a subcritical dimension target space. a connection between non-critical string theory and

tachyon condensation (in the context of the hagedorn transition) was earlier conjectured

in [14], where the form of the tachyon potential in heterotic scherk-schwarz compacti-

cations was explored. we further nd that this point of view is potentially related to the

above point of view involving orientifolds if the type of duality conjectured in [6] is realized

in string theory.

before proceeding we should remark on the dilaton direction in the potential. any

poincare-invariant conguration with negative tree-level vacuum energy is not a solution

to the equations of motion. in string frame the vacuum energy is

 =

1
g2
s

0 + . . .

(1.1)

so in order to solve the equations of motion the dilaton  must vary over spacetime. similar
remarks apply to the spacetime metric g . as we will discuss in 5, the full solution may
be obtained through the conformal eld theory techniques of [2]. however at some points

3

in our analysis, particularly involving our rst approach to the problem (in 2-4), we will
attempt to separate the dependence of the spacetime potential on the originally tachyonic

mode from its dependence on the dilaton and metric by holding  and g =  xed

articially. the true dynamics of the system will of course involve all of these elds, as
discussed more thoroughly in 5.

many interesting papers which discuss tachyons on branes in open string theories

(eld theoretic tachyons) have recently appeared; see e.g.

[15]. there have also been

interesting recent papers on other types of non-supersymmetric string backgrounds [16].

2. an illustrative open-string theory

consider the type iib string theory compactied on t d/id, where id is a reection

on d coordinates and  is a reversal of orientation on the iib worldsheet. the xed planes
of the id action, the orientifold (9  d)-planes, have eectively negative tension [17];
that is, their graviton and dilaton one-point functions have the opposite sign to those of
d(9  d)-branes. there being no degrees of freedom tied to the orientifold planes, this
leads to a negative contribution to the tree-level vacuum energy without leading to any

unphysical negative kinetic energy. these orientifold planes are also charged oppositely
to the d(9  d)-branes under the (10  d)-form rr potential. therefore in the compact
t d, in order for rr ux lines to end consistently, we must introduce 16 d(9  d)-branes.
in addition to cancelling the rr charge, the positive tensions of the branes cancel the

negative tree-level vacuum energy of the orientifolds. this example is very well known, as
a t-dual of the type i string theory on t d.

now consider instead a z2  z2 orientifold of type iib (studied in [18]). on t d

generated by

g1 = id

g2 = id(1)f 

(2.1)

(2.2)

where  is a translation by halfway around one of the circles, with say coordinate x1, of
the t d. the element g2 preserves the opposite half of the supersymmetry from the half
preserved by g1; it introduces anti-orientifolds at positions halfway around the x1 circle

from the positions of the orientifold planes introduced by g1. the element g2 alone would
require the introduction of 16 anti-d(9  d) branes.

4

given both the orientifolds and the anti-orientifolds, we now have many options. we

could:

a) add the 16 d(9  d)-branes and 16 anti-d(9  d)-branes corresponding to each
orientifold action alone, and then project the resulting open string spectrum onto invariant

states. this leads to a theory with rr charge conserved, zero tree-level vacuum energy,
and gauge group o(16)  o(16) or a rank-16 subgroup depending on the positions of the
branes. there is also a tachyon multiplet in the (16, 16) of o(16)  o(16), for suciently
small radius or suciently small separation of branes and anti-branes, and a closed string

tachyon for suciently small radius.

alternatively we could:

b) add k < 16 d(9  d)-branes and k anti-d(9  d)-branes. again the rr charge
is conserved, but the tree-level vacuum energy is negative (as there are too few branes to
cancel the negative tension from the orientifolds). the gauge group is now o(k)  o(k)
and there is a scalar in the bifundamental which becomes tachyonic in appropriate regimes

of the classical moduli space where the branes and anti-branes are close enough to each

other.

it is clear in this example that we can annihilate 16  k of the branes against 16  k
of the antibranes, which proceeds via condensation of (16  k)  (16  k) components of
the bifundamental tachyon along with condensation of the appropriate magnetic tachyon

[10]. in particular when all the open string tachyons of a) condense, we are left with only

orientifolds and antiorientifolds, no gauge group, and nite negative vacuum energy (for

xed nonzero dilaton). so in this open-string context, the zero-energy tachyonic theory a)

rolls to a nite negative energy conguration b) (plus a gas of excitations, since energy is

conserved in this process).

3. negative-tension defects in closed string theory

now, we turn to a discussion of closed string theories with tachyons. it is natural to

ask if there are negative-tension congurations in closed string theory, analogous to the
orientifolds of 2, to which such theories could roll.

5

3.1. s-duality and orientifolds

one obvious place to look for such a conguration is from the s-dual of an orientifold

plane in type iib theory [11,19]. consider for example an orientifold 5-plane. in the iib
theory on ir4/i4, cancelling the rr charge locally gives a d5-brane at an orientifold 5-
plane. the s-dual of this orientifold is type iib on the orbifold ir4/i4(1)fl. the twisted
sector of this orbifold constitutes precisely the worldvolume theory on an ns 5-brane at a

z2 singularity. giving vacuum expectation values to the twisted sector scalars corresponds

to moving the ns 5-brane o of the xed point. the z2 xed point which is left (which

has no degrees of freedom associated with it perturbatively  all of the twisted sector

moduli are accounted for by the translation modes of the ns 5-brane) is the s-dual of

the orientifold. the full closed-string orbifold theory has zero vacuum energy, so since the

ns 5-branes have positive tension (measured by an integral on a sphere surrounding the

brane), the s-dual of the orientifold contributes negatively to the vacuum energy. so one

expects, for instance, that a dilaton gradient should emerge as one turns on the marginal

perturbations in the twisted sector of the orbifold (moving the ns brane away from the

s-dual orientifold), in analogy with [20]. it would be very interesting to understand how

this works out in detail.

3.2. more general examples from non-perturbative orbifolds

the s-dual orientifold is an example of a larger class of negative-tension backgrounds.

in perturbative string theory, modular invariance imposes conditions which sometimes

go beyond the physical condition of anomaly cancellation. modular invariance in the

context of orbifold models requires the inclusion of twisted sectors. in the s-dual orientifold

example, after removing the ns 5-branes we are left with an orbifold xed point with no

twisted states. as we discussed above this object exists in the theory and has a negative

contribution to tree.

more generally we can consider orbifold models in which the level-matching conditions,

which ensure that physical perturbative string states exist in the twisted sectors, are vio-

lated [13]. for example, let us consider the heterotic theory compactied on a k3 surface
realized as an orbifold t 4/zz2 (our comments generalize immediately to the t 4/zzk orbifold
realizations of k3 with k 6= 2 as well). green-schwarz anomaly cancellation requires only
that

dh = trr  r  trf  f  n55

(3.1)

6

where 5 denotes delta functions localized at the positions of the n5 vebranes.

on the compact k3, r dh = 0, so r trf  f + n5 = r trr  r. this means that

the number of instantons in the gauge bundle, ninst, and the number of 5-branes n5 are
constrained by

ninst + n5 = 24.

(3.2)

the perturbative string orbifold level-matching conditions require the orbifold group to

act nontrivially, according to one of a few discrete possibilities, on the gauge degrees of

freedom of the heterotic string. this enforces the introduction of 24 instantons. non-

perturbative orbifold backgrounds with fewer instantons and a compensating number of 5-

branes involve non-modular-invariant choices of the action on the gauge degrees of freedom.

these backgrounds t into an intricate web of six-dimensional string dualities [13]. again

in these cases, the fact that the 5-branes have positive tension, and therefore contribute

positively to tree in these backgrounds, means that the non-level-matched orbifold xed

points that are left over contribute negatively to tree.

in fact, even without invoking non-perturbative physics we can nd congurations

with eectively negative tension. suppose for example that we start with an orbifold action

with the standard embedding in the gauge degrees of freedom of the heterotic string. in

this case, dh cancels locally. now consider moving some large instantons o the orbifold

xed points. these instantons constitute gauge vebranes [21] of the heterotic string, and

have positive tension. since the overall vacuum energy of the string vacuum is zero, the

contribution of the remaining orbifold xed points is negative. clearly there is a whole

zoo of possibilities of this sort. furthermore as long as the instantons are large, the whole
conguration is accessible perturbatively.1

3.3. s-dual o9-planes?

hull and collaborators [12] have proposed formulating the so(32) heterotic string as
an orbifold of type iib by (1)fl. in perturbative string theory, where we must add the
twisted sectors dictated by modular invariance, orbifolding by (1)fl produces iia from
iib and vice versa.

on the other hand, there are other solutions to the anomaly cancellation conditions. in
particular, one could add an so(32) or e8e8 gauge group, obtaining the heterotic string
theory. in the so(32) case, it is argued in [12] that this background can be deconstructed

1 we thank p. aspinwall and r. plesser for discussions on these points.

7

into an s-dual o9-plane plus (in our way of counting) 16 ns 9-branes. in particular, by

s-dualizing the born-infeld like action for the ordinary o9-plane plus 16 d9-branes, one

obtains this formulation of the heterotic string.

in this point of view, the s-dual o-9-

plane has negative tension, so9 < 0, which is cancelled by the tensions of the 16 ns

9-branes to give a vacuum with tree = 0. these branes, if they exist, may provide further

possibilities for the endpoint of tachyon condensation in various backgrounds.

4. examples of tachyon condensation

in the last section we saw that there exists a plethora of possible congurations of

negative vacuum energy (a la gure 2), realized microscopically as s-duals of orientifolds

and their generalizations. in this section we consider the problem, on which we will only

make a start here, of understanding which tachyonic models (g 1) roll to to which (if any)
of these negative-energy congurations. in 5 we will consider another type of negative-
energy conguration which can plausibly be the endpoint of tachyon condensation for a

dierent class of theories. we have mostly been conned here to an analysis of orbifold

backgrounds. one can hope that once more generic non-supersymmetric compactication

geometries are understood, there will be more general examples of such backgrounds.

similarly many of the tachyonic theories (g 1) that we are interested in explaining are

perturbative string orbifolds. in general, as twisted sector tachyon condensation will break

the quantum symmetry of the orbifold, we would expect orbifold models to roll to more

generic geometrical backgrounds.

so we will here consider a non-supersymmetric theory whose tachyons arise at a more

generic point on the cft moduli point (away from an orbifold point). in particular, let

us consider the non-supersymmetric model which is s-dual to the d = 4 (d is the number
of compact dimensions) case of the orientifold model of 2. we begin with type iib theory
on t 4 and mod out by a zz2  zz2 symmetry generated by

g1 = i4(1)fl, g2 = i4(1)fr1.

(4.1)

here 1 is say a shift halfway around one of the circles of the torus. this theory has 16

orbifold xed points (8 xed points each for the g1 and g2 actions). based on the analysis

of [11], we nd that there are ns vebranes sitting at the g1 xed points and ns anti-

ve-branes sitting at the g2 xed points. the vacuum energy is zero, and for large enough

8

radius there is no tachyon in the (1)f 1 twisted sector. at genus zero, this theory is
consistently described by nonsingular orbifold conformal eld theory.

globally the set of vebranes and anti-ve-branes is topologically indistinguishable

from the vacuum. this being true at the level of the classical eld conguration, we expect

to nd an instability in this system at some order in conformal perturbation theory about

the orbifold limit. the leading possibility is that moving some combination of vebranes

o the xed point(s)an exactly marginal perturbationinduces a tachyonic mass term

for the collective coordinate describing the motion of the anti-ve-branes o the orbifold

points. this corresponds to a force on the anti-ve-branes linear in their displacement

from the orbifold points. there is such a force in some regimes at the level of the low-

energy gravity theory, valid when all distances are much larger than string scale. there is
globally therefore a manifest instability in the system, though  corrections may come in at
substringy distances and lift the tachyonic mode from the point where the anti-vebranes

are at the orbifold points. in any case it is natural to postulate that the vebranes and

anti-vebranes annihilate, leaving behind the s-dual orientifolds which are hidden at the

orbifold xed points.

given this, this example gives us one case where the result of condensation of a

negative mode, most probably a tachyon, is a conguration of nite negative tension of
the type discussed in 3 (at xed dilaton) . many other similar models can be obtained
by considering the heterotic theory on t 4 modded out by i4 and i4(1)f , with a level-
matching action on the gauge bundle that introduces 24 instantons and 24 anti-instantons.

these then can move o the xed points and enlarge; there is a global instability in the

moduli space which we would expect to see perturbatively. the global minimum of the

potential for the non-dilatonic moduli is again a conguration of nite negative tension of
the type discussed in 3. we leave detailed analysis of this class of examples for future
work.

5. tachyons and rg flow

another context in which backgrounds with nite negative tree-level cosmological

constant arise is the following [2]. consider bosonic strings propagating in a spacetime of
dimension d < dcrit.2 the weyl anomaly cancellation conditions, which include

0   =

d  dcrit

6


2 2 +  


24



h 2 + o(2)

(5.1)

2 our discussion applies with minor modications to other strings as well.

9

can still be solved in such a situation by allowing the dilaton to vary over spacetime.

for example one exact cft solution is the linear dilaton background [2,22]. the weyl

anomaly conditions, regarded as equations of motion for the spacetime theory, follow from

a lagrangian

s  z ddx

ge2(cid:18)

2(d  dcrit)

3

+ r 

1
12

h 2 + 4 + o()(cid:19)

(5.2)

the rst term is a nite negative cosmological constant proportional to d  dcrit.

it was noted in [2] that such sub-critical-dimension theories could arise naturally as

the result of tachyon condensation. tachyon vertex operators are relevant operators of

the internal worldsheet cft (that is the part of the worldsheet cft not involving the

noncompact poincare-invariant spacetime).

let us consider a specic case. take the bosonic string theory compactied on the
so(32) lattice. in a fermionic description the so(32)2 current algebra arises from 32 real
left-moving fermions i , i = 1, . . . , 32 and 32 real right-moving fermions  i , i = 1, . . . , 32.
there are in addition 10 scalar elds x ,  = 0, . . . , 10 making up the rest of the 26 units

of central charge. this theory has in addition to the singlet tachyon (the universal tachyon

of the bosonic string) a (32, 32) tachyon. the vertex operator for the latter is

v(32,32) = i 

j eikx

(5.3)

to describe tachyon condensation, at leading order we wish to add the integrated

tachyon vertex operator to the worldsheet action. at zero momentum k this operator is

relevant, and the covariant vertex operator which we would naively add,

z d2g

(5.4)

(here
has nontrivial dependence on the conformal factor  in the worldsheet metric.
we use dieomorphisms to x g = e2 where  is the at metric on the worldsheet.)
heuristically, since (5.4) is a mass term for  and , we expect this relevant deformation
to lift these degrees of freedom from the worldsheet theory, giving us a string theory
propagating eectively in d = 26 n
2 where n is the number of worldsheet fermions that
pair up and become massive.

however since this procedure involves going o shell, as formulated here it breaks

the weyl symmetry of the worldsheet theory classically. when we have a well-dened

10

on-shell string theory, before condensing the tachyon, the formulation of the worldsheet

theory involves dividing the worldsheet path integral out by the volume of the weyl group,

thereby eliminating the conformal factor  from the theory. it is dicult to see how this

degree of freedom could be introduced in a physically continuous deformation from that

point.

let us therefore consider adding instead3

z d2geikx

(5.5)

with k2 = m2 < 0. this operator is dimension (1,1) and the expression is weyl invariant

(due to the metric-dependence in the regulated operators [23]). in particular let us take
k = (i, 0, . . . , 0) with  positive. this gives us a dimension (1,1) operator describing a
time-dependent tachyon condensate. then the terms we can add are of the form

z d2g(a+ex0 + aex0 )

(5.6)

for some parameters a.

the addition (5.6) describes the initial time-dependence of the tachyon as it begins

to roll down its potential hill. let us take a = 0 so that the condensate vanishes at
very early times x0  . though as the condensation proceeds we expect higher order
corrections to (5.6), we do expect that the tachyon will continue to condense (rather than
returning to its unstable maximum) and the coecient of the  mass term in (5.6) will
be nonzero for x0 > . therefore it seems quite plausible that the eect of tachyon
condensation is to lift the degrees of freedom ,  and correspondingly introduce a nonzero
d  26 term in the beta function equations (spacetime equations of motion).
to preserve conformal invariance, therefore, the spacetime dilaton needs to begin varying

in order

so as to maintain  = 0. (in other words we are adding a marginal perturbation (5.5)

and therefore must maintain that the total central charge is constant.) one example of

a solution to the modied equations of motion would, for instance, be the linear dilaton

solution of [2,22], though it is not clear that the dynamics favors this solution.

3 we thank s. shenker for a discussion on this approach.

11

5.1. relation to orientifold picture?

this lifting of the ,  degrees of freedom agrees with the picture one would obtain
from the relation of this theory to a certain type i orientifold conjectured by bergman

and gaberdiel [6]. the orientifold in question is simply an orientifold of type iib by a
zz2  zz2 action generated by (1)f and . this theory (which is extremely similar to
the one we discussed in 4, diering by a shift and some duality transformations) has an
orientifold 9-plane, an anti-orientifold 9-plane, 16 d9-branes and 16 anti-d9-branes. this
gives a gauge group so(32)2 with tachyons in the (32, 32) representation. this theory

contains in its spectrum of d1-branes one which has the worldvolume degrees of freedom

of the bosonic string compactied on the so(32) lattice. these degrees of freedom consist

of 10 bosonic collective coordinates from the 1-1 sector of open strings, and 32 left-moving
fermions from the 1-9 sector and 32 right-moving fermions from the 1  9 sector.

in this theory it is relatively clear what happens when the (32, 32) tachyon condenses:

the d9-branes annihilate with the anti-d9-branes. this leaves the spacetime theory with

the o9 and anti-o9 planes, which contribute a nite negative amount to the tree-level

cosmological constant as discussed in very similar circumstances above.

now let us consider what happens on the d1-brane probe in the orientifold theory.

once the d9-branes and anti-d9-branes have annihilated, the contributions from the 1-9
and 1  9 sectors disappear. one is left with a low-energy worldvolume theory with 10
scalar collective coordinates x ,  = 1, . . . , 10. this gives the same result as we found for

the bosonic string in the rg ow analysis (in particular the absence of both the fermions
 and  and the decoupling of the liouville mode classically on the worldsheet). therefore
if the duality between the two theories conjectured in [6] turns out to hold4 there is a

relation between the two approaches we are considering in this paper.

5.2. other models

there is a large set of models amenable to the analysis involving rg ow. for example,

let us consider a (t-dual version of a) scherk-schwarz compactication. this consists of
an orbifold of the toroidally compactied type ii or heterotic theory by (1)f  where 
is a level-matched shift symmetry of the narain lattice. we choose  so that the scherk-

schwarz tachyon(s) are momentum modes which becomes tachyonic at suciently large

4 the meaning of this duality proposal is not entirely clear, since the dilaton potential is not

at in the proposed duals.

12

radius. the integrated vertex operators for these tachyons take the form (in the type ii

case for specicity)

z d2zd2xp

pcos[(p +  + k)  x] + psin[(p +  + k)  x]

(5.7)

here we take  to be half a momentum lattice vector, and we sum over those p in the

momentum lattice such that the internal piece of the added operator is relevanti.e. we

only include tachyons. k is spacetime momentum in the noncompact directions. we work
in (1, 1) superspace with x = x +  +   + f a scalar supereld. in the (0, 0) picture,
in components, the vertex operator is

v (0,0) = (

l + k)  (

r + k)  ei  xeikx

(5.8)

the renormalization group ow for this type of potential has been studied by kutasov
[24]. he nds generically a mass gap for the degrees of freedom in x  . with some ne-
tuning of the coecients  and , one can obtain minima in the potential which locally
take the form of xn potentials for various n > 2. thus minimal models arise as the result

of tachyon condensation in these special directions. in such cases, although one does not

lift all the central charge of the x multiplet, it decreases in the ow to the value of the

appropriate minimal model, and the orthogonal spacetime part of the theory is still of

sub-critical dimension.

a similar analysis can be done for heterotic compactications of the form t d/(1)f .
more generally, this set of ideas might be helpful in any situation where the closed string

tachyon is charged under some spacetime gauge symmetry. such theories with charged

tachyons are natural candidates for admitting dual descriptions in terms of branes (as

in [6]), where the tachyon condensation corresponds to some kind of brane annihilation

process.

it would be interesting to see if these approaches to understanding closed string

tachyons can teach one about string theory at the hagedorn transition. a dierent ap-

proach to this problem was recently discussed in [25].

acknowledgements

we would like to thank o. aharony, p. aspinwall, m. berkooz, j. harvey, i. klebanov,

e. martinec, r. plesser, and s. shenker for discussions. we are also grateful to tasi-99 and

the 1999 amsterdam summer workshop on string theory for hospitality during the course

13

of this work. the research of s.k. is supported by nsf grant phy-95-14797, by doe

contract de-ac03-76sf00098, by an a.p. sloan foundation fellowship and by a doe oji

award. the research of j.k. is supported by the department of defense ndseg fellowship

program and by nsf grant phy-9870115. the research of e.s. is supported by the doe

under contract de-ac03-76sf00515 and by an a.p. sloan foundation fellowship.

14

references

[1] see for instance: v.a. kostelecky and s. samuel, the tachyon potential in string
theory, presented at 1988 mtg. of div. of particle and fields of the aps, storrs,
ct, aug 15-18, 1988;
t. banks, the tachyon potential in string theory, nucl. phys. b361 (1991) 166;
a. belopolsky and b. zwiebach, o shell closed string amplitudes: towards a com-
putation of the tachyon potential, nucl. phys. b442 (1995) 494, hep-th/9409015.

[2] s.p. de alwis, j. polchinski, and r. schimmrigk, heterotic strings with tree level

cosmological constant, phys. lett. b218 (1989) 449.

[3] a. sagnotti, closed strings and their open string descendants, phys. rept. 184,

167 (1989).

[4] p. horava, strings on world sheet orbifolds, nucl. phys. b327 (1989) 461.
[5] j. dai, r.g. leigh and j. polchinski, new connections between string theories,

mod. phys. lett. a4 (1989) 2073.

[6] o.bergman and m. gaberdiel, a nonsupersymmetric open string theory and s-

duality, nucl. phys. b499 (1997) 183, hep-th/9701137.

[7] m. bianchi and a. sagnotti, on the systematics of open string theories, phys.

lett. b247, 517 (1990).

[8] t. banks and l. susskind, brane - anti-brane forces, hep-th/9511194.
[9] a. sen, tachyon condensation on the brane anti-brane system, jhep 9808 (1998)

012, hep-th/9805170.

[10] p. yi, membranes from five-branes and fundamental strings from d-p branes,

hep-th/9901159.

[11] d. kutasov, orbifolds and solitons, phys. lett. b383 (1996) 48, hep-th/9512145.
[12] c. hull, the nonperturbative so(32) heterotic string, hep-th/9812210;

e. bergshoe, e. eyras, r. halbersma, j.p. van der schaar, c. hull and y. lozano,
space-time filling branes and strings with sixteen supercharges, hep-th/9812224.
[13] g. aldazabal, a. font, l.e. ibanez, a.m. uranaga and g. violero, non-perturbative
heterotic d=6, d=4, n=1 orbifold vacua, nucl. phys. b519 (1998) 239, hep-
th/9706158.
i. antoniadis and c. kounnas, superstring phase transition at high temperature,
phys. lett. b261, 369 (1991).

[14]

[15] for a recent review with references, see: a. sen, non-bps states and branes in string

theory, hep-th/9904207.

[16] see for instance: b. kors, d-brane spectra of nonsupersymmetric, asymmetric
orbifolds and nonperturbative contributions to the cosmological constant, hep-
th/9907007;
r. blumenhagen and a. kumar, a note on orientifolds and dualities of type 0b

15

hep-

string theory, hep-th/9906234;
i. klebanov, tachyon stabilization in the ads/cft correspondence,
th/9906220;
c. angelatonj, i. antoniadis and k. forger, nonsupersymmetric type i strings with
zero vacuum energy, hep-th/9904092;
r. blumenhagen, a. font and d. lust, tachyon free orientifolds of type 0b strings
in various dimensions, hep-th/9904069;
r. blumenhagen and l. gorlich, orientifolds of nonsupersymmetric asymmetric
orbifolds, hep-th/9812158;
i. antoniadis, g. dappolonio, e. dudas, and a. sagnotti, partial breaking of su-
persymmetry, open strings and m-theory, hep-th/9812118;
i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, d-branes and dual gauge theories in type 0
strings, nucl. phys. b546 (1999) 155, hep-th/9811035;
c. angelantonj, nontachyonic open descendants of the 0b string theory, phys. lett.
b444, 309 (1998) hep-th/9810214;
g. shiu and s.h. tye, bose-fermi degeneracy and duality in nonsupersymmetric
strings, nucl. phys. b542 (1999) 45, hep-th/9808095;
s. kachru and e. silverstein, self-dual nonsupersymmetric type ii string compact-
ications, jhep 9811 (1998) 001, hep-th/9808056;
j. harvey, string duality and nonsupersymmetric strings, phys. rev. d59 (1999)
026002, hep-th/9807213;
m. berkooz and s. rey, nonsupersymmetric stable vacua of m theory, jhep 9901
(1999) 014, hep-th/9807200;
s. kachru, j. kumar and e. silverstein, vacuum energy cancellation in a nonsuper-
symmetric string, phys. rev. d59 (1999) 106004, hep-th/9807076 ;
i. antoniadis, e. dudas,and a. sagnotti, supersymmetry breaking, open strings and
m-theory, nucl.phys. b544 (1999) 469-502, hep-th/9807011;
s. kachru and e. silverstein, 4-d conformal field theories and strings on orb-
ifolds, phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 4855, hep-th/9802183;
j.d. blum and k.r. dienes, duality without supersymmetry: the case of the
so(16)  so(16) string, phys. lett. b414 (1997) 260, hep-th/9707148.

[17] j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes, hep-th/9611050.
[18]

i. antoniadis, e. dudas,and a. sagnotti, supersymmetry breaking, open strings and
m-theory, nucl.phys. b544 (1999) 469-502, hep-th/9807011.

[19] a. sen, duality and orbifolds, nucl. phys. b474 (1996) 361, hep-th/9604070.
[20] j. polchinski and e. witten, evidence for heterotic-type i string duality, nucl.

phys. b460 (1996) 525, hep-th/9510169.

[21] c. callan, j. harvey and a. strominger, world sheet approach to heterotic instan-

tons and solitons, nucl. phys. b359 (1991) 611.

16

[22] r. myers, new dimensions for old strings, phys. lett. 199b (1987) 371;

i. antoniadis, c. bachas, j. ellis and d. nanopoulos, cosmological string theories
and discrete ination, phys. lett. 211b (1988) 393.

[23] j. polchinski, string theory, vol. i, cambridge university press, 1998.
[24] d. kutasov, irreversibility of the renormalization group flow in two-dimensional

quantum gravity, mod. phys. lett. a7 (1992) 2943, hep-th/9207064;
e. hsu and d. kutasov, the gravitational sine-gordon model, nucl. phys. b396
(1993) 693, hep-th/9212023.
i. antoniadis, j. derendinger and c. kounnas, nonperturbative temperature insta-
bilities in n=4 strings, nucl. phys. b551 (1999) 41, hep-th/9902032.

[25]

17

