0
0
0
2

 

n
a
j
 

7
2

 
 

4
v
9
8
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

in gross-neveu model with u(1) symmetry at nite temperature and low n.

mass generation without phase coherence

possible implications for particle physics.

institute for theoretical physics, uppsala university box 803, s-75108 uppsala, sweden

email: egor@teorfys.uu.se

egor babaev

the gross-neveu model with u(1) symmetry for a small number n of fermions has two charac-
teristic temperatures: tkt that corresponds to onset of quasi-long-range order and t (> tkt ) that
corresponds to thermal breaking of fermion pairs. this phenomenon is not new but is known from
the recent studies of superconductors. the region tkt < t < t  is characterised by a complex gap
function |(x)|ei(x) with nonzero gap modulus || but random phase (x) so there is no phase
coherence (or no quasi-long-range order in the case of a purely 2d system) and system behaves like a
gas of non-condensed composite bosons. in superconductivity this region calls pseudogap phase. in
this paper we rederive these results known from superconductivity in a very simple and trasparent
way in a gn model with u (1)-symmetry and discuss its possible relations to particle physics. in
particular we discuss possibility of generalization of these results to higher dimensions and other
symmetries and roles of quantum and classical uctuations. in the regime of large n we also show
that the temperature of the phase transition of xy-model tends from below to the temperature of
the pair formation and merges with it in the limit n   thus recovering mean-eld scenario for
the onset of quasi-long-range order in this model.

the gross-neveu (gn) model [1] is a eld theoretic
model of zero-mass fermions with quartic interaction,
which provide us with considerable insight into the mech-
anisms of spontaneous symmetry breakdown. the pur-
pose of this paper is to consider possible implications of
the recent results in superconductivity to particle physics
and in the following discussion the gn model with u (1)-
symmetry will play role of a link between superconductiv-
ity and the particle physics. in the model under the con-
sideration fermions form bound states similar to cooper
pairs. at low temperatures in dimensions higher than
two these pairs are condensed, and symmetry is bro-
ken. in exactly two dimensions there is no strict long-
range order however except for high-temperature disor-
dered phase there is a kosterlitz-thouless transition to
a phase with quasi-long range order [2].

according to a mean-eld scenario, condensation (or
quasicondensation in the case of a purely 2d system) of
fermion pairs happens at the same temperature as their
formation. however, at low n this scenario is qualita-
tively wrong and phase diagram of the above version of
gn model should contain a pseudogap phase which is a
large region where there exists a nonzero modulus of a
complex gap function (or what is the same preformed
fermion pairs) but there is no phase coherence or no
quasi-long range order. in order to describe this region
we should incorporate into the theory pairs with non-zero
momentum and thus we should go beyond mean-eld ap-
proximation, for example by extracting lowest gradient
terms and setting up an eective xy-model that serves
for nonperturbative description of the onset and disap-
pearance of the phase coherence in a system with pre-
formed modulus of a complex gap function |(x)|ei(x).
it should be noted that this procedure is not new, it

was applied before in condensed matter physics [3,4] for
the desciription of an analogous phenomena in super-
conductors [5]. and after the publication of the previ-
ous version of the manuscript the author received some
emails indicating overlaps of this paper with earlier pa-
pers on kostrelitz-thouless transition in superconduc-
tors [3]. however below we reproduce these known results
in a very simple and transparent way and what is more
important we dicsuss its possible applictions to the par-
ticle physics, possible extension to higher dimensions as
well as roles of quantum and classcical uctuations. for
the previous papers see [3,5]. it sould be noted that in
contrast to classical uctuations at nite t , discussed in
this paper, the rst discussion of the pseudgap phenom-
ena of dynamic origin and its implications to the particle
physics was presented by us in [6], where we have shown
that the chiral gn model in 2 +  dimensions exhibit
a similar phenomenon governed by dynamical quantum
uctuations.

existence of the pseudogap phase

in the chiral gn
model at low n provide us with example when genera-
tion of fermion mass happens without spontaneous break-
down of continual symmetry.

chiral gn model has the following o(n )-symmetric

lagrange density

l = ai / a +

g0

2n h(cid:0) aa(cid:1)2

+(cid:0) ai5a(cid:1)2i .

where the index a runs from 1 to n . the elds (x) are
integrated out yielding collective eld action:

acoll[] = n(cid:26)

2 + 2

2g0

 itr log [i /  (x)  i5](cid:27) .

this model is invariant under the continuous set of chi-
ral o(2) transformations which rotate  and  elds into

1

each other. this model is closely related to another one,
which resembles a bcs model of superconductivity. its
lagrange density is

l = ai / a +

g0

2n (cid:0) ac t

a(cid:1)(cid:0)t

b cb(cid:1) .

(1)

2 (1  5) + 1

here c is the matrix of charge conjugation which is de-
ned by cc 1 = t . in two dimensions, we choose
the -matrices as 0 = 1, 1 = i2, and c = 1, and
the second model goes over into the rst by replacing
2 (1 + 5)c t , where superscript t de-
  1
notes transposition. for discussion of complex pair eld
model in 2+1 dimensions see [7]. in the lagrange den-
sity (1) we introduce a complex collective eld by adding
, leading to the parti-

a term (n/2g0)(cid:12)(cid:12)  g0
z[, ] =z dd dd exp(cid:8)iz ddx(cid:2) ai / a +

b cb(cid:12)(cid:12)

tion function

n t

2

1

2(cid:0)t

a ca + c.c.(cid:1) +  +  

n
2g0

||2(cid:3)(cid:9). (2)

in 1 + 1 dimensions there is a direct relation with the
previous collective elds  and  :  =  + i. one can
integrate out the fermi elds ( see for details [6,7]) and
obtain the collective action

a[] = 

1

2g0 z ddx||2 

i
2

tr log ig1


(3)

in the mean-eld treatment, the minimum of the eec-
tive action implies for 0 either 0 = 0 or a nonzero
 given by a standard gap equation. in the mean-eld
approximation one always xes phase and assumes 0 to
be a real function.

let us now go beyond mean-eld approximation and
study the propagator of the complete -eld. for small
deviations     0 we can expand around 0 and
nd the quadratic term

1
n

2 = 

1

2( ||2

g0

+

i
2

tr"(cid:18) 

 (cid:19) 
 (cid:19) g0#).

g0(cid:18) 

the second term in curly brackets may be written more

explicitly as an integral r ddq/(2)d over
0(cid:0)2 + 2(cid:1)  + 2||2h  2

2n2

1

0

io ,

where 2
(q)(q). functions , and  are given by

for (q)(q) and ||2

stands

for

 = 2z ddke

(2)d

k(k  q)e  2
0

(k2

e + 2

0) [(k  q)2

e + 2
0]

,

2

 = 2z ddke

(2)d

1

k2
e + 2
0

1
(k  q)2
e + 2
0

(4)

as a result, the action for the quadratic deviations from
0 can be written as

2
n

= z

ddq

(2)d (cid:20)(cid:18) 1

2g0

+

a

2(cid:19) ||2 +

b

4 (cid:0)2 + 2(cid:1)(cid:21)

thus the propagator of imaginary part of the eld  is

g

im

im = 

i
n

1

1/g0 + a  b

.

(5)

in order to consider system at nite temperature we im-
pose antiperiodic condition for imaginary time  with
period  = 1/t and substitute momentum integral
by a sum over matsubara frequencies. performing the
sum over matsubara frequencies one can obtain nite-
temperature gap equation in the mean-eld approxima-
tion:

1 = g0 tr (1)z dd1pe
where e stands for pp2 + 2

(2)d1

0.

1
2e

tanh(cid:18) e

2t(cid:19) ,

(6)

within mean-eld analysis we have situation similar
to bcs superconductor when at certain temperature due
to thermal pair breaking gap disappears. in what follows
we shall call this temperure of thermal decomposition
of cooper pairs t .
it can be expressed via the gap
function at zero temperature. in two space dimensions
corresponding equation reads:

t  =

0(0)
2 log 2

,

(7)

where 0(0) is gap function at zero temperature. near
t  the gap function has in the mean-eld approximation
the following behavior:

0(t ) = t 4plog 2r1 

t
t 

(8)

on the other hand at low temperatures the gap function
has exponentially small temperature correction:

0(t ) = 0(0)  2t exp(cid:18)

0(0)

t (cid:19)

(9)

let us now derive propagator of the imaginary part of


the eld  (5) at nonzero temperature. for   22
0
we have the following expression:

dz

(2)d z 1

q2
ez(z  1) + 2
ez(1  z) + 2
(q2

 2z ddke
here we used the identity (ab)1 = r 1

0 dz[(a  b)z +
b]2. after summation over matsubara frequencies and

0 + k2
0 + k2

e)2 .

(10)

e

0

integration we arrive in the case of two space dimensions
to the nite temperature expression for part of the prop-
agator of 

im that has a pole at q2 = 0:

g

im

im =

1

n (cid:20)

1

160(t )

tanh(cid:18) 0(t )

2t (cid:19)(cid:21)1 i

q2

(11)

lets us now interrupt the discussion and remind to
reader some features of the strong-coupling superconduc-
tivity: symmetry breakdown in the later can not be de-
scribed by a mean-eld theory and, as it will be shown
below, its behavior is in some sence analogous the the
low-n behavior of gn-like models.

the celebrated bcs theory of superconductivity is a
mean-eld theory and it describes superconductivity as
a pair formation - i.e. when pairs form at certain tem-
perature they have zero momentum and thus are con-
densed. obviously critical temperature in this case is
proportional to the energy of the pair binding. n  
mean-eld treatment of the gn-like models is quite simi-
lar to the bcs theory of superconductivity. let us imag-
ine for a moment that we were able to bind cooper pairs
in a superconductor innitely tightly - obviously this im-
plies that characteristic temperature of thermal pair de-
composition will be also innitely high, hovewer this does
not imply that the long-range order will survive at in-
nitely high temperatures. as it was rst observed in [5]
long-range order in strong-coupling superconductor will
be destroyed in a similar way as it happens in super-
uid 4he i.e. tightly bound cooper pairs will acquire,
at certain temperature, a nonzero momentum and thus
we will have gas of tightly bound cooper pairs but no
macroscopic occupation of zero momentum level q = 0
and with it no long-range order.
in order to describe
superconductivity in a system with a strong attractive
interaction theory should incorporate pairs with nonzero
momentum and thus mean-eld treatment is invalid for
description of spontaneous symmetry breakdown in such
a system (see [5,3], [4] and references therein). this can
as well be understood in the following manner: at rst we
can derive eective potential for a strong-coupling super-
conductor, say in the simplest case it will be a mexican
hat potential that disappears at certain temperature.
the eective potential determines size of the modulus
of the complex gap function  = ei(x). bcs the-
ory postulates that phase is constant and thus if we have
eective potential we have spontaneous symmetry break-
down [8]. however it will not be always the case if we
have tightly bound cooper pairs. that can be seen if
we go beyond mean-eld approximation by extracting
lowest gradient term and setting up an eective non-
linear sigma model (in two dimensions it will be a 2d
xy-model) with temperature dependent stiness coe-
cent, for description of the onset or disappearence of the
phase coherence [3,4]. with it we can see that in the
weak-coupling limit, the temperature of the phase tran-
sition of the eective xy-model tends from below to the

3

characteristic temperature of the disappearence of the
eective potential and merges with it for innitesimaly
weak coupling strength [4]. thus we arrive at some sort
of aposteriori verication of bcs behavior in this limit
i.e. in this limit if nonzero modulus of the complex gap
function  = ei(x) appears at some temperature, at
the same temperature phase coherence is estabilished and
continuous symmetry is broken, or in the case of a purely
2d system, instead of the symmetry breakdown transi-
tion we have a kostrelitz-thouless transion to a quasi-
ordered phase.
in the opposite limit of strong coupling
strength we can see that the temperature t  of the disap-
pearence of the eective potential obviously continues to
grow with the coupling strength whereas the phase sti-
ness of the eective xy model tends exponentialy to the
constant value n
4m that corresponds to the phase stiness
of the bose gas with density n/2 and mass 2m [3,4] (and
with it the temperature of the onset of phase coherence
tc also tends to a constant value that depends only on
the mass and density of fermions and does not depend on
the coupling strength). thus in a strong-coupling super-
conductor we have a large region between t  and tc that
is characterized by a complex gap function ||ei(x) with
nonzero gap modulus || but random phase (x) so the
average < ||ei(x) > is zero. the same argumets were
used also in our previous paper for description of conden-
sate depletion due to quantum uctuations in the chiral
gn model at zero temperature and low n in 2 +  dimen-
sions [6] where in the regime of low n existence of the
analogous phase separation was shown. namely it was
observed that at low n and strong coupling strength the
phase stiness of the eective xy-model at low n tends
to a plateau value n/4 that allows to show existence of
the pseudogap phase.

now let us return to the gn model at nite temper-
atures, where we will discuss similarities with described
above situation at low n. below we extract lowest gra-
dient term of the gn model and set up an eective xy-
model. with this procedure one can study relation of the
mass generation and the phase ordering in such models
[3].

the result (11) for d = 2 + 1 renders the following
form of the kinetic term for the gn model with u(1)
symmetry:

hkin =z dx

n
16

0(t ) tanh(cid:18) 0(t )

2t (cid:19) []2

(12)

phase disorder transition is very well understood in a
model eld theory involving a pure phase eld (x), with
a hamiltonian

h =

j
2

[(x)]2,

(13)

where j is the stiness of the phase uctuations. the
temperature of the kosterlitz-thouless phase transition
is given by [2]:



t

tkt

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.5

200

400

600

800 1000

n

fig. 1.

ratio of the temperature of the koster-
litz-thouless transition to the temperature of the gap modu-
lus formation tkt /t  in gn model with u(1) summetry in
the regime of high n . these temperatures merge in the limit
n   thus recovering mean-eld scenario for the transi-
tion into the quasi-ordered state.
in the opposite limit of
low n separation of these temperatures is given by formula:
tkt /t  = n log(2)/8  0.087n

thus the phase diagram of the model consist of the fol-
lowing phases: (i) t > t  - high temperature symmetric
phase with zero local gap. (ii) t  > t > tkt - pseudo-
gap phase - symmetric phase with nonzero modulus of the
complex gap function and random phase. (iii) t < tkt
low temperature quasi-ordered phase with bound vortex-
antivortex pairs.

in 2+1 dimension this result is not new, but is known
from the theory of superconductivity 1. however due to
recent development in this eld and generalization of this
concept to particle physics [6] this phenomenon should be
reinterpreted, also below we summarize al the essential
features:

 in analogy to superconductivity t  in this model
should be associated with pairbreaking process
[3,5,4]. it should be noted that at nite tempera-
tures, mean-eld method can provide a reasonable
estimate for the position of t  but second-order
transition on t  is certainly an artifact of the ap-
proximation since much above tkt one should ex-
pect wash out by violent thermal uctuations. in
a strong-coupling superconductor, in general t  is

tkt =


2

j.

(14)

in contrast to the ordinary xy-model in order to study
phase disorder trasnition in the gn model we should
solve a set of equations: equation for tkt (0, n ) that
follows from kinetic term and equation (6) for the gap
modulus 0(tkt , n ) that follows from eective poten-
tial.

tkt << t .

let us rst consider the case of low n. from expres-
sions (12), (14), (7), (9) we see that in the regime of low
n
in this regime temperature correc-
tions to the phase stiness are exponentialy suppressed.
thus at temperatures t << t  asymptotic expression
for kinetic term (12) reads

hkin =z dx

n
16

0(0)[]2

(15)

thus kosterlitz-thouless transition will take place at

temperature:

tkt =

n
16

0(0)

(16)

which at low n is essentially lower than the temperature
t  = 0(0)
2 log 2 at which gap modulus disappears (7) [9]. so
with decreasing n separation of tkt and t  increases.
lets us now turn to the regime when n is no longer low.
then from the expressions (12), (14), (7), (8) we see that
in this regime tkt tends from below to t . the hamil-
tonian (12) in this limit reads near t :

hkin =z dx

n
32

0(t )2

t

[]2

(17)

from (17), (14), (7), (8) follows the equation for behavior
of tkt at large n:

tkt = t 

1

2

n log(2)

 t (cid:18)1 

2

n log(2)(cid:19) .

1 +

(18)

this equation shows merging of the temperatures tkt
and t  in the limit of large n from which follows restora-
tion of the mean-eld scenario for the quasi-condensation
in the limit n  . the ratio tkt /t  is displayed on
fig. 1.

1in the case of a 2d superconductor (superconductive lm
or strongly anisotropic compounds) we deal with a charged
system and strictly speaking in a charged system kosterlitz-
thouless transition does not exist, however in the case of
high-tc superconductive compounds in-plane magnetic pen-
etration length is much bigger than coherence length so ef-
fectively neutral theory for kosterlitz-thouless transition is
applicable. for phenomenological discussion of this transition
in high-tc cuprates see [5].

4

a charactersitic crossover temperature of thermal
decomposition of certain fraction of cooper pairs.
in the large-n regime tkt tends from below to t 
and merges with it in the limit n   thus re-
covering mean-eld scenario for the onset of quasi-
long-range order.

 in the region tc < t < t  there is no super-
conductivity despite presence of a local gap mod-
ulus. however in superconductors this region ex-
hibit very interesting non-fermi liquid behavior [5].
even in a bcs superconductors there exists a nar-
row region of precursor pairing uctuations that
gives rise for example to paraconductivity eect.

 one should stress that apperance of the pseudo-
gap phase can be governed by two very dient pro-
cesses:
in the considered above cases separation
of tkt and t  is due to violent classical uctu-
ations whereas in the paper [6] we have found a
similar eect, driven by quantum dynamic chiral
uctuations at zero temperature. in principle this
may have nontrivial consequences:
in mean-eld
scenario when we have pairs we have symmetry
breakdown whereas in the discussed above fram-
work we may have the phase with long-range or
quasi-long range order destroyed by uctuations in
a system with preformed pairs. due to existence
of two mechanisms driving phase decoherence pro-
cesses, in principle there may be nontrivial eects
connected with crossover from classical to quantum
directional uctuations, and exotic instabilies may
appear when approaching zero temperature. we
should stress once more that in the discussed above
2 + 1 dimensional case, transition to the pseudo-
gap phase is governed by a classical 2dxy - model,
where as in the 1+1 case at zero temperature quasi-
long-range order is destroyed by uctuations de-
scribed by quantum 2dxy -model.

 most important circumstance is that the recent de-
velopment [4] shows that in principle similar phe-
nomena that appear in higher dimensions can be
described by introduction of higher dimensional
nonlinear sigma models. in contrast to the above
discussion of kt transition it will describe real
symmetry restoration due to directional uctua-
tions.
in particular all the essential features of
bcs-bec crossover in 3d superconductors may be
reproduced with an eective 3d xy -model pro-
posed by the author [4]. one should also observe
that it was shown recently by us that no direct gen-
eralization of the discussed above results in 2 + 
and 2 + 1 dimensions to njl model in 3 + 1 dimen-
sions is possible [10]. there are two reasons: at
rst the njl model is not renormalizable and thus
one can not derive properly the stifness coecent

of the eective o(4)-sigma model. and the second
reason is that critical stifness of the eective non-
linear sigma model is not an universal quantity in
3+1-dimensions [10]. however, since the precritical
pairing uctuations and pseudogap phase should be
a general feature of any fermi system with attrac-
tion and moreover it is a dominating region on a
phase diagram of strong-coupling and low carrier
density superconductors, the interesting question is
to what extend analogous phase may be developed
in qcd and color superconductors. indication of
possible importance of the pseudogap concept in
particle physics is the mentioned above existence of
this phenomenon in the chiral gross-neveu model
at low n . even though these results can not be di-
rectly generalized to njl model, one can guess that
in analogy to 3d xy-model approach to strong-
coupling and low carrier density superconductivity,
one can set up a nonlinear 3d o(4)-sigma model
with temperature depended stiness coecient as
a toy model for qcd at nite temperatures that
would possess two characteristic temperatures cor-
responding to discussed in this paper tc and t .
the discussed above phenomena in 2 + 1 - dimen-
sional model may serve as an additional motivation
for the study of possibility of formation of a phase
analogous to pseudgap in qcd at nite tempera-
tures and color superconductors.

it should be noted that similar behavior is known
in condensed matter physics in ferroelectrics and mag-
nets where one can as well distinguish two characteristic
temperatures, for example in the later case curie- and
stoner-temperatures. also very closely related phenom-
ena exist in exitonic condensate in semiconductors, and
josephson junction arrays.

the author is grateful to prof. a.j. niemi, dr. v.
cheianov and prof. h. kleinert for discussions and to
dr. s.g. sharapov for communiating the references on
related papers after appearence of the previous verison
of this manuscript.

[1] d. gross and a. neveu, phys. rev. d 10 3235 (1974).
[2] v. l. berezinskii. zh. eksp. teor. fiz., 1970, 59 907; j.

kosterlitz, d. thouless. j. phys., 1973, c6 1181.

[3] m. drechsler, w. zwerger. ann. phys.(germany), 1, 15

(1992).
v.p. gusynin, v.m. loktev, s.g. sharapov jetp lett.
65 182 (1997); jetp 88 685 (1999)
s. stintzing, w. zwerger. preprint cond-mat/9703129
o. tchernyshyov, phys. rev. b 56, 3372 (1997)
v.j.emery, s.a. kivelson, nature 374 434 (1995);

5

phys.rev.lett 74 3253 (1995).
r. mackenzie, p.k. panigrahi, s. sakhi. int. j. mod.
phys. a9, 3603 (1994).
r.micnas and t.kostyrko in recent developments in
high temperature superconductivity proceedings af
the rst polish-us conference. wroclaw 1995. r.micnas
et. al. phys. rev. b 52 16223 (1995).
see also
y.j. uemura, in proceedings of the workshop in polarons
and bipolarons in high-tc superconductors and related
materials, cambridge, 1994 ed. by e. salje et al. (cam-
bridge univ. press, 1995) pp. 453. y.j. uemura, in pro-
ceedings of the ccast symposium on high-tc super-
conductivity and the c60 family, beijing, 1994 ed. by
s. feng and h.c. ren (gordon and breach, new york,
1995) pp. 113.

[4] e. babaev and h. kleinert phys. rev. b 59 12083 (1999)

(preprint cond-mat/9804206)

[5] d. m. eagles, phys. rev. 186, 456 (1969).

a. j. leggett, in modern trends in the theory of con-
densed matter, edited by a. pekalski and j. przystawa,
lecture notes in physics, vol. 115 (springer-verlag,
berlin, 1980), p. 13

p. nozieres and s. schmitt-rink, j. low. temp. phys.
59,195 (1985)
c. a. r. sa de melo, m. randeria, and j.r. engelbrecht,
phys. rev. lett. 71, 3202 (1993)
r. haussmann, z. phys. b 91, 291 (1993); phys. rev. b
49, 12975 (1994)
m. randeria. in: bose-einstein condensation, edited by
a. grin, d. w. snoke., and s. stringary. new york,
cambridge university press, 1995. p.355-392.
r. haussmann, z. phys. b 91, 291 (1993); phys. rev. b
49, 12975 (1994)

[6] h. kleinert and e. babaev preprint hep-th/9809112
[7] b. rosenstein, b.j. warr, s.h. park phys. rep. 205 59

(1991)

[8] the same assumption in the case of the chiral gross-
neveu model was made implicitly when we derived the
gap function in the mean-eld approximation i.e. we pos-
tulated that phase is constant and determined the gap
size with a standard variation procedure.

[9] one can see from (12) that obviously stiness of the phase
uctuations tends quickly to zero when temperature ap-
proaches t .

[10] e. babaev preprint hep-th/9909052.

6

