0
0
0
2

 

g
u
a
5
1

 

 
 

5
v
9
8
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

mass generation without phase coherence in the chiral gross-neveu model

at nite temperature and small n in 2+1 dimensions.

institute for theoretical physics, uppsala university box 803, s-75108 uppsala, sweden

egor babaev 

the chiral gross-neveu model is one of the most popular toy models for qcd. in the past,
it has been studied in detail in the large-n limit. in this paper we study its small-n behavior at
nite temperature in 2+1 dimensions. we show that at small n the phase diagram of this model is
principally dierent from its behavior at n  . we show that for a small number n of fermions
the model possesses two characteristic temperatures tkt and t . that is, at small n, along with a
quasiordered phase 0 < t < tkt the system possesses a very large region of precursor uctuations
tkt < t < t  which disappear only at a temperature t , substantially higher than the temperature
tkt of kosterlitz-thouless transition.

in this letter we discuss small-n behavior of the gross-
neveu (gn) [1] model with u(1)-symmetry in 2 + 1 di-
mensions at nite temperature. the gross-neveu model
is a eld theoretic model of zero-mass fermions with
quartic interaction, which provides us with considerable
insight into the mechanisms of spontaneous symmetry
breakdown and is considered to be an illuminating toy
model for qcd. our small-n study is motivated by re-
cent results in the theory of superconductivity in the
regimes when bcs mean-eld theory is not valid.

recently a remarkable progress was made in the the-
ory of superconductivity in understanding mechanisms
of symmetry breakdown in the regimes of strong inter-
action and low carrier density. it was observed that, in
general, a fermi system with attraction possess two dis-
tinct characteristic temperatures corresponding to pair
formation and pair condensation. that is, in a strong-
coupling superconductor cooper pairs are formed at a
certain temperature t  although there is no macroscopic
occupation of zero momentum level and thus no phase
coherence and no symmetry breakdown. the tempera-
ture should be lowered to tc(<< t ) in order to make
these pairs condense and establish phase coherence. the
large region tc < t < t  where there exist cooper pairs
but no continual symmetry is broken is called pseudo-
gap phase. thus the symmetry breakdown in a strong-
coupling superconductor resembles onset of long range
order in 4he where, formally one also can introduce a
characteristic temperature of thermal decomposition of
a he atom, however it does not mean that this tempera-
ture is connected in any respect with temperature of the
onset of phase coherence. in fact, the bcs scenario when
superconductive phase transition can approximately be
described as a pair-formation transition (i.e. when there
is only one characteristic temperature tc) is a very excep-
tional case. that is, the bcs scenario holds true only at
innitesimally weak coupling strength or very high car-

rier density.

similarly as the bcs theory became a source of in-
spiration in particle physics (in particular it had direct
inuence on appearance of the nambujona-lasinio and
gross-neveu models), recently the pseudogap concept
started to penetrate from the theory of superconductiv-
ity to the high-energy physics, sparking many intensive
discussions. the pseudogap concept was rst introduced
to particle physics in [5].

let us now return to the gross-neveu model. at nite
temperatures in the limit of large n its behavior closely
resembles a bcs superconductor [3]. below, we show
that a very rich physical structure, similar to the phase
diagram of a strong-coupling superconductor, emerges in
the small-n limit in the chiral gn model.

existence of the pseudogap phase in the chiral gn
model at small n provides us with an example when
generation of fermion mass happens without spontaneous
breakdown of continual symmetry and suggests possibil-
ity of importance of this concept in particle physics.

the chiral gn model [1] has the following lagrange

density [2]

l = ai / a +

g0

2n h(cid:0) aa(cid:1)2

+(cid:0) ai5a(cid:1)2i .

where the index a runs from 1 to n . the elds (x) can
be integrated out yielding collective eld action:

acoll[] = n (cid:26)

2 + 2

2g0  itr log [i /  (x)  i5](cid:27) .

this model is invariant under the continuous set of chi-
ral o(2) transformations which rotate  and  elds into
each other. in large-n limit, the model has a second order
phase transition at which fermions acquire mass. at zero
temperature in 2+1 dimensions it is accompanied by an
appearance of a massless composite goldstone boson (for
details see e.g. the review [3]). in the symmetry-broken
phase the model is characterized by a typical mexican

email: egor@teorfys.uu.se http://www.teorfys.uu.se/people/egor/

tel: +46-18-4717629 fax +46-18-533180

1

hat eective potential. the propagator of the massive
 uctuations can be readily extracted and it coincides
with the -propagator of the ordinary gn model [3,5]:

g  =

i

n (cid:20)g1

0  i trz



d3k
(2)3

(k2  m 2)[(k  q)2  m 2](cid:21)1
(/k + m )(/k  /q + m )

where m is the mass dynamically acquired by fermions.
at nite temperature according to standard dimensional
reduction arguments the system is eectively two dimen-
sional and thus the coleman theorem forbids the spon-
taneous breakdown of the u(1)-symmetry. however, as
it was shown by witten [4], this does not preclude the
system from generating fermion mass. that is, as was
shown in [4], employing modulus-phase variables

 + i = ||ei

(1)

one can see that the system generates fermion mass
m = || that coincides with the modulus of the com-
plex order parameter, but its phase remains incoherent
and the correlators of the complex order parameter have
algebraic decay. existence of the local gap modulus 
does not contradict coleman theorem since  is neutral
under u (1) transformations. thus at low temperature
in 2+1 dimensions there appears an almost goldstone
boson that becomes a real goldstone boson at exactly
zero temperature.

let us start our study with an inspection of the eec-
tive potential of the model at nite temperature in the
leading order approximation and then take into account
the next-to-leading order corrections. following [4], the
fermion mass at nite temperature is given by the gap
equation which coincides with the gap equation for or-
dinary gn model with discrete symmetry (for detailed
calculations see [3,5]):

1 = g0 tr (1)z

d2k
(2)2

1
2e

tanh(cid:18) e

2t (cid:19) ,

(2)

where e stands for k2 + 2. in the leading order mean-
eld approximation we have a situation similar to bcs
superconductor: there is a gap that disappears at certain
temperature which, in what follows, we denote by t . it
can be expressed via the gap function at zero tempera-
ture:

t  =

(0)
2 log 2

,

(3)

near t  the gap function has, in the mean-eld approx-
imation, the following behavior:

(t ) = (0)  2t exp(cid:18)

(0)

t (cid:19)

(5)

lets us stress once more: a straightforward calculation
of next-to-leading order corrections gives that the gap
should be exactly zero at any nite temperature in 2+1
dimensions. however as it was shown in the paper men-
tioned above [4] such a direct calculation of corrections
misses essential physics of a two-dimensional problem.
the uctuations can be made arbitrarily weak by de-
creasing temperature in 2+1 dimensions (or e.g. increas-
ing n in 2d zero temperature calculations in [4]) and then
the system possesses a very well-dened mexican hat
eective potential that determines fermion mass. due
to phase uctuations in the degenerate valley of the po-
tential, the average of the complex gap function is zero,
however there exist a gap locally (i.e. in some sense the
system in its low energy domain degenerates to a non-
linear sigma model).
in 2+1 dimensions, as the tem-
perature approaches zero the thermal uctuations in the
degenerate valley of the eective potential gradually van-
ish and at t = 0 a local gap becomes a real gap. most
interesting eect happens however when temperature is
increased. it was anticipated before that there is only one
characteristic temperature in a such system - namely the
temperature of the kosterlitz-thouless (kt) transition
which (as was anticipated) coincides with temperature
of the formation of the local gap. we show below that
this scenario holds true only at very large number of eld
components. in general, as we show, the model has two
characteristic temperatures like in the case of a super-
conductor with a pseudogap. in order to show it we have
to go beyond mean-eld approximation.

let us make an expansion around a saddle point solu-
tion and derive the propagator of the imaginary part of
the eld  that has a pole at q2 = 0. the procedure is
standard and will not be reproduced here, see for details
e.g. [5,3].

g

im



im =

1

n (cid:20)

1

8(t )

tanh(cid:18) (t )

2t (cid:19)(cid:21)1

i
q2

(6)

the propagator (6) characterizes stiness of the phase
uctuations in the degenerate minimum of the eective
potential. it gives the following expression for the kinetic
term of phase uctuations for the chiral gn model:

ekin = z d2x

n
8

(t ) tanh(cid:18) (t )

2t (cid:19) []2

(7)

(t ) = t 4plog 2r1 

t
t 

(4)

on the other hand at low temperatures the gap function
receives exponentially small temperature correction:

now we have all the tools to nd the position of the kt
transition in the chiral gn model. it is well-known, that
the kt transition can not be found by straightforward
perturbative methods. in order to nd a position of the
kt transition one should rst observe that in variables

2

(1) the system is described by a complex scalar eld.
the key feature is that the eld  is cyclic:  =  + 2n.
in two dimensions such a system possesses excitations of
the form of vortices and antivortices that are attracted
to each other by a coulomb potential. at low temper-
atures, the vortices and antivortices form bound pairs.
the grand-canonical ensemble of the pairs exhibits quasi-
long-range correlations. at certain temperature tk t , the
vortex pairs break up which is the kosterlitz-thouless
phase-disorder transition [6]. this transition was stud-
ied in detail in the eld theory of a pure phase eld (x),
with a hamiltonian

h =


2

[(x)]2,

(8)

where  is the stiness of the phase uctuations. in our
case the coecient  depends on temperature and pa-
rameters of the gn models, namely number of eld com-
ponents and  [see eq. (7)].

the temperature of the kosterlitz-thouless phase

transition in the system (8) is given by [6]:

tkt =


2

.

(9)

in order to study the phase disorder transition in the chi-
ral gn model we should solve a set of equations: equation
for tk t (, n ) that follows from the kinetic term and
equation (2) for the gap modulus (tk t , n ) that fol-
lows from eective potential. i.e.
in our case the phase
transition is a competition of two processes: the thermal
excitation of directional uctuations in the degenerate
valley of the eective potential and the thermal deple-
tion of the stiness coecient.

let us rst consider the case of small n. from expres-
sions (7), (9), (3), (5) we see that in the regime of small n
tk t << t . in this regime the temperature corrections
to the phase stiness are exponentially suppressed. thus
at temperatures t << t  the asymptotic expression for
the kinetic term (7) reads

hkin = z d2x

n
8

(0)[]2

(10)

thus the kosterlitz-thouless transition will take place at
the temperature:

tk t =

n
8

(0)

(11)

which at small n is signicantly lower than the temper-
ature (3) at which the gap modulus disappears. for the
ratio tk t /t  at small n we obtain:

tk t
t  =

n log(2)

4

(12)

so with decreasing n separation of tk t and t  increases.
lets us now turn to the regime when n is no longer small.

then from the equations (7), (9), (3), (4) we see that in
this regime tk t tends from below to t . the hamilto-
nian (7) in this limit reads near t :

hkin = z dx

n
16

(t )2

t

[]2

(13)

from the eqs. (13), (9), (3), (4) we nd the following
expression for behavior of tk t at large n:

tk t  t (cid:18)1 

1

n log(2)(cid:19) .

(14)

this equation explicitly shows merger of the tempera-
tures tk t and t  in the limit of large n. this can be
interpreted as the restoration of the bcs-like scenario
for the quasi-condensation in the limit n  . the
ratio tk t /t  is displayed on fig. 1.

1

0.95

0.9

0.85

0.8

0.75

0.7

t
__
kt
*
t

50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400

n

fig. 1. recovery of a bcs-like scenario for quasiconden-
sation at large n in the chiral gn model. the solid curve is
the ratio of the temperatures of the kt transition (tkt ) and
the characteristic temperature of the formation of the eec-
tive potential (t ). as it is shown on the picture this ratio
tends from below to unity (the horizontal dashed line) as n
is increasing and the region of precursor uctuations shrinks.

thus the phase diagram of the model at small n con-
sists of the following phases at non-zero temperature: (i)
0 < t < tk t - the low temperature quasi-ordered phase
with bound vortex-antivortex pairs. (ii) tk t < t < t 
- the phase analogous to pseudogap phase
of super-
conductors:
i.e. the chirally symmetric phase with un-
bounded vortex-antivortex pairs that exhibit violent pre-
cursor uctuations and a nonzero local modulus of the
complex gap function. (iii) t > t  - high temperature
normal chirally symmetric phase.

the mechanism of the phase separation is very trans-
parent with the key feature being the fact that the sti-
ness is proportional to n [see eq. (7)]. at large n the di-
rectional uctuations are energetically extremely expen-
sive and thus, the phase transition is controlled basically
by the modulus of the order parameter. on the other
hand at small n , the stiness is low, and the thermal ex-
citation of the uctuations in the degenerate valley of the

3

eective potential starts governing the phase transition
in the system.

now let us briey discuss the physical meaning of t 
and what one can expect to happen when the system
reaches it at small n. at rst, as we can conclude from
simple physical reasoning in analogy with superconduc-
tivity, the appearance of the second characteristic tem-
perature is very natural. besides the fact that the phase
analogous to the intermediate phase tk t < t < t  it
is the dominating region on a phase diagram of strong-
coupling and low carrier density superconductors, the
similar eects are known in a large variety of condensed
matter systems such as exitonic condensates, josephson
juncion arrays and many other systems. one of the most
illuminating examples of the appearance of the pseudo-
gap phase is the chiral gn model in 2 +  dimensions
at zero temperature where this phenomenon is governed
by quantum dynamical uctuations at small n [5]. in
d=2+ the presence of two small parameters in the prob-
lem has allowed to prove existence and dierent phys-
ical origin of two characteristic values of renormalized
coupling constant and the formation of an intermediate
pseudogap phase [5]. we can also observe that the mean-
eld approximation gives a second order phase transition
at t  which is certainly an artifact since much above
tk t there are violent thermal phase uctuations. these
uctuations should wash out the phase transition at t 
which should degenerate to a smeared crossover as it
happens in superconductors. apparently, this crossover
can not be studied adequately in the framework of 1/n -
expansion. the most insight into the properties of the
system in the region tk t < t < t  can be obtained
by numerical simulations. although the kt transition
is very hard to observe in simulations, the hint for the
phase separation would be a gradual degradation of the
transition at t  with decreasing n .

important circumstance is that the pseudogap phase
as a precursor of the chiral phase transition is not a phe-
nomenon common only for low dimensional systems but

also should occur at small n in higher dimensions and
also in systems with other symmetries. one should how-
ever observe that as it was shown recently by us, un-
fortunately no direct generalization of the discussed here
nonlinear sigma model approach is possible to njl model
in 3 + 1 dimensions [7], at least in a closed form.

unfortunately the letter format of this paper does not
allow us to discuss in detail the similarities and dier-
ences of these phenomena in the chiral gn model and
in the models of superconductivity with precursor for-
mation of cooper pairs. a detailed discussion of these
aspects is currently in preparation and will be presented
elsewhere.

the author is grateful to dr. v. cheianov, prof. h.

kleinert and prof. a.j. niemi for discussions.

[1] d. gross and a. neveu, phys. rev. d 10 3235 (1974).
[2] in 2 + 1 dimensions we choose -matrices as in the review

[3]:  =  (cid:18) i

0

0 i (cid:19) and i5 = (cid:18) 0

i 0 (cid:19).

i

[3] b. rosenstein, b.j. warr, s.h. park phys. rep. 205 59

(1991)

[4] e. witten, nucl. phys. b 145, 110 (1978)
[5] h. kleinert and e. babaev preprint hep-th/9809112;
phys.let. b. 438, 311 (1998). [there is a misleading state-
ment in the above paper about a proliferation transition
in 3d].

[6] v. l. berezinskii. zh. eksp. teor. fiz., 1970, 59 907; j.

kosterlitz, d. thouless. j. phys., 1973, c6 1181.

[7] e. babaev preprint hep-ph/0006087 [accepted to phys.
rev. d]. in this paper we also criticize another recent at-
tempt of introduction of a nonlinear sigma for description
of chiral uctuations in the njl in 3+1 dimensions made
in h. kleinert and b. van den bossche phys.lett. b474
(2000) 336.

4

