ift-uam/csic-99-28

hep-th/9907205

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

8
2

 
 

1
v
5
0
2
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ultraviolet and infrared freedom from string

amplitudes

enrique alvarez, 1 and cesar gomez, 2

 theory division, cern,1211 geneva 23, switzerland

and

instituto de fsica teorica, c-xvi, universidad autonoma de madrid

e-28049-madrid, spain3

 departamento de fsica teorica, c-xi, universidad autonoma de madrid

e-28049-madrid, spain

 i.m.a.f.f., c.s.i.c., calle de serrano 113

e-28006-madrid, spain

abstract

the innite tension limit of string amplitudes is examined with some care, identifying the

part responsible of diamagnetic behaviour as well as a peculiar paramagnetic tachyon

magnifying responsible of aysmptotic freedom. the way string theory represents abelian

gauge theories is connected with the non-planar reggeon/pomeron amplitude and a

nontrivial beta function is found in the low energy limit of a single d-brane.

1e-mail: enrique.alvarez@uam.es
2e-mail: iffgomez@roca.csic.es
3unidad de investigacion asociada al centro de fsica miguel catalan (c.s.i.c.)

1

2

1 introduction

one of the most important results in quantum eld theory was the discovery [10] of asymp-

totic freedom for non abelian gauge groups. string theory, among other things, can be used

as a new regulator of quantum eld theories with the ultraviolet cuto given by the string

tension . appropiated eld theory limits,  = 0, can be dened for string amplitudes

and there is now an impressive body of knowledge (cf. for example,[11]. [8], [5], and ref-

erences therein) on the recovering, in this limit, of the perturbative series of non abelian

gauge theories and in particular the correct asymptotically free beta function.

at the level of open string amplitudes the dierence between dealing with abelian or non

abelian gauge groups reduces simply to the type of chan-paton factors used to decorate

the end points of the open string. these group theoretical elements appear in string theory

as multiplicative factors of the skeleton string amplitude that are independent of the gauge

group. thus from the string point of view the only dierence between abelian and non

abelian gauge theories stems basically from the existence of a no planar contribution to the

two point amplitude in the abelian case that vanishes for non abelian chan-paton factors.

therefore and using string theory as the driving principle we notice that the appearance

of infrared free theories is intimately related to the existence of the old fashion reggeon-

pomeron amplitude on the basis of which we build up the the two point non planar string

diagram.

our rst aim in this paper is to perform a careful analysis, in the innite tension limit,

of some open string two point functions and to unravel the specic way string theory

produces infrared free beta functions. from this analysis we shall get some interesting

physical results.

first of all we observe that string theory produces a decomposition of the beta function

into two pieces, infrared free and asymptotically free respectively, corresponding exactly

to the diamagnetic and paramagnetic contributions to the pure yang mills beta func-

1

tion ([12]). when we take into account the non planar two point function -specic to

abelian chan-paton factors- we cancel the paramagnetic asymptotically free part ending

up with a non trivial infrared free beta function corresponding to scalar quantum electro-

dynamics (qed) with (d  2) charged scalar elds, in d space-time dimensions. we then
observe that the way strings, manage to produce infrared free behavior is through the non

planar (reggeon/pomeron vertex) contribution which precisely cancels the paramagnetic

(spin-dependent) piece of the pure yang mills beta function, while keeping untouched the

diamagnetic part which shows up eventually as associated with a set of unexpected charged

scalar elds.

in modern terminology chan-paton factors become equivalent to d-branes and the

dierence between non abelian and abelian equivalent to that between a family of parallel

d(irichlet)-branes and one isolated d-brane.

using d-3 branes we can repeat our analysis for the beta function in the innite tension

limit, but this time for the open string amplitude with world sheet boundaries located on

the d-3 brane world volume. for the non abelian case we get -at one loop- the expected

result, namely the yang mills beta function for a theory with (d4) charged scalars in the
adjoint representation (where d is the external spacetime dimension). it is interesting to

notice that this beta function precisely vanishes for d the bosonic string critical dimension

26. moreover the so derived beta function agrees with the expected spectrum on a set of

parallel d-3 branes in the bosonic string, namely yang mills gluons and adjoint charged

scalars, one for each transverse direction (the goldstone bosons of the spontaneously broken

translation invariance).

for the case of one d-brane and once we take into account the non planar contribution

to the two point function, we get a beta function for scalar qed with (d  2) charged
scalars, a matter content with an unclear geometrical interpretation. in any case we notice

that what will make the world volume dynamics on one d-brane infrared free is intimately

related to the non vanishing amplitude for spontaneous emission processes of the type

2

depicted in gure 1.

figure 1: open/closed string transition from d-branes to the bulk

if by some stability argument we can freeze this emission we will end up with an

asymptotically free dynamics on the world volume of the d-brane.

2 field theory limit of string amplitudes

string techniques have been successfully used in the last decade to reproduce eld theory

amplitudes in a way leading to further insights in the computation of eld theory feynman

diagrams. (cf. [5]).

in order to be specic, let us start by reviewing the recipe of the eld theory limit in the

simplest setting aiming to deriving the su(n) gluon propagator from the open bosonic

string (cf. [8]).

3

this amplitude is given by

cab(k1, k2)  t r < 

1 va(k1)

2vb(k2) >

where the gauge vector vertex operator is given by

v 

a (k)  gy m2ta

dx
d

eik.x()

(1)

(2)

the matrices ta being the generators of the gauge group su(n). the parameter  indicates

the insertion point on the boundary of the world surface of the string, and has to be

integrated over. the yang-mills coupling constant is related to the string coupling, gs,

through the d-brane relationship gy m = 2(2)

d4

4 gs  2

d

4 l
s

d4

2

gs.the simplest one loop

contribution is the annulus (which is topologically a cylinder), which we shall parametrize,

following [9] by the annular region shown in the gure, with the two arcs identied in the

sense shown by the arrows. (this is gotten by dening the convenient variables   12 
(0, 1) and   1  (, 1)).

the modulus of the cylinder is    1

2 log   (0,) (whereas   (0, 1)). instead
of the insertion point on the boundary   (, 1), we will use the convenient variable
   1

2 log .

the diagrams can be classied as planar and non-planar, depending on whether the

two vertex operators are inserted on the same boundary (planar) or in dierent boundaries
(non planar). we normalize the generators by trtatb  c f und

(g)ab = 1

2ab.

2

the innite tension limit   0 is expected to be dominated by congurations in
which   . this corresponds to cylinders with divergent section (that is, innite time
from the open string point of view, and only the massless open string states can survive in

this limit).this is then the natural infrared limit from the open string point of view.

owing to conformal invariance, the situation depicted is equivalent to a cylinder with

constant section, and length l = 1

 . this would be the most natural way to look at the

cylinder from the closed string channel point of view. the limit we are taking is then the

limit in which the length of this cylinder goes to zero.

4





1





 2

/ log



log





figure 2: the annular region of integration for the one-loop diagram

the planar amplitude (which gives the full contribution of the simple group g = su(n)

under consideretion here) is given by([9]) 2:

cab(k1, k2) = n

g24d
(4)d/2

1
2

ab(2)1d/2

(26d)

12

d e

0

0

(i /)(d2)z 

z 
[(1.2)12g(1, 2) + (1.p2)(2.p1)1g(1, 2)2g(1, 2)]
e2p1.p2g(1,2)

dd/2

(3)

2we follow the explicit normalization of di vecchia et al. in [8]; including in particular their prescription

variables and to continue the momenta to k2

for an o-shell continuation, namely, to gauge-x the projective transformations on the koba-nielsen
i = m 2, while keeping transversality, iki = 0  i . this
prescription is dierent from the one advocated in [5], but it is much simpler for our purposes, and it has

not led to any known inconsistencies.

5

g(1, 2) is the standard 3 neumann green function (cf.[9]),

g(| )  log  2i

 |i 
1(i 
 )
 ) 
1(0|i 

2


(5)

there are many points of interest in this formula. the traces over the chan-paton on

the two boundaries give tr 1 = n for the boundary free of external states and trtatb = 1

2ab

for the boundary where the vertex operators lie.

the amplitude has been boldly written in arbitrary dimension d, in spite of the fact

that we know that the string theory is only unitary if d = 26. we will eventually be intested

in d = 4, and we are expressing the coupling constant in terms of the dimensionless four-

dimensional one, so that we have included a term 4d.

a further point is that, on shell, by momentum conservation, p1 = p2, so that p2

1 =

p2
2 = p1.p2 = p11 = p22 = 0, and the only surviving term is the one involving a second

derivative of the greens function (which gives zero upon integration).

the standard procedure (see [5][8]) is to integrate by parts precisely this term, and stay

with the rest, making analytic continuation in the mandelstam variable

s  p1.p2

(6)

in order to take the innite tension limit of the amplitudes, we shall take simultaneously
, 1  , un such a way that the combination    stays nite. actually, this
same variable  will play the role of schwingers proper time in the eld theory limit. let

us stress that due to the conformal mapping depicted in figure 2, the 1 is the world

sheet length of the cylinder, so that the limit    corresponds to zero length where the
dominant contribution corresponds to the lightest open string states.

3this green function is 2 times the one used in [6]

gbm (z| )  log |

1(z| )
1(0| )|  


(im z)2

im 

(4)

with the important dierence that it does not have modulus in the logarithm. note in particular that

gbm (z + | ) = gbm (z| ), whereas g( + | ) = g(| ) + i

6

in this limit, the contribution of the partition function (conveyed by dedekinds func-

tion) is given by:

1 + (d  2)e2

(7)

corresponding to the open tachyon and gluon contribution to the loop. once we multiply

(7) by the measure factor e2 we get the standard tachyon divergence as well as a nite

contribution for the gluonic piece in (7). the terms involving the greens function can be

represented by:

r(s) =

1

s z 

0

d


[e2 + (d  2)]z 

0

d 1d/2e2sg()(g())2

(8)

2.1 the tachyon magnication

the large  expansion of the green function is:

g() = 

2


+  + log(1  e2) + e2 [3 +

e3  e3
e  e ]

(9)

which can as well be written as:

g() = 

2


+  



xn=1

e2n

n

+ e2 [3 



xn=0

e2(1n) +



xn=0

e2(n+2) ]

(10)

let us now consider the region  =    as dening a new integration variable

  / . the relevant contribution to the integrand of (8) is given by:
[e2 +(d2)](g)2 = (d2)(122)+4e4 +4(12)e2 8+4e(42) 4(12)e2
(11)

the correct procedure in this limit, according to the above rules is to neglect the two last

terms of the above expansion, and then, perform the integration over d of the remaining

integrand. let us insist that we have to neglect the term 4e(42) , in spite of the fact that

it enjoys a nite limit when    as long as   1/2. this means that it is necessary to
neglect as tachyon artifacts all terms that diverge when    for some value of .

7

the simplest remaining term, proportional to (d  2), comes from the zero mode part

of the green function, and is given by:

e2s(2) (d  2)(1  2)2

(12)

the remaining contribution, which can be interpreted as due to some sort of tachyon

magnication (because there is a cancellation of the divergent contribution of the tachyon

with an exponentially suppressed contribution coming from oscillatory modes in the green

function), just gives:

e2s(2) [8]

(13)

it should be stressed that by working in the combined limit , 1, 1  , with the
blow-up variables    and   /t, we have avoided the singular region in moduli space
corresponding to coincident vertex operators (cf. figure 3), which from the eld theory

point of view corresponds to the two last diagrams of figure 4, which do not contribute to

the propagator.

~

figure 3: two conformally equivalent ways of depicting coincident vertex operators

all this yields

r(s) = (2  d/2)(2s)d/22 7d  6
d  1

b(d/2  1, d/2  1)

(14)

8

(where b(z, w) is eulers beta function). it is useful for later purposes to realize that

7d  6
d  1

= 8 

d  2
d  1

.

(15)







figure 4: diagrams for the gluon propagator. the wavy line represents gluons; the

discontinuous one, ghosts.

the nal result of the (divergent part of the )two-gluon amplitude, computed in this

way, is:

cab(s) =

n
2



ab

ab

n
2
g2
(4)2 1.2 s ()

g2

(4)d/2 (2)2 d/2(1.2) s r(s) =

22
3

b(1, 1)

(16)

9

(where in the second line dimensional regularization around d = 4 has been used). it is

remarkable that this is exactly the background eld feynman gauge result. indeed, using

the ward identity zg = z1/2

a

, one gets

g0  



xn=0

an(g)
n = g(1  n

g2

32()2

11
3

1


) + 0(

1
2 )

this leads to the correct gauge theory  function, namely:

(g)  

g


= a1 + g


g

a1 = 

11
3

c adj

2 (g)

g3
162

(where c adj

2 (g = su(n)) = n).

(17)

(18)

indeed, the 11

3, where the infrared free part comes from the (d  2)e2 part
in the expansion of the dedekind function, and the whole ultraviolet free part comes from

3 = 4  1

the 1 (that is, the tachyon magnication).

this whole setup is to be contrasted with the corresponding calculation in qft, where

both the contributions of the ghosts and the vector bosons are uv free (11/3 = 10/3 +

1/3).

2.2 the role of the o-shell extension

it has already been pointed out that the amplitude (16) is zero on shell, so that it had

to be continued o-shell to get a non-vanishing result. this step is a perfectly banal one

in eld theory but full of dangers instead in string theory, owing to the fact that only on

shell are the vertex operators conformal elds of scale dimension (1, 1), which is in turn

necessary for consistency.

in the language of the operator formalism ([4]), the on-shell condition on the external

states is necessary to prove that physical amplitudes are independent of the local coordi-

nates of the punctures corresponding to the insertions of the vertex operators. when the

amplitude is extended o-shell, changes of the coordinates of the punctures do change the

10

physical amplitudes.

in reference ([8]) it has been argued that in the eld theory limit

dened as above, those changes are equivalent to changes of gauge xing.

the fact that we recover in this way the background eld feynman gauge (with the

associated ward identity) explains why we were able to extract the beta function from the

gluon propagator alone. although we will have no use for it, it is also true that tree and

loop amplitudes are naturally recovered in dierent gauges, another peculiar property of

the background eld (cf. the second reference in [1]).

3 stringy interpretation of asymptotic freedom

it would be very interesting to nd a eld theory interpretation of the natural string

decomposition of the beta function in a infrared free part (coming fromn the zero modes)

and the asymptotically free piece, visible only thanks to the tachyon magnication.

it

appears that this decomposition naturally ts a beautiful heuristic argument attributed to

t hooft by n.k. nielsen (cf. [12]), where the two pieces are called dia and paramagnetic

because of the striking similarity of the gauge theory vacuum with a polarizable medium.

let us start by expanding the gauge eld around a background a:

a = a + a

so that

f = f  + a  a + [a, a]

the yang-mills lagrangian then reads:

1
4

f f  
1
2

( a)2 

l = 
+

1
2

1
2

f( a  a) 

1
2

( a)2 

1
2

f [a, a]

( a  a)[a, a]

(19)

(20)

(21)

the terms linear in the quantum elds vanish if the background eld is on shell. on the

other hand, up to the one loop approximation, only terms quadratic in the quantum elds

11

do contribute. now it is clear that the diamagnetic (i.e., infrared free) part will come from

the covariant derivative term; actually, the current in the loop induces, via the well-known

lenzs law, a magnetic moment which tends to cancel the external magnetic eld; this

leads to the screening of the charge or what is the same, in qft language, to infrared

freedom.

after including the eects of the gauge xing a = 0, embodied in the ghost elds,
this part of the amplitude (up to multiplicative group theory factors) goes as the vacuum

polarization in scalar qed with d  2 scalars (the true physical polarizations). this
is exactly the contribution we get in string theory coming from the zero modes which

corresponds to the 1/3 in the former units.

the paramagnetic term, coming from the spin dependent interaction (the last term in

equation (21)) (and where, we insist, all the asymptotic freedom resides) matches corre-

spondingly the tachyon magnication term from the stringy viewpoint that is, the 4 in
the same units as before. it is hard to believe that this is only a coincidence; everything

points in the direction that there is still much to be learned on the physical meaning of

asymptotic freedom from the study of string amplitudes.

4 physical eect of d-branes

we have considered up to now formal string amplitudes in d = 4 dimensions. in spite of the

unavoidable o-shell continuation, in the limit    we have encountered no problems
with unitarity, nor any other inconsistency.

there is, however another possibility, namely to work with critical strings (i.e., d = 26),

and still consider gluonic amplitudes on a d-p = 3 brane world volume. it will prove useful

to work out most formulas for generic (d, d).

old-fashioned chan-paton factors are transformed in a sense, in dirichlet boundary

conditions for open strings, the u(n) gauge theory being thus represented by a stack of

12

n parallel d-branes. the standard lore is to argue that the u(1) part just represents

the center of mass degree of freedom. we shall indeed concentrate in this section on the

nonabelian subgroup su(n), and leave the abelian part to the next section.

in the presence of two dirichlet p-branes, the calculation of the vector amplitude is

modied only in two places: rst of all, there is a zero mode correction in the integrand,

namely:

e  y2

22 

(22)

where y is the separation between the branes, and the rest of the notation is as before.

the second modication4 is physically much more important. the dimension d we put

before in the general expression (16) is now replaced by d  p + 1, the total worldvolume
dimension of the brane, except that the string can vibrate in the full target spacetime, so

that the exponent of dedekinds function must be d (that is 26 in the critical dimension).

in order to extract the eld theory limit of this amplitude, we condider the simultaneous
limit where , y, 1  0, keeping nite maldacenas variable, u  y/ as well as   
and   / .

it is worth remarking that the variables  and u are somewhat similar geometrically,

owing to the fact that y and 1 are respectively the world-sheet and space-time length of

the cylinder.

to be specic, the on-shell amplitude now reads:

a =

g2

(4)d/2 1.2z d

 z 1

d  1d/2eu2  [(d  2)(1  2)2  8]

0

from where we easily get:

a = 

g2

(4)d/2 1.2(1  d/2)(u2)d/21[(d  2)  4(d  2)b(2, 2)  8]

(23)

(24)

4were the external momenta to have non-vanishing transversal components, dirichlet green functions

ought to be employed.

13

(where b(u, v) is eulers beta function), which by standard dimensional regularization

leads for d = 4 to:

a = 

g2

(4)d/2 1.2u2 log(u2/2)[(d  2)  4(d  2)b(2, 2)  8]

(25)

it has been already pointed out that maldacenas variable u plays naturally the role of

the renormalization group scale (cf. [3]).

we notice nally, that, in contrast with (16), d-brane amplitudes can perfectly well be

considered on shell, with external momenta parallel to the d-brane, and thus with only

d  p + 1 non trivial components but, we insist, with oscillatory modes of the intermediate
strings vibrating in all d dimensions.

a further observation is that when computing the planar amplitude, the factor 67d

d1 in
. this in turn leads to the new beta function as given

eqn.(15) is now replaced by d+68d

d1

by:

(g) =

1
2

d + 6  8d

d  1

c adj

2 (g)

g3
162

(26)

it is worth noticing that  = 0 when d = 26 and d = 4, which corresponds to yang-

mills with ns = 22 scalar avours in the adjoint of su(n).

incidentaly, this theory is

known not to be conformal at two loops (the beta function is instead positive). it would be

exceedingly interesting to perform this calculation in a stringy context, to check whether

the quantum eld theory contribution to the two-loop beta function can be related to

contributions coming from the region of the genus two string diagram in which closed

string states are exchanged.

5 abelian groups in the innite tension limit

to start with we will reduce ourselves in this section to repeat our previous analysis for

abelian gauge groups. what we should naturally expect as innite tension eld theory limit

would be pure maxwell theory without charged matter and therefore trivially vanishing

14

beta function. this is what seems to indicate the eld theory limit of tree level string

amplitudes with abelian chan-paton factors, where for instance the three point amplitude

vanishes as a consequence of cyclic invariance. when we try to check the validity of

this picture going to one loop amplitudes we get some surprises that could be potentially

interesting to understand the low energy eld theory on the world volume of just one

d-brane.

coming back to the analysis of the two point amplitude nothing much changes in the

abelian case, except for the fact that the nonplanar diagram where the vertex operators

are inserted in dierent boundaries does not vanish anymore. this means that the situa-

tion is in some sense, the opposite as in eld theory: now we have two diagrams instead of

only one. the non planar diagram in the full eged string corresponds to the well known

reggeon-pomeron vertex; a vertex where the open string without chan-paton factors be-

comes a closed string.

in the limit  = 0 the corresponding diagram is dominated by

light closed string states that can mix with the photon giving rise to a stringy version of

higgs mechanism known as cremmer scherk [7] phenomena.

in this paper we will not

be interested in this limit ( that away from the critical dimension produces cuts violating

unitarity ) but instead in the  =  limit of the non planar diagram.

in order to capture the essential dierence between abelian and non-abelian, let us also

perform this computation in detail.

the rst part of the calculation is already done; the planar diagram is exactly the same

as before; with the only dierence that the factor coming from the external traces is now

( 12

)2 instead of n/2ab.5

the nonplanar diagram can be similarly computed as:

cn p (p1, p2) =

1
2

g24d
(4)d/2 (2)1d/2

5this is because if the u (1) is considered as imbedded in u (n ), it is natural to keep the normalization

of the generators in such a way that tr t 2 = 1
2 .

15

(26d)

12

0

d z s

0

dd/2e

(i /)(d2)

z 
[(1.2)12gp (1, 2) + (1.p2)(2.p1)1gn p (1, 2)2gn p (1, 2)]
e2p1.p2gn p (1,2)

(27)

gn p (1, 2) is the green function computed between dierent boundaries (that is, gn p 
g(i 

 ))6 , namely:

 + 1

2|i 

gn p (1, 2) = log  2

2( i

 (2  1)| i
 )
1(0| i
 )

(2  1)2





the expansion of the green function is:

gn p  

2


+  + log (1 + e2) + e2 [

e3 + e3
e + e + 3]

which yields for the product of the derivatives of the green functions:

gn p gp  (d  2)(1  2)2 + 8 e2

(28)

(29)

(30)

the last term cancels when added to the planar diagram, and the nal result for the

(divergent part of) the sum of the two contributions is:

cn p (s) = 2

1
2

g2

(4)2

d  2
d  1

(

4  d

2

)s1.2b(1, 1)

leading to7 :

 = 2

1
482 g3

(31)

(32)

this is exactly the correct result for scalar qed with two = (d  2) avours in the funda-
mental representation of the abelian gauge group.!

it comes, however, as a surprise, because if we only had gauge particles in this limit, it

being a free theory, we should expect  = 0.

6 there is an extra factor of i coming from the zero modes, cf. [9]
7actually the counting is very simple: the non surviving part of the factor 11/3 is the non uv free,

that is, 1/3 and this appears twice, once for each string diagram

16

the origin of the non trivial beta function goes back to the structure of string amplitudes

where the chan-paton group labels appears as multiplicative factors. so for instance the

planar diagram is , up to a numerical factor, the same for abelian and non abelian groups.

the specic abelian contribution corresponding to the non planar diagram is not cancelling

the planar amplitude since the zero mode part of g and gn p are the same. what cancels

between the planar and the non planar amplitudes is the piece coming from what we denote

amplifying tachyon eect. thus the eld theory limit of string amplitudes with abelian

chan-paton factors is not pure maxwell but instead scalar qed, more precisely the scalar

qed describing the diamagnetic part of the yang mills beta function.

if we repeat the previous analysis using a d-brane picture we get a beta function

depending on the target space time dimension d of the type:

(g) =

d  2
d  1

1
162 g3

(33)

which for d = 4 is that of qed with (d  2) charged scalar particles. it is important to
notice that the number of scalars contributing to the beta function is independent of the

d-brane world volume dimension d. notice also that contrary to what did happen for the

non abelian case where we found  = 0 for d = 26 here we get  = 0 for d = 2 that

curiously enough is the critical dimension for the u(1) string model of [2].

the previous analysis of u(1) amplitudes lead us naturally to the conclusion that the

low energy eld theory description of one d-3 brane is scalar qed with (d  2) charged
scalars. the physics underlying these extra scalars can be due to the dual interpretation

of loop corrections in perturbation theory as tree level amplitudes where one of the states

is a closed string state i.e part of the gravitational sector.

it could be this interaction

with gravity the one resposible for the non vanishing beta function and therefore for the

unexpected new degrees of freedom.

17

acknowledgments

this work has been partially supported by the european union tmr program fmrx-

ct96-0012 integrability, non-perturbative eects, and symmetry in quantum field the-

ory and by the spanish grant aen96-1655. the work of e.a. has also been supported by

the european union tmr program erbfmrx-ct96-0090 beyond the standard model

and the spanish grant aen96-1664.

references

[1] l.f. abbott, the background field method beyond one loop, nucl. phys.

b185(1981),189.

l.f. abbott, m.t. grisaru and r. k. schaeer, the background field method and

the s-matrix, nucl.phys. b229,(1983),372.

[2] m. ademollo et al., dual string with u(1) color symmetry, nucl.phys.b111:77-

110,1976.

[3] e. alvarez and c. gomez, noncritical conning strings and the renormalization group,

hep-th 9902012; nucl. phys. b550 (1999),169.

[4] l. alvarez gaume, c. gomez, g. moore, c. vafa, strings in the operator formalism,

nucl.phys.b303:455,1988.

[5] zvi bern, string-based perturbative methods for gauge theories, hep-th/9304249.

(presented at theoretical advanced study institute (tasi 92): from black holes

and strings to particles, boulder, co, 3-28 jun 1992). published in boulder tasi

92:0471-536

[6] c.p. burgess and t.r. morris, open and unoriented strings `a la polyakov, nucl.

phys. b291(1987)256.

18

[7] e. cremmer and j. scherk, spontaneous dynamical breaking of gauge symmetry in

dual models, nucl. phys. b72 (1974) 117.

[8] p. di vecchia, l. magnea, a. lerda, r. russo and r. marotta, string techniques

for the calculation of renormalization constants in field theory, nucl. phys. b469

(1996) 235; hep-th/9601143

[9] m.b.green.j.h.schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory (cambridge university

press,1987)

[10] d.j. gross and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 30 (1973)1343;

h.d. politzer, phys. rev. lett, 30 (1973)1346.

[11] j.a. minahan, one-loop amplitudes on orbifolds and the renormalization of cou-

pling constants, nucl. phys. b298 (1988),36.

[12] n.k. nielsen, asymptotic freedom as a spin eect, am. j. phys.49 (1981),1171.

19

