lbnl43788

july 99

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

4
1

 
 

2
v
5
1
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

holographic cosmology and its relevant degrees of

freedom

richard dawida

theoretical physics group

ernest orlando lawrence berkeley national laboratory

university of california, berkeley, california 94720, usa

abstract

we reconsider the options for cosmological holography. we suggest that a global and time
symmetric version of the fischler-susskind bound is the most natural generalization of the
holographic bound encountered in ads and de sitter space. a consistent discussion of
cosmological holography seems to imply an understanding of the notion of number of degrees
of freedom that deviates from its simple denition as the entropy of the current state. the
introduction of a more adequate notion of degree of freedom makes the suggested variation
of the fischler-susskind bound look like a stringent and viable bound in all 4dimensional
cosmologies without a cosmological constant.

aemail: dawid@thsrv.lbl.gov

1

introduction

for quite some time the remarkable fact that the entropy of a black hole (bh) is represented
by its event horizon [1] has nurtured the suspicion that gravity in general could be holographic
[2], meaning that all degrees of freedom (dof) of a gravitational theory can be projected
onto some lower dimensional surface(s) whose storage capacity is one bit information per
planck area. the discovery of ads/cft duality [3, 4] strengthened this suspicion by directly
identifying a gravity theory on ads with a lower dimensional eld theory on its boundary.

in [5] a specic realization of a general cosmological holographic principle was suggested.
a very attractive point of that proposal is the fact that the suggested holographic bound
is exactly saturated at the planck time if one straightly extrapolates back from todays
condition of the universe. less satisfying seemed the fact that today the actual entropy inside
the particle horizon is far lower than the fs-bound. the most serious problem however was
the fact that in a closed universe the fs-bound seemed necessarily violated. during the last
year various dierent modications of the fs-conjecture have been formulated to deal with
the described problems [6].

in this paper we reconsider the options for a cosmological holographic principle. in the rst
part we investigate what implications for a cosmological holographic principle one can infer
from the realization of holography in ads (section 2) and de sitter space (section 3). we
claim that the most natural generalization would be a principle that it is global, in the sense
that it does not restrict the local density of dof, and time symmetric.

section 4 makes the statement, following the basic idea of [10], that a consistent discussion
of cosmological holography requires a reconsideration of the notion of degree of freedom
(dof) in that context. the recent discussions of a cosmological holographic principle have
been based on the assumption that the actual entropy of a system represents the number
of degrees of freedom that have to be stored on some boundary in a holographic scenario.
this is true as long as one deals with eld theories in an equilibrium state disregarding grav-
ity - in which case there is no holography anyway. however we argue that the assumption
becomes quite questionable in a general cosmology. there are two aspects that change the
situation. first a realistic cosmology is not in the highest entropy state because matter is
more or less evenly distributed and gravitational clumping can enhance the entropy. it is
not a priori clear whether the possible dof must be identied with the actual entropy or
the highest possible entropy. second, the background as well as  if dened in some dynam-
ical way  the position of the holographic boundary depend on the dynamics happening on
that background. therefore the validity of the background and the position of the bound-

2

ary both can give restrictive conditions for the number of dof. the central statement of
this paper is that a denition of degree of freedom that takes into account the two as-
pects mentioned above seems to render a global and timesymmetric version of the original
fischler-susskind conjecture viable and rather stringent for all four dimensional cosmologies
with zero cosmological constant.

section 5 describes the problems one encounters in general cosmological scenarios with a
cosmological constant. we close with conclusions.

2 cosmological holography

the basic claim of a cosmological holographic principle is that some kind of holographic
bound generally exists in cosmology. the upper bound for the number of degrees of freedom
of a threedimensional spacelike or lightlike space should be represented by the area of
some two dimensional surface on which one bit information per planck area can be stored.

the idea was rst formulated in the early papers of t hooft and susskind [2] and was more
specically realized by fischler and susskind in [5] (fsconjecture). the conjecture goes as
follows: given some spherical spatial volume v bounded by the surface b, all dof entering
through the futurelightcone that ends at b can be stored on b if b can store one bit
information per planck area.

there exists one rather powerful argument in favour of the existence of a cosmological holo-
graphic principle along those lines: the corresponding holographic bound turns out to be
valid in the past of our universe up to the planck time and moreover seems to be more or
less exactly fullled at the planck time itself. this is a quite remarkable coincidence.

however on the other side the fsbound has some problems.

first it seems that the bound is violated for a boundary b around the center of a bh whose
radius is smaller than the bhevent horizon. second it seems not very satisfying that today
the actual entropy inside the particle horizon is far lower than the fs-bound. the most
serious problem however is the fact that in a realistic closed universe the fs-bound seems
necessarily violated. this has to do with the fact that in a matter dominated closed 4-
dimensional robertson walker spacetime light starting from one point at t = 0 reaches the
opposite pole on the sphere at the time of maximal expansion. therefore already at times
close to the maximal expansion there exist arbitrarily small bs around the opposite pole
which have to store nearly all of the universes dof, which seems impossible.

3

during the last year various dierent modications of the fs-conjecture have been formu-
lated to deal with the described problems [6, 9, 7]. the most recent interesting attempt to
construct a holographic principle that is generally valid was made in [7]. however the con-
cept has some essential problems in connection with black holes which are partly discussed
in [8]. in particular [8] found an explicit example where the bound of [7] does not hold.

as the situation stands today, it seems to us that no cosmological holographic principle is
enforced by known gravity.1

however a holographic principle might exist without being implied by semi-classical gravity.
the one known example of a full holographic theory, ads/cft duality, was conjectured in
the context of dbranes and does not follow from classical gravity. the suspicious frequency
of holographic phenomena in connection with gravity really looks like a hint towards a general
holographic principle that can only be understood in full quantum gravity. in that case this
principle could well put new constraints on the cosmological evolution that do not exist in
classical gravity. without knowledge of quantum gravity the only way to understand in how
far such a possibility is realistic is to check whether our universe as we know it is consistent
with some holographic principle and possibly shows apparently unnatural constraints that
can be understood in accordance with holography. this as we understand it is the spirit of
the original work of fischler and susskind. in this paper we try to go a little further in that
direction.

a good point of departure seems to be the known example of ads/cft duality. we look for
a denition of cosmological holography that remains as close as possible to this example. if
we compare the fsconjecture or boussos covariant entropy conjecture with the situation in
the case of ads/cft duality, we realize that the former are much stronger in a certain point.
since they allow for all possible b s, also very small ones, they give a bound on the local
density of dof, something ads/cft duality with the boundary strictly at innity does not
do. and it is exactly this requirement that produces considerable problems in connection
with black holes. additionally this requirement devaluates the strongest cosmological argu-
ment in favour of the fsbound, namely the fact that the fsbound is exactly saturated at
the planck time: if it was the case that the fsbound for some reason holds even for the
smallest boundary b and the highest energy density anywhere in space, the statement that
already the naive estimate in [5] leads to a saturated bound at the planck time could only
be judged as a mere accident.

1what seems to be true in all gravitational scenarios as long as one accepts the viability of statistics is

the generalized second law formulated in [9]. this however is no holographic principle.)

4

the arguments above lead us to the assumption that a cosmological holographic principle,
if it exists, is likely to be a global principle in the sense that it does not give bounds on the
local entropy density. local realizations of holography can occur as a consequence of the
global principle but do not necessarily hold under all circumstances.

to make the fsbound global one just has to require that the surface b must be the
particle horizon respectively past event horizon of some observer. this denition makes the
holographic conjecture immune against local problems with todays black holes. b is small
only close to the planck time.2 the holographic conjecture therefore enforces the specic
energy density of the universe one nds at the planck time. it also enforces that the universe
is smooth close to the planck time avoiding high entropy states that include primordial black
holes. holography in this form therefore implies cosmic censorship.

3 pure de sitter space

a main inspiration for the formulation of the holographic bound was ads/cft duality.
however there is a fundamental dierence between the static ads scenario and a realistic
cosmology: the ads structure is only valid as long as the global energy density is zero.
otherwise the einstein equations would enforce a dierent spacetime structure. thus it is
conceptually inconsistent to try to project states with nite global energy density onto the
ads boundary.3 seen from that perspective the step to cosmological holography is the step
to nite matter density.

besides ads (and minkowski space that can be understood as its innite radius limit) there
exists one more example for a zero matter density cosmology: de sitter space. in this section
we will discuss whether the principle of holography encountered in ads and generalized to
minkowski space can also be implemented in de sitter space. from this discussion we will
get further hints concerning a consistent possible generalization of holography in a realistic
cosmological context.

the spacelike dimensions of de sitter space are closed which has some implications for
the character of a holographic bound in this scenario. since the space volume is nite,

2in inationary scenarios the observed initial state is the state after re-heating. in this case one would
hope to nd an argument to replace the exponentially blown up and therefore quite meaningless particle
horizon with an eective particle horizon reaching back to the endpoint of the exponential expansion.

3it seems to us that the connection between ads/cft and this condition has its subtleties. a discussion

of that point is in preparation.

5

the condition of background validity requires empty space. any small matter contribution
would change the background. while in the ads case the holographic boundary of ads sat
at innity, there is no innity in de sitter space. therefore a holographic boundary will
have to sit somewhere in space, thereby resembling already the situation we will encounter
in nite matter density scenarios.

lets have a closer look at the structure of de sitter space. de sitter space is the solution
of the state equations


3

r2  1 = r2

r = 3 r

its metric can be written as

ds2 = dt2 + 2cosh2(1t)d,  := (

3


)1/2

eq.(1) leads to the hubble constant

h :=

r
r

= (


3

 r2)1/2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

de sitter space has a future and a past event horizon ef respectively ep. they are dened
as

ef (t)

ep(t)

dt

r(t)

:= r(t)z 
:= z t

t
dt



r(t)

solving eq.(1) gives

which leads to

r(t) =

1
h

e(ht

ln4

2 ) +

1
4h

e(ht

ln4

2 )

ef (p)(t)/r(t) =

2
h

arctan(cid:20)2e(ht

6

(t)

t()

ln 4

2 )(cid:21)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

this implies

ef () = ep() = r(0) = h 1

ef (0) = ep(0) =


2h

(9)

(10)

therefore we have the following situation: at t =  ep is at a distance h 1 from the
observer while ef is at the same distance from the opposite pole. they meet each other at
t = 0 at the equator and end up with exchanged roles at t = . each horizon travels a
coordinate distance  during its innite lifetime. this situation is directly related to the ads
case. the corresponding statement there would be that light reaches innity at t = /2.

it was shown in [13] that in the exponentially expanding phase of de sitter space the area of
ef plays the role of entropy exactly in the same way as in the case of the black hole. since
de sitter space is empty, it would be natural to have a holographic bound that is exactly
saturated by the geometric entropy. the holographic bound should resemble the area of
the event horizon. now the future event horizon is supposed to cover the dof outside the
horizon seen from the observers perspective. it therefore ts exactly as holographic bound
around the point opposite to the observers position on the sphere. the discussion above
shows us that an area that resembles the future event horizon for one point represents the
past event horizon ep for the point opposite on the sphere. consequently ep is a natural
candidate for the holographic bound on de sitter space in the expanding phase.4 5

now, interestingly, in the contracting phase the whole situation is reversed. by changing
exponential expansion to exponential contraction one changes the area r = 1/h from repre-
senting ef to representing ep. since the denition of entropy does not depend on the time
direction, now the de sitter entropy must be dened by ep. but the observers ep is the
opposite points ef . therefore the holographic bound is represented by ef . we get the
remarkable result that the denition of the holographic boundary depends on the sign of the
expansion of space. ep and ef change roles at the point of extremal extension. this point
will play an important role in the discussion of cosmological holography.

in summary de sitter space has a very natural holographic boundary that is consistent and

4identical to the past event horizon in de sitter space would be the outer apparent horizon that separates
the anti-trapped region from the normal region around the other pole. this outer apparent horizon does not
exist in open universes and therefore cannot serve as a general denition of a holographic boundary. it can
however play a role in a denition of a holographic boundary together with the particle horizon. see [7].

5like its cousins with negative respectively zero cosmological constant, the holographic boundary of de

sitter space has a constant area.

7

stringent and resembles the global fs-bound in a time symmetric form. the closed structure
of space in itself is not contradictory to holography.

4 what is a degree of freedom

we know that the scenarios with zero energy density are holographic. the way holography
is realized there led us to the following concept for a possible general holographic principle:

assume b to be an observers past horizon in the expanding phase of the universe respectively
an observers future horizon in the contracting phase of the universe. then all dof which
entered through the future light cone respectively will exit through the past light cone ending
on b can be stored on b if b can store one bit information per planck area.

next we have to check whether this holographic principle can hold in our real world. the
crucial point will be how to deal with the closed universe scenario.

one question is of central importance in order to know what we are doing: we must have a
clear understanding of what is a dof. this turns out to be less trivial than it seems.

we saw already in de sitter space that the background validity condition enforces empty
space, which in turn is reected by the fact that the holographic boundary is exactly satu-
rated by geometric entropy. this is a rst example showing that the validity of a holographic
bound can be intricately entangled with cosmological restrictions.

in a realistic cosmology the situation is even more subtle. the evolution of space as well as
the evolution of a holographic boundary in terms of comoving coordinates depends on the
matter and radiation energy in that space. but to make the statement what dof can be
stored on a given surface, it is necessary rst to know where this surface is. holography can
only talk about dof under the precondition that the boundary is where it is. therefore the
full history of the universe leading up to the current position of b has to be considered in
deciding which dof are to be stored on b.

in order to deal with this complication we introduce the notion of relevant degree of free-
dom: assume some cosmology and some holographic boundary surface put on the spacetime
of that cosmology. those states of the system which are consistent with the given evolu-
tion of both the universe and the holographic boundary are called relevant dof for that
boundary. only relevant dof are to be stored on a holographic boundary.

note that the relevant dof for a boundary are still to be distinguished from those which
can be stored on that boundary. the question which subset of the relevant dof eventually

8

are accounted for by the holographic boundary depends on the specic denition of the
holographic conjecture.

how exactly to dene consistent with the evolution in the denition above is not quite
clear. the closer one looks, the less tractable situation becomes. the dynamics of the
holographic boundary depends not just on the global features of spacetime but also to some
extent on the local conditions at a given point. the problem is reminiscent of those essential
problems in gravity connected to the fact that what one would like to use as background
space is actually part of the dynamics. the only way to deal with this situation at the
moment seems to be to neglect small local eects and just look for intuitively plausible
global restrictions.

we consider a at spacetime evolving from a big bang according to einsteins equations and
look at the situation at some time t. what are the relevant dof of this system? the global
structure of spacetime is dened by the initial parameters of the cosmology. higher energy
density would imply a closed space, lower energy density an open space. both would imply
a dierent size and position of b which means that both cannot represent relevant dof of
any b in at space.

the position of b wont be inuenced by the degrees of freedom which represent the entropy
of the state (at least to a good approximation). therefore those must be counted as relevant
dof. the crucial question is the following: is the number of relevant dof inside a surface
b represented by the actual entropy of the system or by the maximal entropy state possible.
before dealing with the question we have to make an assumption about the maximal entropy
state of the system. given a certain energy content, the highest possible entropy will be
connected to the largest possible black hole. since holography enforces an initial state
without black holes, all black holes must form dynamically and thus cannot be arbitrarily
large. we assume that the maximal entropy state corresponds to a black hole with the mass

mmax(t)  (t)h 3  (t)e3
p

(11)

where (t) is the global energy density. the maximal entropy inside b therefore should be
represented by a bh that contains all energy inside b. the example of ads suggests that
the dof of this system should be stored at the boundary. however the situation requires
closer examination: holography forces the initial state to be a smooth state that has no black
holes and whose radiative entropy is in equilibrium. if one treats the system classically, all
evolution is strictly deterministic, therefore the number of dof in a system has to remain
constant. at a later stage after black holes have formed this would mean that a big number

9

of bh states would be locally allowed but do not stem from a purely radiative initial state.
thus they are not relevant dof. this argument would reduce the number of relevant dof
to the value of radiative entropy.

quantum processes however do produce new dof. an extreme example is ination where
the quantum process of re-heating produces basically all dof of todays world. assume
there exists an initial microstate at the planck time that leads to a single black hole storing
all matter inside b at time t. one would expect, without making any more specic statement
about bh-physics, that eventually all bh states can be reached through quantum tunneling
in the bh. therefore one should conclude that all bh dof are relevant. this does not
yet mean that they are all to be accounted for at the boundary. the fscondition says
that only those dof are to be stored which enter through the horizon. if a bh is develops
inside the horizon and new bh dof are produced, these dof cannot be stored at the
horizon. however every bh at any moment can be thought of as entering some particle
horizon around an observer somewhere else.6 we conclude that the holographic bound has
to cover a number of dof whose order of magnitude is somewhere close to the entropy of
the maximal bh.

how does this apply to the actual universe? a rough estimate says that the maximal bh
entropy inside the particle horizon today is

while the area of the horizon in planck units is

smax(today)  10123

ah (today)  t(today)2  10122

(12)

(13)

the bound looks realistic and plausibly saturated. the next question is in how far this
remains the case in the past respectively the future.

the radius of the particle horizon moves like

rp h(t)  t

(14)

in the matter dominated regime the line element grows in d spatial dimensions like

6note that this is fundamentally dierent from the case of dof production through re-heating. the
latter is an isotropic process that looks the same for any particle horizon. consequently the newly produced
dof inside the blown up particle horizon are truly invisible to the holographic boundary.

10

and we have a constant energy per comoving volume

r(t)  t

2

d

this means that the energy inside the horizon grows like

(t)rd(t) = k

mp h  (t)rd

p h(t)  ktd2

on the other hand the bh mass goes like

and the bh entropy goes like

mbh  rbh

sbh  rd1
bh

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

if we identify the maximal entropy smax with the black hole built from all energy inside the
horizon, we see that

smax(t)

a(t)

 t(d3)(d1),

f or

t > td

(20)

where td is the decoupling time from which on the dynamics is matter dominated. for d = 3
one gets

sd=3
max(t)
ad=3(t)

= const,

f or

t > td

(21)

this means that if saturated today, the holographic bound remains saturated for all time
into the future and back until td.

one has to note that this nice result is only true for 3 spatial dimensions.
smax(t)

in particular
increases with a positive power of t for d > 3 and thus necessarily leads to a violation

a(t)

of the holographic bound at some time.

the case of radiation domination for d = 3 with

11

leads to

r(t)  t

1

2

smax(t)

a(t)

 t,

f ort < td

(22)

(23)

therefore smax(t)
a(t) would decrease if one goes further into the past beyond td. however in that
regime it clearly makes no sense to consider bh entropy as relevant dof since radiation
domination is conceptually exactly opposite to bh domination.

the case of an open universe initially cannot be distinguished from the at case. at late
stages the ratio smax(t)
a(t) will become considerably smaller than in the at case. assuming
that the holographic bound is saturated in the at case, in the open case the bound will be
nearly saturated at the early stages of matter domination while the number of dof will fall
below the saturation level later.

the most interesting scenario is the closed universe. this is where a holographic bound is
most dicult to dene. in [5] where the degrees of freedom were identied with the actual
entropy of the universe at a given state, it was found that a holographic bound dened by
the particle horizon necessarily is violated at late stages when the boundary has entered the
opposite half of the spatial sphere, therefore decreasing its coordinate area until, when it
reaches the opposite point, it eventually becomes zero. in the discussion of the at case we
argued that the current entropy underestimates the relevant dof. now we will argue that
in the closed case it is a radical overestimation.

at this point we have to remember the time symmetric form of our holographic conjecture.
the denition of the holographic bound is connected to the sign of the universe expansion.
the holographic bound for the contracting phase is given by the future event horizon. we
have seen that holography enforces a smooth initial state without initial black or white holes.
now this implies that we also must have a smooth nal state. but this means that existing
black or white holes have to dissolve in the contracting phase. the entropy arrow must be
reversed there. holography connects the entropy arrow to the sign of the universe expansion.

what does this mean for the dof? let us consider a certain macrostate at the time of
maximal expansion (tmax). the microstates of this macrostate represent the entropy at that
stage. now due to the time symmetric nature of holography, relevant dof are only those
which are consistent with the universe evolution seen from both time directions. in other
words the requirement that the system has to return to a lower entropy state at the nal

12

state has to be fullled by each state that represents a relevant dof. this however will rule
out most of the microstates at time t = tmax. only the small subset that leads back to the
initial condition represents relevant dof.7 the consequences are clear. it is not justied to
use the entropy as a measure for relevant dof in a closed universe. let us see how this ts
into the cosmological picture.

the evolution of a closed (d+1)dimensional spacetime goes like

r()  (sin||)1

,

 =

d
2

(1 + )  1

where  is the coordinate position of the particle horizon,

(t) := z t

0

dt

r(t)

(24)

(25)

and  is the ratio between pressure and matter density. in 3 spatial dimensions we therefore
have the following situation: in the matter dominated case with zero pressure we have  = 0
and  = 1/2. at the time of maximal expansion, characterized by  = /2 we have  = .
the particle horizon reaches the opposite pole at the time of maximal expansion. in the
contracting phase the future event horizon plays the role of the holographic bound making
the situation time symmetric. since holography enforces an initial radiation dominated state
in fact the holographic boundary will not quite reach the pole, meaning that at the time of
maximal extension there still remains a small area for the boundary. this ts nicely into
the picture described above.

in a scenario where the universe remains radiation dominated throughout its evolution, we
have  = 1/3 so that  = 1 and  = . the horizon just reaches the equator at the
point of maximal expansion. therefore the bound at the time of maximal expansion is not
much tighter than it would be at the same time in a at scenario.
if the initial state is
purely radiative, the radiative entropy can be stored at the boundary throughout the whole
evolution of the universe.

if we understand radiation domination in its extreme realization, we have have a situation
where gravitational clumping does not happen at all. there is no gravitational entropy. the
radiative (as the much lower baryonic) entropy however is in an equilibrium state from the

7it is highly nontrivial to formulate this statement more exactly in the framework of quantum statistics

(see some considerations in [10]). in this paper we will not go deeper into that matter.

13

start, therefore the initial and nal conditions do not pose any restrictions. this means that
the radiative entropy in this case in fact represents the relevant dof, which again nicely ts
into the picture.

one has to notice that this nice situation once again only holds for d = 4. the dened
holographic principle seems inconsistent with lower dimensional cosmologies while for higher
dimensional cosmologies the holographic bound evolves less far on the sphere and therefore
does not fully reect the constraints due to recontraction.

5 cosmological constant plus nite energy density

in this chapter we have a short look at the most general case of cosmologies where a cos-
mological constant  is joined by nite energy density. in that case the statement that the
universe is closed and the statement that it recontracts do not imply each other. therefore
the nice connection between the shrinking of the the holographic boundary around the other
pole and the reduction of relevant dof due to recontraction does not work any more.

a cosmology with negative  always recontracts. therefore one would expect a reduction
of relevant dof similar to the closed cosmology with  = 0. however cosmologies with
negative  can be at or open so that the boundary does not shrink.
it seems that the
holographic bound is unreasonably high.

the situation in case of positive  is even worse. the problematic case is the closed scenario.
let us assume a matter content sucient to make the universe recontract. if we ad a small
, the eect will be to drag out the large expansion phase before recontraction takes over.
this means that the particle horizon will - in the matter dominated case - reach the opposite
pole earlier than the time of maximal expansion and vanishes. this would imply that there
are no dof at all. this is most dicult to understand if  is slightly above the value
necessary to prevent recontraction. in that case there will be a phase of semi-stability at a
certain expansion followed by the transition to exponential expansion. the particle horizon
will hit the other pole in the semi-stable phase even though the restrictions on relevant
dof stemming from recontraction do not apply. for even higher  we have the case of a
bouncing universe looking similar to pure de sitter space. in that case the horizons that
should represent the holographic bound also vanish at some time at the point on the sphere
opposite to the observer.

14

6 conclusions

we have formulated what we believe to be the most straightforward generalization of the
holographic bound one encounters in cosmologies with zero matter density. we further
argued that the dof relevant for holography are not simply the ones represented by the
actual entropy. the resulting picture of a global timesymmetric holographic principle and a
set of relevant dof does not t into most cosmological scenarios with nite energy density.
the holographic bound fails for a at universe in more than 4 spacetime dimensions, for a
closed universe in less than 4 spacetime dimensions and for a closed scenario in 4 dimensions
with a considerable positive cosmological constant. on the other side the bound it imposes
is far higher than necessary for most of the other scenarios.

however there is one scenario where the holographic bound is both viable and stringent. this
scenario is the 4dimensional universe with a strongly suppressed cosmological constant we
actually live in. it is surely too early to judge whether this is just a coincidence or not. if
it is more than a coincidence, it would mean that holography hints towards an excitingly
strong restrictiveness of full quantum gravity.

acknowledgments: we would like to thank paolo aschieri for very useful discussions.
this work was supported in part by the director, oce of science, oce of high energy
and nuclear physics, division of high energy physics,, of the u.s. department of energy
under contract de-ac03-76sf00098 and in part by the erwin schrodinger stipendium nr.
j1520-phy.

15

references

[1] j. d. bekenstein, phys. rev. d7, (1973) 2333;

s. w. hawking, commun. math. phys. 43, (1974) 199

[2] g. t hooft, gr-qc/9310026;

l. susskind, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377, hep-th/9509089.

[3] j. maldacena, hep-th/9711200;

s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov phys. lett. b428 (1998) 105,
hep-th/9802109;
e. witten, hep-th/9802150.

[4] o. aharony, s. s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri, y. oz, hep-th/9905111
[5] w. fischler and l. susskind, hep-th/9806039
[6] d. bak and s. j. rey, hep-th/9811008; hep-th/9902173;

a. k. biswas, j. maharana and r. k. pradhan, hep-th/9811051;
g.veneziano, phys. lett. b454, (1999) 22, hep-th/9902126; hep-th/9907012;
n. kaloper and a. linde, hep-th/9904120;
r. brustein, gr-qc/9904061;
r. brustein, s. foa, r. sturani, gr-qc/9907032

[7] r. bousso, hep-th/9905177; hep-th/9906022
[8] d. a. lowe, hep-th/9907062
[9] r. easther and d. a. lowe, phys. lett. 82, (1999) 4967, hep-th/9902088
[10] r. dawid, phys. lett. b451 (1999) 19, hep-th/9811243
[11] l. susskind and e. witten, hep-th/9805114
[12] e. witten, adv. theor. math. phys. 2 (1998) 505, hep-th/9803131
[13] g. w. gibbons and s.w. hawking, phys. rev. d15 (1977) 2738

16

