hep-th/9907062
brown-het-1189

comments on a covariant entropy conjecture

david a. lowe

department of physics

brown university

providence, ri 02912, usa

lowe@het.brown.edu

abstract

recently bousso conjectured the entropy crossing a certain light-like hypersurface is

bounded by the surface area. we point out a number of diculties with this conjecture.

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

8

 
 

1
v
2
6
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

july, 1999

1. covariant entropy conjecture

recently bousso [1] made the interesting conjecture that the entropy s passing
through a certain hypersurface bounded by a two-dimensional spatial surface b with area
a must satisfy the bound

s  a/4 .

(1.1)

the hypersurface l in question is to be generated by one of the four null congruences
orthogonal to b, with non-positive expansion in the direction away from b. the matter
elds in the theory are required to satisfy the dominant energy condition. this covariant
entropy conjecture is motivated by the proposed holographic principle of t hooft and
susskind [2,3], and recent work on attempts to generalize this principle to cosmological
backgrounds [49].

in this note, we point out a number of diculties with this proposal. we begin by
noting the choice of units is such that the fundamental constants satisfy h = c = g = k = 1.
with appropriate factors of g and h restored the bound becomes s  a/(4hg), and we
see the bound becomes trivial in the classical limit, for xed gravitational interactions. if
the bound is to hold at all, it must hold in the full theory of quantum gravity coupled to
matter.

however, as is well-known, the dominant energy condition (and also the weak energy
condition) fails even for free quantum elds. one consequence of the dominant energy
condition is that the local energy density appears positive denite. if one computes the
expectation value of the normal-ordered energy momentum tensor h|t|i in free scalar
eld theory, for a state  that is an admixture of the ground state and a two-particle
state, interference terms in the expectation value can lead to negative values for the energy
density. as it stands therefore, the conjecture is inconsistent. if one insists on taking the
classical limit, the bound becomes trivial. as soon as one goes to the quantum theory, the
conditions for the bound to hold are violated, except possibly for a theory with no matter
content.

one reason for imposing the dominant energy condition was to rule out the possibility
of superluminal entropy ow, which would allow for easy violations of the bound, as we
see in a moment. in addition, one wants to rule out creating large amounts of entropy
with little energy, by simultaneously creating matter with positive and negative energy
density. of course one could try to replace the dominant energy condition with a weaker
constraint. however the following example illustrates diculties with the bound that are
independent of this condition.

consider a black hole in equilibrium with thermal radiation at the same temperature
as the hawking temperature. as discussed in [1], one can take b to be the event horizon at

1

singularity

hawking radiation

l

r=0

thermal radiation

b

fig. 1: penrose diagram for a black hole. b is a surface on the event horizon.
l is a light-like hypersurface with zero expansion, bounded by b.

some time, and construct the hypersurface l using future-directed outgoing null generators,
as shown in g. 1. since the black holes evaporation is supported by the ingoing thermal
radiation, the geometry near the horizon is static. one therefore has an innite amount
of time to send a constant ux of entropy across the hypersurface l, in violation of the
bound. to be precise, we dene the entropy crossing l to be the proper entropy ux,
integrated over l. this problem is independent of the matter content of the theory (and
hence any energy conditions one might choose to impose), since even for pure gravity,
a quantum black hole will hawking radiate gravitons. note also that for a large black
hole the geometry is such that caustics need not force the hypersurface l to approach the
singularity.

it is interesting to consider how this example is consistent with the generalized second
law of black hole thermodynamics. while it is true the black hole absorbs an innite
amount of entropy as time goes to innity, it emits an equal (or larger) amount of entropy
in the form of hawking radiation, in accord with the second law. however the entropy
emitted cannot cross the hypersurface l in a causal way. the wavelength of hawking
particles is of order the size of the black hole. they are best thought of as originating
from outside the black hole, of order the schwarzschild radius from the event horizon. the
hawking particles themselves do not contribute to the proper entropy passing through l,
since they are undetectable to a freely falling observer as she crosses the horizon.

2

if an arbitrarily large amount of entropy can cross the hypersurface l, how can one
regard the log of the number of internal states of the black hole as a/4? we will analyze this
question in the scenario for the resolution of the black hole information problem discussed
in [10]. roughly speaking, in this picture information crosses the horizon in a completely
causal manner, but is eectively transferred to the hawking radiation in a non-local way
as it hits the singularity. thus we do indeed have super-luminal propagation of entropy
in this picture. this component of the entropy does not contribute to the local entropy
ux passing through l. although an arbitrarily large amount of entropy does cross l, a
low-energy observer inside the black hole could never detect more entropy than a/4. in
order for an observer inside to live long to detect more entropy than a/4 she would have
to undergo a trans-planckian acceleration of order em 2
. one sees this via similar gedanken
experiments to ones considered in [10,11]. likewise an observer entering the horizon at
late times will see that most of the entropy has already hit the singularity, preserving the
bound on the number of observable internal states.

singularity

l

b

r=0

fig. 2: penrose diagram for collapsing spherical dust cloud. l is light-like
hypersurface that intersects all the dust cloud. in order to avoid caustics, l
will be deformed to lie along the dotted line.

having presented perhaps the clearest counterexample to the bound (1.1), we now
consider a number of other objections to the arguments bousso presents as evidence for
the bound. consider a collapsing dust cloud, and construct the hypersurface l as indicated

3

in g. 2, so that it intersects the whole dust cloud. boussos claim is that caustics will

force l to take a more circuitous route to the singularity, in such a way that the surface l

does not intersect the whole dust cloud, preserving the bound (1.1). this relies on the fact

that a highly entropic system can never be spherically symmetric so many caustics will be

present. here we simply point out that in the semiclassical approximation, one requires

only that the expectation value of the energy momentum tensor be spherically symmetric

to avoid caustics. this does not provide a signicant constraint on the entropy of such

congurations. beyond the semiclassical approximation, the null convergence condition

does not hold, so such caustics need not form in the rst place. furthermore, since the

construction of the surface l is formulated in terms of classical geometric quantities, it is

not clear how boussos construction carries over to the full quantum theory.

much of the other evidence bousso presents for the bound involves showing consistency

with bekensteins conjectured bound [12]

s  2er ,

(1.2)

in a number of dierent examples. here e is the total energy of the system, and r is
the circumferential radius, dened as r = pa/4 with a the area of the smallest sphere
surrounding the system. this bound has been much discussed since its original proposal

[12]. the bound appears to hold for large systems, provided the number of matter species

is small [13,14]. it can easily be violated for suciently small systems (for example the

free scalar eld case already mentioned), for a large number of matter species [13], or for

systems at suciently low temperature. likewise, one can take a large number of copies

of a small system, to make a large system that violates (1.2). in general, the generalized

second law [15] does not imply the bound (1.2) [16,17]. some special systems for which

(1.2) is violated can be used to construct counterexamples to the covariant entropy bound.

for instance consider a normal region (i.e.

not trapped or anti-trapped) in a

friedmann-robertson-walker cosmology, as discussed in [1]. the covariant entropy bound

implies that the entropy on a spatial hypersurface inside the apparent horizon with radius
rah, should satisfy s  r2
ah. this follows from the bound (1.2) if this region is treated
as a bekenstein system [1]. thus the bound (1.1) can potentially be violated for systems

which violate (1.2). the simplest example of such a system is a gas of n species of free

particles in a box of size r with energy e. the entropy of this gas will diverge as log n .

one cannot use this fact to constrain the value of n , as it simply means the bound (1.1)

is not a universal bound for any system of matter coupled to gravity.

4

2. conclusions

we have noted a number of diculties with the current formulation of the covariant
entropy conjecture. we propose that in general backgrounds, the only unexpected entropy

bounds arise from demanding validity of the generalized second law, as suggested in [5].
this law has passed a number of highly nontrivial consistency checks [16]. however whether

it does not
the second law gives rise to holographic style bounds is system dependent.
constrain the entropy density in the early universe, nor in the nal phase of a recollapsing
universe. however if an isolated system can collapse to a black hole, the second law implies

the entropy satises s  a/4.

acknowledgments

i thank richard easther, sanjaye ramgoolam and don marolf for helpful discussions.

the research of d.l. is supported in part by doe grant de-fe0291er40688-task a.

5

references

[1] r. bousso, a covariant entropy conjecture, hep-th/9905177.
[2] g. t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, gr-qc/9310026.
[3] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, j. math. phys. 36 (1995) 6377, hep-

th/9409089.

[4] w. fischler and l. susskind, holography and cosmology, hep-th/9806039.
[5] r. easther and d.a. lowe, holography, cosmology and the second law of thermody-

namics, hep-th/9902088.

[6] g. veneziano, pre-bangian origin of our entropy and time arrow, hep-th/9902126.
[7] d. bak and s.-j. rey, cosmic holography, hep-th/9902173.
[8] n. kaloper and a. linde, cosmology vs. holography, hep-th/9904120.
[9] r. brustein, the generalized second law of thermodynamics in cosmology, gr-

qc/9904061.

[10] d.a. lowe and l. thorlacius, ads/cft and the information paradox, hep-

th/9903237.

[11] l. susskind and l. thorlacius, gedanken experiments involving black holes, phys.

rev. d49 (1994) 966, hep-th/9308100.

[12] j.b. bekenstein, phys. rev. d23 (1981) 287.
[13] d.n. page, comment on a universal upper bound on the entropy-to-energy ratio for

bounded systems, phys. rev. 26 (1982) 947.

[14] j.b. bekenstein, non-archimedian character of quantum buoyancy and the general-

ized second law, gr-qc/9906058.

[15] j.b. bekenstein, phys. rev. d7 (1973) 2333; phys. rev. d9 (1974) 3292.
[16] w.g. unruh and r.m. wald, phys. rev. d25 (1982) 942; phys. rev. d27 (1983)

2271.

[17] m.a. pelath and r.m. wald, comment on entropy bounds and the generalized second

law, gr-qc/9901032.

6

