9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

1

 
 

1
v
1
0
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

pupt-1775 spin-1998/12 iassns-hep-98-22

hawking radiation as tunneling

maulik k. parikh

joseph henry laboratories, princeton university, princeton, new jersey 08544, usa

spinoza institute, university of utrecht, 3584 ce utrecht, the netherlands

school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study, princeton, new jersey 08540, usa

frank wilczek

abstract

we present a short and direct derivation of hawking radiation as a tunneling

process, based on particles in a dynamical geometry. the imaginary part of

the action for the classically forbidden process is related to the boltzmann fac-

tor for emission at the hawking temperature. because the derivation respects

conservation laws, the exact spectrum is no longer precisely thermal.

i. introduction

broadly speaking, there are two standard approaches to hawking radiation within quan-

tum eld theory; both have roots in the very early literature [1,2]. in the rst, one considers

a collapse geometry [1]. the response of external elds to this can be done explicitly, or

implicitly by abstracting appropriate boundary conditions. in the second, one treats the

black hole immersed in a thermal bath [2]. in this approach, one shows that (in general,

metastable) equilibrium is possible. by detailed balance, this implies the possibility of emis-

sion from the hole.

1

neither of these approaches corresponds very directly to a heuristic picture often pro-

posed to visualize the source of the radiation, as tunneling. according to this picture, the

radiation arises by a process analogous to electron-positron pair creation in a constant elec-

tric eld. the idea is that, since the energy of a particle changes sign as it crosses the

horizon, a pair created just inside or just outside the horizon can materialize with zero total

energy, after one member of the pair has tunneled to the opposite side.

here we shall show, expanding on ideas in [3,4], that this heuristic can be used in a

short, direct semi-classical derivation of black hole radiance (a related approach is pursued

in [5]). in what follows, energy conservation plays a fundamental role: one must make a

transition between states with the same total energy, and the mass of the residual hole must

go down as it radiates. indeed, it is precisely the possibility of lowering the black hole mass

that drives the dynamics. this supports the idea that, in quantum gravity, black holes are

properly regarded as highly excited states.

we will consider a hole in empty schwarzschild space, but with a dynamical geometry.

note that the geometry is not truly static even classically since there is no global killing vec-

tor. by contrast, in both the standard calculations, the background geometry is considered

xed, and energy conservation is not enforced during the emission process. because we are

treating this aspect more realistically, we must  and do  nd corrections to the standard

results. these become qualitatively signicant when the quantum of radiation carries away

a substantial fraction of the mass of the hole.

ii. calculation

to describe across-horizon phenomena, it is necessary to choose coordinates that, unlike

schwarzschild coordinates, are not singular at the horizon. a particularly suitable choice is

obtained by introducing a time coordinate,

t = ts + 22m r + 2m ln

r  2m
r + 2m

,

(1)

where ts is schwarzschild time. with this choice, the line element reads

2

ds2 = (cid:18)1 

2m

r (cid:19) dt2 + 2s2m

r

dt dr + dr2 + r2d2 .

(2)

there is now no singularity at r = 2m, and the true character of the spacetime, as being

stationary but not static, is manifest. these coordinates were rst introduced by painleve

[6] (who used them to criticize general relativity, for allowing singularities to come and go!).

their utility for studies of black hole quantum mechanics was emphasized more recently in

[7].

for our purposes, the crucial features of these coordinates are that they are stationary

and nonsingular through the horizon. thus it is possible to dene an eective vacuum

state of a quantum eld by requiring that it annihilate modes which carry negative frequency

with respect to t. such a state will look essentially empty (in any case, nonsingular) to a

freely-falling observer as he or she passes through the horizon. this vacuum diers strictly

from the standard unruh vacuum, dened by requiring positive frequency with respect to

the kruskal coordinate u = r  2m exp(cid:16) tsr

4m (cid:17) [8]. the dierence, however, shows up

only in transients, and does not aect the late-time radiation.

the radial null geodesics are given by

dr
dt

= 1 s 2m

r

,

r 

(3)

with the upper (lower) sign in eq. (3) corresponding to outgoing (ingoing) geodesics, under

the implicit assumption that t increases towards the future. these equations are modied

when the particles self-gravitation is taken into account [3]. when the black hole mass

is held xed and the total adm mass allowed to vary, a shell of energy  moves in the

geodesics of a spacetime with m replaced by m + . if instead we x the total mass and

allow the hole mass to uctuate, then the shell of energy  travels on the geodesics given

by the line element

ds2 =  1 

2(m  )

r

! dt2 + 2s 2(m  )

r

dt dr + dr2 + r2d2 ,

(4)

so we should use eq. (3) with m  m  .

3

one might be concerned that since the typical wavelength of the radiation is of the order

of the size of the black hole, a point particle description is inappropriate. however, when

the outgoing wave is traced back towards the horizon, its wavelength, as measured by local

ducial observers, is ever-increasingly blue-shifted. near the horizon, the radial wavenumber

approaches innity and the point particle, or wkb, approximation is justied.

the imaginary part of the action for an s-wave outgoing positive energy particle which

crosses the horizon outwards from rin to rout can be expressed as

im s = imz rout

rin

pr dr = imz rout

rin z pr

0

dp

r dr .

(5)

remarkably, this can be evaluated without entering into the details of the solution, as follows

(compare [4]). we multiply and divide the integrand by the two sides of hamiltons equation

, change variable from momentum to energy, and switch the order of integration

r = + dh

to obtain

dpr(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)r

im s = imz +

0 z rout

rin

dr

1 q 2(m )

r

(d ) ,

(6)

where the minus sign appears because h = m   . but now the integral can be done by
deforming the contour, so as to ensure that positive energy solutions decay in time (that is,

into the lower half   plane). in this way we obtain

im s = +4(cid:18)m 



2(cid:19) ,

(7)

provided rin > rout. to understand this ordering  which supplies the correct sign  we

observe that when the integrals in eq.

(5) are not interchanged, and with the contour

evaluated via the prescription     i, we have

im s = +imz rout

rin z m 

m

dr = imz rout

rin r dr .

(8)

dm 

1 q 2m 

r

hence rin = 2m and rout = 2 (m  ). (incidentally, comparing the above equation with
eq. (5), we also nd that im pr = r.) thus, over the course of the classically forbid-
den trajectory, the outgoing particle travels radially inward with the apparent horizon to

materialize at the nal location of the horizon, viz. r = 2 (m  ).

4

alternatively, and along the same lines, hawking radiation can also be regarded as pair

creation outside the horizon, with the negative energy particle tunneling into the black

hole. since such a particle propagates backwards in time, we have to reverse time in the

equations of motion. from the line element, eq. (2), we see that time-reversal corresponds

r  q 2m

to q 2m
r . also, since the anti-particle sees a geometry of xed black hole mass,
the upshot of self-gravitation is to replace m by m + , rather than m  . thus an ingoing
negative energy particle has

im s = imz 

0 z rin

rout

1 +q 2(m +)

r

dr

d  = +4(cid:18)m 



2(cid:19) ,

(9)

where to obtain the last equation we have used feynmans hole theory deformation of the

contour:      + i.

in either treatment, the exponential part of the semi-classical emission rate, in agreement

with [4], is

  e2 im s = e8(m  

2 ) = e+sbh ,

(10)

where we have expressed the result more naturally in terms of the change in the holes

bekenstein-hawking entropy, sbh. when the quadratic term is neglected, eq. (10) reduces

to a boltzmann factor for a particle with energy  at the inverse hawking temperature 8m.

the 2 correction arises from the physics of energy conservation, which (roughly speaking)

eectively raises the eective temperature of the hole as it radiates. a nice consistency

check is to consider the limit in which the emitted particle carries away the entire mass

and charge of the black hole (corresponding to the transmutation of the black hole into an

outgoing shell). there can be only one such outgoing state. on the other hand, there are

exp (sbh) states in total. statistical mechanics then asserts that the probability of nding

a shell containing all the mass of the black hole is proportional to exp (sbh), as above.
following standard arguments, eq. (10) with the quadratic term neglected implies the

planck spectral ux appropriate to an inverse temperature of 8m:

 () =

d
2

| t ()|2
e+8m   1

,

5

(11)

where | t ()|2 is the frequency-dependent (greybody) transmission co-ecient for the out-
going particle to reach future innity without back-scattering. it arises from a more complete

treatment of the modes, whose semi-classical behavior near the turning point we have been

discussing.

the preceding techniques can also be applied to emission from a charged black hole.

however, when the outgoing radiation carries away the black holes charge, the calculations

are complicated by the fact that the trajectories are now also subject to electromagnetic

forces. here we restrict ourselves to uncharged radiation coming from a reissner-nordstrom

black hole. the derivation then proceeds much as above.

the charged counterpart to the painleve line element is

ds2 =  1 

2m
r

+

q2

r2 ! dt2 + 2s 2m
r 

q2
r2

dt dr + dr2 + r2d2 ,

(12)

which is obtained from the standard reissner-nordstrom line element by the coordinate

transformation,

t = tr + 2q2m r  q2 + m ln  r  2m r  q2
r + 2m r  q2!

+

q2  m 2
m 2  q2

arctanh m 2  q22m r  q2

m r

! ,

(13)

where tr is the reissner time coordinate. the line element now manifestly displays the

stationary, nonstatic, and nonsingular nature of the spacetime.

the equation of motion for an outgoing massless particle is

dr
dt

= +1 s 2m
r 

q2
r2

,

r 

(14)

with m  m   when self-gravitation is included [9]. the imaginary part of the action
for a positive energy outgoing particle is

im s = imz +

0 z rout

rin

dr

1 q 2(m )

r

(d ) ,

 q2

r2

(15)

which is again evaluated by deforming the contour in accordance with feynmans w  wi
prescription. the residue at the pole can be read o by substituting u  q2 (m   ) r  q2.

this yields an emission rate of

6

  e2 im s = e

4(cid:16)2(m  

2 )(m )(m )2q2+mm 2q2(cid:17) = e+sbh .

(16)

to rst order in , eq. (16) is consistent with hawkings result of thermal emission at the

hawking temperature, th , for a charged black hole:

th =

1
2

m 2  q2

(cid:16)m + m 2  q2(cid:17)2 .

(17)

but again, energy conservation implies that the exact result has corrections of higher order

in ; these can all be collected to express the emission rate as the exponent of the change

in entropy.

since the emission rate has to be real, the presence of the rst square root in eq. (16)

ensures that radiation past extremality is problematic. in fact it does not arise in the present

framework, since there is no acceptable (real) value of rout. thus, the third law of black hole

thermodynamics is manifest.

iii. conclusion

we have derived hawking radiation as a tunneling process. because we enforce energy

conservation, we are necessarily led to a modied emission spectrum that is not strictly

thermal. the resulting corrected formula has physically reasonable limiting cases. by virtue

of its nonthermality, it suggests the possibility of information-carrying correlations in the

radiation.

note that only local physics has entered into our derivations. there was neither an

appeal to euclideanization nor any need to invoke an explicit collapse phase. the time

asymmetry leading to outgoing radiation arose instead from use of the normal (feynman)

local contour deformation prescription in terms of the nonstatic time coordinate t, which is

nonsingular through the horizon.

acknowledgement

f.w. is supported in part by doe grant de-fg02-90er-40542.

7

references

[1] s. w. hawking, commun. math. phys. 43, 199 (1975).

[2] g. w. gibbons and s. w. hawking, phys. rev. d 15, 2752 (1977).

[3] p. kraus and f. wilczek, nucl. phys. b433, 403 (1995).

[4] p. kraus and e. keski-vakkuri, nucl. phys. b491, 249 (1997).

[5] s. massar and r. parentani, gr-qc/9903027.

[6] p. painleve, c. r. acad. sci. (paris), 173, 677 (1921).

[7] p. kraus and f. wilczek, mod. phys. lett. a 9, 3713 (1994).

[8] w. g. unruh, phys. rev. d 14, 870 (1976).

[9] p. kraus and f. wilczek, nucl. phys. b437, 231 (1995).

8

