0
0
0
2

 

n
u
j
 

6

 
 

2
v
7
3
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

the non-chiral fusion rules

in rational conformal eld theories

a. rida

laboratoire de physiquetheorique, institut de physique,

universite des sciences et de la technologie houari boumedienne,

bp 32 el-alia, alger 16111, algeria

t. sami

laboratoire subatech, universite de nantes, ecole des mines de nantes,

4 rue alfred kastler, la chantrerie 44070 nantes, france

abstract

we introduce a general method in order to construct the non-chiral fusion rules

which determine the operator content of the operator product algebra for rational

conformal eld theories. we are particularly interested in the models of the comple-
mentary dlike solutions of the modular invariant partition functions with cyclic
center zn . we nd that the non-chiral fusion rules have a zn grading structure.

one of the most important requirements in the construction of two-dimensional con-
formal eld theories (cft), the bootstrap requirement, is the existence of a closed as-
sociative operator product algebra (opa) among all elds [1]. the information about
the opa structure is collected in the structure constants, the computation of which is
fundamental since it permits in principle the determination of all correlation functions.
but unfortunately, in practice, the structure of the opa seems to be very complicated
and so is, indeed, the computation of the structure constants.

the structure of the opa is expressed by the so-called fusion rules [2], which describe
how the chiral-sectors vertices, representing the holomorphic (z) and antiholomorphic

e-mail: sami@subatech.in2p3.fr

1

(z) dependencies of the primary elds, combine in the opa [3]. although these fusion
rules contain a large amount of information, this description seems to be incomplete.
indeed, for the maximally extended chiral algebras, i.e., models with no pure holomorphic
primary elds, the chiral fusion rules describe completely the opa structure since the
two structures are isomorphic [4]. but for the non-maximally extended algebras, the
relationship between the two structures is still not clear and in these special cases, the
chiral fusion rules describe in a chiral half-manner only the full opa structure [4].

the purpose of this letter is to propose a construction that provides a complete descrip-
tion of the opa structure using the notion of the non-chiral fusion rules, rst introduced
in [5, 6] for the d series of the minimal (c < 1) models. the non-chiral fusion rules, in
contrast to the chiral ones, determine the operator content of the operator product alge-
bra, i.e., they determine which elds are present in the product (fusion) of two primary
elds.

the rst step is of course the chiral fusion rules: a non-chiral fusion coupling is van-
ishing if and only if the corresponding chiral fusion coupling in the two sectors vanishes.
this is called the naturality statement [4]. the second step consists in combining prop-
erly the fusion rules in the two sectors by considering the closure of the opa so that only
combinations permitted by the operator content are considered. we note that the oper-
ator content, in relation with the modular solutions of the partition function, has been
completely determined for a particular class of rational conformal theories (rcft) known
as simple current solutions [8, 9]. we will henceforth specialize to this particular type
of models. the third step is to show how the simple-current symmetry, a symmetry of
the fusion rules, manifests itself in the construction of the non-chiral fusion rules. in this
letter, we restrict ourselves to the case where the current symmetry forms a cyclic group
zn .

let us now start our construction. the existence of a closed associative operator

algebra among all elds is expressed in the following :

cijk (z  w)hkhihj (z  w)hkhihj [k (w, w) + . . . ] .

(1)

i (z, z)  j (w, w) =xk
i (cid:0)i, i(cid:1) indicates the dierent elds with i(cid:0)i(cid:1) representing the contributions (vertices)

of the holomorphic (antiholomorphic) sectors to the primary elds. hi and hi are the
conformal dimensions of i and the ellipsis stands for terms involving descendant elds.
cijk are the structure constants of the operator algebra. we dene the non-chiral fusion
rules as a formal structure which determine the operator content of the operator algebra.
thus, the fusion of the two primaries i and j produces the eld k if and only if

2

the structure constant cijk in (1) is non-zero. if we adopt (cid:0)i, i(cid:1) and  as notations for

a primary eld i and the opa operation respectively, the non-chiral fusion rules are
formally given by:

(cid:0)i, i(cid:1) (cid:0)j, j(cid:1) =xk

n k

ij (cid:0)k, k(cid:1) ;

n k

ij 6= 0  cijk 6= 0,

(2)

eq. (2) is similar to how the chiral fusion rules (describing an associative structure) in
the two sectors are usually dened. indeed, we usually associate with each primary eld
i a formal object (i) representing its chiral part and introduce a formal multiplication 
by:

(i)  (j) =xk

n k

ij (k) ,

(3)

where n k
ij (chiral fusion rules coecients) counts the number of distinct ways in which
(k) occurs in the chiral fusion of the two elds (i) and (j) respectively [2]. if we denote by
an arrow () the presence of (k) in the fusion (i)  (j), the naturality statement amounts
to:

( (i)  (j)  (k)
(cid:0)i(cid:1) (cid:0)j(cid:1) (cid:0)k(cid:1)

 cijk 6= 0,

which means that for the non-chiral fusion rules, one must have the condition:

n k

ij 6= 0, n k

i j 6= 0  n k

ij 6= 0.

(4)

(5)

as mentioned earlier on, the second step is to consider the closure of the opa: we
require the compatibility of the non-chiral fusion rules with the operator content deter-
mined by the modular constraints on partition functions. denoting the set of the operator
content of a given conformal model by o, this requirement is expressed by:

n k

ij 6= 0 if i, j, k  o.

(6)

the third step relies, as we said, on symmetry considerations. indeed, a symmetry
of the fusion rules provided by the presence of simple currents is quite useful in the con-
struction of a large class of modular invariant partition functions [8, 9]. the construction
of simple currents as solutions to modular invariant partition functions reproduces the
diagonal (a)-like and the non-diagonal (d)-like series of the su (2) kac-moody algebra.

3

in the (d) series case, it was emphasized in [5, 6, 7] that the opa is structured following
a discrete cyclic symmetry z2. here we show how the analogous to this symmetry appears
in more general cases as a consequence of a simple-current structure of the d-like series.

but rst, a brief reminder of the structure of a simple-current symmetry. a simple
current (j) is a primary eld (chiral part) for which the chiral fusion rules with (i) give one
non-vanishing fusion coecient n k
ji, so that (j)  (i) = (k) [8]. due to the associativity
of the fusion product, the fusion of two simple currents is again a simple current. simple
currents thus form an abelian group under the fusion product, called the center of the
theory. since the number of primary elds is nite in a rational theory, the number of
simple currents is nite. this implies that simple currents are unipotent, i.e., there must
be an integer n so that jn = 1. the smallest integer n with this property is called the
order of the simple current. furthermore, by rationality, there must also be a smallest
positive integer ni such that (j)ni  (i) = (i). by associativity, ni must be a divisor of
n. if a simple current takes a eld into itself, we call this latter a xed point of that
current. we see then that any simple current organizes the primary elds into orbits:
{(j  i) ;  = 0 . . . ni}.

the presence of simple currents in a conformal eld theory allows not only the or-
ganization of the elds into orbits but also the expression of a symmetry through a
conservation of a monodromy charge q (i). this latter is dened modulo an integer and
expresses the monodromy property of the (opa) (1) of a primary eld (i) with a simple
current (j): q (i)  hj + hi  h(ji) mod 1. this denition imposes the monodromy charge
to be additive under the operator product, i.e., q (i  k) = q (i) + q (k) and it follows
that all terms in the opa of two elds must have the same charge. as a consequence, the

non-vanishing n-point correlation function hi1i2 . . . ini. so, if we denote the charge asso-
ciated with a simple current j by q, then obviously the charge associated to jd is equal

monodromy charge must be conserved (pn q (in) = q (1) = 0 mod 1) in order to have a
to dq, as usual modulo 1. this implies that simple currents of order n (cid:0)jn = 1(cid:1) have a

charge equal to an integer, and therefore q (j)  r

n mod 1, r dened modulo n.

the conservation of the monodromy charge means that the presence of simple currents
in a conformal eld theory implies that the center forms an abelian discrete symmetry
group. this important fact is very useful in order to nd solutions to a large class of
modular invariant partition functions using an orbifold-like method with respect to the
center. the resulting modular invariant partition functions are known as simple-current

invariants. a modular invariant partition function (z =p mi,kik) is called a simple

current invariant if all elds paired non-diagonally are related by simple currents: mi,k 6= 0

4

if k = ji. in the case where the center forms a cyclic center zn , i.e., there is only one orbit

of simple currents (cid:8)1, j, j2, . . . , jn 1(cid:9), the non-zero couplings mi,k are given by [8, 9]:

mi,jni =

(7)

n
ni

1(cid:20)q (i) +

1
2

nq (j)(cid:21) ,

where 1 is equal to one if its argument is an integer, zero otherwise. these solutions (7)
can be structured as either an automorphism-invariant and integer-spin-invariant struc-
tures or a combination of these. in the rst structure, the two chiral sectors (i, j) are
combined via an automorphism of fusion rules  (i) = j. the second structure can always
be regarded as a diagonal invariant of a larger than originally considered chiral algebra
[4]. this is what happens when some current jn has an integer spin so that the coupling
m0,jn is dierent from zero and hence produces an holomorphic eld corresponding to the
extra currents (noether currents) that will extend the algebra. for the cyclic center zn
with n prime, one has a pure automorphism invariant for q (j) 6= 0 or integer invariant
for q (j) = 0. for the non-prime values of n, the general form of modular partition
function can be a combination of the automorphism and integer-invariant solutions. in
the sequel, we will exploit the operator-content structure provided by the forms of the
modular-invariant partition functions for n prime in the construction of the non-chiral
fusion rules. the same conclusions will be straightforwardly applied to non-prime values
of n.

we now turn to the construction of the non-chiral fusion rules. we start with the
automorphism invariant cases. the fact that the two chiral sectors of a primary eld
are related by an automorphism of fusion rules makes the opa structure isomorphic to
the structure of the fusion rules [4]. to see this, we rst consider the operator content
obtained from (7) for q (j) 6= 0. this content can be structured in sets:

one can see that the two sectors are related by an automorphism of fusion rules  (i) = ic
where ic is the conjugate eld of i under the fusion operation. to construct the non-

ak =(cid:8)(cid:0)jki, jn ki(cid:1) /q (i) = 0(cid:9) .

chiral fusion rules, let us consider two elds (cid:0)jki, jn ki(cid:1) and (cid:0)jpi, jn pi(cid:1) of ak and ap

respectively. due to charge conservation in the chiral fusion rules, we have:

the compatibility with the operator content implies then:

(cid:0)jki(cid:1)  (jpi) = jk+p (i  i)  jk+pk, q (k) = 0;

(cid:0)jn ki(cid:1) (cid:0)jn pi(cid:1) = jn (k+p) (i  i)  jn (k+p)k, q (k) = 0.
(cid:0)jki, jn ki(cid:1) (cid:0)jpi, jn pi(cid:1) =xk (cid:0)jp+k (i  i)k , jn (p+k) (i  i)k(cid:1) ,

(8)

5

where (i  i)k represents all elds k which are results of a chiral fusion of i and i. in a
more compact form, the non-chiral fusion rules are written as:

ak  ap = al,

l = p + k mod n.

(9)

the non-chiral fusion rules have then the structure of a zn -grading where n is the order
of the center zn . this structure (8) is isomorphic to the chiral fusion rules and thus its
associativity derives directly from the associativity of the fusion rules.

it is important to make here two observations related to the zn structure (9). first,
one can see that the set of scalar elds a0 forms a closed sub-algebra in the opa. secondly,
the zn -grading structure of the non-chiral fusion rules (9) points to the conservation of
another charge (other than the monodromy charge) in the non-chiral fusion rules. indeed,
if we assign to each eld in a set (ap) a charge (p/n) which will be called a distance
charge, this charge is conserved.

the above two observations are very important in the construction of the non-chiral
fusion rules in the integer invariant cases where the problem is less evident. indeed, if
the automorphism structure discussed so far of the operator content allows us to have an
isomorphism between the opa and the fusion rules, this is not the situation in the integer
invariant cases. formally, the diculties arise principally from the fact that if q (j) = 0,
then the charge assigned to (jpi) with q (i) = 0 is also zero.

we tackle the issue in these cases starting from the modular partition functions (7)

which yields the following structure of the operator content:

ak =(cid:8)(cid:0)i, jki(cid:1) /q (i) = 0(cid:9) , k = 1 . . . n.

(10)

let us now proceed naively with our algorithm as we did in the automorphism invariant
cases and see what happens. from the structure of the operator content, one can easily
see that it is not possible to have a nice structure as in (9). indeed, one can see that
for each (i) with q (i) = 0, we can nd p and (k) with q (k) = 0 such that jpk = i. as
a consequence, in the results of the products of the scalar  elds a0  a0, it is possible
to obtain elds from dierent sets (10) which are not scalars. a more serious problem
comes from the presence of orbits with length ni 6= n or, in other words, the presence of
xed-point elds (j)  (f ) = (f ). from (7), this means (ni = 1) that one has n copies
of the scalar eld (f, f ) in the operator content. in the structure of the operator content

(10), this multiplicity translates in that a xed point of (j) is also a xed point of (cid:0)jk(cid:1),
so that the elds (cid:0)f, jkf(cid:1)  ak are equal to (f, f ). in the construction of the non-chiral

6

fusion rules, the presence of a multiplicity of a eld creates a problem since we are not
able to dierentiate the behavior of the dierent copies of this eld in the (opa).

following our early work [6], the existence of multiple copies (n copies) of the same pri-
mary eld {p, p = 0 . . . n  1} implies, by the principle of correspondence elds-states,
that the corresponding lowest-weight state (ground state vector) is degenerate. this ob-
servation suggests the existence of a discrete symmetry zn of the ground states such
that:

zn (p) = e

i2p

n p.

(11)

thus the symmetry zn enables one to separate the contributions from the dierent copies
of a degenerate eld: we only need to impose the consistency of the non-chiral fusion rules
with the action of this symmetry. but we must also determine the action of zn on the
other elds of the theory. in order to do this, we rst use a heuristic argument, namely
that the elds of the same structure (elds belonging to the same set ap) must have the
same behavior under zn . observing that each copy p of a degenerate eld belongs to a
set ap, we can write that:

zn () = e

i2p

n ,   ap.

(12)

the action of the discrete symmetry zn provides each eld from ap with a charge equal
to the distance charge (p/n). the consistency of the non-chiral fusion rules with the zn
action (11, 12) implies the conservation of this charge under the fusion operation, so that
nally we obtain a zn -grading (like in the automorphism cases) of these rules:

(i, jpi) (cid:16)i, jp

i(cid:17) =xk (cid:16)(i  i)k , jp+p

(i  i)k(cid:17) .

(13)

in these rules, the dierent copies p of a degenerate eld are considered not as (f, f )
but as (f, jpf ). one rst note that the set a0 of the scalar elds form a sub-algebra of
the opa. by scalar here we mean not only the spinless elds but also the single elds
under the action of the symmetry zn . a more important remark is the associativity of
(13) which is also a consequence of the isomorphism with the structure of the chiral fusion
rules.

the conservation of the zn charge p/n in non-chiral fusion rules leads us to think
that associating a simple-current eld interpretation would provide our construction with
a less heuristic argument. in the integer invariant cases, the simple current (j) is present
as a chiral part of some physical elds, namely:

jp

q=(cid:0)jq, jp+q(cid:1)  ap.

7

(14)

these elds jp
q are indexed by two integers q and p. indeed, the rst index q is present
in the two sectors as a power of j and the second index, the distance p, is present also as
a power of j but only in one sector and so represents the non-diagonal anisotropy in the
coupling between the two sectors. these elds (14) form a sub-algebra of the opa:

jp1
q1  jp2

q2 = jp3

q3 ; q3 = q1 + q2 mod n, p3 = p1 + p2 mod n,

and their action on a eld (i, jpi)  ap is determined by our algorithm:

(15)

(16)

jp1

q1  (i, jpi) =(cid:0)k, jp+p1k(cid:1)  a[p+p1 modn ], k = jq1i.

thus, one sees that the physical elds jp
q in (14) are the simple-current elds of the
non-chiral fusion rules. from their structure, it is easily seen that these simple elds are
divided into two categories. the rst one is that of the scalar elds p = 0. they form
a sub-algebra of the current-eld algebra (15) and are generated under fusion operation
from (j, j). the second category is characterized by a non-vanishing distance p and hence
is composed by the set of the non-vanishing spin elds. as a representative element of
this set, one has the holomorphic (antiholomorphic) eld (1, j) ((j, 1)). from (15), it is
clear that the non-vanishing simple spin elds are all generated from (1, j) and (j, j).

as for the chiral fusion rules, the presence of simple elds implies the conservation of a
charge in the non-chiral fusion rules. indeed, the action of the simple scalar eld (j, j) (16)
on a given eld aects the two sectors on equal footing so that the general structure of this
eld does not change. hence, the simple eld (j, j) can be seen as playing the same role as
the simple current (j) and so it expresses the conservation of the monodromy charge in the
non-chiral fusion rules. this fact comes actually from imposing the naturality statement
in the construction of the non-chiral fusion rules. more important is the holomorphic
simple eld (1, j) since its action (16) aects only the right sector and hence allows the
establishment of a correspondence between elds in dierent sets ap:

(1, j)  ap = ap+1.

(17)

the holomorphic simple eld (1, j) plays the role of the generator of the distance p. in
terms of orbifold partition functions [8], eq. (17) means that elds in twisted sectors
{ap6=0} are generated gradually by the non-chiral fusion of the twist eld (1, j) on
elds of the untwisted sector a0. from this, we can deduce an important fact about
the behavior of the degenerate elds. indeed, by denoting each component of a degenerate
eld by {p}p=n 1

as an element of a set {ap}p=n 1

, we can set from (17) that:

p=0

p=0

(1, j)  p = p+1.

(18)

8

eq. (18) is nothing but a reinterpretation of the action of the zn cyclic symmetry (11).

it is now possible to get the general structure of the non-chiral fusion rules, by estab-
lishing their zn -grading structure. first we start from the general form of the non-chiral
fusion rules of the set of scalar elds a0:

a0  a0 =

bi

0 ai,

n 1

mi=0

(19)

where the coecient bi
0 is non-vanishing if at least one eld from the set ai appears in
the non-chiral fusion of two given scalar elds. since the scalars are self-conjugate, we
must have at least b0
0 6= 0. the general structure of the non-chiral fusion rules can be
deduced by using (17) as a zn -gradation of the scalar rules (19):

ap  aq =

n 1

mi=0

bi

0 ai+k, k = p + q mod n.

(20)

it is important at this point to recall from eq. (18) that each component p of a degenerate
eld behaves like a eld of ap in (20). in order to complete the determination of the non-
chiral fusion rules, it remains to establish the scalar rules (19). it is important in this
regard to recall the nature of the set of scalar elds a0:
it represents the untwisted
sector in terms of orbifolding partition functions. this sector, having an integer charge,
forms a sub-algebra of the original diagonal theory from which the orbifold procedure has
been performed, see [8]. therefore, it is natural to set that the scalar rules (19) must
have the following associative structure:

a0  a0 = a0,

and so, nally, the non-chiral fusion rules (20) will have the desired zn -grading structure
(13).

in conclusion, we have developed in this work a method by which we construct non-
chiral fusion rules as a formal structure describing the operator content of the opa of
a cft. we are particularly interested in the non-diagonal rational conformal models
obtained from a simple-current construction of modular invariant partition functions with
cyclic center zn . the starting point of this construction is the naturality statement from
which we have imposed the consistency of the non-chiral fusion rules with the usual fusion
rules in the two chiral sectors. the results of these fusion operations are then combined
properly by considering the closure of the opa and so the consistency with the operator
content which was taken to be induced by simple currents.
in a third step, we have

9

used the simple current structure of the models to establish the conservation of a charge
termed as distance charge. this charge is related to the anisotropy (the distance) in the
coupling between the two sectors via the simple current j. if this symmetry is trivially
satised in the automorphism-invariant cases as expected from [4], the situation is less
trivial in the integer-invariant cases and a more careful analysis is required. for these last
cases, the analysis shows the prominent role played by the holomorphic elds (1, jp) as
simple current elds of the distance charge symmetry. this important fact reminds us
of the martinec conjuncture [10] which states that the original chiral algebra symmetry
is not sucient in order to have a rational theory, and the symmetry of the full set of
holomorphic elds is needed in order to accomplish a description of it. as a result, it is
checked that each eld (i, jpi) (q (i) = 0) of the integer-invariant part of the operator
content will have a distance charge equal to:

p
n

+ 

ni
n

(1  ni n ) mod 1,  = 0 . . .

n
ni

 1, p = 0 . . . ni  1.

(21)

it is important to point out that the second contribution in the distance charge (21),
present for orbits with length ni 6= n, allows the dierentiation between the behaviors of
the n/ni copies of a degenerate primary eld (i, jpi) in the opa. as a nal result of our
construction and by structuring the elds following their distance charge in sets ap, the
non-chiral fusion rules have then a zn -grading structure.

as a nal comment, we recall that the main goal of our construction of the non-chiral
fusion rules is one important step towards the ultimate determination of the structure
constants of the opa, following our early work [6] for the minimal models. it is therefore
of great importance to be able to nd the structure of the non-chiral fusion rules for
the more general cases of non-cyclic center zp1  zp2    zpn. this is currently under
investigation.

acknowledgments

we would like to thank j. fuchs for his interest in this work and his constructive correspon-
dence. one of us (a.r.) would like to thank a. abada for all his help and encouragements.

references

[1] a.a. belavin, a.m. polyakov, a.b. zamolodchikov; nucl. phys. b 241 (1984) 333.

10

[2] j. fuchs; fortschr. phys. 42 (1994) 1.

[3] j. fuchs; lectures on conformal eld theory and kac-moody algebra. springer lecture

notes in physics 498 (1997). hep-th/9702194.

[4] g. moore and n. seiberg; nucl. phys. b 313 (1989) 16.

[5] j. mcabe, t. sami and t. wydro; int. j. mod. phys. a. vol.11 no.1 (1996) 111.

[6] a. rida and t. sami, non-chiral fusion rules, structure constantes of the dm, chiral,

minimal models. hep-th/9907137.

[7] j. fuchs; phys. lett. b 222 (1989) 411.

[8] a. n. schellekens and s. yankielowicz; int. j. mod. phys. a 5, (1990) 2903.

[9] m. kreuzer a.n. schellekens; nucl. phys. b 411 (1994) 97.

[10] d. kastor, e. martinec and z. qui, phys. lett. b 200 (1988) 434.

11

