0
0
0
2

 

n
a
j
 

5

 
 

5
v
5
2
2
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

hep-th/9907225, pupt-1876, wis-99/26/07-dpp

dynamical supersymmetry breaking

yael shadmi

department of particle physics

weizmann institute of science, rehovot 76100, israel

and

physics department

princeton university, princeton, nj 08544, usa

yuri shirman

physics department

princeton university, princeton, nj 08544, usa

abstract

supersymmetry is one of the most plausible and theoretically motivated

frameworks for extending the standard model. however, any supersymmetry

in nature must be a broken symmetry. dynamical supersymmetry breaking

(dsb) is an attractive idea for incorporating supersymmetry into a success-

ful description of nature. the study of dsb has recently enjoyed dramatic

progress, fueled by advances in our understanding of the dynamics of super-

symmetric eld theories. these advances have allowed for direct analysis of

dsb in strongly coupled theories, and for the discovery of new dsb theories,

some of which contradict early criteria for dsb. we review these criteria,

emphasizing recently discovered exceptions. we also describe, through many

examples, various techniques for directly establishing dsb by studying the

infrared theory, including both older techniques in regions of weak coupling,

1

and new techniques in regions of strong coupling. finally, we present a list of

representative dsb models, their main properties, and the relations between

them.

submitted to reviews of modern physics

2

contents

i

introduction

ii

generalities

a vacuum energy  the order parameter of susy breaking, and f and d

atness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

b the goldstino . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

c tree-level breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1 oraifeartaigh models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 fayet-iliopoulos breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

iii

indirect criteria for dsb

a the witten index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

b global symmetries and supersymmetry breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

c

gaugino condensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

d examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1 spontaneously broken global symmetry: the su(5) model

. . . . . .

2 gaugino condensation: the su(5) model

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 r-symmetry and susy breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 generalizations of the su(5) model

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

iv direct analysis: calculable models

a the 32 model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

b the 41 model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

v

direct analysis: strongly-coupled theories

a supersymmetry breaking through connement

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

b establishing supersymmetry breaking through a dual theory . . . . . . .

c integrating matter in and out . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

5

12

12

17

19

19

22

24

24

28

33

34

34

35

35

37

38

39

46

47

47

51

57

vi violations of indirect criteria for dsb

a non-chiral models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1 susy qcd with singlets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 the intriligator-thomas-izawa-yanagida model . . . . . . . . . . . . .

b quantum removal of flat directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

c supersymmetry breaking with no r-symmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

vii dsb models and model building tools

a discarded generator models

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

b supersymmetry breaking from an anomalous u(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

c list of models and literature guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

appendixes

a

some results on susy gauge theories

1 notations and superspace lagrangian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 d-at directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

pure supersymmetric su(nc) theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 nf < nc: aeck-dine-seiberg superpotential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 nf = nc : quantum moduli space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60

60

61

64

69

74

76

77

80

83

91

91

91

94

95

96

99

6 nf = nc + 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100

7 nf > nc + 1 : dual descriptions of the infrared physics . . . . . . . . . . 101

8 other models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103

4

i. introduction

supersymmetry (susy), which rotates bosons into fermions and vice versa, is a beautiful

theoretical idea. but nature is certainly not supersymmetric.

if it were, we would see a

fermionic partner for each known gauge boson, and a scalar partner for each known fermion,

with degenerate masses. but experimentalists have been looking for superpartners long

and hard, and so far in vain, pushing the limits on superpartner masses to roughly above

a 100 gev. thus, any discussion of supersymmetry in nature is necessarily a discussion of

broken supersymmetry.

still, even broken supersymmetry is theoretically more appealing than no supersymmetry

at all. first, supersymmetry provides a solution to the gauge hierarchy problem. without

supersymmetry, the scalar higgs mass is quadratically divergent, so that the natural scale

for it is the fundamental scale of the theory, e.g., the planck scale, many orders of magnitude

above the electroweak scale. in a supersymmetric theory, the mass of the scalar higgs is

tied to the mass of its fermionic superpartner. since fermion masses are protected by chiral

symmetries, the higgs mass can naturally be around the electroweak scale, and radiative

corrections do not destabilize this hierarchy. this success is not spoiled even when explicit

supersymmetry-breaking terms are added to the lagrangian of the theory, as long as these

terms are soft, that is, they only introduce logarithmic divergences, but no quadratic

divergences, into scalar masses. the appearance of explicit supersymmetry-breaking terms

in the low-energy eective theory can be theoretically justied if the underlying theory is

supersymmetric, yet the vacuum state breaks supersymmetry spontaneously.

while spontaneously broken supersymmetry would explain the stability of the gauge hi-

erarchy against radiative corrections, it still does not explain the origin of the hierarchy, that

is, the origin of the small mass ratios in the theory. indeed if supersymmetry were broken

at the classical level (tree level), the scale of the soft terms would be determined by explicit

mass parameters in the supersymmetric lagrangian, and one would still have to understand

why such parameters are so much smaller than the planck scale. however, the origin of

5

the hierarchy can be understood if supersymmetry is broken dynamically (witten, 1981a).

by dynamical supersymmetry breaking (dsb) we mean that supersymmetry is broken

spontaneously in a theory that possesses supersymmetric vacua at the tree level, with the

breaking triggered by dynamical eects. the crucial point about dsb is that if supersym-

metry is unbroken at tree-level, supersymmetric non-renormalization theorems (wess and

zumino, 1974; ferrara-iliopoulos-zumino, 1974; grisaru-rocek-siegel, 1979) imply that it

remains unbroken to all orders in perturbation theory, and can therefore only be broken by

non-perturbative eects, which are suppressed by roughly e82/g2, where g is the coupling.

the electroweak scale is related to the size of the soft supersymmetry breaking terms, and

thus it is proportional to the supersymmetry breaking scale. the latter is suppressed by

the exponential above, and can easily be of the correct size, about 17 orders of magnitude

below the planck scale.

in addition, supersymmetry, or more precisely, local supersymmetry, provides the only

known framework for a consistent description of gravity, in the context of string theory. if

indeed the underlying fundamental physics is described by string theory, one can contemplate

two qualitatively dierent scenarios. one is that susy is directly broken by stringy eects.

then, however, the susy breaking scale is generically around the string scale (barring new

and better understanding of string vacua), and thus the gauge hierarchy problem is not

solved by supersymmetry. therefore, we shall focus here on a second possible scenario,

namely, that in the low-energy limit, string theory gives rise to an eective eld theory, and

supersymmetry is spontaneously broken by the dynamics of this low-energy eective theory.

the aim of this review is then to describe the phenomenon of dynamical supersymmetry

(n counts the number of
breaking in eld theories with n = 1 global supersymmetry.
supersymmetries. for n = 1 there are four supersymmetry charges and this is the smallest
amount of supersymmetry allowed in four dimensions.)

the restriction on n comes from the fact that only n = 1 supersymmetry has chiral
matter, which we need in the low-energy theory if it is to contain the standard model.

moreover, theories with n > 1 supersymmetry are believed to have an exact moduli space

6

and thus are not expected to exhibit dynamical supersymmetry breaking.

the restriction to global supersymmetry still allows us to answer most of the questions

we would be interested in. this situation is quite analogous to studying the breaking of a

gauged bosonic symmetry in say, a theory with scalar matter. in that case one can determine

the pattern of symmetry breaking just by studying the scalar potential. similarly, we shall

be able to determine whether supersymmetry is broken, and, if the theory is weakly coupled,

what the vacuum energy and the light spectrum are. from our perspective, the most relevant

consequence of gauging supersymmetry is the analogue of the higgs mechanism by which

the massless fermion accompanying supersymmetry breaking, the goldstino, is eaten by the

gravitino.

as we shall see, supersymmetry is broken if and only if the vacuum energy is non-zero.

furthermore, as we mentioned above, if supersymmetry is unbroken at tree level, it can only

be broken by non-perturbative eects. thus studying supersymmetry breaking requires un-

derstanding the non-perturbative dynamics of gauge theories in the infrared. fortunately,

in recent years, there has been tremendous progress in understanding the dynamics of su-

persymmetric eld theories.

the potential of a supersymmetric theory is determined by two quantities, the kahler po-

tential, which contains the kinetic terms for the matter elds, and the superpotential, a holo-

morphic function of the matter elds which controls their yukawa interactions. holomorphy,

together with the symmetries of the theory, may be used to determine the physical degrees of

freedom and the superpotential of the infrared theory (seiberg, 1994; seiberg, 1995). since

the latter two are precisely the ingredients needed for studying supersymmetry breaking,

this progress has fueled the discovery of many new supersymmetry breaking theories, as well

as new techniques for establishing supersymmetry breaking.

the structure of this article is as follows. we start by describing general properties of

supersymmetry breaking and studying examples of tree level breaking in section ii. in sec-

tion iii, we discuss indirect methods for nding theories with dynamical supersymmetry

breaking, and for establishing supersymmetry breaking. as we shall see, these methods

7

direct the search for supersymmetry breaking towards chiral theories with no at directions,

preferably possessing an anomaly free r-symmetry. these criteria do not amount to nec-

essary conditions for supersymmetry breaking, and we shall point out loopholes in the

indirect methods which allow the possibility of supersymmetry breaking in theories which

violate all of the above requirements. recent developments have led to the discovery of such

susy breaking theories and we shall postpone the discussion of representative examples to

section vi. still, some of the indirect methods we shall describe, most notably, the break-

ing of a global symmetry in a theory with no at directions, provide the most convincing

evidence for supersymmetry breaking in theories that cannot be directly analyzed.

in sections iv and v we turn to theories that can be directly analyzed in the infrared.

in the early 80s, such studies were limited to a semi-classical analysis in regions of weak

coupling, and we shall describe such analyses in section iv. the main development in

recent years has been the better understanding of supersymmetric theories in regions of

strong coupling, and we shall study supersymmetry breaking in such theories in section v.

in both cases, the analysis of supersymmetry breaking involves two ingredients. the rst

is identifying the correct degrees of freedom of the theory, in terms of which the kahler

potential is non-singular. in all the theories we shall study, in the interior of the moduli

space, these are either the conned variables, or the variables of a dual theory. 1 indeed, we

shall see that duality (seiberg, 1995)the fact that dierent uv theories may lead to the

same infrared physicscan be a useful tool for establishing supersymmetry breaking, as one

can sometimes pick a more convenient theory in which to study whether supersymmetry is

broken or not. a second, related ingredient is nding the exact superpotential in terms of

the light, physical degrees of freedom.

having established these two ingredients, at low energies one then typically has a theory

1at the boundary of moduli space, the microscopic degrees of freedom will often be more

appropriate.

8

of chiral superelds, with all gauge dynamics integrated out, with a known superpotential.

the problem of establishing supersymmetry breaking is then reduced to solving a system of

equations to check whether or not the superpotential can be extremized.

although the results we shall use on the infrared degrees of freedom and the exact

superpotential apply to supersymmetric theories, they may still be used to argue for super-

symmetry breaking, since the theories we shall study in this way are obtained by perturbing

a supersymmetric theory. for a suciently small perturbation, the scale of supersymmetry

breaking can be made suciently small, so that we can work above this scale and still use

known results on the infrared supersymmetric theory. if supersymmetry is indeed broken

in the theory, the breaking should persist even as the perturbation is increased. otherwise,

the theory undergoes a phase transition as some coupling is varied, being supersymmetric

in some region and non-supersymmetric in another. however, one does not expect su-

persymmetric theories to undergo phase transitions as couplings are varied (seiberg and

witten, 1994a; seiberg and witten, 1994b; intriligator and seiberg, 1994).

having learned various techniques for the analysis of dsb, we use these in section vi to

study a few examples of theories that break supersymmetry dynamically even though they

violate some of the criteria described in section iii.

perhaps the most disappointing aspect of the recent progress in our understanding of

supersymmetry breaking is that it still has not yielded any organizing principle to the study

and classication of supersymmetry-breaking theories. in section vii we shall describe one

method for generating new supersymmetry-breaking theories from known theories. how-

ever, this is far from a full, systematic classication. nor can we tell immediately, without

detailed analysis, whether a specic theory breaks supersymmetry or not. for these reasons

we nd it useful to present a rough survey of known models in section vii, pointing out

their main features, the relations between them, and where applicable, their relevant prop-

erties for model-building purposes. while we shall see many dierent mechanisms by which

supersymmetry is broken in these examples, the breaking is almost always the consequence

of the interplay between instanton eects and a tree-level superpotential.

9

another area requiring further study is the analysis of supersymmetry-breaking vacua,

their symmetries and light spectra, in strongly coupled theories. one may hope that recently

discovered realizations of supersymmetric gauge theories as extended brane congurations

in string theory will lead to further progress in this direction, as well as to some organizing

principle for dsb. indeed, several dsb models have been realized as d-brane congurations

in string/m-theory, see for example (de boer et al, 1998; lykken-poppitz-trivedi, 1999).

moreover, in some cases the dynamical eects leading to supersymmetry breaking were

understood in stringy language (de boer et al, 1998). however, this approach has yet to

lead to results which cannot be directly obtained in a eld theory analysis.

we limit ourselves in this review to the theoretical analysis of supersymmetry breaking in

dierent models. we do not discuss the questions of whether, and how, this breaking can feed

down to the standard model. ideally, a simple extension of the standard model would break

supersymmetry by itself, generating an acceptable superpartner spectrum. unfortunately,

this is not the case. in simple supersymmetry breaking extensions of the standard model

without new gauge interactions, non-perturbative eects would probably be too small to gen-

erate soft terms of the correct size (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985). moreover, unless some of

the scalars obtained their masses either radiatively, or from non-renormalizable operators,

some superpartners would be lighter than the lightest lepton or quark (dimopoulos and

georgi, 1981). thus, supersymmetry must be broken by a new, strongly-interacting sector,

and then communicated to the sm either by supergravity eects, in which case the soft terms

are generated by higher-dimension operators or at the loop level, or by gauge-interactions,

in which case the soft terms occur at the loop-level. these dierent possibilities introduce

dierent requirements on the susy breaking sector. for example, gravity mediation often

requires singlet elds which participate in the susy breaking. simple models of gauge me-

diation require a large unbroken global symmetry at the minimum of the susy breaking

theory, in which the standard model gauge group can be embedded. several of the super-

symmetry breaking models discovered recently have some of these desired properties, and

thus allow for improved phenomenological models for the communication of supersymmetry

10

breaking.

another issue which is important for phenomenological applications of dsb that we

shall not address is the cosmological constant problem. in globally supersymmetric theo-

ries, fermionic and bosonic contributions to the vacuum energy cancel each other and the

cosmological constant vanishes. upon supersymmetry breaking this is no longer true, and

the cosmological constant is comparable to the scale of supersymmetry breaking. while in a

framework of local supersymmetry a further cancellation is possible, signicant ne tuning

is required. eventually, a microscopic understanding of such a ne tuning is needed in any

successful phenomenological application of dynamical supersymmetry breaking.

how to use this review

in the body of this review we assume that the reader is familiar with the general proper-

ties of supersymmetric eld theories and rely heavily on symmetries and a number of exact

non-perturbative results obtained in recent years. the reader who is just beginning the

study of supersymmetry should rst consult the appendix, where we briey present basic

facts about supersymmetry and relevant results to make our presentation self-contained. for

a more complete introduction to susy see for example, bagger and wess (1991) and nilles

(1984). several excellent reviews of the recent progress in the study of strongly coupled

susy gauge theories exist, see for example intriligator and seiberg (1996), peskin (1997),

and shifman (1997).

in appendix a 1 we introduce notations and basic formulae for the lagrangians of su-

persymmetric theories. the knowledge of these results is necessary in every section of the

review. in a 2 we discuss a method for nding the d-at directions of a susy gage theory

(directions along which the gauge interaction terms in the scalar potential vanish), and the

parametrization of d-at directions in terms of gauge-invariant operators. these results are

necessary for the study of supersymmetry breaking in non-abelian gauge theories which we

discuss starting in section iii d. in a 3 through a 7 we turn to susy qcd with dierent

numbers of avors. while the results we present are used directly in various places in sec-

11

tions ivvii, the discussion in these appendixes also illustrates techniques in the analysis

of the dynamics of general susy gauge theories and are applicable to models with matter

transforming in general representations of the gauge group. the discussion also provides

simple examples of phenomena such as theories with no quantum moduli spaces, deformed

quantum moduli spaces, connement without chiral symmetry breaking, and duality. we

shall encounter these phenomena in various theories throughout the review. references to

analyses of the dynamics of theories other than su(n) are collected in a 8.

we also note that the reader who is only interested in a general knowledge of dsb can

skip sections vi and vii. section vii c can be used independently of the rest of the article

as a guide to dsb models.

finally, we note that the interested reader can nd several useful reviews of dynam-

ical supersymmetry breaking which have appeared in the past couple of years. a short

introduction to recent developments can be found in (skiba, 1997; nelson, 1998; pop-

pitz, 1998; thomas, 1998). most notably, the review by poppitz and trivedi (1998), although

smaller in scope than the present review, emphasizes recent developments in the eld. it also

contains a discussion of supersymmetry breaking in quantum mechanical systems. shifman

and vainshtein (1999) give an excellent introduction to instanton techniques and discuss

their application for supersymmetry breaking. the review by giudice and rattazzi (1998),

focuses on applications of dsb to building models of gauge mediated supersymmetry break-

ing.

ii. generalities

a. vacuum energy  the order parameter of susy breaking, and f and d atness

a positive vacuum energy is a necessary and sucient condition for spontaneous susy

breaking. this follows from the fact that the hamiltonian of the theory is related to the

absolute square of the susy generators (see appendix a 1)

12

h =

1
4

(q1q1 + q1q1 + q2q2 + q2q2) .

(1)

the energy is then either positive or zero. furthermore, a state that is annihilated by q

has zero energy, and conversely, a zero-energy state is annihilated by q. thus, the vacuum

energy serves as an order parameter for supersymmetry breaking.

therefore the study of supersymmetry breaking requires the knowledge of the scalar

potential of the theory.

it is convenient to formulate the theory in n = 1 superspace,
where space-time (bosonic) coordinates are supplemented by anti-commuting (fermionic)

coordinates2.

in this formulation elds of dierent spins related by supersymmetry are

combined in the supersymmetry multiplets, superelds. matter elds form chiral superelds,

while gauge bosons and their spin 1/2 superpartners form (real) vector superelds. in the

superspace formulation, physics, and in particular, the scalar potential, is determined by two

functions of the superelds, the superpotential and the kahler potential. the superpotential

encodes yukawa-type interactions in the theory, in particular it contributes to the scalar

potential. the superpotential is an analytic function of the superelds. this fact together

with symmetries and known (weakly coupled) limits often allows to determine the exact

non-perturbative superpotential of the theory. the kahler potential, on the other hand,

is a real function of superelds, and can only be reliably calculated when a weakly couled

description of the theory exists. from our perspective, the kahler potential is important in

two respects. first, it gives rise to gauge-interaction terms in the scalar potential. second, it

determines the kinetic terms of the matter elds and thus modies scalar interactions arising

from the superpotential. assuming a canonical (quadratic in the elds) kahler potential,

the scalar potential is

v = xa

(da)2 +xi

f 2
i

,

(2)

where the sum runs over all gauge indices a and all matter elds i. in (2), the d-terms and

f-terms are auxiliary components of vector and chiral superelds respectively. d-terms and

2for more detail see appendix a 1.

13

f-terms are not dynamical and one should solve their equations of motion. in particular,

f-terms are given by derivatives of the superpotential (for more details, and the analogous

expressions for d-terms, see appendix (a 1).)

fi =

w
i

.

for supersymmetry to remain unbroken, there has to be some eld conguration for which

both the f -terms and the d-terms vanish.3 in fact, generically, such congurations exist not

only at isolated points but on a subspace of the eld space. this subspace is often referred

to as the moduli space of the theory.

classically, one could set all superpotential couplings to zero. then the moduli space of

the theory is the set of d-at directions, along which the d-terms vanish. a particularly

useful parameterization of d-at directions, which we discuss in appendix a 2, can be given

in terms of the gauge invariant operators of the theory (luty and taylor, 1996). even when

small tree-level superpotential couplings are turned on, the vacua will lie near the d-at

directions. it is convenient, therefore, to analyze susy gauge theories in two stages. first

nd the d-at directions, then analyze the f -terms along these directions. the latter have

classical contributions from the tree-level superpotential, and may lift some, or all, of

the d-at directions. since a classical superpotential is a polynomial in the elds, f -terms

typically grow for large scalar vacuum expectation values (vev), and vanish at the origin.4

3 here we implicitly assumed that the kahler potential is a regular function of the elds and has

no singularities. for example, if the derivatives of the kahler potential vanish, the scalar potential

can be non-zero even if all f and d terms vanish, see eq. (a6).

4an important exception are superpotentials terms that are linear in the elds, which lead to

potentials that are nonzero even at the origin. such terms necessarily involve gauge-singlets, and

require the introduction of some mass scale. however, linear term can be generated dynamically.

we shall encounter examples of trilinear, or higher, superpotential terms that become linear after

connement.

14

as mentioned in the introduction, a key point in the study of susy breaking is

the fact that, due to the supersymmetric non-renormalization theorems (wess and zu-

mino, 1974; ferrara-iliopoulos-zumino, 1974; grisaru-rocek-siegel, 1979; seiberg, 1993),

the moduli space remains unmodied in perturbation theory. if the classical potential van-

ishes for some choice of vevs, it remains exactly zero to all orders in perturbation theory.

thus, only non-perturbative eects may generate a non-zero potential, and lift the classical

zeros. indeed, non-perturbative eects can modify the moduli space; they can lift the moduli

space completely; or, nally, the quantum moduli space may coincide with the classical one.

there are numerous possibilities then for the behavior of the theory. if a theory breaks

supersymmetry, it has some ground state of positive energy at some point in eld space (or it

may, in principle, have several ground states at dierent points5). alternatively, the theory

may remain supersymmetric, with either one ground state of zero energy at some point

in eld space, or a few ground states, at isolated points, or with a continuum of ground

states, corresponding to completely at directions that are not lifted either classically or

non-perturbatively. it is also possible that the theory does not have a stable vacuum state.

in such a case, while a supersymmetric vacuum does not exist, the energy can become

arbitrarily small along some direction on the moduli space.6 while such a theory can still

be given a cosmological interpretation (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984a), we shall not consider

5in this latter case the ground states are non-degenerate even if they appear to have the same

energy in a certain approximation. this is because the low energy physics is non-supersymmetric,

and the vacuum energy receives quantum corrections (on top of the non-perturbative eects which

led to the non-vanishing energy in the rst place). since dierent non-supersymmetric vacua are

non-equivalent, these quantum corrections lift the degeneracy.

6we shall call such directions in the moduli space runaway directions, and study them carefully

in sections vi avi b.

15

it a susy breaking theory for our purposes.7

note that supersymmetric theories are very dierent, in this respect, from other theories.

in a non-supersymmetric theory, multiple ground states are usually related by a symmetry,

and are therefore physically equivalent. on the other hand, dierent ground states of a

supersymmetric theory may describe completely dierent physics. for example, classically,

one at direction of an su(3) gauge theory with two avors is (see appendix a 4 for details)

f = f =

,

(3)




v 0

0 0

0 0




where f and f are the scalar components of the su(3) fundamentals and antifundamentals

respectively. for any given choice of v, the low-energy theory is an su(2) gauge theory,

whose gauge coupling depends on v.8 note also that the at directions of susy theories may

extend to innity, unlike the customary compact at directions of bosonic global symmetries.

furthermore, in the case of other global symmetries, the existence of a at direction is

usually associated with spontaneous breaking of the symmetry, with the massless goldstone

bosons corresponding to motions along the at direction. this is not the case with susy.

the reason, of course, is that the susy generators do not correspond to motions in eld

space. theories with unbroken susy may have degenerate vacua precisely because susy

is unbroken. and, as we shall see in the next section, theories with spontaneously broken

7we also note that the runaway moduli may be stabilized, and supersymmetry broken, due to

kahler potential eects when the theory is coupled to gravity (dvali and kakushadze, 1998).

however, since the typical vevs in this case will be of planck size, the vacuum will be determined

by the details of the microscopic theory at mp , and the dynamical supersymmetry breaking is not

calculable in the low energy eective eld theory.

8here we consider the classical vacua of the theory. quantum mechanically, the at directions (3)

are lifted, and the theory does not have a stable vacuum. yet, in many models non-equivalent

quantum vacua exist.

16

susy have the analog of goldstone particles even when they only have a single ground

state.

b. the goldstino

the breaking of any bosonic global symmetry is accompanied by the appearance of mass-

less goldstone bosons that couple linearly to the symmetry current. similarly, a theory with

broken supersymmetry contains a massless fermion, which is usually referred to as a gold-

stone fermion, or in short, goldstino, that couples linearly to the susy current (salam

and strathdee, 1974; witten, 1981a).

the goldstino coupling to the susy current can be expressed as

 = f  
j 

 g

 + . . . ,

(4)

where g

 is the goldstino, and as we shall see momentarily, f is a constant which is non-

zero when susy is broken. the ellipsis in (4) stand for terms quadratic in the elds and

for potential derivative terms. conservation of the susy current then implies that the

goldstino is massless. to justify (4), note that, for broken susy (witten, 1981a),

z d4x  h0|t j 

(x) j 

(0)|0i = h0|{q , j 

(0)}|0i 6= 0 .

(5)

if indeed there is a massless fermion coupling to the current as in (4), then the lhs of (5)

is equal to

f 2  

  

z d4x h0|t g

 (x) g

 (0)|0i = f 2  

  

[ip g(p) ]p0 = f 2 

  ,

(6)

where g(p)   is the goldstino propagator. so indeed f is nonzero. note that a fermion

with derivative coupling to the current would not contribute to the rhs of (6) because of

the additional factors of the momentum in the numerator. in fact, since from the susy
algebra h0|{q , j 

 , with e the energy, we have f 2 = 2e.

(0)}|0i = 2e 

to see the appearance of the goldstino more concretely, consider the susy current

17

j 

  x

l
()

() ,

(7)

where the sum is over all elds, and () is the shift of the eld  under a susy trans-

formation. because of lorentz symmetry, the only linear terms in (7) come from vacuum

expectation values of (). examining the susy transformations of the chiral and vector

multiplets of n = 1 susy (see for example bagger and wess, (1991)), we see from lorentz
invariance that the only elds whose susy transformations contain lorentz-invariant ob-

jects, which can develop vevs, are the matter fermion i, whose susy transformation gives

fi, and the gauge fermion a, whose transformation gives da. one then nds,

g  xhfii i +

1

2 xhdai a ,

(8)

so that the goldstino is a linear combination of the chiral and gauge fermions whose aux-

iliary elds f and d acquire vevs. note that eq. (8) actually only holds with a canonical

(quadratic) kahler potential, otherwise derivatives of the kahler potential enter as well. we

can use this to argue that a non-vanishing f -vev or d-vev is a necessary condition for susy

breaking. when susy is broken, there is a massless fermion, the goldstino, that transforms

inhomogeneously under the action of the susy generators. but the only lorentz-invariant

objects that appear in the susy variations of the n = 1 multiplets, and therefore may
obtain vevs, are the auxiliary elds f and d. thus, for susy breaking to occur, some f -

or d- elds should develop vevs.

in light of the above, it would rst seem that if susy is relevant to nature, we should

observe the massless goldstino. however, we ultimately need to promote susy to a local

symmetry to incorporate gravity into the full theory. in the framework of local supersym-

metry, the massless goldstino becomes the longitudinal component of the gravitino, much

like in the case of the higgs mechanism. the gravitino then has a coupling to ordinary

matter other than the gravitational interaction, by virtue of its goldstino component. it

should come as no surprise then, that the gravitino mass as well as its coupling to matter

elds, are related to the susy breaking scale. this has important phenomenological impli-

cations. in particular, in models with low-scale susy breaking, the gravitino is very light,

18

and the decay of other superpartners into the gravitino may be observed in collider searches

for supersymmetry (dimopoulos et al, 1998; stump-wiest-yuan, 1996).

c. tree-level breaking

1. oraifeartaigh models

one of the simplest models of spontaneous supersymmetry breaking was proposed by

oraifeartaigh (1975), and is based on a theory of chiral superelds. supersymmetry in the

model is broken at tree level: while the lagrangian of the model is supersymmetric, even the

classical potential is such that a supersymmetric vacuum state does not exist.

in addition to giving the simplest example of spontaneously broken supersymmetry, the

study of oraifeartaigh models will be useful for our later studies of dsb, as the low-energy

description of many dynamical models we shall encounter will be given by an oraifeartaigh-

type model.

before writing down the simplest example of an oraifeartaigh model, let us describe the

general properties of such models. first, we shall restrict our attention to superpotentials

with only positive exponents of the elds. we shall later analyze a number of models

where the low-energy description involves superpotentials containing negative exponents of

the elds. such terms, however, are generated by the non-perturbative dynamics of the

underlying (strongly coupled) microscopic theory, and are not appropriate in the tree level

superpotential we consider here.

second, since the superpotential is a polynomial in the elds, at least one of the elds in

this model needs to appear linearly in the superpotential, or there will be a supersymmetric

vacuum at the origin of the moduli space.

it would prove useful, for future purposes, to pay special attention to the r-symmetry

of the model. (for the denition of an r-symmetry, see appendix (a 1)). if this symmetry

is unbroken by the superpotential, there is then at least one eld of r-charge 2. more

19

generally, consider a model containing elds c

i , i = 1, . . . , k with r-charge 2, and elds

n
a, a = 1, . . . , l with r-charge 0. (for convenience, we shall call them charged and neutral

respectively, even though various components of the superelds transform dierently under

r-symmetry.) the most general superpotential respecting the r-symmetry can be written

as

w =

k

xi=1

ifi(n
c

a) ,

(9)

and, for supersymmetry to break, at least one of the fis, say f1, contains a constant term,

independent of the elds. the equations of motion for the r-charged elds w/c

i =

fi(n

a) = 0 give k equations for l unknowns n

a. if k > l there are no solutions for generic

functions fi, the f-term conditions can not all be satised and supersymmetry is broken.

one can modify these models by adding elds with r-charges 0 < qr < 2. since such

elds can not couple to the elds c

i while preserving the r-symmetry, they will not change

the above discussion, and supersymmetry remains broken. if, on the other hand, elds with

negative r-charges are added to the model, the total number of variables on which the fis

depend increases, and in general supersymmetry is unbroken. finally, we should note that

adding to the superpotential explicit r symmetry violating couplings which do not involve

elds of r charge 2 will not modify the above discussion. on the other hand, r symmetry

violating terms which include elds of r charge 2 will generically lead to the restoration of

supersymmetry.

it is also useful to look at the equations of motion for the r-neutral elds. first, note that

their vevs are xed by minimizing the part of the scalar potential arising from the f-terms

of the r-charged elds (the remaining terms in the scalar potential vanish at least when
hc
variables c
i .

ii = 0 for all i). therefore, there are l f-term equations depending on k independent
in a susy breaking model k > l, so there are k  l linear combinations
i that are left undetermined. thus oraifeartaigh models necessarily posses

of the elds c

directions of at (non-zero) potential in the tree level approximation (zumino, 1981; einhorn

and jones, 1983; polchinski, 1983). as we shall discuss later this is not a generic situation

20

in models of dsb.

the simplest example of an oraifeartaigh model requires two elds with r-charge 2,

one eld with r-charge 0 (k = 2, l=1), and has the superpotential

w = 1(m 2

1  12) + m22 .

(10)

it is easy to see that the f-term conditions for 1 and 2 are incompatible. we can directly

minimize the scalar potential

2

v = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

m 2

1  12(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+ |m2|2 + |m22  211|2 .

(11)

in the limit

the rst two terms in (11) determine the value of  at the minimum.

m2

2/(1m 2

 = (m 2

1 )  1 the minimum is found at  = 0, while for small m2
1  m2

2/2)1/2/1. note that 1 and 2 only appear in the last term in (11). this

1 ) we nd

2/(1m 2

term should be set to zero for the potential to be extremal with respect to 1 and 2. this

is achieved when 2 = 211/m2, and therefore, at tree level the linear combination
m21  21hi2 is arbitrary, as was expected from the previous discussion. equivalently,
we can parameterize dierent vacua by the expectation values of 1. note that dierent

vacua are physically non-equivalent, in particular the spectrum depends on h1i.

it is easy to nd the tree level spectrum of the model. for any choice of parameters

it contains a massless fermion, the goldstino. the spectrum also contains the scalar eld

associated with the at direction whose mass arises entirely due to radiative corrections

(however, there are no quadratic divergences since the action of the theory is supersymmetric

although supersymmetry is not realized linearly). all other states are massive. another

important feature of this spectrum is that the supertrace of the mass matrix squared, str m2
i ,

vanishes. this property of the spectrum holds for any model with tree level supersymmetry

breaking (ferrara-girardello-palumbo, 1979).

since supersymmetry is broken, the vacuum degeneracy is lifted in perturbation theory.

huq (1976) calculated the one loop corrections to the potential of this model. they are

given by

21

v (1) = xi

642 mi(1)4 ln  mi(1)2
(1)f
2 ! ,

(12)

where the sum is over all massive elds (and the masses depend on the 1 vev). huq (1976)

found that the corrections generate a positive mass for 1, and that the non-supersymmetric

vacuum is located at 1 = 0 with unbroken r-symmetry. he also analyzed a model with

an su(3) global symmetry and a model constructed by fayet (1975) with su(2)  u(1)
symmetry, and in both cases found that the tree-level modulus acquires positive mass due to

one-loop corrections to the kahler potential, leading to the unique vacuum with unbroken r-

symmetry. in fact, this conclusion is not surprising. in the model discussed above, quantum

corrections to the vacuum energy come from the renormalization of the mass parameter m 2.

due to the holomorphy of the superpotential, these are completely determined by the wave

function renormalization of 1 and, since the model is infrared free, necessarily generate

positive contribution to the scalar potential. it is important to note that in modications of

the model that include gauge elds, there may be a negative contribution to the potential.

the balance of the two perturbative eects may produce a stable minimum at large values

of the modulus vev (witten, 1981b).

2. fayet-iliopoulos breaking

another useful example of tree level supersymmetry breaking is given by a model with

u(1) gauge interactions (fayet-iliopoulos, 1974). in this model supersymmetry breaking is

driven by d-term contributions to the potential, but depending on the parameters of the

lagrangian, the non-zero vacuum energy either comes entirely from d-term contributions, or

from both d- and f-terms. to understand how d-terms can drive supersymmetry breaking,

we recall that the kahler potential can be written as a function of the gauge invariant

combination of elds

k = f (ev ,w w,s),

(13)

22

where  represents matter elds transforming in some representation of the gauge group,

v is a vector supereld whose supersymmetric eld strength is w, and s represents gauge
singlet elds. in a nonabelian theory this is the only possible form of eld dependence in

the kahler potential. in an abelian theory, however, the d-term of the vector supereld v

is invariant under the gauge and supersymmetry transformations by itself. thus, if one does

not require parity invariance, the lowest order kahler potential of a u(1) gauge theory can

be written as9


k = qev q + q

ev q + f iv.

(14)

this kahler potential together with superpotential mass terms for the matter elds leads

to the following scalar potential

v =

g2
2

2

(|q|2 (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
q(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

+ )2 + m2(|q|2 +(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
q(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

) .

(15)

it is easy to see that the vacuum energy determined by this potential is necessarily positive

and supersymmetry is broken. when g2 < m2 both scalar elds have positive mass and

d-term in the potential. the scalar mass matrix has eigenvalues m2

their vevs vanish. the positive contribution to the vacuum energy comes entirely from the
 = m2 g2. the gauge
symmetry is unbroken, and thus the gauge boson remains massless. the matter fermions

retain their mass m, while the gaugino remains massless and plays the role of the goldstino.

(in accord with with the fact that here hfii = 0 and hdi 6= 0, see eq. 8.)

when g2 > m2, the eld q has negative mass and acquires a vev. at the minimum
of the potential q = 0 and q = v, where v = (2  4m2/g2)1/2. we see that both the
gauge symmetry and supersymmetry are broken. moreover, both d-term and f-term are

non-vanishing and supersymmetry breaking is of the mixed type. one can easily nd that

the spectrum of the model contains one vector eld and one real scalar eld of mass squared

1

2g2v2, one complex scalar of mass squared 2m2, two fermions of mass (m2 + 1

2g2v2)1/2, and a

9we restrict our attention to two matter multiplets with charges 1.

23

massless goldstone fermion which is a linear combination of the goldstino and the positively

charged fermion

 =

1

2 g2v2  m +

qm2 + 1

igv
2

q! .

(16)

iii. indirect criteria for dsb

as we have seen in section ii a, the fact that the vacuum energy is the relevant order

parameter immediately points the way in our quest for susy breaking: we should study the

zeros of the scalar potential. this, indeed, is what we shall undertake to do in sections iv

and onward. unfortunately, directly studying the zeros of the potential will not always be

possible, or easy. in this section we review several alternate indirect methods that are

useful in the search for supersymmetry breaking.

a. the witten index

supersymmetry breaking is related to the existence of zero-energy states. rather than

looking at the total number of zero energy states, it is often useful to consider the witten

index (witten, 1982), which measures the dierence between the number of bosonic and

fermionic states of zero energy,

tr(1)f  n0

b  n0
f .

(17)

if the witten index is nonzero, there is at least one state of zero energy, and super-

symmetry is unbroken. if the index vanishes, supersymmetry may either be broken, with

no states of zero energy, or it may be unbroken, with identical numbers of fermionic and

bosonic states of zero energy.

the witten index is a topological invariant of the theory.

in this lies its usefulness.

it may be calculated for some convenient choice of the parameters of the theory, and in

particular, for weak coupling, but the result is valid generally. to see this, note that in a

24

nite volume, fermionic and bosonic states of positive energy are paired by the action of the

susy generator:

q|bei 

e|fei q|fei 

e|bei ,

(18)

where |bei (|fei) is a bosonic (fermionic) state of energy e.10 (recall that states of zero
energy are annihilated by q, and are therefore not paired). thus, under mild variations

of the parameters of the theory, states may move to zero energy and from zero energy, but

they always do so in bose-fermi pairs, leaving the witten index unchanged.

let us be a bit more precise now about what is meant by mild variations above. as

long as a parameter of the theory, which is originally nonzero, is varied to a dierent nonzero

value, we do not expect the witten index to change, since dierent states can only move

between dierent energy levels in pairs. the danger lies in the appearance of new states of

zero energy. this can happen if the asymptotic (in eld space) behavior of the potential

changes, which may happen if some parameter of the theory is set to zero, or is turned on.

in that case, states may come in from innity or move out to innity.

the index of several theories was calculated by witten (1982). in particular, witten

found that the index of a pure supersymmetric yang-mills (sym) theory is non-zero. 11

thus, these theories do not break supersymmetry spontaneously. an important corollary is

10this in fact justies including only zero-energy states in (17). states of non-zero energy do not

contribute.

11 for su and sp groups the index is equal to r + 1, where r is the rank of the group. this is the

same as the number of gaugino condensates for these groups. more generally, the index equals the

dual coxeter number of the group, which is dierent from r + 1 for some groups, notably some of

the so groups (witten, 1998). the fact that the number of gaugino condensates does not always

equal r + 1, which was believed to be the value of the index, remained a puzzle until its resolution

by witten recently (witten, 1998). this puzzle partly motivated the conjecture that sym theories

have a vacuum with no gaugino condensate (kovner and shifman, 1997). this possibility would

25

that sym theories with massive matter (and no massless matter) do not break supersym-

metry either. the reason is that, at least in weak coupling, one can take all masses large,

so that there are no massless states in these theories beyond those of the pure sym theory,

and so the value of the index is the same as in the pure sym theory.

what happens when the mass of the matter elds is taken to zero? the theory with

zero mass has at directions, along which the potential is classically zero (away from these

at directions the potential behaves as the fourth power of the eld strength). in contrast,

the theory with mass for all matter elds has no classical at directions, with the potential

growing at least quadratically for large elds. thus, as the mass is taken to zero, the

asymptotic behavior of the potential changes, and the witten index may change too. in

fact, the index is ill-dened in the presence of at directions, since zero modes associated

with the at directions lead to a continuous spectrum of states. (indeed, to calculate the

index of any theory one needs to consider the theory in a nite volume so that the resulting

spectrum is discrete.) we therefore cannot say anything about supersymmetry breaking in

massless, non-chiral theories based on the witten index of the pure sym theory.

consider for example sqcd with n colors and f avors of mass m, which we discuss in
jqi  qj, the theory

appendix a 4a 7. as explained there, in the presence of mass terms mi

has n vacua at

i  qi  qj = (3n f )/n (detm)1/n (m1)j
m j
i ,

(19)

corresponding to the n roots of unity. this is in agreement with the witten index n of pure

su(n) gauge theory. consider now the massless limit, mi

j  0. for f < n, the vacua (19)
all tend to innity. the theory has no ground state at nite eld vevs. the potential is

have far-reaching consequences for supersymmetry breaking. the vast majority of theories that

break susy do so by virtue of a superpotential generated by gaugino condensation. a vacuum

with no gaugino condensate would mean an extra ground state, or an entire branch of ground

states, with zero energy and unbroken susy.

26

nonzero in any nite region of eld space and slopes to zero at innity. the massless limit

of the theory is therefore not well-dened. for f > n, by taking mi

j  0 in dierent ways,
i may be attained. the massless theory has an entire moduli space of vacua,

any value of m j

parameterized by m j

i . the n = f case is more subtle, but in this case too, the theory has a

moduli space of vacua. thus, the ground states of the massless su(n) theory with f avors

are drastically dierent from those of the massive theory. in these examples we explicitly

see how zero-energy states can disappear to innity, or come in from innity. again, this is

possible because the asymptotic behavior of the potential changes as the mass tends to zero.

the theory including mass terms has no at directions. asymptotically the potential rises at

least quadratically. the massless theory has classical at directions. quantum mechanically,

they are completely lifted for f < n, and the potential asymptotes to zero as a fractional

power of the eld. for f  n at directions remain even quantum mechanically. in any
case, adding mass terms changes the asymptotic behavior of the potential.

in the examples above, the massive theory was supersymmetric (with zero energy states

at nite elds vevs) and the massless theory was either supersymmetric (with a continuum

of vacua) or not well dened (with no ground state).

it is natural to ask whether there

exist vectorlike (parity-conserving) theories that break susy as the relevant masses are

taken to zero. the answer to this question is armative as we shall see in an explicit

example in section vi a 2. it is useful to understand the general properties of the potential

in such a theory. as before, we expect the fully massive theory to have a non-zero witten

index. the only way to obtain supersymmetry breaking as the masses are taken to zero, is

if the masses change the asymptotic behavior of the potential. suppose that for any nite

value of the mass parameter m, the theory possesses a supersymmetric vacuum at some vev

v0(m), which moves away to innity as some of the masses are taken to zero. clearly, for

small nite masses, the directional derivative of the potential with respect to the modulus

is negative for large values of v < v0(m). (the theory may have various minima for nite

values of v, but we are interested in the asymptotic behavior of the potential at large v.)

in the absence of a phase transition at zero mass, such a directional derivative will remain

27

non-positive in the limit m  0. however, there are still two possibilities. first, it is
possible that the directional derivative is negative for any nite vev, and only vanishes in

the double limit, m  0, v  . in such a case the theory does not have a stable vacuum.
however, it is also possible that the derivative vanishes in the limit m  0 for suciently
large, but otherwise arbitrary v. if this is the case, the asymptotic behavior of the potential

changes, and it becomes a non-zero constant asymptotically far along the at direction, so

supersymmetry is broken. however, because the potential is at, running eects cannot be

neglected.

indeed, as we shall argue in section vi a 2, such eects may lift the vacuum

degeneracy and determine the true non-supersymmetric vacuum.

to summarize, pure sym theories, as well as vectorlike theories with masses for all matter

elds, have a non-zero index, and do not break supersymmetry. when some masses are taken

to zero, the resulting theories have classical at directions, and therefore, the asymptotic

behavior of the potential is dierent from that of the massive theory. the witten index may

then change discontinuously and dier, if it is well dened, from that of the massive theory.

what about chiral (parity-violating) theories? in such theories, at least some of the

matter elds cannot be given mass. thus, these theories cannot be obtained by deforming

a massive vectorlike theory, and there is no a priori reason to expect, based on existing

computations of witten index, that these theories are supersymmetric. indeed, most known

examples of supersymmetry breaking are chiral.

b. global symmetries and supersymmetry breaking

in this section we shall discuss the connection between global symmetries and supersym-

metry breaking, which motivates two criteria for supersymmetry breaking. while these are

useful guidelines for nding supersymmetry-breaking theories, they are not strict rules, and

we shall encounter several exceptions in the following.

consider rst a theory with an exact, non-anomalous global symmetry, and no at

directions. if the global symmetry is spontaneously broken, there is a massless scalar eld,

28

the goldstone boson, with no potential. with unbroken supersymmetry, the goldstone

boson is part of a chiral supermultiplet that contains an additional massless scalar, again

with no potential. this scalar describes motions along a at direction of zero potential.

but this contradicts our initial assumption that there are no at directions. to avoid the

contradiction we should drop the assumption of unbroken supersymmetry. this gives a

powerful tool for establishing supersymmetry breaking (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984b; aeck-

dine-seiberg, 1985): if a theory has a spontaneously broken global symmetry and no at

directions, the theory breaks supersymmetry.

we have assumed here that the additional massless scalar corresponds to motions along a

non-compact at direction. this is often the case, since, in supersymmetric theories, the su-

perpotential is invariant under the complexied global symmetry, with the goldstone boson

corresponding to the imaginary part of the relevant order parameter, and its supersymmetric

partner corresponding to the real part of the order parameter.12

in general, deciding whether a global symmetry is broken requires detailed knowledge of

the potential of the theory, and is at least as hard as determining whether the vacuum energy

vanishes. however, if a theory is strongly coupled at the scale at which supersymmetry might

be broken, one cannot directly answer either of these questions.13 still, in some cases, one

may argue, based on t hooft anomaly matching conditions (t hooft, 1980), that a global

symmetry is broken.

if a global symmetry is unbroken in the ground-state, then the massless fermions of

12the possibility that the low-energy theory is a theory of goldstone bosons and massless chiral

elds such that the supersymmetric scalar partner of any goldstone is a goldstone too is ruled

out. such theories can only be coupled to gravity for discrete values of newtons constant (bagger-

witten, 1982), and so cannot describe the low-energy behavior of renormalizable gauge theories.

13the most obvious example is a theory which does not possess any adjustable parameters, and

has only one scale, like an su (5) model of section iii d.

29

the low-energy theory should reproduce the global triangle anomalies of the microscopic

theory (t hooft, 1980). thus there should be a set of elds, with appropriate charges under

the global symmetry, that give a solution to the anomaly-matching conditions. this fact may

be used when trying to determine whether a theory connes, and how its global symmetries

are realized in the vacuum. for example, if the gauge-invariants which can be constructed

out of the microscopic elds of the theory saturate the anomaly-matching conditions for some

subgroup of the global symmetry of the microscopic theory, it is plausible that the theory

connes, and that the relevant symmetry subgroup remains unbroken in the vacuum. in

contrast, if all possible solutions to the anomaly-matching conditions are very complicated,

that is, they require a large set of elds, it is plausible to conclude that the global symmetry

is spontaneously broken.

in the case of an r-symmetry there is another way to determine whether it is spon-

taneously broken.

in many theories, the scale of supersymmetry breaking is much lower

than the strong-coupling scale, so that supersymmetry breaking can be studied in a low-

energy eective theory involving chiral superelds only, with all gauge dynamics integrated

out. in fact, the low-energy theory is an oraifeartaigh-like model (with possibly negative

exponents of the elds in the superpotential arising from non-perturbative eects in the

microscopic description). in some cases it is easy to see that the origin is excluded from

the moduli space, because, for example, the potential diverges there. then typically, some

terms appearing in the superpotential obtain vevs. since all terms in the superpotential

have r-charge 2 this implies that r-symmetry is broken. obviously such an argument is

not applicable to other global symmetries because the superpotential is necessarily neutral

under non-r symmetries. so it is often easier to prove that an r-symmetry is broken, than

to prove that a non-r symmetry is broken. if the theory has no at directions one can then

conclude that supersymmetry is broken.

it is not surprising that r-symmetries, which do not commute with supersymmetry,

should play a special role in supersymmetry breaking. let us discuss this role further,

following nelson and seiberg (1994).

30

in what follows we shall assume that the gauge dynamics was integrated out. suppose

we have a low-energy theory with a superpotential w ({xi}), where xi are chiral elds and
i = 1 . . . n. for supersymmetry to remain unbroken, the superpotential should be extremal

with respect to all elds,

w
xi

= 0 .

if the theory has no symmetries, the number of unknowns, xi, equals the number of equa-

tions. similarly, if the theory has a global symmetry that commutes with supersymmetry,

the number of equations equals the number of unknowns. to see this note that in this case,

the superpotential can only depend on chiral eld combinations that are invariant under the

symmetry. therefore, if there are k symmetry generators, the superpotential depends on

n k invariant quantities (for example, for a u(1) symmetry these could be xi/x
i = 2 . . . n, and qi, q1 are the u(1) charges of xi, x1 respectively) while the remaining k

qi
q1
1 , where

elds do not appear in the superpotential. thus, for supersymmetry to remain unbroken the

superpotential should be extremal with respect to n k variables, leading to n k equations
in n  k unknowns. thus, generically, there is a solution and supersymmetry is unbroken.
in contrast, suppose the theory has an r symmetry that is spontaneously broken. then

there is a eld, x, with r charge q 6= 0, which gets a non-zero vev. the superpotential then
can be written as

w = x 2/qf (yi = x q

i /x qi) ,

where qi is the charge of xi. for supersymmetry to be unbroken we need

and

f
yi

= 0 ,

f = 0 .

thus there is one more equation than unknowns, and generically we do not expect a solution.

roughly speaking, what we mean by generically is that the superpotential is a generic

function of the elds, that is, it contains all terms allowed by the symmetries. we shall

return to this point shortly.

31

if the extremum of the superpotential were determined by a system of homogeneous

linear equations, the above discussion would lead us to conclude that an r-symmetry is a

necessary condition for supersymmetry breaking, and a spontaneously broken r-symmetry is

a sucient condition. while this conclusion generally holds for theories in which the super-

potential is a generic function consistent with all the symmetries, there may be exceptions

to this rule. this is because the f-atness conditions are given by a system of non-linear

equations which may contain negative powers of elds (arising from the dynamical super-

potential) as well as terms independent of elds (arising from linear terms, either generated

dynamically or included in the tree level superpotential). such a system of equations is not

guaranteed to have solutions. in fact, we have already argued in section ii c 1 that one can

add explicit r-symmetry breaking terms to an oraifeartaigh model without restoring su-

persymmetry. later we shall encounter other examples of supersymmetry breaking models

without r-symmetry.

let us make a bit more precise what we mean by a generic superpotential. the super-

potential contains two parts. one is generated dynamically, and certainly does not contain

all terms allowed by the symmetries (seiberg, 1993). in particular, such terms could involve

arbitrarily large negative powers of the elds. the other part is the classical superpotential,

which is a polynomial (of some degree d) in the elds, that preserves some global symmetry.

here what we mean by generic is that no term, with dimension smaller or equal to d that

is allowed by this global symmetry was omitted from the superpotential. on the other hand,

the tree-level superpotential can still be considered generic if the operators with dimension

higher than d are omitted. indeed, in a renormalizable lagrangian with a stable vacuum we

do not expect planck scale vevs. the analysis of nelson and seiberg (1994) shows that the

inclusion of non-renormalizable operators can only produce additional minima with planck

scale vevs, that is in a region of eld space where our approximation of global supersymme-

try is not sucient anyway. on the other hand, in models where a stable vacuum appears

only after the inclusion of non-renormalizable terms of dimension d, the typical expectation

values will depend on the planck scale (or other large scale) but often will remain much

32

smaller than it. as long as the expectation values are small compared to the planck scale,

these minima will remain stable local minima even if operators of dimension higher than d

are added.

we shall encounter several examples of theories that break supersymmetry even though

they do not possess an r symmetry. in some cases, while the microscopic theory does not

have an r symmetry, there is an eective, spontaneously broken r symmetry in the low

energy theory. in other cases, there is not even an eective r symmetry. in one example,

susy will be broken even though the tree-level superpotential is generic and does not

preserve any r-symmetry, and there is no eective r-symmetry.

c. gaugino condensation

let us now introduce a criterion for susy breaking which is based on gaugino con-

densation (meurice and veneziano, 1984; amati-rossi-veneziano, 1985). suppose that a

certain chiral supereld (or a linear combination of chiral superelds) does not appear in

the superpotential, yet all the moduli are stabilized. in such a case the konishi anomaly

(konishi, 1984; clark-piguet-sibold, 1979) implies

d2( ev )  trw 2 ,

(20)

where d is a supersymmetric covariant derivative (see appendix a 1),  is a chiral supereld
and v is the vector supereld. it is instructive to consider eq. (20) in component form. it

is given by an anomalous commutator with the supersymmetry generator q,

{q, }   ,

(21)

where  and  are the fermionic and scalar components of  respectively, and  is the

gaugino. from this equation we see that the vacuum energy is proportional to the lowest

component of w 2, that is, to < tr >. therefore, if the gaugino condensate forms one

can conclude that supersymmetry is broken. note that if the elds  and  appear in

33

the superpotential, the right-hand side of eqs.

(20) and (21) can be modied and the

gaugino condensate may form without violating supersymmetry. for example, if there is a

superpotential mass term, eq. (21) becomes

{q, } = m  +

1
322  .

(22)

the latter equation is compatible with supersymmetry and determines the vevs of the scalar

elds in terms of the gaugino condensate.

this criterion is related to the global symmetry arguments of aeck-dine-seiberg (1985),

since if a gaugino condensate develops in a theory possessing an r-symmetry, this symmetry

is spontaneously broken. in the absence of at directions, the aeck-dine-seiberg argument

leads to the conclusion that susy is broken.

d. examples

we shall now demonstrate the techniques described in iii b and iii c by a few examples.

1. spontaneously broken global symmetry: the su (5) model

consider an su(5) gauge theory with one antisymmetric tensor (10) a, and one anti-

fundamental f (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984b; meurice and veneziano, 1984). the global

symmetry of the theory is u(1)  u(1)r, under which we can take the charges of the elds
to be a(1, 1) and f (3,9). there are no gauge invariants one can make out of a and
f . thus there are no at directions, and classically the theory has a unique vacuum at the

origin. the theory is strongly coupled near the origin, and we have no way to determine the

behavior of the quantum theory. because there are no chiral gauge invariants, the theory

does not admit any superpotential. if supersymmetry is broken, the only possible scale for

its breaking is the strong coupling scale of su(5).

following aeck-dine-seiberg (1984b) we shall now use r-symmetry to argue that su-

persymmetry is indeed broken (we shall consider a gaugino condensation argument due to

34

meurice and veneziano, (1984) in the following subsection). assuming the theory connes,

the massless gauge-invariant fermions of the conned theory should reproduce the triangle

anomalies generated in the microscopic theory. aeck-dine-seiberg (1984b) showed that

the minimal number of fermions required, with u(1) and u(1)r charges under 50, is ve.

this makes it quite implausible that the full global symmetry remains unbroken. but if the

global symmetry is spontaneously broken and there are no at directions, the theory breaks

supersymmetry by the arguments of iii b.

2. gaugino condensation: the su (5) model

we now would like to apply the gaugino condensate argument to the su(5) model dis-

cussed in the previous subsection. since the gaugino condensate serves as an order parameter

for supersymmetry breaking, we need to establish that it is non-zero. to do that we follow

meurice and veneziano (1984) and consider the correlation function

(x, y, z) = dt (2(x), 2(y), (z))e ,

where

 = abcdea

a b

af c

abcabcade ,

(23)

(24)

and f and a are scalar components of 5 and 10 respectively.

in the limit x, y, z  1 one can show that the condensate   13. then one can
take the limit of large x, y, and z and using cluster decomposition properties argue that

<  >6= 0. as a result supersymmetry must be broken.

3. r-symmetry and susy breaking

in the example of the su(5) model we could not explicitly verify the spontaneous break-

ing of the global symmetry, and had to rely on the use of t hooft anomaly matching

conditions to establish supersymmetry breaking. now we consider examples in which one

35

can explicitly show that r-symmetry is spontaneously broken, and to use that to establish

supersymmetry breaking. while we shall be content to only consider models with tree level

breaking, similar arguments can be applied to a number of dynamical models discussed later.

consider rst the oraifeartaigh model of eq. (10). there is an r symmetry under

which 1, 2 have r-charge 2, and  has r charge zero. there is also a discrete z2 symmetry

under which 1 is neutral, while 2 and  change sign. the superpotential is the generic

one consistent with the symmetries and supersymmetry is broken. we can add to the

superpotential  to some even power so that the r-symmetry is broken. still, supersymmetry

is broken. however, the superpotential is no longer generic, and we can add the term 2
1

without breaking the remaining z2 symmetry. this term will restore supersymmetry.

if we do not wish to impose a discrete symmetry the most general superpotential is

w =

2

xi=1

m 2

i i + mii + ii2.

(25)

the model with this superpotential still breaks supersymmetry unless m1/m2 = m1/m2 =

1/2. note that if the parameters are chosen so that this latter equality is satised the su-
perpotential is independent of one linear combination of the elds,  = (m21m12)/(m2
1 +
m2
2), and thus is not generic.

as another example, consider the superpotential

w = p1x1 + p2x2 + a(x1x2  2) + x1x2 .

(26)

for  = 0 the theory has a u(1)  u(1)r symmetry with a(0, 2), x1(1, 0), x2(1, 0),
p1(1, 2), p2(1, 2). supersymmetry is broken whether or not  = 0. for  6= 0 the r-
symmetry is broken and the potential is no longer generic. terms such as p1p2, a2, which

respect the u(1) could restore supersymmetry. this example is a simple version of the low

energy theory of the example we shall study in section vi c.

36

4. generalizations of the su (5) model

to conclude our presentation of the basic examples of supersymmetry breaking we con-

struct an innite class of models generalizing the su(5) model discussed earlier (aeck-

dine-seiberg, 1985; meurice and veneziano, 1984). these models have an su(2n +1) gauge

group, with matter transforming as an antisymmetric tensor a and 2n 3 antifundamentals
f i, i = 1, . . . , 2n  3, (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985). for n > 2, all these models have d-at
directions, which are all lifted by the most general r-symmetry preserving superpotential

w = ijaf if j ,

(27)

for the appropriate choice of the matrix of coupling constants.

first, note that for small superpotential coupling the model possesses almost at direc-

tions, and as a result, part of the dynamics can be analyzed directly. yet the scale of the

unbroken gauge dynamics in the low energy theory is comparable to the scale of susy break-

ing and the model is not calculable. to analyze supersymmetry breaking it is convenient

to start from the theory without the tree level superpotential. in this case the models have

classical at directions along which the eective theory reduces to the su(5) theory with

an antisymmetric and an antifundamental as well as the light modulus parameterizing the

at direction. we already know that in this eective theory susy is broken with a vacuum
energy  4
thus there is a potential

l. the low energy scale depends on the vev of the modulus as in eq. a21, and

v ()  4

l   4

13 (4n 8) .

(28)

when small yukawa couplings are turned on, the at directions are stabilized by the balance

between the tree level contribution of order 24 and the dynamical potential (28). the

minimum of the potential then occurs for

   13

2(4n+5)  with evac  8 n 2

4n+5 4 .

(29)

we found that the potential is stabilized at nite value of the modulus and the eective

low energy description is given in terms of the susy breaking theory. thus supersymmetry

37

must be broken in the full theory. we also note that at the minimum, r-symmetry is broken,

giving us additional evidence for supersymmetry breaking.

before concluding this section we comment on the analogous theories with su(2n) gauge

groups (aeck-dine-seiberg (1985)). in this case the tree level superpotential allowed by

symmetries (including r symmetry) does not lift all the classical at directions. on the

other hand, a dynamical superpotential is generated, pushing the theory away from the

origin. thus the model does not have a stable ground state. it is possible to lift all at

directions by adding r-symmetry breaking terms to the tree level superpotential. while

lifting the at directions, these terms lead to the appearance of a stable supersymmetric

vacuum.

iv. direct analysis: calculable models

as we have seen, susy breaking is directly related to the zero-energy properties of

the theory, namely, the ground-state energy and the appearance of the massless goldstino.

fortunately, then, to establish susy breaking, we only need to understand the low-energy

behavior of the theory in question. as we shall see, many models can be described, in

certain regions of the moduli space, by a low-energy oraifeartaigh-like eective theory.

the question of whether susy is broken simply amounts to the question of whether all

f -terms can vanish simultaneously. the tricky part, of course, is obtaining the correct

low-energy theory. this involves a number of related ingredients: establishing the correct

degrees of freedom, and determining the superpotential and the kahler potential. in many

cases, holomorphy and symmetries indeed determine the superpotential, but the same is not

true for the kahler potential. however, if all we care about is whether the energy vanishes

or not, it suces to know that the kahler potential is not singular as a function of the elds

that make up the low-energy theory. this, in turn, is related to whether or or not we chose

the correct degrees of freedom of our low-energy theory.

we shall divide our discussion into two parts. in this section we shall consider weakly-

38

coupled theories. by tuning some parameters in the superpotential to be very small, we

can typically drive some of the elds to large expectation values, with the gauge symmetry

completely broken, so that all gauge bosons are very heavy. we can then neglect gauge

interactions, and write down, as advertised, a low-energy oraifeartaigh-type model. since

the theory is weakly-coupled, we shall also be able to calculate the kahler potential, and

thus, completely determine the low-energy theory including the ground-state energy, the

composition of the goldstino, and the masses of low-lying states.

but we can also, in many cases, analyze the theory near the origin in eld space, where

the theory is very strongly coupled. if the theory connes, then below the connement scale,

we are again left with an oraifeartaigh-type model. in section (v), we shall see examples

of this kind. in some cases, though we shall not be able to analyze the theory in question,

we shall be able to analyze a dual theory, that, as we just described, undergoes connement.

in all these cases, however, we shall not be able to calculate the kahler potential. thus,

while we shall ascertain that susy is broken, the details of the low-energy theory, and in

particular the vacuum energy, the unbroken global symmetry, and the masses of low-lying

states remain unknown.

in the examples we encounter, supersymmetry is broken due to a variety of eects.

still, it is always the consequence of the interplay between, on the one hand, a tree-level

superpotential, which gives rise to a non-zero potential everywhere except at the origin in

eld space, and, on the other hand, non-perturbative eects, either in the form of instantons

or gaugino condensation, that generate a potential that is non-zero at the origin.

a. the 32 model

probably the simplest model of dynamical supersymmetry breaking is the 32 model

of aeck-dine-seiberg (1985). here we shall choose the parameters of the model so that

the low-energy eective theory is weakly coupled, and thus the model is calculable. in this

weakly coupled regime, the main ingredient leading to supersymmetry breaking in the model

39

is an instanton generated superpotential. in section vi a 2, we shall analyze the same model

in a strongly coupled regime where susy is broken through the quantum deformation of the

moduli space (which is again the result of instanton eects). we shall also discuss numerous

generalizations of the 32 model.

the model is based on an su(3) su(2) gauge group with the following matter content

(we also show charges under the global u(1)  u(1)r symmetry of the model):

su(3) su(2) u(1) u(1)r

q

u
d
l

3
3
3
1

2

1

1

2

1/3
1
4/3 8
4
2/3
3
1

(30)

using methods described in appendix a 2 one can easily determine the classical moduli

space of the model. in the absence of a tree level superpotential, it is given by

qif = q

if

=

, l = (0,a2  b2) ,

(31)

a 0

0 b

0 0







where q = (u, d), and i, f are su(3) color and avor indices respectively. for generic values

of a and b the gauge group is completely broken, and there are three light chiral elds. while

it is not dicult to diagonalize the mass matrix and nd the light degrees of freedom, it is

convenient to use an alternative parameterization of the classical moduli space in terms of

the composite operators

x1 = qid

i

l, x2 = qiuil, y = det(qq) ,

(32)

where greek indices denote su(2) gauge indices. the most general renormalizable superpo-

tential which preserves the u(1)  u(1)r global symmetry is

wtree = q dl = x1 .

(33)

this superpotential lifts all classical at directions.

40

let us now analyze the quantum theory. to do that we choose 2  g2

2  g2

3. the

former inequality implies that the minimum of the scalar potential lies very close to the

d-at direction. to simplify the analysis we shall, in fact, impose d-atness conditions. 14

the latter inequality guarantees that eects due to the su(2) non-perturbative dynamics

are exponentially suppressed compared to those due to the su(3) dynamics. in particular,

at scales below 3 and much bigger that 2, the su(2) gauge theory is weakly coupled and

its dynamics can be neglected. su(3) on the other hand, connes, so we can write down
 = q  qf , subject to the non-perturbative

an eective theory in terms of its mesons m f

superpotential,

wnp =

27
3

det(qq)

,

(34)

which is generated by an su(3) instanton. the reader may now note that in this eective

theory, su(2) appears anomalous; it has three doublets, m f =1,2, l. however, this is not

too surprising, because the superpotential (34) drives the elds q, q away from the origin,

so that su(2) is broken everywhere. indeed, as discussed in the appendix, an su(3) gauge

theory with two avors has no moduli space.

in fact, we can already conclude that supersymmetry is broken. since the superpo-

tential (34) drives the elds q, q away from the origin, the r-symmetry of the model is

spontaneously broken. combining this with the fact the model has no at directions, we

see, based on the arguments of section iii b, that the theory breaks supersymmetry.

let us go on to analyze supersymmetry breaking in the theory in more detail. as we

saw above, in the absence of a tree-level superpotential, the theory has a runaway vacuum
with q, q  . this is precisely what allows us to nd a calculable minimum in this
model. the tree-level superpotential lifts all classical at directions. any minimum would

result from a balance between wtree, which rises at innity, and wnp, which is singular at

14however, in this and in other calculable models it is easy to take d-term corrections to the

scalar potential into account in numerical calculations.

41

the origin. if we choose  to be very small, the minimum would occur for large q, q vevs, so

that the gauge symmetry is completely broken, and gauge interactions are negligible. thus

for a small   1 we can conclude that the light degrees of freedom can still be described
by the gauge invariant operators x1, x2 and y (in the following we shall see additional

arguments supporting the fact that x1, x2 and y are indeed the appropriate degrees of

freedom). furthermore, the superpotential in this limit is given by

w =

27
3
y

+ x1 .

(35)

we now see explicitly that supersymmetry is broken, since wx1 =  6= 0. note that this
conclusion depends crucially on the fact the we have the full list of massless elds. in general,

one should be careful in drawing a conclusion about supersymmetry breaking based on the

presence of a linear term for a composite eld in the superpotential.

if at some special

points additional elds become massless, the kahler metric is singular, and the potential

v = wik 1

ijwj may vanish even if all wi are non-zero. moreover, if the theory has classical

at directions, it is possible that the kahler potential (written in terms of composites)

has singularities at the boundaries of moduli space, with some elds going to innity, and

possibly others to the origin. as a result supersymmetry may be restored at the origin.

as we saw above, for the choice of parameters 3  2,   1, the theory is weakly
coupled. the kahler potential of the low energy theory is therefore the canonical kahler

potential in terms of the elementary elds, q, u, d and l, projected on the d-at direction.

in terms of the gauge invariant operators it is given by (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985; bagger-

poppitz-randall, 1994)

k = 24

a + bx

x2

,

where a = 1/2(x 

1x1 + x 

2x2), b = 1/3y y , and
x  4b cos(cid:18)1

arccos

3

a

b3/2(cid:19) .

(36)

(37)

we therefore have all the ingredients of the low energy theory, including the superpotential

and the kahler potential. this allows one to explicitly minimize the scalar potential.

42

for details of the analysis, we refer the reader to aeck-dine-seiberg (1985) and bagger-

poppitz-randall (1994). here we just give some qualitative results. it is possible to work

in terms of either the elementary elds, or the gauge invariants elds. simple dimensional
analysis shows that the minimum occurs for elementary eld vevs v  1/73, and that
the vacuum energy is of order 5/143. explicitly one nds that at the minimum x2 = 0, so

that the global u(1) symmetry is unbroken (not surprising, as points of higher symmetry are

extremal). the massless spectrum contains the goldstino, a massless fermion of u(1) charge

2, which saturates the u(1) anomaly, as well as a massless scalar which is the goldstone
boson of the broken r-symmetry (usually known as the r-axion).

this concludes our discussion of the calculable minimum of the 32 model, but let us

make a few more comments.

first, the above analysis of supersymmetry breaking did not involve the strong dynamics

of su(2). it is interesting to see therefore the eect of turning o the su(2) gauge interac-

tions. we then have an su(3) gauge theory with two avors, plus two singlets l=1,2, and

with the superpotential (33). classically, this superpotential leaves a set of at directions.

up to global symmetry transformations (which now include an su(2) global symmetry),

these at directions are parameterized by l1 and q2 u. the nonperturbative dynamics leads

to runaway towards a supersymmetric vacuum at innity along this direction. 15 this dan-

gerous direction is no longer d-at when the su(2) is turned on.

second, even though so far we concentrated on the limit 3  2, it is possible to
derive the exact superpotential of the 32 model for any choice of couplings, and to use it to

establish supersymmetry breaking. note rst that the complete list of independent gauge
invariants is x1, x2, y and z  q3l (we suppress all indices). the latter vanishes classically,
or more precisely in the limit 2  0. in the limit 3  2,  = 0, the superpotential is

15we shall discuss the quantum behavior of susy qcd coupled to singlet elds in detail in

section vi a 1.

43

given by (34). in the limit 2  3,  = 0, the theory is an su(2) gauge theory with two
avors and a quantum constraint which can be implemented in the superpotential using a
lagrange multiplier a, as a(z  4
the symmetries of the theory is

2). 16 the most general superpotential that respects all

w =

27
3
y
3, z  z/4

f (t, z) + a(z  4

2) g(t, z) ,

(38)

where t  x1y /7
2 are the only dimensionless eld combinations neutral under
all symmetries. in the limit 3,   0 (for which any value of t can be attained) we nd an
su(2) theory with 4 doublets (and a set of non-interacting singlet elds). since the exact

superpotential for this theory is known we nd g(t, z)  1. similarly, in the limit 2  0
we nd f (t, z) = 1 + t. the exact superpotential is then

w =

27
3
y

+ a(z  4

2) + x1 .

(39)

it is clear from this superpotential that z obtains a mass. to see if the mass is large one

needs to know the kahler potential for this eld.

in the limit of weakly coupled su(2)

and   1 both gauge groups are strongly broken, and the kahler potential is close to the
classical one. since classically z vanishes, the projection of the classical kahler potential

on it also vanishes (see eq. (36)). for small, but non-vanishing 2 the kahler potential of

z is suppressed by some function of 2/v. restoring the canonical normalization for the

kinetic term we nd that the mass of z is enhanced by the inverse of this function. we were

therefore justied in keeping only x1, x2 and y as the light elds.

looking at (39), we can conclude that supersymmetry is broken for any choice of the

parameters of the theory. however, unlike in the limit 3  2, in general the theory is
strongly coupled, and we have no control over the kahler potential. therefore, while we

may be able to estimate the scale of supersymmetry breaking we cannot say anything about

the vacuum, e. g. we cannot establish the pattern of symmetry breaking.

16actually, with su (3) turned o, z in this superpotential should be understood as the pfaan

of the su (2) mesons.

44

in the above, we rst showed that supersymmetry is broken in a specic limit, and later

realized that it is always broken. indeed, we do not expect a theory to break supersymmetry

for some choice of parameters, and to develop a supersymmetric minimum for other choices.

the reason is that no phase transitions are expected to occur in supersymmetric theories as

their parameters are varied (seiberg and witten, 1994a; seiberg and witten, 1994b; intrili-

gator and seiberg, 1994). if a theory is supersymmetric for some choice of parameters, it

remains supersymmetric for any choice. this allows us to establish supersymmetry breaking

by considering a convenient limit. in some theories, including the 32 model, we can es-

tablish supersymmetry breaking in dierent limits. the details of supersymmetry breaking,

such as the vacuum energy and the source of the breaking, may be very dierent in the

dierent limits.

finally, another interesting feature of the 32 model is the possibility of gauging the

global u(1) symmetry, provided that a new eld e+, with u(1) charge +2, is added to cancel

the u(1)3 anomaly. with the addition of this eld, the analysis of dynamical supersymmetry

breaking does not change since neither new classical at directions appear nor are new tree

level superpotential terms allowed. this possibility proved to be useful in phenomenological

model building (dine-nelson-shirman, 1995). for our purposes, however, the importance of

this u(1) is in the observation (dine et al, 1996) that with the addition of e+, the matter

content of the model falls into complete su(5) representations, and in fact they are the

same representations which are required for dsb in the su(5) model of section iii d. in

the following section we shall discuss another simple and calculable model of dsb based on

an su(4)  u(1) gauge group and again see that the matter elds form complete su(5)
representations. in section vii a we shall introduce a method of constructing large classes

of dsb models based on this observation. this method will lead us to an innite class of

models generalizing 32 model. many other calculable and non-calculable generalizations

will be discussed in section vii.

45

b. the 41 model

another example of a calculable dsb model is the 41 model constructed by dine et al

(1996) and poppitz and trivedi (1996). consider an su(4) u(1) gauge group with matter
transforming as an antisymmetric tensor of su(4), a2 (where the subscript indicates u(1)

charge), a fundamental, f3, an anti-fundamental, f 1, and an su(4) singlet, s4.

for a range of parameters of the model, the scale of the gauge dynamics will be below

the susy breaking scale. thus one could analyze supersymmetry breaking in terms of

the microscopic variables (dine et al, 1996). indeed, in terms of the microscopic variables

the kahler potential of the light degrees of freedom is nearly canonical and it is easy to

calculate the vacuum energy. we shall, however, analyze this model in terms of the gauge

invariant polynomials. again for convenience we shall work in a regime where the couplings

are arranged hierarchically, with the superpotential yukawa coupling the smallest, and with

the u(1) coupling weak at the su(4) strong coupling scale17. the su(4) moduli space is

given by the elds m = f f , x = pfa, and s. the model possesses a non-anomalous

r-symmetry, and the unique superpotential allowed by the symmetries is

w =

5
4mx

+  s m .

(40)

the tree level term in the superpotential lifts all classical at directions (note that one more

condition on the su(4) moduli is imposed by the u(1) d-term). due to the non-perturbative

superpotential the vacuum cannot lie in the origin of the moduli space of the theory. as

a result, the r-symmetry is spontaneously broken at the minimum of the potential and

supersymmetry is broken.

let us argue that the non-perturbative term in the superpotential (40) is indeed gener-

ated. we would also like to establish that the model is calculable, namely, that for some

17since both yukawa and u (1) couplings become weaker in the infrared we can just choose them

to be suciently small in the ultraviolet.

46

choices of parameters, the corrections to the classical kahler potential are small near the

minimum. to this end, neglect the tree level superpotential and consider a region of the
classical moduli space with m, s2  x. in this region the gauge group is broken down to
an su(3) subgroup. apart from the light modulus which controls the scale of the unbroken

gauge group there is one su(3) avor in the fundamental representation coming from the

components of a. in this eective theory the non-perturbative superpotential is generated

by gaugino condensation

4
3q q
where q and q denote light su(3) elds, and 4

w =

,

(41)

3 is an su(3) scale. using the scale matching

condition

4

3 =

5
4m

,

(42)

we easily recognize the superpotential (40).

furthermore, we see that the eective su(3) also possesses a at direction along which

q and q acquire vevs and the gauge group is broken down to su(2). the strong scale of this

su(2) tends to zero along the at direction. while the tree level superpotential stabilizes

the theory at nite vevs, the corrections to the classical scalar potential which scale as 2/v

(where v is the typical vev) are negligible for suciently small  and therefore the model is

calculable. the vacuum energy in this model was explicitly calculated by dine et al (1996).

it is worth noting that one can add an r-symmetry breaking (and non-renormalizable)

term, mpfa, to the superpotential (40) (poppitz and trivedi, 1996). we shall discuss dsb

models without r-symmetry in more detail in section vi c.

v. direct analysis: strongly-coupled theories

a. supersymmetry breaking through connement

in previous sections we have seen that, at the classical level, supersymmetric gauge the-

ories without explicit mass terms possess a zero energy minimum at least at the origin of

47

eld space. classical tree level superpotentials may lift the moduli space, but the supersym-

metric vacuum at the origin survives. in traditional calculable models of dsb (such as the

32 model) the vacuum at the origin is lifted due to a dynamical superpotential generated

by non-perturbative eects. on the other hand, in the su(5) model, no superpotential can

be generated, and supersymmetry is broken by the conning dynamics. unfortunately, the

low energy spectrum of the su(5) model is not known, and thus the main arguments for

dsb are based on the complexity of the solutions to the t hooft anomaly matching con-

ditions. it would be very useful to investigate a model in which supersymmetry breaking

is generated by the conning dynamics, with a known low energy spectrum. in fact a very

simple and instructive model of this type was constructed by intriligator-seiberg-shenker

(1995). this model clearly illustrates the fact that a crucial ingredient in studying super-

symmetry breaking is the knowledge of the correct degrees of freedom of the low-energy

theory. supersymmetry breaking in this theory hinges on whether the theory connes, or

has an interacting coulomb phase at the origin. it seems very plausible that the theory

indeed connes, and that supersymmetry is broken as a result.

the model is based on an su(2) gauge theory with a single matter eld, q, in a

three-index symmetric representation. the model is chiral, since the quadratic invariant,

q2, vanishes by the bose statistics of the superelds. it also possesses an r-symmetry under

which q has the charge 3/5. moreover, the model is asymptotically free, and thus non-trivial

infra-red dynamics may lift the supersymmetric vacuum at the origin of eld space. it is,

therefore, a candidate model of dsb according to traditional criteria for supersymmetry

breaking.

the only non-trivial gauge invariant polynomial which can be constructed out of q is

u = q4 (with appropriate contraction of indices). this composite parametrizes the only

at direction of the theory along which the gauge group is completely broken. r-symmetry

and holomorphy restrict any eective superpotential to be of the form w = a1/3u5/6,

where  is the dynamical scale of the theory. this superpotential, however, does not have
a sensible behavior as   0, since for large u/4 the moduli space should be close to the

48

classical one with w  0. therefore, a = 0. this means that the quantum theory also
has a moduli space of degenerate vacua. the moduli space may be lifted by the tree level

non-renormalizable superpotential

w =


m

u ,

(43)

where  is a constant of order 1. in the presence of the nonrenormalizable term, the model

can be thought of as a low energy eective description of a more fundamental theory, which

is valid below the scale m. choosing   m, there is a region of moduli space, with
4  u  m 4, in which the gauge dynamics is weak and we have a good description of the
physics in terms of an eective theory of chiral superelds.

in the presence of the non-renormalizable term, holomorphy and symmetries restrict the

exact superpotential to be

w =


m

uf (t = 2u/m 6) ,

(44)

where the function f is given by the sum of instanton contributions. in the allowed region,

|t|  1, f  1 and we can use the classical superpotential.

naively, the linear superpotential for u leads to supersymmetry breaking since fu 6= 0.
one should remember, however, that as u is a composite eld, its kahler potential may be

quite complicated. in particular, the kahler potential may be singular at some points in the

moduli space, potentially leading to supersymmetry restoration.

to determine the behavior of the kahler potential, consider rst the theory for large

expectation values of u. in this regime the description of the model should be semiclassical

and thus the kahler potential scales as

k  qq  (uu)1/4 .

(45)

indeed this kahler potential is singular at u = 0. the singularity reects the fact that at u =

0 the gauge bosons become massless and must be included in the eective description. there

are two plausible alternatives for the nature of the singularity in the quantum theory. it is

49

possible that the theory is in a non-abelian coulomb phase. on the other hand, it is possible

that the singularity is smoothed out quantum mechanically.

intriligator-seiberg-shenker

(1995) argued that this latter option is probably realized since the massless composite eld

u satises the t hooft anomaly matching conditions, which is quite non-trivial.18 we shall

assume that this is indeed the case. then r-symmetry, smooth behavior near the origin and

semiclassical behavior at innity imply that the kahler potential is a (smooth) function of
uu/||8 satisfying

k = ||2 k(uu/||8)  


uu/||6 ,
(uu)1/4,

uu  8
uu  8 .

(46)

combining this form of the kahler potential with the superpotential of eq.(44) (with

f  1) we nd that the scalar potential

v = (kuu)1 |wu|2 = (kuu)1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

,



m(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

necessarily breaks supersymmetry with a vacuum energy of order

e  ||6
m 2 .

(47)

(48)

at this point we should comment on several other interesting properties of the model.

before adding the tree-level superpotential (43), the eective description of the conned

theory in terms of the u modulus possesses an accidental global u(1) symmetry (as the

kahler potential does not depend on the phase of u). this u(1) is anomalous in terms of

the elementary degrees of freedom. the tree level superpotential explicitly breaks the r-

symmetry of the model, as well as the accidental u(1). however in the low energy description

there is an eective r-symmetry which is a combination of the u(1)r and accidental u(1)

symmetries. since r-symmetry in the macroscopic description is explicitly broken by the tree

18see, however, (brodie-cho-intriligator, 1998), for a class of theories in which the existence of

simple solutions to the anomaly matching conditions suggests that the theories conne, yet the

theories in fact do not conne.

50

level superpotential, higher order terms can generically correct (43). these terms explicitly

violate the eective r-symmetry of the low energy description. according to our analysis

in section iii b this leads to the appearance of supersymmetric vacua, but these vacua will
lie outside the region of validity |u| < m 4 of our analysis, and the non-supersymmetric
minimum will remain a (metastable) local minimum of the potential.

b. establishing supersymmetry breaking through a dual theory

in this section we shall encounter a class of theories, with su(n)  su(n  2) gauge
symmetry, that break supersymmetry for odd n. by directly studying these theories, we

can show that they have calculable, supersymmetry-breaking minima for a certain choice of

parameters. but we cannot show that there is no supersymmetric minimum, simply because

we cannot analyze the low-energy theory in all regions of the moduli space. however, we

shall be able to construct a seiberg-dual of the original theory, that can be reliably analyzed

at low-energy. as we shall see, the dual theory breaks supersymmetry. we can then conclude

that the original theory breaks supersymmetry as well. the reason is, that at least as long as

supersymmetry is unbroken, the two duals should have the same physics at zero energy. it

is therefore impossible for one of them to be supersymmetric, with a vacuum at zero energy,

and for the other one to break supersymmetry, with non zero energy vacuum.

furthermore, it is possible that the two dual theories actually agree not just at zero

energy, but in a small, nite energy window. in the theories at hand, the scale of super-

symmetry breaking is proportional to some superpotential coupling, and can be tuned to

be small enough so that it is within this energy window.

it is important to stress how-

ever that we only use the dual to establish that supersymmetry is broken. the details of

supersymmetry breaking may be dierent between the original theory and its dual.

while we mostly concentrate on the application of duality to establish supersymmetry

breaking, one could adopt a dierent point of view, and use duality to construct new models

of dsb starting with known models. generically new models constructed in such a way will

51

describe completely dierent, yet non-supersymmetric infrared physics.

let us turn now to our example. the theory we start with is an su(n)  su(n  2)
(n  5) gauge theory with elds qi, transforming as (n, n  2) under the gauge groups,
n  2 elds, li
a, that transform as (1, n  2).
we denote the gauge indices of su(n) and su(n  2) by i and , respectively, while
i = 1 . . . n  2 and a = 1 . . . n are avor indices. note that these theories are chiralno
mass terms can be added for any of the matter elds.

i, transforming as (n, 1), and n elds, r

in the following, we shall only outline the main stages of the analysis. for details we refer

the reader to (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996b). in particular, we omit numerical factors and

some scale factors throughout this section.

the classical moduli space of the theory is given by the gauge invariants yia = li q ra,
bab = ( rn 2)ab and b = qn 2  ln 2 (when appropriate, all indices are contracted with
-tensors), subject to the classical constraints yiabab = 0 and bab b  (y n 2)ab.

to lift all classical at directions, we can add the superpotential,

wtree = ia yia + ab bab ,

(49)

with ia =  ia for a  n  2, and zero otherwise. ab is an antisymmetric matrix, whose
non-zero elements are 12 = . . . = (n 2) (n 1) =  for odd n, and 12 = . . . = (n 1)n = 
for even n. 19 note that the second term in (49) is non-renormalizable for n  6, but has
dimension four for n = 5.

as it turns out, there is an important dierence between the theories with even and

odd n. for odd n, the superpotential (49) preserves an r symmetry, and one may expect

supersymmetry to break. for even n, there is no r symmetry that is preserved by (49), so

supersymmetry is most likely unbroken . both of these statements are indeed borne out by

direct analysis, as we shall see.

19in fact, one can lift all at directions with other choices for ia and ab, see poppitz-shadmi-

trivedi (1996b).

52

it is also easy to check that if we set ab = 0 in (49), all at directions are lifted, except

for the baryon directions bab.

to analyze the quantum theory, we can start with the limit n  n 2, where n , n 2
are the strong coupling scales of su(n), su(n  2) respectively. su(n) has n  2 avors,
so gaugino condensation in an unbroken su(2) subgroup generates the superpotential

w    2n +2

b !1/2

n

.

(50)

thus there is no moduli space. below n , su(n 2) appears anomalous. it is also partially
broken. this is reminiscent of the situation we encountered in the 32 model. however,

there, because of the su(3) superpotential, the su(2) was completely broken. in contrast,

here the su(n  2) is not completely broken, so there is some strong dynamics associated
with the unbroken group. it is therefore very hard (or impossible) to analyze the theory

(except for a special choice of parameters, for which it has a calculable minimum, as we shall

see later). fortunately, we can turn to a dual theory, in which the low-energy dynamics is

under control. 20

before we do that, one comment is in order. it is already clear from eq. (50) that the

electric theory has no moduli space. in addition, with  = 0, the theory has classical at

directions. if these are not lifted quantum mechanically, the superpotential (50) pushes some

elds to large vevs along these directions. then for   1 we can nd a calculable minimum.
this indeed is the case. we shall return to this calculable minimum towards the end of the

section. first, however, we would like to show that the theory has no supersymmetric vacua.

to do that, we turn to the dual theory.

we construct the dual theory in the limit n 2  n . however, it is expected to give a
valid description of the original theory in the infrared for any n 2/n (poppitz-shadmi-

trivedi, 1996a). the dual theory is obtained by dualizing the su(n  2). this can be

20the appearance of the superpotential (50) can be seen in the dual theory as well (poppitz-

shadmi-trivedi, 1996b).

53

thought of as the process of rst turning o the su(n) coupling, so that we are left with an

su(n  2) with n avors. dualizing this theory we nd an su(2) theory with n avors.
finally, we switch the su(n) coupling back on in this dual theory.

the dual theory then has su(n)  su(2) gauge symmetry, with the following eld

content:

su(n) su(2)

qi

ra
1
 mia
i
l
i

n

1

n

n

2

2

1

1

(51)

the su(2) singlets mia correspond to the su(n  2) mesons qi  ra, and  is a mass scale
that relates the strong coupling scales of su(n  2) and su(2): 2n 6

2  n .

n 2 6n

in addition, the dual theory has a yukawa superpotential:

w =

1


ma ra  q .

(52)

note that in this dual theory, su(2) has n avors, so naively it is in the dual regime.

we shall soon see however that the combination of the yukawa superpotential (52) and the

su(n) dynamics, drives the theory into the conning regime.

to see that, note that su(n) now has n avors, and therefore, a quantum modied

moduli space. below the su(n) conning scale 21, we can write down an eective theory
in terms of the su(n) mesons na  mia qi
b  det(ma) and

 and yia  mia li

i, and the su(n) baryons

b  q2  ln 2  qn 2  ln 2  b ,

where in the last equation we used the baryon map of sqcd, eq. (a38). here we omit

various scales as well numerical coecients.

21this scale is not n . rather, it is a combination of n , n 2, and  (poppitz-shadmi-

trivedi, 1996b).

54

in terms of these variables, the su(2) still has 2n doublets, na and ra, but the super-

potential (52) now turns into

w  na  ra ,

(53)

which gives masses to all su(2) doublets. thus, indeed, as su(n) connes, the yukawa

couplings turn into mass terms and drive su(2) into the conning regime.

since su(2) is now conning, with mass terms for all its doublets, we should work in

terms of its mesons, all of which obtain vevs. a convenient way of keeping track of the

correct vevs is to add the superpotential

w    pfv
2l !

6n

1

n 2

.

(54)

here 2l is the su(2) scale after su(n) connes, and v stands collectively for the su(2)
mesons [n 2], [r2], [n  r]. we use brackets to indicate that these mesons should be thought
of as single elds now.

in addition, recall that the su(n) dynamics leads to a constraint that can be imple-

mented through the superpotential

a (cid:16)[n 2]  y n 2  b b  2n

n l(cid:17) ,

(55)

where a is a lagrange multiplier, and n l is the su(n) scale.

combining (55), (54) and (53) with the tree level superpotential, which now has the form

ia yia + ab [ra  rb] ,

(56)

we have the complete superpotential. note that in the last step we used the sqcd baryon
map bab  ra  rb.

we now have a low energy eld theory with all gauge dynamics integrated out. this
low energy theory consists of the elds b, b, yia, [n 2], [r2] and [n  r], with a superpo-
tential that is given by adding (53) through (56). we can check then whether all f terms

vanish simultaneously. this is a rather tedious task, and we refer the interested reader

55

to (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996b). as the analysis shows, for odd n, no solution exists,

and supersymmetry is broken. for even n a solution does exist.

it is interesting to see what happens before adding the tree-level superpotential. in that

case, the f equations have no solution for nite eld vevs. furthermore, for  = 0 and
 6= 0, the dierent f-terms tend to zero as some of the baryons bab tend to innity.

one diculty which we glossed over in the above discussion is related to the fact that after

su(n) connes, the su(2) scale 2l is eld dependent. if this scale vanishes, additional

elds may become massless, and the kahler potential in terms of the degrees of freedom we

kept so far may become singular. to resolve this issue, one can add a heavy su(n) avor.

in this case, no scale is eld dependent, and the analysis conrms the results stated above.

in particular, one nds that supersymmetry is broken for odd n. for further details see

(poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996b).

to summarize, while we could not in general analyze the original su(n)  su(n  2)
theory, we were able to show that it breaks supersymmetry for odd n by studying its dual

su(n)  su(2) theory.

to complete our discussion of this theory, we now turn to the calculable minimum we

mentioned earlier. this minimum can be studied in the electric theory itself, so duality

plays no role in the analysis.

as we already mentioned, with  = 0, all f terms asymptote to zero along the baryonic

direction, with ri

at direction. let us now see this in the electric theory. we choose a particular baryon
a. this corresponds to b(n 1)n  vn 2, with all other bab = 0.
along this direction, su(n2) is completely broken, so for large v we can neglect its eects.
furthermore, the rst term in (49) gives masses v to all su(n) avors (in the following

a = v i

we set  = 1 for convenience). at low energies we are thus left with a pure su(n), whose

scale n l satises 3n

n l  vn 2 2n +2

n

. gaugino condensation in this theory then leads to a

superpotential

w  (cid:16)vn 2(cid:17)1/n

 (cid:16)b(n 1)n(cid:17)1/n

.

56

(57)

we thus have a low energy theory in terms of the baryons bab, with the superpotential (57)
(for  = 0), so the f term for b(n 1)n behaves as f  (b(n 1)n )
which goes to zero
as b(n 1)n  . but whether this is a runaway direction or not depends on the kahler
potential. in fact, it can be argued (shirman, 1996) that the kahler potential is canonical

1
n 1

in terms of the elementary elds ra, up to small corrections. thus, if the f terms for ra

tend to zero along this direction, there is a runaway minimum at innity. indeed, these f

terms behave as v

n 2

n 1 = v2/n and asymptote to zero as v  .

adding now a small  6= 0, the potential can be stabilized as v  , with a
supersymmetry-breaking minimum for large values of v. note that for n  6, the baryon
term in (49) is non-renormalizable, so  is naturally small. in fact, as was shown in (poppitz

and trivedi, 1997), this minimum can be analyzed using a simple -model approach, and

is interesting for model building purposes, as there is a large unbroken global symmetry at

the minimum, in which, a priori at least, one can embed the standard-model gauge group.

c. integrating matter in and out

in section iii d we discussed the supersymmetry breaking su(5) model with matter in

the antisymmetric tensor and in the antifundamental representations. this model does not

possess any classical or dynamical superpotential and does not have at directions. we gave

two arguments establishing dsb. one was based on the complexity of solutions to t hooft

anomaly matching conditions, while the other was based on the formation of the gaugino

condensate. we also discussed generalizations of the su(5) model.

here we shall use the same class of theories to illustrate another method of analysis

which is useful in non-calculable models (murayama, 1995; poppitz and trivedi, 1996). in

this method one modies the model of interest to make it calculable through the introduction

of extra vector-like matter. when these vector-like matter elds are massless, the models

typically posses at directions along which the gauge group is broken and the theory is

in a weak coupling regime. for small masses of these matter elds the weak coupling

57

approximation is still reliable and the theory remains calculable. thus, the modied theory

with small masses allows a direct analysis of supersymmetry breaking. then one considers

the limit of innite vector-like matter mass. in this limit the vector-like matter decouples

and one is left with the original theory. if supersymmetry is broken in the modied theory

with the additional light elds, holomorphy arguments ensure that it is broken for any nite

values of masses. moreover, since the theories that we have in mind do not have classical

at directions both for nite and innite masses, we expect that the asymptotic behavior

of the scalar potential (and therefore, the witten index) remain unchanged in the innite

mass limit. thus the assumption that no phase transition occurs when going to the innite

mass limit, leads us to the conclusion that supersymmetry is broken in the original strongly

coupled model. we stress that this approach gives strong evidence for supersymmetry

breaking, yet does not help in understanding the strongly coupled susy breaking vacuum.

the reason is that as the mass of the vector-like matter becomes large, m  , control of
the kahler potential is lost and the theory becomes non-calculable.

we now discuss the application of this method to the models at hand, following poppitz

and trivedi (1996). we consider models with an su(2n + 1) gauge group, an antisymmetric

tensor a, 2n3+nf antifundamentals q
i , (i = 1, . . . , 2n3+nf ), and nf fundamentals
qa
, (a = 1, . . . , nf ). it is convenient to start with the case nf = 3, and then to integrate out



vector-like matter. the classical moduli space is described by the following gauge invariant

operators

i = q

i qa
m a
 ,
xij = aq
i q
j ,
y a = 1,...,2n+1a1,2    a2n 12n qa
z = 1,...,2n+1a12    a2n 3,2n 2 qa

2n+1 ,
2n 1 qb

2n qc

2n+3abc .

(58)

these moduli overcount by one the number of the massless degrees of freedom at a generic

point of the moduli space, and thus are related by a single constraint which easily follows

from the bose statistics of the superelds

58

y  m 2  x n 1 

k
3

zpfx = 0 ,

(59)

where appropriate contraction of indices is assumed. vevs of the moduli (58) satisfying the

constraint (59) describe non-equivalent classical vacuum states. the kahler potential of

the theory written in terms of the gauge invariant composites is singular at the origin. as

usual this singularity reects the fact that the gauge symmetry is restored at the origin of

the moduli space and additional massless degrees of freedom descend into the low energy

theory.

in complete analogy with sqcd (see eq. (a28)) this constraint is modied by

non-perturbative eects,

y  m 2  x n 1 

k
3

zpfx = 4n +2 .

(60)

as a result, the origin of eld space where the gauge symmetry is completely restored does

not belong to the quantum moduli space. the kahler potential is non-singular in any nite

region of the moduli space, and we have good control of the physics. we note in passing that

the kahler potential may still become singular at the boundaries of the (d-at) moduli space,

where a subgroup of the original su(2n + 1) gauge group remains unbroken (corresponding

to the situation with some moduli vevs vanishing while other vevs tend to innity). we

shall carefully consider models in which the physics in such boundary regions is important

in section vi b. for the time being we note that as long as the classical superpotential of

the theory lifts all at directions, such boundary regions are not accessible and we do not

need to worry about them.

having understood the properties of the moduli space we turn on the tree level super-

potential. the full superpotential of the theory with three vector-like avors can be written

as

w3 = l(y  m 2  x k1 

n
3

zpfx  2(2n +1)) + mi

am a

i + ijxij ,

(61)

where mi

a is a rank three mass matrix, and the matrix of yukawa couplings  is chosen so

that all classical at directions are lifted. we can now vary the masses mi

a to move in the

59

parameter space between the nf = 3 and nf = 0 theories. however, it is useful to rst

choose only one mass eigenvalue to be large, so that the eective description is of two light

vector-like avors. in such a case the superpotential takes the form

w2 =

4n +3

(2)

acy am c

i1i1...i2n 1xi2i3  xi2n 2i2n 1

+ mi

am a

i + ijxij ,

(62)

where the low energy scale (2) is given by the usual scale matching condition, 4n +3

(2) =

m4n +2 and the tree level terms only include elds of the nf = 2 model. we note that the

nonperturbative term in eq. (62) is generated by a one instanton term in the gauge theory.

by solving the equations of motion for the mesons m a
i

it is easy to see that the f-atness

conditions can not be satised. together with the regularity of the kahler potential in any

nite region of the moduli space and the absence of classical at directions, this implies

supersymmetry breaking (poppitz and trivedi (1996)). we note that for small masses

m   and couplings   1 the theory is in a semiclassical regime and the low energy
theory is calculable. as the masses are increased, control of the kahler potential, and as a

result, calculability, are lost, yet supersymmetry remains broken. for large masses, m  ,
the eective description is given by the nf = 0 models, so that we have given an additional

argument for supersymmetry breaking in these noncalculable theories.

vi. violations of indirect criteria for dsb

so far we have concentrated on models satisfying the aeck-dine-seiberg (1985) criteria

for dynamical susy breaking. these criteria restricted model building eorts to chiral

models with r symmetries and with no at directions. in recent years a number of non-

chiral models, models with classical at directions, and models with no r-symmetry, have

been shown to break supersymmetry dynamically.

in this section we shall discuss such

examples in turn.

a. non-chiral models

60

1. susy qcd with singlets

we shall start the discussion of non-chiral models with susy qcd coupled to gauge

singlet elds. we shall vary the number of avors in the theory and analyze the quantum

behavior along the classical at directions. we should warn the reader that generically these

models do not break supersymmetry. however, this analysis will lead us to the non-chiral

itiy model of dsb (intriligator and thomas, 1996a; izawa and yanagida, 1996) discussed

in the following subsection. along the way we shall develop useful techniques for the analysis

of at directions and illustrate them in additional examples in section vi b.

consider an su(n) gauge theory with nf avors coupled to a single gauge singlet eld

through the superpotential

w = s qi  qi.

(63)

this superpotential lifts one classical at direction of susy qcd, namely, mij = vij. on

the other hand, there is a at direction along which s is non-vanishing. along this direction

the vev of s plays the role of a mass for the quark superelds 22.

for large s the eective theory is pure sym with an eective strong coupling scale

3n

sy m = snf 3n nf , where s denotes the expectation value, and  is the original su(n)

scale. gaugino condensation in the eective theory generates the superpotential

w = 3

sy m = snf /n 3n nf .

(64)

the superpotential (64) gives an eective description at scales much smaller than hsi, yet
the uctuations of s itself remain massless, and (64) can be considered as an eective

superpotential for this modulus, leading to the scalar potential

v = 2

3n nf

n

nf n

n

.

|s|2

(65)

22note that unlike the case with a tree level mass term the superpotential preserves a nonanoma-

lous r-symmetry, which is only broken spontaneously by the s vev.

61

note that this eective description is only valid for s  . we see that for nf < n this
potential slopes to zero at innity, and the vacuum energy is arbitrarily small for large s,

exactly in the region where our eective description is reliable. for nf  n the potential
for s is non-vanishing at innity (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985). of course, the stabilization

of this direction in the case nf  nc does not imply supersymmetry breaking (or even the
existence of a stable vacuum) in the full model. first, the analysis performed so far is not

valid near the origin of eld space. in addition there are many unlifted mesonic and baryonic

at directions. yet, this suggests a way to stabilize other at directions. namely, one could

couple the quarks to n 2

f gauge singlet elds 23

w =

k

xij

ij sij qi  qj ,

(66)

where the matrix of yukawa coupling constants has maximal rank, and in the following we

shall choose it to be ij =  ij. 24 the superpotential (66) lifts all mesonic at directions

mij = qiqj. if baryonic branches of the moduli space exist, they can be lifted by introducing

additional nonrenormalizable couplings to singlets, but we shall leave these directions aside

for the moment.

along the singlet at directions all quark superelds generically become massive, and

the eective theory is pure sym with the superpotential

w = 

nf

n s

nf
n 

3n nf

n

,

(67)

where s = (det s)

1

nf . this is just a direct generalization of eq. (64), and we see that the at

direction is stabilized quantum mechanically for nf  n. a somewhat more careful analysis

23in this case, the singlets transform under the global su (nf )l  su (nf )r group, and the chiral
symmetry is preserved by the superpotential. it is spontaneously broken by the sij vevs.

24recall that the only fact we need to know about the kahler potential to establish supersymmetry

breaking is that it is non-singular in the appropriate variables. as a result one can further rescale

 to one by eld redenitions, but it would be useful for us to keep it explicit.

62

would show that the stabilization happens for all directions sij as we shall see below.

to better understand the quantum behavior of the model, we shall repeat the above

analysis in more detail. we write the scalar potential in the form 25

v =

nf

xi

2




(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

qi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

qi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2
 +

2

nf

xij (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

sij(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

,

(68)

where w includes all possible nonperturbative contributions. a supersymmetric minimum

in the model exists if all three terms in (68) vanish. the rst two contributions in this

potential reproduce the scalar potential of susy qcd with nf avors and with the mass

matrix mij =  sij. we can, therefore use eq. (a24) of the appendix to nd the meson

expectation values for which these terms vanish

mij = (cid:16)det(s) 3n nf(cid:17)1/n (cid:18) 1

s(cid:19)ij

.

(69)

note that analyticity requires that (69) is satised for all values of nf . we can now substitute

this solution back into (68)

v =

nf

xij (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

sij(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

= ||2 xij |mij|2 = ||2

2/n

nf

n (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

det(s) 3n nf(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

xij (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

s(cid:19)ij(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
(cid:18) 1

it is easy to see that this term is minimized by sij = sij  (det s)1/nf ij. therefore the
scalar potential for the lightest modulus s is

2

.

(70)

v = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

nf 3n nf snf n(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

n .

(71)

this is just the potential which could be derived from eq. (67) and we again see that the

at direction is lifted if nf  n. in fact now we can make a stronger statement. when
nf = n +1 the model is s-conning (csaki-schmaltz-skiba, 1997c), and near the origin has a

weakly coupled description in terms of composite (mesonic and baryonic) degrees of freedom.

as a result the potential (70) is reliable near the origin, and we see that supersymmetry

is restored there. when nf > n + 1 the weakly coupled description is given in terms of

25this potential, of course, is further modied by corrections to the kahler potential.

63

the dual gauge theory theory, and it is also possible to show that a supersymmetric vacuum

exists at the origin.

the most interesting case for our purposes is nf = n, where the vacuum energy is

independent of the value of s in the approximation that the kahler potential is classical.

this statement is equivalent to the statement that the energy is constant and non-vanishing

everywhere on the mesonic branch of the moduli space. so far we have not considered the

baryonic at directions. in fact, in the model with nf = n avors and the superpoten-

tial (66) the potential slopes to zero along the baryonic directions. however, it is easy to

see that a simple modication leads to dsb (intriligator and thomas, 1996a; izawa and

yanagida, 1996). this modication requires the introduction of two additional gauge sin-

glet elds with nonrenormalizable couplings to the su(n) baryons (in the n = 2 case the

new couplings are renormalizable).

2. the intriligator-thomas-izawa-yanagida model

let us concentrate on a particular case with su(2) gauge group with two avors of matter

elds in the fundamental representation (four doublets qi, i = 1, . . . , 4). because the matter

elds are in the pseudoreal representation the superpotential (66) with n 2

f singlets does not

lift all the mesonic at directions. 26 two mesonic at directions remain and lead to a

supersymmetric minimum at innity in direct analogy with the baryonic at directions for

general n. a slight modication of the theory with n 2

f + 2 = 6 singlets lifts all mesonic at

directions

w = xij

sij mij ,

(72)

26note that the superpotential (66) does not preserve the global su (4)f symmetry of the su (2)

with four doublets.

64

where mij = qi  qj, and sij transform in the antisymmetric representation of the global
su(4)f symmetry. 27 furthermore, we notice that near the origin of the moduli space, the

theory has a weakly coupled description in terms of the mesons, mij. thus our preceding

discussion immediately leads us to the conclusion that supersymmetry is broken.

let us understand qualitatively the mechanism of supersymmetry breaking. the non-

perturbative dynamics generates the quantum constraint

pf(m) = 4

2 .

(73)

this quantum constraint modies the moduli space. while the origin mij = 0 belongs to the

classical moduli space, it does not lie on the quantum moduli space. on the other hand, the

s f -terms only vanish at the origin, mij = 0. supersymmetry is therefore broken because

the f-atness conditions are incompatible with the quantum moduli space.

it is often convenient to impose the quantum constraint through a lagrange multiplier

in the superpotential. then the full superpotential is

w =  s m + a (pfm  4

2) ,

(74)

where a is the lagrange multiplier eld. for   1 the vacuum will lie close to the
su(2) quantum moduli space. thus one can consider the superpotential (72) as a small
perturbation around the vacuum of the nf = nc sqcd with masses m = hsi. 28 in this
approximation the scalar potential is given again by (70) and is minimized when (up to

symmetry transformations)

s = s12 = s34 ,

s13 = s14 = s23 = s24 = 0 ,

(75)

m12 = m34 = 1

2

 s (cid:16) 4

pf(s)(cid:17) = 4

2 .

27for simplicity we choose  to respect global su (4) symmetry, but this is not necessary.

28this approximation is equivalent to satisfying the equation of of motion for the lagrange mul-

tiplier a.

65

the vacuum energy is then given by

v = ||2 4
2 .

(76)

thus, we have a non-chiral (left-right symmetric) model 29 which breaks supersymmetry!

indeed, as we mentioned in section iii a the witten index can change discontinuously if the

asymptotic behavior of the classical potential changes. consider modifying the itiy model

by turning on a mass term for the singlet, m s2. for suciently large mass, the low-energy
eective theory is pure sym, and the witten index tr(1)f 6= 0. this is therefore true for
any non-vanishing value of m. as the limit m  0 is taken, the asymptotic behavior of the
potential changes (there is now a classical at direction with s 6= 0) and the witten index
vanishes. note that, in accord with our discussion of section iii a, the potential 76 is at

along the s at direction.

at the level of analysis we performed so far, there is a pseudo-at direction parameterized

by s. since s is the only light eld in the low energy theory and the superpotential (74)

is exact, this direction would be exactly at if the kahler potential for s were canonical.

however, quantum contributions to the kahler potential lift the degeneracy. for suciently

small  and large hsi it is possible to show (arkani-hamed and murayama, 1998; dimopou-
los et al, 1998) by renormalization group arguments that the quantum corrections due to the

wave-function renormalization of s are calculable and lead to a logarithmic growth of the

potential at large s. it is possible to construct modications of the itiy models with cal-

culable (but not necessarily global) supersymmetry breaking (murayama, 1997; dimopoulos

et al, 1998). this is achieved by gauging a subgroup of the global symmetry under which s

transforms. as a result, the wave function renormalization of s as well as the vacuum energy

29practically, what is usually meant by a non-chiral model is that all elds can be given masses.

this issue is a bit subtle in the itiy model, as quark mass terms can be absorbed by a redenition

of the singlets. still, one may rst give masses to the singlets and integrate them out, and then

introduce quark masses, so that ultimately all elds become heavy.

66

depend on both the yukawa and gauge coupling. for an appropriate choice of parameters,

a local minimum of the potential exists for a large s vev realizing wittens (1981b) idea of

inverted hierarchy in a model with dynamical supersymmetry breaking.

on the other hand, the exact superpotential of the theory (74) is of an oraifeartaigh

type. thus it is natural to ask whether there exists a region of the parameters of the model

such that near the origin of the moduli space (where, in particular, the singlet vev is zero),

the strong coupling dynamics decouples and the potential is calculable. indeed, chacko-
luty-ponton (1998) have argued that for suciently small coupling , and s  2/, the
contributions of the strong dynamics to the scalar potential are small compared with the

contributions of the light particles of mass hsi. the latter contribution is calculable, and
it was found in (chacko-luty-ponton, 1998) that there exists a minimum of the potential at

s = 0. moreover, it was argued that the calculability breaks down only when the yukawa

coupling  has non-perturbative strength. finally, another minimum of the potential may
exist at s  o(2/), however, this possibility can not be veried at present, since the
strong coupling dynamics is important in this region.

we should also mention several obvious but useful generalizations of the itiy model.

consider an sp (n) gauge group with n + 1 avors of matter elds in the fundamental

representation. this theory has an su(2n + 2) avor symmetry. when the quarks are

coupled to gauge singlet elds transforming in the antisymmetric representation of the a-

vor symmetry group, supersymmetry is broken in exactly the same way as in the su(2)

model. a slightly more complicated generalization is based on an su(n) gauge group with

nf = n avors. in this case the baryonic operators b and b are required to parameter-

ize the quantum moduli space. therefore, the superpotential (72) will not be sucient for

supersymmetry breaking. in particular there will be a supersymmetric solution mij = 0,

bb = 2n

n . supersymmetry is broken if two additional elds, x and x with superpotential

couplings 1xb + 2xb are added to the superpotential. to enforce this structure of the

superpotential one can gauge baryon number. we should note that in the case of the su(n)

models, the renormalization group argument we used to show that the potential grows at

67

large singlet vevs is not applicable to the x and x directions. other models with quantum

modied moduli spaces can also break supersymmetry when each invariant appearing in the

constraint is coupled to a gauge singlet csaki-schmaltz-skiba (1997b).

the 32 model revisited

before closing this section we would like to reanalyze, following intriligator and thomas

(1996a), the familiar 32 model of aeck-dine-seiberg discussed in section iv a in a dif-

ferent limit, 2  3. we shall see that the description of supersymmetry breaking is quite
dierent in this limit. first, note that from the point of view of the su(2) gauge group we

have the matter content of the itiy model, namely four su(2) doublets (three qs and l)

and six singlets (u and d). the superpotential couplings of the 32 models are not sucient

to lift all classical at directions, and in addition to the singlets there is an su(2) meson

which can acquire a vev. (of course all these at directions, the including singlet ones,

are lifted by su(3) d-terms as we learned in section iv a.) let us parameterize the su(2)

mesons by mij = qiqj, mi4 = qil, where the summation over su(2) indices is suppressed.

in these variables the superpotential of the model is

w = a(pfm  4

2) +  dimi4 ,

(77)

where a is a lagrange multiplier. extremizing the superpotential with respect to d we nd
that the scalar potential contains terms

v =

3

xi

|mi4|2 + . . . .

(78)

by an su(3) rotation we can set m14 = m24 = 0. thus supersymmetry is restored if it
is possible that m34 = 2  0. in turn this requirement and the quantum constraint (73)
mean that

m12 =

4
2
2  .

(79)

at large expectation values the quantum moduli space approaches the classical one. thus

equation (79) can only be satised if the model possesses classical at directions. but as we

68

already know, when the su(3) d-atness conditions are imposed, the model does not have

at directions. therefore supersymmetry must be broken. the natural expectation values

of the (canonically normalized) elds at the minimum of the potential are of order o(2),
therefore the quantum corrections to the kahler potential are signicant and one can only
estimate the vacuum energy in this limit, v  |24|.

b. quantum removal of flat directions

in the previous section we encountered the itiy model which breaks supersymmetry

even though it has a classical at direction. quantum mechanically, the potential becomes

non-zero and at (up to logarithmic corrections) far along this at direction. it is in fact

possible for quantum eects to completely lift classical at directions, generating a growing

potential along these directions. thus it is possible for theories with classical at directions

to break supersymmetry, with a stable, supersymmetry-breaking minimum. we shall now

build upon the insights gained in our analysis of of sqcd of the previous section, to develop

a method for determining when classical at directions are lifted quantum mechanically. we

shall also discuss some examples in which this happens.

as will become clear from our discussion, a crucial requirement for the quantum removal

of at directions is that some gauge dynamics becomes strong along the at direction. in

many models, the opposite happens, that is, the gauge group is completely broken along

the at direction, and the dynamics becomes weaker as s increases. however, it may be the

case that along the at direction, some gauge group remains unbroken, and elds charged

under it obtain masses proportional to s. then the dynamics associated with this gauge

group becomes strong, and may lift the at direction.

we should stress that in this section we shall be asking two separate questions. first, we

shall ask if quantum eects can stabilize the potential along a given at direction. it is most

convenient to answer this question by nding a set of degrees of freedom which give a weakly

coupled description of the theory in the region of interest on the moduli space. however, if

69

the quantum stabilization of the potential indeed happens, the vacuum may well lie in the

genuinely strongly coupled region. thus an armative answer to the rst question is not

sucient to give an armative answer to our second question, whether supersymmetry is

broken in the model. to answer this second question we shall need to consider the properties

of the exact superpotential in the strong coupling region.

following shirman (1996), consider a model with classical at directions. assume for

simplicity that there is a single modulus s.

in the approximation of a canonical kahler

potential, the scalar potential of the model can be written as

2

v = vr + vs = x(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

i(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

2

.

(80)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

s (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

the applicability of this scalar potential is restricted by the assumption that the kahler

potential is canonical. however, for large enough s vevs the description of the physics often

simplies, and in fact, it may be possible to nd a description where the theory (or a sector

of the theory) is weakly coupled. in such a limit, it is convenient to analyze the theory in

two steps. first, one considers a reduced theory with the scalar potential vr, where s

plays a role of the xed parameter. one then studies the behavior of the scalar potential

of the reduced theory as a function of s as well as contributions of vs. let us consider

various possibilities.

1. a susy-breaking reduced theory

suppose that the potential vr in the reduced theory along the at direction is non-zero,

so that the reduced theory breaks supersymmetry . if vr is an increasing function of s, it is

clear that the at direction is stabilized. typically, vr  0 as s  0, but even if vr tends to
a nonvanishing constant one can not conclude at this stage that supersymmetry is broken in

the full theory. this is because the theory is typically in a strong coupling regime near the

origin of the moduli space and therefore the assumption of a canonical kahler potential as

well as the separation of the scalar potential into the sum of two terms is not justied. an

example of a model with such behavior is an su(4) su(3) u(1) model of csaki-randall-
skiba (1996), see section vii a. classically there is a at direction along which the gauge

70

group is broken down to su(4)  u(1) and the matter is the same as in the 4  1 model
discussed in section iv b. the strong coupling scale of the eective su(4) gauge group

grows with the modulus, and the at direction is stabilized (shirman, 1996). additional

analysis performed by csaki-randall-skiba (1996) shows that there is no supersymmetric

vacuum at the origin, thus allowing them to conclude that susy is broken. this mechanism

of quantum removal of classical at directions is quite generic for discarded generator models

(see section vii a).

another possibility is that vr is a decreasing function of the modulus leading to a run-

away behavior at moderate values of s.

in this case one should include in the analysis

contributions from vs. since the stable vacuum (if it exists at all) will be found at large

values of s, the separation of the scalar potential into two terms is well justied. we

can therefore conclude that as long as vs stabilizes the at direction, susy is broken. if,

however, vs  0 as s   the theory does not have a stable vacuum. a very basic example
of such behavior is the antisymmetric tensor models discussed in section iii d 4. in these

models the eective theory along the classical at direction is susy breaking su(5) with

the scale vanishing at the boundary of the moduli space. the theory does not have a stable

vacuum. introducing a tree level superpotential lifts all classical at directions, stabilizes

the potential and breaks supersymmetry. note that there is no weak coupling description

anywhere on the moduli space of the model. this means that the separation of the scalar

potential into vr and vs is not apriori justied. however, vr arises from non-perturbative

eects in the kahler potential while vs arises from the tree level superpotential. as a result

there is no interference eects between vr and vs and we can separate the potential into

two positive denite terms.

2. a supersymmetric reduced theory

now we would like to consider models where vr = 0 has solutions for all values of s (or for

a set of moduli). in these cases we have to analyze the behavior of vs subject to the condition

that vr = 0 is satised. it is instructive to consider as examples two classes of analogous

71

models with the gauge groups sp (n/2) su(n  1) (intriligator and thomas, 1996a) and
su(n)  su(n  1) (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a).

we begin with the model of intriligator and thomas (1996a). the matter content is

q  (n, n  1), l  (n, 1), ra  (1, n  1), with the tree level superpotential:

wtree =  q l r2 +

1
m

n

xa,b>2

ab q2 ra rb .

(81)

this superpotential leaves classical at directions associated with the su(n1) antibaryons
ba = ( qn 1)a = vn 1 (we shall denote the r vevs by v). the exact superpotential was found

in (intriligator and thomas, 1996a), and was used to show that there is no supersymmetric

vacuum in the nite region of moduli space. here we shall conne ourselves to discussing

the physics along the classical baryonic at directions.

without loss of generality, we can consider the at direction s  b1 = vn 1. along
this direction, su(n  1) is completely broken. on the other hand, all sp avors get
masses proportional to v through the tree-level superpotential, so that one is left with a

pure sp (n/2) which gets stronger for larger s. gaugino condensation in this group then

produces the superpotential

leading to the potential

ws  s

2

n+2 ,

(82)

(83)

2

 s 2n

n+2 .

vs = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

s (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

(note that here vr = 0.) actually, one can obtain this result starting from the exact super-

potential. however, at scales s  1 the relevant degrees of freedom are the elementary
ones, so we should consider the behavior of the potential in terms of v,

vs  v2 n 4

n+2 .

(84)

we see that for n > 4 it increases along the classical at direction. thus the classical at

direction is stabilized quantum mechanically. the analysis of the theory in the nite region

of the eld space (intriligator and thomas, 1996a) shows that susy is broken.

72

we would like to compare these results with the behavior of the model of poppitz-shadmi-

trivedi (1996a) based on an su(n)su(n1) gauge group with matter in the fundamental
representations: q  (n, n  1), li  ( n , 1), and ra (1, n  1), where i = 1 . . . n  1, and
a = 1 . . . n. the tree level superpotential is given by:

wtree = xia

ia q li ra + a

ba ,

(85)

where ba = ( rn 1)a is an antibaryon of su(n1). this superpotential lifts all at directions
as long as the coupling are chosen so that (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a) ia has maximal

rank and

ia a 6= 0 .

(86)

since we are interested in understanding the physics along the at directions we shall set

a = 0. then there are classical at directions parameterized by the su(n 1) antibaryons,
in complete analogy with the su(n  1)  sp (n/2) model discussed above. again, along
the direction s  bn , su(n  1) is broken, and all avors of su(n) obtain mass. su(n)
gaugino condensation generates the potential

vs  s2 n 1

n

(87)

again, this potential can also be obtained from the exact superpotential of the theory, which

was obtained in (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a). in terms of the vev of the elementary eld

r we then have

2

n .

vs  v

unlike in the case of the intriligator-thomas model the runaway behavior persists and

the model does not have a stable vacuum state. turning on a according to (86), all at

directions are lifted. this, together with the analysis of (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a),

which shows that there is no supersymmetric minimum in the nite region of moduli space,

allows one to conclude that supersymmetry is broken.

73

as we mentioned in the beginning of this subsection, the key ingredient in quantum

lifting of at directions is that the dynamics of some gauge group becomes strong along the

at direction. this in fact happens in both the su  sp and the su  su examples we saw
above, as, along the relevant at direction, one group factor remains unbroken and elds

charged under it obtain masses. however, the numerical factors are such that the potential

grows along the at direction in the rst example, and slopes to zero in the second.

while general criteria for the determination of the quantum behavior along classical

at directions do not exist, we have illustrated several techniques which are useful for the

analysis. we should also stress that we have concentrated on the simplest examples with

a single modulus. in more general situations it is not sucient to perform an analysis for

each at direction separately, assuming that other moduli are stabilized. one should do

a complete analysis allowing all moduli to obtain independent vevs consistent with d and

f -atness conditions. in particular one should study the moduli which do not appear in the

tree level superpotential.

c. supersymmetry breaking with no r-symmetry

in section iii b we discussed the relation between susy breaking and r-symmetries.

we saw that theories with a spontaneously broken r-symmetry and no at directions break

susy. we also saw that if r-breaking terms are added to the superpotential, susy is typ-

ically restored. we emphasized that both these statements assume that the superpotential

is generic, that is, all terms allowed by the symmetries appear.

in this section we shall encounter a theory with the most general renormalizable super-

potential allowed by symmetries, which breaks supersymmetry even though it does not have

an r-symmetry. furthermore, unlike the theory of section v a, it does not possess an eec-

tive r-symmetry in the low-energy description. as we shall see, the reason supersymmetry

is broken is that the dynamical superpotential is not generic.

the model we describe is an su(4)  su(3) gauge theory studied by (poppitz-shadmi-

74

trivedi, 1996a), which is the rst in a series of su(n) su(n  1) models that we already
discussed from a dierent perspective in section vi b. here we only state some of the results.
the matter content is q  (4, 3), li  (4, 1), and ra  (1, 3) with i = 1 . . . 3, a = 1 . . . 4.
one can add the classical superpotential

w = 

3

xi=1

q  li  ri +  q  l1  r4 + ( r3)1 + ( r3)4 ,

(88)

with appropriate contractions of the gauge indices (in particular, ( r3)a stands for the su(3)

baryon with the eld ra omitted). this superpotential does not preserve any r-symmetry.

it is the most general renormalizable superpotential preserving an su(2) global symmetry

that rotates l2, l3 together with r2, r3. in addition, it lifts all the classical at directions

of the model. if we add nonrenormalizable terms to this superpotential, (supersymmetric)

minima will appear at planckian eld strength. these extra minima will not destabilize the

non-supersymmetric minima we shall be discussing. 30

as was shown in (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a), the theory breaks supersymmetry.

this can be established by carefully analyzing the low energy theory. in the limit that the

su(3) dynamics is stronger, su(3) connes, giving a low energy theory in which su(4)

has four avors. after su(4) connes one has an oraifeartaigh-like theory, with the elds
yia = q  li  ra, ba = ( r3)a, b = q3l3, pa = q3(q  ra), and b = det(q  r) (the last two
vanish classically). taking into account the dynamically generated superpotential we nd

that the full superpotential is given by,

30other models in this class (with n > 4) are non-renormalizable, and we do not have a reason

to neglect non-renormalizable operators. for n  6 the generalization of (88) still gives the most
general superpotential up to operators whose dimension is smaller or equal to the dimension of the

baryon. therefore, the expected susy breaking minimum is still a stable local minimum. in models

with n > 6, the most general superpotential with no r-symmetry and operators whose dimension

does not exceed the dimension of the baryon operator will generically preserve supersymmetry.

75

w =

pa

ba  b
5
3

+ a (cid:16)p  y 3  b b  9
3(cid:17) + 
4 5

3

xi=1

yii +  y14 +  b1 +  b4 , (89)

where a is a lagrange multiplier, and 4, 3, are the scales of su(4), su(3) respectively.

this superpotential does not preserve any eective r-symmetry in terms of the variables of

the low-energy theory. still, as was shown in (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a), supersym-

metry is broken. the crucial point is that the lagrange multiplier a only appears linearly

in (89). if the superpotential contained terms with higher powers of a, supersymmetry would

be restored. note that the superpotential (89) is reminiscent of the superpotential (10) of

the simplest oraifeartaigh model, with a playing the role of 1.

in the absence of an

r-symmetry, one cannot rule out the presence of higher powers of 1 in (10), whereas in the

dynamically generated superpotential (89), a only appears linearly.

other examples have been found which break supersymmetry even though the mi-

croscopic theory does not have an r-symmetry. these include, among others, the 43

1 model of (leigh-randall-rattazzi, 1997), and the 41 model with the superpotential

term mpfa (poppitz and trivedi, 1996), as well as, as we mentioned already, the iss

model (intriligator-seiberg-shenker, 1995). in most of these examples, either the tree-level

superpotential is not generic, or there is an eective r-symmetry in the low energy theory.

vii. dsb models and model building tools

so far we have discussed several important models which illustrate the main methods

and subtleties in the analysis of dsb. many more models (in fact many innite classes of

models) have been constructed in recent years. the methods of analysis we have described

can be used for these models. in fact often, not only the method of analysis but the dynamics

itself is analogous to one or the other models discussed in previous sections. thus it is not

practical to present a detailed investigation of every known model of dsb.

on the other hand, in many cases the dynamics is not well understood beyond the

conclusion that susy must be broken, and further investigation of the dynamics as well

76

as the connection between dierent mechanisms and models of susy breaking may lead to

better understanding of the general conditions for dsb. therefore, in this section we shall

give a list of known models briey discussing how susy is broken. we shall emphasize

the relations between various models, and give a partial classication. in addition we shall

introduce a useful model building method which can be used to construct new models.

we shall also discuss in this section supersymmetry breaking in theories with anomalous

u(1)s which give an example of dynamical susy breaking through the fayet-iliopolous

mechanism.

a. discarded generator models

let us recall the observation that both the 41 and the 32 models have a gauge group

which is a subgroup of su(5), while the matter content (after adding e+ in the 32 model)

falls into antisymmetric tensor and antifundamental representations  exactly as needed

for dsb in su(5). based on this observation, dine et al (1996) proposed the following

method of constructing new dsb models. take a known model of dynamical supersymmetry

breaking without classical at directions and discard some of the group generators. this

reduces the number of d-atness conditions, and therefore, leads to the appearance of at

directions. on the other hand, the most general tree level superpotential allowed by the

smaller symmetry may lift all the moduli. it is also possible that a unique non-perturbative

superpotential will be allowed in such a reduced model. this construction is guaranteed to

yield anomaly free chiral models which often possess a non-anomalous r-symmetry, and thus

are good candidates for dynamical supersymmetry breaking. if a model constructed using

this prescription breaks supersymmetry it is often calculable since for small superpotential

couplings it typically possesses almost at directions along which the eective description

may be weakly coupled.

in fact, the 32 and 41 models are the simplest examples of two innite classes of dsb

models based on su(2n  1)  su(2)  u(1) (dine et al, 1996) and on su(2n)  u(1)

77

(dine et al, 1996; poppitz and trivedi, 1996) gauge groups which can be constructed by

using the discarded generator method.

to construct these theories one starts with an su(2n + 1) theory with matter trans-

forming as an antisymmetric tensor, a, and 2n 3 anti-fundamentals, f . then one requires
gauge invariance under, for example, an su(2n  1) su(2) (1) subgroup, with the u(1)
generator being

t = diag(2, . . . , 2,(2n  1),(2n  1)).

under this group the matter elds decompose as

a( , 1, 4), f ( , 2, 3  2n), s(1, 1, 2  4n),
f a( , 1,2) , a(1, 2, 2n  1), a = 1, . . . , 2n  3 .

the most general superpotential consistent with the symmetries is

w = abaf

b

a

f

+ absab + af f

a

a.

(90)

(91)

(92)

this superpotential lifts all classical at directions. models of this class have non-anomalous

r-symmetry and supersymmetry is broken. it is interesting to observe that the coupling ab

in the superpotential above could be set to zero without restoring supersymmetry. while

for  = 0 classical at directions appear, they are lifted by quantum eects.

the construction of the su(2n)  u(1) dsb series is quite analogous. the mater elds

in this class of models are

a2, f1n, f a

1, sa

n, a = 1, . . . , 2n  3 ,

(93)

where subscripts denote u(1) charges, and superscripts are avor indices. with the most

general superpotential allowed by symmetries the models break supersymmetry .

clearly one can consider many other subgroups of su(2n + 1), and in fact, several other

classes of broken generator models were constructed: su(2n  2)  su(3)  u(1) models
(csaki-randall-skiba, 1996; chou, 1997), su(2n  3)  su(4)  u(1) and su(2n  4) 
su(5)  u(1) models (csaki et al, 1996). while these models are similar by construction

78

to those we discussed above, the supersymmetry breaking dynamics is quite dierent, and

various models in this class can have connement, dual descriptions and quantum removal

of classical at directions. since we have already considered the simplest and illuminating

examples of these phenomena in dsb models, we shall not give a detailed discussion of

all possible discarded generator models. we shall restrict ourselves to the mention of the

sp (2)  u(1) model by csaki-schmaltz-skiba (1997a). this model is interesting because
it is an example of the discarded generator model in which the rank of the gauge group is

reduced compared to the parent theory. the matter elds in this model are

sp (2) u(1)

a

q1
q2
s1
s2

1

1

2
3
1
2

4

(94)

non-renormalizable couplings are required to lift all at directions. the full superpotential

is

w =

7(q1q2)

2(a)2(q1q2)2  (q1aq2)2 + q1q2s2 + q1aq2s1 ,

(95)

where the rst term is generated dynamically.

the existence of a general method for constructing discarded generator models suggests

that there may exist a unied description of these models. in fact, leigh-randall-rattazzi

(1997) found exactly such a description.

it is based on the antisymmetric tensor models

supplemented by a chiral eld  in the adjoint representation of the gauge group. we are

interested in nding an eective description of the discarded generator models, or more

generally of the models with u(1)k1 qk

i=1 su(ni) gauge groups (where pk

i=1 ni = 2n + 1)

and the light matter given by decomposing the antisymmetric tensor and antifundamentals

of su(2n + 1) under the unbroken gauge group. the adjoint  needs to be heavy in such

a vacuum. this can be achieved by introducing the superpotential for the adjoint

79

w =

si
i

k+1

xi=2

tri .

(96)

we shall be most interested in the case k = 2. for generic coecients si there are several

discrete vacua where  is heavy and the model contains matter in desired representations.

note that in the most symmetric vacuum  = 0, the low energy physics is described by

the antisymmetric tensor model, and susy is broken. for supersymmetry to be broken

in other vacua one needs to lift the classical at directions associated with the light elds

which requires the following tree level superpotential

w =

1
2

m2 +

1
3

s3tr3 + ij

1 f iaf j + ij

2 f iaf j + ij

3 f iaf j .

(97)

this superpotential is chosen so that in each vacuum of interest it exactly reproduces the

superpotential needed for supersymmetry breaking. leigh-randall-rattazzi (1997) showed

that in the full model supersymmetry is broken for any value of the adjoint mass including

m = 0. this latter conclusion at rst seems quite unusual, since the one loop beta function

coecient of the model is b0 = 2n + 4.

in the su(2n + 1) model this might suggest

that at least in the absence of the superpotential the theory is in a non-abelian coulomb

phase. however, the analysis of leigh-randall-rattazzi (1997) showed that indeed the

superpotential is quite relevant and, when certain requirements on the yukawa couplings

are satised, susy is broken. a similar construction with k > 2 (that is models with more

than two non-abelian factors and/or more than one abelian factor in the gauge group) was

shown (leigh-randall-rattazzi, 1997) not to break supersymmetry.

b. supersymmetry breaking from an anomalous u (1)

theories with an anomalous u(1) provide a simple mechanism for supersymmetry break-

ing (binetruy and dudas, 1996; dvali and pomarol, 1996). such theories contain a fayet-

iliopoulos (fi) term, so supersymmetry can be broken just as in the fi model we discussed

in section ii c 2. in fact, the anomalous u(1) theories discussed below are the only known

80

examples where the fayet-iliopoulos mechanism of supersymmetry breaking can be real-

ized dynamically. in the absence of any superpotential, at least one eld with appropriate

u(1) charge develops a vev to cancel the fi term. one can then introduce an (eective)

superpotential mass term for this eld so that some f -term and the d-term cannot vanish

simultaneously and supersymmetry is broken.

in our discussion of the fi model in section ii c 2 we simply put in a tree-level fi

term by hand.

it is well known that a u(1) d-term can be renormalized at one loop

(fischler et al, 1981; witten, 1981a). such renormalization is proportional to the sum of

the charges of the matter elds, and therefore, vanishes unless the theory is anomalous.

indeed, in many string models, the low-energy eld theory contains an anomalous u(1),

whose anomalies are canceled by shifts of the dilaton-axion supereld, through the green-

schwarz mechanism (green and schwarz, 1984). a fi term is generated for this u(1) by

string loops. as far as the low-energy eld theory is concerned, we can treat this fi term

as if it was put in by hand. the only subtleties associated with supersymmetry breaking

involve the dilaton supereld.

consider a theory with an anomalous u(1) gauge symmetry with

gs =

1

1922 xi

qi ,

(98)

where qi denote the u(1) charges of the dierent elds of the theory. the dilaton supereld

s then transforms as

s  s + i

gs
2

 ,

(99)

under the u(1) transformation a  a + , where a is the u(1) vector boson. to be
gauge invariant, the dilaton kahler potential is then of the form

k = k(s + s  gsv ) ,

where v is the u(1) vector supereld. this then gives the fi term

2 = 

gs
2

k
s

.

81

(100)

(101)

following (arkani-hamed-dine-martin, 1998) we shall consider the model of (binetruy

and dudas, 1996), which has, in addition to the anomalous u(1), an su(n) gauge symmetry.

the model contains the eld , an su(n) singlet with u(1) charge 1 (assuming gs > 0),
and one avor of su(n), that is, elds q and q transforming as (n, q) and ( n, q) under
su(n)u(1). working in terms of the su(n) meson m = q q, the superpotential is given
by

w = mm   

mp!q+q

+ (n  1) 3n 1
m !

1

n 1

,

(102)

where the rst term is a tree-level term, and the second term is generated dynamically by

su(n) instantons. the potential will also contain contributions from the u(1) d-term,

which is given by,

d = g2(cid:16)(q + q)|m|  ||2 + 2(cid:17) ,

(103)

where g is the u(1) gauge coupling. minimizing the potential, one nds that supersymmetry

is broken.  wants to develop a vev to cancel 2, but because of the su(n) dynamics, the

meson t develops a vev, which then generates, through the rst term in (102), a mass term

for , so that the potential does not vanish.

it is important to recall though that the su(n) scale depends on the dilaton supereld.

this dependence is most easily xed by requiring that the second term in (102) is u(1)

invariant, giving,

3n 1 = m 3n 1

p

e

2(q+ q)s

gs

.

(104)

one can then minimize the potential in terms of t,  and the dilaton, s. at the minimum,

the d-term as well as the t, , and dilaton f -terms are non-zero.

note that if the dilaton supereld is neglected in the above analysis, the theory seems to

have no goldstino, as the gaugino and matter fermions obtain masses either by the higgs

mechanism or through the superpotential. in fact, as was shown in (arkani-hamed-dine-

martin, 1998), the goldstino in these theories is a combination of the gaugino, the matter

fermion and the dilatino. in this basis the goldstino wave-function is given by

82

d
2g




, fi,s 2k

s2 fs
 ,

(105)

where d, fi, and fs stand for the d-term, the i-th matter eld f -term, and the dilaton f

term at the minimum, respectively.

c. list of models and literature guide

finally, in this section we shall present an extensive (but certainly incomplete) list of

models known to break supersymmetry with references to the original papers where these

models were introduced. while some of the models discussed below have been studied in

great detail, frequently it is only known that a given model breaks supersymmetry, but

the low energy spectrum and the properties of the vacuum have not been studied.

in

addition to the examples presented below many other models appeared in the literature.

new supersymmetry breaking theories can be constructed from the known models in a

variety of ways. moreover, for phenomenological purposes it is often sucient to nd a

model with a local non-supersymmetric minimum. while establishing the existence of a

local non-supersymmetric minimum may sometimes be more dicult than establishing the

absence of any supersymmetric vacuum, the methods involved in the analysis are essentially

the same, and we shall not discuss such models here.

 su(5) with an antisymmetric tensor and an antifundamental (aeck-dine-seiberg,
1985; meurice and veneziano, 1984). the arguments of aeck-dine-seiberg (1985) were

based on the diculty of satisfying t hooft anomaly matching conditions, while the meurice

and veneziano (1984) argument was based on gaugino condensation. the model is not

calculable. murayama (1995) and poppitz and trivedi (1996) have used the method of

integrating in and out vector-like matter to give additional arguments for dsb in the model.

pouliot (1996) constructed a dual of the su(5) model and showed that the dual breaks susy

at tree level. for the discussion of the model in the present review see sections iii d and

v c.

83

 su(2n + 1) with an antisymmetric tensor a, 2n  3 antifundamentals f and the

superpotential

w = ijaf if j ,

(106)

where  has the maximal rank (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985). these are generalizations of the

su(5) model. the integrating in and out method was used by poppitz and trivedi (1996)

to further analyze these models. see section iii d and also section vii a.

 so(10) with a single matter multiplet

in the spinor

representation (16 of

so(10)) (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984c). the analysis of supersymmetry breaking in this

model is very similar to that of the non-calculable su(5) model. indeed, the su(5) model

may be constructed from the so(10) model by using the discarded generator method. mu-

rayama (1995) discussed dsb in this model in the presence of an extra eld in the vector

10 representation of so(10). for a small mass of the extra eld, the theory is calculable,

and assuming no phase transition, susy remains broken when the vector is integrated out.

pouliot and strassler (1996) considered the same theory by adding an arbitrary number

n > 5 of vector elds and constructing the dual su(n  5) theory. they showed that the
dual breaks susy when masses for the vectors are turned on. all these arguments can only

be used as additional evidence of dsb in the so(10) model, but do not allow one to analyze

the vacuum and low energy spectrum of the theory.

 the two generation su(5) model (meurice and veneziano, 1984; aec-dine-seiberg,
1984d): su(5) with two antisymmetric tensors and two antifundamentals, with the super-

potential

w = a1f 1f 2 .

(107)

aec-dine-seiberg (1984d) showed that the model is calculable. in fact, historically, this

is the rst calculable model with supersymmetry breaking driven by an instanton-induced

superpotential. the vacuum and the low energy spectrum of the model were analyzed in

detail by ter veldhuis (1996). ter veldhuis (1998) also analyzed generalizations of this model

which include extra vector-like matter with a mass term in the superpotential.

84

 the 3  2 model (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985): su(3)  su(2) with

q (3, 2) ,

u (3, 1) ,

d(3, 1) ,

l (1, 2) ,

(108)

with the superpotential

w =  q l d .

(109)

this model is calculable. the analysis of the vacuum and low energy spectrum can be

found in (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985; bagger-poppitz-randall, 1994). the model possesses

a global u(1) symmetry which can be gauged without restoring susy, the relevant details

of the vacuum structure in this case can be found in (dine-nelson-shirman, 1995). see

sections iv a and vi a 2.

 discarded generator models: these include su(n1)su(n2)u(1) and su(2n)(1)
subgroup of su(2n + 1) (with n1 + n2 = 2n + 1) with matter given by the decomposition

of the antisymmetric tensor and 2n  3 antifundamentals of su(2n + 1) under the appro-
priate gauge group. this construction was proposed in (dine et al, 1996). for details see

section vii a. the two smallest models in this class are the 3 2 model (section iv a) and
the 4 1 model (section iv b). the su(2n)  u(1) models were rst constructed in (dine
et al, 1996; poppitz and trivedi, 1996); the su(2n  1)  su(2)  u(1) models can be
found in (dine et al, 1996); the su(2n  2)  su(3)  u(1) models are considered in 31
(csaki-randall-skiba, 1996); nally, the su(2n  3)  su(4)  u(1) models are discussed
in (csaki et al, 1996). a unied description of this class of models, as well as of the non-

calculable su(2n + 1) models, is given in (leigh-randall-rattazzi, 1997). another example

of the models in this class is sp (2)  u(1) model of csaki-schmaltz-skiba (1997a).

 su(2n + 1)  su(2) (dine et al, 1996) with

q  ( , ),

l  (1, ), qi  (, 1),

i = 1, 2,

(110)

31see also (chou, 1997).

85

and with a superpotential similar to that of the 3  2 model. these models are obvious
generalizations of the 3  2 model. the dynamics in this class of models is very similar to
that of the 3  2 model. for detailed analysis see (intriligator and thomas, 1996b). the
low energy physics of the su(5) su(2) model in this class, in the limit of a strong su(2),
is described by the non-calculable su(5) model (intriligator and thomas, 1996b) to which

we paid so much attention in this review.

 su(7)  sp (1) and su(9)  sp (2) (intriligator and thomas, 1996b): these models
are obtained by dualizing the su(7)  su(2) and su(9)  su(2) models of the previous
paragraph. the matter content is

a ( , 1) ,

f ( , 1) ,

p (, ) ,

(111)

l (1, ) ,

u (, 1) , d (, 1) ,

and the superpotential

w = ap p + f p l .

(112)

note that these models can be constructed starting from the antisymmetric tensor models

of aeck-dine-seiberg (1985), by gauging a maximal global symmetry and adding matter

to cancel all anomalies with the most general superpotential.

 su(2n + 1)  su(2) with

a  (a, 1),

f  ( , 2),

f i  (, 1), d  (1, 2),

(113)

where i = 1, . . . , n  2. (dine et al, 1996) to lift all at directions, a non-renormalizable
superpotential is required

w =

2n 2

xi,j=1

ijaf if j + f 2n 1f d +

1
m

2n 2

xi,j=1

ijf if jf f .

(114)

 su(2n + 1)  sp (m), n  m  1 with

q  ( , ), qi  (, 1),

l  (1, )

(115)

86

where i = 1, . . . , 2m is a avor index (dine et al, 1996). these are generalization of the 32

model with a non-renormalizable superpotential.

the su(2n + 1) dynamics generates a dynamical superpotential (dine et al, 1996). in

addition, a quantum constraint is generated by the sp (m) dynamics for n = m. the tree

level superpotential

w = q2ql +

2m

xi,j>2

ijq2qjqj

(116)

lifts all at directions, and supersymmetry is broken. for details see (dine et al, 1996;

intriligator and thomas, 1996a).

for n = m +1, the tree level superpotential (116) does not lift all classical at directions,

yet they are lifted by nonperturbative eects (intriligator and thomas, 1996a; shirman,

1996) and susy is broken. we discussed this model in section vi b. (note that in that

section, we used a dierent notation for sp and refered to this theory as su(n  1) 
sp (n/2).)

it is also useful to note that for m + 1 < n, the sp (m) dynamics can have dual

description.

intriligator and thomas (1996b) argued that the dual description (with

su(2n + 1) sp (n  m  1) gauge group and matter content which includes the symmet-
ric tensor of su(2n + 1) as well as (anti)fundamentals and bifundamentals breaks susy.

when n > 3m + 2 it is only the dual description which is asymptotically free and can be

interpreted as a microscopic theory.

an interesting modication of these models (luty and terning, 1998) is an su(2n +

1)  sp (n + 1) theory with

q  ( , ), qi  (, 1),

la  (1, ) ,

(117)

where i = 1, . . . , 2(n +1) and a = 1, . . . , 2n +1. we note that this version of the model pos-

sesses an su(2n + 1) u(1) u(1)r global symmetry. luty and terning (1998) considered
only the renormalizable superpotential

w = qql ,

87

(118)

where  has maximal rank. they showed that while this model has a large number of

classical at directions, all of them are lifted quantum mechanically. one can now add mass

terms for some avors of the sp (n + 1) elds la. for an appropriately chosen mass matrix

supersymmetry remains broken. choosing a mass matrix of maximal rank and integrating

out the massive matter, we recover the non-renormalizable model discussed above.

 non-renormalizable su(2n)  u(1) model (dine et al, 1996) with chiral superelds

transforming under the gauge group and a global su(2n  4) symmetry as

a  ( , 2n  4, 1),

f  (,(2n  2), ),

s  (1, 2n,

) .

(119)

the superpotential required to stabilize all at directions

w = af f s ,

(120)

explicitly breaks the global symmetry down to a subgroup. the anomaly free su(n  2)
subgroup of the global symmetry can be gauged without restoring susy.

 non-renormalizable su(n)  u(1) models (dine et al, 1996): the matter content is

(we also give charges under a maximal global su(n  3) symmetry)

a  ( , 2  n, 1), n  (m, 1, 1), n i  (, n  1, ),
sij  (1,n, ) ,

si  (1,n, )),

(121)

where i, j = 1, . . . , n  3. the superpotential

w = in insi + ijan in jsij

(122)

lifts all at directions while preserving a global symmetry. note that for n = 4, sij does

not exist and this is just the 41 model of section iv b.

 su(n)  su(n  1) (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a), and su(n)  su(n 
2) (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996b): the su(n)  su(n  1) models were discussed in
section vi b. we discussed susy breaking without r-symmetry in these models in sec-

tion vi c. the su(n)su(n 2) models, which are similar by construction but have very

88

dierent dynamics are discussed in section v b. both classes of models have calculable min-

ima with an unbroken global symmetry (su(n  2) and sp (n  3) respectively) (poppitz
and trivedi, 1997; arkani-hamed et al, 1998; shadmi, 1997).

 itiy models (intriligator and thomas, 1996a; izawa and yanagida, 1996) and their
modications: we discussed the itiy models in section vi a 2. they are based on an su(n)

(sp (n)) gauge group with n (n + 1) avors of matter in the fundamental representation

coupled to a set of gauge singlet elds in such a way that all d-at directions are lifted. even

after supersymmetry breaking these models posses a at direction which is only lifted by

(perturbative) corrections to the kahler potential. in (shirman, 1996; arkani-hamed and

murayama, 1998; dimopoulos et al, 1998) it was argued that the perturbative corrections

generate a growing potential for large vevs along this direction. by gauging a subgroup of the

global symmetry it is possible to obtain a modication of the model with a calculable local

susy breaking minimum at large vevs (murayama, 1997; dimopoulos et al, 1998). these

models can be generalized in the following way. take any model with a quantum modied

constraint and couple all gauge invariant operators to singlet elds. since the quantum

constraint becomes incompatible with the singlet f-term conditions, supersymmetry must

be broken (csaki-schmaltz-skiba, 1997b). as an example consider an so(7) gauge group

with ve matter multiplets transforming in the spinor representation. the theory possesses

an su(5) global symmetry, and a u(1)r under which all matter elds are neutral. the

gauge invariant composites transform as an antisymmetric tensor a and antifundamental f

of the global symmetry. the quantum constraint is

a5 + af

4

= 10 .

(123)

coupling all gauge invariants to gauge singlets a and f and implementing the constraint

through the lagrange multiplier  one nds

w = aa + f f + (a5 + af 4  10) ,

(124)

and obviously susy is broken. we note that the model is nonrenormalizable.

89

 su(2) with one i = 3/2 matter eld (intriligator-seiberg-shenker, 1995): we discussed
this theory in section v a. a non-renormalizable tree-level superpotential lifts all classical

at directions. the theory connes, no superpotential is generated dynamically, and super-

symmetry is broken since the tree-level superpotential cannot be extremized in terms of the

conned eld.

 su(7) with two symmetric tensors, sa , a = 1, 2, six antifundamentals qi, i = 1, . . . , 6,

and the tree level superpotential

w =

3

xi

s1q2iq2i1 + s2q2iq2i+1 ,

(125)

where in summing over i we identify 7  1 (csaki-schmaltz-skiba, 1997b; nelson and
thomas, 1996). this is another example of susy breaking through connement, which we

saw in the intriligator-seiberg-shenker (1995) model in section v a. the superpotential lifts

all classical at directions while preserving a global anomaly free u(1)  u(1)r symmetry.
su(7) dynamics leads to connement, and generates the nonperturbative superpotential

wdyn =

1
13 h 2n 2 ,

(126)

where h a

ij = saqiqj and ni = s4qi. near the origin of the moduli space the kahler

potential is canonical in terms of the composite elds. solving the equations of motion for

h a

ij one nds that at least some of the composite elds acquire vevs, breaking the global

symmetry, and therefore, supersymmetry.

 so(12) u(1) and su(6) u(1) (csaki-schmaltz-skiba, 1997b). the matter content
of the so(12)u(1) model is (32, 1), (12,4), 1, 8), (1, 2), (1, 6). the matter content of the
su(6)  u(1) model is (20, 1), (6,3), (6,3), (1, 4), (1, 2). these models are constructed
by starting with a non-chiral theory with a dynamical superpotential and gauging a global

u(1) symmetry (adding the necessary elds to make the full theory anomaly free) in a

way which makes the theory chiral. supersymmetry is broken by the interplay between a

dynamically-generated superpotential and the tree-level superpotential.

90

acknowledgements

it is a pleasure to thank michael dine, galit eyal, jonathan feng, martin gremm, and

yossi nir for useful comments. y. shirman is grateful to the aspen center for physics for

hospitality during the early stages of this work. the work of y. shirman was supported in

part by nsf grant phy-9802484. the work of y. shadmi was supported in part by doe

grants #df-fc02-94er40818 and #de-fc02-91er40671, and by the koret foundation.

appendix a: some results on susy gauge theories

in this appendix we shall briey review some results in supersymmetric gauge theories.

our main goal here is to introduce notations (which will mainly follow those of (bagger

and wess, 1991)), and to summarize the results necessary to make the present review

self-contained. much more detailed reviews of the progress in our understanding of su-

persymmetric gauge theories exist in the literature, e.g. (intriligator and seiberg, 1996; pe-

skin, 1997; shifman, 1997).

1. notations and superspace lagrangian

we shall consider an eective low-energy theory of light degrees of freedom well above the

possible scale of supersymmetry breaking. in this case the eective action will have linearly

realized supersymmetry, and it is convenient to write an eective supersymmetric lagrangian

in n = 1 superspace, where four (bosonic) space-time coordinates are supplemented by four
,  = 1, 2. the light matter elds combine
anti-commuting (fermionic) coordinates , and 



into chiral superelds32

 =  + 2 + 2f,

(a1)

32 we shall usually use the same notation for a chiral supereld and its lowest scalar component.

91

while gauge bosons and their superpartners combine into vector superelds

v = a + i2  i

2

 +

2

2

d,

1
2

(a2)

where we have used wess-zumino gauge.

the eective supersymmetric lagrangian for a theory with gauge group g, and matter

elds i transforming in the representation r of the gauge group (with t a being a generator

of this representation) can be written as

l = z d4k(, ev t ) +

1

g2 z d2w w + h.c +z d2w () + h.c.

(a3)

the rst term in (a3) is a kahler potential which contains, among others, kinetic terms for

the matter elds. the kahler potential also contributes gauge-interaction terms to the scalar

potential. the second term in (a3) is the kinetic term for the gauge elds. in particular
w  =  1
of the gauge eld-strength f . the last term in (a3) is the superpotential.

4dddv , where d is a superspace derivative, is a supersymmetric generalization

the superpotential is a holomorphic function of chiral superelds and obeys powerful

non-renormalization theorems. in particular, in perturbation theory the superpotential can

only be modied by eld rescalings (which can be absorbed into renormalization of the

kahler potential). using holomorphy, symmetries of the theory, and known weakly cou-

pled limits it is often possible to determine the superpotential exactly, including all non-

perturbative eects. similarly, the kinetic term for the gauge multiplet is a holomorphic

function allowing one to obtain exact results on the renormalization of the gauge coupling.

the kahler potential on the other hand can be a general real-valued function of  and

 consistent with symmetries. classically it is given by

k = ev t ,

(a4)

but quantum mechanically it is renormalized both perturbatively and non-perturbatively.

in studying the dynamical behavior of the supersymmetric theory it is often useful to

remember that the hamiltonian is determined by the supersymmetry generators

92

h =

1
4

(q1q1 + q1q1 + q2q2 + q2q2) .

(a5)

from eq. (a5) we see that a supersymmetric vacuum state (a state annihilated by the

supersymmetry charges) has vanishing energy. therefore, a particularly important role

(especially in the analysis of supersymmetry breaking) is played by the scalar potential of

the theory

v =

1
2

g2xa

(da)2 + f 

i g1

ij fj,

(a6)

where gij = 2k

ij , and the auxiliary elds f , and d are given in terms of the scalar elds

by

fi = 
i

w

(a7)

where in fi one takes the derivatives of the superpotential with respect to the dierent

da = pi itai ,

superelds and then keeps only the lowest component, and in da, i stands for the scalar

eld of the i supermultiplet.

typically a supersymmetric gauge theory possesses a set of directions in eld space

(called d-at directions) along which da = 0 for all a. along some or all of these d-at

directions, the f -atness conditions, fi = 0, can also be satised. the subspace of eld

space where the scalar potential vanishes is called a moduli space and to a large degree

determines the low-energy dynamics.

the study of non-perturbative eects in susy gauge theories relies heavily on the use of

symmetries. an important role, especially in the applications to dynamical supersymmetry

breaking, is played by an r-symmetry. we therefore pause to introduce this symmetry.

under an r-symmetry, the fermionic coordinates rotate as,

a chiral eld with r-charge q transforms under this symmetry as follows

  ei .

(x, , )  eiq(x, ei, eiq ) .

93

(a8)

(a9)

note that dierent component elds transform dierently under r-symmetry, and thus

it does not commute with supersymmetry. on the other hand, the vector supereld v
is neutral under r-symmetry (therefore, the gaugino transforms as   ei). clearly
there always exists an assignment of r-symmetry charges to the superelds such that the

kahler potential contribution to the action is invariant under r-symmetry. on the other

hand the superpotential contributions to the action explicitly break r-symmetry unless the

superpotential has charge 2 under r-symmetry.

in the following subsections we shall discuss methods for determining the classical moduli

space. we shall also describe the quantum behavior of supersymmetric qcd (sqcd) with

various choices of the matter content. at the end of this section we shall comment on

analogous result for models with dierent gauge groups and matter content. these results

will provide us with tools needed to analyze supersymmetry breaking.

2. d-at directions

classically, one could set all superpotential couplings to zero. then the moduli space

of the theory is determined by d-atness conditions. even when tree level superpotential

couplings are turned on but remain small, the vacuum states of the theory will lie near

the solutions of d-atness conditions (still in the classical approximation). it is convenient,

therefore, to analyze susy gauge theories in two stages. first nd a submanifold in the

eld space on which the d-terms vanish, and then analyze the full theory including both

tree level and non-perturbative contributions to the superpotential.

we start by describing a useful technique for nding the d-at directions of a the-

ory (aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984c; aeck-dine-seiberg, 1985) with su(n) gauge symmetry.

consider the n  n matrix

di

j(cid:17)k
j = l(cid:16)ai

l

k,

(a10)

j(cid:17)k
where (cid:16)ai
l
j(cid:17)k
j (the generalization of(cid:16)ai
(cid:16)ai
l k

= i

l

are the real generators of gl(n). for  in the fundamental representation

j(cid:17) for a general multi-index representation is obvious).

94

it is easy to see that the vanishing of all das is equivalent to the requirement that di
j

be proportional to the unit matrix, di

j. to show this it is sucient to note that

j  i

da = di

jaj

i , where a are generators of su(n) in the fundamental representation.

another way to parameterize the moduli space is by the use of gauge invariant com-

posite operators. it has been shown that a complete set of such operators is in one to one

correspondence with the space of d-at directions (luty and taylor, 1996). an important

feature of this latter parameterization of the moduli space is that in some cases there exist

gauge invariant operators which vanish identically due to the bose statistic of the super-

elds. for this reason they do not have counterparts in the elementary parameterization

of the moduli space. however, due to quantum eects these operators typically describe

light (composite) degrees of freedom of the low-energy theory and play an important role in

the dynamics.

3. pure supersymmetric su (nc) theory

the lagrangian of a pure supersymmetric yang-mills (sym) theory can be written as

l =

1
4g2

w z d2w w + h. c. .

(a11)

the wilsonian coupling constant in the lagrangian can be promoted to a vev of the back-

ground chiral supereld 1
g2

w  s = 1

w  i 

g2

82 . since the physics is independent of shifts in

, the wilsonian gauge coupling in eq. (a11) receives corrections only at one loop. on the

other hand, the gauge coupling constant in the 1pi action receives contributions at all orders

in perturbation theory. these two coupling constants can be related by eld redenitions

(shifman and vainshtein, 1986; shifman and vainshtein, 1991). in the following we shall

always use the wilsonian action and work with wilsonian coupling constants. we shall use

functional knowledge of the exact beta functions only to establish the scaling dimensions of

the composite operators in our discussion of duality in section a 7.

sym is a strongly interacting non-abelian theory very much like qcd. in particular it

95

is believed that it connes and develops a mass gap. by using symmetry arguments it is

possible to show that if the gaugino condensate develops it has the form

hi = const  3

sy m = const  3e 82

ncg2 .

(a12)

in fact the constant can be exactly calculated (novikov et al, 1983; shifman and vainshtein,

1988). the theory has nc supersymmetric vacuum states.

4. nf < nc: aeck-dine-seiberg superpotential

as a next step one can consider an su(nc) gauge theory with nf (< nc) avors of

matter elds in the fundamental q and antifundamental q representations. this theory

possesses a large non-anomalous global symmetry under which matter elds transform as

follows:

su(nf )l  su(nf )r  u(1)b  u(1)r

q

q

nf

1

1

n f

1

1

nf nc

nf

nf nc

nf

(a13)

classically there are d-at directions along which the scalar potential vanishes. using

the techniques described above we can parametrize these at directions (up to symmetry

transformations) by

q =

= q .

(a14)

v1

v2

. . .

vnf

. . .

. . .

. . .

. . .









these at directions can also be parameterized by the vevs of the gauge invariant op-

erators mij = qiqj. these composite degrees of freedom give a better (weakly coupled)

description near the origin of moduli space where the theory is in a conned regime.

in this model a unique nonperturbative superpotential is allowed by the symmetries

(aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984a)

96

wdyn =   3ncnf
det(qq)!

1

ncnf

,

(a15)

where  is the renormalization group invariant scale of the theory. it was shown (aeck-

dine-seiberg, 1984a; cordes, 1986) that this superpotential is in fact generated by instanton

eects for nf = nc  1. it is generated by gaugino condensation in all other cases.

before proving this last statement, let us pause for a moment and discuss the relation

between the renormalization group invariant scales of the microscopic and eective theories.

suppose the microscopic theory is su(nc) with nf avors. as has been mentioned above

the wilsonian coupling (shifman and vainshtein, 1986; shifman and vainshtein, 1991) of

the theory runs only at one loop

1

g2()

=

1

g2(m)

+

b0

162 ln(cid:18) 

m(cid:19) .

(a16)

suppose also that at a scale v some elds in the theory become massive, and the physics

below this scale is described by an su(n 

c) gauge group with n 

f avors. the wilsonian

coupling of the eective theory is

1
g2
l()

=

1

g2
l(m)

+

b0
162 ln(cid:18) 

m(cid:19) .

(a17)

in equations (a16) and (a17) b0 = 3nc  nf and b0 = 3n 
coecients. but the couplings should be equal at the scale  = v. this allows us to

f are the -function

c  n 

derive scale matching conditions. for example, take an su(nc) theory with nf avors. its

renormalization group invariant scale is given by

3ncnf = 3ncnf exp 

82

g2 ! .

(a18)

if one of the matter elds is massive with mass m  , the eective theory has nf  1
avors and its scale is

3ncnf +1

l

= 3ncnf +1 exp 

82

g2 ! .

(a19)

requiring equality of couplings at the scale of the mass we nd

97

3ncnf +1

l

= m3ncnf .

in a general case the equation above becomes



b0
l = v

b0b0b0 ,

where v represents a generic vev and/or mass in the theory.

(a20)

(a21)

now, in the nf = nc  1 theory with small masses m   an instanton calculation
(aeck-dine-seiberg, 1984a; cordes, 1986) is reliable and gives (a15). due to the holo-

morphicity of the superpotential the result can be extrapolated into the region of moduli

space where one avor, say nf th, is heavy, mnf nf  . it decouples from the low energy
eective theory. solving the equations of motion for the heavy eld and using the scale

matching condition (a21) one nds the superpotential (a15) for the eective theory with

nf = nc2 avors. in the low energy eective theory this superpotential can be interpreted
as arising from gaugino condensation. one can continue this procedure by induction and not

only derive the superpotential for arbitrary nf < nc but also x the numerical coecient in

front of the superpotential. (this coecient can be absorbed into the denition of , and

we shall set it to 1 most of the time.)

even though the classical at directions are lifted in the massless theory by the super-

potential (a15), the scalar potential

v = xi

2


(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)


w

qi(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

+(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

w

2
q (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)


(a22)

tends to zero as q = q   and as a result theory does not possess a stable vacuum state.
in our discussion of dsb we discuss examples where at directions may be not only lifted

but stabilized due to nonperturbative eects (see section vi b).

one could lift classical at directions by adding a mass term to the superpotential

wtree = mijqiqj .

(a23)

note that this superpotential explicitly breaks the u(1)r symmetry.

in section iii b we

argue that this is often a signal of unbroken supersymmetry. it is easy to nd the super-

symmetric vacua in this model. in terms of the meson elds they are given by

98

mij = (cid:16)det(m)3ncnf(cid:17)1/nc   1

mij! .

(a24)

it is also worth noting that if some number of matter elds are massive they decouple from

the low energy theory and can be integrated out. solving the equations of motion for the

massive elds one can nd the superpotential of eq. (a15) and the solution (a24) for the

vevs of the remaining light elds.

5. nf = nc : quantum moduli space

additional at directions exist for nf = nc. the most general expression for the at

directions is

a1

a2

q =





. . .

anc

. . .

. . .

. . .

. . .





q =

b1

b2





. . .

bnc

. . .

. . .

. . .

. . .





subject to the condition

|ai|2  |bi|2 = v2 .

(a25)

(a26)

as was mentioned above, the at directions can be parameterized by vevs of gauge invariant

polynomials. in this case new at directions can be represented by elds with the quantum
numbers of baryons33 b = qn and antibaryons b = qn . note, however, that due to

the bose statistics of the superelds, the gauge invariant polynomials obey the constraint,

classically,

det m  bb = 0 .

(a27)

seiberg ((1994; 1995)) showed that this constraint is modied quantum mechanically,

33summation over both color and avor indices is implied.

99

det(m)  bb = 2n .

(a28)

we refer the reader to (seiberg, 1994; intriligator and seiberg, 1996; peskin, 1997; shifman,

1997) for a detailed explanation of this result.

it is often convenient to enforce this quantum mechanical constraint by introducing a

lagrange multiplier term in the superpotential

w = a(det(m)  bb  2n ) + mijmij .

(a29)

once again the validity of this superpotential can be veried in the limit that some of the

matter elds are heavy and decouple from the low energy theory. integrating them out leads

to the superpotential (a15) for the light matter.

naively, the kahler potential of the nf = nc theory is singular at the origin. this

corresponds to the fact that at the origin, the full gauge group su(nc) is restored and

additional degrees of freedom become massless. this singular point, however, does not

belong to the quantum moduli space. su(nc) cannot be restored because of the constraint

(a28) and the kahler potential in terms of composite degrees of freedom is non-singular. in

the infrared mesons and baryons represent a good description of the theory. one of many

non-trivial tests they pass is t hooft anomaly matching conditions (t hooft, 1980). far

from the origin the quantum moduli space is very close to classical one and the elementary

degrees of freedom should represent a good (weakly coupled) description of the theory.

6. nf = nc + 1

in this case there are nf baryons and antibaryons transforming under the global
su(nf )l  su(nf )r as (nf , 1) and (1, nf ) respectively. classically, the gauge invariants
obey the constraints

det(m)  bimijbj = 0 ,
bimij = mijbj = 0 .

100

(a30)

these constraints are not modied quantum mechanically. one can easily see this by adding

a tree level superpotential wtree = pij mijmij. holomorphy guarantees that meson vevs are

given by eq. (a24). taking various limits of the mass matrix one can see that the mesons

mij can have any values on the moduli space. this can also be shown for the baryons.

in terms of the elementary elds the kahler potential is singular at the origin reecting

the fact that su(nc) is restored there and additional degrees of freedom become massless.

in terms of composite degrees of freedom the kahler potential is regular, and they represent

a suitable infrared description of the theory. as in the case nf = nc, t hooft anomaly

matching conditions are satised by the eective description. in this model, the constraints

can be implemented by the superpotential

w =

1

2nc1 (cid:16)bimijbj  det m(cid:17) .

(a31)

adding mass for one avor correctly leads to the nf = nc model.

7. nf > nc + 1 : dual descriptions of the infrared physics

we shall start from the case 3

2nc < nf < 3nc. this theory ows to an infrared xed

point (seiberg, 1995). seiberg (1995) suggested that in the vicinity of the infrared xed point

the theory admits a dual, magnetic, description with the same global symmetries but in

terms of a theory with a dierent gauge group. this theory is based on the gauge group

su(nf nc) with nf avors of q and q transforming as fundamentals and antifundamentals
respectively, as well as gauge-singlet elds m, corresponding to the mesons of the original

(electric) theory. the global-symmetry charges are given by

su(nf )l  su(nf )r  u(1)b  u(1)r

q

q

m

n f

1

nf

1

nf

n f

nc

nf nc

nf nc

 nc
0

nc
nf

nc
nf

2 nf nc

nc

(a32)

the magnetic theory also ows to a xed point. however, in the magnetic theory a tree

level superpotential is allowed by symmetries

101

w = mqq.

(a33)

in the presence of this superpotential the theory ows to a new xed point which is identical

to the xed point of the electric theory.

at the xed point the superconformal symmetry can be used to understand the behavior

of the theory. for example the scaling dimensions of the gauge invariant operators are

known. the exact beta function for the coupling in 1pi action (in the electric description) is

given by (novikov et al, 1983; shifman and vainshtein, 1986; shifman and vainshtein, 1991)

g2
162
g2
162

(g)

= 

(g) =

3nc  nf + nf (g2)

g2
82

1  nc
n 2
c  1
nc

+ o(g4) .

(a34)

at the zero of the -function the anomalous dimension is  = 3nc/nf + 1, and one nds

d(qq) = 2 +  = 3

nf  nc

nf

.

(a35)

the dimension of the baryon operators can be determined by exploiting the r symmetry

(seiberg, 1995)

d(b) = d(b) =

3nc(nf  nc)

2nf

.

(a36)

this allows one to determine the scaling of the kahler potential near the xed point both

in the electric and in the magnetic description

2nf

3(nf nc) ,

ke  (qq)
km  (qq)

2nf
3nc .

let us summarize the correspondence between the electric and magnetic theories:

mij = qiqj  mij ,
w = mijmij  w = mijmij + mijqiqj ,

b, b  b, b .

102

(a37)

(a38)

by performing a second duality transformation one can verify that in fact the magnetic

meson is identied with the composite electric meson through the equations of motion.

the scales of the electric and the magnetic theories are related by

3ncnf 3(nf nc)nf = (1)nf ncnf ,

(a39)

where the scale  is needed to map the composite electric meson qq into an elementary

magnetic meson m. these elds have the same dimension at the infrared xed point, but

dierent dimensions in the ultraviolet.

if the number of avors is nc + 1 < nf < 3

2nc one could construct a dual description

in a similar way. in that case only the electric description is asymptotically free and makes

sense in the ultraviolet.

8. other models

there are numerous generalizations of the results presented in previous subsections to

theories with dierent gauge groups and matter elds. here we mention some of the gener-

alizations which will be useful for our discussion of supersymmetry breaking.

results analogous to those for sqcd can be found for sp (n) theories with nf avors

of matter elds transforming in the fundamental representation34 (intriligator and pouliot,

1995). the one loop -function coecient is given by

b0 = 3(nc + 1)  nf .

(a40)

this can be compared to the one loop -function of the su(n) models given in eq. (a16)

in fact, one can nd many of the results for sp (n) theories by making the substitution

nc  nc + 1 in the expressions for su(n) models (and rewriting determinants as pfaans).
the theory does not have baryons for any number of avors. the supersymmetric vacuum

is given by

34in our notation sp (1) = su (2), and nf avors correspond to 2nf elds.

103

mij = qiqj = (cid:16)p f (m)3(nc+1)(cid:17)

1

nc+1   1

mij! .

(a41)

we can easily see that for nf = nc + 1, the quantum constraint is dierent from the classical

one,

p f (m) = 2(nc+1) .

(a42)

if the number of avors is nf > nc + 2 there is a dual description analogous to the one for

the su(n) theories.

we conclude this section by mentioning several other classes of models which are useful

in the study of the supersymmetry breaking. poppitz and trivedi (1996) studied quantum

moduli space and exact superpotentials in su(n) gauge theories with matter in the anti-

symmetric tensor, fundamental, and antifundamental representations. in the case without

fundamental elds pouliot (1996) has constructed a dual by using berkoozs (1996) decon-

ning trick. in (poppitz-shadmi-trivedi, 1996a) duality was studied in the product group

theories and it was shown that dual models can be constructed by using single group duality.

104

references

aeck, i., m. dine, and n. seiberg, 1984a, dynamical supersymmetry breaking in super-

symmetric qcd, nucl. phys. b 241, 493-534.

aeck, i., m. dine, and n. seiberg, 1984b, dynamical supersymmetry breaking in chiral

theories, phys. lett. b 137, 187-192.

aeck, i., m. dine, and n. seiberg, 1984c, exponential hierarchy from dynamical super-

symmetry breaking, phys. lett. b 140, 59-62.

aeck, i., m. dine, and n. seiberg, 1984d, calculable nonperturbative supersymmetry

breaking, phys. rev. lett. 52, 1677-1680.

aeck, i., m. dine, and n. seiberg, 1985, dynamical supersymmetry breaking in four

dimensions and its phenomenological implications, nucl. phys. b 256, 557-599.

amati, d., g. rossi, and g.veneziano, 1985, instanton eects in supersymmetric gauge

theories, nucl. phys. b 249, 1-41.

arkani-hamed, n., m. dine and s.p. martin, 1998, dynamical supersymmetry breaking

in models with a green-schwarz mechanism, phys. lett. b 431, 329-338; eprint hep-

ph/9803432.

arkani-hamed, n., and j. march-russell, and h. murayama, 1998 building models of

gauge mediated supersymmetry breaking without a messenger sector, nucl. phys. b

509, 3-32; eprint hep-ph/9701286.

arkani-hamed, n., and h. murayama, 1998, renormalization group invariance of exact

results in supersymmetric gauge theories, phys. rev. d 57, 6638-6648; eprint hep-

th/9705189.

bagger, j., e. poppitz, and l. randall, 1994, the r-axion from dynamical supersymmetry

breaking, nucl. phys. b 426, 3-18; eprint hep-ph/9405345.

105

bagger, j., and j. wess, 1991, supersymmetry and supergravity, 2nd edition, (princeton

university press, princeton).

bagger, j., and e. witten, 1982, quantization of newtons constant in certain supergrav-

ity theories, phys. lett. b 115, 202-206.

berkooz, m., 1996, the dual of supersymmetric su(2k) with an antisymmetric tensor

and composite dualities, nucl. phys. b 466, 75-84; eprint hep-th/9512024.

binetruy, p., and e. dudas, 1996, gaugino condensation and the anomalous u(1), phys.

lett. b 389, 503-509; eprint hep-th/9607172.

de boer, j., k. hori, h. ooguri, and y. oz, 1998, branes and dynamical supersymmetry

breaking, nucl. phys. b 522, 20-68; eprint hep-th/9801060.

brodie, j., p. cho, and k. intriligator, 1998, misleading anomaly matchings?, phys. lett.

b 429, 319-326; eprint hep-th/9802092.

chacko, z., m.a. luty and e. ponton, 1998 calculable dynamical supersymmetry break-

ing on deformed moduli spaces, j. high ener. phys. 12, 016; eprint hep-th/9810253.

cheng, c.-h., and y. shadmi, 1998, duality in the presence of supersymmetry breaking,

nucl. phys. b 531, 125-150; eprint hep-th/9801146.

chou, c.-l., 1997, models of dynamical supersymmetry breaking from a su(2k + 3)

gauge model, phys. lett. b 391, 329-334; eprint hep-th/9605119.

clark, t. e., o. piguet, k. sibold, 1979, the absence of radiative corrections to the

axial current anomaly in supersymmetric qed, nucl. phys. b 159, 1-15.

cordes, s., 1986, the instanton-induced superpotential in supersymmetric qcd, nucl.

phys. b 273, 629-648.

csaki, c., r. leigh, l. randall, and w. skiba, 1996, supersymmetry breaking through

conning and dual theory gauge dynamics, phys. lett. b 387, 791-795; eprint hep-

106

th/9607021.

csaki, c., l. randall, and w. skiba, 1996, more dynamical supersymmetry breaking,

nucl. phys. b 479, 65-81; eprint hep-th/9605108.

csaki, c., m. schmaltz, and w. skiba, 1997a, exact results and duality for sp (2n)

susy gauge theories with an antisymmetric tensor, nucl. phys. b 487, 128-140; eprint

hep-th/9607210.

csaki, c., m. schmaltz, and w. skiba, 1997b, connement in n = 1 susy gauge theories

and model building tools, phys. rev. d 55, 7840-7858; eprint hep-th/9612207.

csaki, c., m. schmaltz, and w. skiba, 1997c, a systematic approach to connement

in n=1 supersymmetric gauge theories, phys. rev. lett. 78, 799-802; eprint hep-

th/9610139.

dimopoulos, s., m. dine, s. raby, and s. thomas, 1996, experimental signatures of low-

energy gauge mediated supersymmetry breaking, phys. rev. lett. 76, 3494-3497; eprint

hep-ph/9601367.

dimopoulos, s., g. dvali, r. rattazzi, and g. giudice, 1998, dynamical soft terms with

unbroken supersymmetry, nucl. phys. b 510, 12-38; eprint hep-ph/9705307.

dimopoulos, s., and h. georgi, 1981, softly broken supersymmetry and su(5), nucl.

phys. b 193, 150-162.

dine, m., a. nelson, y. nir, and y. shirman, 1996, new tools for low-energy dynamical

supersymmetry breaking, phys. rev. d 53, 2658-2669; eprint hep-ph/9507378.

dine, m, a. nelson, and y. shirman, 1995, dynamical supersymmetry breaking simpli-

ed, phys. rev. d 51, 1362-1370; eprint hep-ph/9408384.

dvali, g., and z. kakushadze, 1998, dynamical flavor hierarchy and heavy top, phys.

lett. b 426, 78-81; eprint hep-ph/9707287.

107

dvali, d., and a. pomarol, 1996, anomalous u(1) as a mediator of supersymmetry break-

ing, phys. rev. lett. 77, 3728-3731; eprint hep-ph/9607383.

einhorn, m. b., and d. t. r. jones, 1983, absence of goldstino decoupling in hierarchical

superunied models, phys. lett. b 128, 174-178.

fayet, p., 1975, spontaneous supersymmetry breaking without gauge invariance, phys.

lett. b 58, 67-70.

fayet, p., and j. iliopoulos, 1974, spontaneously broken supergauge symmetries and gold-

stone spinors, phys. lett. b 51, 461-464.

ferrara, s., l. girardello, f. palumbo, 1979, a general mass formula in broken super-

symmetry, phys. rev. d 20, 403-408.

ferrara, s., j. iliopoulos and b. zumino, 1974, supergauge invariance and the gell-mann-

low eigenvalue, nucl. phys. b 77, 413-419.

fischler, w., h. p. nilles, j. polchinski, s. raby, and l. susskind, 1981, vanishing renor-

malization of the d-term in supersymmetric u(1) theories, phys. rev. lett. 47, 757-759.

giudice, g. f., and r. rattazzi, 1998, theories with gauge mediated supersymmetry

breaking; eprint hep-ph/9801271.

green, m., and j. schwarz, 1984, anomaly cancellations in supersymmetric d = 10 gauge

theory require so(32), phys. lett. b 149, 117-122.

grisaru, m. t., m. rocek, and w. siegel, 1979, improved methods for supergraphs,

nucl. phys. b 159, 429-450.

t hooft, g., 1980, in recent developments in gauge theories, edited by g. t hooft et al.,

(plenum press, new york, usa).

huq, m., 1976, spontaneous breakdown of fermion number conservation and supersymme-

try, phys. rev. d 14, 3548-3556.

108

intriligator, k., and p. pouliot, 1995, exact superpotentials, quantum vacua and duality

in sp (nc) gauge theories, phys. lett. b 353, 471-476; eprint hep-th/9505006.

intriligator, k., and n.seiberg, 1994, phases of n=1 supersymmetric gauge theories in

four dimensions, nucl. phys. b 431, 551-565; eprint hep-th/9408155.

intriligator, k., and n. seiberg, 1996, lectures on supersymmetric gauge theories and

electric-magnetic duality, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. bc 45, 1-28; eprint hep-th/9509066.

intriligator, k., n. seiberg, and s. shenker, 1995, proposal for a simple model of dynamical

susy breaking, phys. lett. b 342, 152-154; eprint hep-th/9410203.

intriligator, k., and s. thomas, 1996a, dynamical supersymmetry breaking on quantum

moduli spaces, nucl. phys. b 473, 121-140; eprint hep-th/9603158.

intriligator, k., and s. thomas, 1996b, dual descriptions of supersymmetry breaking,

eprint hep-th/9608046.

izawa, k.-i., and t. yanagida, 1996, dynamical supersymmetry breaking in vector-like

gauge theories, prog. theor. phys. 95, 829-830; eprint hep-th/9602180.

konishi, k., 1984, anomalous supersymmetry transformation of some composite opera-

tors in sqcd, phys. lett. b 135, 439-449.

kovner, k., and m. shifman, 1997, chirally symmetric phase of supersymmetric gluody-

namics, phys. rev. d 56, 2396-2402; eprint hep-th/9702174.

leigh, r., l. randall, and r. rattazzi, 1997, unity of supersymmetry breaking models,

nucl. phys. b 501, 375-408; eprint hep-ph/9704246.

luty, m., and w. taylor, 1996, varieties of vacua in classical supersymmetric gauge

theories, phys. rev. d 53, 3399-3405; eprint hep-th/9506098.

luty, m., and j. terning, 1998, new mechanisms of dynamical supersymmetry breaking

and direct gauge mediation, phys. rev. d 57, 6799-6806; eprint hep-ph/9709306.

109

lykken, j., e. poppitz, s. trivedi, 1999, branes with guts and supersymmetry breaking,

nucl. phys. b 543, 105-121; eprint hep-th/9806080.

meurice, y., and g. veneziano, 1984, susy vacua versus chiral fermions, phys. lett. b

141, 69-72.

murayama, h., 1995, studying non-calculable models of dynamical supersymmetry break-

ing, phys. lett. b 355, 187-192; eprint hep-th/9505082.

murayama, h., 1997, a model of direct gauge mediation, phys. rev. lett. 79, 18-21;

eprint hep-ph/9705271.

nelson, a., 1998, dynamical supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 62, 261-

265; eprint hep-ph/9707442.

nelson, a., and n. seiberg, 1994, r-symmetry breaking versus supersymmetry breaking,

nucl. phys. b 416, 46-62; eprint hep-ph/9309299.

nelson, a,. and s. thomas, 1996, unpublished.

nilles, h. p., 1984, supersymmetry, supergravity and particle physics, phys. rep. 110,

1-159.

novikov, v., m. shifman, a. vainshtein, and v. zakharov, 1983, exact gell-mann-low

function of supersymmetric theories from instanton calculus, nucl. phys. b 229, 381-

393.

oraifeartaigh, l., 1975, spontaneous symmetry breaking for chiral scalar superelds,

nucl. phys. b 96, 331-352.

peskin, m., 1997, duality in supersymmetric yang mills theory, in fields, strings and

duality, eds. c. efthimiou and b. greene, (world scientic); eprint hep-th/9702094.

polchinski, j., 1983, eective potentials for supersymmetric three-scale hierarchies,

phys. rev. d 27, 1320-1330.

110

poppitz, e., 1998, dynamical supersymmetry breaking: why and how, int. j. mod.

phys. a 13, 3051-3080; eprint hep-ph/9710274.

poppitz, e., and l. randall, 1996, low-energy kahler potentials in supersymmetric

gauge theories with (almost) flat directions, phys. lett. b 336, 402-408; eprint hep-

th/9407185.

poppitz, e., y. shadmi, and s. trivedi, 1996a, duality and exact results in product group

theories, nucl. phys. b 480, 125-169; eprint hep-th/9605113.

poppitz, e., y. shadmi, and s. trivedi, 1996b, supersymmetry breaking and duality in

su(n)su(nm) gauge theories, phys. lett. b 388, 561-568; eprint hep-th/9606184.

poppitz, e., and s. trivedi, 1996, some examples of chiral moduli spaces and dynamical

supersymmetry breaking, phys. lett. b 365, 125-131; eprint hep-th/9507169.

poppitz, e., and s. trivedi, 1997, new models of gauge and gravity mediated supersym-

metry breaking, phys. rev. d 55, 5508-5519; eprint hep-ph/9609529.

poppitz, e., and s.p. trivedi, 1998, dynamical supersymmetry breaking; eprint hep-

th/9803107.

pouliot, p., 1996, duality in susy su(n) with an antisymmetric tensor, phys. lett. b

367, 151-156; eprint hep-th/9510148.

pouliot, p., and m. strassler, 1996, duality and dynamical supersymmetry breaking in

spin(10) with a spinor, phys. lett. b 375, 175-180; eprint hep-th/9602031.

salam, a., and j. strathdee, 1974, on goldstone fermions, phys. lett. b 49, 465.

seiberg, n., 1993, naturalness versus supersymmetric non-renormalization theorems,

phys. lett. b 318, 469-475; eprint hep-th/9309335.

seiberg, n., 1994, exact results on the space of vacua of four-dimensional susy gauge

theories, phys. rev. d 49, 6857-6863; eprint hep-th/9402044.

111

seiberg, n., 1995, electric-magnetic duality in supersymmetric nonabelian gauge theo-

ries, nucl. phys. b 435, 129-146; eprint hep-th/9411149.

seiberg, n., and e. witten, 1994a, electric-magnetic duality, monopole condensation,

and connement in n = 2 supersymmetric yang-mills theory, nucl. phys. b 426,

19-52; 430, 485-486; eprint hep-th/9407087.

seiberg, n., and e. witten, 1994b, monopoles, duality and chiral symmetry breaking in

n=2 supersymmetric qcd, nucl. phys. b 431, 484-550; eprint hep-th/9408099.

shadmi, y., 1997, gauge mediated supersymmetry breaking without fundamental sin-

glets, phys. lett. b 405, 99-107; eprint hep-ph/9703312.

shifman, m., 1997, nonperturbative dynamics in supersymmetric theories, prog. part.

nucl. phys. 39, 1116; eprint hep-th/9704114.

shifman, m., and a. vainshtein, 1986, solution of the anomaly puzzle in susy gauge

theories and the wilson operator expansion, nucl. phys. b 277, 456-486.

shifman, m., and a. vainshtein, 1988, on gluino condensation in supersymmetric gauge

theories. su(n) and o(n) groups, nucl. phys. b 296, 445-461.

shifman, m., and a. vainshtein, 1991, on holomorphic dependence and infrared eects

in supersymmetric gauge theories, nucl. phys. b 359, 571-580.

shifman, m., and a. vainshtein, 1999, instantons versus supersymmetry: fifteen years

later; eprint hep-th/9902018.

shirman, y., 1996, dynamical supersymmetry breaking versus run-away behavior in su-

persymmetric gauge theories, phys. lett. b 389, 287-293; eprint hep-th/9608147.

skiba, w., 1997, dynamical supersymmetry breaking, mod. phys. lett. a 12, 737-750;

eprint hep-th/9703159.

stump, d. r., m. wiest and c.p. yuan, 1996, detecting a light gravitino at linear collider

112

to probe the susy breaking scale, phys. rev. d 54, 1936-1943; eprint hep-ph/9601362.

thomas, s., 1998, recent developments in dynamical supersymmetry breaking; eprint

hep-th/9801007.

ter veldhuis, t., 1996, the mass spectrum in a model with calculable dynamical super-

symmetry breaking, phys. lett. b 367, 157-162; eprint hep-th/9510121.

ter veldhuis, t., 1998, low energy behavior of some models with dynamical supersym-

metry breaking, phys. rev. d 58, 015010; eprint hep-th/9802125.

wess, j., and b. zumino, 1974, a lagrangian model invariant under supergauge trans-

formations, phys. lett. b 49, 52-54.

witten, e., 1981a, dynamical breaking of supersymmetry, nucl. phys. b 188, 513-554.

witten, e., 1981b, mass hierarchies in supersymmetric theories, phys. lett. b 105,

267-271.

witten, e., 1982 constraints on supersymmetry breaking, nucl. phys. b 202, 253-316.

witten, e., 1998, toroidal compactications without vector structure, j. high ener.

phys. 02, 006; eprint hep-th/9712028.

zumino, b., 1981, spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry, preprint lbl-13691, heisen-

berg simp., 137.

113

