hub-ep-99/30

d-brane spectra of nonsupersymmetric,

asymmetric orbifolds and nonperturbative
contributions to the cosmological constant

boris kors1

humboldt universitat zu berlin

institut fur physik, invalidenstr. 110, 10115 berlin, germany

abstract

we study nonperturbative aspects of asymmetric orbifolds of type iia, focussing on
models that allow a dual perturbative heterotic description.
in particular we derive the
boundary states that describe the nonsupersymmetric d-branes of the untwisted sector and
their zero mode spectra. these we use to demonstrate, how some special non bps multiplets
are identied under the duality map, and give some indications, how the mismatch of bosons
and fermions in the perturbative heterotic spectrum is to be interpreted in terms of the
nonperturbative degrees of freedom on the type iia side.

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

1

 
 

1
v
7
0
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1email: koers@physik.hu-berlin.de

1 introduction

quite recently certain properties of asymmetric orbifolds of type ii and also type i string theories
have been discussed, and they were found to display several phenomenologically attractive fea-
tures, among them the opportunity to have a vanishing contribution to the cosmological constant
c, at least to leading order in perturbation theory, without supersymmetry but with a degen-
eracy of bosons and fermions at any mass level. such models of type ii on a torus t 6 divided
out by an asymmetrically and freely acting orbifold group were constructed by kachru, kumar
and silverstein (kks) in [1, 2]. they argued, that the contribution of the vacuum uctuations to
c might in fact be vanishing at all orders in perturbation theory. furthermore by a self-duality
argument even nonperturbative contributions are believed to be absent [3]. the applicability of
these dualities in nonsupersymmetric but freely acting orbifolds derives from the well known but
still heuristic adiabatic argument [4], which appears to be less reliable than in any supersymmet-
ric case.

in a slight variation of the original kks model, two shifts exchanged and one circle de-
compactied but with still keeping the above mentioned perturbative features, harvey was able
to explicitly compute the nonperturbative contributions to c in a dual perturbative heterotic
model [5]. by splitting the orbifold group in a suitable manner, one can obtain a symmetric spa-
tial reection in an intermediate step and employ the iia on k3s1 to heterotic on t 5 duality.
such one obtains a dual model of the asymmetric iia orbifold. its partition function displayes
a nonvanishing but exponentially suppressed contribution. this raises the question, if there is
a way to identify the nonperturbative degrees of freedom of the iia theory, that lead to the
mismatch of bosons and fermions on the heterotic side. they should be describable as excita-
tions of a iia soliton compactied on k3s1 and further divided out by the asymmetric orbifold
group, or of some wrapped d-brane. as we are dealing with nonsupersymmetric orbifolds, the
cycles will not be holomorphic and the corresponding states cannot be deduced from any bps ar-
gument. we shall employ the boundary state formalism to identify the non bps d-brane spectra.

of course, one has to worry about the question, in which situations there is any hope to
extrapolate the perturbative open string analysis of strings ending on the respective brane to
strong coupling, which is necessary to understand the dual spectra of the heterotic model, while
the usual bps argument is absent. a possible answer is to focus on states which are perturba-
tively the lightest to carry some particular conserved charge or other quantum number. these
states will dominate the dynamics, if uncharged states are prohibited by the conservation law,
and therefore should be present on both sides of the duality, if gauge invariance is respected.
such cases have been studied recently in a number of dierent dualities, including in particular
dual orbifolds and orientifolds of iib [6, 7, 8], the type i to so(32) heterotic [9] as well as the iia
on k3 to heterotic on t 4 dualities [10, 11]. for instance, an interpretation of a d-brane wrapping
a nonsupersymmetric cycle in terms of a superposition of a brane and an anti-brane was given,
that involved the appearance of tachyons in the spectra of open strings, more precisely in the
chan-paton sector of those strings with one end on the brane and one on the anti-brane. by the
application of the formerly invoked tachyon condensation [9, 12] these potentially instable states
can, at least for appropriate values of the radii of the compact dimensions, have a condensate of
the tachyon eld on their world volume, that neutralizes their energy density everywhere except
in some lower dimensional region. such the terminology, that some tachyonic pairs of bps branes
can condensate into a single non bps brane, dened by the vortex of the tachyon eld, was es-
tablished. this mechanism was justied by a strict cft treatment for the case of a d1-brane
and -anti-brane pair in type i on r1,8  s1 [9, 13], analyzing the marginal deformation that
comes from the massless tachyon at a special, critical radius. it corresponds to deforming the
1+1 dimensional cft on the brane pair from a theory without to one with a tachyon condensate.
we shall take the attitude, that this analysis can be carried over to the cases we are discussing
presently without any qualitative modication.

2

in the following we analyze the asymmetric orbifolds and compare some of their charged
states, given by perturbative excitations of the heterotic string and of d-branes of type iia, both
subject to the orbifold projection. this allows to reveal some indication for the origin of the
nonperturbative bose fermi mismatch of harveys example. the key to do this is a study of
lightest charged states that can be reliably identied on both sides of the duality and also violate
the degeneracy of bosons and fermions when subject to the orbifold projection. the further
proceeding will be as follows: in section 2 we shall use the boundary state formalism to derive
the possible bps and non bps branes of iia theory on the r1,9/z2 = k3  r1,5 orbifold and
their zero mode spectra. in section 3 we review some aspects of the duality iia on k3s1 to the
heterotic string on t 5, in particular collect all bps and some non bps charges and recall, how
the asymmetric elements of the orbifold group act on both sides. we shall nd, that the heterotic
bose fermi mismatch is indeed present in certain multiplets which are the lightest states to carry
some charge under the gauge group. finally in section 4 we put both together and show, how
this can be recovered on a heuristic level in terms of the zero modes of d-branes on k3s1. we
close with a summary.

2 iia on a z2 orbifold

we are going to construct all the possible d-brane states in the z2 orbifold of iia on at space-
time, given by dividing out by a reection i4 in four directions, say x1, ..., x4. these branes
carry over to the compactied theory on k3 at its orbifold limit t 4/i4, only modied by zero
mode terms. the lightest excitations of orbifold invariant superpositions of such branes will be
compared to perturbative states of the heterotic asymmetric orbifold later on.

2.1 d-brane spectra

examples of such states have been discussed very many times by dierent authors, and we only
like to collect the facts we shall need, putting them into a suitably systematic order. the states
will be identied using the boundary state formalism, which, to our knowledge, has been invented
in [14, 15], and was used and reviewed by a couple of authors in the recent past. such we take it
as given and stick to the conventions of [7], where some of the following is to be found. for the
oscillators



r

r

1

n i

n  

n 



n(cid:0)i

i
r  

xr>0(cid:16)i

n(cid:1) + i

r(cid:17)!|p, k, i(0)

|p, k, i = exp  
xn=1
solves dirichlet boundary conditions in the 7p i-directions transverse to the brane and neumann
conditions in the p + 1 -directions along the brane, irrespective of the nsns (r  z+ + 1/2) or
rr (r  z+) sector groundstate |p, k, i(0). the exponential is obviously invariant under i4, 
takes values 1 to distinguish the dierent spin structures, and k is the momentum eigenvalue.
the use of light-cone gauge has the advantage of avoiding to write out ghost contributions, but
of course it obscures covariance at several instances unavoidably. the groundstates are dened
to satisfy the additional constraints coming from the zero modes. to obtain a localized state, an
eigenstate of the position operator, one has to integrate over the transverse momenta k in the
dirichlet directions:

nsns,rr (1)

|p, i  (9p)(cid:0)x  x(cid:1)|p, , kk = k = 0i =z 



d(9p)k |p, , kk = 0, ki.

(2)

one needs to introduce a relative normalization of the nsns and rr components by 1 and 4i
with respect to their ground state degeneracy and an over all normalization factor nu for the
brane volume volp+1, which satises 25n 2
u = volp+1/(2)p+1. the gso invariant untwisted
boundary state of type iia is

|dpibulk  |dpiu  |u pinsns  |u pirr,
|u pinsns  |p, +iu

nsns  |p,iu

nsns,

|u pirr  |p, +iu

rr + |p,iu
rr,

(3)

3

p being constrained to be even, of course. these are the well known bps d-branes of iia and
all survive the orbifold projection. in fact only the rr component is constrained to have even p,
while the nsns might be of any dimension, which technically results from the fact that only the
rr elds have zero modes. these are the bulk branes as opposed to the fractional ones localized
at the singular xed planes of the orbifold. the normalization convention is dened in a way,
that the state is normalized to one, but carries the double amount of rr charge compared to a
fractional boundary state which we turn to next.

the states of the twisted sector are necessarily localized at the xed plane, i.e. their boundary
states have to be integrated only over those momenta that are parallel to the xed plane and
transverse to the brane. the moding of the oscillators is changed from half-integer to integer and
vice versa in the directions that are reected. this leads to four (light-cone gauge) fermionic zero
modes in each sector, the nsns and the rr, giving two independent constraints on the allowed
dimensions of the branes, which derive from

(1)f|r, it
(1)f|s, it

rr = |r,it
rr,
nsns = |s,it
nsns,

(1)

f|r, it
f|s, it

rr = (1)r+1|r,it
rr,
nsns = (1)s|s,it

(1)

nsns.

(4)

here r+1 is the total dimension of the brane in the orbifold xed plane, s the dimension transverse
to it and p+1 = r+s+1. in (2) one then has to replace 9p by 5r in the integral and the relative
prefactors 1 and 4i for the degeneracy of the groundstate, the dimension of the spinor, become 2
and 2i. also the overall factor needs to be changed in accord with 23n 2
t = 4volr+1/(2)r+1 to
match the open string spectrum. the gso invariant twisted sector boundary states are:

|d(r, s)it  |t sinsns  |t rirr,
|t sinsns  |s, +it
nsns + |s,it

nsns,

|t rirr  |r, +it

rr + |r,it

rr

(5)

with even r and s in iia. the most general state in the d-brane hilbert space has twisted and
untwisted components. we only consider states that carry some rr charge, so there may be long

|d(p, r, s)ilong 

1
2

(|u pinsns  |u pirr  |t sinsns  |t rirr) ,

or short

|d(p, r, s)ishort 

1
2

(|u pinsns  |t rirr) ,

(6)

(7)

or entirely untwisted bulk branes as in (3). in particular, there are no states with odd r, which
is of some importance for the spectrum of charges in the iia orbifold on k3s1. this analysis
is nothing but a more systematic, slight generalization of particular examples studied previously,
and all the boundary states of [7, 8, 11] t into this pattern.

2.2 zero mode spectra and tachyonic instabilities of non bps branes

we also like to collect some facts about the spectra of open strings that end on and stretch
between the various d-branes [7, 8]. their massless excitations govern the low energy dynamics
and upon quantization on the worldsheet of the dual string are to be compared to the perturbative
spectrum of the heterotic string. two important issues are the amount of supersymmetry broken
by the brane, to be read o from the number of its fermionic zero modes, and the appearance of
tachyons in the spectrum. this is done by computing the projector p that has to be introduced
into the open string trace to reproduce the closed string diagram:

z 

0

dl hdp|elhcl|dpi =z 

0

dt
2t

trns-r(cid:0)p e2thop(cid:1).

4

(8)

starting with the bulk brane from (3) we get the usual supersymmetric gso projection, but no
orbifold projection:

1

p =

2(cid:0)1 + (1)f(cid:1) .

this state has eight (light-cone gauge, as always) fermionic and bosonic zero modes, double as
many fermionic zero modes, as one would expect for a bps state of iia on k3, which can be
resolved by observing, that only half of the states are invariant under the reection i4. they are
the goldstones of the broken translation invariance and the goldstinos of the broken supersym-
metries which have not yet been broken by the k3.

only for a boundary state |dpi = |d(p, r, s)ilong one nds the orbifold and gso projection

expected for an invariant fractional bps brane:

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

1

p =

4(cid:0)1 + (1)f(cid:1) (1 + i4) ,

with all ambiguities concerning the relative signs of the components cancelling. the open string
massless spectrum contains four bosonic and fermionic zero modes each, signalling a bps state
of the n = (1, 1) supersymmetry in d = 6. for a state |dpi = |d(p, r, s)ishort with odd p and s
but even r the projector reads

this spectrum has no gso projection, four bosonic and eight fermionic zero modes, displaying
its non bps nature. for a superposition of a brane with its anti-brane, dened by choosing two
relative signs in a superposition of two long bps states from (6) in a way to cancel the untwisted
sector rr as well as the twisted sector nsns charges, the projection

1

p =

2(cid:0)1 + (1)f i4(cid:1) .

1

p =

4(cid:0)1  (1)f(cid:1) (1  i4)

in the chan-paton sector of strings stretching between the two allows for four fermionic zero
modes in addition to those from the other chan-paton sector and breaks all the supersymmetry.
the question, if any of these non bps branes or superpositions will have a tachyon in the open
string ns sector, depends on the orientation relative to the orbifold xed plane again. if the
non bps brane or the brane anti-brane pair is lying entirely inside the orbifold xed plane,
the momenta of any open string state will be even under the reection and the ns vacuum is
projected out in (11) or (12). this relative orientation enters into the closed string amplitude
only through the momentum integration. if the prefactors 2(9p)/2 and 242(5r)/2 for the twisted
and untwisted sectors leave a relative factor of 4, i.e. p  r = s = 0 and the brane lies entirely
inside the orbifold xed plane, there is no tachyon. on the other hand, if there is a tachyon, the
brane system is unstable and the mechanism of tachyon condensation should take over [9, 12].
this leads to a presumably equivalent description in terms of another non bps brane, which
is assumed to be the core of the tachyon vortex. in the cases we consider this simply means,
there will be a d-brane of one dimension higher or lower, that carries identical rr charges and
is stable. because of the naive identity

1

1

2(cid:0)1 + (1)f i4(cid:1) =

4(cid:0)1 + (1)f(cid:1) (1 + i4) +

4(cid:0)1  (1)f(cid:1) (1  i4)

1

(13)

it appears, that the non bps brane indeed only gives a condensed description of the degrees of
freedom of the brane anti-brane pair, all their chan-paton sectors being combined into a single
one. but the traces, the projectors are inserted into, are in fact performed over dierent hilbert
spaces, diering in the momentum quantum numbers, not the oscillators.

5

2.3 zero mode spectra of t-duality invariant superpositions

later on we shall be particularly interested in d-branes of iia invariant under the naive t-duality
(1, 1)4 of all four directions of the reection i4 and entirely wrapped on k3, and thus we look
at either d04, d22 or d13 superpositions:

|dppi 

1
2

(|dpi + |dpi) =

1

2(cid:0)1 + (1, 1)4(cid:1)|dpi.

(14)

similar superpositions of dp- and d(p + 4)-branes have already been encountered in asymmetric
orientifolds, where in addition to an orbifold group quite similar to that used by kks the world
sheet parity was gauged [16]. fortunately, in the orientifold models there were no contributions
to massless tadpoles in the sectors twisted by any asymmetric group element, and so there was
no need of twisted branes. the question how twisted brane states could be dened, if they exist
at all, and whether they allow any geometrical interpretation relating them to ordinary d-branes,
maybe in the fashion of fractional branes, appears to be very challenging and involved. we shall
eventually argue, that there again is no necessity to include them into our analysis of charges in
the asymmetric orbifold.

the dpp states above have four directions with mixed boundary conditions imposed on the
open strings, therefore vanishing zero point energies in both sectors and a zero mode spectrum
consisting of a single hypermultiplet of the eective theory in d = 6, if no supersymmetry is
broken by the background. the fermions in the r sector are invariant under the internal so(4)
and those in the ns sector transform as 2, due to the extra minus of (1)f from the vacuum.
then the projection by (1 + i4) keeps one half of the fermionic zero modes of the strings between
the two branes, those of the r sector. the state leaves one quarter of the supersymmetry invariant
and from the point of view of the eective theory in d = 6 it breaks all supersymmetry in the
orbifold background. this had to be suspected, as there are no quarter bps multiplets in the
perturbative spectrum of the dual heterotic model. the spectrum can also be derived directly
from the closed string amplitude, the contribution of the entire t-duality invariant superposition
of |dpi  |d(p, 0, p)ilong states being:
z 
dl hdpp|elhcl|dppi = z 
dl hdp|elhcl|dpi = z 
z 

= z 

dl (cid:0)hdp|elhcl|dpi + hdp|elhcl|dpi(cid:1),
(2t)3/2 23(cid:18) f 4

4(cid:0)1 + (1)f(cid:1) (1 + i4) e2thop(cid:19),

4 (et) + f 4
2 (et) f 4
f 4
f 4
3 (et) f 4

4 (et) f 4
1 (et)

2 (et)  f 4
3 (et) f 4
f 4
1 (et) f 4

2 (et) f 4
4 (et)

ns-r(cid:18) 1

the trace being performed only over the strings stretching between the two branes. the fi
were dened in [15] originally, but we use again the convention of [7], which diers by a single
factor of 2 in f2. the normalization now has to be chosen with prefactors 2 and 2i for the
nsns and rr components and equally for the untwisted and twisted components: 23n 2
u =
23n 2
t = vol0+1/(2). the state |dppi may be |d04i or |d22i. the nonvanishing terms in the
numerators originate from (ns-r), ri4, ns(1)f i4 in the open string trace, and obviously the
ns zero modes cancel. the analogous amplitude for the non bps states |dpi  |d(p, 0, p)ishort,
e.g. |d13i gives:

2 (et)

3 (et)

0

0

0

dt
2t

trpp

(cid:19)

(15)

dt

0

0

z 

0

dl hdp|elhcl|dpi = z 


0

dt

(2t)3/2 23(cid:18) f 4

2 (et)  f 4
3 (et) f 4
f 4
1 (et) f 4

2 (et) f 4
4 (et)

3 (et)

f 4
4 (et) f 4
f 4
1 (et) f 4

2 (et)

3 (et)(cid:19)

6

= z 

0

dt
2t

trpp

ns-r(cid:18) 1

2(cid:0)1 + (1)f i4(cid:1) e2thop(cid:19),

(16)

where only the ri4 term is missing, as compared to (15), and there are no tachyons, whatever
relative signs or orientations are chosen.

3 iia on k3s1 and the heterotic string on t 5
in this section we like to review the spectra of states carrying particular charges on both sides of
the duality iia on k3s1 to heterotic on t 5. the lightest among them are of special interest,
as they are believed to be protected from quantum corrections in the fashion of bps states in
supersymmetric theories.

3.1 mapping of charges

the way we like to gure the duality being considered rst in [17, 18] relies very much on the
results of [19]. we shall take the special point in the k3 moduli space, where it can be written
as an orbifold t 4/i 4 of the torus t 4 at self dual radii and also take the compactication torus of
the heterotic side to be self dual, only then the asymmetric orbifold group is a symmetry of the
theory. the duality map implies [18]

gii =

1

ghet

,

rii =

rhet
ghet

.

(17)

in particular it involves the essential inversion of the coupling, which is not present in the four-
dimensional version of the duality. the explicit matching of the degrees of freedom is achieved
by a comparison of the zero modes of the iia solitonic (symmetric) 5-brane [20], compactied
on the k3 down to 1 + 1 dimension, and the world sheet elds of the weakly coupled heterotic
string on the t 4. both consist in eight chiral, say right moving, fermions, four bosonic elds
for the translation zero modes in the noncompact directions and the internal bosons on a lat-
tice 4,20, stemming from the compactication torus respectively from the cohomology lattice.
their classical action is derived by dimensional reduction of the supergravity action in the soliton
background and coincides with the classical world sheet action of the heterotic string [19]. of
course, apparently nothing is known about how to quantize the 5-brane. this twodimensional
cft may then be compactied further to d = 5 by putting some of the elds on an additional
circle. in this spirit we shall later on apply the decomposition (8,)  (2, 2,) according
to so(9, 1)  so(4)  so(4)  so(1, 1) to the fermionic zero modes. the rst (broken) so(4)
acts on the k3, the second on s1  r3  r4 and the unbroken so(1, 1) on the world sheet r1,1
of the dual string. the chirality invariant under the k3 projection is (2+, ...) and the chirality of
the heterotic string world sheet fermions, respectively the goldstone elds of the supercharges,
whose symmetries are broken by the soliton, is (..., +).

in general we take the entire lattice 5,21 at some generic point in the moduli space, con-

strained as stated above. but to allow a separate identication of charges, we factorize it into

5,21 = 16  4,4  1,1

(18)

for the moment, which would correspond to an enhanced gauge group so(32)  so(8)  su (2).
the duality can also be derived from a chain of s- and t-dualities, which at some point singles
out one circle of the t 4, such that the winding and kaluza-klein (kk) momenta on it are related
to the 0- and 4-forms, while those of the other directions of the t 4 are mapped to the 2-form
charges. recalling, that the duality mapping exchanges the eld strength of the nsns 2-form
with its dual and the vectors from the dimensionally reduced rr forms with the heterotic gauge
elds form the internal lattice, we can easily write down the charges of the generic gauge group
so(2)26 = u (1)26. also we ignore, that the 3-form potential that enters the supegravity action

7

is a combination of the rr forms and the nsns 2-form. the heterotic momenta on the 16 are
then mapped to the sixteen d0-branes located at the xed points, or in the blow up to the d2-
branes wrapping the 2-cycles. at a generic point in moduli space these are not intersecting, and
we shall have to turn on appropriate wilson lines on the heterotic t 4 to break the gauge group
accordingly. kk momenta and winding modes on the t 4 are related to d2-branes wrapping
any of the six 2-cycles of the original torus of the k3, as well as to the d0- and d4-brane, the
latter wrapping all of the k3, which together gives the 4,4. finally the winding and momenta
of the heterotic string on the s1 belong to the ns-5-brane of iia wrapped entirely on k3s1.
in the following section we shall see, how this simple mapping gets rened, when deforming to
a generic point in the moduli space. the magnetic charges on the heterotic side are all given
as some excitation of the heterotic 5-brane, leaving just one extended spatial dimension after
wrapping on four of the directions of the t 5. these are mapped to perturbative kk momenta
and winding excitations of the elementary iia string, when the fth circle of the heterotic torus
remained unwrapped, and to some d-branes, when any other circle is unwrapped. thereby the
magnetic dual of any dp-brane is a d(p  6)-brane, as usual, wrapped in order to leave one
noncompact direction. while generically the radius rii of the fth circle on the type ii side
grows large in the limit of small ghet, we could still consider any value by tuning the heterotic
radius rhet, and anyway the only bps brane wrapping this circle is the ns-5-brane, whose mass
by rii/g2
ii  rhetghet stays small, whereas any d-brane would acquire at least nite mass of the
order of the compactication scale.

3.2 spectra of bps and non bps charged states

in the previous paragraph we have displayed all the charges in the two supersymmetric models,
now we proceed by nding the multiplets of the lightest heterotic states that carry them at the
generic point of the moduli space. it is pointed out, that a given d-brane of iia corresponds to
a combination of such charges on the heterotic side. we have seen in section 2, that there are no
boundary states of the i4 orbifold of iia on at space, that contained a twisted rr component
and were extended in an odd number of dimensions inside the orbifold xed plane. this contin-
ues to be valid when taking the compact version of this, iia on a k3s1, i.e. there are no rr
charged bps or non bps boundary states for branes of nite volume, wrapping the s1. at the
orbifold limit of the k3 the boundary states dened in section 2 are to be modied with the only
respect that the momentum integration over the momenta on the s1 direction has to be replaced
by a sum over all kk momenta, and that the strings may carry winding on those directions of
the t 4 that are parallel to the brane, too. such states have been discussed e.g.
in [7, 13], and
the whole modication will be of no concern to us, as only the zero winding terms contribute to
the massless spectrum, as long as we keep the s1 at some generic radius at least. so we only
need to regard d-branes on the k3, and these we have already examined in section 2. their
mapping to the heterotic states charged under the appropriate gauge elds has been explored in
[11], which we like to summarize briey. for an original reference on toroidal compactications
of the heterotic string see [21].

in the perturbative heterotic spectrum precisely all states that have nr = cr, with cr de-
noting the zero point energies in the respective sectors, are bps multiplets. on the right moving
part they are vector supermultiplets of 24 = 16 states. the lightest states carrying any momen-
tum v 2 = 2 on the internal 16 transform in this multiplet, while a bps multiplet carrying only
kk momentum on the 4,4 necessarily starts with a copy of the entire massles multiplet. the
wilson lines that break the gauge group introduce a mixing of charges, as the winding states
automatically have v 2 > 0. the charges of iia d-branes are translated as follows: the bulk
bps d0-brane refers to heterotic states carrying kk momentum only on the special direction of
the t 4, that was related to the d0- and d4-brane part of the cohomology lattice. the fractional
bps d0-brane is also charged under one of the twisted sector gauge elds in addition to the kk
momentum of the bulk d0-brane. the bps d4-branes are mapped to the winding modes in the
special direction and additionally have got a nonvanishing momentum on the 16, too. finally

8

the bps d2-branes belong to the winding and momenta on the remaining three directions of the
torus, momentum and winding being distinguished by the criterion, if the brane wraps the special
circle or not, and again they carry twisted sector charge. to summarize: the only bps charge,
whose lightest states make up a gravity multiplet plus vectors, is that of the bulk d0-brane, while
all other charges appear in vector multiplets on the heterotic side.

as well an example of a non bps multiplet has been discussed. in the right moving heterotic

spectrum the lightest non bps (nr = cr + 1) multiplet is

3/2|0ins, [


1/2

1/2 ]

1/2|0ins, 

1/2 

1|0ins  

1|0ir, 

1|0ir,

(19)

and it may have v 2 = 4 but no winding or kk momenta on the t 4. this can be realized on the
iia side by a superposition of a d0-brane and an anti-d0-brane at dierent or at the same xed
points. taken separately, they are mapped to states with v 2 = 2 and momenta on the t 4, that
cancel each other. it leads to the projection

1

p =

8(cid:0)1  (1)f(cid:1) (1  i4) (1 + s)

in the open string spectrum of the strings stretching between the dierent branes, where s acts
as a shift of the position by one half of the radius of the torus. as the projection without the
shift already removes the tachyon from a d0-brane (no extension transverse to the xed plane),
the state will be stable. an alternative description of this state as a non bps d1-brane was given
[10, 11]. it stretches between the two xed points and carries a nsns component in the untwisted
sector and two twisted sector rr components. the open string spectrum has the projection

(20)

(21)

1

p =

4(cid:0)1 + (1)f i4(cid:1) (1 + s) .

as the d1-brane has its spatial dimension transverse to the orbifold xed plane, it will not have
the open string ns groundstate projected out in general, the lightest potentially tachyonic state
being the one with minimal allowed momentum in this direction.

3.3 the dual pair of asymmetric orbifolds

while the models that were considered by kks and others were dened in d = 4, it was necessary
to decompactify at least one dimension, to be able to apply a duality from iia to the heterotic
string, which inverts the coupling. on the other hand it is crucial to have still one extra circle
in addition to the k3, as only by the shifts in this coordinate the action of the orbifold becomes
free of xed points and the adiabatic argument applicable [4]. we shall focus on models of the
kind of that constructed by harvey [5], where the orbifold group is generated by two elements f
and g with f g = i4, acting on the t 5, which we only need schematically:

f  (1, 1)4(1)fr and shifts,

g  (1,1)4(1)fl and shifts.

(22)

it is found, that one has some freedom in arranging the shifts, which are constrained in particular
by the requirement of level matching, and by f g = i4. the orbifold projection completely
eliminates supersymmetry and leaves bose fermi matching perturbatively, as for the kks models,
at least for the one-loop level. the group can be split o, such one can divide by i4 rst and only
then by an asymmetric element, say f . after using the duality of iia on t 4/i4  s1 to heterotic
on t 5 in the rst step, one deduces the action fhet of f on the heterotic side, and as it is free,
hopes for the duality to be inherited by the pair of nonsupersymmetric orbifolds:

fhet (cid:0)(1)8, 18(cid:1)i (1, 1)4

i (1)fr

and shifts.

(23)

there may appear to be some ambiguity in how to generalize the transformation properties under
fhet from the massless elds to the massive. on the iia side the zero modes of the 5-brane give

9

the world sheet eld theory of the heterotic string after compactication on k3. their trans-
formation under f can directly be deduced from the tendimensional massless elds, and it is
just the action we have given above: one half of the rr forms get reected and only the nsns
elds with no component in the i4 directions are invariant. then by duality this has to be the
action on the heterotic world sheet elds without anything left to be guessed, except for the shifts.

in the twisted sector of the heterotic orbifold there are no massless fermions anyway, due to
the positive zero point energy, and the only boson of potentially zero mass is the ns ground state,
whose mass depends on rhet, the tachyonic region, depending on the nature of the shift on the
1,1, at large or small radius. in particular the twisted sector does not display any new massless
vector elds, such that there are no new gauge degrees of freedom and no new charges present.
correspondingly there should be no massless rr forms in the twisted sector of the dual iia
orbifold showing up and therefore no twisted sector d-branes or boundary states to be regarded.
this argument is surely not entirely satisfactory and should be accompanied by an explicit con-
struction of the twisted sector boundary states or a proof of their absence. unfortunately we do
not know a way to do this presently.

let us also note the action of fhet on the multiplets with (nl = 1, nr = cr) and (nl =
0, nr = cr + 1) explicitly. any of the lightest state carrying a given rr charge transforms in
one of these (or a bps vector multiplet (nl = 0, nr = cr)). we assume to have chosen a
combination of charges that is invariant under the action of fhet on the lattice, so there will be
no further signs to be considered. in the rst case one half of the gauge degrees of freedom are
invariant and of the graviton multiplet all the gravitinos and one half of the vectors are odd. this
leaves bose fermi matching in the massless spectrum and even a supermultiplet for the diagonal
of the gauge group. the second is the lightest non bps multiplet. the projection onto invariant
states simply removes all fermions and leaves all bosons. we immediately recognize the violation
of bose fermi matching at the massive level of the untwisted sector. in particular it is manifest
in non bps multiplets that will be found to be the lightest to carry some charge under the gauge
group in the orbifold.

4 charged states on the asymmetric orbifolds

in the preceding sections we have collected a couple of facts about the spectra of states carrying
some particular charges under the gauge group on both sides of the (conjectured) duality. on the
heterotic side these are perturbative states of the untwisted sector, invariant under the orbifold
projection. on the iia side the charges map to superpositions of d-branes. their zero modes
should, after quantization on the worldsheet of the dual string, reproduce at least the lightest
heterotic states of a given charge. while we do not have a precise understanding, how the
supergravity solution should be modied on the asymmetric orbifold, we have been able to deduce
the zero mode spectra of d-branes from the according boundary states. we shall now gure out,
which space-time elds they would generate as their lightest excitation, if taken to be world
sheet elds of the dual string, subject to the asymmetric orbifold projection, and compare to the
spectra of non bps states on the heterotic side.

4.1 fractional bps branes
we rst look at the boundary states of the k3s1 orbifold, as derived in section 2, and afterwards
we come to the invariant superpositions of branes in the untwisted sector of the asymmetric
orbifold. branes of the twisted sector do not need to be inspected, as there are no additional
charges arising, due to the absence of further gauge elds. recall rst, that the bps soliton of
iia breaks the supersymmetries

(2+, 2, +), (2, 2,)

10

(24)

of even chirality on its worldvolume [20], referring to the zero modes kept by the usual gso
projection of the open strings ending on a bps bulk brane. the k3 leaves all spinors (2+, ...)
invariant, i.e. those that are even under i4. the zero modes on the fractional branes that are
invariant under the orbifold projection in the open string sector via (10) are then given by those
which are unbroken by the k3 and even under (1)f :

(2+, 2, +).

(25)

they are both of positive chirality on the world sheet, identied with the right moving world
sheet spinors of the heterotic theory. after the quantization of the world sheet theory of the
dual string they generate a ground state degeneracy of 28/2 = 16 and reproduce as their lowest
excitation the tendimensional bps vector multiplet, which the lightest states carrying the charge
of the d-brane in the perturbative heterotic spectrum transform in [19]. also we notice, that
the heavier states of the heterotic string, carrying the same charge, would involve excitations of
all left moving bosonic oscillators on the world sheet, whereas the zero mode spectrum of the
d-brane involves only the bosonic goldstone elds for the translations transverse to the k3, not
enough to reproduce the heterotic multiplets.

4.2 non bps branes

the more interesting case is that of the non bps brane with nonsupersymmetric projection
(11) in the open string spectrum. in addition to the zero modes of the fractional brane from
open strings with gso projection there are those, which are odd under (1)f and i4, therefore
belong to supersymmetries that remained unbroken by the bps soliton and transform as (2, ...),
together:

(2+, 2, +), (2, 2, +).

(26)

these sixteen zero modes are still chiral on the world sheet, as they better had to, and upon
quantization they generate a degeneracy of 216/2 = 256 on the right moving side, which, subject
to the gso projection in d = 10, gives rise to 16 fermions, half of them even, the other half odd
under i4. this looks exactly like the fermionic states as given in (19) for the lightest non bps
multiplets of the heterotic string with v 2 = 4. again the more massive states are not reproduced
correctly by the single d-brane, as not enough bosons are available. up to now we have omitted
the tachyon that may be present in the open string spectrum on the iia side. in fact it will
be there, as in general the branes are extended on the k3. but the open string sector with
momenta odd under i4 does not have any additonal zero modes, except at the special radius,
when the tachyon gets massless. the deformation that is associated with this additional bosonic
eld was shown, even if only in a quite dierent situation, to allow to pass to an equivalent
theory in a lower dimension but with a tachyon condensate [9, 12].
if this mechanism works
in our case, it will reduce or enlarge the number of dimensions transverse to the orbifold xed
plane, acquiring some condensate, which only neutralizes the energy density of the brane in these
directions, and nally the above argument goes through without any additional zero modes to
be regarded. in the present case for instance a d1-brane stretching between two xed points
gets deformed to a pair of d0-branes, brane and anti-brane, sitting at the two xed points. the
oscillator parts of the open string hilbert spaces only dier by states, which had combinations of
momenta on the d1-brane, that were odd under i4. therefore the zero modes of the stable brane
anti-brane conguration with tachyon condensate are just those of the unstable non bps brane
and the spectra of charged states identical. in this sense (13) really gets to work after tachyon
condensation. in the supersymmetric models the bosonic states should then follow automatically,
indeed.

4.3 branes of the asymmetric orbifold

only little remains to do the same analysis for the states of the untwisted sector of the asym-
metric orbifold. following our discussion of section 3, it acts on the entire 4,20 by a reection in

11

the sense, that the momenta on the 16 are exchanged in some fashion and the winding and kk
momenta on the 4,4 also. on the type ii side this amounts to mapping fractional d0-branes
to d4-branes with wilson lines given by the image of the charge of the d0-brane on the 16.
d2-branes wrapping a 2-cycle of the 4,4 are mapped to the d2-branes wrapping the naively
dual 2-cycle in the other two directions, and their twisted charges on the 16 also get exchanged.
but the obvious invariant combinations, a brane and its image, are not the lightest states to
carry any given charge. such an invariant d22-brane superposition would carry winding and
momentum on the t 4 as well as internal momentum with respect to two of the so(2) from the
16 in the heterotic picture. but, of course, there are also heterotic states which carry invariant
combinations v 2 = (v1 + v2)2 = 4 of internal momenta, but their winding and momenta on the
t 4 vanish. these are mapped to brane anti-brane superpositions, the lightest states to carry any
orbifold invariant charge on the 16. the d0-brane anti-brane pair, respectively the presumably
equivalent non bps d1-brane, has already been analyzed above as a non bps state, which car-
ried the fermionic zero modes to generate the space-time fermions of (19), the heterotic non bps
multiplet, and was stable for some complementary regions of the radii. the orbifold projection
of iia applied on the world sheet of the dual string now gives a minus to all fermions, that are
left moving on the world sheet and odd under i4 by (1, 1)4, i.e. to none, and a minus to all,
that are right moving by (1)fr, i.e. to all. all the fermions are removed and only bosons left,
the same action as on the heterotic non bps multiplet, which was a source of the violation of the
matching of bosons and fermions. note, that we used the orbifold projection on the iia side only
to deduce this and did not require any information on the heterotic translation fhet. while this
approach gives an interpretation of how the mismatch emerges in the nonperturbative regime of
the iia orbifold, it surely does not allow to do any quantitative computation of the contributions
to the partition function.

there are several other cases left, one has to consider, for instance the superposition of a d4-
or d2-brane with an anti-brane wrapping the same directions of the torus. the lightest heterotic
oscillator excitations are again given by (19) and the derivation of the zero modes proceeds as
above.

one might think, that there also were states carrying equal winding and kk momentum
quantum number on the t 4 but no twisted sector charges. in fact no such superpositions without
momentum on the 16 can occur, as the presence of wilson lines enforces v 2 > 0 for winding
states. the application of fhet does not map the bps states with kk momentum and v 2 = v2
1 = 2
to the bps winding states with v 2 = (v2 + a)2 = 2, a indicating the wilson line in the direction
of the winding, for instance as dened in [11]. also one needs to notice, that the left handed
reection enforces winding equal to minus the canonical momentum, as opposed to a right handed
reection. there are in fact invariant states in the heterotic spectrum with opposite momentum
and winding as well as v 2 = (v1 + v2 + a)2 = 4. the level matching demands for the lightest
such states nl = 0 and nr = cr, which before orbifolding is the bps vector multiplet. the
obvious candidate for an invariant boundary state to describe the dual state with the required
rr charges is a superposition of a d2-brane and an anti-d2-brane wrapping disjoint circles of the
k3, according to opposite momentum and winding. it is one of the stable superpositions with
mixed boundary conditions in four directions, which we have discussed in section 2, with the
exception, that in the chan-paton sector of open strings between the two branes the projector is

4(cid:0)1  (1)f(cid:1) (1  i4) ,

(27)

but again no tachyons can appear. in the other chan-paton sectors it has the fermionic zero
modes of a fractional brane, whereas in the mixed sector all zero modes from the r and ns sectors
now are projected out. the resulting zero mode spectrum is that of a fractional d0-brane, which
again generates a chiral world sheet theory on the dual string with appropriate degeneracy of the
vacuum to reproduce the bps vector multiplet as its lowest excitation. the orbifold projection
then removes the fermions and leaves the bosons, as before.

1

p =

12

the d22 superposition is presumably equivalent via tachyon condensation to an instable
superposition of a d3- and a d1-brane both stretching between the two xed points and with
opposite bulk charges. in this spirit d0- anti-d4-brane superpositions and their tachyonic equiv-
alent, a d1- anti-d3-brane superposition wrapping the special circle, can also be treated.

5 summary

we have analyzed the spectra of boundary states that arise in the untwisted sector of a particular
class of asymmetric orbifolds. they were found to be given by superpositions of branes of the
original iia theory on k3, that are invariant under a version of t-duality. the lightest states
carrying a given conserved charge were found to consist of brane anti-brane pairs. for any such
pair there was an alternative description in terms of non bps branes, the equivalence dened via
the condensation of the tachyon arising in the open string spectrum. assuming the validity of
the adiabatic argument and the continuity of some charged non bps states, the zero modes of
the open strings on these branes were shown to be chiral on the world sheet of the dual string
and to be candidates to generate a spectrum of space-time fermions that have the correct mul-
tiplicity and the same transformation properties under the orbifold reection i4, as the lightest
heterotic states that carry the same charge. this may be gured to be a consistency check of the
applicability of the adiabatic argument and the underlying duality and as a suggestion, how the
mismatch of bosons and fermions in the nonperturbative regime of the iia orbifold appears.

acknowledgements

i like to thank a. krause, a. miemiec and in particular r. blumenhagen for valuable discus-

sion, as well as m. gaberdiel for answering a question of mine.

references

[1] s. kachru, j. kumar, and e. silverstein. vacuum energy cancellation in a non-

supersymmetric string. phys. rev. d 59 p. 106004, 1999.

[2] s. kachru and e. silverstein. on vanishing two loop cosmological constants in nonsuper-

symmetric strings. jhep 9901 p. 4, 1999.

[3] s. kachru and e. silverstein. self-dual nonsupersymmetric type ii string compactications.

jhep 9811 p. 1, 1998.

[4] c. vafa and e. witten. dual string pairs with n = 1 and n = 2 supersymmetry in four

dimensions. nucl. phys. proc. suppl. 46 p. 225, 1996.

[5] j. a. harvey. string duality and non-supersymmetric strings. phys. rev. d 59 p. 26002,

1999.

[6] a. sen. stable non-bps states in string theory. jhep 9806 p. 7, 1998.

[7] a. sen. stable non-bps bound states of bps d-branes. jhep 9808 p. 10, 1998.

[8] o. bergman and m. r. gaberdiel. stable non-bps d-particles. phys. lett. b 441 p. 133,

1998.

[9] a. sen. so(32) spinors of type i and other solitons on brane antibrane pair. jhep 9809

p. 23, 1998.

[10] a. sen. bps d-branes on non-supersymmetric cycles. jhep 9812 p. 21, 1998.

13

[11] o. bergman and m. r. gaberdiel. non-bps states in heterotic-type iia duality. jhep

9903 p. 13, 1999.

[12] a. sen. tachyon condensation on the brane anti-brane system. jhep 9808 p. 12, 1998.

[13] m. frau, l. gallot, a. lerda, and p. strigazzi. stable non-bps d-branes in type i string

theory. (hep-th/9903123).

[14] c.g. callan, c. lovelace, c.r. nappi, and s.a. yost. loop corrections to superstring

equations of motion. nucl. phys. b 308 p. 221, 1988.

[15] j. polchinski and y. cai. consistency of superstring theories. nucl. phys. b, 1988.

[16] r. blumenhagen and l. gorlich. orientifolds of non-supersymmetric, asymmetric orbifolds.

nucl. phys. b 551 p. 601, 1999.

[17] c.m. hull and p.k. townsend. unity of superstring dualities. nucl. phys. b 438 p. 109,

1995.

[18] e. witten. string theory dynamics in various dimensions. nucl. phys. b 443 p. 85, 1995.

[19] j.a. harvey and a. strominger. the heterotic string is a soliton. nucl. phys. b 449 p.

535, erratum nucl. phys. b 458 p. 456, 1995 and 1996.

[20] c.g. callan, j.a. harvey, and a. strominger. worldbrane actions for string solitons. nucl.

phys. b 367 p. 60, 1991.

[21] p. ginsparg. on toroidal compactications of heterotic superstrings. phys. rev. d 35 no.

2 p. 648, 1987.

14

