hep-th/9907041, iassns-hep-99-56

world-sheet corrections

via d-instantons

edward witten

school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study

olden lane, princeton, nj 08540, usa

we use a d-instanton or physical gauge approach to re-derive the heterotic string world-

sheet instanton contribution to the superpotential in calabi-yau compactication. we

derive an analogous formula for worldsheet instanton corrections to the moduli space met-

ric in heterotic string or type i compactication on a k3 surface. in addition, we give a

global analysis of the phase of the worldsheet path integral of the heterotic string, showing

precisely how the b-eld must be interpreted.

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

7

 
 

1
v
1
4
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

june, 1999

1. introduction

world-sheet instanton corrections to string compactications have been rst computed

[1] from the usual standpoint of worldsheet conformal eld theory. in this approach, the

worldsheet is an abstract riemann surface ; one integrates over complex structures on 

and maps of  to spacetime, and divides by the symmetries of .

the conformal eld theory approach to the path integral has the great virtue that

it makes it possible to quantize strings microscopically. for example, the image of  in

spacetime might be a single point; but this causes no diculty in evaluating the path

integral.

in worldsheet instanton physics, at least if the instanton is a smooth submanifold c

of a spacetime x, understanding what a collapsed string would do is not so important.

here one is evaluating the contribution to the path integral from embeddings of c in x.

there is then another possible point of view about worldsheet instantons, which we might

call the physical gauge approach. in this approach, one views the worldsheet instanton as
a submanifold c  x, and integrates only over its physical or transverse oscillations. this
avoids the redundancy that is present in the conformal eld theory approach.

the physical gauge approach to worldsheet instantons was formulated in [2] in the

process of developing a unied approach to string and brane instanton corrections. this

required using a physical gauge approach because for the p-branes of p > 1 there is no

(known) analog of the conformal eld theory description. the physical gauge approach

was used in [2] to compute instanton corrections to moduli space geometry in type ii

compactication on a calabi-yau threefold. these corrections arise in a similar fashion

from both strings and p-branes of p > 1. the string contributions are analogous to world-

sheet instanton corrections to the heterotic string superpotential [1], and were originally

discussed in the conformal eld theory approach in [3].

the purpose of the present paper is to reconsider the heterotic string worldsheet

corrections in a physical gauge approach. a natural and equivalent setting for the discus-

sion (at least in the case of the spin(32)/z2 heterotic string) is to consider d-instanton

contributions to type i compactication.

in section 2, we consider heterotic or type

i string compactication to four dimensions on a calabi-yau threefold, and analyze the

d-instanton contributions to the superpotential. we get results equivalent to those of

[1], but some properties are more obvious. in section 3, we consider heterotic or type i

compactications with eight unbroken supercharges, for example, compactication to six

1

dimensions on a k3 manifold or compactication to four dimensions on k3  t2. in this
case (roughly as in type ii compactication on a calabi-yau threefold [3,2], which also

leaves eight unbroken supercharges), the instantons do not generate a superpotential, but

rather correct the metric on the hypermultiplet moduli space.

in heterotic string compactication on k3, the dilaton is in a tensor multiplet, and

hence the hypermultiplet metric is independent of the string coupling constant. the hy-

permultiplet metric can in principle, therefore, be computed exactly from heterotic string

worldsheet conformal eld theory ((0, 4) conformal eld theory, to be more exact). it dif-

fers, however, from the metric on hypermultiplet moduli space that would be computed in

classical eld theory; the dierences are very likely determined precisely by the worldsheet

instanton contributions that we will discuss. the wording of the last sentence reects

the fact that since the einstein equations obeyed by a quaternionic metric are nonlinear,

the exact quaternionic metric may somehow involve nonlinear combinations of instanton

contributions.

the physical gauge approach to membrane contributions to the superpotential in

compactication on a manifold of g2 holonomy has been recently developed in [4]. the

validity of the physical gauge approach is discussed in section 3 of that paper.

2. d-instantons in calabi-yau threefolds

2.1. evaluation of the superpotential

we consider the heterotic or type i superstring on r4  x, where x is a calabi-yau
threefold. x is endowed with a calabi-yau metric (or its generalization in conformal eld
theory) and a suitable holomorphic e8e8 or spin(32)/z2 gauge bundle. as anticipated in
the introduction, we will analyze the instanton contributions to the superpotential mainly

from the d-instanton point of view, which means that we mainly consider the type i or
heterotic spin(32)/z2 theory. the answer for e8  e8 is, however, also determined by the
resulting formula, as we briey explain below.

a note on vector structure

we can assume that the spin(32)/z2 bundle has vector structure1  in other words,
that it can be derived from an so(32) bundle v  at least in a neighborhood of the

1 see section 4 of [5] for background about this concept.

2

instanton. indeed, a d-string cannot be wrapped on an oriented two-dimensional surface

c unless the gauge bundle, restricted to c, has vector structure. this restriction has a

natural interpretation in k-theory using ingredients described in section 5.3 of [6]; a d-

vector structure is non-zero, then the allowed d-branes take values in a twisted ko-group

instanton wrapped on c represents a class in ko(r4  x), but if the obstruction ew2 to
koew2
when restricted to c, that is, only if ew2 vanishes when restricted to c.

(r4  x). hence a d-instanton can be wrapped on c only if ko and koew2

coincide

a more down-to-earth explanation of the requirement that the bundle should have vec-

tor structure comes by considering the fermionic description of the spin(32)/z2 heterotic
string (or the d-string equivalent, which we will use below). the left-moving fermions are
sections of sv , where s is the negative chirality spin bundle of c. hence v , restricted
to c, must exist (as a bundle in the vector representation), as claimed. if the restriction

of v to c does not exist, then a path integral with a heterotic string worldsheet wrapped

on c makes sense only if one inserts an odd number of twist elds that twist the left-

moving fermions and transform in the spinor representation of spin(32). these elds are

vertex operators of massive particles, and contributions to the superpotential containing

them are inessential. 2 from the type i point of view, this means that if ew2 is nonzero

when restricted to c, then a d-instanton wrapped on c can be considered if and only if

there terminate on c an odd number of worldlines of nonsupersymmetric d-particles [7]

transforming as spinors of spin(32). such a conguration is not supersymmetric and will

not contribute to a superpotential.

the gauge bundle v must, in addition, have w2(v ) = 0, because of the existence of

the massive particles just mentioned which transform as spinors of spin(32).

computation of the superpotential

in computing the instanton contribution to the superpotential, only holomorphic genus

zero instantons are relevant, for familiar reasons of holomorphy [1]. we will in this paper

only consider the case of an isolated instanton, though it is perhaps also important to

consider the general case. (we assume actually that the instanton is isolated in a very

strong sense: no bosonic zero modes except those that follow from translation symmetries

2 fields that are massive for all values of the moduli can be integrated out of the superpotential
by a holomorphic change of variables. let  be such a massive eld and i an arbitrary collection
2 m 2 + (i), with  a holomorphic function,
of possibly light elds. in any superpotential 1
 can be decoupled by     (i)/m .

3

of r4.) moreover, we will consider only the case of a smooth instanton. thus, our instanton
will be a smooth isolated genus zero holomorphic curve c  x.

the instanton has certain zero modes and collective coordinates that are easily de-
scribed. though c is isolated in x, it can be translated in r4, leading to four bosonic
collective coordinates xi. also, while heterotic string compactication on x preserves four

supercharges, two of each chirality, the instanton preserves the two of one chirality and

violates the others. the two supersymmetries that are broken by the instanton lead to
two fermion zero modes and collective coordinates . the term lc in the eective action
induced by an instanton c will hence be

lc =z d4xd2 wc,

(2.1)

where we have made explicit the integral d4xd2 over the collective coordinates, and wc
is calculated by performing the world-sheet path integral with the bosonic and fermionic

zero modes suppressed in the worldsheet path integral. the contribution wc of c to the
superpotential is obtained from wc by setting all derivatives and fermions to zero.

the d-instanton path integral in the one-loop approximation takes the general form

exp(cid:18)

a(c)

2 + izc

b(cid:19) pfa (df )
pdet db

.

(2.2)

here, a(c) is the area of the surface c using the heterotic string kahler metric on x
and  is the heterotic string parameter. b is the b-eld; in the type i description, it

is a ramond-ramond eld, while in the heterotic string, it arises in the neveu-schwarz

sector. the exponential terms in (2.2) come from the classical instanton action, while

the other factors represent the one-loop integral over quantum uctuations around the
classical instanton solution. df and db are the kinetic operators for the bosonic and
fermionic uctuations, respectively. the path integrals give the pfaan for fermions and
the square root of the determinant for bosons; the prime in pfa  and det means that the
zero modes associated with collective coordinates are to be omitted. all determinants and

pfaans are computed using the metric that c obtains as a submanifold of x, so there is no

issue of a conformal anomaly (this contrasts with the conformal eld theory formulation, in

which an abstract metric on c is introduced, and additional ghost determinants cancel the

conformal anomaly). arguments of holomorphy (which are most familiar and perhaps most

transparent in the heterotic string description [1]) show that the superpotential receives

no contributions from higher order corrections to the path integral, so that for purposes of

4

computing it, the integrals over the small uctuations in fact reduce to determinants. the

multi-loop contributions to the worldsheet path integral give a plethora of higher-derivative

interactions, but do not contribute to the superpotential.

let s+ and s be the right- and left-handed spin bundles of c. we pick the complex
structure so that the kinetic operator for a left-moving fermion (a section of s) is a 

operator, while that for a right-moving fermion is a  operator. let n denote the normal
bundle to c in r4  x, understood as a rank eight real bundle, and let s+(n ) denote the
positive chirality spinors of n . right-moving fermions are sections of s+  s+(n ), while
left-moving fermions are sections of s  v (with v being as before the so(32) gauge
bundle).

the eight real bosons representing transverse oscillations in the position of c  r4x
can, in a fairly natural way, be grouped as four complex bosons. the normal bundle to c
in x has a natural complex structure; in fact, it must be isomorphic to o(1)  o(1)
in order for c to be isolated.3 if one picks a complex structure on r4, then the trivial
rank four bundle representing the r4 part of the normal bundle can similarly be written
as o  o. if we reinterpret the real operator db acting on eight real bosons as a complex
operator d

b acting on four complex bosons, then we can write det db = det d

in (2.2), because of the unbroken supersymmetry of the instanton eld, the non-

b.

zero modes of the right-moving fermions cancel the right-moving modes of the bosons.
the dirac operator for left-moving fermions is the  operator on s  v , which equals
o(1)  v (since s = o(1) as a holomorphic bundle). we abbreviate this as v (1).
the left-moving part of d
b is the  operator on o(1)o(1)oo. so (2.2) becomes

wc = exp(cid:18)

a(c)

2 + izc

b(cid:19)

pfa(v (1))

(det o(1))2(det o)2

,

(2.3)

and this, in fact, is our formula for the superpotential. note that by approximating the

worldsheet path integral with the one-loop determinants, we have dropped the higher
derivative interactions and reduced the more general action wc to the superpotential wc.
the exponent in the rst factor in wc is roughly exp(ac), where ac is the supereld

ac = a(c)/2  izc

b.

(2.4)

3 the notation is standard: o(n) is a holomorphic line bundle whose sections are functions
homogeneous of degree n in the homogeneous coordinates of c = cp1. in particular, o(0) = o
is a trivial complex line bundle.

5

we give a more careful discussion of the phase factor in (2.3), or in other words the additive
constant in ac, in section 2.2.

the most striking dierence between this derivation and the analogous derivation

based on conformal eld theory is perhaps that in conformal eld theory, it is most natural

to compute the third derivative of the superpotential, while here we obtain directly a

formula for wc. in practice, this does not make much dierence, since one can take the
third derivative with respect to a, on which wc has a known exponential dependence,
and thereby compute a third derivative of wc without losing any information. but it is

clearly desireable to be able to compute wc directly.

condition for vanishing

the most striking property of the formula for wc, already known [8] from the confor-

mal eld theory point of view, is the following. in the denominator in (2.3), we still have a
det for bosons to indicate that the constant zero mode of o, which is associated with the

translational collective coordinates, should be removed. however, the fermion collective

coordinates are zero modes of right-moving fermions, and are absent in the formula (2.3),

which contains determinants of left-movers only. hence the pfaan in the numerator in

(2.3) is a full pfaan. the contribution wc of the instanton c to the superpotential

therefore vanishes if and only if the pfaan of v (1) vanishes, or in other words if and

only if this operator has a nonempty kernel.

any so(32) bundle v over a genus zero curve c is of the form

v =

16mi=1

(o(mi)  o(mi)) ,

with nonnegative integers mi that are uniquely determined up to permutation. so

v (1) =

16mi=1

(o(mi  1)  o(mi  1)) .

(2.5)

(2.6)

since o(s) has a kernel of dimension s + 1 for all s  0, and otherwise zero, the dimension
of the kernel of v (1) is

 =

mi.

16xi=1

6

(2.7)

 vanishes if and only if the mi are all zero, that is if v |c (the restriction of v to c) is
trivial. in any event,  is always even; this follows from the requirement w2(v ) = 0, since
in general

(w2(v ), c) =

16xi=1

mi mod 2.

(2.8)

hence wc vanishes if and only if v |c is nontrivial. the condition for wc to be sta-
tionary with respect to variations in the gauge eld is stronger. a rst order perturbation

of the fermion kinetic operator can lift a pair of fermion zero modes, so to ensure vanishing

of wc and all its rst derivatives, one needs  > 2.

e8  e8

what if we consider the heterotic string with gauge group e8  e8 instead of
spin(32)/z2? the fermionic construction of the heterotic string makes it obvious that the
formula (2.3) still holds if the structure group of the bundle restricts to so(16) so(16),
which can be naturally regarded4 as a subgroup of either e8  e8 or spin(32)/z2. more-
over, holomorphy says that the superpotential is invariant under complexied e8  e8
gauge transformations. on a genus zero curve, the classication of holomorphic bundles

says that by a complexied gauge transformation, the structure group of any g-bundle
(for any semisimple gauge group g) can be reduced to a maximal torus; for e8  e8, a
maximal torus coincides with that of so(16)  so(16). so the spin(32)/z2 result (2.3)
together with gauge invariance and holomorphy uniquely determines the result also for
e8  e8.

it seems extremely dicult to give an elegant formula for the e8  e8 analog of the
pfaan, but one can give a theoretical explanation of what the answer means. the pfaan

pfav (1) is the partition function of spin(32)/z2 current algebra at level one, coupled
to a background gauge eld, and the analog for e8  e8 is simply the partition function
of e8  e8 current algebra at level one, coupled to a background gauge eld.

multiple covers

one important area where the conformal eld theory and d-instanton derivations look

quite dierent, at least at rst sight, is in treating multiple covers of c. to study k-fold

4 we are being slightly imprecise here and not distinguishing the various global forms so(16),
spin(16), and spin(16)/z2. the justication for this is that, as explained earlier, when restricted

to c the obstructions w2 and ew2 vanish.

7

instanton wrapping on c, in conformal eld theory, one must integrate over the moduli

space of k-fold holomorphic covers of c. an elegant result has been obtained, at least for

(2, 2) models [9,10]. in the d-instanton approach, to study a k-fold cover, one must endow

the d-instanton with chan-paton factors of the gauge group so(k). as a result, one must

study a certain supersymmetric so(k) gauge theory on c. to get the superpotential,

however, this must be studied only in the limit of weak coupling. the analysis might be

tractable, though it is beyond the scope of the present paper.

we can also reconsider, for multicovers, the condition that the restriction of the

spin(32)/z2 bundle to c must admit vector structure if c is to contribute to the superpo-

tential. for a k-fold cover, the left-moving fermions on the d-instanton world-volume are
sections of s  v  w where v is the spin(32)/z2 bundle in the vector representation,
and w is the so(k) chan-paton bundle, also in the vector representation. so the condi-

tion is not that v or w should exist separately in the vector representations, but that the
tensor product v  w should exist in the tensor product 32  k of those representations.
if the spin(32)/z2 bundle restricted to c does not admit vector structure, then likewise

the so(k) chan-paton bundle on c must not admit vector structure. this implies that
k must be even.5 in this case, the chan-paton bundle cannot be at, and the classical

action of the instanton has an additional term from its curvature. it appears that such a

conguration is not supersymmetric and does not contribute to the superpotential.

from the conformal eld theory point of view, the role of even k arises because if

 :   c is a degree k map, then (ew2) is always zero for even k (even if ew2 is not),

so for even k, (v ) always makes sense in the vector representation. from this point of

view, it appears that k-fold wrappings for even k might contribute to the superpotential.

2.2. the phase of the superpotential

this completes what we will say about the heterotic string or d-instanton superpo-

tential, except for a technical analysis of the phase factor in (2.3). (this discussion is not

needed as background for section 3.) in this discussion, we consider the heterotic string or

d-instanton in an arbitrary spacetime y , with gauge bundle v , subject only to the usual

anomaly cancellation conditions, and an arbitrary (closed and oriented) string worldsheet

5 the ability to construct an so(k) bundle without vector structure depends on having an
element 1 of the center of so(k) that acts nontrivially in the vector representation. such an

element exists only for even k; for odd k, the element 1 of o(k) does not lie in so(k).

8

c. (to make contact with the discussion of the superpotential, the analysis can be spe-
cialized to y = r4  x with x a calabi-yau manifold and c a holomorphic curve in x.)
most of the discussion below is a summary of standard material concerning heterotic string

worldsheet anomalies. however, a complete denition of the overall phases of the heterotic

string path integral in the dierent topological sectors has apparently never been given in

the literature. for this, we will need a theorem of dai and freed [11] which generalizes

the formulas for computing global anomalies.

naively speaking, the b-eld is a two-form, and the phase factor

exp(cid:18)izc

b(cid:19)

(2.9)

is a complex number. however, life is really much more subtle. the eld strength, naively

h = db, of the b-eld, does not obey the expected bianchi identity dh = 0, but rather

obeys the equation

dh =

1
4

(trr  r  trf  f ) .

(2.10)

here r is the riemann tensor of spacetime, and f is the curvature of the so(32) connection

on v . (2.10) is associated with heterotic string anomaly cancellation in the following sense.

let (y ) and (v ) be the characteristic classes of the tangent bundle of y and of v which
at the level of dierential forms are represented by (1/82)tr r  r and (1/82)tr f  f .
a three-form h obeying (2.10) exists if and only if (y ) = (v ) mod torsion; existence of

such an h is required (as we will review below) for cancellation of perturbative heterotic

string worldsheet anomalies. the stronger condition that

(y ) = (v )  h 4(y ; z)

(2.11)

gives cancellation of global worldsheet anomalies.

obviously, given (2.10), b is not a potential for the gauge-invariant three-form h in

the naive sense h = db, for this would imply dh = 0. the familiar formula for h is

h = db + grav  gauge,

(2.12)

where grav and gauge are suitably normalized gravitational and gauge chern-simons

three-forms. consequences of this formula for b will be discussed presently, but rst note

the following fact, which we will need later. for any closed three-cycle w in spacetime,

zw

h =zw

(grav  gauge) mod 2.

(2.13)

9

we are here using the fact that though the three-forms grav and gauge are not gauge-

invariant, their periods are gauge-invariant modulo 2.

so what kind of object is b? under local lorentz or gauge transformations with
innitesimal parameters  and , one has the familiar formulas grav  grav + d(trr)
and gauge  gauge + d(trf ), so for gauge invariance of h, b transforms in the familiar
fashion

b  b  trr + trf.

(2.14)

in particular, b, and likewise the phase factor in (2.9), is not gauge-invariant.

we will see that it is a long story to explain what a b-eld actually is. one simple

thing that we can say right away is the following. let us agree that by an ordinary two-
form eld we mean a eld that is locally represented by a two-form b , with eld strength
h  = db  and standard bianchi identity dh  = 0, and subject to the usual integrality
conditions on the periods.6 then b is not an ordinary two-form eld, but the space of

b-elds is a torsor for the group of ordinary two-form elds. this is a fancy way to say
that to b we can add an ordinary two-form eld b , and that given one b eld (with given
y and v ), any other b eld is of the form b + b  for some unique b .

this statement alone does not determine what the phase of the path integral is sup-

posed to be. in fact, we will only make sense of the b-eld phase factor (2.9) in conjunction

with another factor in the worldsheet path integral. the other relevant factor is of course

the fermion pfaan. we must understand the product

pfa(df )  exp(cid:18)izc

b(cid:19) .

(2.15)

(we here omit the bosonic determinant, which is positive and contributes no interesting
phase. the operator df includes both left and right-moving fermions.)

we therefore must discuss the phase of pfa(df ). the pfaan of df is not, in
general, well-dened as a complex number. it takes values in a complex line that varies,
as c varies, to give a pfaan line bundle over the space of cs. we let l[c] denote the
pfaan line bundle for worldsheets in the homotopy class of c.7 for dirac operators

6 mathematically, such a b  is sometimes called a connection on a gerbe. the b-elds of type

ii superstring theory are such elds.

7 the square of the pfaan line bundle is a more familiar determinant line bundle. we get a
pfaan line bundle because the heterotic string worldsheet fermions are majorana-weyl fermions.

10

in general, a pfaan line bundle such as l[c] might be topologically nontrivial. for the
heterotic or d-string, the condition (2.11) ensures that l[c] is topologically trivial.

however, it does not have a canonical trivialization, and hence pfa(df ) is not dened
as a complex number. there is always a natural absolute value |pfa(df )| (dened, for
example, by zeta function regularization), so the problem is only with the phase f (c) =
pfa(df )/|pfa(df )|. while lacking a canonical trivialization, lc does have a canonical
unitary connection  [12]. this means that if we are given two world-sheets c1 and c2 in
the same homotopy class [c], and a path p between them, then we can dene the phase of
pfa(df ) at c2 in terms of what it is at c1. concretely, such a path p is a three-manifold
u  y of topology c  i, with i = [0, 1] being a unit interval on the x-axis, such that u
coincides with c2 at x = 1 and with c1 at x = 0. (more generally, we could dene a path
by a map  : c  i  y with (c  1) = c2 and (c  0) = c1.) given such a path, we
set

(2.16)

fp (c2) = exp(cid:18)izp

(cid:19) f (c1).

as we have suggested in the notation, fp (c2) depends on the path p , because the connec-
tion  is not at. if p is deformed to another path p  keeping the endpoints xed, then

the quillen-bismut-freed formula for the curvature of  asserts that

exp(cid:18)izp 

(cid:19) = exp(cid:18)izk

trr  r  trf  f

4

(cid:19) exp(cid:18)izp

(cid:19) ,

(2.17)

where k is the four-manifold swept out by u in varying the path from p to p .

at this point, the shifted bianchi identity (2.10) saves the day. we modify the con-

nection  by adding an extra term involving the integral of h, replacing the phase factor

in (2.16) by the product

exp(cid:18)izp

(cid:19) exp(cid:18)izu

h(cid:19) .

(2.18)

by virtue of (2.10) and (2.17), this product is invariant under continuous variations of p ; in
other words, the modied connection on l[c] is at. this statement is, in fact, equivalent
to cancellation of heterotic string perturbative anomalies.

though we have formulated the discussion in seemingly abstract terms involving con-

nections on determinant line bundles, we have by now implicitly arrived at a partial ex-

planation of the meaning of the phase factor in (2.9). the variation of this factor, when

c varies along a path p to sweep out a three-manifold u , should be understood as

exp(cid:18)izu

h(cid:19) ,

11

(2.19)

and thus we know what is meant by the variation along a path of exp(irc b), though
we cannot make sense of exp(irc b) itself. thus, if we set f (c) = f (c) exp(irc b), the

phase factor (2.18) can be understood physically as describing parallel transport of f (c)

along the path p :

f (c2) = exp(cid:18)izp

(cid:19) exp(cid:18)izu

h(cid:19) f (c1).

(2.20)

cancellation of global worldsheet anomalies is the assertion that the modied connec-
tion on l[c] also has trivial holonomies globally, so that the above formula for f (c2) in
terms of f (c1) is invariant even under discontinuous changes in p . we will briey recall
the proof [13,14]. (the following summary omits some important steps. the goal is just

to write down a couple of formulas that will be handy later.) if p is a closed path, then

one can glue together the ends of u (which are copies of the same surface c) to make a
closed three-manifold w  y . the holonomy around w of the connection  is, by the
global anomaly formula,

exp (i(w )/2) ,

(2.21)

where (w ) is the eta-invariant of a suitable dirac operator on w . including also the

contribution of h, the holonomy of the modied connection will vanish if

exp (i(w )/2)  exp(cid:18)izw

h(cid:19) = 1.

(2.22)

that this holds, for all w , is proved by using the atiyah-patodi-singer theorem to evaluate

the -invariants, and using (2.13) to evaluate rw h.

given that the modied connection is completely trivial, we get a complete denition

of the phase factor in the path integral

pfa(df ) exp(cid:18)izc

b(cid:19)

(2.23)

for every worldsheet c in a given homotopy class [c], in terms of a choice of phase f (c1)
at an arbitrary base-point c1 in the homotopy class. but what is the phase f (c1)?

if c1 is nontrivial in h2(y ; z), then this question does not have an answer that
depends only on the gauge-invariant eld h (plus the metric and connection on y and v ),

because the answer depends on the b-eld, which is not fully specied even when h is

known. it is elusive to explain what a b-eld is, but as we remarked above, b-elds can
be transformed by b  b + b , with b  an ordinary two-form eld. if h is given, we
are limited to b  b + b  with b  at, so b  denes an element of h 2(y ; u (1)). under

12

b  b + b , f (c1) is multiplied by exp(irc1

there is a at b  eld for which this factor is not 1.

b ), and if c1 is nontrivial in h2(y ; z),

more generally, suppose that c1, c2, . . . , cs are a set of worldsheets that are linearly

independent (they obey no linear relations with integer coecients) in h2(y ; z). then,

as the b-eld is varied keeping h xed, the phases f (c1), f (c2), . . . , f (cs) vary com-

pletely independently. this is because the phases exp(cid:16)irci

independent if the ci are linearly independent in homology.

b (cid:17), for at b , are completely

suppose, on the other hand, that c1, . . . , cs do obey a linear relation. there is no

essential loss of generality in assuming that this linear relation is

c1 + c2 + . . . + cs = 0.

(2.24)

(if some coecients are negative, we reverse the orientations of the relevant cs; if some

coecients are bigger than 1, we increase s to reduce to the case that all coecients are
1.) such a relation means that there is a three-manifold u  y whose boundary is the
union of the ci (or more generally a three-manifold u with a map  : u  y such that
the boundary of u is mapped dieomorphically to the union of the ci). in this situation,

we can give a relation, which depends only on the gauge-invariant h-eld and not on the

mysterious b-eld, for the product qs

first of all, though the factors exp(cid:16)irci

i=1 f (ci).

b(cid:17) are mysterious individually, for their

product we can write an obvious classical formula that depends only on h and u :

exp(cid:18)izci

b(cid:19) = exp(cid:18)izu

h(cid:19) .

syi=1

(2.25)

this expression depends on u , though this is not shown in the notation on the left hand

side.

more subtle is the product of the pfaans. we recall that each fermion path integral
pfa(df (ci)) takes values in a complex line lci. however, according to a theorem of dai
and freed [11], for every choice of a three-manifold u whose boundary is the union of the ci

(together with an extension of all of the bundles over u ), there is a canonical trivialization
of the product ilci . this trivialization is obtained by suitably interpreting the quantity
exp(i(u )/2), where (u ) is an eta-invariant of a dirac operator on u dened using

global (atiyah-patodi-singer) boundary conditions on the ci. we write the trivialization
as tu : ilci  c. via this trivialization, the product f (c1)f (c2) . . . f (cs) is mapped

13

to a well-dened (but u -dependent) complex number tu (f (c1)  f (c2)  . . .  f (cs)).
we now set
h(cid:19) .

b(cid:19)(cid:19) = tu (f (c1)  f (c2)  . . . f (cs)) exp(cid:18)izu

(2.26)

(cid:18)pfa(df (ci)) exp(cid:18)izci

syi=1

the point is that, in fact, the right hand side is independent of the choice of u . for

continuous variations of u , this follows from the variational formula that expresses a change
in  (and hence in tu ) in terms of trr  r  trf  f , together with the bianchi identity
(2.10) which implies a similar formula for the variation of ru h. more generally, if u is

replaced with another three-manifold u  with the same boundary (u  may or may not

be in the same homotopy class as u ), we let w be the three-manifold without boundary
obtained by gluing together u and u  along their boundaries with opposite orientation.
then to prove that the right hand side of (2.26) is unchanged if u is replaced by u , we

need the formula

tu  = tu exp(cid:18)izw

h(cid:19) .

(2.27)

this can proved as follows. one has tu = exp(i(u )/2), tu  = exp(i(u )/2) (where
(u ) and (u ) are suitably interpreted -invariants on the manifolds with boundary u
and u ). the gluing formula for the eta-invariant [11] gives

exp(i(w )/2) = exp(i(u )/2) exp(i(u )/2).

(2.28)

(the minus sign in the last factor enters because, in gluing u and u  to make w , one
reverses the orientation on u .) using this, (2.27) is equivalent to (2.22). it is no coinci-

dence that the verication of well-denedness of (2.26) is so closely related to the proof

of absence of global anomalies. the dai-freed theorem is a generalization of the global

anomaly formula (and essentially reduces to it when u is constructed from a path from

c1 to c2) and enables us not just to prove that the heterotic string path integral is well-
dened (as we can learn from the global anomaly formula) but to relate the path integrals

in dierent topological sectors.

the nature of the b-field

at last, i can state the best description i know for what a b-eld is for the heterotic

string. a b-eld is a choice of phases f (ci) for the heterotic string (or d-string) world-

sheet path integral for all closed surfaces ci, obeying (2.26) whenever c1 + . . . + cs is

14

a boundary. as justication for this notion of a b-eld, i note that with this denition,

the heterotic string world-sheet path integral is manifestly well-dened for every choice of
b-eld. moreover, it makes sense to transform b  b + b  for any ordinary two-form
b (cid:17), which
eld b  (at or not). this operation transforms f (ci)  f (ci) exp(cid:16)irci
together with h  h + db  clearly preserves (2.26). conversely, with this denition, any
two b-elds are related by b  b + b  for a unique b . (if (2.26) is obeyed with either
of two b-elds b1 and b2, then the dierence b1  b2 obeys a relation similar to (2.26)
but with the pfaans canceled out; this relation is equivalent to the dening property of
an ordinary two-form eld b .) these properties together fully characterize what we want

a b-eld to be.

i believe that with this notion of a b-eld, all other formulas in which the b-eld

appears for the heterotic or type i string (like the green-schwarz anomaly-canceling terms)

make sense.

3. moduli space metric for (0, 4) models

we will now consider, with the methods of section 2.1, the heterotic (or type i)
string on r6  y, with y a k3 manifold. other compactications with eight unbroken
supersymmetries, such as k3  t2 compactication to four dimensions, can be treated
similarly.

the parameters labeling the hyper-kahler metric and b-eld on y , as well as the

moduli of the gauge bundle, all transform in hypermultiplets. the metric on hypermultiplet

moduli is independent of the heterotic string coupling constant, so it can be computed in

the weak coupling limit, that is, from conformal eld theory. worldsheet instantons, or

d-instantons, that correct this metric are therefore of genus zero. for the same reasons as

in section 2, in the case of the spin(32)/z2 heterotic or type i string, contributions come

only from instantons c such that the gauge bundle v has vector structure when restricted

to c.

a formula for the correction to the metric can be obtained along the lines of the
analysis in section 2. let c  y be a genus zero surface that is invariant under half of the
supersymmetries. this is so if, and only if, c is holomorphic with respect to one of the

complex structures on y . if so, the d-instanton (or elementary heterotic string) wrapped

on c has four fermionic zero modes, coming from the broken supersymmetries, as well as

15

six bosonic zero modes representing translations in r6. the eective action lc due to the
instanton takes the general form

lc =z d6x d4 uc,

(3.1)

where uc is computed from a worldsheet path integral with the zero modes suppressed. if
uc has a term uc with no fermions or derivatives, then the integralr d4 uc will generate

(among other things) terms fij()didj, with i the bosonic part of the hypermultiplets.

such terms are the desired corrections to the hypermultiplet moduli space metric.

in computing uc, we will evaluate the path integral over the uctuations of c about
the classical solution in a one-loop approximation.8 the resulting formula diers only

slightly from the formula obtained in section 2 for the superpotential in a model with four

unbroken supercharges:

uc = exp(cid:18)

a(c)

2 + izc

b(cid:19) pfa(v (1))

(det o)4

.

(3.2)

only the denominator requires some explanation. three factors of det o arise by inter-
preting the normal bundle to r6 as o3, but the fourth arises in a more complicated way.
the normal bundle to c in y = k3 is as a complex bundle o(2), so the bosonic operator
for uctuations of c inside k3 is o(2) = o(2)o(2). though o(2) has no kernel
or cokernel, its left and right-moving factors do. so to factor its determinant, we must use
the det and write det o(2) = det o(2) det o(2). by serre duality, o(2) is the
transpose of o, so det o(2) = det o; and likewise det o(2) = det o. (in the rep-
resentation of these dets as path integrals of    systems, these statements arise simply
from exchanging  and .) the factor det o cancels part of the right-moving fermion
path integral, and the factor det o gives the fourth such factor in the denominator of

(3.2).

8 this at least will suce to show that uc is nonzero for generic v for all supersymmetric
two-spheres c. additionally, it is quite possible that holomorphy implies vanishing of the higher

order corrections. holomorphy here means really holomorphy on the twistor space of the moduli

space. the moduli space itself is a quaternionic manifold, not a complex manifold. the twistor

space is obtained by looking at the (0, 4) superconformal eld theory as a (0, 2) model; in other

words, a point in the twistor space is a point in the ordinary moduli space together with a choice

of a (0, 2) subalgebra of the (0, 4) superconformal algebra.

16

much of the discussion of the superpotential in section 2 has a direct analog here. for
example, uc vanishes if and only if v |c is nontrivial. (in particular, on the (2, 2) locus in
heterotic string moduli space, where the spin connection is embedded in the gauge group,
v |c is always nontrivial, and hence uc is identically zero.) also, while the formula is
written for spin(32)/z2, the analog for e8  e8 is determined by arguments similar to
those in section 2. multicovers of c would again be expected to contribute; an analysis

of their contributions will be important for applications. finally, the discussion in section

2.2 is again needed for a precise explanation of the phase of uc.

one can completely characterize the cs that correct the metric. the group  =
h2(y ; z) is a lattice of signature (3, 19). a two-sphere c  y that is holomorphic in
some complex structure must obey c  c = 2. given a class x   with x2 = 2,
there is a unique complex structure j on the hyper-kahler manifold y (more exactly, a

complex structure that is unique up to the possibility of replacing it with the opposite or
complex conjugate structure j) for which x is of type (1,1) and so might be the class of
a holomorphic curve c, which will automatically have genus zero since x2 = 2. in fact,
there is a unique two-sphere c  y which, depending on its orientation, has homology class
x or x and is holomorphic with respect to j or j. 9 hence, the instanton correction
to the metric is obtained as a sum over all x with x2 = 2.

if the volume of y in heterotic string units is comparable to ()2, then many instan-
tons make appreciable contributions to the metric on the moduli space, and the classical

formula for this metric will not be a good approximation. let us ask how, while keeping y

at large volume, the corrections to the metric can become large. this can occur if one of

the cs goes to zero volume, which happens precisely when y develops an a1 singularity.
we also require that the bundle v should be trivial when restricted to c (in the complex

structure in which c is holomorphic), and in particular should have vector structure. un-

der these conditions, the contribution of c and its multicovers to the metric will become

large. it would be quite interesting to get a better understanding of this situation.

i would like to thank d. freed and g. moore for comments. this work was supported

in part by nsf grant phy-9513835.

9 this is proved by applying the riemann-roch theorem to a holomorphic line bundle l with
c1(l) = x, getting h0(l)  h1(l) + h2(l) = 1, where we have used the facts that c1(y ) =
0, c2(y ) = 24, and x2 = 2. by serre duality, h2(l) = h0(l1). so we get an inequality
h0(l) + h0(l1)  1. a vanishing theorem shows that the sum is precisely 1. so either l or l1
has a holomorphic section s, which is unique up to scaling; c is the zero-set of s.

17

references

[1] m. dine, n. seiberg, x.-g. wen, and e. witten, non-perturbative eects on the
string world sheet, i, ii nucl. phys. b278 (1986) 769, nucl. phys. b289 (1987)
319.

[2] k. becker, m. becker, and a. strominger, fivebranes, membranes, and non-

perturbative string theory, hep-th/9507158.

[3] m. dine, p. huet, and n. seiberg, large and small radius in string theory, nucl.

phys. b322 (1989) 301.

[4] j. harvey and g. moore, superpotentials and membrane instantons, to appear.
[5] m. berkooz, r. g. leigh, j. polchinski, j. h. schwarz, n. seiberg, and e. witten,
anomalies, dualities, and topology of d = 6 n = 1 superstring vacua, nucl.
phys. b475 (1996) 115, hep-th/9605184.

[6] e. witten, d-branes and k-theory, hep-th/9810188.
[7] a. sen, so(32) spinors of type i and other solitons on brane-antibrane pair,

hep-th/9808141.

[8] j. distler and b. greene, some exact results on the superpotential from calabi-

yau compactication, nucl. phys. b309 (1988) 295.

[9] p. candelas, x. c. de la ossa, p. s. green, and l. parkes, a pair of calabi-yau
manifolds as an exactly soluble superconformal theory, nucl. phys. b359 (1991)
21.

[10] p. aspinwall and d. r. morrison, topological field theory and rational curves,

commun. math. phys. 151 (1993) 245.

[11] x. dai and d. s. freed, -invariants and determinant lines, j. math. phys.
35 (1994) 5155; d. freed, determinant line bundles revisited, in geometry and
physics, ed. j. a. andersen et al (marcel dekker, 1997) 187.

[12] j. m. bismut and d. s. freed, the analysis of elliptic families i: metrics and

connections on determinant bundles, commun. math. phys. 106 (1986) 59.

[13] e. witten, global anomalies in string theory, in anomalies, geometry, and topol-

ogy, ed. a. white (world-scientic, 1985) 61.

[14] d. freed, determinants, torsion, and strings, commun. math. phys. 107 (1986)

483, with an appendix by d. freed and j. morgan, p. 510.

18

