ftuam-99/21

iassns-hep-99/61

ift-uam/csic-99-25

hep-th/9907074

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

0
1

 
 

1
v
4
7
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

n = 1 type iia brane congurations,

chirality and t-duality

j. park 1, r. rabadan 2 and a. m. uranga 3

 school of natural sciences, institute for advanced study,

olden lane, princeton nj 08540, usa.

 departamento. de fsica teorica c-xi and instituto de fsica teorica c-xvi,

universidad autonoma de madrid, cantoblanco, 28049 madrid, spain.

abstract

we consider four-dimensional n = 1 eld theories realized by type iia brane con-

gurations of ns-branes and d4-branes, in the presence of orientifold six-planes and

d6-branes. these congurations are known to present interesting eects associated

to the appearance of chiral symmetries and chiral matter in the four-dimensional eld

theory. we center on models with one compact direction (elliptic models) and show

that, under t-duality, the congurations are mapped to a set of type iib d3-branes

probing n = 1 orientifolds of c2/zn singularities. we explicitly construct these

orientifolds, and show the eld theories on the d3-brane probes indeed reproduces

the eld theories constructed using the iia brane congurations. this t-duality

map allows to understand the type iib realization of several exotic brane dynam-

ics eects on the type iia side: flavour doubling, the splitting of d6-branes and

o6-planes in crossing a ns-brane and the eect of a non-zero type iia cosmological

constant turn out to have surprisingly standard type iib counterparts.

1jaemo@ias.edu
2rabadan@delta.ft.uam.es
3uranga@ias.edu

1 introduction

one of the most interesting features of four-dimensional eld theories that has been

successfully reproduced in their realization in string theory is the appearance of chiral

matter and chiral symmetries. the rst realizations of n = 1 supersymmetric gauge

eld theories in terms of brane congurations, in the spirit of [1], involved a set of type

iia d4-branes (along the directions 01236), relatively rotated ns-vebranes (along

012345 or 012389), and d6-branes (along 0123789) [2] (see review for further refer-

ences). however, given their close relation with the n = 2 models in [4] via a rotation

of ns-branes [5] which makes the adjoint matter massive, they have vector-like matter

content. also, the chiral symmetries present in the eld theory for massless avours

are not manifest in the brane realization.

the second of these issues was further explored in [6], where it was noticed that the

fundamental avours arising from the d6-branes have generically quartic superpotential

interactions, mediated by the massive adjoints, which only preserve the diagonal vector-

like subgroup of the chiral symmetry. this superpotential can however be varied by

rotating the d6-branes in the 45-89 plane, and vanishes for d6-branes oriented along
0123457 (d6-branes) 1. the chiral symmetries in the eld theory were argued to be
manifest in the brane conguration when the d6 branes are located on top of the
ns-branes and split in half d6-branes, of semi-innite extent in the direction 7. the
independent gauge symmetries on these upper  and lower half d6-branes correspond

to the independent chiral rotations of the matter multiplets, leading to the conclusion
that one half d6-brane, ending on a ns-brane with d4-branes suspended on it, leads to
one chiral fundamental multiplet in the four-dimensional eld theory 2. unfortunately,
the inability of the ns-branes to carry away the rr charge of the half d6-branes

requires the number of upper and lower half-branes to be identical, implying vector-

like matter contents.

a further step was taken in [8], where it was pointed out that the presence of a non-

zero type iia cosmological constant (so that the conguration is actually embedded in

massive type iia theory) forces a mismatch between the number of upper and lower
half d6-branes (equal to the value of the cosmological constant in appropriate units),

which allows to obtain chiral matter localized at these intersections. in this setup quite

exotic phase transitions were shown to occur, in which the number of chiral multiplets

1further support for these superpotentials was provided in [7].
2this proposal implies that, in gauge theories with several gauge factors, a single half d6-brane

ending on a ns-brane provides two fundamental chiral multiplets, one for each gauge factor arising

from d4-branes ending on the ns-brane. this phenomenon is known as avour doubling [12].

1

changes due to a change in the iia cosmological constant. the latter is achieved by

introducing d8-branes (along 012345689), which behave as domain walls across which

the cosmological constant changes, and crossing them through the conguration. in

these initial models, however, overall conservation of rr charge implied the complete

matter content must be vector-like, even though fundamental and anti-fundamental

chiral multiplets are generically localized at spatially dierent positions in the direc-

tion 6. from the eld theory point of view the vector-like matter content is merely

consequence of cancellation of gauge anomalies, since the conguration only allow to

obtain fundamental and anti-fundamental representations.

the nal ingredient to achieve chiral matter contents was the introduction of ori-
entifold planes parallel to the d6-branes (o6-planes), since they allow the appearance
of two-index tensor representations. specically, when an o6-plane sits on top of a

ns-brane, its two halves have opposite rr charge [9]. due to the dierent orientifold
projection in the upper and lower halves in x7, there appears chiral matter multiplets

transforming in the

+ representation [10, 11, 12]. finally, overall conservation

of rr charge (or anomaly cancellation in the eld theory) implies the existence of
additional half d6-branes producing eight anti-fundamental chiral avours 3, localized

either at the same position in the direction 6 (for zero iia cosmological constant) or

elsewhere (for non-zero cosmological constant). this type of dynamics of d6-branes

and o6-planes has also appeared in the context of type iia brane congurations real-

izing six-dimensional supersymmetric eld theories [14, 15, 16].

despite this success, which allows to realize a chiral gauge eld theory in string

theory, and to analyze its m-theory lift [17, 18], the type iia approach is extremely
rigid and has not allowed to construct further examples of chiral theories 4. completely

dierent setups, like type iib brane box models [20], and their t-dual realization in

terms of d3-brane probes at threefold singularities [22, 23, 24] (and orientifolds thereof

[25]) have proved more ecient in producing generically chiral eld theories.

two conclusions can be drawn from this brief review. the rst is the surprising

amount, diversity and apparent exotism of the non-trivial eects required in the type

iia setup to reproduce models with chiral symmetries and chiral matter content. the

second is the apparent extreme isolation of the chiral gauge theory constructed in the
iia setup using the change of sign of the o6-plane. it seems to be rather unrelated to

3this chiral matter content has been studied in [13] from the eld theory point of view.
4in [19] the introduction of orbifold (and orientifold) singularities in the type iia setup allowed to
construct further chiral models. they can be regarded as t-duals of the brane box models mentioned

below.

2

other congurations in string theory realizing four-dimensional chiral gauge theories.

in this paper we provide some insight into these issues. we consider type iia
congurations of ns-branes (along 012345), d4-branes (along 01236), and d6-branes
and o6-planes (along 0123457), with the direction 6 compactied on a circle. these
can be regarded as the n = 2 elliptic models of [4] in the presence of o6-planes

which break the supersymmetry to n = 1. we study the resulting type iib string

theory congurations obtained upon t-dualizing along this compact direction. they
correspond to n = 1 orientifolds of a system of d3-branes at a c2/zn singularity. we

explicitly classify and construct these orientifolds, and show they indeed realize the

eld theories obtained from the type iia congurations. the matching of both types

of models allows to nd the type iib counterparts of the non-trivial brane dynamics

eects present in the iia models. the correct chiral matter content and pattern of

chiral symmetries are reproduced by the completely standard rules of iib orientifold

construction. we list here the main results:

 we nd that half d6-branes map to whole d7-branes. concretely, upper and
lower half d6-branes map to d7-branes along either of the two complex planes
in c2/zn. the chiral symmetries in the eld theory (gauge symmetries on the
half d6-branes) appear as gauge symmetries on the d7-branes 5.

 the phenomenon of avour doubling is reproduced by the fact that one d7-brane
produces two fundamental chiral avours arising from the 3-7 and 7-3 sectors 6.

 the matter content

+ + 8 in the chiral theories is correctly reproduced in
the iib setup. the iib orientifold also encodes the structures of o6-planes in the
upper and lower halves in x7, in terms of the orientifold action on the two complex
planes in c2/zn. the type iib orientifold congurations are, in contrast with

the type iia models, quite smooth and do not present abrupt changes in the

orientifold type.

 cancellation of anomalies in the eld theory (conservation of rr charge in the

iia conguration) corresponds to cancellation of tadpoles for twisted rr elds

in the iib model.

 we also nd the type iib t-dual of the type iia cosmological constant. the

transitions changing the number of eld theory avours are interpreted as a brane

5this facts have already been observed in [26] in a related context.
6in orientifold models, where both sectors are related by the orientifold projection, the two funda-

mental avours still arise, in a slightly dierent fashion.

3

creation process in the type iib side.

thus, several rather exotic eects in the type iia brane congurations are repro-

duced by completely standard rules in the context of type iib orientifold construction.

this also sheds some light on the issue of the isolation of these chiral eld theories. in

the type iib realization as d3-branes probing orientifold singularities, these models do

not dier in any essential way from the constructions yielding generically chiral eld
theories (for instance d3-branes probes at c3/ threefold orbifold singularities and

orientifolds thereof). this point becomes even clearer by noticing that both types of

models are actually continuously connected [27]: some congurations of d3-branes at
orientifolds of c3/ reduce, after suitable partial resolutions of the singularity, to the
orientifolds of c2/zn appearing in this paper; from the eld theory point of view this is

realized a suitable baryonic higgs breaking that relates both eld theories. therefore,

our realization of these models in the singularity picture points towards a more unied

description of all string theory congurations producing four-dimensional chiral eld

theories.

a last advantage of having a realization of these gauge theories in terms of d3-brane

probes at singularities is that it is well-suited for the study of the eld theory in the

large n limit through the ads/cft correspondence [28].

the paper is organized as follows. in section 2 we construct type iia congura-
tions of ns-branes, d4-branes and d6-branes, with one compact direction but without
orientifold planes. even though the elds can be arranged in n = 2 multiplets, the

superpotential interactions only preserve n = 1 supersymmetry. we consider the case
of d6-branes sitting on top of the ns-branes, so that these congurations are the sim-

plest models presenting the phenomena of manifest chiral symmetry, avour doubling,

localization of chiral matter, and non-trivial eect of the iia cosmological constant.
we construct the type iib t-dual realization, in terms of d3-branes at a c2/zn sin-

gularity in the presence of a suitable set of d7-branes, and discuss the iib counterparts

of the above mentioned eects.

in section 3 we consider the introduction of o6-planes and present a complete

classication of models with one compact direction. these illustrate other eects like
the appearance of chiral matter content, due to the change of sign of the o6-plane when

crossing the ns-brane. in section 4 we construct the t-dual type iib version of these

models. we classify the possible choices of chan-paton embeddings on d3-branes and

nd that they reproduce the eld theories constructed in the iia framework, including

the models with chiral matter content. we discuss how the change of sign of the iia
o6-planes is encoded in the iib picture.

4

in section 5 we consider type iib congurations with more general structure of
d7-branes, and construct the corresponding iia models, which include additional d6-

branes. we compute the tadpole cancellation conditions on the iib orientifolds and

nd they are equivalent to the cancellation of gauge anomalies in the eld theory, and

to conservation of rr charge in the t-dual iia brane conguration. we conclude with

section 6, which contains some nal comments.

2 flavour doubling and orbifold models

before entering the discussion of the brane congurations with orientifold projection in

the coming sections, it is convenient to study some properties of n = 1 brane congu-

ration that appear even before the introduction of orientifolds. the iia congurations

we study in this section constitute an interesting modication of the n = 2 elliptic
models in [4], consisting on the introduction of d6-branes. these break the supersym-

metry to n = 1 in the four-dimensional eld theory. the type iia brane conguration

presents a number of interesting phenomena, like explicit realization of chiral symme-
tries [6], localization of chiral matter in the direction x6 [8], avour doubling [12], the

eect of the type iia cosmological constant, and transitions changing the number of

avours [8].

the model has a simple t-dual description in terms of a set of iib d3-branes

sitting at an orbifold singularity, in the presence of a suitable set of d7-branes. we will

show how the phenomena observed in the iia side are reproduced in the iib picture.

surprisingly enough, most of these exotic eects have a standard realization in the iib

setup.

we start with a elliptic model [4] with n ns branes (along the directions 012345)
and ni d4 branes (along 01236) in the ith interval, suspended between ns-branes. the
low-energy eld theory on the d4-branes has the following gauge group and n = 1
matter content

i=1 su (ni)  u (1)

qn

( i,

i+1)

( i,

i+1)

adj i

(2.1)

qi,i+1
qi+1,i

i

and there is a n = 2 superpotential

w =

n

xi=1

[ iqi,i+1 qi+1,i  i+1 qi+1,iqi,i+1 ]

(2.2)

5

vn     

{

ns

n-1

u(n        )
v1

{

{

w  n   

ns

0u(n   )

vn-1   

{

ns

{w  n-1   

1u(n   )

v3

{

ns

. . . 
v2

{

ns

{w 3

u(n   )2

 7

 6

{

w 1

{

w 2

figure 1: type iia brane conguration corresponding to an n = 2 elliptic model with a
set of d6-branes introducing n = 1 chiral matter. in this picture, the crosses represent ns-
branes and the thin vertical lines represent half d6-branes. the d4-branes stretch between

the ns-branes along the direction 6. for the sake of clarity, the d4-branes have been drawn

at the origin in the coulomb branch. this conguration presents the phenomenon of avour
doubling: each half d6-branes provides two chiral fundamental avours, one for each gauge

factor bounded by the corresponding ns brane.

now we add a set of d6 branes stretching along 0123457, such that they have semi-

innite extent along 7 and end on the ns-branes. we place vi upper (i.e. along
positive x7) and wi lower (negative x7) such half-d6 on top of the ith ns-brane. the
conguration and our conventions are shown in gure 1.

the presence of the d6-branes breaks the supersymmetry of the conguration to
four supercharges, n = 1 in the four-dimensional eld theory on the d4-branes. since
the ith such half-brane is sitting exactly at the boundary between the (i  1)th and the
ith gauge factors, each half-d6-brane gives a chiral avour to each factor. this is the
avour doubling phenomenon [12]. so we have the additional n = 1 matter

:

t w
i
t v
i1 :

(ni, wi)
(ni1, vi)

;

;

t w
i1 :
t v
:
i

(ni1, wi)

(ni, vi)

(2.3)

where the second entries specify the representation with respect to the gauge group
i=1 su(wi) on the half d6-branes, interpreted as global chiral sym-
metries from the eld theory viewpoint [6]. following [12], there is also a n = 1

qn
i=1 su(vi)qn

superpotential

[ qi1,it w
i

t w
i1  qi,i1 t v

i1t v
i

]

(2.4)

n

xi=1

which ensures that, when the ns brane is removed (that is, when the bifundamentals

get a vev), two of the four kinds of chiral multiplets become massive and we are left

6

with the familiar situation of each d6-brane giving one vector-like avour to only one
gauge group. notice that for d6-branes there is no coupling between the avours

and the adjoint multiplets i. such coupling would not be consistent with the chiral
symmetries mentioned above.

the conguration also contains states arising from strings stretched between upper
and lower half d6-branes on the same ns-brane. these are six-dimensional elds,

which transform in bifundamental representations (vi, wi). they parametrize the pos-
sibility of recombining upper and lower half d6-branes and moving them o the ns-

brane.

cancellation of non-abelian gauge anomalies imposes constraints on wi, vi. the
anomaly for the su(ni) gauge factor is proportional to wi  wi+1  vi + vi+1, so the
anomalies vanish when

wi  vi = c0

(2.5)

with c0 is a constant independent of i. notice that the matter content is non-chiral 7.
in the type iia conguration anomaly cancellation is a consequence of the conser-

vation of rr charge. equation (2.5) states that for c0 = 0 the number of upper and
lower half-d6-branes must be equal. this is the usual condition of rr charge con-
servation [14]. when c0 6= 0 there is an i-independent mismatch between the number
of upper and lower half-d6-branes. this situation is consistent when the type iia

background has a non-zero cosmological constant [8] proportional to the mismatch c0.
notice that even though the resulting eld theories are non-chiral, the congurations

have in general localized chiral matter.

a related interesting phenomenon was studied in [8], where the introduction of

d8-branes (along 012345689) in the conguration allowed to change the value of the

cosmological constant. a change from c0 to c0 + 1 is achieved by crossing a d8-brane
from a very large positive value of x7 to a very large negative value. consistency with
the equation (2.5) above requires either a decrease in the number of upper half d6-

branes, or an increase in the number of lower ones. this is achieved by the well-known

brane creation eect [1], which in this case implies that, at each ns-brane, either one
upper half d6-brane disappears (if it was attached at the crossing d8-brane) or one
lower half d6-brane is created. from the viewpoint of the four-dimensional eld theory,

the net eect is a sudden change in the number of avours for each gauge group.

in the remainder of this section we focus on a t-dual type iib realization of these

7moreover, it can be organized in n = 2 multiplets. however, the superpotential interactions in

(2.4) preserve only n = 1 supersymmetry.

7

eld theories, as a set of d3-branes probing an orbifold singularity, in the presence of

d7-branes. we show how the dierent phenomena arising from the type iia brane

dynamics receive a simple interpretation in the type iib picture.

let us t-dualize the iia model along the direction x6, so that the ns-branes trans-

form into a n-centered taub-nut space [29], and the d4-branes become a set of d3
brane probes. we rst consider the model without d6-branes. a quite detailed ac-

count of properties of this t-duality can be found in [30]. as usual, at the origin of

the baryonic and mesonic branches the centers of the taub-nut coincide and give a
c2/zn singularity, at which d3-branes sit. therefore in the following we center on

the local structure, or equivalently take the limit in which the asymptotic taub-nut

radius goes to innity, and work with d3-branes at the orbifold singularity. the space
is c2/zn  c, with the generator  acting as

 : (z1, z2, z3)  (e2i 1

n z1, e2i 1

n z2, z3)

(2.6)

however, we will keep in mind the decompactication limit we have taken, since it may

introduce subtleties to be discussed below.

the construction of the eld theory in the type iib setup is rather familiar in the

absence of the fundamental avours [31]. we start with a set of d3-branes in at space
c3 and mod out by the geometric action (2.6), embedded on the chan-paton factors

of d3-branes through the matrix

,3 = diag (1n0, e2i 1

n 1n1, . . . , e2i n 1

n 1nn 1)

the projection onto invariant elds, given by

v = ,3v 1
z3 = ,3z31

,3  qi u (ni)

,3  adj i

; z1 = e2i/n ,3z11
; z2 = e2i/n ,3z21

,3  pn

,3 

i=1( i,
( i,

i+1)

i+1)

(2.7)

(2.8)

reproduces the spectrum of the eld theory (2.2) 8. the interactions (2.2) are recovered
from the orbifold interaction, inherited from the n = 4 superpotential w = z3[z1, z2].
notice that the n = 1 multiplets v , z3 and z1, z2 form n = 2 vector and hypermul-
tiplets respectively.

the introduction of avours is more interesting, and has not appeared in the liter-

ature. it can be accomplished by the introduction of d7-branes in the conguration.
we will denote by d7i the d7-branes transverse to the ith complex plane. it is easy
to see that d73 branes preserve the n = 2 supersymmetry and thus they correspond
8the u (1) factors appearing in the orbifold theory (except for the decoupled diagonal combination)
are made massive by the couplings b  tr f on the d3-brane world-volume. this phenomenon is the

t-dual of the freezing of u (1)s observed in the iia brane conguration [4].

8

to d6-branes in the iia conguration. on the other hand, d71- and d72-branes break
the supersymmetry to n = 1 and seem the appropriate objects to match the iia d6-

branes. we now show that the spectrum (2.3) is reproduced by the string states in the

3-7i, 7i-3 sectors if we make the following choice of chan-paton matrices

,71 = diag (ei 1

n 1w1, ei 3

n 1w2, . . . , ei 2n 1

n 1wn )

and analogously for the d72-branes 9, replacing the numbers of entries wi by vi.

the spectrum in the 3-71, 3-72 sectors is obtained through the projections

3  71 :

71  3 :

3  72 :

72  3 :

 = e i
 = e i

 (ni, wi)

n k,31
k,71
n k,711
k,3  (ni1, wi)
n k,31
 (ni1, vi)
k,72
n k,721
k,3  (ni, vi)

i

i

 = e

 = e

(2.9)

(2.10)

notice that each d7i-brane provides one chiral avour to two gauge groups of the four-
dimensional eld theory. this statement is the t-dual of the avour doubling eect in

the iia conguration, and appears automatically in the iib setup. the superpotential

(2.4) is also reproduced in the orbifold model, by the couplings (3-3)i(3-7i)(7i-3) among
3-3 states associated to zi and states in the 3-7i and 7i-3 sectors. also, no coupling to
the adjoint multiplets appears.

this proposal also reproduces several other features of the iia conguration. for

instance, the global chiral symmetries in the four-dimensional eld theory correspond

to the gauge symmetries in the d7-brane world-volumes. this suggests the proposal
that the half-d6-branes in the iia side map to complete d7-branes in the iib side. in

fact, this observation has been already made in [26] in a related context.

the seemingly striking feature that the iia half d6-branes, which originally span
the same directions, end up as d7-branes spanning dierent complex planes in c2/zn

deserves some comment. this point is better understood if we consider the ale space
i=1(v  vi), where vi correspond to
the positions of the t-dual ns-branes in 89. in this case, the d6-branes are not split in

to be slightly blown-up, and is described by xy = qn

halves, and map to d7-branes located at v = 0, so that they wrap the complex curve

9the unusual property that tr n ,3 = 1 while tr n ,71 = tr n ,72 = 1 is actually required for
consistency of the model (let us point out that if d73-branes are included, they must have tr n ,73 =
1). this follows for instance from the analysis in [32] of a system of d9- and d5i-branes (we refer

to d5-branes wrapping the complex plane zi as d5i-branes). the simultaneous rotation by 2 in the

complex planes z1, z2 was shown to act with opposite signs on the chan-paton factors of d9-, d53-

branes vs. d51-, d52-branes. by t-dualizing along z1, we recover our system of d3- and d7-branes,
with n acting with opposite signs on d3-, d73 vs, d71-, d72-branes.

9

xy = qn

i=1 vi. when the ns-branes are brought back to v = 0, this curve degenerates to
xy = 0, which represents two complex planes intersecting at one point. the d7-branes
wrapping each of these correspond to dierent half d6-branes.

as further evidence for this identication, we study the string consistency conditions

in the type iib conguration, namely cancellation of tadpoles for twisted rr elds.

more concretely, consistency only requires the cancellation of d7-brane tadpoles, since

those corresponding to the d3-branes yield no inconsistency, since the rr ux can

escape to innity along the complex plane z3. the d7-brane tadpoles appear from
cylinder diagrams, and give the constraint

tr k,71  tr k,72 = 0

for k 6= 0

(2.11)

these conditions ensure the cancellation of non-abelian anomalies in the four-dimensional

eld theory, as can be checked by expressing (2.11) in terms of vi and wi (see e.g. [33]
for extensive application of this trick). notice the general solution to the constraints

is given by

vi  wi = c0

(2.12)

where the constant c0 is independent of i, and counts the dierence between the
number of d71- and d72 branes. comparing with (2.5), we obtain the result that this
number in the iib conguration is mapped to the cosmological constant on the iia

side.

finally, let us comment on a subtle point concerning deformations of the sets of d7-

branes. one can check that the states in the 71-72 sector in the iib orbifold correspond
to the bifundamentals (vi, wi) living on the d6-brane world-volume in the iia cong-
uration. the corresponding deformations are identical to those in [26]: in the type iia

side, the bifundamental parametrizes the possibility of recombining upper and lower
half-d6-branes and moving them o the ns brane; in the iib side, it parametrizes the

deformation of two transverse d7-branes into a single smooth one [34].

on the other hand, the 71-71 and 72-72 sector give rise to a set of bifundamental
multiplets (wi, wi+1), (vi, vi+1), etc, which have no iia counterpart. the deformations
associated to these iib states correspond to combining dierent fractional d7-branes

into a dynamical one and moving it away from the orbifold singularity. these defor-
mations seem to be absent in the type iia description 10.

notice that there is a crucial dierence between the 71-72 and 7i-7i states. while the
former are localized at a point in the orbifold space, the latter spread out on complex

10in a particular case, ref.

[26] proposed a deformation of two, say upper, half-d6-branes into a

parabola. however this type of deformation would does not solve the problem in the general case, since

the iib deformation would require the participation of half d6-branes located at dierent ns-branes.

10

planes. this fact implies that the 7i-7i states are sensitive to the asymptotic radius of
the taub-nut space which is the true t-dual of the iia brane conguration. more

concretely, these 7i-branes wrap the compact direction of the taub-nut space, hence
the asymptotic wilson lines (actually self-dual connections asymptotically at) may

give masses to these states, inversely proportional to the taub-nut radius (so they

become massless in the ale limit). these states should therefore be mapped to massive

states in the corresponding type iia conguration, with masses proportional to the iia
x6 radius. in fact, the iia model contains reasonable candidates for such states, as
open strings stretched between half d6-branes sitting at dierent ns-branes. it would

be interesting to obtain further support for this picture. we would like to stress that

this interpretation implies that the removal of a dynamical d7-brane from the orbifold

singularity is not a supersymmetric deformation of the type iib conguration for nite

asymptotic radius of the taub-nut space.

to nish this section, we would like to comment on the t-dual version of the

transitions changing the number of avours in the four-dimensional eld theory. as

explained above, in the iia picture this process takes place when d8-branes along
012345689 are moved in x7 and cross the conguration. so it will be useful to identify

the t-dual of the d8-brane in the iib picture. on general grounds, the t-dual of a d8-

brane should correspond to a d7-brane wrapped on a holomorphic curve  in the taub-

represent the taub-nut as slightly blown-up for the sake of clarity, xy = qn

nut space, so as to preserve the same supersymmetries as the remaining branes. let us
i=1(v  vi),
where v corresponds to the coordinates 89. the curve  is parametrized by v, and it is
located at a specic value of x/y. the modulus of x/y is related to the x7 position of the
d8-brane, whereas its phase corresponds to the coordinate t-dual to x6. recall that
the d7-branes t-dual to the d6-branes wrap the curve  given by v = 0. notice that

 and  are transverse and intersect once, as is required to reproduce the spectrum of
6-8 states (i.e. the number of dn+nd directions is preserved).

now let us argue how the transition in which avours of the eld theory are cre-
ated/anihilated occurs. when the curve  is moved in the direction x7 in the taub-
nut, eventually it will hit its centers (notice that even though  is localized in the s1

coordinate, the collision with the centers cannot be avoided, since the compact direc-

tion shrinks to zero size at the centers). clearly it is enough to consider the crossing

of one center. during this crossing the non-trivial metric of the taub-nut near the

center induces a change in the vortex number for the gauge eld propagating on .

this change must be compensated by the creation of a brane that stretches between

the taub-nut center and the d7-brane. more concretely, what has been created is a

11

d7-brane tube stretching from the taub-nut center to the d7-brane, to which it joins
smoothly 11. when the d7-brane t-dual to the d8-brane is carried away to innity,

one is left with an innite d7-brane, localized in v at the position of the corresponding

taub-nut center. this is precisely the type of curve wrapped by the t-dual of one
upper or lower d6-brane, that is, it become a d71 or d72 (depending on whether
the original d8-brane moved upwards or downwards in x7) in the orbifold limit. the

creation of this d7-brane explains the net change in the number of avours in the eld

theory. it also implies that the constant c0 above has changed in one unit, even though
we have not found a more direct derivation of this fact.

since the orientifold models studied in this paper are obtained by a projection of

the orbifold states into z2-invariant elds, all the comments in this section apply to

the orientifold models to come. therefore, in principle we study the models without

additional chiral avours (unless they are required for consistency), and briey discuss

more general congurations in section 5.

3 introduction of o6-planes in the type iia con-

gurations

there is a very simple way to obtain eld theories with n = 1 supersymmetry using

type iia brane congurations. we start with a conguration of ns-branes (along

012345) and d4-branes (along 01236) leading to n = 2 eld theories [4], and introduce

orientifold planes that break half of the supersymmetries. this can be done introducing
orientifold six-planes along 0123457 (referred to as o6-planes), xed under (1)fli689
(where i689 is a reection in the coordinates 689). these brane congurations present a
number of interesting properties related to chiral symmetries and chiral matter content
in the four-dimensional eld theory. such are the splitting of d6-branes in halves, or

the change of sign in the orientifold rr charge as it crosses a ns-brane. this type
of congurations has been studied in the non-compact x6 case in a number of papers

(for instance see [10, 11, 12]), which provide the rules to read o the spectrum and

interactions of the resulting n = 1 eld theories. we will be interested in models
where the direction x6 has been compactied on a circle, therefore the conguration

contains two orientifold planes at opposite sides on the circle.

in the following we make a classication of the possible models depending on the

11this process is geometrically identical to the m-theory lift of the crossing of a type iia ns-brane

with a d6-branes, in which a d4-brane is created. moreover, if appropriate directions are compactied

on circles, the processes are related by t-duality.

12

a)

ns 

 o6  +

ns 

b)

 o6  

ns 

ns 

ns 

ns 

4,5

6

7

 o6  

 o6  +

 o6  +

 o6  

ns 

ns 

ns 

ns 

figure 2: typical n = 1 brane congurations obtained by introducing o6-planes in n = 2
elliptic models with odd number of ns-branes. notice the fork conguration, where the o6-

plane changes sign when it crosses the ns-brane. the change of sign is depicted by a change
of color. the eight half d6-branes stuck on the negatively charged half of the orientifold are

not shown in the picture.

number n of ns branes 12 and their positions with respect to the o6-planes. the
classication is analogous to that in [35] (see also [36, 37]) for n = 2 theories. notice
that we do not include d6-branes in the models below, unless they are required for
consistency. more general congurations of d6-branes are discussed in section 5.

3.1 odd number of ns branes, n = 2p + 1

in these congurations, we have p pairs of two ns branes related by the z2 orientifold
symmetry, and one unpaired ns brane which intersects one of the o6-planes. notice
that the ns brane actually divides the o6-plane in two halves, so the orientifold plane

changes sign when it crosses the ns brane [9]. due to conservation of rr charge in
this crossing, we have to add 8 half d6-branes on the negatively charged side of the
o6-plane. this is the fork conguration appeared in [12, 10, 11] (see also [17, 18]),

which yields a chiral matter content.

the charge of the remaining o6-plane can be chosen of either sign, so for a given
n there are two possible congurations, which are depicted in gure 2. to give an
example of the eld theories that are obtained from these brane congurations, let
us consider the fork-o6  + conguration, gure 2a. the eld theory gauge group and

12we will usually work with z2 invariant congurations on the z2 covering space of the orientifold.

thus n denotes the number of ns-branes in this covering space.

13

n = 1 matter content is

qi,i+1
qi+1,i

s0
i
sp
ap
t a
p

so(n0) qp

( i,
( i+1,

i=1 u (ni)
i+1)
i)

0
adj i

p

p

p

i = 0, . . . , p  1

i = 0, . . . , p  1

i = 1, . . . , p

a = 1, . . . , 8

the superpotential is given by

w = s0q0,1 q1,0 +

p 1

xi=1

[ i qi,i1qi1,i + iqi,i+1 qi+1,i ] +

p qp,p 1qp 1,p + sp tp tp

(3.1)

(3.2)

the eld theory for the fork-o6   conguration, gure 2b, is obtained by replacing

so(n0) by usp(n0), and the symmetric representation s0 by an antisymmetric a0.

3.2 even number of ns branes, n = 2p

when the number of ns-branes is even, n = 2p , there are two possible z2-invariant ar-

rangements of ns branes, depending on whether or not there are ns-branes coinciding
with the o6-planes.

3.2.1 models without ns branes on top of the orientifold planes

the congurations contain p pairs of ns-branes related by the z2 symmetry. since no
ns-branes intersects the o6-planes, there are no fork congurations and the theories

will be non-chiral. as shown in gure 3, there are three possible choices for the signs
of the o6-planes.

the eld theories can be read o directly from the brane picture. for instance, for

the o6  +-o6  +conguration in gure 3a, we have

qi,i+1
qi+1,i

s0
i
sp

so(n0) qp 1

i=1 u (ni)  so(np )
( i,
( i+1,

i+1)
i)

0
adj i

p

14

i = 0, . . . , p  1

i = 0, . . . , p  1

i = 1, . . . , p  1

(3.3)

a)

ns  
o6 +

ns  

 4,5

6

7

o6 +

ns  

ns  

b)

 o6

ns  

ns  

ns  
o6 +

ns  

ns  

c)

ns  

ns  

 o6

ns  

ns  

ns  

ns  

 o6

ns  

ns  

ns  

figure 3: the n = 1 brane congurations with o6-planes and an even number of ns-branes,

in the case in which no ns-brane coincides with the orientifold planes.

the superpotential is given by

w = s0q0,1 q1,0 +

p 1

xi=1

[ i qi,i1qi1,i + iqi,i+1 qi+1,i ]  sp qp,p 1qp 1,p (3.4)

the eld theory corresponding to the o6  +-o6  conguration in gure 3b is obtained

from the above one by changing e.g. so(n0) by usp(n0) and the symmetric s0 by an
antisymmetric a0. the eld theory for the conguration in o6  -o6  in gure 3c is
obtained by changing both orthogonal factors to symplectic ones, and both symmetric

representations to antisymmetric ones.

3.2.2 models with ns branes coinciding with the o6-planes

these congurations contain p  1 pairs of ns-branes, and two unpaired ns-branes.
the latter are stuck at the two o6-planes, which are therefore split in halves and give

rise to two fork congurations. there are two possible models for a given n, shown in
gure 4, which only dier in the orientation of the forks in x7. we will denote the two

relative orientations as antiparallel and parallel.

considering for instance the case of parallel forks, the eld theory obtained is

15

 4,5

6

7

a)

ns  

o6 +

 o6

ns  

ns  

b)

ns  

o6 +

 o6

ns  

ns  

ns  

o6 +

ns  

 o6

ns  

ns  

o6 +

ns  

 o6

ns  

figure 4: the n = 1 brane congurations with o6-planes and an even number of ns

branes, in the case with ns branes coinciding with the orientifold planes.

given by

qp

i=1 u (ni)
( i,
i+1)
i)
( i+1,

qi,i+1
qi+1,i

i = 1, . . . , p  1

i = 1, . . . , p  1

s1
a1
t1,a
i
sp
ap
tp,a

1

1

1
adji

p

p

p

a = 1, . . . , 8

i = 1, . . . , p

a = 1, . . . , 8

the superpotential is given by

w = s1 t1 t1 + 1q1,2 q2,1 +pp 1

p qp,p 1qp 1,p + sp tp tp

i=2 [ i qi,i1qi1,i + iqi,i+1 qi+1,i ] +

(3.5)

(3.6)

changing the orientation of a fork simply conjugates the corresponding representations
s, a and t . even though the dierence between the two congurations may seem
rather subtle, the models are dierent and should be treated as such. for instance,

notice the particular case of having only two ns branes, where one of the congurations

is chiral and the other is non-chiral (even though there is chiral matter localized at

points in the circle).

we have completed the classication of type iia congurations obtained by adding
o6-planes to the n = 2 elliptic models. in the following subsection we construct the

same eld theories in a t-dual iib singularity picture.

16

4 the type iib orientifold construction

in this section we provide a type iib t-dual construction of the eld theories studied
in the previous section, in terms of d3-branes probing certain orientifolds of c2/zn.

we will show that the classication of the dierent orientifold projections reproduces

the classication of type iia models. this t-duality map gives a type iib singularity

realization of the dierent phenomena observed in the iia brane construction, giving

rise to chiral symmetries and chiral matter. these features of the eld theory arise in

a natural fashion in the orientifold construction.

our goal in this section is to provide a construction of these eld theories in the

type iib side. since in the type iia setup the models were obtained by introducing

orientifold planes in a n = 2 elliptic model, we expect the type iib realization to

correspond to an orientifold projection on the system of d3-branes at an orbifold
singularity c2/zn  c, with the generator  of zn acting as

(z1, z2, z3)  (e2i/n z1, e2i/n z2, z3)

(4.1)

a dierence with the n = 2 orientifold models studied in [35] is that in our case the

orientifold projection must break half of the supersymmetries, yielding n = 1 eld

theories on the d3-brane world-volume. thus, a suitable orientation reversing element
is 1  (1)flr1 (rather than the n = 2 preserving 3  (1)flr3). here ri
changes the sign of the complex coordinate zi, leaving the others invariant.

our proposal is that the eld theories will be realized in the world-volume of a

system of d3-branes at the orientifold singularities obtained by modding the orbifold

(4.1) by the world-sheet orientation reversing action 1. this is actually suggested by
t-dualizing the iia congurations along x6 (for a detailed description of this t-duality

in a particular case, see [26]). namely, the ns-branes along 012345 transform into the

orbifold above (if we identify the 45, 67, 89 planes with, say, the z3, z2, z1 complex
planes), the d4-branes turn into d3-brane probes, and the type iia orientifold action
(1)fli689 transforms into (1)flr1.

in the following section we turn to the classication and explicit construction of

these type iib orientifolds. we show that the eld theories on the d3-branes actually

reproduce the eld theories in the previous section. moreover, we discuss how the

orientifold structure on the iia side is neatly encoded in the structure of the iib

orientifold group. this strongly supports the t-duality argument sketched above, and

also provides a singularity realization of the fork congurations yielding chiral matter.

we also mention that the consistency conditions of the iib orientifolds (cancellation

17

of twisted tadpoles) imply the cancellation of gauge anomalies in the d3-brane world-

volume theory (the corresponding tadpole computations are however postponed until

section 5). these models provide an interesting realization of how an inconsistency in

a background is detected as an anomaly on a d-brane probe.

4.1 odd order case, n = 2p + 1

4.1.1 construction

let us consider the case where the orientifold group is zn + 1zn, i.e. the orientifold
projection has the structure

(1 +  + 2 +    + n 1)(1 + 1)

(4.2)

where 1  (1)flr1

we will consider the following choice of chan-paton matrices for the d3-branes.

,3 = diag(1n0, e2i 1

n 1n1, . . . , e2i p

n 1np , e2i p +1

n 1np , . . . , e2i 2p

n 1n1)

(4.3)

1,3 =

1n0





where n0 =  

1n1

0

1n0/2

1np

1np

  

1n1

  





or 1,3 =

n0





1np

  

1n1

1n1

  

1np





1n0/2

0 !. these matrices satisfy the group law and all algebraic

consistency conditions imposed by the structure of the orientifold group. the two

possibilities for 1,3, symmetric or antisymmetric, correspond to choosing the so or
sp orientifold projection on the d3-branes.

it is a simple exercise to compute the 3-3 spectrum that arises from the projections
imposed by the above matrices. for instance, for the so projection, we obtain the
following gauge group and matter content (we have already taken into account the
disappearance of the u(1) factors)

so(n0)  su (n1)  su (np )

i=0 [ ( i,

i+1) + ( i,

pp 1

i+1) ] + p + p + 0 +pp

i=1 adj i

(4.4)

it reproduces the spectrum (3.1) of the eld theory corresponding to the iia congu-

ration gure 2a, studied in section 3. this was expected, since the t-duality argument

18

implies the order of the orbifold group matches the number of ns-branes in the iia

picture. the superpotential interactions in the iib orientifold also reproduce the iia

result (3.2).

notice that the spectrum above is actually missing some of the states in the iia
brane conguration, namely the eight fundamental avours arising from the half d6-

branes in the fork. the solution to this issue comes from the fact that the iib orientifold

above is not consistent yet, since it contains non-cancelled tadpoles (see section 5.1).

this inconsistency is manifest in the eld theory, since the su(np ) factor is anomalous.
the tadpoles can be cancelled by introducing d7 branes. the minimal choice to cancel

the tadpoles (see eq. (5.7)) is to place eight d72-branes with chan-paton matrices

,72 = 18

;

1,72 = 18

(4.5)

the 3-72 spectrum yields the 8 fundamentals of u(np ) required to cancel the anoma-
lies and complete the matching with the spectrum obtained from the type iia brane

conguration. the interactions between 3-72 states and 3-3 states (more concretely,
those associated to the second complex plane) in the orientifold provides the coupling

between the fundamentals and symmetric of su(np ). also, the so(8) symmetry on
the d72-brane world-volume agrees with the so(8) symmetry of the half d6-branes in
the iia picture. the fact that whole d72-branes are t-dual to half d6-branes conrms
our expectations from the analysis in section 2. further evidence is provided in section

5.1, where we study models with more complicated choices of d7-brane chan-paton

matrices, and their interpretation in terms of type iia picture.

another interesting feature is that the geometry of the type iib orientifold encodes
the change of sign of the iia o6-plane. in gure 2a, for negative values of x7 both o6-
planes are positively charged, while for positive values of x7 their charges are opposite.

this translates into dierent behaviours of the iib orientifold projection with respect
to the two complex planes in c2/zn. in fact, the orientifold group (4.2) contains the
element (1)flr1, and the model contains an o7+-plane wrapped along z2. this
is the t-dual to the two positively charged o6-planes in the positive x7 region in

the iia construction. on the other hand, the iib orientifold group does not contain
(1)flr2, so there is no rr charge along the complex planez1. this corresponds to
the fact that the o6-plane charges compensate in the negative x7 region in the iia

picture.

the orientifold obtained with the antisymmetric 1,3 can be analyzed analogously.
it provides a construction of the eld theory corresponding to the iia conguration in

gure 2b.

19

as a nal comment, let us mention that there is another consistent structure for

the orientifold group, given by

(1 +  + 2 +    + n 1)(1 + 1),

(4.6)

with  : (z1, z2, z3)  (ei/n z1, ei/n z2, z3). however, it does not provide new models.
in order to see that, recall that p  = r1r2, so the projection above is equivalent to
a projection using 2  (1)flr2 (without ), which is equivalent to the one above.

4.1.2 comparison with n = 2 models

the n = 1 orientifolds just constructed dier from the n = 2 models of [35] only in
the use of 1 instead of 3 as the orientifold action. this apparently innocent change
has nevertheless a dramatic eect in the eld theory. in particular, it is responsible
for the appearance of the fork structure, and consequently, of chiral matter. in what
follows we compare both projections, and discuss how the 1 orientifold yields the fork
matter content. the projections are given in the following table

n = 2 projection

n = 1 projection

vector mult:

ch.mult. z1:

ch.mult. z2:

ch.mult. z3:

z1 = +3z t

v = 3v t 1
3
1 1
3
2 1
3
3 1
3

z3 = 3z t

z2 = +3z t

z1 = 1z t

v = 1v t 1
1
1 1
1
2 1
1
3 1
1

z3 = +1z t

z2 = +1z t

recall that before the orientifold projection, the n = 1 multiplets v and z3 pair up
to form n = 2 vector multiplets. analogously, the chiral multiplets z1, z2 form n = 2
hypermultiplets. this n = 2 structure is preserved by the projection 3, while the
projection 1 introduces relative signs that break the structure of n = 2 multiplets.
the eects of these signs are most manifest in two sectors of the eld theory which we

now analyze:

consider rst the two n = 1 multiplets v , z3 in the n = 2 vector multiplet in
the adjoint of u(n0) in the orbifold theory, before the orientifold projection. from
the above equations (for a specic choice of i, say, symmetric), we see 3 projects
both multiplets to adjoints of so(n0), in agreement with n = 2 supersymmetry. on
the other hand, 1 projects the n = 1 vector multiplet v to the adjoint of so(n0),
and the chiral multiplet z3 to the symmetric representation. this nicely parallels the
results in the iia brane conguration [12], where n0 d4-branes stretched between two
ns-branes, in the presence of an o6+-plane give rise to a so(n0) gauge group with

20

one antisymmetric chiral multiplet [38], and in the presence of an o6 +-plane give a

so(n0) gauge group and one symmetric chiral multiplet.

now we consider the projection at the other end of the chain of gauge factors, and

look at what kind of two-index representations of u(np ) are obtained. for the pro-
jections 3, we obtain one chiral multiplet in the symmetric and one in the conjugate
symmetric representation, in agreement with n = 2 supersymmetry. for the projec-

tion 1 we obtain one chiral multiplet in the antisymmetric and one in the conjugate
symmetric representation. this is basically the fork conguration that appears in the

t dual iia conguration.

as mentioned above, the spectrum in the fork conguration also includes chiral
avours coming from eight half d6-branes, required to conserve the rr charge. the

n = 2 iia conguration, however, does not require the presence of d6-branes for

consistency. these features are also reproduced in the iib orientifold construction, as

is revealed by studying the dependence of the klein bottle tadpoles with the volume v3
of the complex plane z3, which we momentarily imagine to be compact. the projection
3 allows winding states in the direction z3, which give (after poisson resumming) a
tadpole inversely proportional to v3. the tadpole vanishes in the non-compact limit,
and the model is consistent without the introduction of d7-branes. the projection 1,
however, projects out winding states and allows for momentum states. these generate

a tadpole proportional to v3, which does not vanish in the non-compact limit, and must
be cancelled by a suitable set of d7-branes. these provide the fundamental avours

required to complete the fork spectrum in the d3-brane eld theory.

4.2 even order case, n = 2p

when the order of the orbifold action is even, the group contains a z2 twist, p . the

orientifold action on the closed string exchanges oppositely twisted sectors [39], and

so maps the z2 twisted sector to itself. there is an arbitrary choice of sign in this

map, which determines the symmetry of the ns-ns and r-r states that survive the

orientifold projection. by open-closed duality, the choice of sign imposes a constraint

on the chan-paton matrices which act on the open strings, and determines the vector

structure of the gauge bundle on the corresponding d-branes (for further details see

[40, 39, 41]). for instance, for d71-branes we have

p ,71 = 1,71t

p ,711

1,71

(4.7)

21

with the upper (lower) sign when the z2 rr twisted states surviving the orientifold
projection are antisymmetric (symmetric) combinations of left and right movers 13.
these two cases correspond to tr n ,3 = 1, respectively, so we will use this fact to
refer to both kinds of models.

4.2.1 models with tr n ,3 = +1

there are two dierent structures for the orientifold group. consider rst the orientifold

projection

(1 +  + 2 +    + n 1)(1 + 1)

(4.8)

the chan-paton matrices for the d3 branes are

,3 = diag (1n0, e2i 1

n 1n1,    , e2i p 1

n 1np 1, e2i p

n 1np , e2i p +1

n 1np 1, . . . , e2i 2p 1

n 1n1)

1,3 =

1n0





1np 1

  

1n1

1n1

  

1np 1

1np





(4.9)

these matrices satisfy all algebraic consistency conditions. the corresponding 3-3
spectrum is

so(n0)  su (n1)  . . .  su (np 1)  so(np )

i=0 [ ( i,

i+1) + ( i,

pp 1

i+1) ] + 0 +pp 1

i=1 adj i + p

(4.10)

this reproduces the spectrum of the eld theory (3.3) corresponding to the iia con-

guration 3a, studied in section 3. the superpotential interactions (3.4) are also
reproduced in the orientifold. the eld theory corresponding to the o6  -o6  iia

brane conguration, gure 3c, is reproduced by an analogous iib orientifold using an

antisymmetric version for 1.

in these models, the consistency of the iia brane conguration without d6-branes

suggests that the type iib orientifold must be consistent without the addition of d7-

branes. in fact, this is conrmed by a computation of the klein bottle tadpoles, which

are found to vanish (see section 5.2.1).

notice that the orientifold group (4.8) contains both the elements (1)flr1 and
(1)flr2. therefore, there is rr charge along the complex planes parametrized

13this relation follows from the result in [39] for d9-branes by t-duality along z1.

22

by z1 and z2. under the t-duality, this implies that the iia conguration contains
identically charged upper half o6-planes, as well as identically charged lower half
o6-planes. this is indeed the case for our candidate t-dual iia models.

there is another possibility for the orientifold group

(1 +  + 2 +    + n 1)(1 + 1)

(4.11)

with  : (z1, z2, z3)  (ei/n z1, ei/n z2, z3). as we show below, this structure provides
new models. let us consider the following d3-brane chan-paton matrices

,3 = diag(1n0, e2i 1

n 1n1, . . . , e2i p 1

n 1np 1, e2i p

n 1np , e2i p +1

n 1np 1, . . . , e2i 2p 1

n 1n1)

1,3 =

1n0

(p 1)1np 1

  

11n1

1n1

  

p 11np 1

p np









2i

where  = e
conditions. the spectrum of massless 3-3 states is

2n . these matrices satisfy the group law and all algebraic consistency

(4.12)

(4.13)

so(n0)  su (n1)  . . .  su (np 1)  u sp(np )

i=0 [ ( i,

i+1) + ( i,

pp 1

i+1) ] + 0 +pp 1

i=1 adj i + p

and reproduces the complete eld theory spectrum and interactions of the iia cong-

uration in gure 3b. a nice feature of the type iib orientifold we have constructed is

that the matrix 1 is rather unique, neither symmetric nor antisymmetric. the fact
that this orientifold group structure provides only one class of models agrees with the
type iia construction, where the o6  +-o6  and o6  -o6  +congurations are equiv-

alent. to complete the discussion, let us mention that all dangerous tadpoles vanish

in this model (see section 5.2.1), so it is consistent not to include d7-branes.

finally, let us mention that the orientifold group (4.11) contains neither (1)flr1
nor (1)flr2, and therefore there is no rr charge along the complex planes in
c2/zn. this suggests that the o6-plane charges in the t-dual type iia conguration
will cancel both in the positive and in the negative x7 regions, as indeed happens for

the model in gure 3b.

4.2.2 models with tr n ,3 = 1

as in the theories in the previous subsection, there are two possible choices for the

orientifold group. let us start by considering

(1 +  + 2 +    + n 1)(1 + 1)

(4.14)

23

we take the following chan-paton matrices for the d3 branes

,3 = diag (ei 1

n 1n1, ei 3

n 1n2,    , ei 2p 1

n 1np , ei 2p +1

n 1np ,    , ei 4p 3

n 1n2, ei 4p 1

n 1n1) (4.15)

1,3 =





1np

1np

  

1n2

1n1

1n1

1n2

  





(4.16)

(in this case using an antisymmetric version of 1 does not produce new models).
the matrices satisfy all algebraic consistency conditions. the 3-3 spectrum is

su (n1)  . . .  su (np )

1 + 1 +pp 1

i=1 [ ( i,

i+1) + ( i,

i+1) ] + p + p +pp

i=1 adj i

(4.17)

this reproduces most of the spectrum of the eld theory (3.5), which corresponds to

the iia conguration in gure 4, with parallel forks. as discussed in section 5.2.2, this

orientifold contains non-vanishing klein bottle tadpoles. the minimal choice to cancel

them (see eq.(5.23)) is to introduce a set of d72-branes with chan-paton matrices

,72 = diag (18, 18)

;

1,72 = 116

(4.18)

the 3-7 spectrum provides the eight antifundamental avours for su(n1) and eight
fundamental avours for su(np ) required to cancel the anomalies and complete the
matching with the spectrum (3.5). the superpotential interactions in the iib orien-

tifold neatly reproduce the iia result (3.6).

we can also show how the orientifold group (4.14) encodes the structure of o6-
planes in the t-dual iia model. the presence of (1)flr1 and (1)flr2 in the
orientifold group implies that there is rr charge along both complex planes in c2/zn.
this implies the iia model has net o6-plane charge both in the upper and lower regions
in x7, as indeed is the case when the forks have the same orientation (parallel). further
agreement comes from checking that the iib model contains one o7+ and one o7.

this can be seen by directly computing the rr charge or looking at the orientifold

actions on d71- and d72-branes (see subsection 5.2.2).

there is a second possible structure for the orientifold projection, namely

(1 +  + 2 +    + n 1)(1 + 1)

(4.19)

24

the d3-brane chan-paton matrices have the general structure

,3 = diag(ei 1

n 1n1, ei 3

n 1n2, . . . , ei 2p 1

n 1np , ei 2p +1

n 1np , . . . , ei 4p 3

n 1n2, ei 4p 1

n 1n1)

1,3 =

(4.20)

ei 1

2n 1n1

  

ei 2p 1

2n 1np

ei 2p +1

2n 1np

  

ei 4p 1

2n 1n1









and satisfy all the requirements for algebraic consistency. the 3-3 spectrum obtained

from the relevant projection is analogous to (4.17), diering only in the conjugation of

the representations

1. this realizes the eld theory corresponding to
the iia conguration in gure 4, with antiparallel forks. as in the previous model,

1 to 1,

1,

the missing states arise in the 3-7 sector when one introduces the d7-branes required

to cancel the tadpoles in the orientifold. in this case, the minimal choice of d71, d72
chan-paton factors is (see eq. (5.27))

,71 = 18

1,71 = 18

,72 = 18

1,72 = 18

(4.21)

this provides eight chiral fundamental avours for su(n1) and su(np ), precisely the
amount required to reproduce the type iia spectrum and cancel the eld theory gauge

anomalies.

in this case, the group (4.19) implies there is no rr charge along the complex planes
in c2/zn. therefore, we expect no net rr charge along either positive or negative x7

in the t-dual iia conguration. this is indeed the case for antiparallel forks.

this concludes our classication and construction of n = 1 orientifolds of c2/zn

models. the results are summarized in table 1, which shows how the dierent orien-

tifolds we have constructed reproduce on the d3-brane probes the eld theories we had

classied in the type iia setup.

5 more general d7-brane structure

here we would like to consider the orientifold models of section 4 with a more general

choice of chan-paton matrices for the d7-branes, and discuss the computation of the

tadpole conditions. we will also describe the corresponding type iia brane congu-
rations, which are those in section 3 with additional d6-branes. these models will

provide the type iib realization of several phenomena in the iia construction. the

results in this discussion parallel those in the orbifold models of section 2.

25

n = 1

type iib orientifold

type iia conguration

odd n

zn + 1zn



fig. 2 : o6 +-ns1-...-nsp -fork

n = 2p + 1

o6 -ns1-...-nsp -fork

even n

n = 2p

zn + 1zn



fig. 3a : o6 +-ns1-...-nsp -o6 +

tr n ,3 = +1

fig. 3c : o6 -ns1-...-nsp -o6 

zn + 1zn

fig. 3b : o6 -ns1-...-nsp -o6 +

tr n ,3 = +1

zn + 1zn

fig. 4 : fork-ns1-...-nsp 1-fork

tr n ,3 = 1

(parallel forks)

zn + 1zn

fig. 4 : fork-ns1-...-nsp 1-fork

tr n ,3 = 1

(antiparallel forks)

table 1: this table shows the dierent type iib n = 1 orientifolds of c2/zn, constructed

in section 4, along with their t-dual type iia brane congurations, classied in section 3.

an asterisk in the orientifold group indicates there are two possible projections (so or sp)

on the d3-branes.

5.1 odd order case, n = 2p + 1

these are the models constructed in section 4.1. for concreteness, we will center on the
case of so projection on the d3-branes. the models with sp projection can be studied
analogously. an interesting conguration is obtained by using d71- and d72-branes
(with z1 and z2 as their transverse directions, respectively), with chan-paton matrices

,71 = diag (ei 1

n 1w1, . . . , ei 2p 1

n 1wp , ei 2p +1

n 1wp +1, ei 2p +3

n 1wp , . . . , ei 4p +1

n 1w1) (5.1)

and an analogous ,72, with the numbers of entries given by vi instead of wi. we also
take

1,71 =





1wp

  

1w1

1w1

  

1wp

wp +1





1,72 =





1vp

  

1v1

1v1

  

1vp

1vp +1





26

the symmetry of the matrices 1,7 is not arbitrary: the orientifold requires the pro-
jection onto d71 (vs d72) to be opposite (similar) to the projection on d3-branes 14.
in our case, d3- and d72-branes have a so projection, and d71-branes have a sp
projection.

the spectrum in the 3-71, 3-72 sectors is obtained through the projections (2.10).

recalling that 1 relates the 3-7i sector to the 7i-3 sector, the resulting spectrum is

p

p

xi=1

[ (ni, vi) + (ni1, vi) ] + (np , vp +1)

[ (ni, wi) + (ni1, wi) ] + (np , wp +1) +

xi=1
where the second entry gives the representations under the d7-brane groupsqp
usp(wp +1) and qp
w = pp 1
 pp 1

i=0 [ (ni, ni+1)(ni+1, wi+1)(wi+1, ni) ] + p (np , wp +1)2 +
i=0 [ (ni, ni+1)(ni+1, vi+1)(vi+1, ni) ]  p (np , vp +1)2 +

i=1 su(vi)  so(vp +1). the superpotential is

the integers vi, wi are constrained by cancellation of twisted tadpoles, whose com-
putation we sketch in what follows. the tadpoles can be directly taken from [43], by

(5.2)

i=1 su(wi)

(5.3)

changing only the zero mode structure. the twisted tadpoles arising from the cylinder,

mobius strip and klein bottle amplitudes are given by

(tr k,71)2 +

(tr k,72)2  2

tr k,71tr k,72

n 1

xk=1
k1,711

n 1

n 1

xk=1
xk=1

m = 16

tr (t

)  16

k1,71

tr (t

k1,721

k1,72

n 1

c =

xk=1

k =

n 1

xk=1

n 1

xk=1

64

)

(5.4)

the trigonometric functions that usually appear in the numerator of these contribu-

tions are exactly cancelled against the trigonometric functions in the denominator that

appear from the counting of zero modes. this feature is also shared by the remaining

orientifold models.

using the properties

tr (t

k1,7i1

k1,7i) = tr 2k,7i

(5.5)

(with the negative (positive) sign for d71- (d72-) branes) and the relationpk tr 2k,7i =
pk(1)ktr k,7i, the tadpoles factorize as follows

n 1

[ tr k,71  tr k,72 + 8(1)k ] = 0

(5.6)

xk=1

14this follows for instance from arguments in [32] (generalizing [42]) stating that, in a model with

d9-, d51 and d52-branes the orientifold action on d5i-branes is opposite to that on d9-branes. our

claim above follows after t-dualizing along z1.

27

v1

{

v2

{

vp

{

vp+1

{

7

6

so(n   )

 0

o6 + 

u(n   )1
ns  

ns  

. . . 

u(n    )

p

ns  

- 
o6  

ns  
o6 + 

{

w 1

{

w 2

{ {

w p

wp+1

figure 5: the iia brane conguration corresponding to the odd order iib orientifold with a

more general distribution of d7-branes. for clarity, in this picture we have depicted one copy

of the interval and not its image by the orientifold z2 symmetry. ns branes are indicated
by crosses, d4 branes by horizontal lines, the o6-planes by vertical dashed lines, and the
half-d6-branes by vertical continuous lines, with their number indicated by braces.

the cancellation condition is therefore

tr k,71  tr k,72 + 8(1)k = 0 ,

for k 6= 0

(5.7)

notice that the chan-paton matrices for d3-branes are irrelevant, since the corre-

sponding rr tadpole can escape to innity along the complex plane z3.

these equations correspond to the conditions of cancellation of non-abelian anoma-

lies in the d3-brane probe world-volume. this can be shown for instance by nding

the general solution to (5.7), which is

vi = wi + c0 + 8 i,p +1

(5.8)

here c0 is a constant independent of i. this equation states that the number of
fundamentals and antifundamental multiplets is equal for each gauge group, save for

su(np ), which has an excess of eight fundamental avours to cancel the anomaly
generated by the antisymmetric and conjugate symmetric multiplets in the 3-3 sector.

the set of d7-branes we have introduced has a nice interpretation in the iia side,

as we discuss in the following. the d71-branes (d72-branes) map to lower (upper) half
d6-branes ending on the ns branes, as depicted in gure 5. the spectrum (5.2) and

superpotential (5.3) are nicely reproduced by this iia brane conguration, once we

take into account the avour doubling eect [12].

several other features in this map are appealing as well. gauge symmetries on the
d7-branes correspond precisely to the gauge groups on the half d6-branes (and to

global chiral symmetries in the four-dimensional eld theory [6]). the six-dimensional

28

theory on the half-d6 branes contains some bifundamentals pp

i=1(vp , wp ), which are
present in 71-72 sector of the iib construction. finally, the tadpole conditions on the
iib side correspond to conservation of rr charge in the iia side. the constant c0
in (5.8) maps to the iia cosmological constant. also, the transitions in which the

number of eld theory avours changes are explained as in the models of section 2.

as a nal comment, let us note that, just like the orbifold models of section 2, these

iib orientifolds contain 7i-7i states not present in the iia conguration.
clear whether these states are actually massless before taking the ale limit of the

it is not

taub-nut space. similar comments apply to the remaining orientifold models in this

section.

5.2 even order case, n = 2p

5.2.1 models with tr n ,3 = +1

let us start with the models studied in section 4.2.1. recall that there are two possibil-
ities for the orientifold group. we consider rst the projection (4.8), that is zn +1zn.
let us introduce a set of d71- and d72-branes, with

,71 = diag (ei 1

n 1w1, . . . ei 2p 1

n 1wp , ei 2p +1

n 1wp , . . . , ei 4p 1

n 1w1)

(5.9)

and the analogous ,72 with wi instead of vi. choosing the so projection (4.9) on
the d3-brane forces the following projection on d7-branes

1,71 =





1wp

  

1w1

1w1

  

1wp





;

1,72 =





1vp

  

1v1

1v1

  

1vp

(5.10)





the resulting 3-7 spectrum is

p

xi=1

[ (ni, wi) + (ni1, wi) ] +

p

xi=1

[ (ni, vi) + (ni1, vi) ]

(5.11)

with a d7-brane group qp

i=1 su(vi) qp

p 1

i=1 su(wi). the superpotential is

[ (ni, ni+1)(ni+1, wi+1)(wi+1, ni)  (ni, ni+1)(ni+1, vi+1)(vi+1, ni) ]

(5.12)

xi=0

let us discuss the computation of tadpoles. as explained at the beginning of section

4.2, in this type of models (with tr n ,3 = +1) the orientifold action on the z2 twisted
sector is such that antisymmetric combinations of left and right movers survive in

29

the rr closed string sector. the orientifold action is such that the two contributions
z(1, k) and z(p , k) to the klein bottle have negative relative sign. taking these

points into account, the tadpoles are

n 1

n 1

n 1

(tr k,71)2 +

(tr k,72)2  2

tr k,71tr k,72

m = 16

tr (t

)  16

k1,71

xk=1
k1,711

n 1

xk=1
xk = 1

k6=n/2

c =

xk=1

n 1

xk = 1

k6=n/2

k =

n 1

xk = 1

k6=n/2

(64  64)

tr (t

k1,721

k1,72

)

(5.13)

the relative sign for the klein bottle mentioned above makes the corresponding am-

plitude vanish. we also see that using the properties

tr (t

k1,7i1

k1,7i

) = tr (t

k+p 1,7i1

k+p 1,7i

)

(5.14)

the contributions from the k and k + p pieces cancel, and the mobius amplitude

vanishes. thus the tadpole conditions are obtained merely from the cylinder piece,

leading to the constraints

tr k,71 + tr k,72 = 0 for k 6= 0

(5.15)

they correspond to cancellation of non-abelian anomalies in the d3-brane world-

volume theory. the most general solution is given by vi = wi + c0, which states that
each gauge group has an equal number of fundamental and antifundamental multiplets.

as in the orientifold models of the previous section, this conguration of d7-branes

has a direct interpretation in the iia side. the iia brane conguration is schematically

depicted in gure 6. it reproduces the spectrum and superpotential interactions com-

puted in the iib side. as usual, the constant c0 corresponds to the iia cosmological
constant.

for the orientifold group (4.11), that is zn +1zn, things work analogously. if we
introduce a set of d71- and d72-branes, the corresponding chan-paton matrices have
the structure (5.9), (5.10). the resulting 3-7 spectrum and superpotential are given by

(5.11), (5.12). the tadpoles are given by (5.13) with the only modications of replacing
the matrices k1,7i by k1,7i in m, and letting k run through the complete range
0 . . . n  1 in m and k. in any event, the vanishing of the klein bottle and mobius

strip amplitudes also follows in this case. the only tadpoles are generated from the

cylinder amplitudes, and give the same constraint (5.15) on d7-brane matrices. these

conditions ensure the cancellation of gauge anomalies on the d3-brane world-volume.
the type iia conguration is given by gure 6 if one ips the sign of the left o6-plane.

30

v1

{

v2

{

vp

{

7

6

so(n   )

 0

o6 + 

u(n   )

  1

ns  

ns  

. . . 

so(n   )

 p

ns  

o6 + 

{

w 1

{

w 2

{

w p

figure 6: the iia brane conguration corresponding to the even order iib orientifold with

tr n ,3 = +1, with a more general distribution of d7-branes.

5.2.2 models with tr n ,3 = 1

here we consider the models constructed in section 4.2.2. recall that the orientifold
group had two possible structures. we start by studying (4.14), i.e. zn + 1zn. a
quite general conguration is obtained by introducing a set of d71- and d72-branes
with

,71 = diag (1w0, e2i 1

n 1w1, . . . , e2i p 1

n 1wp 1, e2i p

n 1wp , e2i p +1

n 1wp 1, . . . , e2i 2p 1

n 1w1) (5.16)

(and the analogous ,72 with vi instead of wi) and

1,71 =

w0

1wp 1

1w1

1w1

1wp 1

wp









; 1,72 =

1v0





1vp 1

1v1

1v1

1vp 1

1vp

(5.17)





the resulting 3-7 spectrum is given by

(n1, w0) +

p 1

xi=1

+(n1, v0) +

[ (ni+1, wi) + (ni, wi) ] + (np , wp ) +

p 1

xi=1

[ (ni+1, vi) + (ni, vi) ] + (np , vp )

(5.18)

i=1 su(wi)  usp(wp ) and so(v0) 

where the d7-brane groups are usp(w0)  qp 1
qp 1

i=1 su(vi)  so(vp ). the superpotential is

w = 1(n1, w0)2 +pp 1
1(n1, v0)2 +pp 1

+

i=1 (ni, ni+1)(ni+1, wi)(wi, ni) + p (np , wp )2 +
i=1 (ni, ni+1)(ni+1, vi)(vi, ni) + p (np , vp )2

(5.19)

let us sketch the computation of tadpoles. in this case the orientifold projection on

the closed string sector chooses rr symmetric combinations. consequently, the relative

31

sign between the two contribution to the klein bottle is positive. the corresponding

tadpoles are

n 1

n 1

n 1

(tr k,71)2 +

(tr k,72)2  2

tr k,71tr k,72

c =

xk=1

m = 16

n 1

n 1

xk=1

xk=1
k1,711

n 1

xk=1
xk=1

tr (t

)  16

k1,71

tr (t

k1,721

k1,72

k =

(64 + 64)

xk=1

k6=n/2

in this case, the matrices have the properties

tr (t

k1,7i1

k1,7i) = tr (t

k+p 1,7i1

k+p 1,7i) = tr 2k,7i

)

(5.20)

(5.21)

with the negative (positive) sign for d71 (d72) branes. they can be used to rewrite
the tadpoles as

n/2

n/21

xk=1
xk=1

+

(tr 2k1,71  tr 2k1,72)2+

[ (tr 2k,71  tr 2k,72)2+ 32(tr 2k,71  tr 2k,72) + 256 ] (5.22)

the factorization leads to the constraints

tr k,71  tr k,72 + 16k,0 mod 2 = 0

for k 6= 0

(5.23)

their general solution, wi = vi + c0  8i,0  8i,p , ensures the cancellation of gauge
anomalies on the d3-brane. the corresponding type iia conguration, reproducing

the spectrum (5.18) and interactions (5.19), is shown in gure 7.

we now consider the case of the orientifold group (4.19) zn + 1zn. a quite
general choice for d7-brane chan-paton matrices is given by the (5.16) for the orbifold
twist, and

1,71 =

1w0





p wp

(p 1)1wp 1

11w1

32

1w1

p 11wp 1





v
0

{

v1

{

v2

{

vp-1

{

pv

{

7

- 
o6  

6

o6 + 

1u(n   )
ns 

u(n   )

  2

ns 

ns 

. . . 

u(n    )p
ns 

- 
o6  

ns 
o6 + 

{
0

w

{

w 1

{
2

w

{ {

 pw -1

wp

figure 7: the iia brane conguration corresponding to the even order iib orientifold with
tr n ,3 = 1, with a more general distribution of d7-branes.

1,72 =

(5.24)

p v0

(p 1)1v1

11vp 1

1vp

1vp 1

p 11v1









for the orientifold action. the resulting 3-7 spectrum and superpotential coincide with
i=1 su(wi)usp(wp ) and

(5.18), (5.19), but the d7-brane symmetries are so(w0)qp 1
usp(v0)qp 1

i=1 su(vi)so(vp ).

the tadpoles are given by (5.20) with the replacement of tr k1 by tr k1,7i,
and summing over the full range k = 0, . . . , n  1 in k and m. the matrices satisfy

the property

tr (t

k1,7i1

k1,7i

) = tr (t

k+p 1,7i1

k+p 1,7i

) = tr 2k+1,7i

(5.25)

now with the positive (negative) sign for d71 (d72) branes. using this relation, the
tadpoles can be written as

n/21

[(tr 2k,71  tr 2k,72)2+

[ (tr 2k1,71  tr 2k1,72)2 32(tr 2k1,71  tr 2k1,72) + 256 ](5.26)

n/2

xk=1
xk=1

+

the factorization of this expression yields the constraints

tr k,71  tr k,72  16k,1 mod 2 = 0

for k 6= 0

(5.27)

their general solution is wi = vi + 8 i,0  8 i,p +1 + c0, which ensures the cancellation
of anomalies on the d3-brane probe. the corresponding type iia conguration is that

obtained from gure 7 by inverting the orientation of the fork on the left.

33

6 conclusions

in this paper we have analyzed several features of t-duality for some type iia brane

congurations preserving four supercharges. these congurations realize four-dimensional

n = 1 supersymmetric eld theories with interesting chirality properties. the t-dual
congurations have been found to be n = 1 orientifolds of c2/zn singularities, which

we have explicitly constructed and matched with the iia models.

the discussion has enlightened several aspects about the string theory embedding

of these eld theories. we have shown that several seemingly exotic eects in the type

iia construction have a perfectly smooth and standard realization when translated to

the type iib picture. a crucial fact for this feature is the peculiar mapping of spacetime

directions in this t-duality. specically, the positive and negative regions of the iia
coordinate x7 are mapped to two dierent complex planes in c2/zn in the iib model.

we have provided extensive evidence for this fact, mainly based on a precise matching

of the dierent type iia and iib models.

we also would like to stress that the type iib realization of these eld theories is

very similar to that of other chiral gauge theories. this points towards a more unied

description of the string theory congurations yielding chiral eld theories.

finally, even though we have centered on understanding the properties of the string

theory congurations, the type iib picture of d3-brane probes that we have constructed

also presents some advantages for the study of the large n limit of the eld theory.

it would be interesting to nd out the relation between these models and other chiral

gauge theories from the point of view of the ads/cft correspondence.

acknowledgements

it is our pleasure to thank j. erlich, a. hanany, l. e. ibanez, b. janssen, a. ka-

pustin, a. karch, p. meessen and a. naqvi for useful conversations. a. m. u. is grateful

to g. aldazabal and d. badagnani for their insights about orientifold constructions,

and also to m. gonzalez for kind encouragement and support, and to the center for

theoretical physics at m. i. t. for hospitality. the research of j. p. is supported

by the us. department of energy under grant no. de-fg02-90-er40542. the re-

search of r. r. is supported by the ministerio de educacion y cultura (spain) under a

fpu grant. the research of a. m. u. is supported by the ramon areces foundation

(spain).

34

references

[1] a. hanany, e. witten,

type iib superstrings, bps monopoles, and three-

dimensional gauge dynamics, nucl. phys. b492 (1997) 152, hep-th/9611230.

[2] s. elitzur, a. giveon, d. kutasov, branes and n=1 duality in string theory,

phys. lett. b400 (1997) 269, hep-th/9702014.

[3] a. giveon, d. kutasov, brane dynamics and gauge theory, hep-th/9802067.

[4] e. witten, solutions of four-dimensional eld theories via m theory, nucl. phys.

b500 (1997) 3, hep-th/9703166.

[5] j. l. f. barbon, rotated branes and n=1 duality, phys. lett. b402 (1997) 59,

hep-th/9703051.

[6] j. h. brodie, a. hanany, type iia superstrings, chiral symmetry, and n=1 4-d

gauge theory dualities, nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 157, hep-th/9704043.

[7] o. aharony, a. hanany, branes, superpotentials and superconformal xed points,

nucl. phys. b504 (1997) 239, hep-th/9704170.

[8] a. hanany, a. zaaroni, chiral symmetry from type iia branes, nucl. phys.

b509 (1998) 145, hep-th/9706047.

[9] n. evans, c. v. johnson, a. d. shapere, orientifolds, branes, and duality of 4-d

gauge theories, nucl. phys. b505 (1997) 251, hep-th/9703210.

[10] k. landsteiner, e. lopez, d. a. lowe, duality of chiral n=1 supersymmetric

gauge theories via branes, jhep 9802(1998)007, hep-th/9801002.

[11] s. elitzur, a. giveon, d. kutasov, d. tsabar, branes, orientifolds and chiral

gauge theories, nucl. phys. b524 (1998) 251, hep-th/9801020.

[12] i. brunner, a. hanany, a. karch, d. lust, brane dynamics and chiral nonchiral

transitions, nucl. phys. b528 (1998) 197, hep-th/9801017.

[13] k. intriligator, r. g. leigh, m. j. strassler, new examples of duality in chiral

and nonchiral supersymmetric gauge theories, nucl. phys. b456 (1995) 567, hep-

th/9506148.

[14] i. brunner, a. karch, branes and six-dimensional xed points, phys. lett. b409

(1997) 109, hep-th/9705022.

35

[15] i. brunner, a. karch,

branes at orbifolds versus hanany witten in six-

dimensions, jhep 03(1998)003, hep-th/9712143.

[16] a. hanany, a. zaaroni, branes and six-dimensional supersymmetric theories,

nucl. phys. b529 (1998) 180, hep-th/9712145.

[17] j. park, m theory realization of a n=1 supersymmetric chiral gauge theory in

four-dimensions, hep-th/9805029.

[18] k. landsteiner, e. lopez, d. a. lowe,

supersymmetric gauge theories from

branes and orientifold six planes, jhep 9807(1998)011, hep-th/9805158.

[19] j. lykken, e. poppitz, s. p. trivedi, chiral gauge theories from d-branes, phys.

lett. b4 (191) 6(98)286, hep-th/9708134; m(ore) on chiral gauge theories from

d-branes, nucl. phys. b520 (1998) 51.

[20] a. hanany, a. zaaroni, on the realization of chiral four-dimensional gauge the-

ories using branes, jhep 9805(1998)001, hep-th/9801134.

[21] a. hanany, m. j. strassler, a. m. uranga, finite theories and marginal operators

on the brane, jhep 9806(1998)011, hep-th/9803086.

[22] m. r. douglas, b. r. greene, d. r. morrison,

orbifold resolution by d-

branes,nucl. phys. b506 (1997) 84, hep-th/9704151; s. kachru, e. silverstein,

4-d conformal theories and strings on orbifolds, phys. rev. lett. 80 (1998) 4855,

hep-th/9802183; a. lawrence, n. nekrasov, c. vafa, on conformal eld theories

in four-dimensions, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 199, hep-th/9803015; a. hanany,

a. m. uranga, brane boxes and branes on singularities, jhep 9805(1998)013,

hep-th/9805139.

[23] a. hanany, y.-h. he,

nonabelian nite gauge theories, jhep 9902(99)013,

hep-th/9811183; b. r. greene, c. i. lazaroiu, m. raugas, d-branes on non-

abelian threefold quotient singularities, hep-th/9811201; t. muto, d branes on

three-dimensional nonabelian orbifolds, jhep 9902(1999)008, hep-th/9811258;

b. feng, a. hanany, y.-h. he,

the z(k) x d(k) brane box model, hep-

th/9906031.

[24] a. m. uranga, brane congurations for branes at conifolds, jhep 9901(99)022,

hep-th/9811004; m. aganagic, a. karch, d. lust, a. miemiec, mirror symmetries

for brane congurations and branes at singularities, hep-th/9903093.

36

[25] z. kakushadze, gauge theories from orientifolds and large n limit, nucl. phys.

b529 (1998) 157, hep-th/9803214; on large n gauge theories from orientifolds,

phys. rev. d58 (1998) 106003, hep-th/9804184

l. e. ibanez, r. rabadan, a. m. uranga, anomalous u(1)s in type i and type

iib d = 4, n=1 string vacua, nucl. phys. b542 (1999) 112, hep-th/9808139.

[26] m. gremm, a. kapustin, n = 1 theories, t duality, and ads/cft correspon-

dence, hep-th/9904050.

[27] j. park, r. rabadan, a. m. uranga, orientifolding the conifold, to appear.

[28] o. aharony, s. s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. ooguri, y. oz, large n eld theories,

string theory and gravity, hep-th/9905111.

[29] h. ooguri, c. vafa, two-dimensional black hole and singularities of cy mani-

folds, nucl. phys. b463 (1996) 55, hep-th/9511164.

[30] a. karch, d. lust, d. smith, equivalence of geometric engineering and hanany-

witten via fractional branes, nucl. phys. b533 (1998) 348, hep-th/9803232;

a. karch, field theory dynamics from branes in string theory, doctoral the-

sis, hep-th/9812072.

[31] m. r. douglas, g. moore,

d-branes, quivers, and ale instantons, hep-

th/9603167.

[32] m. berkooz, r. g. leigh, a d = 4 n=1 orbifold of type i strings, nucl. phys.

b483 (1997) 187, hep-th/9605049.

[33] g. aldazabal, d. badagnani, l. e. ibanez, a. m. uranga, tadpole versus anomaly

cancellation in d = 4, d = 6 compact iib orientifolds, hep-th/9904071

[34] a. sen f-theory and the gimon-polchinski orientifold, nucl. phys. b498 (1997)

135, hep-th/9702061.

[35] j. park, a. m. uranga, a note on superconformal n = 2 theories and orien-

tifolds, nucl. phys. b542 (1999) 139, hep-th/9808161.

[36] a. m. uranga, towards mass deformed n=4 so(n) and sp(k) gauge theories from

brane congurations, nucl. phys. b526 (1998) 241, hep-th/9803054.

[37] j. erlich, a. hanany, a. naqvi,

marginal deformations from branes, jhep

9903(1999)8, hep-th/9902118.

37

[38] k. landsteiner, e. lopez, new curves from branes, nucl. phys. b516 (1998) 273,

hep-th/9708118.

[39] j. polchinski, tensors from k3 orientifolds, phys. rev. d55 (1997) 6423, hep-

th/9606165.

[40] m. berkooz, r. g. leigh, j. polchinski, j. h. schwarz, n. seiberg, e. witten,

anomalies, dualities, and topology of d=6 n = 1 superstring vacua, nucl. phys.

b475 (1996) 115, hep-th/9605184.

[41] k. intriligator, rg xed points in six-dimensions via branes at orbifold singu-

larities, nucl. phys. b496 (1997) 177, hep-th/9702038; j. d. blum, k. intriliga-

tor, consistency conditions for branes at orbifold singularities, nucl. phys. b506

(1997) 223, hep-th/9705030.

[42] e. gimon, j. polchinski, consistency conditions for orientifolds and d manifolds,

phys. rev. d54 (1996) 1667, hep-th/9601038.

[43] e. g. gimon, c. v. johnson, k3 orientifolds, nucl. phys. b477 (1996) 715, hep-

th/9604129; a. dabholkar, j. park, strings on orientifolds, nucl. phys. b477

(1996) 701, hep-th/9604178.

38

