ufift-hep-99-08
hep-th/9907160

unsharp degrees of freedom and the

generating of symmetries

achim kempf

institute for fundamental theory, department of physics

university of florida, gainesville, fl 32611, usa

email: kempf@phys.u.edu

abstract

in quantum theory, real degrees of freedom are usually described by oper-
ators which are self-adjoint. there are, however, exceptions to the rule. this
is because, in innite dimensional hilbert spaces, an operator is not necessarily
self-adjoint even if its expectation values are real. instead, the operator may be
merely symmetric. such operators are not diagonalizable - and as a consequence
they describe real degrees of freedom which display a form of unsharpness or
fuzzyness. for example, there are indications that this type of operators could
arise with the description of space-time at the string or at the planck scale, where
some form of unsharpness or fuzzyness has long been conjectured.

a priori, however, a potential problem with merely symmetric operators is the
fact that, unlike self-adjoint operators, they do not generate unitaries - at least
not straightforwardly. here, we show for a large class of these operators that they
do generate unitaries in a well dened way, and that these operators even generate
the entire unitary group of the hilbert space. this shows that merely symmetric
operators, in addition to describing unsharp physical entities, may indeed also
play a role in the generation of symmetries, e.g. within a fundamental theory of
quantum gravity.

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

9
1

 
 

1
v
0
6
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

1

contents

1 introduction

2 examples of unsharp degrees of freedom

2.1 the momentum of the particle in a box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 an unsharp position operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 unsharpness from noncommutativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3 unsharp degrees of freedom and the generating of unitaries

3.1 the theorem in concrete examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 generating b(h) in the scalar case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 the case with isospin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 theorem

4.1 denitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 outline of the proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5 a corollary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 conclusions and outlook

3

6
6
8
9

10
11
12
15

16
16
16
16
16
19

20

2

1 introduction

as a rule, real entities, or real degrees of freedom, are described in quantum theory
through operators which are self-adjoint. there are, however, exceptions to the rule.
a common feature of these exceptional degrees of freedom is that they display a form
of unsharpness or fuzzyness.

to see this, let us rst recall that if an observable is described, as usual, through a self-
adjoint operator, then the observable is absolutely sharp in the sense that, in principle,
it can be measured to arbitrarily ne resolution. this is because every self-adjoint
operator q possesses a spectral resolution, or eigenbasis. indeed, if the system is in
a q-eigenstate, say |qni, then the q-uncertainty

q(|i) := h|(q  h|q|i)2|i1/2

(for |i normalized) vanishes:

q(|qni) = hqn|(q  hqn|q|qni)2|qni1/2 = 0

(1)

(2)

also, eigenvectors to dierent eigenvalues are orthogonal. thus, if the system is lo-
calized with respect to the observable q around some value q then the probability for
nding it localized around any other value q vanishes. of course, if an eigenvalue q
is in the continuous spectrum then the eigenstate |qi is nonnormalizable and must
be approximated by a sequence of normalizable states. but also in this case, the un-
certainty q can be made arbitrarily small, and two eigenstates to dierent points in
the spectrum are orthogonal, then with respect to the continuum normalization.
thus, as is well-known, any self-adjoint observable q is sharp in the sense that its
states of maximal q-localization - the eigenstates {|qi} - are orthogonal if localized
around dierent values of q, and in the sense that each maximal localization state has
vanishing uncertainty q.

the reason why unsharp real degrees of freedom can occur is that, a priori, a real
entity in a quantized theory may correspond to any operator whose expectation values
are real - and, crucially, operators whose expectation values are real need not be self-
adjoint:
we recall that an operator whose expectation values are real is a symmetric oper-
ator.
in nite dimensional hilbert spaces, symmetric operators are self-adjoint and
self-adjoint operators are symmetric. but in innite dimensional hilbert spaces, sym-
metric operators need not be self-adjoint. this also means that they need not possess
a spectral resolution and diagonalization. as a consequence, an operator q whose
expectation values are real may also describe a degree of freedom which is fuzzy or
unsharp, in the sense that the minimum value for q may be larger than zero, and/or
those vectors which realize the minimum value for q may not be orthogonal.

3

a simple example in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics is the momentum operator p
of the particle in a box. for simplicity, let us consider the case in one dimension, where
the particle is conned, e.g., into the interval [l, l]:
we recall that all physical wave functions (x) vanish at the boundary of the box and
that the momentum operator p acts on physical wave functions as the derivative oper-
ator p = ihx. indeed, p is an example of a merely symmetric operator: clearly, all
expectation values of p are real, and therefore p is symmetric. on the other hand, p is
not self-adjoint. this is because plane waves do not vanish at the boundaries and they
are therefore not physical states. this means that plane waves are not in the domain
of p, which implies that p has no eigenbasis and no spectral resolution.
as a consequence, p is indeed unsharp: from the uncertainty relation, since x is
surely smaller than 2l, we can expect that the minimum uncertainty in momentum is
larger than zero. indeed, the precise minimum value for p is pmin = h/2l. we
will discuss this example in more detail below.

in general, for example in any candidate theory for a fundamental theory of quan-
tum gravity, it appears reasonable1 to assume that entities which are described in the
classical theory through real variables are described in the quantized theory through
operators which are linear and whose expectation values are real. of course, we cannot
assume that all those operators are observables in the usual quantum mechanical sense,
nor that they even act on the space of states. instead, these operators may act on some
hilbert space of elds, or branes (as we will briey discuss below), or indeed on any
abstract hilbert space.
on this level of generality we can only say that while some real degrees of freedom may
be described as self-adjoint operators, others may be described by merely symmetric
operators - and that correspondingly the real physical entities which they correspond
to are sharp or unsharp. interestingly, however, there exists only a limited number
of types of sharpness or unsharpness, or short-distance structures, which can occur
with operators whose expectation values are real, i.e. with symmetric operators. a
classication has been outlined in [1]:
since the class of symmetric operators includes the self-adjoint operators, two of the
possible short distance structures are lattices and continua, corresponding to the fact
that self-adjoint operators occur with discrete and continuous spectra. the other ex-
treme are the purely unsharp cases. these are described by the class of simple symmet-
ric operators. those are operators which are symmetric but not self-adjoint, not even
on any invariant subspace. there exist subclasses of these operators which describe
dierent types of unsharpness. in [1], they have been divided into two broad classes,
fuzzy-a and fuzzy-b. technically, the two classes correspond the two possibilities of
the deciency indices being equal or unequal.
in the present paper, we are concerned with those operators which describe entities

1 we will here not consider the alternative possibility of nonlinear operators.

4

that are unsharp of type fuzzy-a. mathematically, these are the simple symmetric
operators with equal deciency indices. for example, the momentum operator of the
particle in a box is of the type fuzzy-a.
there are indeed theoretical indications that short-distance structures of the type
fuzzy-a occur with the description of space-time at the planck scale:
various theoretical arguments have long indicated that space-time displays a funda-
mental foaminess, see [2], or unsharpness at very small lengths. in particular, several
studies, see e.g. [3]-[11], suggest that the structure of space-time at the planck scale,
or the string scale, is characterized eectively by correction terms to the uncertainty
relations and, in particular, by corrections of the type:

xp 

h
2

(1 + k (p )2 + ...)

(3)

as is easily veried, for any k > 0, eq.3 implies the existence of a nite lower bound
for x, namely:

xmin = hk

(4)

here, k is assumed to be a small positive constant which is related to the planck scale,
or in string theory to the string scale. we here only remark that recent studies (on large
extra dimensions that are seen by gravity only) suggest that the unication and/or the
planck scale may even be as low as the tev scale, see e.g.[12].
a positive minimum uncertainty xmin > 0 arising from uncertainty relations of the
type of eq.3 can be introduced as an ultraviolet cuto in quantum eld theories [13, 14].
it has also been shown that this type of cuto may solve the transplanckian energy
paradox of black hole radiation, see [15]. for general reviews of quantum gravity -
and string theory motivations of eq.3, see e.g. [16, 17]. for a recent discussion of the
potential origins of eq.3 see e.g.
[18], and for a path integral approach to modied
uncertainty relations see [19].
technically, it is clear that any operator x which obeys an uncertainty relation of
the type of eq.3 cannot possess eigenvectors, since the uncertainty x would vanish
for eigenvectors. therefore, any such operator x can only be symmetric but not self-
adjoint. more precisely, it must be of the type fuzzy-a, as was rst shown in [1]. we
remark that operator realizations and the functional analysis of uncertainty relations
of the type of eq.3 were rst discussed in [20].

on the other hand, if we are to study those cases in which a real degree of freedom
is represented not by a self-adjoint but instead by a merely symmetric operator, then
we must also address the fact that self-adjoint operators often play two roles, namely
both as real degrees of freedom and also as generators of symmetries. therefore, the
question arises, whether, or how, merely symmetric operators could also be involved in
the generating of symmetries. indeed, it is known that there is an important dierence
in this respect between self-adjoint and merely symmetric operators. namely, merely

5

symmetric operators, unlike self-adjoint operators, do not generate unitaries, at least
not directly.

in the present paper, we therefore consider fuzzy-a type operators with respect to the
generation of unitary transformations - and we will nd that these operators possess a
remarkable property:

by denition, the fuzzy-a type operators are those operators q which on the physical
domain dq = dphys are simple symmetric with equal deciency indices. for each
such operator there exists a family of operators {q()} which coincide with q on the
physical domain dq and which are self-adjoint. the q() therefore generate unitaries
in the usual way. we claim that these q() - we recall that they all coincide with q
on the physical domain - generate, together, all unitary operators in the hilbert space.
this shows that, in this way, operators of the type fuzzy-a can indeed relate to all
aspects of symmetries in the hilbert space on which they act.
we will also nd that this result supports a conjecture made in [1, 21]. the conjecture
proposes a mechanism by which those small wavelengths which are being cut o in
the case of a fuzzy-a short-distance structure eectively turn into internal degrees of
freedom with an isospinor structure on which unitary groups act.

2 examples of unsharp degrees of freedom

before we discuss the theorem, let us introduce concrete examples of simple symmetric
operators to which the theorem will apply.

2.1 the momentum of the particle in a box
we have already mentioned the example of the momentum operator p = ix of the
particle in a box (from now on we set h = 1). since we will later use this example
also to illustrate the new theorem on generating symmetries, let us discuss this case in
more detail:
assume the box to be the one-dimensional interval [l, l]. due to the conning box
potential, all physical wave functions (x)  dphys  h = l2(l, l) vanish at the
boundary:
(5)

(l) = 0 = (l)

the expectation values of p are real:

h|p|i  ir,

for all

|i  dphys

(6)

thus, p is a symmetric operator. on the other hand, since no plane wave obeys
the boundary condition, eq.5, p does not possess (normalizable nor nonnormalizable)
eigenvectors. thus p is not self-adjoint, instead p is simple symmetric.

6

even though there are no plane waves among the physical states, plane waves can of
course be approximated by sequences of physical states which are approximately plane
waves within most of the interval [l, l], but which also quickly decay to zero towards
the boundaries, such as to always obey the boundary condition, eq.5.
one may therefore be tempted to assume that p is still approximately self-adjoint
and should therefore describe a sharp entity. this is, however, not the case: indeed, as
we already mentioned, p is unsharp in the sense that for all physical states |i  dphys
the momentum uncertainty is bounded from below by a xed nite amount:

p()  pmin =


2l

for all normalized |i  dphys

(7)

intuitively, the reason is that the larger the part of the interval on which a physical
wave function approximates a plane wave, the steeper it must decay to zero towards the
boundaries. the steep decay necessarily yields a signicant contribution to the action
of the derivative operator p. this is connected to the fact that p is a noncontinuous
operator. we remark that only noncontinuous i.e. only unbounded operators can be
simple symmetric and display this unsharpness. for an explanation of the unsharpness
phenomena in these terms, see [21, 22].
here, let us explicitly calculate the physical states with the lowest momentum uncer-
tainty. to this end, we solve the variational problem of minimizing

(p)2 = h|p2|i  h|p|i2

(8)

by minimizing h|p2|i under the constraints h|p|i =  and h|i = 1, and the
boundary condition eq.5.
introducing lagrange multipliers k1, k2, the functional to be minimized is:

s = z l

l

dx {(x)(x) + k1(  c1) + k2(ix  c2)} ,

yielding the euler-lagrange equation:

2
x + k1  ix = 0

(9)

(10)

for each choice of momentum expectation value hpi = , there is (up to a phase) one
normalized and the boundary condition obeying solution:

(x) = l1/2 cos(cid:18)x

2l(cid:19) eix

(11)

these are the physical wave functions which minimize p. we see that the (x)
are essentially plane waves, apart from the modulus, which approaches zero at the
boundaries, as it must, being a physical state.
it is clear that the modulus of the
wave functions (x) goes to zero with just the optimal steepness to minimize the

7

momentum uncertainty p.
the minimum value for the uncertainty in the momentum of a particle in the box is
now readily calculated from the solutions , as:

pmin = qh|p2|i  2 =


2l

(12)

in this case here, the minimum uncertainty pmin does not depend on the expectation
value . note that for generic simple symmetric operators with equal deciency indices
the minimum standard deviation can depend on the expectation value:

qmin = qmin(hqi).

(13)

it is standard procedure to verify that the deciency indices of p are indeed equal,
namely (1, 1). thus, the short-distance structure (of momentum space) is of the type
fuzzy-a in the terminology of [1].

2.2 an unsharp position operator

let us now illustrate the same phenomena with the example of a simple symmetric
operator which is given explicitly in terms of an innite dimensional matrix.
consider the operator q which is dened as the matrix

q =

0
a1
0
0
...





a1
0
a2
0
...

0
a2
0
a3
...

0
0
a3
0
...

. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .





where we dene the matrix elements an through

an := 1 + s + s2 + ... sn1

(14)

(15)

with s being a constant, obeying s  1. of course, one may use the partial geometric
series:
(16)

1 + s + s2 + ... sn1 = (sn  1)/(s  1).

we dene the domain dq of q to consist of all column vectors which possess an
arbitrary but nite number of nonzero entries. the domain dq is dense in the hilbert
space h = l2 of all of square summable vectors, i.e. dq = h.
clearly,

qij = q
ji.

(17)

thus, on its domain, dq, the expectation values of q are real, i.e. q is a symmetric
operator.

8

let us consider rst the special case s = 1.
in the case s = 1, the matrix elements reduce to an = n. we recognize that q is
then the ordinary essentially self-adjoint quantum mechanical position operator, in its
fock space representation. its spectrum is the real line and there exist sequences of
vectors in its domain dq such that q becomes arbitrarily small, i.e. q is a sharp
observable.

the situation is qualitatively dierent for s > 1.
it has been shown in [20] that if s > 1, then for all vectors in dq the uncertainty q
is nitely bounded from below, by:

qmin = 1  s1

(18)

this means that for all normalized |i  dq, i.e. for all normalized vectors with an
arbitrary but nite number of nonzero entries, the uncertainty in q obeys:

q(|i) = h|(q  h|q|i)2|i1/2  qmin.

(19)

the fact that qmin = 1  s1 is larger than zero implies that there are no (normal-

izable nor nonnormalizable) eigenvectors of q, i.e. that q is not self-adjoint. q has
been shown to be simple symmetric of type fuzzy-a, see [1, 20].
in fact, in this example, the minimum standard deviation is a nontrivial function of
the expectation value of q. for simplicity, we have only given the absolute minimum
qmin. for the precise form of qmin(hqi) and its derivation, see [20].
finally, we remark that no nite dimensional truncation of the matrix q could possess
a nonzero minimum uncertainty qmin > 0. this is because the notions of symme-
try and self-adjointness only dier on innite dimensional hilbert spaces: every nite
dimensional symmetric matrix is also self-adjoint and therefore possesses eigenvectors
|qi for which, of course, q(|qi) = 0.

2.3 unsharpness from noncommutativity

the statement that self-adjoint operators can always be resolved to arbitrary precision
is compatible with the heisenberg uncertainty principle. assume, for example, that s
and t are two self-adjoint observables which do not commute.
then, there holds the uncertainty relation:

s t 

1
2 |h[s, t ]i|

(20)

this implies of course that if t is smaller than some value, say t < t0 and if,
say, [s, t ] = i1 then the rhs is nonvanishing, yielding s  1/2t0. thus, in this
case, s cannot be made arbitrarily small but possesses instead a nite lower bound

9

smin = 1/2t0.
this is not a contradiction to the statement that self-adjoint operators can always be
diagonalized, because to require t  t0 is to restrict the hilbert space to only those
states for which t  t0 holds. on this restricted domain, the operator s is not
self-adjoint, instead it is simple symmetric.
in general, noncommutativity of symmetric operators in any physical theory induces
an interplay between the domains of those operators, which in turn aects whether
or not they are self-adjoint or merely symmetric.
indeed, even more generally, not
only kinematical but also dynamical operator equations, i.e. not only commutation
relations but also operator equations of motion can aect the domains of operators,
and can therefore aect whether or not these operators are symmetric or self-adjoint.
thus, while it is a well-known and much-discussed phenomenon that the sharpness
or unsharpness of real entities in quantum theory can depend on the kinematics -
through uncertainty relations - it appears that there is a priori no reason to exclude
the possibility that the sharpness of real entities can also change dynamically, for
example in a fundamental theory of quantum gravity.

3 unsharp degrees of freedom and the generating

of unitaries

as is well-known, self-adjoint operators often act not only as real degrees of freedom,
but simultaneously also as generators of symmetries. merely symmetric operators, on
the other hand, do not directly generate unitary operators.
this appears to indicate that while symmetric operators possess the interesting prop-
erty of being able to describe unsharp real degrees of freedom, they should not be able
to play a role in the generation of symmetries.
here, we will therefore address the problem of the generation of unitary operators for
the class of simple symmetric operators which describe fuzzy-a type short-distance
structures, i.e. which have equal deciency indices. this class includes our exam-
ples above, and it includes, in particular, all operators x with a nite lower bound
xmin > 0.
we will prove the following:
for each simple symmetric operator x with equal deciency indices, acting on a physi-
cal domain dphys which is dense in a hilbert space h, there exists a family of self-adjoint
operators x() which coincide with x on the physical domain. we claim that these
operators x(), together, generate the full unitary group of the hilbert space. this
result shows that, in this way, the operators of this class can relate to all aspects of
symmetry in the hilbert space on which they act.
the precise formulation of the general theorem and its proof are given in sec.4. before,

10

however, we will give a detailed illustration of the theorem in concrete examples.

3.1 the theorem in concrete examples

in order to demonstrate the mechanism by which simple symmetric operators are able
to generate all unitaries of the hilbert space, let us consider a concrete example in
ordinary nonrelativistic quantum mechanics in one dimension.
in this case, for the particle on the real line, the operators x and p are self-adjoint and
can be exponentiated to yield unitaries:

we may represent the operators x and p, irreducibly, as the self-adjoint multiplication
and dierentiation operators x.(x) = x(x) and p.(x) = ix(x) acting on a
dense domain in the hilbert space h of square integrable wave functions (x) over the
real line.
as is well-known, x and p, together, generate all unitary operators u on the hilbert
space h, via the weyl formula

u = z z dsdt

2h

u(s, t) exp[i(sx + tp)/h]

(21)

where the u(s, t) are suitable complex-valued functions. in fact, all bounded operators
b  b(h) can be generated in this way.
on the other hand, we can also represent x and p reducibly, for example, as the
self-adjoint multiplication and dierentiation operators

x.i(x) = xi(x)

and p.i(x) = ixi(x)

(22)

acting on a hilbert space of wave functions i(x) on the real line which possess an
additional isospinor index, running i = 1, ..., n.
the scalar product of wave functions then contains an iso-sum:

h|i =

n

xi=1z 



dx 

i (x)i(x)

(23)

clearly, x and p are acting diagonally in the isospinor space. therefore, x and p do
not generate the u(n) of the isorotations. thus, in this case, the weyl formula, eq.21,
does not yield all bounded operators nor does it yield only all unitaries on the hilbert
space. only if we supplemented the operators x and p by additional hermitean n  n
matrices, ti, could we generate u(n) on the isospinor space and therefore all of b(h).

let us now consider again the case where the particle is conned to the interval [l, l].
as we saw above, the momentum operator p = ix is then no longer self-adjoint and

11

it is instead simple symmetric of type fuzzy-a. therefore, p then matches the condi-
tions of our proposition.

namely, our proposition is that for any simple symmetric operator p of type fuzzy-a,
e.g. the momentum of the particle in a box, there exists a one-parameter family of
self-adjoint operators p(),

(0   < 2), such that:

 each p() coincides with p on the physical domain, i.e.

p()|i = p|i

for all

|i  dphys

 the p(), together, (weakly) generate the algebra b(h) of bounded operators on

the hilbert space, which includes of course the full unitary group on h.

indeed, we claim that, unlike in the weyl formula, the operator x is now no longer
needed to generate b(h), because the operators p() alone already generate b(h)
(even though each p() coincides with p on the dense physical domain dp).
even further, we can consider the case where the wave functions of the particle in the
box carry some isospinor index. then, p is again simple symmetric of type fuzzy-a
and our theorem applies. we claim that there then exists a multi-parameter set of
self-adjoint operators p(u), which again all coincide with p on physical states, and
which generate all of b(h)! this means that there is no need to introduce isospin
rotation generators tj by hand, since the p(u) are able to generate all: translations,
phase rotations and isorotations.

3.2 generating b(h) in the scalar case

to see this, we consider rst the case without an isospinor index.
as discussed above, the momentum operator p, acting as p.(x) = ix(x) on the
physical wave functions   dphys over the interval is a simple symmetric operator.
we recall that although all physical wave functions vanish at the boundary, they are a
dense set in the hilbert space of square integrables dphys = h = l2(l, l).
let us now construct a family of operators p() which coincide with p on the physical
domain dphys, but whose domain is larger and who are self-adjoint on this larger
domain.
to this end, we dene the operators p() by extending the domain dphys such as to
include wave functions which are periodic up to a phase

(l) = ei(l),

12

(24)

where  is some arbitrary but xed real number. to be precise, the domain of the
self-adjoint extension p() is therefore

dp()

:= dphys  n(x)  dp | (l) = ei(l)o ,

(25)

where dp is the domain of the adjoint operator p.
note that ei must be a xed phase in order to ensure that the boundary terms cancel in
the partial integrations which are needed to show that h1|(p()|2i) = (h1|p())|2i.
indeed, for each xed choice of a phase ei there exist eigenvectors of p(), i.e. plane
waves, ()

n (x), which obey the corresponding boundary condition:

()
n (x) = einx

where n =

2n  

2l

, n  zz

(26)

as is straightforward to check, the ()
each p() is self-adjoint.

n

form an orthonormal eigenbasis of p(), and

let us now consider the implications for the generating of unitaries:

if the wave functions were not restricted to the interval, p would be self-adjoint and p
could be exponentiated to obtain a unitary operator, say

u(a) := exp(iap),

(27)

for some a  0. the action of this unitary is to translate wave functions by the amount
a to the right:
(28)

u(a).(x) = eax (x) = (x + a).

in the case where the particle is conned to the box, however, i.e. where the hilbert
space only consists of wave functions on the interval, the operator p is not self-adjoint
and cannot be exponentiated: the formal expression u(a) = exp(iap) is now not
a unitary transformation, because it would translate beyond the interval boundaries,
which is not dened in the hilbert space.
nevertheless, for the particle in a box, there exists, as we saw, a whole family of self-
adjoint extensions p() of p. since each p() is self-adjoint, each can be exponentiated
and the resulting operator

u(a) := exp(iap())

(29)

is unitary. the action of u(a) on wave functions is again to translate wave functions
to the right (for a > 0), as in eq.28. now, however, due to the boundary condition,
eq.24, the part of the wave function which would be translated beyond the right interval
boundary reappears into the interval from the left, with the same modulus, but phase
shifted by the phase ei.
thus, the unitary u(a) translates the wave functions by the amount a and phase

13

shifts the wave functions by ei when translating them beyond a boundary and into
the interval again from the opposite boundary.
let us consider the composition of such unitaries. crucially, the product

u(a)u(a)

(30)

is a unitary operator which does not translate wave functions. this is because the rst
factor translates by a and the second factor translates back by the same amount. nev-
ertheless, since the two factors translate with dierent phase shifts, the product is not
the identity operator. namely, u(a)u(a) is the unitary operator whose action is to
leave the modulus of wave functions unchanged, but to phase shift the wave functions
on a part of the interval.
e.g., choosing some a  [0, 2l], the action is
(x),

for

u(a) u(a).(x) = 


ei()(x),

for

x  [l, l  a]
x  [l  a, l]

(31)

by suitable composition of operators u(a) for various a and  it is therefore possible
to generate unitaries which yield arbitrary local phase rotations of wave functions.
for example, choosing some a, b obeying 0 < b < a < 2l, we form the operator:

u((a  b)) u0(b) u(a).(x)

(32)

(x),

ei()(x),

for

for

x  [l, l  a]  [l  a + b, l]

x  [l  a, l  a + b]

= 


the action of this operator is to phase rotate wave functions by ei in the interval
[l  a, l  a + b] and to leave the wave functions invariant outside that interval.
thus, remarkably, the set of self-adjoints which coincide with p on the physical domain
is able to generate all translations and also all local phase rotations, while we recall
that in the case where p is self-adjoint, the operator x is needed order to generate
phase rotations, namely through eif (x)(x) = eif (x)(x).

14

3.3 the case with isospin
we consider again a particle constrained to the interval [l, l]. the particles wave
function i(x) shall now carry an isospinor index i = 1, ..., n. the scalar product in
the hilbert space of square integrables on the interval then includes an iso-sum:

h|i =

n

xi=1z l

l

dx 

i (x)i(x)

(33)

due to the box potential, the physical wave functions, |i  dphys, again obey the
boundary condition
(34)
the action of p is diagonal in iso-space: p.i(x) = ixi(x). again, there are no
plane waves in the physical domain and therefore the momentum operator on the
physical domain is not self-adjoint. instead, p is simple symmetric (with deciency
indices (n, n)). self-adjoint extensions p(u) are now obtained by enlarging the domain
of p to include wave functions which obey the boundary condition

i(l) = 0 = i(l),

(i = 1, ...n)

i(l) =

n

xi=1

uij j(l)

(35)

where uij is any unitary n  n matrix, generalizing the phase ei of the scalar case
above. as is readily checked, the proof of self-adjointness of the p(u) requires again
the cancellation of the boundary terms which arise through the partial integrations
needed to show that (h|p(u))|i = h|(p(u)|i), and this cancellation is achieved
exactly by the boundary conditions of the form of eq.35.
as in the scalar case, while p does not directly yield unitaries, each of the self-adjoint
p(u) which reduce to p on the physical domain does generate unitaries, e.g. by expo-
nentiation (a real) :

uu(a) := eiap(u)

(36)

the unitaries uu(a) again act on wave functions by translating them by the amount
a, and, due to the self-adjoint extensions boundary conditions, any part of the wave
function which hits a boundary reappears from the other side into the interval, now
iso-rotated by the matrix u (or by u1 if a is negative).
it is possible to proceed as in the scalar case, composing such unitaries to translate the
wave functions back and forth, using dierent self-adjoint extensions. it is clear that
in this way arbitrary local isorotations can be generated.
thus, the set of self-adjoint operators which reduce to p on the physical domain indeed
generates not only translations, which they may be expected to, but also arbitrary local
phase rotations, and - if an isospinor index is present - then they even generate all local
iso-rotations.

we now proceed to the proof of the theorem for the general case.

15

4 theorem

4.1 denitions

let us recall that a symmetric operator x is called simple symmetric if x is not self-
adjoint and if it possesses no invariant subspace such that the restriction of x to this
subspace yields a self-adjoint operator. our examples above are simple symmetric.
further, we recall that the cayley transformed operator s of a symmetric operator x,
dened as

s := (x  i1)(x + i1)1

(37)

is isometric. an isometric operator is called simple isometric if it cannot be reduced
to an invariant subspace such that the reduced operator is unitary. it is known that a
subspace reduces a symmetric operator x if and only if it reduces its cayley transform,
see, for example, [23]. note, however, that not every isometric operator is the cayley
transform of a symmetric operator.

4.2 theorem

let x be a closed simple symmetric operator with equal deciency indices, dened
on a domain dx which is dense in a complex hilbert space h. then, the self-adjoint
extensions x() of x generate a -algebra a which is weakly dense in b(h). thus,
in particular, the self-adjoint extensions generate the full unitary group u(h) of the
hilbert space.

4.3 outline of the proof
the rst step will be to use the x() to generate a suitable set m of unitaries, which
in turn generate an algebra a. the proof then consists in showing that the commutant
a of the algebra a is a = c1. this implies that its double commutant is a = b(h).
the proposition then follows since, with v. neumann, the double commutant of any
-algebra is its weak closure.

4.4 proof

we begin by choosing a suitable set of unitaries which are generated by the self-adjoint
extensions x() of x. to this end, consider the isometric cayley transform s of x

with domain

s := (x  i1)(x + i1)1

ds = (x + i1).dx.

16

(38)

(39)

we dene the local group t as the set of all unitaries which map the deciency space
s = ((x + i1).dx) onto itself and which act as the identity on ds, i.e.:
d
s , t|ds = 1, t t  = t t = 1}.

t := {t | t : ds  ds, t : d

s  d

(40)

it is clear that the local group, t , is isomorphic to the unitary group u(n), where n is
the deciency index n := dim(d

s ).

since, by assumption, both deciency indices are equal, i.e. both spaces

l = ((x  i1).dx)

are of equal dimension, there exist unitary extensions of s.
let u be one of the unitary extensions of s:

u u = uu  = 1, u : l+  l, u|ds = s.

we consider now the coset

m := {m | m = ut, t  t }

(41)

(42)

(43)

of unitary extensions of s.
indeed, as is well known, each unitary extension of the cayley transform s of a sym-
metric x, i.e. here each element of m, is indeed generated, via the cayley transform,
by a self-adjoint extension x() of x.
we will now show that the -algebra a generated by m is weakly dense in b(h).
as mentioned, this follows from v. neumanns double commutant theorem if we can
prove that only multiples of the identity operator commute with m, i.e. with u and
all elements of t .
to this end, let us consider an operator v which obeys:

||v || <  and [v, u] = 0 = [v, t ],  t  t

(44)

we need to show that v is a multiple of the identity operator.
since the closure of x implies the closure of the deciency space d
can use h = ds  d

s and of ds, we

here, t = t|d
[t, v ] = 0 reads:

s

, i.e. t : d

s to write v and the elements t  t in block form:
t = (cid:18) 1 0
t(cid:19) ,
s  d

v =   vds ds

s and, e.g., vds d

s ds vd

vds d
s d

s !

: d

vd

0

s

s

s  ds. in this notation,

(45)




0

vds d

s

(t  1)vd

s ds

[t, vd

17

(1  t)
]

s d

s

= 0

(46)




eq.46 holds for all t  t , and in particular it holds for unitaries t : d
which the value 1 is a regular point, e.g. t = 1. thus, vds d
= 0 and vd
further, t is the full unitary group on d
d
s . thus, [t, vd
s d
the identity, i.e. vd

s . it is therefore irreducibly represented on
s as a multiple of
= 1 where   c. in block matrix form, v therefore reads:

] = 0, t implies with schur that v acts on d

s  d
s ds = 0.

s for

s d

s

s

s

v = (cid:18) vds ds

0

0

1(cid:19)

(47)

consider now the kernel

k := ker(v  1).

(48)
s  k, and k  ds. as the kernel of a closed operator, k is
by construction, d
closed. we wish to show that in fact k = h and k = , which is to say that v = 1.
to this end, let us assume the opposite, namely that k 6= .
we can then use h = k  k to write both v and u in a new block form:

v = (cid:18) vkk

vkk

0

1(cid:19) ,

u = (cid:18) ukk ukk
ukk (cid:19)

ukk

the relation [v, u] = 0 now reads:

,

,

...

...




(vkk  1)ukk

vkkukk




= 


0 , 0

0 , 0




(49)

(50)

on the other hand, ukk.k  k, i.e. the range of ukk is not in the kernel of the
operator (v  1):
(v  1)|wi = 



 6= 0,

 |i 6= 0,|i  ukk.k

(vkk  1)|wi

vkk|wi

(51)

thus, the existence of any nonzero vector |wi  k in the range ukk.k would con-
tradict eq.50. consequently, the range of ukk.k is empty, i.e. ukk = 0.
therefore, k is an invariant subspace for u. since also [u 1, v ] = 0, it follows analo-
gously that k is an invariant subspace for u 1. thus, k and k both reduce u:

u = (cid:18) ukk

0

0

ukk(cid:19)

18

(52)

since u|ds = s and k  ds we have ukk = skk. this implies that k is an
invariant subspace for s, on which s is unitary. however, the simplicity of x implies
that also s is simple, i.e. s does not have any invariant subspace on which it would
be unitary.
thus, in fact, k =  and k = h. consequently, v = 1, which had to be shown.
with von neumann this implies that the weak closure of the -algebra a generated by
1, u and the elements of t is the algebra b(h) of all bounded operators on the hilbert
space, and b(h) includes of course all unitaries. we recall that this means that for
each bounded operator b  b(h) there exist sequences of operators bn  a such that

nh|b  bn|i = 0
lim

 |i, |i  h.

thus, for any simple symmetric x with equal deciency indices the set of self-adjoint
operators which coincide with x on its domain generate indeed (e.g. via generating
the coset m) the full unitary group of the hilbert space.

4.5 a corollary

as we mentioned before, in nite dimensional hilbert spaces every symmetric operator,
i.e. every operator whose expectation values are real, i.e. every matrix obeying xij =
x 
ji, is also self-adjoint. therefore, in nite dimensional hilbert spaces, there are no
simple symmetric operators, i.e. our theorem cannot be applied.
let us add, however, that the above proof yields as a corollary that any simple isometric
operator with equal deciency indices has the property that its unitary extensions,
together, generate all unitaries and b(h). and indeed, there exist simple isometric
operators also in nite dimensional hilbert spaces.
as an illustration, let us consider the simple case of the two dimensional hilbert space
spanned by normalized vectors e1, e2. we dene a linear operator, s, as the map
which maps s : e1  e2. clearly, s is not unitary, because of its limited domain
ds := ce1 and range ce2. also, s does not have any invariant proper subspace. s
is norm preseving where it is dened. thus, s is a simple isometric operator. the
dimensions of its deciency spaces, i.e. of the orthogonal complements of its domain
and range are both 1, i.e. they are equal. thus, s is an operator to which the corollary
of our theorem applies. the claim is that the unitary extensions of s generate all 2 2
matrices, including of course the unitaries.
to see this, we begin by choosing one unitary extension u of s, e.g.:

u = (cid:18) 0 1
1 0(cid:19)

19

(53)

the elements t () of the local group t of all unitaries which act as the identity on
ds and which act as a unitary on d

s are of the form

t () := (cid:18) 1

0 ei(cid:19)

0

(54)

where ei is any arbitrary phase. thus, each unitary extension of s is of the form
u t () for some . indeed, the algebra generated by 1, u and the unitary extensions
t () is all of m2(c), as is clear because it contains for example the pauli matrices:

1 = u,

2 = i u t (),

3 = t ().

(55)

on the other hand, we recall that simple symmetric operators only exist in innite
dimensional hilbert spaces.
indeed, in our 2-dimensional example here, the inverse
cayley transform x of s does exist,

x = i (s + 1)(s  1)1 =  i(cid:18) 1 0
2 1(cid:19)

(56)

but x is clearly not symmetric. in general, the inverse cayley transform of a simple
isometric operator is not necessarily a simple symmetric operator.
in particular, it
cannot be simple symmetric in nite dimensional hilbert spaces. on the other hand,
the fact that, vice versa, the cayley transform of a simple symmetric operator is always
a simple isometric operator is what we used in the theorem.

5 conclusions and outlook

our subject of investigation is any physical entity, within a quantized theory, which is
real in the sense that it is described by an operator q whose expectation values are
real.

our rst conclusion has been that any such real entity or real degree of freedom
can only be sharp or unsharp in a few well-dened ways. namely, the physical
entity is sharp if the operator q is self-adjoint. in this case, its possible short-distance
structures are lattices and continua. on the other hand, the physical entity is unsharp
if the operator q is merely symmetric. then, its possible short-distance structures are
what we call fuzzy-a and fuzzy-b. all other possibilities are mixtures of these. the
sharpness or unsharpness of a real entity can depend on the kinematics of the theory,
e.g. through commutation and uncertainty relations. a priori, the unsharpness of a
real entity can also be a function of the dynamics, e.g. through operator equations of
motion. several properties of the fuzzy-a and fuzzy-b short-distance structures are
discussed in [1]. a more detailed classication is in preparation.

secondly, and this has been the main subject of the present work, we considered that

20

self-adjoint operators often not only represent real degrees of freedom but that they
can also act as generators of symmetries. we therefore investigated in which way also
operators that describe fuzzy degrees of freedom could generate symmetries.

to this end, we focussed on the class of operators of the type fuzzy-a. we found that
these possess a remarkable property: if, on the physical domain, dphys, an operator
q is of the type fuzzy-a (i.e. simple symmetric with equal deciency indices), then
there exists a set of self-adjoint operators {q()} (the self-adjoint extensions) which all
agree with q on the physical domain. we showed that the operators q(), together,
generate all unitaries and all bounded operators in the hilbert space. thus, in this
way, at least the fuzzy operators of type fuzzy-a can indeed play a role in all aspects
of symmetries in the hilbert space in which they act.

in our investigation of the properties of physical entities which are described by oper-
ators whose expectation values are real, we did not make any assumptions about the
interpretation of these operators, nor about the underlying physical theory. there-
fore, our conclusions, rstly about the possible types of sharp- and unsharpness and
secondly about these operators ability to generate symmetries, apply to all linear op-
erators which describe real degrees of freedom - for example in candidate theories for
a fundamental theory of quantum gravity.

indeed, for example the matrix model for m-theory, see e.g. [24], does employ symmet-
ric operators, xi, to encode space-time information. in this case, the matrix elements
of the xi are interpreted in terms of coordinates of d0-branes. initially, the xi are
nite dimensional, say n  n matrices. the quantization and the necessary limit
n   are highly nontrivial, but it is clear that the resulting operators will still be at
least symmetric. the short-distance structure which they describe will therefore fall
into the classication outlined in [1]. the xi are in general noncommutative, which is
of course a kinematical source for fuzzyness, but there may also exist dynamical causes
for fuzzyness of the xi. it is clear that if, or when, these operators are of type fuzzy-a,
then our present results show how they relate to the unitary group of the hilbert space
on which they act.

studies in the context of quantum groups, see e.g.
[25, 26], and in the wider eld of
noncommutative geometry, have yielded new approaches to building models for space-
time at the planck scale, see e.g.
[27]-[29]. some of this work has been shown to be
related to string theory, see e.g. [30]. as far as these models of space-time apply linear
operators to describe real entities we are covering these operators. it should be very
interesting to investigate the role of the present results in this context.

on the other hand, even on the level of generality on which we have been working here,
more conclusions can likely be drawn: indeed, one of the examples which we gave for
our theorem indicates a particular direction for further investigation:
we discussed the case of the simple symmetric dierential operator p = iijx which
acts on a domain of wave functions i(x) with an isospinor index i = 1, ..., n, dened

21

over the interval [l, l]. there exists a whole u(n)- family of self-adjoint operators
p(u) which coincide with p on its domain. we showed that, even though p itself acts
diagonally on the isospinor space, the operators p(u) are able to generate all unitaries
in the hilbert space - which includes, in particular, also all isospinor rotations.
we can interpret this result as providing an example for a conjecture made in [1, 21].
the conjecture is that simple symmetric operators with equal deciency indices (n, n)
always induce isospinor structures of dimension equal to the deciency index.
the conjecture also yields an intuitive physical interpretation of the eect of an ul-
traviolet cuto of the type fuzzy-a: namely, those short wavelengths which are being
cut o at short distances are being turned eectively into internal degrees of freedom
associated with a unitary isospinor structure. this would mean that local gauge group
structures could have their origin in what we here called the local unitary group on the
deciency spaces. work in this direction is in progress.

acknowledgement: the author is happy to thank john klauder for useful criticisms.

references

[1] a. kempf, preprint ufift-hep-98-30, hep-th/9810215

[2] s.w. hawking, nucl. phys. b144, 349 (1978)

[3] d.j. gross, p.f. mende, nucl. phys. b303, 407 (1988)

[4] d. amati, m. ciafaloni, g. veneziano, phys. lett. b216 41, (1989)

[5] s. doplicher, k. fredenhagen, j.e. roberts, comm. math. phys. 172, 187 (1995)

[6] d.v. ahluwalia, phys. lett. b339, 301 (1994)

[7] g. amelino-camelia, j. ellis, n.e. mavromatos, d.v. nanopoulos, mod. phys.

lett.a12 2029 (1997)

[8] m.-j. jaeckel, s. reynaud, phys. lett. a185, 143 (1994)

[9] c. rovelli, preprint c-97-12-16, gr-qc/9803024

[10] a. jevicki, t. yoneya, nucl. phys. b535 335 (1998), hep-th/9805069

[11] s. de haro, jhep 9810 023 (1998), gr-qc/9806028

[12] k.r. dienes, e. dudas, t. gherghetta, nucl. phys. b537 47 (1999), hep-

ph/9806292

[13] a. kempf, j. math. phys. 38 1347 (1997), hep-th/9405067, hep-th/9602085

22

[14] a. kempf, g. mangano, phys.rev. d55 7909 (1997), hep-th/9612084

[15] r. brout, c. gabriel, m. lubo, p. spindel, phys. rev. d59, 044005 (1999), hep-

th/9807063

[16] l.j. garay, int. j. mod. phys. a10, 145 (1995)

[17] e. witten, phys. today 49 (4), 24 (1996)

[18] r.j. adler, d. i. santiago, gr-qc/9904026

[19] g. mangano, j. math. phys. 39, 2584 (1998), gr-qc/9705040, and preprint dsf-

38-98, hep-th/9810174

[20] a. kempf, j. math. phys. 35 (9), 4483 (1994), hep-th/9311147

[21] a. kempf, europhys. lett. 40 (3), 257 (1997), hep-th/9706213

[22] a. kempf, rep. math. phys. 43 171 (1999), hep-th/9806013

[23] n.i. akhiezer, i.m. glazman, theory of linear operators in hilbert space, dover,

new york (1993)

[24] j. polchinski, string theory, vol.2, cup (1998)

[25] s. majid, class. quant. grav. 5 1587 (1988)

[26] s. majid, foundations of quantum group theory, cup (1996)

[27] a. connes, noncommutative geometry, ap (1994)

[28] j. madore, an introduction to noncommutative dierential geometry and its phys-

ical applications, cup (1995)

[29] a.h. chamseddine, a. connes phys. rev. lett.77, 4868 (1996)

[30] a. connes, m.r. douglas, a. schwarz, jhep 9802 003 (1998), hep-th/9711162

23

