9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

7
1

 
 

2
v
2
4
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

itp-sb-99-36

hep-th/9907142

july, 1999

fundamental vs. solitonic description of d3 branes

i.y. park 1,

c.n. yang institute for theoretical physics

state university of new york

stony brook, n. y. 11794-3840

abstract

type iib string theory expanded around d3 brane backgrounds describes

the dynamics of d3 branes as solitonic objects. on the other hand, there is

a fundamental description of them via polchinskis open strings with dirichlet

boundary conditions. since these two descriptions describe the dynamics of the

same objects, d3 branes, it is natural to believe that they are dual. therefore

at this level, we have a string-string duality as opposed to a string-eld theory

duality. once we take the same limits in both descriptions, maldacena con-

jecture in its weaker form follows. we try to make this viewpoint precise and

study the implication of it for the stronger form of maldacena conjecture.

1email: ipark@insti.physics.sunysb.edu

in the progress of string theory during the past several years, d-branes [1] have

played a central role. in particular, the authors of [2, 3, 4, 5] studied the absorption of

scalars by d3 branes and noticed that supergravity calculations of the cross sections

for various scattering processes are reproduced by the gauge theories on the branes.

more recently, by studying the extremal 3 brane congurations of iib supergravity

maldacena made a conjecture [7]: the weaker form of the conjecture states that iib
supergravity on ads5s5 is holographically [8, 9] dual to large n, n =4, d=4 super
yang-mills (sym4) theory and the stronger form states that iib string theory on
ads5s5 is dual to sym4 for any value of gs and n. there are several reviews of the
topic, for example, [10, 11, 12, 13].

large amount of literature has appeared so far to support the weaker form of the

conjecture. however, not much has been done along the line of proving or deriving

the conjecture. in this article, we address the question of why the weaker form of the

conjecture should be true. similar reasoning appeared in [14]. however the viewpoint

we take does not lead to the stronger form. instead we seem to obtain a string-string

duality. more specically, we propose and try to make precise the following: iib
string theory on ads5s5 should be dual to oriented open string theory1 propagat-
ing in the same background.

a couple of years ago, it was shown [15] that closed strings (or supergravity in the

low energy) describe the dynamics of d-branes at length scales much larger than the

string scale while it is the open strings (or world volume theory in the low energy)

which dominate at the sub-stringy scales. then one may ask whether one can put

together open strings, closed strings and branes in one theory such that the theory is

valid for the entire range of length scale.

this is a very natural question because d-branes are, in some sense, topological

defects that convert closed strings into open strings when the close strings touch the

branes [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. then there should be reversed processes in which open strings

become closed strings and leave the branes. we take these properties of d-branes as

our axiomatic starting point: the physical system under consideration consists of

d-branes, open strings and closed strings, and we look for theories that describe their

dynamics. below we argue that there are (at least) two ways to combine these three

1the closed strings produced by open string interactions are understood throughout the article.

1

objects (although there are some subtleties) and they correspond to two dierent
stringy descriptions of d3 brane2 dynamics: one is fundamental and the other is
solitonic. in the solitonic approach, one looks for a theory in which the d-branes

are embedded as solitons while one would consider the coordinates of the branes as

dynamical elds in the fundamental description. for convenience and reasons which

will become more clear, we will use the same word embedding for both descriptions.

it is well known that type iib supergravity has extremal solutions of parallel 3-

brane congurations [17, 18]. for simplicity we only consider n coincident d-branes in

this article. the solutions preserve one half of the supersymmetry and carry ramond-

ramond (rr) charges. these facts allow one to view these particular solutions as a

low energy realization of the d3 branes introduced by polchinski. even with the full

string corrections, one expects to have corresponding solutions: a d3 brane will be a

soliton of the full iib string theory. type iib string theory expanded around them

provides a solitonic description of d3 brane dynamics, fig 1(a). in this description,

d3 branes appear as solutions of eld equations. they interact with each other by

exchanging the perturbative spectrum of iib theory excited around them. the

situation is very similar to that of monopoles in ordinary eld theories, where one

considers perturbative excitations around a monopole solution.

then the subtlety lies in the way the open strings appear in this description. in

other words, if iib string theory expanded around a d3 brane solution correctly de-

scribe the dynamics (we assume it does), how does it incorporate the open strings? to

answer this question precisely will require much work. however, given the fact that

the open strings are associated with the excitations of the branes, a natural guess will

be that the combined system of branes and open strings on them should be somehow

associated with solutions with various non-extremality. we will return to this matter

later. in summary, we started with iib closed stings, the d branes appear as solitons,

open string eects will be embedded in some solutions with energies higher than those

of extremal solutions and iib string theory expanded around the d3 brane solutions

describes their dynamics as solitons.

now we seek another way of putting together the open strings, closed strings

and d3 branes. since we started with closed strings above, we start with d3 branes

this time. one might consider the supermembrane lagrangian [19] introducing the
2in this article, we only consider d3 branes which are non-singular [16]. for dp branes with p6=3,

there may be subtleties with the singularities.

2

n

(a)

n

(b)

figure 1: (a) d3 branes appear as backgrounds in the solitonic description. (b) d3

branes appear as dirichlet boundary conditions (represented by the dotted lines) in

the fundamental description.

coordinates for the branes and try to quantize the theory. however, a direct quanti-

zation of such extended objects is known to be a dicult task [20, 21]. quantization

of bosonic membranes has been discussed more recently in [22]. fortunately one can

achieve the same goal by an alternative description through open strings to which we

now turn.

obviously the open strings must be oriented and have dirichlet boundary condi-

tions since the open strings we need are exactly the same open strings produced when

the closed strings touch the d-branes. in this description, d branes are introduced as

boundary conditions, figure 1(b). (d branes are not merely boundary conditions, but

they should provide a background in which open strings propagate. we will discuss

this point later.) finally closed strings are produced through the interactions of open

strings, which will describe the reversed processes mentioned previously.

it has been argued by witten [23] that in the low energy, the dynamics of d3

branes are described by sym4 theory. sym4 has scalar elds which have the inter-
pretation of the transverse coordinates3 of the d-branes. therefore the open string
description can be considered as a fundamental description of d branes. it is a fun-

damental description since the coordinates of the branes appear in the lagrangian as

3there may be higher derivative corrections to the identication of the scalars and the transverse

coordinates of the branes [24].

3

dynamical variables.

above we have found two dierent ways of combining the three objects: open

strings, closed strings and d3 branes. these in turn correspond to two dierent de-

scriptions of the same d3 brane system: one is a solitonic description of iib string

theory for the d3 brane conguration under consideration, and the other is an open

string description with dirichlet boundary conditions. this is exactly the concept of

duality: the two descriptions must be dual since they describe the same d3 brane

system, which must have unique physics, at the same energy scale, the string scale.

therefore before taking any limits, we have a string-string duality. we will call

this fundamental-solitonic duality. in the solitonic description, closed strings are

primary objects while the open strings are associated with some excited states of

3-brane congurations. on the other hand, it is the open strings which are primary in

the fundamental description and the closed strings appear through the interactions of

the open strings. below we take this viewpoint seriously and study the implications

of it.

the organization of this paper is as follows: first, we briey demonstrate that the

weaker form of maldacena conjecture follows from the fundamental-solitonic duality

by taking the same limits on both sides of the two descriptions. then we argue that in

high energy, one should expect a string-string duality rather than the stronger form of

the maldacena conjecture which is a string-eld theory duality. these two points can

be made without nding the precise statement of the fundamental-solitonic duality.

then we try to make this string-string duality more precise and study the additional

implications of it. finally we conclude with a summary and open problems.

to show that our viewpoint leads to the weaker form of maldacena conjecture, we

consider n coincident d3 branes, figure 2. once again, it should be emphasized that

we take limits starting from the string-string duality. other than the fact that we do
not take any limit for r, the coordinate transverse to the branes4, the argument
should be rather familiar and we will be brief. figure 2(b) represents the fundamental

description and figure 2(a) the solitonic one. consider the low energy limit where one

can neglect the massive string modes: the eective actions of both sides contain only
massless string modes. we also impose the following common limits5 on both sides,
n  , gs  0, gsn =xed but very large. first consider the description (b), the

4we will discuss the near-horizon limit of r later.
5similar limits were taken in [3].

4

low e
g-> 0

n-> infinity

gn=large, fixed

n

(a)

n

(b)

figure 2: we take common limits in solitonic description, (a) and fundamental

description, (b)

fundamental description. according to witten [23], the low energy eective action
of n coincident d3 branes is u(n) gauge theory. even though gs  0, we can not
neglect the quantum corrections (because the eective loop expansion parameter is
gsn), but rather the theory becomes strongly coupled. therefore the resulting theory
in the description (b) is n =4, d=4 u(n) sym with quantum correction.

this is in contrast with the solitonic description where the theory becomes clas-

sical. the metric conguration for n coincident d3 branes is [17]

ds2 = h

h = 1 +

1

2 (cid:16)dr2 + r2d2
5(cid:17)

1

2 dx2

4 + h
4gsn 2

r4

(1)

in the limit where gsn is very large, the geometry of the solitonic description becomes

ads5s5. the radius of curvature of s5, r, is given by r2 = 4gsn . the

massive stringy corrections are also neglected since they are expected to come as a
geometrical series of 
4gsn which becomes negligibly small in the limit we are
taking. therefore we have classical supergravity on ads5s5.

since we started with two dual descriptions, the limiting theories must be dual too:
type iib supergravity on ads5s5 is holographically dual to large n strongly coupled
su(n)6 sym4 and the precise form of the connection between the two theories was

r2 =

1

6it has been argued [26, 27] that the bulk theory corresponds to su(n) part of the u(n) gauge

group.

5

proposed in [25, 26].

now we turn to the implication of our viewpoint for the stronger form of the

conjecture. it is necessary to keep only the massless modes of open string description

to obtain the sym. since we must impose the same limit for the solitonic description,

it seems to be impossible to have full iib string theory with all the massive modes if

our viewpoint is correct. in other words, without taking the limits discussed above one

will have oriented open string theory as a theory dual to iib string theory. therefore,

instead of the stronger conjecture, we propose below to consider oriented open string
theory7 as a theory dual to iib string theory on ads5s5.

having argued that the fundamental-solitonic duality implies ads5/cft4 duality

in its weaker form, we now turn to the more precise statement of this string-string

duality itself and study other implications of it. for this, we consider fig 3. from
now on, we do not take any limits of gs,  and n unless otherwise specied.

n

(a)

n

(b)

figure 3: (a) solitonic description. (b) fundamental description

the solitonic description, i.e., type iib string theory on a background of n co-

incident d3 branes with rr charge [30], is complicated at the technical level, given
the fact that even the string theory on a simpler background such as ads5s5 is not
completely understood although there has been some progress [31, 32, 33, 34]. the

d3 branes appear as backgrounds interacting each other by exchanging iib strings,

figure 3 (a). it is not very clear how this description incorporates the open strings

precisely. in [35, 36], calculations of entropy of d-brane system using statistical me-

chanics of massless open string gas agreed with the bekenstein-hawking entropy of

7extension of the weaker form of maldacena conjecture to a duality between supergravity and

dbi action was discussed in [28, 29].

6

near-extremal solution of supergravity. therefore a natural guess would be that the

massive open strings should be associated with non-extremal solutions with large

non-extermality. in other words, when closed strings are incident on d-branes, open

strings appear on the branes, but in the iib description the combined system of the

branes and the open strings on them may appear as some excited states and whether

the open strings are massless or massive will be associated with the size of the non-
extremality parameter, typically called ro. reversely, a brane in its excited state will
decay emitting a closed string.

to go to the fundamental description, we turn to our axiomatic starting point:

when a closed string touches a d brane, it becomes an open string. this is the open

string we must consider to obtain the fundamental description. in this description,

the branes are embedded as dirichlet boundary conditions, fig 3(b). since the branes
are oriented, the open strings must be oriented8. to be consistent, the open strings
must be coupled to the closed strings coming from the iib closed string sector. the
end points of open strings are constrained to move in a at hyper-plane9. however,
the body of them propagates in the background produced by d branes. therefore

the d branes are not merely the boundary conditions but they also embed themselves

as a background geometry for the open strings to propagate in.

we have just argued that iib theory on d3 brane backgrounds must be dual to

open string theory on the same background. now we return to the near horizon limit
r  r. this limit allows one to drop 1 in h of eq (1) (without taking any limits for
gs and n), and the metric becomes that of ads5s5 again. therefore we have iib
string theory on ads5s5 for the solitonic description. then we have to consider the
same background for the open string description: we have open strings propagating
in ads5 s5. therefore it is natural to believe that iib string theory on ads5s5
with n units of ux of 5-ve form eld strength should be dual to an open string
theory on the same background10. then one immediate question is whether the open

8there has been some discussion of oriented open and closed string theory in the frame work of

string eld theory [37].

9in the low energy limit where we have a very poor resolution, the open strings on the at hyper-
plane will appear as particles moving in four dimensional minkowski space (the at hyper-plane)
and this is the space where sym theory is dened.

10 it has been argued [38, 39] that the dirac-born-infeld plus wess-zumino action should be
expanded around ads5 rather than a at background to obtain the dimension six operator predicted
by supergravity [40, 41, 38]. this is natural according to our viewpoint.

7

string description has the same symmetries as the iib description. at the level of

dbi action plus wz term, superconformal symmetry has been discussed in [42]. we

expect to have superconformal symmetry at the level of full string theory too. after

all, the symmetry should be viewed as coming from the background in the open string

description too as it is true in the solitonic description.

conclusion

in this article, the physical system of n coincident d3 branes, open strings and

closed strings was considered. we argued that there are (at least) two ways to embed

the system in string theory. the two ways correspond to two dierent descriptions

of d3 branes: fundamental and solitonic. since they are the descriptions of the same

system, it is natural to believe that the two descriptions are dual. taking appro-

priate, common limits on both sides of the descriptions leads to the weaker form of

maldacena conjecture. however, we argued that in high energy, it is more natural to

expect a string-string duality than the stronger form of maldacena conjecture which

takes the form of a string-eld theory duality.
in particular, we propose that iib
string theory on ads5s5 with n units of the ux of ve-form eld strength should
be dual to oriented open string theory in the same background.

there are many details to ll in. many of them are related to the poor status

of string theory in various curved backgrounds. in particular, it will be very helpful

to learn about oriented open and closed string theory in the geometry of d3 branes
or ads5s5.
corporates open string eects. we hope to make progress along these lines in near

it will also be interesting to study how precisely iib description in-

future.

acknowledgments

i thank j. maldacena, h. oogury and j. schwarz for conversations and s.r. das, j.

polchinski and b. zwiebach for communications. i am very grateful to i.r. klebanov

for reading the draft and making useful suggestions and corrections. i thank p. van

nieuwenhuizen for raising interesting questions. finally i would like to thank i. che-

8

pelev, b. kulik, m. rocek and specially f. gonzalez-rey for very helpful discussions

and corrections.

9

references

[1] j. polchinski, tasi lectures on d-branes,hep-th/9611050; string theory vol.

1,2, cambridge

[2] a. hashimoto and i.r. klebanov, decay of excited d-branes, hep-th/9604065

[3] i.r. klebanov, world volume approach to absorption by non-dilatonic branes,

hep-th/9702076

[4] s.s. gubser and i.r. klebanov and a.a. tseytlin, string theory and classical

absorption by threebranes, hep-th/9703040

[5] s.s. gubser and i.r. klebanov, absorption by branes and schwinger terms in

the world volume theory, hep-th/9708005

[6] i.r. klebanov, d-branes and creation of strings, hep-th/9709160

[7] j. maldacena, the large n limit of superconformal field theories and

supergravity,hep-th/9711200

[8] g. t hooft, dimensional reduction in quantum gravity, gr-qc/9310026

[9] l. susskind, the world as a hologram, hep-th/9409089

[10] i. klebanov, from threebranes to large n gauge theories, hep-th/9901018

[11] m.r. douglas and s. randjbar-daemi, two lectures on ads/cft correspon-

dence, hep-th/9902022

[12] j.l. petersen, introduction to the maldacena conjecture on ads/cft,hep-

th/9902131

[13] o. aharony, s.s. gubser, j. maldacena, h. oogury, and y. oz, large n field

theories, string theory and gravity, hep-th/9905111

[14] i.r. klebanov, unpublished

[15] m.r. douglas, d.kabat, p. pouliot and s.h. shenker, d-branes and short dis-

tances in string theory, hep-th/9608024

10

[16] g.w. gibbons and p.k. townsend, vacuum interpolation in supergravity via

super p-branes, hep-th/9307049

[17] g. horowitz and a. strominger, nucl. phys. b360 (1991)197

[18] m. du, r.r. khuri and j.x. lu, string solitons, phys. rep.259(1995)213,

hep-th/9412184

[19] e. bergshoe, e. sezgin and p.k. townsend, phys. lett. 189b (1987) 75; ann.

phys. 185 (1988) 330

[20] b. de wit, m. luscher and h. nicolai, nucl. phys. b320 (1989)135

[21] b. de wit, supermembranes and super matrix models, hep-th/9902051

[22] m. kaku, ultra-violet behavior of bosonic quantum membranes, hep-

th/9907016

[23] e. witten, bound states of strings and p-branes,hep-th/9510135

[24] f. gonzalez-rey, b. kulik, i.y. park and m. rocek, selfdual eective action

of n=4 super yang-mills, hep-th/9810152

[25] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.m. polyakov, gauge theory correlators from

non-critical string theory,hep-th/9802109

[26] e. witten, anti-desitter space and holography,hep-th/9802150

[27] o. aharony and e. witten, anti-de sitter space and the center of the gauge

group, hep-th/9807205

[28] s.s. gubser, a. hashimoto, i.r. klebanov and m. krasnitz,scalar absorption

and the breaking of the world volume conformal invariance, hep-th/9803023

[29] s.p. de alwis, supergravity, the dbi action and black hole physics, hep-

th/9804019

[30] d. berenstein and r.g. leigh, superstring perturbation theory and ramond-

ramond backgrounds,hep-th/9904104

11

[31] i. pesando, a  gauge fixed type iib superstring action on ads5s5,hep-

th/9808020

[32] r. kallosh and j. rahmfeld, the gs string on ads5s5, hep-th/9808038
[33] r. kallosh and a.a. tseytlin, simplifying action on ads5s5
[34] d. polyakov, on the nsr formulation of string theory on ads5s5, hep-

th/9812044

[35] s.r. das and a.d. mathur, excitations of d-strings, entropy and duality,

hep-th/960115

[36] s.s. gubser, i.r. klebanov and a.w. peet, entropy and temperature of black

3-branes, hep-th/9602135

[37] b. zwiebach, oriented open-closed string theory revisited, hep-th/9705241

[38] s.r. das and s.p. trivedi, three brane action and the correspondence be-

tween n =4 yang mills theory and anti de sitter space, hep-th/9804149

[39] s. ferrara, m.a. lledo and a. zaaroni, born-infeld corrections to d3-brane

action in ads(5)s(5) and n=4, d=4 primary superelds, hep-th/9805082

[40] h.j. kim, l.j. romans and p. van nieuwenhuizen, the mass spectrum of

chiral n=2 d=10 supergravity on s5, phys. rev. d32 (1985) 389.

[41] a. rajaraman, two-form fields and the gauge theory description of black

holes, heo-th/9803082

[42] p. claus, r. kallosh and a. van proeyen, conformal symmetry on world

volumes of branes, hep-th/9812066

12

