cern-th/99-213
damtp/99-83
hep-th/9907110

july 1999

9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

4
1

 
 

1
v
0
1
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

waves on noncommutative spacetime

and gamma-ray bursts

giovanni amelino-camelia1

theory division, cern, ch-1211, geneva, switzerland

shahn majid2

department of applied mathematics & theoretical physics

university of cambridge, cambridge cb3 9ew

abstract quantum group fourier transform methods are applied to the study of
processes on noncommutative minkowski spacetime [xi, t] = xi. a natural wave
equation is derived and the associated phenomena of in vacuo dispersion are dis-
cussed. assuming the deformation scale  is of the order of the planck length one
nds that the dispersion eects are large enough to be tested in experimental inves-
tigations of astrophysical phenomena such as gamma-ray bursts. we also outline a
new approach to the construction of eld theories on the noncommutative spacetime,
with the noncommutativity equivalent under fourier transform to non-abelianness
of the addition law for momentum in feynman diagrams. we argue that cpt
violation eects of the type testable using the sensitive neutral-kaon system are to
be expected in such a theory.

1

introduction

quantum groups and their associated noncommutative geometry have been proposed as a can-

didate for the generalisation of geometry needed for planck scale physics in [1, 2]. using such

methods there were provided models exhibiting the unication of quantum and gravity-like ef-

fects into a single system with a at space quantum limit when a parameter g  0 and a classical

but curved space limit when   0. radically new phenomena at the planck scale were also

proposed, notably an extension of wave-particle duality between position and momentum via

fourier theory to a novel duality between quantum observables and states in which their roles

1marie curie fellow (permanent address: dipartimento di fisica, universita di roma la sapienza, piazzale

moro 2, roma, italy)

2royal society university research fellow and fellow of pembroke college, cambridge

1

could be interchanged. for the specic models in [1, 2] this observable-state duality was imple-

mented through quantum group duality with the dual system of the same form but with dierent

values of the parameters (i.e. a form of t-duality). in addition, in a dierent approach, it was

proposed in [3] that noncommutative geometry in the form of q-deformation could provide an

eective way to model planck-scale quantum corrections to spacetime geometry. it was argued

that eld theory on such spacetimes would be more regular, with uv divergences appearing

as poles at q = 1, while symmetries would be preserved as quantum group symmetries. more

recently in refs. [4, 5] an analysis of some candidate quantum-gravity phenomena was used to

suggest that an eective large-distance description of some aspects of quantum gravity might be

based on quantum symmetries and noncommutative geometry, while it was argued that at the

planck scale even more novel structures might be required. in particular, it was observed that

the classical-apparatus limit, which is fully consistent [6, 7] with ordinary quantum mechan-

ics, is not accessible [8] in theories with gravitation, and this was used to suggest [5] that a fully

developed quantum gravity should be based on a mechanics departing from ordinary quantum

mechanics in such a way as to accommodate a new concept of apparatus and an accordingly

modied relation between the apparatus and the system under observation.

in the present article we report progress toward the use of some of these ideas in a testable

and workable approach to particle physics on noncommutative spacetime.

since planck-scale energies are so very far from present-day experiments we will be mostly

attempting to model quantum gravity eects at distances much larger than the planck length,

postponing to future work the investigation of whether quantum-group ideas might prove useful

for a description of physics at even shorter distances (perhaps all the way down to the planck-

length). specically, we are interested in noncommutative minkowski space as a basis for an

eective description of phenomena associated to a nontrivial foamy quantum gravity vacuum

of the type considered by hawking, wheeler and others. when probed very softly such a space

would appear as an ordinary minkowski space, but probes of suciently high energy would be

aected by the properties of the quantum-gravity foam and we attempt to model (at least some

aspects of) the corresponding dynamics using a noncommutative minkowski spacetime. in the

present work we do not discuss the generalization necessary for a description of how the quantum-

gravity foam aects spaces which are curved (non-minkowski) at the classical level. even for

spaces which are minkowski at the classical level a full quantum gravity of course would predict

phenomena which could not be simply encoded in noncommutativity of minkowski space and

actually would not be exclusively associated to its foamy vacuum structure, but it is plausible

that the most signicant implications of quantum gravity for the low-energy (large-distance)

physics of minkowski spaces would be associated to some aspects of the hawking-wheeler foam.

2

the noncommutative minkowski spacetime we consider here is the algebra

[xi, t] =  xi,

[xi, xj] = 0

(1)

where i, j = 1, 2, 3 and  is a free length scale, which (as justied by the above physical motivation

for our studies) we shall often implicitly assume to be closely related to the planck length
lp  1035m. we work in units such that the speed-of-light constant is c = 1. the algebra (1)
can be interpreted as a version of minkowski spacetime with noncommutative coordinates, see

notably [9]. such algebras in 3 dimensions can be found in [2] while a q-deformation version of

them in 1+1 dimensions was further studied from a noncommutative spacetime point of view in

[3]. they provide a compelling candidate for the type of spacetime in which we are physically

interested because they have a natural interpretation in momentum space[10] and because they

t well the intuition emerging from certain heuristic analyses of the structure of the quantum

gravity vacuum [4, 8]. they are also part of a 2-parameter family of algebras proposed for

planck-scale physics in [1].

among the already-studied implications of adopting (1) is that the appropriate notion of

poincare invariance under which it is covariant has to be modied and becomes in fact a quantum

group[9] (using the notation p for momentum space)

u (so1,3)c(p )

(2)

of the bicrossproduct type introduced in [2] in the 3-dimensional euclidean case. the paper

[9] also showed that (2) was (nontrivially) isomorphic to the so-called -deformed poincare

quantum group [11], which had been earlier introduced from another point of view. ref. [9]

identied (1) as the spacetime on which -poincare acts covariantly. the introduction of a

noncommutative-geometric point of view in which the -poincare indeed acts covariantly on

a suitable -minkowski spacetime (1) was the main result in [9]. the paper also solved the

problem of nding the coordinate algebra dual to the -poincare algebra and allowed it to be

identied it with an otherwise unconnected proposal in [12].

preliminary, but to some extent heuristic, analyses of the physical implications of the de-

formed or -poincare proposal have led to interesting hypotheses, most notably the possibility

of modied dispersion relations [13, 14]. since recent progress in the phenomenology of gamma-

ray bursts [15] and other astrophysical phenomena [16, 17] renders experimentally accessible [18]

such modied dispersion relations, there is strong motivation in verifying whether the analyses

reported in [13, 14] can be seen as part of a wider systematic analysis of particle-physics phe-

nomena in the noncommutative minkowski spacetime (1). this is one of the primary objectives

of the present paper. we shall rely on a dierent approach suggested by [19] that makes use

more directly of the structure[9] of (1) itself as a quantum group in its own right. its coproduct

3

structure here is

t = t  1 + 1  t, xi = xi  1 + 1  xi

(3)

which expresses the addition law on (1). as noted already in [9], this addition law is valid

but is not itself covariant under the deformed poincare algebra, hence this algebra necessarily

takes a back seat in the new approach. we deal separately with translation and (classical)

lorentz covariance. however, this new approach based directly on the intrinsic structure of

(1) allows us to make substantial progress toward a formalism in which all computations are

not signicantly more complicated than in a corresponding ordinary theory in a commutative

spacetime.

important tools are provided by the availability of a 4-dimensional translation-

invariant dierential calculus[20] (which is not possible in the -poincare covariant setting) and

by the quantum group fourier transform which was worked out for our particular algebra in

[10]. the latter is dened by the additive quantum group structure and allows one to rewrite

structures living on noncommutative spacetime as structures living on a commutative (but

nonabelian) energy-momentum space. since our emphasis is on the structure of the space-

time (1) we nd it convenient to write formulas in terms of the length scale  rather than

the dimensionful parameter  of the -poincare approach. because of the transparent relation
 = 1 we do not expect our choice of conventions to create any confusion; however, for good

measure, we shall occasionally refer back to the  notation and emphasize that some of the

structures we consider are frequently denominated in the literature as -minkowski spacetime

and -poincare group.

in the next section we provide the basic elements of the mathematics used for our proposal:

we discuss the analogues of functions and a dierential calculus on the deformed minkowski

spacetime (1) and then use the above-mentioned fourier transform to introduce the deformed

momentum space and the wave equation for deformed minkowski spacetime. in section 3 we

discuss the physical interpretation of some of the new structures present in deformed minkowski

spacetime.

in section 4 we provide a possible scenario in which (1) arises as the quantum

system associated to spacetime itself as the phase space of some pregeometry. in section 5,

also using the fourier theory, we sketch out a proposal for a new approach to the construction of

eld theories in noncommutative spacetimes. in section 6 we elaborate on the phenomenology

associated to in vacuo dispersion and cpt violation. finally in section 7 we summarize our

results and set up an agenda for future work.

4

2 functions, dierential calculus, momentum space and wave

equation

a key ingredient of our proposal (and a general feature of the particular quantum groups in [1])
is that all functions in xi, t can be treated as if classical under a normal ordering prescription.

thus, we consider general functions on the deformed minkowski spacetime (1) as elements of the

algebra of the form : (~x, t) : where  is a usual function in 4 variables and where by convention

the t generator is taken to the right.

the translation coproduct (3) implies a natural 4-dimensional translation-invariant calculi
of dierentials[20] spanned by dxi, dt. in noncommutative geometry the dierential calculi are

not usually unique but in the 1+1 dimensional case of (1) there are in fact two possibilities

discussed in [20]; we chose one of these to extend to our 4-dimensional case, namely with the

relations

[xi, dxj] = 0,

[t, dxi] = 0,

[x, dt] = dx.

the corresponding partial derivatives are dened by

d = ()dx

and take the form

(4)

(5)

i : (~x, t) :=:


xi (~x, t) :,

0 : (~x, t) :=: ()1 ((~x, t)  (~x, t  )) :

(6)

this means that the associated noncommutative dierential geometry of our deformed minkowski

space behaves in practice like the usual dierentials in position and like a lattice in the time

direction. on the other hand, t is an operator and there is no xed lattice in this noncommuta-

tive geometry. concerning the nature of the time-direction lattice it would be tempting here to

redene, say, i =  so that 0 appears like a usual lattice derivative. however, if  is real then

(1) tell us that for hermitian x, t would have to be antihermitian. so in any conventional ideas

of measurement it would have imaginary eigenvalues. one would then be displacing imaginary

time values by real . since we prefer to envisage real eigenvalues for t we are forced to take 

real. in fact the  here is not so alarming. on analytic functions we obtain as   0 the usual

dierential just as well as for a real displacement, so this is an equally valid deformation even if

a little unfamiliar. in fact its meaning is that this 0 is a lattice dierential in euclidean space

and just appears as above after wick rotation. we recall that frequently in theoretical physics

certain constructions look more natural in euclidean space and are only viewed in minkowski

space after wick rotation. this would appear to be such a situation.

5

next we consider integration in our non-commutative spacetime. a natural translation-

invariant choice is [3]

z :  := z d3~x dt (~x, t)

(7)

in terms of usual integration of the underlying function. it is such that the integral of a partial

derivative of a suitably decaying function  vanishes.

we now consider the momentum space dual under non-abelian fourier transform to the

minkowski spacetime (1). note rst of all that fourier theory is usually considered for abelian

groups but the nonabelian case can be handled just as well using modern (quantum group)

methods. thus, if p is some nonabelian matrix group then its algebra of coordinate functions

c(p ) can be regarded as a (commutative) quantum group or hopf algebra. its dual (cocom-

mutative) hopf algebra is the enveloping algebra u (p) where p is the lie algebra of p and

fourier transform provides maps c(p )  u (p) and vice-versa. this is a completely canonical

construction[21], but it does oblige us to regard the enveloping algebra u (p) as the coordinates

of some noncommutative space if we want to think of fourier theory as mapping functions on

one space to functions on some dual space (this is why usual fourier theory is restricted to

abelian groups so that the dual is a usual and not noncommutative space).

our minkowski spacetime (1), (3) is such an enveloping algebra and is therefore connected

by nonabelian fourier theory precisely to functions on a classical but nonabelian momentum

group, namely the group p of matrices of the form

e k1 k2 k3
0
0
0
0
1
0

1
0
0

0
1
0




.




(8)

one may then compute the canonical fourier theory using the integral (7) and the canonical

element for the duality pairing[21]. it comes out as cf.[10]

t : mink  c(p ),

t (:  :)(~k, ) = z d3~x dt e~k~xet(e~x, t)

(9)

where the integral is over usual commuting functions. the canonical property of fourier theory

comes out as

t (i) = t ()kie, t (0) = t () 

1  e



.

we can also work with the generator of 0 as

t :  :=:


t

 :,

t (t) = t ().

(10)

(11)

6

these formulae emerge naturally from noncommutative geometry and of course become usual

fourier theory when   0. here

(~k, )(~k, ) = (~k + e~k,  + ),

(~k, )1 = (~ke, )

(12)

are the group law and inversion in the nonabelian momentum group.

the natural plane waves associated to a point (~k, ) in momentum space are provided by the
inverse fourier transform of left-translation invariant delta-functions at (~k, )1, which come

out as

~k, = e~k~xet,

(13)

i.e. a plane wave in our deformed minkowski spacetime. these respect the group law on

momentum space in the sense

(~k,)(~k,) = ~k,~k,

so that, in particular, the wave in the reverse direction in momentum space is

(~k,)1 = e~ke~xet = ete~k~x,

(14)

(15)

i.e., another plane wave in our deformed minkowski space time (note, however, the order of the

generators.)

we are now ready to obtain the appropriate dispersion relations for such waves. by denition

these are constraints in momentum space p which should be lorentz invariant. because our
momentum space is a nonabelian group, not the usual r1,3, the appropriate action of the

lorentz algebra is not the usual one. rather, there is a particular action of the lorentz algebra

on the momentum group p which is used in the semidirect product algebra (2) of the deformed

poincare quantum group in [9]. we clearly should use this action. it is [9]

mi = imnkm


kn

, ni = ki




 (


2

~k2 +

(1  e2)

2

)


ki

+ kikj


kj

(16)

for the action of the standard rotation and boost generators. these are the vector elds on p

corresponding to the action on generators given in [9].

from (16) one nds the appropriate constraint which has the right limit and which is both

lorentz invariant and invariant under group inversion (12) to be

2(cid:16)e + e  2(cid:17)  ~k2e = m2.

(17)

the operator corresponding under fourier theory (10) to the left hand side in momentum space

is (cid:3), where

(cid:3) :  :=: 2 ((~x, t + ) + (~x, t  )  2(~x, t)) x 2

i (~x, t + ) :

(18)

7

i.e.,

(cid:3) = (2

0 x 2
i )l

where l : (~x, t) :=: (~x, t + ) : is the shift operator and 0 is the derivative in (6). it is easy

to see that the plane waves (13) are eigenfunctions with eigenvalue given by the left hand side

of (17). also, from the bicrossproduct construction of the deformed poincare algebra (2) in [9]

it is known that a lorentz-invariant expression in momentum space necessarily corresponds to

a casimir from the deformed poincare point of view.

it is of course important to be able to construct wave packets from our plane-wave solutions.

to construct a wave packet we should average over waves with some density function a, for

example a might be a gaussian centred at the origin and then translated to be centred at some
average spatial momentum ~k0 (and trivial in the energy direction). in more conceptual terms
the wave-packet is the inverse fourier transform of the translated a. in addition, the composite

waves are constrained to obey the dispersion relation. the noncommutative analogue is therefore

a,~k0

(~x, t) = z d3~k ea((~k0, 0)(~k, )1)(~k,)1

(19)

where  is a function of ~k according to the dispersion relation (17). similarly for 0. the choice
of a a left-invariant delta function recovers a pure on shell plane wave. with care one may also
change the variable (~k, )1 of integration to (~k, ).

let us note that while this is the natural denition from the mathematical point of view,

the physical applications to which we put our wave-packet might dictate other choices based

on the same pattern. thus, in the above we have used the left-translation invariant integral

r dd3~ke required by the quantum-group fourier theory in the present conventions. it is also

possible that one might prefer to build a wave-packet using an integration invariant under the

deformed action of lorentz transformations. this would be with integration measure

z d d3~k e3

(20)

so that r mi(f ) = 0,

is suciently rapidly decaying at innity. in other conventions or some other applications one

r ni(f ) = 0 (where mi, ni are the rotation and boost vector elds) if f

might also need right-invariant integration measure

z d d3~k

(21)

so that r f(~k0,0) = r f , where f(~k0,0)(~k, ) = f ((~k, )(~k0, 0)). these choices will be discussed

further in section 5.

8

3 physical interpretation

it is of course necessary to discuss the relation between the algebra of the deformed minkowski

spacetime (1) and the physically measured time and position of events. it is tempting to associate

to our formal normal ordering prescription an operative prescription in which the coordinates

can be treated conventionally provided one always measures the time coordinates rst. this is

in fact what one would expect based on an analogy with similar normal-ordering prescriptions

in ordinary quantum-mechanics frameworks. while in the following we do assume that there

exists some form of measurement procedure in an unknown theory of quantum gravity allowing

us to treat our coordinates conventionally, we want to emphasize that the nature of the observ-

ables associated to our operators must be somewhat dierent from the observables of ordinary

quantum mechanics. we expect such dierences especially because we have a time operator,
while ordinary quantum mechanics only involves a time parameter3. the observables of ordinary

quantum mechanics are measured in correspondence with a value of the time parameter, and

at least the observable associated to our time operator does not appear suited for this type of

operative denition. thus, one may attempt to treat the system with operators xi, t quantum

mechanically (we give an example in the next section) but the time variable for that quantum

mechanics would have to be dierent from the operator t. the two times would at some point

need to be reconciled within a more complete and unknown theory of quantum gravity. in fact

the problem we are facing here is nothing else than another version of the problem of time

encountered in one form or another in any approach to quantum gravity, although not always

immediately evident within some of the more abstract formalisms.

there is probably no reason to be surprised of these diculties of ordinary quantum me-

chanics. in fact, the conceptual analysis of measurements procedures [8, 24, 25] for candidate

quantum-gravity observables has been used [5, 26] to argue that the mechanics on which quan-

tum gravity is based should not be exactly the one of ordinary quantum mechanics. the new

mechanics should accommodate a somewhat dierent relationship between system and mea-

suring apparatus, and should take into account the fact that the limit in which the apparatus
behaves classically is not accessible4 once gravitation is turned on. the issue of separation

between observer and observed, which is likely to play a central role in the new mechanics,

has already been explored to some extent from the point of view of the necessary formalisms in

refs. [1] and in more recent works such as [27]. in general measurement is seen as an interaction

3the time appearing in the evolution equations of ordinary quantum mechanics is indeed only a parameter.
one can attempt to construct in some way a time of arrival operator (see, e.g., ref. [22]) but in general there
is no self-adjoint operator canonically conjugate to the total energy, if the energy spectrum is bounded from
below [23]

4in ordinary (non-gravitational) quantum mechanics the limiting procedure allowing to consider classical ap-
paratus requires an innite-mass limit [6, 7], which turns out to be inconsistent with the structure of gravitational
measurements [5, 8, 24, 25].

9

between aspects of the system labelled by macroscopic or classical handles and the microscopic

quantum system. to formulate this properly one rst needs to have a way to identify the

macroscopic, typically geometric, aspects (such as the separation between two devices) within

the overall quantum system, which is precisely the task of noncommutative geometry.

for our present purposes, in trying to envisage a type of setup that would allow to treat our

coordinates conventionally, let us consider the measurement of the speed of a particle travelling

along a straight-line trajectory. assuming the space-time points were identied in our laboratory

by a grid of clock-detector pairs and that one was able to set up the emission of the particle

from position p0 at time t0, the speed could be measured in two ways: by measuring the clock

time needed by the particle to reach a given detector in the grid or by measuring the position

(detector triggering) of the particle at a given time of the (sychronized) clocks of our grid.

while any denite statement must await the development of a consistent measurement theory

for quantum gravity (and in particular for the class of models we are considering), we expect

that within our proposal these two ways of measuring the speed would be signicantly dierent

and it appears plausible that our normal ordering prescription would correspond to the second

method, the one in which a chosen clock readout triggers the detectors to determine the position

of the particle at that time.

4 an example of pregeometry quantum system

while for the eective theory viewpoint that we advocate the details of the underlying physics

are not directly relevant, it might nevertheless be useful to have at least an intuitive picture of

the fact that our noncommutative minkowski spacetime should emerge from quantum gravity.

we assume that only certain macroscopic modes of the unknown quantum gravity theory survive

at the level of our eective description and, for the sake of discussion, that these form an eective
quantum mechanical system underlying the [xi, t] noncommutativity relations. we call this the

pregeometry quantum system. it should be considered as still an eective description of some

unknown quantum gravity theory but one which is slightly deeper than the operative prescription
for handling xi, t in terms of classical functions in the preceding sections.

we should stress that our operative prescriptions for handling x, t as well as for scattering
in terms of classical momentum and energy ~k,  do not require us necessarily to develop this

extra layer of pregeometry for our model. moreover, the best description of the eective

pregeometry may not be a quantum one at all. nevertheless, the conventional way of thinking

about noncommutative algebras is in terms of quantum mechanics and hence it is natural to

provide, for completeness, at least a sketch of one example of a suitable quantum system that

could serve as a link between our operative description and the unknown quantum gravity theory.

to approach this question, not knowing a complete quantum gravity theory, we can nev-

10

ertheless explore some mathematical possibilities. this is akin to using classical topology to

distinguish dierent a priori possible classical solutions of a complex system, but in our case in

an algebraic or quantum mechanical setting. thus we would like to ask about dierent possi-

bilities to extend the algebra to a quantum system with additional pi generators and suitable

commutation relations between position and momenta subject to some a priori assumptions.

this question was explored and answered in one spatial dimension in [1]. thus, if we are

given a variable x which we deem to be position and a variable  which we deem a priori to be

some kind of momentum variable and ask for all possible commutation relations such that the
addition law in phase space r2 extends to the quantum system as a quantum group a extending

x,  in the sense

c[]  a  c[x]

as a hopf algebra extension (here c[x] denotes functions in one variable x, etc.) then one nds

(coming out of the analysis) a two-parameter family of possibilities[1] for a, namely

[x, ] = 0(1  e x
 )

where 0,  are the two parameters, with the coproduct

x = x  1 + 1  x,

 =   1 + e x

  .

(22)

(23)

this is the 2-parameter planck-scale hopf algebra c[]0,c[x] introduced in [1] in this way.

of course, that a should a priori be a hopf algebra extension is a conceptual assumption which

may well not be true.

i.e. we are not absolutely forced to take this form of a, it is merely

a mathematically natural class of possibilities. moreover, whereas in [1] the two parameters

were intepreted as the physical  and the gravitational length scale of the background geometry,

in our case they are the parameters of the pregeometry system with an unknown relationship

to the actual physical parameters of the unknown quantum gravity theory. likewise, we do

not suppose that  is exactly the physical momentum of the theory. rather, we are merely

using the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics to build a deeper model behind the

commutation relations (1).

in any event, motivated by this one-dimensional analysis, as an example of a pregeometry

quantum system for our 3+1-dimensional minkowski space we take three independent copies of

(22), i.e. we add generators i, say, where i = 1, 2, 3, with the relations and coproduct

[xi, j] = i

j0(1  e xi
 ),

[i, j] = 0,

~x = ~x  1 + 1  ~x, i = i  1 + e xi

  i

11

within this larger algebra we identify our noncommutative minkowski space as generated by
the xi and

in the limit

t = xi

i

, 0  ,

0


= .

note that the role of the i here is as auxiliary time variables with their sum giving the time of

the minkowski theory. one in fact expects something unusual like this when one considers the

asymmetric (and to date still problematic) treatment of time in canonical quantum gravity; there

one considers the spatial elds and their conjugates on each time-slice and tries to reconstruct

the spacetime time afterwards. in addition, the commuting i corresponds to the absence of

spatial curvature in the noncommutative minkowski-space. one can certainly envisage more

complex models where an additional parameter enters into nontrivial commutation relations

between the i as well.

although this is just one example of a pregeometry quantum system, it shows how the

minkowski space algebra (1) might arise as the limiting case of commutation relations which

have a more familiar quantum mechanical form. (and if one wants to render the commutation
relations in an even more canonical form one need only change to i = (1  e xi
 )1i at the
expense of a more unnatural coproduct in terms of xi, i.)

given such a picture, one can now explore, at least tentatively, certain issues. first of all,

as a genuine quantum system in [1] one has natural hermiticity properties

xi = xi,


i = i

giving a hopf -algebra. we see that if we want to have a quantum-mechanical interpretation of

the noncommutativity of our minkowski-space then we should take  real when t is hermitian.

this forces us to the imaginary nite dierences in 0 in section 2. alternatively we could

replace  by  here and in section 2 for a more conventional lattice dierential in 0 but

would then have to take t antihermitian for a quantum mechanical picture. this situation is

not unlike quantum eld theory where for a proper mathematical foundation it is best to wick

rotate to imaginary time. one might therefore expect that this should be an eective remnant

of the problem of wick rotation in the unknown quantum gravity theory.

one also has a natural schroedinger type representation on wavefunctions (~x) with xi
xi , etc. the implied representation of our

acting by multiplication and i = 0(1  e xi
minkowski space is

 ) 

xi   = xi,

t   = xi

xi


xi 

(24)

12

i.e., t acts as an innitesimal scale transformation. the xi is hermitian and t indeed hermitian

with respect to a certain inner product.

one has uncertainties in the simultaneous measurement of xi, i and other familiar quantum
eects. of course it implies the obvious uncertainty due to (1) but potentially further uncertain-

ties as well, depending on the ultimate physical interpretation of the individual i. similarly,
if one takes as in [1] the hamiltonian ~2/2m, one has dynamics on the pregeometry quantum

system consisting of a particle moving more and more slowly as it approaches the origin (in a

manner not unlike the approach to a black hole event horizon[1]). of course, the formal time

variable pertaining to this discussion of the pregeometry quantum system should not be confused

with the operator t dened in (24) from the pregeometry momentum operators i.

we emphasize again that we are providing these comments solely for illustrative purposes.

of course, experiments suitable for exploring the nature of such a pregeometry system are well

beyond our reach. in principle one would rst devise experiments to conrm (or falsify) the mod-

els at the geometry level and only once this level was well established one could hope to devise

even more rened experiments to test models of the pregeometry level. since technology only

very recently [18, 26, 28, 29] became advanced enough for a few very preliminary experimental

investigations of the geometry level, all considerations concerning the pregeometry level

must indeed be considered as purely illustrative.

finally, as well as the example discussed above based on extension theory there are other

more naive approaches to the pregeometry quantum system one could also consider. for exam-
ple, for any hopf algebra h there is a canonical semidirect product h>h , the weyl algebra

or so-called heisenberg double, see [21]. it is easy enough to compute in our case as generated
by x, p with the commutation relations given in [9] as the action of the p on the x as part of
the action there of the deformed poincare quantum group. while probably playing some role,

we do not take it as the pregeometry quantum system itself because as a quantisation it treats

time on the same footing as the space (which is not really appropriate even when quantising

a single relativistic particle). the weyl algebra also does not have a coproduct or other inter-

esting mathematical properties to characterise it in place of that. we defer the discussion of

this to further work in which, particularly, the relationship between any pregeometry quantum

system and quantum mechanics on the noncommutative minkowski space (which are dierent

questions) should be explored.

5 quantum eld theory on noncommutative spacetime via non-

abelian energy-momentum space

in this section we point out the possibility of a new approach to the construction of eld the-

ories on a noncommutative space-time. previous attempts at a satisfactory denition of eld

13

theory in a non-commutative space-time have had only limited success. at a rather formal level

some progress has been made, but eventually one was confronted with the diculties involved

in generalizing to a noncommutative space-time some of the operators and other tools required
for a eld theory.5 here we observe that these diculties could be evaded by exploiting the

fact that quantum group fourier transform allows us, as we have already seen, to rewrite struc-

tures living on noncommutative spacetime as structures living on a classical (but nonabelian)

energy-momentum space. if one is content to evaluate everything in energy-momentum space,

this observation gives the opportunity to by-pass all problems directly associated with the non-

commutativity of space-time. we are condent that eventually a compelling space-time for-

mulation of eld theories on noncommutative geometries will emerge, but in the meantime we

restrict ourselves to energy-momentum space where the underlying noncommutativity manifests

itself only through the curvature (nonabelianness of the group) of the space. note that this

approach does not work for any noncommutative spacetime but for all those where the spacetime

coordinate algebra is the enveloping algebra of a lie algebra, with the lie algebra generators

regarded up side down as noncommuting coordinates[19].

because of the viewpoint we are advocating, within our approach eld theories are not

naturally described in terms of a lagrangian. we resort directly to a feynman-diagramatic
formulation.6

in principle, according to our proposal a given ordinary eld theory can be

deformed into a counterpart living in a suitable noncommutative spacetime not by fancy

quantum group methods but simply by the appropriate modication of the momentum-space

feynman rules to those appropriate for a nonabelian group. the quantum group concepts

are, however, required in order to do this in a manner consistent with the (noncommutative)

geometry of space-time, for example to consistently obtain predictions for cross sections from

the amplitudes evaluated using the nonabelian feynman rules.

while we postpone to future work (also because some of the relevant mathematics is only

at an early stage of development) the detailed discussion of examples of such eld-theoretical

models, in the rest of this section we give some general guidelines to be followed in constructing

the type of eld theories we are proposing.

let us start with the feynman rules. as mentioned the guiding principle of our proposal for

the construction of deformed eld theories is the replacement with quantum-group counterparts

of those group-theoretic elements which characterize the structures relevant for ordinary eld
theories. accordingly, the propagator d(~k, ) of a scalar particle will be essentially given by the

5in particular, interesting studies of eld theories in certain other noncommutative geometries were reported
in the two preprints [30] and [31] which appeared while we were completing the writeup of the present article.
our own approach is completely dierent from these works (in fact they are based on dierent methods which
would not seem to apply to our particular spacetime (1) at all.)

6this also implies that the description of certain non-perturbative eects (the ones not obtainable as innite

sums of feynman diagrams) might not be possible within our energy-momentum space formulation.

14

inverse of the operator in the dispersion relation eq. (17), i.e. in place of d = (2  ~k2  m2)1

we take

d = (cid:16)2(e + e  2)  e~k2  m2(cid:17)1

.

(25)

the feynman rules for vertices that do not involve the momenta of incoming/outgoing
particles remain unchanged. for example, in 4 theory the 4-point vertex is still simply given

by the coupling constant

 = g   = g .

(26)

vertices which involve the momenta of incoming/outgoing particles and in particular those

that require to sum the momenta of pairs of particles must be rewritten also taking into account

the rule (12) for combining momenta in our deformed minkowski spacetime. we postpone a full

discussion until we will be ready to discuss more complex eld theories. it is clear, however, that

when our momenta are nonabelian there will be a fundamental dierence between scattering

particle 1 with particle 2 and scattering particle 2 with particle 1; even for trivial scattering

the total momentum of particle 1 plus particle 2 or particle 2 plus particle 1 (where addition is

replaced by our nonabelian group law) will be dierent in the two cases. this is a new physical

eect which we are predicting, which is therefore dicult to lay down the rules for in advance.

in the rst instance one should simply do scattering computations according to all distinct

order-of-addition rules, to see which t best with a given set of actual scattering experiments.

one could also express ignorance of the new eect by averaging over the dierent orderings of

the momenta. such an averaging procedure might even be the correct choice at least in cases

involving indistinguishable particles.

the feynman diagrams involving integration over loop momenta will also reect the underly-

ing non-commutativity of spacetime and nonabelian nature of energy-momentum space, through

the measure of integration on the latter. as mentioned in our discussion of wave packets in sec-

tion 2, there are at least three candidates for the measure of integration in energy-momentum

space (i.e. for loop integration); the left-invariant, right-invariant and lorentz invariant mea-

sures. all three coincide classically but in our noncommutative theory we have to choose.

fortunately, all the measures have a similar form

z d d3~k e

(27)

for suitable  = 1, 0, 3. one can therefore proceed, for example, with  regarded as a parameter

to be tted by comparison with experminent.

since feynman rules come in fact from an analysis of the scattering of wave-packets, the

obvious choice suggested by section 2 is the left-invariant one  = 1. however, we would prefer

15

to leave the choice open at the present stage. future work might show that only some (perhaps

only one) of these candidates leads to renormalizable theories. actually, it is plausible that some

of these measures might lead to nite theories, since the exponential suppression of high-energy

modes might be sucient to eliminate all ultraviolet problems. we postpone investigation of

these issues to future publications, but let us emphasize here that these issues that confront us

because we have lost the equivalence between left-invariant, right-invariant and lorentz invariant

measures are more complex examples of the type of issues that one encounters, e.g. when

allowing p-parity violation in particle physics (which actually turns out to be the scenario

preferred by nature). the loss of p-parity introduces the arbitrariness between v-a and

v+a behaviour which can only be settled by experiments. in our case besides experiments also

the requirement of mathematical consistency might be useful in identifying the correct measure.

future more in-depth investigations of this approach might uncover additional requirements to

be satised by the integration measure, thereby reducing the number of choices available.

having sketched out our approach to deformed feynman rules let us close this section with

some comments on obtaining cross sections from the amplitudes calculated using the nonabelian

feynman rules. this is of course a necessary step since experimental data are compared to cross

sections. the usual formulas cannot be naively applied in our case since the derivation of cross

sections from amplitudes must now be done consistently with the measurement of solid angles

etc in the noncommutative spacetime. this could be the most delicate part of our approach

because it is the part where we cannot fully conne the analysis within energy-momentum space.

we indicate here only a general strategy that could be adopted. first of all, using our principle

of normal ordering we consider normal ordered spacetime expressions as identied with their

classical counterparts for the purposes of specifying solid angles, etc. using this identication

one is left with the task of obtaining a consistent deformation of the standard cross-section

formulas. let us discuss the elements of novelty required by our framework within the specic

example of a scattering process with two particles in the initial state and two particles in the

nal state. the relevant standard cross section formula in the ordinary commutative minkowski

spacetime is

d =

d3~kf,1
163f,1

d3~kf,2
163f,2
(q1)|2|~ki,2

|~ki,1

|m(1i + 2i  1f + 2f )|2

|vi,1  vi,2|

z

d3~q1

d3~q2

163i,1

163i,2

(28)

(q2)|2 164 (4)(cid:16)(~q1, i,1) + (~q2, i,2)  (~kf,1, f,1)  (~kf,2, f,2)(cid:17) ,
where (~ki,1, i,1) and (~ki,2, i,2) (respectively vi,1 and vi,2) denote energy-momentum (respec-
tively velocity) of the particles in the initial state, d3kf,1 and d3kf,2 are innitesimal volume
elements in the space of momenta of the particles in the nal state, ~ki,1
(~q) are the
momentum-space wave functions of the particles in the initial states, which are assumed to be
sharply peaked around ~q  ~ki,1 and ~q  ~ki,2 respectively.

(~q) and ~ki,2

16

the deformation of the formula (28) requires various elements of our formalism. most

notably, the energy-momentum conservation enforced by the  function must be implemented

consistently with the nonabelianess of our energy-momentum space, and this brings in again

some choices with respect to the ordering of the various momenta entering the sums. the usual

problem of choosing the measure of integration is also present here, but one would expect this

ambiguity to be settled by a requirement of consistency with the choice of measure adopted

for loop-integrals in feynman diagrams and in the denition of wave packets.

in particular,

at present it appears legitimate to proceed taking measures according to the left-invariance
advocated in section 2. finally the wave functions ~ki,1
equation (28), but this is the result [32] of the simplicity of the procedure for the construction

appear in a very simple way in

,~ki,2

of two-particle wave packets in ordinary minkowski spacetime.

in our case we have already

constructed 1-particle wave packets in section 2, modulo some possible variations. the usual

denition (as an approximation) for multiple-wave packets is as the tensor product of 1-particle

wave packets, i.e. this in itself presents no problem in our formalism. e.g.

a1,~k1,a2,~k2

= a1,~k1

 a2,~k2

.

(29)

the ordering of the addition of momenta for in and out states in a scattering corresponds to the

ordering of such tensor products. for identical particles one could again perform some form of

symmetrization to express our ignorance of which particle should be on the left and which on

the right factor, but in any case nontrivial implications for the cross-section formula are to be

expected.

6 phenomenology

6.1 phenomenology of deformed dispersion relations

the deformed dispersion relation (17) can have important implications even though the de-

formation is only minute (it is proportional to , which we expect to be close to the planck

length). while we derived (17) for scalar particles, and a rigorous analysis of spin-1 particles

must still await some developments on the mathematics side, it appears quite plausible that the

same dispersion relation, which is primarily dictated by the deformed symmetries present in our

approach, would also apply to photons. this would lead to an eect of energy dependence of

the speed of photons which is large enough for observation in experiments involving the gamma

rays we collect from astrophysical sources.

in clarifying the origin of this energy-dependence of the speed of massless particles let us

start by observing that within the stated assumption of existence of a practical measurement

procedure allowing to treat normal ordered expressions conventionally it is legitimate to describe

the physical wave velocity of our noncommutative plane waves (13) according to the conventional

17

formula

vi =

d
dki

.

(30)

one may analyse this in terms of a wave packet or, equivalently, by thinking about one wave (13)
at a time. when traveling a distance ~l in time t the wave still completes n = (~k  ~l + t )/2
cycles as usual. hence if we vary ~k with the same number of cycles, the arrival time varies by

t = 

(~l + t~v)



 ~k

as usual, with vi dened by (30). this is arranged so that

e~k~xet|~l,t = e(~k+~k)~xe(+~v~k)t|~l,t +t

when one replaces the noncommutative coordinates ~x, t by their measured values as shown. note

that one would obtain quite dierent answers due to the noncommutativity of the generators

without the normal ordering assumption for the comparison with measured values. this provides

at least some justication for (30) within the present framework; a fuller justication would

presumably come out of a more detailed model of an actual measuring apparatus within a more

complete theory.

with this justication, we may combine (13) and (17) to nds that the velocity of massless

particles is given by

vi =

d
dki

=

ki
2~k2 + 

||p2~k2

.

consequently, the speed of massless particles is given by

v =

1
1 + 

||p2~k2

= e  1   ,

(31)

(32)

where on the right-hand side we expanded for small  (  1).

this velocity law for massless particles eq. (32) was already considered in some studies

[13, 14, 18] based on the -poincare symmetries and studies based on liouville non-critical

string theory [18, 33]. the fact that we also encounter this velocity law is of course not

surprising since (in the sense claried in section 1) our approach is consistent with a background

-poincare symmetry.

it is signicant however that, thanks to the quantum group fourier

transform methods, we could for the rst time discuss corresponding plane waves (13) and

thereby justify eq. (32) as fully deserving its physical interpretation as velocity law. instead,

in previous -poincare approaches this velocity law was only suggested at a rather heuristic

level starting from the properties of a casimir and using formal manipulations with generators

p which, although commuting among themselves, were viewed as part of a noncommutative

18

deformed poincare algebra, and with formulae such as vi = dp0/dpi assumed formally. by
replacing these p by the underlying energy-momentum space with points (~k, ) we are able to
compute with the latter, which are numbers and not formal generators. and we are able to give

at least some justication for (30) through the properties of the plane waves (13) now at our

disposal. also notice that our wave equation was not obtained simply using a casimir, which

would have not xed it or its corresponding dispersion relation uniquely; we also demanded that

the dispersion relation be invariant under group inversion in energy-momentum space.

the velocity law (32) is a signicant prediction of our proposal since recent progress in the

phenomenology of gamma-ray bursts [15] and other astrophysical phenomena [16, 17] renders

experimentally accessible [18] the investigation of certain modied velocity laws, including the

ones of type eq. (32). as explained in ref. [18], these experimental tests are actually rather

simple.

in fact, according to (32), two signals respectively of energy  and  +  emitted

simultaneously from the same astrophysical source in travelling a distance l acquire a relative

time delay |t| given by

|t|   

l
c

.

(33)

this time delay can be detected if  and l are large whilst the time scale over which the signal

exhibits time structure is small. these conditions are in particular met by certain gamma-ray

bursts. we recall that these bursts involve [34] typical photon energies in the range 0.1100 mev

and time structure down to the millisecond scale has been observed in the light curves. according

to eq. (33) a signal with millisecond time structure in a burst of photons with energies spread
over a range of order 10 mev coming from a distance of order 1010 light years7 would be sensitive
to  of order 1035m  lp.

already available data [16] rule out values of  of order 1033m in eq. (32), and planned
experiments should achieve sensitivity to values of  of order  1035m  lp within a few
years [17].

let us also emphasize that in our proposal the v appearing in eq. (32) is naturally inter-

preted as the expectation of a velocity operator in some underlying prequantized pregeometry.

in particular, this implies that a sample of massless particles of energy  would have average

speed given by the v() of eq. (32) but there would also be a certain spread v() in the speeds

of individual particles within the sample. since we do not have any very denite knowledge of

the structure of the pregeometry quantum system we are unable to make denite predictions

for v(), but we hope experimentalists will nd motivation in our analysis to search for this

eect. additional motivation for this particular type of experimental investigations comes from

analogous eects encountered in other quantum gravity motivated studies [35].

7the cosmological origin of at least some grbs has been recently established [15].

19

6.2 cpt violation

another class of recently proposed quantum gravity phenomena have to do with violations of

cpt invariance. this is a rather general prediction of quantum gravity [36], since most ap-

proaches involve some elements of non-locality (so that one of the hypotheses of the cpt

theorem does not hold) and/or decoherence. what is remarkable is that certain quantum grav-

ity approaches predict violations of cpt invariance large enough to be detectable by exploiting

the properties of the very delicate neutral-kaon system.

in this subsection we observe that the proposal we are putting forward in the present article

hosts a mechanism of cpt violation. although a detailed study of cpt violation within our

approach will require the development of the mathematical tools mentioned in the preceding

section, we shall also provide here some evidence suggesting that this cpt violation might be

tested using the neutral-kaon system.

the root of cpt violation within our approach resides in the discretization of time (in

the sense claried earlier). actually, cpt invariance is not necessarily lost: it can in fact be

traded for a novel invariance, which we could see as a deformed cpt invariance. our (quantum)

deformation of minkowski spacetime leads to deformation of p and t transformations. the

situation of cpt transformations in our proposal is somewhat analogous to the deformations of

lorentz invariance considered in [13, 14, 18], whose experimental signature would be a violation

of ordinary lorentz invariance [18], but at the fundamental level can be described by replacing

the lorentz symmetries with a deformed version of lorentz symmetries [13, 14].

in characterizing the deformed cpt invariance which is consistent with our approach it is

important to notice that in our approach a particle with charges, say, , ,  and momentum
(~k, ) has as antiparticle a particle of charges , ,  and momentum not (~k, ) but

(~k, )1 = (~ke, ) .

(34)

from (12). correspondingly in the loop integrals of our momentum-space eld theory particles

and antiparticles do not contribute in a totally symmetric way. this is also evident when

comparing the positive values of energy and the negative values energy which are consistent
with a given momentum (~k, ) according to eq. (17) and (25). that is, if one takes a usual
splitting of momentum into spatial momentum ~k and energy  and carries this over to the

experimental interpretation one can expect to observe the modication in the group inversion

as a breakdown of ordinary cpt invariance.

it may be that such a breaking of ordinary cpt invariance turns out to be consistent with

quantum mechanics, i.e. the violations of cpt invariance may be described as terms in an (eec-

tive) hamiltonian which governs otherwise ordinary evolution equations of quantum mechanics.

while this seems rather probable a denite statement will have to wait more detailed analyses;

20

in fact, at present one cannot exclude that the novel elements of our approach (particularly

the peculiar nature of time) could lead to evolution equations not exactly of the type expected

within ordinary quantum mechanics. we have discussed this possibility already in section 3.

on the other hand, at present, we are setting up only a framework for an eective low-energy

description of certain quantum gravity eects and the fact that the full quantum gravity might

require departures from ordinary quantum mechanics does not necessarily imply that its eec-

tive low-energy descriptions should already incorporate this property. we emphasize this point

because other approaches to quantum gravity lead to violations of cpt invariance which cannot

be accommodated within the formalism of ordinary quantum mechanics [37, 38, 39].

the dierence between breaking ordinary cpt invariance within quantum mechanics [39, 40]

and outside quantum mechanics has been emphasized in work on the neutral-kaon system, and is

accessible experimentally [29]. the type of breaking of ordinary cpt invariance which we expect

to emerge in future developments of the approach here proposed would also be distinguishable

from other proposals because of the fact that here cpt invariance is replaced by a deformed

cpt invariance whose predictions could be tested experimentally.

7 summary and outlook

the analysis here reported had two objectives which we can now restate more succinctly using the

discussion that preceded. the rst objective was the one of putting on rmer ground recent ideas

on the possibility that the quantum-group formalism might allow a consistent formulation of

theories with deformed dispersion relations of the type which can now be tested [18] using recent

progress in the phenomenology of gamma-ray bursts [15] and other astrophysical phenomena

[16, 17]. in sections 2, 3 and 6 this more rigorous analysis was given together with the rst

elements of a possible measurement theory for noncommutative spacetimes. we hope that having

established more rmly the possibility of a consistent formalism for the mentioned deformed

dispersion relations we will provide additional motivation for experimentalists to look for this

new eect.

our second objective was to point out the possibility of a new approach to the construction of

eld theories on noncommutative spacetimes of the type here considered (those where a quantum-

geometry transformation[19] to a classical but nonabelian energy-momentum group is possible),

and to discuss some of the issues arising. this was done in section 5. while several mathematical

and interpretational developments are still required for us to be able to use this approach for

the construction of a meaningful model, we believe that the procedure here outlined can provide

a useful starting point for future work in this direction. as mentioned in section 5, it appears

likely that some of these eld theories would be well-behaved in the ultraviolet (they would

not require regularization of ultraviolet divergences). additional motivation for this research

21

programme should come from the fact that by constructing (if this indeed turns out to be

possible) a consistent model of particle physics according to the guidelines described in section

5 we might then have a formalism which allows direct/explicit calculation of the mentioned

in-vacuo dispersion eects and cpt-violation eects. the magnitude of these eects could be

related directly and calculably to , while in other quantum-gravity formalisms believed to host

these eects the evaluation of the magnitude of the eects directly from the original theory turns

out to be too dicult (but one is able to identify in the theory the structures required for the

eects of interest and phenomenological models [33, 35, 39, 41] can then be made to parametrize

the magnitude of the eects).

of course it would also be interesting to investigate further the idea that our noncommutative

minkowski spacetime could be used to model some properties of the foamy vacuum of quan-

tum gravity. a natural framework for such studies appears to be provided by canonical/loop

quantum gravity [42].

acknowledgements

these results were obtained at the karpacz winter school in polanica, poland in february

1999; we warmly thank the organisers for making our collaboration possible. one of us (g.a.c.)

would also like to thank carlo rovelli and rodolfo russo for conversations. g.a.c. is supported

by a marie curie tmr fellowship.

references

[1] s. majid, hopf algebras for physics at the planck scale, class. quantum grav. 5 (1988)

1587-1606.

[2] s. majid, non-commutative-geometric groups by a bicrossproduct construction, (phd the-

sis, harvard mathematical physics, 1988).

[3] s. majid, on q-regularization, int. j. mod. phys. a5 (1990) 4689-4696.

[4] g. amelino-camelia, enlarged bound on the measurability of distances and quantum -

poincar`e group phys. lett. b392 (1997) 283-286.

[5] g. amelino-camelia, dimensionful deformations of poincare symmetries for a quantum

gravity without ideal observers, mod. phys. lett. a13 (1998) 1319-1325.

[6] n. bohr and l. rosenfeld, kgl. danske videnskab s. nat. fys. medd. 12 (1933) 1.

[7] e.p. wigner, relativistic invariance and quantum phenomena, rev. mod. phys. 29 (1957)

255; h. salecker and e.p. wigner, phys. rev. 109 (1958) 571.

22

[8] g. amelino-camelia, limits on the measurability of space-time distances in (the semi-

classical approximation of ) quantum gravity, mod. phys. lett. a9 (1994) 3415-3422; on

local observations in quantum gravity, mod. phys. lett. a11 (1996) 1411-1416.

[9] s. majid and h. ruegg, bicrossproduct structure of the -poincare group and non-

commutative geometry, phys. lett. b334 (1994) 348-354.

[10] s. majid and r. oeckl, twisting of quantum dierentials and the planck scale hopf agebra,

preprint 1998, to appear commun. math. phys.

[11] j. lukierski, a. nowicki, h. ruegg, and v.n. tolstoy, q-deformation of poincare algebra,

phys. lett. b264 (1991) 331-338.

[12] s. zakrewski, j. phys. a27 (1994) 2075.

[13] j. lukierski, a. nowicki and h. ruegg, classical and quantum-mechanics of free -

relativistic systems, ann. phys. 243 (1995) 90-116.

[14] g. amelino-camelia, j. lukierski and a. nowicki, -deformed covariant phase space and

quantum-gravity uncertainty relations, hep-th/9706031, phys. atom. nucl. 61 (1998) 1811-

1815; distance measurement and -deformed propagation of light and heavy probes, gr-

qc/9903066, int. j. mod. phys. a (in press).

[15] see r. wijers, nature 393 (1998) 13, and references therein.

[16] s.d. biller et al., limits to quantum gravity eects from observations of tev flares in

active galaxies, gr-qc/9810044.

[17] g. amelino-camelia, j. ellis, n.e. mavromatos, d.v. nanopoulos and s. sarkar, sensi-

tivity of astrophysical observations to gravity-induced wave dispersion in vacuo, astro-

ph/9810483.

[18] g. amelino-camelia, j. ellis, n.e. mavromatos, d.v. nanopoulos and s. sarkar, tests of

quantum gravity from observations of -ray bursts, nature 393 (1998) 763-765.

[19] s. majid, duality principle and braided geometry, springer lec. notes in physics 447 (1995)

125-144.

[20] r. oeckl, classication of dierential calculi on uq(b+), classical limits and duality, preprint

1998, to appear j. math. phys.

[21] s. majid, foundations of quantum group theory (cup, 1995).

[22] n. grot, c. rovelli, r.s. tate, time-of-arrival in quantum mechanics, quant-ph/9603021.

23

[23] w. pauli, die allgemeinen prinzipien der wallen-mechanik. handbuch der physik, edited

by s. fluegge (springer, 1958).

[24] p.g. bergmann and g.j. smith, gen. rel. grav. 14 (1982) 1131-1166.

[25] y.j. ng and h. van dam, mod. phys. lett. a9 (1994) 335.

[26] g. amelino-camelia, gravity-wave interferometers as probes of a low-energy eective quan-

tum gravity, gr-qc/9903080.

[27] c. rovelli, relational quantum mechanics, quant-ph/9609002

[28] g. amelino-camelia, gravity-wave interferometers as quantum-gravity detectors, nature

398 (1999) 216.

[29] j. ellis, j. lopez, n.e. mavromatos, d.v. nanopoulos and cplear collaboration, test

of cpt symmetry and quantum mechanics with experimental data from cplear, phys.

lett. b 364 (1995) 239.

[30] m.m. sheikh-jabbari, one loop renormalizability of supersymmetric yang-mills theories

on noncommutative two-torus, hep-th/9903107.

[31] r. oeckl, braided quantum field theory, hep-th/9906225.

[32] m.l. goldberger and k.m. watson, collision theory (john wiley & sons, new york,

1967).

[33] g. amelino-camelia, j. ellis, n.e. mavromatos and d.v. nanopoulos, distance measure-

ment and wave dispersion in a liouville string approach to quantum gravity, int. j. mod.

phys. a12 (1997) 607-623.

[34] g.j. fishman and c.a. meegan, annu. rev. astron. astrophys. 33 (1995) 415; d.h. hart-

mann, astron. and astrophys. suppl. 120 (1996) 31.

[35] j. ellis, n.e. mavromatos and d.v. nanopoulos, a microscopic recoil model for light cone

uctuations in quantum gravity, gr-qc/9906029.

[36] d.n. page, is quantum gravity deterministic and/or time symmetric?, gen. rel. grav. 14

(1982) 299-302; l. alvarez-gaume and c. gomez, remarks on quantum gravity, com-

mun. math. phys. 89 (1983) 235.

[37] j. ellis, j.s. hagelin, d.v. nanopoulos and m. srednicki, search for violations of quantum

mechanics nucl. phys. b241 (1984) 381.

24

[38] p. huet, m. e. peskin, violation of cpt and quantum mechanics in the k0-anti-k0 system,

nucl. phys. b434 (1995) 3-38.

[39] j. ellis, j.l. lopez, n.e. mavromatos, d.v. nanopoulos, precision tests of cpt symmetry

and quantum mechanics in the neutral kaon system, phys. rev. d53 (1996) 3846-3870.

[40] l. maiani in the dane physics handbook (infn, frascati, 1992).

[41] j. ellis, n. mavromatos and d.v. nanopoulos, string theory modies quantum mechanics,

phys. lett. b293 (1992) 37.

[42] a. ashtekar, new variable for classical and quantum gravity, phys. rev. lett. 57 (1986)

2244; c. rovelli and l. smolin, knot theory and quantum gravity, phys. rev. lett. 61

(1988) 1155.

25

