9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

1
2

 
 

2
v
0
3
1
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ph. d. thesis (internet version)
hep-th/9907130

symmetry algebras of quantum

matrix models in the large-n limit

department of physics and astronomy, p.o. box 270171, university of

rochester, rochester, new york 14627

c.-w. h. lee

july 15, 1999

abstract

quantum matrix models in the large-n limit arise in many physical sys-
tems like yangmills theory with or without supersymmetry, quantum grav-
ity, string-bit models, various low energy eective models of string theory,
m(atrix) theory, quantum spin chain models, and strongly correlated elec-
tron systems like the hubbard model. we introduce, in a unifying fashion, a
hierachy of innite-dimensional lie superalgebras of quantum matrix models.
one of these superalgebras pertains to the open string sector and another
one the closed string sector. physical observables of quantum matrix models
like the hamiltonian can be expressed as elements of these lie superalgebras.
this indicates the lie superalgebras describe the symmetry of quantum ma-
trix models. we present the structure of these lie superalgebras like their
cartan subalgebras, root vectors, ideals and subalgebras. they are general-
izations of well-known algebras like the cuntz algebra, the virasoro algebra,
the toeplitz algebra, the witt algebra and the onsager algebra. just like we
learnt a lot about critical phenomena and string theory through their confor-
mal symmetry described by the virasoro algebra, we may learn a lot about
quantum chromodynamics, quantum gravity and condensed matter physics
through this symmetry of quantum matrix models described by these lie
superalgebras.

foreword

in the past year or so, my advisor, s. g. rajeev, and i published a num-
ber of articles [68, 69, 70, 71] on algebraic approaches to yangmills theory,
d-branes, m-theory and quantum spin chain systems. each of these papers
focuses on a particular aspect. for example, in one paper we discussed exclu-
sively the case when the physical system consists of open singlet states only,
and in another one we conned ourselves to closed singlet states. moreover,
we omitted a number of proofs and intermediate steps of calculations which
led to the conclusions presented in those articles in order to keep them of
reasonable sizes. taking the opportunity to write this ph.d. thesis, i now
present our results in a more coherent fashion and a more detailed manner
so that it is more accessible to those who want to acquire a deeper under-
standing. we hope that the following pages have achieved these purposes.
we had in mind junior graduate students when we wrote this article, and
hope that this article is accessible to them.

the following table shows whether and where the material of a section

has been published:

section 2.2: refs.[68], [69], [70] and [71] and some yet to be pub-

lished material.

section 2.3: ref.[70].
section 2.4: ref.[69].
sections 2.5 and 2.6: to be published.
section 2.7: refs.[68], [70] and [71].
section 2.8: refs.[69] and [71].
chapter 3: ref.[69].
section 4.2: to be published.
section 4.3: ref.[70].
section 5.2: to be published.
section 5.3: ref.[69] and some yet to be published material.
section 5.4: refs.[68] and [70] and some yet to be published ma-

terial.

section 5.5: refs.[68] and [70].

ref.[73] is a very recent review article which is a simplied version of this
thesis. it introduces to readers only the bosonic part of the theory. readers
who prefer a simpler and more basic exposition of the subject matter are
referred to it.

ii

acknowledgement

first of all, i would like to thank my advisor, s. g. rajeev, for all the years
of his patient guidance and instructions. besides teaching me a lot of physics,
mathematics and sometimes even english, he distilled in me valuable wisdom
in putting a physics problem in a proper perspective and understanding its
elegance. for example, he demonstrated to me that if it is possible to think
of a physics problem geometrically or diagrammatically, a lot of times the
geometry or the diagrams will unveil simple but profound properties of the
physics, and help you solve the problem elegantly.
i hope that the many
diagrams in this whole thesis illustrate this point well. more importantly, he
demonstrates to us what a proper attitude towards scientic research should
be. one should pick a physics problem that is truly important to the progress
of science, and be persistent and patient in looking for its solution. no doubt
understanding yangmills theory is an important problem of science in this
generation. i hope that the approach described in these pages provide us a
clue to the ultimate solution to yangmills theory.

i would also like to thank to y. shapir and e. wolf for their guidance
of my research on roughening transition and coherence theory, respectively
and thus gave me some valuable personal lessons in conducting scientic
research. my special thanks is also due to my very rst mentor, h. m.
lai, who introduced scientic research to me and taught some fundamental
lessons of it. for example, he taught me that if a problem looks too dicult,
one may try to tackle a simpler version of it, and go back to the full problem
later. this simple philosophy proves to be very useful in this work.

many other people have oered help to this research. i would like to ex-
press my special gratitude to o. t. turgut for introducing to me an algebraic
formulation of gluon dynamics which provides the basis for this whole work.
moreover, v. john, s. okubo and t. d. palev give us good suggestion on
certain parts of the thesis. many other people have taken the time to listen
to our results in seminars, talks or informal discussions. regrettably, there
are too many of them that i am unable to list all their names here.

i would also like to thank t. guptill and c. macesanu for their technical
help in the computer part of this thesis, and l. orr and s. gitler for their
careful proofreading.

of course, without the instructions of basic knowledge in language, science
and others from my former teachers, and without the encouragement from

iii

my former classmates at all the tertiary, secondary and primary institutions i
attended, it is impossible to nish this research. they laid a good foundation
for me to pursue this work.

last, i would like to express my greatest gratitude to my parents, lee
kun hung and cheng yau ying, for all their years of care, patience and
sacrice.

this work was supported in part by funds provided by the u.s. depart-

ment of energy under grant de-fg02-91er40685.

iv

contents

abstract

foreword

acknowledgement

table of contents

1 introduction

i

ii

iii

v

1

1.1 hadron structure, quantum gravity and condensed matter

1
phenomena . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2 classical matrix models in the large-n limit . . . . . . . . .
1.3 quantum matrix models in the large-n limit . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4 symmetry algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.5 an algebraic approach to quantum matrix models in the

large-n limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

2 formulation and examples of quantum matrix models in

15
introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
17
. . 30

the large-n limit
2.1
2.2 formulation of quantum matrix models in the large-n limit
2.3 examples: yangmills theory with adjoint matter fields
2.4 examples: yangmills theory with fundamental and adjoint

matter fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
2.5 examples: supersymmetric yangmills theory . . . . . . . . 38
2.6 examples: quantum gravity and string theory . . . . . . . . 40
2.7 examples: quantum spin chains (1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

v

2.8 examples: quantum spin chains (2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

3 a lie algebra for open strings

52
introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.1
3.2 an algebra for finite-rank operators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
3.3 operators of the second kind and the cuntz algebra . . . . . 55
3.4 current algebra in the large-n limit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
3.5 a lie algebra for the operators of the fourth kind . . . . . . 64
3.6 operators of the fourth kind and the witt algebra . . . . . . 72

4 a lie superalgebra

76
4.1
introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
4.2 derivation of a precursor superalgebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
4.3 structure of the precursor algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84

5 open string superalgebra and closed string superalgebra 92
5.1
introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
5.2 denition of the grand string superalgebra . . . . . . . . . . 93
5.3 open string superalgebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
5.4 closed string superalgebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5.5 the ising model revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105

a conventions used in chapter 2 and some pertinent proofs 107
a.1 multi-indices: ordinary sequences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
a.2 multi-indices: cyclic sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
a.3 actions of operators on physical states in the large-n limit 111

b proofs of some results in chapter 3

116

b.1 associativity of the algebra for the operators of the second

kind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
b.2 cartan subalgebra of l . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
b.3 root vectors of l . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
b.4 lie bracket of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
b.5 root vectors of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124

c proofs of some results in chapter 4

127
c.1 linear independence of color-invariant operators . . . . . . . 127
c.2 product of two color-invariant operators . . . . . . . . . . . 128

vi

c.3 lie brackets of a precursor algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129

d proofs of results in chapter 5

133
d.1 grand string superalgebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
d.2 a basis for a  = 1 quotient lie algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
d.3 cartan subalgebra of a  = 1 quotient lie algebra . . . . . . 135

bibliography

138

vii

chapter 1

introduction

1.1 hadron structure, quantum gravity and

condensed matter phenomena

as physicists, there are a number of phenomena in strong interaction, quan-
tum gravity and condensed matter physics which we want to understand.

quantum chromodynamics (qcd) is the widely accepted theory of strong
interaction. it postulates that the basic entities participating strong interac-
tion are quarks, antiquarks and gluons. in the high-energy regime, the theory
displays asymptotic freedom. the coupling among these entities becomes so
weak that we can use perturbative means to calculate experimentally mea-
surable quantities like dierential cross sections in particle reactions. indeed,
the excellent agreement between perturbative qcd and high energy particle
phenomena form the experimental basis of the theory.

nevertheless, strong interaction manifests itself not only in the high-
energy regime but also in the low-energy one. here, the strong coupling
constant becomes large. quarks, anti-quarks and gluons are permanently
conned to form bound states called hadrons, like protons and neutrons.
hadrons can be observed in laboratories. we can measure their charges,
spins, masses and other physical quantities. one challenging but important
problem in physics is to understand the structures of hadrons within the
framework of qcd; this serves as an experimental verication of qcd in the
low-energy regime. hadronic structure can be described by something called
a structure function which tells us the (fractional) numbers of constituent

1

quarks, antiquarks or gluons carrying a certain fraction of the total momen-
tum of the hadron. the structure function of a proton has been measured
carefully [20]. there has been no systematic theoretical attempt to explain
the structure function until very recently [67]. in this work, the number of
colors n is taken to be innitely large as an approximation. the resulting
model can be treated as a classical mechanics [15, 102, 83]; i.e., the space of
observables form a phase space of position and momentum, and the dynamics
of a point on this phase space is governed by the hamiltonian of this clas-
sical system and a poisson bracket1. this is because quantum uctuations
abate in the large-n limit  the green function of a product of color singlets
is dominated by the product of the green functions of these color singlets,
and other terms are of subleading order2. it is possible to derive a poisson
bracket for yangmills theory in the large-n limit. this poisson bracket can
be incorporated into a commutative algebra of dynamical variables to form
something called a poisson algebra [25].

as an initial attempt, only quarks and anti-quarks in the qcd model
in ref.[67] are dynamical. a more realistic model should have dynamical
gluons in addition to quarks. gluons carry a sizeable portion of the total
momentum of a proton [20] and are thus signicant entities. one notable
feature of a gluon eld is that it is in the adjoint representation of the gauge
group and carries two color indices. these can be treated as row and column
indices of a matrix. this suggests gluon dynamics can be described by an
abstract model of matrices.

besides strong interaction phenomena, another fundamental question in
physics is how one quantizes gravity. the most promising solution to this
problem is superstring theory [82]. here we postulate that the basic dy-
namical entities are one-dimensional objects called strings. quarks, gluons,
gravitons and photons all arise as excitations of string states. if the theory
consists of bosonic strings only, the ground states will be tachyons. to re-
move tachyons, fermions are introduced into the theory in such a way that
there exists a symmetry between bosons and fermions. this bosonfermion
symmetry is called supersymmetry3 a superstring theory which is free of

1ref.[6] provides an excellent discussion for such a geometric formulation of classical

mechanics.

2for an introductory discussion on this point, see refs.[99] and [26].
3supersymmetry could also be viewed as a symmetry which unies, in a non-trivial
manner, the space-time symmetry described by the poincare group, and the local gauge

2

quantum anomaly must be ten-dimensional. since we see only four macro-
scopic dimensions, the extra ones have to be compactied.

a partially non-perturbative treatment of superstring theory is through
entities called dp-branes [82]. they are extended objects spanning p dimen-
sions. open strings stretch between dp-branes in the remaining dimensions,
which are all compactied. there is a non-trivial background gauge eld
permeating the whole ten-dimensional space-time. the dynamics of the end
points of open strings can be regarded as the dynamics of dp-branes them-
selves, each of which behaves like space-time of p dimensions.

dierent versions of string theory were put forward in the 80s. lately,
evidence suggests that there exist duality relationship among these dierent
versions of string theory and so there is actually only one theory for strings.
the most fundamental formulation of string theory is called m(atrix)-theory
[10]. currently, there is a widely-believed m-theory conjecture which states
that in the innite momentum frame (a frame in which the momentum of
a physical entity in one dimension is very large), m-theory [10] can be de-
scribed by the quantum mechanics of an innite number n of point-like
d0-branes, the dynamics of which is in turn described by a matrix model
with supersymmetry.

besides the m-theory conjecture, there are a number of dierent ways of
formulating the low-energy dynamics of superstring theory as supersymmet-
ric matrix models [82].

we can use matrix models to describe condensed matter phenomena, too.
one major approach condensed matter physicists use to understand high-tc
superconductivity, quantum hall eect and superuidity is to mimic them
by integrable models like the hubbard model [57].
(this is a model for
strongly correlated electron systems. its hamiltonian consists of some terms
describing electron hopping from site to site, and a term which suppresses
the tendency of two electrons to occupy the same site. we will write down
the one-dimensional version of this model in a later chapter.) it turns out
that the hubbard model and many other integrable models can actually be
formulated as matrix models with or without supersymmetry.

thus matrix models provide us a unifying formalism for a vast variety of
physical phenomena. now, we would like to propose an algebraic approach to

symmetry at each point of space-time. the symmetry between bosons and fermions then
come as a corollary. see refs.[98] or [22] for further details.

3

matrix models. the centerpiece of the classical mechanical model of qcd in
refs.[83] and [67] is a poisson algebra. we can write the hamiltonian as an
element of this poisson algebra, and can describe the dynamics of hadrons and
do calculations through it. in string theory, the string is a one-dimensional
object and so it sweeps out a two-dimensional surface called a worldsheet
as time goes by. worldsheet dynamics possesses a remarkable symmetry
called conformal symmetry  the lagrangian is invariant under an invertible
mapping of worldsheet coordinates x  x which leaves the worldsheet metric
tensor g(x) invariant up to a scale, i.e., g
(x) = (x)g(x), where (x)
is a non-zero function of worldsheet coordinates. this invertible mapping is
called the conformal transformation. it turns out that the conformal charges,
i.e., the conserved charges associated with conformal symmetry, in particular
the hamiltonian of bosonic string theory, can be written as elements of a lie
algebra called the virasoro algebra [97, 46]. through the virasoro algebra,
we learn a lot about string theory like the mass spectrum and the s-matrix
elements.

the relationship between conformal symmetry and the virasoro algebra
illustrates one powerful approach to physics  identify the symmetry of a
physical system, express the symmetry in terms of an algebra, and use the
properties of the algebra to work out the physical behavior of the system.
sometimes, the symmetry of the physical system is so perfect that it com-
pletely determines the key properties of the system.

the above argument suggests that we may get fruitful discovery in gluon
dynamics, m-theory and superconductivity if there is a lie algebra for a
generic matrix model, and we are able to write its hamiltonian in terms of
this lie algebra, which expresses a new symmetry in physics.

1.2 classical matrix models in the large-n

limit

it helps to give a more precise denition of matrix models. there are two
broad families, namely classical matrix models and quantum matrix models.
let us consider classical matrix models rst. they are models in which
the classical dynamical variables form hermitian matrices q(1), q(2), . . . ,
and q() with the same dimension, say, n. a matrix entry of, say, q(1) is

4

denoted by q1
any integer value between 1 and n inclusive. let q(1),
be their time derivatives, respectively. the lagrangian

2(1), where 1 and 2 are row and column indices and take
q(2), . . . , and q()

l(q(1), q(2), . . . , q(); q(1), q(2), . . . , q())

is the trace of a polynomial of these matrices. as usual, the conjugate mo-
menta p m2

m1 (k) for k = 1, 2, . . . , and  and the hamiltonian

h(q(1), q(2), . . . , q(); p (1), p (2), . . . , p ())

are dened by the formulae

and

p m2
m1 (k) 

l
 qm1
m2 (k)

h  tr



xk=1

p (k) q(k)  l.

the partition function can then be written as

z dq(1)dq(2)   dq()dp (1)dp (2)   dp ()eh,

(1.1)

where 1/ is the product of the boltzmann constant and the temperature
of the system. there are systematic approaches to evaluate this kind of
integrals [19, 23, 77, 39, 90].

interest in matrix models in the large-n limit was stimulated by a pio-
neering work of t hooft [54]. he showed that if there are an innite number
of colors in yangmills theory, then the feynman diagrams can be dramat-
ically simplied. a gauge boson carries two color indices, and instead of
drawing only one line for a gauge boson propagator, we draw two lines jux-
taposed with each other. a quark or an anti-quark carries one color index
only and so we still draw just one line for its propagator. the vertices are
modied in such a way that propagation lines carrying the same color are
joined together. it turns out that in the large-n limit, only planar diagrams
 diagrams in which no two lines cross each other  with the least possible
number of quark loops survive. feynman diagrams with higher genus, i.e.,
those with handles, are of subleading order. as pointed out by t hooft, so

5

long as a theory with a global u(n) symmetry contains elds with two u(n)
indices, i.e., so long as the theory is a matrix model, the above argument will
apply.

this observation led to an immediate triumph. t hooft was able to show
that in two dimensions (one spatial and one temporal), the meson spectrum
displays a regge trajectory, i.e., the spectrum consists of discrete points lying
roughly on a straight line with no upper bound [55]. in other words, quarks
are permanently conned in the large-n limit in two dimensions.

an alternative approach to describe the dynamics of gauge theory is to
solve for the schwingerdyson equation for wilson loops. since a wilson loop
consists of a series of the traces of path-ordered products of classical gauge
boson elds, it is natural for us to think of these gauge boson elds as matrix
elds. one famous example is the eguchikawai model [40]. in this model,
space-time is approximated by a discrete set of points (lattice), and parallel
transport operators between adjacent points are assumed to be the same as
long as the parallel transports are in the same directions. then the theory
becomes a classical matrix model with a small number of dierent matrices.
this model and its variations provide an interesting way to understand phase
transition between connement and deconnement in large-n gauge theory.
t hoofts idea can be adapted to quantum gravity, too. the dual of a
planar feynman diagram can be taken as a triangulation of a planar surface,
which serves as a lattice approximation of a geometrical surface. the parti-
tion function for a quantum gravitational theory can then be approximated
by a classical matrix model [30, 61]. this approach, called lattice quantum
gravity, has drawn a lot of attention. ref.[33] gives an interesting review on
the subject.

classical matrix models have also found application in the study of spin
systems. kazakov showed that if ising spins are placed on a random lattice,
the resulting ising model is equivalent to a classical one-matrix model [62].
such kind of random spin models can be useful to mimic some condensed
matter phenomena like spin glass. moreover, there are some common prop-
erties of random spin models and quantum gravity; cross-pollination of the
two disciplines can bring fruitful progress to both.

6

1.3 quantum matrix models in the large-n

limit

the major focus of this whole article is not classical matrix models, but
quantum matrix models instead. a quantum matrix model is a matrix model
whose matrix entries are not dynamical variables but quantum operators
instead. more specically, again consider the set of n  n time-dependent
matrices q(1), q(2), . . . , and q(), and again let

l(q(1), q(2), . . . , q(); q(1), q(2), . . . , q())

be the lagrangian. instead of treating the qs and p s as dynamical vari-
ables, here we impose the canonical commutation relation

hq1
2(k1), p 3

4 (k2)i = ih1

4 3

2 (k1, k2).

(1.2)

we now have a quantum system. the partition function becomes4







du

du2   z 

z 
du1z 
z q(1,)=u1
q(1,0)=u1 dq(1, t1)z q(2,)=u2
er 

dth(q(1,t),q(2,t),...,q(,t);

0

q(2,0)=u2 dq(2, t2)  z q(,)=u

q(,0)=u dq(, t)

l

q(1,t) ,

l

q(2,t)

l

q(,t) ).

(1.3)

comparing eqs.(1.1) and (1.3), we see that ordinary integrals over matrix
entries are replaced with path integrals over them.

dene the annihilation operators

a1
2(k) 

and creation operators

a1
2 (k) 

1

2 (cid:16)q1

2(k) + ip 1

2 (k)(cid:17)

1

2 (cid:16)q1

2(k)  ip 1

2 (k)(cid:17) .

(1.4)

(1.5)

4readers who are not familiar with the way the partition function of a quantum system

is expressed as a path integral are referred to ref.[43].

7

then these operators satisfy the canonical commutation relation

ha1
2(k1), a3

4 (k2)i = h1

4 3

2 (k1, k2).

(1.6)

the hamiltonian h can be written as the trace of a linear combination of
products of these operators.
in practical applications, the hamiltonian is
usually written in this canonical form.

like classical matrix models, quantum matrix models arise in a diversity
of physical systems. the models we discussed in section 1.1 are all quantum
matrix models. we will now briey how these models t in this formalsim of
quantum matrix models, and introduce a number of other systems which can
also be expressed as quantum matrix models. a more systematic account of
how these systems are formulated as quantum matrix models will be provided
in the next chapter.

consider yangmills theory as a quantum theory. then yangmills ma-
trix elds, with colors as row and column indices, should be treated as quan-
tum elds. if we choose a certain gauge called the light-cone gauge [21] (to
be explained in the next chapter), the yangmills hamiltonian will take the
form described in the previous paragraph. the physical states are formu-
lated as linear combinations of the traces of products of matrix elds only, or
products of matrix and vector elds. physically speaking, the vector elds
represent quarks and anti-quarks, and the matrix elds represent gluons.
the traces are color singlet states. a remarkable feature of this formulation
of yangmills theory is that if we treat two matrix elds sharing a common
color index, which is being summed over, as adjacent segments of a string,
these color singlet states can be envisaged as closed strings or open strings.
a glueball, which has gluons only, is a closed string. a meson, which has
a quark, an anti-quark and gluons, is an open string with fermionic elds
attached to the two ends of it.

this formulation of yangmills theory leads us naturally to the idea of the
string-bit model [16]. the key idea is that a string can be approximated as
a collection of particle-like entities called string bits. each string bit carries
its own momentum, and the behavior of the whole string is manifested as
a collective behavior of these string bits. the physical states of a quantum
matrix model now represent strings, and the hamiltonian acts as a linear
operator, replacing a segment of the string by another segment of the same
or a dierent length.

8

we can extend yangmills theory to incorporate supersymmetry. the
resulting supersymmetric yangmills (sym) theory can be formulated as a
quantum matrix model in the same manner. the only complication is to
add fermionic annihilation and creation operators to the model. the fact
that sym theories with dierent spacetime dimensions and numbers of
supersymmetries can be used to mimic a large number of superstring models
further broadens the applications of quantum matrix models. for example,
the low-energy dynamics of dp-branes in an essentially at space-time can
be approximated very well by an n = 1 sym theory5 dimensionally reduced
from 10 down to p + 1 [74, 101]. (in other words, the elds are independent
of 9  p transverse dimensions.)
m-theory [82] is conjectured to be the same as the n   limit of 0-
brane quantum mechanics.
it cannot be described by a quantum matrix
model in the form introduced at the beginning of this section. however, a
natural corollary of this conjecture is that light-front type-iia superstring
theory can be described by an n = 1 sym theory dimensionally reduced
from 10 to 2 in the large-n limit [35]. this so-called matrix string theory
can be formulated as a quantum matrix model described above.

quantum matrix models can be used to study spin systems, too. this
time the spins do not lie on a random lattice as in classical matrix models.
the systems are one-dimensional quantum spin systems, many of which are
well known to be equivalent to two-dimensional classical ones [48]. the
hamiltonian of a quantum spin system involves nearest neighbour interaction
only and is translationally invariant. its action on the spin chain is to change
the quantum states of adjacent spins. the key observation is that a spin
chain can be viewed as a string, and each spin can be regarded as a string
bit. then the action of the hamiltonian is to replace a segment of the string
with another segment with an equal number of string bits. this is typical
of the action of the hamiltonian of a string model. through the above
construction of a string model as a quantum matrix model, we can formulate
a one-dimensional quantum spin system as a quantum matrix model, too.
as we have noted in section 1.1, many condensed matter phenomena can be
mimicked by integrable models in the form of one-dimensional quantum spin
system. this provides us a way to study condensed matter physics through
quantum matrix models.

5the number n counts the number of supersymmetries in a physical model [92, 98].

9

1.4 symmetry algebra

recall that we proposed to study matrix models by an algebraic approach in
section 1.1. let us look at a number of examples to see how this works.

we will start with the following pedagogical model. consider a (3 + 1)-
dimensional quantum system whose hamiltonian is nothing but the square
of the angular momentum operator l2. clearly the hamiltonian h is invari-
ant under a rotation in the 3 spatial dimensions. this rotational symmetry
is described by the lie group so(3). the hamiltonian is the generator of
temporal translation, and it is natural for us to put it on the same footing as
the generators of so(3). indeed, h can be written in terms of the elements
of the associated lie algebra, so(3)6. this viewpoint of relating physical
variables with a lie algebra can be pushed further. as we know, h acts as
an operator on a quantum state to produce another quantum state. this
is akin to treating the elements of a lie algebra as linear transformations
of vector spaces. these vector spaces are called representation spaces. the
hilbert space of quantum states can be regarded as a particular nite- or
innite-dimensional representation space, which is always a direct sum of
irreducible representations. h can be seen as a matrix acting on this rep-
resentation. now, the representation of so(3) is very well developed. we
know all the irreducible representations of it. an irreducible representation
is characterized by a positive integer l. each irreducible representation space
is (2l + 1)-dimensional. the highest weight vector is an eigenvector of lz, the
component of the angular momentum in the z-direction, with the eigenvector
l. the lowest weight vector is also an eigenvector of lz with the eigenvalue
l. there is a whole set of eigenvectors of lz with integer eigenvalues be-
tween l and l. in addition, every vector in this representation space is an
eigenvector of h with the eigenvalue l(l + 1). thus, rotational symmetry
alone dictates the spectrum of this physical system completely, and we can
even determine the degeneracy of each eigenenergy up to internal symmetries
not shown up in the hamiltonian.

a number of more realistic models can be solved along the same line.
take the hydrogenic atom as an example. again the hamiltonian respects
rotational symmetry and so it commutes with the generators of spatial ro-

6those readers who are familiar with the general theory of lie algebras may take note

that the hamiltonian is an element of the enveloping algebra [58] of so(3).

10

tations. however, the central potential of the hydrogenic atom is so unique
that it possesses an extra symmetry, described by the rungelenz vector
[47]. hence, the hamiltonian commutes with a properly normalized runge
lenz vector which is dependent on the eigenvalue of the hamiltonian. the
angular momentum operator, whose components form the generators of the
rotational symmetry, together with the rungelenz vector form a bigger lie
algebra  so(4). we can form a certain function of the angular momentum
and rungelenz vector which is not dependent on the eigenvalues of the
angular momentum and is dependent on the rungelenz vector through the
eigenvalue of the hamiltonian only. in the language of lie algebra, this func-
tion can be written in terms of the elements of so(4)7. since we know the
representation of so(4) very well, too, we know all the irreducible representa-
tions of so(4) and from them the eigenvalues of this function. consequently,
we can obtain all the eigenvalues of the hamiltonian, or in other words, the
spectrum of the hydrogenic atom8.

other physical systems possess other symmetries described by other lie
algebras. for instance, the hamiltonian of the simple harmonic oscillator
can be written in terms of the symplectic algebra sp(2). we can use our
knowledge of the representation theory of the symplectic algebra to deduce
the spectrum of the simple harmonic oscillator. another example is the 2-
dimensional ising model, a well-known exactly integrable model. its hamilto-
nian is an element of a more sophisticated algebra called the onsager algebra
[81, 31], whose denition will be provided a later chapter. briey speaking,
the onsager algebra is isomorphic to the xed-point subalgebra of the sl(2)
loop algebra l(sl(2)) with respect to the action of a certain involution [85].
the properties of nite-dimensional versions of the onsager algebra then
help us solve for the spectrum of the ising model. nowadays, many exactly
integrable models are derived by solving for the irreducible representations
of lie algebras or even quantum groups [25]9.

another notable example is conformal eld theory [14]10, a eld theory

7more precisely speaking, the hamiltonian is an element of the enveloping algebra of

so(4).

8miller [79] has given a concise but thorough account of this argument.
9gomez, ruiz-altaba and sierra [48] have provided a systematic account on the rela-

tionship between exactly integrable models and quantum groups.

10francesco, mathieu and senechal [34] have provided a detailed introductory exposition

and a comprehensive list of relevant literature on the subject.

11

which possesses conformal symmetry which we discussed in section 1.1. be-
sides string theory, critical phenomena manifests conformal symmetry also.
our knowledge of the virasoro algebra thus nds application in critical phe-
nomena. indeed, it helps us determine the correlation functions at the critical
points of a physical system displaying critical phenomena.

to understand models with both conformal symmetry and a classical-
group symmetry like the wesszuminowitten model [100], we need an al-
gebra which is an apt amalgamation of the virasoro algebra and a classical
lie algebra. such an amalgamation yields the kacmoody algebra, or the
ane lie algebra [59, 51], another algebra which plays a vital role in physics.
all the above examples illustrate the following truth. a fruitful approach
to study a physical system is to identify the underlying symmetry of the
system, express the symmetry in terms of a lie algebra (or even a quantum
group), elucidate the structure of this lie algebra, and use the irreducible
representations of it to understand key properties of the system.

1.5 an algebraic approach to quantum ma-

trix models in the large-n limit

superstring theory and its latest incarnation, m-theory, is a promising candi-
date of a theory of everything; strong interaction is described by yangmills
theory; it is conjectured that the essential properties of high-tc superconduc-
tivity are captured by the hubbard model. the previous section shows that
all these theories can be written as (supersymmetric) quantum matrix mod-
els. therefore it is of interest to develop methods to tackle them, something
we have done for their classical counterparts.

is there an underlying symmetry for quantum matrix models? can we
use an algebra to characterize the symmetry? what are the mathematical
properties and physical implications of this symmetry algebra? these are
the questions we are going to address in this whole article.

the rst thing we need to do is to set up a formalism, with supersymmetry
from the very outset, for quantum matrix models. we will show that in the
large-n limit, planarity dramatically simplies the formalism [54, 96]. in the
language of string bit models, what will happen is that a physical observable
will send a single closed string state to a linear combination of closed string

12

states, and an open string state to a linear combination of open string states.
a string will not split into several strings, and several strings will not combine
to form a string. equipped with this crucial observation, we will then be able
to give a systematic account on how quantum matrix models arise in dierent
physical system, as mentioned in the previous section. we will do all these
in chapter 2.

in subsequent chapters, we will develop an argument for the existence
of a lie superalgebra11, which we will call the grand string superalgebra,
for quantum matrix models with both open and closed strings in the large-n
limit. because of the complexity of the full formalism, we will study an easier
special case in which there is only one degree of freedom for the fundamental
and conjugate matter elds, and there is no fermionic adjoint matter rst
in chapter 3. there is a lie algebra of physical observables in this special
case, and we will call it the centrix algebra. it has a number of subalge-
bras. interestingly, they are all related to the cuntz algebra [28]. (roughly
speaking, the cuntz algebra is an algebra of isometries acting on an innite-
dimensional hilbert space.
its versatility lies in the fact that as long as
these isometric operators satisfy certain algebraic relations, it does not mat-
ter which hilbert space and isometries we choose. we will give a preliminary
but more systematic account of the formalism in chapter 3. some knowl-
edge in c-algebras [36] and k-theory [18] is very helpful in understanding
the cuntz algebra.) this implies that a well-developed representation theory
of the cuntz algebra should be very useful in elucidating the spectra of vari-
ous quantum matrix models for open strings. we remark in passing that the
cuntz algebra emerges in a number of other physical contexts, too [94, 49, 5].
then we will use the techniques we will have learnt in chapter 3 to
study the most general case in subsequent chapters. there indeed exists a
superalgebra which we will call the grand string superalgebra, for quantum
matrix models with both open and closed strings in the large-n limit. this
will be done by showing that this superalgebra is a subalgebra of a precursor
superalgebra which we will call the heterix superalgebra, and which we will
derive in chapter 4. we will not give a rigorous proof of the existence of
precursor superalgebra, as the proof will be too long to be written down.
however, we will point out some important graphical features of quantum

11those readers who are not familiar with the notion of a lie superalgebra are referred

to ref.[22] for its denition.

13

matrix models to convince the reader of the result. in the rest of the chapter,
we will study the mathematical structure, e.g., the cartan subalgebra and
its root vectors, of the corresponding heterix algebra, which can be otained
from the heterix superalgebra by removing all fermionic elds.

in chapter 5, we will obtain the grand string superalgebra as a subalge-
bra of the heterix algebra. in practical applications, open and closed strings
essentially form distinct physical sectors. this means there will be one su-
peralgebra for each sector. we will call them the open string superalgebra
and cyclix superalgebra. these two superalgebras will both be quotient al-
gebras of the grand string superalgebra. the open string algebra associated
with the corresponding superalgebra will be a direct product of the algebra
for innite-dimensional matrices and the centrix algebra. on the other hand,
the cyclix algebra associated with the corresponding cyclix superalgebra is
closely related to the onsager algebra. this provides a glimpse of how the
cyclic algebra helps us determine the integrability of certain spin systems.

a major eld of application of quantum matrix models in the large-n
limit is yangmills theory. as mentioned in section 1.1, this theory can
be formulated as a classical mechanical system. there is a poisson algebra
of dynamical variables in this classical yangmills theory [84, 72]. we
conjecture that the lie algebras described in the previous paragraphs are
approximations of this poisson algebra in some geometric sense.

14

chapter 2

formulation and examples of
quantum matrix models in the
large-n limit

2.1 introduction

in this chapter, we will demonstrate systematically how a number of physi-
cal systems are formulated as quantum matrix models in the large-n limit.
these systems fall into three broad classes: yangmills theory with or with-
out supersymmetry, string theory and one-dimensional quantum spin sys-
tems. they were concisely introduced in section 1.3.

it should be obvious why yangmills theory can be expressed as a quan-
identify the trivial vacuum state |0i with respect to
tum matrix model.
the annihilation operators characterized by eq.(1.6), i.e., the action of any of
these annihilation operators on this vacuum state yields 0. a typical physical
state is a linear combination of the traces of products of creation operators
acting on this vacuum state. (in the context of yangmills theory, this is
a color-singlet state of a single meson or glueball.) a typical observable is
a linear combination of the trace of a product of creation and annihilation
operators. naively, we may think that the ordering of these operators is arbi-
trary, and which ordering is used in an actual physical application depends on
the details of that physical model only. actually, the planar property of the
large-n limit [54] comes into the picture here, and only those traces in which

15

all creation operators come to the left of all annihilation operators survive
the large-n limit. moreover, the large-n limit brings about a dramatic sim-
plication in the action of this collective operator on a physical state  the
unique trace of a product of creation operators acting on the vacuum will not
be broken up into a product of more than one trace of products of creation
operators acting on the vacuum, and it is not possible for a product of more
than one trace of products of creation operators to merge into just one trace
of products of creation operators. in other words, an observable propagates
a color-singlet state into a linear combination of color-singlet states [96].

this explains why we can mimic a string as a collection of string bits. in
this context, a physical state is a string, open or closed, and the concluding
statement of the previous paragraph implies that an observable replaces a
segment of the string with another segment, without breaking it and with-
out joining several strings together. this is a desirable simplifying feature
for some string models. an important feature of this string-bit model is
that wherever this segment lies on the string, it will be replaced with the
new segment at exactly the same location.
in other words, the action of
an observable involves neighbouring string bits only, and is translationally
invariant with respect to the string.

this brings us to quantum spin chain models. since the two most impor-
tant properties of a quantum spin chain model is that a spin interacts with
neighbouring spins (not necessarily nearest neighbouring spins though) only,
and the interaction is translationally invariant, we can write down a typical
quantum spin chain model as a quantum matrix model in the large-n limit,
so long as the boundary conditions match.

we are going to present these ideas systematically in this chapter.
in section 2.2, we will present an abstract formalism of quantum matrix
models which is a generalization of the one discussed in section 1.3. there
the models possessed only bosonic degrees of freedom. here we will include
fermionic degrees of freedom as well. this is needed in sym theory, and in
fermionic spin chains like strongly correlated electron systems.

sections 2.3 to 2.5 will be devoted to two-dimensional yangmills the-
ories. we will show how to formulate these theories with dierent matter
contents as quantum matrix models. to be more specic, we will consider
yangmills theory with only bosonic adjoint matter elds in section 2.3,
with bosonic adjoint matter together with fundamental and conjugate mat-
ter elds in section 2.4, and with fermionic and bosonic adjoint matter elds

16

in section 2.5. these models are suitable for studying glueballs, mesons and
sym theory, respectively.

in section 2.6, we will focus on the relationship between string theo-
ries and quantum matrix models. we will see that there are many ways to
approximate a string theory as a quantum matrix model like treating the
string as a collection of discrete entities called string bits [16], taking the
low-energy limit of superstrings, d-branes or even m-theory, or associating
a string model with a quantum gravity model and then approximating the
quantum gravity model by a quantum matrix model.

in sections 2.7 and 2.8, we will present a formal way of transcribing
a quantum spin chain system into a quantum matrix model in the large-
n limit, and give examples from bosonic spin systems to strongly correlated
electron systems. since many of them are known to be exactly integrable, and
have even been exactly solved, we thus give here some examples of quantum
matrix models, with or without supersymmetry, which are exactly integrable
or even exactly solved. the models in section 2.7 obey cyclicity and the
periodic boundary condition. the models in section 2.8 obey open boundary
conditions.

2.2 formulation of quantum matrix models

in the large-n limit

we are going to generalize the bosonic formalism in section 1.3 to include
fermions. we advise the reader to take a look at appendices a.1 and a.2
rst to learn the notations we will use throughout this article.

think of the row and column indices of those annihilation and creation
operators as the row and column indices of an element in u(n). we will call
them color indices, as this is the case in yangmills theory (section 2.3). let
a1
2(k) be an annihilation operator of a boson in the adjoint representation
if 1  k  , or a fermion in the adjoint representation if  + 1  k  2.
(here  is a positive integer.) let () be an annihilation operator of a
boson in the fundamental representation if 1    f , or a fermion in
the fundamental representation if f + 1    2f . (here f is also a
positive integer.) lastly, let () be an annihilation operator of a boson in
the conjugate representation if 1    f , or a fermion in the conjugate

17

representation if f + 1    2f . we will call k and  quantum states
other than color. the corresponding creation operators are a1
()
and () with appropriate values for k and . we will say that these
operators create an adjoint parton, a fundamental parton and a conjugate
parton, respectively. most of these operators commute with each another
except the following non-trivial cases:

2 (k), 

ha1
2(k1), a3

4 (k2)i = k1k23

2 1
4

for 1  k1, k2  ;

ha1
2(k1), a3
for  + 1  k1, k2  2;

4 (k2)i+

= k1k23

2 1
4

for 1  1, 2  f ;

h 1(1), 2(2)i = 122

1

h 1(1), 2(2)i+

= 122
1

for f + 1  1, 2  2f ;

h1(1), 

2(2)i = 121

2

for 1  1, 2  f ; and

h1(1), 

2(2)i+

= 121
2

(2.1)

(2.2)

(2.3)

(2.4)

(2.5)

(2.6)

for f + 1  1, 2  2f .
there are two families of physical states (or color-singlet states in the
context of gauge theory). one family consists of linear combinations of states
of the form

1  s k  2  n ( c+1)/2 1(1)a2
 c+1(2)|0i.

a c+1

(k c)

 c

1 (k1)a3

2 (k2)  

(2.7)

here we use the capital letter k to denote the integer sequence k1, k2, . . . , kc.
unless otherwise specied, the summation convention applies to all repeated

18

color indices throughout this whole article. the justication of the use of the
notation  will be given later. this term carries a factor of n to make its
norm nite in the large-n limit. (the proof of this is similar to that given
in appendix a.3 in which we will prove a closely related statement.) we
will call these open singlet states. they are single meson states in qcd, and
open superstring states in the string-bit model. the other family consists of
linear combinations of states of the form

k  n c/2a2

1 (k1)a3

2 (k2)   a1

c (kc)|0i.

(2.8)

this will be called a closed singlet state. they are single glueball states in
qcd, and closed superstring states in the string-bit model.

fig.2.1(a) shows a typical open singlet state in detail. the solid square at
the top is the creation operator of a conjugate parton of the quantum state
1. following it is a series of 4 adjoint partons of the quantum states k1, k2,
and k3, respectively. the creation operators of these gluons are represented
by solid circles. the solid square at the bottom is the creation operator of
a fundamental parton of the quantum state 2. note that all the creation
operators carry color indices. a solid line, no matter how thick it is, con-
necting two circles, or a circle and a square, is used to mean that the two
corresponding creation operators share a color index, and this color index is
being summed over. the arrow indicates the direction of the integer sequence
k. fig.2.1(b) is a simplied diagram of an open singlet state. conjugate and
fundamental partons are neglected. they will be consistently ignored in all
brief diagrammatic representations. the series of adjoint partons in between
are represented by the integer sequence k. fig.2.1(c) shows a typical closed
singlet state k with 5 indices in detail. there is a series of adjoint partons
of the quantum states k1, k2, . . . , and k5. this state is cyclically symmetric
up to a sign. fig.2.1(d) is a simplied diagram of a closed singlet state. the
state is represented by the integer sequence k. we are ignoring the sign
carried by this state, and thus it is legitimate to use a cyclically symmetric
diagram to represent it. the size of this big circle does not indicate the
number of indices the circle carries.

to move on, we need the notion of a grade. the grade of the integer
sequence i, which we will denote by ( i), is dened to be 0 if the number of
integers within i which are larger than  but smaller than 2 + 1 is even,
and 1 if the number is odd. moreover, we dene the grades of the open

19


1
1k
k2
3k
4k

2

.
k

k2

k
3

k1

k

k5

k4

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

figure 2.1: color-invariant states.

singlet state sk and the closed singlet state l to be the grades of k and
l respectively. we call a state a pure state if it is a linear combination of
states of the same grade. clearly, the grade of a pure singlet state is 0 if the
number of adjoint fermions in each term of the linear combination forming
the state is even, and 1 if the number is odd. in these cases, we say that the
singlet states are even and odd, respectively.

we now remark that

k = (1)(k1)(k2)k2k1.

(2.9)

thus a closed singlet state is cyclic up a sign. the special case in which
there is no fermionic creation operator in k will be of considerable interest.
then eq.(2.9) reduces to

k1k2 = k2k1.

(2.10)

this state is thus manifestly cyclic. to emphasize this cyclicity, we may
denote such ks as (k)s.

now let us construct physical operators acting on these singlet states. it
turns out that there are ve families of them. the rst family consists of
nite linear combinations of operators of the form

2  f i
1

j  3

4  n ( a+b+2)/2 1(1)a2

 1(2)a1

2(j1)   a

20

1 (i1)   a a+1
 b
 b+1(jb) b+1(4),

 a

(i a)

 a+1(3)

(2.11)


2
1j
j 2
j 3
j 4

4


1
i
1
i
2

3

.
i

.
j*

.
i

.
.
j* k

.
i

(a)

(b)

.

.
(c) j = k

figure 2.2: operators of the rst kind.

where a = #( i) and b = #( j). we say that this is an operator of the
rst kind. fig.2.2(a) shows a typical operator of the rst kind. the solid
squares and circles are creation operators of conjugate, fundamental and
adjoint partons. the hollow squares are annihilation operators of a conjugate
parton of the quantum state 2 and a fundamental parton of the quantum
state 4, and the hollow circles are annihilation operators of adjoint partons.
in this particular example, there are 2 creation and 4 annihilation operators
of adjoint partons. the creation operators are joined by thick lines, whereas
the annihilation operators are joined by thin lines. note that the sequence
j is in reverse. fig.2.2(b) is a simplied diagram of an operator of the rst
kind. the thick line represents a sequence of creation operators of adjoint
partons, whereas the thin line represents a sequence of annihilation operators
j carries an asterisk to signify the fact that j is put in reverse.
of them.
note that the lengths of the two lines have no bearing on the numbers of
creation or annihilation operators they represent.

in the planar large-n limit, a typical term of an operator of the rst kind

propagates an open singlet state to another open singlet state:

2  f i
1

j  3

2  k
4 (cid:16) 5  s k  6(cid:17) = 5
j 6
we can visualize eq.(2.12) in fig. 2.2(c).
in this gure, the dotted lines
connect the line segments to be annihilated together. the gure on the
right of the arrow is the resultant open singlet state. on the other hand, an
operator of the rst kind annihilates a closed singlet state:

1  s i  3.

(2.12)

4

2  f i
1

j  3

4 (cid:16)k(cid:17) = 0.

21

(2.13)

the fact that this operator does not split a single singlet state into a product
of states, and it does not combine a product of singlet states together to form
a single singlet state has been known for a long time [96], and is ultimately
related to the planarity of the large-n limit [54]. we will provide a non-
rigorous diagrammatic proof of this fact in appendix a.3, where we work
on the action of an operator of the second kind (to be dened below) on an
open singlet state. the reader can easily work out the actions of operators
of other kinds by the same reasoning.

2, f i

it is now clear why we are using the direct product symbol   the open
singlet state can be regarded as a direct product of 5, s k and 6. the set
of all 5s, where 1 = 1, 2, . . . , and 2f , form a basis of a 2f -dimensional
vector space. the set of all 6s, where again 2 = 1, 2, . . . , and 2f , form
a basis of another 2f -dimensional vector space. the operator of the rst
kind can be regarded as a direct product of the operators 1
j and 3
4.
the rst operator acts as a 2f  2f matrix on 5, the second one acts
on s k, whereas the last one acts as another 2f  2f matrix on 6. it is
therefore clear that that an open singlet state lies within a direct product of
two 2f -dimensional vector spaces (labelling the fundamental and conjugate
parton states) and a countably innite-dimensional vector space spanned by
all s ks labelling the adjoint parton states (including the state containing no
adjoint partons). an operator of the rst kind lies within the direct product
gl(2f )  f|  gl(2f ). here, gl(2f ) is the lie algebra of the general
linear group gl(2f ). also the innite-dimensional lie superalgebra f|
is spanned by f i
j . we will see that the lie algebra f, which is the even part
of f|, is isomorphic to the inductive limit gl+ of the gl(n)s as n  .
operators of the second kind are nite linear combinations of operators
of the form

2  l i
1

j  n ( a+b)/2 1(1)a2

1 (i1)a3

a b
 a+1(jb)a

 b1
 b

(jb1)   a1

2 (i2)   a a+1
 a
2(j1) 1(2).

(i a)

(2.14)

a typical operator of this kind is depicted in fig.2.3(a). there are 5 creation
and 4 annihilation operators of adjoint partons in this example. the solid
square is a creation operator of a conjugate parton, whereas the hollow square
is an annihilation operator of it. fig.2.3(b) is an abbreviated diagram of
fig.2.3(a). an operator of the second kind acts on the end with a conjugate
parton and propagates an open singlet state to a linear combination of open

22

1

i 1

i 2

i 3

i 4

i 5

.
i



2

1j

j 2

.
i

.
j*

j 3

j 4

(a)

.
j*

.
k 1

.
k 2

(b)

.
i

.
k 2

.

.

(c) j = k1

figure 2.3: operators of the second kind.

23

singlet states:

2  l i
1

j (cid:16) 3  s k  4(cid:17) = 3

2 xk1 k2= k

k1

j

1  s i k2  4.

(2.15)

k is identical to j.

in words, the action of l i
j is such that it checks if the beginning segment
of
if this is the case, then the beginning segment is
replaced with i whereas the rest remains unchanged; otherwise, the action
yields 0. on the r.h.s. of this equation, there will only be a nite number
of non-zero terms in the sum (bounded by the number of ways of splitting
k into subsequence), so there is no problem of convergence. for example, if
k is shorter than j, the right hand side will vanish. we can visualize this
equation in fig. 2.3(c). this equation shows why we can treat this operator
as a direct product of the operators 1
j and the identity operator. the
rst operator acts as a 2f  2f matrix on 3, the second one acts on s k,
whereas the last one acts trivially on 4. this operator annihilates a closed
singlet state:

2, l i

operators of the third kind are very similar to those of the second kind.

2  l i
1

j (cid:16)k(cid:17) = 0.

(2.16)

they are linear combinations of operators of the form
2 (i2)   a a+1
 b1(jb1)   a1

2  n ( a+b)/2a2

1 (i1)a3
 b1
 b2
 b

r i
j  1

 b(2)a

(jb)a

 a

(i a)

 a+1(1)

1 (j1).

(2.17)

a typical operator of this kind is depicted in fig.2.4(a). there are 4 creation
and 3 annihilation operators of adjoint partons in this example. this time
the solid square is a creation operator of a fundamental parton, whereas the
hollow square is an annihilation operator of it. compare the orientations of
the arrows with those in fig. 2.3(a). the choices of the orientations reect
the fact that the color indices are contracted dierently in eqs.(2.14) and
(2.17). fig.2.4(b) is a simplied diagram of an operator of the second kind.
they act on the end with a fundamental parton instead of a conjugate parton
as shown below:
r i
j  1

(1)( k1)[( i)+( j)]

2(cid:16) 3  s k  4(cid:17) = 4

k2
j

(2.18)

2 xk1 k2= k
3  s k1 i  1.

24

i 1

i 2

i 3

i 4

1

(a)

.
i

j 1

j 2
j 3


2

.
k 1

.
k 2

.
j*

.
i

.
j*

(b)

.
k 1

.
i

.

.

(c) j = k2

figure 2.4: operators of the third kind.

25

fig. 2.4(c) shows this action diagrammatically. this equation shows that
a term of an operator of the third kind is a direct product of the identity
operator, the operator r i
2. like the previous two kinds
of operators, an operator of the third kind also annihilates a closed singlet
state:

j and the operator 1

r i
j  3

4 (cid:16)k(cid:17) = 0.

operators of the fourth kind are the most non-trivial among all physical

operators. they are nite linear combinations of operators of the form

(2.19)

(2.20)

j  n (a+b2)/2a2
i
(jb)ab2

1 (i1)a3

2 (i2)   ab

a (ia)

b1(jb1)   a1

1 (j1).

b

ab1
j as i

sometimes we write i
j . unlike the operators of the rst three kinds,
both i and j in the operators of the fourth kind must be non-empty se-
quences. fig.2.5(a) shows a typical operator of the fourth kind in detail.
there are 2 creation and 2 annihilation operators of adjoint partons in this
example. there are no operators acting on a conjugate or fundamental par-
ton. fig.2.5(b) is an abbreviated version of fig.2.5(a). in the planar large-n
limit, it replaces some sequences of adjoint partons on an open singlet state
with some other sequences, producing a linear combination of this kind of
states:

i

j (cid:16) 1  s k  2(cid:17) =
1 
 xk1k2 k3= k

(1) k1[(i)+(j)]k2

j s k1i k3

  2.

(2.21)

j is such that if it detects a segment of

k, no matter
in words, the action of i
where this segment lies within k, to be identical to j, then this particular
segment is replaced with i. if there are n segments within k identical to
j, then the action returns a sum of n sequences in each of which one of the
segments is replaced by i. this action is depicted in fig.2.5(c). when it acts
on a closed singlet state, it also replaces some sequences of adjoint partons
with others:

i
jk = k

j i + xk1k2=k

(1)(k1)(k2)k2k1

j

i + xk1k2=k

k1
j ik2

26

i 1

i 2

j 1

j 2

(a)

i

j*

i

j*

(b)

.
k1

i

.
k3

.
k1

k2

.
k3

(c) j = k2

i

j*

k1

.
k2

i

.
k2

(d) k   = j

1

figure 2.5: operators of the fourth kind.

27

(1)(k1)[(k2)+(k3)]k2

j ik3k1

(1)(k1)(k2)k2

j ik1

+ xk1k2k3=k
+ xk1k2=k
+ xj1j2=j xk1k2k3=k

(1)(k3)[(k1)+(k2)]k3

j1 k1

j2 ik2;

(2.22)

this action is depicted in fig. 2.5(d).

operators of the fth kind form the last family of physical operators. they

are linear combinations of operators of the form

f i
j  n (a+b)/2a2
ab
1(jb)ab1

1 (i1)a3
(jb1)   a1

b

2 (i2)   a1

a (ia)

2(j1).

(2.23)

a typical operator of this kind is shown in detail in fig.2.6(a).
in this
diagram, the upper circle represents i, whereas the lower circle represents j.
there are 3 indices in i and 4 indices in j. note the sequence j is put in the
clockwise instead of the anti-clockwise direction. fig.2.6(b) is a simplied
diagram of an operator of the fth kind. j carries an asterisk to signify the
fact that j is in the anti-clockwise direction. this operator possesses the
following interesting properties:

f i2i1
= (1)(i1)(i2) f i1i2
j
j
f i
j2j1 = (1)(j1)(j2) f i
j1j2.

; and

it annihilates an open singlet state:

it may replace a closed singlet state with another one, though:

f i

j (cid:16) 1  s k  2(cid:17) = 0.

f i
j k = k

j i + xj1j2=j

(1)(j1)(j2)k

j2j1i.

this action is depicted in fig.2.6(c).

(2.24)

(2.25)

(2.26)

j , l i

j , r i

j , i

the grades of f i

j are dened to be the grade of the
concatenated sequence i j or ij. an observable is said to be even or odd if
the grades of all terms in the linear combination are all 0 or all 1, respectively.
clearly, an even operator sends an even singlet state to an even singlet state,

j and f i

28

i1

i2

j4

j3

i

j*

i3

j1

j2

(a)

(b)

i

j*

k

i

(c) (j) = (k)

figure 2.6: operators of the fth kind.

29

and an odd state to an odd state. on the contrary, an odd operator sends an
even singlet state to an odd singlet state, and an odd state to an even state.
a pure operator is either an even or odd operator.

it is easy for the reader to derive from the above formulae the actions
of these ve families of operators on the physical states when there is no
adjoint fermion in the theory. alternatively, the reader can nd the formulae
in refs.[69] and [70]. we will say more about the mathematical properties
of these physical operators in later chapters.

2.3 examples: yangmills theory with ad-

joint matter fields

let us see how the physical states and operators show up in actual physical
systems. our rst example is 2-dimensional yangmills theory with adjoint
matter elds. dalley and klebanov have provided a detailed introduction to
the formulation of this model [29] and the following presentation is closely
parallel to theirs. as will be shown below, there is no dynamics for the gauge
bosons in 2 dimensions. the quantum matrices in the above abstract for-
malism are realized as canonically quantized adjoint matter elds. dierent
matrices carry dierent momenta. the linear momentum and hamiltonian
of the model can be expressed as linear combinations of the ve families of
operators introduced above.

we need a number of preliminary denitions. let g be the yangmills
coupling constant,  and  ordinary space-time indices, a a yangmills
potential and  a scalar eld in the adjoint representation of the gauge group
u(n), and m the mass of this scalar eld. both  and a are n  n
hermitian matrix elds.
if we treat the yangmills potential as the lie-
algebraically valued connection form and  a cross section in the language of
dierential geometry1, then the covariant derivative is

d =  + i [a, ] .

1an authoritative text on dierential geometry which explains the notion of a ber
bundle is ref.[64]. however, those readers who are not interested in dierential geometry
may well take the covariant derivative to be given shortly for granted.

30

the minkowski space action of this model is

s = z d2xtr" 1

dd 
introduce the light-cone coordinates

2

1
2

m22 

1

4g2 ff # .

(2.27)

and

x+ =

x =

1
2

1
2

(x0 + x1)

(x0  x1) .

take x+ as the time variable. choose the light-cone gauge

the action is now simplied to

a = 0.

s = z dx+dxtr"+ 

1
2

m22 +

1

2g2 (a+)2 + a+j +# ,

(2.28)

where

2 = i [, ]1
j +1

2

is the longitudinal momentum current. note that a+ is no time dependence
in eq.(2.28) and so the gauge eld is not dynamical at all in the light-cone
gauge. let us split a+ into its zero mode a+,0 (this is a mode which is
independent of x.) and non-zero mode a+,n, i.e.,

the lagrange constraints for them are

a+ = a+,0 + a+,n.

z dxj + = 0, and

2
a+,n  g2j + = 0,

(2.29)

(2.30)

respectively. now we can use these two equations to eliminate a+ in eq.(2.28)
and get

s = z dx+dxtr + 

1
2

m22 +

g2
2

j + 1
2


j +! .

(2.31)

31

the light-cone momentum and hamiltonian are

p   z dxt +.

it follows from eq.(2.31) that their expressions in this model are

p + = z dxtr ()2 , and
p  = z dxtr  1
m22 

2

1
2

g2j + 1
2


j +! .

(2.32)

(2.33)

we now quantize the system. eq.(2.31) implies that the canonical quan-

tization condition is

h1
2(x), 3

4(x)i =

i
2

1
4 3

2 (x  x).

(2.34)

then a convenient eld decomposition is

1
2(x+ = 0) =

1

2 z 

0

dk+

2k+ ha1

2(k+)eik+x

+ a1

2 (k+)eik+xi . (2.35)

the annihilation and creation operators here satisfy the canonical commu-
tation relation eq.(2.1), except that the kronecker delta function k1k2 in
eq.(2.1) is replaced with the dirac delta function (k1 k2) here, the adjoint
matter eld will satisfy eq.(2.34). a state can be built out of a series of
creation operators acting on the trivial vacuum, and it takes the form

a1
1 (k+

1 )a2

2 (k+

2 )   ac

c (k+

c )|0i.

however, in general this state does not satisfy the lagrangian constraint
eq.(2.29). only those of the form given in eq.(2.8) satisfy this constraint. we
thus obtain a model whose physical states are the physical states introduced
in the previous section.

using eqs.(2.32) and (2.34), we can quantize the light-cone momentum

and get

p + = z 

0

dkkk
k ,

(2.36)

where gk
k is dened in eq.(2.20). we have dropped the superscript + in k
to simplify the notation. this is a concrete example in which a physical

32

observable is expressed as a linear combination of the operators introduced
in the previous section. (here k can take on an innite number of values, and
the regulator   . nonetheless, taking the regulator to innity has an
inuence on technical details only, since we are talking about a eld theory
without divergences in this limit.) to obtain a similar formula for the light-
cone hamiltonian, we need to express, in momentum space, the longitudinal
momentum current as a quantum operator rst. dene the longitudinal
momentum current in momentum space to be

j +(k) =

1

2 z dxj +(x)eik+x

.

(2.37)

then, for q > 0,

j +1
2 (q) =

and

2(p)a1

 (p + q)

 (q  p),



0

1

dp

(p)a

2p + q

22 z 
a1
+z q
dp

qp(p + q) ha
2(p + q)i
q  2p
qp(q  p)
2 (q) = h j +1

2 (q)i

a
2(p)a1

.

0

j +1

(2.38)

(2.39)

(2.40)

we can now use eqs.(2.33), (2.34), (2.37), (2.38) and (2.39) to obtain

p  =

where

cgk
k

0

g2n

+

1
2

g2n

dk
k

dk
k

gk
k +

4 z 

0
dk1dk2dk3dk4

m2z 
8 z 
+ b(k1  k2  k3  k4)(cid:16)gk2k3k4

k1

0

k1k2k3k4 na(k1 + k2  k3  k4)gk3k4

k1k2

+ gk1

k2k3k4(cid:17)o ,

a =

b =

(k2  k1)(k4  k3)

(k1 + k2)2

(k2 + k1)(k4  k3)

c = z k

0

(k4 + k3)2
(k + p)2

dp

p(k  p)2 .

(k3 + k1)(k4 + k2)

(k4  k2)2

(k4 + k1)(k3  k2)

(k3 + k2)2





;

; and

33

eq.(2.40) shows that the light-cone hamiltonian is a linear combination of
operators of the fourth kind.

the above formalism can be easily generalized to the case in which there
are more than one adjoint matter elds. this kind of models is useful for
studying gluons in quantum chromodynamics [3]  take the large-n limit as
an approximation for pure yangmills theory. if we assume that the gluon
eld, i.e., the gauge eld, is not dependent on the transverse dimensions
(in other words, we take dimensional reduction as a further approximation),
the gluon eld will precisely be the adjoint matter elds. the number of
adjoint matter elds is the same as the number of transverse dimensions in
the system. the prototype model in the next section can serve as an example;
if we remove the fundamental and conjugate matter elds, we will obtain an
approximate model for gluons in three dimensions

2.4 examples: yangmills theory with fun-

damental and adjoint matter fields

we can incorporate fundamental and conjugate matter elds in the above
model. this is best understood in the context of large-n yangmills theory
with quark and antiquark matter elds [4]. consider the simplest non-trivial
example, an su(n) gauge theory in (2+1)-dimensions with one avor of
quarks of mass m. let g be the strong coupling constant, and  a quark
eld in the fundamental representation of the gauge group u(n). then  is
a column vector of n grassman elds. the covariant derivative for  is

d =  + ia

the action of this model is

s = z d4x"

1

4g2 trff  + i d  m #

(2.41)

in the weyl representation

0 =   0 1

0 ! and i =   0
 i

1

 i

0 !

34

for i = 1 or 3. imposing the conditions for dimensional reduction

1a = 1 = 0,

we obtain an eectively two-dimensional yangmills theory with adjoint mat-
ter elds and fundamental dirac spinors.

to express this model as a quantum matrix model, we can follow the
same procedure described in detail in the previous section (and so here we
will be brief). take the light-front gauge a = 0. let

21/4sz dx1 = 


u(+)
ul(+)
ul()
u()

.




(2.42)

then the elds a+ and ul() are not dynamical. eliminating the con-
strained elds yields the light-front energy and momentum

p  = z dx"
1(+)a1

i



2 (cid:16)u
2 (cid:16)u


i

1()a1
p + = z dxha1
()u()(cid:17)i

+u

j +2
1

2

1
1
2g2 j +1
2

12  mu
12 + mu

2()(cid:17) 1
 (cid:16)a2
2(+)(cid:17) 1
 (cid:16)a2
11() + i(cid:16)u

13u3(+)  mu2()(cid:17)
13u3()  mu2(+)(cid:17)# (2.43)

(2.44)

12(+)a2

(+)u(+)

in eqs.(2.43) and (2.44), g2 = g2/r dx1. the longitudinal momentum current

is given by

j +1
2 = i[a1, a1]1

2 + u1(+)u

2(+) + u1()u

2()

(2.45)

we now quantize the dynamical elds as follows:

u() =

1

2 z 

0

dk+(cid:16)(k+,)eik+x

+ (k+,)eik+x(cid:17)

(2.46)

35

and

a1

12 =

g

2 z 

0

dk+

2k+ (cid:16)a1

2(k+)eik+x

+ a1

2 (k+)eik+x(cid:17) .

(2.47)

 and  satisfy eq.(2.6), and so are  and . physically speaking,  and 
are annihilation operators of a quark and an anti-quark, respectively. a and
a satisfy eq.(2.1), as usual. again we will simply write k+ as k in the rest
of this section.

there are two families of physical states in this model. one family is of
the form shown in eq.(2.8). this is a single glueball state. another family
is of the form shown in eq.(2.7). this is a single meson state. the physical
observables can be expressed as linear combinations of operators of the rst
four kinds. for instance, the light-cone momentum and hamiltonian read

0

p + = z 
p  = z 

0

dk k
k + xj=+,(cid:16)kj
k
k +z 

dk hiv (k)k

0

kj  l

 + r

kj(cid:17)
  kj
 ; and

dk1dk2dk3dk4

(2.48)

k3,  l

k2

+ k1

k2k3k4(cid:17)i

0

k1

k1k2

 + 1r

kj  l

hhiv (k1, k2; k3, k4)(k1 + k2  k3  k4)k3k4
+hiv (k1; k2, k3, k4)(k1  k2  k3  k4)(cid:16)k2k3k4
+ xj=+,z 
+z 

dk1dk2dk3hii(k1; k2, k3)(k1  k2  k3)(cid:16)k1,+
k2  k1,+

dkhii(k)(cid:16)kj

kj(cid:17)
  kj

  k3,
k1, + rk2

k1,  lk2
  k3,+

k2 + k3,+
k3,+  rk2

k1,+  lk2
 + r
k1,+(cid:17)
  k3,

+k1,
k3,+  l
k2  k1,
r
+ xj=+,z 
(cid:16)k1,j
k4,j  lk2
+hii(k1; k2, k3, k4)(k1  k2  k3  k4)(cid:16)k1,j
k4,j  l
k1,j(cid:17)i
  k4,j
+z 

k4,j(cid:17)
k3  k1,j

k4,j + rk2k3

k1,j  lk3k2

 + r

k2k3  k1,j

k3 + rk2

dk1dk2dk3dk4hi(k1, k2; k3, k4)(k1 + k2  k3  k4) 

+k4,j

k3k2+

k3,

0

0

dk1dk2dk3dk4 [hii(k1, k2; k3, k4)(k1 + k2  k3  k4)

0

36

(cid:16)k1,+
k3,+  f 

  k2,

k4, + k1,

k3,  f 

k4,+(cid:17) ,
  k2,+

where

(2.49)

hiv (k) =

hiv (k1, k2; k3, k4) =

hiv (k1; k2, k3, k4) =

hii(k) =

hii(k1; k2, k3) =

hii(k1, k2; k3, k4) =

hii(k1; k2, k3, k4) =

hi(k1, k2; k3, k4) = 

g2n

4k z k

0

(k + p)2

p(k  p)2 ;

dp

1

g2n
8

1



g2n
8

(k2 + k1)2

k1k2k3k4 
"(k2  k1)(k4  k3)
k1k2k3k4 
"(k2 + k1)(k4  k3)

dp" 1

(k4 + k3)2
g2n

m2
2k

+

0

(

);

2(k2 + k3)

p2 +
1
k3

4 z k
1
m
k2
k1 
k2k3 "
1
(k2  k3)2 +
k2k3 "2(k2  k3)
(k2 + k3)2 +
(k1  k3)2 .

1

1

g

4s n


g2n
8
g2n
8
g2n
2

(k3 + k1)(k4 + k2)

(k4  k2)2

# ;

(k4 + k1)(k3  k2)

(k3 + k2)2

1

+

2p(k  p)

# ;
(k  p)2# ;

1

1

k1 + k2# ;
k3 + k4# ; and

1

(remark: hiv (k), hiv (k1, k2; k3, k4) and hiv (k1; k2, k3, k4) are closely related
to the coecients a, b and c in the previous section.) the roman numerals
i and iv carried by some hs refer to the fact that these are coecients
of operators of the rst and fourth kinds respectively, whereas the roman
number ii carried by other hs signify that these are coecients of operators
of the second and third kinds2.

this is a model suitable for studying meson spectrum.

2eq.(2.49) corresponds to eq.(14) in ref. [4], which shows terms corresponding to
operators of the second kind only. in fact, these two equations do not agree, but since
these self-energy terms will anyway be absorbed into a redenition of the mass of the
scalar, they do not aect the nal answer.

37

2.5 examples: supersymmetric yangmills

theory

the adjoint matter elds in all the models discussed so far are bosonic.
in wesszumino matrix model [52] and supersymmetric yangmills theory,
there are both fermionic and bosonic adjoint matter elds. because of the
usefulness of sym theory in studying the low-energy dynamics of d-branes
and m-theory, it should be of interest to see if these models can be expressed
in terms of the physical states and observables introduced in section 2.2,
too. indeed, the answer is armative, and we will explicitly demonstrate
this using the simplest sym theory, n = 1 2-dimensional supersymmetric
yang-mills theory [42, 76]. we will follow the notations in ref.[76] in this
section.

in the wesszumino gauge, the action is given by

s = z d2xtr"

1
4g2 ff  +

1
2

dd + i d  2ig 5# .(2.50)

in this equation, a, f and d are yangmills potential, yangmills eld
and the covariant derivative, as usual.  and  are bosonic and fermionic
adjoint matter elds, respectively.  = t 0. this lagrangian density is
invariant under the following transformation, which is a mixture of super-
symmetric and gauge transformations:
a = ig52,
 = 2, and
 = 

f +

d,

1
22g

i
2

(2.51)

where  is an innitesimal spinor matrix, and 01 = 01 = 1. noethers
theorem tells us that the associated spinor supercurrent j is

j = tr"

2d +

i
2g

f + 25d# .

(2.52)

choose the following conventions for the spinor and gamma matrices:

1

2 = 21/4(1

2 , 1

2)t ,

38

0 = 2,
1 = i1, and
5 = 01 = 3.

(2.53)

if we now rewrite the action in terms of light-cone coordinates and take the
usual light-cone gauge a = 0, we will nd that a+ and  are not dynamical.
quantize the dynamical elds as usual:

2(x, 0) =
1

1

2 z 

0

dk+

2k+ ha1

2(k+)eik+x

+ a1

2 (k+)eik+xi

(2.54)

and

2 (x, 0) =
1

1

2 z 

0

2(k+)eik+x

dk+hb1

+ b1

2 (k+)eik+xi .

(2.55)

the annihilation and creation operators in eqs.(2.54) and (2.55) satisfy

ha1
2(k+), a3

4 (k+)i = hb1

2(k+), b3

4 (k+)i+

= (k+  k+)1

4 3
2 .

(2.56)

up to some notational dierence, eq.(2.56) is the same as eqs.(2.1) and (2.2).
this is why the formalism in section 2.2 is applicable here. we can now write
the supercharge operators as operators of the fourth kind, as follows:

q1  z dxj+

1 = i21/4z 

0

and

q2  z dxj+

2 = i21/4gz 

0

dkkhb1

2 (k)a2

1(k)  a1

m2 (k)b2

1(k)i

(2.57)

dk

k hb1

2 (k) j 2

1 (k)  j 1

2 (k)b2

1 (k)i ,(2.58)

where j is again the longitudinal momentum current, and again we have
dropped the superscript + carried by the longitudinal momenta.
in this
model, the expression of the longitudinal momentum current is

j 2
1 (k) =

0

1

22 z 
a2
3 (p)a3

2p + k

dp

qp(p + k) ha3
1(k + p)i

1 (p)a2

3(k + p)

39

dp

0

+

+

+

1

1

22 z k
2 z 
2 z k

1

0

0

k  2p
qp(k  p)
1 (p)b2

dphb3
1(p)b2

dpb3

3(k  p)

a3
1(p)a2

3(k  p)

3(k + p)  b2

3 (p)b3

1(k + p)i

(2.59)

and j 2

1 (k) = j 2

1 (k) for k > 0.

the above trick can be applied to other supersymmetric matrix models.

2.6 examples: quantum gravity and string

theory

there are several ways to study quantum gravity and its most promising
candidate, string theory, in terms of quantum matrix models. one idea is
based on the crucial observation that the dual of a feynman diagram can be
taken as a triangulation of a planar surface, which serves as a lattice approx-
imation to a geometrical surface. the partition function for two-dimensional
quantum gravity can then be approximated by a matrix model in the large-n
limit [30, 61]. whether the matrix model is classical or quantum, and the
exact form of its action depends on what the conformal matter eld coupled
to quantum gravity is. this, in turn, is equivalent to a string theory with
certain dimensions [33]. this approach has the virtue that it reveals some
non-perturbative behavior of string theory. for example, a three-dimensional
non-critical string theory is equivalent to a model of two-dimensional quan-
tum gravity coupled with conformal matter with the conformal charge c = 2.
then this model of quantum gravity is further mapped to a one-matrix model
in the large-n limit with 3 interaction, i.e., the action of this matrix model
is

2

 +

s = z d2xtr  1

3! ,
where  is an n  n matrix, and  and  are constants.
another idea is to approximate a string by a collection of string bits [16].
a closed singlet state then represents a closed string, and an open singlet
state an open string.

1
3n

2 

(2.60)

1
2

40

another approach is to consider the low-energy dynamics of string theory
[82]. for example,
if we exclude all feynman diagrams with more than
one loop in a bosonic open string theory with n chanpaton factors, we
will retain only a tachyonic matrix eld  with three-tachyon coupling, and
yangmills gauge bosons minimally coupled to tachyons. the action is

1

s =

tr(dd) +

1
2

g2 z d26x

tr(ff )(cid:21) ,


1
4

1
2 tr(2) +

1

3s 2

 tr(3)

(2.61)

where  is the regge slope, and g is the gauge boson coupling constant.

the low-energy dynamics of bosonic dp-branes [82] can likewise be de-
scribed by a quantum matrix model. let 1, 2, . . . , and p be the coordinates
inside a p-brane. the action turns out to be

s = tpz dp+1e [det(gab + bab + 2fab)]1/2 ,

(2.62)

where tp is the brane tension,

and

gab() =

x 
a

x 
b g(x())

bab() =

x 
a

x 
b b(x())

(2.63)

(2.64)

are the induced metric and antisymmetric tensor on the brane, and fab is
the background yangmills eld.

if supersymmetry is incorporated into the theory, and if we further assume
that spacetime is essentially at, the low-energy dynamics of dp-branes can
be approximated very well by an n = 1 sym theory dimensionally reduced
from 10 down to p + 1 [74, 101]. here we have a (p + 1)-dimensional gauge
eld theory with 9p adjoint matter elds of bosons and a number of adjoint
matter elds of fermions. n, the dimension of the matrices, is the number of
d-branes in the system, the color index labels a particular d-brane, and the
quantum state other than color, ranging from p+1 to 9, labels the transverse

41

dimensions. classically speaking, diagonal elements of the matrices give the
coordinates of the d-branes in the k-th dimension, and o-diagonal elements
tell us the distances between the corresponding d-branes in that transverse
dimension.

closely associated with d-branes is the m-theory conjecture [10], namely
that in the innite momentum frame, m-theory is exactly described by the
n   limit of 0-brane quantum mechanics. a natural corollary of this con-
jecture is that light-front type-iia superstring theory can be described by an
n = 1 sym theory dimensionally reduced from 10 to 2 [35] in the large-
n limit. the hamiltonian thus obtained is essntially the green-schwarz
light-front string hamiltonian, except that the elds are matrices. (a com-
prehensive review on sym theory, d-branes and m-theory can be found in
ref. [95].)

the existence of a multitude of methods to transcribe string theory to

matrix models shows their intimate relationship.

2.7 examples: quantum spin chains (1)

quantum matrix models have a deep relationship with condensed matter sys-
tems, too. the essence of many condensed matter systems can be captured
by bosonic or fermionic quantum spin chain systems. for example, we can
use the ising model to study ferromagnetism, lattice gas and order-disorder
phase transition [38]. another paradigmatic model is the hubbard model in
which the spins are fermions (electrons). the hubbard model is believed to
describe salient features of high-tc superconductivity, metal-insulator tran-
sition, fractional quantum hall eect, superuidity, etc. [9].

another factor which motivates us to study quantum spin chain systems
is their integrability. the bethe ansatz [17] and the closely related yang
baxter equations [103, 12] are well known to be powerful tools in studying
and exactly solving many of these spin chain systems. these tools provide
us a way to determine the integrability of and solve the associated quantum
matrix models. a better knowledge in quantum matrix models should thus
help us understand exactly integrable models and condensed matter systems
better, and vice versa.

there is a one-to-one correspondence between spin chain systems, bosonic
and/or fermionic, satisfying periodic or open boundary conditions and quan-

42

tum matrix systems in the large-n limit. (a connection between spin systems
and matrix models was observed previously in ref.[63].) in this section, we
will focus on spin chains that satisfy the periodic boundary condition. let
c be the number of sites in a spin chain. each site can be occupied either
by a boson or a fermion. assume that there are b possible bosonic states,
and f possible fermionic ones. let ap(1), ap(2), . . . , ap(b) be the anni-
hilation operators of these bosonic states at the p-th site, and ap(b + 1),
ap(b + 2), . . . , ap(b + f ) be the annihilation operators of the fermionic
ones. attaching daggers as superscripts to these operators turns them to the
corresponding creation operators. then a typical state of a spin chain can
be written as

2(k2)   a
dene the hubbard operator [11] as follows:

k  a

1(k1)a

c(kc)|0i.

p  a
x ij

p(i)ap(j).

now, consider the action of a product of hubbard operators on k:
p+a1k = (1)[(k1)+(k2)++(kp1)][(i)+(j)]

p+1    x iaja

x i1j1

p x i2j2
(1)[(ia)+(ja)][(kp)+(kp+1)++(kp+a2)]kp+a1
(1)[(ia1)+(ja1)][(kp)+(kp+1)++(kp+a3)]kp+a2
(1)[(i2)+(j2)](kp)kp+1

kp
j1 k1k2...kp1i1i2...iakp+akp+a+1...kn

  

ja1

ja

j2

for p + a  1  n. we can manipulate eq.(2.67) to be

(1)[(ia)+(ja)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja1)]
(1)[(ia1)+(ja1)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja2)]   
(1)[(i2)+(j2)](j1)x i1j1

p+1    x iaja

p x i2j2

p+a1k =

(1)[(k1)+(k2)++(kp1)][(j)+(kp+a)+(kp+a+1)++(kn)]
(1)[(k1)+(k2)++(kp1)][(i)+(kp+a)+(kp+a+1)++(kn)]
kp
j1 kp+1

k1k2...kp1i1i2...iakp+akp+a+1...kn.

   kp+a1

ja

j2

(2.65)

(2.66)

(2.67)

(2.68)

if p + a  1 > c = p + a1  1, then the action of this product of hubbard
operators on k becomes instead

x i1j1

p x i2j2

p+1    x iaja

p+a1k = (1)[(ia)+(ja)][(k1)+(k2)++(ka21)]ka2

ja

43

ka21
ja1

ja1+1

  

ja1+2k1

(1)[(ia1)+(ja1)][(k1)+(k2)++(ka22)]
(1)[(ia1+2)+(ja1+2)](k1)k2
(1)[(ia1+1)++(ia)+(ka2+1)++(kp1)][(i1)++(ia1 )+(j1)++(ja1)]
(1)[(ia1 )+(ja1 )][(kp)+(kp+1)++(kc1)]kc
(1)[(ia11)+(ja11)][(kp)+(kp+1)++(kc2)]kc1
(1)[(i2)+(j2)](kp)kp+1

kp
j1 ia1+1ia1+2...iaka2+1ka2+2...kp1i1i2...ia1 ,

ja11   

ja1

j2

(2.69)

where a1 + a2 = a. again we can turn eq.(2.69) into
(1)[(ia)+(ja)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja1)](1)[(ia1)+(ja1)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja2)]   
(1)[(i2)+(j2)](j1)x i1j1

p+1    x iaja

p+a1k =

p x i2j2

(1)[(ja1+1)+(ja1+2)++(ja)+(ka2+1)+(ka2+2)++(kp1)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja1 )]
(1)[(ia1+1)+(ia1+2)++(ia)+(ka2+1)+(ka2+2)++(kp1)][(i1)+(i2)++(ia1 )]
j1 kp+1
kp
ja ia1+1ia1+2...iaka2+1ka2+2...kp1i1i2...ia1 .(2.70)
we are now ready to identify quantum matrix models with quantum spin
chains. consider the following weighted sum of all cyclic permutations of the
states of a quantum spin chain in the following way:

ja1+2    ka2

k1
ja1+1k2

   kc

ja1

j2

k = xk1 k2=k

(1)(k1)( k2) k2k1.

(2.71)

this k obeys eq.(2.9). eqs.(2.68), (2.70) and (2.71) together then imply
that

n

k

x i1j1

p x i2j2

(1)[(ia)+(ja)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja1)]
(1)[(ia1)+(ja1)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja2)]   
p+1    x iaja
(1)[(i2)+(j2)](j1)
xp=1
(1)(k1)(k2)k2k1
j i + xk1k2=k
(1)(k1)[(k2)+(k3)]k2
+ xk1k2k3=k
(1)(k1)(k2)k2
+ xk1k2=k
+ xj1j2=j xk1k2k3=k

j ik1

j

44

p+a1k =
i + xk1k2=k
j ik3k1

k1
j ik2

(1)(k3)[(k1)+(k2)]k3

j1 k1

j2 ik2.

(2.72)

comparing eq.(2.72) with eq.(2.22) then nally yields

j = (1)[(ia)+(ja)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja1)]
i

c

(1)[(ia1)+(ja1)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja2)]    (1)[(i2)+(j2)](j1)
xp=1


p+1    x iaja

p x i2j2

p+a1.

x i1j1

(2.73)

as the hamiltonian of a typical matrix model is of the form pi,j hj

j, where
only a nite number of hj
i s are non-zero, eq.(2.73) provides us a way to
transcribe the matrix model into a quantum spin chain with fermions and/or
bosons, if for each non-zero hj
i the numbers of integers in i and j are the
same.

i i

let us see how the above abstract formalism is put into practice in rep-

resentative models.

 the ising model [81, 44, 65].

the one-dimensional quantum ising model is perhaps the simplest ex-
actly integrable model. its hamiltonian h spin

ising is

h spin

ising(, ) =

c

xp=1

 z
p + 

c

xp=1

 x
p  x

p+1.

(2.74)

1

p

c+1 =  x,y,z

here  is a constant, and  x,y,z
are pauli matrices at the p-th site.
moreover,  x,y,z
. two pauli matrices at dierent sites (i.e.,
with dierent subscripts) commute with each other. this ising spin
chain is equivalent to a bosonic two-matrix model, as follows. we set
the bosonic quantum state 1 in the matrix model to correspond to the
spin-up state in the ising spin chain, and the bosonic quantum state 2
to correspond to the spin-down state. since

 z
p = x 11

p  x 22

p ,  x

p + i y

p = 2x 12

p and  x

p  i y

p = 2x 21
p ,

the hamiltonian can be rewritten as

h matrix

ising = h0 + v

where

h0 = 1

v = h22

2; and

1  2
11 + 21

12 + 12

22i .
21 + 11

45

(2.75)

(2.76)

(2.77)

this is a two-matrix model with the hamiltonian


n

h matrix

ising

= trha(1)a(1)  a(2)a(2)i +

trha(2)a(2)a(1)a(1)

+a(2)a(1)a(2)a(1) + a(1)a(2)a(1)a(2)

+a(1)a(1)a(2)a(2)i .

(2.78)

our results, along with known results of the ising spin chain [65], give
the spectrum of this matrix model in the large-n limit:

c

e(np, c, ) = 2

xp=c(cid:18)1 + 2 cos(cid:20) 2p

2c + 1(cid:21) + 2(cid:19)1/2
where np = 0 or 1. also, we must impose the condition pc

p=c npp = 0
to get cyclically symmetric states. let us underscore that the matrix
model dened by the hamiltonian h matrix
in eqs.(2.77) or (2.78) is an
integrable matrix model in the large-n limit. we will come back to this
model again in chapter 5.

(2.79)

np,

ising

 the chiral potts model [56, 45, 8, 13].

this is a bosonic model in which the number of quantum states avail-
able for a site is not restricted to 2 but is any nite positive integer.
the hamiltonian is

h spin

cp =

where

c

1

xp=1

xk=1

[kqk

p + kp k

p p k
p+1 ],

(2.80)

k = ei( 2k
sin k
n

n

1)

, k = ei( 2k
sin k
n

n

1)

, cos  =  cos ,  = e

2i

n ,

j =

1 0
0
0  0
0 0 2
. . .
0

0 0





. . .
. . .
. . .

0
0
0

. . . n1

,





46

and

j =





0 0 0 . . . 0 1
1 0 0 . . . 0 0
0 1 0 . . . 0 0

. . .

0 0 0 . . . 1 0

.





this model is exactly solvable by the yang-baxter method. the hamil-
tonian of the associated solvable multi-matrix model is

h matrix

cp =

1

xk=1


k

k(j1)j

j + k



xj=1



xj1,j2=1

j1+k,j2k
j1,j2




(2.81)

where j1 + k should be replaced with j1 + k   if j1 + k >  and j2  k
should be replaced with j2 +   k if j2  k  0 in gj1+k,j2k
in the
above equation.

j1,j2

 the hubbard model [57].

we will see that the matrix model associated with the hubbard model
is a model with two fermionic and two bosonic states. let cp, and cp,
be the annihilation operators of spin-up and spin-down electrons at the
p-th site respectively. the hamiltonian of the hubbard model is

hhubbard = 

n

xp=1 x=,(cid:16)c

pcp+1, + c

p+1,cp(cid:17) + u

npnp,

(2.82)

n

xp=1

pcp and np = c

where np = c
pcp are the number operators for spin-
up and spin-down states at the p-th site. rewrite the hamiltonian in
terms of hubbard operators as follows. identify the states 1, 2, 3, 4
to be the vacuum state, the state with one spin-up and one spin-down
electrons, the state with a spin-up electron only, and the state with a
spin-down electron only, respectively. then the following correspon-
dence holds true:

cp,  ap(3); cp,  ap(4); and cp,cp,  ap(2).

(2.83)

we can then use eq.(2.83) to rewrite eq.(2.82) as

hhubbard = 

n

xp=1 x=3,4(cid:16)x 1

p x 1

p+1  x 1

p+1(cid:17)
p x 1

47

p+1 + x 24

p x 13

p+1 + x 14

p x 23

p x 24

p+1  x 41
p+1  x 23
p x 14
p+1(cid:17)
p x 2
p+1  x 2

p+1 + x 32
p x 41
p+1
p+1(cid:17)
p x 32

n

p x 42

xp=1(cid:16)x 31

x 42
p+1  x 13
p x 31
n
xp=1 x=3,4(cid:16)x 2
p x 2

xp=1

x 22
p .

+u

n

(2.84)

then eq.(2.73) tells us that the corresponding quantum matrix model
is

h matrix

hubbard = (cid:16)34
(cid:16)13
31 + 31
+u2
2.

12 + 34

13 + 14

21  43
41 + 41

12  43
14(cid:17) +(cid:16)23

21 + 12
32 + 32

34 + 21
23 + 24

43(cid:17)
43  21
34  12
24(cid:17)
42 + 42

(2.85)

using the bethe ansatz, lieb and wu showed that this model is exactly
integrable [75].

 t-j model [93, 86, 87, 11].

it is not necessary for the number of bosonic and fermionic quantum
states in a model to be the same in order for the model to be exactly
integrable. consider, for instance, the hamiltonian of the t-j model:

htj = t
j
2

+

n

p (cid:16)c
xp=1 x=,
xp=1(cid:20)sp  sp+1 

n

icp+1, + c

p+1,cp(cid:17) p

1
4

(np + np) (np+1,np+1,)(cid:21) . (2.86)

in this equation,

n

p =

(1  npnp)

yp=1

is the projection operator to the collective state in which no site has 2
electrons. si is the usual spin operator:

sx

p =

1

p(cid:17) ;
2 (cid:16)sp + s

48

1

sy

sz

p =

2i (cid:16)sp  s
p(cid:17) ;
1
(np  np) ;
p =
2
p = c
s
pcp; and
sp = c
pcp.

if j  t, then this model is equivalent to the hubbard model in the
large-u limit. however, this model is in general dierent from the
hubbard model. when the values of j and t are such that j = 2t, we
say that the model is at the supersymmetric point, and it is integrable.
the corresponding integrable matrix model in the large-n limit is

tj

j

h matrix

0 + 0

0 + 0

0 + 0

= t(cid:16)0

(cid:17) .(2.87)
note that there are 2 fermionic states ( and ) but only 1 bosonic
state (0) in this integrable model.

2 (cid:16)

0(cid:17) 

  

  

 + 

some other examples of exactly integrable quantum spin chain models
and the corresponding quantum matrix models in the large-n limit can be
found in refs.[70] and [71].

2.8 examples: quantum spin chains (2)

so far, we have been discussing quantum spin chains satisfying the periodic
boundary condition. quantum spin chains satisfying open boundary con-
ditions are also of considerable interest. recent years have seen signicant
progress in the understanding of the integrability of open spin chains. con-
sider vertex models with open boundary conditions. sklyanin [91] found that
if a set of equations, now know as the sklyanin equations [48], are satised
in a vertex model, then this model is integrable. we can further derive an
expression for the associated one-dimensional quantum spin chain model.

there is also a one-to-one correspondence between the open spin chains
and quantum matrix models in the large-n limit. the relation between a 
and hubbard operators is almost the same as that in eq.(2.73), except that
the summation index p runs from 1 to c  a + 1 this time. it can be easily

49

seen that the corresponding hubbard operators for an li

j and an ri

j are

j = (1)[(ia)+(ja)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja1)] 
li

(1)[(ia1)+(ja1)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja2)]    (1)[(i2)+(j2)](j1) 
x i1j1
1 x i2j2

2

(2.88)

   x iaja

a

and

j = (1)[(ia)+(ja)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja1)] 
ri

(1)[(ia1)+(ja1)][(j1)+(j2)++(ja2)]    (1)[(i2)+(j2)](j1) 
x i1j1
ca+1x i2j2

ca+2    x iaja

c

(2.89)

respectively.

let us give representative examples to see how the transcription is put

into practice.

 integrable spin- 1

2 xxz model [1].

the hamiltonian h spin
six-vertex model which satises the sklyanin equations is

xxz of this spin chain model corresponding to the

h spin

xxz =

( x

j  x

j+1 +  y

j  y

j+1 + cos  z

j  z

j+1)

+ i sin (coth  z

1 + coth + z

c )] ,

(2.90)

1

c1

2 sin  
xj=1


where   (0, ) and both  and + are arbitrary constants. the
hamiltonian h matrix

of the associated integrable matrix model is

xxz

h matrix

xxz

=

1

2 sin  n2(21

12 + 12

+i sin [coth (l1

21 + cos (11
1  l2

11  12
2) + coth +(r1

12  21
21 + 22
22)
2)]o .
1  r2

(2.91)

we can further rewrite this formula in terms of the creation and anni-
hilation operators a and a:

h matrix

xxz =

1

2n sin  n2(cid:16)a2
2(2)a1

2 (1)a1

1 (1)a2
1 (1)(cid:17)

+a2

1 (2)a2

2 (2)a1

2(1)a1

1 (2)

50

2 (1)a1

1 (1)a2

cos (cid:16)a2
1 (2)a2
 a2
2(1)a1
+i sin hcoth (q1a2

2 (1)a1

coth +(q

1a1

2 (1)a2

2(1)a1

1 (1)  a2

1 (1)a2

2 (2)a1

1 (2)a2

2 (2)a1
2(1)q3  q1a2

1 (2) + a2
1 (1)a3
3(1)q3  q

2(2)a1
1 (2)a3
3(2)q3io .

1a1

2 (2)a2

1 (1)

2(2)a1
1 (2)(cid:17)

2(2)q3)

(2.92)

 the hubbard model [88, 7, 105]. many hubbard models with dierent
open boundary conditions have been found to be exactly integrable.
one of them [7] has the hamiltonian

n1

hhubbard(o) = 

ici+1, + c

xi=1 x=,(cid:16)c

xi=1
(ni + ni)  p (n1 + nn)  p (n1 + nn) .

i+1,ci(cid:17) + u

n

nini

+

n

xi=1

(2.93)

using eqs.(2.73) (subject to the remark in the second paragraph of
this section), (2.88) and (2.89), we can derive the hamiltonian of the
associated matrix model:

h matrix

12 + 34

hubbard(o) = (cid:16)34
(cid:16)13
13 + 14
31 + 31
2 + (cid:16)3
u2
3 + 4
p(cid:16)l3
3 + l2
3 + r3

21  43
12  43
14(cid:17) +(cid:16)23
41 + 41
2(cid:17)
4 + 22
2(cid:17)  p(cid:16)l4

2 + r2

21 + 12
32 + 32

34 + 21
23 + 24

43(cid:17)
34  12
43  21
24(cid:17)
42 + 42

4 + r4

4 + l2

2(cid:17) .
2 + r2

(2.94)

other examples of exactly integrable spin chain models satisfying open
boundary conditions and the corresponding quantum matrix models in the
large-n limit can be found in refs.[69] and [71].

51

chapter 3

a lie algebra for open strings

3.1 introduction

as we have just been seen in the previous chapter, quantum matrix models
in the large-n limit are of very wide applicability in physics. this leads us
naturally to the following question: can we do something more in addition to
writing down the physical observables of these models as linear combinations
of the operators introduced in section 2.2? one major milestone in under-
standing the physics of these models would be to obtain the spectra of some
of these observables, or at least to obtain their key qualitative properties.

as we have discussed in section 1.2, a number of systematic analytic ap-
proaches have been developed to solve classical matrix models in the large-n
limit, which are also widely used in physics. on the other hand, the method
employed for studying the spectra of the hamiltonians or supercharges of
various versions of yangmills theory in recent years is numerical in nature.
a lot of eort has been spent to develop more accurate and sophisticated
numerical analysis, and there is now a fairly large literature in the numerical
solutions of these quantum matrix models. (refs.[29, 52, 76, 3, 4] are just a
random sample of the literature in this area.) it should be nice to see how
much this approach can tell us about the various interesting physical sys-
tems. nonetheless, it should also be nice if we have several other approaches
to the same problem; some results which are dicult to obtain in one ap-
proach may be pretty trivial in another. a combination of the knowledge
gained from dierent approaches can lead us to much deeper understandings

52

of the physics.

in section 1.4, we have underscored the advantage of understanding the
symmetry of a physical system in elucidating important features of it. this
suggests another approach: what is the symmetry of quantum matrix mod-
els? a continuous symmetry in physics is usually expressed as a lie group,
or its innitesimal form, a lie algebra. is there a lie algebra for quantum
matrix models? more specically speaking, are the physical observables of
quantum matrix models elements of a lie algebra, or a lie superalgebra?

yes, such a lie superalgebra exists.
the derivation of this superalgebra is, however, not that easy to under-
stand. for pedagogical purpose, we will consider a special case in this chapter
 we will study the open strings with adjoint bosons, one degree of freedom
for the fermion in the fundamental representation, and one degree of freedom
for the anti-fermion in the conjugate representation only. the physical oper-
ators acting on these open strings form a lie algebra, which we will call the
centrix algebra . we will see that the centrix algebra has very rich math-
ematical properties. there are a hierachy of subalgebras. the most notable
ones are the extended cuntzlie algebras [28, 41] formed by all operators of
the second and third kinds. the centrix algebra itself is an extension of the
lie algebra of a set of outer derivations of the cuntz algebra v by a lie
algebra which we will call the multix algebra m and which is formed out of
the extended cuntzlie algebra. in the simplest case when there is only one
degree of freedom for the adjoint bosons, the centrix algebra reduces to an
extension of the witt algebra [104, 24, 89], the central extension of which is
the virasoro algebra [97], by the commutative algebra of polynomials on a
unit circle after the proper ideal formed by all nite-rank operators, i.e., all
operators of the rst kind, has been quotiented out. thus this set of outer
derivations of the cuntz algebra form a generalization of the witt algebra,
and plays an important role in governing the dynamics of many physical
systems.

we will study  progressively from its most easily understood subalgebra
to its full version. in section 3.2, we will study the lie algebra f formed
by the operators of the rst kind. we will see that f is equivalent to gl+
[59] and is well understood. in section 3.3, we will move on to study the
lie algebra l formed by the operators of the second kind. we will see
that this l is precisely the extended cuntzlie algebra. we will study its
structure like its cartan subalgebra and root vectors, and will see that f

53

form a proper ideal of l. if there is only one degree of freedom, i.e.,  = 1,
the quotient algebra l1/f 
1 will be the toeplitz algebra [80]. in section 3.4,
we will study the lie algebra r formed by the operators of the third kind.
this algebra is isomorphic to l. we will also consider the lie algebra m
formed by the operators of the rst three kinds.

finally, in section 3.5, we will study the centrix algebra . we will
show in an accompanying appendix that this is indeed a lie algebra. we will
study its cartan subalgebra, root vectors and ideals. we will see that l, r
and m are proper ideals of . in section 3.6, we will consider the special
case when there is only one degree of freedom. we will see why the smallest
quotient algebra of 1 we know so far is equivalent to the witt algebra.

after acquiring some expertise in this kind of lie algebraic arguments,
we will study the full superalgebra, the grand string superalgebra, for all ve
kinds of operators, and some more subalgebras of it in subsequent chapters.

3.2 an algebra for finite-rank operators

in this section, we are going to study operators of the rst kind with no
adjoint fermions, and restrict our attention to the action of the middle of
these operators on adjoint matter. we will see that these operators form
an associative algebra equivalent to gl+; it is thus not an essentially new
object.

consider the action of an operator of the rst kind on an open string
state. we will ignore the action on the fundamental and conjugate matter
elds; this corresponds to setting f = 1 temporarily. then eq.(2.12) tells
us that

j s k =  k
f i

j s i

(3.1)

(c.f., fig.2.2(c)). in particular, f 
 , where  is the null sequence, is nothing
but the projection operator to the state with no adjoint matter. dene
l by the requirement that its action on s m give
the composite operator f i
j (f k
f i

l s m ). then it follows that

j f k

j f k
f i

l =  k

j f i
l.

(3.2)

54

thus the f s form an algebra. moreover, it is obvious that this algebra is the
associative algebra of nite-rank matrices on the innite-dimensional space
spanned by all s is. f i

j is a weyl matrix in this orthogonal basis.

let us dene a lie algebra f spanned by the f i

j s with the usual com-

mutator

then

j , f k
[f i

l ]  f i

l  f k
j f k

l f i
j .

j , f k
hf i

j f i
l i =  k

l   i

lf k
j .

(3.3)

(3.4)

the set of all diagonal elements f i
each f k

l , where k 6= l, forming a one-dimensional root vector space:

i s form a cartan subalgebra of f, with

i , f k
hf i

l i = (cid:16) k

i   i

l .

l(cid:17) f k

(3.5)

eq.(3.5) reveals clearly that f is isomorphic to gl+, the lie algebra,
with the usual bracket, of all complex matrices (aij)i,j  z+ such that the
number of nonzero aij is nite. the isomorphism is given by a one-one
correspondence between the multi-indices i and the set of natural numbers
z+, for example by the lexicographic ordering introduced in appendix a.1.
thus each of the algebras f with any value of  is isomorphic to gl+,
the inductive limit of the general linear algebras. gl+ has already been
thoroughly studied [59, 60].

3.3 operators of the second kind and the

cuntz algebra

we now study the algebra formed by the adjoint portion of the operators of
the second kind with no fermions. we will see that this associative algebra
is an innite-dimensional associative algebra closely related to the cuntz
algebra. the corresponding lie algebra is a kind of current algebra in our
theory.
in a special case, we will relate this current algebra with another
well-known algebra, the toeplitz algebra [80].

55

ignoring the action on the two ends of an open string, we can simplify

eq.(2.15) to

l i

j s k = xk1 k2= k

k1
j s i k2.


(3.6)

this action was illustrated in fig.2.3(c). note that l
operator.

let us consider the multiplication rule for the l i

l by the requirement that its action on s m give l i
j l k
operator l i
it follows that

j s. dene the composite
l s m ). then

j (l k

 = 1, the identity

j l i
l =  k
j l k
l i
l + xj1j2= j

 k
j1

l i
lj2

+ xk1k2= k

k1

j l

ik2
l .

(3.7)

here we sum over all possible sequences except that both j2 and k2 are
required to be non-empty. if we do not impose this non-empty restriction,
j2 being empty and k2 being empty
there will be an overcounting problem.
describe really the rst term on the r.h.s. and we want to make sure that
this term is counted only once in the sums.

thus the ls form an algebra. moreover, this algebra is associative. the
associativity is proved in appendix b.1. we can now dene the corresponding
lie algebra of the ls as follows:

j , l k
[l i

 k
j1

j l i
l ] =  k
l + xj1j2= j
ll k
j  xl1l2= l

 i

ik2
k1

j l
l

l i
lj2

 i
l1

+ xk1k2= k
l k
jl2  xi1i2= i

ki2
i1

l l
j

.

(3.8)

the second and third terms on the r.h.s. of eq.(3.8) are shown in fig.3.1(a)
and (b), respectively. we will call the lie algebra dened by eq.(3.8) the
leftix algebra or l. (we justify this name as an abbreviation of left multi-
matrix algebra.)

to understand the properties of this lie algebra better, let us deter-
mine its cartan subalgebra and the root spaces with respect to this cartan
subalgebra. we will follow the denition of a cartan subalgebra given by
humphreys [58]. to understand this denition, we need a number of prelim-
inary notions. let l be a lie algebra. dene the descending central series

56

.
i

.
i

.
j*
1

.
k

j*
2

.
k1

.
j*

.
l*

.

.
(a) j   = k1

.
l*

k2

.

.
(b) j = k
1

.
i

.
i

.
l*

j*2

.
l*

k2

figure 3.1: the leftix algebra.

by l0 = l, l1 = [l,l], l2 = [l,l1], . . . , li = [l,li1]. l is nilpotent if
ln = 0 for some n. the normalizer of a subalgebra k of l is dened by
nl(k) = {x  l|[x,k]  k}. a cartan subalgebra of a lie algebra l is a
nilpotent subalgebra which is equal to its normalizer in l. it turns out that
all vectors of the form l i
i , where i is either empty or an arbitrary nite integer
sequence of integers between 1 and  inclusive, span a cartan subalgebra of
the algebra l. the proof of this proposition can be found in appendix b.2.

now we note the following identity:

(3.9)


l k
l 



xj=1

l

kj

lj 
 s m =  m

l s k.

this equation tells us that the operator on the l.h.s. is nothing but f k
saw earlier:

l we

l = l k
f k

l 

kj
lj .
l



xj=1

(3.10)

in particular, the projection operator to the state with no adjoint partons
can be written as

f 
 = 1 

lj
j .



xj=1

57

(3.11)

.
i

.
j*

.
k1

.
k2

.
l*

.
.
j = k

1

.
i

.
k2

.
l*

figure 3.2: a root vector of the leftix algebra.

we can obtain from eqs.(3.1) and (3.6) the following relation:

j , f k
hl i

l i = xk1 k2= k

k1

j f

i k2

l  xl1 l2= l

 i
l1

f k
j l2

.

(3.12)

the rst term on the r.h.s. of this formula is depicted in fig.3.2.

it follows from eq.(3.12) that f forms an ideal of the algebra l. this
is a proper ideal because obviously nite linear combinations of f i
j do not
span the whole leftix algebra. the quotient l = l/f is thus also a lie
algebra. put it another way, l is the extension of l by f: we have the
exact sequence of lie algebras

0  f  l  l  0.

l, l and the above exact sequence have an intimate relationship with
the cuntz algebra. to understand this, let us recall some basic properties
of the cuntz algebra now, following evans [41]. let h be a -dimensional
hilbert space spanned by v1, v2, . . . , and v, and f (h) be the full fock space

r=0(rh), where (0h) is a one-dimensional hilbert space spanned by a
unit vector , the vacuum1. then there is a bijective mapping between
the fock space of physical states spanned by open string states and the
space f (h). the state s is mapped to , and the state sk is mapped to
vk1  vk2      vkc. dene the operators a1, a2, . . . , a as follows:

aivk1  vk2      vkc = vi  vk1  vk2      vkc; and

ai = vi

(3.13)

1for us the state  is not exactly the vacuum, but rather has the physical meaning of
the state with no adjoint matter. this state still contains a fundamental and a conjugate
matter eld.

58

where i is an integer between 1 and  inclusive. the corresponding adjoint
operators a1, a2, . . . , a have the following properties:

aivk1  vk2      vkc = k1
ai = 0.

i vk2      vkc; and

as a result, the as and as satisfy the following properties:

aiaj = j

i ; and
aiai = 1  p,



xi=1

(3.14)

(3.15)

(3.16)

where p is the projection operator to the vacuum . eqs.(3.15) and (3.16)
give the dening relations for the annihilation operators a and creation op-
erators a of the extended cuntz algebra. furthermore,

vk1  vk2      vkc = ak1ak2    akc.

(3.17)

 to the identity operator.

j corresponds to ai1ai2    aiaajbajb1    a1, li

it is now straightforward to see that there is a one-to-one correspondence
among the operators characterized by eq.(3.6) and the operators acting on
 to ai1ai2    aia, l
f (h). li
to ajbajb1    a1, and l
there is a technical dierence between our point of view and that of evans
or cuntz. they regard all algebras as banach algebras2, while we regard our
algebras as nite linear combinations of basis elements. for example, the
analogue of our algebra f will be the algebra k(h) of compact operators3
on h = c . this is because k(h) is just the completion of f in the topology
dened by the operator norm. it follows from our previous discussion that
k(h) is an ideal of the banach algebra generated by as and as.
if we
quotient the extended cuntz algebra by k(h), then we get the cuntz algebra,
with the as and as satisfying the following relations:

j

aiaj = j

i ; and

aiai = 1.

(3.18)

(3.19)



xi=1

2a banach algebra is an algebra among elements in a complete normed space.

its

elementary properties are discussed in ref.[66].

3a compact linear operator is a linear operator t from a normed space x to a normed
space y such that for every bounded subset m of x, the closure of the image t (m ) is
compact [66].

59

the role of the last relation is to set all f i
j s to zero; i.e., to quotient by f.
consequently, up to the issue of completeness in the operator norm, we can
make these identications: f is the lie algebra associated with the banach
algebra of compact operators on h, l is the lie algebra associated with the
extended cuntz algebra, or the extended cuntzlie algebra, and l is the
lie algebra associated with the cuntz algebra, or the cuntzlie algebra.

we will see that in fact the presence of f as a proper ideal is a generic
feature of most of the algebras we will study. quotienting by this ideal will
get us the essentially new algebras we are interested in studying. but it is
only the extension that will have interesting representations. it appears that
the extension by gl+ plays a role in our theory that central extensions play
in the theory of kacmoody and virasoro algebras. similar extensions have
appeared in previous approaches to current algebras [78].

as a special case, we get from eq.(3.12) that:

l i = 

i , f k
hl i

 xk1 k2= k



k1

i  xl1 l2= l

l1
 f k
 i

l .

(3.20)

as a result, every f k
l is a root vector of l. moreover, these are the only
root vectors of the algebra l. a proof that there are no root vectors other
than the f k
l s will be provided in appendix b.3. we therefore conclude that
every root space is one-dimensional.

we can get further insight of l and l by considering the special case
 = 1. then all integer sequences are repetitions of the number 1 a number
of times. we can then simplify the notations and write s k as s#( k) and l i
j
as l#( i)
b , where a and b
are the numbers of integers in the various sequences, on s c, where c is also a
non-negative integer, is given by

#( j). we can deduce from eq.(3.6) that the action of l a

b s c = (b  c)s a+ cb,
l a

(3.21)

where (condition) is 1 if the condition holds, and 0 otherwise. the lie
bracket eq.(3.8) is simplied to

di = ( c  b)l a
hl a
b , l c

b+ d c + (b < c)l a+ cb

d

 ( a  d)l c

b+ d a  ( d < a)l a+ c d

.
b
(3.22)

60

the set of all vectors of the form l a
vectors are given by f c
action of f a

d l c+1

d = l c

b on s c, which can be derived from eq.(3.1), is

a span a cartan subalgebra. the root
d+1. this can be deduced from eq.(3.10). the

the corresponding eigenequation, which can be deduced from eq.(3.20), is

f a
b s c =  c

bs a.

(3.23)

hl a
a, f c

di = (cid:16)( a  c)  ( a  d)(cid:17) f c
d.

as in an earlier discussion, the subspace f1 spanned by all the vectors of
d form a proper ideal of this  = 1 algebra l1. we can deduce

the form f c
from eq.(3.12) that

(3.24)

(3.25)

hl a
b , f c

di = (b  c)f a+ cb

d

 ( a  d)f c

b+ d a.

0 + f and l0

we can now form the quotient algebra of cosets of the form v + f, where v
is an arbitrary vector of the algebra l1. this quotient algebra is spanned by
the cosets l a
b + f1, where a and b run over all 0, 1,   ,. it is
straightforward to show that the following lie brackets hold:
hl a
0 + f1, l c
hl a
0 + f1, l0
hl0
b + f1, l0

0 + f1i = f1;
d + f1i = f1; and
d + f1i = f1.

therefore, this quotient algebra is an abelian algebra. furthermore, consider
eq.(3.16), one of the relations for the extended cuntz algebra . when  = 1,
the superscript in a and the subscript in a have to be 1 and so there is no
danger of ambiguity to omit them. this relation is now simplied to:

(3.26)

aa = 1.

(3.27)

this is the dening relation for the toeplitz algebra [80]. note that the com-
mutator between a and a is a nite-rank operator, the projection operator
to the vacuum state. thus if we quotient the toeplitz algebra by f1, we will
get an abelian algebra generated by the operators satisfying

aa = 1,

and aa = 1.

(3.28)

this is just the algebra of functions on a circle, and is consistent with the
fact that the quotient algebra characterized by eq.(3.26) is abelian. thus
we can regard the cuntz algebra as a non-commutative multi-dimensional
generalization of the algebra of functions on the circle.

61

3.4 current algebra in the large-n limit

in this section, we will study the lie algebra for all operators of the third
kind, and the lie algebra spanned by the operators of the rst three kinds.
the theory of the lie algebra r spanned by the operators of the third
kind is closely parallel to that of l. considering only the action of an
operator of the third kind on the adjoint matter portion of an open string
state in eq.(2.18) gives

r i

js k = xk1 k2= k

j s k1 i.
k2

the lie bracket between two rs is:

j , r k
[r i

l ] =  k

 k
j2

j r i
l + xj1 j2= j
ll k
j  xl1 l2= l

 i

l i
j1 l + xk1 k2= k
l k
 i
l1 j  xi1 i2= i
l2

k2
j lk1 i


l

i2
l li1 k

j

.

a vector in f can be expressed as an element in r as well:

l = r k
f k

l 

ri k
i l .



xi=1

the lie bracket between an r and an f is

(3.29)

(3.30)

(3.31)

j , f k
hr i

l i = xk1 k2= k

k2

j f

k1 i

l  xl1 l2= l

 i
l2

f k
l1 j .

(3.32)

the algebra m spanned by all operators of the forms f i

j , and r i
j
together is also interesting. l and r are subalgebras of m. in addition,
the lie bracket between an element of l and an element of r is

j , l i

j , r k
hl i

li =

k1

j2

xj1 j2 = j

k1 k2 = k

f

i k2

j1 l  xi1 i2 = i

l1 l2 = l

i2

l1

i1 k
f
j l2

.

(3.33)

a heuristic way to see that eq.(3.33) is true is by verifying that the action
of the r.h.s. on an arbitrary state s m gives l i
js m ). this,

j (r k

l (l i

l s m )  r k

62

.
i

.
j*1

.
k1

.
j*2

.
k2

.
i

.
k2

.
j*1

.
l*

.
l*

.
j

.
2 = k1

figure 3.3: the multix algebra.

however, does not automatically imply that this denition of the lie bracket
between an l and an r satises the jacobi identity because eqs.(3.10) and
(3.31) together imply that the set of all nite linear combinations of the
operators in l and r is not linearly independent. we will properly justify
eq.(3.33) in chapter 5 where we will see that we can treat m as a subalgebra
of yet another larger lie algebra. the rst term on the r.h.s. of the above
equation is depicted in fig.3.3.

eq.(3.33) tells us that l and r are proper ideals of m. in particular,
f is a proper ideal of m, so there exists the quotient algebra m = m/f.
since the commutator between an l and an r is an element in f, l and r
commute when they are viewed as elements in m. in fact m is almost the
direct sum of l and r. the only subtlety is that the identity operator can
be identied with either l
. in order not to count it twice, we must
require l

 or r

  r

 = 0 in l  r to get m.

these operators are regularized versions of the left- and right-handed
current operators of yangmills theory. we see that the chiral structure of
the current algebra is reproduced beautifully in the multix algebra. the fact
that only the extension of the current algebra by gl+ has a representation
on the space of open string states is also reminiscent of what happens in lower
dimensional theories. there must be a way to extend this representation on
the space of open string states to a sort of fock space of multi-open string
states.

we have summarized the relationship among the various algebras dis-

cussed in this section in table 3.1.

63

operators

extended
algebra

comment

quotient algebra

f i
j
l i
j
l = l k
f k
l  l
r i
j
l  ri k
l = r k
f k
j and r i
l i
j

kj
lj

i l

f
l

r

m

l  l/f

f  gl+
f is a proper
ideal of l.
f is a proper r  r/f
ideal of r.
m 6= l  r m  m/f

table 3.1: relationship among f, l, r and m. the summation con-
vention is adopted for repeated indices in this table.

3.5 a lie algebra for the operators of the

fourth kind

in previous sections we studied the actions of the operators of the rst three
kinds, and obtained associative algebras closely related to known algebras
such as the cuntz algebra.
it turns out that products of operators of the
fourth kind cannot be written as nite linear combinations of these operators;
they do not span an algebra under multiplication. however, the commutator
of two operators of the fourth kind can be written as a nite linear combi-
nation of these operators. thus operators of the fourth kind acting on open
singlet states form a lie algebra, which we will call the centrix algebra .
this new lie algebra we discover reduces to the witt algebra [104, 24, 89] in
the special case  = 1. thus the centrix algebra is a sort of generalization
of the lie algebra of vector elds on the circle in noncommutative geometry
[27]. a priori many such generalizations are possible; we have identied the
one that is relevant to the planar large-n limit of matrix models.

we will see that there is a proper ideal f 

 of the lie algebra  which
is equivalent to gl+; hence, there is a quotient lie algebra  = /f 
.
furthermore, we will see that l and r share some elements with .
this is perhaps a bit surprising since they were originally introduced using
operators acting on the ends of an open string state, and  has no eect
j and ri
on the ends. more precisely, the generators li
j with non-empty i and
j . we can form a quotient 
j are in fact some linear combinations of i

64

by the algebra among all li
have discovered.

j s and ri

j s. this is the essentially new object we

once again we will focus on the action of i

j on the adjoint matter portion
of an open string state. we can capture the essence of this action given in
eq.(2.21) by the following equation4:

i

j s k = xk1k2 k3= k

j s k1i k3.
k2

(3.34)

this action was shown diagrammatically in fig.2.5(c). using the identities
in appendix a.1, we can rewrite the action of  as

i

j s k = xa, b

aj bs ai b.
 k

(3.35)

this form is more convenient in some calculations. from eq.(3.34), we can
see that the set of i
j s with all possible non-empty sequences i and js is
linearly independent.

j (k

unlike the case of the algebra l considered in section 3.3, we cannot
dene the composite operator i
l by the requirement that its action on
l s m ) because in general this action cannot be written as a
s m give i
nite linear combination of the ss. (we will put o proving this assertion
because we are going to prove a similar but more general statement in the
next chapter in appendix c.2.) nonetheless, the lie bracket between two
s is well dened by the requirement that

j k

(cid:16)[i

j , k

l ](cid:17) s p  i

j (cid:16)k

l s p(cid:17)  k

l (cid:16)i

j s p(cid:17)

for any arbitrary sequence p . then it can be shown that the expression of
the lie bracket is

(3.36)

li = k
hi
j i
j , k
+ xj1j2 = j

l + xj1j2=j
k1
j2 ik2

j1l + xk1k2=k
k
j1i

j2i
k
j1l + xj1j2=j

k1
j ik2
lj2 + xk1k2=j

l

k2
j k1i

l

k1k2 = k

4of course, i

j acting on a state with no adjoint matter gives zero.

65

j*
1

j*
2

j*
1

j*
2

j*

j*1

j*2

j*3

k

l*

i

k
1

k
2

k1

k2

(b) j   = k2

l*

(d) j   = k
1

2

l*

(f) j = k 2

i

k2

k1

i

k

l*

i

(h) j   = k2

j*1

l*

j*1

l*

l*

j*1

l*

j*
3

i

i

i

i

i

j*

k

l*

i

l*

i

j*

k1

k2

(a) j = k 

l*

(c) j = k 1

i

k2

l*

i

k

l*

i

j*1

j*2

j*1

j*2

(e) j   = k1

l*

(g) j   = k
2

1

k1

k2

k1

j*

k2

l*

k3

(i) j = k 
2

i

i

l*

j*2

l*

j*
2

l*

k
1

i

k1

i

k3

figure 3.4: the centrix or cyclix algebra.

66

+ xj1j2 = j

k1k2 = k

j1 k1i
k2

lj2 + xj1j2j3=j

k
j2i

j1lj3 + xk1k2k3=k

j k1ik3
k2

l

(i  k, j  l).

(3.37)

the proof of this equation can be found in appendix b.4. the diagrammatic
representations of the rst nine terms are given in fig.3.4). we will call the
lie algebra dened by eq.(3.37) the centrix algebra .

as in the discussion of the algebra l (section 3.3), we are going to
determine a cartan subalgebra of the centrix algebra and the root spaces
with respect to this cartan subalgebra. it turns out that all vectors of the
form i
i , where i is an arbitrary nite integer sequence of integers between
1 and  inclusive, span a cartan subalgebra 0
 of the centrix algebra. the
proof is pretty much the same as the one shown in appendix b.2.

now let us note the following identities that follow easily from the action
of i
j :

and

 i
j 



xi=1

ii

ij! s k = xk1 k2= k

j si k2
k1


i
j 



xj=1

ij

jj
 s k = xk1k2= k

j s k1i.
k2

these are exactly the action of the opeartors li

j and ri

j . thus,

li
j = i

j 

ri
j = i

j 

ii
ij ; and

ij
jj.





xi=1
xj=1

(3.38)

(3.39)

(3.40)

(3.41)

of course, we must require that the sequences i and j be non-empty for this
to be true.

the operators li

l
 of l, the operators ri

j s with non-empty sequences i and j form a subalgebra
 of r, and the

j s form another subalgebra r

67

, r

j s and ri

 and m 

j s together form yet another subalgebra m 

 of m. what
operators li
we have just seen is that l
 can also be viewed as subalgebras
of ; in fact they are even ideals of . this will be evident from the (more
general) commutation relations between i

j and l i
analogously, we can dene a vector space f 

j with non-
empty i and j. by the same counting argument as before, this is also
isomorphic to gl+. we have already seen that

j , etc. given below.
 spanned by f i

f k
l = lk

l 

f k
l = rk

l 

lkj
lj

rik
il .



xj=1



xi=1

and

thus we have



j = i
f i

xj=1
 is an ideal of  as well.
f 

j 

ij
jj 



xi=1

ii
ij +

iij
ijj.



xi,j=1

(3.42)

now we give the commutation relations between centrix and multix op-

erators:

 k
j1li

lj2

+ xk1k2= k

k2
j lk1i

l

k2
j1 lk1i
lj2

+ xk1k2k3= k

k2
j lk1ik3

l

li =  k
j , l k
hi
j li
l + xj1j2=j
k1
j lik2
+ xk1k2= k

l + xj1j2 = j
k1k2 = k
ll k
l2l k
i1
i
j  xi1i2=i
j  xl1l2= l
l l
l1l k
i
jl2  xl1l2 = l

i
 xl1l2= l

i1
l2l

ki2

l1j

i1i2 = i

j , r k
hi

li =  k
j ri
l + xj1j2=j

 k
j2ri
j1 l + xk1k2= k

k2
j rk1i

l

68

ki2

l1j  xl1l2l3= l

l2l k
i

l1jl3;

(3.43)

i

i

i

j*

.
k

.
l*

i

.
(a) j = k

(c) j = k2

.
l*

.
l*

k1

j*

k1

j*1

j*2

2k

2k

k1

k1

i

i

.
l*

.
l*

.
l*

j*2

i

i

i

.
k

.
l*

i

j*1

j*2

.
(b) j   = k

1

(d) j = k
1

.
l*

.
l*

k1

j*

k1

j*

2k

2k

k3

i

2k

k1

i

k3

.
l*

j*2

.
l*

.
l*

(e) j  = k
2

1

(f) j = k 2

figure 3.5: the lie bracket between an opertor of the fourth kind and an
operator of the second kind.

k1
j2 rik2

j1 l + xk1k2k3= k

k2
j rk1ik3

l

k1
j rik2

+ xk1k2= k

l + xj1j2 = j
k1k2 = k
l ri1 k
lr k
l2r k
i2
i
j  xi1i2=i
j  xl1l2= l
l1r k
i
jl2  xl1l2 = l

i
 xl1l2= l

l1ri1 k
i2

l1j

jl2  xl1l2l3= l

l2r k
i

l1jl3;

(3.44)

and

i1i2 = i

j , f k
hi

l i = xk1k2 k3= k

k1i k3
k2
j f
l

 xl1l2 l3= l

l2f k
i

l1j l3

.

(3.45)

the rst six terms on the r.h.s. of eq.(3.43), the rst six terms on the r.h.s.
of eq.(3.44) and the rst term on the r.h.s. of eq.(3.45) are illustrated in
figs.3.5, 3.6 and 3.7, respectively.

these prove, in particular, that the algebras l

 are proper
ideals of the centrix algebra. in addition, eq.(3.43) shows that an element

 and f 

, r

69

j*

.
k

.
l*

i

i

i

i

.
(a) j = k

(c) j = k2

.
l*

.
l*

k1

j*

2k

k1

j*1

j*2

2k

k1

i

i

j*1

2k2k

.
l*

.
l*

.
l*

i

i

i

.
k

.
l*

i

j*1

j*2

.
(b) j   = k

2

(d) j = k
1

.
l*

.
l*

k1

k1

j*

2k

j*

2k

k3

i

k1

2k

i

k3

j*1

.
l*

.
l*

.
l*

(e) j  = k
1

2

(f) j = k 2

figure 3.6: the lie bracket between an operator of the fourth kind and an
operator of the third kind.

i

j*

.
k1

k2
.
k3

.
l*

(d) j = k
2

.
k1

i

.
k3

.
l*

figure 3.7: the lie bracket between an operator of the fourth kind and an
operator of the rst kind.

70

operators

extended
algebra

comment

quotient algebra(s)

f 
l





r



m 



il

lj

li
j and ri
j

f i
j
li
j
l  lkj
l = lk
f k
ri
j
l  rik
f k
l = rk
i
j
j  ii
j = i
li
j  ij
ri
j = i
j  ij
f i
j = i
ij + iij
ii

iij

jj

jj

ij

 is a proper ideal r

.

  gl+
 is a proper ideal

f 
f 
of l
f 
of r
.
m  6= l
, l
f 
 are
proper ideals of .

  r

 and r



l

/f 

/f 

  l
  r
  m 
m 
/f 
  /f 
v  / m 

= /m 








table 3.2: , its subalgebras and quotient algebras. the summation con-
vention is adopted for repeated indices in this table.

which does not belong to l
 in the centrix algebra is an outer derivation of
the algebra l, which is the extended cuntzlie algebra. let us summarize
the various relationships among the lie algebras in table 3.2.

now, recall that outer derivations of the algebra of functions on a manifold
are just vector elds. we have seen that the cuntz algebra is a noncommu-
tative generalization of the algebra of functions on a circle. thus our centrix
lie algebra should be thought of as the corresponding noncommutative gen-
eralization of the lie algebra of vector elds on a circle. indeed, in the special
case  = 1 we will see that our algebra reduces exactly to the witt algebra,
the central extension of which is the virasoro algebra; the witt algebra is
just the algebra of vector elds on a circle.

let us make some remarks on root vectors parallelling our discussion in

section 3.3. we obtain from eq.(3.45) that

hi
i , f k

l i = 

 xk1k2 k3=k

k2

i  xl1l2 l3=l

i

l2
 f k

l

(3.46)

as a result, every f k
other than f k

l is a root vector. moreover, there are no root vectors
l s, and a proof of this statement will be given in appendix b.5.

71

hence every root space is one-dimensional.

there are various ways to construct dierent quotient algebras from the
centrix algebra. for instance, we can make the set of all cosets i
 into
a quotient algebra . furthermore, within this quotient algebra, all cosets
of the form li
j + f
span another ideal r. we can further extract the quotient algebra

, and all cosets of the form ri

j + f span a proper ideal l

j + f 

v  / m 

 = /m 



(3.47)

this lie algebra v seems not to have been discussed before; we will see
in the next section that v1 is just the algebra of vector elds on the circle.
more generally, the previous discussion shows that the generators of  act
as derivations on the cuntz algebra. when we quotient out the above ideal,
we are basically extracting the part which corresponds to inner derivations
(up to some extensions by standard algebras such as gl+). thus v should
be viewed as a generalization of the algebra of vector elds of a circle. it is
the lie algebra of vector elds on a sort of noncommutative generalization of
the circle, which has the cuntz algebra as its algebra of functions. it would
be interesting to investigate this further.

there is a way of splitting  into raising operators, diagonal operators
 be the vector space spanned by all elements
j such that i > j (appendix a.1). then it can be proved
 is indeed a
 be the vector space
j such that i < j. then it also follows

and lowering operators. let +
of the form i
by checking term by term on the r.h.s. of eq.(3.37) that +
subalgebra of the centrix algebra5. likewise, let 
spanned by all elements of the form i
from eq.(3.37) that 

 is also a subalgebra. moreover, we have

 = +

  0

  
 .

3.6 operators of the fourth kind and the

witt algebra

we are going to consider the simplest version of the centrix algebra  the
 = 1 centrix algebra. we will see that it could be obtained by rst forming

5take the fourth term as an example. if both i
j1 l  +

j1j2k2 = j1k1k2 = j1k > j1l. hence ik2

j and k
 also.

l  +

 , then ik2 > j k2 =

72

a semi-direct product of the virasoro algebra and the algebra of functions
on a circle, and then extending the semi-direct product by gl+. this will
suggest a deep relationship between the witt algebra and an algebra of a set
of outer derivations of the cuntz algebra.

consider the centrix algebra for the case  = 1. again we write s k as
s#( k) and i
#(j). we can deduce from eq.(3.34) that the action of a
b ,
where a and b > 0 are the number of integers in the various sequences, on
s c, where c is a non-negative integer, is

j as #(i)

b s c = ( c  b + 1)(b  c)sa+ cb.
a

(3.48)

the lie bracket given in eq.(3.37) is simplied to

[a

b , c

d] = (c  b)h2a+c1
+(b  c + 1)a
+   + 2a+cb+1
(a  c, b  d).

b+d1 + 2a+c2
b+d2 +    + 2a+1
d+bci + (b < c)h2a+c1
i
+ (c  b + 1)a+cb

d+1

d

b+dc+1

b+d1 + 2a+c2
b+d2

(3.49)

all the vectors of the form a
is a linear combination of vectors of the form lc
d = c
root vectors are given by f c
from eq.(3.42). the action of f a
corresponding eigenequation, which can be deduced from eq.(3.46), is

a span a cartan subalgebra. a vector in m 
1
d = rc
d+1. the
d  2c+1
d+2. this can be deduced
b on s c is also given by eq.(3.23). the

d  c+1

d+1 + c+2

d = c

[a

a, f c

d] = ((a  c)(c  a + 1)  (a  d)(d  a + 1)) f c
d.

(3.50)

as in the previous section, the subspaces f 

1 form proper ideals of
this  = 1 centrix algebra. let us consider the quotient algebra of cosets of
, where v is an arbitrary vector of the algebra 1, in detail.
the form v + f 
this quotient algebra is spanned by the cosets la
1 and
b + f 
1
1, where a and b run over all positive integers. it is a straightforward
matter to show that the following lie brackets are true:

1 and m 

1 + f 

1 + f 

b + f 

1, a

1, l1

1, lc
1, l1
1, l1

1 + f 
d + f 
d + f 

1 + f 
[la
hla
1 + f 
hl1
b + f 

1] = f 
1;
1i = f 
1;
1i = f 

1;

73

1, c

1 + f 

1, 1

d + f 

1, 1
1, lc

d + f 
1 + f 

1, lc

1 + f 

1, l1

d + f 

1, l1

d + f 

[a

1 + f 
ha
1 + f 
h1
b + f 
1 + f 
[a
h1
b + f 
h1
b + f 
hla
1 + f 

if d  a, or
if a  d;

(2  a  d)(1

+ f 
1)
1
da+1 + f 
1)

1] = (c  a)(a+c1 + f 
1);
1i = ( (2  a  d)(ad+1
1i = (b  d)(1
1] = (c  1)(la+c1
1i = ( (c  1)(lcb+1
(c  1)(l1
1i = (d  1)(1
1i = ( (d  1)(l1

b+d1 + f 
1);
+ f 
1);
+ f 
1)
1
bc+1 + f 
1)
b+d1 + f 
1); and

da+1 + f 
1)
+ f 
1)
1

(d  1)(lad+1

1

if b  c, or
if c  b;

if a  d, or
if d  a.

. (3.51)

let us make the following identications:

1 + f 
la
b + f 
l1
1 + f 
a

b + f 
1

1  za1;
1  z(b1);
1  za1 d
dz
1  z(b1) d

dz

= la1; and

= l1b.

(3.52)

here z is a complex number with |z| = 1. note that the ls here are not
integer sequences. then eq.(3.48) becomes

[zp, zq] = 0;
[lp, lq] = (p  q)lp+q; and
[lp, zq] = qzp+q1,

(3.53)

where p and q are integers which may be positive, negative or zero. thus this
is the extension of the witt algebra by the functions on a unit circle on the
complex plane. now we also see that the algebra v1 is just the lie algebra
of vector elds on the circle, spanned by all lps with p being all integers.
we can also infer from the results in sections 3.3, 3.5 and this one that
the cuntzlie algebra corresponds to a generalization of the algebra of func-
tions on the unit circle which is the leftix algebra with an arbitrary positive
integer , and the quotient lie algebra of a set of outer derivations of the

74

cuntz algebra by the elements of the cuntz algebra corresponds to a gen-
eralization of the witt algebra which is the centrix algebra, also with an
arbitrary positive integer .

75

chapter 4

a lie superalgebra

4.1 introduction

in the previous chapter, we studied a lie algebra for bosonic open strings,
and gained some expertise in how to study its structure. we will use this
skill to fulll our promise in the preceding chapter, which is to study the full
lie superalgebra for open and closed string-bit states, or in other words, the
lie superalgebra for the ve kinds of operators discussed in section 2.2.

to achieve this purpose, we need to dene a precursor lie superalgebra
which we will call the heterix superalgebra among some physical operators.
these physical operators are nothing but the ones dened in section 2.2,
except that the ranges of values of the quantum states other than color
(see the second paragraph in section 2.2) are changed. then the grand
string superalgebra will be seen as a subalgebra of the heterix superalgebra.
readers who are only interested in the denition of this superalgebra may
skip this chapter. occasionally returning to section 4.2 to look up the relevant
denitions. in section 4.3, we will study the mathematical structure of the
heterix algebra, which can be obtained from the heterix superalgebra by
considering only bosonic adjoint matter elds. again we will derive a cartan
subalgebra and the associated root vectors of the heterix algebra.

76

4.2 derivation of a precursor superalgebra

we are going to derive a precursor superalgebra. the grand string super-
algebra will be identied as a subalgebra of this superalgebra in the next
chapter. (those readers who do not know what a superalgebra is are re-
ferred to ref.[22] for its denition.)

let 

 (k) be an annihilation operator for a boson in the adjoint repre-
sentation for 1  k   and 2 + 1  k  2 + 4f , or a fermion in the
adjoint representation for  + 1  k  2 (the apparently weird choices of
the ranges of k are for later convenience), and let  and  be annihilation
operators for an antifermion in the conjugate representation and a fermion
in the fundamental representation, respectively. moreover, let 
 (k), 
and 
 be the corresponding creation operators. the annihilation and cre-
ation operators satisfy the usual canonical (anti)-commutation relations, the
non-vanishing ones being

h1
2(k1), 3

4 (k2)i = k1k23

2 1
4

for both k1 and k2  {1, 2, . . . , , 2 + 1, 2 + 2, . . . 2 + 4f};

h1
2(k1), 3

4 (k2)i+

= k1k23

2 1
4

for both k1 and k2  { + 1,  + 2, . . . , 2};
= 2
1 ;

h 1, 2i+

and

h1, 

2i+

= 1
2 .

(4.1)

(4.2)

(4.3)

(4.4)

again we introduce two families of color singlet states. a typical open

singlet state is a linear combination of the states of the form

sk  n (c+1)/2 12

1 (k1)3

2 (k2)   c+1

c

(kc)

c+1|0i.

(4.5)

we denote by t 
closed singlet state is a linear combination of the states of the form

o the hilbert space of all these open singlet states. a typical

k  n c/22

1 (k1)3

c (kc)|0i.

2 (k2)   1
77

(4.6)

the hilbert space of all closed singlet states will be denoted by t 
c .
o and
t 
c to establish our main results. one family consists of operators of the form

we need only two families of color-invariant operators acting on t 

f i
j  n (a+b)/22
b
1(jb)b1

b

2 (i2)   1

1 (i1)3
(jb1)   1

2(j1).

a (ia, (ia))

(4.7)

in the large-n limit, the actions of this operator on singlet states read (c.f.
ref.[96] or appendix a.3 of this article)

f i
j sk = 0; and
f i
j k = k

j i + xj1j2=j

(1)(j1)(j2)k

j2j1i,

(4.8)
(4.9)

it is clear that the sum on the right hand side of eq.(4.9) is a nite one. the
other family consists of operators of the form

j  n (a+b2)/22
i
(jb)b2

b1

b

1 (i1)3

2 (i2)   b

a (ia)

b1(jb1)   1

1 (j1).

(4.10)

in the large-n limit, this operator propagates singlet states in the following
manner:

j (1)( k1)[(i)+(j)]s k1i k3; and
k2

(4.11)

(1)(k1)(k2)k2k1

j

i

(1)(k1)[(k2)+(k3)]k2

j ik3k1

i

k1

j i + xk1k2=k

j sk  xk1k2 k3=k
i
j k  k
+ xk1k2=k
+ xk1k2=k
+ xj1j2=j xk1k2k3=k
j s and i

j ik2 + xk1k2k3=k
(1)(k1)(k2)k2
j ik1

78

(1)(k3)[(k1)+(k2)]k3

j1 k1

j2 ik2.

(4.12)

the set of all f i

j s is linearly independent. this fact, the proof
of which can be found in appendix c.1, is of some importance, as we will
dene a lie superalgebra with this set as a basis soon. on the contrary, the
set of all gi
j s acting on closed string states alone is not linearly independent.

the next thing we are going to do is to construct a precursor lie super-
algebra out of the two families of color-invariant operators. if the product
of any two of these operators were well dened, i.e., if we could write down
the product as a nite linear combination of color-invariant operators, the
easiest way to obtain a superalgebra would certainly be to dene the lie
superbracket of two operators as a sum or dierence of their products in
dierent orders of the operators. however, such a product is actually not
well dened; this is shown in appendix c.2. now consider the commutator
of two pure operators, at least one of which being even, and the anticom-
mutator of two odd operators.
it can be shown that the actions of these
(anti-)commutators on singlet states are identical to the actions of some
observables. if we dene the color-invariant-operator-valued binary opera-
tion [,] on two color-invariant operators to be the color-invariant operator
whose action on t 
c is identical to that of the (anti)-commutator of the
pair of operators, then we have

o  t 

= k

l i
hi
j , k
+ xk1k2=k

j i
l + xj1j2=j
j ik2
k1
l + xj1j2 = j

(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k

j2i
j1l

(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k1

j2 ik2
j1l

k1k2 = k

(1)(k1)[(i)+(j)]k2

j k1i

l

lj2 + xk1k2=j
(1)(k1)[(i)+(j)]k2

j1 k1i
lj2

j1i
k
+ xj1j2=j
+ xj1j2 = j

k1k2 = k

+ xj1j2j3=j
+ xk1k2k3=k
+ xj1j2 = j

j2i

(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k
(1)(k1)[(i)+(j)]k2
(1)(j1)(k1)k1

j1lj3

j k1ik3

l

j2 k2
j1

f i
l

k1k2 = k

79

+ xj1j2j3 = j

k1k2 = k

(1)[(j1)+(j2)](k1)k1

j3 k2
j1

f i
lj2

+

+

xj1j2 = j

k1k2k3 = k

xj1j2j3 = j

k1k2k3 = k

(1)(j1)[(k1)+(k2)]k1

j2 k3
j1

f ik2
l

(1)[(j1)+(j2)][(k1)+(k2)]k1

j3 k3
j1

f ik2
lj2

(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)](i  k, j  l),

(4.13)

(1)(k1)(k2)k2k1

j

f i
l + xk1k2=k

k1
j

f ik2
l

f k
j

(4.14)

(4.15)

l

l

k
j

k3k1
j

= 
j , f k
f i
l i
hi
l + xk1k2=k

j (1)(k1)[(i)+(j)] f k1ik3
k2
+ xk1k2k3=k
j (1)(k1)[(i)+(j)] f k1i
k2
+ xk1k2=k
+ xk1k2k3=k
(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]

(1)(l1)[(i)+(j)]i
 xl1l2=l
(1)(l1)[(i)+(j)]i
 xl1l2l3=l
 xl1l2l3=l

(1)(l3)[(l1)+(l2)]i

f k

l3l1

jl2


l 
(1)[(k1)+(k2)](k3) f ik2

f k
(1)(l1)(l2)i
j  xl1l2=l
f k
l1j

i
l

l2

l2l1

l2

f k
l1jl3  xl1l2=l

i
l1

f k
jl2

and

j , f k
h f i
l i

= k
j

f i
l + xk1k2=k

(1)(k1)(k2)k2k1

j

f i
l

(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)](i  k, j  l).

80

j and k

l (i

consider i

l m ), and consider a term t1 in i

j (k

j m ) produced by the operations of i

to see that eqs.(4.13), (4.14) and (4.15) indeed hold, we can verify that
the actions of the left hand sides of these equations on an arbitrary singlet
state are the same of those on the right hand sides of the same equations.
we have already done part of the job in appendix b.4, which accompanies
section 3.5. we will do another part of the verication in appendix c.3,
which accompanies section 4.3. these two long appendices together will
complete the proof for the case in which there are no fermions. we will not
present the full proof here because it would take up too many pages. to
enlighten the reader, we would like to discuss the following special cases in
eq.(4.13) to see why it makes sense for the right hand sides of these equations
to appear this way.
j (k

l m ) produced
by the operations of i
l on disjoint sequences of creation operators
in m (fig. 4.1(a)), i.e., no annihilation operator in i
j acts on any creation
operator in k
l . this term is identical, up to a minus sign, to the term
t2 in k
l on the same
disjoint sequences in m . since during the process of producing t1 and
t2, there is no contraction at all between any operator in i
j and any in
k
l (any contraction between i
l will produce terms which we are
not considering right now), t2 can be obtained from i
l m ) as well by
interchanging i
l rst before these two color-invariant operators act
on m . this interchange produces a factor of (1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]. as a
result, t1 is cancelled by (1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]t2 in the (anti)-commutator.
therefore, during the process of producing terms that are not killed by
the (anti)-commutator, there must be contraction(s) among some operators
in i
if we perform such contractions rst before con-
tracting the annihilation operators in i
l with the creation oper-
ators in m , in general we will obtain a color-invariant operator of the
form tr(                 )   tr(          ) multi-
plied by a factor of n raised to some power. figs.4.1 and 4.2 tell us there
are only ve dierent possibilities. fig.4.1(a) shows the case when i
j and
l act on disjoint segments in m . obviously this is the same as the cor-
gk
responding term in k
j m ) up to a sign. this term is cancelled in the
lie superbracket. fig.4.1(b) shows a partial overlap between j and k. this
corresponds to the case j1 = k2. this term is equivalent to the correspond-
ing one in k1i
lj2 m . fig.4.1(c) shows a complete overlap between j and k.
this time j = k. this term is equivalent to a term in i
l m . fig.4.2(a)

j and some in k
l .

j and k

j (k

j and k

j and k

j and k

l (i

81

k

l*

k

l*

i

j*

l*

k1

2k

j*1

j*2

i

m

-+= 

(a)

m

-+= 

(b)

i

j*

k1

i

l*

j*2

i

j*

k

l*

-+= m

i

l*

(c)

m

m

m

figure 4.1: possible terms in i

j (k

l m ).

82

m

i

j*1

j*2

k1

2k

l*

m

+-= 

(a)

k1
2k
3k

l*

m

j*3
j*2
j*1

i

+-= 

(b)

i

k2

k2

l*

j*
1

l*

i

j*2

m

figure 4.2: other possible terms in i

j (k

l m ).

shows another partial overlap between j and k. this time j2 = k1. this
term is equivalent to a term in ik2
j1l m . lastly, fig.4.2(b) shows a par-
tial overlap in which j1 = k3 and j3 = k1. note that we have turned
j by 180 degrees. this term is equivalent to f ik2
i
j2l m . these ve g-
ures together clearly reveal that only color-invariant operators of the forms
tr(       ) and tr(    )tr(   ) survive the large-n limit. all
the possibilities of producing color-invariant operators in these two forms are
contained in eqs.(4.13) to (4.15). to understand the factors of -1, consider,
say, the term

(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k1

j2 ik2
j1l

xj1j2 = j

k1k2 = k

in eq.(4.13). here the annihilation operators in the subsequence j2 are con-
tracted with the creation operators in k1. thus this term is derived by the
following procedure (in the following expressions, b = #(j), b1 = #(j1),
b2 = #(j2), c = #(k), c1 = #(k1) and c2 = #(k2)):

n (a+b2)/22
a+1

a

1 (i1, (i1))3

2 (i2, (i2))  

(ia, (ia))a+2

a+1(jb, (jb))a+3

a+2(jb1, (jb1))  

83

a+b(j1, (j1))n (c+d2)/22
1
c+1
c
1
c+d(l1, (l1))

(kc, (kc))c+2

c+1(ld, (ld))c+3

1 (k1, (k1))3

2 (k2, (k2))  

c+2(ld1, (ld1))  

= (1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]n (a+b+c+d4)/22

a+1(jb, (jb))a+3

1 (i1, (i1))3
a+2(jb1, (jb1))  

2 (i2, (i2))  

a+1

(ia, (ia))a+2

a
a+b2+1

a+b2
c+1
c
1
c+d(l1, (l1))
1
a+b(j1, (j1)) +   

(jb1+1, (jb1+1))2

1 (k1, (k1))3

2 (k2, (k2))  

c+1(ld, (ld))c+3
(kc, (kc))c+2
a+b2+2
a+b2+1(jb1, (jb1))

c+2(ld1, (ld1))  

a+b2+3

a+b2+2(jb11, (jb11))  

a

= (1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]n (a+b1+c2+d2)/22
c1+2
(ia, (ia))
a+1 (kc1+1, (kc1+1))
(kc, (kc))c+2
c+1(ld, (ld))c+3
a+b2+2
(jb1, (jb1))
1

a+1
c+1
c
1
c+d(l1, (l1))
1
a+b(j1, (j1)) +    .

1 (i1, (i1))3

2 (i2, (i2))  
c1+3
c1+2 (kc1+2, (kc1+2))  

c+2(ld1, (ld1))  

a+b2+3
a+b2+2(jb11, (jb11))  

other terms in eqs.(4.13), (4.14) and (4.15) can be understood in a similar
fashion.

the heterix superalgebra is the lie superalgebra dened by the lie super-
brackets in eqs.(4.13) to (4.15). if we consider only the subspace of the het-
erix superalgebra spanned by all color-invariant operators with no fermions
in the adjoint representation, we will obtain the heterix algebra |.

4.3 structure of the precursor algebra

a remark on the notations in the remaining sections of this chapter and their
accompanying appendices: sk and i
j introduced in the previous section will
be written as sk and i
j will be written as (k)
and f (i)
(j), respectively because with the absence of adjoint fermions, any cyclic
permutations of k, i and j leave them unchanged. moreover, we will take
 to be the number of degrees of freedom in this algebra. these notational
changes are not valid in other chapters.

j, respectively. k and f i

we are going to nd a cartan subalgebra of the heterix algebra and its

84

i

i

i

j*1

j*2

k1

k2

l*

(a)

j2 k1 j1 k2

=

=

,

j*1

j*2

j*3

k1

k2

l*

(b)

j3

=

j*1

j*2

k1
k2

k3

l*

k1 j1 k2

=

,

i

i

i

k2

l*

j*2

l*

l*

(c)

j2 k1 j1 k3

=

,

=

figure 4.3: some terms on the r.h.s. of eq.(4.16).

85

i

k2

j*2

l*

i

j*1
j*2

j*3

k1

k2

k3

l*

=

j3

k1 j1 k3

=

,

figure 4.4: another term on the r.h.s. of eq.(4.16).

associated root vectors. we will also consider the special case when  = 1 to
see what the algebra looks like. readers who are only interested in the grand
string superalgebra and its subalgebras can skip this section altogether.

from eqs.(4.13), (4.14) and (4.15), we can obtain the following lie brack-

ets of the heterix algebra:

li = k
hi
j i
j , k
l + xj1j2=j
k1
j2 ik2
+ xj1j2 = j

j1l + xk1k2=k
k
j1i

j2i
k
j1l + xj1j2=j

l

j ik2
k1
lj2 + xk1k2=j

k2
j k1i

l

k1k2 = k

+ xj1j2 = j

k1k2 = k

+ xj1j2 = j

k1k2 = k

+

xj1j2 = j

j1 k1i
k2

lj2 + xj1j2j3=j

k
j2i

j1lj3 + xk1k2k3=k

k2
j k1ik3

l

k1
j2 k2
j1

f (i)
(l) +

k1
j3 k2
j1

f (i)
(j2l)

xj1j2j3 = j

k1k2 = k

k1
j2 k3
j1

f (ik2)
(l)

k1k2k3 = k

86

+

xj1j2j3 = j

k1k2k3 = k

k1
j3 k3
j1

f (ik2)
(j2l)  (i  k, j  l).

(4.16)

moreover, the commutators between a  and an f , and between two fs, are
j , f (k)
hi

f (i)
(l) + xk1k2=(k)

f (k)
(j)  xl1l2=(l)

(l) i = k

f (ik2)
(l)  i

f (k)
(l1j)

k1
j

i
l2

(l)

(j)

(4.17)

and

h f (i)
(j), f (k)

(l) i = k

(j)

f (i)
(l)  i

(l)

f (k)
(j) ,

(4.18)

respectively. in the above equations, the summationpk1k2=(k) and the delta

function i
(j) are introduced in appendix a.2. the proof of these equations
will be relegated to appendix c.3. the rst nine terms on the r.h.s. of
eq.(4.16) are the same as those of eq.(3.37), and have been depicted in
fig.3.4. the next four terms on the r.h.s. of eq.(4.16) are new terms which
have not shown up before. the tenth to the twelfth terms are depicted in
fig.4.3, and the thirteenth term is depicted in fig.4.4. illustrated in fig. 4.5
are the rst two terms on the r.h.s. of eq.(4.17), and the rst term on
the r.h.s. of eq.(4.18). these two equations together clearly show that the
subspace spanned by all f (i)
(j)s, which we will call f, forms an ideal of f.
let us explore the structure of the heterix algebra. consider the subspace
h spanned by all vectors of the forms i
(i) , where i is an arbitrary
nite integer sequence of integers between 1 and  inclusive. it turns out
that h is a cartan subalgebra of the heterix algebra. (the proof is given in
appendix e of ref.[70]. this is essentially just a more sophisticated version of
appendix b.2.) in addition, we have the following special cases of eqs.(4.17)
and (4.18):

i and f (i)

i , f (k)
hi

(l) i = 
k
(i) + xk1k2=(k)

k1
i  i

(l)  xl1l2=(l)

i

l1


f (k)
(l)

(4.19)

and

therefore, every f (k)
(l)
the subalgebra h.

(i) , f (k)
h f (i)

(l) i = (cid:16)k

(i)  i

(l) .

(l)(cid:17) f (k)

is a root vector of the heterix algebra with respect to

(4.20)

87

k

k1

i

j*

i

j*

i

i

l*

(a) j = (k)

k2

l*

(b) k   = j

1

l*

k2

l*

i

k

i

j*

l*

l*

(c) j = (k)

figure 4.5: the lie brackets involving an operator of the fth kind.

88

suppose we dene some operators as follows:

j  i
li

j 

ri
j  i

j 





xi=1
xj=1

ij  f (i)
ii

(j); and

jj  f (i)
ij
(j).

the actions of these operators are:

j sk = k
li

j si + xk1k2=k

j (k) = 0;
li
ri
j sk = k

ri
j (k) = 0.

j si + xk1k2=k

k1
j sik2;

k2
j sk1i; and

(4.21)

(4.22)

j are precisely the
hence they act only on open singlet states.
operators discussed in sections 3.3 and 3.4. thus the algebra consisting of
nite linear combinations of li
, is a subalgebra of the heterix algebra.
similarly, the algebra consisting of nite linear combinations of ri
, is
also a subalgebra of the heterix algebra.

j s, r

j s, l

li
j and ri

ii
ij 

ij
jj



xj=1



xi,j=1

ijj  f (i)
iij

(j) +

f (ii)
(ij)



xi=1

now dene



f i
j  i

j 

= li

j 

= ri

j 

its actions read

xi=1
xj=1
xi=1





lij
jj

rii
ij .

f i
j sk = k
f i
j (k) = 0.

j si; and

(4.23)

(4.24)

hence this f i
of nite linear combinations of f i

j is the one we discussed in section 3.2. the algebra consisting
 and the

, is a subalgebra of l

j s, f 

, r

89

heterix algebra. we deduce from eqs.(4.9), (4.12) and (4.24) that

j f ik2
k1

l i = k
hi
j f i
j, f k
l + xk1k2=k
l + xk1k2=k
j f k1ik3
k2
 i
lf k
+ xk1k2k3=k
j  xl1l2=l
i
l2f k
 xl1l2=l
l1j  xl1l2l3=l
h f (i)
l i = 0.
(j), f k

i
l2f k

l

l1jl3; and

j f k1i
k2

l

i
l1f k
jl2

in particular,

(4.25)

hi
i , f k

l i = 
k
i + xk1k2=k
i
l  xl1l2=l
l i = 0.

h f (i)
(i) , f k

k1

i + xk1k2=k
l1  xl1l2=l

i

k2

k2
i

i + xk1k2k3=k
l2
 f k
l2  xl1l2l3=l

i

i

l ; and

(4.26)

thus every f k
l is also a root vector with respect to the cartan subalgebra
h. in fact, a root vector with respect to h is either of the form f (k)
(l) or f k
l .
the proof of this assertion can be found in appendix f of ref.[70]. (this is
essentially a more sophisticated version of appendix b.5.) hence every root
space is one-dimensional.

now let us consider various quotient algebras of the heterix algebra. since
f is a proper ideal, we can make the set of all cosets i
j + f into a quotient
algebra. this quotient algebra is nothing but the centrix algebra  dened
in section 3.5. the multix algebra m 
 discussed in section 3.4 is another
 and f (i)
j + m 
(j) + m 
proper ideal. hence we can make the set of all cosets i

a quotient algebra as well. note that every operator in m 
 kills a closed
singlet state. we conjecture that the vector space spanned by all closed string
states provides a faithful representation for the quotient algebra of all cosets
j + m 
i
. as we will see in section 5.4, the corresponding  = 1
quotient algebra is again the witt algebra. therefore the quotient algebra
with  > 1 can be regarded as a generalization of the witt algebra. at
present we know nothing about the relationship between this generalization

 and f (i)

(j) + m 

90

of the witt algebra, and the other generalization  discussed in section 3.5.
we would like to investigate this in the future.

the lie bracket of the subalgebra f is given by eq.(4.18). if we rescale

each vector by dening

,

(4.27)

f (i)
(j) 

f (i)
(j)
qi
(i)j
(j)

then the lie bracket between two f (i)
(j)s is similar to that in eq.(4.18), except
that the delta function there with the generic form i
(j) should be replaced
with another delta function such that this new delta function yields simply 1
if (i) = (j), and remains 0 otherwise. then there is a one-to-one correspon-
dence between each f (i)
(j) and each complex matrix (aij)i,j  z+ such that all
but one aij is nonzero, and that nonzero entry is 1. thus the lie algebras
f, for any  are all isomorphic to gl+, the inductive limit of the general
linear algebras.

91

chapter 5

open string superalgebra and
closed string superalgebra

5.1 introduction

in the previous chapter, we justied the existence of a superalgebra, and
studied its mathematical structure. building upon this result, we will nally
fulll our promise in this chapter by deriving a lie superalgebra for open
superstrings, and one for closed superstrings, as subalgebras of this precur-
sor superalgebra. this is done as follows. in section 5.2, we will give the
denition of a superalgebra of operators acting on open and closed singlet
states. we will call this the grand string superalgebra. the dierence be-
tween this superalgebra and the precursor superalgebra is that there are more
than one degree of freedom at the ends of the open singlet states. at a rst
glance, this superalgebra is somewhat larger than the precursor superalge-
bra. ironically, we will derive this grand string superalgebra as a subalgebra
of the precursor superalgebra by manipulating the numbers of degrees of
freedom in an accompanying appendix.

in section 5.3, we will derive a superalgebra just for open superstrings.
this will be a quotient algebra of the grand string superalgebra.
in sec-
tion 5.4, we will derive a superalgebra for closed superstrings as another
quotient algebra of the grand string superalgebra. we will see that the cor-
responding lie algebra, which we will call the cyclix algebra, for bosonic
closed strings has a close relationship with the witt algebra, too.

92

to have a glimpse of how to use these algebras in the study of physical
systems, we will turn to the ising model again in section 5.5. it is well known
that there are many ways of solving the quantum ising model in one dimen-
sion. one method which is close to the spirit of the original way onsager
himself solved the model [81] is via the onsager algebra [31]. we will see
that actually this onsager algebra is a subalgebra of the cyclix algebra, and
we can use the cyclix algebra directly to obtain some conserved quantities of
the ising matrix model. this example may give us a clue of how to use these
lie algebras more eectively in the future.

5.2 denition of the grand string superal-

gebra

we are going to give a precise denition of a lie superalgebra of the operators
dened in section 2.2 acting on closed or open singlet states. unlike the
open singlet states in section 4.2, the numbers of degrees of freedom of the
fundamental and conjugate elds are arbitrary. the proof that this is really
a lie superalgebra will be given in appendix d.1.

consider a vector space of all nite linear combinations of vectors of the
forms given in table 5.2, where 1  1, 2, 3, and 4  2f , i and j are
non-empty sequences of integers between 1 and 2 inclusive, and i and j are
empty or non-empty sequences of integers also between 1 and 2 inclusive.
in the above table, (i) is 0 if the number of integers between  + 1 and 2
inclusive in i is even, and 1 if it is odd. the denition is analogous for ( i).
the reader can regard the ve types of vectors as those operators dened
in eq.(d.1), or as axiomatic entities satisfying a set of lie superbrackets to
be described immediately. we call a vector or an operator an operator of
the rst, second, third, fourth or fth kind if it is a nite linear combination
of operators, all of which are of the rst, second, third, fourth or fth form
enlisted above, respectively.

let us describe the lie superbrackets among dierent kinds of operators.
the lie superbracket between an operator of the fth kind, and an operator
of the rst, second or third kind is trivial:

2  f i
h1

j  3

4, f k
l i

= 0;

93

operator of
which kind

rst

second
third
fourth
fth

expression

grade

j  3

4

j

2  f i
1
2  l i
1
r i
j  3
i
j
f i
j

4

( i) + ( j)
( i) + ( j)
( i) + ( j)
(i) + (j)
(i) + (j)

(mod 2)
(mod 2)
(mod 2)
(mod 2)
(mod 2)

table 5.1: the grades of operators.

2  l i
h1
hr i
j  1

j , f k
l i
2, f k
l i

= 0; and

= 0.

(5.1)

the operators of the rst kind form a proper ideal of the lie superalgebra:

4, 5

4, 5

j  3

j  3

6  f k

2  f i
h1
8i
l  7
6  i
l3
(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]1
8
6  l k
2  f i
li
h1
1
= 5
2
(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]1
4, r k
2  f i
6i
h1
l  5
j  3
(1)( j1)[( k)+( l)] k
1
5
2  xj1 j2= j
4

5

=

6

j2

2  xi1 i2= i

(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]3

6

and

1

2  xi1 i2= i

l  3

8

4

6  f i
2  k
1
j 7
= 5
2  f k
5
j  7
4;
f i
 k
l j2  3
6  xj1 j2= j
j1
i1

l f

j  3
4;

k i2

4

6

f i
j1 l  3
(1)( i1)[( k)+( l)]

i2
l f

i1 k

j  5
4;

2  f i
h1

j  3

li
4, k

= 1

2 

 xj1j2 j3= j

(1)( j1)[(k)+(l)]k

j2f i

j3l j1

94

 (1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)] xi1i2 i3= i

i1k i3
(1)( i1)[(k)+(l)]i2
l f
j


  3

4.(5.2)

the operators of the second kind form a subalgebra. so are the operators of
the third kind:

=

2  l i
h1
1
3
2

4  l k
li
j , 3
4 
j l i
 k
l + xj1j2= j
(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]1

4

 k
j1

l i
lj2

k1

j l

+ xk1k2= k
2 
ll k
 i
j + xl1l2= l

3

ik2

l 

 i
l1

l k
jl2

+ xi1i2= i

ki2

j 
i1

l l


and

hr i
j  1

= 3

2, r k

4i
l  3

2 
j r i
 k
l + xj1 j2= j
l 
k2
j rk1 i
(1)[(k1)[( i)+( j)]
  1
+ xk1 k2= k
4 
lr k
 i
(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]1
j + xl1 l2= l
j 
l ri1 k
i2
  3

(1)[(i1)[( k)+( l)]

+ xi1 i2= i

2.

4

(1)(j1)[( k)+( l)] k

j2

r i
j1 l

(1)(l1)[( i)+( j)] i

l2

r k
l1 j

(5.3)

eqs.(5.1) to (5.3) together with the following relations show that operators
of the rst three kinds as a whole form another ideal:

2  l i
h1

j , r k

4i
l  3

=

95

1
2 





xj1 j2 = j

k1 k2 = k

(1)( j1)[( k)+( l)]

k1
j2

i k2
f
j1 l

 (1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)] xi1 i2 = i

l1 l2 = l

(1)( i1)[( k)+( l)]

i2
l1

i1 k
f
j l2

 3
4;





=

2  l i
h1
li
j , k
2 

j l i
1
k
l + xk1k2=k

j1l i
k
+ xj1j2= j
lj2 + xj1j2 = j

k1
j l

ik2

l + xj1j2= j
(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k1
j2 l

j2l i
(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k

j1l

ik2
j1l

k1k2 = k

j1lj3
j2l i
(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k
+ xj1j2j3= j

(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]
 i
llk
j + xl1l2=l
(1)(i1)[(k)+(l)]i2
l li1k
+ xi1i2= i
j + xi1i2= i
l1li1k
+ xl1l2 = l
jl2
i1i2 = i

(1)(i1)[(k)+(l)]i2

 i
l1lk
jl2

i1
l lki2

j

(1)(i1)[(k)+(l)]i2
+ xi1i2i3= i
hr i
li
j  1
2, k

=

l li1ki3

j





 ; and

96



j r i
k
l + xk1k2=k

(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k
+ xj1j2= j
+ xj1j2 = j

j rk1 i
(1)(k1)[( i)+( j)]k2
j2r i
j1l + xj1j2= j
j1 rk1 i

(1)(k1)[( i)+( j)]k2

lj2

l

j1r i
k

lj2

k1k2 = k

(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k
+ xj1j2j3= j
(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]
 i
(1)(i1)[(k)+(l)]i2
+ xi1i2= i
+ xl1l2 = l
i1i2 = i

j1lj3
j2r i

lrk
j  xl1l2=l
l ri1k
j + xi1i2= i
l2rki2
l1 j

(1)(l1)[( i)+( j)]i1

(1)(l1)[( i)+( j)] i
i1
l rki2

j

l2rk
l1 j

+ xi1i2i3= i

(1)(i1)[(k)+(l)]i2

l ri1ki3

j



  1


2.

(5.4)

these equations also reveal that operators of the rst kind form a proper
ideal of the superalgebra spanned by operators of the rst three kinds.

the operators of the fth kind form yet another proper ideal of this

superalgebra:

j , f k
h f i
l i

= k
j

f i
l + xk1k2=k

(1)(k1)(k2)k2k1

j

f i
l

(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)](i  k, j  l)

(5.5)

and

= 
j , f k
l i
hi

+ xk1k2k3=k

k
j

(1)(k1)(k2)k2k2

f i
l + xk1k2=k
j (1)(k1)[(i)+(j)] f k1ik3
k2

l

j

f i
l + xk1k2=k

k1
j

f ik2
l

97

f k
l1jl3  xl1l2=l

i
l1

f k
jl2

l3l1

.

(5.6)

f k

jl2


finally, the lie superbracket between two operators of the fourth kind is a
linear combination of operators of the fourth and fth kinds:

l 
(1)[(k1)+(k2)](k3) f ik2

f k
(1)(l1)(l2)i
j  xl1l2=l
f k
l1j

i
l

f k
j

l2l1

j (1)(k1)[(i)+(j)] f k1i
k2

l

k3k1
j

+ xk1k2=k
+ xk1k2k3=k
(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)]

(1)(l1)[(i)+(j)]i
 xl1l2=l
(1)(l1)[(i)+(j)]i
 xl1l2l3=l
 xl1l2l3=l

l2

(1)(l3)[(l1)+(l2)]i

l2

= k

l i
hi
j, k
+ xk1k2=k

j i
l + xj1j2=j
k1
j ik2
l + xj1j2 = j

(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k

j2i

j1l

(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k1

j2 ik2
j1l

k1k2 = k

(1)(k1)[(i)+(j)]k2

j k1i

l

lj2 + xk1k2=j
(1)(k1)[(i)+(j)]k2

j1 k1i
lj2

j1i
k
+ xj1j2=j
+ xj1j2 = j

k1k2 = k

+ xj1j2j3=j
+ xk1k2k3=k
+ xj1j2 = j

j2i

(1)(j1)[(k)+(l)]k
(1)(k1)[(i)+(j)]k2
(1)(j1)(k1)k1

j1lj3

j k1ik3

l

j2 k2
j1

f i
l

k1k2 = k

98

+ xj1j2j3 = j

k1k2 = k

(1)[(j1)+(j2)](k1)k1

j3 k2
j1

f i
lj2

+

+

xj1j2 = j

k1k2k3 = k

xj1j2j3 = j

k1k2k3 = k

(1)(j1)[(k1)+(k2)]k1

j2 k3
j1

f ik2
l

(1)[(j1)+(j2)][(k1)+(k2)]k1

j3 k3
j1

f ik2
lj2

(1)[(i)+(j)][(k)+(l)](i  k, j  l).

(5.7)

we call the lie superalgebra dened by the lie superbrackets from eqs.(5.1)
to (5.7) the grand string superalgebra. we have given diagrammatic repre-
sentations of these equations in the last two chapters with a more detailed
exposition of the mathematical implications of these lie superbrackets.

let to be the vector space of all nite linear combinations of singlet states
of the form 1s k2 where 1  1, 2  2f and all integers are between
1 and 2 inclusive in k, which may be empty. also let tc be the vector space
of all nite linear combinations of singlet states of the form k such that
all integers are again between 1 and 2 inclusive in k, which has to be non-
empty, and that k satises eq.(2.9). if we treat the operators totc as the
ones dened in the section 4.2, we will nd that the actions of an operator
of the rst kind are precisely given by eqs.(2.12) and (2.13); those of the
second kind by eqs.(2.15) and (2.16); those of the third kind by eqs.(2.18)
and (2.19); those of the fourth kind by eqs.(2.21) and (2.22); and those of the
fth kind by eqs.(2.25) and (2.26). alternatively, we can dene the actions
of the operators of the ve kinds on to tc by these ten equations, and show
that to  tc provides a representation for this superalgebra.

5.3 open string superalgebra

now that we have the grand string superalgebra at hand, we are going to
derive the superalgebra of operators acting on open singlet states only as a
quotient algebra of it. we will call this the open string superalgebra, and

99

identify some subalgebras of it. the superalgebra of operators acting on
closed singlet states only will be considered in the next section.

since every element of the open-closed string superalgebra maps a state
in to to a state in to, and a state in tc to a state in tc, to and tc furnish
two representation spaces to the superalgebra. the representations of the
operators in the superalgebra form a lie superalgebra on each of these two
representation spaces. however, since none of these two representation spaces
provide faithful representations to the superalgebra, some operators vanish.
consider the lie superalgebra generated by the representation to rst.
we are going to call this superalgebra the open string superalgebra. since all
operators of the fth kind sends any state in to to zero, there are only four
kinds of operators in this superalgebra. the lie brackets of these operators
are the same as those in the previous section, except that we set all f i
j s
to be zero, i.e., only eq.(5.7) needs to be modied. let us write  as  in
this open string superalgebra. note that the operators in this superalgebra
are not linearly independent; there are many relations among them. for
example,


  li

j = i

(1)(i)[(i)+(j)]ii
ij ;

2

2

j 

j 

xi=1
xj=1
2  l i
j  1

ij
jj;

ri
j  

 = i

j  3

3 = 1

2 

ij
jj; and
l

2

xj=1

2f

2f

x=1
x=1
2  f i
1

2f

2f

x3=1
x1=1

1  f i
1

j  3

4 = r i

j  3

4 

2

xi=1

(1)(i)[(i)+(j)]ri i

i j  3

4. (5.8)

there are many subalgebras and ideals in the open string superalgebra.
these are tabulated in table 5.2. the results of this table can be easily
deduced from the results of the previous section.

like the centrix algebra  dened in section 3.5, the centrix superalge-
bra | also has a myriad of subalgebras and ideals. the reader can obtain
these subalgebras and ideals easily by generalizing the results in table 3.2.

100

4

operators
2  f i
1
j  3
2  l i
1
j  1
1  r i
j  3
4
2  f i
1
j  3
4,
2  l i
1
j  1, and
1  r i
j  3
i
j
all of the above

4

algebra
f|,f |f

gl(f|f )  l|
r|  gl(f|f )

m|,f |f

|

open string
superalgebra

comment

f|,f |f 
gl(f|f )  f|  gl(f|f )

f|,f |f is a proper ideal of
m|,f |f .

f,f and m,f are proper
ideals of the open string
superalgebra.

table 5.2: open string superalgebra, its ideals and subalgebras.

5.4 closed string superalgebra

let us turn our attention to the lie superalgebra of operators acting on
closed singlet states only. it is generated by the representation space tc. we
will call this the closed string superalgebra or the cyclix superalgebra c|f .
since acting any operator of the rst three kinds on tc yields zero, this lie
superalgebra is obtained by considering the lie superbracket among opera-
tors of the fourth and fth kinds only. thus the closed string superalgebra
is characterized by eqs.(5.5), (5.6) and (5.7). we will write  as g in the
closed string superalgebra. again the operators are not linearly independent;
in fact, any operator of the fth kind can be written as a linear combination
of operators of the fourth kind as

or

f i
j = gi

j 

gik
jk

2

xk=1

f i
j = gi

j 

2

xk=1

(1)(k)[(i)+(j)]gki
kj.

these two relations together with

f i1i2
j = (1)(i1)(i2) f i2i1

j

101

(5.9)

(5.10)

(5.11)

and

j1j2 = (1)(j1)(j2) f i
f i

j2j1

(5.12)

can generate many other relations. from eq.(5.6), we see that the set of all
f i
j s span a proper ideal f 

| for the closed string superalgebra.

we stated a conjecture in section 4.3 that the vector space spanned by
all closed string states provides a faithful representation for the quotient
algebra of all cosets i
 of the heterix algebra. in other
words, we conjecture that this quotient algebra is precisely the cyclix algebra.
likewise, we have a conjecture that the cyclix superalgebra can be obtained
as a quotient algebra of the superalgebra dened by eqs.(5.5), (5.6) and (5.7),
where f i

j are independent, by m,f .

 and f (i)

(j) + m 

j and i

j + m 

we know that this conjecture is true for  = 1 and f = 0.

in the
remaining paragraphs, we will show why this is so, and will see that the
cyclix algebra, like the centrix algebra, has a close relationship with the witt
algebra.

let  = 1 and f = 0. then all the sequences are repetitions of the
number 1 a number of times. we can simplify the notations and write k
as (#(k)), sk as s#(k), i
(#(j)). we can deduce from
eqs.(4.8), (4.9), (4.11) and (4.12) that the actions of f (a)
b , where a
and b are the number of integers in the various sequences, on (c) and sc,
where c is also a positive integer, are given by

#(j) and f (i)

(j) as f (#(i))

(b) and a

j as #(i)

b(a);

f (a)
(b) (c) = cc
f (a)
(b) sc = 0;
b (c) = c(b  c)(a+cb); and
a
b sc = (c  b + 1)(b  c)sa+cb.
a

(5.13)

(5.14)

(5.15)
(5.16)

where (condition) is 1 if the condition holds, and 0 otherwise. the lie
brackets for the  = 1 cyclix algebra are

[a

b , c

d] = (c  b)h2a+c1
+(b  c + 1)a
+   + (c  1) f (a)

b+d1 + 2a+c2
b+d2 +    + 2a+1
b+dci + (2  c  b)h f (a+c2)
(b+dc)i + (b < c)h2a+c1

b+dc+1

(b+d2) + 2 f (a+c3)
b+d1 + 2a+c2
b+d2

(b+d3)

102

and

+ (c  b + 1)a+cb

d

i + (2  b < c)h f (a+c2)

(b+d2)

(b+d3) +    + (b  1) f (a+cd)

(b)

i

d+1

+   + 2a+cb+1
+ f (a+c3)
(a  c, b  d);
b , f (c)
ha

(d)i = c(b  c) f (a+cb)

(d)

 d(a  d) f (c)

(b+da)

(b) , f (c)
h f (a)

(d)i = bc

b

f (a)
(d)  aa

d

f (c)
(b) .

(5.17)

(5.18)

(5.19)

these three equations can be deduced from eqs.(4.16), (4.17) and (4.18),
respectively.

the cartan subalgebra h is now spanned by vectors of the forms a
(d) + f (c+1)
d can be deduced from eq.(4.23). the eigenequations are

f (a)
(a) . a root vector reads f (c)
expression for f c

d+2  f (c)

d  2c+1

a and
(d+1). the

d+1 + c+2

(d) or f c

d = c

(d);

(d)i = (c(a  c)  d(a  d)) f (c)
a, f (c)
ha
h f (a)
(d)i = a (c
(a) , f (c)
d] = ((a  c)(c  a + 1)  (a  d)(d  a + 1)) f c
a, f c
[a
h f (a)
di = 0.
(a) , f c

a  a

d) f (c)
(d) ;

d; and

(5.20)

(b) + m 

1 and f (a)

let us consider the quotient algebra of all cosets a

(b) + m 
1.
in the rest of this section and in the accompanying appendices, we will write
b + m 
a
(b) , respectively. the vector space
spanned by all bosonic closed string states still provides a representation for
this quotient algebra  the actions of ga
(b) on this vector space are
still described by eqs.(5.13) and (5.15). however, there is now a kernel in
this representation:

1 simply as ga

b and f (a)

b and f (a)

1 and f (a)

b + m 

f (a)
(b) = ga

b  ga+1
b+1 .

hence,

ga

b = 


 f (a)
 f (a)

(b)  f (a1)
(b)  f (a1)

(b1)      f (ab+1)
(b1)      f (1)

1
(1)
(ba+1) + g1

+ gab+1

ba+1

a simplication brought about by setting  to 1 is that we can write a basis
for the quotient algebra easily.
1s

indeed, the set of all f (a)

b s and ga

(b) s, g1

(5.21)

if a  b; and
if a < b.

(5.22)

103

where a and b are arbitrary positive integers form a basis for the  = 1
quotient algebra. the proof of this statement will be given in appendix d.2.
the same proof also shows that not only does the vector space of bosonic
closed string states provide a representation, but also it provides a faithful
representation for this quotient algebra. from eq.(5.18), we deduce that the
subspace f 
(d) form a proper ideal
of this quotient algebra.

1 spanned by all the vectors of the form f (c)

the set of all f (a)

(a) s, where a is arbitrary, and g1

1 form a basis for a cartan
subalgebra. the proof of this statement will be seen in appendix d.3. in
addition, since f 
1 is a proper ideal of the quotient algebra, the same proof
reveals that any root vector with respect to this cartan subalgebra must be
a linear combination of a number of f (a)
(b) s. therefore all root vectors are of
the form f (c)
(d) with c 6= d. the corresponding eigenequations, which can be
deduced from eqs.(4.19) and (4.20), are

and

(d)

1, f (c)
hg1
h f (a)
(a) , f (c)

(d)i = (c  d) f (c)
d) f (c)
(d)i = a (c
a  a
(d).

as f 

1 is a proper ideal of this  = 1 quotient algebra, we can form yet
another quotient algebra of cosets of the form v + f 
1 where v is an arbitrary
vector of the previous quotient algebra. this new quotient algebra is spanned
by the cosets ga
1, where a and b run over all positive integers.
it is a straightforward matter to show that the following lie brackets are true:

1 + f and g1

b + f 

(5.23)

(5.24)

(5.25)

(5.26)

1, gc

1 + f 

1, g1

d + f 

1, g1

d + f 

hga
1 + f 
hga
1 + f 
hg1
b + f 

let us dene

1

1

1(cid:17) ;
1i = (c  a)(cid:16)ga+c1
+ f 
1i = 
(2  a  d)(cid:16)gad+1
+ f 
(2  a  d)(cid:16)g1
da+1 + f 

1i = (b  d)(cid:16)g1
1(cid:17) .
b+d1 + f 
1 + f 
la = ( ga+1
1a + f 
g1

if a  0, and
if a  0.

1

1

1(cid:17) if d  a, or
1(cid:17) if a  d; and

note that the l here is not an integer sequence. then eq.(5.25) becomes

[la, lb] = (a  b)la+b.

104

(5.27)

b and f (a)

this is the witt algebra. consequently, the  = 1 quotient algebra of all
cosets a
(b) can be regarded as an extension of the witt algebra by an
 + f for  > 1
j + m 
algebra isomorphic to gl+. the quotient algebras i
can then be regarded as generalizations of the witt algebra.

5.5 the ising model revisited

in this and the last two chapters, we have mostly been studying issues in
mathematics. let us see how to use these mathematical results in physics.
a good starting point should be a model which is simple enough that we
know a great deal of it so that we can see how the algebraic point of view
we have been discussing t in. in section 2.7, we introduced a number of
exactly solvable matrix models. the ising model is the simplest, and let us
look into this model to see what can be learnt.

it is possible to understand the solvability of the ising model in terms
of the dolangrady conditions [37, 32] and the onsager algebra [81, 31].
suppose we have a system whose hamiltonian can be written as

h = h0 + v

(5.28)

with the two terms in the hamiltonian satisfying the dolangrady condi-
tions:

and

[h0, [h0, [h0, v ]]] = 16[h0, v ],

[v, [v, [v, h0]]] = 16[v, h0].

(5.29)

(5.30)

then we can construct operators satisfying an innite-dimensional lie alge-
bra

[am, an] = 4gmn, [gm, an] = 2an+m  2anm, and [gm, gn] = 0 (5.31)

by the following recursion relations:

a0 = h0, a1 = v, an+1  an1 = 1

2[g1, an],

g1 = 1

4 [a1, a0], and gn = 1

4[an, a0].

(5.32)

105

this lie algebra is called the onsager algebra. it is known to be isomorphic
to a xed-point subalgebra of the sl(2) loop algebra l(sl(2)) with respect to
the action of a certain involution [85]. in particular, the system will admit
an innite number of conserved quantities [53]:

qm = 

1
2

(am + am + am+1 + am+1) .

(5.33)

hence any such system should be integrable.

in the case of the ising model we choose h0 and v as above. the lie
brackets of the gi
j then allow us to verify easily that the rst of the dolan
grady conditions is satised. this, together with the self-duality of the
ising model, guarantee that the other dolangrady condition is satised
also. eq.(5.30) could also be veried directly. the only caveat is that as the
operators act on closed string states only, we have to treat all f s as linear
combinations of gs in order for eq.(5.30) to hold true. moreover we see
that the onsager algebra is a subalgebra of our algebra c; all the conserved
quantities are just linear combinations of our gi
j . this suggests that
there may be other models that are integrable by this method; what we
need to do is to identify pairs of elements in our algebra that satisfy the
dolangrady conditions.

j and f i

another deep relationship between integrable spin chain models and our
algebras is that to each solution of the yangbaxter equation (or yang
baxtersklyanin equation for the case of open chains), there is a maximal
abelian subalgebra of the centrix or cyclix algebra. this is just the subal-
gebra spanned by the conserved quantities of the corresponding spin chain:
each conserved quantity is an element of our centrix or cyclix algebra. thus
it emerges that the lie algebras we have found are the underlying symme-
tries of many integrable models. perhaps we may even be able to identify
the relationship between the symmetries of integrable models and those of
yangmills theory because of these lie algebras. we intend to develop these
ideas in the future into a systematic theory.

106

appendix a

conventions used in chapter 2
and some pertinent proofs

a.1 multi-indices: ordinary sequences

much of our work involves manipulating tensors carrying multiple indices.
for the convenience of the reader, we give here a summary of the notation
used in this article for multi-indices.

we will use lower case latin letters such as i, j, i1, j2 to denote indices
taking nite integer values. often we will have to deal with a whole sequence
of indices i1i2i3 . . . ia, which we will denote by the corresponding uppercase
letter i as the collective index of this sequence. the length of the sequence
i will be denoted by #(i).

thus if

and

i = i1i2 . . . ia

j = j1j2 . . . jb

, then we have #(i) = a and #(j) = b. the composition of these two
sequences will be denoted by

ij = i1i2 . . . iaj1j2 . . . jb.

in particular, we have

ij = i1i2 . . . iaj,

(a.1)

107

when only a single index is added to the end. this operation of composing
sequences is associative but not commutative:

ij 6= ji,

i(jk) = (ij)k = ijk.

(a.2)

often we will have to allow the null sequence  among the range of values
of a collective index. a collective index that is allowed to take the null
i
sequence as its value will have a dot over it. thus the possible values of
are

i = , 1, 2, . . . , , 11, 12, . . . 1, 21, . . . , , . . .

(a.3)

while those of i do not include the empty set are

i = 1, 2, . . . , , 11, 12, . . . 1, 21, . . . , , . . .

(a.4)

of course the length of the null sequence is zero. it is the identity element
of the composition law above,

 i = i = i.

(a.5)

in fact the inclusion of the empty sequence in the set of all sequences turns
it into a semi-group under the above composition law.

the equation i = j means that they have the same length a (say) and

i1 = j1; i2 = j2; . . . ia = ja.

in the same way we can dene i = j either if they are both the empty
sequence, or if they are equal in the above sense.

the kronecker delta function for integer sequences is dened as follows:

i

j  ( 1 if i = j; or
0 if i 6= j.

)

and similarly for dotted indices. the summation sign in an expression such
as

means that all possible distinct sequences, excluding the empty sequence, are
summed over. (in all practical cases, it turns out that there is only a nite

x i
j ,

xi

108

number of is such that x i
on the other hand, the summation sign over a dotted index

j 6= 0 so there will be no convergence problems.)

x i
j

xi

means that all possible distinct sequences for i, including the empty sequence,
are summed over.

often we will have to sum over all the ways of splitting a sequence into
subsequences. for example, the summation sign on the l.h.s. of the equation

xi1i2=i

x i1y i2

k  xi1i2

i1i2
i x i1y i2

k

(a.6)

denotes the sum over all the ways in which a given index i can be split
into two nonempty subsequences i1 and i2. if there is no way to split i as
required, then the sum simply yields 0. for example, eq.(a.6) yields 0 if i
has only one integer. if the rst subsequence is allowed to be empty in the
sum, we would write instead,

x i1y i2
k .

xi1i2=i

(a.7)

there is a total ordering (lexicographic ordering) > among integer se-

quences such that i > j for the sequences i and j if either

1. #( i) > #( j); or
2. #( i) = #( j) = a 6= 0, and there exists an integer r  a such that

i1 = j1, i2 = j2, . . . , ir1 = jr1 and ir > jr.

explicitly, the total ordering can be presented as

 < 1 < 2 <    <  < 11 < 12 <    < 1
< 21 <    < 1 <     < 111   .

(a.8)
(a.9)

this also gives a one-one correspondence (counting rule) between the set of
values of the indices and the set of natural numbers:   1, 1  2, . . . ,  
 + 1, 1   + 2, etc..

109

when we talk of an algebra spanned by operators such as f i

a typical element of  will be of the form pij cj

1,
the underlying vector space is that of nite linear combinations. for example,
j . although i and j
can take an innite number of values, only a nite number of the complex
numbers cj
i can be non-zero. thus there is never any issue of convergence
in the sums of interest to us: they are all nite sums. viewed as operators,
j s are nite rank, l i
f i
j are unbounded. hence
their nite linear combinations are also nite rank, bounded and unbounded,
respectively.

j s are bounded and i

js and r i

j , l i

j , r i

j or i

j

i i

a.2 multi-indices: cyclic sequences

we dene (i) to be the equivalence class of all cyclic permutations of i. in
fact (i) can be viewed as a discrete model for a closed loop, or closed string.
the corresponding kronecker delta function is dened by the following rela-
tion:

(j)  i
i

j + xj1j2=j

i
j2j1.

(a.10)

eq.(a.10) means that the delta function returns the number of dierent
cyclic permutations of j such that each permuted sequence is identical with
i. thus i
(j) can take any non-negative integer as its value, not just 0 or 1.
the reader can verify from this denition that

next, the expression

i
(j) = j
(i)

x i,

x(i)

(a.11)

where x i is dependent on the equivalence class (i), i.e., x i = x j if (i) =
(j), means that all possible distinct equivalence classes (i) are summed. note
that each equivalence class appears only once in the sum.
in all cases of
interest to us, it turns out that there are only a nite number of (i)s such
that f (i) 6= 0.

1for denitions in section 2.2 or chapter 3

110

now we can introduce the formula that denes the following summation:

xi1i2in=(i)

x i1,i2,...,in  xi1,i2,...,in

i1i2in
(i)

x i1,i2,...,in.

(a.12)

in words, in eq.(a.12) we sum over all distinct ways of cyclically permuting
i, and then all distinct sets of n non-empty sequences i1, i2, . . . , in (but note
that within a particular set of i1, i2, . . . , in, some of the sequences can be
identical) such that i1i2 . . . in is the same as this permuted sequence. this
equation then leads to

i1i2in
(i)

= xi 

2i 

1i 

n=(i)

i1
i 
1

i2
2    in
i 

i 
n

.

(a.13)

a direct consequence of eq.(a.13) is

i1i2in
(i)

= i2i3ini1

(i)

.

in addition, the reader can verify from eq.(a.12) together with eqs.(a.6),
(a.10) and (a.11) that

xi1i2in=(i)

+ xi11i12=i1

i22i3ini1i21
i

i


i1i2in
= xi1,i2,...,in
+ xi21i22=i2
+ xin1in2=in

i12i2i3ini11
i

+ i2i3ini1

i

i

+    + ini1i2in1

 .

in2i1i2in1in1
i

(a.14)

a.3 actions of operators on physical states

in the large-n limit

we are going to illustrate (though not rigorously prove) why in the planar
large-n limit, an operator representing a term in a dynamical variable sends
singlet states to singlet states. we are going to conne ourselves to the action
of operators of the second kind dened in section 2.2 only. the reasoning is
similar for operators of other kinds.

111






1

1
2




2
3
.
c
.
c+1



.
c+1

(a)

1

i 1



3

1k

k2

.
ck



4

1


1



2


1


2

1j


2


3

i 1

i 2

i 2

j 2

.
i a

.
j b


.
b

.
a+1



(b)



2



.
a+1






1

1
2




2
3
.
c
.
c+1

.
c+1







3

1k

k2

.
ck



4

.i
a

.
a+1

(c)

= 



2

3





figure a.1: detailed diagrammatic representations of singlet states, and the
action of an operator of the second kind with no annihilation operator of an
adjoint parton on an open singlet state.

assume that the operator is of the form eq.(2.14) and the open singlet
state is of the form eq.(2.7). let a = #( i), b = #( j ) and c = #( k). so there
are a creation operators and b annihilation operators for adjoint partons in
the operator of the second kind, and c creation operators for adjoint partons
in the open singlet state. there is a factor of n ( a+b)/2 in the operator of the
second kind and a factor of n ( c+1)/2 in the open singlet state, so initially
there is a total factor of n ( a+b+ c+1)/2. a term in the nal state is either an
open singlet state or a product of an open singlet and a number of closed
singlets. no matter how many closed singlets there are in this term, n should
be raised to the power of ( a  b + c + 1)/2 in order that the term survives
the large-n limit. it is therefore that only the operations which produce a
factor of n b survive the large-n limit.

to clarify the argument, we need to rene the diagrammatic representa-
tions of an operator of any kind and a singlet state more carefully. note that
in figs. 2.1(a) and (c), each square carries one color index whereas each circle
carries two color indices. we can put these indices at the ends of the thick
or thin lines attaching to them. fig.a.1(a) shows a typical open singlet state
given by eq.(2.7). here the color indices are explicitly written out. note that
each square carries 1 color index, whereas each circle carries 2 color indices.
moreover, the color indices at the two ends of a connecting solid line are the
same. fig.a.1(b) shows an operator of the second kind, given by eq.(2.14),

112

1

i 1

i 2

i

.
a



2


1
1



.
a+1

1j


1
1








2

2
3
.
c

.
c+1
.
c+1







3

1k

k2

.
k
c



4

1

i 1

i 2

i

.
a



2


1


1



.
a+1

1j






1
1

2


x
x+1

.
c

.
c+1
.
c+1







3

1k

kx

.
k
c



4

(a)



=

2



3 ;

1j

=

1k

(b)



=

2



3 ;

1j

= kx

figure a.2: the action of an operator of the second kind with one annihila-
tion operator of an adjiont parton on an open singlet state.

with explicit color indices of the annihilation operators.

consider the case when there are no annihilation operators for adjoint
partons in the operator of the second kind, i.e., b = 0. fig. a.1(c) shows
the action of such an operator on an open singlet state. it destroys the solid
square in fig. a.1(a) and the hollow square in fig. a.1(b). the ends of the
lines originally attached to the squares are now joined together by a dotted
line with an appearance dierent from other dotted lines in the diagram.
algebraically this dotted line is the kronecker delta function 1
a+1. clearly
the nal state is an open singlet state.. the factor involving n in the nal
state is n ( a+ c+1)/2. this is precisely the factor for an open singlet state with
a + c partons in the adjoint representation.

now consider the case when there is one annihilation operator of an ad-
joint parton in the operator of the second kind, i.e., b = 1. the action of this
operator needs to produce a factor of n in order for the nal state to survive
in the large-n limit. consider the following two cases illustrated separately
in figs. a.2(a) and (b). in the former diagram, the annihilation operator
of an adjoint parton in the operator of the second kind contracts with the
creation operator of the rst adjoint parton in the initial open singlet state.
this results in a closed loop with no squares or circles but two dotted lines
only. algebraically this loop is the factor 1
1, which in turn is equal to
n. the remaining parts of this diagram form an open singlet state. thus
the singlet state survives the large-n limit. in the latter diagram, the an-

1 1

113

1h

h2

l1

l2

l3

l4

s1

s2

1

i 1

i 2



2


1
1


2

2

1j


3

2j


.
b



.
a+1

.
bj

i

.
a

(a)

(b)



2

= 

;

3

1j

1k=

; ... ;

.
=bj

.
bk


1
1




2
2





3

.
b









.
b+1
.
b+1
.
b+2

.
c

.
c+1
.
c+1



3

1k

k2

.
kb

.
kb+1

.
k
c



4

figure a.3: (a) contraction of circles.
(b) the action of an operator of
the second kind with b annihilation operators of adjoint partons on an open
singlet state.

nihilation operator of the adjoint parton in the operator of the second kind
contracts with the creation operator of a later adjoint parton in the adjoint
parton sequence of the initial open singlet state. this time the nal state is
a product of an open singlet together with a closed singlet. however, there
is no closed loop with solid and dotted lines only. this implies that no extra
factor of n is produced and so this term can be neglected in the large-n
limit.

let us now turn to the case when b is an arbitrary positive integer. the
annihilation operator of a conjugate parton in the operator of the second
kind will contract with the creation operator of a conjugate parton in the
initial open singlet state. this will produce 1 dotted line. the b annihilation
operators of adjoint partons in the operator of the second kind will contract
with b creation operators of adjoint partons in the initial meson state. this
will further produce 2b dotted lines. hence there are 2b + 1 dotted lines. one

114

of these dotted lines has to be recruited to join the creation and annihilation
operators in the nal state. in order for the nal state to survive in the large-
n limit, we need a factor of n b, as explained above. since the minimum
number of dotted lines to produce a closed loop without squares or circles
is 2, the factor n b can be obtained only if there are b closed loops, every
closed loop has 2 dotted lines only, and there are no circles or squares in any
closed loop. this can be done only if the 2 dotted lines join 2 adjacent pairs
of creation and annihilation operators. moreover, only 1 dotted line can be
uninvolved in any closed loops. consider fig a.3(a), where we contract 2
circles h1 and s1, producing 2 dotted lines l1 and l2. since one of these dotted
lines has to be lie within a closed loop, a pair of circles adjacent to h1 and
s1 has to be contracted. in fig a.3(a), h2 and s2 are contracted and hence
we obtain l3 and l4. then either l1 or l4 (or both) has to lie within a closed
loop. if we continue this argument, we will obtain fig. a.3(b). as is clear
from the gure, the nal state is an open singlet state. thus we conclude
that in the large-n limit, an operator of the second kind propagates open
singlet states to open singlet states. the actions of operators of other kinds
can be understood similarly.

115

appendix b

proofs of some results in
chapter 3

b.1 associativity of the algebra for the op-

erators of the second kind

the reader can prove the associativity of this algebra by verifying the fol-
lowing identity:

n =  k

j  m

l(cid:17) l m
j l k
n (cid:17) = (cid:16)l i
l l m
j (cid:16)l k
l i
l i
j  m
 k
+ xl1l2= l
n l2
l1

im2
m1
l l
n

ik2

 k
j 

l l i
n + xm1m2= m
k1
j  m
l l

+ xk1k2 = k

n + xj1j2= j

+ xk1k2= k
k1
m1
ik2m2

j 
l l
n

 k
j1

l l i
 m

n j2

k1
j  m

l1

ik2
l
n l2

xk1k2 = k

m1m2 = m

xj1j2 = j

m1m2 = m

+

+

+

l1l2 = l

 k
j1

m1
l2 l i
l m2


n + xj1j2 = j

l1l2 = l

 k
j1

 m
l1

l i
n l2j2

xj1j2 = j

m1m2m3 = m

 k
j1

m1
l m2

j2 l

im3
n +

 k
j1

m1
j2 l i
l m2


n j3

xj1j2j3 = j

m1m2 = m

116

q.e.d.

b.2 cartan subalgebra of l

this can be seen by the following argument. let us call the subspace spanned
by all the l i
j ] = 0 for any integer sequences i and
j. thus m is an abelian subalgebra. in particular, m is niltpotent. to
proceed on, we need the following two lemmas:

i s m. from eq.(3.8), [l i

i , l j

lemma 1 let

n

i , l k
[l i

l ] =

nk
mk

mk
l
nk



xk=1
mk and nk are positive integer sequences
are non-zero numerical coecients.

where n is a nite positive integer,
such that l
then

mk
nk 6= l

mk
nk

nk
mk

for k 6= k, and 
#( mk)  #( nk) = #( k)  #( l)

for every k = 1, 2, . . . , n.

this lemma can be proved by using eq.(3.8) with j = i.

lemma 2 with the same assumptions as in the previous lemma, we have

#( mk) + #( nk)  #( k) + #( l)

for every k = 1, 2, . . . , n.

this lemma can also be proved by using eq.(3.8) with j = i. let m be a
positive integer. now we are ready to show for arbitrary non-zero complex
, where i = 1, 2, . . . , m and arbitrary integer sequences lis and
numbers 
for i 6= i, and ki 6= li for at least one i, that there
kis such that l
exists a sequence i such that

6= l

ki
li

ki
li

li
ki

[l i
i ,

m

xi=1



li
ki

ki
l
li

]

does not belong to m. indeed, let j be an integer such that

117

1. #( kj)  #( lj)  #( ki)  #( li) for all i = 1, 2, . . . and m; and
2. #( kj) + #( lj)  #( ki) + #( li) for any i = 1, 2, . . . or m such that

#( kj)  #( lj) = #( ki)  #( li).

if #( kj)  #( lj), then consider

[l

kj
kj

,

m

xi=1



li
ki

ki
l
li

] = 

lj
kj

where

kj
lj  
l

lj

kj xkj1kj2= kj

kj1

lj

kjkj2
l
kj

+ ,

(b.1)

 = [l

kj
kj

,

m

=

m

xi = 1
i 6= j
xk=1

ni

xi = 1
i 6= j



li
ki

ki
l
li

]



li
ki



nik
mik

mik
l
nik

(b.2)

where each ni for i = 1, 2, . . . , m but i 6= j is dependent on i. let us assume
that
(b.3)
for some i  {1, 2, . . . , m} but i 6= j and k  {1, 2, . . . ni}. then #( mik) =
#( kj) and #( nik) = #( lj). by lemmas 1 and 2, we get #( ki) = #( kj)
and #( li) = #( lj). however, we also know that ki 6= kj or li 6= lj and
so there is no k  {1, 2, . . . , ni} such that eq.(b.3) holds. this leads to a
contradiction and so we conclude that

mik
l
nik

kj
lj

= l

kj
mik
nik 6= l
l
lj

for all i  {1, 2, . . . , m} but i 6= j and k  {1, 2, . . . , ni}. from eqs.(b.1) and
] does not belong to m. similarly, if
(b.2), we deduce that [l
#( kj)  #( lj), then [l
] does not belong to m. hence, the
normalizer of m is m itself. we therefore conclude that m is a cartan
subalgebra of the algebra l. q.e.d.

,pm
,pm

ki
l
li
ki
l
li

kj
kj
lj
lj

li
ki
li
ki

i=1 

i=1 

118

b.3 root vectors of l

q
p l p

all we need to do is to show that any root vector has to be of the form
given by eq.(3.12). let f  p p , q a
q, where only a nite number of the
p 6= 0, be a root vector. in addition, we can assume
numerical coecients a
q
without loss of generality that p 6= q if a
p = 0. recall from eq.(3.6) that
k1
j s k = xk1 k2= k
j s i k2.


l i

q

hence,

therefore,

l p

qs j = xi xj1 j2= j

j1
p j2

q 
i

s i.

m , fi s k = xi, p , q
hl m

q
a
p

(cid:16) m

i1

xi1 i2 = i

k1 k2 = k

since f is a root vector, we have

k1

q 

p k2

i   p

i1

k1
m  k


q i2(cid:17) s i.

(b.4)

hl m
m , fi =  m xp , q

q
p l p
a
q

(b.5)

where  m is a root. as a result, we can combine eqs.(b.4) and (b.5) to
obtain

q
a
p

xp , q

(cid:16) m

i1

xi1 i2 = i

k1 k2 = k

xp , q

k1

q 

p k2

i   p

i1

q

a

p  m xk1 k2= k

k1
m  k
q i2(cid:17)


k1
p k2

q 
i

= 0.

(b.6)

this equation holds true for any arbitrarily chosen integer sequences i,
and m.

let us nd an a s

r1 = 0 for all r1s
and s1s such that r1 r2 = r and s1 s2 = s for some r2 and s2. the reader

r in f such that r 6= s, a s

r 6= 0, and as1

k

119

can easily convince himself or herself that such an a s
r always exists. let us
choose i = r and k = s in eq.(b.6). then we obtain from this equation
that

 m = xr1 r2= r



r1

m  xs1 s2= s

 m
s1

.

(b.7)

therefore,

thence

 m 



xi=1

 m i =  r

m   m
s .



"l r
xi=1
r 
"l s
xi=1
s 
ri and l s
i=1 l ri
however, both l r
eq.(3.20) shows clearly that f = f r
each root vector space must be one-dimensional. q.e.d.

ri, f# 6= 0; and
l ri
si, f# 6= 0.
l si
i=1 l si
s  p

r  p



si  f. thus f  f. now
s . the same equation also shows that

b.4 lie bracket of 

we are going to show that the commutator between two operators of the
fourth kind, eq.(3.37), denes a lie bracket between them. this can be
done by showing that eq.(3.37) satises eq.(3.36). this involves a tedious
compuatation involving the delta function dened in appendix a.1. the
properties of this delta function will be extensively used. let us consider the
action of the commutator of two s on s p . if
p is empty, then eq.(3.37)
certainly satises eq.(3.36). therefore we only need to consider the case
when p is not empty. in this case we can simply write p as p . then the
action of the commutator on sp is

li sp = xq  i
hi
j , k
+xc,d

i
qckd

p

j

j

p

qk
j p
l +xc
ai
q k
cld +xa

qck
i
l + xa,c

aj p

cl +xd
ai
q ck

aj p
cl

i
qkd

j

p
ld

120

ai
q kd

aj p

ai
q ckd

aj

ib
q k

jbp
l

ib
q ck

jb p

ib
q kd

jb p

ib
q ckd

jb p

cld

+xa,d
+xb,c
+xa,b
+ xa,b,c,d

ld + xa,c,d
cl + xb,d
ajbp
l + xa,b,c
cld
ajb p

aib
q ckd

aib
q k

p

cld +xb
ld + xb,c,d
ajbp

aib
q ck

cl + xa,b,d
 sq  (i  k, j  l).

aib
q kd

ajbp
ld

(b.8)

each of the terms on the r.h.s. of the above equations can be rewritten as
follows;

k
j2i

qp

j1lj3;

j1l;

lj2;

l = k
p

j

j

i
qkd

qk
j p
i
i
qck
xc
xd
xc,d
xa
xa,c

q k
ai

p

qp

qp

qp
l ;

k
j2i

j i
cl = xj1j2=j
j1i
k
ld = xj1j2=j
cld = xj1j2j3=j
j k1i
k2
l = xk1k2=k
cl = xk1k2=kxe

p

i
qckd

j

aj p

q p
l ;

q ck
ai
aj p
+ xj1j2=jxe
aj p
ai
q kd

j2ei
k
ld = xf

xa,d

q p

ej1l;

k2
j ek1i

q

p

el +xe

k
j ei

q p
el

kf i
q p

lf j + ki

q p

k2
j1 k1

q p

lj2;

lj + xj1j2 = j

k1k2 = k

xa,c,d

aj

p

ai
q ckd
+ xj1j2 = j

cld = xj1j2j3=jxe

k2
j1 ek1i

q

p

k
j2ei
q p
elj2 +xe

ej1lj3 + xj1j2=jxe
eki
q p

elj + xe,f

k
j1ei

q p

elj2

ekf i
q

p
elf j;

k1k2 = k
jbp

ib
q k

l = xk1k2=k

xb

k1
j ik2

q p
l ;

121

ib
q ck

jb p

cl =

xj1j2 = j

j2 ik2
k1

q p

j1l + ik

q p

jl +xf

if k
q p

jf l;

k1k2 = k
k
j1if

q p

lj2f +xf

k
j if

q p
lf

xb,c

xb,d

xb,c,d

p
lf ;

q

q kd
ib
+ xk1k2=kxf
q ckd
jb p
ib
+ xj1j2 = j

jb ld = xj1j2=jxf
j ik2f
k1
cld = xf,g
j2 xf

k1

k1k2 = k

+ xj1j2j3=jxf
ajbp
aib
q k

q ck
aib
ajbp
+ xk1k2=kxe

j1lj3f ;

j2if
k

q p
l = xk1k2k3=k
cl = xk1k2k3=kxe
k1
j eik2

p

q

xa,b
xa,b,c

if kg
q

p

ikg
q p

jlg

jf lg +xg
j1lf + xj1j2=j

p

ik2f
q

j2if
k

q p

j1lf

k2
j k1ik3

q

p
l ;

k2
j ek1ik3

q

p
el

el + xj1j2 = j

k1
j2 eik2

q

p
ej1l

xe

k1k2 = k

eif k
q

p
ejf l;

kf ig
q

p

k2
j1 k1if

q

ljg

q p
kig
lf jg +xg
lj2f + xk1k2=kxf

p

k2
j k1if

q

p
lf

xa,b,d

eik
q p

+xe
q kd
aib
ajbp
+ xj1j2 = j

ejl + xe,f
ld = xf,g
xf

k1k2 = k

+ xk1k2k3=kxf
ajb p
aib
q ckd

xa,b,c,d

q

k2
j k1ik3f
cld = xe,f,g

p
lf ; and

ekf ig
q

p

elf jg + xe,g

ekig
q

p
eljg

122

+ xj1j2 = j

xe,f

k1k2 = k

j1 ek1if
k2

q

q

elj2f + xk1k2=k xe,f

j ek1if
k2

q

p
elf

k
j1eif

q p

elj2f

q

p

elf + xj1j2=j xe,f

+ xk1k2k3=k xe,f
q p
k
j eif
+xe,f
+ xj1j2j3=j xe,f
+ xj1j2 = j

j ek1ik3f
k2
elf + xk1k2=k xe,f
j2eif
k
q p
xe,f

j eik2f
k1
ej1lj3f + xj1j2=j xe,f
j2 eik2f
k1
ej1lf + xe,g

p

q

q

p
elf

k
j2eif

q p

ej1lf

eikg
q

p
ejlf

(b.9)

k1k2 = k
eif kg
q

+ xe,f,g

p
ejf lg.

we can now substitute the expressions in eq.(b.9) into eq.(b.8) to get

hi
j , k

q p
eif

li sp =

k
j (i
xq

+ xj1j2=j
+xe,f
+xf
q p
ei
+xe
+ xk1k2=k
+xe,f

ik2f
q

ek1if
q

p

lf + xe,f
q p
if
l +xe

qp
ei
q p
l +xe
el +xf
k
j2(i
qp
q p
ei
j1l +xe
ej1lf ) + xk1k2=k
lf + xe,f
elj2 +xf
j (k1i
k2
q p
elf ) + xj1j2 = j

if
q p
ej1l +xf
j (ik2
k1
q p
elf ) + xj1j2=j
q p
eif
el +xf
k1
j2 (ik2

q p
if
l +xe

lj2f + xe,f

eik2f
q

ek1i
q

q p

p

p

p

eif
q p

elf )

j1lf

eik2
q

p
el

k
j1(i

qp

lj2

elj2f )

k1if
q

p
lf

j1l +xe

eik2
q

p
ej1l

k1k2 = k

123

+xf

ik2f
q

p

j1lf + xe,f

eik2f
q

p

ej1lf ) + xj1j2 = j

j1 (k1i
k2

q p

lj2

k1k2 = k
ek1if
q

p
elj2f )

p

lj2f + xe,f
q p
ei
ej1lj3f ) + xk1k2k3=k

ej1lj3

k1ik3f
q

p

lf + xe,f

ek1ik3f
q

p

k1if
q

ek1i
q

elj2 +xf
j2(i
qp
k
j1lj3 +xe
j1lj3f + xe,f
el +xf

+xe
+ xj1j2j3=j
if
q p
+xf
+xe
+} sq  (i  k, j  l)

ek1ik3
q

p

e,i,f p

j (k1ik3
k2

q

p
l

p
elf )

(b.10)

where

 = ik

jl +xe

eif k
q

p

eif kg
q

ejl +xf

q p
eik
q p
if k
jf l +xg
ejf l +xf,g
jf lg + xe,g
p
ejf lg + (i  k, j  l)

if kg
q

p

q p
+xe,f
+ xe,f,g

ikg
q p

jlg

eikg
q

p
ejlg

(b.11)

if we substitute eq.(b.10) without  into eq.(b.8), we will obtain exactly
the action of operators on the r.h.s. of eq.(3.37) on sp .  is reproduced
when i and k are interchanged with j and l, respectively, in eq.(b.10) and
so it is cancelled. consequently, eq.(3.37) is true. q.e.d.

b.5 root vectors of 

p p

we need to show that any root vector has to be of the form given by eq.(3.46).
let f  pp,q aq
q, where only a nite number of the numerical coeicients
aq
p 6= 0, be a root vector. in addition, we can assume without loss of gener-
ality that p 6= q if aq
j si + xk1k2=k
i
j sk = k

j sk1i + xk1k2k3=k

j sik2 + xk1k2=k

p = 0. recall from eq.(3.34) that

k2
j sk1ik3

k1

k2

124

hence,

therefore,

p

qsj = xi

q j1p
j2
i + xj1j2=j

q p j2
j1

i


j
xj1j2j3=j

qp
i + xj1j2=j

j2
q j1p j3
 si.

i

m , fi sk =
hm

i k
m
q p
xi
m + xk1k2=k
q k1p k3
i k2
m
+ xk1k2k3=k

m

i k2
q k1p
m
+ xi1i2=i

m + xk1k2=k

i k1
q p k2
m
q p
i + xi1i2 = i

m
i2 k

m

i2 k2
m

q k1p

i

+ xi1i2 = i

i2 k1
m

q p k2

i +

k1k2 = k
m
i1 k

+ xi1i2=i

q p
i + xi1i2 = i

k1k2 = k
i2 k2
m

q k1p k3

i

xi1i2 = i

k1k2k3 = k
q k1p

i1 k2
m

i + xi1i2 = i

i1 k1
m

q p k2

i

+

xi1i2 = i

k1k2 = k
i1 k2
q k1p k3
m

i

+ xi1i2i3=i

k1k2 = k
q p
i

m
i2 k

k1k2k3 = k
i2 k2
m

+ xi1i2i3 = i

q k1p

i + xi1i2i3 = i

k1k2 = k

k1k2 = k

i2 k1
m

q p k2

i

+

xi1i2i3 = i

k1k2k3 = k

i2 k2
m

q k1p k3

i

aq
p si

(p  m in the superscripts, m  q in the subscripts)

(b.12)





125

since f is a root vector, we have

hm
m , fi = m xp,q

aq
p p
q.

(b.13)

where m is a root. as a result, we can combine eqs.(b.12) and (b.13)
together to obtain an equation which is too long to be written down here for
any integer sequences i, k and m.

let us nd an as

r in f such that r 6= s, as

r2 = 0 for all
r1s, s1s, r2s and s2s such that r1r2 = r and s1s2 = s, and as2
r2 = 0 for
all r2s and s2s such that r1r2r3 = r and s1s2s3 = s for some r1, r3,
s1 and s3. the reader can easily convince himself or herself that such an as
r
always exists. let us choose i = r and k = s in eq.(b.12). then when we
combine eqs.(b.12) and (b.13), we get

r 6= 0, as1

r1 = as2

m = r

r1

m + xr1r2=r
m
s  xs1s2=s

m + xr1r2=r
s1  xs1s2=s

m

r2

m + xr1r2r3=r
s2  xs1s2s3=s

m

r2
m

m
s2.

(b.14)

therefore, we obtain after some manipulation that

m 



xj=1

m j 



xi=1

im 



xi,j=1

im j = r

m  m
s .

this means

hf r
r , fi
hf s
s , fi

6= 0; and
6= 0.

since f is a proper ideal, so f  f. now eq.(3.46) shows clearly that
f = f r
s . the same equation also shows that each root vector space must be
one-dimensional. q.e.d.

126

appendix c

proofs of some results in
chapter 4

c.1 linear independence of color-invariant

operators

in this appendix, we are going to show by ad absurdum that the set of all f i
j s
dened by eq.(4.7) and all i
j s dened by eq.(4.10) is linearly independent.
assume, on the contrary, that the set is linearly dependent. then there exists
an equation

p f ip

jp +

r

xp=1

s

xp=r+1

pip

jp = 0

(c.1)

such that r and s are positive integers with r  s (r = s means that the
second sum vanishes), and all ps for p = 1, 2, . . . , and s are non-zero
complex constants. in addition, in the above equation, either (ip) 6= (iq), or
(jp) 6= (jq), or both if 1  p  r, 1  q  r and p 6= q, and either ip 6= iq,
or jp 6= jq, or both if r + 1  p  s, r + 1  q  s and p 6= q.

assume that s > r. we can assume without loss of generality that

1. jr+1 = jr+2 =    = jr+x;
2. jr+1 6= jr+x+1, jr+1 6= jr+x+2, . . . , and jr+1 6= js; and
3. #(jr+1)  #(jp) for all p = r + 1, r + 2, . . . , and s

127

for some integer x such that r < r + x  s. consider the action of the l.h.s.
of eq.(c.1) on sjr+1. we get

p

f ip
jp +

r

xp=1

s

xp=r+1




jp
pip
 sjr+1 =

r+x

xp=r+1

psip.

(c.2)

combining eqs.(c.1) and (c.2) yields pr+x

p=r+1 psip = 0, which is impossible
because sir, sir+1, . . . , sir+x are linearly independent. therefore, s = r and
eq.(c.1) can be simplied to

p f ip

jp = 0.

r

xp=1

(c.3)

again we can assume without loss of generality that

1. (j1) = (j2) =    = (jy); and
2. (j1) 6= (jy+1), (j1) 6= (jy+2), . . . , and (j1) 6= (jr)

for some integer y such that 1  y  r. consider the action of the l.h.s. of
eq.(c.3) on j1:

r

xp=1

y

xp=1

jp 
p f ip
 j1 =



however, the r.h.s. of this equation is impossible to vanish because i1,
i2, . . . , iy are linearly independent. thus the set of all f i
j s together with
all i

p
j1
jp ip + xjp1jp2=j

jp2jp1ip
 .

(1)(jp1)(jp2)j1

j s is linearly independent. q.e.d.

c.2 product of two color-invariant opera-

tors

we will show by contradiction that the product of two color-invariant op-
erators is in general not well dened. consider the case when  = 1, and
assume that the operators 
11...1 and
f (a)
(b) = f 11...1
11...1 , where the number 1 shows up a times in the superscript and

 (1) are bosonic. let a

 (1) and 

b = 11...1

128

q=1 q

assume that 1

1 (s2) = 1

1 (1

p + ps

1 = pr

b times in the subscript of . moreover, let (c) = (11...1) and sc = s11...1,
where the number 1 shows up c times.
p=1 pp

f (q)
(q) , where 1, 2, . . . , r,
1, 2, . . . , and s are non-zero complex numbers for some positive inte-
1 s1) = 12s1,
gers r and s. then from the equations 1
1 s1) = r2s1,
1
1 1
1 s1) = 22s1, . . . , and 1
we deduce that 1 = 1 and 2 = 3 =    = r = 2. hence 1
1 =
1 + 2pr
1 (sr+1) = (r + 1)2sr+1 and
(q) . however, 1
1
1 + 2pr
(q) (sr+1) = (r2 + 2r  1)sr+1, leading to a contra-
1
diction. (this proves our assertion at the beginning of section 3.5, namely
that the product of two operatros of the fourth kind cannot be written as a
nite linear combination of operators of this kind.)

p + ps
p +ps

1 (s1) = 1
1 (sr) = 1

q=1 q f (q)
q=1 q f (q)

p=2 p
p=2 p

1 (1
1 (1

1 1
1 1

1 1

1 1

1 1

q=1 q f (q)
ps

thus we assume instead that 1

1 1
non-zero complex numbers. however, 1

(q) , where the qs are
1 ((s+1)) = (s+1)2(s+1) whereas
(q) (s+1) = 0, leading to a contradiction, too. consequently, it is

1 = ps

1 1

q=1 q f (q)

impossible to write 1

1 1

1 as a nite linear combination of s and f s.

this proof can be easily modied to more general cases. q.e.d.

c.3 lie brackets of a precursor algebra

what we need to do is to show that eqs.(4.16), (4.17) and (4.18) satisfy

j (p ));

l ](p ) = i
[i
j, k
j , f (k)
[i
(l) ](p ) = i
[ f (i)
(j), f (k)
(l) ](p ) = f (i)
l ]sm = i
[i
j , k
j , f (k)
(l) ]sm = i
[i
(l) ]sm = f (i)
(j), f (k)
[ f (i)

j(k
j( f (k)
(j)( f (k)
j(k
j( f (k)
(j)( f (k)

l (p ))  k
l (i
(l) (p ))  f (k)
(l) (i
(l) (p ))  f (k)
(l) ( f (i)
l (i
l sm )  k
jsm );
(l) sm )  f (k)
(l) (i
(l) ( f (i)
(l) sm )  f (k)

jsm ); and
(j)sm ).

j (p ));
(j)(p ));

(c.4)

(c.5)

(c.6)

(c.7)

(c.8)

(c.9)

for any integer sequences i, j, k, l, m and p . eqs.(c.8) and (c.9) are
trivially true. that eq.(4.18) satises eq.(c.6) is also straightforward. we
have proved the validity of eq.(c.7) in appendix b.4. the remaining ques-
tions are whether eq.(4.17) satises eq.(c.5), and whether eq.(4.16) satises
eq.(c.4).

129

consider eq.(4.17). the action of the lie bracket operator on the l.h.s.
of this equation on (p ), where p is arbitrary, can be obtained using eqs.(4.9)
and (4.12), and we get

[i

j, f (k)

(l) ](p ) = x(q) i
 k

(q)i

(l)p

(q)ia
k

(l) p

(c.10)

(q)k

(j)p

(q)k
ia

(l) +xa
(j) xa

(ja)p
(l)
(ja)! (q).

on the other hand, the action of the operators on the r.h.s. of eq.(4.17)
(let us call this linear combination of operators g f i,k

j,l ) on (p ) is

(j)i

(q)p

g f i,k


j,l (p ) = x(q)
k
i

(l)k

(q)p

(l)

(l) + xk1k2=(k)
i
l2k
(j)  xl1l2=(l)

j ik2
k1
(q) p
(l1j)

(q)p

 (q).

(c.11)

the r.h.s of eqs.(c.10) and (c.11) can be seen to the same by using the
delta function dened in eq.(a.10). thus eq.(c.5) holds true.

now let us verify eq.(c.4). consider the lie bracket operator on the

l.h.s. of eq.(4.16) on (p ), where p is again arbitrary. we then obtain

hi
j, k

li (p ) = x(q) i
+xa,b

(q)k

(j)p

(l) +xa
(lb)
(ja)p

ia
(q)kb

ia
(q)k

(ja)p

(l) +xb

i
(q)kb

(j) p

(lb)

 (q)  (i  k, j  l).

(c.12)

the rst three summations on the r.h.s. of this equation can be turned into
the following expressions:

i
(q)k

(j)p

(l) = k

j i

(q)p

(l) + xj1j2 = j

k1
j2 k2

j1 i

(q)p

(l); (c.13)

xa

ia
(q)k

(ja)p

(l) = xk1k2=k

k1k2 = k

k1
j ik2

(q) p

(l) + xk1k2=k

k2
j ik1

(q) p

(l)

130

xb

i
(q)kb

(j) p

(lb) = xj1j2=j

+ xk1k2k3=k
xj1j2 = j

+

j k1ik3
k2

(q)

p
(l)

j2 k3
k1

j1 ik2

(q) p

(l); and

k1k2k3 = k

j1i
k

(q)p

(j2l)

(q)p

j2i
k
(j1l) + xj1j2=j
j2i
(q)p
k
+ xj1j2j3=j
+ xj1j2j3 = j

j3 k2
k1

j1 i

(j1lj3)

(q)p

(j2l).

(c.14)

(c.15)

the fourth summation is more complicated. this can be manipulated to be:

k1k2 = k

xa,b

(q)kb
ia
(ja)p
+ xk1k2=kxc
+ xk1k2=kxc

(lb) = k

j xc
k1
j ik2c
(q) p

k2
j k1ic

(q) p

(lc) + xj1j2=jxc
k
j2ic

(q)p
ic
(lc) + xj1j2=jxc
(lc) + xj1j2 = j

k
j1ic

(q)p

(lj2c)

(q)p

(j1lc)

k2
j1 ik1

(q) p

(j2l)

k1k2 = k

k1
j2 ik2

(q) p

(j1l) + xj1j2 = j

k1k2 = k

k2
j1 k1ic

(q) p

(lj2c)

k
j2ic

(q)p

(j1lj3c)

k2
j k1ik3c

(q)

p
(lc)

k1
j3 k3

j1 ik2

(q) p

(j2l) + 2

+ xj1j2 = j

k1k2 = k

+ xj1j2 = j

xc

k1k2 = k

+ xj1j2j3=jxc
+ xk1k2k3=kxc
xj1j2j3 = j
+x(q)

k1k2k3 = k

131

k1
j2 ik2c

(q) p

(j1lc)

xc

(c.16)

where

2 =

xp1p2 = (p )

q1q2 = (q)

xp1p2p3 = (p )

q1q2q3 = (q)

+

+

i
q1k

q2p1

l p2

j +

xp1p2p3 = (p )

k
q1i

q2p1

q3p2

l p3

j

q1q2q3 = (q)
j p3

l

i
q1k

q2p1

q3p2

x

p1p2p3p4 = (p )
q1q2q3q4 = (q)

i
q1k

q3p1

j p3

l p2

q2p4
q4.

(c.17)

if we substitute eqs.(c.13), (c.14), (c.15) and (c.16) without 2 into
eq.(c.12), we will obtain exactly the action of the operators on the r.h.s.
of eq.(4.16) on (p ). 2 is reproduced when i and k are interchanged with
j and l, respectively, in eq.(c.17) and so it is cancelled. hence eq.(c.4) is
also satised. consequently, eq.(4.16) is true. q.e.d.

132

appendix d

proofs of results in chapter 5

d.1 grand string superalgebra

we would like to show that the binary operations given in section 5.2 are
lie superbrackets. thus they constitute a lie superalgebra.

dene the following operators:

li
j  i

j 

ri
j  i

j 

f i
j  li

j 

(1)(i)[(i)+(j)]ii

ij  f i
j ;

2+4f

2+4f

lij
jj

j ; and

jj  f i
ij

xi=1
xj=1
xj=1
xi=1
xi=1
(1)(i)[(i)+(j)]iij

(1)(i)[(i)+(j)]rii

ij

(1)(i)[(i)+(j)]ii

ij 

2+4f

2+4f

2+4f

= ri

j 

= i

j 

+

2+4f

xi,j=1

2+4f

xj=1

ij
jj

2+4f

xj=1

iij  f i

j +

f ij
jj .

(d.1)

133

eqs.(4.21), (4.22), (4.23) and (4.24) are now generalized to

li

j sk = xk1 k2=k
j sk = xk1k2=k
j si;
f i
j sk = k

ri

j si k2;
k1

(1)( k1)[(i)+(j)]k2

j s k1i;

and

li
j k = ri

j k = f i

j k = 0.

(d.2)

(d.3)

consider the subspace of the singlet states spanned by all states of the

form

1  s k  2  s1+2, k,2+2+2f and k  k,

(d.4)
where any integer in k and k is between 1 and 2 inclusive, and 1  1, 2 
2f . (the justication of the use of the direct products  will be obvious
shortly.) from eqs.(4.6) tells us that this denition of k satises eq.(2.9)

k = (1)(k1)(k2)k2k1.

next, consider a subset of color-invariant operators in the heterix superalge-
bra consisting of all nite linear combinations of

j  i
i
j ;
j  f i
f i
j ;
j  l1+2, i
2  l i
1
2+2, j ;
4  r i,3+2+2f
r i
j  3
4  f 1+2, i,3+2+2f
2  f i
1
j  3
(d.5)
i or j is between 1 and 2 inclusive, and 1 
where any integer in i, j,
1, 2, 3 and 4  2. (again it will be obvious shortly why the direct
products are appropriate.) it can be shown that this subset of color-invariant
operators form a subalgebra of the heterix superalgebra. a fortiori, this
subset forms a lie superalgebra. moreover, the subspace of the states dened
above is a representation space for this lie superalgebra, albeit a reducible
one according to eq.(5.8).

2+2, j,4+2+2f

j,4+2+2f

; and

134

d.2 a basis for a  = 1 quotient lie algebra

we are going to prove that the set of all f (a)
1 where a and b are
arbitrary positive integers form a basis for the quotient algebra of all cosets
b and f (a)
a

(b) . indeed, consider the equation

b and ga

(b) , g1



xa,b=1

(b)
(a)

f (a)
(b) +

dg1

d +



xd=1



xc=2

cgc

1 = 0

(d.6)

where only a nite number of the s are non-zero. let n be an integer such
that for all as and bs such that (b)
(a) 6= 0, we have n > b and for all ds such
that d 6= 0, we have n > d also. then
xd=1

f (a)
(b) +

xc=2

(b)
(a)

cgc

dg1

d +





1
 (n) =




xa,b=1

xd=1



nd(nd+1) +

nc(n+c1).



xc=2

for the r.h.s. of this equation to vanish, we need d = 0 and c = 0 for all
cs and ds. hence eq.(d.6) becomes

then



xa,b=1

(b)
(a)

f (a)
(b) = 0.



xa,b=1

(b)
(a)

f (a)
(b) (e) =

e(e)

(a)(a)



xa=1

for any positive integer e. thus (e)
consequently, the set of all f (a)
integers is linearly independent. q.e.d.

(b) s, g1

(a) = 0 also for any positive a and e.
b s and ga
1s where a and b are arbitrary

d.3 cartan subalgebra of a  = 1 quotient

lie algebra

this can be seen as follows. from the results of section 4.3, we know that the
subspace spanned by all f (a)
1 forms an abelian subalgebra. moreover,

(a) s and g1

135

consider a vector v of the form

v =



xa,b=1

(b)
(a)

f (a)
(b) +

dg1

d +



xd=2

cgc
1



xc=2

where only a nite number of the s not equal to 0, and where (a)
(a) = 0 for
all a = 1, 2,   ,. if all the ds and cs vanish, then choose a particular
a0 such that there exists a b with (b)

(a0) 6= 0. then
xa=1

f (a0)
(b) 



a0(b)
(a0)

a0(a0)
(a)

f (a)
(a0)

h f (a0)
(a0) , vi =



xb=1
6= 0.

hence v does not commute with the subspace spanned by all f (a)
(a) s and g1
1.
if there exists at least one non-zero d or c, set m to be the maximum of
all as and bs such that (b)
(a) = 0 if either b or a > m. use
eq.(5.21) to rewrite each g1

(a) 6= 0. then (b)
d and gc

1 such that d 6= 0 and c 6= 0 as

and

then

where

d = f (1)
g1

(d) + f (2)

(d+1) +    + f (m)

(m+d1) + gm+1

d+m

1 = f (c)
gc

(1) + f (c+1)

(2) +    + f (m+c1)

(m)

+ gc+m
m+1.







cgc+m
m+1

v =

(b)
(a)

f (a)
(b) +

dgm+1

d+m +

xc=2

xd=2

xa,b=1
(a) = 

(a) 6= 0 only if b  m or a  m. if (b0)

(b)
(a) + ab+1
(b)
(a) + ba+1

if a > b; and
if b > a.

(b)

h f (b0)
(b0) , vi
h f (a0)
(a0) , vi

6= 0 if b0  m; or
6= 0 if a0  m

136

it is possible for (b)
pair of numbers b0 and a0, then

(a0) 6= 0 for a particular

because

if b0  m, and

" f (b0)
(b0) ,
" f (b0)
(b0) ,





xd=2
xc=2

" f (a0)
(a0) ,
" f (a0)
(a0) ,





xd=2
xc=2

dgm+1

d+m# = 0; and
m+1# = 0

cgc+m

dgm+1

d+m# = 0; and
m+1# = 0

cgc+m

if a0  m. if all (b)

(a) s vanish, then

v =



xd=2

dgm+1

d+m +

cgc+m
m+1



xc=2

and so

q.e.d.

h f (m+1)
(m+1) , vi =



xd=2

(m + 1)d f (m+1)

(d+m) 



(m + 1)c f (c+m)
xc=2

(m+1) 6= 0.

137

bibliography

[1] f. c. alcaraz, m. n. barber and m. t. batchelor, phys. rev. lett. 58,

771 (1987).

[2] p. w. anderson, science, 235, 1196 (1987).

[3] f. antonuccio and s. dalley, nucl. phys. b 461, 275 (1996).

[4] f. antonuccio and s. dalley, phys. lett. b 376, 154 (1996).

[5] i. ya. arefeva and i. v. volovich, nucl. phys. b 462, 600 (1996).

[6] v. i. arnold, mathematical methods of classical mechanics, 2nd ed.

(springer-verlag, new york, 1989).

[7] h. asakawa and m. suzuki, j. phys. a: math. gen. 29, 225 (1996).

[8] h. au-yang, b. m. mccoy, j. h. h. perk, s. tang and m.-l. yan,

phys. lett. a 123, 219 (1987)

[9] d. baeriswyl et al. (ed.), the hubbard model: its physics and math-

ematical physics (plenum press, new york, 1995).

[10] t. banks, w. fischler, s. h. shenkar and l. susskind, phys. rev. d

55, 5112 (1997).

[11] p.-a. bares, g. blatter and m. ogata, phys. rev. b 44 130 (1991).

[12] r. j. baxter, exactly solved models in statistical mechanics (academic

press, london, 1982).

[13] r. j. baxter, j. h. h. perk and h. au-yang, phys. lett. a 128, 138

(1988).

138

[14] a. a. belavin, a. m. polyakov and a. b. zamolodchikov, nucl. phys.

b 241, 333 (1984).

[15] f. a. berezin, commun. math. phys. 63, 131 (1978).

[16] o. bergman and c. b. thorn, phys. rev. d 52, 5980 (1995).

[17] h. a. bethe, z. phys. 71, 205 (1931).

[18] b. blackadar, k-theory for operator algebras, msri publications no.

5 (springer-verlag, new york, 1986).

[19] e. brezin, c. itzykson, g. parisi and j. b. zuber, comm. math. phys.

59, 35 (1978).

[20] r. brock et al., rev. mod. phys. 67, 157 (1995).

[21] s. j. brodsky, h.-c. pauli and s. s. pinsky, phys. rep. 301, 1 (1998).

[22] i. l. buchbinder and s. m. kuzenko, ideas and methods in supersym-
metry and supergravity, or a walk through superspace (institute of
physics publishing, bristol, philadelphia, 1995).

[23] s. chadha, g. mahoux and m. l. mehta, j. phys. a: math. gen. 14,

579 (1981).

[24] h. j. chang, hamb. abh. 14, 151 (1941).

[25] v. chari and a. pressley, a guide to quantum groups (cambridge

university press, cambridge, 1994).

[26] s. coleman, aspects of symmetry (cambridge university press, cam-

bridge, 1985).

[27] a. connes, noncommutative geometry (academic press, san diego,

1994).

[28] j. cuntz, commun. math. phys., 57, 173 (1977).

[29] s. dalley and i. r. klebanov, phys. rev. d 47, 2517 (1993).

[30] f. david, nucl. phys. b 257, 45 (1985).

139

[31] b. davies, j. phys. a: math. gen. 23, 2245 (1990).

[32] b. davies, j. math. phys. 32, 2945 (1991).

[33] p. di francesco, p. ginsparg and j. zinn-justin, phys. rep. 254, 1

(1995).

[34] p. di francesco, p. mathieu and d. senechal, conformal field theory

(springer-verlag, new york, 1997).

[35] r. dijkgraaf, e. verlinde and h. verlinde, nucl. phys. b 500, 43

(1997).

[36] j. dixmier, c -algebras (north-holland, amsterdam, 1982).

[37] l. dolan and m. grady, phys. rev. d 25, 1587 (1982).

[38] c. domb, in ising model, edited by c. domb and m. s. green, phase
transitions and critical phenomena, vol. 3 (academic press, london,
new york, 1974).

[39] m. r. douglas, phys. lett. b 238, 176 (1990).

[40] t. eguchi and h. kawai, phys. rev. lett. 48, 1063 (1982).

[41] d. e. evans, publ. rims, kyoto univ. 14, 383 (1980).

[42] s. ferrara, lett. nuovo cimento 13, 629 (1975).

[43] r. p. feynman and a. r. hibbs, quantum mechanics and path inte-

grals (mcgraw hill, new york, 1965).

[44] e. fradkin and l. susskind, phys. rev. d 17, 2637 (1978).

[45] g. von gehlen and v. rittenberg, nucl. phys. b 257, 351 (1985).

[46] p. goddard and d. olive, int. j. mod. phys. a 1, 303 (1986).

[47] h. goldstein, classical mechanics, 2nd ed. (addison-wesley, 1980).

[48] c. gomez, m. ruiz-altaba and g. sierra, quantum groups in two-
dimensional physics (cambridge university press, cambridge, 1996).

140

[49] r. gopakumar and d. j. gross, nucl. phys. b 451, 379 (1995).

[50] m. b. green, j. h. schwarz and e. witten, superstring theory, vols.

1 and 2 (cambridge university press, cambridge, 1987).

[51] m. b. halpern, e. kiritsis, n. a. obers and k. clubok, phys. rep.

265, 1 (1996).

[52] a. hashimoto and i. r. klebanov, mod. phys. lett. a 10, 2639 (1995).

[53] a. honecker, ph. d. thesis, hep-th/9503104.

[54] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 72, 461 (1974).

[55] g. t hooft, nucl. phys. b 75, 461 (1974).

[56] s. howes, l. p. kadano and m. den nijs, nucl. phys. 215, 169 (1983).

[57] j. hubbard, proc. royal soc. london, ser. a 276, 238 (1963).

[58] j. e. humphreys, introduction to lie algebras and representation the-

ory (springer-verlag, new york, 1972).

[59] v. g. kac, innite dimensional lie algebras, 3rd ed. (cambridge uni-

versity press, cambridge, 1990).

[60] v. g. kac and d. h. peterson, lectures on the innite wedge-
representation and the mkp hierarchy, syst`eme dynamiques non-
lineaires:
integrabilite et comportement qualitatif, sem. math. sup.
102 (press univ. montreal, montreal, que. 1986).

[61] v. a. kazakov, phys. lett. b 150, 28 (1985).

[62] v. a. kazakov, phys. lett. a 119, 140 (1986).

[63] i. r. klebanov and l. susskind, nucl. phys. b 309, 175 (1988).

[64] s. kobayashi and k. nomizu, foundations of dierential geometry,

vol. 1, wiley classics library edition (wiley interscience, 1996).

[65] j. b. kogut, rev. mod. phys. 51, 659 (1979).

141

[66] e. kreyszig, introductory functional analysis with applications, wiley

classics library ed. (wiley, new york, 1989).

[67] g. s. krishnaswami and s. g. rajeev, phys. lett. b 441, 429 (1998)

[68] c.-w. h. lee and s. g. rajeev, phys. rev. lett. 80, 2285 (1998).

[69] c.-w. h. lee and s. g. rajeev, nucl. phys. b 529, 656 (1998).

[70] c.-w. h. lee and s. g. rajeev, j. math. phys. 39, 5199 (1998).

[71] c.-w. h. lee and s. g. rajeev, phys. lett. b 436, 91 (1998).

[72] c.-w. h. lee and s. g. rajeev, j. math. phys. 40, 1870 (1999).

[73] c.-w. h. lee and s. g. rajeev, e-print hep-th/9906060, to be published

in the int. j. mod. phys. a.

[74] r. g. leigh, mod. phys. lett. a 4, 2767 (1989).

[75] e. h. lieb and f. y. wu, phys. rev. lett. 20, 1445 (1968).

[76] y. matsumura, n. sakai and t. sakai, phys. rev. d 52, 2446 (1995).

[77] m. l. mehta, comm. math. phys. 79, 327 (1981).

[78] j. mickelsson and s. g. rajeev, lett. math. phys. 21, 173 (1991).

[79] w. miller, jr., symmetry groups and their applications (academic

press, new york and london, 1972), p.376.

[80] g. j. murphy, c -algebras and operator theory (academic press, san

diego, 1990).

[81] l. onsager, phys. rev. 65, 117 (1944).

[82] j. polchinski, string theory, vols. 1 and 2 (cambridge university

press, cambridge, 1998).

[83] s. g. rajeev, int. j. mod. phys. a 9, 5583 (1994).

[84] s. g. rajeev and o. t. turgut, j. math. phys. 37, 637 (1996).

142

[85] s.-s. roan, max planck institute, bonn, report no. mpi/91-70 (1991).

[86] p. schlottmann, phys. rev. b 36 5177 (1987).

[87] p. schlottmann, int. j. mod. phys. b 11, 355 (1997).

[88] h. schultz, j. phys. c: solid state physics, 18, 581 (1985).

[89] g. b. seligman, modular lie algebras, ergebnisse der mathematik
und ihrer grenzgebibete band 40 (springer-verlag, berlin heidelberg,
1967).

[90] g. w. semeno and r. j. szabo, int. j. mod. phys. a 12, 2135 (1997).

[91] e. k. sklyanin, j. phys. a: math. gen. 21, 2375 (1988).

[92] m. f. sohnius, phys. rep. 128, 39.

[93] b. sutherland, phys. rev. b 12, 3795 (1975).

[94] k. szlachanyi and p. vecsernyes, commun. math. phys. 156, 127

(1993).

[95] w. taylor iv, e-print hep-th/9801182.

[96] c. b. thorn, phys. rev. d 20, 1435 (1979).

[97] m. a. virasoro, phys. rev. d 1, 2933 (1970).

[98] j. wess and j. bagger, supersymmetry and supergravity, 2nd edition

(princeton university press, princeton, n.j., 1992).

[99] e. witten, nucl. phys. b 160, 57 (1978).

[100] e. witten, comm. math. phys. 92, 455 (1984).

[101] e. witten, nucl. phys. b 460, 335 (1996).

[102] l. yae, rev. mod. phys. 54, 407 (1982).

[103] c. n. yang, phys. rev. lett. 19, 1312 (1967).

[104] h. zassenhaus, hamb. abh. 13, 1 (1939).

[105] h.-q. zhou, phys. rev. b 54, 41 (1996).

143

