                gravity coupling from micro-black holes

                                               fabio scardigli1
                                    institute for theoretical physics
               university of bern, sidlerstrasse 5, ch-3012 bern, switzerland.

abstract: recently much work has been done in lowering the planck threshold of quantum
gravitational effects (sub-millimeter dimension(s), horava-witten fifth dimension, strings or
branes low energy effects, etc.). with a semi-classical calculation based on hawking
evaporation of planckian micro-black holes, i shall show  in this paper as quantum gravity
effects have to be present also at gut energies. 

pacs  numbers: 04.60 - quantum theory of gravitation

                    

      1 postal address: via europa, 20, 20097 s. donato milanese, milano, italy.
e-mail: scardus@galactica.it

1

1. introduction

as it is well known, the standard picture of supersymmetric gut models predicts that the
couplings of the three gauge interactions (electromagnetic, weak and color) unify to good
accuracy at an energy around  2 x 1016  gev. gravity, on the contrary, presents another
natural energy scale: quantum fluctuations of the gravitational field seem to become important
only when we observe them at the planck length lp= (g 
fluctuations of the order of ep = (  c5 /g)1/2 = 1.2 x 1019 gev create at this scale microblack
holes that modify the topology of spacetime. at the same scale, following the common views,
gravity coupling (that is the"strenght" of gravitational interaction) should become comparable
with those of the other three gauge interactions. this standard picture can be summarized in
the figure 1.

/c3)1/2  = 1.6 x 10-33 cm. energy

during the last years, studies based on string
theories have changed this vision[1]. in the early
times of superstring theory, it was usual to
associate it with (sub)planckian physics, because
the theory provided an ultraviolet regulator of
quantum gravity. this was particularly natural with
weakly coupled heterotic string which gives a
promising qualitative description of supersymmtric
unification scenario at mgut . the simple tree-level
expression for the string scale, mh    gmp (where
mp is the planck mass and g    1/5 is the string
coupling), valid in the context of perturbative heterotic string, enforced these beliefs. more
recently, a number of authors have considered the possibility that the compactification energy
scale is far lower, with a fundamental scale of string theory being as low as tev. since the
gauge couplings are inversely proportional to the volume of the compatification space, this
implies large compactification volumes and therefore large extra dimension(s). by modifying
the compactification radius one can tune the couplings of gauge interactions, including
gravity.

the heterotic string compactified on large volumes
is strongly coupled and, by duality, it is well
described by a weak coupled theory (type i or type
ii). a general property of these theories is that
gauge interactions are localized on p-branes (with 
p  9 ) while gravity propagates in different
spacetime dimensions. precisely, gauge fields and
particles with gauge charges move only on the
"walls" (i.e. on the p-branes) while gravity moves
in the bulk, the spacetime region whose the p-
branes are the boundary[2]. this is the horava-

witten proposal: the branes represent 3+1 dimensional walls in which all the standard model
particles live, while gravity moves in the 4+1 dimensional bulk between the walls. the other

2

six additional dimensions of string theory should be much smaller than that inhabited by
gravity. the wall is then 9+1 dimensional in all and the complete spacetime is 10+1
dimensional. one can choose the size of the 11th dimension so that all four forces meet at the
same common scale, presumably the gut scale (see figure 2)[3] . 
the basic idea is thus very simple: modifying the size of this extra dimension(s) where
gravity propagates, the coupling of gravity can be modified as to raise the unification point
with the other three interactions. and, very cleverly, the couplings of other interactions
remain untouched by this extra dimension. 

2. gravity  coupling  from  micro-black  holes 

the purpose of this section is to show how the threshold of quantum gravitational effects can
be lowered from mp to mgut without the use of large extra dimensions, of 11 dimensional m-
theory or of horava-witten model. also in the framework of semiclassical 4 dimensional
gravity a careful analysis brings to the conclusion that quantum gravity effects should be
present at the gut scale. this result surely enforces also string theorists' speculations because
gives to them a valuable semiclassical (i.e. non-stringy) base. in other words, effects of this
kind should be rather model independent and therefore should belong to real physics and not
only to a particular theoretical framework of predictions. 
let us begin by reminding the process of creation of a micro black hole. we can use the
heisenberg inequality  px   
our high energy situation) to observe that in a space region of width x the metric field can
fluctuate with an amplitude in energy of  e      c / 2 x. if the gravitational radius

/ 2 casted in the form ex    c / 2 (beacause  e   cp in

 associated with the energy  e equals the width x of the space region,  a
micro-black hole originates[4] . this happens when x =lp and the typical energy of the
process is of course the planck energy ep. micro holes are therefore typical quantum
gravitational objects. now, let us suppose that the evaporation mechanism via hawking
radiation hold its validity also at the planck scale, and therefore the micro hole evapotate just
as its bigger brothers. we can calculate the lifetime of a black hole of given inital mass m0 ,
loosing mass via hawking radiation, in a strightforward manner. 
using the stefan-boltzmann law 

we can say that the variation dm of the mass of the hole in a time dt is

where s is the surface of the hole and t is the hawking temperature. for a schwarzschild
black hole we have

3

the equation in dm becomes 

with 

this gives the mass of the hole at time t

and therefore the lifetime  of the hole

in particular, for a micro-black hole of planck mass, we obtain for the lifetime

where

 is the planck time.

we note that an energy fluctuation of the same size of a micro hole would have a lifetime of
only one planck time, if there weren't gravitational effects (i.e. the event horizon of the micro
hole which traps the energy and the hawking evaporation) and if we took into account the
heisenberg principle only. thus we can consider the micro hole, which is a genuine quantum
object, as a sort of  metastable  quantum  state. from the theory of the decay of metastable[5] 
states we can infer that the decay probabilty dp during the time interval (t, t+dt) of the state is
proportional to

4

where  is the wideness in energy of the state. the mean lifetime of the state is

from the lifetime of the quantum state micro  hole, which is about 2000 
the wideness in energy of the metastable micro-black hole state

p , we can estimate

this wideness, as one can immediately see, allows the existence of micro-black holes also at
the gut threshold, well below the planck energy. and probably also at energies around 1-10
tev.

3. conclusion 

the gut energy scale emerges therefore in a natural way from a careful analysis of the
micro-black hole metastable state. this seems to indicate that typical quantum gravity objects
can be present also at energies well below the planck threshold. and it seems to corroborate
from a semiclassical point of view the string theory claim that the fundamental scale for
unification may be the mgut scale. it seems that the quantum gravity scale can be fixed
definitly at the gut scale (and perhaps below) and no more at the planck scale. this agrees
also with the simplest inflationary potential invoked to explain the density fluctuations as
measured by cobe, which goes as m4

gut  v(/mp). (see banks et al. [1]). 

5

    
references

[1] see, for example, i. antoniadis, on possible
modifications of gravitation in the (sub)millimeter
range, lanl hep-ph 9904272 v2;
i. antoniadis, b. pioline, large dimensions and
string physics at a tev, lanl hep-ph 9906480;
t.banks, m.dine, a.e.nelson, constraints on the
theories with large extra dimensions, lanl hep-th
9903019, jhep 9906 (1999) 014.

[2] see, for example, j.polchinski, quantum gravity
at the planck length, lanl hep-th 9812104

[3] p.horava, e.witten, nucl.phys.b 475 (1996)
94-114;
m.j.duff, scientific american, february 1998,
p.54-59.

[4]see, for example, f. scardigli, phys.lett.b 452
(1999) 39-44 

[5]see, for example, l.d.landau, e.m.lifshitz,
quantum mechanics, pergamon press.

6

