9
9
9
1

 
l
u
j
 

9

 
 

1
v
7
6
0
7
0
9
9
/
h
t
-
p
e
h
:
v
i
x
r
a

ba-th/99-345
hep-th/9907067

elementary introduction to pre-big bang

cosmology and to the relic graviton

background

m. gasperini

dipartimento di fisica , universit`a di bari, via g. amendola 173, 70126 bari, italy

and istituto nazionale di fisica nucleare, sezione di bari, bari, italy

abstract

this is a contracted version of a series of lectures for graduate and
undergraduate students given at the vi seminario nazionale di fisica
teorica (parma, september 1997), at the second int. conference
around virgo (pisa, september 1998), and at the second sigrav
school on gravitational waves in astrophysics, cosmology and string
theory (center a. volta, como, april 1999). the aim is to provide
an elementary, self-contained introduction to string cosmology and, in
particular, to the background of relic cosmic gravitons predicted in the
context of the so-called pre-big bang scenario. no special preparation
is required besides a basic knowledge of general relativity and of standard
(inationary) cosmology. all the essential computations are reported
in full details either in the main text or in the appendices. for a
deeper and more complete approach to the pre-big bang scenario the
interested reader is referred to the updated collection of papers available
at http://www.to.infn.it/~gasperin/.



to appear in proc. of the second sigrav school on

gravitational waves in astrophysics, comology and string theory

villa olmo, como, 19-24 april 1999  eds. v. gorini et al.

1

elementary introduction to pre-big bang cosmology
and to the relic graviton background

m. gasperini
dipartimento di fisica , universit`a di bari, via g. amendola 173, 70126 bari, italy
istituto nazionale di fisica nucleare, sezione di bari, bari, italy

abstract. this is a contracted version of a series of lectures for graduate and
undergraduate students given at the vi seminario nazionale di fisica teorica
(parma, september 1997), at the second int. conference around virgo (pisa,
september 1998), and at the second sigrav school on gravitational waves in
astrophysics, cosmology and string theory (center a. volta, como, april 1999).
the aim is to provide an elementary, self-contained introduction to string cosmology
and, in particular, to the background of relic cosmic gravitons predicted in the context
of the so-called pre-big bang scenario. no special preparation is required besides a
basic knowledge of general relativity and of standard (inationary) cosmology. all
the essential computations are reported in full details either in the main text or
in the appendices. for a deeper and more complete approach to the pre-big bang
scenario the interested reader is referred to the updated collection of papers available
at http://www.to.infn.it/~gasperin/.

preprint ba-th/99-345

e-print archives: hep-th/9907067

1. introduction

the purpose of these lectures is to provide an introduction to the background of relic
gravitational waves expected in a string cosmology context, and to discuss its main
properties. to this purpose, it seems to be appropriate to include a short presentation
of string cosmology, in order to explain the basic ideas underlying the so-called pre-big
bang scenario, which is one of the most promising scenarios for the production of a
detectable graviton background of cosmological origin.

after a short, qualitative presentation of the pre-big bang models, i will concentrate
on the details of the cosmic graviton spectrum: i will discuss the theoretical predictions
for dierent models, and i will compare the predictions with existing phenomenological
constraints, and with the expected sensitivities of the present gravity wave detectors. a
consistent part of these lectures will thus be devoted to introduce the basic notions of
cosmological perturbation theory, which are required to compute the graviton spectrum
and to understand why the amplication of tensor metric perturbations, at high
frequency, is more ecient in string cosmology than in the standard inationary context.

 e-mail: gasperini@ba.infn.it.

pre-big bang cosmology

2

curvature  scale  versus  time
curvature  scale  versus  time

big  bang
big  bang
singularity
singularity

present  time
present  time

standard    cosmology
standard    cosmology

time

de  sitter

standard    inflation
standard    inflation

time

ms

string  pert.
  vacuum

pre-big  bang

post-big  bang

string    cosmology
string    cosmology

time

figure 1. time evolution of the curvature scale in the standard cosmological scenario,
in the conventional inationary scenario, and in the string cosmology scenario.

let me start by noting that a qualitative, but eective representation of the
main dierence between string cosmology and standard, inationary cosmology can
be obtained by plotting the curvature scale of the universe versus time, as illustrated
in fig. 1.

according to the cosmological solutions of the so-called standard scenario [1],
the spacetime curvature decreases in time. as we go back intime the curvature grows
monotonically, and blows up at the initial big bang singularity, as illustrated in the
top part of fig. 1 (a similar plot, in the standard scenario, also describes the behaviour
of the temperature and of the energy density of the gravitational sources).

according to the standard inationary scenario [2], on the contrary, the universe in
the past is expected to enter a de sitter, or almost de sitter phase, during which the
curvature tends to stay frozen at a nearly constant value. from a classical point of view,
however, this scenario has a problem, since a phase of expansion at constant curvature
cannot be extended back in time for ever [3], for reasons of geodesic completeness. this
point was clearly stressed also in alan guths recent survey of inationary cosmology
[4]:

... nevertheless, since ination appears to be eternal only into the future, but

pre-big bang cosmology

3

not to the past, an important question remains open. how did all start? although
eternal ination pushes this question far into the past, and well beyond the range of
observational tests, the question does not disappear.

a possible anwer to this question, in a quantum cosmology context, is that the
universe emerges in a de sitter state from nothing [5] (or from some unspecied
vacuum), though a process of quantum tunnelling. i will not discuss the quantum
approach in these lectures, but let me note that the computation of the transition
probability requires an appropriate choice of the boundary conditions [6], which in
the context of standard ination are imposed ad hoc when the universe is in an
unknown state, deeply inside the non-perturbative, quantum gravity regime. in a string
cosmology context, on the contrary, the initial conditions are referrred asymptotically
to a low-energy, classical state which is known, and well controlled by the low-energy
string eective action [7].

from a classical point of view, however, the answer to the above question  what
happens to the universe before the phase of constant curvature, which cannot last for
ever  is very simple, as we are left only with two possibilities. either the curvature
starts growing again, at some point in the past (but in this case the singularity problems
remains, it is simply shifted back in time), or the curvature starts decreasing.

in this second case we are just led to the string cosmology scenario, illustrated in
the bottom part of fig. 1. string theory suggests indeed for the curvature a specular
behaviour (or better a dual behaviour, as we shall see in a moment) around the
time axis. as we go back in time the curvature grows, reaches a maximum controlled
by the string scale, and then decreases towards a state which is asymptotically at
and with negligible interactions (vanishing coupling constants), the so-called string
perturbative vacuum. in this scenario the phase of high, but nite (nearly planckian)
curvature is what replaces the big bang singularity of the standard scenario. it comes
thus natural, in a string cosmology context, to call pre-big bang [8] the initial phase
with growing curvature, in contrast to the subsequent, standard, post-big bang  phase
with decreasing curvature.

at this point, a number of questions may arise naturally. in particular:

 motivations: why such a cosmological scenario, characterized by a bell-like
shape of the curvature, seems to emerge in a string cosmology context and not, for
istance, in the context of standard cosmology based on the einstein equations?

 kinematics: in spite of the dierences, is the kinematic of the pre-big bang phase
still appropriate to solve the well known problems (horizon, atness ...) of the
standard scenario? after all, we do not want to loose the main achievements of the
conventional inationary models.

 phenomenology: are there phenomenological consequence that can discriminate
between string cosmology models and other inationary models? and are such
eects observable, at least in principle?

pre-big bang cosmology

4

in the following sections i will present a quick discussion of the three points listed

above.

2. motivations: duality symmetry

there are various motivations, in the context of string theory, suggesting a cosmological
scenario like that illustrated in fig. 1. all the motivations are however related, more
or less directly, to an important property of string theory, the duality symmetry of the
eective action.

to illustrate this point, let me start by recalling that in general relativity the

solutions of the standard einstein action,

s = 

1

2d1

p

z dd+1xq|g| r

(2.1)

(d is the number of spatial dimensions, and p = m1
is the planck length scale), are
invariant under time-reversal transformations. consider, for instance, a homogeneous
and isotropic solution of the cosmological equations, represented by a scale factor a(t):

p

ds2 = dt2  a2(t)dx2
i .

(2.2)
if a(t) is a solution, then also a(t) is a solution. on the other hand, when t goes into
t, the hubble parameter h = a/a changes sign,

a(t)  a(t),

h = a/a  h.

(2.3)

to any standard cosmological solution h(t), describing decelerated expansion and
h < 0), is thus associated a reected solution, h(t),
decreasing curvature (h > 0,
describing a contracting universe because h is negative.
this is the situation in general relativity. in string theory the action, in addition
to the metric, contains at least another fundamental eld, the scalar dilaton . at the
tree-level, namely to lowest order in the string coupling and in the higher-derivatives
() string corrections, the eective action which guarantees the absence of conformal
anomalies for the motion of strings in curved backgrounds (see the apppendix a) can
be written as:

1

2d1

s

s

z dd+1xq|g| ehr + ()2i

s = 
( s = m1
is the fundamental string length scale; see the appendix b for notations
and sign conventions).
in addition to the invariance under time-reversal, the above
action is also invariant under the dual inversion of the scale factor, accompanied by
an appropriate transformation of the dilaton (see [9] and the rst paper of ref.
[8]).
more precisely, if a(t) is a solution for the cosmological background (2.2) , then a1(t)
is also a solution, provided the dilaton transforms as:

(2.4)

a  a = a1,

   =   2d ln a

(2.5)

(this transformation implements a particular case of t -duality symmetry, usually called
scale factor duality, see the appendix b).

pre-big bang cosmology

5

expanding
expanding
pre-big  bang
pre-big  bang

h

expanding
expanding
post-big  bang
post-big  bang

~
h  (-t)

h  (-t)

h (t)

~
h (t)

t

contracting
contracting
pre-big  bang
pre-big  bang

contracting
contracting
post-big  bang
post-big  bang

figure 2. the four branches of a low-energy string cosmology background.

when a goes into a1, the hubble parameter h again goes into h so that, to
each one of the two solutions related by time reversal, h(t) and h(t), is associated a
dual solution, h(t) and h(t), respectively (see fig. 2). the space of solutions is thus
indeed, because of the combined invariance
reacher in a string cosmology context.
under the transformations (2.3) and (2.5), a cosmological solution has in general
four branches: two branches describe expansion (positive h), two branches describe
contraction (negative h). also, as illustrated in fig. 2, for two branches the curvature
scale ( h 2) grows in time, with a typical pre-big bang behaviour, while for the other
two branches the curvature scale decreases, with a typical post-big bang behaviour.
it follows, in this context, that to any given decelerated expanding solution, h(t) >
h(t) < 0 (typical of the standard cosmological scenario),
0, with decreasing curvature,
is always associated a dual partner describing accelerated expansion, h(t) > 0,
h(t) > 0. this doubling of solutions has no analogue in the
and growing curvature,
context of the einstein cosmology, where there is no dilaton, and the duality symmetry
cannot be implemented.

it should be stressed, before proceeding further, that the duality symmetry is
not restricted to the case of homogeneous and isotropic backgrounds like (2.2), but is
expected to be a general property of the solutions of the string eective action (possibly
valid at all orders [10], with the appropriate generalizations). the inversion of the scale
factor, in particular, and the associated transformation (2.5), is only a special case
of a more general, o(d, d) symmetry of the string eective action, which is manifest
already at the lowest order. in fact, the tree-level action in general contains, besides
the metric and the dilaton, also a second rank antisymmetric tensor b, the so-called
kalb-ramond universal axion:

s = 

1

2d1

s

z dd+1xq|g| e(cid:20)r + ()2 

given a background, even anisotropic, but with d abelian isometries, this action is
invariant under a global, pseudo-orthogonal group of o(d, d) transformations which mix

1

12 (cid:16)[b](cid:17)2(cid:21) .

(2.6)

pre-big bang cosmology

6

in a non-trivial way the components of the metric and of the antisymmetric tensor,
leaving invariant the so-called shifted dilaton :

 =   lnq|detgij|.

in the particular, cosmological case in which we are interested in, the d isometries
correspond to spatial traslations (namely, we are in the case of a homogeneous, bianchi
i type metric background). for this background, the action (2.6) can be rewritten in
terms of the 2d  2d symmetric matrix m, dened by the spatial components of the
metric, gij, and of the axion, bij, as:

(2.7)

(2.8)

(2.9)

b  bij,

g  gij,

m =   g1

bg1 g  bg1b! .

g1b

in the cosmic time gauge, the action takes the form (see the appendix b)

s = 

s

2 z dt e(cid:20)( )2 +

1
8

tr

m (m1)(cid:21) ,

and is manifestly invariant under the set of global transformations [11]:

  ,

m  t m,

t  = ,

 =   0

i

i

0! ,

(2.10)

where i is the d-dimensional unit matrix, and  is the o(d, d) metric in o-diagonal
form. the transformation (2.5), representing scale factor duality, is now reproduced as
a particular case of (2.10) with the trivial o(d, d) matrix  = , and for an isotropic
background with b = 0.

this o(d, d) symmetry holds even in the presence of matter sources, provided they
transform according to the string equations of motion in the given background [12]. in
the perfect uid approximation, for instance, the inversion of the scale factor corresponds
to a reection of the equation of state, which preserves however the shifted energy
 = |detgij|1/2:

a  a = a1,

  ,

p/  p/,

  

(2.11)

a detailed discussion of the duality symmetry is outside the purpose of these
lectures. what is important, in our context, is the simultaneous presence of duality
and time-reversal symmetry: by combining these two symmetries, in fact, it is possible
in principle to obtain cosmological solutions of the self-dual type, characterized by
the conditions

a(t) = a1(t),

(t) = (t).

(2.12)

they are important, as they connect in a smooth way the phase of growing and
decreasing curvature, and also describe a smooth evolution from the string perturbative
vacuum (i.e.
the asymptotic no-interaction state in which    and the string
coupling is vanishing, gs = exp(/2)  0), to the present cosmological phase in which
the dilaton is frozen, with an expectation value [13] hgsi = ms/mp  0.3  0.03 (see
fig. 3).

pre-big bang cosmology

7

h

gs = exp (

t

t

figure 3. time evolution of the curvature scale h and of the string coupling
gs = exp(/2)  ms/mp, for a typical self-dual solution of the string cosmology
equations.

the explicit occurrence of self-dual solutions and, more generally, of solutions
describing a complete and smooth transition between the phase of pre- and post-big
bang evolution, seems to require in general the presence of higher order (higher loop
and/or higher derivative) corrections to the string eective action [14] (see however

[15, 16]). so, in order to give only a simple example of combined {duality l time-
reversal} transformation, let me consider here the low-energy, asymptotic regimes, which
are well described by the lowest order eective action.

by adding matter sources,

string cosmology equations for a d = 3, homogeneous,
at background can be written as (see appendix c, eqs.
respectively):

in the perfect uid form, to the action (2.4), the
isotropic and conformally
(c.16), (c.18), (c.15),

2  6h  + 6h 2 = e,
h  h  + 3h 2 =
ep,
2  + 6h   2  6 h  12h 2 = 0.

1
2

(2.13)

for p = /3, in particular, they are exactly solved by the standard solution with constant
dilaton (see eqs. (c.32), (c.33)),

a  t1/2,

 = 3p  a4,

 = const,

t  +,

(2.14)

describing decelerated expansion and decreasing curvature scale:

a > 0,

a < 0,

h < 0.

(2.15)

this is exactly the radiation-dominated solution of the standard cosmological scenario,
based on the einstein equations.
in string cosmology, however, to this solution is
associated a dual complement, i.e. an additional solution which can be obtained
by applying on the background (2.14) a time-reversal transformation t  t, and the
duality transformation (2.11):

a  (t)1/2,

t  , (2.16)
this is still an exact solution of the equations (2.13) (see the appendix c), describing
inationary) expansion, with growing dilaton and growing
however accelerated (i.e.

  3 ln(t),

 = 3p  a2,

pre-big bang cosmology

curvature scale:

a > 0,

a > 0,

h > 0.

8

(2.17)

we note, for future reference, that accelerated expansion with growing curvature is
usually called superination [17], or pole-ination, to distinguish it from the more
conventional power-ination, with decreasing curvature.

the two solutions (2.14) and (2.16) provide a particular, explicit representation of
the scenario illustrated in fig. 3, in the two asympotic regimes of t large and positive,
and t large and negative, respectively. the duality symmetry seems thus to provide an
important motivation for the pre-big bang scenario, as it leads naturally to introduce
a phase of growing curvature, and is a crucial ingredient for the bell-like scenario of
fig. 3.

it should be noted that pure scale factor duality, by itself, is not enough to convert
a phase of decreasing into growing curvature (see for instance fig. 2, where it is clearly
shown that h and h, in the same temporal range, lead to the same evolution of the
curvature scale, h 2  h 2). time reection is thus necessarily required, if we want to
invert the curvature behaviour. from this point of view, time-reversal symmetry is more
important than duality.

in a thermodynamic context, however, duality by itself is able to suggests the
existence of a primordial cosmological phase with specular properties with respect to
the present, standard cosmological phase [18]. it must be stressed, in addition, that it
is typically in the cosmology of extended objects that the phase of growing curvature
may describe accelerated expansion instead of contraction, and that the growth of the
curvature may be regularized, instead of blowing up to a singularity. for instance, it is
with the string dilaton [8], or with a network of strings self-consistently coupled to the
background [19], that we are naturally lead to superination. also, in quantum theories
of extended objects, it is the minimal, fundamental lenght scale of the theory that is
expected to bound the curvature, and to drive superination to a phase of constant,
limiting curvature [20] asymptotically approaching de sitter, as explicitly checked in
a string theory context [21]. duality symmetries, on the other hand, are typical of
extended objects (and of strings, in particular), so that it is certainly justied to think
of duality as of a fundamental motivation and ingredient of the pre-big bang scenario.
duality is an important symmetry of modern theoretical physics, and to conclude
this section i would like to present an analogy with another very important symmetry,
namely supersymmetry (see table i).

according to supersymmetry, to any bosonic state is associated a fermionic partner,
and viceversa. from the existence of bosons that we know to be present in nature, if
we believe in supersymmetry, we can predict the existence of fermions not yet observed,
like the photino, the gravitino, and so on.

in the same way, according to duality and time-reversal, to any geometrical state
with decreasing curvature is associated a dual partner with growing curvature. on
is in the standard post-big bang phase,
the other hand, our universe, at present,

pre-big bang cosmology

9

supersymmetry duality + time-reversal

pair of partners

{bosons, fermions}

{growing curvature, decreasing curvature}

known states

photons, gravitons, ...

decelerated, standard post-big bang

predicted

photinos, gravitinos, ...

accelerated, inationary pre-big bang

table 1. analogy between supersymmetry and duality.

with decreasing curvature.
if we believe that duality has to be implemented, even
approximately, in the course of the cosmological evolution, we can then predict the
existence of a phase, in the past, characterized by growing curvature and by a typical
pre-big bang evolution.

3. kinematics: shrinking horizons

if we accept, at least as a working hypothesis, the possibility that our universe had in
the past a dual complement, with growing curvature, we are lead to the second of
the three questions listed in section 1: is the kinematics of the pre-big bang phase still
appropriate to solve the problems of the standard inationary scenario? the anwer is
positive, but in a non-trival way.

consider,

for instance, the present cosmological phase. today the dilaton is
expected to be constant, and the universe should be appropriately described by the
einstein equations. the gravitational part of such equations contains two types of terms:
terms controlling the geometric curvature of a space-like section, evolving in time like
a2, and terms controlling the gravitational kinetic energy, i.e. the spacetime curvature
scale, evolving like h 2. according to present observations the spatial curvature term is
non-dominant, i.e.

r =

a2
h 2 

spatial curvature

spacetime curvature

< 1.

(3.1)

according to the standard cosmological solutions, on the other hand, the above

ratio must grow in time. in fact, by putting a  t,

r  a2  t2(1),

(3.2)

so that r keeps growing both in the matter-dominated ( = 2/3) and in the radiation-
dominated ( = 1/2) era. thus, as we go back in time, r becomes smaller and smaller,
and when we set initial conditions (for instance, at the planck scale) we have to impose
an enormous ne tuning of the spatial curvature term, with respect to the other terms
of the cosmological equations. this is the so-called atness problem.

pre-big bang cosmology

10

the problem can be solved if we introduce in the past a phase (usually called
ination), during which the value of r was decreasing, for a time long enough to
compensate the subsequent growth during the phase of standard evolution.
it is
important to stress that this requirement,
in general, can be implemented by two
physically dierent classes of backgrounds.

consider for simplicity a power-law evolution of the scale factor in cosmic time,
with a power , so that the time-dependence of r is the one given in eq. (3.2). the two
possible classes of backgrounds corresponding to a decreasing r are then the following:

 class i: a  t,  > 1, t  +. this class of backgrounds corresponds to what is
conventionally called power ination, describing a phase of accelerated expansion
a > 0, a > 0, h < 0. this class contains, as a
and decreasing curvature scale,
h = 0, i.e.
limiting case, the standard de sitter ination,   , a  eht,
accelerated exponential expansion at constant curvature.

 class ii: a  (t),  < 1, t  0. this is the class of backgrounds corresponding

to the string cosmology scenario. there are two possible subclasess:

iia :  < 0, describing superination, i.e. accelerated expansion with growing

curvature scale, a > 0, a > 0, h > 0;

iib : 0 <  < 1, describing accelerated contraction and growing curvature scale,

a < 0, a < 0, h < 0.

a phase of growing curvature, if accelerated like in the pre-big bang scenario, can
thus provide an unconventional, but acceptable, inationary solution of the atness
problem (the same is true for the other standard kinematical problems, see [8]). it is
important to stress, in particular, that the two subclasses iia, iib, do not correspond
to dierent models, as they are simply dierent kinematical representation of the same
scenario in two dierent frames, the string frame (s-frame), in which the eective action
takes the form (2.4),

s(g, ) = z dd+1xq|g| e [r + g] ,

(3.3)

and the einstein frame (e-frame), in which the dilaton is minimally coupled to the
metric, and has a canonical kinetic term:

s(g, ) = z dd+1xq|g| (cid:20) r 

g



1
2

(cid:21) .

(3.4)

in order to illustrate this point, we shall proceed in two steps. first we will show
that, through a eld redenition g = g(g, ),  = (g, ),, it is always possible to
move from the s-frame to the e-frame; second, we will show that, by applying such a
redenition, a superinationary solution obtained in the s-frame becomes an accelerated
contraction in the e-frame, and viceversa.

we shall consider, for simplicity, an isotropic, spatially at background with d

spatial dimensions, and we set:

g = diag(cid:16)n 2,a2ij(cid:17) ,

 = (t),

(3.5)

pre-big bang cosmology

11

where g00 = n 2 is to be xed by an arbitrary choice of gauge. for this background we
get:

0i

j = hj
i ,

ij

0 =

a a
n 2 ij,

0

00 =

n
n

= f

1

r =

n 2 h2df h  2d h  d(d + 1)h 2i ,

and the s-frame action (3.3) becomes

(3.6)

(3.7)

(3.8)

s(g, ) = z dd+1x

ade

n h2df h  2d h  d(d + 1)h 2 + 2i

modulo a total derivative, we can eliminate the rst two terms, and the action takes
the quadratic form

s(g, ) = z dd+1x

ade

n h 2  2dh  + d(d  1)h 2i

where, as expected, n plays the role of a lagrange multiplier (no kinetic term in the
action).

in the e-frame the variables are n , a, , and the action(3.4), after integration by

part, takes the canonical form

s(g, ) = z dd+1x

ad

n (cid:20)

1
2

2



+ d(d  1)h 2(cid:21)

(3.9)

a quich comparison with eq. (3.8) leads nally to the eld redenition (no coordinate
transformation!) connecting the einstein and string frame:

a = ae/(d1),

n = ne/(d1),

in fact, the above transformation gives

 = s 2
d  1

.

h = h 


d  1

and, when inserted into eq. (3.9), exactly reproduces the s-frame action (3.8).

(3.10)

(3.11)

consider now a superinationary, pre-big bang solution obtained in the s-frame,

for instance the isotropic, d-dimensional vacuum solution

a = (t)1/d,

e = (t)(d+1),

t < 0,

t  0

(3.12)

(aee appendix b, eqs. (b.21), (b.22)), and look for the corresponding e-frame solution.
the above solution is valid in the syncronous gauge, n = 1, and if we choose, for
instance, the syncronous gauge also in the e-frame, we can x n by the condition:

ndt  ne/(d1)dt = dt,

which denes the e-frame cosmic time, t, as:

dt = e/(d1)dt.

after integration

d1
d+d ,

t  t

(3.13)

(3.14)

(3.15)

pre-big bang cosmology

12

and the transformed solution takes the form:

e

 = (t)q 2(d1)

d

a = (t)1/d,
one can easily check that this solution describes accelerated contraction with growing
dilaton and growing curvature scale:

t  0.

t < 0,

(3.16)

,

da
dt

< 0,

d2a
dt2

< 0,

d h
dt

< 0,

d 
dt

> 0.

(3.17)

the same result applies if we transform other isotropic solutions from the string to the
einstein frame, for instance the perfect uid solution of appendix c, eq. (c.32). we
leave this simple exercise to the interested reader.

having discussed the dynamical equivalence (in spite of the kinematical
it seems
dierences) of the two classes of string cosmology metrics, iia and iib,
appropriate at this point to stress the main dynamical dierence between standard
ination, class i metrics, and pre-big bang ination, class ii metrics. such a dierence
can be conveniently illustrated in terms of the proper size of the event horizon, relative
to a given comoving observer.

consider in fact the the proper distance, de(t), between the surface of the event
horizon and a comoving observer, at rest at the origin of an isotropic, conformally at
background [22]:

de(t) = a(t)z tm

t

dta1(t),

(3.18)

here tm is the maximal allowed extension, towards the future, of the cosmic time
coordinate for the given background manifold. the above integral coverges for all the
above classes of accelerated (expanding or contracting) scale factors. in the case of class
i metrics we have, in particular,

de(t) = tz 

t

dtt =

t

  1  h1(t)

for power-law ination ( > 1, t > 0), and

de(t) = ehtz 

t

dteht = h1

for de sitter ination. for class ii metrics ( < 1, t < 0) we have instead

(3.19)

(3.20)

(3.21)

de(t) = (t)z 0

t

dt(t) =

(t)
1    h1(t).

in all cases the proper size de(t) evolves in time like the so-called hubble horizon (i.e. the
inverse of the hubble parameter), and then like the inverse of the curvature scale. the
size of the horizon is thus constant or growing in standard ination (class i), decreasing
in pre-big bang ination (class ii), both in the s-frame and in the e-frame.

such an important dierence is clearly illustrated in fig. 4 and fig. 5, where the
dashed lines represent the evolution of the horizon, the full lines the evolution of the
scale factor. the shaded area at time t0 represents the portion of universe inside our
present hubble radius. as we go back in time, according to the standard scenario, the

pre-big bang cosmology

13

standard
evolution

a

de sitter
inflation

constant    horizon
constant    horizon

figure 4. qualitative evolution of the hubble horizon (dashed curve) and of the scale
factor (full curve) in the standard inationary scenario.

horizon shrinks linearly, (h1  t), but the decrease of the scale factor is slower so that,
at the beginning of the phase of standard evolution (t = t1), we end up with a causal
horizon much smaller than the portion of universe that we presently observe. this is
the well known horizon problem of the standard scenario.

in fig. 4 the phase of standard evolution is preceeded in time by a phase of standard
de sitter ination. going back in time, for t < t1, the scale factor keeps shrinking, and
our portion of universe re-enters inside the hubble radius during a phase of constant
(or slightly growing in time) horizon.

in fig. 5 the standard evolution is preceeded in time by a phase of pre-big bang
ination, with growing curvature . the universe re-enters the hubble radius during
a phase of shrinking horizon. to emphasize the dierence, i have plotted the evolution
of the scale factor both in the expanding s-frame, a(t), and in the contracting e-frame,
a(t). unlike in standard ination, the proper size of the initial portion of the universe
may be very large in strings (or planck) units, but not larger than the initial horizon
itself [23], as emphasized in the picture. the initial horizon is large because the initial
curvature scale is small, in string units, hi  1/s.

this is a basic consequence of the choice of the initial state which, in the pre-big
bang scenario, approaches the at, cold and empty string perturbative vacuum [8], and
which is to be contrasted to the extremely curved, hot and dense initial state of the
standard scenario, characterizing a universe which starts inating at the planck scale,
hi  1/p.

4. open problems and phenomenological consequences

in order to give a honest presentation of the pre-big bang scenario, it is fair to say
that the string cosmology models are not free from various (more or less important)

pre-big bang cosmology

14

standard
evolution

pre-big bang
   inflation

a

a



shrinking    horizon
shrinking    horizon

figure 5. qualitative evolution of the hubble horizon (dashed curve) and of the scale
factor (full curve) in the pre-big bang inationary scenario, in the s-frame, a(t), and
in the e-frame, a(t).

diculties, and that many aspects of the scenario are still unclear. a detailed discussion
of such aspects is outside the purpose of this paper, but i would like to mention here
at least three important open problems. presented in time-ordered form (from the
beginning to the end of ination) they are the following.

 the rst concerns the initial conditions, and in particular the decay of the string
perturbative vacuum. the question is whether or not the switching on of a long
inationary phase requires ne-tuning. originally raised in [24], this problem was
recently re-proposed as a fundamental diculty of the pre-big bang scenario [25]
(see however [23, 26, 27, 28]).

 the second concerns the transition from the pre- to the post-big bang phase, which
is expected to occur in the high curvature and strong coupling regime. there is
a quantum cosmology approach, based on the scattering of the wheeler-de witt
wave function in minisuperspace [7], but the problem seems to require, in general,
the introduction of higher derivative () and quantum loop corrections [21, 29] in
the string eective action (see however [15, 16]).

 the third problem concerns the nal matching to the standard friedman-
robertson-walker phase, with a transition from the dilaton-dominated to the
radiation-dominated regime, and all the associated problems of dilaton oscillations,
re-heating, pre-heating, particle production, entropy production [30], and so on.

all these problems are under active investigation, and further work is certainly
needed for a nal answer. however, even assuming that all the problems will be solved
in a satisfactory way, we are left eventually with a further question, the third one
listed in the introduction, which is the basic question (in my opinion). are there
phenomenological consequences that can discriminate string cosmology from the other

pre-big bang cosmology

15

inationary scenarios? and, in particular, are such consequences observable (at least in
principle) ?

the answer is positive. there are many phenomenological dierences, even if all
the dierences seem to have the same common denominator, i.e. the fact that the
quantum uctuations of the background elds are amplied in dierent models with
dierent spectra. the spectrum, in particular, tends to follow the behaviour of the
curvature scale during the phase of ination. in the standard scenario the curvature
is constant or decreasing, so that the spectrum tends to be at, or decreasing with
frequency.
in string cosmology the curvature is growing, and the spectrum tends to
grow with frequency.

in the following sections i will discuss in detail this eect for the case of tensor
metric perturbations. here i would like to note that the phenomenological consequences
of the pre-big bang scenario can be classied into three dierent types, depending on the
possibility of their observation: type i eects, referring to observations to be performed
in a not so far future (20-30 years?); type ii eects, referring to observations to be
performed in a near future (a few years); type iii eects, referring to observations
already (in part) performed. to conclude this very quick presentation of the pre-big
bang scenario, let me give one example for each type of phenomenological eect.

 type i: the production of a relic graviton background that, in the frequency range
of conventional detectors ( 102  103 hz), is much higher (by 8  9 orders of
magnitude) than the background expected in conventional ination [8, 31, 32, 33].
the sensitivity of the presently operating gravitational antennas is not enough
to detect it, however, and we have to wait for the advanced, second generation
interferometric detectors (ligo [34], virgo [35]), or for interferometers in space
(lisa [36]).

 type ii:

the large scale cmb anisotropy seeded by the inhomogeneous
uctuations of a massless [37] or massive [38] axion background. metric uctuations
are indeed too small, on the horizon scale, to be responsible for the temperature
anisotropies detected by cobe [39]; the axion spectrum, on the contrary, can be
suciently at [40] for that purpose. such a dierent origin of the anisotropy may
lead to non-gaussianity, or to dierences (with respect to the standard inationary
scenario) in the height and position of the rst doppler peak of the spectrum [41].
such dierencs could be soon conrmed, or disproved, by the planned satellite
observations (map [42], planck [43], ... ).

 type iii: the production of primordial magnetic elds strong enough to seed the
galactic dynamo, and to explain the origin of the cosmic magnetic elds observed
on a large (galactic, intergalactic) scale [44]. in the standard inationary scenario,
in fact, the amplication of the vacuum uctuations of the electromagnetic eld
is not ecient enough [45], because of the conformal invariance of the maxwell
equations. in string cosmology, on the contrary, the electromagnetic eld is also
coupled to the dilaton, and the uctuations are amplied by the accelerated growth

pre-big bang cosmology

16

of the dilaton during the phase of pre-big bang evolution.

finally, i wish to mention a further important phenomenogical eect, typical of
string cosmology (and that i do not know how to classify within the tree types dened
above, however): dilaton production, i.e. the amplication of the dilatonic uctuations
of the vacuum, and the formation of a cosmic background of relic dilatons [46].

the possibility of detecting such a background is strongly dependent on the value
of the dilaton mass, that we do not known, at present. if dilatons are massless [47],
then the amplitude and the spectrum of the relic background should be very similar
to those of the graviton background, and the relic dilatons could be possibly detected,
in the future, by gravitational antennas able to respond to scalar modes, unless their
coupling to bulk matter is too small [47], of course.

if dilatons are massive, the mass has to be large enough to be compatible with
existing tests of the equivalence principle and of macroscopic gravitational forces. in
addition, there is a rich phenomenology of cosmological bounds, which leaves open only
two possible mass windows [46]. interestingly enough, however, in the allowed light mass
sector the dilaton lifetime is longer than the present age of the universe, and the dilaton
fraction of critical energy density ranges from 0.01 to 1:
in this context, the dilaton
becomes a new, interesting dark matter candidate (see [48] for a detailed discussion of
the allowed mass windows, and of the possibility that light but non-relativistic dilatons
could represent today a signicant fraction of dark matter on a cosmological scale). i
have no idea, however, of how to detect directly such a massive dilaton background,

because the mass is light, but it is heavy enough (> 104ev) to be far outside the

sensitivity range of resonant gravitational detectors.

the rest of this lecture will be devoted to discuss various theoretical and
phenomenological aspects of graviton production, in a general cosmological context and,
in particular, in the context of the pre-big bang scenario. let me start by recalling
some basic notions of cosmological perturbation theory, which are required for the
computation of the graviton spectrum.

5. cosmological perturbation theory

the standard approach to cosmological perturbation theory is to start with a set of
non-perturbed equations, for instance the einstein or the string cosmology equations,

g = t,

(5.1)

to expand the meric and the matter elds around a given background solution,

g  g(0)

 + (1)g,

t  t (0)

 + (1)t,

g(0)

 = t (0)
 ,

(5.2)

and to obtain, to rst order, a linearized set of equations describing the classical
evolution of perturbations,

(1)g = (1)t.

(5.3)

pre-big bang cosmology

17

in principle, the procedure is simple and straightforward. in practice, however, we have
to go through a series of formal steps, that i list here in chronological order:

 choice of the frame;
 choice of the gauge;
 normalization of the amplitude;
 computation of the spectrum.

5.1. choice of the frame

the choiche of the frame is the choice of the basic set of elds (metric included) used
to parametrize the action. the action, in general, can be expressed in terms of dierent
elds.
in string cosmology, for instance, there is a preferred frame, the s-frame, in
which the lowest order gravi-dilaton action takes the form (3.3). it is preferred because
the metric appearing in the action is the same as the sigma-model metric to which
test strings are minimally coupled (see appendix a): with respect to this metric, the
motion of free strings is then geodesics. it is always possible, however, through the eld
redenition

g = ge2/(d1),

,

(5.4)

 = s 2
d  1

to introduce the more conventional e-frame (3.4) in which the dilaton is minimally
coupled to the metric, with a canonical kinetic term.

in the two frames the eld equations are dierent, and the perturbation equations
are also dierent. this seems to rise a potential problem: which frame is to be used to
evaluate the physical eects of the cosmological perturbations?

the problem is only apparent, however, because physical observables (like the
perturbation spectrum) are the same in both frames. the reason is that there is a
compensation between the dierent perturbation equations and the dierent background
solution around which we expand. a general proof of this result can be given by using
the notion of canonical variable (see the subsection 5.3). here i will give only an explicit
example for tensor perturbations in a d = 3, isotropic and spatially at background.

let me start in the e-frame, with the background equations:

r =

1
2

,

(5.5)

referring to the tilded variables (5.4) (i will omit the tilde, for simplicity, and i will
explicitly reinsert it at the end of the computation). consider the transverse, traceless
part of metric perturbations:
(1) = 0,
(5.6)
( denotes covariant dierentiation with respect to the unperturbed metric g, and the
indices of h are also raised and lowered with g). the perturbation of the background
equations gives:

(1)g = h,

(1)g = h,

h

 = 0 = h



(1)r

 = 0.

(5.7)

pre-big bang cosmology

we can work in the syncronous gauge, where

g00 = 1,
h00 = 0,

g0i = 0,
h0i = 0,

gij = a2ij,
gijhij = 0,

jhi

j = 0.

to rst order in h we get
1
2
1

(1)0i

j =

(1)ij

k =

(1)ij

k + jhi

j,

hi
2 (cid:16)ihj

1
2

hij,
0 = 
k  khij(cid:17) .

18

(5.8)

(5.9)

the (0, 0) component of eq. (5.7) is trivially satised (as well as the perturbation of
the scalar eld equation); the (i, j) components, by using the identities (see for instance
[54])

gjk hik = hi
gjkhik = hi

j + 2hhi
j + 2 hhi

j,
j + 4h hi

j + 4h 2hi

j,

(5.10)

give

(1)ri

j = 

1

2  hi

j + 3h hi

j  2
a2 hi

j!  

1
2

hi

j = 0.

(5.11)

in terms of the conformal time coordinate, d = dt/a, this wave equation can be nally
rewritten, for each polarization mode, as

h + 2

a
a

h  2h = 0,

(5.12)

(where i have explicitly re-inserted the tilde, and where a prime denotes dierentiation
with respect to the conformal time, which is the same in the einstein and in the string
frame, according to eqs. (3.10), (3.14)).

let us now repeat the computation in the s-frame, where the background equations
for the metric (eq. (c.12) with no contribution from h, t, v and ) can be written
explicitly as

(5.13)

(5.14)

r

 + g (  

) = 0.

perturbing to rst order,

(1)r

 (cid:16)(1)g

0 + g(1)

0(cid:17)  = 0.

the (0, 0) component, as well as the perturbation of the dilaton equation, are trivially
satised. the (i, j) components, using again the identities (5.10), lead to [31]:

hi

j   hi

j = 0.

in conformal time, and for each polarization component,

h + 2

a

a  ! h  2h = 0

(5.15)

(5.16)

this last equation seems to be dierent frm the e-frame equation (5.12). recalling,

however, the relation (3.10) between a and a, we have

2

a
a

= 2

a
a  ,

(5.17)

pre-big bang cosmology

19

so that we have the same equation for h and h, the same solution, and the same spectrum
when the solution is expanded in fourier modes. the perturbation analysis is thus
frame-independent, and we can safely choose the more convenient frame to compute the
spectrum.

5.2. choice of the gauge

the second step is the choice of the gauge, i.e. the choice of the coordinate system
within a given frame. the perturbation spectrum is of course gauge-independent, but
the the perturbative analysis is not, in general. it is possible, in fact, that the validity
of the linear approximation is broken in a given gauge, but still valid in a dierent, more
appropriate gauge.

since this eect is particularly important, let me give, in short, an explicit example
for the scalar perturbations of the metric tensor in a d = 3, isotropic and conformally
at background, in the e-frame (i will omit the tilde, for simplicity). the perturbed
metric, in the so-called longitudinal gauge, depends on the two bardeen potentials 
and  as [49]:

ii .
ds2 = a2h(1 + 2) d2  (1  2) dx2

(5.18)

by perturbing the einstein equations (5.5), the dilaton equation, and combining the
results for the various components, one obtains to rst order that  = , and that the
metric uctuations satisfy the equation:

 + 6

a
a

  2 = 0.

(5.19)

we now consider the particular, exact solution of the vacuum string cosmology equations
in the e-frame,

a() = ||1/2,

() = 

3 ln||,

  0,

(5.20)

corresponding to a phase of accelerated contraction and growing dilaton (i.e. the pre-big
bang solution (3.16), written in conformal time, for d = 3). for this background, the
perturbation eq. (5.19) becomes a bessel equation for the fourier modes k,

k +

3


k + k2k = 0,

2k = k2k,

(5.21)

and the asymptotic solution, for modes well outside the horizon (|k|  1),

k = ak ln|k| + bk|k|2

(5.22)
contains a growing part which blows up ( 2) as the background approaches the high
in this limit the linear approximation breaks down, so
curvature regime (  0).
that the longitudinal gauge is not in general consistent with the perturbative expansion
around a homogeneous, inationary pre-big bang background, as scalar inhomogeneities
may become too large.

pre-big bang cosmology

20

in the same background (5.20) the problem is absent, however,

for tensor
perturbations, since their growth outside the horizon is only logarithmic. from eq.
(5.12) we have in fact the asymptotic solution

hk = ak + bk ln|k|,

|k|  1.

(5.23)

for scalar
this may suggests that the breakdown of the linear approximation,
perturbations, is an artefact of the longitudinal gauge. this is indeed conrmed by
the fact that, in a more appropriate o-diagonal (also called uniform curvature [50])
gauge,

ds2 = a2h(1 + 2) d2  dx2

i  2ibdxidi ,

(5.24)

the growing mode is gauged down, i.e. it is suppressed enough to restore the validity
of the linear approximation [51] (the o-diagonal part of the metric uctuations remains
growing, but the growth is suppressed in such a way that the amplitude, normalized to
the vacuum uctuations, keeps smaller than one for all scales k, provided the curvature
is smaller than one in string units). this result is also conrmed by a covariant and
gauge invariant computation of the spectrum, according to the formalism developed by
bruni and ellis [52].

it should be stressed, however, that the presence of a growing mode, and the need
for choosing an appropriate gauge, is a problem typical of the pre-big bang scenario. in
fact, let us come back to tensor perturbations, in the e-frame: for a generic accelerated
background the scale factor can be parametrized in conformal time with a power , as
follows:

a = (),

  0,

(5.25)

and the perturbation equation (5.12) gives, for each fourier mode, the bessel equation

hk +

2


hk + k2hk = 0,

with asymptotic solution, outside the horizon (|k|  1):
= ak + bk ||12 .

hk = ak + bkz  d

a2()

(5.26)

(5.27)

the solution tends to be constant for  < 1/2, while it tends to grow for  > 1/2. it is
now an easy exercise to re-express the scal factor (5.25) in cosmic time,

dt = ad,

a(t)  |t|/(1+),

(5.28)

and to chech that, by varying , we can parametrize all types of accelerated backgrounds
introduced in section 3: accelerated expansion (with decreasing, constant and growing
curvature), and accelerated contraction, with growing curvature (see table ii).

in the standard, inationary scenario the metric is expanding,  < 0, so that the
amplitude hk is frozen outside the horizon. in the pre-big bang scenario, on the contrary,
the metric is contracting in the e-frame, so that hk may grow if the contraction is fast
enough, i.e.  > 1/2 (in fact, the growing mode problem was rst pointed out in the

pre-big bang cosmology

21

 < 1

 = 1

1 <  < 0

power-ination

a > 0, a > 0, h < 0

de sitter

a > 0, a > 0, h = 0

super-ination

a > 0, a > 0, h > 0

 > 0

accelerated contraction

a < 0, a < 0, h < 0

table 2. the four classes of accelerated backgrounds.

context of kaluza-klein ination and dynamical dimensional reduction [53], where the
internal dimensions are contracting). for the low-energy string cosmology background
(5.20) we have  = 1/2, the growth is simply logarithmic (see (5.23)), and the linear
approximation can be applied consistently, provided the curvature remains bounded by
the string scale [51]. but for  > 1/2 the growth of the amplitude may require a dierent
gauge for a consistent linearized description.

5.3. normalization of the amplitude

the linearized equations describing the classical evolution of perturbations can be
obtained in two ways:

 by perturbing directly the background equations of motion;
 by perturbing the metric and the matter elds to rst order, by expanding the

action up to terms quadratic in the rst order uctuations,

g  g + (1)g,

(2)s  s(cid:20)(cid:16)(1)g(cid:17)2(cid:21) ,

and then by varying the action with respect to the uctuations.

(5.29)

the advantage of the second method is to dene the so-called normal modes
for the oscillation of the system {gravity + matter sources}, namely the variables
which diagonalize the kinetic terms in the perturbed action, and satisfy canonical
commutation relations when the uctuations are quantized. such canonical variables
are required, in particular, to normalize perturbations to a spectrum of quantum, zero-
point uctuations, and to study their amplication from the vacuum state up to the
present state of the universe.

let us apply such a procedure to tensor perturbations, in the s-frame, for a d = 3
isotropic background.
in the syncronous gauge, the transverse, traceless, rst order
metric perturbations h = (1)g satisfy eq. (5.8). we expand all terms of the low
energy gravi-dilaton action (3.3) up to order h2:

(1)g = h,

(2)g = hh

,

pre-big bang cosmology

(1)g = 0,

(2)g = 

1
4

ghh,

22

(5.30)

and so on for (1)r, (2)r (see for instance [54]). by using the background equations,
and integrating by part, we nally arrive at the quadratic action

(2)s =

1

4 z d4xa3e  hj

i

hi
j + hj

j!.
i 
a2 hi

(5.31)

by separating the two physical polarization modes, i.e. the standard cross and plus
gravity wave components,

j = 2(cid:16)h2
hj
i hi

(cid:17) ,
+ + h2

we get, for each mode (now generically denoted with h), the eective scalar action

(2)s =

1

2 z d4xa3e(cid:18) h2 + h

a2 h(cid:19) ,

which can be rewritten, using conformal time, as

(2)s =

1

2 z d3xda2e(cid:16)h2 + hh(cid:17) .

(5.32)

(5.33)

(5.34)

(5.36)

(5.37)

the variation with respect to h gives nally eq. (5.16), i.e. the same equation obtained
by perturbing directly the background equations in the s-frame.

the above action describes a scalar eld h, non-minimally coupled to a time-
dependent external eld, a2e (also called pump eld).
in order to impose the
correct quantum normalization to vacuum uctuations, we introduce now the so-called
canonical variable , dened in terms of the pump eld as

 = zh,

z = ae/2.

(5.35)

with such a denition the kinetic term for  appears in the standard canonical form:
for each mode k, in fact, we get the action

(2)sk =

1

2 z d 2

k  k22

k +

z
z

2

k! ,

and the corresponding canonical evolution equation:

k +hk2  v ()i k = 0,

v () =

z
z

,

which has the form of a schrodinger-like equation, with an eective potential depending
on the external pump eld. this form of the canonical equation, by the way, is the same
for all types of perturbations (with dierent potentials, of course). what is important,
in our context, is that for an accelerated inationary background v (z)  0 as   .
this means that, asymptotically, the canonical variable satises the free-eld oscillating
equation

  ,

k + k2k = 0,

and can be normalized to an initial vacuum uctuation spectrum,

  ,

k =

1
2k

eik,

(5.38)

(5.39)

pre-big bang cosmology

23

with



without



|h(k,t)|

4

3

2

1

-40

-20

20

40

t

60

figure 6. amplication of tensor uctuations, with and without the higher-curvature
corrections included in the canonical perturbation equation.

in such a way as to satisfy the free eld canonical commutation relations, [k, 
j ] = ikj.
the normalization of k then xes the normalization of the metric variable hk = k/z.
it is important to stress that there is no need to introduce the canonical variable
to study the classical evolution of perturbations, but that such variable is needed for
the initial normalization to a vacuum uctuation spectrum. we can also normalize
perturbation in a dierent way, of course but in that case we are studying the
amplication not of the vacuum uctuations, but of a dierent spectrum [55].

at this point, two remarks are in order. the rst concerns the frame-independence
of the spectrum. the above procedure can also be applied in the e-frame, to dene
a canonical variable : one then obatins for k the canonical equation (5.37), with a
pump eld that depends only on the metric, z = a. however, by using the conformal
transformation connecting the two frames, it turns out that the two pump elds are the
same, z = a = ae/2 = z, so that for  and  we have the same potential, the same
evolution equation, the same solution, and thus the same spectrum.

the second remark is that the canonical procedure can be applied to any action,
and in particular to the string eective action including higher curvature corrections of
order , which can be written as [21]:



4 hr2

gb  ()2i)

(5.40)

s = z d4xge(r   +
  4r2

gb  r2

where r2
 + r2 is the gauss-bonnet invariant (we have chosen a
convenient eld redenition that removes terms with higher-than-second derivatives
from the equations of motion, see appendix a). from the quadratic perturbed action
we obtain  corrections to the pump elds. the canonical equation turns out to be the
same as before, but with a k-dependent eective potential [54], and such an equation can
be used to estimate the eects of the higher curvature corrections on the amplication of
tensor perturbations. a numerical integration [54], in which the metric uctuations are
expanded around the high-curvature background solution of ref. [21], leads in particular
to the results illustrated in fig. 6.

pre-big bang cosmology

24

figure 7. scattering and amplication of the canonical variable.

the qualitative behaviour is similar, both with and without  corrections in the
perturbed equations:
the uctuations are oscillating inside the horizon and frozen
outside the horizon, as usual. however, the nal amplitude is enhanced when 
corrections are included, and this suggests that the energy spectrum of the gravitational
radiation, computed with the low-energy perturbation equation, may represent a sort
of lower bound on the total amount of produced gravitons.

5.4. computation of the spectrum

the nal, amplied perturbation spectrum is to be obtained from the solutions of the
canonical equation (5.37).
in order to solve such an equation we need explicitly the
eective potential v [z()] which, in general, vanishes asymptotically at large postive and
negative values of the conformal time. consider, for instance, the tensor perturbation
equation in the e-frame, so that the pump eld is simply the scale factor. the typical
cosmological bckground in which we are interested in should describe a transition fom
an initial accelerated, inationary evolution,

  ,

a  ||,

v  2,

to a nal standard, radiation-dominated phase,

  +,

a  ,

v = 0.

(5.41)

(5.42)

in this context, the evolution of uctuations, initially normalized as in eq. (5.39), can
be described as a scattering of the canonical variable by an eective potential, according
to the schrodinger-like perturbation equation (5.37) (see fig. 7).

however, the dierential variable in eq. (5.37) is (conformal) time, not space. as a
consequence, the eigenfrequencies represent (comoving) energies, not momenta. thus,
even normalizing the initial state to a positive frequency mode, as in eq. (5.39), the nal
state is in general a mixture of positive and negative frequency modes, i.e. of positive
and negative energy states,

  +,

out  c+eik + ce+ik.

(5.43)

pre-big bang cosmology

25

in a quantum eld theory context, such a mixing represents a process of pair
production from the vacuum. the coecients c are the so-called bogoliubov
coecients, parametrizing a unitary transformation between |ini and |outi states. in
matrix form, they connect the set of |ini annihilation and creation operators, {in, bk, bk}
to the out ones {out, ak, ak}, as follows:
a
k = cbk + c+b

ak = c+bk + c


b
k,

k.

thus, even starting from the vacuum,

(5.44)

(5.45)

(5.46)

we end up with a nal number of produced pairs which is nonzero, in general, and is
controlled by the bogoliubov coecient c as

nin = h0|bb|0i = 0,

nout = h0|aa|0i = |c|2 6= 0.

in a second quantization approach, the amplication of perturbations can thus be
seen as a process of pair production from the vacuum (or from any otherwise specied
initial state), under the action of a time-dependent external eld (the gravi-dilaton
background, in the string cosmology case). equivalently, the process can be described as
a squeezing of the initial state [56] (this description is useful to evaluate the associated
entropy production [57]), or, in a semiclassical language, as a parametric amplication
[58] of the wave function k, which is scattered by an eective potential barrier through
an anti-tunnelling process [59]. quite independently of the adopted language, the
dierential energy density of the produced radiation, for each mode k, depends on the
number of produced pairs, and can be written as

dk = 2knk

d3k
(2)3 ,

nk = |c(k)|2.

(5.47)

the computation of the so-called energy spectrum, dened as the spectral energy density
per logarithmic interval of frequency,

dk
d ln k  k

dk
dk

=

k4
2|c(k)|2,

(5.48)

thus requires the computation of c(k), and then the knowledge of the asymptotic
solution of the canonical pertubation equation at large positive times.

to give an explicit example we shall consider here a very simple model consisting
of two cosmological phases, an initial accelerated evolution up to the time 1, and a
subsequent radiation-dominated evolution for  > 1:

a  (),
a  ,

 < 1,
 > 1.

(5.49)
the eective potential for tensor perturbations in the e-frame, |a/a|, starts from zero
at , grows like 2, reaches a maximum  2
1 , and vanishes in the radiation phase.
we must solve the canonical perturbation equation for  < 1 and  > 1. in the rst
phase the equation reduces to a bessel equation:

k +"k2 

(  1)

2

# k = 0,

(5.50)

pre-big bang cosmology

with general solution [60]

26

 = |  1/2|,

(5.51)

k = ||1/2hah (2)

 (|k|) + bh (1)

 (|k|)i ,



where h (1,2)
are the rst and second kind hankel functions, of argument k and index
 = |  1/2| determined by the kinematics of the background. by using the large
argument limit of the hankel functions for   ,

h (2)
 (k) 

1
k

eik,

h (1)
 (k) 

1
k

e+ik,

(5.52)

we choose initially a positive frequency mode, normalizing the solution to a vacuum
uctuation spectrum,

a = 1/2,

b = 0.

in the second phase v = 0, and we have the free oscillating solution :

(5.53)

(5.54)

1

k =

k (cid:16)c+eik + ce+ik(cid:17) .

the matching of  and  at  = 1 gives now the coecients c (more precisely,
the matching would require the continuity of the perturbed metric projected on a
spacelike hypersurface containing 1, and the continuity of the extrinsic curvature of that
hypersurface [61]; but in many cases these conditions are equivalent to the continuity
of the canonical variable , and of its rst time derivative).

for an approximate determination of the spectrum, which is often sucient for
pratical purposes, it is convenient to distinguish two regimes, in which the comoving
frequency k is much higher or much lower than the frequency associated to the top of
the eective potential barrier, |v (1)|1/2  1
1 . in the rst case, k  1/|1|  k1, we
can approximate the hankel functions with their large argument limit, and we nd that
there is no particle production,

|c+|  1,

|c|  0.

(5.55)

in practice, c is not exactly zero, but is exponentially suppressed as a function of the
frequency, just like the quantum reection probability for a wave with a frequency well
above the top of a potential step. we will neglect such an eect here, as we are mainly
interested in a qualitative estimate of the perturbation spectrum.

in the second case, k  1/|1|  k1, we can use the small argument limit of the

hankel functions,

h (2)
  a(k1)  ib(k1),

h (1)
  a(k1) + ib(k1),

(5.56)

and we nd

|c+|  |c|  |k1|1/2,
corresponding to a power-law spectrum:

dk
d ln k

=

k4
2|c(k)|2 

k4
1

2   k

k1!32

(5.57)

,

k < k1,

(5.58)

pre-big bang cosmology

27

scale factor bessel index spectrum

de sitter, constant curvature

 = 1

3  2 = 0

at

power-ination, decreasing curvature

pre-big bang ination, growing curvature

 < 1

3  2 < 0 decreasing

 > 1

3  2 > 0

increasing

table 3. slope of the graviton spectrum.

with a cut-o frequency k1 = 1
1

controlled by the height of the eective potential.

for a comparison with present observations, it is nally convenient to express the
spectrum in terms of the proper frequency, (t) = k/a(t), and in units of critical energy
p h 2(t)/8. we then obtain the dimensionless spectral distribution,
density, c(t) = 3m 2

(, t) =



c(t)

d()
d 

8
3

4
1
m 2

p h 2 (cid:18) 
1(t)(cid:18) 

1(cid:19)32
1(cid:19)32

,

 g2

where

1 =

k1
a

=

1
a1 

h1a1

a

is the maximal amplied proper frequency, g1 = h1/mp, and

(t) =


c

2

= (cid:18)h1
h (cid:19)

a (cid:19)4
(cid:18)a1

 < 1,

(5.59)

(5.60)

(5.61)

is the energy density (in critical units) of the radiation that becomes dominant at t = t1,
rescaled down at a generic time t (today, (t0)  104).

it is important to stress that the amplitude of the spectrum is controlled by
g1 = h1/mp, i.e. by the curvature scale in planck units at the time of the transition t1
(a fundamental parameter of the given inationary model). the slope of the spectrum,
3  2, is instead controlled by the kinematics of the background. in fact, it depends
on the bessel index  which, in its turn, depends on , the power of the scale factor
(eq. (5.51). the behaviour in frequency of the graviton spectrum, in particular, tends
to follow the behaviour of the curvature scale during the epoch of accelerated evolution,
see table iii.

the standard inationary scenario is thus characterized by a at or decreasing
graviton spectrum; in string cosmology, instead, we must expect a growing spectrum.
this has important phenomenological
implications, that will be discussed in the
following section.

pre-big bang cosmology

6. the relic graviton background

28

as discussed in the previous section, one of the most rm predictions of all inationary
models is the amplication of the traceless, transverse part of the quantum uctuations
of the metric tensor, and the formation of a primordial, stochastic background of relic
gravitational waves, distributed over a quite large range of frequencies (see [62] for a
discussion of the stochastic properties of such a background, and [63] for a possible
detection of the associated squeezing [64]).

in a string cosmology context, the expected graviton background has been already
discussed in a number of detailed review papers [59, 65, 66]. here i will summarize the
main properties of the background predicted in the context of the pre-big bang scenario.
for a phenomelogical discussion of the spetrum, it is convenient to consider the

plane {g, }. in this plane there are three main phenomenological constraints:

 a rst constraint comes from the large scale isotropy of the cmb radiation. the
degree of anisotropy measured by cobe imposes a bound on the energy density of
the graviton background at the scale of the present hubble radius [67],

(6.1)
 a second constraint comes from the absence of distortion of the pulsar timing-data

g(0) < 1010,

0  1018 hz.

[68], and gives the bound

g(p) < 108,

(6.2)
 a third constraint comes from nucleosynthesys [69], which implies that the total
graviton energy density,
integrated over all modes, cannot exceed the energy
density of one massless degree of freedom in thermal equilibrium, evaluated at
the nucleosynthesis epoch. this gives a bound for the peak value of the spectrum
[33],

p  108 hz.

h100z d ln g(, t0) < 0.5  105,

h100 = h0/(100 km sec1mpc1),

which applies to all scales.

(6.3)

a further bound can be obtained by considering the production of primordial black
holes [70]. the production of gravitons, in fact, could be associated to the formation
of black holes, whose possible evaporation, at the present epoch, is constrained by a
number of astrophysical observations. the absence of evaporation imposes an indirect
upper limit on the graviton background. in a string cosmology context, however, and in
the frequency range of interest for observations, this upper limit is roughly of the same
order as the nucleosynthesis bound [70].

for at or decreasing spectra it is now evident that the more constraining bound
is the low-frequency one, obtained from the cobe data. in the standard inationary
scenario, characterized by at or decreasing spectra (see table iii), the maximal allowed
graviton background can thus be plotted as in fig. 8. the at spectrum corresponds

pre-big bang cosmology

29

)
g


(
 
0
1
g
o
l

log10 ( hz)

figure 8. graviton spectra in the standard inationary scenario.

to de sitter ination, the decreasing spectra to power ination. the breakdown in
the spectrum, around eq  1016 hz, is due to the transition from the radiation-
dominated to the matter-dominated phase, which only aects the low-frequency part of
the spectrum, namely those modes re-entering the horizon in the matter-dominated era.
for such modes there is an additional potential barrier in the canonical perturbation
equation, which induces an additional amplication  (eq/)2 > 1, with respect to
the at de sitter spectrum.

however, this break of the spectrum is not important for our purposes. what is
important is the fact that the observed anisotropy constrains the maximal amplitude
of the spectrum. but the amplitude depends on the ination scale, as stressed in the
previous section. from the cobe bound (6.1), imposed on the modied de sitter
spectrum at the hubble scale,
g(0, t0) = g2

(6.4)

we thus obtain a direct constraint on the ination scale:

1(t)(eq/)2 < 1010,

h1/mp < 105

(for power-ination the bound is even stronger [31]).

(6.5)

this bound applies to all models characterized by a at or decreasing spectrum. the
bound can be evaded, however, if the spectrum is growing, like in the string cosmology
context. to illustrate this point, let me consider the simplest class of the so-called
minimal pre-big bang models, characterized by three main kinematic phases [32, 44]:
an initial low-energy, dilaton-driven phase, an intermediate high-energy string phase,
in which  and loop corrections become important, and a nal standard, radiation-
dominated phase (see fig. 9). the time scale s marks the transition to the high
curvature phase, and the time scale 1, characterized by a nal curvature of order one
in string units, marks the transition to the radiation-dominated cosmology.

by computing graviton production in this background [32] we nd that the
spectrum is characterized by two branches: a high frequency branch, for modes crossing

pre-big bang cosmology

30

figure 9. a minimal model of pre-big bang background.

the horizon (or hitting the barrier) in the string phase,  > s = (as)1; and a low
frequency branch, for modes crossing the horizon in the initial dilaton phase,  < s.
the slope is cubic at low frequency, and atter at high frequency, and the spectrum can
be parametrized as follows:

g(, to)  g2
 g2

1(t0)(cid:18) 
1(t0)(cid:18)1

1(cid:19)32
s(cid:19)2 (cid:18) 
1(cid:19)3

,

s <  < 1,

,

 < s

(6.6)

(modulo logarithmic corrections). there are two main parameters:
the transition
frequency s, and the bessel index , for the high frequency part of the spectrum.
these parameters represent our present ignorance about the duration and the kinematic
details of the high curvature phase.

in spite of this uncertainty, however, there is a rather precise prediction for the
height and the position of the peak of the spectrum, which turns out to be xed in
terms of the fundamental ratio ms/mp as:

g(1)  104(ms/mp)2,

1  1011(ms/mp)1/2 hz.

(6.7)

the behaviour of the spectrum, in this class of models, is illustrated in fig. 10. a precise
computation [33] shows that, given the maximal expected value of the string scale [13]
(ms/mp  0.1), the peak value is automatically compatible with the nucleosynthesis
bound, as well as with bounds from the production of primordial black holes.

in the minimal models the position of the peak is xed. actually, what is really
xed, in string cosmology, is the maximal height of the peak, but not necessarily the
position in frequency, and it is not impossible, in more complicated non-minimal models,
to shift the peak at lower frequencies.

in minimal models, in fact, the beginning of the radiation phase coincides with the
end of the string phase. we may also consider models, however, in which the dilaton
coupling g2
s = exp() is still small at the end of the high curvature phase, and the
radiation era begins much later, when g2
s  1, after an intermediate dilaton-dominated
regime. the main dierence between the two cases is that in the second case the eective
potential which amplies tensor perturbations is non-monotonic [59], so that there are

pre-big bang cosmology

31

)
g


(
 
0
1
g
o
l

de  sitter

-18           -13            -8            -3          2           7              12

log10 (

 hz)

figure 10. graviton spectra in minimal pre-big bang models.

high frequency modes re-entering the horizon before the radiation era. as a consequence,
the perturbation spectrum is also non-monotonic, and the peak does not coincide any
longer, in general, with the end point of the spectrum (see also [71]), as illustrated in
fig. 11.

for minimal models the peak is around 100 ghz, for non minimal models it could
be at lower frequencies. these are good news from an experimental point of view, of
course, but non-minimal models seem to be less natural, at least from a theoretical point
of view. the boxes around the peak, appearing in fig. 11, represent the uncertainty in
the position of the peak due to our present ignorance about the precise value of the ratio
ms/mp (for the illustrative purpose of fig. 11, the ratio is assumed to vary in the range
0.1 0.01). the wavy line, in the high frequency branch of the spectrum, represents the
fact that the spectrum associated to the string phase could be monotonic on the average,
but locally oscillating [72]. finally, the lower strip, labelled by s = 99%, represents
the fact that even the height of the peak could be lower than expected, if the produced
gravitons have been diluted by some additional reheating phase, occurring well below
the string scale, during the standard evolution.

this last eect can be parameterized in terms of s, which is the fraction of present
entropy density in radiation, due to such additional, low-scale reheating. the position
of the peak then depends on s as [33]:

1/2

1(t0)  t0(cid:18) ms
mp(cid:19)
g(1, t0)  7  105h2

(1  s)1/3 ,
100(cid:18) ms
mp(cid:19)

2

(1  s)4/3 ,

(6.8)

where t0 = 2.70k  3.61011hz. such a dependence is not dramatic, however, because
even for s = 99% the peak keeps well above the standard inationary prediction,
represented by the line labelled de sitter in fig. 11.

given the various theoretical uncertainties, the best we can do, at present, is to
dene the maximal allowed region for the expected graviton background, i.e. the region

pre-big bang cosmology

32

figure 11. peak and end point of the spectrum in minimal and non-minimal models.

spanned by the spectrum when all its parameters are varied. such a region is illustrated
in fig. 12, for the phenomenologically interesting high frequency range. the gure
emphasizes the possible, large enhancement (of about eight orders of magnitude) of the
intensity of the background in string cosmology, with respect to the standard inationary
scenario.

it may be useful to stress again the reason of such enhancement. in the standard
inationary scenario the graviton spectrum is decreasing, the normalization is imposed
at low frequency, and the peak value is contolled by the anisotropy of the cmb radiation,

t /t < 105. thus, at low frequency,
g(t0) < (t0)(cid:18)t
t (cid:19)

2

cobe  1014.

(6.9)

in string cosmology the spectrum is growing, the normalization is imposed at high

frequency, and the peak value is controlled by the fundamental ratio ms/mp < 0.1.

thus

mp!2
g(t0) < (t0)  ms

< 106.

(6.10)

the graviton background obtained from the amplication of

the vacuum
uctuations, in string cosmology and in standard ination, is compared in fig. 12
with other, more unconventional graviton spectra. in particular: the graviton spectrum
obtained from cosmic strings and topological defects [73], from bubble collision at the
end of a rst order phase transition [74], and from a phase of parametric resonance of
the inaton oscillations [75]. also shown in fig. 12 is the spectrum from models of
quintessential ination [76], and a thermal black body spectrum for a temperature of
about one kelvin. all these cosmological backgrounds are higher than the background
expected from the vacuum uctuations in standard ination, but not in a string
cosmology context.

it may be interesting, at this point, to recall the expected sensitivities of the present,

and near future, gravitational antennas, referred to the plots of fig. 12.

pre-big bang cosmology

33

)
0
0
1

2
h
g

(

0
1
g
o
l

log
10

(

/ hz)

figure 12. allowed region for the spectrum of vacuum uctuations in string
cosmology and in standard ination, compared with other relic spectra of primordial
origin.

at present, the best direct, experimental upper bound on the energy of a stochastic
graviton background comes from the cross-correlation of the data of the two resonant
bars nautilus and explorer [77]:

gh100 < 60,

  907 hz

(6.11)

(similar sensitivities are also reached by auriga [78]). unfortunately, the bound is
too high to be signicant for the plots of fig. 12. however, a much better sensitivity,
g  104 around   103 hz, is expected from the present resonant bar detectors, if
the integration time of the data is extended to about one year. a similar, or slightly
better sensitivity, g  105 around   102 hz, is expected from the rst operating
version of the interferometric detectors, such as ligo and virgo. at high frequency,
from the khz to the mhz range, a promising possibility seems to be the use of resonant
electromagnetic cavities as gravity wave detectors [79]. work is in progress [80] to
attempt to improve their sensitivity.

the present, and near future, available sensitivities of resonant bars and
interferometers, therefore, are still outside the allowed region of fig. 12, determined
by the border line

gh100  106.

(6.12)

such sensitivities are not so far from the border, after all, but to get really inside we have
to wait for the cross-correlation of two spherical resonant-mass detectors [81], expected
to reach g  107 in the khz range, or for the advanced interferometers, expected to
reach g  1010 in the range of 102 hz. at lower frequencies, around 102  103 hz,
the space interferometer lisa [36] seem to be able to reach very high sensitivities, up
to g  1011. work is in progress, however, for a more precise computation of their
sensitivity to a cosmic stochastic background [82].

pre-big bang cosmology

34

detectors able to reach, and to cross the limiting sensitivity (6.12), could explore
for the rst time the parameter space of string cosmology and of planck scale physics.
the detection of a signal from a pre-big bang background, extrapolated to the ghz
range, could give a rst experimental indication on the value of the fundamental ratio
ms/mp. even the absence of a signal, inside the allowed region, would be signicant,
as we could exclude some portion of parameter space of the string cosmlogy models,
obtaining in such a way direct experimental information about processes occuring at
(or very near to) the string scale.

7. conclusion

the conclusion of these lectures is very short and simple.

there is a rich structure of stochastic, gravitational wave backgrounds, of
cosmological origin, in the frequency range of present (or planned for the future) gravity
wave detectors.

among such backgrounds, the stronger one seems to be the background possibly
predicted in the context of the pre-big bang scenario, in a string cosmology context,
originating at (or very near to) the fundamental string scale. also, the maximal
predicted intensity of the background seems to be accessible to the sensitivity of the
future advanced detectors.

if this is the case, the future gravity wave detectors will be able to test string
theory models, or perhaps models referring to some more fundamental unied theory,
such as d-brane theory, m-theory, and so on. in any case, such detectors will give direct
experimental information on planck scale physics.

acknowledgments

it is a pleasure to thank the organizers of the second sigrav school, and all the sta
of the center a. volta, in villa olmo, for the pleasant hospitality and the perfect
organization of this interesting school.

appendix a. the string eective action

the motion of a point particle in an external gravitational eld, g, is governed by the
action

m

2 z d x xg(x),

where x( ) are the spacetime coordinates of the particle, and  is an ane parameter
along the particle world-line.

s = 

(a.1)

pre-big bang cosmology

35

the time evolution of a one-dimensional object like a string describes a world-
surface, or world-sheet, instead of a world-line, and the action governing its motion
is given by the surface integral

s = 

m 2
s

2 z d dijixjxg(x),

(a.2)

where i  /i, and i = (, ) are respectively the timelike and spacelike coordinate
on the string world-sheet (i, j = 1, 2). the coordinates x(, ) are the elds governing
the embedding of the string world-sheet in the external (also called target) space. the
parameter m 2
s denes (in units h/2 = 1 = c) the so-called string tension (the mass per
unit length), and its inverse denes the fundamental length scale of the theory (often
called, for hystorical reasons, the  parameter):

m 2

s 

1
s 
2

1

2

.

(a.3)

in a curved metric background g depends on x, and the nonlinear action (a.2)
represents what is called a sigma model dened on the string world sheet.

for the point particle action (a.1) the variation with respect to x leads to the well

known geodesic equations of motion,

x + 

 x x = 0.

(a.4)

the string equations of motion are similarly obtained by varying with respect to x the
action (a.2): we get then the eulero-lagrange equations

i

l

(ix)

=

l
x ,

l = ijixjxg,

which can be written explicitly as

x + ijixjx

 = 0,



1



iijj,

these equations describe the geodesic evolution of a test string in a given external
metric. the variation with respect to ik imposes the so-called costraints, i.e. the
vanishing of the world sheet stress tensor tik,
s
ij = ixjxg 

ijkxkx = 0.

tij =

(a.7)

1
2

2



it is important to note, at this point, that for a classical string it is always possible
to impose the so-called conformal gauge in which the world sheet metric is at,
ij = ij.
in fact, in an appropriate basis, the two-dimensional metric tensor can
always be set in a diagonal form, ij = diag(a, b), and then, by using reparametrization
invariance on the world sheet, b2d2 = a2d2, the metric can be set in a conformally
at form, ij = a2ij. since the action (a.2) in invariant under the conformal (or weyl)
transformation ij  2(k)ij,

ij 

4 2ij,

(a.5)

(a.6)

(a.8)

pre-big bang cosmology

36

we can always eliminate the conformal factor a2 in front of the minkowski metric, by
choosing  = a1. in the conformal gauge the equations of motion (a.6) reduce to

x  x + 

 ( x + x)(cid:16) x  x(cid:17) = 0,

where x = dx/d , x = dx/d, and the constraints (a.7) become

g ( x x + xx) = 0,

g xx = 0.

(a.9)

(a.10)

we now come to the crucial observation which leads to the eective action governing
the motion of the background elds. the conformal transformation (a.8) is an invariance
of the classical theory. let us require that there are no anomalies, i.e. no quantum
violations of this classical symmetry. by imposing such a constraint, we will obtain a set
of dierential equations to be satised by the background elds coupled to the string.
thus, unlike a point particle which does not imposes any constraint on the external
geometry in which it is moving, the consistent quantization of a string gives constraints
for the external elds. the background geometry cannot be chosen arbitrarily, but must
satisfy the set of equations(also called -function equations) which guarantee the absence
of conformal anomalies. the string eective action used in this paper is the action which
reproduces such a set of equations for the background elds, and in particular for the
metric.

the derivation of the background equations of motion and of the eective action,
from the sigma-model action (a.2), can be performed order by order by using a
perturbative expansion in powers of  (indeed, in the limit   0 the action becomes
very large in natural units, so that the quantum corrections are expected to become
smaller and smaller). such a procedure, however, is in general long and complicated,
even to lowest order, and a detailed derivation of the background equations is outside
the purpose of these lectures. let me sketch here the procedure for the simplest case in
which the only external eld coupled to the string is the metric tensor g.

in the conformal gauge, the action (a.2) becomes:

s = 

1

4 z d2 ixixg.

let us formally assume a deformation of the number of world sheet dimensions, from
2 to 2 + , and perform the conformal transformation: ij  ij exp(). expanding we
get, for small ,

(a.11)

(a.12)

1




4 z d2+ e/2ixixg =
4 z d2+ ixixg (cid:18)1 +

1


2

 + ...(cid:19) .

for   0 the  dependence disappears, and the classical action is conformally
invariant. in order to preserve this invariance also for the quantum theory, at the one
loop level, let us treat the sigma model as a quantum eld theory for x(,  ), and let
us consider the quantum uctuations x around a given expectation value x
0 . for the
general reparametrization invariance of the theory we can always choose for x0 a locally
inertial frame, such that g(x0) = . by expanding the metric around x0, the leading

pre-big bang cosmology

37

corrections are of second order in the uctuations, because in a locally inertial frame
the rst derivatives of the metric (and then the cristoel connection) can always be
set to zero (but not the curvature). with an appropriate choice of coordinates, called
riemann normal coordinates, the metric can thus be expanded as:

g(x) =  

1
3

r(x0)x x + ...

(a.13)

and the action for the quantum uctuations becomes, to lowest order in the curvature,

s = 

1
3



1

4 z d2+"i xi x(cid:18)1 +
ixi xr(x0)x x(cid:18)1 +


2


2

(cid:19)
(cid:19) + ...#.

(a.14)

it must be noted that, at the quantum level, the dependence of  does not disappear
in general from the action in the limit   0, since there are one-loop terms that diverge
like 1, just to cancel the  dependence and to give a contribution proportional to  to
the eective action. by evaluating, for instance, the two point function for the quantum
operator x x, in the coincidence limit    (the tadpole graph), one obtains [83]

hx()x()i   lim

z d2+k

which gives the one-loop contribution to the action

eik()

k2

s  z d2+ ixi xr .

this term violates, at one-loop, the conformal
background geometry satisfying the condition

 1,

(a.15)

(a.16)

invariance, unless we restrict to a

r = 0,

(a.17)

which are just the usual einstein equations in vacuum.

a similar procedure can be applied if the string moves in a richer external
background (not only pure gravity). indeed, pure gravity is not enough, as a consistent
quantum theory for closed bosonic strings, for instance, must contain at least three
massless state (beside the unphysical tachyon, removed by supersymmetry) in the lowest
energy level: the graviton, the scalar dilaton and the pseudo-scalar kalb-ramond axion.
the sigma model describing the propagation of a string in such a background must thus
contain the coupling to the metric, to the dilaton , and to the two-form b = b:

1

4 z d2 ixjx (cid:16)ijg + ijb(cid:17)

s = 
4 z d2
1



2

r(2)(),

(a.18)

where ij is the two-dimensional levi-civita densor density, 12 = 21 = 1, and r(2)()
is the two-dimensional scalar curvature for the world sheet metric . the condition of
conformal invariance, at the one-loop level, leads to the equations

r +  

1
4

hh

 = 0, h = b + b + b,

pre-big bang cosmology

r + 22  ()2 
(cid:16)eh (cid:17) = 0,

1
12

h 2

 = 0,

which can be obtained by extremizing the eective action

s = 

1

2d1

s

z dd+1xq|g| e(cid:20)r + ()2 

1
12

h 2

(cid:21) .

(see appendix c).

38

(a.19)

(a.20)

it should be noted that the inclusion of the dilaton in the condition of conformal
invariance cannot be avoided, since the dilaton coupling in the action (a.18) breaks

conformal invariance already at the classical level (r(2) is not invariant under a

weyl rescaling of ). however, the dilaton term is of order  with respect to the other
terms of the action (for dimensional reasons), so that it is correct to sum up the classical
dilaton contribution to the quantum, one-loop eects, as they are all of the same order

in . without the dilaton, however, the world sheet curvature density r(2) does

not contribute to the string equations of motion, as it is a pure eulero two-form in two
dimensions (just like the gauss-bonnet term in four dimensions).

let me note, nally, that the expansion around x0 can be continued to higher

orders,

g(x) =  + rxx + rxxx + r2xxxx + ...,

(a.21)

thus introducing higher curvature terms, and higher powers of , in the eective action:

s = 

1

2d1

s

z dd+1xq|g| e"r + ()2 


4

r2

 + ...# .

(a.22)

at any given order, unfortunately, there is an intrinsic ambiguity in the action due to
the fact that, with an appropriate eld redenition of order ,

g  g +  (r +  + ...)
   + (cid:16)r + 2 + ...(cid:17) ,

(a.23)

we obtain a number of dierent actions, again of the same order in  (see for instance
[84]). this ambiguity cannot be eliminated until we limit to an eective action truncated
to a given nite order.

the higher curvature (or higher derivative) expansion of the eective action is
typical of string theory: it is controlled by the fundamental, minimal length parameter
s = (2)1/2, in such a way that the higher order corrections disappear in the point-
particle limit s  0. at any given order in , however, there is also the more
conventional expansion in power of the coupling constant gs (i.e. the loop expansion
of quantum eld theory: tree-level  g2, one-loop  g0, two-loop  g2, ...). the
important observation is that, in a string theory context, the eective couplig constant
is controlled by the dilaton. consider, for instance, a process of graviton scattering, in
four dimensions. comparing the action (2.4) with the standard, gravitational einstein
action (2.1), it follows that the eective coupling constant, to lowest order, is

8g = p = se/2

(a.24)

pre-big bang cosmology

39

(g is the usual newton constant). each loop adds an integer power of the square of the
dimensionless coupling constant, which is controlled by the dilaton as

s = (p/s)2 = (ms/mp)2 = e.
g2

(a.25)

we may thus expect, for the loop expansion of the action, the following general scheme:

s =  z eg(cid:16)r + 2 + r2 + ...(cid:17)
 z g(cid:16)r + 2 + r2 + ...(cid:17)
 z e+g(cid:16)r + 2 + r2 + ...(cid:17)

............................

tree level

one  loop
two  loop

(a.26)

unfortunately, each term in the action, at each loop order, is multiplied by a dilaton
form factor which is dierent in general for dierent elds and for dierent orders.
this dierence can lead to an eective violation of the universality of the gravitational
interactions [85] in the low-energy, macroscopic regime, and this violation can be
reconciled with the present tests of the equivalence principle only if the dilaton is massive
enough, to make short enough the range of the non-universal dilatonic interactions.

the tree-level relation (a.25) is valid also for a higher-dimensional eective action,
provided e represents the shifted four-dimensional dilaton which includes the volume of
the extra-dimensional, compact internal space, and which controls the grand-unication
gauge coupling, gu t , as [13]

gu t = exphi = (ms/mp)2  0.1  0.001.

(a.27)

however, the relation (a.25) is no longer valid, in general, if the gauge interactions are
conned in four-dimensions and only gravity propagates in the extra dimensions.
in
that case the relation depends on the volume of the extra dimensions, whose size may
be allowed to be large in planck units [86]. for internal dimensions of volume vn the
relation becomes, in particular,

m 2

p = m 2+n

s

vne,

(a.28)

where  is the dilaton in d = 3 + n dimensions. in this case, the string mass parameter
could be much smaller than the value expected from eq. (a.27), provided the internal
volume is correspondingly larger.

appendix b. duality symmetry

notations and conventions. in this paper we use the metric signature (+  ),
and we dene the riemann and ricci tensor as follows:
  (  ),

 + 



r
r = r

 = 
.

by noting that

2
n 2 ,

1

0i

r =

00

0 =

d

e

hi  2xi

()2 =
n
n  f,
n 2 
2f xi

n   d
ak! xi
yk=1
ak!
n   d
yk=1
2xi
n 
2 xi


dt "2

yi=1

e

d

e

ai

=

d

g = n

ai,

yi=1
j = hij
i ,

ij

0 =

ai ai
n 2 ij,

hi xi

h 2

i  xi

.

hi!2


hi!#
hi  2f xi

hi  2 xi

hi + 2 xi

hi!2
 ,

h 2

i + xi

hi!2

 2 xi

hi
 .

the action (b.1), modulo a total derivative, can be rewritten as:

(b.1)

(b.2)

(b.3)

(b.4)

(b.5)

(b.6)

(b.7)

pre-big bang cosmology

40

consider the gravi-dilaton eective action, in the s-frame, to lowest order in  and

in the quantum loop expansion:

s = 

1

2d1

s

z dd+1xq|g| ehr + ()2i .

for a homogeneous, but anisotropic, bianchi i type metric background:

 = (t),

g00 = n 2(t),

gij = a2

i (t)ij,

we have (hi = ai/ai):

s = 

1

2d1

s

z ddxdt

we now introduce the so-called shifted dilaton , dened by

e = z ddx

d
s

d

yi=1

aie,

from which

 =  +xi

ln ai,

 =  +xi

hi

(by assuming spatial sections of nite volume, (r ddxq|g|)t=const < , we have absorbed
into  the constant shift  ln(d
r ddx), required to secure the scalar behaviour of
 under coordinate reparametrizations preserving the comoving gauge). the action
becomes:

s

s = 

s

2 z dt

2

e

n   

xi

h 2

i! .

(b.8)

by inverting one of the d scale factors the corresponding hubble parameter changes
sign,

ai  ai = a1

i

,

hi  hi =

ai
ai

= ai

da1
i
dt

= hi,

(b.9)

pre-big bang cosmology

41

so that the quadratic action (b.8) is clearly invariant under the inversion of any scale
factor preserving the shifted dilaton,

ai  ai = a1

i

,

  

(b.10)

(scale factor duality, see [9] and the rst paper of ref. [8]).

in order to derive the eld equations, it is convenient to use the variables i = ln ai,
so that hi = i,
hi = i, and the action (b.8) is cyclic in i. by varying with respect
to n, i and , and subsequently xing the cosmic time gauge n = 1, we obtain,
respectively,

2



xi
hi  hi
2  

2

h 2

i = 0,

 = 0,
xi

h 2

i = 0.

(b.11)

(b.12)

(b.13)

this is a system of (d+2) equations for the (d+1) variables {ai, }. however, only (d+1)
equations are independent (see for instance [21]: eq. (b.11) represents a constraint on
the set of initial data).

the above equations are invariant under a time reversal transformation

t  t,

h  h,

and also under the duality transformation (b.10).
a1 = a1

k , the shifted dilaton is preserved,  = , provided

1 , ... ak = a1

   ,

(b.14)
if we invert k  d scale factors,

 =  

d

xi=1

ln ai =  

k

xi=1

ln ai 

d

xi=k+1

ln ai,

from which:

 =   2

ln ai.

k

xi=1

given an exact solution, represented by the set of variables

(b.15)

(b.16)

{a1, ...ad, },

(b.17)
the inversion of k  d scale factors denes then a new exact solution, represented by
the set of variables
{a1

k , ak+1, ...ad,   2 ln a1...  2 ln ak}.

1 , ...a1

(b.18)

by inverting all the scale factors we obtain the transformation

d

{ai, }  {a1

i

,   2

ln ai}

(b.19)

xi=1

which, in the isotropic case, corresponds in particular to the duality transformation
(2.5).

as a simple example, we consider here the particular isotropic solution

a = t1/d,

 =  ln t,

(b.20)

pre-big bang cosmology

42

which satises identically the set of equations (b.11) - (b.13). by applying a duality
and a time-reversal transformation we obtain the four dierent exact solutions

{a(t) = t1/d, (t) =  ln t},
{a(t) = (t)1/d, (t) =  ln(t)},

(b.21)

corresponding to the four branches illustrated in fig. 2, and describing decelerated
expansion, a+(t), decelerated contraction, a(t), accelerated contraction, a+(t),
accelerated expansion, a(t). the solution describes expansion or contraction if the
sign of a is positive or negative, repectively, and the solution is accelerated or decelerated
if a and a have the same or the opposite sign, respectively.

it is important to consider also the dilaton behaviour. according to eq. (b.7):

(t) = (t) + d ln a(t) = (cid:16)

(b.22)
it follows that, in a phase of growing curvature (t < 0, t  0), the dilaton is growing
only for an expanding metric, a(t). this means that, in the isotropic case, there are
only expanding pre-big bang solution, i.e. solutions evolving from the string perturbative
vacuum (h  0,   ), and then characterized by a growing string coupling,
gs = (exp /2) > 0.

d  1(cid:17) ln(t).

in the more general, anisotropic case, and in the presence of contracting dimensions,
a growing curvature solution is associated to a growing dilaton only for a large enough
number of contracting dimensions. to make this point more precise, consider the
particular, exact solution of eqs. (b.11) - (b.13) with d expanding and n contracting
dimensions, and scale factors a(t) and b(t), respectively:

a = (t)1/d+n,

b = (t)1/d+n,

 =  ln(t),

t  0. (b.23)

this gives, for the dilaton,

 =  + d ln a + n ln b =

n  d  d + n

d + n

ln(t),

so that the dilaton is growing if
d + d + n > n.

(b.24)

(b.25)

for n = 6, in particular, this condition requires d > 3. this could represent a potential
diculty for the pre-big bang scenario, which might be solved, however, by quantum
cosmology eects [87].

the scale factor duality of the action (b.8) is in general broken by the addition of
a non-trivial dilaton potential (unless the potential depends on the dilaton through ,
of course). when the antisymmetric tensor b is included in the action, however, the
scale factor duality can be lifted to a larger group of global symmetry transformations.
to illustrate this important aspect of the string cosmology equations, we will consider
here a set of cosmological baground elds {, g, b}, for which a syncronous frame
exists where g00 = 1, g0i = 0, b0 = 0, and all the components , gij, bij do not depend
on the spatial coordinates.

pre-big bang cosmology

let us write the action

s = 

1

2d1

s

z dd+1xq|g| e(cid:20)r + ()2 

1
12

h 2

(cid:21)

43

(b.26)

directly in the syncronous gauge, as we are not interested in the eld equations, but
only in the symmetries of the action. we set gij = ij and we nd, in this gauge,

1
2

0 =

1
2
1
0 = 
4
1
j = 

ij

ij,

0i

j =

gjk gik =

1
2

ri

r0

tr(cid:16)1 (cid:17)2
tr(cid:16)1(cid:17) 

1
4 (cid:16)1 (cid:17)i
2 (cid:16)1(cid:17)i
j 
tr(cid:16)1 (cid:17) = (cid:16)1(cid:17)ij

ji = gij gji,

j = (cid:16)1 (cid:17)i

j

1

2 (cid:16)g1 g(cid:17)i
tr(cid:16) 1 (cid:17) ,

1
2

1

jtr(cid:16)1 (cid:17) +

2 (cid:16)1 1 (cid:17)i

j,

(b.27)

(b.28)

and so on [note also that 1 means (1)]. similarly we nd, for the antisymmetric
tensor,

where

from which

(b.30)

(b.31)

(b.32)

h 0ij = gikgjl bkl = (cid:16)1 b1(cid:17)ij

,

(b.29)

let us introduce the shifted dilaton, by absorbing into  the spatial volume, as before:

h0ij = bij,

.

hh  = 3h0ijh 0ij = 3tr(cid:16)1 b(cid:17)2
q| det gij|e = e,
 =  

ln (det ) =  

d
dt

1
2

1
2

tr(cid:16)1 (cid:17) .

by collecting the various contributions from , r and h 2, the action (b.26) can be
rewritten as:

s = 

1
2



2

+

s

1
4

2 z dte" 
tr(cid:16) 1 (cid:17) + tr(cid:16)1 (cid:17) +

tr(cid:16)1 (cid:17)2

 tr(cid:16)1(cid:17)
tr(cid:16)1 b(cid:17)2#.

1
4

we can now eliminate the second derivatives, and the mixed term (  ), by noting

that

finally, by using the identity,

d

dt hetr(cid:16)1 (cid:17)i = e(cid:20)tr(cid:16)1(cid:17) + tr(cid:16) 1 (cid:17)  tr(cid:16)1 (cid:17)(cid:21) .
(cid:16)1(cid:17) = 1 1

(b.33)

(b.34)

(following from g1g = 1 = i), we can rewrite the action in quadratic form, modulo
a total derivative, as

s = 

s

2 z dte(cid:20) 

2

1
4



tr(cid:16)1 (cid:17)2

+

1
4

tr(cid:16)1 b(cid:17)2(cid:21) .

(b.35)

pre-big bang cosmology

44

this action can be set into a more compact form by using the 2d  2d matrix
m, dened in terms of the spatial components of the metric and of the antisymmetric
tensor,

g1b

m =   g1
g = gij  ij,

bg1 g  bg1b! ,
g1  gij,

b  bij,

(b.36)

and using also the matrix , representing the invariant metric of the o(d, d) group in
the o-diagonal representation,

 =   0

i

i

0!

(b.37)

(i is the unit d-dimensional matrix). by computing m,
fact,

m  and ( m )2 we nd, in

tr(cid:16) m (cid:17)2

and the action becomes
s

= 2tr(cid:20) 1  +(cid:16)1 b(cid:17)2(cid:21) = 2tr(cid:20)(cid:16)1 (cid:17)2
tr(cid:16) m (cid:17)2(cid:21) .

2 z dte(cid:20) 

s = 

1
8

2

+

+(cid:16)1 b(cid:17)2(cid:21) ,

(b.38)

(b.39)

we may note, at this point, that m is a symmetric matrix of the pseudo-orthogonal

o(d, d) group. in fact,

m t m = ,

m = m t

for any b and g. therefore:

m = m1,

and the action can be nally rewritten as

s = 

s

2 z dte(cid:20) 

2

+

1
8

tr

(cid:16) m (cid:17)2

= (cid:16)m1(cid:17)m,
m (cid:16)m1(cid:17)(cid:21) .

this form is explicitly invariant under the global o(d, d) transformations (2.10),
preserving the shifted dilaton:

  ,

m  t m,

t  = 

in fact

tr m (cid:16) m1(cid:17) = tr(cid:20)t m 1(cid:16)m1(cid:17)(cid:16)t(cid:17)1(cid:21) = tr

m (cid:16)m1(cid:17).

in the absence of the antysimmetric tensor m is diagonal, and the special o(d, d)
transformation with  =  corresponds to an inversion of the metric tensor:

(b.40)

(b.41)

(b.42)

(b.43)

(b.44)

(b.45)

m = diag(g1, g),
m = t m = m = diag(g, g1) = g = g1.

for a diagonal metric g = a2i, and the invariance under the scale factor duality
transformation (2.5) is recovered as a particular case of the global o(d, d) symmetry
of the low energy eective action.

pre-big bang cosmology

45

appendix c. the string cosmology equations

for
in order to derive the cosmological equations let us include in the action,
completeness, the antisymmetric tensor b, a dilaton potential v (), and also the
possible contribution of other matter sources represented by a lagrangian density lm:

z dd+1xq|g| e(cid:20)r + ()2 

1

s

2d1

s = 
+z dd+1xq|g| lm.

1
12

h 2

 + v ()(cid:21)

(c.1)

in a scalar-tensor model of gravity, expecially in the presence of higher derivative
interactions,
it is often convenient to write the action in the language of exterior
dierential forms, as this may simplify the variational procedure (see for instance [88]).
here we will follow however the more traditional approach, by varying the action with
respect to g,  and b. we shall take into account the dynamical stress tensor t of
the matter sources (dened in the usual way), as well as the scalar source  representing
a possible direct coupling of the dilaton to the matter elds:

g(glm) =

1
2

gtg,

(glm) = g.

(c.2)

we start performing the variation with respect to the metric, using the standard,

general relativistic results:
1
2

ggg,

g = 
(cid:16)gr(cid:17) = g(cid:16)gg + g2g  g(cid:17) ,

where g is the usual einstein tensor.
it must be noted, however, that the second
covariant derivatives of g, when integrated by parts, are no longer equivalent to a
divergence (and then to a surface integral), because of the dilaton factor exp() in
front of the einstein action, which adds dilatonic gradients to the full variation. by
performing a rst integration by part, and using the metricity condition g = 0, we
get in fact:

(c.3)

gs =

1

2 z dd+1xq|g|tg 

1

2d1

s

"g + g   +  

z dd+1xq|g| e
g ()2 

1
2

1
2

gv ()

+

1
2

g

1
12

1

2d1

s



3
12

#g

hh

h 2
 
z dd+1xq|g| "egg  eg# = 0.

(c.4)

a second integration by part of g cancels the bilinear term , and leads to
the eld equations:
1
2
1
et.
2

g (cid:20)()2  22  v () +

g +  +
=

(cid:21) 

hh

1
12

(c.5)

h 2

1
4



pre-big bang cosmology

46

we have chosen units such that 2d1

s = 1, so that e represents the (d + 1)-
dimensional gravitational constant (see appendix a). also, we have implicitly added to
the action the boundary term

1

2d1

s

zq|g| ek d,

(c.6)

whose variation with respect to g exactly cancels the contribution of the total divergence
appearing in the last integral of eq. (c.4):

gz q|g| ek d = z q|g| e (gg  g) d.

(c.7)

here k  is a geometric term representing the so-called extrinsic curvature on the d-
dimensional closed hypersurface, of innitesimal area d, bounding the total spacetime
volume over which we are varying the action. note that the integral (c.6) diers from
the usual boundary term, used in general relativity [89] to derive the einstein equations,
only by the presence of the tree-level dilaton coupling e to the extrinsic curvature.

let us now perform the variation with respect to the dilaton, again in units

2d1

s = 1. we get the eulero-lagrange equations:

h2gei = eg(cid:20)r + ()2 
 egv  + g

1
12

h 2 + v(cid:21)

(where v  = v /), from which

r + 22  ()2 + v  v  

1
12

h 2 + e = 0.

the variation with respect to b,

gives nally

bz dd+1xq|g| e (b) h  = 0,
(cid:18)q|g| eh (cid:19) = 0 = (cid:16)eh (cid:17) .

(c.8)

(c.9)

(c.10)

(c.11)

eqs.

(c.5, c.9, c.11) are the equations governing the evolution of the string
cosmology background, at low energy. note that eq.
(c.5) can also be given in a
simplied form: if we eliminate the scalar curvature present inside the einstein tensor,
by using the dilaton equation (c.9), we obtain:

r

 +  

1
2


v  

1
4

hh  =

1
2

e(cid:16)t

  

(cid:17) .

(c.12)

for the purpose of these lectures, it will be enough to derive some simple solution
of the string cosmology equations in the absence of the potential (v = 0), of the
antisymmetric tensor (b = 0), and with a perfect uid, minimally coupled to the
dilaton ( = 0), as the matter sources. assuming for the background a bianchi i type
metric, we can work in the syncronous gauge, by setting

g = diag(1,a2
i ij),
i j
 = diag(,p2
t
i ),

ai = ai(t),
pi/ = i = const,

 = (t),

 = (t).

(c.13)

pre-big bang cosmology

for this background:

0i

j = hij
i ,

ij

0 = ai aiij, r0

0 = xi (cid:16) hi + h 2
i(cid:17) ,
i(cid:17)  xi

hk, r = xi (cid:16)2 hi + h 2
hi , 00 = ,

ri

i xk

i  hij

j =  hij
()2 = 2, 2 =  +xi
ij = hi

j
i .

the dilaton eq. (c.9) gives then

the (00) component of the eq. (c.5) gives

2  + 2 xi

2  2 xi

hi  2 xi (cid:16)2 hi + h 2
hi!2

i + xi

hi xi

h 2

= e.

i(cid:17)  xi

hi!2

= 0.

47

hi!2

,

(c.14)

(c.15)

(c.16)

the diagonal, spatial components (i, i) of eq. (c.5) (the o-diagonal components are
trivially satised) give

 

2 xi (cid:16)2 hi + h 2

i(cid:17) 

1

2  xi

hi!2

hi + hixk


hk  hi
2 +  + xi

1
2

1

1
2

hi =

epi.

(c.17)

the last ve terms on the left-hand side add to zero because of the dilaton equation
(c.15), and the spatial equations reduce to

hi  hi   xk

hk! =

1
2

epi.

(c.18)

the above equations are clearly invariant under time-reversal, t  t. in order
to make explicit also their duality invariance, let us introduce again the shifted dilaton
(see eq. (b.7)), such that

and dene

e = e/g,
 = g = yi

ai,

 =  xi

hi,

(c.19)

p = pg = pyi

ai.

(c.20)

in terms of these variables, the time and space equations (c.16,c.18), and the dilaton
equation (c.15), become, respectively:

2



xi
hi  hi
2  

2

h 2

i = e,

epi,

1
2
h 2

 =
xi

i = 0.

(c.21)

(c.22)

(c.23)

pre-big bang cosmology

they are explicitly invariant under the scale-factor duality transformation:

ai  a1

i

,

  ,

  ,

p  p.

48

(c.24)

for a perfect uid source, a reection of the equation of state,
which implies,
 = p/ = p/  p/ =  (see the rst paper in ref.
[8]). a general o(d, d)
transformation changes however the equation of state in a more drastic way (see [12]),
introducing also shear and bulk viscosity.

the above (d + 2) equations are a system of independent equations for the (d + 2)
variables {ai, , }. their combination implies the usual covariant conservation of the
energy density. by dierentiating eq. (c.21), and using (c.22,c.23) to eliminate hi, ,
respectively, we get in fact

hipi = 0,

 +xi

which, using the denitions (c.20), is equivalent to

hi ( + pi) = 0.

 +xi

in order to obtain exact solutions, it is convenient to include this energy conservation
equation in the full system of independent equations.

in these lectures i will present only a particular example of matter-dominated
solution by considering a d-dimensional, isotropic background characterized by a power-
law evolution,

a  t,

   ln t,

p = .

(c.27)

we use (c.21,c.23, c.25) as independent equations. the integration of eq. (c.25) gives
immediately

 = 0ad;

eq. (c.21) is then satised provided

d +  = 2.

finally, eq. (c.23) provides the constraint

2  2  d2 = 0.

(c.28)

(c.29)

(c.30)

we have then a system of two equations for the two parameters ,  (note that, if 
is a solution for a given , then also  is a solution, associated to ). we have in
general two solutions. the trivial at space solution  = 2,  = 0, corresponds to dust
matter ( = 0) according to eq. (c.22). for  6= 0 we obtain instead

 =

2

1 + d2 ,

2

 =

1 + d2 ,

which xes the time evolution of a and :

2

1+d2 ,

a  t

 = 

2

1 + d2 ln t,

(c.25)

(c.26)

(c.31)

(c.32)

pre-big bang cosmology

49

and also of the more conventional variables , :

 = ad = 0ad(1+),

 =  + d ln a =

2(d  1)
1 + d2

ln t.

(c.33)

this particular solution reproduces the small curvature limit of the general solution
with perfect uid sources (see the last two papers of ref. [8]), suciently far from the
singularity. like in the vacuum solution (b.20) there are four branches, related by
time-reversal and by the duality transformation (c.24), and characterized by the scale
factors

a(t)  (t)2/(1+d2 ).

(c.34)

the duality transformation that preserves  and , and inverts the scale factor, in this
case is simply represented by the transformation   . consider for instance the
standard radiation-dominated solution, corresponding to d = 3,  = 1/3, and t > 0,
and associated to a constant dilaton, according to eq. (c.33). a duality transformation
gives a new solution with  = 1/3, namely (from (c.32,c.33):

a  t1/2,

  a2,

  3 ln t.

(c.35)

by performing an additional time reection we then obtain the pre-big bang solution
dual to radiation, already reported in eq. (2.16).

references

[1] s. weinberg, gravitation and cosmology (wiley, new york, 1972).
[2] e. w. kolb and m. s. turner, the early universe, (addison wesley, redwood city, ca, 1990);
a. d. linde, particle physics and inationary cosmology (harwood, chur, switzerland, 1990).
[3] a. vilenkin, phys. rev. d 46, 2355 (1992); a. borde, a. vilenkin, phys. rev. lett. 72, 3305

(1994).

[4] a. guth, the inationary universe, (vintage, london, 1998), p. 271.
[5] a. vilenkin, phys. rev. d 30, 509 (1984); a. d. linde, sov. phys. jept 60, 211 (1984); y.
zeldovich and a. a. starobinski, sov. astron. lett. 10, 135 (1984); v. a. rubakov, phys.
lett. b 148, 280 (1984).

[6] j. b. hartle and s. w. hawking, phys. rev. d 28, 2960 (1983); s. w. hawking, nucl. phys. b

239, 257 (1984); s. w. hawking and d. n. page, nucl. phys. b 264, 185 (1986).

[7] m. gasperini, j. maharana and g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b 472, 394 (1996); m. gasperini and
g. veneziano, gen. rel. grav. 28, 1301 (1996); m. gasperini, int. j. mod. phys. a 13, 4779
(1998); m. cavaglia and c. ungarelli, class. quantum grav 16, 1401 (1999).

[8] g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 265, 287 (1991); m. gasperini and g. veneziano, astropart.
phys. 1, 317 (1993); mod. phys. lett. a 8, 3701 (1993); phys. rev. d 50, 2519
(1994). an updated collections of papers on the pre-big bang scenario is available at
http://www.to.infn.it/~gasperin.

[9] a. a. tseytlin, mod. phys. lett. a 6, 1721 (1991).
[10] a. sen, phys. lett. b 271, 295 (1991) ; s. f. hassan and a. sen, nucl. phys. b 375, 103 (1992).
[11] k. a. meissner and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 267, 33 (1991); mod. phys. lett. a 6, 3397

(1991).

[12] m. gasperini and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 277, 256 (1992).
[13] v. kaplunovsky, phys. rev. lett. 55, 1036 (1985).

pre-big bang cosmology

50

[14] r. brustein and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 329, 429 (1994); n. kaloper, r. madden and k. a.
olive, nucl. phys. b 452, 677 (1995); r. easther, k. maeda and d. wands, phys. rev. d 53,
4247 (1996).

[15] m. gasperini, j. maharana and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 272, 277 (1991).
[16] m. gasperini, mod. phys. lett. a 14, 1059 (1999).
[17] d. shadev, phys. lett. b 317, 155 (1984); r. b. abbott, s. m. barr and s. d. ellis, phys. rev.
d 30, 720 (1984); e. w. kolb, d. lindley and d. seckel, phys. rev. d 30, 1205 (1984); f.
lucchin and s. matarrese, phys. lett. b 164, 282 (1985).

[18] r. brandenberger and c. vafa, nucl. phys. b 316, 391 (1989); a. a. tseytlin and c. vafa, nucl.

phys. b 372, 443 (1992).

[19] m. gasperini, n. sanchez and g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b 364, 365 (1991).
[20] e. r. caianiello, m. gasperini and g. scarpetta, class. quantum grav. 8, 659 (1991); m.
in proc. of the first workshop on advances in theoretical physics (vietri,

gasperini,
october 1990), edited by e. r. caianiello (world scientic, singapore, 1991) p. 77.

[21] m. gasperini, m. maggiore and g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b 494, 315 (1997).
[22] w. rindler, mon. not. r. astr. soc. 116, 6 (1956).
[23] m. gasperini, ination and initial conditions in the pre-big bang scenario, ba-th/99-332, gr-

qc/9902060.

[24] m. s. turner and e. j. weinberg, phys. rev. d 56, 4604 (1997).
[25] n. kaloper, a. linde and r. bousso, phys. rev. d 59, 043508 (1999).
[26] m. maggiore and r. sturani, phys. lett. b 415, 335 (1997).
[27] a. buonanno, t. damour and g. veneziano, nucl. phys. b 543, 275 (1999).
[28] d. clancy, j. e. lidsey and r. tavakol, phys. rev. d 59, 063511 (1999).
[29] i. antoniadis, j. rizos and k. tamvakis, nucl. phys. b 415, 497 (1994); s. j. rey, phys. rev. lett.
77, 1929 (1996); m. gasperini and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 387, 715 (1996); r. brustein and
r. madden, phys. lett. b. 410, 110 (1997); phys. rev. d 57, 712 (1998); r. brandenberger,
r. easther and j. maia, jhep 9808, 007 (1998); m. maggiore and a. riotto, d-branes and
cosmology, cern-th/98-361, hep-th/9911089; s. foa, m. maggiore and r. sturani, loop
corrections and graceful exit in string cosmology, ifup-th 8/99, hep-th/9903008.

[30] m. gasperini and m. giovannini, phys. lett. b 301, 334 (1993); class. quantum grav. 10, l133
(1993); g. veneziano, pre-bangian origin of our entropy and time arrow, cern-th/99-32,
hep-th/9902126.

[31] m. gasperini and m. giovannini, phys. lett. b 282, 36 (1992); phys. rev. d 47, 1519 (19934).
[32] r. brustein, m. gasperini, m. giovannini and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 361, 45 (1995).
[33] r. brustein, m. gasperini and g. veneziano, phys. rev d 55, 3882 (1997).
[34] see for instance p. fritschel, in second amaldi conference on gravitational waves (cern,

july 1997), edited by e. coccia et al. (world scientic, singapore, 1998), p. 74.

[35] see for instance a. brillet, in second amaldi conference on gravitational waves (cern, july

1997), edited by e. coccia et al. (world scientic, singapore, 1998), p. 86.

[36] see for instance j. hough, in second amaldi conference on gravitational waves (cern, july
1997), edited by e. coccia et al. (world scientic, singapore, 1998), p. 97; see also p. bender,
these proceedings.

[37] r. durrer, m . gasperini, m. sakellariadou and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 436, 66 (1998);

phys. rev. d 59, 043511 (1999).

[38] m. gasperini and g. veneziano, phys. rev. d 59, 043503 (1999).
[39] c. l. bennet et al., astrophys. j. 430, 423 (1994).
[40] e. j. copeland, r. easther and d. wands, phys. rev. d 56, 874 (1997); e. j. copeland, j. lidsey
and d. wands, nucl. phys. b 506, 407 (1997); a. buonanno, k.a. meissner, c. ungarelli and
g. veneziano, jhep01, 004 (1998).

[41] a. melchiorri, f. vernizzi, r. durrer and g. veneziano, cosmic microwave anisotropies and extra

dimensions in string cosmology, astro-ph/9905327.

pre-big bang cosmology

51

[42] see for instance the web site: http://map.gsfc.nasa.gov.
[43] see for instance the web site: http://astro.estec.esa.nl/sa-general/projects/planck.
[44] m. gasperini, m. giovannini and g. veneziano, phys. rev. lett. 75, 3796 (1995).
[45] m. s. turner and l. m. widrow, phys. rev. d37, 2743 (1988).
[46] m. gasperini, phys. lett. b 327, 314 (1994); m. gasperini and g. veneziano, phys. rev. d 50,

2519 (1994).

[47] t. damour and a. m. polyakov, nucl. phys. b 423, 532 (1994).
[48] m. gasperini, in proc. of the 12th it. conference on general relativity and gravitational
physics (rome, september 1997), edited by m. bassan et al. (world scientic, singapore,
1997), p. 85.

[49] v. f. mukhanov, h. a. feldman and r. h. brandenberger, phys. rep. 215, 203 (1992).
[50] j. hwang, ap. j. 375, 443 (1991).
[51] r. brustein, m. gasperini, m. giovannini, v. mukhanov and g. veneziano, phys. rev. d 51,

6744 (1995).

[52] g. f. r. ellis and s. bruni, phys. rev.d 40, 1804 (1989).
[53] r. b. abbott, b. bednarz and s. d. ellis, phys. rev. d33, 2147 (1986).
[54] m. gasperini, phys. rev. d 56, 4815 (1997).
[55] m. gasperini, m. giovannini and g. veneziano, phys. rev. d 48, r439 (1993).
[56] l. p. grishchuk and y. v. sidorov, class. quantum grav. 6, l161 (1989); phys. rev. d 42, 3413

(1990); l. p. grishchuk, class. quantum grav. 10, 2449 (1993).

[57] r. brandenberger, v. mukhanov and t. prokopec, phys. rev. lett. 69, 3606 (1992); m. gasperini

and m. giovannini, phys. lett. b 301, 334 (1993); class. quantum grav. 10, l133 (1993).

[58] l. p. grishchuk, sov. phys. jetp 40, 409 (1975).
[59] m. gasperini, in string theory in curved spacetimes, edited by n. sanchez (world scientic,

singapore, 1998), p. 333.

[60] m. abramowitz and i. a. stegun, handbook of mathematical functions (dover, new, york,

1972).

[61] v. f. mukhanov and n. deruelle, phys. rev.d 52, 5549 (1995).
[62] b. allen, in proc. of the les houches school on  astrophysical sources of gravitational waves,
edited by j. a. mark and j. p. lasota (cambridge, 1997), p. 373; b. allen and j. d. romano,
detecting a stochastic background of gravitational radiation, gr-qc/9710117.

[63] b. allen, e. e. flanagan and m. a. papa, is the squeezing of relic gravitational waves produced

by ination detectable?, gr-qc/9906054.

[64] l. p. grishchuk, the detectability of relic (squeezed) gravitational waves by laser interferometers,

gr-qc/9801055.

[65] m. gasperini, in proc. of the second paris cosmology colloquium (paris, 1994), edited by h.
j. de vega and n. sanchez (world scientic, singapore, 1995), p. 429; in string gravity and
physics at the planck energy scale, ed. by n. sanchez and a. zichichi (kluwer acad. publ.,
dordrecht, 1996), p. 305; in second amaldi conference on gravitational waves (cern, july
1997), edited by e. coccia et al. (world scientic, singapore, 1998), p. 62.

[66] m. maggiore, high energy physics with gravitational wave experiments, gr-qc/9803028.
[67] l. m. krauss and m. white, phys. rev. lett. 69, 869 (1992).
[68] v. kaspi, j. taylor and m. ryba, ap. j. 428, 713 (1994).
[69] v. f. schwarztmann, jetp letters 9, 184 (1969).
[70] e. j. copeland, a. r. liddle, j. e. lidsey and d. wands, phys. rev. d 58, 63508 (1998); gen.

rel. grav. 30, 1711 (1998).

[71] m. galluccio, f. litterio and f. occhionero, phys. rev. lett. 79, 970 (1997).
[72] a. buonanno, m. maggiore and c. ungarelli, phys. rev. d55, 3330 (1997).
[73] r. r. caldwell and b. allen, phys. rev. d45, 3447 (1992); r. a. battye and e. p. s. shellard,

phys. rev. d53, 1811 (1996).

[74] m. s. turner and f. wilczek, phys. rev. lett. 65, 3080 (1990).

pre-big bang cosmology

52

[75] s. y. khlebnikov and i. i. tkachev, phys. rev. d 56, 653 (1997); b. bassett, phys. rev. d 56,

3439 (1997).

[76] p. j. e. peebles and a. vilenkin, phys. rev. d 59, 063505 (1999); m. giovannini, production

and detection of relic gravitons in quintessential ination models, astro-ph/9903004.

[77] p. astone, in second amaldi conference on gravitational waves (cern, july 1997), edited

by e. coccia et al. (world scientic, singapore, 1998), p. 192.

[78] g. prodi, talk given at the second int. conference around virgo (tirrenia, pisa, september

1998); see also m. cerdonio, these proceedings.

[79] f. pegoraro, e. picasso and l. radicati, j. phys. a 11, 1949 (19780.
[80] e. picasso, private communication.
[81] see for instance j. a. lobo, in second amaldi conference on gravitational waves (cern,

july 1997), edited by e. coccia et al. (world scientic, singapore, 1998), p. 168.

[82] c. ungarelli and a. vecchio, in preparation.
[83] m. b. green, j. schwartz and e. witten, superstring theory (cambridge university press,

cambridge, ma, 1987).

[84] r. r. metsaev and a. a. tseytlin, nucl. phys. b 293, 385 (1987).
[85] t. r. taylor and g. veneziano, phys. lett. b 213, 459 (1988).
[86] see for instance i. antoniadis and b. pioline, large dimensions and string physics at a tev,

hep-ph/9906480 (cpht-pc720-0699, march 1999).

[87] a. buonanno, m. gasperini, m. maggiore and c. ungarelli, class. quantum grav. 14, l97

(1997).

[88] m. gasperini and m. giovannini, phys. lett. b 287, 56 (1992).
[89] g. w. gibbons and s. hawking, phys. rev. d 15, 2752 (1977).

